C O M P U T E R - B A S E D S Y S T E M S F O R C O O P E R A T I V E W O R K A N D G R O U P D E C I S I O N M A K I N G : S T A T U S OF U S E A N D P R O B L E M S I N D E V E L O P M E N T Kenneth L . Kraemer and John Leslie King University of California Irvine , CA 92717 September , 1986 ABSTRACT Application of computer and information technology to cooperative work and group decisionmaking has grown out of three traditions : computer - based communications , computer - based information service provision , and computer - based decision support . This paper provides an overview of the various kinds of systems that have been configured to meet the needs of groups at work , evaluates the status of these systems in the United States , evaluates the experience with them , assesses bar - riers to their further development and use , and draws conclusions about future work in this area that should be undertaken . An extensive set of references is provided . I . INTRODUCTION COOPERATIVE WORK AND GROUP DECISIONMAKING Computer - based systems are being used with increasing frequency as tools for cooperative work and group decision support . Until recently , most efforts in this direction have grown out of the desire to apply Decision Support Systems ( DSS ) technology toward group decisionmaking situations . After their beginning in the early seventies , these efforts slowed down in the late seventies when the magnitude of this challenge became more evident . In the early eighties the interest in this stream of work revived , with a change in paradigm . Instead of an exclusive focus on group decision support , the new research objectives concentrated on a slightly broader concept : cooperative work . In this paradigm , the tasks of group decisionmaking have become just one of several approaches to dealing with the challenge of using computer technologies to facilitate cooperative work . The general approach is to combine computers , communications , decision and group process technologies to support groups who work closely together . Although our focus in this paper is on the broader issues of computer - supported cooperative work and group decisionmaking , we retain the acronym GDSS ( Group Decision Support System ) to describe the array of technologies at interest . This paper presents an assessment of the use of such systems in the United States at present . It updates our earlier survey of GDSS ' s performed in 1983 , and extends the assessment . Specifically , it reviews the conceptual foundations for such systems , describes those systems in operation or under development , and assesses the experience with GDSS thus far . 2 It notes that GDSS ' s have expanded in scope considerably in recent years to include other group activities besides decisionmaking . Chief among these are communication and information processing . There is little agreement in the literature or among people working in this field about what constitutes a GDSS . Extending the accepted definition of a " decision support system , " DeSanctis and Gallupe define GDSS as " an interactive computer - based system which facilitates solution of unstructured problems by a set of decisionmakers working together as a group ( DeSanctis and Gallupe , 1985 ) . We would broaden the definition to include any computer and communications - based support of group work , including but not limited to decisionmaking . Moreover , we suggest that the problems dealt with in GDSS are most offer partially structured rather than unstructured . Our working definition , which we provide below in Section II , is a synthesis of the opinions of those who are knowledgeable about the topic . Despite the lack of agreement on a definition of GDSS , there is agreement on the need for development of improved means of aiding group processes . 1 Authors ' names are listed randomly to denote equal contribution . Kenneth L . Kraemer is Professor in the Graduate School of Management and the Department of Information and Computer Science , U . C . Irvine . John Leslie King is Associate Professor and Chair in the Department of Information and Computer Science , and Associate Professor in the Graduate School of Management , U . C . Irvine . This work was supported in part by the Gesselschaft ffir Mathematik und Datenverarbeitung ( GMD ) , Bonn , W . Germany . The opinions expressed here are those of the authors and should not be ascribed to the GMD . The authors would appreciate any and all comments and corrections . 2 Three methods were used to collect information about GDSS ' s : a search of libraries , computer data bases , and research centers ; telephone interviews with knowledgeable individuals about the systems they were building , using , or researching ; and field visits to a small number of sites . 353 Perhaps the best articulation of the need for such aids is found in Huber ( 1984 ) , who posits the following dilemm ~ decisionmakers find themselves faced with an increasing number of lengthy meetings needed to discuss information - laden issue , , but decisionmakers are beginning to resist attending such meetings because they take time away from other critical activitie : The solution to this dilemma is to make meetings more productive . This is the key concept behind the GDSS - to make decisio : meetings more productive . Operationally , this means increasing the speed with which decisions are arrived at without reducing and hopefully enhancing , the quality of resulting decisions . How might GDSS ' s help increase productivity of decision meetings ? Huber ( 1982a ) provides the following succinct assess ment of the issue : I . Effective group decisionmaking requires : 1 . Meeting the need of the situation . 2 . Ensuring that members are satisfied with the process . 3 . Enabling members to meet and work successfully in the future . II . " Losses " of productivity in group decisionmaking occur because : 1 . Discussions are dominated by certain individuals . 2 . Low - status members defer to high - status members . 3 . Group pressures lead to conformity of thought . 4 . Miscommunication among members is common . 5 . Insufficient time is spent in problem exploration and generation of alternatives . III . GDSS ' s could help alleviate these problems by providing : 1 . Personal computer terminal for each participant . 2 . Public display screen for all . 3 . Computing / communication capability for accessing data bases ; communicating with the group leader , and the public display . 4 . Software for word processing , data access and management , graphics , and " controls " to allow public or anony - mous communications with others or the group . The idea here is that the primary problems of productivity loss in group decision meetings are from information los . , information distortion , or sub - optimal decisionmaking ( ie . not enough issues / alternatives explored ) . GDSS ' s can reduce thes losses by allowing anonymity of contribution to the discussions , searching of data bases and doing analyses to answer question , , and displaying individuals ' inputs to the public screen for open discussion . As Huber points out elsewhere ( 1981a , 1982b ) , this view of the contribution of GDSS ' s to decisionmaking is essentially rational one . That is , the participants in decision meetings use information in an intendedly rational manner to benefit th organization or group as a whole . Lack of success under this model is due to intellectual or resource constraints . Under thi model the QDSS can provide the following information : Basic Information : 1 . What are the alternatives ? 2 . What are the likely future conditions ? 3 . What criteria are to be used in the decision ? Elaborating Information : 1 . What are the probabilities of the future conditions occurring ? 2 . What are the relative importance of the criteria for deciding ? 3 . What payoffs accrue to what outcomes ? 4 . What are the constraints on payoffs or costs ? Existing techniques such as return on investment analysis and breakeven analysis can be used for these purposes . In the futur judgement - eliciting techniques also might be incorporated to glean members ' judgements . Huber acknowledges that the rational model is useful due to its simplicity , but it is naive . He posits three other models c decision behavior taken from the literature on decisionmaking , and suggests how GDSS technology might be used for them . One is the political / competitive model , in which organizational decisions are viewed as consequences of strategies and tactic 354 of units and individuals trying to influence things in a manner beneficial to themselves . GDSS ' s could be used by the individuals or units in the competitive process to answer the following questions : 1 . Who are the other parties at interest in the decision ? 2 . What influence do the other parties have ? 3 . What alternatives favor or damage the other interests ? 4 . How can other parties influence alternative selection ? 5 . Which alternatives might other parties choose , and how likely is it that they will choose them ? GDSS technology might help answer these questions by listing those other parties involved in the decision , providing historical data on the positions taken by other parties in other decisions , providing data on the other parties ' affiliations , and providing gaming capabilities such as coalition formation models . Another model is the garbage can model , which holds that organizational decisions are consequences of intersections of problems looking for solutions , solutions looking for problems , and decisionmakers looking for opportunities to make decisions . This model highlights the role of chance and timing in decision situations . GDSS technology might help with the garbage can model of decisionmaking by providing the following kinds of information : 1 . What problems and opportunities might be forthcoming , how likely is it that they will appear , and when will they appear if they do ? 2 . What potential solutions might be forthcoming , how likely is it that they will appear , and when might they appear ? 3 . What potential opportunities for decisionmaking might be forthcoming , how likely is it that they will appear , and when might they appear ? GDSS technology might help by providing the opportunity for " environment scanning " to build decisionmakers ' understanding of the larger context of the decision situation . Key - word searches of relevant data sources , names and addresses of relevant experts , data on stock market changes or other " news " ( eg . events , patents granted ) , and decision models would facilitate decisionmakers ' environment scanning . The final model is tile program model , which holds that organizational decisions are consequences of programs and the programming of units involved in the decision situation . Programs are standards , group norms , budget limits , and so forth . Programming is the prior professional training , biases , reenforcements , and other cognitive backgrounds of the individuals involved . GDSS technology might aid in the program model of decisionmaking by providing : 1 . Data on past behavior of units and subunits in dealing with particular kinds of decisions . 2 . Accuracy assessments of the behavior information provided to assess the kinds of biases units and subunits incorporate in their decisions and actions . 3 . Data on the time and costs units and subunits spend to implement decisions . Capabilities such as CPM , Gantt charts and PERT can facilitate such analyses . From this characterization of the " domain " of GDSS ' s , and a similar characterization by Quinn , Rohrbaugh and McGrath ( forthcoming ) it can be seen that , theoretically , there are many possible applications of the technology . Therefore , this study identifys what kinds of GDSS ' s have actually been built and used , and with what effects . II . CURRENT STATUS OF GDSS SYSTEMS KINDS OF GDSS ' S IN EXISTENCE Our review of the literature and the practice suggests that there is no established way of classifying GDSS ' s , just as there is no common way of defining them . Consequently , we have developed our own classification which is based primarily on the nature of the information technology available in the conference room . The technology can be computer , communications or decision technology or combinations of these . Alternatively , we could have classified GDSS ' s on the basis of whether they are single - purpose or multi - purpose , inside or outside the organization , and fixed ( you come to them ) or portable ( they come to you ) ( see , for example , Huber , 1984 ) . We chose to classify GDSS ' s on the nature of their underlying technology because ( 1 ) they are more easily differentiated this way , ( 2 ) the technology , particularly the hardware and software , is the major content of the GDSS ' s , and ( 3 ) the technology is the prime interest and focus of this analysis . Accordingly , we distinguish six types of GDSS ' s as shown in Table 1 . 355 TABLE 1 . SIX TYPES OF GDSS ' s ELECTRONIC BOARDROOM Computer and audiovisuals TELECONFERENCING FACILITY Computer and communications LOCAL AREA GROUP NET Computer and interactive conferencing INFORMATION CENTER Computer , databases and retrieval tools DECISION CONFERENCE Computer and decision models COLLABORATION LABORATORY Computer and collaboration tools THE GDSS PACKAGE As with many other technologies , it is useful to conceive of GDSS ' s as a sociotechnical " package " comprised of ( 1 ) hardware ( 2 ) software , ( 3 ) organizationware , and ( 4 ) people . Typically , A GDSS involves a group of decisionmakers with access to computer , viewing screen , database , decision model ( s ) , and a " facilitator " who supports the group in use of the technology instructs them on the use of the decision model , coordinates the group ' s activity , and documents the group ' s work . 1 . Hardware includes the conference facility itself , computing equipment , telecommunications equipment , and audiovisua equipment . At minimum , the conference facility is a single room with a conference table and supporting equipment . In sore ( cases , the meeting room has space for observers of the conference ( e . g . , teleconferences , which usually are expensive and lasl only a few hours ) and in still other cases ( e . g . , decision conferences , which last several days ) the meeting room is accompaniec by break - out , audiovisual , and lounge rooms for the staff and participants . The computing equipment includes a computer processor with graphics capability and an information display , usually computer display or a large projection screen , accessible to the group as a whole . In more sophisticated systems , the computing equipment will include a computer terminal or personal computer for each group member , a large central processor for managing communications among members and storing common databases and models , a local area network ( " local " to the meeting rooK - or the local work locations of the group ) for communication among group members , a long - distance communications system foJ linkage with outside groups or databases , and several large viewing screens or one large screen with multiuser and windowing capabilities . These sophisticated systems also might include multipoint interactive communication capabilities for compute and / or video conferencing , shared files and displays which all group members can view and change , and private files and display , , which only individual members can view and change . 2 . Software is the key distinguishing technological feature of GDSS and may be for support of general information processing decision modeling , or communications . General information processing software could be used for either individual or grou work , and includes database management systems and high - level programming languages as well as generalized applicatior packages such as those for graphics , spreadsheets and statistical analysis . Decision modeling software is specifically aimed al supporting group decisionmaking and includes both modeling languages ( e . g . , SIMSCRIPT , DYNAMO ) and specialized softwar ( for decision modeling and analysis such as utility and probability assessment , multiattribute utility analysis , and multiattribut ( weighting analysis ( Adehnan , 1984 ) . Communications software is specifically aimed at supporting the collaborative aspeck , of group work and includes tools for both local and long - distance text , data voice and video transmission ( e . g . , electronk chalkboard , electronic voting , networking , electronic mail , computer conferencing ) among local and distant group members between group members and the facilitator , and between group members and the central processor . 3 . Organizationware includes the organizational data , group processes for decisiomnaking , and management procedure , , for collaborative group work . While some GDSS ' s generate their own data by polling the members for their ideas , opinions weightings , and judgments , other GDSS ' s involve the use of organizational or outside databases as well . These databases mighl include strategic or operating plans , budgets , market or customer data , or industry data . GDSS ' s also involve specific processe . , for group decision making such as the brainstorming , nominal group technique , social judgment analysis , the Delphi technique or others . These techifiques direct the flow of events and discussion regarding the group ' s decision . In addition to these specifi ( decisionmaking techniques , there are management procedures for collaborative group work . These are aimed at the social versm the task aspects of group activity such as developing full participation , commitment to the decision , and continued support ol the group . 4 . People includes the participants in the group and the support staff who facilitate the group ' s activities . The " facilitator " is the key distinguishing social component of GDSS and his or her role can vary widely . At minimum , the facilitator operate , , the technology required to support the group activity . For example , the facilitator may input member ' s opinions , perforir calculations , produce displays and document group decisions . Alternatively , the facilitator may actually conduct the groul : 356 meeting , leading the participants through each step of some specific decisionmaking or other group process technique and directing the technological aspects as well . While this role is often taken with new groups , the facilitator ' s role usually evolves to that of a trainer and troubleshooter , teaching the participants how to use both the hardware / software and the group process technology themselves , and then remaining available for help as problems arise and providing advice and feedback to the group . Table 2 shows each of our six kinds of GDSS ' s summarized in terms of these elements . Each kind is discussed and illustrated next . TABLE 2 . COMPARISON OF GDSS ELEMENTS ELEMENT ELECTRONIC BOARDROOM TELECONFERENCE LOCAL AREA FACILITY GROUP NETWORK Hardware Conference room ; audio Conference room ; audio - Offices ; file server and visuals ; graphic visuals ; audio , computer computer work stations ; displays ; computer or video telecomnmnication telephone controller Comnmnications Software Interactive graphics Org . Ware Audiovisuals ; corporate Audiovisuals ; teleconfer - reports ; standard meet - ence protocols ing protocols People Participants ; audio - Participants ( in two or visual technician more locations ) ; tele - conference facilitator Picturephone Meeting Service ; Participate Examples N . A . Custom tailored for each site although some " modular " audio - visual rooms exist Interactive conlputer conferencing ; ternfinal linking ; real - time meeting scheduling ; shared bit - map display Conference chair conducts meetings Participants ( in two or more local places ) , group leader MIT Lab . for Colnputer Science RTCAL and MBlink ELEMENT INFORMATION CENTER DECISION CONFERENCE COLLABORATION LABORA TOR Y Hardware Conference room ; large - Conference room ; large - Conference room ; screen video projector ; screen video projector ; electronic chalkboard computer ; display display ternfinals ; voting microcomputer work - terminals terminals stations , electern Database management Decision analysis Multiuser inter - software ; statistical software ; modeling soft - face ; WYSIWIS ; out - packages ; retrieval , ware ; voting tally and lining ( COGNOTER ) ; graphics and text display software evaluating ( Argnoter ) processing software Corporate and other databases ; standard meeting protocols ; standard meetings ( e . g . annual report , market forecast ) Participants ; computer specialists ; modeling specialists HOBO System ; SYSTEM W ; EIS , EXPRESS , XSIM Software Org . Ware Democratic decisionmaking Standard meeting protocols ( e . g . , one protocols person one vote ; all major interests represented ; majority opinion rules ) ; People Participants ; decision Participants analysts ; group process facilitators Group Decision Aid ; Decision Conferences of DDI ; Decision Tectronics , SUNY , Albany Examples Colab , Xerox PARC ; Planning Lab , U . Arizona The Electronic Boardroom The electronic boardroom is the most elementary of the GDSS ' s and differs little from its nonelectronic parent except that the audiovisual technology is computer - based , primarily in the form of computer graphics or computer - controlled audiovisuals ( e . g . , slide projectors , video projectors , movie projectors ) used for presentations . Here the computer is a very indirect aid 357 to group decisionmaking . The capability provided by the computer is used primarily in relation to storage , retrieval an < programming of previously prepared presentation materials . It is possible , however , for the computer to be used in a mor , interactive way in group meetings . For example , it is logically possible to use the computer to store audiovisuals such as slides maps , charts , photographs , and drawings of areas of a city and to retrieve these on demand for a city planning commission o city council as a direct aid to discussions about problems and issues in a particular area of the city . But such applications ar , only possibilities presently ; to our knowledge there are no operational applications . The electronic boardroom is the earliest of the GDSS types , having been the topic of nmch discussion and constructiol during the early 70s . Although we cannot verify this claim on a broad basis , from our field investigations we have come t , believe that many of these early versions of the electronic boardroom have either disappeared from use ( i . e . , have been takel out of service or allowed to languish ) or have been transformed into one of the other three types of GDSS . Examples of th , electronic boardroom were found in the City of Brea ( CA ) , Arthur Anderson and Company ( San Francisco , Chicago , Ne ~ York , Los Angeles ) , Chase Manhattan Bank ( New York ) , First Chicago Corporation ( Chicago ) , Transamerica Corporation ( Sa ~ Francisco ) , Aetna Life and Casualty ( Hartford , CN ) , and Bank of America ( San Francisco ) Administrative Management , 1982 Business Week , 1976 ; Manilla , 1980 ; City of Brea , 1982 . The Teleconferencing Facility The teleconferencing facility is a GDSS designed primarily to facilitate meetings between groups at two different locations All of the conference rooms designed for teleconferencing have been designed to facilitate audio or video teleconferencing rathe than computer teleconferencing since the latter does not require a conference room . Computers seldom play a direct role iJ these teleconferencing facilities since most of the concern is with trying to mimic face to face meetings . 3 A modern two - way video teleconference facility usually provides for 6 - 12 active participants in a meeting and another 12 - 2 , passive participants . The active participants sit around a conference table which is surveyed by a video camera with zoon capability that is automatically directed towards the speaker ( and one or two persons around the speaker ) by voice activation Microphones in front of each speaker are also voice activated . A control panel in the center of the conference table , operated b : the conference chair , permits the chair to override the automatic voice activation , to switch control between the two meetini locations , to focus the video cameras on presentation materials in the room , and to activate other presentation devices . Othe hardware in the teleconferencing facility includes conventional audiovisuals such as movies , audio recorders / players , facsimil machines , blackboards or whiteboards , overhead projectors , opaque projectors , and flip charts . The software in support of video and audio teleconferencing is primarily communications software for handling digita transmission of voice , data and picture . The organizationware used in teleconferencing involves special preparation and planninl for each teleconference , including planning of the audiovisuals , and meeting protocols designed specifically for teleconfernces The people involved in a teleconference are the meeting participants , background support people outside the meeting room , am a teleconference facilitator who provides an introduction to teleconferencing for the participants and hovers at the meeting il case assistance is needed . The meeting is chaired by a participant at one of the sites participating in the conference . Because o their capabilities and expense , conference rooms built for video teleconferencing are being used increasingly for internal meetings and some of them are being hooked up to the corporate computers and databases to provide the additional capabilities of corporate information center . Most of the private teleconference facilities currently in existence have been built for large business or government orga nizations which have need for frequent communication between two or more sites . Some of these systems have been built a : operational demonstrations to learn more about their feasibility and utility . Examples of such facilities include those at Atlanti , Richfield , U . S . Department of Energy , General Services Administration , Jet Propulsion Laboratory , National Aeronautics ant Space Administration , Union Trust , and United California Bank ( Gold , 1979 ; Kraemer , 1982 ) . Picturephone meeting service i a " public " teleconferencing service . Tile Information Center The information center is a portion of the data processing resources of an organization that is organized and dedicate < to support the users of computer - based information systems in activities such as report generation and modification , dat ~ manipulation and analysis , and spontaneous inquiries . The assumption underlying the information center is that if provide < proper education , technical support , usable tools , data availability , and convenient access to the system , users may directly an < rapidly satisfy some of their computer - based information requirements ( Hammond , 1982 ; Chastain , 1983 ; Youstra and Squire 1982 ; Mau , 1982 ; Grindlay , 1980 ) . The impetus for development of the information center stems from the fact that the project - oriented development en vironment for information systems in most organizations seldom meets the needs of managers and professional users . Th ~ 3 Computer teleconferencing was was considered outside the realm of GDSS systems because it does not support face to fac ~ meetings ; however , it does facilitate group meetings ( Turoff and I - Iiltz , 1982 ; Hiltz and Turoff , 1981 ; Turoff , 1972 ) . 358 development environment is usually characterized by long lead times and emphasis on stability whereas the decision environ - ment of managers and professionals is characterized by rapid change , short turnaround , and the requirement for flexible data handling capabilities . Consequently , the aim of the information center is to provide users with computer power , databases , software and technical support that enables them to directly control their information environment . The type of work intended to be supported through the information center is the short job , the one - time query , the simple report , the minor change , the ad hoc analysis . The kinds of software typically provided in an information center include packaged programs for data management , report generation , data retrieval and query , text - handling , statistical analysis , and mathematical and simulation modeling . The information center usually has a manager and several technical staff who , in turn , are backed up by the organization ' s data processing staff . The center also operates on the organization ' s main computing facilities and accesses corporate databases as well as secondary data sources . The information center usually is part of the organization ' s data processing installation , with status equal to major divisions such as development and operations , but physically separate from these to emphasize the relationship of the center to the users . The physical arrangement of the information center includes public areas with terminals that users can access , private cubicles or offices where center staff can work with individual users , and a conference facility with a large - screen display and terminals to serve small to medium - sized groups ( cf . , for example , Kucia , 1983 ) . As is apparent from this description , the information center started out as a way of distributing computing to managers and professional users throughout an organization . In many cases it continues to operate in that way - basically providing a smorgasboard of computer power , databases , software packages and consulting to the users . But in some instances the center and its tools have become tailored to serve a particular group of users - such as the marketing department , the planning staff , the corporate staff and managers . And in such instances the center ' s activity has focused on honing the tools of the information center into aids specifically designed for decisionmaking by a particular group , e . g . , the marketing group . It is this group - oriented use of information centers that most properly falls under the GDSS label and that was the intellectual forerunner of the contemporary information center ( cf . Robinson and Stidsen , 1971 ) . Examples of the generalized information center abound in large organizations ( Torgler , 1983 ; Frank , 1981 ; Mollen and Bakshi , 1981 ; Stone , 1981 ; Waltrip , 1983 ) . But specialized information centers serving the information and decision needs of a particular group are relatively few as yet ( Van Nievelt , 1982 ; Moore , 1983 ; Bode , 1983 ) . Integrated software packages for information centers include : Executive Information Services ( EIS ) , EXPRESS , System W , and XSIM ( see Houston , 1983 and Sumner , 1985 ) . The Decision Conerence The decision conference facility is the newest form of GDSS and frequently is discussed in the literature under the labels of group decision support system , decision analysis , and group decision aid . What distinguishes the decision conference from the other GDSSs is its explicit focus on improving decisionmaking by groups and its emphasis on the use of structured decision processes , mainly involving computer models but increasingly also involving group process models . The hardware for the decision conference consists of a medium - sized conference room furnished with a large - screen video projector , a computer , video terminals , hand - held terminals for voting or other input by the participants , and a control terminal for presenting participant inputs in graphic form and for accessing other sources of information ( e . g . , databases , general reference materials , results of previous conferences ) . The software of the decision conference is usually some form of decision analytic technique : decision trees and influence trees ; multiattribute expected utility models for single - stage decisions ; hierarchical evaluation structures for multiattribute utility analysis ; Pareto algorithms for two - party negotiations ; cost - benefit models for resource allocation ; and spread - sheet models . Software for graphics and vote tally and display also are part of the decision conference facility . The organizationware of the decision conference relates primarily to meeting protocols regarding who participates , on what basis , with what voting rights , and with what consequences and commitments resulting from the process . Most of the decision conferences we examined emphasize " democratic " protocols rather than " authoritarian " , " hierarchical " , or " authoritative " ones . The primary reason for this fact seems to be that the decision conferences involve equals ( e . g . , managers at more or less the same level in the organization ) , or representatives of groups who insist they be treated as equals ( e . g . , community interest groups vying with one another and the city council on some policy issue ; labor and management negotiators ) . The participants in the decision conference are the actual people in the organization who are involved in making a decision . In addition , the participants usually are assisted by decision analysts who explain the various decision analytic tools available and work with the participants in modeling their decision problem . The participants also might be assisted by one or more group process facilitators - people trained in the behavioral dynamics of group meetings and in facilitating self - awareness of the group about its processes . Illustrations of the decision conference in industry are provided by GROUP DECISION AID of Perceptronics , Inc . ( Steeb and Johnston , 1981 ) , the Decision Conferences of Decisions and Designs , Inc . ( Buede and Waslov , 1981 ; Adehnan , 1982 ; Kelly , 359 Gulick and Stewart , 1980 ; and Patterson , Randall and Stewart , 1981 ) , and the Colab of Xerox Palo Alto Research Cente ( Stefik , et . al . , 1985 ) . In universities , the decision conference is illustrated by : the Decision Tectronics Laboratory at AUNY Albany ( Quinn , Rohrbaugh , and McGrath , 1985 ) ; the Planning Laboratory at the University of Arizona ( Applegate , Konsynsk and Nunamaker , 1986a , 1986b ) ; the Cooperative GDSS at New York University ( Bui and Sarke , 1984 ) ; and the Decision Roon ( Gray , 1981 ) . Although most GDSS ' s focus on decisionmaking and involve formal decision technologies of some kind , there are importan variants which begin with the notion of facilitating simple group collaboration around common tasks such as setting meetings sharing information , outlining ideas and evaluating proposals rather than only facilitating group decisioninaking . The impor tance of these variants is that they bring whole new kings of capabilities to support group work . Many of these capabilities such as outlining , word processing , or spreadsheet analysis , already exist for individuals but generally have not been tailore ~ for groups . Nor has the supporting common infrastructure been developed . Although in prototype stages , we believe thes , represent significant new types of GDSS not uncovered in our previous survey . These are the Collaborative Laboratory and th , Group Network . The Collaborative Laboratory The collaborative laboratory is focused on computer support for fact - to - face group work . Although decisionmaking ant problem solving might be involved in group work , the Laboratory does not involve the use of formal decision models ant quantitative techniques . Rather , it focuses on writing and argumentation ; involves verbal models and qualitative technique through the manipulation of text - oriented data and graphical images , which are the most common form of data used in grou meetings . Physically , the collaborative laboratory looks similar to the decision conference . It consists of workstations that are buil into a conference table to permit eye contact and that communicate with one another and with a shared electronic chalkboard The electronic chalkboard is contrasted as follows with the conventional chalkboard : " A chalkboard provides a shared and focused memory for a meeting . Chalkboards allow flexible placement of text and figures , and this complements our human capabilities for manipulating spatial memories . But space is limited and items disappear when their space is needed for something else . Rearranging items is inconvenient because they must be manually redrawn and then erased . Handwriting on a chalkboard can be illegible . Chalkboards are also unreliable for information storage . They are used in rooms that are often shared by many groups . Text and figures created in one meeting may be erased by the next group to use the room . If an issue requires several meetings to resolve , then some other means must be used to save the information between meetings . Many things that are awkward with chalkboards are easy with computers . Computers provide nmch greater flexibility for rearranging text and figures with window systems and drawing aids . Computers can create text in fonts that are crisp and reproducible . File systems for today ' s computers make it possible to redisplay information from previous meetings , to revisit old arguments , to show the history of a series of arguments , and to resume discussions . Computer displays can replicate the objects under discussion and place them where everyone can see them , point to them and change them . Participation can feel less like being a member of a committee , and more like being a member of a community barn - rMsing . " ( Stefik , et . al . ) The collaborative laboratory also consists of text - oriented tools for collaboration . Among the tools are a common human machine interface , WYSIWIS ( What You See Is What I See ) for presentation of images of shared information for all participants public ( shared ) and private ( not shared ) windows on the workstations , and applications such as a group method of preparin ~ outlines of ideas and associated text , and a group method of evaluating plans and programs that have already been developed The group inethod for outlining is similar to individual tools for outlining such as Thinktank , but includes additiona features to specifically aid group collaboration . For example , it works for multiple participants or a single user , it separates th , brainstorming task of outlining from the ordering task , and it saves all ideas even if they do not fit into the outline until th , last possible moment . As the name suggests , the collaborative laboratory is aimed at facilitating equal participation among essentially equa members of a work group . The multiuser interface is intended to discourage control over the group activity by any on , participant by equalizing the access of all participants to displays and shared data . In reality , as is the case with all GDSS , th , technology requires turn - taking , with only one person writing or editing shared text , or speaking , at the same time . However because turn - taking is facilitated by the multiuser interface and because participants can work in wither the shared or publi , spaces and easily move back and forth between them , the dynamic flow of collaborative group work appears highly supporte ~ by the technology . The only current illustration of the collaborative laboratory that we are aware of is Colab at Xerox Palo Alto Researc Center ( Stefik , 1985 ) . It is currently a part of the Colab Project . 360 The Group Network The group network is focused on interactive computer support for small groups in geographically dispersed but nearby locations such as offices within a building or a building complex . It differs from asynchronous computer conferencing in that it is real - time and interactive . In fact , it is the participant ' s ability to access and manipulate information dynamically by use of computer - based tools that is the distinguishing characteristic of the group network . Each participant can be seated in his or her own office at a microcomputer workstation with a keyboard and pointing device and a speaker telephone and can communicate directly with the other participants in the meeting by voice and shared information on the workstation displays . Each workstation has public and shared spaces , terminal linking , meeting scheduling , bit map sharing , and shared applications such as graphics , word processing and spreadsheeting which permit all participants to create , edit , or simply exchange graphics , text of numbers ( though only one person at a time can do so ) . The meeting scheduler application illustrates how interaction takes place over the network . A meeting chair calls , conducts and terminates meetings . The chairperson determines who has permission to enter calendar commands at any given time , when voting begins and ends , and when control of shared space is given or taken away . The meeting scheduler application displays who is part of the meeting and when they enter and exit the meeting . It allows each participant ' s public schedule to be viewed by all and their private schedule by themselves ; the public and private schedules scroll up and down together . The meeting scheduler allows participants to vote for a preferred meeting time and displays the results at each workstation ; when a time is agreed each participant ' s public schedule is automatically posted with the meeting . The integrated group network exists only in prototypes and is illustrated by the work of the MIT Laboratory for Computer Science ( Sarin and Grief , 1985 ) . Stand alone applications for group work exist in commercial form for graphics teleconferencing ( Pferd , Peralta and Prendegast , 1979 ) , interactive word processing , and computer aided drafting . INVENTORY OF EXISTING SYSTEMS With the exception of decision conferences , it is extremely difficult to inventory existing GDSSs . There are probably thousands of electronic boardrooms , each built more or less custom with new office construction or modification , and designed by an architecture or engineering firm with technical consultation from an audiovisual provider . Teleconferencing facilities on the other hand are somewhat rare with no more than three dozen private teleconference facilities in existence in the U . S . and probably only one - half dozen public facilities . Information centers are a relatively new phenomenon being promoted by the providers of large computer mainframes and currently being developed in a majority of established data processing installations in the U . S . The providers of the information centers are in the first instance the data processing organization itself and , secondly , the computer vendor who supplies concepts , equipment and software to the data processing organization . Only in the case of decision conferences do we have a GDSS that is relatively easily identified separate from its institutional context and provided to the market as a " product " that can therefore be inventoried . Table 3 presents an overview of major GDSS providers , their systems , and the functions performed by the systems . Several general observations can be made based on information about these systems . 1 . There are about three general functions and 1 - 2 dozen specific functions that are provided in support of decision conferences : a . structured decision analysis decision trees multiattribute utility b . structured group process social judgment analysis delphi technique nominal group technique c . collaboration support data management graphic display decision documentation tutoring decision analysis consultation group process facilitation meeting facility vote tabulation and display 2 . Only three of the systems in the inventory constitute a complete package ( i . e . , hardware , software , organiza - tionware and people operating as a system and providing most of the functions listed above ) . Of these three systems , only one is available for purchase as a " turn - key " package ( Perceptronics , Inc . ' s GROUP DECISION 361 TABLE 3 . OVERVIEW OF MAJOR GDSS PROVIDERS PR 0 VID ER S YS TEM F UNC TI O NS Applied Futures , Inc . Compshare Decisions + Designs , Inc . EXECUCOM Institute for the Future MIT Colnmunity Dialog Project * MIT Laboratory for for Computer Science Perceptronics , Inc . SMU Decision Room * Project SRI International SUNY , Albany Decision Techtronics Group UCLA Cognitive Systems Laboratory University of Arizona Planning Laboratory Xerox PARC CONSENSOR ( hard / software ) SYSTEM W ( software ) EXPRESS ( software ) Decision conference ( complete package ) IFPS ( software ) N / A - research N / A - research ( hardware / software ) RTCAL , MBlink ( complete package ; research only ) GROUP DECISION AID N / A - research ( hardware / software ) QUICKTREE and APLTYER N / A - public svs . ( complete package ) N / A - research ( math models / software PLEXYS software COLAB - research ( complete package ) Vote tabulation and display Data management , modeling statistical analysis , graphics , report generation PC communications Interactive decision analysis ( 6 models ) , conference facility , decision analysis , consultation Interactive financial modeling , data management , graphics Research / Consulting oll teleconferencing Interactive decision analysis ( 3 models ) Computer support of geo - graphically separated local group work Interactive decision tree ; analysis ; tutor ; documentation Financial modeling , futures forecasting , relational data management , graphics , conferences Interactive decision tree analysis for individuMs Internative decision analysis ( 6 models ) , data management , graphics , decision and process consulting Group decision theory and analysis Electronic brainstorming stakeholder identification and analysis , organization analysis , knowledge management , graphics , report generation , PC network Computer support of face - to - face group work * No longer exist AID ) . Other systems ( Decisions and Designs , Inc . , SUNY , Albany and University of Arizona ) are in - house decision conference facilities which are available for outside use on a fee - for - service basis . Still other systems are for in - house research only ( Xerox PARC , MIT , University of Minnesota , New York University ) . 3 . Several of the systems ( SMU Decision Room Project and MIT Community Dialog Project ) are now defunct . 4 . There is a tendency towards greater and greater integration within , between and among the various functions provided in a GDSS . For example , information center products like SYSTEM W now integrate several software capabilities ( data management , graphics , statistical analysis , modeling , report generation , and PC communica - tions ) in a single system . Traditionally , these functions have been provided through separate , or only partially linked , software products . Similarly , versions of Group Decision Aid now under development include the array of decision models used by Decisions and Designs ; and marketing plans call for greater emphasis on group processes in addition to the hardware and software of group decision aid . 5 . As the four types of GDSS suggest , GDSSs can take a variety of forms . Generally , the more sophisticated the GDSS technology the more dramatic is the intervention into the group ' s work processes . DeSanctis and Gallupe ( 1986 ) have identified three levels of GDSS , based upon the nature of the intervention into the group ' s work 362 processes , that fits nicely with our foregoing classification of GDSS . We adopt those levels here but sharpen the distinction . At the simplest level GDSS provide features aimed at removing common barriers to group work and communication , such as unequal consideration of ideas , dominance by individuals , peer pressure , and loss of autonomy . These features include anonymous input of ideas and preferences , and large screens for instantaneous display of ideas , and secret voting and compilation . The level is illustrated by the electronic boardroom or computer - supported conference room . At another level , GDSS provide specific group techniques aimed at structuring the group ' s work and decision processes . These techniques might include : planning tools such as brainstorming , stakeholder identification and analysis , or organization analysis ; modeling tools that support qualitative and quantitative decision analysis such as decision trees , risk analysis , social judgment analysis or multiattribute utility analysis ; and group process tools from the organization development field such as process observation , team building and reality testing . Group members aided by a facilitator work with these tools together and view both inputs and results simultaneously , again using a large common screen . This level is illustrated by the decision conference above . At a third level , GDSS structure group communication patterns and select and arrange the rules to be applied during a meeting . There are no existing systems of this type , but teleconferencing and computer conferencing exhibit some features of such a system . SUMMARY OF THE CURRENT STATUS OF GDSS ' S The clearest summary statement that can be made about the current status of GDSSs is their current reality is greater than in 1983 when we first examined these systems , but also far less than might be expected given their need and promise . For example , in our 1983 paper , we referred to a paper by Huber ( 1982b ) which stated that " a number of academic research groups and private - sector corporations are developing or employing group decision support systems " and listed eight such organizations . 4 We began our 1983 assessment of the state - of - the - art of GDSS ' s with Huber ' s list . Based on subsequent telephone conversations with Huber and our own assessments , we discovered that only two of eight organizations studied ( Perceptronics and Decisions and Designs ) had operational systems that were in use and available for purchase , and most of the systems had never come to fruition ; that some systems were being considered for development ( eg . EXECUCOM ' s ) ; and that one relatively new GDSS used by State government agencies had been developed and was in active use ( that at the Institute of Government and Policy Studies at SUNY , Albany ) . Among the three extant organizations we found : the hardware / software offered by Perceptronics and the software offered by Decisions and Designs were in the public domain ; that these systems were only marginally successful in that they appear to only break even ; and that those developing the systems believe that GDSSs will do better in the next five years , although none could explain in detail why they felt that way . In short , GDSSs currently remain more prospect , promise and possibility than successfully operating reality . Nevertheless , we believe that GDSSs , and particularly the hardware and software technologies that underlie them , will continue to receive public and private investments . They are a good idea . People who participate in the decision conferences are uniformly enthusiastic about the experience . The analytic tools are useful in structuring decision problems , though sometimes overly complex for most participants . And , the hardware both performs useful functions in support of the participants and adds futuristic imagery that participants enjoy . III . EVALUATION OF EXPERIENCE WITH GDSS SYSTEMS Despite considerable enthusiasm for the concept of GDSS ' s , there is a considerable shortfall in the actual deployment and use of such systems at this time . In this section we briefly trace the evolution of GDSS system efforts , evaluate the benefits and problems with GDSS systems to date , and assess the barriers we see to successful GDSS implementation as it has been attempted thus far . THE EVOLUTION OF GDSS EFFORTS We identify two major streams of evolution in GDSS efforts . One is the study of decisionmaking itself , both at the indi - vidual and group levels ( cf . De Sanctis and Gallupe , 1986 ) . This stream has had a research component that has concentrated on discovering the psychological or cognitive processes of individuals and groups involved in reaching conclusions , and on the sociology of small - group interactions . It has also had a development component concentrating on finding ways of facilitating group interaction toward reaching decisions more quickly and with greater consensus and conviviality , mainly from the Organi - zation Development perspective . Neither of these components of the decision research field has been particularly concerned with technology per se . Rather , the focus has been on how the people involved in the decisionmaking processes think and behave . 4 The organizations in the list were : CACI , Inc . , Cleveland State University , Decisions and Designs , Inc . , Execucom Sys - tems Corp . , Georgia Institute of Technology , K . R . Hammond Associates , Perceptive Decisions ( Perceptronics ) , and Southern Methodist University . 363 The other major stream has been the development of technologically supported means of collecting , managing and displayir information that might be useful in decision situations ( Sprague , 1981 ; Steeb and Johnson , 1981 ; Stodolsky , 1981 ; Turoff an Hiltz , 1982 ) . This field has been dominated by an engineering perspective . The goal has been to make new discoveries i decision methods or decision technology and apply them in the creation of tools that people in decision making situations mig find helpful . The major areas of this work have been in decision analysis and other fornts of decision modeling and huma information processing through interactive use of digital computers , electronic storage media , electronic communications , an electronic information display . The Electronic Boardroom and the Teleconferencing Facility have developed primarily from the technology perspectiv These embody technologies that facilitate rapid collection and tallying of votes by participants , information sharing throu ~ video displays of computer - based information , and communication over distances between decision meeting participants i various locations . Organizationware for these technologies has generally been limited to protocols for using them for the specific purposes . The Information Center and the Local Area Group Network also have been developed primarily from an engineering poil of view , but with the goal of making " friendly " technologies that users find genuinely helpful . They embody refined interfao and non - procedural languages to provide the user with a means to convey his requests to the information system easily . The systems act as interpreters of the requests of the user , and build the appropriate system - level commands required for tl information system to execute the requests . Organizationware for such systems includes information bases used in the analys , requested by the users , and protocols for using the system . The Decision Conference and the Collaboration Laboratory result of an attempted union of the psycho - social perspecti , and the technology perspective . The technologies developed for other GDSS applications are brought together to facilita information acquisition and sharing . Knowledge of group decision processes is applied to shaping technologies into systems th ~ facilitate these processes . Decision analysis and modeling systems provide the means to utilize available data and participant inputs to deal with " what if " questions . These are the most ambitious of the GDSS efforts , because it attempts to Inert the two perspectives that previously have been segregated . Organizationware for these applications embodies the values an ideologies inherent in the designers ' views of what group decisionmaking is ( or should be ) like . To date , efforts to crea Decision Conference and Collaboration Laboratory facilities continue to be heavily influenced by the technology perspectiv mainly because there still is uncertainty about the nature of decisionmaking processes . Although they embrace a broad vie of psycho - social theory about group decision processes , they remain more influenced by the rational model of decisionmakir than by the " political , " " garbage can " or " program " models . The strong influence of the technology perspective in the evolution of GDSS ' s has had two important consequences . Firs most of the efforts to apply these technologies have affected decision processes either too much or too little to provide good assessment of their effects . Electronic Boardroom and Teleconference Facility technolgies affect decision meetings on by speeding up certain common tasks ( eg . voting ) or adding flexibility to meeting opportunities ( eg . teleconferencing whi ( permits meetings without travel ) . Neither claims to improve the quality of decisionmaking appreciably . Use of Informatic Centers and Local Area Group Networks might improve the quality of decisions , but they typically are used outside the actu ; decision meeting context to prepare for meetings . The Decision Conference and Collaborative Laboratory approaches attem 1 to improve the actual process and consequence of decision meetings , but they nevertheless imposes the designers ' views , the decision process on the participants . Despite recent empirical research ( e . g . , Gallupe , DeSanctis and Dickson , 1986 ) , tt question of the qualitative impact of advanced GDSS ' s on decision meetings remains unsettled . Second , the bias toward technological development makes GDSS efforts very " supply - push " in their orientation . Tt designers of GDSS systems usually develop technological aids that they presume will be needed by decisionmakers . This is i contrast to the " demand - pull " forces of innovation , in which extant demand lures developers into creating a supply that mee that demand . The question of whether supply or demand comes first is hard to answer , but it is easier to build technical aids 1 decisionmaking than it is to paint a clear picture of what decisionmaking is , , so the technical orientation often takes precedenc Sometimes these new technologies are widely adopted and used , but it still is not always clear whether the technologies real improve the condition of those who use them . PERCEIVED BENEFITS OF GDSS USE We identify three classes of benefits that appear to accrue from GDSS use . Affective Benefits First , GDSS ' s appear to bring " affective " benefits , in the sense that they enliven meetings and in some cases help encoura ~ a sense of group cohesion . Computer - supported systems for graphics , voting , communications , data analysis , and modelir appears to increase some participants ' interest in the group activity . Some of these technologies are interesting and excitir to watch in action ; for example , computer - generated color graphics can be fascinating . Similarly , hands - on data input systen such as voting systems seem to elicit group interest because that they get users directly involved with the technology . Use , 364 the system requires participants to go through a shared learning experience to use the technology correctly , and this alone can facilitate cooperation in a manner that affects the substance of the subsequent discussions . The transference of some of the protocol of decisionmaking onto technological devices appears to reduce the ammount of intra - group tension in difficult decision situations . The technology is perceived , correctly or incorrectly , as " neutral " in respect to the issues being discussed . Whether these affective benefits of GDSS technology truly contribute to the quality of resulting decisions is unclear . On the one hand , it can be argued that improvement of the general atmosphere for decisionmaking ( eg . making the process more structured or more " professional " ) results in improvements in individuals ' contributions to the process . Under this assumption , the technology constitutes an effective " intervention " in the process of group decisionmaking , with the intent of getting the decisionmakers to cooperate and arrive at decisions more quickly . The goal is not to provide more information , or even better information , but to use information technology to secure cooperation among participants by getting them to focus more quickly on the issues . On the other hand , decisions that are reached more quickly or with greater group consensus are not necessarily better than decisions arrived at through less expeditious and enjoyable means . Some research indicates that techniques for facilitating group cooperation often result in poorer judgements than the " best " decisiunmaker in the group would arrive at on his own ( Rohrbaugh , 1979 , 1981 ) . In such cases , the improved speed and solidarity with which group decisions are made saves time of the group participants and makes them feel better about the decision process but the larger goal of iinproving the quality of decisions is not achieved . Facilitation of Protocols GDSS technologies appear to facilitate execution of the protocols of group decisionmaking . Group decisionmaking typically rests on protocols for focusing decision attention on the key issues , iteratively eliciting the views of the issues from the partici - pants , and attempting to reach some threshold of agreement among participants about what action to take . GDSS technologies seem to focus participants ' attention more quickly and precisely on the major issues embodied in the decision problem . This happens through several means . In the simplest systems , such as computer - supported graphic display , it occurs through the replacement of text and tables with charts and graphs . Many people find text and tables difficult to read for " significant differences " among the data elements , whereas charts and graphs quickly display the highlights of the data elements and the differences between them . The particular advantages of computer - generated graphics are that summary tabular data can be immediately translated into graphic displays , which saves time and allows more flexibility in choosing what to display and when , and that coinputer - generated graphics can be manipulated to highlight specific features of the data ( eg . changing the x and y axis scales ) that might be of interest . Voting systems have similar but more pronounced effects . Voting systems allow for rapid identification of variance in participant attitudes on given issues . Anonymous voting helps reduce bias of dominant individuals in the group , and results are tabulated rapidly and displayed to a common screen in a summary format . Agreement and disagreement on issues is readily apparent . When confidence measurement is introduced to weight votes of individuals , greater interpretive information is available for assessing the meaning of the votes . Voting - based decision protocols are predicated on the assumption that pluralities ( or , better , majorities ) signify substantial collective confidence in a given choice . Sometimes voting constitutes the end of the decision process ( one side wins , the other loses ) . But most decision situations votes serve the intermediate role of helping to identify where consensus is lacking . Electronic voting systems are designed to facilitate the use of voting by identifying presence or lack of consensus , allowing issues to be discussed and debated again , and new information to be brought to bear on the discussion . Information retrieval and modeling / simulation systems facilitate identification of key issues by providing a means of probing the assumptions and facts underlying a particular problem . Information retrieval systems allow new data to be brought into the discussion . These data can be used to clarify the factual bases of the discussion and to reveal where participants ' beliefs about the facts are in error . Models make it possible to relax or tighten constraints , change exogenous variable values , and to bring in or throw out various variables from consideration . Simulations reveal whether outcomes of given changes in assumptions affect the final outcome substantially , allowing sensitivity testing . These aspects of GDSS technology build on established protocols of group decisionmaking . Research has not shown defini - tively whether these protocols are always effective at yielding good decisions , but collective experience as well as research indicates that there is wisdom in them . All protocols for group decisionmaking rest on assumptions about the goals of decision - making rest on other assumptions about human behavior in group decisionmaking processes . As noted by Huber ( 1982b ) , most GDSS ' s assume rational decisionmaking processes , and do not deliberately facilitate alternative models of group interaction . This close adherence to the rational model automatically limits assessment of improvements in decisionmaking protocols due to GDSS technologies . Quality of Information Available for Decisions GDSS systems in some cases appear to improve the quality of information available to the decisionmaker . This is achieved 365 in two ways : use of on - line data bases to provide information from sources not otherwise accessible to participants in thei decisionmaking meetings ; and the provision of modeling and simulation capability for reducing , assessing and integratin information into the decision process . The use of on - line data bases in decision conferences is not very widespread at present . The most advanced systems do allo ~ searches of large corporate or other data bases for relevant information , but due to the complexities of accessing , reducing an , displaying such information in a real - time manner , such systems are rare . More often , the information to be used in a decisio conference will be brought into the meeting after being compiled in advance by staff support personnel . Computer - based system provide important assistance here , but such uses of information systems do not constitute the " real - time " use of data base envisioned in the more elaborate characterizations of QDSS systems . The more common uses of GDSS systems to improve the quality of information are found in settings that use modelin and decision analysis capabilities to filter out and analyze data prepared in advance and brought into the meetings . Typicall 2 decisions rest in part on factual data that need not be current to the minute ( eg . the costs of various proposals , or financi ~ data on the previous month ' s performance ) , and in part on perceptions of group participants about the feasibility and efflcac of various options for action . The systems seldom provide any new factual information , but rather provide a means of usin factual information to explore the sensibility of different assumptions . They also provide an opportunity to segregate factue information from biases and assumptions , and systematically test the ways in which the facts coupled with various assumption influence some objective function agreed on by the group . The objective function might be a " final " goal or it might be a intermediate step towards a goal . In either case , GDSS can contribute to the precision and care used to deal with the facts an assumptions participants bring to meetings . Whether these capabilities improve the quality of decisions depends on the ability of the individual participants to filtc through available information and make sense out of it given the challenge of the decision problem . It is widely acknowledge that improving decisions by simply providing more information is not possible . Too nmch information quickly results in overloa of the participants ' abilities to deal with the issues , and in some cases can be disruptive to the decision process by providin a confusing array of details for participants to disagree over . The common observation in the literature is that the " right information must be provided , but the question of what is the " right " information remains . As existing research on the use c models in complex decision processes suggests , providing more precise data on the ramifications of decisions can disrupt th process of decisionmaking by sharpening participants ' views of who might gain and who might lose from various options ( Kin and Kraemer , 1983 ) . Simply connecting the group decision meeting to on - line data bases is not likely to dramatically improv the process or quality of the decisionmaking process . Nevertheless , there is a real possibility that the benefits of GDSS system for testing the assumptions of participants given available data will prove to be among the most important provided by thi technology . Summary We find that GDSS systems can provide three kinds of benefits : affective benefits in which participants ' attituteds towar , cooperation and decision effectiveness are increased by use of GDSS technologies ; protocol benefits , in which the importan tasks of focusing on key issues and assessing differences of opinion among participants are facilitated ; and information benefit , , in which GDSS technologies either provide more useful information or facilitate the application of available factual informatio to evaluation of the assumptions of group members . Two observations about these benefits must be made . First , it is not at all clear whether M1 of these benefits accrue i the use of GDSS systems , or under what conditions they do accrue . Obviously , some of the benefits depend on the presenc of GDSS technologies that enable them ( eg . voting systems are needed to facilitate voting protocols ) . But assuming that th systems are in place , we do not know what other variables are important in achieving the desired benefits . The fact that man of the commercial systems have been abandoned suggests that something was missing . At best , we are at present constrained i : our assessment of the benefits of these systems to claims of the developers and participants and our observations about whic systems survive and which are abandoned . Our overall judgement is that there is promise in these systems even though th specific claims of their promoters are often not realized as extensively or quickly as hoped for . Second , it is not clear what effect these systems have on the quality of the decisions resulting from their use . Studie of teleconferencing and structured group decision processes suggest that these systems can expedite decision processes an , increase participants ' feelings of solidarity about group decisions and satisfaction with the process . But the linkage betwee these perceptions and the net consequences of decisions for the welfare of the group , orgainzation , or society is not established IV . BARRIERS TO SUCCESSFUL USE OF GDSS SYSTEMS We identify a number of barriers to successful use of GDSS systems . For ease of presentation , we divide these int three categories : technical problems ; incomplete understanding of the decisionmaking process ; and problems with the GDS ' , " package . " 366 Technical Problems GDSS systems depend on a number of technologies : computer processing and storage , graphics displays , data base manage - ment systems , statistical processors , decision analysis and modeling programs , communications , and distributed input devices . At the current stage of technical development , there are a number of shortcomings in these technologies that affect GDSS use . We summarize these here . Accessibility and flexibility in using computing resources . In a few cases it is possible to include all the computing resources necessary for a full - scale GDSS in the conference room . Many of the newer systems use microcomputers , which can be accom - modated in the decision room , but these systems do not stand alone . Access to major processing power or on - line data bases cannot easily be accomplished using PC ' s , so it becomes necessary to link the input / output technology ( eg . terminals , video displays , printers ) in the conference room with the computing resources located somewhere else . This is technically feasible , but there are problems of cost , speed and reliability of data communications for this purpose . Increased use of GDSS ' s and / or decreased costs for data communication are necessary to overcome this problem . Display Technology . Despite continuing performance and price improvements in computer and video technology , some lingering problems remain . One is the fact that most video projection equipment is not designed to operate for computer display , especially if high - resolution graphics are to be used . The good quality computer video display systems , while less costly than their predecessors , are still quite expensive . A good quality color projector system that can display a medium - resolution image large enough for use by a group of 20 people costs a minimum of $ 10 , 000 , while the high - resolution projectors cost much more . The use of such systems must be frequent enough or important enough to warrant this investment . Again , the use of GDSS ' s requiring such displays must increase and / or the cost of such displays decrease before this barrier will be overcome . Graphics Capability . A key component of many GDSS systems is the ability to displa ) the results of analyses quickly and effectively . There have been many major advancements in graphics in the past few years , but problems remain . A particularly pressing problem is the difficulty of rapidly , preferably automatically , turning computer - generated output data into good quality graphic displays . Another problem arises from the limitations of the display technology to present more than a portion of the relevant data at one time . The working matrix information relevant to a given decision can dramatically exceed the ammount of data that can be displayed on the screen or the video projector , so the operator of the sy , ' tem must constantly move different parts of the display into the " window " provided by the screen . Even with a fast operator this can be disconcerting to the participants . This problem might be overcome through use of very high resolution display technologies that allow for compressing the full display onto a single screen . If the screen were large enough , all participants could see the entire display at once . We are not aware of systems that do this as yet . Modeling and Analysis Software . Decision Conference and Collaboration Laboratory systems depend on modeling and analysis software to permit the structuring of decision problems and modeling of various decision outcomes given agreed - on input data . Rapid strides have been made in recent years in the creation of systems such as spread - sheets , but more elaborate modeling capabilities for doing simulations , econometrics , are required . These require much more powerful computer support , and as noted above , this means linking the conference room to a remote computer facility . It also usually means that a highly skilled modeler who is familiar with the system must be present to run the analyses . There probably will be continued improvements in modeling and analysis software , and these will probably prove useful to GDSS systems . But when the needed improvements will appear is not clear . Integrated Data Base / Modeling Capability , Most Decision Conference and Collaboration systems depend for modeling mainly on the data supplied by participants in the conference or in a previous conference . To achieve the kinds of integrated data base / modeling uses of computing envisioned by Huber ( 1982b ) , it will be necessary to link together modeling capabilities with data base management systems that can access large data bases . As yet this has not been accomplished in the GDSS systems . Incomplete Understanding of the Deeisionmaking Process The study of individual and group decisionmaking is a relatively new field , replete with unanswered questions about decision behavior . In part this shortfall results from a lack of understanding of cognitive processes generally , and in part from the inherent ambiguities surrounding complex decision situations that make the study of decisionmaking empirically difficult . This is the primary reason most efforts to develop supportive techniques and technologies for decisionmaking have focused on the relatively narrow , rational view of the decision process . This view is comparatively simple and straightforward : decision participants attempt to optimize their decision choices based on careful specification of the facts and refinement of their understanding of the probable consequences of their available options . But as experience shows , and as the other models of decision behavior attempt to describe , this rational viewpoint is limited in its utility to " real world " decisionmaking because it specifically excludes the baffling non - rational or quasi - rational behaviors individuals often exhibit . The rational viewpoint has an important role to play , and sometimes does describe the behavior of individuals in real decision processes . But in many cases it is an " ideal " description of behavior that bears little resemblance to reality . 367 This discrepancy between ideal and realistic accounts of decision behavior creates a peculiar paradox for the developmen and application of GDSS technologies . On one hand , creation of discrete decision tools requires a specific model of decisiol behavior , and the rational model of decison behavior is the best developed and most internally consistent model available . I provides a clear - cut specification around which the decision tools can be designed . Other models of decision behavior haw the singular drawback of being " fuzzy " in their accounting of decision behavior . They leave room for inconsistency , ignorance deliberate deviousness , and even irrationality on the part of individuals . They specifically incorporate the ambiguities tha make system design difficult or even impossible . For this reason , most of the efforts to develop GDSS technology have avoide ( these other models . On the other hand , the rational model is demonstrably weak as a descriptor of actual decisionmaking behavior . The ver2 attributes of the decision process it excludes are often found in complex and important decision situations . To the extent tha GDSS systems are developed around the rational model , they seem doomed from the start to a limited set of decision situations Yet , the ambiguities inherent in the other models of decision behavior work against the creation of tools that genuinely sic decisionmaking . We do not mean to suggest that there is no future for GDSS technology with respect to alternative models of decisioJ behavior . As Huber ( 1982b ) points out , one can think of several ways in which QDSS systems might fit each of the model of decision behavior he identifies . GDSS technology could be put to work to help identify problems and opportunities , refin , understanding of the consequences of options , and clarify the role of the decisionmakers in the process of dealing with thes , issues . Within the political / competitive model , GDSS systems at the level of each competitive group might aid in identificatioJ of the competing parties and assessment of their strengths and weaknesses . In the garbage can model GDSS systems migh help identify solutions that have been available " on the shelf " to fit the problems that have arisen . And in the program mode GDSS systems might be used to identify the relevant behaviors of various units and subunits in contributing to problems o : their solutions . These kinds of GDSS aids to decisionmaking could be built and tried , although to date we have seen no system : that are designed to do such things . Curiously , existing decision support systems ( not GDSS systems ) have been applied to such uses , and these provide a mode of what could happen with GDSS technology under the right circumstances . Research on computerized models in support o decisionmaking in conflictual problem domains ( Kraemer , Dickhoven , Fallows and King , forthcoming ; Dutton and Kraemer 1986 ) suggests that these systems are used in highly political ways by various political factions in the decision arena . Th , systems become , in essence , an integrated part of the political decisionmaking process . It is unclear whether use of suct systems in political decisionmaking actually improves the quality of resulting decisions , but most of the participants in politics decisionmaking that use such models believe they have become essential to the process . Perhaps the widespread deployment o GDSS technology among competing interests in politically sensitive decision situations might have the same results . Continued research into the decision process is an essential requirement for the development of more effective GDSS systems especially in decision settings that do not conform closely to the rational model of decision behavior . Interestingly , however , thi : does not mean that research on decision processes must precede new GDSS development . On the contrary , we believe that th , development and application of GDSS tools is an important component of doing research on decision processes . In the propel settings , and under the right controls , these tools can be powerful experimental treatments for studying decision processes . Problems with the GDSS " ' Package " As we noted in Section II , it is useful to characterize the combination of GDSS technics , organizationware and people as " package . " Successful application and routinization of GDSS systems is impossible if the components of the package are missing Without the enabling technologies provided by hardware and software , GDSS systems are little more than dreams . Moreover the pieces of the package must be integrated in a manner that is technically proficient , organizationally stable , financially sound and demonstrably productive to its clients and customers . Here we must step back for a moment to consider the evolution of GDSS systems discussed earlier . Much of the research oi graphics display , decision modeling , and decision conferencing was , and in some cases still is , supported by the U . S . Departmen of Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA ) . DARPA supports advanced research to discover whether emergen technologies have important military application . Over the past two decades DARPA has spent a great deal of money ol research and development of computing and information technologies . Some of the developments that originated from suct support have been classified , but among those that have not , some have found subsequent commercial application and som ~ have been tried in the marketplace and have failed . We place GDSS systems in this latter category . All of the DARPA - spawned systems have been developed with defense - related concepts of the decisionmaking process iI mind . These efforts were aimed mainly at creating the technical support for these processes . This concentration on technolog 3 has pushed the state of the art forward , but it has not built a base of institutional and market capability necessary fo ~ commercial success . Both DDI and Perceptronics were DARPA project spin - offs , and neither has been particularly successfu in the marketplace . The SUNY Albany Decision Techtronics Group was a spin - off of the DDI effort , and presents a differen ' but no more financially profitable case . DTG ' s institutional home , the Institute for Government and Policy Studies , is a public 368 non profit organization affiliated with a major university . Its state - funded budget helps defray costs , and its service mission ties it closely with New York state agencies that might use its services . DTG management would like to make the system " profitable " by running enough conferences to cover the operating costs of the enterprise , and hopefully , produce a surplus to support research . Perhaps it will be able to do so . But DTG and the other university - based GDSS systems ( which are about the only active research centers in GDSS at this time ) do not provide an adequate model for efficient and competitive service enterprise . Summary The comparatively simple GDSS systems of electronic boardroom and teleconferencing are established in use , although the full extent of such use is difficult to ascertain . The technologies are practical and improvements are being made constantly . The price / performance ratios of the underlying technologies are falling . In most cases , these GDSS tools are not designed specifically to facilitate group decision processes in the large sense . Rather , they facilitate discrete aspects of decision processes such as display of data , recording and display of votes , and communications among members of the decision group . The Information Center is growing in use , and will probably see continued growth in the future . The technology is being developed by major computer hardware manufacturers who have a clear objective in supporting this technology : the expanded use of computer systems that require computer equipment . Again , however , these systems are not dependent on a detailed understanding of the processes of group decisionmaking . Often they are single - user systems applied to non - controversial problems such as finding a way to generate a report the user wants . They might come to play an important role in the real - time decision meeting by facilitating the report generation capabilities of information systems and information system users that make up the decision meeting . Local Area Group Networks are springing up as networking technologies become more widespread and accessible . Like teleconferencing centers , network technologies are merely enabling features that could eventually be the backbone of major group work projects . But they also serve more routine purposes , such as simple exchange of administrative information . This basic role for these systems is actually an asset to their chances for survival and eventual contribution to group decision processes , since these systems do not have to justify their existence only on facilitating group decision making . The Decision Conference and the Collaboration Laboratory are simultaneously the most problematic and promising appli - cation domains of GDSS systems . The technical systems necessary to create effective GDSS tools for real - time decision making are difficult to build , and the potential uses of such systems are not well specified . The most coherent specifications of the deci - sion process are built on the rational model of decisionmaking , which at best accounts for only a part of true decision behavior that takes place in group decisionmaking . Development of technical support for other models of decision behavior is a harder problem to tackle . Nevertheless , the development and use of the Decision Conference and Collaboration Laboratory types of GDSS in controlled experimental settings could facilitate research into the nature of decisionmaking where such understanding could be gained . V . THE LIKELY NEAR - TERM FUTURE OF GDSS ' S As we noted above , it is difficult to tell for certain where GDSS development is headed . We can , however , make some observations that might be of use in determining what the promise of GDSS ' s both as an area of research and development , and as a technological development of utility to decisionmakers . Likely Growth Rates in GDSS ' s For the next few years we beleive there will be relatively little growth in GDSS application at the " high " end of Decision Conferences and Collaboration Laboratories . The user base of these systems is still small , and the genuine utility of the systems is still insufficiently proven to provide evidence that the systems will be widely adopted in the short run . Still , there appears to be evidence of continued interest on the part of governmental funding agencies , so development will probably continue If reductions are made in the cost of the systems , and improvements are made in both the technology and in the other components of the GDSS package , there might be a significant acceleration in the growth rate within three to five years . We would characterize this area as still experimental , but with potential to become commercially viable . Those who enter this field will be taking on the risks normally associated with experimental systems and uncertain markets . The Technology There is little doubt that many of the problems now found with GDSS technology will be declining in the next few years . We anticipate that there will be continued improvements in the price / performance ratios of computer processor technology , which will put the technology more within reach of many organizations . Display technology is likely to improve in performance as well as price . Software will continue to be developed that facilitates data access , data analysis , decision analysis and modeling . These software improvements will probably be spurred in part by the extensive development efforts now underway to capitalize on the growing microcomputer market . More user - friendly interfaces will be built to facilitate end - user access to and use of data 369 bases . The one area of technology where we are uncertain of the future is in the creation and maintenance of the necessary dat ~ bases to support advanced GDSS uses , especially those requiring data that cut across organizational lines . For example , w , are doubtful that rapid progress will be made in the area of assembling for on - line use extensive corporate data bases , let alom those dealing with the kinds of political information Huber ( 1982b ) suggests would be necessary to support decisionmakinl under the political model . Knowledge of Decision Processes There is likely to be less spectacular progress in efforts to improve understanding of decision processes . Progress in this area depends on progress in other fields such as cognitive science and management science . There could be important breakthrough in this area , but rapid progress cannot be counted on . Rather , we see a slightly accelerating but still slow growth in knowledg , of decision processes . We believe experimental use of GDSS systems might help provide new knowledge on decisionmakinl processes , in much the same way that artificial intelligence technologies are being used to help with research on the functionin ~ of human cognition . This will require the establishment of ongoing research effort , however , and is not likely to result simpl : by the deployment and use of GDSS ' s in organizations . V . CONCLUSIONS The field of GDSS ' s is as yet not well developed , even as a concept . There are divergent and conflicting definitions o what the term means . As we have shown , the term can refer to very simple systems for voting and display of data , or t , highly integrated systems that incorporate voting , modeling , data analysis , decision analysis and data display . Moreover , eve1 among the simple technologies of GDSS ' s there has been only limited adoption and use in organizations . Most organizations conference rooms look like they did fifteen years ago - no computer terminals , no video displays , no modeling systems . Th , technology has been adopted by some organizations only to be subsequently abandoned . In such cases we can only conclud , that the technology was ineffective and / or uneconomical to use . Still , there is promise in this field . The benefits from GDSS use described in Section III suggest that further developmen and experimentation is warranted . We believe that non - profit institutions would be promising research environments for GDSS development at this time . h particular , universities and non - profit research laboratories are likely to be the hosts of productive efforts that move thes ~ systems forward . This is this is because these systems are still sufficiently experimental in nature to warrant investment al research endeavors . Although some for - profit companies have undertaken to build GDSS systems , they are not yet makinl much money . Perhaps the technology is still underdeveloped , and once more fully developed the markets will respond . On th ~ other hand , experience to date suggests that we still do not know whether there is anything inherent in the GDSS concept t ~ make the markets respond , even after technological improvements . We suggest two lines of further research into GDSS ' s that would be fruitful at this time . First , we think a more rigorous an ( detailed examination of the experiences with existing GDSS ' s would produce valuable information about the promises , problems and challenges involved in this technology . It would be worthwhile to examine carefully a number of significant successes iI use of GDSS systems as well as some notable failures . Some of these have available extensive data on the experiences with th , systems that could be studied . In any case , such a study would make it possible to assess the factors affecting GDSS use muc more fully than has been possible in this review . Second , we suggest that detailed experimental use of GDSS technologies be undertaken to investigate their effects oI decision processes . A useful means of conducting such research would be to assemble operating examples of all the majo : available systems , and scientifically test them in laboratory situations using controlled groups of participants and structure ( decision problems . A university would be a likely site for such research , since similar psychological studies are often done a universities using students as subjects . GDSS BIBLIOGRAPHY 1 . Adelman , Leonard 1982 . Real time computer support of decision analysis in a group setting . Paper presented at thq ORSA / TIMS meeting , Detroit , MI , April 18 - 21 . 2 . Adelman , Leonard . 1984 . Real time computer support for decision analysis in a group setting : Another class of decisiol support systems , Interfaces , 14 ( 2 ) : 75 - 83 . 3 . Adelman , Leonard , Michael L . Donnell , John F . Patterson and Jonathan J . Weiss . 1981 . Issues in the Design and Evaluatior of Decision - Analytic Aids . Technical Report TR 81 - 1 - 304 . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 4 . Administrative Management , 1982 . New ideas in conference rooms . September : 30 - 32 . 5 . Allardyce , Linda B . , Dorothy M . Amey , Phillip H . Feuerwerger and Roy M . Gulick . 1979 . Documentation of Decision - Aidin ! Software : DECISION Functional Description . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 370 6 . Allardyce , Linda B . , Dorothy M . Amey , Phillip H . Feuerwerger and Roy M . Gulick . 1979 . Documentation of Decision - Aiding Software : EVAL Functional Description . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 7 . Amey , Dorothy M . , Phillip H . Feuerwerger and Roy M . Gulick . 1979 . Documentation of Decision - Aiding Software : INFER Functional Description . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 8 . Amey , Dorothy M . , Phillip H . Feuerwerger and Roy M . Gulick . 1979 . Documentation of Decision - Aiding Software : OPINT Functional Description . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 9 . Amey , Dorothy M . , Phillip H . Feuerwerger and Roy M . Gulick . 1979 . Documentation of Decision - Aiding Software : RAM Functional Description . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs . 10 . Amey , Dorothy M . , Phillip H . Feuerwerger and Roy M . Gulick . 1979 . Documentation of Decision - Aiding Software : SCOR - ING RULE Functional Description . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 11 . Applegate , Lynda M . , Benn R . Kosynski and Jay F . Nunamaker . 1986 . Knowledge management in organizational planning . Working paper # PL - 16 . Tucson , AZ : Department of Management Information Systems , University of Arizona . 12 . Applegate , Lynda M . , Benn R . Kosynski and Jay F . Nunamaker . 1986 . A group decision support system for idea generation and issue analysis in organizational palnning . Working paper # PL - 17 . Tucson , Arizona : Department of Management Information Systems , University of Arizona . 13 . Bode , Joseph J . 1983 . An executive information system : a DSS case study , in George P . Huber ( ed . ) , DSS - 83 Transac - tions , Third International Conference on Decision Support Systems , June 27 - 29 , Boston , MA . Austin , TX : Institute for Advancement of Decision Support Systems , pp . 129 - 130 . 14 . Brea , City of . 1982 . A communications master plan for the Brea civic cultural center . Brea , CA : March , mimeo . 15 . Brown , Rex V . 1978 . Research on Decision - Analytic Technology . Final Report PR 78 - 11 - 25 . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 16 . Buede , Dennis M . Undated . Decision conferences at Decisions and Designs , Incorporated . 6 pages plus overhead slides . 17 . Buede , Dennis M . 1979 . Decision analysis : engineering science clinical art ? Paper prepared for Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency , November . 48 pages . 18 . Buede , Dennis M . and Kathleen A . Waslov . 1981 . Decision Analytic Workshops . Final Report PR 81 - 15 - 324 . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 19 . Business Week , 1976 . Corporate war rooms plug into the computer . August 23 : 65 , 67 . 20 . CACI , Inc . 1978 . CACI further development of evaluation methodologies for an interactive computer - based group decision making aid , final report . Arlington , VA : CACI , Inc . 21 . Chastain , Jean L . 1983 . Creation of an information center , DSS - 83 Transactions , Third International Conference on Decision Support Systems , June 27 - 29 , Boston , MA . Austin , TX : Institute for Advancement of Decision Support Systems , pp . 97 - 107 . 22 . Dalkey , Norm C . 1977 . Group decision making . Rep . UCLA - ENG - 7749 . Los Angeles , CA : School of Engineering and Applied Science . 23 . Dalkey , Norm C . 1975 . Group decision analysis . Rep . UCLA - ENG - 7571 . Los Angeles , CA : School of Engineering and Applied Science . 40 pages . 24 . DeSanctis , Geraldine and Brent Gallupe . 1985 . GDSS : A brief look at a new concept in decision support , 21st Annual Computer Personnel Research Conference , SIGCPR and SIGBDP , May 2 - 3 . 25 . Elfont , Mark 1982 . Group decision aid : an interactive comuter approach to decision making . Paper presented at the ORSA / TIMS Meeting , Detroit , MI , April 18 - 21 . 26 . Fischer , Gregory W . , Ward Edwards and Clinton W . Kelly , III . 1978 . Decision Theoretic Aids for Inference , Evaluation , and Decision Making : A Review of Research and Experience . Technical Report TR 78 - 1 - 30 . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 27 . Fischoff , Baruch , Bernard Goitein and Zur Shapira . 1981 . Subjective expected utility : a model of decision making , Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 32 ( September ) : 391 - 399 . 28 . Gardiner , P . C . and W . Edwards . 1975 . Public values : multiattribute utility management for social decision making . In Schwartz and Kaplan , eds . , Human Judgment and decision Processes . New York : Academic Press . 29 . Gray , Paul 1983 . Initial observations from the decision room project . In George P . Huber ( ed . ) , DSS - 83 Transactions , Third International Conference on Decision Support Systems , June 27 - 29 , Boston , MA , Transactions , pp . 135 - 138 . 371 30 . Gray , P . , Aronofsky , J . S . Berry , N . , Hehner , O . , Kane , G . R . and Perkins , T . E . 1981 . The SMU decision room project . In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Decision Support Systems , Execucom Systems Corporation , Austin , TX , pp . 122 - 129 . 31 . Grindlay , Andrew . 1980 . Information centres , Business Quarterly , Winter : 84 - 86 . 32 . Hammond , Kenneth R . Undated . Externalizing the parameters of quasirational thought . Boulder , CO : Institute of Behav - ioral Science , University of Colorado , mirneo . 33 . Hammond , Kenneth R . , J . L . Mumpower , and T . H . Smith . 1977 . Linking environmental models with models of human judgment ; a symmetrical decision aid , IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , 7 ( 5 ) : 358 - 367 . 34 . Hammond , L . W . 1982 . Management considerations for an information center , IBM Systems Journal , 21 ( 2 ) : 131 - 161 . 35 . Hiltz , S . R . and M . Turoff 1981 . The evolution of user behavior in a computerized conferencing system . Communications of : he ACM . 24 ( 2 ) : 739 - 751 . 36 . Hogarth , Robin M . , and Spyros Makridakis . 1981 . The value of decision making in a complex environment , Management Science , 27 ( 1 ) : 93 - 107 . 37 . Houston , V . 1983 . Survey : Three DSS Products Similar . MIS Week , September 14 , Section II , 2 - 5 . 38 . Howard , R . A . 1980 . An assessment of decision analysis , Operations Research . 39 . Huber , George P . 1980 . Organizational science contributions to the design of decision support systems . In Goran Fick and Ralph H . Sprague , Jr . , eds . , Decision Support Systems : Issues and Challenges . New York : Pergamon Press , pp . 45 - 55 . 40 . Huber , George P . 1982a . Group decision support systems as aids in the use of structured group management techniques . In Gary Dickson ( ed . ) , DSS - 82 , Second International Conference on Decision Support Systems Transactions , June 14 - 16 , San Francisco , CA , pp . 96 - 108 . 41 . Huber , George P . 1982b . Decision support systems : their present nature and future applications . In Gerardo R . Ungson and Daniel N . Braunstein ( eds . ) , Decision Making : An Interdisciplinary Inquiry . Belmont , CA : Kent Publishing Company , pp . 249 - 262 . 42 . Huber , George P . 1981a . The nature of organizational decisionmaking and the design of decision support systems . MIS Quarterly , 5 ( 2 ) , June , pp . 1 - 10 . 43 . Huber , George P . 1981b . Integrating the design of organizations and the design of decision support systems . Paper presented at the ORSA / TIMS meeting , Houston , TX , October 11 - 14 . 44 . Huber , George P . 1984 . Issues in the design of group decision support systems . MIS Quarterly , 8 ( 3 ) : 195 - 204 45 . Huber , George P . and Andre Delbecq , 1972 . Guidelines for combining the judgments of individual members in decision conferences , Academy of Management Journal , ( June ) : 161 - 174 . 46 . Institute of Government and Policy Studies ( undated ) . Decision Techtronics Group : The New Perspective . Albany , NY : Nelson A . Rockefeller College of Public Affairs and Policy , State University of New York . 5 pages . 47 . Jerving , J . 1980 . Electronic technology speeds decision making , Association Management , 32 ( 6 ) : 108 - 111 . 48 . Jones , Kirk , M . 1981 . Technology to support group decision making . Paper presented at the ORSA / TIMS Meeting , Houston , TX , October 11 - 14 . 49 . Kaplan , M . F . and S . Schwartz , eds . 1975 . Human Judgment and Decision Processes . New York : Academic Press . 50 . Kaplan , M . F . and S . Schwartz , eds . 1977 . Human Judgment and Decision Processes in Applied Settings . New York : Academic Press . 51 . Kelly , Clinton W . , Roy M . Gulick and Richard R . Stewart . 1980 . The Decision Template Concept . Final Technical Report PR 80 - 17 - 99 . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 52 . Kerr , E . B . and S . R . Hiltz . 1982 . Computer - Meditated Communication Systems : Status and Evaluation . New York : Academic Press . 53 . King , John Leslie , 1983 . Report of visit to SUNY , Albany Decision Techtronics Group , Albany , NY , September 1 . 54 . King , John Leslie , 1983 . Report of visit to First National Bank of Chicago Headquarters , Chicago , IL , September 2 . 55 . King , John Leslie , 1983 . Report of visit to the Gould Corporation , Rolling Meadows , IL , September 2 . 56 . King , John L . and Kenneth L . Kraemer . 1983 . Information Systems and Intergovernmental Relations . In Trudi Miller ( ed ) , Governmental Performance . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press . 57 . Kraemer , Kenneth L . 1982 . Telecommunications / transportation substitution and energy conservation , Telecommunications 372 Policy , ( March ) : 39 - 59 . 58 . Kraemer , Kenneth L . , Dickhoven , Siegfried , Fallows , Susan E . and King , John L . 1983 . Computers , Planning Models and Policymaking . Irvine , CA : Public Policy Research Organization , University of California . 59 . Kucia , Richard J . 1983 . Designing an information center for a new headquarters , in George P . Huber ( ed . ) , DSS - 83 Transactions , Third International Conference on Decision Support Systems , June 27 - 29 , Boston , MA . Austin , TX : The Institute for Advancement of Decision Support Systems , pp . 116 - 120 . 60 . Kunreuther , H . C . , and P . J . H . Schoemaker . 1982 . Decision analysis for complex systems : integrating descriptive and prescriptive components . In G . R . Ungson and D . N . Braunstein ( eds . ) , Decision Making : An Interdisciplinary Inquiry . Belmont , CA : Kent Publishing Company , pp . 263 - 279 . 61 . Leal , Antonio , Steven Levin , Steven Johnson , Marcy Agmon , and Gershon Weltman . 1978 . An interactive computer aiding system for group decision making . Tech . Rep . PQTR - 1046 - 78 - 2 . 62 . Leal , Antonio and Judea Pearl . 1977 . An interactive program for conversational elicitation of decision structures , IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , SMC - 7 ( May ) : 368 - 376 . 63 . Mackinnon , W . J . , and L . M . Anderson . 1976 . The SPAN III computer program for synthesizing group decisions : weighting participants ' judgments in proportion to confidence , Behavior Research Methods and Instrumentation , 8 ( 4 ) : 409 - 410 . 64 . Manilla , James . 1980 . The meeting room of the future , Public Relations Journal , 36 ( 9 ) : 29 - 30 . 65 . Marling , W . 1976 . Advice and the consensor , MBA , 10 ( 8 ) : 32 . 66 . Martin , Anne W . , Terry A . Bresnick and Dennis M . Buede . 1981 . Evaluation of Command and Control Centers . Interim Technical Report TR 81 - 3 - 328 . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 67 . Mau , Sonya . 1982 . The information center , Access , 82 : 153 - 161 . 68 . Merkhofer , M . W . , B . Robinson , and R . J . Korsan . 1979 . A computer - aided decision structuring process . Tech . Rep . 7320 . Menlo Park , CA : SRI International . 69 . Moore , Craig W . An integrated DSS for sales , marketing and planning , in George P . Huber ( ed . ) , DSS - 83 Transactions , Third International Conference on Decision Support Systems , June 27 - 29 , Boston , MA . Austin , TX : The Institute for Advancement of Decision Support Systems , pp . 22 - 23 . 70 . Morris , P . A . , and R . D . Smallwood , 1981 . A task force decision analysis , Operations Research . 71 . Moss , Lynn 1982 . Marketing News , November 26 : 72 . Nickerson , R . S . and C . E . Feehrer , 1975 . Decision making and training : a review of theoretical and empirical studies of decision making and their implications for the training of decision makers . Tech . Rep . NAVTRAEQUIPCEN 73 - C - 0128 - 1 . Cambridge , MA : BBN . 73 . Participation Systems , Inc . 1983 . Participate : a tool for managers , 8 pages , mimeo . 74 . Patterson , , Iohn F . , Scott L . Randall , and Richard R . Steward . 1981 . Advisory Decision Aids : A Prototype . Technical Report PR 80 - 27 - 312 . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 75 . Pferd , W . , L . A . Peralta , and F . X . Predergast . 1979 . Interactive graphics teleconferencing , Computer , 18 ( 10 ) : 62 - 72 . 76 . Quinn , Robert E . 1978 . Towards a theory of changing : a means - ends model of the organizational improvement process , Human Relations , 3l ( 5 ) : 395 - 416 . 77 . Quinn , Robert E . and Michael R . McGrath 1982 . Moving beyond the single - solution perspective : the competing values approach as a diagnostic tool , The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science , 18 ( 4 ) : 463 - 472 . Quinn , Robert , John Rohrbaugh and Michael R . McGrath . 1985 . Automated decision conferencing : How it works , Personnel , 62 ( 11 ) : 49 - 55 . 78 . Robinson , Patrick J . and Brent Stidsen . 1971 . Experience with a management information and control laboratory . In Kriebel , Charles H . , Richard Van Horn and J . Timothy Heames , Management Information Systems : Progress and Perspec - tives . Pittsburgh , PA : Graduate School of Industrial Administration , Carnegie - Mellon University , pp . 253 - 277 . 79 . Rohrbaugh , John 1981 . hnproving the quality of group judgment : social judgment analysis and the nominal group technique , Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 28 : 272 - 288 . 80 . Rohrbaugh , John 1979 . hnproving the quality of group judgment : social judgment analysis and the Delphi technique , Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 24 : 73 - 92 . 81 . Rohrbaugh , John and Paul Wehr . 1978 . Judgment analysis in policy formation : a new method for improving public participation , Public Opinion Quarterly , pp . 521 - 532 . 82 . Rouse , William B . 1973 . Group - computer interaction , Proceedings of the 1973 International Conference on Cybernetics and 373 Society , pp . 145 - 146 . 83 . Rouse William B . 1974 . GRPRNK : A group - computer interactive package for ranking of alternatives . Cambridge , MA MIT Community Dialog Project Report No . 10 . 84 . Rouse , William B . 1973a . TAXPKG : A group - computer interactive package for decision making on income taxation policy Cambridge , MA : MIT Community Dialog Project Report No . 3 . 85 . Rouse , William B . 1973b . SOLVER : A group - computer interactive package for general problem solving . Cambridge , MA MIT Comnmnity Dialog Project Report No . 4 . 86 . Rouse William B . and Thomas B . Sheridan 1973 . Utility Approach to Group Decision Making . Cambridge , MA : MIX Community Dialog Project Report No . 2 . 87 . Rouse . William B . and Thomas B . Sheridan 1975 . Computer - aided group decision making : theory and practice , Techno logical Forecasting and Social Change , 7 : 113 - 126 . 88 . Saleh , J . , A . Leal , J . Kim , and J . Pearl . 1979 . Progress towards a goal - directed decision support system . UCLA - ENG CSL - 7973 . Los Angeles , CA : Cognitive Systems Lab , UCLA . 89 . Sarin , Sunil . 1984 . Interactive on - line conferences . Ph . D . thesis , MIT / LCS / TR - 330 . Cambridge , MA : Laboratory fo Computer Science , MIT . 90 . Sarin , Sunil and Irene Grief . 1985 . Computer - based real time conferencing systems , Computer , 18 ( 10 ) : 33 - 45 . 91 . Seaver , D . A . 1977 . How groups can assess uncertainty : human interaction versus mathematical models . Los Angeles , CA Social Science Research Institute , University of Southern California . 92 . Sheridan , Thomas B . 1973 . Progress report of the MIT Community Dialog Project , Proceedings of the 1973 Internationo Conference on Cybernetics and Society , Boston , MA , pp . 139 - 144 . 93 . Sheridan , Thomas B . 1975a . Man - Machine Systems : Information Control and Decision Models of Human Performance Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 94 . Sheridan , Thomas B . 1971 . New technology for group dialog and social choice , Proceedings of the 1971 Fall Joint Compute Conference , pp . 327 - 335 . 95 . Sheridan , Thomas B . 1975b . Community dialog technology , Proceedings , IEEE Special Issue on Social Systems Engineering 63 ( 3 ) ( March ) : 463 - 475 . 96 . Simmons , William W . 1979 . " The consensor : a new tool for decision - makers , The Futurist , April : 91 - 94 . 97 . Sprague , R . H . 1980 . " A Framework for the Development of Group Decision Support Systems , " MIS Quarterly , 4 ( 4 ) : 1 : 26 98 . Steeb , Randall 1978 . Automated management of communications with remote systems : a decision analysis approach source is currently unknown 99 . Steeb , Randall and Steven C . Johnston . 1981 . A computer - based interactive system for group decisionmaking . IEEI Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , 11 ( 8 ) : 544 - 552 . 100 . Stefik , Mark , Gregg Foster , Daniel G . Bobrow , Kenneth Kahn , Stan Lanning , and Luch Suchman . 1985 . Beyond the chalk board : Computer support for collaboration and problem solving in meetings . Palo Alto : Intelligent Systems Laboratory Xerox Palo Alto Research Center . 101 . Sticha , Paul J . , and John F . Patterson . 1981 . Evaluation of Video Teleconference Systems . Final Technical Report T ~ 80 - 8 - 317 . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 102 . Sticha , Paul J . , and John F . Patterson . 1980 . Video Teleconference Design Evaluation . Interim Report PR 80 - 19 - 317 McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 103 . Sticha , Paul J . , Scott L . Randall , and Gregory M . Hunter . 1980 . Research into Teleconferencing . Final Technical Repot ~ TR 80 - 9 - 314 . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 104 . Stodolsky , D . , 1981 . " Automatic Mediation in Group Problem Solving . " Behavior Research Methods and Instrumentation 13 ( 2 ) : 235 : 242 . 105 . Sumner , Mary . 1985 . Organization and management of the information center : Case studies . In James C . Wetherbe ( ed . ) Proceeding of the Twenty - First Annual Computer Personnel Research Conference , May 2 - 3 , 1985 , pp . 38 - 49 . New York Association for Computing Machinery . 106 . Telephone interview with Richard G . Miltner , Associate Director - Program Planning , Decision Techtronics Group , SUNY Albany , 6 - 23 - 83 . 107 . Telephone interview with Robert Quinn , Executive Director , Institute of Government and Policy Studies , SUNY , Albany 374 6 - 23 - 83 . 108 . Torgler , Robert H . 1983 . The information center , Information Processing , 2 ( 1 ) : 12 - 27 . 109 . Turoff , M . 1972 . Delphi conferencing : computer - based conferencing with anonymity . Technological Forecasting and Social Change . 3 : 159 - 204 . 110 . Turoff , M . and S . R . Hiltz 1982 . Computer support systems for group versus individual decisions . IEEE Transactions on Communications . 30 ( 1 ) : 82 - 91 . 111 . Ulvila , Jacob W . 1975 . A Pilot Survey of Computer Programs for Decision Analysis . Technical Report 75 - 2 . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 112 . Ungson , G . R . , and D . N . Braunstein ( eds ) . 1982 . Decision Making : An Interdisciplinary Inquiry . Belmont , CA : Kent Publishing Company . 113 . U . S . News and World Report 1981 , November , 23 : 114 . Von Winterfeldt , D . 1975 . An overview , integration , and evaluation of utility theory for decision analysis . Res . Rep . 75 - 9 . Los Angeles , CA : Social Science Research Institute , University of Southern California . 115 . Van Nievelt , M . C . Augustus , 1982 . Marketing goes on - line : a DSS case study , in Gary W . Dickson , DSS - 82 Transactions , Second International Conference on Decision Support Systems , June 14 - 16 , 1982 , San Francisco , CA , pp 84 - 86 . 116 . Waltrip , R . 1983 . The HOBO System . Sacramento , CA : County Data Processing Department . 117 . Weiss , Jonathan J . 1980 . QVAL and GENTREE : Two Approaches to Problem Structuring in Decision Aids . Technical Report TR 80 - 3 - 97 . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 118 . Weiss , Jonathan J . , and Clinton W . Kelly , III . 1980 . RSCREEN and OPGEN : Two Problem Structuring Decision Aids which Employ Decision Templates . Technical Report TR 80 - 4 - 97 . McLean , VA : Decisions and Designs , Inc . 119 . Youstra , Ray and Enid Squire . 1983 . Information Center Implementation Guide , IBM Technical Bulletin , April . New York : The IBM Corporation , 82 pages . 375