Epistemic evaluation and comprehension of web - source information on controversial science - related topics : Effects of a short - term instructional intervention Lucia Mason * , Andrea Anahi Junyent , Maria Caterina Tornatora Department of Developmental Psychology and Socialization , University of Padova , Via Venezia 8 , 35131 Padova , Italy a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 24 September 2013 Received in revised form 17 March 2014 Accepted 18 March 2014 Available online 26 March 2014 Keywords : Source evaluation Epistemic evaluation Multiple document comprehension Inquiry tasks Instructional interventions a b s t r a c t This study examines the effectiveness of a short - term instructional intervention in the school context . The aim was to provide students with essential declarative knowledge on what to consider when evaluating the authoritativeness of Web sources , and the accuracy of their information . It also provided the opportunity to apply this declarative knowledge in a basic inquiry task on the controversial topic of the possible harm caused by mobile phones . Participants were 134 ninth graders , randomly assigned to the instruction or no - instruction condition . In both conditions the same multiple Internet sources , varying for authoritativeness and stance , were given for the basic and transfer ( about GM food ) inquiry tasks . Findings reveal that learners in the instruction condition outperformed the others in both the inquiry task of the instructional context and , more importantly , in the transfer inquiry task . These learners showed more appropriate navigation behavior and greater source evaluation , as well as better surface and deeper comprehension of the accessed information on GM food . In addition , prior knowledge moderated the latter . Theoretical and practical signi ﬁ cance of the study is outlined . (cid:1) 2014 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Online information searching on the Web is widely used in the educational context for carrying out school assignments . Yet , the extensive use of Internet as an information resource has posed new questions , some of which pertain to problematic issues regarding the evaluation of the quality of the accessed information . For traditional printed media the dif ﬁ cult task of controlling the accuracy and rele - vance of information was carried out byeditors and publishing companies . In the Internet era this task is transferred to the users themselves ( Goldman , Lawless , Gomez , Braasch , MacLeod , & Manning , 2009 ; Kammerer , Bråten , Gerjets , & Stromso , 2013 ; Mason & Boldrin , 2008 ) . Students today live immersed in technology and are almost always connected through a smart phone , tablet , or laptop . However , this does not mean that they have the declarative and procedural knowledge to access , and evaluate , electronic sources when seeking information on an unfamiliar topic ( Brand - Gruwel , Woporeis , & Vermetten , 2005 ; Stadtler & Bromme , 2008 ; Tsai , 2004 ; Walraven , Brand - Gruwel , & Boshuizen , 2009 , 2013 ) . The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of a short - term instructional intervention implemented in the upper secondary school context to provide students with essential declarative knowledge on how to evaluate the reliability of Web sources and the accuracy of the information . It also aimed to provide them with the opportunity to apply this declarative knowledge in an inquiry task . The effectiveness of the intervention should be revealed by the transfer of students ’ evaluation skills to a new inquiry task on a different topic , as well as by superior comprehension of the information provided in the sources . Based on recent research , evaluation and comprehension of information were considered as related processes ( Braasch , Rouet , Vibert , & Britt , 2012 ; Bråten , Strømsø , & Britt , 2009 ; Britt & Aglinskas , 2002 ; Strømsø , Bråten , & Britt , 2010 ) . * Corresponding author . Tel . : þ 39 049 8276562 ; fax : þ 39 049 8276511 . E - mail address : lucia . mason @ unipd . it ( L . Mason ) . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Computers & Education journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / compedu http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2014 . 03 . 016 0360 - 1315 / (cid:1) 2014 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 1 . 1 . Epistemic evaluation of online information More than a decade ago , the International Reading Association ( 2001 ) posited that in relation to technology , traditional de ﬁ nitions of reading , and the instructional practices based on reading books and other printed materials , are insuf ﬁ cient . Digital environments require new literacy skills ( Coiro , Knobel , Lankshear , & Leu , 2008 ; Goldman et al . , 2009 ) . The disparate documents that can be easily accessed through Web navigation must be read with different strategies , according to the purpose of navigation . The accomplishment of this aim requires resolving an information problem . The process of information problem solving encompasses activities such as de ﬁ ning the information problem , searching information , scanning information , processing information , and organizing and presenting the information ( Brand - Gruwel et al . , 2005 ; Walraven et al . , 2009 ) . We are particularly interested in one of these activities – the processing of information – in which the relevance and usefulness of the information is judged , as is the quality in terms of truth and veracity . Individuals must be able to evaluate the authoritativeness of an electronic source and the accuracy of the content provided in order to follow up reliable sources only . In other words , they must know what to believe and why ( Barzilai & Zohar , 2012 ; Braasch , Bräten , Strømsø , Anmarkrud , & Ferguson , 2013 ; Hofer , 2004 ; Tsai , 2004 ; Walraven et al . , 2013 ; Wopereis & van Merriënboer , 2011 ) . Epistemic evaluation of information is the result of processing that takes into account the source , reliability , and accuracy of the informational content . This process leads to ajudgment of the quality of a source and its material ( Mason & Ariasi , 2010 ) . Evaluation of online information implies judgments of other important aspects , such as those regarding the relevance and usefulness of the materials accessed ( e . g . , Gerjets & Hellenthal - Schorr , 2008 ; Hwang , Tsai , Tsai , & Tseng , 2008 ; Rouet , Ros , Goumi , Machedo - Rouet , & Dinet , 2011 ; Tsai , Hsu , & Tsai , 2012 ; Tu , Shih , & Tsai , 2008 ) . However , these are not considered here as the focus of the current investigation is only on epistemic evaluation as revealed in judgments of the reliability of the website and accuracy of the information provided . Are students able to epistemically evaluate the quality of online information accessed ? This is a crucial question for researchers and educators interested in the acquisition of digital literacy . Students are required to use at least some essential criteria to judge whether the sites accessed are reliable and whether the information provided allows them to qualify as true and accurate ( Goldman , Braasch , Wiley , Graesser , & Brodowinska , 2012 ) . Empirical research has documented that elementary school children believe that everything they ﬁ nd on the Web is true ( Schacter , Chung , & Dorr , 1998 ) , they never question the reliability of a speci ﬁ c website ( Kuiper , Wolman , & Terwel , 2008 ) , do not perceive con ﬂ icting information across sites ( Mason & Boldrin , 2008 ) , and do not take into consideration source characteristics when indicating the most knowledgeable source ( Macedo - Rouet , Braasch , Britt , & Rouet , 2013 ) . Middle school students also focus much more on the content and form of a site than on the source characteristics ( Barzilai & Zohar , 2012 ) . Similar results come from studies with high school students . They may not take into account the authority of the source when evaluating a theory on a controversial scienti ﬁ c topic ( Clark & Slotta , 2000 ) . They may refer to naïve criteria , such as source popularity ( Mason , Ariasi , & Boldrin , 2011 ) , or show little re ﬂ ection activity in assessing the credibility or accuracy of the contents provided ( Brem , Russell , & Weems , 2001 ; Walraven et al . , 2009 ) . Research has also indicated that university students express more judgments of information quality and source reliability only when instructed to do so , compared with uninstructed students ( Gerjets , Kammerer , & Werner , 2011 ) . Undergraduates may also spontaneously evaluate only online resources at the ﬁ rst level , that is , they may take into account source characteristics but not information characteristics ( Mason , Boldrin , & Ariasi , 2010b ) . Undergraduates may be more likely to trust less authoritative sources and not differentiate between relevant and irrelevant criteria in judging source reliability if they have low knowledge of the topic ( Bråten , Strømsø , & Salmerón , 2011 ) . These outcomes seem to indicate that inappropriate behavior does not disappear with age and grade level as skills of epistemic evaluation of online information may be unsophisticated even at college level . At the same time , the outcomes also indicate that instruction on epistemic evaluation when searching the Web for information is necessary . 1 . 2 . Source evaluation and comprehension of information What is the impact of epistemic evaluation skills when dealing with the variety of sources and materials that an online search usually offers ? This question is particularly relevant as searching information on the Web is one of the most common student activities for discovering more about topics related to school assignments . The question regards the crucial link between evaluation of information and comprehension of information . This link has been repeatedly documented in research on multiple documents , both printed and online , the comprehension of which requires readers to deal with inconsistent accounts of the same phenomenon or event ( Stadtler & Bromme , 2013 ) . For example , using printed texts , Bråten et al . ( 2009 ) indicated that what undergraduates considered reliable and the criteria used to evaluate the sources independently predicted comprehension performance . Similarly , Strømsø et al . ( 2010 ) found that university students ’ memory for source predicted their deep comprehension of multiple texts on the causes and solutions of climate change . Stadtler , Scharrer , Brummernhenrich , and Bromme ( 2013 ) documented that undergraduates showed superior memory for , and a more balanced description of con ﬂ icting medical information when reading it across four documents , rather than in a single document . With respect to online materials , a series of studies with university ( Goldman et al . , 2012 ; Mason et al . , 2010b ; Stadtler & Bromme , 2007 ; Strømsø , Bråten , Britt , & Ferguson , 2013 ) , high ( Mason et al . , 2011 ) , and middle school students ( Mason , Boldrin , & Ariasi , 2010a ) have indicated that online evaluation of sources and content on the Internet is related to of ﬂ ine comprehension of information . A theoretical model that accounts for the empirical ﬁ ndings of multiple - text comprehension was proposed by Perfetti , Rouet , and Britt ( 1999 ) , and Rouet ( 2006 ) ﬁ fteen years ago and recently revised ( Bråten , Britt , Strømso , & Rouet , 2011 ; Britt & Rouet , 2012 ) . With respect to the Kintsch ( 1998 ) construction - integration model that describes super ﬁ cial and deep levels of single - text comprehension ( surface code , textbase , and situation model ) , Perfetti et al . ’ s model includes the additional layer of intertext model . This regards comprehension of the relationships between sources and text contents , as well as the relationships among sources through rhetorical predicates ( e . g . , con ﬁ rms , contradicts , etc . ) . During the comprehension process , readers achieve overall coherence through the intertext model despite inconsistent or con ﬂ icting information . However , according to the document model , readers may not want to integrate uncertain or inconsistent L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 144 information , especially if the source is considered biased and unreliable . Nevertheless , they may read and consider the information , marking it as closely related to a particular source ( Britt & Rouet , 2012 ) . In this regard , the recently proposed discrepancy - induced source comprehension assumption ( D - ISC assumption ) provides an expla - nation for why there is a relationship between the processes of information evaluation and information comprehension when reading multiple documents ( Braasch et al . , 2012 ) . According to this assumption , readers pay more attention to source information when con ﬂ icting information is provided . Perceived discrepancies between texts are in fact a potential mechanism through which readers are prompted to process and evaluate source information more deeply when encoding the links between sources and the related statements . Greater encoding is likely to result in the presence of source - content links in mental representations of the texts . Con ﬂ icting information is therefore integrated into a coherent overall mental representation . This theoretical assumption has been empirically tested in two experiments . Undergraduates showed an ability to integrate information from multiple messages by paying attention to their sources , which functioned as organizing factors in the construction of text repre - sentations ( Braasch et al . , 2012 ) . In summary , when accessing multiple documents through the Web , the evaluative aspect of the quality of the sources and retrieved information becomes particularly salient . Source evaluation is also crucial because it is related to comprehension of the information pro - vided in multiple documents . However , students may lack the skills needed to judge the epistemic quality of the sources they access when trying to discover more about an unfamiliar topic . Thus , it is of paramount importance to carry out intervention studies focused on the implementation of educational treatments which promote epistemic evaluation of Web sources , and also comprehension of their often con ﬂ icting contents through critical integration , since students are increasingly exposed to multiple and complex documents . 1 . 3 . Teaching - learning web source evaluation Some studies have recently been conducted to teach how to evaluate Web sources and the contents provided . The ﬁ rst study with university students showed that source processing and evaluation about the causes of a volcanic eruption predicted learning outcomes ( Wiley et al . , 2009 , experiment 1 ) . The second study , which inspired our investigation , implemented a short - term intervention to provide students with declarative knowledge about key aspects of source and content evaluation . Findings revealed that instructed students pro - duced greater differentiation when evaluating the reliability of information sources and greater learning on low carbohydrate diets from the Internet - based inquiry about a new transfer topic regarding volcanic eruptions ( Wiley et al . , 2009 , experiment 2 ) . A recent study with younger students , ninth graders , was based on a long - term intervention embedded in a history course . It was aimed at teaching information problem solving during ﬁ fteen lessons about World War II ( Walraven et al . , 2013 ) . Students were instructed the essential criteria for evaluating sources and information , which regarded their epistemic quality as well as their usability , appearance , and language . Results showed that students in the experimental condition improved their evaluation behavior to a higher level . No measures of learning from multiple sources were used in this study , but data about the ﬁ nal exam were available . They revealed that students in the experimental group outperformed those in the control group . However , the former were not able to transfer their source evaluation skill to the biological domain ( Walraven et al . , 2013 ) . In contrast , in a previous study , ninth graders were not only able to increase their knowledge and use of criteria for evaluating sources and information , but were also able to transfer them ( Walraven , Brand - Gruwel , & Boshuizen , 2010 ) . Another recent study focused on an intervention to promote the evaluation of source features in students of the last year of upper secondary school ( Braasch et al . , 2013 ) . They were provided with two contrasting cases of protocols about source evaluation strategies ( expert vs . non expert ) and were asked to decide which were the best strategies to evaluate multiple scienti ﬁ c documents , and explain why . Findings showed that these students – when compared with students who received regular instruction – were more able to include correct scienti ﬁ c concepts from the more useful texts when prompted to generate essays . They were also more able to rank - order the usefulness of the various documents , and justify the ranking by appealing to reliability features of the sources ( Braasch et al . , 2013 ) . Declarative knowledge on epistemic evaluation of online sources was also included in an articulated training for lower secondary school students on how to become competent searchers of information on the Web ( Gerjets & Hellenthal - Schorr , 2008 , study 2 ) . The training had a positive effect on search behavior and resolving information problems . However , this investigation did not include a comparison group or assess - ment of comprehension of accessed information . In sum , from current research we know that students need to be instructed about the crucial criteria to use in order to epistemically evaluate the sources and information accessed on the Web . These criteria refer to the qualities that make a source reliable ( i . e . , expertise and unbiased motivation ) and to the qualities that make its information accurate ( i . e . , based on scienti ﬁ c evidence , corroborated , and aligned with information from other reliable sites and the scienti ﬁ c knowledge one might have ) . Students should also have various concrete op - portunities to practice received knowledge on source evaluation . Importantly , current research also indicates that instructional in - terventions on the criteria for evaluating online sources can be successfully implemented in the context of high school , to the extent to which they equip students with declarative and procedural knowledge to be competent users of Internet - based information . However , with respect to the current literature , two open questions regard the effectiveness of instructional interventions in promoting source evaluation skills , which deserve further investigation . The ﬁ rst is the transfer of this complex cognitive skill , given the mixed results in the literature regarding students in the ﬁ rst years of upper secondary school . In most countries these students are daily online information - searchers for school assignments . The second open question concerns comprehension of online information , that is , whether instruction on source evaluation is also effective in promoting better learning outcomes , given that the above - mentioned studies with high school students did not measure comprehension of information searched on the Web . 1 . 4 . The present study To extend current research on the effectiveness of instructional interventions in promoting students ’ epistemic evaluation skills , we implemented a short - term intervention in upper secondary school . Ninth grade was considered because at this grade level previous L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 145 research had found mixed results . Speci ﬁ cally , we were interested in examining students ’ skills in transferring online source evaluation from an inquiry task on a given topic to another inquiry task on a different topic . We were also interested in examining students ’ comprehension of information provided in online sources used for the transfer inquiry task . We sought , therefore , to provide empirical evidence for the theoretical assumption that epistemic evaluation and comprehension of information are related processes ( Braasch et al . , 2012 ; Bråten et al . , 2009 ; Britt & Aglinskas , 2002 ; Richter & Schmid , 2010 ; Strømsø et al . , 2010 ) . For a further contribution , we sought to analyze the potentially moderating role of two learner characteristics , such as prior knowledge of the topic and argumentative reasoning skill , when evaluating and comprehending information in Web sources . Prior knowledge was examined as it is helpful for navigating more appropriately across web sources and for evaluating the epistemic quality of online sources and information , since inaccurate information can be recognized more easily . Recent research has indicated that higher prior knowledge of the searched topic is a resource in the process of assessing the credibility of websites , and veracity of the content , on the basis of their authoritativeness and scienti ﬁ c nature ( Mason et al . , 2011 ) . In addition , it is well known that higher topic knowledge positively affects text comprehension ( e . g . , Braasch & Goldman , 2010 ) . Therefore , low - prior knowledge students might need instruction on source evaluation more than high - prior knowledge students in order to be able to evaluate the epistemic status of online information , and comprehend it better . Argumentative reasoning skill was also examined as an individual difference factor . It is intended as the skill to detect informal reasoning fallacies , that is , arguments that are psychologically persuasive but logically incorrect ( Neuman , 2003 ) . This personal characteristic was taken into consideration as we assumed that students with a greater skill in detecting fallacious arguments as improper inferences would be more likely to be able to recognize whether little or no veracious information is reported on a webpage . Research has recently indicated that argumentative reasoning skill is positively related to learning about a topic searched on the Web ( Mason et al . , 2011 ) . Therefore , low - argumentative reasoning skill students might require instruction on source evaluation more than high - argumentative reasoning skill students , to be able to evaluate the epistemic status of online sites and comprehend their information . Examining the effectiveness of a short - term instructional intervention , and the moderating role of the two above - mentioned individual characteristics , also meant it was necessary to control that instructed and no - instructed students would not differ for a number of other factors that could interfere with navigational and evaluation behavior during an inquiry task on the Web . While it might seem evident why reading comprehension , Internet , and achievement in science ( see below ) should be considered , the measurement of personal belief about a topic may need some clari ﬁ cation . We took into account topic - speci ﬁ c beliefs about the controversial question of the transfer inquiry task in the light of the well - known research by Stanovich and colleagues ( e . g . , Stanovich , West , & Toplak , 2013 ) . This research has documented myside bias , that is , individuals ’ tendency to evaluate or generate evidence according to their own points of view , regardless of their cognitive ability . The effects of prior beliefs have recently been revealed in research on the processing of con ﬂ icting information in multiple texts ( e . g . , Maier & Richter , 2013 ) . We sought , therefore , to ensure that instructed and no - instructed students would not differ as to their personal views on a debated question . The following research questions guided the study : ( 1 ) Are ninth graders – who had the opportunity to learn how to evaluate online sources through a short - term instructional intervention – more able than a comparison group to epistemically evaluate sources used for the inquiry task in the instructional setting ? More importantly , can they transfer source evaluation skills to a new inquiry task on a different topic ? Is information evaluation moderated by the individual characteristics of prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skills ? ( 2 ) Do students instructed on source evaluation also comprehend the transfer topic better than a comparison group ? Is information comprehension moderated by the individual characteristics of prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skills ? Based on the ﬁ ndings of previous research reported above with older students , we expected more appropriate navigation patterns and epistemic judgments about the reliability of sources among the instructed readers for the basic inquiry and transfer tasks . These readers would spend longer time on the most reliable sources and show better discrimination in rank - ordering reliable and unreliable sources . They would also use more appropriate criteria to justify the ranking . We also predicted that students instructed in source evaluation would comprehend better Internet - based information in the new content area , especially at a deeper level as revealed by their argumentation on the controversial topic . In other words , students instructed on how to validate online documents would also comprehend them better because they evaluate source information more deeply when encoding the links between sources and the related statements . Greater encoding is likely to imply the presence of source - content links in the mental representations of the texts . Con ﬂ icting information may therefore be integrated into a coherent overall mental representation . Concerning the moderating role of the two learner characteristics of prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skill , we expected a direction of the aptitude - treatment interaction effect for both . That is , students with low prior knowledge and students with low argu - mentative reasoning skill would bene ﬁ t more from instruction on source evaluation than students with high prior knowledge and students with high reasoning skill , since they are more dependent on instructional support . 2 . Method 2 . 1 . Participants Initially , 160 ninth graders attending the ﬁ rst year of two public upper secondary schools in a north - eastern region of Italy were involved on a voluntary basis with parental consent . Because of the absence of 6 students in one of the sessions , partial completion of the given tasks by 7 students , and the loss of the navigation logs of 13 students because of a technical fault , we considered the data of 134 participants ( 66 girls , 63 boys , and 5 without report ) , with a mean age of 14 . 83 years ( SD ¼ . 46 ) . All were Caucasian native - born Italians who learned Italian as a ﬁ rst language . They were also relatively homogeneous in regards to their middle class socioeconomic status . Participants were randomly assigned to two conditions at the start of the study : Instruction ( n ¼ 69 ) and no - instruction ( n ¼ 65 ) in online source evaluation . L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 146 2 . 2 . Instruction on source evaluation For the students assigned to the instruction condition , the intervention consisted of three pages of declarative information about how to epistemically evaluate the reliability of a website and the veracity of its content . This written material included the “ SEEK instructional unit ” ( SEEK is the acronym for Source , Evaluation , Explanation , Knowledge ) used in the second study described by Wiley et al . ( 2009 ) , which was translated into Italian and adapted . Essentially , this declarative material explains that there are three main criteria to assess how reliable or trustworthy websites are : Who is the author ? How reliable is the information ? How well does the site explain the information ? Procedures for answering questions about each of these criteria were also provided . As regards the Source ( author ) , readers were instructed to assess whether the authors were knowledgeable about the topic and their motivation . For the Evaluation of information , readers were instructed to assess whether information is based on scienti ﬁ c evidence , and whether similar information is given across reliable sources . Concerning the Explanation of the information , readers were instructed to evaluate whether they understood what the site says about the topic and whether the explanation ﬁ ts with the scienti ﬁ c Knowledge that they might have , or with information given by other reliable sources ( Wiley et al . , 2009 , pp . 1098 – 1099 ) . The SEEK material source evaluation , therefore , included consideration of both source authoritativeness and accuracy of the content provided . It is important to note that the instruction group received only this material with declarative information about source evaluation . We focused on a short - term intervention with the aim of indicating that it is not only feasible in the natural context of a class lesson , but also effective in improving evaluation and comprehension of multiple online documents . The declarative information material was accompanied by instructions for the speci ﬁ c session ( basic inquiry task ) , which were the same as those given to students in the no - instruction condition . In addition , the instruction group was given a worksheet for each site , with questions about the author , information , and explanation . Responses were to take into account the information provided in the declarative material ( SEEK instruction ) to evaluate source reliability and information veracity and accuracy ( Wiley et al . , 2009 , p . 1100 ) . The worksheets were intended to guide the application of declarative information on what to consider in order to evaluate the various sites used in the inquiry task in the instructional setting . 2 . 3 . Materials 2 . 3 . 1 . Information sources for the basic inquiry task ( mobile phones ) The basic inquiry task – performed immediately after reading the material containing the declarative information about how to evaluate sources and their content – regarded the controversial topic of the health risks caused by using a mobile phone . Students were told that a search had been carried out on Google using the phrase “ mobile phone use and health ” and the top eight results ( in Italian ) were being presented to them ( see Fig . 1 ) . They were also told that their task was to read the Internet sources provided to ascertainwhich sites would be the best for deciding whether using a mobile phone is , or is not , harmful to the user ’ s health . Sources appeared with the page titles as hotlinks to the original resource locators , and a short description of the contentof each page . Although the sources were presented through a browser with clickable links and appeared as Google search output page , they were in fact of ﬂ ine and stored locally . Eight sites were selected to represent a range of authoritativeness considering the position on the controversial topic , harmful or not harmful , where harmfulness could be related to both more and less serious aspects of the user ’ s health . Fig . 1 . The page with Google - style search results presented for the basic inquiry task on mobile phones . L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 147 Sources contained between 350 and 450 words of text , taken from the real sites . In some cases , the language was modi ﬁ ed to make the texts simpler to read . In other cases , the sources were summarized to present only part of the whole site . However , in all other respects , the sources looked like the original . When preparing the materials for the study we rank - ordered the eight sites by taking into account the reliability of the source , and type and accuracy of the information provided . Prior to the study , the reliability and accuracy of the eight sites on the topic was also evaluated independently by ﬁ ve doctoral students with expertise in the ﬁ elds . After reading the texts from the eight sites , the experts were asked to rank - order them . Pairwise Spearman rank - order correlations were quite high ( r s ranged from . 78 to 1 . 00 ) , indicating a high degree of agreement among the experts , who con ﬁ rmed our rank - order . In order of reliability , the eight sites were : 1 . the Ministry of Health 1 ( position : not harmful ) ; 2 . “ CNR ” , the National Council for Scienti ﬁ c Research ( position : harmful ) ; 3 . “ Dica33 ” , an association of physicians ( position : not harmful ) ; 4 . “ Repubblica ” , one of the most reputable newspapers ( position : harmful ) ; 5 . a consumers ’ union ( position : harmful ) ; 6 . “ Mednat ” , a center for alternative medicine ( position : harmful ) ; 7 . “ Cellulari ” , a commercial site that sells mobile phones ( position : not harmful ) ; and 8 . “ Ericsson ” , a producer of mobile phones ( position : not harmful ) . To avoid possible interference from the order of appearance of the sites , different combinations of search results depending on the authoritativeness and position of the ﬁ rst sources were prepared and used in random order . 2 . 3 . 2 . Information sources for the transfer inquiry task ( GM food ) The material used for the transfer inquiry task focused on the controversial question of the harmfulness of genetically modi ﬁ ed food for consumers and the environment . Like for the topic of mobile phones , students were told that a search had been carried out on Google using the phrase “ GMO , health , and environment ” , and the top nine results ( in Italian ) were presented as a Google search output page . The nine sites varied for authoritativeness and , given the controversial nature of the topic , also for their position on the question , which , in this case , included a neutral stance . For this transfer inquiry task , participants were also told that they should read the Internet sources provided to ascertain which sites would be the best for deciding whether the production and marketing of GM food is , or is not , harmful to the con - sumer ’ s health and the environment . The sites included 300 – 400 words of text , taken from the real sites . As for the topic of mobile phones , the language was modi ﬁ ed in some cases to make the text simpler to read . In other cases the sources were also summarized to present only part of the whole site . However , the sources looked like the original in all other respects . Like the previous topic , when preparing the materials , we rank - ordered the nine sites by taking into account the reliability of the source , and type and accuracy of the information provided . Reliability and accuracy of the nine sites on the topic was also evaluated independently by ﬁ ve doctoral students with expertise in the ﬁ elds prior to the study . After reading the texts from the nine sites , the experts were asked to rank - order them . Pairwise Spearman rank - order correlations were quite high ( r s ranged from . 75 to . 98 ) , indicating a high degree of agreement among the experts , who con ﬁ rmed our rank - order . In orderof reliability , the nine sites were : 1 . the Ministry of Agriculture ( position : neutral ) ; 2 . “ Torinoscienza ” , a popular science site of the Province of Turin ( position : not harmful ) ; 3 . “ OK La salute prima di tutto ” , a monthly periodical on health and well - being ( position : not harmful ) ; 4 . “ Espresso ” , one of the most reputable magazines ( position : harmful ) ; 5 . “ AIAB ” , the Italian Association for Biological Agriculture ( position : harmful ) ; 6 . “ Altervista ” , an online encyclopedia ( position : neutral ) ; 7 . “ Viva il ﬁ tness ” , an association in the ﬁ eld of ﬁ tness ( position : neutral ) ; 8 . “ Scienza - misteri ” , a forum about mysteries in science and UFOs ( position : harmful ) ; and 9 . “ Monsanto ” , a company that produces and sells GM seeds ( position : not harmful ) . To avoid possible interference from the order of appearance , different combinations of search results - depending on the authorita - tiveness and position of the ﬁ rst sources - were prepared and used in random order for this transfer inquiry task . 2 . 4 . Measures of individual characteristics as potential moderators We measured topic prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skill as individual characteristics that could moderate source eval - uation and comprehension . 2 . 4 . 1 . Prior knowledge of the topic of mobile phones ( basic inquiry task ) Four open - ended written questions , already used in a previous study ( Mason et al . , 2011 ) , were asked to assess prior knowledge of the topic of electromagnetic ﬁ elds and electromagnetic pollution . Answers to these questions were analyzed for content and scored 1 for each correct information unit mentioned ( maximum score ¼ 8 ) . Two raters coded the answers independently . Their agreement , as measured by Cohen ’ s kappa coef ﬁ cient , was . 86 . Each disagreement was carefully examined and discussed in the presence of the ﬁ rst author until consensus was reached . Cronbach ’ s alpha reliability coef ﬁ cient was . 73 . 2 . 4 . 2 . Prior knowledge of the topic of GMO ( transfer inquiry task ) Two open - ended written questions and 10 multiple - choice questions , already used in a previous study ( Mason & Boscolo , 2004 ) , were asked to assess knowledge about GM organisms . Answers to the open - ended questions were analyzed for content and scored 1 for each correct information unit mentioned ( maximum score ¼ 8 ) . The two raters coded these answers independently . Their agreement , as measured by Cohen ’ s kappa coef ﬁ cient , was . 88 . Each disagreement was carefullyexamined and discussed in the presence of the ﬁ rst author until consensus was reached . Cronbach ’ s alpha reliability coef ﬁ cient was . 74 for the open - ended questions and . 85 for the multiple - choice questions . For each participant a composite score was calculated by summing the scores for answers to the open - ended questions and multiple - choice questions ( maximum score ¼ 18 ) . 1 The site of the Ministry of Health was ranked ﬁ rst ( a higher position than the site of the National Council for Scienti ﬁ c Research ) as the most authoritative source ( in the country ) that must rely on the available scienti ﬁ c evidence about the health risks related to the use of mobile phones . L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 148 2 . 4 . 3 . Argumentative reasoning skill The instrument devised by Neuman ( 2003 ) was translated into Italian and adapted . It measures the ability to identify arguments with apparently proper conclusions , which are actually logically incorrect . The instrument includes three pairs of written informal reasoning tasks . Each of the six tasks has the same structure , presenting a debate between two characters . Each pair of tasks corresponds to one of three types of informal reasoning fallacy : ( a ) False cause fallacy , when the argument ’ s conclusion is a necessary , but not suf ﬁ cient , condition to establish a causal relationship ; ( b ) appeal to people fallacy , when the argument ’ s conclusion is considered true because many people believe it to be true ; and ( c ) appeal to ignorance fallacy , when the argument ’ s conclusion is considered true because it has not been proven to be false . All tasks had the same structure . The participants were asked the following two questions : ( a ) ‘‘ Do you think that there is a problem in argument X , as presented in line 5 ? ’’ ( Yes or No ) . ( b ) ‘‘ If you think that there is a problem in the argument presented by X , what is the problem ? ’’ . Answers to the two questions were analyzed for content and scored 0 when the fallacy in the examined argument was not identi ﬁ ed , and scored 1 when it was identi ﬁ ed ( maximum ¼ 6 ) . The two raters coded the answers independently . Their agreement , as measured by Cohen ’ s kappa coef ﬁ cient , was . 93 . Each disagreement was carefully examined and discussed in the presence of the ﬁ rst author until consensus was reached . Cronbach ’ s alpha reliability coef ﬁ cient was . 72 . 2 . 5 . Control variables We also measured four other learner characteristics with the aim of controlling , as far as possible , that students in the two conditions did not differ for prerequisites of source evaluation : topic - speci ﬁ c belief about GM food , reading comprehension , Internet use , and achievement in science . 2 . 5 . 1 . Topic - speci ﬁ c belief about GM food Besides topic knowledge , participants ’ personal position about transgenic food was also assessed on a 5 - point scale ( 1 ¼ totally con ; 5 ¼ totally pro ) . The question asked was : “ What is your personal position on the production and marketing of genetically modi ﬁ ed food ? ” . 2 . 5 . 2 . Reading comprehension skill Reading comprehension was measured using the Italian test for upper secondary school , which evaluates reading comprehension of two texts ( Cornoldi , Pra Baldi , & Friso , 2010 ) . One point was given for each correct answer ( maximum ¼ 20 ) . The Cronbach ’ s a reported for this instrument is . 71 . In the present study the Cronbach reliability coef ﬁ cient was ¼ . 70 . 2 . 5 . 3 . Internet use Self - reported Internet use for various purposes ( e . g . , “ I use Internet to look for information about music , sport , and leisure ” ; “ I use Internet to look for information to help with homework ” “ I use Internet to prepare for school tests ” ) was measured using a self - report questionnaire with 7 items to be rated on a 5 - point Likert scale ( 1 ¼ never ; 5 ¼ always ) . Cronbach reliability coef ﬁ cient was ¼ . 78 . 2 . 5 . 4 . Achievement in science Achievement in science was measured using students ’ reported grade in science at the end of the previous term . The overall grade , assigned by the science teachers , is based on several tests performed during the term . In the Italian school system grades range from 1 to 10 ( highest grade ¼ 10 ) . For reasons of privacy , according to the law , we could not directly access the grades assigned by the teachers , so we relied on students reporting their grades , which was not the best way to collect the required information . However , in several previous studies , pursuing different aims , with students of primary , middle , and high school schools , we used self - reported grades of achievement in science ( e . g . , Mason , Pluchino , & Tornatora , 2013 ; Mason , Tornatora , & Pluchino , 2013 ) . Although not optimal , it was a reliable way to gain information on students ’ school achievement in a given subject . 2 . 6 . Navigation patterns To capture participants ’ processing of the various online sources , navigation logs were used for each inquiry task . They provided in - formation about the time spent on each site and the frequency of visits to the sites . 2 . 6 . 1 . Time on sites We computed the total time ( in minutes ) spent on each site . 2 . 6 . 2 . Visit to the sites We computed the frequency of returning to each site . 2 . 7 . Measures of source evaluation 2 . 7 . 1 . Rank - ordering of the most and least reliable sites For each topic , participants were asked to identify the two most and least reliable sites . They were awarded 1 point for each of the four sites correctly ranked ( Walraven et al . , 2013 ) . 2 . 7 . 2 . Justi ﬁ cation for source evaluation Participants ’ justi ﬁ cations for rank - ordering the most and least reliable sites were awarded 1 point for each SEEK criteria mentioned , that is , for referring to a criterion described in the declarative material given to the instruction group . Justi ﬁ cations were analyzed qualitatively by the two independent raters . Their agreement , as measured by Cohen ’ s kappa coef ﬁ cient , was . 95 . Each disagreement was carefully examined and discussed in the presence of the ﬁ rst author until consensus was reached . L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 149 2 . 7 . 3 . Overall rank - ordering For each topic , participants were also asked to rank - order all the various sites from the most , to the least reliable . They were awarded 1 point for each site correctly ranked , compared with the expert rank - order , as reported above ( see 2 . 3 . 1 and 2 . 3 . 2 ) . Participants were provided with a randomized list of the sites including the URLs ( as in Fig . 1 ) and a blank space to write the rank . 2 . 8 . Measures of information comprehension We measured comprehension of information provided in the various sites about the transfer topic of GM food at the surface and deeper levels . 2 . 8 . 1 . Sentence - veri ﬁ cation task This task was used to measure students ’ surface comprehension at the level of individual texts ( Bråten et al . , 2009 ; Royer , Carlo , Dufresne , & Mestre , 1996 ) and included 36 sentences constructed by generating four types of test sentence : ( 1 ) originals , which were copies of sentences that appeared in the texts ; ( 2 ) paraphrases with the same meaning , which were generated by changing as many words as possible in the original sentences without altering their meaning ; ( 3 ) meaning changes , which were constructed by changing one or two words in the original sentences to alter their meaning ; and ( 4 ) distractors , which were syntactically similar and thematically related to the original sentences but unrelated in meaning to any of them . Participants were asked to mark yes if sentences had the same meaning as the text sentences and no if they had a different meaning . Cronbach reliability coef ﬁ cient was ¼ . 70 . All four types of text sentence are considered “ to measure students ’ representation of the surface meaning of the texts ” ( Bråten et al . , 2009 , p . 13 ) , so a composite score was computed . Following the appropriate procedure for assessing the strength of this representation , we computed the mean d 0 value for each participant ( Schmalhofer & Glavanov , 1986 ) . The proportions of yes - responses to the distracter items and meaning change items ( false alarms ) were subtracted from the proportions of yes - responses to the original sentences ( hits ) . Likewise , the pro - portions of yes - responses to the distracter items and meaning changes were subtracted from the proportions of yes - responses to the paraphrases ( hits ) . 2 . 8 . 2 . Essay on the question of GM food This task was used to measure participants ’ ability to make relations between texts , identifying corroborating evidence or contradictions across sources , that is , comprehension of the intertextual model which re ﬂ ects overall coherence despite inconsistent or con ﬂ icting in - formation . Participants were asked to write an essay to express everything they had understood about the question of GM food . Based on the content analysis , each essay was coded for three aspects : ( 1 ) the number of scienti ﬁ cally correct information units about GMO ; ( 2 ) the number of scienti ﬁ cally correct information units about the consequences of GM crops on the health and the environment ; and ( 3 ) the argument provided about the controversial question . An analysis of these aspects of the essay resulted in three different dependent measures . The ﬁ rst two aspects were considered to re ﬂ ect less deep comprehension of information across sources . The latter aspect – argumentation – was considered to re ﬂ ect a deeper intertextual comprehension of the multiple texts . For the ﬁ rst two aspects , one point was assigned to each correct information unit . For the evaluation of the argument in the essay , we referred to the coding scheme used in Mason and Boscolo ’ s ( 2004 ) study – that is , 1 point was given when the essay re ﬂ ected only one position without mentioning or taking into account the controversy of the topic ; 2 points when the two contrasting positions on the topic were presented , describing the pros and cons of GM crops , without mentioning the “ openness ” of the debate ; 3 points when the essay referred to the two contrasting positions , arguing the need for more scienti ﬁ c information about the effects of producing transgenic food before being able to take a more sustainable position ; 4 points were given when the essay argued in support of one view , maintaining that position by counter - arguing the other in a reasoned evaluation . This coding scheme is theoretically based on Kuhn , Cheney , and Weinstock ’ s ( 2000 ) model of the development of epistemic understanding , which includes three levels of thinking about knowledge . The ﬁ rst is absolutism : Knowledge is absolute , certain , and does not need to be justi ﬁ ed since it originates from observations of reality or the au - thorities . The second position is multiplism : Knowledge is ambiguous , idiosyncratic , and each individual has his or her own views and own truths . The third position is evaluativism : Some positions are reasonably more justi ﬁ ed and sustainable than others against shared norms of inquiry and knowing . The two raters coded the essays independently . Their overall agreement , as measured by Cohen ’ s kappa coef ﬁ cient , was . 92 . Each disagreement was carefully examined and discussed until consensus was reached in the presence of the ﬁ rst author . 2 . 9 . Procedure Participants were involved in three sessions . The ﬁ rst was devoted to measuring individual characteristics of prior knowledge for each topic , topic - speci ﬁ c belief about GM food , argumentative reasoning skill , reading comprehension , and Internet use . Participants also re - ported their marks in science at the end of the previous term . The ﬁ rst session took approximately one hour . The second session was devoted to the inquiry task on the topic of mobile phones . In a computer classroom , in groups of about 15 , students in the instruction condition were ﬁ rst given the SEEK declarative material on source evaluation and told to read it very carefully . Internet sources were not available while students were reading this material . The students were then asked to read the Internet sources provided to ascertainwhich sites would be the best for deciding whether using a mobile phone is , or is not , harmful to the user ’ s health . They were also asked to use the declarative material to complete a worksheet for each site while reading . They had access to the material on source evaluation throughout the inquiry task . Navigation behavior was recorded during the inquiry task . After reading through all the sites , participants were asked to complete the various source evaluation tasks and to rank - order each site on the basis of its reliability ( 1 ¼ most reliable ) and to justify their ranking for the most and least reliable sites . When performing the evaluation tasks , participants did not have access to the websites , only to the randomized list of URLs . L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 150 In groups of about 15 , students in the no - instruction condition were not given the declarative material on source evaluation or the worksheets for each site . They were only given the instruction to read the websites very carefully to ascertain which sites would be the best for deciding whether using a mobile phone is , or is not , harmful to the user ’ s health . In both conditions , students were given 35 min to read the Internet sources for the inquiry task . After reading the sites , students in the no - instruction condition completed the same evaluation tasks as the students in the in - struction condition . When performing the evaluation tasks , participants did not have access to the websites , only to the randomized list of URLs . The third session , which took place a week later , was devoted to the transfer inquiry task . In the same computer classroom , again in groups of about 15 , students were asked to read the provided Internet sources to ascertain which sites would be best for deciding whether the production and marketing of GM food is , or is not , harmful to the consumers ’ health and the environment . They were also told that they would complete two tasks to show what they had comprehended from the Internet sources . During this session the procedure was the same for all participants . The instructional material on source evaluation was not available to the students in the instruction group , unlike the ﬁ rst session . Performance in the evaluation tasks in the new inquiry task would reveal the transfer of the skill learned from the instruction to source evaluation in the context of the previous inquiry task . Participants were given 35 min to read the Internet sources . After reading the websites , participants in both conditions were given the same evaluation tasks as in the ﬁ rst session . They did not have access to the websites , only to the randomized list of URLs , when performing the evaluation tasks . In addition , in both conditions they were given tasks to measure their comprehension of information on the controversial topic of GM food . This session took approximately 70 min . During both the inquiry tasks , Web monitoring software registered the websites visited and the time spent on each site . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Preliminary analyses Preliminary analyses were conducted to examine whether there were statistically signi ﬁ cant different individual characteristics present in the students in the two conditions , to be controlled to ensure the equivalence of the groups . No statistically signi ﬁ cant differences be - tween conditions emerged for prior knowledge about mobile phones , F ( 1 , 132 ) ¼ . 17 , MSE ¼ 2 . 81 , p ¼ . 68 ; prior knowledge about GMO , F ( 1 , 132 ) ¼ 1 . 54 , MSE ¼ 1 . 65 , p ¼ . 21 ; topic - speci ﬁ c belief about GM food , F ( 1 , 132 ) ¼ 3 . 76 , MSE ¼ . 91 , p ¼ . 055 , h 2 p ¼ . 02 , argumentative reasoning skill , F < 1 , reading comprehension , F < 1 ; Internet use , F < 1 ; and grade in science , F ( 1 , 132 ) ¼ 1 . 39 , MSE ¼ 1 . 19 , p ¼ . 24 . Table 1 lists the descriptive data for individual characteristics . 3 . 2 . Navigation patterns and source evaluation during the basic inquiry task ( mobile phones ) To answer the ﬁ rst part of research question 1 regarding the basic inquiry task , we ﬁ rst examined participants ’ navigation behavior across the sites as an implicit indicator of epistemic evaluation . In the instruction condition this inquiry task was performed after reading the material containing declarative knowledge about what to consider when evaluating the reliability of a source and the accuracy of its content . 3 . 2 . 1 . Navigation patterns A MANCOVA was conducted with condition as the between - subject factor and the z - standardized values of prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skill as the factors of covariance , since the interaction terms were also incorporated into the design to control for the possible aptitude - treatment - interaction ( Field , 2009 ) . Table 2 lists the descriptive data for each of the dependent measures regarding the basic inquiry task about mobile phones . The MANCOVA only revealed the multivariate effect of condition , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 62 , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 18 . 94 , p < . 001 , h 2 p ¼ . 37 . No effects were related to the covariates , prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skill , both F < 1 . Regarding the main effect of condition , univariate tests showed signi ﬁ cant differences for the frequency of visits to the least reliable sites , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 4 . 50 , MSE ¼ 2 . 01 , p ¼ . 036 , h 2 p ¼ . 03 ; the time spent visiting the most , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 53 . 66 , MSE ¼ 9 . 98 , p < . 001 , h 2 p ¼ . 29 , and least reliable sites , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 20 . 97 , MSE ¼ 7 . 16 , p < . 001 , h 2 p ¼ . 14 . Students in the instruction condition made fewer visits to the least reliable sites but spent more time reading both the most and least reliable electronic resources . The exploratory analysis of the interaction effect of the two covariates , prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skills , and the experimental factor on navigation patterns showed that neither the former , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 57 , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 1 . 54 , p ¼ . 19 , nor the latter , F < 1 , moderated participants ’ behavior when navigating the sites . Table 1 Means and standard deviations of scores of individual characteristics as prerequisites of source evaluation by condition . Variables No - instruction ( n ¼ 65 ) Instruction ( n ¼ 69 ) M SD M SD Prior knowledge ( mobile phones ) 2 . 57 1 . 69 2 . 45 1 . 67 Prior knowledge ( GMO ) 6 . 52 1 . 31 6 . 25 1 . 26 Argumentative reasoning 2 . 22 1 . 59 2 . 29 1 . 38 Topic - speci ﬁ c belief about GM food 2 . 32 1 . 02 2 . 64 . 88 Reading comprehension 11 . 88 3 . 11 12 . 26 3 . 10 Internet use 21 . 35 3 . 90 20 . 83 4 . 30 Achievement in science 6 . 25 1 . 15 6 . 03 1 . 04 L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 151 3 . 2 . 2 . Source evaluation Another MANCOVA was then carried out with the scores for rank - ordering of the most and least reliable sites , and justi ﬁ cation for it , as dependent variables ( Table 2 ) . The MANCOVA revealed the multivariate effects of condition , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 88 , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 4 . 25 , p ¼ . 003 , h 2 p ¼ . 12 . No effects were related to the covariate prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skill , both F < 1 . Regarding the main effect of condition , univariate tests showed signi ﬁ cant differences for the rank - ordering of the most reliable sites , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 4 . 55 , MSE ¼ . 34 , p ¼ . 035 , h 2 p ¼ . 03 ; the use of SEEK criteria to justify the rank - ordering of the most , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 8 . 60 , MSE ¼ . 56 , p ¼ . 004 , h 2 p ¼ . 06 , and least reliable sites , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 9 . 39 , MSE ¼ . 63 , p ¼ . 003 , h 2 p ¼ . 07 . Students in the instruction condition rank - ordered more accurately the most reliable sites , and justi ﬁ ed their rank - ordering of the most and least reliable sources by appealing more to the criteria mentioned in the SEEK declarative material . It is worth noting that 4 students in the no - instruction condition did not open or read the most reliable source , the Ministry of Health site , whereas all those in the instruction condition spent time on it . The exploratory analysis of the interaction effect of the two covariates , prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skills , and the experimental factor on source evaluation , again revealed that neither prior knowledge , F < 1 , nor argumentative reasoning , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 95 , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 1 . 54 , p ¼ . 19 , moderated participants ’ evaluative behavior . We also carried out a qualitative analysis to see whether the use of the speci ﬁ c SEEK criteria differentiated as a function of condition when justifying the rank - ordering of the most and least reliable online sources . As described above , students in the instruction condition were given declarative knowledge about the criteria to be used to evaluate sources . These criteria pertain to three main aspects : 1 . the author ( Knowledgeable about the topic ? With what motivation ? ) ; 2 . the reliability of the information ( Based on scienti ﬁ c evidence ? Similar in - formation across sites ? ) ; 3 . the quality of the explanation ( Understandable ? Aligned with prior scienti ﬁ c knowledge or information in other reliable sites ? ) . A chi square test on the number of SEEK criteria used when justifying rankings of the most credible sites , revealed no signi ﬁ cant differences due to condition for using criteria referring to characteristics of authors , the nature of information , and quality of explanation . This ﬁ nding indicates that students in both conditions appealed equally to one or other aspect . In contrast , when providing the reasons for judging some sites as the least reliable , condition differentiated the use of criteria referring to author credentials , X 2 ( 2 ) ¼ 6 . 50 , p ¼ . 030 . Students considered author characteristics more in the instruction than in the no - instruction condition . A similar qualitative analysis was also carried out to see whether the use of criteria other than those provided in the SEEK material differentiated as a function of condition when justifying the rank - ordering of the most and least reliable online sources . These alternative criteria pertained to three main aspects : 1 . the easiness of information comprehension ; 2 . the quantity of information provided ; 3 . the interestingness and emotionality of information . A series of chi square tests on the number of non - SEEK criteria used , when justifying rankings of the most and least credible sites , revealed no signi ﬁ cant differences due to condition . These ﬁ ndings indicate that students in both conditions refer equally to one or other less relevant aspect of the sources . Finally , an ANCOVA was carried out with the scores for rank - ordering all the eight sites as the dependent variable . No effect of condition emerged from this analysis , F < 1 , but an effect of the covariate prior knowledge did emerge , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 5 . 41 , MSE ¼ 11 . 71 , p ¼ . 022 , h 2 p ¼ . 04 . No effects were related to the other covariate , argumentative reasoning skill , F < 1 . This ﬁ nding indicates that the students who had just received the short - term intervention were not able to produce an overall more accurate rank - ordering of the eight sites than the students in the no - instruction condition . The former were able to discriminate better the most reliable sources , as shown by the previous ﬁ nding . An exploratory analysis of the interaction of the two covariates , and the experimental factor of condition , revealed no moderation effect for either prior knowledge , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 2 . 33 , MSE ¼ 5 . 06 , p ¼ . 129 , or for argumentative reasoning skill , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 1 . 15 , MSE ¼ 2 . 49 , p ¼ . 285 . 3 . 3 . Navigation patterns and rank - order of the sources about the transfer inquiry task ( GM food ) To answer the most important part of research question 1 , we examined participants ’ navigation behavior and epistemic evaluation skill in relation to the transfer inquiry task , which regarded the controversial topic of whether GM food is harmful to the consumer ’ s health and the environment . 3 . 3 . 1 . Navigation patterns A MANCOVA was conducted with condition as the between - subject factor . The z - standardized values of prior knowledge and argu - mentative reasoning skill were the factors of covariance , since the interaction terms were also incorporated into the design to control for possible aptitude - treatment - interaction ( Field , 2009 ) . Table 3 lists the descriptive data for each of the dependent measures regarding the transfer inquiry task about GM food . The MANCOVA revealed the multivariate effect of condition , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 90 , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 3 . 38 , p ¼ . 012 , h 2 p ¼ . 09 . No effects were related to the covariates , prior knowledge , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 96 , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 1 . 30 , p ¼ . 27 , and argumentative reasoning skills , F < 1 . Table 2 Adjusted means and standard Errors of scores for navigation behavior and evaluation of information in the basic inquiry task ( mobile phones ) by condition . Variables No - instruction ( n ¼ 65 ) Instruction ( n ¼ 69 ) M SE M SE Visits to most reliable sites 3 . 47 . 18 3 . 03 . 18 Visits to least reliable sites 3 . 25 . 18 2 . 74 . 17 Time on most reliable sites 4 . 60 . 39 8 . 51 . 38 Time on least reliable sites 4 . 90 . 33 7 . 03 . 32 Rank - order of most reliable sites . 37 . 07 . 60 . 07 Rank - order of least reliable sites . 65 . 09 . 60 . 09 Overall ranking - order 1 . 71 . 18 1 . 91 . 17 SEEK criteria to justify most reliable sites . 97 . 09 1 . 35 . 09 SEEK criteria to justify least reliable sites 1 . 03 . 10 1 . 46 . 10 L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 152 Regarding the main effect of condition , univariate tests showed signi ﬁ cant differences for the time spent visiting the most reliable sites , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 9 . 15 , MSE ¼ 5 . 08 , p ¼ . 003 , h 2 p ¼ . 07 . Students in the instruction condition spent longer reading the most authoritative electronic resources . The exploratory analysis of the interaction effect of the covariates , prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skills , and the experimental factor on navigation patterns , showed that neither the former , F < 1 , nor the latter , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 93 , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 2 . 21 , p ¼ . 07 , moderate participants ’ behavior when navigating the sites about the controversial topic of genetically modi ﬁ ed food . 3 . 3 . 2 . Source evaluation Another MANCOVA was carried out with the scores for the rank - ordering of the most and least reliable sites , and justi ﬁ cation for it , as dependent variables ( Table 3 ) . The MANCOVA revealed the multivariate effects of condition , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 92 , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 2 . 57 , p ¼ . 041 , h 2 p ¼ . 07 , and of the covariate prior knowledge , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 91 , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 2 . 87 , p ¼ . 026 , h 2 p ¼ . 08 , but not of argumentative reasoning skill , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 96 , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 1 . 24 , p ¼ . 29 . Regarding the main effect of condition , univariate tests showed signi ﬁ cant differences for the rank - ordering of the least reliable sources , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 4 . 01 , MSE ¼ . 42 , p ¼ . 047 , h 2 p ¼ . 03 , and the use of SEEK criteria to justify the rank - ordering of the most reliable , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 5 . 66 , MSE ¼ . 66 , p ¼ . 019 , h 2 p ¼ . 04 , and least reliable sites , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 4 . 82 , MSE ¼ . 60 , p ¼ . 030 , h 2 p ¼ . 03 , in favor of the students in the instruction condition . It is worth noting that 9 students in the no - instruction condition did notopen or read the second most reliable source , the popular science site of the Province of Turin , whereas all those in the instruction condition spent time on it . The exploratory analysis of the interaction effect of the covariates , prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skills , and the experimental factor on evaluation behavior , showed that neither the former , F < 1 , nor the latter , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 94 , F ( 4 , 124 ) ¼ 2 . 00 , p ¼ . 09 , moderate participants ’ rankings and justi ﬁ cations for their rankings . We also performed a qualitative analysis to see whether the use of speci ﬁ c SEEK criteria differentiated as a function of condition to justify the rank - ordering of the most and least reliable sites . As regards the former , chi square tests revealed that two criteria were considered in the instruction more than in the no - instruction condition when judging the information provided by a Web source : the presence of scienti ﬁ c evidence , X 2 ( 2 ) ¼ 8 . 66 , p ¼ . 013 , and the ﬁ t of the explanation with prior scienti ﬁ c knowledge or information from other reliable sources , X 2 ( 2 ) ¼ 8 . 57 , p ¼ . 014 . Reference to author credentials did not differentiate as a function of condition . For the least reliable sites , no differences were revealed by chi square tests as students in both conditions appealed equally to one or other aspect of source evaluation . A similar qualitative analysis was carried out for the use of non - SEEK criteria in source evaluation . These criteria were substantially the same as those reported above for the topic of mobile phones . A series of Chi square tests revealed no differences as a function of condition , neither when judging the most , nor the least reliable sites . The students appealed equally to one or other less relevant aspect of the sources . Finally , an ANCOVA was carried out with the scores for rank - ordering all the sites as the dependent variable . An effect of condition emerged from this analysis , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 13 . 07 , MSE ¼ 38 . 22 , p < . 001 . In contrast , no effects were related to the covariates of prior knowledge , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 1 . 24 , MSE ¼ 3 . 62 , p ¼ . 267 , or argumentative reasoning skill , F < 1 . This ﬁ nding indicates that the students who received the short - term intervention were able to produce an overall more accurate rank - ordering of the eight sites than students in the no - instruction condition . Therefore , the performance of the former was superior to that of the latter , not only for discriminating better the least reli - able sites , as indicated by the previous ﬁ nding . An analysis of the interaction of the two covariates and the experimental factor of condition , revealed no moderation effect for either prior knowledge , F < 1 , or for argumentative reasoning skill , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 1 . 24 , MSE ¼ 3 . 62 , p ¼ . 267 . 3 . 4 . Comprehension of information about the transfer inquiry task ( GM food ) To answer research question 2 , for the transfer inquiry task we also examined the comprehension of information accessed on the websites as revealed by the sentence veri ﬁ cation task and the written essay . The essay was analyzed for ( 1 ) the number of scienti ﬁ cally correct information units about GMO ; ( 2 ) the number of scienti ﬁ cally correct information units about the consequences of GM crops for consumer health and the environment ; and ( 3 ) the argument about the controversial issue provided ( Table 3 ) . The sentence veri ﬁ cation task was considered as a measure of comprehension of the surface meaning of the texts , while the argumentation about the controversial question provided in the essay was considered as a measure of deeper comprehension of the texts . Table 3 Adjusted means and standard Errors of scores for navigation behavior and evaluation and comprehension of information in the transfer inquiry task ( GMO ) by condition . Variables No - instruction ( n ¼ 65 ) Instruction ( n ¼ 69 ) M SE M SE Visits to most reliable sites 2 . 89 . 26 3 . 45 . 25 Visits to least reliable sites 3 . 59 . 30 3 . 09 . 29 Time on most reliable sites 4 . 56 . 28 5 . 72 . 27 Time on least reliable sites 4 . 17 . 32 4 . 36 . 31 Rank - order of most reliable sites . 92 . 08 . 94 . 08 Rank - order of least reliable sites . 55 . 08 . 71 . 08 Overall ranking - order 1 . 75 . 21 2 . 80 . 20 SEEK criteria to justify most reliable sites 1 . 43 . 10 1 . 75 . 10 SEEK criteria to justify least reliable sites 1 . 41 . 10 1 . 70 . 09 d ’ ( sentence veri ﬁ cation ) . 92 . 75 1 . 21 . 74 Scienti ﬁ c information units about GMO 1 . 68 . 23 1 . 74 . 23 Scienti ﬁ c information units about consequences of GM crops 5 . 15 . 40 5 . 43 . 39 Argumentation 2 . 16 . 13 2 . 56 . 12 L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 153 A MANCOVA was carried out with condition as the between - subject factor and the z - standardized values of prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skill as factors of covariance , since the interaction terms were also incorporated into the design to control for a possible aptitude - treatment - interaction . The MANCOVA revealed the multivariate effect of condition , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 90 , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 3 . 18 , p ¼ . 016 , h 2 p ¼ . 09 . No effects were related to the covariates , prior knowledge , Wilks ’ lambda ¼ . 96 , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 1 . 27 , p ¼ . 28 , and argu - mentative reasoning skills , F < 1 . Regarding the main effect of condition , univariate tests revealed signi ﬁ cant differences for the sentence veri ﬁ cation task , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 5 . 81 , MSE ¼ . 56 , p ¼ . 017 , h 2 p ¼ . 04 , and the argumentation about GMO , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 6 . 33 , MSE ¼ 1 . 05 , p ¼ . 013 , h 2 p ¼ . 05 . Participants who had read the declarative material on source evaluation before carrying out the inquiry task on mobile phones , showed greater comprehension at both less deep and deeper levels . The exploratory analysis of the moderating role of prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skill on comprehension of online information revealed only a signi ﬁ cant interaction between the former and condition , Wilks ’ lambda , F ( 4 , 125 ) ¼ 2 . 48 , p ¼ . 047 , h 2 p ¼ . 07 . This indicates that the effectiveness of the instructional intervention on information comprehension was to some extent moderated by par - ticipants ’ knowledge of the topic before the inquiry task . Univariate tests revealed that this interaction effect speci ﬁ cally concerned the argumentation about GM food , F ( 1 , 128 ) ¼ 7 . 26 , MSE ¼ 1 . 05 , p ¼ . 008 , h 2 p ¼ . 05 . To follow up on the signi ﬁ cant interaction , a simple slope analysis was conducted at (cid:2) 1 standard deviation ( SD ) and þ 1 SD of the variable ( Aiken & West , 1991 ) . This analysis indicates that par - ticipants with higher prior knowledge ( i . e . , 1 SD above the mean ) were in ﬂ uenced by condition , and produced a greater argumentation in their essay when instructed on source evaluation compared with participants in the no - instruction condition ( b ¼ 1 . 26 , SE ¼ . 34 , b ¼ . 63 , t ( 21 ) ¼ 3 . 67 , p ¼ . 001 ) . On the other hand , participants with a lower prior knowledge ( i . e . , 1 SD below the mean ) were not in ﬂ uenced by condition in their argumentation included in the essay ( b ¼ (cid:2) . 50 , SE ¼ . 31 , b ¼ (cid:2) . 29 , t ( 27 ) ¼ (cid:2) 1 . 57 , p ¼ . 12 ) ( see Fig . 2 ) . The students in the instruction condition also spent more time reading the most reliable sites . The reason for this could be that they comprehended better the information about GM food , not because they were more able to evaluate the sources , but rather because they had more access to more valid materials . In order to ensure that our results can indicate a link between source evaluation and comprehension of information , we performed two regression analyses , which included navigation time as a predictor of scores for the sentence veri ﬁ cation task and argumentation . When considering the less deep level of information comprehension , the navigation time on the most reliable sites was not a predictor for either the instruction ( b ¼ (cid:2) . 03 , SE ¼ . 04 , b ¼ . 08 , t ( 68 ) ¼ (cid:2) . 71 , p ¼ . 48 ) , or the no - instruction condition ( b ¼ . 05 , SE ¼ . 03 , b ¼ . 17 , t ( 64 ) ¼ 1 . 38 , p ¼ . 17 ) . The same patterns of results emerged when considering the argumentation produced in the essays . The time spent reading the most reliable sources was not a predictor for either the instruction condition ( b ¼ . 03 , SE ¼ . 05 , b ¼ . 07 , t ( 68 ) ¼ . 61 , p ¼ . 54 ) , or the no - instruction condition ( b ¼ (cid:2) . 02 , SE ¼ . 06 , b (cid:2) . 05 , t ( 64 ) ¼ (cid:2) . 46 , p ¼ . 64 ) . 4 . Discussion This study focuses on the effectiveness of a short - term intervention regarding how to judge sources and their contents . We investigated students ’ transfer of epistemic evaluation skills from the inquiry task of the instructional context , as well as comprehension of online in - formation . For a further contribution , we were also interested in examining the moderating role of two learner characteristics , prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skills . We predicted that providing students in the instruction condition with declarative knowledge about epistemic evaluation of online sources and the opportunity to immediately apply this knowledge would be bene ﬁ cial for a transfer inquiry task . We also expected that students in the instruction condition would be superior in their comprehension of the information accessed on the Web since evaluation and comprehension of multiple documents are related processes . We also expected an aptitude - treatment interaction in the direction of favoring participants with lower prior knowledge or a lower argumentative reasoning skill , who would bene ﬁ t more in the instruction condition for evaluation and for comprehension of information . Not surprisingly , as far as the controversial topic of the instructional context ( mobile phones ) is concerned , ﬁ ndings revealed that students who were given the declarative material on source evaluation showed more advanced navigation and evaluation behavior , at least 0 1 2 3 4 - 1 . 00 1 . 00 A r g u m e n t a t i o n s c o re s Prior Knowledge ( z - score ) No - Instruction Instruction Fig . 2 . Plot of a signi ﬁ cant interaction effect of source evaluation instruction and prior knowledge on argumentation about genetically modi ﬁ ed food . L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 154 to some extent , than students in the no - instruction condition . They made fewer visits to the least reliable sites and spent more time on the most reliable sites . They were also more able to use more sophisticated criteria ( described in the instructional material ) when judging the most and least reliable resources . In particular , the students in the instruction condition appealed more to the SEEK criterion of author credentials when assessing the epistemic quality of the most reliable online sources . It should be noted that these students spent more time not only on the most , but also the least , credible resources . A plausible interpretation is that they paid more attention to the least authoritative sites in an attempt to apply the newly learned criteria to judge their epistemic value . Regarding the more important outcomes of the transfer inquiry task , the only one that can document the effectiveness of the short - term intervention , ﬁ ndings , as predicted , revealed signi ﬁ cant differences in navigation behavior , epistemic evaluation , and comprehension of information due to condition . In the new inquiry task on a different controversial topic , students who received declarative material about source evaluation devoted more time to the most reliable sources when navigating across the sites and appealed more to advanced criteria when assessing the epistemic quality of both the most and least reliable sources . In particular , in their epistemic judgments these students referred , more than those in the no - instruction condition , to the sophisticated SEEK criteria of scienti ﬁ c evidence and corroboration across sites , or to prior scienti ﬁ c knowledge . The former were also able to provide a more accurate rank - ordering of the nine sites than the latter . In addition , as predicted , the instruction condition led readers to comprehend better the information accessed on the various sites . They were not only able to outperform the no - instruction group in intratextual surface text comprehension , but also for argumentation about the controversial topic of GM food . These ﬁ ndings indicate a superior comprehension at an intratextual level of recognition of information read on the websites , and at an intertextual deeper level of the construction of relationships between sources . The latter leads to an overall coherence , despite con ﬂ icting information across the multiple documents . Instructed students did not differ from the no - instructed stu - dents just when reporting information about technical details on genetic engineering and its application to the production of food , or about the consequences of GM crops on the health and the environment – that is , information which was provided across sources . Concerning the moderating role of the two learner characteristics , prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skill , no aptitude - treatment interaction emerged for navigational and evaluative behavior for either the basic inquiry task , or the transfer task . The inter - action emerged only in relation to prior knowledge for the deeper level of information comprehension , as revealed by the argumentation about GM food . However , the interaction was not in the expected direction . Students who had lower prior knowledge of the topic did not bene ﬁ t from the instruction on source evaluation when producing their argument on GM food . In contrast , the participants who knew more about the controversial question before the inquiry task and received the instruction on source evaluation , were more able to take advantage of it at a deeper level of information comprehension than those who did not read the declarative material . A plausible explanation for this outcome is that a certain amount of prior knowledge on the controversial topic is needed in order to be able to bene ﬁ t from guidelines on how to evaluate sources that provide con ﬂ icting information on the topic . In sum , the outcomes regarding the transfer inquiry task indicate that a short - term intervention to enhance ninth graders ’ navigational behavior and source evaluation and comprehension was quite effective . The study is , to some extent , aligned with the outcomes of previous research with undergraduates ( Wiley et al . , 2009 ) . It also partially extends , in two ways , recent investigations with students of the same educational level involved in a long - term instructional intervention , which obtained mixed results ( Walraven et al . , 2010 ; Walraven at al . , 2013 ) . First , the study indicates that students in the ﬁ rst year of upper secondary school are able , at least to some extent , to transfer source evaluation skills from an inquiry task to a similar task in a different domain . Second , the study seems to indicate that students who are better able to discriminate the websites and judge their epistemic quality – as an effect of a short - term instructional intervention – also comprehend them better , both super ﬁ cially and more deeply , through the construction of an overall coherence , despite con ﬂ icting information across the documents read . This result is also aligned , to some extent , with outcomes from correlational research revealing that memory for sources predicts deep comprehension on both intratextual and intertextual levels in students in the last year of upper secondary school who read multiple printed texts ( Strømsø et al . , 2010 ) . The study also supports correlational research indicating that greater evaluation of some aspects of online sources is associated with greater learning from them in middle ( Mason et al . , 2010a ) and high school ( Mason et al . , 2011 ) , and university students ( Mason et al . , 2010b ) . Furthermore , the ﬁ ndings of the present study are in agreement with recent research based on thinking - aloud methodology to study processing patterns , which documents that Internet - based multiple - document comprehension is the outcome of a dynamic interplay of factors – among them information evaluation – promoting strategic reading ( Goldman , Braasch et al . , 2012 ) . 4 . 1 . Limitations When interpreting the results of the study , however , it is necessary to take into account some limitations , which should be overcome in future research . First , although there were some signi ﬁ cant differences between the two conditions for source evaluation – in favor of the situation in which instruction was provided – students ’ scores are low . In addition , some effect sizes related to the signi ﬁ cant differences between conditions when navigating , evaluating , and comprehending online information are small . Further research based on longer and more articulated instructional interventions may provide more solid results . Second , in the present study we measured several reader characteristics as prerequisites for source evaluation , two of which ( prior knowledge and argumentative reasoning skill ) were considered as potential moderators of epistemic evaluation and comprehension of information in relation to the independent variable of condition . The other individual differences were taken into account only to ensure the equivalence of readers in the two conditions . It should also be noted that participants had rather low topic prior knowledge and argu - mentative reasoning skills in both conditions . We found that the former interacted with condition , and that only readers with a higher prior knowledge of the topic were able to bene ﬁ t from the instruction condition at the deeper level of information comprehension . Undoubtedly , further investigation is needed for an in - depth analysis of the role of individual factors that may act as a resource or constraint in web - based learning contexts , or may simply make students more or less dependent on instructional support when using the Internet for information searching , evaluation , and comprehension . For example , one of the individual factors is topic - speci ﬁ c beliefs , which we measured only for the transfer inquiry task as a control variable . In the light of the effects of myside bias and poor rational thinking in naturalistic reasoning situations ( Stanovich et al . , 2013 ) , current research could be extended by examining whether belief - consistency / inconsistency may affect both source evaluation and less deep , and deeper comprehension of their contents . In this regard , Maier and Richter ( 2013 ) have recently L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 155 demonstrated differential effects of prior beliefs on memory for text and situational model when dealing with multiple texts on scienti ﬁ c controversies . Third , we did not measure participants ’ prior navigation and source evaluation skills . It might be that they already knew at least some of the relevant criteria beforehand , and were prompted to actually use them by the instructional intervention . However , our main focus was on the transfer of source evaluation skills and the ﬁ ndings substantially con ﬁ rm that the participants learned – to some extent – the relevant criteria as an effect of the intervention . Fourth , the study indicates that epistemic evaluation and comprehension of information are related processes . However , the present data do not permit making inferences about the time course of information validation during reading . In this respect , it is worth investigating the question of whether validation occurs at an early stage of information processing , preparing for deeper comprehension . Fifth , in the present study , the transfer inquiry task was carried out one week after the ﬁ rst task . Future studies should examine the long - term effects associated with instruction on source evaluation . 4 . 2 . Conclusion Despite its limitations , the study has some theoretical signi ﬁ cance as it provides evidence that at least some aspects of epistemic evaluation of online information sources can be enhanced in adolescent readers , and that this evaluation may impact their comprehension of information . The study is also signi ﬁ cant regarding educational practice . It documents that a short - term intervention based on reading declarative material , which is easier to implement in the real school context , can be effective for transferring some procedural skills about source evaluation . Central to literacy in today ’ s information age is the ability to evaluate multiple documents . Teaching ninth graders which factors are important to consider when evaluating Internet sites may lead these students to use these factors when making and justifying epistemic judgments for information validation in new inquiry tasks . It may also lead to a better comprehension of the content provided in these sites . Such interventions on Web source evaluation are necessary to equip students with important tools for becoming lifelong learners who are critical consumers of information . Being able to evaluate epistemically materials on the Web , which is now “ the ” source of information used by digital natives , can make a great difference among these students in the knowledge society . Acknowledgments This study was mainly supported by a grant to the ﬁ rst author from the Italian Ministry of University and Scienti ﬁ c Research under the funding program for projects of national relevance ( PRIN 2008 : 2008ZCCHBW _ 003 ) . The study was also partially supported by a grant to the ﬁ rst author from the University of Padova ( Italy ) , under the funding program for “ Strategic Projects ” ( STPD08HANE _ 001 ) . We are very grateful to all the students , their parents and teachers , and the school principals , who made this study possible . We are also grateful to David Trivellin for his help in data collection . References Aiken , L . S . , & West , S . G . ( 1991 ) . Multiple regression : Testing and interpreting interactions . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Barzilai , S . , & Zohar , A . ( 2012 ) . Epistemic thinking in action : evaluating and integrating online sources . Cognition and Instruction , 30 ( 1 ) , 39 – 85 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370008 . 2011 . 636495 . Braasch , J . L . G . , Bräten , I . , Strømsø , H . , Anmarkrud , Ø . , & Ferguson , L . ( 2013 ) . Promoting secondary school students ’ evaluation of source features of multiple documents . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 38 ( 3 ) , 180 – 195 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cedpsych . 2013 . 03 . 003 . Braasch , J . L . G . , & Goldman , S . R . ( 2010 ) . The role of prior knowledge in learning from analogies in science texts . Discourse Processes , 47 ( 6 ) , 447 – 479 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01638530903420960 . Braasch , J . L . G . , Rouet , J . - F . , Vibert , N . , & Britt , M . A . ( 2012 ) . Readers ’ use of source information in text comprehension . Memory & Cognition , 40 ( 3 ) , 450 – 465 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3758 / s13421 - 011 - 0160 - 6 . Brand - Gruwel , S . , Wopereis , I . , & Vermetten , Y . ( 2005 ) . Information problem solving by experts and novices : analysis of a complex cognitive skill . Computers in Human Behavior , 21 ( 3 ) , 487 – 508 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2004 . 10 . 005 . Bråten , I . , Britt , M . A . , Strømsø , H . I . , & Rouet , J . - F . ( 2011 ) . The role of epistemic beliefs in the comprehension of multiple expository texts : toward an integrated model . Educational Psychologist , 46 ( 1 ) , 48 – 70 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2011 . 538647 . Bråten , I . , Strømsø , H . I . , & Britt , M . A . ( 2009 ) . Trust matters : examining the role of source evaluation in students ’ construction of meaning within and across multiple texts . Reading Research Quarterly , 44 ( 1 ) , 6 – 28 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1598 / RRQ . 41 . 1 . 1 . Bråten , I . , Strømsø , H . I . , & Salmerón , L . ( 2011 ) . Trust and mistrust when students read multiple information sources about climate change . Learning and Instruction , 21 ( 2 ) , 180 – 192 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2010 . 02 . 002 . Brem , S . K . , Russell , J . , & Weems , L . ( 2001 ) . Science on the Web : student evaluations of scienti ﬁ c arguments . Discourse Processes , 32 ( 2 – 3 ) , 191 – 213 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0163853X . 2001 . 9651598 . Britt , M . A . , & Aglinskas , C . ( 2002 ) . Improving students ’ abilities to identify and use source information . Cognition and Instruction , 20 ( 4 ) , 485 – 522 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S1532690XCI2004 _ 2 . Britt , M . A . , & Rouet , J . - F . ( 2012 ) . Learning with multiple documents : component skills and their acquisition . In J . R . Kirby , & M . J . Lawson ( Eds . ) , Enhancing the quality of learning : Dispositions , instruction , and learning processes ( pp . 276 – 314 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Clark , D . B . , & Slotta , J . D . ( 2000 ) . Evaluating media - enhancement and source authority on the Internet : the Knowledge Integration Environment . International Journal of Science Education , 22 ( 8 ) , 859 – 871 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 095006900412310 . Coiro , J . , Knobel , M . , Lankshear , C . , & Leu , D . J . ( Eds . ) . ( 2008 ) . Handbook of research on new literacies . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Cornoldi , C . , Pra Baldi , A . , & Friso , G . ( 2010 ) . MT avanzate – 2 . Prove MT avanzate di lettura e matematica per il biennio della scuola secondaria superiore [ Advanced MT – 2 . Advanced MT tests of reading and mathematics for upper secondary school ] . Firenze : Italy . O . S . ( in Italian ) . Field , A . P . ( 2009 ) . Discovering statistics using SPSS ( 3rd ed . ) . Los Angeles , CA : Sage . Gerjets , P . , & Hellenthal - Schorr , T . ( 2008 ) . Competent information search in the World Wide Web : development and evaluation of a web training for pupils . Computers in Human Behavior , 24 ( 3 ) , 693 – 715 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2007 . 01 . 02 . Gerjets , P . , Kammerer , Y . , & Werner , B . ( 2011 ) . Measuring spontaneous and instructed evaluation processes during Web search : integrating concurrent thinking - aloud protocols and eye - tracking data . Learning and Instruction , 21 ( 2 ) , 220 – 231 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2010 . 02 . 005 . Goldman , S . R . , Braasch , J . L . G . , Wiley , J . , Graesser , A . C . , & Brodowinska , K . ( 2012 ) . Comprehending and learning from Internet sources : processing patterns of better and poorer learners . Reading Research Quarterly , 47 ( 4 ) , 356 – 381 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / RRQ . 027 . Goldman , S . R . , Lawless , K . A . , Gomez , K . W . , Braasch , J . L . G . , MacLeod , S . , & Manning , F . ( 2009 ) . Literacy in the digital world : Comprehending and learning from multiple sources . In M . C . McKeown , & L . Kucan ( Eds . ) , Bringing reading research to life ( pp . 257 – 284 ) . New York : Guilford . L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 156 Hofer , B . K . ( 2004 ) . Epistemological understanding as a metacognitive process : thinking aloud during online searching . Educational Psychologist , 39 ( 1 ) , 43 – 55 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15326985ep3901 _ 5 . Hwang , G . - J . , Tsai , P . - S . , Tsai , C . - C . , & Tseng , J . C . R . ( 2008 ) . A novel approach for assisting teachers in analyzing student web - searching behaviors . Computers & Education , 51 ( 2 ) , 926 – 938 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2007 . 09 . 01 . International Reading Association . ( 2001 ) . Integrating literacy and technology in the curriculum : a position statement . Retrieved from http : / / www . reading . org / downloads / positions / ps1048 _ technology . pdf . Kammerer , Y . , Bråten , I . , Gerjets , P . , & Stromso , H . I . ( 2013 ) . The role of Internet - speci ﬁ c epistemic beliefs in laypersons ’ source evaluations and decisions during Web search on a medical issue . Computers in Human Behavior , 29 ( 3 ) , 1193 – 1203 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2012 . 10 . 012 . Kintsch , W . ( 1998 ) . Comprehension : A paradigm for cognition . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Kuhn , D . , Cheney , R . , & Weinstock , M . ( 2000 ) . The development of epistemological understanding . Cognitive Development , 15 ( 3 ) , 309 – 328 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0885 - 2014 ( 00 ) 00030 - 7 . Kuiper , E . , Wolman , M . , & Terwel , J . ( 2008 ) . Integrating critical Web skills and content knowledge : development and evaluation of a 5th grade educational program . Computers in Human Behavior , 24 ( 3 ) , 666 – 692 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2007 . 01 . 022 . Macedo - Rouet , M . , Braasch , J . L . G . , Britt , A . M . , & Rouet , J . - F . ( 2013 ) . Teaching fourth and ﬁ fth graders to evaluate information sources during text comprehension . Cognition and Instruction , 31 ( 2 ) , 204 – 226 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370008 . 2013 . 769995 . Maier , J . , & Richter , T . ( 2013 ) . Text - belief consistency effects in the comprehension of multiple texts with con ﬂ icting information . Cognition and Instruction , 13 ( 2 ) , 151 – 175 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370008 . 2013 . 769997 . Mason , L . , & Ariasi , N . ( 2010 ) . Critical thinking about biology during Web page reading : tracking students ’ evaluation of sources and information through eye ﬁ xations . In L . Verschaffel , E . De Corte , T . de Jong , & J . Elen ( Eds . ) , Use of representations in reasoning and problem solving : Analysis and improvement ( pp . 55 – 73 ) . New York : Routledge . Mason , L . , Ariasi , N . , & Boldrin , A . ( 2011 ) . Epistemic beliefs in action : spontaneous re ﬂ ections about knowledge and knowing during online information searching and their in ﬂ uence on learning . Learning and Instruction , 21 ( 1 ) , 137 – 151 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2010 . 01 . 001 . Mason , L . , & Boldrin , A . ( 2008 ) . Epistemic metacognition in the context of information searching on the Web . In M . S . Khine ( Ed . ) , Knowing , knowledge and beliefs : Episte - mological studies across diverse cultures ( pp . 377 – 404 ) . New York : Springer . Mason , L . , Boldrin , A . , & Ariasi , N . ( 2010a ) . Epistemic metacognition in context : evaluating and learning online information . Metacognition and Learning , 5 ( 1 ) , 67 – 90 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11409 - 009 - 9048 - 2 . Mason , L . , Boldrin , A . , & Ariasi , N . ( 2010b ) . Searching the Web to learn about a controversial topic : are students epistemically active ? Instructional Science , 38 ( 6 ) , 607 – 633 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11251 - 008 - 9089 - y . Mason , L . , & Boscolo , P . ( 2004 ) . Role of epistemological understanding and interest in interpreting a controversyand in topic - speci ﬁ c belief change . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 29 ( 2 ) , 103 – 128 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cedpsych . 2004 . 01 . 001 . Mason , L . , Pluchino , P . , & Tornatora , M . C . ( 2013 ) . Effects of picture labeling on illustrated science text processing and learning : evidence from eye movements . Reading Research Quarterly , 48 ( 2 ) , 199 – 214 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / rrq . 41 . Mason , L . , Tornatora , M . C . , & Pluchino , P . ( 2013 ) . Do fourth graders integrate text and picture in processing and learning from an illustrated science text ? Evidence from eye - movement patterns . Computers & Education , 60 ( 1 ) , 95 – 109 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2012 . 07 . 011 . Neuman , Y . ( 2003 ) . Go ahead , prove that God does not exist ! on high school students ’ ability to deal with fallacious arguments . Learning and Instruction , 13 ( 4 ) , 367 – 380 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0959 - 4752 ( 02 ) 00011 - 7 . Perfetti , C . A . , Rouet , J . - F . , & Britt , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Toward a theory of documents representation . In H . van Oostendorp , & S . R . Goldman ( Eds . ) , The construction of mental representations during reading ( pp . 99 – 122 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Richter , T . , & Schmid , S . ( 2010 ) . Epistemological beliefs and epistemic strategies in self - regulated learning . Metacognition and Learning , 5 ( 1 ) , 47 – 65 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11409 - 009 - 9038 - 4 . Rouet , J . - F . ( 2006 ) . The skills of document use : From text comprehension to Web - based learning . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Rouet , J . - F . , Ros , C . , Goumi , A . , Macedo - Rouet , M . , & Dinet , J . ( 2011 ) . The in ﬂ uence of surface and deep cues onprimary and secondary school students ’ assessment of relevance in web menus . Learning and Instruction , 21 ( 2 ) , 205 – 219 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2010 . 02 . 007 . Royer , J . M . , Carlo , M . S . , Dufresne , R . , & Mestre , J . ( 1996 ) . The assessment of levels of domain expertise while reading . Cognition and Instruction , 14 ( 3 ) , 373 – 408 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s1532690xci1403 _ 4 . Schacter , J . , Chung , G . K . W . K . , & Dorr , A . ( 1998 ) . Children ’ s Internet searching on complex problems : performance and process analysis . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 49 ( 9 ) , 840 – 849 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1097 - 4571 ( 199807 ) 49 : 9 < 840 : : AID - ASI9 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - D . Schmalhofer , F . , & Glavanov , D . ( 1986 ) . Three components of understanding a programmer ’ s manual : Verbatim , propositional , and situational representations . Journal of Memory and Language , 25 ( 3 ) , 279 – 294 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0749 - 596X ( 86 ) 90002 - 1 . Stadtler , M . , & Bromme , R . ( 2007 ) . Dealing with multiple documents on the WWW : the role of metacognition in the formation of documents models . International Journal of Computer - supported Collaborative Learning , 2 , 191 – 210 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11412 - 007 - 9015 - 3 . Stadtler , M . , & Bromme , R . ( 2008 ) . Effects of the metacognitive computer - tool met . a . ware on the web search of laypersons . Computers in Human Behavior , 24 ( 3 ) , 716 – 737 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2007 . 01 . 023 . Stadtler , M . , & Bromme , R . ( 2013 ) . Multiple document comprehension : an approach to public understanding of science . Cognition and Instruction , 31 ( 2 ) , 122 – 129 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370008 . 2013 . 771106 . Stadtler , M . , Scharrer , L . , Brummernhenrich , B . , & Bromme , R . ( 2013 ) . Dealing with uncertainty : readers memory for and use of con ﬂ icting information from science texts as function of presentation format and source expertise . Cognition and Instruction , 31 ( 2 ) , 130 – 150 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370008 . 2013 . 769996 . Stanovich , K . E . , West , R . F . , & Toplak , M . E . ( 2013 ) . Myside bias , rational thinking , and intelligence . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 22 ( 4 ) , 259 – 264 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0963721413480174 . Strømsø , H . I . , Bråten , I . , & Britt , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Reading multiple texts about climate change : the relationship between memory for sources and text comprehension . Learning and Instruction , 20 ( 3 ) , 192 – 204 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2009 . 02 . 001 . Strømsø , H . I . , Bråten , I . , Britt , M . A . , & Ferguson , L . E . ( 2013 ) . Spontaneous sourcing among students reading multiple documents . Cognition and Instruction , 31 ( 2 ) , 176 – 203 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370008 . 2013 . 769994 . Tsai , C . - C . ( 2004 ) . Beyond cognitive and metacognitive tools : the use of Internet as an “ epistemological ” tool for instruction . British Journal of Educational Technology , 35 ( 5 ) , 525 – 536 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 0007 - 1013 . 2004 . 00411 . x . Tsai , M . - J . , Hsu , C . - Y . , & Tsai , C . - C . ( 2012 ) . Investigation of high school students ’ online science information searching performance : the role of implicit and explicit strategies . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 21 ( 2 ) , 246 – 254 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10956 - 011 - 9307 - 2 . Tu , Y . W . , Shih , M . , & Tsai , C . - C . ( 2008 ) . Eighth graders ’ web searching strategies and outcomes : the role of task types , web experiences and epistemological beliefs . Computers & Education , 51 ( 3 ) , 1142 – 1153 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2007 . 11 . 003 . Walraven , A . , Brand - Gruwel , S . , & Boshuizen , H . P . A . ( 2009 ) . Howstudents evaluate information and sources when searching the World Wide Web for information . Computers & Education , 52 ( 1 ) , 234 – 246 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2008 . 08 . 003 . Walraven , A . , Brand - Gruwel , S . , & Boshuizen , H . P . A . ( 2010 ) . Fostering transfer of websearchers ’ evaluation skills : a ﬁ eld test of two transfer theories . Computers in Human Behavior , 26 ( 4 ) , 716 – 728 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2010 . 01 . 008 . Walraven , A . , Brand - Gruwel , S . , & Boshuizen , H . P . A . ( 2013 ) . Fostering students ’ evaluation behaviour while searching the internet . Instructional Science , 41 ( 1 ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11251 - 012 - 9221 - x . Wiley , J . , Goldman , S . R . , Graesser , A . C . , Sanchez , C . A . , Ash , I . K . , & Hemmerich , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Source evaluation , comprehension , and learning in Internet science inquiry tasks . American Educational Research Journal , 46 ( 4 ) , 1060 – 1106 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3102 / 0002831209333183 . Wopereis , I . G . J . H . , & van Merriënboer , J . J . G . ( 2011 ) . Evaluating text - based information on the World Wide Web . Learning and Instruction , 21 ( 2 ) , 232 – 237 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2010 . 02 . 003 . L . Mason et al . / Computers & Education 76 ( 2014 ) 143 – 157 157