A Longitudinal Analysis of the Effects of Media Richness on Cohesion Development and Process Satisfaction in Computer - supported Workgroups Kelly Burke Kregg Aytes Idaho State University Idaho State University Media richness theory argues that different media are more or less appropriate for different tasks . Adaptive structuration theory ( AST ) implies that technology users may creatively adapt technological structures to mitigate differences in richness . Social Information Processing theory ( SIP ) suggests a motivation and method guiding such technology adoption . In light of these theories , this paper investigates the development of two important group process factors—cohesion development and process satisfaction—in two different studies of groups supported by EMS . Consistent with AST and SIP , results indicate that cohesion and process satisfaction increase over time in all types of electronic support , despite relative differences in richness . 1 . Introduction The collaborative organizational model requires new methods for facilitating workgroup interaction [ 21 ] . Although a number of technologies have emerged to support distributed workgroups , few studies have examined the effects these various types of Electronic Meeting Systems ( EMS ) produce with respect to group dynamics over time . This paper examines the development of several group factors in the context of EMS supported distributed interaction . While the influence of technologically deterministic theories—for example Media Richness and Social Presence ( i . e . bandwidth related ) theories— concerning media characteristics is widespread , there is mounting evidence that EMS mediated interaction permits more relational development than previously expected [ e . g . , 3 , 16 , 34 ] . This paper reports on two studies that observed cohesiveness and process satisfaction among EMS supported groups . This paper ' s primary concern is whether or not media that differ in richness also differ in their impact on cohesion development or members’ satisfaction with the process in groups . This investigation specifically addresses a void in current research by examining cohesion development in computer - supported groups across a relatively large variety of media . The next section of the paper examines relevant theory and research followed by an explanation of the hypotheses and the research design used in the studies . The paper concludes with a discussion of the results and their implications for future research and practice . 2 Relevant Theory 2 . 1 Media Richness Media bandwidth theories [ e . g . , 4 , 26 ] lead to the conclusion that a medium’s relational communication effectiveness is related to its capacity for carrying a variety of cue types . Relational interaction functions to maintain social relations more than task - focused activities . According to bandwidth type theories , some media are leaner than others and impede or even prohibit back - channel cueing like body language . For instance , computer mediated communication ( CMC ) and audio - conferencing permit fewer cues than face - to - face interaction . Leaner media are thought to possess limited utility for interaction requiring more complex communication , such as that necessary for clarifying highly ambiguous situations . Evidence from both objective [ e . g . , 24 ] and perceptual measures [ e . g . , 34 ] however indicates that lean media can accommodate relational interaction . The emergent use of emoticons provides an example of the adaptation of a “lean” medium for expressing emotions . 2 . 2 Adaptive Structuration It appears then that media richness and social presence are not invariant characteristics of the media as some propose [ e . g . , 31 ] , but rather people can exercise creativity in pushing the medium’s limits and redefining its functionality , as evidenced by the invention of emoticons . A daptive Structuration Theory ( AST ) has been prescribed as an approach for understanding the dynamic role of technology in human interaction by examining the reciprocal impact people and systems have on each other [ 22 , 23 ] . Central to AST is the argument that technological and social structures—in the form of rules and resources— constrain and enable group activities . The features provided to users of an EMS , e . g . , bandwidth , decision tools , anonymity , etc . , are examples of technological structures . Structures limit actions while also providing resources for undertaking those actions . For example , e - mail is more constraining than face - to - face interaction . Nonetheless , as a resource , e - mail also affords opportunities to communicate when physically getting together is not possible . 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE Similarly , social structures such as rules and norms are constraints and resources which define group interaction . In his seminal development of structuration theory , Giddens describes rules as methods or techniques that people know about , often only implicitly , which provide formulas for action [ 9 ] . We argue that within every interaction exists a configuration of rules and resources—i . e . , a formula for action—that affects the extent to which a group will cohere . As it emerges , a structural bundle results in a social system , for instance a group’s cohesiveness . Cohesion can thus be seen a manifestation of the bundle of rules and resources that affect the attitudes of group members toward each other . Attitudes relating to cohesion include mutual attraction , affinity , influence and morale . The resulting level of cohesion - - considered as a social system - - defines the group’s future actions . As a structure , cohesion enables groups to work together . Cohesiveness is also a constraining factor in that it is required for group action . Moreover , if either too much ( e . g . , groupthink ) or too little cohesiveness is present , groups can suffer . A similar argument can be made for process satisfaction . For instance , the effectiveness of the bundle of rules and resources which impacts procedural aspects of the task— e . g . , inhibition , dominance , goal directedness , etc . —is manifested as process satisfaction . The purpose of the current analysis is to examine the impact of technical structures ( media richness ) on social structures ( cohesion and process satisfaction ) . 2 . 3 Social Inofrmation Processing An important problem currntly facing EMS research is that , while bandwidth theories are clearly correct in arguing that media do differ in their relative richness , because they are static theories , they offer us little insight about the effect of different media on group development over time . Alternatively , with its focus on adaptation , AST alerts us to the possibility that although media characteristics don’t change , the way people use them may change as time passes . AST however also leaves unanswered questions about why or how usage might be expected to change . Social information processing ( SIP ) theory helps us understand both issues . Walther ( 1992 ) argues that affiliation needs lead people to engage in relational interaction during task performance , regardless of the communication medium being used . The availability of a relatively larger number of communication channels via richer media permits more relational communication in a shorter time frame than with leaner media . Walther suggests however that leaner media permit a comparable amount of relational exchange when used over longer time frames . In other words , given enough time , CMC users for example can accumulate a relationally rich interaction context , thus allowing relational development . To summarize our position about technical structures , we argue that as stated by bandwidth type theories , different kinds of EMS media do indeed differ in richness . However , as time passes users tend to experiment and become more familiar and comfortable with new technologies . Experience leads to adaptations and enhancement of usage techniques . As users’ experience with media grows , they become more able to generate the relational development required for good group performance . In a sense , with usage media become richer . 3 . Hypotheses About Media Effects on Group Development Cohesiveness : Cohesion is defined as the aggregate of the interpersonal attractions of individual group members to each other and to the group as a whole [ 19 ] . Cohesiveness increases as individuals in a group perceive that individual and common goals can be achieved through group action . Interpersonal attraction is dependent on communication [ 19 ] ; as people communicate they increase the potential for attraction which , in turn , generates pressure toward agreement ( i . e . , conformity ) . Perceived cohesion should , therefore , be affected by the extent to which a meeting environment facilitates interpersonal communication . The importance of cohesion in workgroups is widely accepted . One critical reason managers desire to facilitate cohesion development in work groups is because non - cohesive groups are likely to exhibit performance problems . A survey of cohesion research found that cohesion is positively corelated with performance [ 28 ] . In the only EMS study we find that meaured cohesiveness specifically , computer - supported groups report less cohesiveness than manually supported groups ( i . e . , those having access to “manual” decision aids such as flip charts , etc . ) in early sessions but more in later sessions [ 2 ] . Although these groups were using the computer as a tool supporting decision making rather than writing or interaction , nonetheless , these results suggest that technical structures may be used over time to facilitate development of important social structures . Other variables which bear directly on cohesion include influence , consensus , and relational factors such as affection , self disclosure , informality and impression formation . Influence is important to cohesion since the degree of cohesion is known to vary with influence [ 19 ] . Influence is the process of bringing a group member into agreement with one’s own opinions . As members’ opinions converge , they experience increased cohesion . Synchronous computer conferencing and asynchronous e - mail groups exhibited greater choice shift , indicating greater influence , than face - to - face groups [ 15 ] . One reason may be that CMC depersonalizes interaction , thus allowing people to abandon choices more readily than in a 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE less anonymous environment ( e . g . , face - to - face ) . Conversely , face - to - face groups expressed more agreement than computer supported groups [ 12 ] . Assessment of others is important in establishing trust and consensus building . Face - to - face meetings have been shown to exhibit more socio - emotional exchange ( e . g . , tension release , joking , etc . ) and CMC had more task related exchange [ 12 ] . These results suggest that CMC may be a less relational and less influential medium than face - to - face . Considered in this light , cohesiveness may be expected to suffer in CMC . In contrast however , other results suggest the potential for relational content in CMC [ e . g . , 24 ] . Moreover , asynchronous groups have reported higher perceptions than face - to - face groups along several relational dimensions , including immediacy / affection ( a construct similar to cohesions ) [ Walther , 1992 ] . The fact that Walther’s findings differ from earlier results is significant due to differences from earlier studies in research method . For instance , unlike Walther’s study , most early studies were one time observations , failing to account for longitudinal interaction which is critical in relational development . Thus , although findings with respect to socio - emotional interaction in the context of EMSs are mixed , nonetheless , evidence from severl important longitudinal studies does suggest that electronically mediated interaction can permit relational development and facilitate cohesion over time . To summarize the salient issues about cohesion and EMS , social information processing theory and other results suggest that a rich relational context develops as needed even in leaner conditions as time passes ( Walther , 1992 ) . Thus , those in leaner environments should start off slower in cohesion building than face - to - face groups but should be able to develop cohesion as time passes and they overcome the impediments [ 2 ] . Following social information processing theory , we hypothesize that regardless of the degree of richness exhibited , all media facilitate cohesion development over time . Also as suggested by SIP in conjunction with media richness theory , we hypothesize that different degrees of media richness result in different rates of change in cohesion . We present the hypotheses regardingh media effects on cohesion development as follows . H1a : Over time , cohesion will increase for groups using all media , regardless of degree of richness . H1b : Groups using richer media will exhibit higher levels of cohesion initially . H1c : Over time , cohesion in groups using leaner media will increase more than in groups using richer media . Process Satisfaction : Satisfaction with the group process includes relational and procedural aspects of the activity , member contribution , and participation [ 36 ] . The degree to which these factors change over time determines how the process as a whole is perceived . EMS groups have reported being less satisfied than non - supported groups [ 12 ] . Similarly , satisfaction was reported higher by face - to - face dyads when performing a value laden decision making task but greater by distributed dyads when performing an information gathering task [ 32 ] . These inconclusive results shed little light on the role of the EMS environment with respect to overall process satisfaction . Perceived contribution and participation are also considered important in determining member satisfaction [ 7 ] . Inhibition is related to participation because inhibited members are less likely to contribute to the proceedings than uninhibited members . Generally , greater inhibition occurs in face - to - face groups leading to the potential for less equality of participation than in distributed EMS groups [ e . g . , 15 , 18 ] while more equal participation was found in anonymous EMS settings than when the EMS permitted identification [ 14 ] . These findings support the contention that EMSs afford more anonymity than face - to - face environments , resulting in a greater tendency to “speak out” without fear of retribution . However , other studies found no difference between EMS supported and non - supported environments or between collocated and distributed groups in terms of participatory equality [ e . g . , 1 , 8 , 13 , 29 , 35 ] . Taken all together , findings suggest that distributed groups are probably at least no worse off than face - to - face groups in terms of participation equality . Members’ satisfaction with the group process also depends on such procedural issues as being able to explore a sufficient number of alternatives , feeling comfortable that others’ contributions were adequately validated prior to adoption , and whether the leadership function is appropriately served ( for example , cohesion was highly correlated with the leader’s contribution to the process [ 37 ] ) . To the extent that these types of procedures are absent or not followed , reduced satisfaction is likely to occur . Communication is critical to process satisfaction . For instance , in CMC use , one of the best predictors of process satisfaction is frequency of prior communication among members [ 11 ] . Since the process factors concerned here all depend to a significant extent on the availability of interaction opportunites and adequate information exchange , a medium’s communication effectiveness is quite likely to have a notable impact on satisfaction development . Moreover , group , process satisfaction is positively correlated with cohesion , the more cohesive a group is , the more its members are likely to be satisfied with the group and its process outcomes [ 28 ] . In summary , both cohesion and process satisfaction are important structural outcomes of group work that depend to some extent on the characteristics of structural inputs like media richness . Hence we expect cohesion and satisfaction to be positively corelated in both the state 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE values ( i . e . session - by - session ) and the patterns of change over time . We sum up our hypotheses about media effects on group process satisfaction as follows . H2a : Over time , process satisfaction will increase for groups using all media , regardless of degree of richness . H2b : Groups using richer media will exhibit higher levels of process satisfaction initially . H2c : Over time , process satisfaction in groups using leaner media will increase more than in groups using richer media . 4 . Research Method Because group interaction is a dynamic process , assessing group development can be approached from an inputs - process - outputs perspective . Characteristics of the meeting environment ( i . e . , inputs including media richness and delay of message receipt or asynchronicity ) will impact group processes by affecting the way participants behave and in turn perceive their behaviors . Affected behaviors include self disclosure , influence , and other forms of interaction that determine cohesion . Perceptions about the process states and their evolution over time will determine outputs like members’ attitudes and the group’s performance . The first study examined three types of interaction : face - to - face , CMC - synchronous and CMC - asynchronous . Face - to - face meetings are the richest and most interactive . Asynchronous media ( supporting different time / different place interaction ) are leaner than synchronous media ( supporting same time / different place interaction ) because of the feedback delay they exhibit ( Daft and Lengel , 1986 ) . The second study looked at video - conference supported groups versus audio - conference supported oness , and also groups using audio - conference support for early sessions and video - conferencing for the last session . Analyzing data from both studies therefore compares interaction along a broad continuum of media richness ( conceptualized according to traditional , static interpretations of media richness ) shown in Table 1 . Processes of interest here are cohesion and members’ satisfaction with the group proocess . We look at their development over time by assessing members’ attitudes about them . From a structurational perspective , outputs include attitudes towards various aspects of the processes—which feed back as inputs to future stages of the process—and are hence an integral part of the system process . The current paper focuses on attitudinal output measures , not addressing performance explicitly . Media Richness Face - to - face High Video conference High moderate Combined video and audio Moderate Audio conference Low moderate CMC synchronous Low CMC asynchronous Very Low Table 1 : Relative Richness of Media Both studies employed a repeated measures design , capturing data from each of four group meetings over a four week period . Meetings in study 1 were one hour long while in study 2 they were one hour and fifteen minutes long . All sessions in both studies were scheduled at the same time one week apart . Study 1 used 127 subjects comprising 33 groups of junior and senior Business and Travel Industry Management students while study two used 111 participants comprising 29 groups . Participants in bothe studies were randomly assigned to groups and groups were randomly assigned to meeting environments . Study 1 operationalized three conditions of media richness as follows : face - to - face , distributed - synchronous , and distributed - asynchronous groups . The synchronous and asynchronous groups used only the group writing tool ) for communicating . So , for example , one member communicating to another in the asynchronous condition , had to wait until his / her session the next week to see what if any response was received . In contrats , the synchronous CMC groups could see immediately on the shared screen if any members were trying to communicate . Study 2 examined three conditions of media richnesss as follows : a video - conference mode , an audio - conference mode and a combined mode ( i . e . , audio - conferencing followed by video - conferencing in the final session ) . The EMS used in study 1 ( called GroupLink ) is a networked , distributed system . Study 2 used a similar group writing tool called Rapport . In both studies subjects were instructed about and practiced on the group writing tool prior to beginning the task and used only the co - authoring tool for all activities pertaining to the task . The same task was used in both studies and consisted of a complex project development case that required all groups to create a policy manual for a multinational firm . As planned and validated via observation of the taped interactions and session text transcripts , writing the document required participants to seek clarification on a number of issues . Hence the task exhibits a moderate level of amiguity . Groups were required to write their document using the group writing tool which functioned identically for all teams within each study . Face - to - face , video - supported , audio - supported , and combined mode ( video / audio - supported ) groups could talk while CMC - synchronous and CMC - asynchronous groups’ interaction was mediated by the writing tool . The instruments used had been previously validated [ 2 ] . Cohesiveness was measured on a 5 point scale , process satisfaction on a 7 point scale . Results from follow - up reliability tests performed on all scales in both studies indicated acceptable reliability levels ( i . e . , Cronbach’s alphas of 0 . 79 , and 0 . 84 for cohesion and satisfaction 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE respectively in study 1 and 0 . 69 and 0 . 73 respectively in study 2 ) . 5 . Results and Discussion All statistical tests were performed using SPSS for Windows . To test the two primary hypotheses about increasing cohesion and satisfcation over time , regardless of condition , we used the General Linear Model ( GLM ) analysis of variance for repeated measures . The GLM tests for main effects ( variable over time only ) and interaction effects ( variable over time by treatment inetraction ) . Main effects indicate support for the primary hypothesis , while inetraction effects indicate that treatments differ over time . If interaction effects are observed , follow up one - way ANOVAs with range tests are used to determine the direction of the differences . Although no over - time - by - treatment interactions were observed in the data from either study , main effects were found for both variables over time in both studies . The statistical tests were performed on each of the two data sets individually , thus the comparisons were for 1 ) face - to - face vs CMC - synchronous vs CMC - asynchronous and 2 ) video - support only vs video - and audio - support vs audio - support only . A significance level of a = . 05 was applied in all cases . Means and standard deviation are presented in Tables 2 and 3 . Cohesiveness : Results presented in Figure 1 and Table 2 suggest that cohesion increased significantly for all treatments in both studies ( f = 9 . 61 , p = . 000 , f = 17 . 51 , p = . 000 for studies 1 and 2 respectively ) . Hypothesis H1a was supported in both studies . Regardless of the relative richness of the medium used , groups were able to generate increasing levels of cohesiveness as sessions progressed . These results are consistent with both adaptive structuration and social information processing approaches . The media may exhibit different communication characteristics , but these characteristics may not be used the same way over time or their application may change as time passes . For example , the use of emoticons emerged in CMC presumably in response to a need to expand the channels of that medium in order to transmit different types of information . As users gain experience with leaner media they are still driven by certain task and relational needs to find ways to facilitate the requisite interaction . As Walther [ 34 ] suggests , contextual richness will develop in leaner environmemnts , perhaps more slowly than in richer ones but it will develop nontheless . Certainly evidence from these two studies supports that notion . In every instance , we observed steady and roughly equivalent increases in cohesion development across all four sessions . Table 2 : Cohesion Means and ( Standard Deviations ) Sess . 1 Sess . 2 Sess . 3 Sess . 4 F - t - F 3 . 75 ( 0 . 298 ) 3 . 64 ( 0 . 356 ) 3 . 89 ( 0 . 547 ) 4 . 10 ( 0 . 517 ) Video 3 . 78 ( 0 . 277 ) 4 . 03 ( 0 . 249 ) 4 . 13 ( 0 . 430 ) 4 . 10 ( 0 . 523 ) Vid - Aud 3 . 77 ( 0 . 383 ) 3 . 84 ( 0 . 349 ) 3 . 97 ( 0 . 373 ) 4 . 02 ( 0 . 397 ) Audio 3 . 79 ( 0 . 365 ) 4 . 01 ( 0 . 488 ) 4 . 01 ( 0 . 535 ) 4 . 19 ( 0 . 357 ) CMC - sync 3 . 33 ( 0 . 382 ) 3 . 60 ( 0 . 323 ) 3 . 71 ( 0 . 394 ) 3 . 76 ( 0 . 480 ) CMC - async 3 . 13 ( 0 . 185 ) 3 . 24 ( 0 . 356 ) 3 . 46 ( 0 . 311 ) 3 . 62 ( 0 . 384 ) Table 3 : Satisfaction Means and ( Standard Deviations ) Sess . 1 Sess . 2 Sess . 3 Sess . 4 F - t - F 4 . 82 ( 0 . 649 ) 4 . 94 ( 0 . 738 ) 5 . 27 ( 0 . 611 ) 5 . 49 ( 0 . 689 ) Video 3 . 78 ( 0 . 277 ) 4 . 03 ( 0 . 249 ) 4 . 13 ( 0 . 429 ) 4 . 10 ( 0 . 523 ) Vid - Aud 3 . 79 ( 0 . 365 ) 4 . 01 ( 0 . 488 ) 4 . 01 ( 0 . 535 ) 4 . 02 ( 0 . 397 ) Audio 3 . 77 ( 0 . 383 ) 3 . 84 ( 0 . 349 ) 3 . 968 ( 0 . 373 ) 4 . 02 ( 0 . 397 ) CMC - sync 4 . 64 ( 0 . 505 ) 5 . 03 ( 0 . 541 ) 5 . 09 ( 0 . 496 ) 5 . 49 ( 0 . 484 ) CMC - async 4 . 51 ( 0 . 225 ) 4 . 90 ( 0 . 523 ) 5 . 09 ( 0 . 462 ) 5 . 33 ( 0 . 682 ) Profiles of cohesiveness however did not differ across treatments . A condition - by - time interaction would mean that profiles differed among the treatments over time ; we observed no such interactions in either study . The profile is the shape of the pattern of observations over four sessions . In other words , the overall patterns of change were similar for face - to - face , CMC - synchronous , and CMC - asynchronous in study 1 and were also similar for video , audio , and combined - mode supported groups in study 2 . Moreover , when plotting data from both studies on a common graph , we can visually see that the means for the three treatments from study 2 fall within the means from the three treatments in study 1 . Furthermore , the patterns appear almost identical across all six levels of media richness . When looking at cohesion development over time , the pattern of change does not depend on the richness of the medium . Interpreting longitudinal data is a complex task however and differences ( or similarities ) in patterns of change over time may not tell the whole story . For instance , although profiles may not differ , results from other tests may be helpful in understanding specific behavior patterns . Session - by - session ANOVAs indicate that face - to - face groups reported greater cohesiveness after the first session than groups in both CMC conditions in study 1 . This provides some support for hypothesis H1b . However , results were counter to that expected for the three media in study 2 . No differences were observed among video , audio , or combined - mode support : nor do their means 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE differ from either face - to - face or CMC means . In general then hypothesis H1b is rejected and taken as a whole we are unable to say that media differ significantly from one another in the amount of cohesion they permit initially . Moreover , cohesion differences between face - to - face and CMC - synchronous groups disappear after the first session . While cohesion in CMC - synchronous groups increased more than in face - to - face groups—consistent with hypothesis H1c—counter to our expectations this trend did not pertain to CMC - asynchronous or any other condition . It is interesting to note that the CMC - asynchronous means do appear to be narrowing the gap with face - to - face means . This trend is consistent with social information processing predictions , and there is no reason not to expect either CMC condition to continue to improve , equalling cohesion among richer media if given enough time . Within the four sessions of the studies assessed however , statistical teste lead us to conclude that in general hypothesis H1c is also rejected . Taken together , these results suggest that , while environments differ structurally in communication capacity—and hences their relative richness—nonetheless groups supported with leaner media can still achieve cohesion development . Furthermore , as time progresses , groups supported with the leanest media can reduce the differences in cohesion development between themselves and those using substantially richer media . . In the end , all media observed in these two studies permitted the development of cohesion to roughly equivalent levels . 1 2 3 4 5 S e s s io n 1 S e s s io n 2 S e s s io n 3 S e s s io n 4 M ea n s F - t - F C M C - S yn c C M C - As yn c V id e o V id - Au d Au d io Figure 1 : Cohesiveness Process Satisfaction : Main effects were observed indicating that process satisfaction increased for all groups in both studies , supporting hypopthesis H2a ( f = 9 . 13 , p = . 000 , f = 9 . 01 , p = . 000 for studies 1 and 2 respectively ) . Overall profiles of satisfaction with group processes however did not differ across treatments . Nor were there any differences in the first or any other session . In fact , a visual representation ( Figure 2 ) depicts the relationships of the profiles for all four sessions : the profiles appear to be almost identical . Although they did increase in each session for all groups , increases were roughly comparable across treatments and satisfaction was essentially no different across groups in any session , regardless of condition ( Table 3 ) . Thus , neither hypothesis H2b or H2c were supported . A variety of factors in addition to participatory equality are considered important to satisfaction . Among them are critical examination of members’ contributions and validity checking of members’ assumptions [ 6 ] as well as goal - directedness and issue amplification—all of which were included in the construct used in the current study . Results from both studies indicate that media has no effect on process satisfaction . Each of the different media looked at in these two studies is equally effective at permitting alternative exploration and validation , participation , and leadership contribution . The results which counter our expectations are interesting in light of the relationship between communication and satisfaction . Communication is the process of clarifying issues and , if effective , helps keep members focused [ 18 ] . When impeded however communication can become mis - communication , causing misunderstanding and frustration leading to discontent with the process . Although the six media we investigated differ considerabl ; y in richness and presence type characteristics , especially at the extremes of the continuum represented in these studies , nonetheless all media generated identical levels of satisfaction . 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE Does richness then not matter for satisfaction ? One response to such a conlcusion is that task is an important variable in determining the communication requirements , and consequently also in detemining satisfaction . Less ambiguous tasks require clarification and therefore may need less complex communication media for adequate performance and satisfaction development . In fact this is an explicit conclusion of media richness theorists [ 4 ] . The task used in both studies was relatively complex and ambiguous . Developing a policy document required participants to come to consensus about and define what policies the document should address . Additionally the case foucsed on a number of ethical and behavioral issues . Thus the task inherently required substantial clarification and would be considered a potential problem for interaction environments that impede such communication . Despite the ambiguity of the task issues , richer media did not result in higher satisfaction . So while the fit of the media to the task’s complexity and ambiguity may make a difference in process satisfaction , in this case did not . We conlude that media richness has no effect on process satisfaction for a task like the one used in these two studies . Results from these two studies , for both cohesion development and process satisfaction , may be interpreted as yet more “nails in the coffin”—albeit indirectly—for media richness theory . It appears that media richness may not be as important a factor as originally predicted , especially when media use is considered over time . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 S e s s i o n 1 S e s s i o n 2 S e s s i o n 3 S e s s i o n 4 M ea n s F - t - F C M C - S y n c C M C - A s y n c V i d e o V i d e o / A u d i o A u d i o Figure 2 : Process Satisfaction 6 . Conclusions Limitations : Consisting of data captured in two controlled experiments , limitations in study design and implementation indicate a number of cautionary notes . For example , student subjects are always a matter of contention . We are limited in how far we can generalize behaviour of students to worker behavior . Having said that though , the students used in these studies were business students , many of whom had had previous work experience . Moreover , while no groups had any specific ‘history’ together , because both colleges involved use extensive “group project” learning approaches , some individuals were acquainted with some others in some groups , as might be observed in typical organizational project assignments . When combining data from multiple studies , one issue that needs to be resolved concerns the question about how similar or different the studies are . Obviously , the more significant their differences , the less sens it makes to directly compare their results . There were some design differences between the two studies looked at here . For instance , training in study 1 was actually done in large groups that did not correspond to the task groups and it was done in a separate session prior to the first group meeting . Training for study 2 occurred within the first meeting and each task group was trained as a group . However , the total training and task times were roughly comparable across studies . As discussed earlier , the studies used different tools , but both were relatively simple group - writing tools ( i . e . , shared - screen editors ) which could also be used for interaction . Another issue regards the analysis of data . As presented in the current paper , the data were analyzed independently for each study then results were sysnthesized to facilitate drawing conclusions common to both . This paper argues that the similarity of designs , procedures , subjects , tasks and measures makes such a synthesis of reaults appropriate . Another approach would be to combine the data and perform statistical tests on one data superset . 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE Regognizing that analysis of results from different datasets places limitations on the power of such conclusions , the authors suggest that a future study should detail why the data could be considered as one , then combine the data to present a unified analysis . Despite the differences , there were a number of similarities between the two studies that make comparison of their results reasonable . Both studies used the same task , the same measures , the same basic design with respect to group size , configuration , subject type , training and facilitation parameters , EMS support , and a number of other issues . Overall , we feel that there were enough similarities to warrant examining the results together . Lessons : The results and lessons from this study raise several issues . With respect to cohesion in very rich versus very lean media , although this study generally found no differences among environments in the patterns of development they generate , nonetheless , differences were exhibited during particular sessions with respect to cohesiveness . For example , face - to - face and CMC groups differed in cohesion in every session . , while at the same time increasing from session to session . These findings suggest that some media differ in the amount of cohesion they will permit , although , since we observed no differences among the richer four media , the differences may only pertain to those media that lie at extreme odds from each other in relative richenss . More importantly however , from a group development perspective even the leanest media permit cohesion and process satisfaction growth . Despite differences among media in richness , our results suggest that media do not differ siginficantly in their capacity to facilitate either cohesion or process satisfaction development over time . Groups can develop along these relational dimensions quite well regardless of the type of EMS support provided when performing a relatively complex and ambiguous task . Cohesion is a critical developmental factor in groups [ 5 ] and since prior research has for the most part ignored the effects of cohesion over time , we need longitudinal investigations to better understand the dynamics of cohesion . Our analysis provides just such an extension to current research . We have examined developmental issues in a developmental ( i . e . , longitudinal ) context . In doing so , we find evidence which runs counter to social presence and media richness perspectives , suggesting that , when used over time media may exhibit different effects than expected . Consistent with adaptive structuration and social information processing theories , our examination suggests that cohesion and satisfaction are dynamic factors and respond to media characteristics in complex and perhaps evolutionary ways . Time becomes the media user’s ally , allowing technology adaptation and facilitating developmental dynamics as groups work together . The current study’s contribution can be understood by looking at the role of cohesion in group interaction . For example , cohesion is directly related to task commitment [ 38 ] . Their path analysis also determined that task commitment exhibits a significant positive correlation to task productivity and performance . Hence , cohesion is indirectly responsible for quality of group performance . The importance of communication ( and therefore media characteristics ) to cohesion development and satisfaction is demonstrated by looking at interaction issues . For instance , interaction frequency is positively correlated with interpersonal attraction - - a major component of cohesion [ 38 ] . The relationship between effective communication , cohesion , satisfaction , and performance is therefore a critical one to understand and foster in work groups . Knowing that different media may be equally effective in facilitating the development of this relationship is important to all managers in today’s emerging electronic environments . Implications For Future Research : Motivation may be a critical determinant of the structuring process and future research ought to address this factor . For instance , groups meeting in organizational settings will probably be motivated differently than experimental groups , like those used in this study . Therefore , organizational case studies should be used to investigate the relationships amomg real world motivational factors , group development and the use of EMS . The expectation that groups using leaner media would experience greater increases in cohesion and satisfaction than richer media was not justified in general . There was some evidence supporting that prediction , but only for the CMC vs face - to - face treatments . Reason indicates that CMC is considerably more disadvantaged than face - to - face interaction and therefore has more ground to make up , as indicated by the results of study 1 . By looking at six different media at one time , the present analysis loses the ability to discriminate among a few media on a fine grained level . Future studies may be abke to tease out the differences by focusing specifically on one aspect of CMC ( i . e . , either synchronous or asynchronous ) compared to face - to - face . Implications For Managers : This paper starts from the assumption that distributed interaction will become more prevalent as technology permits and customer demand requires organizations to expand their current boundaries . However , in order to truly support distributed group activities , managers need to have a better understanding of how groups develop in these new types of work environments . The premise driving this investigation was that , while spatial and temporal distribution present opportunities , they also create problems for interaction . New technologies and communication media facilitate 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE distributed interaction , but do we know which ones are more or less effective for social as well as task oriented fucntions ? From an analysis of the results of two similar studies , distributed groups developed along two important social dimensions , generally faring just as well as face - to - face groups . This suggests that adaptation to a wide variety of quite disparate communication technologies occurs successfully in distributed and co - located goups alike . This study demonstrates that , though perhaps starting with a media - related defficiency in process dynamics , over time distributed work groups can generate cohesiveness and improve in process satisfaction—two factors critical to group development and performance—as effectively as face - to - face groups . . It is significant to note that development takes place despite differences in the richness of the various media available for meeting support . While media certainly differ in their communication characteristics , nonetheless these differences do not prevent important aspects of group development . Since social development occurs with leaner , often less expensive media , perhaps managers can be less concerned with providing richer , more expensive media to group members unless the specific task - related activity requires high - bandwidth interaction . References [ 1 ] Beauclair , R . A . ( 1987 ) An Experimental Study of the Effects of Group Decision Support System Process Support Applications on Small Group Decision Making , Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation , Indiana University . [ 2 ] Chidambaram , L . ( 1996 ) “Relational Development in Computer - Supported Groups , ” MIS Quarterly , Vol . 20 , No . 2 , pp . 143 - 163 . [ 3 ] Chidambaram , L . and Jones , B . ( 1993 ) “Impact of Communication Medium and Computer Support on Group Performance : A Comparison of Face - to - Face and Dispersed Meetings , ” MIS Quarterly , Vol . 17 , No . 4 , pp . 465 - 488 . [ 4 ] Daft , R . L . and Lengel , R . H . ( 1986 ) " Organizational Information Requirements , Media Richness , and Structural Design . " Management Science , Vol . 32 , No . 5 , pp . 554 - 571 . [ 5 ] Drescher , S . , Burlingame , G . , and Fuhriman , A . ( 1985 ) “Cohesion : An Odyssey in Empirical Understanding , ” Small Group Behavior , Vol . 16 , No . 1 , pp . 3 - 29 . [ 6 ] Festinger , L . ( 1954 ) " A Theory of Social Comparison Processes " Human Relations , Vol . 7 , 117 - 140 . [ 7 ] Fisher , B . A . and Ellis , D . G . ( 1990 ) Small Group Decision Making : Communication and the Group Process 3rd ed . , New York , NY : McGraw Hill Publishing Company . [ 8 ] Gallupe , R . B . ( 1985 ) The Impact of Task Difficulty on the Use of a Group Decision Support System , Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation , University of Minnesota . [ 9 ] Giddens , A . ( 1984 ) The Constitution of Society : Outline of the Theory of Structuration , Berkeley , CA : University of California Press . [ 10 ] Gilbert , S . J . ( 1976 ) " Empirical and Theoretical Extensions of Self Disclosure , " in G . R . Miller ( Ed . ) , Explorations in Interpersonal Communication , Beverly Hills , CA : Sage Publications , 197 - 215 . [ 11 ] Hiltz , S . R . and Johnson , K . ( 1990 ) “User Satisfaction with Computer - Mediated Communication Systems , ” Management Science , Vol . 36 , No . 6 , pp . 739 - 764 . [ 12 ] Hiltz , S . R . , Johnson K . , and Turoff , M . ( 1986 ) " Experiments in Group Decision Making : Communication Process and Outcome in Face - to - Face Versus Computerized Conferences . , Human Communication Research , Vol . 13 , No . 2 , 225 - 252 . [ 13 ] Jarvenpaa , S . L . , Rao , V . S . , and Huber , G . P . ( 1988 ) " Computer Support for Meetings of Groups Working on Unstructured Problems : A Field Experiment , " MIS Quarterly , 645 - 665 . [ 14 ] Jessup , L . M . , Connolly , T . and Tansik , D . A . ( 1990 ) " Toward a Theory of Automated Groupwork : The Deindividuating effects of Anonymity , " Small Group Research , Vol . 21 , No . 3 , 333 - 348 . [ 15 ] Kiesler , S . , Siegel , J . and McGuire , T . W . ( 1984 ) " Social Psychological Aspects of Computer - Mediated Communication , " American Psychologist , Vol . 39 , No . 10 . , 1123 - 1134 . [ 16 ] Kinney , S . and Dennis , A . ( 1994 ) “Reevaluating Media Richness : Cues , Feedback , and Task , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . IV . , 21 - 30 . [ 17 ] Knapp , M . , Ellis , D . and Williams , B . ( 1980 ) “Perceptions of Communication Behavior Associated With Relationship Terms , ” Communication Monographs , Vol . 47 , 262 - 278 . [ 18 ] Kutsko , J . and Smith , J . Y . ( 1991 ) " Effectiveness Measures for Distributed Teams Using Electronic Meeting Technology : The Larson / Lafasto Instrument , " Proceedings of the Twenty - Fourth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . III . , 458 - 470 . [ 19 ] McGrath , J . E . ( 1984 ) Groups : Interaction and Performance , Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . [ 20 ] Miranda , S . M . and Bostrom , R . P . ( 1993 ) " The Impact of Group Support Systems on Group Conflict 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE and Conflict Management : An Empirical Investigation , " Proceedings of the Twenty - Sixth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . IV . , 83 - 94 . [ 21 ] Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . , Briggs , R . O . , and Romano , N . C . , Jr . , ( 1993 ) " Meeting Environments of the Future , " GroupWare ' 93 Proceedings , San Mateo , CA : Morgan Kaufman Publishers , 125 - 144 . [ 22 ] Poole , M . S . and DeSanctis , G . ( 1989 ) " Use of Group Decision Support Systems as an Appropriation Process , " Proceedings of the Twenty - Second Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . III , 149 - 157 . [ 23 ] Poole , M . S . and DeSanctis , G . ( 1992 ) “Microlevel Structuration in Computer - Supported Group Decision Making , ” Human Communication Research , Vol . 19 , No . 1 , 5 - 49 . [ 24 ] Rice , R . E . and Love , G . ( 1987 ) " Electronic Emotion : Socio - emotional Content in a Computer - Mediated Communication Network , " Communication Research , Vol . 14 , No . 1 , 85 - 108 . [ 25 ] Ross , R . S . ( 1989 ) Small Groups in Organizational Settings , Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . [ 26 ] Short , J . , Williams , E . , and Christie , B . ( 1976 ) The Social Psychology of Telecommunications , London : John Wiley and Sons . [ 27 ] Summers , I . , Coffelt , T . , and Horton , R . E . ( 1988 ) “Work Group Cohesion , ” Psychological Reports , Vol . 63 , p . 627 - 636 . [ 28 ] Siegel , J . , Dubrovsky , V . , Kiesler , S . , and McGuire , T . W . ( 1986 ) " Group Processes in Computer - Mediated Communication , " Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , Vol . 37 , 157 - 187 . [ 29 ] Smith , J . , and Vanecek , M . T . ( 1989 ) " A Nonsimultaneous Computer Conference as a Component of Group Decision support Systems , " Proceedings of the Twenty - Second Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . III . , 370 - 377 . [ 30 ] Sproull , L . and Kiesler , S . ( 1986 ) “Reducing Social Context Cues : Electronic Mail in Organizational Communication , ” Management Science , Vol . 32 , No . 11 , 1492 - 1512 . [ 31 ] Trevino , L . K . , Daft , R . , and Lengel , R . H . ( 1990 ) " Understanding Managers ' Media Choices : A Symbolic Interactionist Perspective , ” J . Fulk and C . Steinfield ( Eds . ) , Organizations and Communication Technology , Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications , 71 - 94 . [ 32 ] Valacich , J . S . , Mennecke , B . E . , Wachter , R . , and Wheeler , B . C . ( 1994 ) “Extensions to Media Richness Theory : A Test of the Task - Media Fit Hypothesis , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . IV . , 11 - 20 . [ 33 ] Walther , J . B . ( 1992 ) “A Longitudinal Experiment on Relational Tone in Computer - Mediated and Face to Face Interaction , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Fifth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . IV . , 220 - 231 . [ 34 ] Walther , J . B . and Burgoon , J . K . ( 1992 ) “Relational Communication in Computer - Mediated Interaction , ” Human Communication Research , Vol . 19 , No . 1 , 50 - 88 . [ 35 ] Watson , R . T . , DeSanctis , G . and Poole , M . S . ( 1988 ) “Using a GDSS to Facilitate Group Consensus : Some Intended and Unintended Consequences , ” MIS Quarterly , Vol . 12 , No . 3 , 463 - 480 . [ 36 ] Witteman , H . ( 1991 ) “Group Member Satisfaction : A Conflict - Related Account , ” Small Group Research , Vol . 22 , No . 1 , 24 - 58 . [ 37 ] Wolfe , J . and Box , T . M . ( 1988 ) “Team Cohesion on Business Game Performance , ” Simulation and Games , Vol . 19 , No . 1 , pp . 82 - 98 . [ 38 ] Zaccaro , S . J . and Lowe , C . A ( 1988 ) " Cohesiveness and Performance on an Additive Task : Evidence for Multidimensionality , " The Journal of Social Psychology , Vol . 128 , No . 4 , pp . 547 - 558 . 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE