The main cell adhesion receptors for components of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , the integrins , are a family of 24 transmembrane heterodimers generated from a combination of 18α integrin and 8β integrin subunits . Integrins can be classified into receptors recognizing Arg - Gly - Asp ( RGD ) peptide motifs , collagen recep - tors , laminin receptors and leukocyte - specific inte - grins 1 . However , integrins also recognize numerous other physiological ligands and serve as receptors for snake venoms , viruses and other pathogens 2 , 3 . While some integrins bind to only specific ECM ligands ( for example , α5β1 integrin to fibronectin ) , others exhibit a broader ligand - binding repertoire overlapping with other integrin heterodimers ( for example , αvβ3 inte - grin binds to fibronectin , vitronectin , fibrinogen and thrombospondin , to name a few ) 1 . Engagement of the same ligand by different integrin heterodimers can trigger distinct signalling in the cell and thus the pat - tern of integrin expression on the cell surface is key to determining cell behaviour in response to microenvi - ronmental influences . Integrins heterodimerize in the endoplasmic reticulum and , following further post - translational modifications in the Golgi , are trafficked to the cell surface in an inactive conformation 4 , where they can become activated to engage the ECM . Integrins are unique multidirectional signalling molecules ( Box 1 ) . Integrin activation and binding to the ECM trigger the recruitment of the so - called adhesome : a complex array of signalling , scaffolding and cytoskeletal proteins engaging directly or indirectly with integrin cytoplasmic tails 5 – 7 . Together , these adhesion constituents represent a complex and highly dynamic machinery responsi - ble for regulating aspects of cell fate such as survival , migration , polarity and differentiation 8 . Therefore , dys - regulated integrin - mediated adhesion and signalling is a precursor in the pathogenesis of many human diseases , including bleeding disorders , cardiovascular disease and cancer 8 . Altered integrin expression patterns have been linked to many types of cancer 9 – 11 . Supplementary Table 1 summarizes some purported associations between the expression of specific integrin subunits or integrin heterodimers and the extent of neoplastic progression , patient survival or response to therapy ; however , it is worth noting that most of the observed clinical data are correlative , rather than direct evidence of a role for spe - cific integrins in the indicated cancers . Moreover , some of these studies provide contradictory data either within the same cancer type or in relation to different cancers for the same integrin molecules . These discrepancies Every step of the way : integrins in cancer progression and metastasis Hellyeh Hamidi 1 and Johanna Ivaska 1 , 2 * Abstract | Cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix is fundamental to tissue integrity and human health . Integrins are the main cellular adhesion receptors that through multifaceted roles as signalling molecules , mechanotransducers and key components of the cell migration machinery are implicated in nearly every step of cancer progression from primary tumour development to metastasis . Altered integrin expression is frequently detected in tumours , where integrins have roles in supporting oncogenic growth factor receptor ( GFR ) signalling and GFR - dependent cancer cell migration and invasion . In addition , integrins determine colonization of metastatic sites and facilitate anchorage - independent survival of circulating tumour cells . Investigations describing integrin engagement with a growing number of versatile cell surface molecules , including channels , receptors and secreted proteins , continue to lead to the identification of novel tumour - promoting pathways . Integrin - mediated sensing , stiffening and remodelling of the tumour stroma are key steps in cancer progression supporting invasion , acquisition of cancer stem cell characteristics and drug resistance . Given the complexity of integrins and their adaptable and sometimes antagonistic roles in cancer cells and the tumour microenvironment , therapeutic targeting of these receptors has been a challenge . However , novel approaches to target integrins and antagonism of specific integrin subunits in stringently stratified patient cohorts are emerging as potential ways forward . 1 Turku Centre for Biotechnology , University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University , Turku , Finland . 2 Department of Biochemistry , University of Turku , Turku , Finland . * e - mail : johanna . ivaska @ utu . fi https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41568 - 018 - 0038 - z Corrected : Author Correction REVIEwS NATuRe RevIewS | CAnCer volume 18 | SePTemBeR 2018 | 533 may be explained on several levels by factors , including challenges in acquiring patient samples at equivalent stages of disease and in classifying disease state based on different methodologies ; the reported integrin expres - sion profiles possibly being a dynamic property of the disease , with switching between integrin heterodimers , binding of different integrins to the same ligand ( poten - tially occurring in response to treatment or microenvi - ronmental cues 12 – 14 ) and fluctuation of integrin levels at different stages of disease progression ; heterogeneity in patient samples ; and altered integrin expression , although evident in many cancers , not being a direct readout of integrin signalling and therefore possibly not being the defining feature of the disease . Indeed , integrin function in cells is regulated by more than mere expression ; multiple additional levels of reg - ulation exist . Integrins are constantly endocytosed and recycled back to the plasma membrane , the kinetics of which are frequently altered in cancer cells , resulting in a change in the normal ratios of the receptors between the cell surface and endosomal pools 4 , 15 . Furthermore , integrin activity is tightly regulated in normal cells ( Box 1 ) , and aberrations in integrin activity confer cells with oncogenic properties through altered adhesion dynamics and increased integrin signalling 16 . A vast collection of literature exists regarding altered integrin expression in different cancer types ( Supplementary Table 1 ) , the applicability of integrins as therapeutic Box 1 | Multidirectional integrin signalling Integrins are unique bidirectional signalling molecules that exist in different conformational states that determine the receptor affinity for extracellular matrix ( eCm ) proteins : a bent ( closed ) integrin represents the inactive form , with low affinity for eCm ligands , whereas a fully extended ( open ) integrin is active and capable of eliciting downstream signalling and cellular responses following ligand engagement . many eCm proteins contain multivalent integrin recognition sites and / or are assembled as multiprotein deposits or fibrils in the extracellular compartment . ensuing integrin – ligand engagement ( adhesion ) and clustering on the plasma membrane provides a platform for the assembly of multimeric complexes that provoke downstream adhesion signalling ( ‘outside - in’ signalling ) . This outside - in signal is heterodimer - dependent and context - dependent ( for example , specific to the cell type or the eCm ligand engaged or dictated by eCm properties ) but typically involves recruitment and autophosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) with subsequent recruitment and activation of SRC 1 , 5 . Integrin adhesion also activates , among other pathways , the RAS – mAPK and PI3K – AKT signalling nodes . Integrins also respond to ‘inside - out’ signals , whereby stimulation of small GTPase RAP1A activity on the plasma membrane triggers recruitment of RAP1 - GTP - interacting adaptor molecule ( RIAm ; also known as APBB1IP ) to activate talin . Talin binding to the β - integrin subunit tail triggers an extended open receptor conformation and recruitment of additional integrin - activating proteins such as kindlins 205 . Integrin activation can be counterbalanced by inactivating proteins such as integrin cytoplasmic domain - associated protein 1 ( ICAP - 1 ; also known as ITGB1BP1 ) , filamin A , SHARPIN and proteins of the SH3 and multiple ankyrin repeat domains ( SHANK ) family , which , directly or indirectly , restrict the ability of talin to bind and activate integrins 16 , 206 . Integrins have also been demonstrated to be functional in subcellular locations other than plasma membrane adhesion sites , where their roles are well recognized . Active integrins and integrin - dependent signalling complexes , along with eCm ligands or receptor tyrosine kinases found within endosomes , can trigger ‘inside - in’ signalling 44 , 45 , 123 ( see also Fig . 2 ) . RAP1A - GTP RIAM Activeintegrin ( open ) Inactiveintegrin ( closed ) Plasmamembrane Endomembrane Inactivators Outside - in signals Extracellular space Cytoplasm ECM ECM and integrinclustering Adhesome Talin Inside - out signals Inside - in signals β α β α β α β α β α β α FAK P MAPK P FAK SRC P P ERKP AKTP www . nature . com / nrc R e v i e w s 534 | SePTemBeR 2018 | volume 18 targets 10 , 11 , 17 and , given that integrin profiles are used to identify tumour - initiating cells , the potential role of integrins in cancer stem cells 9 , 11 . In this Review , we dis - cuss the contribution of integrins to the different steps of the metastatic cascade with a special focus on key mechanisms identified in the past 5 years that under - lie the ability of integrins to drive invasive protrusions , influence tumour – stroma crosstalk , support the forma - tion of metastases and induce drug resistance in solid tumours . However , it is important to note that integrins play vital roles in other cancer - relevant processes not described in this Review , including white blood cell traf - ficking and activation , chronic inflammation , immune mimicry and angiogenesis , which ultimately determine disease state . Despite the disappointing outcome of previous clin - ical trials targeting integrins , the continued drive to better understand the role of these receptors in cancer progression could lead to the development of innovative targeting approaches and a revival in the field . Integrins and the metastatic cascade Integrins and integrin - dependent processes have been implicated in almost every step of cancer progression , including cancer initiation and proliferation , local inva - sion and intravasation into vasculature , survival of circu - lating tumour cells ( CTCs ) , priming of the metastatic niche , extravasation into the secondary site and meta - static colonization of the new tissue ( Fig . 1 ) . For most solid tumours , the metastatic cascade begins with can - cer cells breaching the underlying basement membrane . This process is considered to require proteolytic activity , and integrins contribute by upregulating the expression of matrix metalloproteinase genes and facilitating pro - tease activation and function at the ECM interface 18 . Invasive carcinomas penetrate the stroma and migrate into the surrounding tissue as individual cells or as cell clusters by multiple different integrin - dependent mechanisms . In addition , cancer - associated fibroblasts ( CAFs ) can contribute to cancer progression via several integrin - linked mechanisms . CAFs can lead invasion Angiogenesis A physiological process characterized by the formation of new blood vessels from pre - existing vasculature , which can be deregulated during disease to promote the spread of cancer cells . Intravasation The invasion of cancer cells through a basement membrane to enter blood or lymphatic vessels . Extravasation The movement of cells out of a blood vessel , which involves traversing an endothelial cell layer and basement membrane , into the surrounding tissue . d Formation of the metastatic niche and colonization • Integrins guide pro - metastatic exosomes • Integrin signalling overcomes dormancy of seeded cancer cells Extravasation e Resistance • Creation of ECM safe havens induced by drugs • Drugs and radiation induce integrin expression , resulting in resistance f Therapeutic targeting • Antibody blockade of integrin function • Integrin - directed delivery of therapeutics • Inhibition of latent TGF β activation • Vascular promotion therapy ECMprotease Lysyl oxidase Normalﬁbroblast CAF Altered ECM a Primary tumour and the tumour microenvironment • Upregulation of pro - tumorigenic integrins • Increased outside - in signalling ( e . g . FAK , SRC , PI3K – AKT and MAPK ) • Synergy with RTKs and oncogenes • In stromal cells , increased ECM secretion and organization ( desmoplasia ) b Migration and invasion • Increased cancer cell migration ( e . g . increased integrin trafﬁcking and activity , and actin protrusions ) • Protease activation • Increased pro - invasive CAFs guide invasion • ECM stiffness , alignment and gradients support invasion • TGF β signalling and EMT c Metastasis and anchorage - independent survival • Endosomal integrins and FAK inhibit anoikis • Non - ligated integrins support RTK signalling and cancer stem cells • Contacts with endothelium • Support of extravasation Basement membrane Cancer cell Fig . 1 | Integrin involvement in many of the steps of cancer progression . Integrin expression and / or function have been implicated in nearly every stage of cancer development from primary tumour formation to cancer cell extravasation and formation of a metastatic niche ( parts a – d ) . In addition , integrin signalling has been linked to the acquisition of drug resistance ( part e ) . This fact , together with the vital roles of integrins in cancer , has rendered integrins and integrin - dependent functions attractive therapeutic targets in the fight against cancer ( part f ) . CAF , cancer - associated fibroblast ; ECM , extracellular matrix ; EMT , epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ; FAK , focal adhesion kinase ; RTK , receptor tyrosine kinase ; TGF β , transforming growth factor - β . NATuRe RevIewS | CAnCer R e v i e w s volume 18 | SePTemBeR 2018 | 535 by generating pro - migratory tracks through the stro - mal ECM 19 , by depositing fibronectin 20 , 21 , by regulating fibronectin alignment 22 or by physically pulling cancer cells out of the primary tumour 23 . CTCs are readily detected in patients with cancer , suggesting that cancer cells are constantly entering the circulation from the primary tumour 24 . While nor - mal epithelial cells undergo anoikis 25 , CTCs undergo anchorage - independent growth and display anoikis resistance through pathways involving altered integrin signalling 26 . For successful metastasis , CTCs must attach within the vasculature of distant organs and extrava - sate into the perivascular tissue . Thrombus formation is thought to support tumour cell extravasation by recruit - ing fibronectin to activate integrins 27 , 28 . Finally , following successful extravasation , integrin contacts with the ECM in the perivascular tissue dictate whether the seeded cancer cells continue to proliferate or become dormant 24 . The primary tumour and microenvironment Integrins as tumour promoters and tumour suppres - sors . As depicted in Supplementary Table 1 , the reported links between integrin expression and cancer are highly dependent on the tumour type and on the state of the disease , complicating the applicability of these receptors as therapeutic targets and underlying the need for patient stratification on the basis of integrin profiles in future studies . For example , while most β1 integrins , and more specifically α3β1 integrin , are necessary for mammary tumorigenesis 29 , 30 , α2β1 integrin is a metastasis suppres - sor in breast cancer 31 , and laminin - binding integrins have both growth - promoting and growth - inhibiting functions ( reviewed in reF . 32 ) . Integrins that activate transforming growth factor - β ( TGFβ ) may be tumour suppressors 33 until the cancer becomes refractory to the anti - proliferative effects of TGFβ ; after this event , the same integrins can drive tumour progression 34 . There is also crosstalk between integrins , which determines their response in activating TGFβ . Genetic depletion of β1 integrin induces a compensatory - like upregulation of β3 integrins that may promote activation of TGFβ and TGFβ - mediated epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) in breast cancer cells 35 . However , β3 integrin overexpression alone was not sufficient to replicate the pro - metastatic phenotype observed in response to β1 integrin loss , suggesting that other factors are involved in regulating TGFβ signalling . Increased expression of tumour - promoting integrins correlates with poor prog - nosis ; the underlying contribution of these integrins to cancer progression varies but can include support of cancer invasion , which occurs in part by cooperating with or upregulating proteases 36 – 40 or by switching the integrin – ECM linkage . For example , upregulation of α5β1 integrin and fibronectin is linked to poor prognosis and tumour progression in lung cancer 41 . Furthermore , upon loss of epithelial monolayer integrity , α5β1 inte - grin becomes engaged by its specific adaptor protein zonula occludens 1 ( ZO1 ) 42 , to drive directional cancer cell migration 42 and alter the mechanical properties of α5β1 integrin – fibronectin links by increasing ligand recruitment but reducing resistance to force 43 . Integrins also facilitate tumour progression by promoting cancer cell stemness 9 and / or by acting alone or in synergy with growth factor receptors ( GFRs ) to promote survival and growth signalling 10 , 44 – 49 . For example , in breast and lung cancer , increased αvβ3 integrin expression and downstream activation of SRC correlate with a cancer stem cell phenotype , anoikis resistance and increased metastasis 50 – 52 . In the case of growth factors , fibronec - tin binding to α5β1 integrin is sufficient to induce ligand - independent activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase ( RTK ) MET 53 while α6β4 integrin regulates MET oncogenic signalling 49 . Cooperation between cancer cells and stromal cells . Cancer progression is not an isolated event of accu - mulating mutations and ensuing malignant traits in the primary tumour . Secreted factors from cancer cells profoundly alter the biology and composition of the underlying stroma by attracting immune cells , trigger - ing angiogenesis and inducing CAF activation . These events result in numerous tumour - promoting signals from the tumour microenvironment ( TME ) 20 . In this Review , we focus specifically on modifications in the ECM such as stiffening ( desmoplasia ) , owing to excess matrix protein deposition , and remodelling during can - cer invasion . CAF activation is associated with altera - tions in integrin function , the actomyosin cytoskeleton and cellular mechanical properties 21 , which result in effective remodelling of the TME to support tumour progression . In addition , crosstalk between cancer cells , CAFs , immune cells and the vasculature is likely to be involved in generating an organ - specific , cancer - driven ECM , with substantial changes in ECM composition and topological structure 54 , 55 . Under normal conditions , each tissue has a tightly regulated , specific optimal stiffness 56 , which is sensed by cells via integrins and the cytoskeleton . Thus , inte - grins are important mechanoreceptors and , in conjunc - tion with other mechanoresponsive adhesome proteins such as the integrin - activating protein talin , vinculin and CRK - associated substrate ( CAS ; also known as BCAR1 ) 57 , 58 , convert mechanical signals into biochemi - cal ones . Desmoplasia is common in many cancer types , including breast and pancreatic cancers , and facilitates cancer cell proliferation via multiple mechanisms , many of which are linked to integrins 59 . Increased stiffness cor - relates with higher β1 integrin activity in cancer cells , culminating in increased focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) and RHOA – RHO - associated protein kinase ( ROCK ) signalling , two important pro - oncogenic elements in breast cancer 60 , 61 . In accordance , higher levels of β1 integrin , active FAK and active AKT are detected in invasive fronts and correlate with increased stiff - ness in experimental mouse breast cancer models and in invasive human breast cancer 62 . ECM stiffness sup - ports cell proliferation by increasing , through direct or indirect epigenetic regulation , two transcriptional activators , nuclear yes - associated protein ( YAP ) and transcriptional co - activator with PDZ - binding motif ( TAZ ; also known as WWTR1 ) , that operate in the Hippo pathway to induce the expression of pro - survival genes 63 – 65 . Mechanosensing by integrins and adhesion reinforcement by talin and vinculin support nuclear Anoikis A specialized form of programmed cell death , which occurs upon loss of integrin - mediated adhesion to the extracellular matrix . Thrombus Also known as a blood clot , a structure that is the final result of blood coagulation . A thrombus consists of aggregated platelets and red blood cells and a mesh of crosslinked fibrin . Desmoplasia The growth of fibrous or connective tissue wherein resident cells produce excess fibrous matrix components such as collagen . Mechanoreceptors A term used to define receptors capable of receiving and translating mechanical cues from the environment . www . nature . com / nrc R e v i e w s 536 | SePTemBeR 2018 | volume 18 YAP localization 66 . The link between matrix rigidity , mechanosensing and nuclear YAP – TAZ is well estab - lished 63 – 65 . By contrast , the exact signalling pathways activating YAP – TAZ downstream of integrins in cancer are not fully understood and remain somewhat contro - versial . In sparse fibroblasts , cultured in the presence of serum , nuclear localization of YAP is integrin inde - pendent 67 , whereas in serum - starved breast epithelial MCF10A cells , fibronectin engagement appears to trig - ger nuclear YAP ; additionally , in mammary fibroblasts , inhibition of αv integrins with the RGD peptide - based antagonist cilengitide inhibits YAP transcriptional activ - ity 68 , 69 . Nevertheless , a requirement for SRC and / or FAK activity has been reported in numerous studies 65 , 67 – 70 , and a recent study unveiled a feedforward mechanism whereby increased cellular spreading via RHOA acti - vates a YAP - dependent transcriptional programme upregulating genes encoding integrins and focal adhesion docking proteins 71 . CAFs and their integrins contribute to generating a stiffer , altered ECM by promoting the secretion of ECM components such as collagen and fibronectin , and even more importantly by altering ECM architecture by adhering to the ECM and generating contractile forces to remodel the matrix . CAFs increase ECM stiffening by introducing increased crosslinking through the activ - ity of lysyl oxidase ( Lox ) enzymes 20 , 72 . This is most likely linked to the integrins expressed on CAFs , given that several αv integrins activate TGFβ 73 , a known activator of LOX expression 74 , and that α2β1 integrin binding to collagen induces LOX expression 75 . Such a structurally altered ECM is sensed by cancer cells and facilitates their growth by promoting gene transcription and signalling 65 , 76 . Cancer cell migration and invasion As the principal receptors for ECM molecules , integrins are critically important in regulating cell motility in nor - mal physiological processes , such as development and wound healing 77 , and during cancer dissemination . The major emphasis of research into cancer cell migration has been on the pursuit of understanding cancer cell invasion and metastasis . However , increased cell motil - ity could also be an important contributor to tumour growth , as demonstrated by mathematical simulations coupling cell proliferation to cell motility 78 . Tumours with non - motile cells undergo rapid growth inhibition owing to steric hindrance and crowding , whereas local cell dispersal allows tumours to expand and reach higher growth rates 78 . The molecular and biomechanical details of cell movement in 2D in vitro settings are well defined , in which integrin - mediated ECM contacts function as so - called molecular clutches that propel the cell forward by converting actin polymerization at the protruding plasma membrane into traction force 79 – 81 . However , owing to the complexity of the 3D in vivo microenvi - ronment , the dynamic interplay between different cells and the unique features ( for example , genomic profile , tumour origin , environment and tumour heterogeneity ) of each cancer type , the mechanisms governing cancer cell motility in vivo remain much more poorly under - stood . What is evident is that cancer cell migration is characterized by remarkable plasticity and crosstalk between integrins , other cell adhesion receptors and the actin cytoskeleton . Altered ECM guides migration and invasion . In addition to providing a stiffer microenvironment that favours cancer progression , the cancer - associated ECM is a rich source of other pro - migratory and pro - invasive cues . Second - harmonic generation microscopy analy - sis , which detects fibrillar collagen structures , in mouse breast tumour models suggests that collagen reorgan - ization at the tumour – stromal interface is a relevant parameter for predicting breast cancer dissemination 82 . In addition , elevated collagen deposition in the ECM augments tumour - progressive signals , intravasation and metastasis of oestrogen receptor - α ( ERα ) - positive mouse mammary tumour cells injected into the mam - mary fat pads of recipient mice 83 . These findings are not restricted to breast cancer . In pancreatic adenocarci - noma , a highly fibrotic cancer type , increased collagen alignment promotes cancer cell migration and serves as a negative prognostic factor 84 , 85 . Moreover , the thickness of collagen fibres in the tumour stroma also appears to be linked to survival in patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma ( PDAC ) 86 . Accordingly , in KRAS - driven mouse models of PDAC with constitutively active β1 integrin and deletion of epithelial TGFβ signalling , tumour progression is accelerated and correlates with increased deposition of thick collagen fibres and tissue tension 86 . In fact , altered collagen deposition , which is presumably mediated by collagen - binding integrins and contractility of stromal cells , may be a general hallmark of poor prognosis in cancer . Recent work analysing col - lagen fibre structure within the tumour stroma of head and neck , oesophageal and colorectal cancers suggests a significant correlation between activated myofibroblasts , collagen fibre elongation and poor survival in all three cancer types 87 . However , in the microenvironment of the brain , which is poor in ECM , the presence of collagen fibres has been associated with better survival of patients with glioblastoma 88 . In addition to contraction and remodelling of the existing collagen stroma to promote cancer cell invasion , CAFs have been shown to drive invasion by depositing fibronectin in an αvβ3 integrin - dependent manner in colon cancer 21 . In this context , contractile forces exerted by CAFs are insufficient to promote invasion in the absence of a fibronectin network 21 . Another fibronectin receptor , α5β1 integrin , has also been reported to play a role in pro - migratory fibronectin alignment by CAFs 22 . In addition , cancer - specific intracellular - binding part - ners of α5β1 integrin can also promote cell invasion by sensitizing cancer cells to changes in ECM compo - sition . Coupling of α5β1 integrin to the pro - metastatic isoform of the actin - regulatory protein mammalian enabled homologue ( MENA ; also known as ENAH ) , termed MENA ( INV ) , which is frequently reported to be highly expressed in invasive breast cancer cells , supports α5β1 integrin ‘outside - in’ signalling to FAK 89 ( Box 1 ) and tumour cell haptotaxis towards high fibronectin concen - trations such as those typically seen in the perivascular space and in the periphery of breast tumour tissues 90 . Focal adhesion integrin - mediated cell – extracellular matrix contact that is connected to the actin cytoskeleton and acts as both a physical anchor and a signalling hub to regulate the cell’s response to extracellular cues . Lysyl oxidase ( LOX ) enzymes extracellular copper - dependent enzymes that act on lysine residues in collagen and elastin to promote crosslinking of these matrix molecules . Haptotaxis Directional cell migration on an extracellular matrix gradient towards higher matrix concentrations . NATuRe RevIewS | CAnCer R e v i e w s volume 18 | SePTemBeR 2018 | 537 Recently , pharmacological inhibition or RNAi - mediated or genetic knockout of AMP - activated pro - tein kinase ( AMPK ) , an important metabolic sensor , was shown to trigger elevated integrin activity and fibronectin matrix deposition in normal fibroblasts by increasing tensin expression and the formation of α5β1 integrin – tensin complexes 91 , 92 . While the link between AMPK activity and fibronectin deposition in CAFs remains to be fully explored , AMPK activation with metformin , a widely used anti - diabetic drug , has been demonstrated to reduce desmoplasia and tumour growth in a PDAC mouse model 93 . Furthermore , in contrast to the well - established link between talin - induced integrin activation and mechanoresponsive growth signalling to YAP 66 – 71 , the relevance of tensins as integrin activators in cancer cells remains to be investigated , and their possible implication in mechanotransduction is not known . Integrin involvement in different modes of migration in cancer . Cancer cell invasion involves complex crosstalk between distinct receptor systems . In addition to integrin – ECM contacts , cancers , in particular , invasive carci - nomas , exhibit different degrees of cell – cell contacts , perhaps reflecting the various modes of cell migration observed in vivo ( which range from integrin - mediated single - cell motility to collective cell migration as sheets or strands ) 94 , 95 . A substantial body of evidence has linked EMT , loss of E - cadherin - mediated adherens junctions and increased integrin - mediated adhesions to dissemination of individual cancer cells 96 . However , in collectively migrating carcinomas , invasion is a deli - cate balance between cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesions and requires crosstalk between junctional proteins and proteins regulating integrin – ECM adhesions . For example , in squamous cell carcinoma ( SCC ) , both loss of E - cadherin at cell – cell adhesions 97 and overexpres - sion of E - cadherin , which normally localizes to cell – cell junctions , have been reported to inhibit collective migration and invasion 98 . Furthermore , cell – ECM adhesions are coupled to cell – cell adhesions via mul - tiple distinct crosstalk pathways 98 , 99 . Integrin - mediated adhesion to fibronectin triggers a negative feedback sig - nal that hinders the formation of E - cadherin - mediated cell – cell adhesions 100 . Reintroduction of β1 integrin to β1 integrin - null epithelial cells triggers loss of cell – cell contacts and scattering of individual cells in a manner dependent upon β1 integrin activity and ligand bind - ing 101 , and this result is indicative of an inhibitory role for integrin – ECM adhesions in the regulation of cell – cell junctions . Accordingly , integrin outside - in signalling can disrupt cell – cell adhesion by increasing actomyosin contractility 102 and by influencing E - cadherin junctional stability through FAK and SRC signalling . In addition , SRC activity induces E - cadherin endocytosis to desta - bilize adherens junctions 98 . While the extent of cross - talk between integrins and cell – cell junctions is likely to be influenced by the cell type and the local TME , it is clear that this interdependence is an important regulator of the apparent plasticity of cancer cell migration and invasion in vivo . In individually migrating cells , integrins are asso - ciated with another switch between migration modes . Particularly evident in melanoma , cells in a 3D ECM can switch between integrin - dependent mesenchymal migration and integrin - independent amoeboid migra - tion 103 ( reviewed in reFs 104 , 105 ) . The latter is driven by strong actomyosin contractility and can be induced in cells that normally adopt the mesenchymal migration mode by global inhibition of integrins and matrix - degrading proteases 104 , 105 . Alternatively , amplification of MET can trigger strong activation of RHO signalling and integrin internalization , resulting in amoeboid cell morphology in gastric cancer 47 . Integrin transport and invasion . Integrin traffic is an important mechanism contributing to dynamic adhe - sion turnover , actin remodelling and membrane pro - trusion and is therefore central to the process of cell migration 15 . Interestingly , trafficking of integrin heterod - imers with overlapping ligand specificity , such as α5β1 integrin and αvβ3 integrin that both bind fibronectin , can trigger very different cell motility outcomes . It is well established that preferential recycling of αvβ3 integrin over α5β1 integrin triggers directional cell migration in 2D , whereas increased α5β1 integrin recycling drives random cell motility in 2D and correlates with increased 3D invasion 14 , 106 . Interestingly , retrograde transport of inactive , non - ligand - bound β1 integrin heterodimers , but not β3 integrins , from the plasma membrane to the Golgi , followed by polarized delivery of the receptor to the cell front , has been linked to persistent cell migra - tion in normal epithelial cells 107 . However , this pathway remains to be validated in other cell types , and its role in directional motility of cancer cells has not been studied . These examples highlight an antagonistic relationship between α5β1 integrin and αvβ3 integrin heterodimers during cell migration in 2D that may also be reliant on receptor activation state . The identification of an α - integrin subunit - specific clathrin - adaptor - binding motif in a subset of α - integrin subunits , including α2 integrin , α3 integrin and α6 inte - grin 108 , which have been reported to have both cancer - inhibiting and cancer - promoting roles ( that is , such roles have been identified for α2β1 integrin , α3β1 inte - grin and α6 integrin pairs 31 , 54 ) , could provide a mech - anism for regulating the trafficking of these receptors independently of other α - integrin – β1 integrin pairs that bind to the same ligand and possibly explain some of the context - dependent and cell type - specific behaviour of these integrins in cancer . Integrin - heterodimer - specific trafficking has already been linked to cancer cell migration and inva - sion . Among the genetic mutations prevalent in human cancer , mutant p53 expression is strongly linked to increased invasion and metastasis 109 – 111 . Interestingly , gain - of - function p53 mutant proteins increase α5β1 integrin recycling , which , in turn , is linked to genera - tion of RHO - driven invasive cellular protrusions in a fibronectin - rich 3D microenvironment 106 . Furthermore , mutant p53 - mediated α5β1 integrin recycling has been demonstrated to promote actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex - independent ovarian cancer cell invasion in vivo , a process that is regulated by the formation of FH1 / FH2 domain - containing protein 3 www . nature . com / nrc R e v i e w s 538 | SePTemBeR 2018 | volume 18 ( FHOD3 ) - dependent filopodia - like protrusions 112 . In addition , mutant p53 increases the expression of the non - conventional myosin motor myosin X 113 , which binds directly to integrin and transports it to filopodia tips 114 . Thus , mutant - p53 - driven integrin recycling and overexpression of an integrin - transporting motor pro - tein could synergistically facilitate cancer cell invasion . In concordance , high levels of myosin X correlate with poor prognosis in cohorts of patients with breast cancer and with metastasis in mouse models of the disease 113 , 115 . Integrins sense both chemical and physical prop - erties of the ECM , and cells can dynamically increase the affinity of integrins for their ligands . For example , integrin - mediated adhesion at filopodia tips and filopo - dia formation in breast cancer cells are influenced by matrix composition 116 . In addition , integrin activation at filopodia tips is critical for filopodia stabilization and for the capacity to direct focal adhesion maturation via a mechanism involving voltage - dependent calcium chan - nels and integrin downstream signalling 117 . Integrins are also important components of invasive structures called invadopodia or invadosomes found in cancer cells in 2D 118 , 119 . While the existence of invadopodia in 3D remains somewhat debated , numerous studies have linked increased numbers of invadopodia - like structures with increased ECM degradation and invasive capacity in 3D and in vivo 120 . Giving rise to metastasis A major challenge for cancer cells , and possibly the most critical step in cancer progression , is survival within the vasculature for long enough to home to a distant site that permits dissemination . Here , we focus on highlighting recently emerged integrin functions in this step . Integrin endosomal signalling in cancer cell survival and anoikis suppression . Classically , integrins and their cancer - regulatory functions have been consid - ered to be restricted to the plasma membrane and to signalling from focal adhesions . However , recent studies have challenged these views and identified novel mech - anisms of integrins promoting anchorage - independent survival and metastasis in unconventional ways ( Fig . 2 ) . Even though the exact trigger for endocytosis of active integrins is unknown , one hypothesis has been that , upon matrix degradation , loss of ECM tension enables uptake of active integrins bound to ligand fragments . In accordance , active integrins and ECM ligands like fibronectin are readily detected in endosomes in can - cer cells 121 , 122 . Importantly , active FAK localizes to active β1 integrin - positive endosomes 45 , 123 , and at least in reconstituted systems , integrin - containing endo - somes have the capacity to recruit and activate FAK on endomembranes 45 . In adherent cells , FAK activity on endosomes maintains integrin activity by facili - tating talin 1 recruitment to endosomes 123 . In normal detached cells , endosomal integrin signalling pro - longs FAK activity and in breast cancer cells supports anchorage - independent growth and metastasis 45 . Integrins can also function in a ligand - independent manner to support cell survival in suspension and pro - long oncogenic signalling . Activation of MET by hepato - cyte growth factor ( HGF ) induces co - endocytosis of MET and β1 integrins 44 , 47 . Unexpectedly , the β1 integ - rin within these MET - containing endosomes is main - tained in an active conformation , even in the absence MET HGF β 1 β 1 β 1 Talin AMPK ↑ Fibronectin ↑ Laminin ↑ pSRC P P P P P α 6 β 1 integrin α 6 β 4 integrin α v β 5 integrin a Survival signalling from endosomes KRAS KRAS KRAS CYR61 b Formation of a pro - tumorigenic niche distal to the primary site Clustering of α v β 3 integrin by galectin 3 Clustering of α v β 3 integrin in the absence of ligand c Signalling from the plasma membrane in the absence of a conventional ECM ligand Signals regulate anchorage - independent survivalSignals regulate KRAS oncogenic functions , cancer cell stemness and EGFR drug resistance Nucleus P P P P p 5 2 - S H C P P FAK ERK P P CAS P P CAS P P CAS P P P P P P P SRC P SRC SRC Fig . 2 | Unconventional integrin signalling contributes to cancer cell survival , stemness and drug resistance . Classical integrin signalling has been described to be restricted to the plasma membrane and to require intact integrin – extracellular matrix ( ECM ) ligand engagement . However , it is now clear that unconventional modes of integrin signalling exist and contribute to cancer cell survival and disease progression . For example , active integrin signalling has been shown to be maintained away from the plasma membrane following integrin endocytosis in the presence of an ECM ligand or hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) - stimulated receptor tyrosine kinase MET and to contribute to anchorage - independent growth and survival of cancer cells through different pathways ( part a ) . A more extreme example of long - range integrin signalling has been illustrated in tumour exosomes and is associated with disease advancement . Tumour exosomal α 6 β 1 integrin and α 6 β 4 integrin appear to target metastatic cells to the lung , whereas exosomal α v β 5 integrin is linked to liver metastasis . At these defined sites , the exosomes prepare a premetastatic niche by triggering the expression of specific ECM components ( higher laminin and elevated SRC phosphorylation ( pSRC ) in lung fibroblasts and elevated fibronectin in the liver ) and pro - inflammatory S100 proteins in the target tissue ( part b ) . Integrin signalling from the plasma membrane can also be unconventional and occur in the absence of an ECM ligand or be promoted by the interaction of non - structural ECM proteins such as galectin 3 and cysteine - rich angiogenic inducer 61 ( CYR61 ) with the integrin extracellular domains ( part c ) . AMPK , AMP - activated protein kinase ; CAS , CRK - associated substrate ; EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; FAK , focal adhesion kinase ; P , phosphorylation ; p52 - SHC , p52 isoform of SHC - transforming protein 1 . NATuRe RevIewS | CAnCer R e v i e w s volume 18 | SePTemBeR 2018 | 539 of ECM ligands , and in this active form it supports prolonged MET signalling from the p52 isoform of SHC - transforming protein 1 ( p52 - SHC ) to ERK 44 . This integrin – MET ‘inside - in’ signalling is necessary for oncogenic MET to drive anchorage - independent growth and metastasis in a mouse model using NIH - 3T3 fibroblasts overexpressing mutant MET 44 ( Box 1 ) . Even more unexpectedly , a recent study suggested that MET displaces α5 integrin from β1 integrin to form a MET – β1 integrin complex in breast cancer and glioblastoma , particularly in therapy - resistant invasive glioblasto - mas 124 . It is currently unclear whether this unorthodox integrin heterodimer is implicated in the previously reported requirement for a functional β1 integrin in MET - driven oncogenic signalling 44 . Nevertheless , the multiple reported links between β1 integrin and β4 inte - grin and oncogenic MET signalling 44 , 47 , 49 , 53 , 125 suggest that targeting these integrins would provide some benefit in treating MET - dependent carcinomas . While the biology and cancer relevance of integrin endosomal signalling alone or in conjunction with GFRs remain to be studied in detail in relevant in vivo models , the role of integrins in anoikis resistance via other mechanisms is well established . ECM - induced integrin outside - in signalling entails ligand engagement and receptor clustering ( Box 1 ) . In non - anchored cells , clustering of most integrins on the plasma membrane by ECM molecules is lost . Furthermore , in the absence of matrix adhesion , clustering of other receptors like epidermal GFR ( EGFR ) is also reduced 126 . In nor - mal cells , such events are sufficient to trigger anoikis . However , upregulation of specific integrins can confer anoikis resistance . αvβ3 integrin has the unique ability to maintain receptor clustering in non - adherent cells 51 . This enables αvβ3 integrin to confer anoikis resistance to cancer cells by recruiting SRC to the β3 integrin sub - unit cytoplasmic tail , leading to SRC activation , CAS phosphorylation and cell survival 51 . Interestingly , in contrast to the anoikis resistance induced by endosomal signalling of β1 integrins , this αvβ3 integrin - mediated anoikis resistance mechanism appears independent of FAK activation 51 . In addition , there are reports suggesting that integ - rins can also provide anoikis resistance by binding to non - structural ECM components . Members of the CCN family of matricellular proteins , including cysteine - rich angiogenic inducer 61 ( CYR61 ) , harbour several bind - ing sites for integrins and heparan sulfate proteoglycans and are secreted by cancer cells and stromal cells into the TME 127 . Elevated CYR61 levels are correlated with a more advanced phenotype in breast cancer 128 . In triple - negative breast cancer cell lines , CYR61 supports metas - tasis and attenuates anoikis by activating β1 integrins and AMPK signalling independently of AKT , FAK and ERK1 and / or ERK2 activation 129 . Secreted galectin 3 is a carbohydrate - binding protein that promotes inte - grin endocytosis in adherent cells by interacting with N - glycans on the integrin extracellular domains 130 . By contrast , galectin 3 mediates anchorage - independent clustering of αvβ3 integrin , giving rise to membrane - proximal KRAS clustering , which enables numerous oncogenic functions of activated KRAS , including macropinocytosis 131 , cancer cell stemness and resistance to EGFR inhibitors 132 . Galectin 3 – αvβ3 integrin cluster - ing was recently described as an underlying mechanism driving KRAS addiction in tumour cells , and inhibition of galectin 3 was identified as a potential strategy to target KRAS - addicted ( KRAS - G12D mutant ) lung and pancreatic cancers 133 . Oncogenic KRAS ( KRAS - G12V ) can also induce anoikis resistance in normal kidney epi - thelial cells by increasing α6 integrin expression . When coupled to ectopic overexpression of αv integrins , the KRAS – α6 integrin – αv integrin axis was sufficient to transform these cells into a highly invasive phenotype characterized by EMT - like features in vitro 134 . Integrins and priming the metastatic niche . Exosomes , the small membrane - bound vesicles actively shed by both normal and cancerous cells 135 , regulate cell – cell communication by horizontal transfer of RNAs and pro - teins 136 . Integrins are the most highly expressed receptors on the surface of exosomes and were recently shown to have a functional role in guiding exosomes to particu - lar tissue sites to act as ‘primers’ of the metastatic niche ( Fig . 2 ) and support the propensity of different cancer types to metastasize to specific organs 137 . In particular , lung - tropic cancer cells were found to secrete exosomes rich in α6β1 integrins and α6β4 integrins , whereas liver - tropic cancer cells shed predominantly αvβ5 integrin - positive exosomes . When isolated from cancer cells and injected into mice , the biodistribution of these exosomes was found to match the organotropic dissemination of the cell line of origin . Furthermore , exosome uptake by resident cells within the target tissue was suggested to prime the distant site in support of cancer cell survival by triggering the expression of specific ECM compo - nents and pro - inflammatory S100 proteins 137 ( Fig . 2 ) . However , the general applicability of this mechanism in cancer metastasis remains to be validated in vivo for other models of metastasis and for other cancer types . Integrins in extravasation . For enduring CTCs , the next critical step in metastasis is extravasation , and this is dependent on multiple factors . For example , the perme - ability and integrity of the vascular endothelium deter - mine the rate of extravasation in many organs . Several mechanisms involving platelet - released ATP , inflamma - tory mediators and cancer cell - secreted growth factors and proteases have been implicated in the regulation of capillary wall permeability 24 . Integrin expression both on cancer cells and on endothelial cells has also been implicated in extravasation ( Fig . 3 ) . Endothelial cells use integrins to interact with their underlying basement membrane . These cell – ECM contacts combined with protein tyrosine kinase - induced signalling are impor - tant regulators of vessel integrity 138 . In cancer , increased angiopoietin 2 ( ANG2 ) signalling in endothelial cells , in conjunction with reduced levels of the angiopoietin receptor TIE2 ( also known as TEK ) , increases vascular permeability , and ANG2 blocking antibodies can inhibit metastasis 138 , 139 . In the absence of TIE2 , ANG2 interacts with α5β1 integrin , triggering integrin receptor acti - vation and translocation to fibrillar adhesions , which results in compromised vascular integrity 140 . In addition , Filopodia Actin - rich , finger - like membrane protrusions that extend out of the cell to probe the extracellular matrix . Invadopodia Actin - based membrane protrusions found in invasive carcinoma cells and associated with sites of extracellular matrix degradation . www . nature . com / nrc R e v i e w s 540 | SePTemBeR 2018 | volume 18 endothelial α5 integrin contributes to extravasation by directly interacting with neuropilin 2 ( NRP2 ) , a multi - functional non - kinase receptor for multiple growth factors expressed on cancer cells 141 . The NRP2 – α5 inte - grin trans - interaction facilitates cancer cell binding to the endothelium and mediates vascular extravasation in zebrafish and mouse xenograft models of clear cell renal cell carcinoma and pancreatic adenocarcinoma 141 . Thus , endothelial α5 integrin expression is likely to be associated with the strong clinical correlation between elevated NRP2 levels and metastasis in osteosarcoma and breast cancer 142 , 143 . e Basement membrane Perivascular tissue Vessel endothelium Bloodvessel a b d e c Blood ﬂow a c d Anchoring to basement membrane laminin • α 3 β 1 integrin on cancer cell • α 6 β 1 integrin on cancer cell Laminin Breaking through αβ 1 integrin on cancer cell • MT1 – MMP • MMP9 Invadopodia formation TKS5 expression in cancer cell • NRP expression on cancer cell • α 5 β 1 integrin expression on endothelial cells • Platelet , cancer cell and fibrin aggregates recruit fibronectin • α v β 3 integrin is activated on cancer cell • Cancer cell escapes fibrin clot NRP2 Fibronectin Fibrin Platelet b • Fibronectin patches on endothelial cells • Talin 1 expression in cancer cell Fibronectin patch Talin 1 • α 3 β 1 integrin on cancer cell • α 6 β 1 integrin on cancer cell • Anchoring to basement membrane laminin Cancercell Fig . 3 | Integrins in extravasation . The middle panel shows a schematic of integrin - mediated extravasation of circulating tumour cells ( CTCs ) . The mechanisms involved in this process are α 3 β 1 integrin - mediated and α 6 β 1 integrin - mediated cancer cell adhesion to subendothelial laminin , which is required for successful transendothelial migration . β 1 integrin is also a prerequisite for tumour cells to fully clear the endothelial layer and invade into the basement membrane ( part a ) . The presence of fibronectin patches on endothelial cells promotes cancer cell adhesion to the vessel wall in a manner dependent on the integrin activator talin 1 ( part b ) . Endothelial cells also express integrins . Endothelial α 5 integrin directly binds to neuropilin 2 ( NRP2 ) , a receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) and the semaphorin family of proteins , on cancer cells , and this interaction promotes cancer cell attachment to the endothelium and subsequent extravasation ( part c ) . Pre - existing patches of exposed basement membrane can promote CTC arrest on the vascular wall in a mechanism whereby exposed laminin is engaged by α 3 β 1 integrin on the tumour cell ( part d ) . Features of the blood clotting cascade can promote integrin - mediated cancer cell invasive protrusion and extravasation , such as local recruitment of plasma fibronectin to trigger α v β 3 integrin activation ( part e ) . MMP , matrix metalloproteinase ; MT1 , membrane type 1 ; TKS5 , tyrosine kinase substrate with five SH3 domains ( also known as SH3PXD2A ) . NATuRe RevIewS | CAnCer R e v i e w s volume 18 | SePTemBeR 2018 | 541 The requirement for integrins in extravasation and metastasis is likely to be dependent on the cancer cell type and tissue - specific features . For instance , the pres - ence of integrin - dependent myosin X - induced filopo - dia in breast cancer cells correlates with the degree of extravasation in the lung 113 . In another example of direct integrin - mediated regulation of cancer cell – endothelium interactions at the step of extravasation , pre - existing patches of exposed basement membrane in the pul - monary vasculature regulate CTC arrest 144 as laminin , a basement membrane component , is engaged by α3β1 integrin on the tumour cell 144 . In addition , the blood clotting cascade is selectively involved in lung metastasis and associated with integrin activation 27 , 28 . Here , aggregates of platelets , fibrin and carcinoma cells support local recruitment of plasma fibronectin . The ensuing fibrin – fibronectin complexes induce αvβ3 integrin activation , triggering invasive protrusions and pro - invasive EMT signalling in the cancer cells 27 , 28 . Within the fenestrated endothelium of bone marrow and liver , which are regions that are more permissive to CTC entry , direct integrin - mediated interactions or active transendothelial migration may be less prominent approaches for extravasation . However , recent data from primary tumour - bearing mice and tissue from human colon cancer metastases show that the luminal side of liver blood vessels is enriched in fibronectin deposits 145 . CTCs adhere to these endothelial fibronectin patches , and this tethering requires talin 1 ( reF . 145 ) and presuma - bly integrins , although this remains to be formally inves - tigated . In the brain , CTCs need to cross the blood – brain barrier , the integrity of which may be compromised in patients with cancer 146 . Currently , there is no clear understanding of how , or whether , integrins contribute to cancer cell extravasation to the brain owing to the challenge of directly assessing the blood – brain barrier . However , at least in model systems , certain integrin profiles have been shown to influence tropism of breast cancer cell metastases to the brain 147 . Inhibition of β1 integrin significantly reduces the for - mation of metastatic foci of several cancer types , includ - ing breast cancer 148 and PDAC 149 . However , the specific metastatic steps regulated by β1 integrin remain unclear and are likely to be context dependent . Human MDA - MB - 231 breast cancer cells injected into the vascula - ture of zebrafish embryos were found to adhere to the intraluminal vessel wall via β1 integrins , migrate along the vessel and undergo β1 integrin - dependent trans - endothelial migration by inducing remodelling of the vascular endothelium , including cell – cell junctions 150 . Furthermore , transcriptional upregulation of β1 integrin expression by CDC42 and serum response factor ( SRF ) has been linked to cancer cell interaction with endothe - lial cells and transendothelial migration 151 . A more detailed insight into the role of tumour β1 integrin in extravasation was obtained using an in vitro model of microvasculature 152 . β1 integrin - mediated adhesion and activation were essential to stabilize the initial contacts made by the tip of the leading protrusion of the cancer cell with the subendothelial matrix . In addition , β1 inte - grin was necessary for the cancer cells to invade through the basement membrane after clearing the endothelial barrier 152 . These findings , which are supportive of inte - grin activation playing a key role in extravasation , are in line with the finding that expression of activated mutants of β1 integrin in cancer cells intravenously injected into chick embryos and mice increases metastatic colonization of the liver 153 . Regulators of integrin activity have also been impli - cated in metastasis . Gene expression profiling of CTCs derived from patients with metastatic colorectal cancer has revealed high expression of known integrin bind - ing partners such as talin 1 , vinculin and kindlin 3 ( also known as FERMT3 ) 154 . Specifically , talin 1 functionally contributes to the extravasation and metastasis of colon cancer CTCs 145 , while talin 1 overexpression has been shown to correlate with aggressiveness in oral SCC and contribute to anoikis suppression during prostate cancer metastasis 155 , 156 . Kindlin 1 ( also known as FERMT1 ) is elevated in cancer types with a propensity to metastasize to the lungs , such as breast cancer ; this finding has led to the suggestion that kindlin 1 is a prognostic factor for lung metastasis 157 , 158 . Short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) - me - diated knockdown of kindlin 1 in breast cancer cells has been shown to suppress primary tumour growth and lung metastasis in vivo 157 , while genetic deletion of kindlin 1 in mice impaired α4 integrin - mediated pulmo - nary arrest of disseminating mammary tumour cells 158 . Therefore , mounting evidence suggests that increased integrin activity in cancer cells or endothelial cells is coupled to extravasation . Integrins in dormancy . Successfully extravasated can - cer cells may lack the necessary growth - promoting sig - nals in their new tissue environment and thus enter a dormant state . Links between integrins and the ECM play an important role in regulating cancer cell dor - mancy . Fibronectin secretion , activation of cytoskeletal contractility downstream of β1 integrins 159 and activa - tion of FAK in response to integrin - mediated adhesion 160 have all been associated with integrin - induced exit of cancer cells from dormancy . During lung metastasis , the proliferation of cancer cells was induced by the for - mation of β1 integrin - containing , actin - rich , filopodia - like protrusions . These protrusions were generated by the cooperative action of two formin family members , namely , RAP1 - interacting factor ( RIF ) and MDIA2 ( also known as DIAPH3 ) 161 , which induce actin nucle - ation and subsequent elongation of actin filaments 162 and were critical for the activation of FAK to overcome dormancy 163 . In addition , integrin downstream signal - ling functioned as a positive feedback mechanism to sustain signalling pathways involving integrin - linked kinase ( ILK ) and β - parvin , two integrin – actin - bridging proteins , prolonging the lifetime of the filopodia 161 . Integrins in anticancer therapy In addition to being implicated in nearly every step of the metastatic cascade , integrin - mediated pathways are often connected to the development of drug resistance 10 , 132 , 164 – 166 . In mouse mammary tumour models , increased colla - gen levels and increased β1 integrin and SRC activity have been demonstrated to accompany , and promote , combined resistance to anti - human epidermal growth www . nature . com / nrc R e v i e w s 542 | SePTemBeR 2018 | volume 18 factor receptor 2 ( HER2 : also known as ERBB2 ) ( tras - tuzumab and pertuzumab ) and anti - PI3K ( buparlisib ) therapies 164 . In lung cancer , β1 integrin – SRC – AKT sig - nalling has been proposed as a key mediator of acquired resistance to EGFR - targeted anticancer drugs 167 , while a β1 integrin – FAK – cortactin signalling nexus has been described as a mechanism reducing head and neck SCC sensitivity to radiotherapy 168 . αvβ3 integrin is a putative marker of breast , lung and pancreatic carcinomas with stem - like properties and high resistance to RTK inhibi - tors 9 , 132 . Recently , paradoxical activation of melanoma - associated fibroblasts by a BRAF inhibitor ( PLX4720 ) , which leads to stromal matrix stiffening and elevated β1 integrin – SRC – FAK signalling in melanoma cells , was demonstrated to promote PLX4720 resistance 169 . As such , integrins are considered to be attractive drug targets , a concept that is bolstered by the accessibility of their crucial cell surface - exposed ligand binding and regulatory sites to therapeutic intervention ; however , despite largely encouraging preclinical studies , ensu - ing successful clinical trials based on current method - ologies are , regrettably , few in number . For example , several in vitro and preclinical studies have indicated that integrin inhibition would be efficient at sensitizing breast cancer 170 , 171 and glioblastoma to radiotherapy 172 , 173 . However , cilengitide , a selective αvβ3 integrin and αvβ5 integrin inhibitor , in combination with standard of care ( radiotherapy with the chemotherapy temozolomide ) , failed to improve survival of patients with glioblastoma in an open - label phase III trial , the CENTRIC EORTC 26071 – 22072 study , and in a companion phase II trial , the CORE study , and therefore , further development of this drug was discontinued for treatment of glioblas - toma 174 – 176 . The recent POSEIDON trial , combining abituzumab , a humanized αv integrin - specific antibody , with the standard of care , showed no improvement in progression - free survival of patients with wild - type - KRAS metastatic colorectal cancer compared with the standard of care alone 177 ; however , the data did suggest some improvement in patients with high αvβ6 integrin expression 177 , a preliminary observation that needs to be verified in trials in which αvβ6 integrin expression is used to stratify the patient cohort . Notably , most current therapeutic strategies , includ - ing cilengitide and abituzumab , have been primarily designed to interfere with integrin – ligand interactions . Considering the breadth of new evidence describing ECM ligand - independent integrin signalling in can - cer cell survival and drug resistance 44 , 51 , 129 , 132 , there may be a need to develop alternative strategies that exploit tumour - specific integrin expression profiles ( Box 2 ) or downstream integrin effectors rather than focusing directly on targeting the integrin receptors themselves . Moreover , switching between integrin heterodimers in cancer 12 , 14 may be one mechanism whereby tumour cells evade therapy 12 and may explain the lack of efficacy of specific integrin heterodimer inhibitors . FAK is a typical example of a protein that is highly phosphorylated in response to integrin activation and has diverse cellular functions ( for example , cell prolifer - ation , adhesion and migration ) that impinge on tumour cell behaviour 178 – 180 . FAK has been identified as a key player in the resistance to anoikis 45 , 178 – 180 and in main - taining an immunosuppressive TME 181 , 182 . Currently , FAK inhibitors in combination therapy are under phase I / II safety and pharmacokinetics evaluation for treatment of advanced solid cancers ( NCT02428270 , a phase II trial using a FAK inhibitor in combination with a MEK1 and MEK2 inhibitor 183 and NCT02546531 , a phase I trial using a FAK inhibitor in combination with a humanized antibody targeting programmed cell death protein 1 ( PD1 ) and chemotherapy 184 ) ; however , whether these have true potential as single or combi - natorial therapies remains to be seen . The interpreta - tion of results from these clinical trials is likely to be complicated , in particular , by new insights into cancer - specific roles of FAK distinct from those associated with its classical subcellular localization at the plasma mem - brane . In SCC , FAK activity in the nucleus has been linked to transcriptional regulation of chemokine and cytokine networks to promote tumour evasion from immune cells 182 and to cell cycle progression to sup - port tumour growth 185 . It is currently unclear whether integrin signalling plays a role in nuclear FAK activity , how FAK is translocated to the nucleus and whether FAK - dependent transcription of immunomodulatory genes also occurs in other cancer types . This latter point is particularly interesting , as in pancreatic cancer , FAK inhibition has been shown to increase immune cell infiltration into the TME and to sensitize tumours to immune checkpoint therapy 181 . An emerging theme in integrin research is the ability of these receptors to modulate the tumour - associated stroma into an environment tolerating tumour growth and progression . This has potential therapeutic implica - tions . For example , LOX - mediated matrix crosslinking , which is associated with matrix stiffening and tumour progression in several cancers 186 – 189 , increases integrin - dependent signalling in pancreatic cancer 190 and drives SRC - dependent cell proliferation and metastasis in colorectal cancer 191 . Recently , inhibition of LOX was shown to dampen metastasis and to increase response to chemotherapy in a PDAC mouse model 187 . In this study , it was suggested that blocking integrin interaction with fibronectin ( using an α5 integrin - blocking antibody ) strengthens the negative effect of LOX inhibition on cell viability ; however , this preliminary observation requires in - depth validation . It may also be interesting to dissect the potential relationship between integrins and LOX expression 73 , 75 to further understand the mechanisms of action of LOX inhibitors . Another therapeutically intriguing finding is the somewhat counterintuitive role of a bulky glycocalyx in inducing integrin signalling and cell survival in cancer . Mucins , such as mucin 1 ( MUC1 ) and MUC16 , are bulky cell surface glycoproteins frequently upregulated in epithelial cancers 192 . They extend far from the plasma membrane and sterically hinder integrin – ECM links . However , in parallel , they promote increased integrin clustering , downstream signalling and crosstalk with GFRs in areas in the cell membrane where ECM link - ages are formed 193 . Importantly , MUC1 overexpression supports tumour growth and metastasis of melanoma xenografts in mice , and cells engineered to have a thick Glycocalyx Also known as the pericellular matrix , an external cell layer that contains a fibrous meshwork of carbohydrates ( oligosaccharides , glycoproteins and mucins ) . This layer projects from the cell surface to cover the cell membrane in many animal cells and bacteria . NATuRe RevIewS | CAnCer R e v i e w s volume 18 | SePTemBeR 2018 | 543 glycocalyx foster increased metastatic potential , most likely owing to increased integrin signalling 194 . Given the established role of mucins in tumour progression 192 , several strategies to target them therapeutically have been developed . Small molecule drugs that inhibit MUC1 cytoplasmic tail oligomerization ( for exam - ple , GO - 201 ) have shown promising results in human breast tumour and MUC1 - expressing prostate cancer xenografts in mice 195 , 196 and were found to be well tol - erated in a phase I trial in patients with advanced solid tumours ( NCT01279603 ( reF . 197 ) ) . In addition , drugs inhibiting the core mucin - synthesizing enzyme GCNT3 , which lead to disrupted mucin production in vivo and in vitro 198 , have been described and may inhibit tumour growth either independently or in synergy with other drugs 192 . In addition to being considered prominent drug tar - gets , several integrins ( for example , αvβ3 integrin , αvβ6 integrin and α5β1 integrin ) are emerging as valuable probes in cancer imaging studies to determine both prognosis and treatment efficacy 199 – 201 . Clinical trials using positron emission tomography ( PET ) imaging of integrin - binding tracers include an RGD peptide - containing αvβ3 integrin tracer to evaluate tumour Box 2 | A second chance for integrin - targeting agents in cancer therapy ? The identification of Arg - Gly - Asp ( RGD ) motif - binding α 5 β 1 integrin and α v integrin expression in the tumour vasculature , combined with their important roles in vascular biology and angiogenesis 207 , initiated the development of RGD peptide - specific antagonists , as potential anti - angiogenic cancer therapies 185 , and imaging tracers 199 – 201 . However , the success of integrin antagonists in preclinical cancer models has not been reflected in clinical settings 11 , calling for alternative strategies to target integrin function . New studies are now exploiting RGD integrins not in their capacity as extracellular matrix ( eCm ) adhesion molecules but rather as validated tumour - associated antigens to selectively deliver antitumour agents ( see the figure ) . Recent successes of immune checkpoint inhibitors , which were developed to induce T cell antitumour activity , have prompted a wide interest towards cancer immunotherapy 208 . In a recent study , a highly specific RGD integrin imaging peptide fused to the Fc - domain of immunoglobulin G2a ( IgG2a ) was used to direct antibody - dependent cell - mediated cytotoxicity 209 . This peptide , when administered alongside an interleukin - 2 ( Il - 2 ) fusion protein , was shown to promote CD8 + T cell and natural killer cell activation and was demonstrated to significantly improve survival in preclinical models of melanoma , colorectal cancer and fibrosarcoma . The observed efficacy was attributed to efficient recruitment of host immune cells to the tumours , rather than through any antagonism of integrin function 209 ( see the figure , part a ) . Another study exploited an α v β 6 integrin - specific peptide to generate a tumour - targeted photosensitizer , which , when used in photodynamic therapy resulted in effective ablation of primary lung tumours in mouse models . The resulting necrotic tumour cells triggered dendritic cell activation and a CD8 + T cell response to destroy residual tumour cells and suppress tumour relapse 210 ( see the figure , part b ) . others have shown that co - administration of an internalized RGD ( iRGD ) peptide with affinity for both RGD integrins and neuropilin 1 ( NRP1 ) increases cellular uptake via NRP1 of silicasome carriers loaded with the chemotherapeutic drug irinotecan , resulting in improved survival and markedly reduced metastasis in a pancreatic adenocarcinoma ( PDAC ) mouse model 211 ( see the figure , part c ) . In another example , the potential for redesigning replication - selective oncolytic adenoviruses to include expression of an α v β 6 integrin - specific peptide to specifically target cancer cells has been demonstrated in a PDAC mouse model 212 . Peptide that recognizes multiple RGD integrins α v β 6 integrin - recognizingpeptide Mouse IgG2a Fc domain Graphene oxide Photosensitizer b a + + IL - 2 Mesoporous silica nanoparticle + Irinotecan Lipid bilayer Silicasome Light ( photodynamictherapy ) KRAS - induced orthotopic PDAC • Improved survival • Reduced metastasis Syngeneic melanoma ( B16F10 ) , fibrosarcoma ( Ag104A ) and colon carcinoma ( MC38 ) • Improved survival • Reduced MC38 tumour growth upon rechallenge of cured mice Mouseserumalbumin Breast cancer ( 4T1 ) • Reduced primary tumour growth • Reduced tumour growth at distal untreated secondary sites • Reduced metastasis to lungs Targeting peptide or construct Therapy or co - administration Mouse models and results c C - R - G - D - K / R - - - G - P - D - C - - - Cleavage site Cleavage site Photodynamic therapy A medical treatment that uses a photosensitizing molecule ( frequently a drug that becomes activated by light exposure ) and a light source to activate the administered drug . www . nature . com / nrc R e v i e w s 544 | SePTemBeR 2018 | volume 18 burden and angiogenesis ( NCT00565721 ( reF . 202 ) ) and an αvβ6 integrin tracer to detect tumours and evaluate treatment response in patients with pancreatic cancer ( NCT02683824 ( reF . 203 ) ) . Conclusions Decades of research into the biological functions of integrins in cancer have demonstrated a strikingly complex set of molecular mechanisms employed by these adhesion receptors in different steps of cancer progression . The importance of integrins as cellular mechanotransducers is becoming increasingly rec - ognized , and integrins are understood to play critical roles in tumour progression , in which altered integrin function or expression contributes to both cancer cell behaviour and the biophysical and biochemical features of the TME . Integrins are also expressed by stromal cells and on tumour - derived exosomes , and in this way , they help to define the ECM deposited around primary tumours and in metastatic niches and further contribute to disease progression . Thus , targeting integrins in the tumour stroma may be an important avenue to explore when considering future therapeutic options . Integrins are also key players in metastasis owing to diverse roles in cell motility , the ability to facilitate intravasation and extravasation via multiple mechanisms and regu - lation of cancer cell survival in the circulation . Whole genome sequencing of clinical samples from an autopsy study of patients with metastatic prostate cancer has demonstrated that metastases seed further metastases and give rise to diverse therapy - resistant subclones 204 . Thus , inhibiting integrin - mediated seeding of cancer at any stage of the disease is likely to be beneficial for the patient . Published online 12 July 2018 1 . Humphries , J . D . , Byron , A . & Humphries , M . J . Integrin ligands at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 3901 – 3903 ( 2006 ) . 2 . Arruda Macêdo , J . K . , Fox , J . W . & de Souza Castro , M . Disintegrins from snake venoms and their applications in cancer research and therapy . Curr . Protein Pept . Sci . 16 , 532 – 548 ( 2015 ) . 3 . Hussein , H . A . M . et al . Beyond RGD : virus interactions with integrins . Arch . Virol . 160 , 2669 – 2681 ( 2015 ) . 4 . De Franceschi , N . , Hamidi , H . , Alanko , J . , Sahgal , P . & Ivaska , J . Integrin traffic — the update . J . Cell Sci . 128 , 839 – 852 ( 2015 ) . 5 . Horton , E . R . et al . Definition of a consensus integrin adhesome and its dynamics during adhesion complex assembly and disassembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 1577 – 1587 ( 2015 ) . 6 . Horton , E . R . et al . The integrin adhesome network at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 129 , 4159 – 4163 ( 2016 ) . 7 . Zaidel - Bar , R . , Itzkovitz , S . , Ma’ayan , A . , Iyengar , R . & Geiger , B . Functional atlas of the integrin adhesome . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 858 – 867 ( 2007 ) . 8 . Winograd - Katz , S . E . , Fässler , R . , Geiger , B . & Legate , K . R . The integrin adhesome : from genes and proteins to human disease . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 273 – 288 ( 2014 ) . 9 . Seguin , L . , Desgrosellier , J . S . , Weis , S . M . & Cheresh , D . A . Integrins and cancer : regulators of cancer stemness , metastasis , and drug resistance . Trends Cell Biol . 25 , 234 – 240 ( 2015 ) . 10 . Hamidi , H . , Pietilä , M . & Ivaska , J . The complexity of integrins in cancer and new scopes for therapeutic targeting . Br . J . Cancer 115 , 1017 – 1023 ( 2016 ) . 11 . Raab - Westphal , S . , Marshall , J . F . & Goodman , S . L . Integrins as therapeutic targets : successes and cancers . Cancers 9 , E110 ( 2017 ) . 12 . Parvani , J . G . , Galliher - Beckley , A . J . , Schiemann , B . J . & Schiemann , W . P . Targeted inactivation of β 1 integrin induces β 3 integrin switching , which drives breast cancer metastasis by TGF - β . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 , 3449 – 3459 ( 2013 ) . 13 . van der Flier , A . et al . Endothelial alpha5 and alphav integrins cooperate in remodeling of the vasculature during development . Development 137 , 2439 – 2449 ( 2010 ) . 14 . White , D . P . , Caswell , P . T . & Norman , J . C . alpha v beta3 and alpha5beta1 integrin recycling pathways dictate downstream Rho kinase signaling to regulate persistent cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 177 , 515 – 525 ( 2007 ) . 15 . Paul , N . R . , Jacquemet , G . & Caswell , P . T . Endocytic trafficking of integrins in cell migration . Curr . Biol . 25 , 1092 ( 2015 ) . 16 . Bouvard , D . , Pouwels , J . , De Franceschi , N . & Ivaska , J . Integrin inactivators : balancing cellular functions in vitro and in vivo . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 , 430 – 442 ( 2013 ) . 17 . Sheldrake , H . M . & Patterson , L . H . Strategies to inhibit tumor associated integrin receptors : rationale for dual and multi - antagonists . J . Med . Chem . 57 , 6301 – 6315 ( 2014 ) . 18 . Munshi , H . G . & Stack , M . S . Reciprocal interactions between adhesion receptor signaling and MMP regulation . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 25 , 45 – 56 ( 2006 ) . 19 . Gaggioli , C . et al . Fibroblast - led collective invasion of carcinoma cells with differing roles for RhoGTPases in leading and following cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1392 – 1400 ( 2007 ) . 20 . Attieh , Y . & Vignjevic , D . M . The hallmarks of CAFs in cancer invasion . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 95 , 493 – 502 ( 2016 ) . 21 . Attieh , Y . et al . Cancer - associated fibroblasts lead tumor invasion through integrin - β 3 - dependent fibronectin assembly . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 3509 – 3520 ( 2017 ) . This article demonstrates that cancer cell invasion requires not only CAF - mediated contractility of the matrix but also CAF - dependent remodelling of fibronectin by α v β 3 integrin . 22 . Erdogan , B . et al . Cancer - associated fibroblasts promote directional cancer cell migration by aligning fibronectin . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 3799 – 3816 ( 2017 ) . This study describes a mechanism whereby CAFs align fibronectin fibres within the tumour ECM and , through application of traction forces mediated by α 5 β 1 integrin , promote directional cancer cell migration . 23 . Labernadie , A . et al . A mechanically active heterotypic E - cadherin / N - cadherin adhesion enables fibroblasts to drive cancer cell invasion . Nat . Cell Biol . 19 , 224 – 237 ( 2017 ) . 24 . Lambert , A . W . , Pattabiraman , D . R . & Weinberg , R . A . Emerging biological principles of metastasis . Cell 168 , 670 – 691 ( 2017 ) . 25 . Frisch , S . M . , Vuori , K . , Ruoslahti , E . & Chan - Hui , P . Y . Control of adhesion - dependent cell survival by focal adhesion kinase . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 793 – 799 ( 1996 ) . 26 . Strilic , B . & Offermanns , S . Intravascular survival and extravasation of tumor cells . Cancer Cell 32 , 282 – 293 ( 2017 ) . 27 . Knowles , L . M . et al . Integrin α v β 3 and fibronectin upregulate slug in cancer cells to promote clot invasion and metastasis . Cancer Res . 73 , 6175 – 6184 ( 2013 ) . The authors in this study connect increased fibronectin and active α v β 3 integrin expression to upregulation of the transcription factor SLUG ( also known as SNAI2 ) , EMT and fibrin invasion as a mechanism selectively involved in lung metastasis . 28 . Malik , G . et al . Plasma fibronectin promotes lung metastasis by contributions to fibrin clots and tumor cell invasion . Cancer Res . 70 , 4327 – 4334 ( 2010 ) . 29 . Cagnet , S . et al . Signaling events mediated by α 3 β 1 integrin are essential for mammary tumorigenesis . Oncogene 33 , 4286 – 4295 ( 2014 ) . 30 . White , D . E . et al . Targeted disruption of beta1 - integrin in a transgenic mouse model of human breast cancer reveals an essential role in mammary tumor induction . Cancer Cell 6 , 159 – 170 ( 2004 ) . 31 . Ramirez , N . E . et al . The α 2 β 1 integrin is a metastasis suppressor in mouse models and human cancer . J . Clin . Invest . 121 , 226 – 237 ( 2011 ) . 32 . Ramovs , V . , Te Molder , L . & Sonnenberg , A . The opposing roles of laminin - binding integrins in cancer . Matrix Biol . 57 – 58 , 213 – 243 ( 2017 ) . 33 . Ludlow , A . et al . Characterization of integrin beta6 and thrombospondin - 1 double - null mice . J . Cell . Mol . Med . 9 , 421 – 437 ( 2005 ) . 34 . Moore , K . M . et al . Therapeutic targeting of integrin α v β 6 in breast cancer . J . Natl Cancer Inst . 106 , dju169 ( 2014 ) . 35 . Truong , H . H . et al . β 1 integrin inhibition elicits a prometastatic switch through the TGF β - miR - 200 - ZEB network in E - cadherin - positive triple - negative breast cancer . Sci . Signal . 7 , ra15 ( 2014 ) . 36 . Ahmed , N . et al . Overexpression of alpha ( v ) beta6 integrin in serous epithelial ovarian cancer regulates extracellular matrix degradation via the plasminogen activation cascade . Carcinogenesis 23 , 237 – 244 ( 2002 ) . 37 . Baum , O . et al . Increased invasive potential and up - regulation of MMP - 2 in MDA - MB - 231 breast cancer cells expressing the beta3 integrin subunit . Int . J . Oncol . 30 , 325 – 332 ( 2007 ) . 38 . Gu , X . , Niu , J . , Dorahy , D . J . , Scott , R . & Agrez , M . V . Integrin alpha ( v ) beta6 - associated ERK2 mediates MMP - 9 secretion in colon cancer cells . Br . J . Cancer 87 , 348 – 351 ( 2002 ) . 39 . Kesanakurti , D . , Chetty , C . , Dinh , D . H . , Gujrati , M . & Rao , J . S . Role of MMP - 2 in the regulation of IL - 6 / Stat3 survival signaling via interaction with α 5 β 1 integrin in glioma . Oncogene 32 , 327 – 340 ( 2013 ) . 40 . Yue , J . , Zhang , K . & Chen , J . Role of integrins in regulating proteases to mediate extracellular matrix remodeling . Cancer Microenviron . 5 , 275 – 283 ( 2012 ) . 41 . Roman , J . , Ritzenthaler , J . D . , Roser - Page , S . , Sun , X . & Han , S . alpha5beta1 - integrin expression is essential for tumor progression in experimental lung cancer . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 43 , 684 – 691 ( 2010 ) . 42 . Tuomi , S . et al . PKCepsilon regulation of an alpha5 integrin - ZO - 1 complex controls lamellae formation in migrating cancer cells . Sci . Signal . 2 , ra32 ( 2009 ) . 43 . González - Tarragó , V . et al . Binding of ZO - 1 to α 5 β 1 integrins regulates the mechanical properties of α 5 β 1 - fibronectin links . Mol . Biol . Cell 28 , 1847 – 1852 ( 2017 ) . 44 . Barrow - McGee , R . et al . Beta 1 - integrin - c - Met cooperation reveals an inside - in survival signalling on autophagy - related endomembranes . Nat . Commun . 7 , 11942 ( 2016 ) . 45 . Alanko , J . et al . Integrin endosomal signalling suppresses anoikis . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 1412 – 1421 ( 2015 ) . 46 . Guo , W . et al . Beta 4 integrin amplifies ErbB2 signaling to promote mammary tumorigenesis . Cell 126 , 489 – 502 ( 2006 ) . 47 . Mai , A . et al . Distinct c - Met activation mechanisms induce cell rounding or invasion through pathways involving integrins , RhoA and HIP1 . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 1938 – 1952 ( 2014 ) . 48 . Novitskaya , V . et al . Integrin α 3 β 1 - CD151 complex regulates dimerization of ErbB2 via RhoA . Oncogene 33 , 2779 – 2789 ( 2014 ) . 49 . Trusolino , L . , Bertotti , A . & Comoglio , P . M . A signaling adapter function for alpha6beta4 integrin in the control of HGF - dependent invasive growth . Cell 107 , 643 – 654 ( 2001 ) . 50 . Desgrosellier , J . S . et al . Integrin α v β 3 drives slug activation and stemness in the pregnant and neoplastic mammary gland . Dev . Cell 30 , 295 – 308 ( 2014 ) . NATuRe RevIewS | CAnCer R e v i e w s volume 18 | SePTemBeR 2018 | 545 51 . Desgrosellier , J . S . et al . An integrin alpha ( v ) beta ( 3 ) - c - Src oncogenic unit promotes anchorage - independence and tumor progression . Nat . Med . 15 , 1163 – 1169 ( 2009 ) . 52 . Sun , Q . et al . Proapoptotic PUMA targets stem - like breast cancer cells to suppress metastasis . J . Clin . Invest . 128 , 531 – 544 ( 2018 ) . 53 . Mitra , A . K . et al . Ligand - independent activation of c - Met by fibronectin and α ( 5 ) β ( 1 ) - integrin regulates ovarian cancer invasion and metastasis . Oncogene 30 , 1566 – 1576 ( 2011 ) . 54 . Mayorca - Guiliani , A . E . et al . ISDoT : in situ decellularization of tissues for high - resolution imaging and proteomic analysis of native extracellular matrix . Nat . Med . 23 , 890 – 898 ( 2017 ) . This article describes a whole - organ decellularization technique to study native ECM architecture and components , and to monitor cancer cell - induced changes in ECM during disease progression . 55 . Naba , A . et al . Characterization of the extracellular matrix of normal and diseased tissues using proteomics . J . Proteome Res . 16 , 3083 – 3091 ( 2017 ) . 56 . Handorf , A . M . , Zhou , Y . , Halanski , M . A . & Li , W . Tissue stiffness dictates development , homeostasis , and disease progression . Organogenesis 11 , 1 – 15 ( 2015 ) . 57 . Matsui , H . , Harada , I . & Sawada , Y . Src , p130Cas , and mechanotransduction in cancer cells . Genes Cancer 3 , 394 – 401 ( 2012 ) . 58 . Sun , Z . , Guo , S . S . & Fässler , R . Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction . J . Cell Biol . 215 , 445 – 456 ( 2016 ) . 59 . Kaushik , S . , Pickup , M . W . & Weaver , V . M . From transformation to metastasis : deconstructing the extracellular matrix in breast cancer . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 35 , 655 – 667 ( 2016 ) . 60 . Acerbi , I . et al . Human breast cancer invasion and aggression correlates with ECM stiffening and immune cell infiltration . Integr . Biol . 7 , 1120 – 1134 ( 2015 ) . 61 . Paszek , M . J . et al . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 – 254 ( 2005 ) . 62 . Rubashkin , M . G . et al . Force engages vinculin and promotes tumor progression by enhancing PI3K activation of phosphatidylinositol ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) - triphosphate . Cancer Res . 74 , 4597 – 4611 ( 2014 ) . 63 . Aragona , M . et al . A mechanical checkpoint controls multicellular growth through YAP / TAZ regulation by actin - processing factors . Cell 154 , 1047 – 1059 ( 2013 ) . 64 . Dupont , S . et al . Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature 474 , 179 – 183 ( 2011 ) . 65 . Kaukonen , R . et al . Normal stroma suppresses cancer cell proliferation via mechanosensitive regulation of JMJD1a - mediated transcription . Nat . Commun . 7 , 12237 ( 2016 ) . 66 . Elosegui - Artola , A . et al . Mechanical regulation of a molecular clutch defines force transmission and transduction in response to matrix rigidity . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 540 – 548 ( 2016 ) . 67 . Das , A . , Fischer , R . S . , Pan , D . & Waterman , C . M . YAP nuclear localization in the absence of cell - cell contact is mediated by a filamentous actin - dependent , myosin II - and phospho - YAP - independent pathway during extracellular matrix mechanosensing . J . Biol . Chem . 291 , 6096 – 6110 ( 2016 ) . 68 . Kim , N . & Gumbiner , B . M . Adhesion to fibronectin regulates Hippo signaling via the FAK - Src - PI3K pathway . J . Cell Biol . 210 , 503 – 515 ( 2015 ) . 69 . Foster , C . T . , Gualdrini , F . & Treisman , R . Mutual dependence of the MRTF - SRF and YAP - TEAD pathways in cancer - associated fibroblasts is indirect and mediated by cytoskeletal dynamics . Genes Dev . 31 , 2361 – 2375 ( 2017 ) . 70 . Si , Y . et al . Src inhibits the hippo tumor suppressor pathway through tyrosine phosphorylation of Lats1 . Cancer Res . 77 , 4868 – 4880 ( 2017 ) . 71 . Nardone , G . et al . YAP regulates cell mechanics by controlling focal adhesion assembly . Nat . Commun . 8 , 15321 ( 2017 ) . 72 . Cox , T . R . et al . LOX - mediated collagen crosslinking is responsible for fibrosis - enhanced metastasis . Cancer Res . 73 , 1721 – 1732 ( 2013 ) . 73 . Khan , Z . & Marshall , J . F . The role of integrins in TGF β activation in the tumour stroma . Cell Tissue Res . 365 , 657 – 673 ( 2016 ) . 74 . Voloshenyuk , T . G . , Landesman , E . S . , Khoutorova , E . , Hart , A . D . & Gardner , J . D . Induction of cardiac fibroblast lysyl oxidase by TGF - β 1 requires PI3K / Akt , Smad3 , and MAPK signaling . Cytokine 55 , 90 – 97 ( 2011 ) . 75 . Gao , A . E . , Sullivan , K . E . & Black , L . D . Lysyl oxidase expression in cardiac fibroblasts is regulated by α 2 β 1 integrin interactions with the cellular microenvironment . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 475 , 70 – 75 ( 2016 ) . 76 . Franco - Barraza , J . et al . Matrix - regulated integrin α v β 5 maintains α 5 β 1 - dependent desmoplastic traits prognostic of neoplastic recurrence . eLife 6 , e20600 ( 2017 ) . This study compares normal fibroblasts and CAFs from patients with pancreatic cancer to reveal alterations in the subcellular localization of α 5 β 1 integrin as a potential prognostic marker for disease recurrence . 77 . Maritzen , T . , Schachtner , H . & Legler , D . F . On the move : endocytic trafficking in cell migration . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 72 , 2119 – 2134 ( 2015 ) . 78 . Waclaw , B . et al . A spatial model predicts that dispersal and cell turnover limit intratumour heterogeneity . Nature 525 , 261 – 264 ( 2015 ) . This study presents a model that provides insights into tumour growth and evolution on the basis of short - range cell movement and cell turnover within the tumour . 79 . Chan , C . E . & Odde , D . J . Traction dynamics of filopodia on compliant substrates . Science 322 , 1687 – 1691 ( 2008 ) . 80 . Gardel , M . L . et al . Traction stress in focal adhesions correlates biphasically with actin retrograde flow speed . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 999 – 1005 ( 2008 ) . 81 . Mitchison , T . & Kirschner , M . Cytoskeletal dynamics and nerve growth . Neuron 1 , 761 – 772 ( 1988 ) . 82 . Provenzano , P . P . et al . Collagen reorganization at the tumor - stromal interface facilitates local invasion . BMC Med . 4 , 38 ( 2006 ) . 83 . Barcus , C . E . et al . Elevated collagen - I augments tumor progressive signals , intravasation and metastasis of prolactin - induced estrogen receptor alpha positive mammary tumor cells . Breast Cancer Res 19 , 9 ( 2017 ) . 84 . Drifka , C . R . et al . Human pancreatic stellate cells modulate 3D collagen alignment to promote the migration of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells . Biomed . Microdevices 18 , 105 ( 2016 ) . 85 . Drifka , C . R . et al . Highly aligned stromal collagen is a negative prognostic factor following pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma resection . Oncotarget 7 , 76197 – 76213 ( 2016 ) . 86 . Laklai , H . et al . Genotype tunes pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma tissue tension to induce matricellular fibrosis and tumor progression . Nat . Med . 22 , 497 – 505 ( 2016 ) . 87 . Hanley , C . J . et al . A subset of myofibroblastic cancer - associated fibroblasts regulate collagen fiber elongation , which is prognostic in multiple cancers . Oncotarget 7 , 6159 – 6174 ( 2016 ) . 88 . Pointer , K . B . et al . Association of collagen architecture with glioblastoma patient survival . J . Neurosurg . 126 , 1812 – 1821 ( 2017 ) . 89 . Gupton , S . L . et al . Mena binds α 5 integrin directly and modulates α 5 β 1 function . J . Cell Biol . 198 , 657 – 676 ( 2012 ) . 90 . Oudin , M . J . et al . Tumor cell - driven extracellular matrix remodeling drives haptotaxis during metastatic progression . Cancer Discov . 6 , 516 – 531 ( 2016 ) . This study describes how a direct interaction between the pro - metastatic , actin - regulatory protein MENA ( INV ) and α 5 β 1 integrin increases tumour cell haptotaxis and contributes to the formation of perpendicular collagen capsules at the tumour edge . 91 . Georgiadou , M . & Ivaska , J . Tensins : bridging AMP - activated protein kinase with integrin activation . Trends Cell Biol . 27 , 703 – 711 ( 2017 ) . 92 . Georgiadou , M . et al . AMPK negatively regulates tensin - dependent integrin activity . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 1107 – 1121 ( 2017 ) . 93 . Duan , W . et al . Desmoplasia suppression by metformin - mediated AMPK activation inhibits pancreatic cancer progression . Cancer Lett . 385 , 225 – 233 ( 2017 ) . 94 . Te Boekhorst , V . , Preziosi , L . & Friedl , P . Plasticity of cell migration in vivo and in silico . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 32 , 491 – 526 ( 2016 ) . 95 . Te Boekhorst , V . & Friedl , P . Plasticity of cancer cell invasion - mechanisms and implications for therapy . Adv . Cancer Res . 132 , 209 – 264 ( 2016 ) . 96 . Yilmaz , M . & Christofori , G . EMT , the cytoskeleton , and cancer cell invasion . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 28 , 15 – 33 ( 2009 ) . 97 . Macpherson , I . R . et al . p120 - catenin is required for the collective invasion of squamous cell carcinoma cells via a phosphorylation - independent mechanism . Oncogene 26 , 5214 – 5228 ( 2007 ) . 98 . Canel , M . et al . Quantitative in vivo imaging of the effects of inhibiting integrin signaling via Src and FAK on cancer cell movement : effects on E - cadherin dynamics . Cancer Res . 70 , 9413 – 9422 ( 2010 ) . This study points to a novel role for integrin signalling in regulating E - cadherin internalization and therefore cell – cell adhesion strength and collective cancer cell movement . 99 . Canel , M . , Serrels , A . , Frame , M . C . & Brunton , V . G . E - cadherin - integrin crosstalk in cancer invasion and metastasis . J . Cell Sci . 126 , 393 – 401 ( 2013 ) . 100 . Borghi , N . , Lowndes , M . , Maruthamuthu , V . , Gardel , M . L . & Nelson , W . J . Regulation of cell motile behavior by crosstalk between cadherin - and integrin - mediated adhesions . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 13324 – 13329 ( 2010 ) . 101 . Gimond , C . et al . Induction of cell scattering by expression of beta1 integrins in beta1 - deficient epithelial cells requires activation of members of the rho family of GTPases and downregulation of cadherin and catenin function . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1325 – 1340 ( 1999 ) . 102 . Martinez - Rico , C . , Pincet , F . , Thiery , J . & Dufour , S . Integrins stimulate E - cadherin - mediated intercellular adhesion by regulating Src - kinase activation and actomyosin contractility . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 712 – 722 ( 2010 ) . This study builds on the reported crosstalk between integrins and cadherins to show that E - cadherin - dependent adhesion strength can be stimulated in the presence of fibronectin . 103 . Hegerfeldt , Y . , Tusch , M . , Bröcker , E . & Friedl , P . Collective cell movement in primary melanoma explants : plasticity of cell - cell interaction , beta1 - integrin function , and migration strategies . Cancer Res . 62 , 2125 – 2130 ( 2002 ) . 104 . Friedl , P . , Sahai , E . , Weiss , S . & Yamada , K . M . New dimensions in cell migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 743 – 747 ( 2012 ) . 105 . Ridley , A . J . Rho GTPase signalling in cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 36 , 103 – 112 ( 2015 ) . 106 . Jacquemet , G . et al . RCP - driven α 5 β 1 recycling suppresses Rac and promotes RhoA activity via the RacGAP1 - IQGAP1 complex . J . Cell Biol . 202 , 917 – 935 ( 2013 ) . 107 . Shafaq - Zadah , M . et al . Persistent cell migration and adhesion rely on retrograde transport of β ( 1 ) integrin . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 54 – 64 ( 2016 ) . 108 . De Franceschi , N . et al . Selective integrin endocytosis is driven by interactions between the integrin α - chain and AP2 . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 23 , 172 – 179 ( 2016 ) . 109 . Adorno , M . et al . A mutant - p53 / Smad complex opposes p63 to empower TGFbeta - induced metastasis . Cell 137 , 87 – 98 ( 2009 ) . 110 . Morton , J . P . et al . Mutant p53 drives metastasis and overcomes growth arrest / senescence in pancreatic cancer . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 246 – 251 ( 2010 ) . 111 . Muller , P . A . J . et al . Mutant p53 drives invasion by promoting integrin recycling . Cell 139 , 1327 – 1341 ( 2009 ) . 112 . Paul , N . R . et al . α 5 β 1 integrin recycling promotes Arp2 / 3 - independent cancer cell invasion via the formin FHOD3 . J . Cell Biol . 210 , 1013 – 1031 ( 2015 ) . 113 . Arjonen , A . et al . Mutant p53 - associated myosin - X upregulation promotes breast cancer invasion and metastasis . J . Clin . Invest . 124 , 1069 – 1082 ( 2014 ) . 114 . Zhang , H . et al . Myosin - X provides a motor - based link between integrins and the cytoskeleton . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 523 – 531 ( 2004 ) . 115 . Jacquemet , G . , Hamidi , H . & Ivaska , J . Filopodia in cell adhesion , 3D migration and cancer cell invasion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 36 , 23 – 31 ( 2015 ) . 116 . Jacquemet , G . et al . FiloQuant reveals increased filopodia density during breast cancer progression . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 3387 – 3403 ( 2017 ) . 117 . Jacquemet , G . et al . L - type calcium channels regulate filopodia stability and cancer cell invasion downstream of integrin signalling . Nat . Commun . 7 , 13297 ( 2016 ) . 118 . Beaty , B . T . & Condeelis , J . Digging a little deeper : the stages of invadopodium formation and maturation . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 93 , 438 – 444 ( 2014 ) . 119 . Destaing , O . , Block , M . R . , Planus , E . & Albiges - Rizo , C . Invadosome regulation by adhesion signaling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 , 597 – 606 ( 2011 ) . 120 . Paterson , E . K . & Courtneidge , S . A . Invadosomes are coming : new insights into function and disease relevance . FEBS J . 285 , 8 – 27 ( 2017 ) . www . nature . com / nrc R e v i e w s 546 | SePTemBeR 2018 | volume 18 121 . Caswell , P . T . , Vadrevu , S . & Norman , J . C . Integrins : masters and slaves of endocytic transport . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 843 – 853 ( 2009 ) . 122 . Pellinen , T . et al . Small GTPase Rab21 regulates cell adhesion and controls endosomal traffic of beta1 - integrins . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 767 – 780 ( 2006 ) . 123 . Nader , G . P . F . , Ezratty , E . J . & Gundersen , G . G . FAK , talin and PIPKI γ regulate endocytosed integrin activation to polarize focal adhesion assembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 491 – 503 ( 2016 ) . 124 . Jahangiri , A . et al . Cross - activating c - Met / β 1 integrin complex drives metastasis and invasive resistance in cancer . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 114 , E8694 ( 2017 ) . 125 . Yoshioka , T . et al . β 4 Integrin signaling induces expansion of prostate tumor progenitors . J . Clin . Invest . 123 , 682 – 699 ( 2013 ) . 126 . Gao , J . et al . Mechanistic insights into EGFR membrane clustering revealed by super - resolution imaging . Nanoscale 7 , 2511 – 2519 ( 2015 ) . 127 . Lau , L . F . Cell surface receptors for CCN proteins . J . Cell Commun . Signal . 10 , 121 – 127 ( 2016 ) . 128 . Xie , D . , Nakachi , K . , Wang , H . , Elashoff , R . & Koeffler , H . P . Elevated levels of connective tissue growth factor , WISP - 1 , and CYR61 in primary breast cancers associated with more advanced features . Cancer Res . 61 , 8917 – 8923 ( 2001 ) . 129 . Huang , Y . , Lan , Q . , Lorusso , G . , Duffey , N . & Rüegg , C . The matricellular protein CYR61 promotes breast cancer lung metastasis by facilitating tumor cell extravasation and suppressing anoikis . Oncotarget 8 , 9200 – 9215 ( 2017 ) . 130 . Lakshminarayan , R . et al . Galectin - 3 drives glycosphingolipid - dependent biogenesis of clathrin - independent carriers . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 595 – 606 ( 2014 ) . 131 . Commisso , C . et al . Macropinocytosis of protein is an amino acid supply route in Ras - transformed cells . Nature 497 , 633 – 637 ( 2013 ) . 132 . Seguin , L . et al . An integrin β 3 - KRAS - RalB complex drives tumour stemness and resistance to EGFR inhibition . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 457 – 468 ( 2014 ) . 133 . Seguin , L . et al . Galectin - 3 , a druggable vulnerability for KRAS - addicted cancers . Cancer Discov . 7 , 1464 – 1479 ( 2017 ) . This study identifies an exciting therapeutic opportunity to target KRAS - addicted tumours by dampening the activity of galectin , a cell surface carbohydrate that binds to , and clusters , α v β 3 integrin to activate KRAS signalling . 134 . Zhang , K . et al . Oncogenic K - Ras upregulates ITGA6 expression via FOSL1 to induce anoikis resistance and synergizes with α V - Class integrins to promote EMT . Oncogene 36 , 5681 – 5694 ( 2017 ) . 135 . Colombo , M . , Raposo , G . & Théry , C . Biogenesis , secretion , and intercellular interactions of exosomes and other extracellular vesicles . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 30 , 255 – 289 ( 2014 ) . 136 . E . L . Andaloussi , S . , Mäger , I . , Breakefield , X . O . & Wood , M . J . Extracellular vesicles : biology and emerging therapeutic opportunities . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 12 , 347 – 357 ( 2013 ) . 137 . Hoshino , A . et al . Tumour exosome integrins determine organotropic metastasis . Nature 527 , 329 – 335 ( 2015 ) . 138 . Holash , J . et al . Vessel cooption , regression , and growth in tumors mediated by angiopoietins and VEGF . Science 284 , 1994 – 1998 ( 1999 ) . 139 . Parikh , S . M . et al . Excess circulating angiopoietin - 2 may contribute to pulmonary vascular leak in sepsis in humans . PLOS Med . 3 , e46 ( 2006 ) . 140 . Hakanpaa , L . et al . Endothelial destabilization by angiopoietin - 2 via integrin β 1 activation . Nat . Commun . 6 , 5962 ( 2015 ) . 141 . Cao , Y . et al . Neuropilin - 2 promotes extravasation and metastasis by interacting with endothelial α 5 integrin . Cancer Res . 73 , 4579 – 4590 ( 2013 ) . 142 . Handa , A . et al . Neuropilin - 2 expression affects the increased vascularization and is a prognostic factor in osteosarcoma . Int . J . Oncol . 17 , 291 – 295 ( 2000 ) . 143 . Yasuoka , H . et al . Neuropilin - 2 expression in breast cancer : correlation with lymph node metastasis , poor prognosis , and regulation of CXCR4 expression . BMC Cancer 9 , 220 ( 2009 ) . 144 . Wang , H . et al . Tumor cell alpha3beta1 integrin and vascular laminin - 5 mediate pulmonary arrest and metastasis . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 935 – 941 ( 2004 ) . 145 . Barbazán , J . et al . Liver metastasis is facilitated by the adherence of circulating tumor cells to vascular fibronectin deposits . Cancer Res . 77 , 3431 – 3441 ( 2017 ) . 146 . Bos , P . D . et al . Genes that mediate breast cancer metastasis to the brain . Nature 459 , 1005 – 1009 ( 2009 ) . 147 . Barney , L . E . et al . A cell - ECM screening method to predict breast cancer metastasis . Integr . Biol . 7 , 198 – 212 ( 2015 ) . 148 . Huck , L . , Pontier , S . M . , Zuo , D . M . & Muller , W . J . Beta1 - integrin is dispensable for the induction of ErbB2 mammary tumors but plays a critical role in the metastatic phase of tumor progression . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 15559 – 15564 ( 2010 ) . 149 . Grzesiak , J . J . et al . Knockdown of the β ( 1 ) integrin subunit reduces primary tumor growth and inhibits pancreatic cancer metastasis . Int . J . Cancer 129 , 2905 – 2915 ( 2011 ) . 150 . Stoletov , K . et al . Visualizing extravasation dynamics of metastatic tumor cells . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 2332 – 2341 ( 2010 ) . 151 . Reymond , N . et al . Cdc42 promotes transendothelial migration of cancer cells through β 1 integrin . J . Cell Biol . 199 , 653 – 668 ( 2012 ) . 152 . Chen , M . B . , Lamar , J . M . , Li , R . , Hynes , R . O . & Kamm , R . D . Elucidation of the roles of tumor integrin β 1 in the extravasation stage of the metastasis cascade . Cancer Res . 76 , 2513 – 2524 ( 2016 ) . The authors of this study use a 3D microfluidic model of the human microvasculature to reveal β 1 integrin adhesion to subendothelial laminin as a critical prerequisite for successful transmigration . 153 . Kato , H . et al . The primacy of β 1 integrin activation in the metastatic cascade . PLOS ONE 7 , e46576 ( 2012 ) . 154 . Barbazán , J . et al . Molecular characterization of circulating tumor cells in human metastatic colorectal cancer . PLOS ONE 7 , e40476 ( 2012 ) . 155 . Lai , M . et al . Talin - 1 overexpression defines high risk for aggressive oral squamous cell carcinoma and promotes cancer metastasis . J . Pathol . 224 , 367 – 376 ( 2011 ) . 156 . Sakamoto , S . , McCann , R . O . , Dhir , R . & Kyprianou , N . Talin1 promotes tumor invasion and metastasis via focal adhesion signaling and anoikis resistance . Cancer Res . 70 , 1885 – 1895 ( 2010 ) . 157 . Sin , S . et al . Role of the focal adhesion protein kindlin - 1 in breast cancer growth and lung metastasis . J . Natl Cancer Inst . 103 , 1323 – 1337 ( 2011 ) . 158 . Sarvi , S . et al . Kindlin - 1 promotes pulmonary breast cancer metastasis . Cancer Res . 78 , 1484 – 1496 ( 2018 ) . 159 . Barkan , D . et al . Inhibition of metastatic outgrowth from single dormant tumor cells by targeting the cytoskeleton . Cancer Res . 68 , 6241 – 6250 ( 2008 ) . 160 . Shibue , T . & Weinberg , R . A . Integrin beta1 - focal adhesion kinase signaling directs the proliferation of metastatic cancer cells disseminated in the lungs . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 10290 – 10295 ( 2009 ) . 161 . Shibue , T . , Brooks , M . W . & Weinberg , R . A . An integrin - linked machinery of cytoskeletal regulation that enables experimental tumor initiation and metastatic colonization . Cancer Cell 24 , 481 – 498 ( 2013 ) . 162 . Mellor , H . The role of formins in filopodia formation . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1803 , 191 – 200 ( 2010 ) . 163 . Shibue , T . , Brooks , M . W . , Inan , M . F . , Reinhardt , F . & Weinberg , R . A . The outgrowth of micrometastases is enabled by the formation of filopodium - like protrusions . Cancer Discov . 2 , 706 – 721 ( 2012 ) . 164 . Hanker , A . B . et al . Extracellular matrix / integrin signaling promotes resistance to combined inhibition of HER2 and PI3K in HER2 + breast cancer . Cancer Res . 77 , 3280 – 3292 ( 2017 ) . 165 . Huang , C . et al . β 1 integrin mediates an alternative survival pathway in breast cancer cells resistant to lapatinib . Breast Cancer Res . 13 , R84 ( 2011 ) . 166 . Sethi , T . et al . Extracellular matrix proteins protect small cell lung cancer cells against apoptosis : a mechanism for small cell lung cancer growth and drug resistance in vivo . Nat . Med . 5 , 662 – 668 ( 1999 ) . 167 . Kanda , R . et al . Erlotinib resistance in lung cancer cells mediated by integrin β 1 / Src / Akt - driven bypass signaling . Cancer Res . 73 , 6243 – 6253 ( 2013 ) . 168 . Eke , I . et al . Simultaneous β 1 integrin - EGFR targeting and radiosensitization of human head and neck cancer . J . Natl Cancer Inst . 107 , dju419 ( 2015 ) . 169 . Hirata , E . et al . Intravital imaging reveals how BRAF inhibition generates drug - tolerant microenvironments with high integrin β 1 / FAK signaling . Cancer Cell 27 , 574 – 588 ( 2015 ) . This article describes paradoxical activation of melanoma - associated fibroblasts by a BRAF inhibitor , which leads to increased stromal matrix stiffening and elevated β 1 integrin – SRC – FAK signalling and drug resistance in melanoma cells . 170 . Hu , T . , Zhou , R . , Zhao , Y . & Wu , G . Integrin α 6 / Akt / Erk signaling is essential for human breast cancer resistance to radiotherapy . Sci . Rep . 6 , 33376 ( 2016 ) . 171 . Park , C . C . , Zhang , H . J . , Yao , E . S . , Park , C . J . & Bissell , M . J . Beta1 integrin inhibition dramatically enhances radiotherapy efficacy in human breast cancer xenografts . Cancer Res . 68 , 4398 – 4405 ( 2008 ) . 172 . Lomonaco , S . L . et al . Cilengitide induces autophagy - mediated cell death in glioma cells . Neuro Oncol . 13 , 857 – 865 ( 2011 ) . 173 . Mikkelsen , T . et al . Radiation sensitization of glioblastoma by cilengitide has unanticipated schedule - dependency . Int . J . Cancer 124 , 2719 – 2727 ( 2009 ) . 174 . Mason , W . P . End of the road : confounding results of the CORE trial terminate the arduous journey of cilengitide for glioblastoma . Neuro Oncol . 17 , 634 – 635 ( 2015 ) . 175 . Nabors , L . B . et al . Two cilengitide regimens in combination with standard treatment for patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma and unmethylated MGMT gene promoter : results of the open - label , controlled , randomized phase II CORE study . Neuro Oncol . 17 , 708 – 717 ( 2015 ) . 176 . Stupp , R . et al . Cilengitide combined with standard treatment for patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma with methylated MGMT promoter ( CENTRIC EORTC 26071 – 22072 study ) : a multicentre , randomised , open - label , phase 3 trial . Lancet Oncol . 15 , 1100 – 1108 ( 2014 ) . 177 . Élez , E . et al . Abituzumab combined with cetuximab plus irinotecan versus cetuximab plus irinotecan alone for patients with KRAS wild - type metastatic colorectal cancer : the randomised phase I / II POSEIDON trial . Ann . Oncol . 26 , 132 – 140 ( 2015 ) . 178 . Aslan , B . et al . The ZNF304 - integrin axis protects against anoikis in cancer . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7351 ( 2015 ) . 179 . Lee , B . Y . , Timpson , P . , Horvath , L . G . & Daly , R . J . FAK signaling in human cancer as a target for therapeutics . Pharmacol . Ther . 146 , 132 – 149 ( 2015 ) . 180 . Leng , C . et al . An integrin beta4 - EGFR unit promotes hepatocellular carcinoma lung metastases by enhancing anchorage independence through activation of FAK - AKT pathway . Cancer Lett . 376 , 188 – 196 ( 2016 ) . 181 . Jiang , H . et al . Targeting focal adhesion kinase renders pancreatic cancers responsive to checkpoint immunotherapy . Nat . Med . 22 , 851 – 860 ( 2016 ) . 182 . Serrels , A . et al . Nuclear FAK controls chemokine transcription , Tregs , and evasion of anti - tumor immunity . Cell 163 , 160 – 173 ( 2015 ) . 183 . US National Library of Medicine . ClinicalTrials . gov https : / / clinicaltrials . gov / ct2 / show / NCT02428270 ( 2018 ) . 184 . US National Library of Medicine . ClinicalTrials . gov https : / / clinicaltrials . gov / ct2 / show / NCT02546531 ( 2018 ) . 185 . Canel , M . et al . Nuclear FAK and Runx1 cooperate to regulate IGFBP3 , cell - cycle progression , and tumor growth . Cancer Res . 77 , 5301 – 5312 ( 2017 ) . 186 . Johnston , K . A . & Lopez , K . M . Lysyl oxidase in cancer inhibition and metastasis . Cancer Lett . 417 , 174 – 181 ( 2018 ) . 187 . Miller , B . W . et al . Targeting the LOX / hypoxia axis reverses many of the features that make pancreatic cancer deadly : inhibition of LOX abrogates metastasis and enhances drug efficacy . EMBO Mol . Med . 7 , 1063 – 1076 ( 2015 ) . 188 . Pickup , M . W . et al . Stromally derived lysyl oxidase promotes metastasis of transforming growth factor - β - deficient mouse mammary carcinomas . Cancer Res . 73 , 5336 – 5346 ( 2013 ) . 189 . Wei , Y . et al . Fibroblast - specific inhibition of TGF - β 1 signaling attenuates lung and tumor fibrosis . J . Clin . Invest . 127 , 3675 – 3688 ( 2017 ) . 190 . Levental , K . R . et al . Matrix crosslinking forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling . Cell 139 , 891 – 906 ( 2009 ) . 191 . Baker , A . et al . The role of lysyl oxidase in SRC - dependent proliferation and metastasis of colorectal cancer . J . Natl Cancer Inst . 103 , 407 – 424 ( 2011 ) . 192 . Rao , C . V . , Janakiram , N . B . & Mohammed , A . Molecular pathways : mucins and drug delivery in cancer . Clin . Cancer Res . 23 , 1373 – 1378 ( 2017 ) . 193 . Freeman , S . A . et al . Integrins form an expanding diffusional barrier that coordinates phagocytosis . Cell 164 , 128 – 140 ( 2016 ) . NATuRe RevIewS | CAnCer R e v i e w s volume 18 | SePTemBeR 2018 | 547 194 . Woods , E . C . et al . A bulky glycocalyx fosters metastasis formation by promoting G1 cell cycle progression . eLife 6 , e25752 ( 2017 ) . 195 . Raina , D . et al . Direct targeting of the mucin 1 oncoprotein blocks survival and tumorigenicity of human breast carcinoma cells . Cancer Res . 69 , 5133 – 5141 ( 2009 ) . 196 . Joshi , M . D . et al . MUC1 oncoprotein is a druggable target in human prostate cancer cells . Mol . Cancer Ther . 8 , 3056 – 3065 ( 2009 ) . 197 . US National Library of Medicine . ClinicalTrials . gov https : / / clinicaltrials . gov / ct2 / show / NCT01279603 ( 2014 ) . 198 . Rao , C . V . et al . Small - molecule inhibition of GCNT3 disrupts mucin biosynthesis and malignant cellular behaviors in pancreatic cancer . Cancer Res . 76 , 1965 – 1974 ( 2016 ) . 199 . Notni , J . et al . Variation of specific activities of 68Ga - aquibeprin and 68Ga - avebetrin enables selective PET imaging of different expression levels of integrins α 5 β 1 and α v β 3 . J . Nucl . Med . 57 , 1618 – 1624 ( 2016 ) . 200 . Notni , J . et al . Complementary , selective PET imaging of integrin subtypes α 5 β 1 and α v β 3 using 68Ga - aquibeprin and 68Ga - avebetrin . J . Nucl . Med . 57 , 460 – 466 ( 2016 ) . 201 . Notni , J . et al . In vivo PET imaging of the cancer integrin α v β 6 using ( 68 ) Ga - labeled cyclic RGD nonapeptides . J . Nucl . Med . 58 , 671 – 677 ( 2017 ) . 202 . US National Library of Medicine . ClinicalTrials . gov https : / / clinicaltrials . gov / ct2 / show / NCT00565721 ( 2014 ) . 203 . US National Library of Medicine . ClinicalTrials . gov https : / / clinicaltrials . gov / ct2 / show / NCT02683824 ( 2018 ) . 204 . Gundem , G . et al . The evolutionary history of lethal metastatic prostate cancer . Nature 520 , 353 – 357 ( 2015 ) . 205 . Shattil , S . J . , Kim , C . & Ginsberg , M . H . The final steps of integrin activation : the end game . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 288 – 300 ( 2010 ) . 206 . Lilja , J . et al . SHANK proteins limit integrin activation by directly interacting with Rap1 and R - Ras . Nat . Cell Biol . 19 , 292 – 305 ( 2017 ) . 207 . Avraamides , C . J . , Garmy - Susini , B . & Varner , J . A . Integrins in angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis . Nat . Rev . Cancer 8 , 604 – 617 ( 2008 ) . 208 . Topalian , S . L . , Drake , C . G . & Pardoll , D . M . Immune checkpoint blockade : a common denominator approach to cancer therapy . Cancer Cell 27 , 450 – 461 ( 2015 ) . 209 . Kwan , B . H . et al . Integrin - targeted cancer immunotherapy elicits protective adaptive immune responses . J . Exp . Med . 214 , 1679 – 1690 ( 2017 ) . 210 . Yu , X . et al . Inhibiting metastasis and preventing tumor relapse by triggering host immunity with tumor - targeted photodynamic therapy using photosensitizer - loaded functional nanographenes . ACS Nano 11 , 10147 – 10158 ( 2017 ) . 211 . Liu , X . et al . Tumor - penetrating peptide enhances transcytosis of silicasome - based chemotherapy for pancreatic cancer . J . Clin . Invest . 127 , 2007 – 2018 ( 2017 ) . 212 . Man , Y . K . S . et al . The novel oncolytic adenoviral mutant Ad5 - 3 Δ - A20T retargeted to α v β 6 integrins efficiently eliminates pancreatic cancer cells . Mol . Cancer Ther . 17 , 575 – 587 ( 2018 ) . Acknowledgements The authors apologize to all colleagues whose work was not mentioned here owing to space limitations . The authors thank the Ivaska laboratory members for their constructive criti - cisms of this review and J . Marshall for insightful discussion and contributions to Supplementary Table 1 . Work in the authors’ laboratory was supported by funding from the Academy of Finland , a European Research Council ( ERC ) Consolidator Grant , the Sigrid Juselius Foundation and the Cancer Society of Finland . Author contributions J . I . researched the data for the article and wrote the body of the manuscript before submission . H . H . assembled the table , drafted the display items and contributed to writing of the manuscript before submission . J . I . and H . H . equally contributed to revising and editing of the manuscript . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Reviewer information Nature Reviews Cancer thanks D . Calderwood , D . Cheresh and the other anonymous reviewer ( s ) for their contribution to the peer review of this work . Supplementary information Supplementary information is available for this paper at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41568 - 018 - 0038 - z . www . nature . com / nrc R e v i e w s 548 | SePTemBeR 2018 | volume 18