nature methods | VOL . 11 NO . 3 | MARCH 2014 | 235 commentary Ulrike Endesfelder and Mike Heilemann are in the Single Molecule Biophysics Group , Institute of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry , Goethe University Frankfurt , Frankfurt , Germany . e - mail : endesfelder @ chemie . uni - frankfurt . de or heilemann @ chemie . uni - frankfurt . de Art and artifacts in single - molecule localization microscopy : beyond attractive images Ulrike Endesfelder & Mike Heilemann Single - molecule super - resolution techniques emerged only several years ago but have revolutionized fluorescence microscopy of cellular structures . We discuss some key principles of these techniques , point out pitfalls , highlight recent developments and identify opportunities for the future . The beauty and prosperity of fluorescence microscopy lie in its simplicity and univer - sal applicability . Even complex targets , such as living cells or whole small organisms , can be visualized and studied . Single - molecule localization microscopy 1 is a recent exten - sion of fluorescence microscopy and belongs to the wider group of super - reso - lution techniques capable of bypassing the diffraction limit in optical microscopy . Localization microscopy combines a low technical complexity ( i . e . , micro - scope configuration and setup ) —which motivates many groups to set up micro - scopes—with a rather high complexity of experimental design and acquisition . The latter includes the fact that photoswitch - ing of fluorophores depends on the actual sample and that both primary data analysis and data postprocessing are prone to arti - facts . As a consequence , some experimen - tal results might not represent the biologi - cal reality . But the many exciting insights into nanoscale cellular organization or the mechanisms of molecular processes obtained through the appropriate use of localization microscopy have motivated increasing numbers of researchers to con - sider these still - young technologies . Photoswitchable fluorophores Unlike classical fluorescence microscopy , localization microscopy requires photo - switchable fluorescent probes . Stochastic activation of fluorescence is used to con - trol the density of emitters and thus to confine the readout of the signal in space . Understanding and controlling the pho - tophysical and photochemical processes of photoswitching is crucial for success - ful imaging ; it allows microscopists to determine the origin of artifacts and how to avoid them . Nonrobust photoswitch - ing leads to the detection of too few fluorophores ; thus , the final image lacks information . In quantitative localization microscopy , protein copy numbers would be underestimated . Photoswitching also affects the achievable localization precision , as discussed in the accompanying Review by Deschout et al . 2 . Photoswitching of synthetic fluorophores typically requires an imaging buffer that contains redox - active chemicals . Exploring and rethinking the standard buffer systems for photoswitching synthetic fluorophores is a topic of current research . For example , the fluorescence quantum yield of many fluorophores is solvent dependent and can be increased twofold or more by , for instance , replacing H 2 O by D 2 O ( deute - rium oxide ) —a concept that was recently revived for localization microscopy 3 . In addition , pH - stable oxygen - scavenger buf - fers ( in contrast to the common glucose oxidase system ) ensure a defined chemical environment over time such that kinetic rates of photoswitching stay constant dur - ing the whole experiment . The addition of more chemicals that interfere with spe - cific states involved in photoswitching ( for example , cyclo - octatetraene , which depop - ulates the triplet state 4 ) allows for even more control of the photophysical pathway . The need for switching buffers renders live - cell imaging with synthetic fluoro - phores difficult in the first place . However , the chemical environment within a living cell can make localization microscopy pos - sible for some synthetic fluorophores : for example , if suitable redox properties are provided . One should consider , though , that the chemical environment of a cell var - ies : that of , say , a mitochondrion is largely different than the cytosol . This can lead to imaging artifacts , as the readout of the fluo - rescence signal depends on the location of the fluorophore in a cell . In addition , per - turbing the cellular redox machinery by consuming thiols and generating highly reactive radical species influences cellular processes and thus the observation made . Unlike barrel - protected chromophores in fluorescent proteins ( FPs ) , synthetic fluorophores are directly exposed to their nanoenvironment : nearby electron donors such as tryptophan or guanidine can lead to efficient fluorescence quenching and thus ‘switch off’ the photoswitching properties . These physicochemical interactions need to be accounted for , as synthetic fluoro - phores are conjugated to a target biomol - ecule . Oxazine fluorophores , for example , are ideally suited for localization micros - copy imaging with antibodies 5 or with a chemical tag in a live cell 6 yet are efficiently quenched by tryptophan ( as found in the heptapeptide phalloidin ) or guanidine . If small - molecule tags are used , one further needs to rule out that fluorescence labeling occurs because of the molecular character n p g © 201 4 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . 236 | VOL . 11 NO . 3 | MARCH 2014 | nature methods commentary number of orthogonal and reversible bind - ing reactions in combination with short oligonucleotides 10 . Another promising option involves pairs of two - fluorophore constructs at a distance allowing for fluo - rescence resonance energy transfer , with a photochromic donor and a nonphoto - chromic acceptor . Similarly to the early proposed ‘antenna’ complexes—wherein one fluorophore acts as a sort of antenna and captures the photons , thereby facili - tating the photoswitching of the second fluorophore—this concept reduces the complexity by keeping the photoswitching on the donor side and extends the usability toward multicolor imaging on the acceptor side 11 . This should similarly be considered for simultaneous multicolor colocalization tracking schemes of interacting molecules . obtaining data : find , localize and resolve Localization microscopy requires algo - rithmic processing . In a first step , the posi - tions of single emitters are extracted from raw single - molecule images . These data of single - molecule localizations are used for a pointillist reconstruction of an artificial , super - resolved image . Several algorithms with different approaches to identify and localize single molecules have been devel - oped and are summarized and compared in detail in the accompanying Review by Small and Stahlheber 12 . Researchers who wish to apply localization microscopy must thoroughly understand the algorithm they use , its characteristic parameters , its strengths and its weaknesses . Artifacts arise if , for example , background signal or multiple emitters are interpreted as a single fluorophore . Even small details can be critical : the size of the region of interest around a local maximum as input param - eter of the fitting routine may lead to error - prone fits ( see Small and Stahlheber 12 ) . The overall importance of the performance of single - molecule localization software was highlighted in the recent International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging chal - lenge ( http : / / bigwww . epfl . ch / smlm / ) , in which many algorithms were compared according to how well they processed dif - ferent data sets . Likewise , benchmark - ing and characterizing the algorithms for super - resolution tracking is envisaged for the near future . A difficult but important measure is the resolution . Resolution refers to the smallest observable detail of an object , depends on amino acid residues were identified that govern transitions into reversible dark states , as were different molecular mecha - nisms of photoswitching 9 . Labeling a tar - get structure with an FP is not an option in every experiment , and only a small number of suitable photochromic FPs ( as determined by ( i ) efficient photoconver - sion and ( ii ) a high contrast ratio between on and off states ) are available . In addi - tion , some of the brightest and best - suited FPs for localization microscopy , which are from the Dendra and Eos families , are pho - toswitched from one fluorescing state to another . These FPs occupy a larger spectral range than those that fluoresce in only one state , and this large range reduces the flex - ibility for performing multicolor imaging . Bright , suitable FPs that fluoresce in the blue or far - red portions of the electromag - netic spectrum are still largely missing . In multicolor imaging , a compromise for photoswitching with different photochemi - cal properties and targeting approaches has to be found . One option to bypass this caveat is to use the same fluorophore and a of the fluorophore itself ( its ‘stickiness’ to particular cellular organelles ) , which leads to false targeting . More work is needed toward the develop - ment of synthetic dyes that are less sensi - tive to the nanoenvironment and that carry molecular properties that allow for intrin - sic photoswitching . A promising approach could be the conjugation of a specific reducing group directly to the fluorophore . In a further step , this conjugate should be shielded from the cellular environment by a small surrounding structure similar to the barrel in most FPs . In addition , this would minimize chemical interactions between reactive radical species originat - ing from photoswitching processes and the biomolecules in the cell . The generation of radical species is one origin of phototoxic - ity in localization microscopy , as is radia - tion - induced damage of cellular structures caused by high laser intensities 7 . Recently , researchers also began to rationalize the structural impact on pho - toswitching in the design of novel FPs suit - able for localization microscopy 8 . Specific ( i ) a b ( i ) ( ii ) ( ii ) 16 nm 18 nm C o un t s C o u n t s C o u n t s Transverse position ( nm ) Transverse position ( nm ) Nearest neighbor in adjacent frames ( nm ) – 40 – 20 0 20 40 – 40 – 20 0 0 p ( d ) fit = 8 . 6 ± 0 . 1 nm 100 200 800 400 0 20 40 50 25 0 35 0 σ Figure 1 | Cellular structures can serve as a benchmark for calculating the spatial resolution . ( a ) Localization microscopy image of microtubulin filaments assembled in vitro from fluorophore - stained tubulin monomers ( adapted from Vaughan et al . 17 ) . The two - dimensional projection of the fluorescence intensity distribution appears as two separate lines that can be discerned in the super - resolution image . The distance of the two parallel lines is a direct demonstration of the spatial resolution . ( b ) Localization microscopy image of microtubulin in a fixed cell stained by immunofluorescence . A nearest - neighbor analysis of the single - molecule localization data and subsequent approximation by a distance distribution function ( p ( d ) ) allows determination of the experimental localization precision ( s ) ( according to Churchman et al . 20 and Endesfelder et al . 21 ) . n p g © 201 4 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nature methods | VOL . 11 NO . 3 | MARCH 2014 | 237 commentary careful control of switching properties are key elements . It is essential to ensure low spot densities , and to correct for drift and chromatic errors , in order to obtain high - quality super - resolution images . With the advent of commercially available systems , a lot of experimental parameters have already been automated by software , but not all can be . Finally , localization microscopy may likely never be the first choice for imag - ing large and complex cellular structures and their dynamics in live cells ( this does not apply to single - particle tracking in combination with photoswitchable fluo - rophores ) . This is because of the nature of the technology . First , the localization pre - cision is impaired by movement . Second , imaging a sufficient number of molecules requires time . Increasing the imaging speed using fast detectors is certainly an option 27 , yet the photon output of a fluo - rophore is limited , and that itself limits the acquisition speed . Third , photoswitching rates and yields of both FPs and synthetic dyes vary throughout a cell . This trans - lates into locally varying image quality and information content . But is this really a problem ? Not at all . The usefulness of an advanced microscopic technique is not constrained because it is not applied to resolve complex structural features in live cells or live animals . In the context of localization microscopy , this becomes evident from the increasing number of excellent scientific publications that report new findings in cell biology . Rather than trying to make localization microscopy an every - sample technique , it is worthwhile to clearly define for which experiments it can be robustly used to provide a mini - mum of artifacts and a maximum of reli - able information . acKnoWLedGments This work was supported by the Systems Biology Initiative ( FORSYS ) of the Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung and by the German Science Foundation ( EXC 115 ) . comPetInG FInancIaL Interests The authors declare no competing financial interests . 1 . Moerner , W . E . J . Microsc . 246 , 213 – 220 ( 2012 ) . 2 . Deschout , H . et al . Nat . Methods 11 , 253 – 266 ( 2014 ) . 3 . Lee , S . F . , Vérolet , Q . & Fürstenberg , A . Angew . Chem . Int . Edn . Engl . 52 , 8948 – 8951 ( 2013 ) . 4 . Olivier , N . , Keller , D . , Gönczy , P . & Manley , S . PLoS ONE 8 , e69004 ( 2013 ) . 5 . Vogelsang , J . , Cordes , T . , Forthmann , C . , Steinhauer , C . & Tinnefeld , P . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 8107 – 8112 ( 2009 ) . neighbor distances in adjacent frames does not yield the Gaussian distribution of the experimental localization precision itself but characterizes the positional variability of this distribution by the pairwise displace - ment between its repeat localizations . The non - Gaussian distribution of these relative distances can be assumed to have a true dis - tance of 0 and is therefore an ideal experi - mental measure of the average localization precision 20 , 21 ( Fig . 1b ) . Quantitative localization microscopy The primary data of localization micros - copy are a list of single - molecule localiza - tions . Beyond the visualization of cellular structures with better spatial resolution , a question worth thinking about is : what other information can we extract from localization microscopy ? Here , and as a consequence of its single - molecule ances - tors , one option is the absolute quantifica - tion of protein copy numbers or molecular colocalization analysis . This requires post - processing of primary data , which cur - rently is heavily explored in the research community with a few examples published to date 22 – 25 . So far , and largely owing to the novelty of the methods , none of these approaches has emerged as a standard pro - cedure to extract quantitative information from localization microscopy data , and more clever ideas will likely emerge in the future . Driving this approach further , one could think of molecular quantification of signaling proteins at the single - cell level , aiming at ‘single - molecule systems biology’ . A second option is to employ clever image analysis tools to study symmetric protein distributions . An example is particle averag - ing , i . e . , averaging hundreds or thousands of images of a conserved cellular structure . Particle averaging was used first to visualize the nanoscale organization of nuclear pore protein gp210 and the central pore channel 18 and later to determine the orientation of the Y - shaped complex in a nuclear pore 26 . a brief outlook Becoming an experienced user of localiza - tion microscopy takes considerable train - ing , and a new kind of thinking is needed for both preparing and performing the experiment . The first step is the selection of a suitable fluorescent probe and label - ing strategy , which is not a simple task and critically dictates the outcome of an experi - ment . Experimental factors such as single - molecule sensitivity , low background and a the optics of a microscope and was elabo - rated by Ernst Abbe in 1873 ( ref . 13 ) . In the context of fluorescence microscopy ( and in particular for structures ) , the resolu - tion also depends on the labeling density , which is expressed by the Nyquist - Shannon sampling theorem 14 . Other parameters important for localization microscopy are the localization precision of individual molecules , the fraction of detected fluoro - phores and the fraction of false positives . We exclude from our discussion the impact of dynamics and PSF distortion that can occur in live - cell imaging ( the interplay of temporal and spatial resolution is discussed in ref . 15 ) . The intricateness of algorithmic process - ing can be illustrated by the quantification of the localization precision , which is one of the components contributing to the spatial resolution in localization microscopy . The theoretical upper limit of the localization precision primarily depends on the fitting performance and , therefore , mainly on the number of photons detected per localized spot 16 . This theoretical value is not reached under experimental conditions for a number of reasons , such as linker length and flexibil - ity , emitter orientation and postprocessing ( for example , drift correction and channel registration ) , and thus has little practical value . In practice , users often determine the experimental localization precision in their experiment by measuring multiple local - izations of the same single molecule and calculating the standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution of these localizations . This approach does not work for dense tar - gets , in which well - separated single emitters are not available . It also fails if fluorophores are not localized in multiple frames . In these cases , one may determine the spatial resolu - tion instead . Well - defined cellular structures are an ideal measure for this : for example , resolution can be quantified by separating two lines in the two - dimensionally project - ed walls of microtubule filaments ( rather than their width ) 17 ( Fig . 1a ) or the width of the central channel of a nuclear pore 18 . Alternatively , a very different approach that directly determines the resolution employs Fourier ring correlation , which also takes into account the distribution of fluorophores and their densities 19 . As Small and Stahlheber 12 point out in their Review , a mostly neglected fact is the high probability of having several consecu - tive frames of fluorescence of an individ - ual fluorophore . Analyzing these nearest - n p g © 201 4 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . 238 | VOL . 11 NO . 3 | MARCH 2014 | nature methods commentary doi : 10 . 1007 / s00418 - 014 - 1192 - 3 ( in the press ) . 22 . Lando , D . et al . Open Biol . 2 , 120078 ( 2012 ) . 23 . Endesfelder , U . et al . Biophys . J . 105 , 172 – 181 ( 2013 ) . 24 . Lee , S . H . , Shin , J . Y . , Lee , A . & Bustamante , C . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 17436 – 17441 ( 2012 ) . 25 . Puchner , E . M . , Walter , J . M . , Kasper , R . , Huang , B . & Lim , W . A . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 16015 – 16020 ( 2013 ) . 26 . Szymborska , A . et al . Science 341 , 655 – 658 ( 2013 ) . 27 . Huang , F . et al . Nat . Methods 10 , 653 – 658 ( 2013 ) . 14 . Shannon , C . E . Proc . IRE 37 , 10 – 21 ( 1949 ) . 15 . Shroff , H . , Galbraith , C . G . , Galbraith , J . A . & Betzig , E . Nat . Methods 5 , 417 – 423 ( 2008 ) . 16 . Smith , C . S . , Joseph , N . , Rieger , B . & Lidke , K . A . Nat . Methods 7 , 373 – 375 ( 2010 ) . 17 . Vaughan , J . C . , Jia , S . & Zhuang , X . Nat . Methods 9 , 1181 – 1184 ( 2012 ) . 18 . Löschberger , A . et al . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 570 – 575 ( 2012 ) . 19 . Nieuwenhuizen , R . P . J . et al . Nat . Methods 10 , 557 – 562 ( 2013 ) . 20 . Churchman , L . S . , Flyvbjerg , H . & Spudich , J . A . Biophys . J . 90 , 668 – 671 ( 2006 ) . 21 . Endesfelder , U . , Fricke , F . , Malkusch , S . & Heilemann , M . Histochem . Cell Biol . 6 . Wombacher , R . et al . Nat . Methods 7 , 717 – 719 ( 2010 ) . 7 . Anonymous . Nat . Methods 10 , 1135 ( 2013 ) . 8 . Adam , V . et al . Chem . Biol . 18 , 1241 – 1251 ( 2011 ) . 9 . Bourgeois , D . & Adam , V . IUBMB Life 64 , 482 – 491 ( 2012 ) . 10 . Jungmann , R . et al . Nat . Methods 11 , 313 – 318 ( 2014 ) . 11 . Bates , M . , Huang , B . , Dempsey , G . T . & Zhuang , X . W . Science 317 , 1749 – 1753 ( 2007 ) . 12 . Small , A . & Stahlheber , S . Nat . Methods 11 , 267 – 279 ( 2014 ) . 13 . Abbe , E . Arch . Mikroskop . Anat . 9 , 413 – 418 ( 1873 ) . n p g © 201 4 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d .