What is narrative inter viewing ? Molly Andrews Centre for Narrative Research NOVELLA m . andrews @ uel . ac . uk Is there something intrinsically special about the the way a narrative scholar approaches inter viewing ? • many narrative researchers do not use interviews • many scholars who would not describe themselves as being particularly interested in narratives might agree with what I am going to say to you today . Key assumptions of narrative interviews • Stories are an important means through which we communicate with one another and with ourselves ; one way of eliciting stories is through interviews • The dynamic and messy nature of data ; meaning is contextual and constructed • Importance of temporal framing Assumption 1 : Orienting towards stories You know everything is not an anecdote . You have to discriminate . You choose things that are funny or mildly amusing or interesting . You ' re a miracle ! Your stories have NONE of that . . . . And by the way , you know , when you ' re telling these little stories ? Here ' s a good idea - have a POINT . It makes it SO much more interesting for the listener ! Neal ( Steven Martin ) and Del ( John Candy ) in Planes , Trains and Automobiles ’ • Starting point is that there is something intrinsically useful / interesting about stories • Stories are told in interviews spontaneously and when they are elicited ; sometimes when they are elicited they are not told • Stores DO something ; they have a purpose • Stories are almost always subjectively true • Stories are always in relation to other stories – Micro / macro narratives – Counter - narratives Assumption 2 : Dynamic and messy nature of data • Invariable , meaning changes over time . Data cannot be captured in pure form , even on transcripts , as the same words mean something different across time and place • Subjective truth is important • Meaning is contextual and constructed / negotiated in interviews – Questions , responses , follow - up questions Assumption 3 : The importance of temporal framing • Where does the story begin and end ? • What does this temporal framing bring into focus ? Obscure ? Who is included ? Who is absent ? • When is the story being told in relation to when it happened ? Is the comparison of the temporal perspective explicit ? Implied ? ( e . g . the self I once was , the self I could have been , the self I dream of becoming ? ) Elizabeth and I are sitting in her living room . The age difference between us is roughly fifty years . This excerpt comes from our first interview together . We have been speaking for more than an hour , when Elizabeth describes an event which took place more than three decades ago . Just before this point in the interview , Elizabeth has told me that , as a mother of four , she spent two weeks in a maximum security prison , as a result of her political protest . MA : How about your decision to actually break the law , was that a difficult decision for you , or did you feel very convinced that what you were doing was right ? How did you think about that decision at the time ? EW : Yes , I took a lot of thinking about it . Because I had been on [ a similar protest ] the year before , but I hadn ’ t [ broken the law ] because of family affairs and so on . The next year I was going again , and there was nobody else from [ her town ] , and I thought well , I wouldn ’ t go . I mean , nobody ’ s going this year . I went and sat in the garden and then I felt such a heel . The fact that nobody was going , it was all the more important for me to go , wasn ’ t it ? And if there ’ s only a few of you going , it ’ s all the more important that if you do go , you make a stand . But I mean it was such a silly idea to think that just because nobody else was going , well I wouldn ’ t go . I did talk it over with my husband first , needless to say . Then I wondered if I ought to go . You know how it is – and you ’ re aware , and it ’ s , you know , ‘ am I being just an exhibitionist , and showing off ? ’ … And I think I dreamed – whatever was the dream ? Very often when I ’ d got a problem like that , and I ’ m turning it over in my mind , a dream makes it clear . Oh , I know , I dreamed there was a tray and my hands were underneath holding the tray and I was doing a lot , what with the family and the famine relief and one thing and another . I was doing a lot , and more and more things were piled on this tray , and I said ‘ Oh Lord , don ’ t put on any more . I can ’ t hold it . ’ And then when I looked under the tray , it wasn ’ t my hands that were holding it , it was sort of symbolic hands , large , thick hands that you get on Henry Moore sculptures . And I knew that it wasn’t really me – that if what I was doing was right , one was upheld in another dimension somehow . In here it was right , and it was go ahead . And somehow that made it clear to me , anyway . Somebody else might have interpreted it another way , but from my interpretation , it was that I should go ahead , which I did . And it was trying and difficult , but a very rewarding experience , really . Making sense of Elizabeth’s story • How should we interpret what she is saying ? • Is this story ‘true’ ? Does it matter ? • Story within a story • Temporal aspect – The interview took place 25 years ago – She is describing an event that happened 30 years earlier • Can we here and now understand what she is saying ?