ARTICLE Self - assembly of tessellated tissue sheets by expansion and collision Matthew A . Heinrich 1 , 8 , Ricard Alert 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 8 , Abraham E . Wolf 6 , 8 , Andrej Ko š mrlj 1 , 7 ✉ & Daniel J . Cohen 1 , 6 ✉ Tissues do not exist in isolation — they interact with other tissues within and across organs . While cell - cell interactions have been intensely investigated , less is known about tissue - tissue interactions . Here , we studied collisions between monolayer tissues with different geometries , cell densities , and cell types . First , we determine rules for tissue shape changes during binary collisions and describe complex cell migration at tri - tissue boundaries . Next , we propose that genetically identical tissues displace each other based on pressure gradients , which are directly linked to gradients in cell density . We present a physical model of tissue interactions that allows us to estimate the bulk modulus of the tissues from collision dynamics . Finally , we introduce TissEllate , a design tool for self - assembling complex tes - sellations from arrays of many tissues , and we use cell sheet engineering techniques to transfer these composite tissues like cellular ﬁ lms . Overall , our work provides insight into the mechanics of tissue collisions , harnessing them to engineer tissue composites as designable living materials . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 OPEN 1 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA . 2 Princeton Center for Theoretical Science , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA . 3 Lewis - Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA . 4 Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems , Nöthnitzerst . 38 , 01187 Dresden , Germany . 5 Center for Systems Biology Dresden , Pfotenhauerst . 108 , 01307 Dresden , Germany . 6 Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA . 7 Princeton Institute of Materials , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA . 8 These authors contributed equally : Matthew A . Heinrich , Ricard Alert , Abraham E . Wolf . ✉ email : andrej @ princeton . edu ; danielcohen @ princeton . edu NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2022 ) 13 : 4026 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 89 0 ( ) : , ; A biological tissue is a cellular community or , as Virchow wrote in the 19th century 1 , “ a cell state in which every cell is a citizen ” . This concept is increasingly apropos as interdisciplinary research pushes deep into the coordinated cell behaviors underlying even “ simple ” tissues . Indeed , cell – cell interactions give rise to behaviors such as contact inhibition 2 – 4 , collective cell migration 5 , 6 , and cell - cycle regulation 7 – 10 , which underlie physiological functions such as tissue development and healing 11 , 12 , organ size control 13 , 14 , morphogenetic patterning 15 , and even pathological processes such as tumor invasion 16 , 17 . In places where tissues meet , the resulting tissue is a living composite material whose properties depend on its constituent tissues . In particular , tissue – tissue interfaces underlie both biological processes such as organ separation and compartmentalization 18 , 19 , as well as biomedical applications such as tissue - mimetic materials 20 – 22 and engineered tissue constructs 23 – 25 . Thus , recent research has focused on the for - mation and dynamics of tissue – tissue boundaries . For instance , the interplay between repulsive Eph / ephrin and adhesive cad - herin cell – cell interactions regulate tissue boundary roughness , stability , and cell fate 26 – 30 . Furthermore , colliding monolayers with differences in Ras gene expression were able to displace one another 31 , 32 , while epithelial tissue boundaries were found to induce waves of cell deformation and traction long after the tis - sues had collided 33 . Here , we sought to broadly investigate questions such as : how do tissues of different shapes interact with each other , and what happens when many tissues simultaneously interact ? Our goal was to then develop these fundamental concepts into broad “ design principles ” for assembling composite tissues in a con - trolled way . Speci ﬁ cally , we sought to harness mechanical tissue interactions in the context of both tissue biophysics and cell - sheet engineering , where the latter aims to produce and harvest intact cell monolayers to create scaffold - free , high - density tissues 24 . Such cell sheets are typically produced by allowing cells to come to con ﬂ uence within a stencil or patterned substrate to form a monolayer with a desired geometry 34 , 35 . Alternatively , tissue composites can be produced by harvesting arrays of small , autologous epidermal patches to fuse with time over burn wounds 36 . To facilitate this work , we developed a rapid tissue patterning and arraying approach based on low - cost razor writing of silicone micro - stencils 10 . Using this technique , we created arrays of individual epithelial monolayers and then allowed them to grow out and collide , fuse at the interfaces , and ultimately self - assemble into tessellated patterns . During this process , we performed live imaging as these tissue arrays self - assembled into patterns over 2 – 3 days , which we were able to predict by extending our earlier model of tissue expansion 10 to account for multi - tissue interac - tions . We then characterized the dynamics of the boundary in collisions of tissues with different sizes and cell densities . More - over , we proposed a physical model for understanding the resulting boundary motion and extracting tissue mechanical properties from it . We next introduced a design framework for the systematic assembly of many - tissue composites ( 3 cell types and 30 + tissues ) , and investigated more complex cases such as the singular dynamics of tri - tissue junctions . Finally , we intro - duced heterotypic tissue collisions as an area for future devel - opment , which enabled additional features such as tissue engulfment . Results Collisions between archetypal tissue pairs . Our ﬁ rst experiment aimed at uncovering the basic rules governing tissue collisions , with the goal to understand and then fully predict the shape and motion of the tissue – tissue boundary . As classical “ healing ” assays exclusively focus on collisions between rectangular tissue domains , we ﬁ rst investigated the importance of tissue shape and size in collisions between homotypic tissues ( i . e . , of the same cell type ) . Speci ﬁ cally , we characterized interactions between growing pairs of millimeter - scale epithelial tissues , including equal - size rectangles , circles , small vs . large circles , and circles vs . rectangles ( Fig . 1 and Supplementary Video 1 ) . We used MDCK epithelial cells , a standard model 5 , 7 , and labeled each tissue in a pair with a different color ( Methods ) to clearly distinguish the boundary . Imaging over 2 – 3 days , we observed no mixing ( Supplementary Video 2 ) . Collisions between identical rectangular tissues are well characterized from the traditional wound healing scratch and barrier removal assays 5 , 33 , and our data here con ﬁ rmed the expected symmetric collision and fusion along the midline ( Fig . 1a ) , allowing us to move on to unstudied con ﬁ gurations . We next compared identical circles , where we observed that a straight boundary formed at the midline as before ( Fig . 1b ) , but it was nearly twice as smooth as the boundary between colliding rectangles ( Supplementary Fig . 1 , p value 0 . 014 , see Methods ) . We suspect that this is due to the difference in collision dynamics : while parallel strips of tissue collide all along the collision line at once , circles collide at a single point and gradually extend the boundary line outward ( Supplementary Videos 2 and 3 ) . Finally , we introduced signi ﬁ cant asymmetry by replacing one of these circles with either a much larger circle , or a long , thin rectangle ( Fig . 1c , d ) . In each case , we observed a curving of the boundary away from the larger tissue , which was especially t = 0h a b c d t = 30h t = 60h t = 60h ( average ) 1 mm model experiment n = 7 n = 5 n = 4 n = 4 Fig . 1 The shapes of colliding tissues are stereotyped and predictable . a – d Archetypal collision experiments ( solid ) and simulations ( outline ) for equally sized rectangles ( a ) , equally sized circles ( b ) , size - mismatched circles ( c ) , and circle - rectangle pairs ( d ) . Averages over several tissues at 60 h are shown in the rightmost panels ( n = 4 – 7 ) . See Supplementary Videos 1 and 4 . ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2022 ) 13 : 4026 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications notable in the circle - rectangle collisions . We aligned and averaged the ﬁ nal segmented ﬂ uorescence signals that revealed stereotyped and reproducible collision patterns determined solely as a function of initial tissue shapes ( Fig . 1 , rightmost column ) . Predicting the shape of colliding tissues . The stereotyped nature of these collision patterns implied that a computational design tool could capture and predict the evolution of tissue shapes upon collisions . We previously established that freely growing epithelia expand outward with a normal velocity v n , which , except in high - curvature zones , is uniform around the perimeter of a tissue and independent of the tissue geometry or density 10 . Here , we incorporated this observation into our model to predict the expansion and interaction of multiple tissues by assuming that tissue edges pin in place upon contact ( Supplementary Fig . 2 and Supplementary Note 1 ) . We initialized the model simulations using the initial tissue locations from experiments , and we used v n = 29 . 5 μ m / h as measured in ref . 10 and con ﬁ rmed here ( Methods ) . Without any ﬁ t parameters , these simulations predict the shape evolution of the colliding tissue pairs in our experi - ments ( Fig . 1 and Supplementary Video 4 , blue / yellow / white outlines show model predictions ) . Consistent with our observations , pairs of equally sized rectangles or circles produce a straight boundary , while mismatched shapes produce a curved boundary ( Fig . 1a – d ) . In our model , this is because the initial tissue edges are equidistant to the dividing midline in equal tissues but closer to the midline in large tissues than in smaller tissues . In all cases , we found that the mean error of the predicted boundary was compatible with its measured roughness ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) , showing that our modeling approach is appropriate at these scales . Homotypic tissue boundary dynamics and collision memory . Having established a platform for reproducibly studying the formation of complex boundaries between homotypic tissues , we next aimed to connect key biophysical factors to the behavior of these tissue – tissue boundaries . To this end , we studied collisions of homotypic tissues with relative mismatches in either size or cell density . Using the same con ﬁ guration of two rectangles as in Fig . 1a as a control ( Fig . 2a ) , we prepared tissue pairs with an initial mismatch in tissue width of 1000 vs . 500 μ m ( Fig . 2b ) , and other pairs with an initial mismatch in cell density of ~ 2600 vs . ~ 1800 cells / mm 2 ( Fig . 2c ) . First , we determined how asymmetry in either tissue width or density affected boundary motion upon collision . We tracked the mean tissue boundary and found that wider and denser tissues displaced narrower and less dense tissues , respectively . Boundary motion was pronounced , directed , and sustained for 15 – 20 h before stopping ( red and blue in Fig . 2d and Supplementary Video 5 ) . In contrast , control experiments with symmetric tissue collisions showed larger boundary ﬂ uctuations with very little average drift ( black in Fig . 2d and Supplementary Video 5 ) . Prior studies have noted similarly biased boundary dynamics , but only in heterotypic tissue collisions , for example between wild - type and Ras - transformed endothelial cells 31 , 32 . Here , we show that collisions between homotypic tissues — genetically identical — also produce boundary motion due to asymmetry in tissue size or cell density . In contrast to heterotypic collisions 32 ; however , homo - typic tissue boundary motion eventually stops . We related boundary motion to tissue ﬂ ow using particle image velocimetry ( PIV ) to measure the velocity ﬁ eld . We represented these data in kymographs of the velocity component along the collision direction , v x , averaged over the tissue length , across multiple tissue collisions ( Fig . 2e , see Methods ) . With identical ( control ) tissues , cells around the tissue boundary symmetrically reversed their velocity shortly after collision ; convergent motion became divergent . We de ﬁ ned the “ center of expansion ” as the position from which tissue ﬂ ow diverges ( Methods ) . For control tissues , the center of expansion lies very near the tissue centroid shortly after collision ( Fig . 2e , left ) . A key biological question for tissue healing and fusion is at what point , if any , do two fused tissues act as one in terms of their overall dynamics ? We investigate this question in collisions between tissues with size or density mismatch , which exhibited tissue ﬂ ow towards the less dense or narrower tissues . In these cases , the centers of expansion began at the centroid of wider or denser tissues rather than at the overall centroid or collision boundary ( Fig . 2e , center and right ) . The center of expansion then gradually shifted towards the centroid of the fused tissue . After the center of expansion reached the overall centroid , the fused tissue expanded symmetrically without memory of the collision . Thus , by comparing expansion centers to geometric centroids , we demonstrated that a transition exists beyond which two colliding tissues cease functioning independently and shift to behaving as one larger tissue . Cell density gradients drive boundary motion . We hypothesized that collision boundary motion was driven by differences in tissue pressure , which are directly linked to cell density gradients 37 – 41 . To test this , we quanti ﬁ ed local cell density ( Methods ) and represented it in kymographs for each collision assay ( Fig . 2f ) . In all cases , we found collision boundaries moved down local density gradients , consistent with our hypothesis . While tissues in the size - mismatch assay had the same initial density , the larger tissue had a higher density at the time of collision ( Fig . 2f , center and Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . This observation is consistent with our prior work showing that , even when prepared with the same density , larger tissues develop higher cell densities than smaller tissues as they expand due to increased relative tissue spreading in smaller tissues 10 . Accord - ingly , initially larger tissues displaced initially smaller tissues . Respectively , in the density mismatch assay , the tissues that are initially denser remain denser at the time of collision ( Fig . 2f , right ) . Accordingly , the density gradient at the onset of collision correlates with the initial density mismatch ( Supplementary Fig . 4 ) , culminating in the denser tissues displacing the less dense ones . To understand the mechanics of the collision boundary motion , we modeled the expanding tissue as an active compressible medium 42 . Tissue expansion is driven by polarized active cell - substrate forces , which are known to be maximal at the tissue edge and decay over a distance L c ~ 50 μ m as we move into the cell monolayer 43 , 44 . Hence , we ignore active traction forces at the tissue boundary after collision , which is ~ 1 mm away from the outer tissue edges . At the collision boundary , we establish a force balance whereby pressure gradients drive tissue ﬂ ow v as (cid:1) ∇ P ¼ ξ v : ð 1 Þ Here , ξ is the cell - substrate friction coef ﬁ cient , which for simplicity we assume to be density - independent . Including a density - dependent friction would affect the speed but not the direction of boundary motion , which is determined by the tissue pressure pro ﬁ le . We assume that the tissue pressure P increases with cell density ρ as speci ﬁ ed by an unknown equation of state P ( ρ ) , with P 0 ð ρ Þ > 0 . Hence , we obtain v ¼ (cid:1) P 0 ð ρ Þ ξ ∇ ρ ; ð 2 Þ which predicts that the collision boundary moves from high to low cell densities with a speed proportional to the density gradient ( Fig . 2g ) . NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2022 ) 13 : 4026 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications 3 To test this prediction , we measure both the velocity and the density gradient at the boundary for each experiment in our three different assays ( Methods ) . Consistent with our prediction , the results show a negative correlation between the boundary velocity and the cell density gradient ( Fig . 2h ) . To more strongly connect density gradients to boundary displacement , we explored the importance of both the steepness of the density gradient and the absolute cell numbers for a given gradient . In the ﬁ rst case , we swept the initial density mismatch ratio from 1 . 3 , as in Fig . 2a – f , up to 2 . 6 — the largest mismatch we could experimentally achieve . Higher initial density mismatches led to higher density gradients upon collision , and hence to faster motion of the collision boundary ( Supplementary Fig . 5a , b and Supplementary Video 6 ) . Thus , our model applies across all these density mismatches , which are shown together in purple in Fig . 2h . Next , we varied the absolute cell densities of the colliding tissues , ranging from 1200 to 3300 cells / mm 2 , while preserving the mismatch ratio . We found that the absolute densities did not signi ﬁ cantly affect collision boundary displacement ( Supplementary Fig . 5c ) . Alto - gether , we conclude that cell density gradients drive boundary motion , which is consistent with pressure - driven tissue ﬂ ow . These pressure - driven tissue ﬂ ows could be driven either by passive volume - exclusion forces between cells , which result from cell crowding , or by active cell - generated forces , which can also be regulated by cell density . To probe the cellular origin of the forces that drive boundary motion , we conducted density mismatch collision assays between tissues treated with blebbistatin ( Meth - ods ) . This treatment inhibits myosin - II activity , hence decreasing active cellular forces 45 . Here , blebbistatin treatment resulted in smaller boundary displacements ( Supplementary Fig . 6 and Supplementary Video 7 ) , which suggests that myosin - generated active forces provide a major contribution to boundary motion . Myosin , then , is part of the molecular pathway that translates the density mismatch into a pressure gradient that moves the tissue Highdensity Lowdensity Centroid Control n = 5 n = 5 n = 4 Control - 2 - 1 0 1 2 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 Control Control Narrow Wide − 20 − 10 0 10 20 − 1500 − 1000 − 500 0 500 B ounda r y v e l o c i t y v x Cell density gradient ∂ x ρ ( cells / mm3 ) Velocity Cell density and pressure Tissue boundary Control Density mismatch Size mismatch Fit Control Control Control 16 24 32 40 0 8 48 T i m e ( h ) v ₓ ( μ m / h ) ρ ( x 10 3 c e ll s / mm 2 ) 16 24 32 40 0 8 48 T i m e ( h ) High density Low density Highdensity Lowdensity Narrow Wide Narrow Wide vₓ Cell density Size mismatch Tissue boundary movement Density mismatch 1 2 3 4 - 20 - 10 0 10 20 Size mismatchControl Density mismatch - 100 0 100 200 Boundary oﬀset from collision location ( μm ) 0 8 16 24 32 40 T i m e a ft e r c o lli s i on ( h ) a b c d e f g h Tissue boundary x Center of Expansion Average tissue fusion location X position ( mm ) X position ( mm ) X position ( mm ) 500 μm y x - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 3 μ ( m / h ) Fig . 2 Asymmetric tissue collisions produce boundary motion . a – c Initial condition of collisions between control ( a ) , size mismatch ( b ) , and density mismatch ( c ) rectangle tissue pairs . Micrographs are representative of n = 5 ( control ) , n = 5 ( size mismatch ) , and n = 4 ( density mismatch ) independent experiments with similar results . d Tissue boundary displacement in both mismatch and control collisions . e , f Kymographs of tissue velocity v x ( e ) and cell density ( f ) along the collision direction for control ( left , n = 5 ) , size mismatch ( center , n = 5 ) , and density mismatch ( right , n = 4 ) collisions . The superimposed curves indicate initial midline location x 0 ( thin black dashed line ) , the geometric tissue centroid ( thick black dashed line ) , the tissue boundary ( cyan line ) , and the center of expansion ( pink dash - dotted line ) , as de ﬁ ned in the text and Methods . The cyan star marks the average tissue fusion location , which occurs at the initial point of the tissue boundary line . Panels d – f are from the same data set . g Our model proposes that the tissue boundary moves driven by pressure gradients between tissues of different cell densities . h Consistent with our model , the velocity and the cell density gradient at the tissue boundary are negatively correlated ( correlation coef ﬁ cient r = − 0 . 47 ) . Small points represent individual data , big points correspond to the averages for each of our three assays , and the black line is a linear ﬁ t through the averages . This plot includes data from experiments with initial density mismatches higher than in panels d – f . The range of applicability of our model extends to all of these density mismatches ( additional n = 16 , Supplementary Figs . 4 and 5 ) . Error bars are standard deviation . See Supplementary Videos 5 and 6 . ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 4 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2022 ) 13 : 4026 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications boundary . Cell density can also regulate cell – cell adhesion strength . Future work can investigate whether the density mismatch induces differences in cell – cell adhesion between colliding tissues , and whether they contribute to the mechanical forces that drive boundary motion . Overall , these results bridge the tissue - scale mechanical picture of our model with some of the molecular mechanisms underlying tissue collision dynamics . Estimating tissue mechanical properties from collisions . Based on our model , we use our measurements of cell density and velocity to extract information about the tissue ’ s equation of state P ( ρ ) . To this end , we obtain the average boundary velocity and density gradient for each assay , and we ﬁ t a line to them ( Fig . 2h ) . From this ﬁ t , and using ξ ~ 100 Pa ⋅ s / μ m 2 44 , 46 , we obtain P 0 ð ρ Þ (cid:3) 0 . 5 Pa ⋅ mm 2 . This result indicates that , in the conditions of our experiments , for every cell that we add per square millimeter , the tissue pressure goes up about 0 . 5 Pascal . Next , we use these results to estimate the mechanical properties of the cell monolayer . To this end , we assume a speci ﬁ c equation of state P ( ρ ) . Whereas the functional form of P ( ρ ) for tissues remains to be established in experiments , here we use the form proposed in theoretical work by Recho et al . 47 : P ð ρ Þ ¼ K ln ρ ρ e (cid:1) (cid:3) ; ð 3 Þ where K is the bulk modulus of the monolayer around the reference cell density ρ e . Accordingly , K is a density - independent parameter that characterizes the linear mechanical response of the cell monolayer around its reference state . Deriving generalized equations of state with a density - dependent bulk modulus K ( ρ ) remains a challenge for future work . Equation ( 3 ) was justi ﬁ ed theoretically for growing tissues around their homeostatic state , around which the cell proliferation rate varies linearly with cell density 47 . Although we cannot test the accuracy of this equation of state in our experiments , its assumptions are quite generic and could be met in our system ; hence , our choice . From Eq . ( 3 ) , we have P 0 ð ρ Þ ¼ K = ρ . Using the average cell density measured in our experiments during boundary motion , ρ = ( 3 . 4 ± 0 . 2 ) × 10 3 mm − 2 ( SD ) , we estimate K ~ 2 kPa . This order - of - magnitude estimate falls in between two previous measurements of bulk moduli of MDCK cell monolayers . First , in - plane stretching of suspended cell monolayers yielded a stiffness E = 20 ± 2 kPa 48 . Because these monolayers have no substrate , cells do not migrate , and hence suspended monolayers might have different mechanical properties than monolayers on a substrate . Second , in spreading cell monolayers , a linear relation - ship between tension and strain revealed an effective tensile modulus Γ = 2 . 4 ± 0 . 4 mN / m 49 . Using a monolayer height h = 5 μ m 44 , 50 , this value translates into a stiffness E ≈ 0 . 48 kPa . Complementary to these measurements , which probe tissue stiffness under extension , our estimate re ﬂ ects the stiffness of the cell monolayer under the compression that results from a tissue collision . The mechanical response of tissues is strongly non - linear . Hence , the response to compression and to extension need not be the same . In fact , the cellular mechanisms responsible for extensional and compressional tissue elasticity can be quite different , and hence the corresponding moduli could differ widely 51 . Here , our estimate suggests that the compressional modulus of MDCK cell monolayers on a substrate is of a similar order of magnitude to the extensional one . Overall , our collision assays provide a way to probe the bulk mechanical properties of migrating cell monolayers , which are otherwise dif ﬁ cult to measure . Remarkably , analyzing collisions between tissues that differ only in their cell density allowed us to infer mechanical properties without measuring any mechanical forces . Rather , we employed our model to relate tissue ﬂ ows to pressure and density gradients , from which we inferred the relationship between pressure and density . In the future , collision assays might be used to measure the equation of state of cell monolayers , which is a key input for mechanical models of growing and expanding tissues 42 , 52 . Large - scale tissue tessellations for cell sheet engineering . The stereotyped dynamics of tissue collisions that we uncovered suggested simple underlying design rules that would allow self - assembled tissue tessellations to be designed ﬁ rst in silico and then realized in vitro with potential applications in tissue engineering . We tested this idea with a tessellation inspired by the artwork of M . C . Escher - a “ dice lattice ” ( Fig . 3a ) . To design this tessellation , we used the computational model described above ( Fig . 1 ) to simulate many initial tissue array conditions until b a Initial 1 mm 1 mm e f model model d c 72 h 72 h 40 h 1 mm Fig . 3 TissEllate approach to design complex tissue composites . a , b Target tricolor tessellation ( a ) and chosen initial condition ( solid black lines ) with accompanying ﬁ nal pattern simulated using TissEllate ( b ) . c , d In vitro realization of the tissue composite , which self - assembles from the initial pattern ( c ) to the ﬁ nal tessellation by collision ( d ) , representative of three independent experiments with similar results . e , f Initial pattern and ﬁ nal tessellation for a two - dimensional hexagonal lattice ( e , one experiment ) and another complex pattern ( f , representative of six independent experiments with similar results ) . The white outlines indicate the simulated tissue shapes . See Supplementary Videos 8 – 10 . NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2022 ) 13 : 4026 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications 5 converging on the pattern of ellipses shown in Fig . 3b . We engineered this pattern with tissues ( Fig . 3c ) and ﬁ lmed it developing as predicted ( Fig . 3d and Supplementary Video 8 ) . This computer - aided design ( CAD ) process can be generalized to arbitrary tessellations ( Fig . 3e , f and Supplementary Videos 9 and 10 ) , offering a “ TissueCAD ” approach , which we call “ TissEllate ” , to designing and building composite tissues . Composite cell sheets may be particularly useful for tissue engineering where cell sheets are extracted from culture vessels and used as building blocks for larger constructs for therapeutic applications 53 . We demonstrated the compatibility of this process with our tissue composites by culturing a dice lattice on a temperature - responsive substrate ( UpCell dishes ) and then transferring the tissue to a new culture dish ( Fig . 4 , Methods ) . The morphology of sharp tissue – tissue interfaces was preserved during the transfer , demonstrating that such tissue composites can , in principle , be handled like standard cell sheets . Interest - ingly , such multi - tissue composites are similar to current clinical approaches such as suction blister arrays ( e . g . , the “ CelluTome ” ) where 50 + circular epidermal patches from a patient ’ s own healthy skin are transplanted to a burned or injured region and allowed to collectively re - epithelialize and fuse to cover the injury 54 – 56 . Given the encouraging clinical results of such approaches , the ability to customize internal tissue architecture and coverage we present here may prove valuable in future cell sheet applications . Dynamics at tri - tissue collisions . During the self - assembly of tissue tessellations , we observed a special behavior at tri - tissue collision points : We often found long streams of the inner tissue migrating in between the outer tissues , similar to an extrusion process ( Fig . 5a , b ) . These extruding streams of inner tissue were narrow , progressively necking down to the single - cell scale , visually reminiscent of streams of invasive cancer cells ( Fig . 5c – e ) . However , these events , which we call “ escapes ” , involve the co - migration of all three tissues rather than the invasion of one tissue into the others . In other words , the inner tissue does not break through the outer ones , rather , it squeezes between them as they expand ( Fig . 5c – e and Supplementary Videos 11 and 12 ) . Con - sequently , the initial relative positions of the three colliding tis - sues are a strong statistical determinant of escape events ( Supplementary Figs . 7 and 8 ) . We characterized the dynamics of escapes by measuring cell speed ﬁ elds around tri - tissue collisions , which showed that the escaping inner tissue migrated faster than its neighbors ( Fig . 5f – h , see Methods ) . To determine whether this speed increase was a generic consequence of the local negative curvature of tri - tissue collision points , we compared tri - tissue collisions to a single tissue patterned to match the overall shape of the colliding tissues at the time of escape ( Fig . 5i ) . For the single tissue case , we did not observe any speed increase ( Fig . 5h , j ) , which rules out local curvature as the sole cause of escape events . Therefore , escapes are not a direct result of the overall geometry of the multi - tissue composite ; rather , they emerge from the collision interactions between three tissues with their own expansion histories . Furthermore , our simulations of tissue shape evolution based on binary collision rules fail to capture escapes ( Fig . 5b ) . Therefore , escapes are a result of three - body interactions . Moreover , this extrusive behavior represents an unexpected mechanism for producing ﬁ ne structures between tissues . Heterotypic tissue boundary dynamics . Where homotypic tis - sues re ﬂ ect fusion events during morphogenesis and healing , heterotypic tissue boundaries ( i . e . , different tissue types ) arise 1 mm t = 80h Dish # 1 , before transfer Dish # 2 , after transfer c b a 37°C 25°C 37°C Tessellation transfer 2 . Whole monolayer harvesting 3 . Transfer to tissue culture dish ( dish # 2 ) 1 . Seeding and collision on thermal - release dish ( dish # 1 ) ( Fig . 4 Transfer of intact tissue tessellations . a Schematic of the tissue tessellation transfer process . A support membrane ( white ) facilitates cell sheet removal and transfer at room temperature from cell culture - ware with temperature - switchable cell adhesion ( UpCell ) . Created with Biorender . com . b , c Tessellation on UpCell dish ( b ) is transferred to standard tissue - culture dish ( c ) . Four independent tessellation transfers were performed with qualitatively similar results . Single - tissue Escape SingleTissue 0 10 20 30 40 50 Multi - tissue vs single - tissue speeds A v e r age S peed S peed S peed Escaping Region * * * ns Converging Region EscapingRegion ConvergingRegion a i j h b 60 h 0 h 42 h 48 h 36 h Cell speed : single tissue c d e 1 mm 1 mm 250 μm g Cell speed : multi - tissue Multi - tissue f 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 10 20 30 40 50 Tissue 1 Tissue 2 Tri - tissue collisionlocation Tissue 3 Tissue 1 Tissue 2 Tissue 3 Fig . 5 Tri - tissue collisions produce “ escape ” events . a , b Example con ﬁ guration in which the magenta tissue nearly escapes in between the green tissues during expansion . Labels denote three tissues that participate in a tri - tissue collision leading to an escape event . The white line in b indicates the tissue boundary predicted by our simulation tool TissEllate based on binary collisions . Escapes occur in 50 % of cases , n = 14 ( Supplementary Fig . 7 ) . c – e Close - up view of the escape process , from a different experiment with higher magni ﬁ cation . The same labeling scheme used as in panel a . Micrographs show one experiment , as representative example of the 7 of 14 independent experiments that resulted in escapes . f – h Tissue dynamics in a tri - tissue collision ( f ) feature a higher local cell speed in the escaping region than the converging region ( g ) with a p value of 0 . 006 using a two - sided Mann – Whitney U test ( h ) . i , j A single tissue with a similar pre - escape geometry ( i ) does not have this speed increase in the escaping region ( j ) . Plot shows mean with standard deviation across n = 7 ( escape ) and n = 8 ( single tissue ) independent collisions in a single experiment , of which associated micrographs are representative . Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁ le . See Supplementary Videos 11 and 12 . ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 6 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2022 ) 13 : 4026 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications during compartmentalization , and our fourth experiment high - lighted how heterotypic tissue interactions can differ from those between homotypic tissues . Critically , heterotypic tissues can have different cell migration speed , motion patterns , and cell – cell interactions ( e . g . , adhesion and repulsion ) . However , these dif - ferences were not included in our physical model of tissue colli - sions , and hence we did not use it to analyze heterotypic collisions . Generalizing the biophysical and simulation models to heterotypic collisions is an interesting and important direction for future work . Here , we prepared co - cultures of the breast cancer cell lines MCF10A ( benign ) , MCF7 ( malignant , non - invasive ) , and MDA - MB - 231 ( metastatic ) as monolayers of the same size and cell density . We used homotypic MCF10A collisions as a reference , for which we observed non - mixing and boundary dynamics similar to the homotypic MDCK collisions discussed earlier ( Supplementary Video 13 ) . We ﬁ rst collided rectangular monolayers of MCF10A and MDA - MB - 231 cells , which have the largest phenotypic difference among the cell lines we used . While these tissues have similar expansion speeds , they exhibit radically different collective dynamics , re ﬂ ective of different cell – cell adhesion strengths 57 ( Supplementary Video 14 ) . While cells in MCF10A tissues hardly exchange neighbors , the metastatic MDA - MB - 231 cells continu - ally undergo neighbor exchanges and even crawl over each other out of the plane . Upon collision , the MCF10A tissue simulta - neously displaced and crawled underneath the MDA - MB - 231 tissue ( Fig . 6a – d ) . We next investigated collisions between MCF10A and MCF7 monolayers . The MCF7 monolayer expands about 6 times more slowly than the MCF10 monolayer , which allowed us to explore the effects of different edge speeds on tissue collisions , with implications for multi - tissue design . Surprisingly , we found that the slower MCF7 tissues actually displaced the MCF10A tissues ( Fig . 6e and Supplementary Video 15 ) , which may be due to differences in cell – cell and cell - substrate adhesion . Thus , a higher expansion speed does not imply the ability to displace tissues that expand more slowly . In fact , MCF10A cells at the collision boundary reversed their velocity and migrated away from the MCF7 tissue within 8 h after collision , starting at the boundary and progressively moving into the MCF10A monolayer ( Fig . 6f ) . This behavior seems a tissue - scale analog of the cellular behavior known as contact inhibition of locomotion , whereby a cell stops and reverses its direction of motion upon collision with another cell 2 – 4 . Furthermore , in collisions between tissues with different expansion speed , the faster tissue should be able to engulf the slower tissue , similar to the engulfment between tissues with differential adhesion 58 . We con ﬁ rmed this hypothesis in collisions between rectangular strips of MCF10A cells ( fast ) and circles of MCF7 cells ( slow ) , which we reproduced with our tissue shape model by incorporating different speeds into our simula - tion ( Fig . 6g – j and Supplementary Video 16 , see Supplementary Fig . 9 and Supplementary Note 2 ) . Future work is needed to elucidate the biophysical properties of heterotypic tissue inter - faces , but here we highlight how differences in expansion speed enable design options in future multi - tissue studies and applications . Discussion We investigated how tissue – tissue interactions can be harnessed to self - assemble complex composite tissue sheets — tissue tessel - lations . First , we demonstrated that colliding tissues change shape in stereotyped and predictable ways . Then , we proposed a phy - sical model of tissue – tissue collisions where the critical driver of boundary dynamics is the underlying gradient in cell density across the interface that induces pressure - driven tissue ﬂ ow down the gradient . Furthermore , we used this model to estimate the material properties of the colliding tissues without any force measurements . In the future , this approach might be used to reveal information about the equation of the state of living tissues . Regarding the collision dynamics , previous work had shown that heterotypic tissues can displace each other upon collision 31 , 32 . Our ﬁ ndings revealed that even homotypic tissues , which are genetically identical , can displace each other based on purely mechanical differences , suggesting a mechanical tug - of - war where cellular pressure gradients across the boundary can compete with tissue - scale contact - inhibition - of - locomotion . Therefore , our collision assays could be used to study mechanical tissue competition 37 – 41 , 59 , 60 , which might provide biophysical insight into development 61 , 62 , homeostasis 63 , and tumor growth 37 , 59 . In our in vitro experiments , the mechanical com - petition arises from differences in cell density between the col - liding tissues , which are imposed in our experimental setup . In vivo , cell density gradients could potentially arise from a number of biological mechanisms . Uncovering such mechanisms and their consequences for tissue collisions in vivo is an interesting avenue for future research . Furthermore , based on the reproducible and almost algo - rithmic tissue interactions that we found , we developed compu - tational design tools to create complex tissue tessellations . Whereas previous work had exclusively studied binary head - on collisions , the tessellations allowed us to study collisions between myriad , arbitrary tissues . For example , a ﬁ nding unique to tri - tissue interactions is that the inner tissue can speed up and 120 h 72 h i j V ₓ ( μ m / h ) - 20 - 10 01020 0816243240 T i m e ( h ) 0816243240 T i m e ( h ) MCF10A MDA - MB - 231 0816243240 T i m e ( h ) MCF10A MCF7 0 h t = 0h Model 0 h 12 h 36 h a b c d e f g 40 μm / h 7 μm / h 0 1 - 1 - 2 X position ( mm ) 0 1 - 1 - 2 2 X position ( mm ) 24 h h 1 mm 1 mm Fig . 6 Heterotypic tissue collisions . a Average kymograph of segmented ﬂ uorescence for collisions ( n = 12 ) between rectangular MCF10A and MDA - MB - 231 tissues of the same size and cell density . The MCF10A tissue displaces the MDA - MB - 231 tissue . b – d Snapshots of the co - culture at the initial con ﬁ guration ( b ) , the collision time t = 12 h ( c ) , and 24 h after collision , i . e . , t = 36 h ( d ) . The green line indicates the edge of MCF10A tissue . Micrographs are representative of 11 independent tissue collisions with similar results . e , f Average kymographs of segmented ﬂ uorescence ( e ) and velocity v x ( f ) for collisions ( n = 11 ) between rectangular MCF10A and MCF7 monolayers of the same size and cell density . The cyan line indicates the tissue boundary . g – j Snapshots of the initial con ﬁ guration ( g ) , collision onset ( h ) , partial engulfment ( i ) , and full engulfment ( j ) of a circular MCF7 ( magenta ) tissue by a rectangular MCF10A ( green ) tissue . Simulations ( yellow outlines ) con ﬁ rm that a difference in expansion speed is suf ﬁ cient to predict the engulfment process . Engulfment repeated with similar results in two independent experiments . See Supplementary Videos 13 – 16 . NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2022 ) 13 : 4026 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications 7 squeeze between the outer tissues . Such collision dynamics do not follow binary collision rules and are particularly surprising in their ability to produce complex , ﬁ ne patterns almost at the single - cell scale . Our work thus opens the door to characterizing and understanding the dynamics of increasingly complex multi - tissue collisions . Finally , the tessellations are obtained by self - assembly , which allows the tissue boundaries to develop naturally . Thus , our work demonstrates how tissue sheets can be treated as “ designable ” living materials . Speci ﬁ cally , we developed a simulator that , despite lacking both biophysical laws and cellular resolution , predicts tissue patterns accurately at the 100 + μ m scale . This feature makes the simulator useful to design tissue composites in silico before realizing them in vitro . This approach is compatible with advanced biofabrication strategies such as cell sheet engi - neering , which we demonstrated by transferring an “ Escher ” tissue sheet between Petri dishes while preserving tissue integrity and internal boundaries . Tissue tessellation should also be com - patible with bioprinting , which could be used to pattern larger arrays of the initial tissue seeds . While our work focused on the biophysical elements of tissue interactions , our tissue arraying method provides unique advan - tages relative to other forms of tissue patterning . First , razor - writing allows custom silicone stencils to be cut and seeded within minutes , all at the benchtop . Second , stencils fundamentally allow cells to grow out simply by removing the stencil , which is distinct from many advanced tissue patterning processes . For instance , printing of unique DNA - oligomer pairs or patterned extracellular matrix allows for precise , high throughput patterning of micro - tissues with unique composition , but does not support outgrowth 64 – 66 . Similarly , elegant photopatterning methods allow for precise , spatiotemporal control of the microenvironment but require signi ﬁ cant infrastructure and are dif ﬁ cult to scale up to many tissues 67 , 68 . Ultimately , while razor - writing has limitations below 500 μ m , its convenience and low cost make it extremely accessible to the numerous and wide range of research groups studying monolayer biophysics and cell sheet engineering . Finally , we envision future work generalizing these design tools to tissue interactions with heterotypic tissues and 2D vs . 3D geometries , each of which will necessitate characterizing bound - ary rules and implementing them in the computational tools . There is also merit in comparing the similarities and differences between interface formation between growing tissues and immiscible , viscous ﬂ uids where similar tessellation dynamics can arise 69 . Such extensions will allow the design of increasingly complex , multi - functional tissue patches for biophysical and biomedical applications . Methods Cell culture . MDCK - 2 wild - type canine kidney epithelial cells ( ATCC ) were cul - tured in customized media consisting of low - glucose ( 1 g / L ) DMEM with phenol red ( Gibco , USA ) , 1 g / L sodium bicarbonate , 1 % streptomycin / penicillin ( Gibco , USA ) , and 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Atlanta Biological , USA ) . MCF10A human mammary epithelial cells ( ATCC ) were cultured in 1 : 1 DMEM / F - 12 ( Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c , USA ) media that consists of 2 . 50 mM L - Glutamine and 15 mM HEPES buffer . This media was supplemented with 5 % horse serum ( Gibco , New Zealand origin ) , 20 ng / mL human EGF ( Sigma , USA ) , 0 . 5 μ g / mL hydrocortisone ( Fisher Scienti ﬁ c ) , 100 ng / mL cholera toxin ( Sigma ) , 10 μ g / mL insulin ( Sigma , USA ) , and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin ( Gibco , USA ) . MDA - MB - 231 ( ATCC ) and MCF7 ( ATCC ) human mammary cancer cells were both cultured in 1 : 1 DMEM / F - 12 ( Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c , USA ) media supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Atlanta Biological , USA ) and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin ( Gibco , USA ) . All cells were maintained at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 in humidi ﬁ ed air . Tissue patterning and labeling . Experiments were performed on tissue - culture plastic dishes ( BD Falcon , USA ) coated with type - IV collagen ( MilliporeSigma , USA ) . Dishes were coated by incubating 120 μ L of 50 μ g / mL collagen on the dish under a glass coverslip for 30min at 37°C , washing three times with deionized distilled water ( DI ) , and allowing the dish to air - dry . Stencils were cut from 250 - μ m - thick silicone ( Bisco HT - 6240 , Stockwell Elastomers ) using a Silhouette Cameo vinyl cutter ( Silhouette , USA ) and transferred to the collagen - coated surface of the dishes . Cells were separately labeled using CellBrite TM ( Biotium , USA ) red and orange dyes for two - color experiments and CellBrite TM ( Biotium , USA ) red , orange , and green dyes for three - color experiments . For MDCK experiments , suspended cells were concentrated at ~ 2 . 25 × 10 6 cells / mL and separated into identical aliquots for labeling . We added 8 μ L of the appropriate membrane dye color per 1mL of media and brie ﬂ y vortexed each cell suspension . Then , we immediately pipetted into the stencils at ~ 1000 cells / mm 2 , taking care not to disturb the collagen coating with the pipette tip . To allow attachment of cells to the collagen matrix and labeling of the cell membranes , we incubated the cells in the stencils for 30min in a humidi ﬁ ed chamber before washing out the dye and ﬁ lling the dish with media . For experiments using other cell types , suspended cells were concentrated at ~ 3 × 10 6 cells / mL and 10 μ L of membrane dye color per 1 mL of media . We brie ﬂ y vortexed the cell suspension and allowed it to incubate for 20 min at 37 °C . We then centrifuged the suspension and removed the supernatant , replacing it with the appropriate media without dye . We pipetted into the stencils at the same volume as before ( greater number of cells ) , and incubated the cells in the stencils for 2 – 3 h to allow attachment before ﬁ lling the dish with media . For all experiments , we then incubated the cells for an additional 18 h after cell attachment to form con ﬂ uent monolayers in the stencils . Stencils were removed with tweezers , with imaging beginning ~ 30min thereafter . Media without phenol red was used throughout seeding and imaging for three - color experiments to reduce background signal during ﬂ uorescence imaging . For experiments involving blebbistatin ( BioGems , USA ) , 25 μ m was mixed into fresh media and added to the dish 2h after the stencils were removed . To ensure no phototoxicity , no excitation wavelengths below 500 nm were used during live imaging 70 . This was con ﬁ rmed in our assays by ensuring migration speeds of blebbistatin - treated tissues matched that of control tissues . Live - cell time - lapse imaging . We performed imaging on an automated , inverted Nikon Ti2 with a Nikon Qi2 CMOS camera and NIS Elements software ( version AR 5 . 20 . 01 64 - bit ) . We equipped the microscope with environmental control for imaging at 37°C and humidi ﬁ ed 5 % CO 2 . Final images were composited in NIS Elements from montages of each pair or tessellation . For experiments from Fig . 5c – j , we used a 10× phase - contrast objective to capture phase - contrast and ﬂ uorescence images every 10 min . RFP / Cy5 images were captured at 10 % lamp power ( Sola SE , Lumencor , USA ) and 150 ms exposure time . No phototoxicity was observed under these conditions for up to 24h . For all other experiments , we used a 4× phase - contrast objective to capture phase - contrast images every 20 min . For two - color time - lapse images , RFP / Cy5 images were also captured every 20min at 15 % lamp power ( Sola SE , Lumencor , USA ) and 500 ms exposure time . For three - color time - lapse images , RFP / Cy5 images were captured every 60 min at 15 % lamp power ( Sola SE , Lumencor , USA ) and 300ms exposure time , while GFP images were captured every 120 min at 15 % lamp power ( Sola SE , Lumencor , USA ) and 300ms exposure time . No phototoxicity was observed under these conditions for up to 72 h . Final images were composited in NIS Elements from montages of each pair or tessellation . Tissue dye segmentation . The tissue dye becomes diluted as cells divide and spread , so the dye at tissue edges ( where cells are more spread and divide more frequently ) becomes much more dim than the center of tissues . Because we saw no mixing in our collisions , we segmented the ﬂ uorescence channels using a custom MATLAB ( Mathworks , version 2018b ) script and overlaid them with the phase - contrast images for clear visualization . To segment ﬂ uorescence images , we nor - malized the ﬂ uorescence channel histograms to each other and compared relative brightness for each pixel between channels . We then masked with the binary masks obtained from the phase - contrast channel . Setting v n for model . We set the normal velocity for the model ( all shapes and tessellations ) according to the outward velocity of the outer edges of the control rectangle collisions . The outward velocity was found to be 29 . 4 ±2 . 3 μ m / h ( stan - dard deviation ) , so we used the previously reported speed for expanding circles of 29 . 5 μ m / h 10 . Velocity measurements . We calculated tissue velocity vector ﬁ elds from phase - contrast image sequences , rotating each image so that the initial tissue locations in image pairs were horizontal . We used the free MATLAB package PIVLab version 2 . 56 with the FFT window deformation algorithm , employing a ﬁ rst pass window size of 96 ×96 pixels and second pass of 48 × 48 pixels , with 50 % pixel overlaps . This resulted in a ﬁ nal window size of 88× 88 μ m . Data were smoothed in time with a moving average of three timepoints centered at each timepoint . Average kymographs . We ﬁ rst constructed kymographs of each rectangular collision pair , averaging over the vertical direction of each timepoint and ignoring the top and bottom 1 mm . We then averaged the individual tissue kymographs , aligning by the initial tissue con ﬁ guration , and determined the edge extent from the median extent of the individual kymographs . ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 8 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2022 ) 13 : 4026 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications Center of expansion . We determined the center of expansion by thresholding as ∣ v x ∣ < 3 μ m / h for individual kymographs of v x . We ﬁ ltered for the largest contiguous region and took the midline of this region as the center of expansion . Cell density measurements . We ﬁ rst reproduced nuclei positions from 4× phase - contrast images using our in - house Fluorescence Reconstruction Microscopy tool 71 . The output of this neural network was then segmented in ImageJ to determine nuclei footprints and centroids . Local density was calculated for each PIV window by counting the number of nucleus centroids in that window . Boundary velocity and cell density gradient determination . Boundary velocity was found from the position change of the midline in Fig . 2d . Cell density gradient ∂ x ρ was found as ρ R (cid:1) ρ L x R (cid:1) x L , where ρ L and ρ R are the total density within 300 - μ m - wide regions immediately to the left and right of the tissue boundary , respectively , and x R − x L = 300 μ m . We plotted ∂ x ρ for timepoints between 20 and 36 h , which is after collisions and before the boundary stops moving . Statistical analysis . For all signi ﬁ cance testing and corresponding p values reported in this study , we used GraphPad Prism 9 . 1 . 0 ( GraphPad Software ) to perform non - parametric , unpaired two - sided Mann – Whitney U tests . All mea - surements were taken from distinct samples , where averages and standard devia - tions were calculated across the series of replicates . In every assay , sample sizes include at least four replicates , across at least three independently performed experiments . Cell sheet engineering tissue patterning and transfer . We ﬁ rst patterned tissues on a 3 . 5 - cm NUNC TM UpCell TM dish with a supportive membrane ( Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c , USA ) . We followed the same collagen coating and stencil appli - cation process as before , but passivated the underside of our stencils to avoid damaging the UpCell TM surface . To passivate the stencils , we incubated them for 30min at 37°C in Pluronic TM F - 127 solution ( Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c , USA ) diluted in PBS to 2 % . We washed the stencils three times in DI and gently dried them with compressed air before transferring them to the dish . After the tissues reached con ﬂ uence within the stencils , we removed the stencils and allowed the tessellation to collide and heal for ~ 72h . To release the tessellation monolayer from the dish , we changed to cold media and moved the dish to an incubator set to 25 °C for 1 . 5h . We then pre - soaked the supportive membrane in the media to avoid membrane folding , and ﬂ oated the membranes on the media above the tessellations . We then carefully aspirated the media from beside the membranes to ensure tight contact between the membrane and monolayer with no bubbles . We moved the UpCell TM dish with membrane to a 4°C refrigerator to ensure total release , and prepared a standard 3 . 5mm tissue culture dish ( BD Falcon , USA ) coated with collagen IV as before and ﬁ lled with warm media . After 7min at 4°C , we carefully removed the membrane and tessellation monolayer from the UpCell TM dish and ﬂ oated it in the tissue culture dish with the tessellation side down . We aspirated the media from beside the membrane to initiate bubble - free contact with the dish surface and covered the membrane with 350 μ L of warm media . We incubated the membranes at 37°C overnight before ﬂ oating the membrane off the surface by ﬁ lling the dish with media and removing it with tweezers . Reporting summary . Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article . Data availability The complete raw data generated during the current study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request due to the size of the datasets ( terabytes ) . Representative data and analysis code can be found at https : / / github . com / CohenLabPrinceton / TissEllation . Source data are provided with this paper . Code availability Key code used in this study is available on our laboratory repository [ https : / / github . com / CohenLabPrinceton / TissEllation . git ] . Received : 26 May 2021 ; Accepted : 17 June 2022 ; References 1 . Virchow , R . L . K . Cellular - pathologie . Arch . Pathol . Anat . Physiol . Klin . Med . III , 3 – 39 ( 1855 ) . 2 . Abercrombie , M . & Heaysman , J . E . M . Observations on the social behaviour of cells in tissue culture . II . “ Monolayering " of ﬁ broblasts . Exp . Cell Res . 6 , 293 – 306 ( 1954 ) . 3 . Carmona - Fontaine , C . et al . Contact inhibition of locomotion in vivo controls neural crest directional migration . Nature 456 , 957 – 961 ( 2008 ) . 4 . Stramer , B . & Mayor , R . Mechanisms and in vivo functions of contact inhibition of locomotion . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 43 – 55 ( 2017 ) . 5 . Poujade , M . et al . Collective migration of an epithelial monolayer in response to a model wound . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA . 104 , 15988 – 15993 ( 2007 ) . 6 . Vishwakarma , M . et al . Mechanical interactions among followers determine the emergence of leaders in migrating epithelial cell collectives . Nat . Commun . 9 , 3469 ( 2018 ) . 7 . Pulia ﬁ to , A . et al . Collective and single cell behavior in epithelial contact inhibition . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA . 109 , 739 – 744 ( 2012 ) . 8 . Streichan , S . J . , Hoerner , C . R . , Schneidt , T . , Holzer , D . & Hufnagel , L . Spatial constraints control cell proliferation in tissues . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA . 111 , 5586 – 5591 ( 2014 ) . 9 . Uroz , M . et al . Regulation of cell cycle progression by cell - cell and cell - matrix forces . Nat . Cell Biol . 20 , 646 – 654 ( 2018 ) . 10 . Heinrich , M . A . et al . Size - dependent patterns of cell proliferation and migration in freely - expanding epithelia . eLife 9 , e58945 ( 2020 ) . 11 . Ewald , A . J . , Brenot , A . , Duong , M . , Chan , B . S . & Werb , Z . Collective epithelial migration and cell rearrangements drive mammary branching morphogenesis . Dev . Cell 14 , 570 – 581 ( 2008 ) . 12 . Park , J . A . , Atia , L . , Mitchel , J . A . , Fredberg , J . J . & Butler , J . P . Collective migration and cell jamming in asthma , cancer and development . J . Cell Sci . 129 , 3375 – 3383 ( 2016 ) . 13 . Yu , F . X . , Zhao , B . & Guan , K . L . Hippo pathway in organ size control , tissue homeostasis , and cancer . Cell 163 , 811 – 828 ( 2015 ) . 14 . Conlon , I . & Raff , M . Size control in animal development . Cell 96 , 235 – 244 ( 1999 ) . 15 . Heisenberg , C . P . & Bellaïche , Y . Forces in tissue morphogenesis and patterning . Cell 153 , 948 ( 2013 ) . 16 . Friedl , P . , Locker , J . , Sahai , E . & Segall , J . E . Classifying collective cancer cell invasion . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 777 – 783 ( 2012 ) . 17 . Lambert , A . W . , Pattabiraman , D . R . & Weinberg , R . A . Emerging biological principles of metastasis . Cell 168 , 670 – 691 ( 2017 ) . 18 . Monier , B . , Pélissier - Monier , A . , Brand , A . H . & Sanson , B . An actomyosin - based barrier inhibits cell mixing at compartmental boundaries in Drosophila embryos . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 60 – 65 ( 2010 ) . 19 . Batlle , E . & Wilkinson , D . G . Molecular mechanisms of cell segregation and boundary formation in development and tumorigenesis . CSH Perspect . Biol . 4 , 1 – 14 ( 2012 ) . 20 . Anselme , K . , Ploux , L . & Ponche , A . Cell / material interfaces : in ﬂ uence of surface chemistry and surface topography on cell adhesion . J . Adhes . Sci . Technol . 24 , 831 – 852 ( 2010 ) . 21 . Cosgrove , B . D . et al . N - cadherin adhesive interactions modulate matrix mechanosensing and fate commitment of mesenchymal stem cells . Nat . Mater . 15 , 1297 – 1306 ( 2016 ) . 22 . Cohen , D . J . , Gloerich , M . & Nelson , W . J . Epithelial self - healing is recapitulated by a 3D biomimetic E - cadherin junction . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA . 113 , 14698 – 14703 ( 2016 ) . 23 . Vig , K . et al . Advances in skin regeneration using tissue engineering . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 18 , 789 ( 2017 ) . 24 . Takahashi , H . & Okano , T . Thermally - triggered fabrication of cell sheets for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 138 , 276 – 292 ( 2019 ) . 25 . Daly , A . C . , Davidson , M . D . & Burdick , J . A . 3D bioprinting of high cell - density heterogeneous tissue models through spheroid fusion within self - healing hydrogels . Nat . Commun . 12 , 1 – 13 ( 2021 ) . 26 . Gale , N . W . et al . Eph receptors and ligands comprise two major speci ﬁ city subclasses and are reciprocally compartmentalized during embryogenesis known family of RTKs with at least 13 distinct members family display dynamic and spatially restricted expres . Neuron 17 , 9 – 19 ( 1996 ) . 27 . Astin , J . W . et al . Competition amongst Eph receptors regulates contact inhibition of locomotion and invasiveness in prostate cancer cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 1194 – 1204 ( 2010 ) . 28 . Porazinski , S . et al . EphA2 drives the segregation of Ras - transformed epithelial cells from normal neighbors . Curr . Biol . 26 , 3220 – 3229 ( 2016 ) . 29 . Taylor , H . B . et al . Cell segregation and border sharpening by Eph receptor - ephrin - mediated heterotypic repulsion . J . R . Soc . Interface 14 , 20170338 ( 2017 ) . 30 . Cayuso , J . , Xu , Q . , Addison , M . & Wilkinson , D . G . Actomyosin regulation by eph receptor signaling couples boundary cell formation to border sharpness . eLife 8 , e49696 ( 2019 ) . 31 . Hogan , C . et al . Characterization of the interface between normal and transformed epithelial cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 460 – 467 ( 2009 ) . NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2022 ) 13 : 4026 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications 9 32 . Moitrier , S . et al . Collective stresses drive competition between monolayers of normal and Ras - transformed cells . Soft Matter 15 , 537 – 545 ( 2019 ) . 33 . Rodriguez - Franco , P . et al . Long - lived force patterns and deformation waves at repulsive epithelial boundaries . Nat . Mater . 16 , 1029 – 1036 ( 2017 ) . 34 . Wright , D . , Rajalingam , B . , Selvarasah , S . , Dokmeci , M . R . & Khademhosseini , A . Generation of static and dynamic patterned co - cultures using microfabricated parylene - C stencils . Lab Chip 7 , 1272 – 1279 ( 2007 ) . 35 . Elloumi Hannachi , I . et al . Fabrication of transferable micropatterned - co - cultured cell sheets with microcontact printing . Biomaterials 30 , 5427 – 5432 ( 2009 ) . 36 . Joethy , J . et al . Initial impression of the cellutome ™ epidermal harvesting system in burns management . Burns Open 3 , 68 – 74 ( 2019 ) . 37 . Basan , M . , Risler , T . , Joanny , J . - F . , Sastre - Garau , X . & Prost , J . Homeostatic competition drives tumor growth and metastasis nucleation . HFSP J . 3 , 265 – 272 ( 2009 ) . 38 . Ranft , J . , Aliee , M . , Prost , J . , Jülicher , F . & Joanny , J . F . Mechanically driven interface propagation in biological tissues . N . J . Phys . 16 , 035002 ( 2014 ) . 39 . Podewitz , N . , Jülicher , F . , Gompper , G . & Elgeti , J . Interface dynamics of competing tissues . N . J . Phys . 18 , 083020 ( 2016 ) . 40 . Williamson , J . J . & Salbreux , G . Stability and roughness of interfaces in mechanically regulated tissues . Phys . Rev . Lett . 121 , 238102 ( 2018 ) . 41 . Ganai , N . , Büscher , T . , Gompper , G . & Elgeti , J . Mechanics of tissue competition : Interfaces stabilize coexistence . N . J . Phys . 21 , 063017 ( 2019 ) . 42 . Alert , R . & Trepat , X . Physical models of collective cell migration . Annu . Rev . Condens . Matter Phys . 11 , 77 – 101 ( 2020 ) . 43 . Blanch - Mercader , C . et al . Effective viscosity and dynamics of spreading epithelia : a solvable model . Soft Matter 13 , 1235 – 1243 ( 2017 ) . 44 . Pérez - González , C . et al . Active wetting of epithelial tissues . Nat . Phys . 15 , 79 – 88 ( 2019 ) . 45 . Straight , A . F . et al . Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin II inhibitor . Science 299 , 1743 – 1747 ( 2003 ) . 46 . Cochet - Escartin , O . , Ranft , J . , Silberzan , P . & Marcq , P . Border forces and friction control epithelial closure dynamics . Biophys . J . 106 , 65 – 73 ( 2014 ) . 47 . Recho , P . , Ranft , J . & Marcq , P . One - dimensional collective migration of a proliferating cell monolayer . Soft Matter 12 , 2381 – 2391 ( 2016 ) . 48 . Harris , A . R . et al . Characterizing the mechanics of cultured cell monolayers . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA . 109 , 16449 – 16454 ( 2012 ) . 49 . Vincent , R . et al . Active tensile modulus of an epithelial monolayer . Phys . Rev . Lett . 115 , 248103 ( 2015 ) . 50 . Serra - Picamal , X . et al . Mechanical waves during tissue expansion . Nat . Phys . 8 , 628 – 634 ( 2012 ) . 51 . Guimarães , C . F . , Gasperini , L . , Marques , A . P . & Reis , R . L . The stiffness of living tissues and its implications for tissue engineering . Nat . Rev . Mater . 5 , 351 – 370 ( 2020 ) . 52 . Ranft , J . et al . Fluidization of tissues by cell division and apoptosis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA . 107 , 20863 – 20868 ( 2010 ) . 53 . Kobayashi , J . , Kikuchi , A . , Aoyagi , T . & Okano , T . Cell sheet tissue engineering : cell sheet preparation , harvesting / manipulation , and transplantation . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . Part A 107 , 955 – 967 ( 2019 ) . 54 . Singh , M . et al . Challenging the conventional therapy : emerging skin graft techniques for wound healing . Plast . Reconstr . Surg . 136 , 524e – 530e ( 2015 ) . 55 . Serena , T . , Francius , A . , Taylor , C . & MacDonald , J . Use of a novel epidermal harvesting system in resource - poor countries . Adv . Ski . Wound Care 28 , 107 – 112 ( 2015 ) . 56 . Osborne , S . N . , Schmidt , M . A . , Derrick , K . & Harper , J . R . Epidermal micrografts produced via an automated and minimally invasive tool form at the dermal / epidermal junction and contain proliferative cells that secrete wound healing growth factors . Adv . Ski . Wound Care 28 , 397 – 405 ( 2015 ) . 57 . Yuki , K . , Yoshida , Y . , Inagaki , R . , Hiai , H . & Noda , M . E - cadherin - downregulation and RECK - upregulation are coupled in the non - malignant epithelial cell line MCF10A but not in multiple carcinoma - derived cell lines . Sci . Rep . 4 , 4568 ( 2014 ) . 58 . Foty , R . A . & Steinberg , M . S . The differential adhesion hypothesis : a direct evaluation . Dev . Biol . 278 , 255 – 263 ( 2005 ) . 59 . Murphy , R . J . , Buenzli , P . R . , Baker , R . E . & Simpson , M . J . Mechanical cell competition in heterogeneous epithelial tissues . Bull . Math . Biol . 82 , 130 ( 2020 ) . 60 . Gradeci , D . et al . Cell - scale biophysical determinants of cell competition in epithelia . eLife 10 , e61011 ( 2021 ) . 61 . Shraiman , B . I . Mechanical feedback as a possible regulator of tissue growth . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA . 102 , 3318 – 3323 ( 2005 ) . 62 . Irvine , K . D . & Shraiman , B . I . Mechanical control of growth : ideas , facts and challenges . Development 144 , 4238 – 4248 ( 2017 ) . 63 . Eisenhoffer , G . T . & Rosenblatt , J . Bringing balance by force : live cell extrusion controls epithelial cell numbers . Trends Cell Biol . 23 , 185 – 192 ( 2013 ) . 64 . Scheideler , O . J . et al . Recapitulating complex biological signaling environments using a multiplexed , dna - patterning approach . Sci . Adv . 6 , 5696 – 5714 ( 2020 ) . 65 . Bernard , A . , Renault , J . P . , Michel , B . , Bosshard , H . R . & Delamarche , E . Microcontact printing of proteins . Adv . Mater . 12 , 1067 – 1070 ( 2000 ) . 66 . Doxzen , K . et al . Guidance of collective cell migration by substrate geometry . Integr . Biol . 5 , 1026 – 1035 ( 2013 ) . 67 . Zisis , T . et al . Sequential and switchable patterning for studying cellular processes under spatiotemporal control . ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 13 , 35545 – 35560 ( 2021 ) . 68 . Strale , P . O . et al . Multiprotein printing by light - induced molecular adsorption . Adv . Mater . 28 , 2024 – 2029 ( 2016 ) . 69 . Badoui , M . , Kresge , G . , Ushay , C . , Marthelot , J . & Brun , P . - T . Formation of pixelated elastic ﬁ lms via capillary suction of curable elastomers in templated hele - shaw cells . Adv . Mater . e2109682 ( 2022 ) . 70 . Kolega , J . Phototoxicity and photoinactivation of blebbistatin in uv and visible light . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 320 , 1020 – 1025 ( 2004 ) . 71 . LaChance , J . & Cohen , D . J . Practical ﬂ uorescence reconstruction microscopy for large samples and low - magni ﬁ cation imaging . PLoS Comput . Biol . 16 , 1 – 24 ( 2020 ) . Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by the National Institutes of Health 1R35 GM133574 - 01 ( to D . J . C . ) . R . A . acknowledges support from the Human Frontier Science Program ( LT000475 / 2018 - C ) . The authors thank Jenna Heinrich for artwork . Author contributions M . A . H . , A . E . W . , and D . J . C . designed and performed experiments . M . A . H . , R . A . , A . E . W . , and D . J . C . analyzed data . M . A . H . , R . A . , and A . K . developed the models . D . J . C . and A . K . funded and supervised the work . M . A . H . , R . A . , A . E . W . , D . J . C . , and A . K . wrote the paper . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Additional information Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Andrej Ko š mrlj or Daniel J . Cohen . Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the other , anonymous , reviewer ( s ) for their contribution to the peer review of this work . Peer reviewer reports are available . Reprints and permission information is available at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints Publisher ’ s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁ liations . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2022 ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 10 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2022 ) 13 : 4026 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 31459 - 1 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION Self - assembly of tessellated tissue sheets by growth and collision Matthew A . Heinrich 1 , * , Ricard Alert 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , * , Abraham E . Wolf 6 , * , Andrej Košmrlj 1 , 7 , ‡ , Daniel J . Cohen 1 , 6 , ‡ ( 1 ) Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA ( 2 ) Princeton Center for Theoretical Science , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA ( 3 ) Lewis - Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA ( 4 ) Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems , Nöthnitzerst . 38 , 01187 Dresden , Germany ( 5 ) Center for Systems Biology Dresden , Pfotenhauerst . 108 , 01307 Dresden , Germany ( 6 ) Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA ( 7 ) Princeton Institute of Materials , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA * These three authors contributed equally to this work . ‡ Corresponding authors : Andrej Košmrlj ( andrej @ princeton . edu ) and Daniel J . Cohen ( danielcohen @ princeton . edu ) Supplementary Figure 1 | Roughness and model accuracy . a , The collision boundary that forms between circles is smoother than the boundary between parallel rectangles . Roughness quantified as the mean absolute error of 2 mm line fit to the steady state interface . P value = 0 . 0121 using a two - sided Mann - Whitney U test , plot center is the mean , error bars are standard deviation for n = 4 ( circles ) and n = 7 ( rectangles ) independent tissues across three experiments . b , Error of model is compatible with the boundary roughness . Error was found as the mean distance from the actual boundary to the boundary in model . Black and gray dotted lines are the roughness of the boundary line between colliding rectangles and circles , respectively . Plot center is the mean , and error bars are standard deviation for n = 5 ( equal rectangles ) , n = 4 ( equal circles ) , n = 7 ( big and small circles ) , and n = 5 ( rectangle and circle ) independent tissues across three experiments . Source data are provided as a Source Data file . Supplementary Figure 2 | Phenomenological model of collisions . a , Binary image of Initial tissue footprints ( 𝐼 ! ! ) . b , Heatmap of time that would elapse for initial tissues to fill pixels within image ( 𝑇 ) . c , Binary image of predicted tissue footprints after 24 h of growth , without non - mixing collision ( 𝐼 ! ! " # $ % & ’ ) . d , Steady state forms of tissue footprints ( 𝐼 ( ( ) , with non - mixing collisions that pin in place on contact . 𝐼 ( ( for tissue 1 is found as 𝑇 ) * + + , - / < 𝑇 ) * + + , - # . e , Binary image of predicted tissue footprints after 24 h of growth , with non - mixing collision . Supplementary Figure 3 | Density evolution of size mismatch tissues . Although 1000 𝜇 m ( ‘wide’ , blue squares ) and 500 𝜇 m ( ‘narrow’ , red triangles ) width tissues start with the same cell density , narrower tissues expand with a lower cell density because the expansion space accounts for a larger relative tissue growth , consistent with previous work 1 . Densities here are calculated across the entire tissue , with shading indicating standard deviation among tissues in all five size - mismatch collisions . Source data are provided as a Source Data file . Supplementary Figure 4 | Density gradient at the collision front . For tissues initially seeded at different densities , with the left tissue at a higher density than the right , the density gradient at the onset of collision is dependent on the initial density mismatch between the two tissues . The initially - denser tissues , on the left , remain denser during expansion through the onset of the collision , and hence , tissues seeded with a higher density displace those of lesser density . Source data are provided as a Source Data file . 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 2 . 0 2 . 2 2 . 4 2 . 6 2 . 8 - 500 - 400 - 300 - 200 - 100 0 100 200 Initial density mismatch helps determine the mean density gradient at the onset of collision Initial density mismatch ratio M ean den s i t y g r ad i en t a t t he on s e t o f c o lli s i on ( c e ll s / mm 3 ) Supplementary Figure 5 | Homotypic collisions at a range of initial density mismatches . a , Tissue boundary displacement over time is distinct for different initial density mismatch ratios , here shown by color for three categories of initial mismatches . b , Final collision boundary displacement depends on initial density mismatch ratio , ranging from 1 . 3 to 2 . 6 across all of our assay replicates , resulting in boundary displacements of 110 to 290 𝜇 m . c , Final boundary displacement shows no clear dependency on absolute cell densities of the colliding tissues within preserved initial density mismatch ratios . Blue squares represent an initial density ratio of 1 . 4 - 1 . 7 ; black circles represent an initial density ratio of 2 . 0 - 2 . 6 . Source data are provided as a Source Data file . Supplementary Figure 6 | Blebbistatin treatment reduces collision boundary movement . Density mismatch collisions between tissues treated with blebbistatin ( purple dashed lines ; see Methods ) resulted in smaller boundary displacements , as compared to collisions of tissues with similar initial density mismatches ( solid blue lines ) . Supplementary Figure 7 | Escape frequency . a , Distance of escaping tissue from the outer edge of converging tissues after 53 h of tissue growth , for converging tissues with interior angle of 110° . In these examples , the phenomenological model would indicate expectation of ~ 1 mm from the tissue edge at this time . Here , we denote escapes as those tissues that are within 1 correlation length of the tissue edge ( ~ 200 µ m ) , but we note that all tissues reach closer to the edge than the simulation , indicating the escape effect is present in all tissues . b , c Representative escapes , with partial escape ( b ) and true escape ( c ) , representative of n = 8 ( escape ) and n = 7 ( no escape ) tissues . Source data are provided as a Source Data file . 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 100 150 200 250 300 Boundary movement depends on density mismatch Initial density mismatch F i na l bounda r y d i s p l a c e m en t ( μ m ) 2000 2500 3000 3500 0 100 200 300 No clear dependency on absolute densities Initial cell density of denser tissue ( cells / mm² ) F i na l bounda r y d i s p l a c e m en t ( μ m ) Large density mismatch Moderate densitymismatch 0 10 20 30 0 100 200 300 Collision boundary location ( μm ) 2 . 0 - 2 . 25 mismatch 2 . 4 - 2 . 6 mismatch 1 . 5 - 1 . 7 mismatch T i m e a ft e r c o lli s i on ( h ) a b c 0 10 20 30 - 50 0 50 100 150 Collision boundary location ( μm ) 25μM Blebbistatin Control mismatch collision T i m e a ft e r c o lli s i on ( h ) Supplementary Figure 8 | Initial tissue configuration determines escape frequency . a , Representative escapes for converging tissues at an initial interior angle of 90° vs . 120° . TissEllate predicts the green tissue will migrate farther laterally between the magenta tissues in the 120° configuration than in the 90° configuration ( white outlines ) . Even so , the green tissue exceeds these predictions by more in the 120° case . Distance bar represents the distance past simulation for these examples . b , Distance that escaping tissue overshoots the model at 60 h for a variety of initial tissue angles . Plot shows mean with standard deviation for n = 6 ( 60° ) , n = 8 ( 90° ) , n = 12 ( 110° ) , and n = 12 ( 120° ) independent tissues in one experiment . P = 0 . 0009 ( 60° vs . 90° ) , P = 0 . 0077 ( 120° vs . 90° ) , and P = 0 . 0052 ( 110° vs . 90° ) , calculated using a two - sided Mann - Whitney U test . Source data are provided as a Source Data file . Supplementary Figure 9 | Model considerations for edge speed differences and envelopment . a , Time course of envelopment for basic model , where faster tissue ( magenta , 40 µ m / h ) unphysically grows “through” the slower tissue ( green , 7 µ m / h ) . b , Resetting initial tissue locations to current tissue locations periodically ( here , every 6 hours ) prevents unphysical envelopment . Images shown once every 12 h . SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES Supplementary Note 1 . Model of expansion and collision of homotypic tissues Based on our previous work 1 , we modeled the expansion of monolayers of arbitrary shape by moving its boundary with constant outward normal velocity 𝑣 ! . Here , we worked with pixelated binary images of initial tissue footprints 𝐼 " ! at time 𝑡 # ( Supplementary Fig . 2a ) , which enabled us to take advantage of standard image processing tools in Matlab . The goal is to find the expected tissue image footprints 𝐼 " ! $ % " at any later time 𝑡 # + Δ𝑡 . For each tissue , we first used the bwdist method to calculate the distance map 𝐷 , which shows the shortest distance between a given pixel and the initial tissue . This distance map is then used to calculate the time map 𝑇 = & ∗ ) " # $ % & * ’ at which a tissue reaches every pixel ( Supplementary Fig . 2b ) , where 𝑙 + , - . ) is the pixel size . In the absence of collisions with other tissues , we can then find the new tissue footprint 𝐼 " ! $ % " ! / simply as all pixels for which 𝐼 " , 0 . < Δ𝑡 . ( Supplementary Fig . 2c ) . For multiple expanding tissues , we assumed that the boundary gets pinned upon collision . After a long time ( steady state ) each tissue thus occupies all the pixels that it manages to reach before any other tissue . The steady state tissue form 𝐼 11 of a given tissue thus contains all pixels for which the value of 𝑇 is the minimum across all tissues ( Supplementary Fig . 2d ) . Note that for the homotypic tissues that expand with equal outward speed 𝑣 ! , the steady state tissue form 𝐼 11 corresponds to the pixels that are the closest to a given tissue . The time evolution of each tissue image 𝐼 " ! $ % " can then be obtained as the intersection between the tissue footprint without collisions 𝐼 " ! $ % " ! / and the steady state tissue form 𝐼 11 , i . e . , 𝐼 " ! $ % " = 𝐼 " ! $ % " ! / ∩ 𝐼 11 ( Supplementary Fig . 2e ) . Supplementary Note 2 . Model extension for heterotypic tissues The model described above has to be slightly adjusted for the heterotypic tissues that expand with different outward velocities . The problem is that the model above predicts that a faster expanding tissue migrates “through” a slower expanding tissue to reach distant points ( Supplementary Fig . 9a ) . To correct for this issue , we repeatedly calculate the distance map 𝐷 with respect to the current tissue forms ( rather than initial forms ) for all tissues at a time interval chosen such that the slower tissue expands by at least 4 pixels and the faster tissue expands by no more than half the width of the slower tissue . A smaller pixel size may be used to address any time interval or resolution issues . The rest of the steps are identical as in the model described above . This slight modification of the model is sufficient to properly capture how faster expanding tissues envelop slower ones ( Supplementary Fig . 9b ) . References 1 . Heinrich , M . A . , Alert , R . , Lachance , J . M . , Zajdel , T . J . , Kosmrlj , A . , & Cohen , D . J . ( 2020 ) . Size - dependent patterns of cell proliferation and migration in freely - expanding epithelia . eLife , 9 , e58945 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / ELIFE . 58945 Descriptions of Additional Supplementary Data Files Supplementary Video 1 | Collisions of archetypal shapes . From left to right : rectangle pairs , circular pairs , circle and larger circle , and circle and rectangle collisions . Fluorescence channels were segmented and overlaid with phase channel ( Methods ) . Movies includes 60 h . Supplementary Video 2 | Rectangle collision nonmixing dynamics . Fluorescence channels and phase overlay ( left ) clearly shows the boundary is sharp with no mixing . This makes segmentation of fluorescence channels appropriate for visualization ( right , see methods for details ) . Boundaries between rectangle initial tissues form by colliding all along the collision line at once . Supplementary Video 3 | Circle collision dynamics . Boundaries between initial circular tissues form from a small collision region that then extends outward . Supplementary Video 4 | Collisions of archetypal shapes with model . Model accurately reproduces collision dynamics , with less accuracy at sharp corners of rectangular tissues . Yellow and blue lines represent the model prediction for green and magenta tissues , respectively . Supplementary Video 5 | Dynamics of collision boundary - MDCK width or density mismatch . On top , a control collision : a rectangular pair matched in both size and cell density features oscillating dynamics with little bias in boundary motion . In the middle , a width mismatch : a rectangular pair mismatched in tissue width but matched in cell density features translation of the boundary away from the wider tissue ( 1000 µm ) toward the narrower tissue ( 500 µm ) . On the bottom , a density mismatch : a rectangular pair mismatched in cell density but matched in tissue size features translation of the boundary away from the high density tissue ( ~ 2600 cells / mm 2 ) toward the low density tissue ( ~ 1800 cells / mm 2 ) . All fluorescent channels were segmented for visualization . Supplementary Video 6 | Dynamics of collision boundary - range of initial density mismatches . Rectangular pair mismatched in cell density but matched in tissue size features translation of the boundary away from the high density tissue toward the low density tissue , here shown for a range of initial density mismatch ratios—1 . 5 ( top ) , 2 . 0 ( middle ) , and 2 . 5 ( bottom ) . In all three collisions , the denser tissue is presented in green on the left side . Fluorescent channels were segmented for visualization . Supplementary Video 7 | Dynamics of collision boundary - translation reduced by blebbistatin treatment . Density mismatch collisions between tissues treated with blebbistatin ( bottom ; see Methods ) results in smaller translation of the boundary , as compared to collisions of tissues with similar initial density mismatches ( top ) . Fluorescent channels were segmented for visualization . Supplementary Video 8 | TissEllate - MDCK Escher . Three color collision dynamics of pattern from Fig . 3 A - D . Supplementary Video 9 | TissEllate - MDCK circle tessellation . Two color collision dynamics of tissues ( filled color ) vs . predicted model steady - state tissue boundaries ( white lines ) for hexagonal lattice tessellation of circular monolayers . Supplementary Video 10 | TissEllate - MDCK rectangle tessellation . Two color collision dynamics of tissues ( filled color ) vs . predicted model steady - state tissue boundaries ( white lines ) for tessellation of rectangular monolayers . Supplementary Video 11 | ‘Escape . ’ One tissue migrating between two converging tissues forms a long , necked down region that we denote an “escape . ” Supplementary Video 12 | Minimal escape . When the converging tissues collide ahead of the escaping tissue , very little necking down can occur . Supplementary Video 13 | Dynamics of heterotypic collision boundary - MCF10A control . MCF10A monolayer pairs feature similar nonmixing dynamics as MDCK monolayers . Supplementary Video 14 | Dynamics of heterotypic collision boundary - MCF10A with MDA - MB - 231 . MCF10A monolayer ( left ) displaces MDA - MB - 231 monolayer ( right ) . Supplementary Video 15 | Dynamics of heterotypic collision boundary - MCF10A with MCF7 . MCF10A monolayer ( left ) is faster than MCF7 monolayer ( right ) , but is displaced backward at the collision . Supplementary Video 16 | Engulfment of MCF7 monolayer by MCF10A monolayer . MCF10A monolayer ( rectangle ) is faster than MCF7 monolayer ( circle ) , and therefore grows around the MCF7 monolayer until total engulfment .