REVIEW ARTICLE Actin as target for modiﬁcation by bacterial protein toxins Klaus Aktories 1 , Alexander E . Lang 1 , Carsten Schwan 1 and Hans G . Mannherz 2 , 3 1 Institut fu¨r Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie , Albert - Ludwigs - Universita¨t Freiburg , Germany 2 Physikalische Biochemie , Max - Planck - Institut fu¨r molekulare Physiologie , Dortmund , Germany 3 Abteilung fu¨r Anatomie und molekulare Embryologie , Ruhr - Universita¨t Bochum , Germany Introduction The actin cytoskeleton is involved in many cellular motile events like intracellular vesicle transport , phago - cytosis and cytokinesis after mitosis and is essential for active cell migration . It plays pivotal roles in the con - trol of epithelial barrier functions and the adherence of cells to the extracellular matrix . It is essential for the recognition and adherence of immune cells and their subsequent phagocytic activity . Furthermore , the actin cytoskeleton is a general regulator in immune cell sig - naling and is involved in the control of cytokine and reactive O 2 ) production . Similarly , cytoplasmic micro - tubules are essential for the establishment of cell polar - ity and directed intracellular vesicle transport over long distances as in neuronal axons . Both the F - actin ﬁlaments and microtubules are highly dynamic struc - tures , whose supramolecular organization is constantly modiﬁed according to cellular needs . Their dynamic behavior is regulated by a large number of binding proteins , which are often the effectors of intracellular and extracellular signaling pathways . It is therefore not surprising that the actin cytoskeleton is one of the main targets of bacterial protein toxins , and thus of major importance for the host – pathogen interaction . Bacteria have developed numerous toxins and effec - tors to target the actin cytoskeleton . ( Note that toxins are often deﬁned as bacterial products that can act in the absence of the bacteria . The bacterial effectors depend on the presence of the bacteria , e . g . for trans - port into the target cells . ) Probably most of these bac - terial products affect the actin cytoskeleton by Keywords actin ; ADP - ribosylation ; bacterial protein toxins ; cytoskeleton ; Rho GTPases ; thymosin - b 4 Correspondence K . Aktories , Institut fu¨r Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie , Albert - Ludwigs - Universita¨t Freiburg , Albertstr . 25 , 79104 Freiburg , Germany Fax : + 49 761 203 5311 Tel : + 49 761 203 5301 E - mail : klaus . aktories @ pharmakol . uni - freiburg . de ( Received 26 January 2011 , revised 24 March 2011 , accepted 31 March 2011 ) doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1742 - 4658 . 2011 . 08113 . x Various bacterial protein toxins and effectors target the actin cytoskeleton . At least three groups of toxins ⁄ effectors can be identiﬁed , which directly modify actin molecules . One group of toxins ⁄ effectors causes ADP - ribosy - lation of actin at arginine - 177 , thereby inhibiting actin polymerization . Members of this group are numerous binary actin – ADP - ribosylating exo - toxins ( e . g . Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin ) as well as several bacterial ADP - ribosyltransferases ( e . g . Salmonella enterica SpvB ) which are not bin - ary in structure . The second group includes toxins that modify actin to promote actin polymerization and the formation of actin aggregates . To this group belongs a toxin from the Photorhabdus luminescens Tc toxin complex that ADP - ribosylates actin at threonine - 148 . A third group of bacterial toxins ⁄ effectors ( e . g . Vibrio cholerae multifunctional , autoprocess - ing RTX toxin ) catalyses a chemical crosslinking reaction of actin thereby forming oligomers , while blocking the polymerization of actin to functional ﬁlaments . Novel ﬁndings about members of these toxin groups are dis - cussed in detail . Abbreviations ABP , actin binding protein ; ACD , actin crosslinking domain ; CDT , Clostridium difﬁcile transferase ; CST , Clostridium spiroforme toxin ; GAP , GTPase - activating protein ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; PA , protective antigen ; VIP , vegetative insecticidal protein . 4526 FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS interfering with the endogenous regulation of the cyto - skeleton [ 1 , 2 ] . Thus , several bacterial protein toxins have been described that modify the activity of Rho proteins . These master regulators of the cytoskeleton can be manipulated by toxins by ADP - ribosylation [ 3 , 4 ] , glucosylation [ 5 ] , proteolysis [ 6 ] , adenylylation [ 7 ] , deamidation [ 8 ] and transglutamination [ 9 ] . More - over , several types of bacteria target the actin cytoskel - eton by modulating the Rho GTPase cycle of host cells with effectors , acting as GTPase - activating pro - teins ( GAPs ) [ 10 – 13 ] or guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) [ 14 , 15 ] . A direct interaction with actin molecules is the basis for the rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton by bacterial effectors like Salmonella invasion protein A ( SipA ) and C ( SipC ) . Whereas SipA decreases the critical concentration for F - actin formation leading to polymerization and stabilization of F - actin ﬁlaments by acting as a molecular staple [ 16 – 18 ] , the SipC functions as an actin nucleator and ﬁlament bundling protein [ 17 , 19 ] . Certain bacterial tox - ins also directly modify the actin molecule . These tox - ins belong to at least three groups . The ﬁrst group causes ADP - ribosylation of speciﬁc residues of actin , resulting in depolymerization of actin . The second group induces polymerization by ADP - ribosylation of actin . The third group modiﬁes actin by enzymatic crosslinking leading to the formation of stable dimers and higher order oligomers of this microﬁlament pro - tein . Bacterial toxins that directly modify actin mole - cules are discussed in this review in more detail . Three - dimensional structure of monomeric and ﬁlamentous actin Actin is one of the most abundant proteins in eukary - otic cells and is composed of 375 amino acid residues forming a single chain of 42 kDa . Its atomic structure was ﬁrst solved for its complex with deoxyribonuclease I [ 20 ] . G - actin is a ﬂat molecule with dimensions of about 50 · 50 · 35 A˚ . Figure 1 gives the standard view on the ﬂat face of actin . A deep cleft separates actin into two main domains of almost equal size , each being composed of two subdomains numbered SD1 – SD4 ( Fig . 1 ) . All subdomains contain a central b - sheet sur - rounded by a varying number of a - helices . The bound adenine nucleotide ( ATP ; deep blue in Fig . 1 ) is located at the bottom of the deep cleft . Both N - and C - terminus are located in SD1 and the peptide chain crosses twice between the two main domains at the bottom of SD1 and SD3 , i . e . underneath the nucleotide binding site involving the sequence stretches from resi - dues 140 to 144 and 340 to 345 . This region is sup - posed to form a ﬂexible hinge region , allowing movements of the two main domains relative to each other . Under physiological salt conditions puriﬁed mono - meric or G - actin polymerizes to its ﬁlamentous form , F - actin . F - actin is composed of two strands of linearly arranged actin subunits that are wound around each other forming a helix that can be described either as a two - start left - handed double helix with a half - pitch of about 360 A˚ or as a one - start genetic right - handed helix with a rotational translocation of 166 (cid:2) and an axial rise of 27 . 5 A˚ resulting in a pitch of 360 A˚ after 13 actin molecules and six turns [ 21 ] . G - actin contains ﬁrmly bound one molecule of ATP that is hydrolyzed to ADP and Pi after incorporation into a growing F - actin ﬁlament . The ADP remains attached to the actin subunit , whereas the Pi dissoci - ates slowly from the ﬁlament generating two ﬁlament ends with actin subunits differing in their bound nucleotide : either ATP or ADP . Actin polymerization proceeds until equilibrium is established between monomeric and ﬁlamentous actin . The concentration of the remaining monomeric actin is the critical con - centration of actin polymerization ( C c ) . During polymerization ATP - bound G - actin preferen - tially associates to the end containing ATP - actin subunits , the fast growing end , which has also been termed the plus or barbed end . After reaching Fig . 1 . Structure of the actin molecule . The four subdomains of actin are indicated ( SD1 – SD4 ) . In red , amino acids are indicated , which are modiﬁed by bacterial protein toxins . Arg177 ( R177 ) is ADP - ribosylated by toxins ( e . g . binary actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins which prevent polymerization and induce depolymerization of actin ) . Thr148 ( T148 ) is ADP - ribosylated by Photorhabdus luminescens toxin ( TccC3 ) , which causes polymerization of actin . Various toxins catalyze actin crosslinked between Lys50 ( K50 ) and Glu270 ( E270 ) . For details see text . K . Aktories et al . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS 4527 equilibrium actin monomers associate to the barbed end and an identical number dissociates preferentially from the opposite end , which has also been termed the minus or pointed end . Thus , under these conditions and in the presence of ATP actin subunits constantly associate to the barbed end and travel through the whole ﬁlament until they dissociate from the pointed end [ 22 ] . This behavior has been termed treadmilling or actin cycling and represents for a number of motile processes the sole basis for force generation [ 23 , 24 ] . The critical concentra - tions for the barbed end C c b and pointed end C c p are 0 . 1 and 0 . 8 l m , respectively . Under polymerizing condi - tions the critical concentration of polymerization C c is 0 . 2 l m , i . e . closer to that of the barbed end [ 24 ] . Actin is one of the most highly conserved proteins in nature . In mammals there exist six tissue - speciﬁc actin isoforms : a - skeletal , a - cardiac , a - and c - smooth muscle , and b - and c - cytoplasmic actins [ 25 ] . a - Skeletal and c - cytoplasmic actins differ only by 25 amino acid exchanges most of them being conservative and located on the surface of the molecule . The mammalian actins exhibit about 90 % sequence identity with those from distant organisms like yeast . The physiologically active form of actin is F - actin ; therefore much effort has been undertaken to elucidate the orientation and the F - speciﬁc structural alterations of the actin monomer [ 21 ] . A recent study using high magnetic ﬁelds to obtain optimal alignment of F - actin ﬁlaments has led to the resolution of the F - actin struc - ture being increased to about 4 A˚ [ 26 ] . Actin binding proteins Actin is a highly ‘promiscuous’ protein that interacts with many different kinds of proteins . About 150 dif - ferent speciﬁc actin binding proteins ( ABPs ) are known both at extracellular ( only a few ) and intracellular localizations that modify particular properties or its supramolecular organization [ 27 , 28 ] . The ABPs can be grouped into at least eight classes : ( a ) proteins that sta - bilize or sequester the monomeric actin ; ( b ) proteins that bind along F - actin ﬁlaments ( like tropomyosin ) ; ( c ) motor proteins that generate the force for the slid - ing of F - actin ﬁlaments ; ( d ) proteins that nucleate actin polymerization [ 29 , 30 ] ; ( e ) proteins that bundle F - actin ﬁlaments ; ( f ) proteins that stabilize ﬁlament networks ; ( g ) proteins that sever F - actin ﬁlaments ; and ( h ) proteins that attach ﬁlaments to specialized mem - brane areas . Even if they have different functions many of these proteins attach to a few target zones on the actin surface such as the hydrophobic region men - tioned above . It is probably because of these multiple interactions that the sequence and three - dimensional structure of actin has been so highly conserved during the billions of years of evolution . Many ABPs are at the end of signaling cascades and regulated by phospholipid interaction , Ca 2 + - ion con - centrations , phosphorylation or small GTPases [ 31 ] . These signals either deactivate or activate the supramo - lecular organization of actin during cell migration , exocytosis or endocytosis , or cytokinesis . Binary actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins Actin is ADP - ribosylated by various bacterial protein toxins ( Fig . 2 ) . The prototype of these toxins is 850 1 N Proteolytic activation C 225 N ART C 431 1 Adaptor 374 1 594 N C ART TcaCHomolog7xP 255 N 1 C 475 ART ExoS - 93 Like Rho - GAP 185 N 1 C 408 716 N C ART 1 927 N C ART VgrG - like domains C2 toxin ( iota toxin , CDT , VIP , CST ) SpvB Aext Photox VgrG1 A . h . Fig . 2 . Different structures of actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins ⁄ effec - tors , which all modify actin at Arg177 . The family of binary toxins consists of Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin , Clostridium perfringens iota toxin , Clostridium difﬁcile transferase ( CDT ) , Bacillus cereus vegetative insecticidal toxin ( VIP ) and Clostridium spiroforme toxin ( CST ) . The toxins are binary in structure . They consist of a bind - ing ⁄ translocation component and the separated enzymatic compo - nent . The activated binding ⁄ translocation domain forms heptamers . The enzymatic component consists of a C - terminal ADP - ribosyl - transferase ( ART ) domain and an N - terminal adaptor domain , which interacts with the binding domain . Numbers given are from C . botu - linum C2 toxin . The other toxin ⁄ effectors are not binary in structure but all possess a C - terminal actin – ADP - ribosylating domain . These toxins are introduced into host cells by a type III secretion system ( SpvB , AexT ) or by unknown mechanisms . Salmonella enterica pro - duces the effector SpvB , which possesses a C - terminal actin – ADP - ribosylating domain . AexT is produced by Aeromonas salmonicida and possesses , in addition to the actin ART domain , a domain with Rho GTPase - activating activity ( GAP ) , which is related to Pseudo - monas ExoS protein . Photox is an effector , which is produced by Photorhabdus luminescens . VgrG1 from Aeromonas hydrophila pos - sesses an actin – ADP - ribosyltransferase domain at its C - terminus . This protein is probably part of the type VI secretion system and also effector ( see also Fig . 8 ) . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation K . Aktories et al . 4528 FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin [ 32 – 34 ] , which is the founding member of the family of binary actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins . Other members are Clostridium perfringens iota toxin [ 35 , 36 ] , Clostridium difﬁcile trans - ferase ( CDT ) [ 37 ] , Clostridium spiroforme toxin ( CST ) [ 38 , 39 ] and the Bacillus cereus vegetative insecticidal protein ( VIP ) [ 40 ] . All these toxins ADP - ribosylate Arg177 of actin ( marked in Fig . 1 ) ; they are binary in structure and consist of an enzyme component , which harbors ADP - ribosyltransferase activity , and a sepa - rated binding component , which is responsible for the uptake of the toxin [ 2 , 41 – 43 ] . The binding component ( C2II ) of C2 toxin has to be activated by proteolytic cleavage ( Fig . 2 ) , which releases an (cid:2) 20 kDa fragment from C2II [ 44 ] . The activated C2II fragment forms heptamers , which have a prepore structure [ 45 ] . These heptamers bind to carbo - hydrate structures ( complex and hybrid carbohydrates ) on the surface of target cells [ 46 ] . Recent crystal structure analysis provided a preliminary model of the structure of the binding component [ 47 ] , which is very similar to the prepore structure of Bacillus anthracis protective antigen ( PA ) , the binding component of anthrax toxin [ 48 , 49 ] . In fact , sequence comparison and structural data revealed a high similarity of the binding components of all binary actin ADP - ribosyltransferases throughout the whole molecule with the exception of the C - terminal receptor - binding domain . Most probably the heptameric structure of C2II gen - erates a polyvalent binding platform of high afﬁnity for the proposed carbohydrates on the surface of target cells , which function as cell receptors or are at least an essential part of the receptors [ 46 ] ( Fig . 3 ) . Then , the enzyme component C2I binds to the heptameric C2II and subsequently the toxin – receptor complex is endo - cytosed . At the low pH prevailing in endosomes a Proteolytic cleavage Receptor Binding component Oligomerisation Destruction of the actin cytoskeleton H + Enzyme component Binding H + H + H + H + “Capping” NAD G - actin F - actin ADP - R ADP - R ADP - R ADP - R ADP - R “Trapping” Formation of microtubule protrusions Bacteria Actin cortex ADP - R ADP - R ADP - R ADP - R ADP - R Fig . 3 . Model of the action of binary actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins . The binary toxins consist of the binding component and the enzymatic ADP - ribosyltransferase component . The binding component is proteolytically activated and forms heptamers . After binding to cell surface receptors , the enzyme component interacts with the binding component and the toxin complex is endocytosed . At low pH of endosomes , the binding and translocation component inserts into membranes and ﬁnally allows the delivery of the enzyme component into the cytosol . Here actin is ADP - ribosylated at Arg177 . ADP - ribosylation of actin at Arg177 causes inhibition of actin polymerization and destruction of the actin cytoskeleton . This has consequences for the microtubule system . Growing microtubules are no longer captured at the cell membrane and form long protrusions extending from the cell surface . These protrusions facilitate adherence and colonization of bacteria . K . Aktories et al . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS 4529 conformational change of the prepore occurs . This is characterized by the conversion of a loop ( most proba - bly loop 2 b 2 – 2 b 3 as in PA [ 48 ] ) in domain 2 of each monomer to form a b - barrel structure , forcing the insertion into the endosomal membrane resulting in formation of a pore . Through this pore ( with help of the w - clamp - like residue Phe428 [ 50 ] ) the enzyme compo - nent is transported into the cytosol , a process which depends on the cytosolic heat shock protein Hsp90 [ 51 ] . Recent studies suggest that , in addition to the heat shock protein Hsp90 , cyclophilin A is involved in the trans - location of the enzyme component into the cytosol [ 52 ] . The binary actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins can be divided into two subfamilies . One subfamily is formed by C . botulinum C2 toxin , and the other subfamily is the so - called iota - like toxin family composed of the toxins iota , CST and CDT [ 43 , 53 ] . Within the family of iota - like toxins the binding components can be exchanged . Thus , the binding component Ib of iota toxin is able to translocate the enzyme components of CST or CDT into target cells [ 54 ] . The iota toxin appears to gain access to the cytosol by entering the cells through a different pool of endosomes [ 55 ] . Another difference between the toxin subfamilies is their substrate speciﬁcity . The iota - like toxins ADP - ribosylate all actin isoforms studied so far . The C2 toxin , however , appears to modify b , c - actins but not – or to a much lesser extent – the a - actin isoforms [ 56 , 57 ] . The ADP - ribosyltransferase component of binary toxins During the last few years we have learned much about the structure – function relationship of the ADP - ribo - syltransferase components of the toxins [ 47 , 58 – 60 ] . Early analysis of the sequences of the enzyme compo - nents revealed that the ADP - ribosylating enzyme com - ponents consist of two related domains of almost identical fold , which were probably generated by gene duplication [ 40 ] . However , only the C - terminal domain is a functional ADP - ribosyltransferase pos - sessing the typical active site residues . The N - terminal part , which during evolution has lost a number of crucial amino acid residues for the ADP - ribosyltrans - ferase activity , functions as an adaptor for the interaction with the binding ⁄ transport components . Nevertheless , a recent crystal structure analysis of the complex of the enzyme component of iota toxin with its substrate actin showed that not only the active C - terminal domain but also the N - terminal domain of Ia interacts with actin ( see Fig . 4 later ) . The ﬁnding that the N - terminal part of the enzyme component is important for the interaction with the translocation domain was used to construct a delivery system for fusion proteins . All known binary ADP - ribosylating toxins possess a very similar catalytic fold with a highly conserved NAD + binding core , consisting of a central six - stranded b - sheet [ 61 , 62 ] . Within this core , three highly conserved motifs , which are often abbreviated RSE , can be identiﬁed in b - strands 1 , 2 and 5 . The ‘R’ located in b - strand 1 and the ‘STS’ motifs positioned in b - strand 2 are both crucial for NAD binding . The b - strand 5 contains the EXE motif including two glu - tamate residues , which are essential for ADP - ribosyla - tion of actin at Arg177 . The ﬁrst glutamate is part of the ARTT ( ADP - ribosylating turn - turn ) loop in front of b - strand 5 , which is involved in substrate recogni - tion ( see also below ) . The second glutamate of this motif is the so - called catalytic glutamate . Actin N C R177 Iota toxin ( Ia ) Fig . 4 . Complex of Clostridium perfringens iota toxin with actin . Actin is shown in blue . Arg177 ( R177 ) of actin is modiﬁed by toxin - catalyzed ADP - ribosylation . The enzymatic component of C . perfringens iota toxin ( Ia ) is on the right . The enzyme domain , pos - sessing ADP - ribosyltransferase activity , is in green and the adaptor domain , which inter - acts with the binding component ( not shown ) , is in grey . The data are from Protein Data Bank 3BUZ . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation K . Aktories et al . 4530 FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS Recently , iota toxin has been crystallized in com - plex with actin and the non - hydrolyzable NAD ana - log betaTAD [ 58 ] ( Fig . 4 ) . Structure analysis has shown that the iota toxin binds to actin through subdomains 1 , 3 and 4 . The structure of actin was hardly changed , whereas the substrate – enzyme inter - action induced speciﬁc changes in the enzyme component of the toxin . It was demonstrated that the recognition of actin depended on ﬁve loops of the enzyme component . Surprisingly , the structural data demonstrated that the N - terminal domain of the enzyme domain also , which was previously sus - pected to be only involved in the interaction with the binding component , is essential for the interac - tion with actin [ 58 ] . Comparison of the actin - binding interface of iota toxin with other actin - binding pro - teins like gelsolin , proﬁlin or DNaseI revealed that the toxin binds in a completely different manner to actin . Bacterial actin ADP - ribosyltransferases , which are not binary toxins ADP - ribosylation of actin is also caused by bacterial toxins or effectors which differ in their structure and delivery system from the binary toxins [ 63 – 65 ] ( Fig . 2 ) . Salmonella SpvB is a bacterial effector which is trans - ported into eukaryotic target cells by the type III secretion system [ 66 ] . The protein consists of 594 amino acid residues . The C - terminus , covering residues 374 – 594 , shares similarities with actin – ADP - ribosylat - ing toxins like Vip2 ( identity 19 % ) . The N - terminus is similar to the N - terminal part of Photorhabdus lu - minescens toxin complex component TcC ( see below ) . However , the function of this part is not known . SpvB modiﬁes actin ( most probably all isoforms ) also at Arg177 and therefore the functional consequences for actin are probably the same as with binary toxins [ 64 , 67 ] . Photox is a (cid:2) 46 kDa protein which is produced by P . luminescens ( see also below ) and possesses a two - domain structure [ 68 ] . The complete protein shares 39 % identity with SpvB . Even higher is the sequence identity ( (cid:2) 60 % ) of the C - terminal 200 amino acid resi - dues of photox with the catalytic core of SpvB . The role of the N - terminal part of the protein is unclear . However , it might play a role in toxin entry into target cells ; indeed for this process a type VI secretion has been proposed [ 68 ] . Photox , like SpvB , does not possess any detectable NAD hydrolase activity . Photox targets all actin iso - forms and like other toxins it modiﬁes Arg177 and does not accept polymerized actin as substrate [ 68 ] . Aeromonas salmonicida is a ﬁsh pathogen which produces the bifunctional Aeromonas exotoxin T ( AexT ) [ 69 , 70 ] . The toxin consists of at least two functional modules . The complete protein is (cid:2) 60 % identical with ExoT and ExoS from Pseudomo - nas aeruginosa . The bacterial type III secretion effec - tors ExoT and ExoS possess N - terminal Rho - GAP and C - terminal ADP - ribosyltransferase activities , modifying the Crk ( C10 regulator of kinase ) protein and Ras , respectively [ 71 ] . The N - terminal 210 amino acids of AexT are also (cid:2) 33 % identical with the Rho - GAP - like effector from Yersinia pseudotuberculosis YopE [ 69 ] . Thus , AexT possesses GAP activity towards Rho , Rac and Cdc42 , while the C - terminal ADP - ribosyltransferase activity causes modiﬁcation of actin at Arg177 [ 70 ] . AexT modiﬁes non - muscle actin much more efﬁciently than skeletal muscle actin . Of special interest is the diversity in the active site of the ADP - ribosyltransferase of AexT . Whereas all argi - nine - modifying transferases possess an EXE motif , AexT appears to use an EXXE motif for its catalytic activity [ 70 ] . Recently , the type - VI secretion effector protein VgrG1 ( (cid:2) 100 kDa ) from Aeromonas hydrophila was shown to ADP - ribosylate actin and to cause depoly - merization of the actin cytoskeleton and ﬁnally apop - tosis . The site of actin modiﬁcation by VgrG1 is not known so far . However , because the C - terminal part of VgrG1 covering (cid:2) 200 residues is very similar to the ADP - ribosyltransferase domain of VIP2 from B . cereus it is feasible that this effector also modiﬁes Arg177 [ 72 ] . Functional consequences of the ADP - ribosylation of actin at Arg177 All binary actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins studied so far modify G - actin at Arg177 [ 64 , 68 , 70 , 73 , 74 ] ( Fig . 3 ) . This residue is located near the interaction site between the two helical strands of F - actin ﬁlaments [ 21 ] and has been shown to be directly involved in the interstrand interaction . Using SpvB transferase , actin was ADP - ribosylated and subsequently crystal - lized . The data obtained from the crystal structure analysis conﬁrmed previous suggestions [ 21 ] that the polymerization of actin ADP - ribosylated at Arg177 is blocked by steric hindrance [ 67 ] . Figure 5A illustrates this fact by showing the steric effect of ADP - ribosyla - tion of Arg177 of one actin within the F - actin ﬁla - ment . It can be clearly seen that the ADP - ribosyl group can extend towards the neighboring strand like the so - called hydrophobic loop that links the two strands ( Fig . 5A ) . K . Aktories et al . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS 4531 Thus , actin ADP - ribosylated at Arg177 cannot be polymerized and conversely F - actin is not a substrate or is only a very poor substrate for ADP - ribosylation by these toxins [ 56 ] . Indeed , it is completely blocked when F - actin is stabilized by phalloidin as shown bio - chemically [ 68 , 75 ] . It is conceivable , however , that monomeric actin in equilibrium with F - actin or disso - ciating from the pointed ends during treadmilling may become accessible for ADP - ribosyltransferases , and by this effect the cellular actin will be completely con - verted into polymerization - incompetent ADP - ribosylat - ed actin ( see also Fig . 4 ) . Although Arg177 ADP - ribosylated actin is unable to polymerize , it is still able to bind to and cap the barbed ends of native ( unmodi - ﬁed ) actin ﬁlaments [ 76 – 78 ] , inhibiting further growth of actin ﬁlaments from the barbed end . Figure 5B gives a model of binding of one ADP - ribosylated actin to the plus end , thus inhibiting the addition of further subunits . By contrast , the pointed ends of ﬁlaments are not affected and depolymerization or exchange of actin subunits can occur at this site [ 77 , 78 ] . It has been shown for C . perfringens iota toxin , C . botulinum C2 toxin [ 79 ] and P . luminescens toxin photox [ 78 ] that the toxin - induced ADP - ribosylation of actin is reversible in the presence of an excess of nicotinamide . De - ADP - ribosylation restores the prop - erty of actin to polymerize . In Acanthamoeba rhysodes , which can be infected by SpvB - producing speciﬁc sero - vars of Salmonella enterica , actin is rapidly degraded after toxin - catalyzed ADP - ribosylation [ 80 ] ; however , this is not observed in mammalian cells . ADP - ribosylation has effects on the binding and hydrolysis of ATP . The afﬁnity of ATP for ADP - ribosylated actin is decreased ( the dissociation rate of e - ATP is increased after ADP - ribosylation at Arg177 by a factor of 3 ) . Concomitantly , the thermal stability is slightly reduced [ 78 ] . Moreover , ATP hydrolysis is largely inhibited by ADP - ribosylation of actin at Arg177 [ 81 , 82 ] . These data are in agreement with recent ﬁndings that ADP - ribosylation of actin at Arg177 by SpvB toxin causes conformational changes in the so - called W - loop ( residues 165 – 172 ) of actin , a putative nucleotide - state sensor and an important region for interaction with proﬁlin , coﬁlin and MAL [ 83 ] . It has been shown that actin also when bound to gelsolin is a substrate for ADP - ribosyltransferases . Gelsolin is a multifunctional protein that can cap , nucleate or sever F - actin ﬁlaments depending on the free Ca 2 + - ion concentration and the presence of either G - or F - actin . Gelsolin is built from six homologous domains of identical fold ( G1 – G6 ) , but only three are able to bind actin : G1 , G2 and G4 . The N - terminal segment G1 binds G - actin independently of the Ca 2 + concentration with high afﬁnity , whereas binding of G4 to G - actin occurs only in the presence of micromo - lar Ca 2 + . G2 binds F - actin preferentially . At low Ca 2 + intact gelsolin binds only one actin molecule , most probably by its G1 segment . At micromolar Ca 2 + - ion concentration it forms stable complexes with two actin molecules presumably by its G1 and G4 seg - ments . The isolated N - terminal half of gelsolin ( G1 – 3 ) is able to nucleate and to sever F - actin and also to form a complex with two actin molecules independent of the Ca 2 + concentration . Therefore in the presence of ADP - ribosylated actin ( Ar ) several types of gelso - lin – actin complexes can be formed . Quite early studies showed that the gelsolin – actin complexes can be modi - ﬁed , resulting in three types of complexes ( G – Ar – A , G – A – Ar and G – Ar – Ar ) [ 84 ] . However , whereas the G – Ar and G – Ar – A complexes , in which the Ar was most probably attached to G1 , nucleated the actin polymerization , this was not the case with the G – A – Ar complex . The nucleation of actin polymerization occurred not before the ADP - ribosylated actin was exchanged for non - modiﬁed actin . A recent study con - ﬁrmed the formation of a ternary complex of gelsolin with two ADP - ribosylated actins . Moreover , at least two different modes of binding of ADP - ribosylated actin to gelsolin were shown . However , the complex obtained was readily able to nucleate actin polymeriza - tion [ 78 ] . As in the test - tube , intracellular ADP - ribosylation of actin at Arg177 favors the depolymerization of F - actin ﬁlaments , and ﬁnally results in destruction of the actin cytoskeleton [ 85 ] . Toxin - induced depolymerization of actin causes dramatic effects on the physiological responses of target cells , e . g . of mast cells [ 86 , 87 ] , leu - kocytes [ 88 , 89 ] , PC12 cells [ 90 ] , ﬁbroblasts [ 91 ] smooth Fig . 5 . Effect of ADP - ribosylation of Arg177 on actin – actin interac - tion . ( A ) Ribbon presentation of ADP - ribosylated actin ( green ) within the F - actin ﬁlament ( grey ) ; ADP - ribose is colored in red . The steric hindrance induced by ADP - ribosylation of Arg177 is shown . ( B ) Binding of ADP - ribosylated actin to the plus end of F - actin . The data are from Protein Data Bank 1ATN . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation K . Aktories et al . 4532 FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS muscle [ 92 ] , axons of spinal nerve cells [ 93 ] and endo - thelial cells [ 94 , 95 ] , which have been described in detail in previous reviews [ 34 , 41 , 96 , 97 ] . Recent studies reported also the induction of apoptosis by actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins [ 98 ] . Effect of ADP - ribosyltransferases on the microtubule system More recently , an unexpected effect of the binary actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins on the microtubule sys - tem has been observed . When epithelial cells are trea - ted with CDT the formation of cell protrusions with diameters of 0 . 05 – 0 . 5 l m and a length of > 150 l m is observed ( Fig . 6 ) [ 99 ] . These protrusions form a dense network at the surface of epithelial monolayers . Inter - estingly , the protrusions generated in the presence of the actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins are formed by microtubule structures . The cellular microtubule system consists of long ﬁla - ments formed by a - and b - tubulin heterodimers . Microtubules , like F - actin ﬁlaments , are polarized and possess a fast growing plus end and a slowly growing minus end [ 100 ] . The minus end of most microtubules is anchored and stabilized at the microtubule organiz - ing center . The dynamic plus ends are directed towards the peripheral cell cortex . These plus ends undergo phases of rapid polymerization and depolymerization , a phenomenon called dynamic instability . This dynamic behavior of microtubules is controlled and modiﬁed by several regulatory proteins . Of special importance are the plus end binding proteins EB1 ( end binding protein 1 ) and CLIP - 170 ( cytoplasmic linker protein 170 ) , which are called + TIPs ( plus end track - ing proteins ) . + TIPs are essential for growth of micro - tubules [ 101 ] . However , some + TIPs ( so - called capture proteins ) like CLASP2 ( CLIP - associated pro - tein ) and ACF7 ( actin crosslinking family 7 ) stop microtubule polymerization when the growing microtu - bules reach the actin cortex located below the cell membrane [ 102 – 104 ] . Apparently , actin microﬁlaments and microtubule structures regulate each other in a dynamic fashion . Thus , ADP - ribosylation of actin , which results in depolymerization of F - actin , affects the regulation of the dynamic behavior of microtubules [ 105 ] and causes formation of tubulin protrusions [ 99 ] . Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy revealed that the actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins increase the length of Fig . 6 . Effects of ADP - ribosylation of actin at Arg177 on the microtubule system . ( A ) Subconﬂuent Caco - 2 cells were treated with the actin – ADP - ribosylating toxin Clostridium difﬁcile transferase ( CDT ) . The number and length of cell processes increase over time . In each panel the incubation time ( h ) is indicated . Scale bar represents 10 l m . ( B ) Indirect immunoﬂuorescence of a - tubulin ( green ) and actin staining by TRITC - conjugated phalloidin ( red ) in Caco - 2 cells . CDT causes disruption of the actin cytoskeleton and concomitant formation of microtubule - based protrusions . Cells were treated for 2 h . Scale bar represents 10 l m . ( C ) Scanning electron microscopy of Caco - 2 cells . Cells were trea - ted without and with CDT . After 1 h , C . difﬁcile bacteria were added . After 90 min cells were washed and ﬁxed . Scale bar represents 5 l m . After CDT treatment Clostridia were caught and wrapped in protrusions ( arrows ) . The ﬁgure is reproduced from [ 99 ] . K . Aktories et al . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS 4533 the plus ends decorated with EB1 . Probably more importantly , ADP - ribosylation of actin causes the translocation of the capture proteins ACF7 and CLASP2 from the actin cortex into the cell interior apparently resulting in blockage of their capture func - tions [ 99 ] . Toxin - induced formation of the microtubule - based network of protrusions on the surface of epithelial cells has major consequences for the adherence of bacteria . Electron microscope studies as well as colonization assays revealed that the toxin - producing bacteria adhere more strongly to epithelial cells . Moreover , a mouse infection model revealed elevated dissemination of bacteria with increasing activity of the actin – ADP - ribosylating toxin [ 99 ] . All these data indicate a novel role of the toxins , which by actin ADP - ribosylation at Arg177 appear to inﬂuence the host – pathogen interaction . ADP - ribosylation of actin by P . luminescens toxin Recently , it was shown that P . luminescens produces toxins that target actin . P . luminescens are motile Gram - negative entomopathogenic enterobacteria , which live in symbiosis with nematodes of the family Heterorhabditidae [ 106 , 107 ] . The nematodes , which carry the Photorhabdus bacteria in their gut , invade insect larvae , where the bacteria are released from the nematode gut by regurgitation into the open circula - tory system ( hemocoel ) of the insect . Here , the bacteria replicate and release various toxins , which kill the insect host usually within 48 h . Subsequently , the insect body is used as a food source for the bacteria and the nematodes [ 107 , 108 ] . Photorhabdus luminescens produce a large array of toxins , which are only partially characterized . How - ever , the actin - modifying toxins appear to be the most important ones . This toxin type has a high molecular mass ( (cid:2) 1 MDa ) and belongs to the toxin complex ( Tc ) family of P . luminescens . Tc toxins are trimeric toxins consisting of the three components TcA , TcB and TcC . A number of homologs exist for each toxin component and several of these homologs are present in Photorhabdus [ 109 ] . The TcA components appear to be involved in toxin uptake , the TcC components pos - sess biological activity and the TcB components are suggested to have a chaperone - like function . The nomenclature of the toxins is rather complicated , because several gene loci are found for the various toxin homologs . Recently , the activity of the TcdA1 , TcdB2 and TccC3 toxin complex , which targets actin , has been elucidated [ 110 ] . The complex , consisting of these three components , caused formation of actin clusters in insect hemocytes ( e . g . Galleria mellonella hemocytes ) and in mammalian HeLa cells . Further studies revealed that the TcC component TccC3 exhib - its the actin - clustering activity . Studies on the enzyme activity of TccC3 showed that this component possesses ADP - ribosyltransferase activ - ity and modiﬁes actin in cell lysates . Also isolated b , c - and a - actin isoforms are substrates for ADP - ribosylation by the toxin . Studies performed in parallel with C2 toxin , which ADP - ribosylates actin at Arg177 , revealed that modiﬁcation by TccC3 occurs at a differ - ent site . Moreover , analysis of the chemical stability of the ADP - ribose – actin bonds showed major differences . While the Arg – ADP - ribose bond in actin , which was catalyzed by C2 toxin , was cleaved by hydroxylamine , this was not the case for the ADP - ribose bond to actin catalyzed by TccC3 . Mass spectrometric analysis of peptides obtained from TccC3 - modiﬁed actin revealed that this toxin caused ADP - ribosylation of Thr148 or Thr149 . Finally , mutagenesis studies clariﬁed that in fact TccC3 modiﬁes Thr148 ( marked in Fig . 1 ) . So far , threonine residues were not known to be acceptor amino acids for modiﬁcation by ADP - ribosylation . The ﬁnding of a different modiﬁcation site of actin compared with the binary actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins provides an explanation for the different stability of the ADP - ribose – actin bonds observed after C2 toxin and TccC3 induced ADP - ribosylation . Of special interest is the localization of Thr148 within the actin molecule ( see Figs 1 and 7C ) . In the standard view of actin it is localized at the base of sub - domain 3 and points into the hydrophobic pocket , which represents the docking site for a number of ABPs ( Fig . 7C ) . Of particular interest is its overlap with the binding site of the N - terminal part of thymo - sin - b 4 , but it appears conceivable that ADP - ribosyla - tion of Thr148 also modiﬁes the binding of gelsolin , of proteins of the ADF ⁄ coﬁlin family and of proﬁlin . The b - thymosins The b - thymosins are a group of highly homologous peptides of about 5 kDa usually built from 42 – 45 amino acid residues ( 43 residues for the main represen - tative , thymosin - b 4 ) . The b - thymosins occur extracellu - larly and intracellularly [ 111 , 112 ] . Extracellularly , they appear to fulﬁl a large array of diverse functions like wound healing , angiogenesis and tissue cell protection . Intracellularly , they are expressed in many eukaryotic cells ( except in yeast cells ) , often in high concentra - tion , and fulﬁl as sole function the sequestration of Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation K . Aktories et al . 4534 FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS monomeric actin [ 113 ] . The b - thymosin peptides bind to actin in an elongated conformation ( Fig . 7A ) stretching from the barbed to the pointed end regions of actin and thereby inhibiting association to either end of F - actin ( Fig . 7B and 7D as space ﬁlling model ) . This kind of binding to actin is also observed in a large family of proteins that contain the so - called WH2 domain ( Wiskot – Aldrich homology domain 2 ) . Their WH2 domains also share high sequence homolo - gies to the N - terminal 35 residues of the b - thymosins ( for a review see [ 112 ] ) . In resting cells the b - thymosins bind to monomeric actin and by their ability to inhibit the salt - induced actin polymerization are responsible for maintaining a high fraction of the intracellular actin in mono - meric form despite the high ion concentration that would otherwise lead to its complete polymerization [ 114 ] . After cell stimulation this monomeric actin pool is readily activatable for the re - polymerization of new F - actin ﬁlaments by the action of actin nucle - ating proteins [ 112 , 115 ] . The activity of the b - thymo - sins themselves is not regulated directly ; they act as mere G - actin sequestering proteins or buffers and the amount of thymosin - b 4 - sequestered actin is depen - dent on the activity of other depolymerization or polymerization promoting proteins ( for a review see [ 112 ] ) . Since Thr148 is located within the binding area of thymosin - b 4 , the effects of ADP - ribosylation of Thr148 of actin ( see Fig . 7C ) on the interaction with thymosin - b 4 were studied in greater detail . Chemical crosslinking and stopped - ﬂow experiments demon - strated that TccC3 - mediated ADP - ribosylation leads to a decrease in binding of thymosin - b 4 to actin , which might be responsible for the enhanced polymeri - zation of actin , as observed in cells after toxin treatment . Further effects of P . luminescens toxins Moreover , the actin cytoskeleton is also targeted by P . luminescens toxins via the Rho proteins , which are master regulators of the cytoskeleton [ 31 , 116 , 117 ] . TccC5 of P . luminescens , which is also introduced into target cells by means of TcdA1 and TcdB2 , ADP - ri - bosylates and thus activates Rho GTPases ( in particu - lar RhoA ) , which control actin polymerization and stress ﬁber formation , resulting in clustering of the actin cytoskeleton ( Fig . 8 ) . What are the pathophysiological consequences of the modiﬁcation of actin at Thr148 ? To elucidate the functional consequences of the effects of TccC3 , the phagocytic activity of insect larvae hemocytes was studied in the presence of Escherichia coli particles . The cellular uptake was monitored by ﬂuorescence of internalized particles into low - pH endosomes . These studies showed that the TcdA1 , TcdB2 and TccC3 complex potently inhibits the phagocytosis by hemo - cytes [ 110 ] . Therefore , ADP - ribosylation of actin at Thr148 in immune cells of insect larvae might be an important strategy for the bacteria to prevail in an otherwise extremely efﬁcient immune system of insect hemocytes . As already mentioned , P . luminescens also produces the binary actin – ADP - ribosylating toxin photox , which modiﬁes actin at Arg177 to inhibit actin polymeriza - tion . Thus , a bidirectional modulation of actin ( induc - tion of polymerization of actin by TccC3 and induction of depolymerization of actin by photox ) appears to be necessary for the optimal interaction of P . luminescens with its host nematodes and its host insect larvae . Fig . 7 . Interaction of thymosin - b 4 with actin . ( A ) The extended conformation of thymosin - b 4 with its N - terminal ( bottom ) and C - terminal helix ( top ) . ( B ) Model of binding of thymosin - b 4 to actin . It can be seen that the N - terminal helix binds to the small lower groove between subdomains 1 and 3 , thereby blocking the barbed end area of actin . The C - terminal helix binds to the top of actin at its pointed end area . ( C ) An actin molecule with ADP - ribosylated T148 pointing into the groove between SD1 and SD3 indicating the possible steric hindrance of this binding site . ( D ) Interaction of thymosin - b 4 with actin in a space - ﬁlling model . The (cid:2) 5 kDa thy - mosin - b 4 interacts with actin in an extended conformation partially covering residue Thr148 ( T148 ) of actin . Data from Protein Data Bank 1UY5 . K . Aktories et al . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS 4535 Toxins inducing actin crosslinking Actin is directly affected also by a family of toxins which catalyze its chemical crosslinking [ 118 ] . The pro - totype of these toxins is MARTX vc ( multifunctional , autoprocessing RTX toxin ) from Vibrio cholerae with a mass of about (cid:2) 500 kDa ( Fig . 9 ) . MARTX toxins are multimodular proteins , having different functional domains , which most probably are processed and released during the uptake mechanism in target cells . Release of toxin modules is achieved by auto - catalytic processing by an inherent cysteine protease activity , which is typically activated by inositol hexakisphos - phate binding [ 119 ] . In the case of MARTX vc an actin crosslinking domain ( ACD ) , a Rho GTPase inactivat - ing domain ( RID ) and a domain of unknown function are released . MARTX containing ACD domains are also produced by A . hydrophila and Vibrio vulniﬁcus [ 118 ] ( Fig . 9 ) . The major effect of these toxins in target cells is the depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton by covalent crosslinking of actin monomers to dimers , trimers and high molecular mass oligomers that are polymerization incompetent and therefore lead to cell rounding [ 120 ] . By mass spectrometric analyses and crystallographic approaches it was shown that ACD causes covalent crosslinking of actin by forming iso - peptide bonds between Lys50 and Glu270 of actin ( see Fig . 1 for the location of these residues ) . Crosslinking causes dimer , trimer or higher order oligomer formation [ 120 ] ; how - ever , in all cases Lys50 and Glu270 are involved [ 121 ] . Crosslinking preferentially starts with monomeric actin [ 120 ] even when the actin is complexed to monomer stabilizing proteins like thymosin - b 4 or proﬁlin . The further crosslinking of dimers to higher order oligo - mers occurs at a lower rate . Also yeast actin is sub - strate for this modiﬁcation , but exchange of Lys50 or Glu270 for other amino acids completely blocks cross - linking . Lys50 is located at the so - called DNaseI binding loop [ 20 ] and Glu270 on the subdomain 3 ⁄ 4 loop ( also termed the hydrophobic plug , see Fig . 1 ) and both are essentially involved in intrastrand and interstrand interactions respectively of F - actin subunits [ 122 ] . In F - actin these two hydrophobic loops do not contact each other ; therefore their crosslinking distorts the normal F - actin interfaces and forces them into an ori - entation that is incompatible with polymerization to a ADP - R H + H + H + TccC5 RhoAGDP RhoAGDP + NAD + NAD + H + T β 4 TccC3 TccC3TccC5 T148 ADP - R + G - actin TcdA1 Receptor Binding Q63 Actinclusters TccC3 TccC5 TcdB2 Fig . 8 . Action of Photorhabdus luminescens toxins on the actin cytoskeleton . The P . luminescens toxin complex consists of at least three different types of toxin proteins called TcA , TcB and TcC . Many orthologs and paralogs of the components exist . Component TcA of the toxin complex forms tetramers and is most probably involved in receptor binding and protein translocation of the biologically active compo - nent TcC . The role of the TcB component is not clear so far . Component TcC , which has a highly conserved N - terminal region , possesses a C - terminal ADP - ribosyltransferase activity , the substrate speciﬁcity of which varies in paralogs . TccC3 ADP - ribosylates actin at Thr148 thereby preventing the binding of the actin - sequestering protein thymosin - b 4 to G - actin and favoring actin polymerization . TccC5 ADP - ribosy - lates Rho proteins at Gln63 , thereby persistently activating Rho GTPases , which cause stress ﬁber formation and facilitate actin polymeriza - tion . Together , TccC3 and TccC5 cause clustering of F - actin . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation K . Aktories et al . 4536 FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS functional F - actin ﬁlament . Surprisingly , it was reported that polymerization was partially rescued in the presence of phalloidin or coﬁlin [ 121 ] . Indeed , elec - tron microscopy after negative staining revealed the formation of short albeit often distorted ﬁlaments in the presence of phalloidin or coﬁlin ; however , the func - tionality of these polymers was not further analyzed . Nevertheless , this particular mode of actin modiﬁca - tion aims to severely compromise actin - dependent cytoskeletal functions like phagocytosis allowing the pathogens to escape immune cell surveillance and to increase their dissemination within the host organism . Molecular mechanism of crosslinking Crosslinking of actin by the toxin occurs in vitro and in vivo . Actually , the in vitro crosslinking of actin by ACD requires G - actin , ATP and magnesium [ 123 ] . Interestingly , ATP is not essential for actin but for the toxin - catalyzed reaction . The toxin domain ACD is an ATPase , which needs ATP for the catalytic reaction of the iso - peptide bond formation [ 121 ] . The catalytic mechanism appears to be similar to that caused by glu - tamate synthetase [ 124 ] . It has been proposed that ﬁrst Glu270 of actin is activated by phosphorylation and subsequently the crosslinking occurs by release of the phosphate . This reaction is very similar to the attach - ment of ammonia to glutamate to form glutamine [ 123 ] ( Fig . 9 ) . Actin crosslinking enzymes as part of VgrG1 proteins ACD is also found in VgrG1 proteins from V . cholerae strains . VgrG proteins are part of the complex type VI secretion system of various Gram - negative bacteria [ 125 – 128 ] . They are essential for the secretory function of this machine but are also secreted by themselves via this system . The proteins exhibit high similarity with the tail parts of various bacteriophages . The C - termi - nal part contains speciﬁc effector domains . As men - tioned above , a VgrG protein from A . hydrophila harbors a C - terminal actin ADP - ribosyltransferase domain , which modiﬁes Arg177 . In the case of V . cholerae VgrG1 , the ACD domain forms the C - ter - minus of the protein ( Fig . 9 ) . Conclusions For efﬁcient invasion and dissemination many bacteria have developed convergent strategies to escape the immune surveillance of the host organism and to 650 N 1 C 1163 VgrG1 V . c . Phage T4 gp5 - like ACD Phage Mu gp44 - like 1963 2375 1 N MARTX V . c . MARTX ACD R MARTX MARTXrepeats ACD R MARTXrepeats Actin 1 ACD 270 Glu – C – OH O = H – NH – L Met Ser O Met Gln Actin 1 ACD 270 Glu – C – O = NH – Lys 50 Ser Asp ID CPD 4545 C MARTX ID CPD MARTXrepeats Actin 2 ys 50 Gln Asp Actin 2 Fig . 9 . Structure of actin crosslinking toxins . MARTX ( multifunctional , autoprocessing RTX toxin ) of Vibrio cholerae is a very large multi - mod - ule protein , which consists of several conserved glycine - rich RTX motifs ( MARTX repeats ) , a Rho GTPase inactivating domain ( RID ) , an a ⁄ b hydrolase ( a ⁄ b ) , a cysteine protease domain ( CPD ) and an actin crosslinking region ( ACD ) . The CPD is suggested to be involved in mobiliza - tion and release of ( arrow ) the ACD , which then catalyzes crosslinking of G - actin . Crosslinking is caused by bond formation between Glu270 and Lys50 of two actin molecules . The ACD domain is also found at the C - terminus of VgrG1 protein from V . cholerae . VgrG1 proteins are part of the type VI secretion system , which is present in many Gram - negative pathogens . The N - terminal and middle part of VgrG1 harbors domains with similarity to bacteriophage tail spike complex like proteins , which might function as a translocon . K . Aktories et al . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS 4537 modify particular cellular activities for their intracellu - lar or extracellular survival . Frequently , bacteria do not conquer the genetic material of their hosts in order to reprogram it in favor of their own replication ; instead they manipulate the host cell metabolism and ⁄ or its intracellular organization to form a niche to prevail . Very often , they do this by producing toxin ⁄ effector proteins , which possess speciﬁc enzy - matic activities allowing them to efﬁciently modify particular host cell target proteins . Using highly sophis - ticated delivery systems , including pore formation and cellular uptake from acidic endosomal compartments , cell entry after retrograde transport from the endoplas - mic reticulum via the sec61 translocator or direct cell delivery by microsyringe - like nanomachines , the bacte - rial toxins ⁄ effectors enter the cytosol and modify eukaryotic targets by glycosylation , adenylylation , deamidation , proteolysis or ADP - ribosylation . The cytoskeletal protein actin is a frequently tar - geted substrate protein , modiﬁed in a manner that compromises its proper functions . Actin is constantly cycling between monomeric and polymeric state in order to fulﬁl its dynamic functions , including its diverse roles in innate and adapted immune responses . Therefore , disturbing the dynamic behavior of actin as achieved by ADP - ribosylation will profoundly disturb the cellular response to pathogen invasion . Notably , the bacterial ADP - ribosyltransferases have been specif - ically tailored to modify residues like Arg177 , which are essential for its proper function , i . e . the ability to polymerize to F - actin ﬁlaments . Indeed , it was only the analysis of the toxin speciﬁcity that led to the rec - ognition of the importance of this particular residue for this process . Similarly , ADP - ribosylation of Thr148 by the TccC3 toxin of P . luminescens clearly empha - sized the essential role of the actin – thymosin - b 4 inter - action for the maintenance of the correct dynamic behavior of actin for cell survival . However , one has to keep in mind that in most cases the targeting of the cytoskeleton by bacterial pro - tein toxins and effectors is much more complex . Stud - ies from recent years have shown that numerous pathogens produce toxins and bacterial effectors dur - ing host – pathogen interactions in a precise time - and space - dependent manner to speciﬁcally support deﬁned phases of the infection process . This explains the fre - quent ﬁndings that the same species of bacteria may produce different toxins and effectors , which cause polymerization as well as depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton . For example , P . luminescens produces one toxin which inhibits actin polymerization ( photox ) and another which induces actin polymerization ( TccC3 ⁄ TccC5 ) . Another example is S . enterica , a pro - ducer of effectors which indirectly or directly induce actin polymerization ( SipA ⁄ C , SopE ) or cause depoly - merization of the actin cytoskeleton ( SptP ) [ 129 – 131 ] . A large number of bacterial factors have been identi - ﬁed that act via Rho GTPases , which are master regu - lators of the actin cytoskeleton , on target cells . Many of these bacterial factors hijack the physiological con - trol mechanism by mimicking the regulatory role of Rho GAP or Rho GEF proteins , thereby ﬁne - tuning the activity state of Rho GTPases and modulating the speciﬁc function of the cytoskeleton . This may lead , for example , to inhibition of phagocytosis of patho - gens by macrophages but to enhanced adhesion of bac - teria and stimulation of non - professional phagocytosis of invasive bacteria . Thus , bacteria are capable of modulating the cytoskeleton , thereby using the multi - tude of functions of the cytoskeleton for their own advantage . Acknowledgements It is a pleasure for us to thank Sonja Ku¨hn ( MPI Dortmund ) for help with Figs 5 and 7 . Studies reported in this review were ﬁnancially supported by the DFG program SPP1150 , the DFG projects AK6 ⁄ 22 - 1 and Ma807 ⁄ 14 - 3 , the BMBF Zoonose col - laborative research project Botulinom and the BIOSS excellence cluster . References 1 Aktories K & Barbieri JT ( 2005 ) Bacterial cytotoxins : targeting eukaryotic switches . Nat Rev Microbiol 3 , 397 – 410 . 2 Barbieri JT , Riese MJ & Aktories K ( 2002 ) Bacterial toxins that modify the actin cytoskeleton . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 18 , 315 – 344 . 3 Aktories K , Braun U , Ro¨sener S , Just I & Hall A ( 1989 ) The rho gene product expressed in E . coli is a substrate of botulinum ADP - ribosyltransferase C3 . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 158 , 209 – 213 . 4 Aktories K & Just I ( 2005 ) Clostridial Rho - inhibiting protein toxins . Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 291 , 113 – 145 . 5 Just I , Selzer J , Wilm M , Von Eichel - Streiber C , Mann M & Aktories K ( 1995 ) Glucosylation of Rho proteins by Clostridium difﬁcile toxin B . Nature 375 , 500 – 503 . 6 Shao F , Merritt PM , Bao Z , Innes RW & Dixon JE ( 2002 ) A Yersinia effector and a Pseudomonas aviru - lence protein deﬁne a family of cysteine proteases func - tioning in bacterial pathogenesis . Cell 109 , 575 – 588 . 7 Yarbrough ML , Li Y , Kinch LN , Grishin NV , Ball HL & Orth K ( 2009 ) AMPylation of Rho GTPases by Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation K . Aktories et al . 4538 FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS Vibrio VopS disrupts effector binding and downstream signaling . Science 323 , 269 – 272 . 8 Schmidt G , Sehr P , Wilm M , Selzer J , Mann M & Ak - tories K ( 1997 ) Gln63 of Rho is deamidated by Escher - ichia coli cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1 . Nature 387 , 725 – 729 . 9 Masuda M , Betancourt L , Matsuzawa T , Kashimoto T , Takao T , Shimonishi Y & Horiguchi Y ( 2000 ) Acti - vation of Rho through a cross - link with polyamines catalyzed by Bordetella dermonecrotizing toxin . EMBO J 19 , 521 – 530 . 10 Galan JE & Fu Y ( 2000 ) Modulation of actin cytoskel - eton by Salmonella GTPase activating protein SptP . Methods Enzymol 325 , 496 – 504 . 11 Fu Y & Galan JE ( 1999 ) A Salmonella protein antago - nizes Rac - 1 and Cdc42 to mediate host - cell recovery after bacterial invasion . Nature 401 , 293 – 297 . 12 von Pawel - Rammingen U , Telepnev MV , Schmidt G , Aktories K , Wolf - Watz H & Rosqvist R ( 2000 ) GAP activity of the Yersinia YopE cytotoxin speciﬁcally tar - gets the Rho pathway : a mechanism for disruption of actin microﬁlament structure . Mol Microbiol 36 , 737 – 748 . 13 Goehring U - M , Schmidt G , Pederson KJ , Aktories K & Barbieri JT ( 1999 ) The N - terminal domain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa exoenzyme S is a GTPase - activating protein for Rho GTPases . J Biol Chem 274 , 36369 – 36372 . 14 Hardt W - D , Chen L - M , Schuebel KE , Bustelo XR & Gala´n JE ( 1998 ) S . typhimurium encodes an activator of Rho GTPases that induces membrane rufﬂing and nuclear responses in host cells . Cell 93 , 815 – 826 . 15 Stender S , Friebel A , Linder S , Rohde M , Mirold S & Hardt W - D ( 2000 ) Identiﬁcation of SopE2 from Sal - monella typhimurium , a conserved guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Cdc42 of the host cell . Mol Micro - biol 36 , 1206 – 1221 . 16 Zhou D , Mooseker MS & Galan JE ( 1999 ) Role of the S . typhimurium actin - binding protein SipA in bacterial internalization . Science 283 , 2092 – 2095 . 17 McGhie EJ , Hayward RD & Koronakis V ( 2001 ) Cooperation between actin - binding proteins of invasive Salmonella : SipA potentiates SipC nucleation and bun - dling of actin . EMBO J 20 , 2131 – 2139 . 18 Lilic M , Galkin VE , Orlova A , VanLoock MS , Egelman EH & Stebbins CE ( 2003 ) Salmonella SipA polymerizes actin by stapling ﬁlaments with non - globular protein arms . Science 301 , 1918 – 1921 . 19 Hayward RD & Koronakis V ( 1999 ) Direct nucleation and bundling of actin by the SipC protein of invasive Salmonella . EMBO J 18 , 4926 – 4934 . 20 Kabsch W , Mannherz HG , Suck D , Pai EF & Holmes KC ( 1990 ) Atomic structure of the actin : DNase I complex . Nature 347 , 37 – 44 . 21 Holmes KC , Popp D , Gebhard W & Kabsch W ( 1990 ) Atomic model of the actin ﬁlament . Nature 347 , 44 – 49 . 22 Wegner A ( 1976 ) Head tail polymerization of actin . J Mol Biol 108 , 139 – 150 . 23 Lai FP , Szczodrak M , Block J , Faix J , Breitsprecher D , Mannherz HG , Stradal TE , Dunn GA , Small JV & Rottner K ( 2008 ) Arp2 ⁄ 3 complex interactions and actin network turnover in lamellipodia . EMBO J 27 , 982 – 992 . 24 Bugyi B & Carlier MF ( 2010 ) Control of actin ﬁlament treadmilling in cell motility . Annu Rev Biophys 39 , 449 – 470 . 25 Vandekerckhove J & Weber K ( 1978 ) At least six different actins are expressed in a higher mammal : an analysis based on the amino acid sequence of the amino - terminal tryptic peptide . J Mol Biol 126 , 783 – 802 . 26 Oda T , Iwasa M , Aihara T , Maeda Y & Narita A ( 2009 ) The nature of the globular - to ﬁbrous - actin transition . Nature 457 , 441 – 445 . 27 Pollard TD & Cooper JA ( 1986 ) Actin and actin - bind - ing proteins . A critical evaluation of mechanisms and functions . Ann Rev Biochem 55 , 987 – 1035 . 28 Pollard TD & Cooper JA ( 2009 ) Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 , 1208 – 1212 . 29 Goode BL & Eck MJ ( 2007 ) Mechanism and function of formins in the control of actin assembly . Annu Rev Biochem 76 , 593 – 627 . 30 Schoenichen A & Geyer M ( 2010 ) Fifteen formins for an actin ﬁlament : a molecular view on the regulation of human formins . Biochim Biophys Acta 1803 , 152 – 163 . 31 Etienne - Manneville S & Hall A ( 2002 ) Rho GTPases in cell biology . Nature 420 , 629 – 635 . 32 Aktories K , Ba¨rmann M , Ohishi I , Tsuyama S , Jakobs KH & Habermann E ( 1986 ) Botulinum C2 toxin ADP - ribosylates actin . Nature 322 , 390 – 392 . 33 Aktories K , Ba¨rmann M , Chhatwal GS & Presek P ( 1987 ) New class of microbial toxins ADP - ribosylates actin . Trends Pharmacol Sci 8 , 158 – 160 . 34 Ohishi I ( 2000 ) Structure and function of actin – adeno - sine - diphosphate - ribosylating toxins . In Bacterial Pro - tein Toxins ( Aktories K & Just I eds ) , pp . 253 – 273 . Springer , Berlin . 35 Stiles BG & Wilkins TD ( 1986 ) Clostridium perfringens iota toxin : synergism between two proteins . Toxicon 24 , 767 – 773 . 36 Simpson LL , Stiles BG , Zapeda HH & Wilkins TD ( 1987 ) Molecular basis for the pathological actions of Clostridium perfringens iota toxin . Infect Immun 55 , 118 – 122 . 37 Perelle S , Gibert M , Bourlioux P , Corthier G & Popoff MR ( 1997 ) Production of a complete binary K . Aktories et al . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS 4539 toxin ( actin - speciﬁc ADP - ribosyltransferase ) by Clostridium difﬁcile CD196 . Infect Immun 65 , 1402 – 1407 . 38 Popoff MR & Boquet P ( 1988 ) Clostridium spiroforme toxin is a binary toxin which ADP - ribosylates cellular actin . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 152 , 1361 – 1368 . 39 Simpson LL , Stiles BG , Zepeda H & Wilkins TD ( 1989 ) Production by Clostridium spiroforme of an iotalike toxin that possesses mono ( ADP - ribosyl ) trans - ferase activity : identiﬁcation of a novel class of ADP - ribosyltransferases . Infect Immun 57 , 255 – 261 . 40 Han S , Craig JA , Putnam CD , Carozzi NB & Tainer JA ( 1999 ) Evolution and mechanism from structures of an ADP - ribosylating toxin and NAD complex . Nat Struct Biol 6 , 932 – 936 . 41 Considine RV & Simpson LL ( 1991 ) Cellular and molecular actions of binary toxins possessing ADP - ribosyltransferase activity . Toxicon 29 , 913 – 936 . 42 Aktories K & Barth H ( 2004 ) The actin – ADP - ribosy - lating Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin . Anaerobe 10 , 101 – 105 . 43 Barth H , Aktories K , Popoff MR & Stiles BG ( 2004 ) Binary bacterial toxins : biochemistry , biology , and applications of common Clostridium and Bacillus proteins . Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 68 , 373 – 402 . 44 Ohishi I ( 1987 ) Activation of botulinum C2 toxin by trypsin . Infect Immun 55 , 1461 – 1465 . 45 Barth H , Blo¨cker D , Behlke J , Bergsma - Schutter W , Brisson A , Benz R & Aktories K ( 2000 ) Cellular uptake of Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin requires oligomerization and acidiﬁcation . J Biol Chem 275 , 18704 – 18711 . 46 Eckhardt M , Barth H , Blo¨cker D & Aktories K ( 2000 ) Binding of Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin to aspara - gine - linked complex and hybrid carbohydrates . J Biol Chem 275 , 2328 – 2334 . 47 Schleberger C , Hochmann H , Barth H , Aktories K & Schulz GE ( 2006 ) Structure and action of the binary C2 toxin from Clostridium botulinum . J Mol Biol 364 , 705 – 715 . 48 Petosa C , Collier RJ , Klimpel KR , Leppla SH & Liddington RC ( 1997 ) Crystal structure of the anthrax toxin protective antigen . Nature 385 , 833 – 838 . 49 Young JA & Collier RJ ( 2007 ) Anthrax toxin : receptor binding , internalization , pore formation , and transloca - tion . Annu Rev Biochem 76 , 243 – 265 . 50 Lang AE , Neumeyer T , Sun J , Collier RJ , Benz R & Aktories K ( 2008 ) Amino acid residues involved in membrane insertion and pore formation of Clostrid - ium botulinum C2 toxin . Biochemistry 47 , 8406 – 8413 . 51 Haug G , Leemhuis J , Tiemann D , Meyer DK , Aktories K & Barth H ( 2003 ) The host cell chaperone Hsp90 is essential for translocation of the binary Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin into the cytosol . J Biol Chem 274 , 32266 – 32274 . 52 Kaiser E , Pust S , Kroll C & Barth H ( 2009 ) Cyclophi - lin A facilitates translocation of the Clostridium botu - linum C2 toxin across membranes of acidiﬁed endosomes into the cytosol of mammalian cells . Cell Microbiol 11 , 780 – 795 . 53 Perelle S , Scalzo S , Kochi S , Mock M & Popoff MR ( 1997 ) Immunological and functional comparison between Clostridium perfringens iota toxin , C . spiro - forme toxin , and anthrax toxins . FEMS Microbiol Lett 146 , 117 – 121 . 54 Richard JF , Petit L , Gibert M , Marvaud J - C , Bou - chaud C & Popoff M ( 1999 ) Bacterial toxins modifying the actin cytoskeleton . Int Microbiol 2 , 185 – 194 . 55 Gibert M , Marvaud JC , Pereira Y , Hale ML , Stiles BG , Boquet P , Lamaze C & Popoff MR ( 2007 ) Differ - ential requirement for the translocation of clostridial binary toxins : iota toxin requires a membrane potential gradient . FEBS Lett 581 , 1287 – 1296 . 56 Schering B , Ba¨rmann M , Chhatwal GS , Geipel U & Aktories K ( 1988 ) ADP - ribosylation of skeletal muscle and non - muscle actin by Clostridium perfringens iota toxin . Eur J Biochem 171 , 225 – 229 . 57 Mauss S , Chaponnier C , Just I , Aktories K & Gabbiani G ( 1990 ) ADP - ribosylation of actin isoforms by Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin and Clostridium perfringens iota toxin . Eur J Biochem 194 , 237 – 241 . 58 Tsuge H , Nagahama M , Oda M , Iwamoto S , Uts - unomiya H , Marquez VE , Katunuma N , Nishizawa M & Sakurai J ( 2008 ) Structural basis of actin recognition and arginine ADP - ribosylation by Clostridium perfringens iota - toxin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 , 7399 – 7404 . 59 Tsuge H , Nagahama M , Nishimura H , Hisatsune J , Sakaguchi Y , Itogawa Y , Katunuma N & Sakurai J ( 2003 ) Crystal structure and site - directed mutagenesis of enzymatic components from Clostridium perfringens iota - toxin . J Mol Biol 325 , 471 – 483 . 60 Sundriyal A , Roberts AK , Shone CC & Acharya KR ( 2009 ) Structural basis for substrate recognition in the enzymatic component of ADP - ribosyltransferase toxin CDTa from Clostridium difﬁcile . J Biol Chem 284 , 28713 – 28719 . 61 Hottiger MO , Hassa PO , Luscher B , Schuler H & Koch - Nolte F ( 2010 ) Toward a uniﬁed nomenclature for mammalian ADP - ribosyltransferases . Trends Biochem Sci 35 , 208 – 219 . 62 Laing S , Unger M , Koch - Nolte F & Haag F ( 2010 ) ADP - ribosylation of arginine . Amino Acids , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00726 - 010 - 0676 - 2 . 63 Tezcan - Merdol D , Nyman T , Lindberg U , Haag F , Koch - Nolte F & Rhen M ( 2001 ) Actin is ADP - ribosy - lated by the Salmonella enterica virulence - associated protein SpvB . Mol Microbiol 39 , 606 – 619 . 64 Hochmann H , Pust S , von Figura G , Aktories K & Barth H ( 2006 ) Salmonella enterica SpvB Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation K . Aktories et al . 4540 FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS ADP - ribosylates actin at position arginine - 177 - charac - terization of the catalytic domain within the SpvB protein and a comparison to binary clostridial actin - ADP - ribosylating toxins . Biochemistry 45 , 1271 – 1277 . 65 Lesnick ML , Reiner NE , Fierer J & Guiney DG ( 2001 ) The Salmonella spvB virulence gene encodes an enzyme that ADP - ribosylates actin and destabilizes the cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells . Mol Microbiol 39 , 1464 – 1470 . 66 Otto H , Tezcan - Merdol D , Girisch R , Haag F , Rhen M & Koch - Nolte F ( 2000 ) The spvB gene - product of the Salmonella enterica virulence plasmid is a mono ( ADP - ribosyl ) transferase . Mol Microbiol 37 , 1106 – 1115 . 67 Margarit SM , Davidson W , Frego L & Stebbins CE ( 2006 ) A steric antagonism of actin polymerization by a salmonella virulence protein . Structure 14 , 1219 – 1229 . 68 Visschedyk DD , Perieteanu AA , Turgeon ZJ , Field - house RJ , Dawson JF & Merrill AR ( 2010 ) Photox , a novel actin - targeting mono - ADP - ribosyltransferase from Photorhabdus luminescens . J Biol Chem 285 , 13525 – 13534 . 69 Braun M , Stuber K , Schlatter Y , Wahli T , Kuhnert P & Frey J ( 2002 ) Characterization of an ADP - ribosyl - transferase toxin ( AexT ) from Aeromonas salmonicida subsp . salmonicida . J Bacteriol 184 , 1851 – 1858 . 70 Fehr D , Burr SE , Gibert M , d’Alayer J , Frey J & Popoff MR ( 2007 ) Aeromonas exoenzyme T of Aero - monas salmonicida is a bifunctional protein that targets the host cytoskeleton . J Biol Chem 282 , 28843 – 28852 . 71 Deng Q & Barbieri JT ( 2008 ) Molecular mechanisms of the cytotoxicity of ADP - ribosylating toxins . Annu Rev Microbiol 62 , 271 – 288 . 72 Suarez G , Sierra JC , Erova TE , Sha J , Horneman AJ & Chopra AK ( 2010 ) A type VI secretion system effec - tor protein , VgrG1 , from Aeromonas hydrophila that induces host cell toxicity by ADP ribosylation of actin . J Bacteriol 192 , 155 – 168 . 73 Vandekerckhove J , Schering B , Ba¨rmann M & Aktories K ( 1988 ) Botulinum C2 toxin ADP - ribosy - lates cytoplasmic b ⁄ g - actin in arginine 177 . J Biol Chem 263 , 696 – 700 . 74 Vandekerckhove J , Schering B , Ba¨rmann M & Aktories K ( 1987 ) Clostridium perfringens iota toxin ADP - ribosylates skeletal muscle actin in Arg - 177 . FEBS Lett 225 , 48 – 52 . 75 Aktories K , Ankenbauer T , Schering B & Jakobs KH ( 1986 ) ADP - ribosylation of platelet actin by botulinum C2 toxin . Eur J Biochem 161 , 155 – 162 . 76 Weigt C , Just I , Wegner A & Aktories K ( 1989 ) Non - muscle actin ADP - ribosylated by botulinum C2 toxin caps actin ﬁlaments . FEBS Lett 246 , 181 – 184 . 77 Wegner A & Aktories K ( 1988 ) ADP - ribosylated actin caps the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments . J Biol Chem 263 , 13739 – 13742 . 78 Perieteanu AA , Visschedyk DD , Merrill AR & Daw - son JF ( 2010 ) ADP - ribosylation of cross - linked actin generates barbed - end polymerization - deﬁcient F - actin oligomers . Biochemistry 49 , 8944 – 8954 . 79 Just I , Geipel U , Wegner A & Aktories K ( 1990 ) De - ADP - ribosylation of actin by Clostridium perfrin - gens iota - toxin and Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin . Eur J Biochem 192 , 723 – 727 . 80 Tezcan - Merdol D , Engstrand L & Rhen M ( 2005 ) Salmonella enterica SpvB - mediated ADP - ribosylation as an activator for host cell actin degradation . Int J Med Microbiol 295 , 201 – 212 . 81 Geipel U , Just I & Aktories K ( 1990 ) Inhibition of cytochalasin D - stimulated G - actin ATPase by ADP - ribosylation with Clostridium perfringens iota toxin . Biochem J 266 , 335 – 339 . 82 Geipel U , Just I , Schering B , Haas D & Aktories K ( 1989 ) ADP - ribosylation of actin causes increase in the rate of ATP exchange and inhibition of ATP hydro - lysis . Eur J Biochem 179 , 229 – 232 . 83 Kudryashov DS , Grintsevich EE , Rubenstein PA & Reisler E ( 2010 ) A nucleotide state - sensing region on actin . J Biol Chem 285 , 25591 – 25601 . 84 Wille M , Just I , Wegner A & Aktories K ( 1992 ) ADP - ribosylation of the gelsolin – actin complex by clostridial toxins . J Biol Chem 267 , 50 – 55 . 85 Wiegers W , Just I , Mu¨ller H , Hellwig A , Traub P & Aktories K ( 1991 ) Alteration of the cytoskeleton of mammalian cells cultured in vitro by Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin and C3 ADP - ribosyltransferase . Eur J Cell Biol 54 , 237 – 245 . 86 Wex CBA , Koch G & Aktories K ( 1997 ) Effects of Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin - induced depolymerisa - tion of actin on degranulation of suspended and attached mast cells . Naunyn - Schmiedeberg’s Arch Pharmacol 355 , 319 – 327 . 87 Prepens U , Barth H , Wilting J & Aktories K ( 1998 ) Inﬂuence of Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin on FceRI - mediated secretion and tyrosine phosphorylation in RBL cells . Naunyn - Schmiedeberg’s Arch Pharmacol 357 , 323 – 330 . 88 Norgauer J , Kownatzki E , Seifert R & Aktories K ( 1988 ) Botulinum C2 toxin ADP - ribosylates actin and enhances O 2 ) production and secretion but inhibits migration of activated human neutrophils . J Clin Invest 82 , 1376 – 1382 . 89 Grimminger F , Sibelius U , Aktories K , Suttorp N & Seeger W ( 1991 ) Inhibition of cytoskeletal rearrange - ment by botulinum C2 toxin ampliﬁes ligand - evoked lipid mediator generation in human neutrophils . Mol Pharmacol 40 , 563 – 571 . 90 Matter K , Dreyer F & Aktories K ( 1989 ) Actin involvement in exocytosis from PC12 cells : studies on the inﬂuence of botulinum C2 toxin on stimulated noradrenaline release . J Neurochem 52 , 370 – 376 . K . Aktories et al . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS 4541 91 Schmid G , Schu¨rmann A , Huppertz C , Hofmann F , Aktories K & Joost H - G ( 1998 ) Inhibition of insulin - stimulated glucose transport in 3T3 - L1 cells by Clostridium difﬁcile toxin B , Clostridium sordellii lethal toxin , and Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin . Naunyn - Schmiedeberg’s Arch Pharmacol 357 , 385 – 392 . 92 Mauss S , Koch G , Kreye VAW & Aktories K ( 1989 ) Inhibition of the contraction of the isolated longitudi - nal muscle of the guinea - pig ileum by botulinum C2 toxin : evidence for a role of G ⁄ F - actin transition in smooth muscle contraction . Naunyn - Schmiedeberg’s Arch Pharmacol 340 , 345 – 351 . 93 Shupliakov O , Bloom O , Gustafsson JS , Kjaerulff O , Low P , Tomilin N , Pieribone VA , Greengard P & Brodin L ( 2002 ) Impaired recycling of synaptic vesicles after acute perturbation of the presynaptic actin cyto - skeleton . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 , 14476 – 14481 . 94 Schnittler H - J , Schneider SW , Raifer H , Luo F , Diete - rich P , Just I & Aktories K ( 2001 ) Role of actin ﬁla - ments in endothelial cell – cell adhesion and membrane stability under ﬂuid shear stress . Pﬂu¨gers Arch 442 , 675 – 687 . 95 Suttorp N , Polley M , Seybold J , Schnittler H , Seeger W , Grimminger F & Aktories K ( 1991 ) Adenosine diphosphate - ribosylation of G - actin by botulinum C2 toxin increases endothelial permeability in vitro . J Clin Invest 87 , 1575 – 1584 . 96 Aktories K & Just I ( 1990 ) Botulinum C2 toxin . In ADP - Ribosylating Toxins and G - Proteins ( Moss J & Vaughan M eds ) , pp . 79 – 95 . American Society for Microbiology , Washington , DC . 97 Aktories K , Wille M & Just I ( 1992 ) Clostridial actin – ADP - ribosylating toxins . Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 175 , 97 – 113 . 98 Heine K , Pust S , Enzenmuller S & Barth H ( 2008 ) ADP - ribosylation of actin by the Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin in mammalian cells results in delayed cas - pase - dependent apoptotic cell death . Infect Immun 76 , 4600 – 4608 . 99 Schwan C , Stecher B , Tzivelekidis T , van Ham M , Rohde M , Hardt WD , Wehland J & Aktories K ( 2009 ) Clostridium difﬁcile toxin CDT induces formation of microtubule - based protrusions and increases adherence of bacteria . PLoS Pathog 5 , e1000626 . 100 Desai A & Mitchison TJ ( 1997 ) Microtubule polymeri - zation dynamics . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 13 , 83 – 117 . 101 Akhmanova A & Steinmetz MO ( 2008 ) Tracking the ends : a dynamic protein network controls the fate of microtubule tips . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 , 309 – 322 . 102 Kodama A , Karakesisoglou I , Wong E , Vaezi A & Fuchs E ( 2003 ) ACF7 : an essential integrator of micro - tubule dynamics . Cell 115 , 343 – 354 . 103 Mimori - Kiyosue Y , Grigoriev I , Lansbergen G , Sasaki H , Matsui C , Severin F , Galjart N , Grosveld F , Vorobjev I , Tsukita S et al . ( 2005 ) CLASP1 and CLASP2 bind to EB1 and regulate microtubule plus - end dynamics at the cell cortex . J Cell Biol 168 , 141 – 153 . 104 Akhmanova A , Hoogenraad CC , Drabek K , Stepano - va T , Dortland B , Verkerk T , Vermeulen W , Burgering BM , De Zeeuw CI , Grosveld F et al . ( 2001 ) Clasps are CLIP - 115 and - 170 associating proteins involved in the regional regulation of microtubule dynamics in motile ﬁbroblasts . Cell 104 , 923 – 935 . 105 Uematsu Y , Kogo Y & Ohishi I ( 2007 ) Disassembly of actin ﬁlaments by botulinum C2 toxin and actin - ﬁla - ment - disrupting agents induces assembly of microtubules in human leukaemia cell lines . Biol Cell 99 , 141 – 150 . 106 Forst S , Dowds B , Boemare N & Stackebrandt E ( 1997 ) Xenorhabdus and Photorhabdus spp . : bugs that kill bugs . Annu Rev Microbiol 51 , 47 – 72 . 107 Waterﬁeld NR , Ciche T & Clarke D ( 2009 ) Photor - habdus and a host of hosts . Annu Rev Microbiol 63 , 557 – 574 . 108 ffrench - Constant R , Waterﬁeld N , Daborn P , Joyce S , Bennett H , Au C , Dowling A , Boundy S , Reynolds S & Clarke D ( 2003 ) Photorhabdus : towards a functional genomic analysis of a symbiont and pathogen . FEMS Microbiol Rev 26 , 433 – 456 . 109 Waterﬁeld NR , Bowen DJ , Fetherston JD , Perry RD & ffrench - Constant RH ( 2001 ) The tc genes of Photorhabdus : a growing family . Trends Microbiol 9 , 185 – 191 . 110 Lang AE , Schmidt G , Schlosser A , Hey TD , Larrinua IM , Sheets JJ , Mannherz H - G & Aktories K ( 2010 ) Photorhabdus luminescens toxins ADP - ribosylate actin and RhoA to force actin clustering . Science 327 , 1139 – 1142 . 111 Huff T , Muller CS , Otto AM , Netzker R & Hannappel E ( 2001 ) beta - Thymosins , small acidic peptides with multiple functions . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 33 , 205 – 220 . 112 Mannherz HG & Hannappel E ( 2009 ) The beta - thymo - sins : intracellular and extracellular activities of a versatile actin binding protein family . Cell Motil Cyto - skeleton 66 , 839 – 851 . 113 Cassimeris L , Safer D , Nachmias VT & Zigmond SH ( 1992 ) Thymosin b4 sequesters the majority of G - actin in resting human polymorphonuclear leukocytes . J Cell Biol 119 , 1261 – 1270 . 114 Irobi E , Aguda AH , Larsson M , Guerin C , Yin HL , Burtnick LD , Blanchoin L & Robinson RC ( 2004 ) Structural basis of actin sequestration by thymosin - beta4 : implications for WH2 proteins . EMBO J 23 , 3599 – 3608 . 115 Mazur AJ , Gremm D , Dansranjavin T , Litwin M , Jockusch BM , Wegner A , Weeds AG & Mannherz HG ( 2010 ) Modulation of actin ﬁlament dynamics by actin - binding proteins residing in lamellipodia . Eur J Cell Biol 89 , 402 – 413 . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation K . Aktories et al . 4542 FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS 116 Hall A ( 1998 ) Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskele - ton . Science 279 , 509 – 514 . 117 Machesky LM & Hall A ( 1996 ) Rho : a connection between membrane receptor signalling and the cytoskeleton . Trends Cell Biol 6 , 304 – 310 . 118 Satchell KJ ( 2007 ) MARTX , multifunctional auto - processing repeats - in - toxin toxins . Infect Immun 75 , 5079 – 5084 . 119 Egerer M & Satchell KJ ( 2010 ) Inositol hexakisphos - phate - induced autoprocessing of large bacterial protein toxins . PLoS Pathog 6 , e1000942 . 120 Fullner KJ & Mekalanos JJ ( 2000 ) In vivo covalent cross - linking of cellular actin by the Vibrio cholerae RTX toxin . EMBO J 19 , 5315 – 5323 . 121 Kudryashov DS , Durer ZA , Ytterberg AJ , Sawaya MR , Pashkov I , Prochazkova K , Yeates TO , Loo RR , Loo JA , Satchell KJ et al . ( 2008 ) Connecting actin monomers by iso - peptide bond is a toxicity mechanism of the Vibrio cholerae MARTX toxin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 , 18537 – 18542 . 122 Lorenz M , Popp D & Holmes KC ( 1993 ) Reﬁnement of the F - actin model against X - ray ﬁber diffraction data by the use of a directed mutation algorithm . J Mol Biol 234 , 826 – 836 . 123 Satchell KJ ( 2009 ) Actin crosslinking toxins of Gram - negative bacteria . Toxins ( Basel ) 1 , 123 – 133 . 124 Geissler B , Bonebrake A , Sheahan KL , Walker ME & Satchell KJ ( 2009 ) Genetic determination of essential residues of the Vibrio cholerae actin cross - linking domain reveals functional similarity with glutamine synthetases . Mol Microbiol 73 , 858 – 868 . 125 Pukatzki S , Ma AT , Revel AT , Sturtevant D & Mekal - anos JJ ( 2007 ) Type VI secretion system translocates a phage tail spike - like protein into target cells where it cross - links actin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 , 15508 – 15513 . 126 Pukatzki S , McAuley SB & Miyata ST ( 2009 ) The type VI secretion system : translocation of effectors and effector - domains . Curr Opin Microbiol 12 , 11 – 17 . 127 Satchell KJ ( 2009 ) Bacterial martyrdom : phagocytes disabled by type VI secretion after engulﬁng bacteria . Cell Host Microbe 5 , 213 – 214 . 128 Ma AT , McAuley S , Pukatzki S & Mekalanos JJ ( 2009 ) Translocation of a Vibrio cholerae type VI secre - tion effector requires bacterial endocytosis by host cells . Cell Host Microbe 5 , 234 – 243 . 129 Guiney DG & Lesnick M ( 2005 ) Targeting of the actin cytoskeleton during infection by Salmonella strains . Clin Immunol 114 , 248 – 255 . 130 Patel JC , Rossanese OW & Galan JE ( 2005 ) The func - tional interface between Salmonella and its host cell : opportunities for therapeutic intervention . Trends Pharmacol Sci 26 , 564 – 570 . 131 Patel JC & Galan JE ( 2005 ) Manipulation of the host actin cytoskeleton by Salmonella – all in the name of entry . Curr Opin Microbiol 8 , 10 – 15 . K . Aktories et al . Actin as target for toxin modiﬁcation FEBS Journal 278 ( 2011 ) 4526 – 4543 ª 2011 The Authors Journal compilation ª 2011 FEBS 4543