* Department of Cell Biology and Physiology , Washington University School of Medicine , St . Louis , Missouri 63110 , USA . ‡ Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry , University of Kentucky College of Medicine , Lexington , Kentucky 40536 , USA . Correspondence to P . I . H . e - mail : phanson @ cellbiology . wustl . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1684 WALKERA AND B MOTIFS Conserved sequence elements that are characteristic of nucleotide - binding folds . PLOOP A loop element of the Walker - A motif that is associated with the phoshates of bound nucleotides . ROSSMAN FOLD An α / β fold that is characteristic of nucleotide - binding domains . The hallmark of the AAA ( ATPases associated with various cellular activities ) family of proteins is a 200 – 250 amino - acid ATP - binding domain ( AAA domain ) . This domain contains WALKERA AND B MOTIFS , as well as several other motifs that distinguish it from classic PLOOP NTPases . AAA domains are attached to various other domains and , in some cases , inter - act with adaptor proteins to generate the structural and functional diversity of the family . Motifs that are used to define the original AAA family have more recently been considered in combination with struc - tural information , and this has led to further mem - bers being added to what is now referred to as the AAA + family 1 , 2 . In this review , we first describe structural simi - larities and differences amongst AAA + proteins to highlight regions and residues that are crucial to all family members . Mutation of these residues has pro - vided mechanistic insights and produced useful rea - gents with which to probe AAA + - protein function . Second , we discuss examples of the conformational changes that these enzymes undergo on nucleotide binding and hydrolysis — changes that are ultimately responsible for their function . Third , we consider the types of reaction that are carried out by AAA + pro - teins . We hope to highlight the functional diversity of the family , and to simplify this diversity by focusing on the unifying concept that most , if not all , AAA + - catalysed reactions are associated with significant conformational remodelling of substrate proteins . Last , we discuss the growing set of genetic diseases that are associated with AAA + - protein dysfunction . We hope that this review serves as both an intro - duction to , and an update on , this important family of ATPases ( for other reviews of AAA + proteins , see REFS 35 ) . Structural elements of the AAA + domain Scans of genomic databases using a consensus sequence show that AAA + proteins are present in all kingdoms . Arabidopsis thaliana has the most diversity , with ~ 140 AAA + proteins . Most other eukaryotes have 50 – 80 family members . Recent stud - ies have organized the family into several subgroups on the basis of sequence 1 , 6 , 7 and structural 2 similarities . Conserved features of the AAA + domain are shown in FIG . 1 , with the helices and strands as designated by Iyer and colleagues 2 . On the basis of crystal structures ( of which there are > 15 ) , the AAA + domain consists of two subdomains — an N - terminal α / β ROSSMAN FOLD and a C - terminal α - helical subdomain ( FIG . 2 ) . The N - terminal subdomain is wedge shaped and has a β - sheet of parallel strands that are arranged in a β 5 – β 1 – β 4 – β 3 – β 2 sequence at its core ( FIG . 1 ) . The insertion of β 4 between β1 and β 3 distinguishes AAA + domains from other nucleotide - binding domains , and the lack of other strands adjacent to β 2 is also unique 2 . AAA + PROTEINS : HAVE ENGINE , WILL WORK Phyllis I . Hanson * and Sidney W . Whiteheart ‡ Abstract | The AAA + ( ATPases associated with various cellular activities ) family is a large and functionally diverse group of enzymes that are able to induce conformational changes in a wide range of substrate proteins . The family’s defining feature is a structurally conserved ATPase domain that assembles into oligomeric rings and undergoes conformational changes during cycles of nucleotide binding and hydrolysis . Here , we review the structural organization of AAA + proteins , the conformational changes they undergo , the range of different reactions they catalyse , and the diseases associated with their dysfunction . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | JULY 2005 | 519 REVIEWS N - Linker Secondary structure Key elements Walker A Walker B Sensor 1 SRH Sensor 2 Pore 0 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 5 6 7 8 T D E R R G K T / S 8 7 5 6 5 4 1 0 N C 3 2 2 a b 1 3 4 N - linker Walker A Walker B Sensor 2 Sensor 1 SRH Pore b P - loop a 8 6 5 7 2 3 4 5 1 4 3 2 0 1 Diversity in AAA + domains comes in part from the number and position of the five or more α - helices that connect the strands of this central β - sheet . Further diversity comes from insertions between strands ( for example , the helical I domain in HslU that binds sub - strates 8 , 9 ) . The C - terminal subdomain is composed of several α - helices ( α 5 – α 8 ) 2 and is an important distin - guishing feature of the AAA + family compared with other nucleotide - binding proteins . This subdomain lies above the wide end of the N - terminal wedge and forms a partial lid over the nucleotide - binding site ( FIG . 2 ) . The two - subdomain architecture of AAA + domains is more conserved than the underlying sequences 10 . The N terminus of the AAA + domain is formed by residues that lie just N - terminal to helix 0 REFS 2 , 10 . A conserved sequence motif in this region called the N - linker identifies AAA + proteins and differentiates them into two subfamilies 10 ( FIGS 1 , 2 ) . One subfamily has the sequence glycine – glycine in its N - linker , whereas the other has a hydrophobic residue fol - lowed by a glycine . This region contributes to the adenine - ring - binding pocket and is part of the linker that connects AAA + domains to other ( non - AAA + ) domains . Molecular dynamics analysis indicates that the N - linker is flexible and could therefore propagate nucleotide - dependent changes to other parts of the AAA + protein 10 . Walker - A and - B motifs are integral parts of the AAA + ATP - binding site 1 ( FIGS 1 , 2 ) . The P - loop of the Walker - A motif ( between β 1 and α 1 ) directly interacts with the phosphates of ATP . One specific res - idue in the P - loop — the lysine residue in the consen - sus sequence GXXXXGK [ T / S ] ( where X is any amino acid ) — is crucial . Its mutation typically eliminates nucleotide binding and inactivates the AAA + protein TABLE 1 . The Walker - B motif ( from β 3 to the start of α 3 ) also forms contacts with nucleotide , and the acidic residues of its hhhhDE sequence ( h represents a hydrophobic amino acid ) are crucial for ATPase activ - ity . The aspartate residue can coordinate Mg 2 + that is required for ATP hydrolysis , and the glutamate residue is thought to activate water for the hydrolysis reac - tion 2 . Mutation of this glutamate blocks nucleotide hydrolysis but not binding TABLE 1 . As ATP ( rather than ADP ) is required for substrate binding by most , if not all , AAA + proteins , mutations in the Walker - B motif have been used to create ‘substrate traps’ that bind but cannot release substrates . These mutants have Figure 1 | The organization of an AAA + domain . a | The secondary structure and key elements of an AAA + ( ATPases associated with various cellular activities ) domain are depicted in linear diagrams . The approximate position of key elements — the N - linker , Walker - A and - B motifs , sensor 1 and 2 , the second region of homology ( SRH ) and the pore region — are shown under the position of the α - helices ( rectangles ) and β - strands ( arrows ) . Residues of specific functional importance ( for example , the GKT / S sequence of the P - loop ) are highlighted . There is a region of overlap between sensor 1 and the SRH . b | A generalized topology diagram for an AAA + domain . The colouring of the secondary structural elements is consistent with the upper panel of part a , and the colouring of the loops between the helices and strands is consistent with the regions highlighted in the lower panel of part a . The structural elements in this figure are numbered according to REF . 2 . Figure 2 | Structure of an AAA + domain . The crystal structure of the second AAA + ( ATPases associated with various cellular activities ) domain of NSF 103 ( Protein Data Bank accession code 1D2N ) is presented as a model AAA + domain . a | The positions of the structural elements are shown using the numbering system in REF . 2 , and the position of the conserved P - loop is indicated . In this representation , the N - terminal Rossman - fold subdomain is the lower wedge - shaped structure and the C - terminal helical domain is in the upper left corner . b | Approximate positions of the key elements are highlighted on the same structure as shown in part a . A nucleotide analogue ( AMP - PNP ) , shown in stick representation , is coordinated by Mg 2 + . The colour scheme used in this figure is the same as that used in FIG . 1 . SRH , second region of homology . 520 | JULY 2005 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S HslU The AAA + - protein component of the heat - shock - locus HslVU protease of bacteria and archaea . NSF ( N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor or N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ) . It was originally discovered on the basis of its essential activity in transport between Golgi stacks . proven to be effective tools for probing the functions of AAA + proteins 11 – 13 . In their narrowest , sequence - based classifica - tion 4 , 14 , classic AAA proteins contain a conserved region that is positioned C - terminal of the Walker - B motif and is called the second region of homology ( SRH ; FIGS 1 , 2 ) . The SRH consists of part of β 4 , all of α 4 and the loop to β 5 . The sequence of the SRH is not strictly conserved in all AAA + proteins , but compa - rable structural features are always present 2 . The SRH contains two specific structural elements , one at either end ( sensor 1 and arginine fingers ( FIG . 1 ) ; see below ) , which have been proposed to coordinate nucleotide hydrolysis and conformational changes between sub - units 15 . The SRH is responsible for some of the unique properties of the AAA + family . Sensor 1 , which is present in all AAA + proteins , is found at the N terminus of the SRH in the loop connecting β 4 to α 4 ( FIGS 1 , 2 ) . Owing to the confor - mation of the core β - sheet , sensor - 1 residues — in particular , a conserved polar residue — are physi - cally located between the Walker - A and - B motifs and interact with important Walker - B elements and with the γ - phosphate of bound ATP ( FIG . 2 ) . Mutation of polar amino acids in sensor 1 ( such as T394 in yeast NSF ) impairs nucleotide hydroly - sis 16 TABLE 1 . At the other end of the SRH ( at the loop between α 4 and β 5 ; FIG . 1 ) are the arginine fingers , so named because of their similarity to the arrangement of the arginines of GTPase - activator proteins that are inserted into GTP - binding sites to promote nucleotide hydrolysis 17 . In known structures of AAA + oligomers , arginine fingers from one subunit constitute part of the nucleo tide - binding site of an adjacent subunit . Two arginine residues are present as arginine fingers in classic AAA proteins , but only one is conserved in all AAA + proteins . Mutation of the arginine - finger residues has been shown to affect nucleotide hydrolysis and / or the propagation of hydrolysis - dependent conformational changes in AAA + hexamers 15 TABLE 1 . Near the C - terminal end of the AAA + domain , in the α - helical subdomain , is sensor 2 ( FIGS 1 , 2 ) . Its residues also participate in nucleotide binding . A conserved sensor - 2 arginine , near the beginning of α 7 , interacts directly with the γ - phosphate of ATP . Mutating this residue negatively affects nucleotide binding and / or hydrolysis 15 TABLE 1 . Classic AAA proteins generally have an alanine in place of this arginine , but other charged residues are nearby in α 7 ( which is also referred to as the sensor - 2 helix ) . In an AAA + hexamer , residues from this helix are close to the pointed end of the Rossman fold in an adjacent subunit ( specifically the loop between α 0 and β 1 ; FIG . 3 ) and might therefore — similarly to the SRH — have a role in coordinating conformational changes between subunits . Mutations in sensor 2 / α 7 have con - firmed a role for this region in both ATP hydrolysis and substrate unfolding 18 TABLE 1 . AAA + enzymes assemble into oligomers — generally hexamers — that seem to be their biologically active form ( FIG . 3 ) . The hexameric configuration gives AAA + proteins unique characteristics . One is the position - ing of the ATP - binding sites at the interface between subunits of the holoenzyme . This allows direct ( SRH ) and indirect ( sensor 2 / α 7 ) links between the nucle - otide - binding sites of adjacent subunits . All hexam - eric AAA + proteins also have a central cavity or pore that is lined by residues from each subunit . The loop between β 2 and α 2 provides most of the surface of the pore 19 ( FIGS 1 – 3 ) , and three conserved amino acids in this loop ( aromatic – hydrophobic – glycine ) have a role in the function of several AAA + proteins . Specifically , mutations in these residues affect substrate binding and processing without perturbing oligomerization or , in most cases , ATPase activity 20 – 24 TABLE 1 . The pore is of interest because a number of AAA + proteins thread their substrates through it , as discussed below . Table 1 | A molecular toolbox for studying the function of AAA + proteins * AAA + - domain motif Key residue ( s ) Typical mutation Effects References Walker A K in GXXXXGK [ T / S ] K → A Inhibits nucleotide binding 13 , 105 Walker B E in hhhhDE E → Q Impairs ATP hydrolysis , functions as a ‘substrate trap’ 11 – 13 Sensor 1 A polar residue at the end of β 4 N / T → A Impairs ATP hydrolysis 16 , 70 , 106 Sensor 2 R in the sequence GAR near the N terminus of α 7 R → A / M Impairs ATP hydrolysis , sometimes also ATP binding 15 Arginine fingers R residues in the SRH at the end of α 4 R → A R → E Impairs ATP hydrolysis in most AAA + proteins Impairs ATP hydrolysis and oligomerization 15 Pore loop YVG in the β 2 – α 2 loop Y → X V → X G → X These mutations impair substrate binding and processing , with little or no effect on ATP hydrolysis or oligomerization 20 – 24 * The table shows common AAA + - domain mutants that are used to manipulate activity to understand AAA + - protein function . AAA + , ATPases associated with various cellular activities ; h , hydrophobic residue ; SRH , second region of homology ; X , any amino acid . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | JULY 2005 | 521 R E V I E W S p97 / VCP ( 97 - kDa protein / valosin - containing protein ) . p97 / VCP has been implicated in numerous cellular processes , but most clearly in handling ubiquitylated proteins en route to the proteasome . THERMOTOLERANCE A transient state of enhanced heat resistance that is induced by exposure to mild heat shock . CHAMBERED PROTEASE A barrel - shaped oligomeric proteolytic complex with restricted access to internal active sites . ClpXP Caseinolytic protease found in bacteria , which consists of a proteolytic ClpP barrel and a ‘gatekeeping’ AAA + hexamer of ClpX . ClpAP ClpAP is similar to ClpXP and is also found in bacteria , but the ‘gatekeeping’ AAA + hexamer is composed of ClpA . FtsH A membrane - anchored AAA protease in bacteria , which contains AAA and protease domains within a single polypeptide chain . Lon A soluble AAA protease in bacteria , which contains AAA and protease domains within a single polypeptide chain . It is important in cell stress responses . 26S PROTEASOME The primary chambered protease in eukaryotes . Its name reflects its approximate sedimentation coefficient . It is composed of multicatalytic proteolytic ( 20S ) and regulatory ( 19S ) subcomplexes . ATP - driven conformational changes It is clear that most AAA + proteins undergo conforma - tional changes that are linked to ATP binding and / or hydrolysis and that these conformational changes are transmitted to substrate proteins . Although the extent of these nucleotide - driven conformational changes are , in general , not well defined , a few snapshots of enzymes in different states have been obtained . One example is HslU , for which Wang and colleagues examined eight available X - ray structures 8 , 9 , 19 , 25 and described four conformations of the AAA + domain . These differ mainly in the relative position of the N - and C - terminal subdomains . In the empty , no - nucleotide - bound state , the two subdomains are farthest apart , whereas in the ADP - bound state , they are closest . This difference seems to be , in part , due to nucleotide - dependent movement of the P - loop and its adjacent β - strand ( β 1 ) and α - helix ( α 1 ) . Nucleotide binding also affects whether the central pore of the HslU hexamer is open or closed . Although we can - not yet generalize about how nucleotide - driven con - formational changes occur in other AAA + proteins , on the basis of the family - wide sequence conserva - tion , there are probably common mechanisms to convert nucleotide binding and / or hydrolysis into physical work 26 . Nucleotide - dependent structural changes also seem to be propagated to domains that are linked to AAA + domains . One well - studied example of this is in p97 / VCP . Each p97 / VCP protomer consists of two tandem AAA + domains and an N - terminal domain ( N - domain ) that is involved in substrate and / or co factor binding , and these protomers assemble into hexamers . The p97 N - domain has been shown to vary in postion in the different nucleotide - bound states using several techniques 27 – 29 . In the ATP - and ADP - bound states , the N - domains are too mobile to be defined by cryo - electron - microscopy analy - sis 27 . However , in the presence of the transition - state analogue ADP - AlF x , N - domains are seen as discrete densities that sit on top of the hexameric ring that is formed by the AAA + domains . Recent examination of X - ray crystal structures of p97 / VCP in four different nucleotide - bound states confirms that there are large differences in the relative position of the N - domain and the AAA + domains 28 , 30 , and indicates that nucle - otide - dependent changes in interactions between the N - domain and the α - helical subdomain of the first AAA + domain control these movements 28 . Small - angle X - ray scattering measurements of p97 in solu - tion have also shown significant nucleotide - dependent changes in the positions of the N - domains relative to the hexameric AAA + rings of p97 / VCP 29 . Functions of AAA + proteins AAA + proteins are involved in an array of cellular processes . These range from protein degradation and DNA replication in all organisms to evolutionarily specific activities , such as THERMOTOLERANCE in bacte - ria , fungi and plants , and membrane fusion and the movement of microtubule motors in eukaryotes . For functional purposes , there is little evidence to support separating the classic AAA branch of the family from the larger AAA + superfamily , which leads us to con - sider the AAA + superfamily as a whole . A simplifying idea that emerges from recent mechanistic studies is that AAA + proteins all operate by promoting confor - mational changes or remodelling in target proteins . In many cases this remodelling perturbs protein structure sufficiently to promote unfolding . Below , we review the main categories of AAA + - protein - mediated reactions — unfolding for proteolysis , the disassembly of protein aggregates , and protein - complex disassembly — and highlight examples that have available mechanistic information about how substrates are recognized and altered . Other reactions that are not explicitly consid - ered here include the use of cyclical conformational changes to generate unidirectional movement ( as in the case of the molecular motor dynein moving along microtubules 31 ) , and the reactions of the clamp loader complex during DNA replication 32 . Protein unfolding and degradation AAA + proteins are crucial for proteolysis , in which their role is to unfold substrates and deliver them to the degradative chamber of so - called CHAMBERED PROTEASES 33 . There are five AAA + - containing proteolytic systems in bacteria ( ClpXP , ClpAP , HslUV , FtsH and Lon ) and equivalent systems in eukaryotes ( the 26S PROTEASOME and bacte - rial - like systems in organelles ) . Chambered proteases are responsible for a large proportion of intracellular Figure 3 | The structure of an AAA + oligomer . This shows the arrangement of subunits in the hexamer that is formed by the second AAA + ( ATPases associated with various cellular activities ) domain of NSF 103 ( Protein Data Bank accession code 1D2N ) ( the positions of the monomers are highlighted by alternating light and dark grey colouring ) . A nucleotide analogue ( AMP - PNP ; red stick representation ) occupies a binding site at the interface between neighbouring subunits . The second region of homology is shown in purple , sensor 2 in green and the pore in yellow . 522 | JULY 2005 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S Disordered aggregate Reactivated folded proteins Ordered aggregate ATP ATP ADP + P i ADP + P i Hsp104 / ClpB Hsp70 Hsp40 ClpA ClpP NSF α - SNAP SNAREcomplex SNAREmonomers a Protein degradation b Protein disaggregation c Protein - complex disassembly Folded substrate ATP ADP + P i ATP ADP + P i protein degradation . In most systems , the AAA + domain and protease are encoded on separate polypep - tides ( ClpXP , ClpAP , HslUV and the 26S proteasome ) ; in others , both activities are present in one polypep - tide ( FtsH , Lon and mitochondrial AAA + proteases ) . Detailed studies of ClpXP and ClpAP show how AAA + proteins promote protein unfolding ( FIG . 4a ) . ClpXP and ClpAP : chambered proteases in bacteria . ClpP is a barrel with 1 – 2 - nm pores at either end and is built from two stacked rings that each contain seven proteolytic subunits 34 . Entrance to ClpP ( through the axial pores ) is controlled by ring - shaped homo - hexamers of the AAA + proteins ClpX or ClpA , which bind to one or both ends of the ClpP barrel 35 , 36 . A conserved tripeptide sequence ( IGF ) in a loop that lies C - terminal of sensor 1 in the AAA + domain is crucial for binding to ClpP 37 . The affinity of this interaction is also modulated by whether or not the ATPase is bound to substrate 38 . Each ClpX subunit has one AAA + domain , whereas ClpA has two . The functional significance of having one versus two AAA + domains for delivering substrates to ClpP is not known . Both ClpX and ClpA have a further domain N - terminal to their AAA + domain ( s ) . This is referred to as an N - domain and it has a role in substrate recognition . Substrate recognition by ClpX and ClpA . A theme that is emerging from studies of ClpX and ClpA is that short sequence motifs define the substrates of these protease - associated enzymes . These sequence motifs are recognized directly by the AAA + protein , and also ( sometimes preferentially ) by adaptor proteins that help to deliver a substrate to the AAA + protein . The best - characterized motif for targeting a substrate to ClpX is the 11 - amino - acid tag ( AANDENYALAA ) that is encoded by the small stable 10S RNA ( ssrA ) and is added to polypeptides when ribosomes stall 39 . The ssrA - tagged polypeptides dis - sociate from ribosomes and are degraded by ClpXP ( or ClpAP or FtsH ) . Degradation of ssrA - tagged polypeptides by ClpXP can be enhanced by the adap - tor protein SspB , which binds to both the tag and to the N - domain of ClpX . This positions the tagged substrate near the ClpX pore 5 . Other motifs that direct proteins for degradation by ClpXP in Escherichia coli were identified by examining the sequences of proteins that accumulate in a proteolytically inactive ClpXP sub - strate trap 40 . In ~ 60 trapped proteins ( which included transcription factors , metabolic enzymes and stress - response proteins ) , five common ClpXP - targeting motifs were identified . All are located at the termini of targeted proteins and are rich in hydro phobic and basic amino acids . Further levels of diversity among ClpXP substrates include degradation motifs that are only exposed under particular circumstances . An interesting example of this involves two ClpX - recognition motifs that are buried in the middle of the LexA transcriptional repressor and are only exposed following DNA damage 41 . Figure 4 | AAA + - protein function . a | The steps involved in the degradation of an ssrA - tagged substrate by ClpAP . First , the folded substrate is marked for engagement by the AAA + ( ATPases associated with various cellular activities ) protein ClpA by the attachment of an ssrA tag ( green ) to its C terminus . Then , unfolding occurs . Unfolding is ATP dependent and might require many rounds of ATP hydrolysis before it is complete . The unfolded substrate is passed through axial pores into the degradative chamber of ClpP and degraded . The image of ClpAP is based on a cryo - electron - microscopy reconstruction 104 . b | This panel depicts the different types of aggregate that can be handled by the AAA + protein 104 - kDa heat - shock protein ( Hsp104 ) and its bacterial orthologue ClpB . Disordered aggregates that accumulate following cell stress , as well as ordered aggregates that are formed by prions , can be disassembled ( and their component proteins reactivated ) by Hsp104 / ClpB . For disordered aggregates , Hsp104 / ClpB is thought to cooperate with the Hsp70 chaperone system . The image of ClpB is based on a cryo - electron - microscopy reconstruction 71 . c | This panel shows a representative protein - complex disassembly reaction . SNARE complexes that form during membrane fusion are highly stable four - helix bundles that do not readily dissociate . The AAA + protein NSF , together with its adaptor protein α - SNAP , disassembles this complex to release individual SNARE proteins . These SNAREs are often unstructured and can interact with many other proteins . They are also available to form new SNARE complexes with SNAREs on other membranes , which leads to new membrane - fusion events . The image shown for NSF is based on a cryo - electron - microscopy reconstruction of the structurally similar AAA + protein p97 REF . 27 . P i , inorganic phosphate . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | JULY 2005 | 523 R E V I E W S ClpP The proteolytic component of bacterial chambered proteases , which consists of 14 proteolytic subunits . GroEL TRAP A mutant of the GroEL chaperonin that binds unfolded proteins but does not release them . To understand how AAA + proteins handle their substrates , the location of substrate - binding elements must be identified . The N - domains of ClpX and ClpA are flexibly attached to their respective AAA + domains 42 , and are thought to operate as tethers to deliver substrates to the AAA + domains 5 . However , elements in the AAA + domains must also have a fun - damental role in substrate binding , because ClpA and ClpX that lack their N - domains continue to promote substrate degradation 43 . Recent mutagenesis data indi - cate that hydrophobic residues in the conserved pore loop ( YVG ) ( FIGS 1 – 3 ) have a role in substrate engage - ment 22 TABLE 1 . Other elements in AAA + domains have also been implicated in substrate binding . These include the C - terminal α - helical subdomain — which is referred to in this context as the ‘sensor and sub - strate discrimination’ ( SSD ) domain 44 — and the N - terminal ~ 65 residues of the AAA + domain 45 . Substrate processing by ClpXP and ClpAP . What do ClpX and ClpA do to substrates ? Unfolding was assumed to be necessary for moving a substrate polypeptide through the narrow entrance into the proteolytic chamber of ClpP . This activity was attrib - uted to AAA + proteins when it was found that ClpA ( and later ClpX ) functions independently of ClpP as a chaperone to remodel proteins 46 . Direct demonstra - tion of the unfolding activity of these enzymes came from studies that used loss of fluorescence , hydrogen / deuterium exchange and a GroEL TRAP to show that ClpA or ClpX and ATP enhance the rate at which ssrA - tagged green fluorescent protein unfolds 47 , 48 . In addition to unfolding substrates , AAA + pro - teins also translocate them into the ClpP barrel . This process is ATP - dependent and , in the case of ClpX , consumes 1 – 2 ATP molecules per substrate residue delivered to ClpP 49 . Substrate movement from the outer surface of the ATPase to the inside of ClpP has been directly visualized by electron microscopy 35 , and has been shown in kinetic studies to proceed from the tagged to the untagged end of a substrate 50 . Elegant studies of the relationship between the thermodynamic stability of proteins and the rate at which ClpXP degrades them have provided insights into how AAA + proteins alter protein structure . Unexpectedly , there is not always a correlation between global protein stability , as measured in vitro by susceptibility to heat - or solvent - induced dena - turation , and the ease of ClpX - catalysed unfold - ing and ClpXP - mediated degradation 49 , 51 – 53 . To understand why this might be , Matouscheck and co - workers studied the degradation of circularly permuted dihydrofolate reductase variants with ssrA tags attached to different structural elements . They found that the type of secondary structure immedi - ately adjacent to the degradation tag correlates with the efficiency of AAA + - catalysed protein unfolding 52 . In particular , dihydrofolate reductase was more read - ily degraded when an ssrA tag was connected to a surface - exposed loop or α - helix than when it was connected to a β - strand . Complementary studies of the titin I27 immunoglobulin - like domain show that destabilizing mutations near the degradation tag increase the rate of degradation , whereas comparable mutations elsewhere do not 49 . Together , these results indicate that ClpX actively unfolds its substrates by destabilizing structural elements adjacent to the degradation tag of a substrate . What changes in protease - associated AAA + proteins are responsible for substrate unfolding and translocation ? Overall , these are poorly understood . As mentioned above , there are nucleotide - driven con - formational changes in AAA + domains , as well as in the attached N - domains . The most detailed proposals for how these conformational changes lead to sub - strate unfolding come from the structural studies of HslU that were described above . In particular , nucle - otide - dependent differences in the size of the central pore and in the position of the GYVG - containing β 2 – α 2 pore loop have led to the suggestion that changes in this loop might mediate unfolding and translocation 19 . Large changes in the relative position - ing of the N - and C - terminal subdomains are also proposed to contribute to unfolding 25 . Less - detailed models for unfolding by ClpX predict that the ATP - driven pulling of a substrate through the central pore leads to its unfolding 5 , 53 . Recent studies of ATP hydrolysis and substrate denaturation by ClpX have shown that there are large variations in how much ATP is needed to denature different substrate pro - teins 49 . This has led to the idea that ClpX works by the repeated application of a constant ATP - generated force to substrates , and only sometimes does this force result in unfolding 5 , 49 . Extending the paradigm : the 26S proteasome . The principles of how ClpXP and ClpAP unfold their substrates for degradation probably apply in a gen - eral way to the eukaryotic 26S proteasome , with a few further levels of regulation and complexity ( for a review , see REF . 33 ) . The protease itself ( 20S ) is built from four rings instead of two . The gatekeeper com - plex ( 19S ) consists of one ring of AAA + proteins ( six subunits , each encoded by a different gene ) , which is referred to as the base , and another ring of unrelated subunits , which is referred to as the lid . The main difference in protein degradation between eukaryotes and prokaryotes is that the proteins to be degraded in eukaryotes are marked by polyubiquitin tags 33 . This transfers the task of identifying abnormal proteins to cellular ubiquitin - ligase systems . Ubiquitin - tagged substrates are recognized by elements in the 19S complex ( or by adaptor proteins ) , deubiquitylated , and then delivered to the chamber of the 20S protease for degradation . Successful degradation of substrates by the proteasome also requires the presence of an unstructured region of polypeptide , which functions as the initiation site for degradation 54 . As with ClpA and ClpX , the 19S lid can operate independently as a chaperone that recognizes misfolded model proteins , although the physiological role of this activity remains to be established 55 , 56 . 524 | JULY 2005 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S PRION A proteinaceous infectious particle , which was discovered by Stanley Prusiner for its role in the transmission of infectious neurodegenerative disorders . Prions are conformationally modified proteins .  PSI +  An ordered aggregate of the yeast translation terminator Sup35 , which is referred to as a yeast prion . Hsp70 CHAPERONE SYSTEM ( 70 - kDa heat - shock - protein chaperone system ) . Conserved family of ~ 70 - kDa ATPases that are involved in protein folding . They cooperate with Hsp40 and nucleotide - exchange factors . Members include DnaK , DnaJ and GrpE in Escherichia coli and related proteins in higher organisms . Membrane - protein unfolding and degradation . Degrading proteins that are embedded in mem - branes presents a special set of problems , because the polypeptide within the membrane has to be extracted to be degraded by a soluble protease . AAA + proteins are often involved in this extraction process . For example , proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) are retrotranslocated to the cytosol and passed to the proteasome for degradation in a process known as ER - associated degradation ( ERAD ) . The cytoplasmic AAA + protein p97 / VCP is essential for removing numerous ERAD protein substrates from the mem - brane 57 , and has recently been shown to associate with the transmembrane protein Derlin , a candidate retrotranslocation channel 58 , 59 . Precisely how p97 / VCP promotes retrotranslocation is unclear , and for some ERAD substrates , p97 / VCP is not involved . In these cases , AAA + proteins in the 19S proteasome cap might directly promote retrotranslocation 60 . In bacteria , mitochondria and chloroplasts , AAA + and protease domains are directly linked to each other and to the membrane . Substrates are extracted from the membrane by the AAA + component of these AAA + proteases and are then degraded by the hydrophilic protease domain . FtsH , the prototype of this group , has an essential role in the turnover of bacterial membrane proteins as well as some cytosolic proteins 3 . Mitochondria contain two membrane - anchored AAA + proteases , the cata - lytic sites of which are orientated on opposing sides of the inner membrane . These two enzymes extract proteins from their respective side of the mem - brane for proteolysis and are essential for normal mitochondrial function 61 . Summary . Although each of the protease - associated AAA + proteins discussed here handle different sub - strates , the common mechanistic theme is that they all unwind or unfold their target proteins in a vecto - rial manner for delivery to their associated protease ( FIG . 4a ) . The intimate physical connection between the AAA + proteins and the proteolytic chamber into which they deliver substrates provides an efficient mechanism for coupling unfolding with degradation . As we discuss further below , many of the same ATPases can also engage and unfold substrates in the absence of their associated protease , which leads to the remodel - ling of the substrate protein and / or disassembly of a protein complex . Fighting protein aggregation A second type of reaction carried out by members of the AAA + family is the disassembly of protein aggregates ( FIG . 4b ) . Proteins that fail to fold but escape proteolysis ( perhaps because the cellular proteolytic machinery is overwhelmed by environmental stress or a mutant protein ) often coalesce to form aggre - gates . It was long assumed that when such aggregates reached a threshold size , they became irreversible and potentially toxic . However , the discovery that thermotolerance in yeast is mediated by the 104 - kDa heat - shock protein ( Hsp104 ) 62 indicated that Hsp104 in fungi — and its orthologues in plants ( Hsp101 ) and bacteria ( ClpB ) — can enhance survival by eliminat - ing stress - induced protein aggregates 63 , 64 . In parallel studies , Hsp104 was shown to have an important role in handling a different kind of aggregate , namely the ordered β - sheet or amyloid that is formed by PRIONS in Saccharomyces cerevisiae 65 . An example of this is the  PSI +  prion that is formed by a glutamine - rich region of the translation termination factor Sup35 . Cells that contain no Sup35 amyloid are [ psi – ] , whereas those with Sup35 amyloid are [ PSI + ] and have decreased Sup35 activity . Hsp104 has an essential role in con - trolling the formation , propagation and elimination of this prion state 64 , 66 . How Hsp104 resolves protein aggregates remained a mystery until Glover and Lindquist showed that it cooperated with the Hsp70 CHAPERONE SYSTEM in vitro to solubilize and refold aggregated proteins 67 . Similar studies in other systems extended the analysis of this bi - chaperone network 68 , and led to the proposal that Hsp104 and its orthologues might break large aggre - gates into smaller pieces that the Hsp70 system can then refold 64 . Direct contact between ClpB and Hsp70 , as well as recent evidence that Hsp70 is needed for ClpB to engage certain substrates 69 , indicates that the collaboration between these two chaperone systems is intimate but not yet fully understood . For Hsp104 to resolve aggregates , it must first rec - ognize them . Defining what Hsp104 recognizes has been challenging , because aggregates are intrinsically heterogeneous and are not structurally well char - acterized . A recent study used a library of peptides that represented the sequences of six proteins that , in their aggregated form , interact with ClpB . This study showed that ClpB — like ClpX — binds to short motifs that are rich in basic and aromatic residues 24 . Further studies of these and similar peptide substrates will shed light on the specific features that Hsp104 / ClpB recognize and will facilitate a more quantitative understanding of the interactions in this system . How does Hsp104 / ClpB dissociate aggregates ? Hsp104 / ClpB contains two tandem AAA + domains , as well as a unique and essential ‘middle’ or M - domain that is positioned near the end of the first AAA + domain . Both AAA + domains seem to be important for activity , and there is communication between them 70 . The M - domain consists of antiparallel helices that form propeller - like structures around the perimeter of the assembled hexamer 71 . Two models for Hsp104 action have been considered 64 . In the first , which was alluded to above , Hsp104 / ClpB can be thought of as a ‘crowbar’ that breaks large aggregates into smaller pieces that become substrates for refolding by the Hsp70 sys - tem ( which can handle small , but not large , protein aggregates ) . The propeller - like M - domains have been proposed to function as crowbars on the basis of their shape and on experiments showing that immobiliz - ing them by crosslinking engineered cysteine residues inactivates the enzyme 71 . However , direct contact between M - domains and substrate proteins has yet to NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | JULY 2005 | 525 R E V I E W S DNA TRANSPOSITION The movement of mobile DNA elements or transposons by recombination . Mu TRANSPOSOSOME A complex containing the MuA transposase tetramer and the two ends of the Mu genomic DNA . MuA TRANSPOSASE A 75 - kDa multidomain enzyme of a bacterial virus . It forms a homotetramer and promotes DNA recombination by catalysing donor DNA cleavage and strand transfer and joining at the target site . SNAREs ( soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ( NSF ) attachment protein receptors ) . Coiled - coil - forming proteins that are found on cellular membranes and that promote intracellular membrane fusion . α SNAP ( α - soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ( NSF ) attachment protein ) . Recruits NSF to membranes and binds to SNARE proteins . be shown . Alternatively , Hsp104 / ClpB might operate as a ‘ratchet’ that unfolds aggregates by pulling indi - vidual components out of an aggregate and through its central pore 64 . Experiments showing that the con - served β 2 – α 2 pore loop is important for disaggrega - tion support this model 23 , 24 . Compelling evidence in favour of this model comes from a recent study show - ing that ClpB will deliver substrates into ClpP when it contains the ClpP - interacting loop from ClpA / ClpX 69 . This implies a similarity between AAA + - mediated disaggregation and the unfolding reactions that pre - cede proteolysis . How close this similarity is , how much ATP is needed to disaggregate substrates , and how processive the reaction is are all questions that remain to be answered . Promoting protein - complex disassembly A third type of reaction catalysed by AAA + proteins is the disassembly of what are otherwise stable pro - tein complexes that are formed in various processes throughout the cell ( FIG . 4c ) . Although , at first glance , this function might not seem related to the protein unfolding and disaggregating activities discussed above , a second look indicates that the mechanisms involved could be similar . The same force application that is needed for protein unfolding could transiently or partially unfold components of stable protein com - plexes and lead to their disassembly . In support of this idea is the fact that the same AAA + proteins that deliver substrates to ClpP operate on their own as protein - complex disassemblers . We focus the discussion below on a few well studied examples of AAA + - mediated protein - complex disassembly . Disassembly of MuA strand - transfer complex by ClpX . The bacterial virus Mu replicates its genome during lytic development by DNA TRANSPOSITION . The core of the Mu TRANSPOSOSOME is the MuA TRANSPOSASE , which operates by binding to and bringing together the ends of the Mu genome , and promoting the DNA cleavage and joining reactions that are necessary for transposition 72 . The transpososome becomes increasingly stable as transposition proceeds , and culminates in a highly stable , post - transposition strand - transfer complex ( STC ) that is bound to DNA . The core of the STC con - sists of four MuA subunits and is resistant to high salt , 6M urea concentrations and temperatures up to 75°C REF . 73 . When it is bound to DNA , the STC inhibits DNA replication . ClpX was found to be the factor responsible for destabilizing the STC and enabling DNA replication to proceed 74 . ClpX operates independently of ClpP in this reaction and uses ATP hydrolysis to destabilize MuA tetramers . ClpX binds to the C - terminal ten residues of MuA 75 and unfolds individual MuA subunits 76 . This unfolding coincides with the release of MuA mono - mers from the STC 77 . Interestingly , experiments with mixtures of full - length and truncated MuA show that only MuA that contains the C - terminal ClpX - binding motif is released from DNA and that only one of the four subunits needs to be removed to destabilize the entire STC 76 . These observations lead to the more general proposal that protein complexes can be dis - assembled by remodelling ( and perhaps unfolding ) a subset of their components . Disassembly of SNARE complexes by NSF . Intracellular membrane fusion requires membrane - associated heli - cal proteins known as SNAREs , which assemble into com - plexes that bring membranes together and promote membrane fusion 78 , 79 . Despite limited sequence con - servation , all of the SNARE complexes that have been examined so far are rod - shaped four - helix bundles that are very stable and , in many cases , resist dissociation by high temperatures and the denaturing detergent SDS . Following membrane fusion , SNARE complexes have to disassemble to regenerate free SNAREs for use in subsequent fusion reactions . Spontaneous SNARE - complex disassembly is slow , and cells therefore depend on the AAA + protein NSF and its adaptor protein αSNAP to carry out this reaction 80 ( see BOX 1 for details of this reaction and for other roles of AAA + proteins in cellular membrane dynamics ) . Simliar to other proteins that contain tandem AAA + domains , NSF forms a hexameric cylinder in which two AAA + rings are stacked on top of each other 80 . The first AAA + domain of NSF hydrolyses ATP to disassem - ble SNARE complexes . In present models of this reac - tion , α - SNAP is thought to envelop the SNARE complex ( with three α - SNAPs surrounding a SNARE bundle ) and recruit a NSF hexamer . When bound , α - SNAP stimulates the ATPase activity of this hexamer and triggers disassembly of the protein complex 81 ( FIG . 4c ) . By analogy to the situation with ClpX and MuA , it is reasonable to imagine that NSF could unfold one or more components of a SNARE complex to destabilize and disassemble it . However , how NSF accomplishes this is far from clear . First , there is no evidence , so far , for a direct contact between NSF and SNAREs ; instead α - SNAP seems to be a requisite link between them . Whether a pull from NSF on the C - terminus of α - SNAP is enough to unfold SNAREs , and disassem - ble the complex , remains to be established . Second , so far , data indicate that the primary α - SNAP - binding sites on NSF are in its flexibly attached N - domains 82 . Whether nucleotide - controlled movements in these flexible domains promote SNARE disassembly by pulling on α - SNAP , or instead facilitate the contact of α - SNAP and / or the SNARE complex with more rigid sites inside the AAA + ring ( such as the central pore residues mentioned above ) , needs to be established . Last , even if disassembly involves an unfolding reac - tion that is fundamentally similar to those catalysed by ClpX , ClpA and ClpB , it is unlikely that NSF threads its substrates entirely through its central pore owing to the geometric constraints of the membrane . This dictates that disassembled SNAREs must leave NSF through the same ‘door’ by which they entered . Understanding how this disassembly reaction takes place will help us to expand on and generalize the model that has been indicated by studies of ClpX and MuA for how AAA + proteins disassemble protein complexes 77 . 526 | JULY 2005 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S MULTIVESICULAR BODY An endosome , usually a late endosome , that contains lumenal vesicles . The internal vesicles are thought to form by invagination and budding from the limiting membrane . Other protein - complex disassembly reactions . It is becoming increasingly clear that AAA + - mediated protein - complex disassembly is involved in various cellular processes . ClpA , like ClpX , participates in well - defined protein - complex disassembly reactions — for example , converting the plasmid replication initiator protein RepA from an inactive dimer to an active monomer . It does this with only one round of ATP hydrolysis , which indicates that it disassembles the dimer without unfolding the entire RepA protein 83 . ClpB ( again working together with the Hsp70 system ) has roles outside of disaggregation that include acti - vating the plasmid replication initiation protein TrfA , thereby converting it from an inactive dimer to an active monomer 84 . Other examples of disassembly reactions include the severing of microtubules by the AAA + proteins katanin 85 and spastin 86 , and the activity of the AAA + protein Vps4 ( vacuolar protein sorting - 4 ) in modulating interactions between the ESCRT ( endo - somal sorting complex required for transport ) proteins that are essential for MULTIVESICULARBODY biogenesis 87 . Several protein - complex remodelling reactions that are necessary for DNA replication also require AAA + proteins 32 . Despite the common requirement for AAA + proteins in all of these disassembly reactions , it seems probable that the mechanistic details will differ and that the extent of the conformational change or ‘pulling’ that is needed to disassemble each of these diverse complexes will vary . Diseases caused by mutations in AAA + proteins Proteins of the AAA + family are involved directly and indirectly in a rapidly increasing number of human diseases ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . Among the earliest AAA + proteins to be identified and linked to disease was the human orthologue of yeast Pex1 ( human PEX1 is also called PAS1 ) 88 , which has an essential role in the import of peroxisomal matrix proteins and is mutated in > 70 % of Zellweger’s type peroxisome - biogenesis disorders 88 . Over the past decade , mutations in other AAA + proteins have been linked to various clini - cal syndromes , which highlights the importance of these enzymes in many aspects of normal physiology . Other recent developments in this area include the finding that a syndrome of myositis ( inflammation of muscle tissue ) , frontotemporal dementia and Paget’s disease of the bone is caused by mutations in p97 / VCP 89 , the discovery that the ER - lumenal AAA + protein torsinA , which is responsible for early - onset torsion dystonia , might operate in the nuclear enve - lope 90 , 91 , and the demonstration that a protein that is responsible for hereditary spastic paraplegia is a microtubule - severing enzyme 86 . Many AAA + - associated diseases are inherited as autosomal dominant traits . A probable explanation for this is that the function of oligomeric AAA + holoenzymes depends on communication between subunits , with full activity requiring that most or all of the subunits are functional . In addition to spe - cific mutations that cause disease , there are several correlations between the expression level of AAA + proteins and disease . These include an association between increased p97 / VCP levels and poor prog - nosis in carcinomas 92 , and between decreased levels of NSF and schizophrenia and epilepsy 93 , 94 . AAA + proteins are also involved in diseases in which cells have to deal with protein misfolding and / or aggregation . As described above , proteolysis and disaggregation depend on AAA + - enzyme activ - ity , so their function is a crucial part of the cellular response to what are often referred to as diseases of protein conformation . Summary The AAA + family of proteins is defined by the sequence and structure of the AAA + ATP - binding domain . Members of the family have been well delineated in recent genome - wide surveys , and an increasing number of high - resolution structural studies have provided a detailed picture of the conserved structure of the AAA + platform . How AAA + domains assemble into functional oligomers and change their conforma - tion during ATP hydrolysis has been studied less exten - sively . Future high - resolution structures of oligomeric AAA + proteins in different nucleotide - bound states , and eventually bound to substrates and / or cofactors , will be essential to better define the mechanisms for members of this family . Many reactions have yet to be reconstituted in vitro with purified com ponents , and this remains an essential step to show that a Box 1 | AAA + proteins and cellular membrane dynamics AAA + ( ATPases associated with various cellular activities ) proteins have unique and essential roles in regulating proteins and protein complexes that define the function and organization of cellular membranes and organelles . One of the best - studied members of the family in eukaryotes is NSF , which , together with its adaptor protein α - SNAP , is responsible for disassembling highly stable SNARE complexes after they form to promote membrane fusion 80 ( FIG . 4c ) . SNARE - complex disassembly is essential for maintaining the elaborate network of intracellular membranes that define a eukaryotic cell ; without NSF , membrane trafficking ceases as assembled SNARE complexes accumulate 95 , 96 . NSF is present in all tissues , but is most highly expressed in the nervous system where it enables the rapid membrane trafficking that is needed to maintain synaptic function . Its activity has been shown to be modulated by nitric oxide 97 and phosphorylation 98 , 99 . Other membrane - fusion events — notably , nuclear - envelope and Golgi - apparatus assembly following mitosis , assembly of transitional endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , and fusion between ER membranes — seem to be regulated by the AAA + protein p97 / VCP 100 – 102 . How p97 and its ubiquitin - binding cofactors participate in these reactions has not yet been established . A loosely analogous machinery operates to control the biogenesis of multivesicular bodies ( MVBs ) in the endosomal pathway , regulating the formation of lumenal vesicles from the limiting membrane of the endosome 87 . In this case , the AAA + protein Vps4 ( vacuolar protein sorting - 4 , also called SKD1 in mammals ) operates on one or more components of the endosomal sorting complex required for transport ( ESCRT ) machinery to regulate their association with membranes and the invagination of membrane into the MVB 87 . The details of this reaction and its precise relationship to membrane invagination into the MVB remain unknown . Knowledge of other members of the AAA + family and the application of novel assays both in vitro and in vivo are sure to give insights into how AAA + proteins carry out these membrane - based remodelling reactions . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | JULY 2005 | 527 R E V I E W S 1 . Neuwald , A . F . , Aravind , L . , Spouge , J . L . & Koonin , E . V . AAA + : a class of chaperone - like ATPases associated with the assembly , operation , and disassembly of protein complexes . Genome Res . 9 , 27 – 43 ( 1999 ) . 2 . Iyer , L . M . , Leipe , D . D . , Koonin , E . V . & Aravind , L . Evolutionary history and higher order classification of AAA + ATPases . J . Struct . Biol . 146 , 11 – 31 ( 2004 ) . A recent , definitive sequence and structure - based analysis of the AAA + - protein family . 3 . Ogura , T . & Wilkinson , A . J . AAA + superfamily ATPases : common structure — diverse function . Genes Cells 6 , 575 – 597 ( 2001 ) . 4 . Lupas , A . N . & Martin , J . AAA proteins . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 12 , 746 – 753 ( 2002 ) . 5 . Sauer , R . T . et al . Sculpting the proteome with AAA ( + ) proteases and disassembly machines . Cell 119 , 9 – 18 ( 2004 ) . 6 . Frickey , T . & Lupas , A . N . Phylogenetic analysis of AAA proteins . J . Struct . Biol . 146 , 2 – 10 ( 2004 ) . 7 . Beyer , A . Sequence analysis of the AAA protein family . Protein Sci . 6 , 2043 – 2058 ( 1997 ) . 8 . Bochtler , M . et al . The structures of HsIU and the ATP - dependent protease HsIU – HsIV . Nature 403 , 800 – 805 ( 2000 ) . 9 . Sousa , M . C . et al . Crystal and solution structures of an HslUV protease – chaperone complex . Cell 103 , 633 – 643 ( 2000 ) . 10 . Smith , G . R . , Contreras - Moreira , B . , Zhang , X . & Bates , P . A . A link between sequence conservation and domain motion within the AAA + family . J . Struct . Biol . 146 , 189 – 204 ( 2004 ) . 11 . Weibezahn , J . , Schlieker , C . , Bukau , B . & Mogk , A . Characterization of a trap mutant of the AAA + chaperone ClpB . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 32608 – 32617 ( 2003 ) . 12 . Dalal , S . , Rosser , M . F . , Cyr , D . M . & Hanson , P . I . Distinct roles for the AAA ATPases NSF and p97 in the secretory pathway . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 637 – 648 ( 2004 ) . 13 . Babst , M . , Wendland , B . , Estepa , E . J . & Emr , S . D . The Vps4p AAA ATPase regulates membrane association of a Vps protein complex required for normal endosome function . EMBO J . 17 , 2982 – 2993 ( 1998 ) . 14 . Tomoyasu , T . et al . The Escherichia coli FtsH protein is a prokaryotic member of a protein family of putative ATPases involved in membrane functions , cell cycle control , and gene expression . J . Bacteriol . 175 , 1344 – 1351 ( 1993 ) . 15 . Ogura , T . , Whiteheart , S . W . & Wilkinson , A . J . Conserved arginine residues implicated in ATP hydrolysis , nucleotide - sensing , and inter - subunit interactions in AAA and AAA + ATPases . J . Struct . Biol . 146 , 106 – 112 ( 2004 ) . 16 . Steel , G . J . , Harley , C . , Boyd , A . & Morgan , A . A screen for dominant negative mutants of SEC18 reveals a role for the AAA protein consensus sequence in ATP hydrolysis . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 1345 – 1356 ( 2000 ) . 17 . Scheffzek , K . et al . The Ras – RasGAP complex : structural basis for GTPase activation and its loss in oncogenic Ras mutants . Science 277 , 333 – 338 ( 1997 ) . 18 . Joshi , S . A . , Baker , T . A . & Sauer , R . T . C - terminal domain mutations in ClpX uncouple substrate binding from an engagement step required for unfolding . Mol . Microbiol . 48 , 67 – 76 ( 2003 ) . 19 . Wang , J . et al . Crystal structures of the HslVU peptidase – ATPase complex reveal an ATP - dependent proteolysis mechanism . Structure 9 , 177 – 184 ( 2001 ) . First study to highlight the importance of the conserved GYVG motif in the central pore of AAA + proteins . 20 . Song , H . K . et al . Mutational studies on HslU and its docking mode with HslV . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 14103 – 14108 ( 2000 ) . 21 . Yamada - Inagawa , T . , Okuno , T . , Karata , K . , Yamanaka , K . & Ogura , T . Conserved pore residues in the AAA protease FtsH are important for proteolysis and its coupling to ATP hydrolysis . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 50182 – 50187 ( 2003 ) . 22 . Siddiqui , S . M . , Sauer , R . T . & Baker , T . A . Role of the processing pore of the ClpX AAA + ATPase in the recognition and engagement of specific protein substrates . Genes Dev . 18 , 369 – 374 ( 2004 ) . 23 . Lum , R . , Tkach , J . M . , Vierling , E . & Glover , J . R . Evidence for an unfolding / threading mechanism for protein disaggregation by Saccharomyces cerevisiae Hsp104 . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 29139 – 29146 ( 2004 ) . 24 . Schlieker , C . et al . Substrate recognition by the AAA + chaperone ClpB . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 11 , 607 – 615 ( 2004 ) . 25 . Wang , J . et al . Nucleotide - dependent conformational changes in a protease - associated ATPase HsIU . Structure 9 , 1107 – 1116 ( 2001 ) . 26 . Wang , J . Nucleotide - dependent domain motions within rings of the RecA / AAA ( + ) superfamily . J . Struct . Biol . 148 , 259 – 267 ( 2004 ) . 27 . Rouiller , I . et al . Conformational changes of the multifunction p97 AAA ATPase during its ATPase cycle . Nature Struct . Biol . 9 , 950 – 957 ( 2002 ) . 28 . DeLaBarre , B . & Brunger , A . T . Nucleotide dependent motion and mechanism of action of p97 / VCP . J . Mol . Biol . 347 , 437 – 452 ( 2005 ) . 29 . Davies , J . M . , Tsuruta , H . , May , A . P . & Weis , W . I . Conformational changes of p97 during nucleotide hydrolysis determined by small - angle X - ray scattering . Structure 13 , 183 – 195 ( 2005 ) . 30 . DeLaBarre , B . & Brunger , A . T . Complete structure of p97 / valosin - containing protein reveals communication between nucleotide domains . Nature Struct . Biol . 10 , 856 – 863 ( 2003 ) . First complete crystal structure of a hexameric AAA + protein that contains tandem AAA + domains . 31 . Burgess , S . A . , Walker , M . L . , Sakakibara , H . , Knight , P . J . & Oiwa , K . Dynein structure and power stroke . Nature 421 , 715 – 718 ( 2003 ) . 32 . Davey , M . J . , Jeruzalmi , D . , Kuriyan , J . & O’Donnell , M . Motors and switches : AAA + machines within the replisome . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 826 – 835 ( 2002 ) . 33 . Pickart , C . M . & Cohen , R . E . Proteasomes and their kin : proteases in the machine age . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 177 – 187 ( 2004 ) . 34 . Wang , J . , Hartling , J . A . & Flanagan , J . M . The structure of ClpP at 2 . 3 Å resolution suggests a model for ATP - dependent proteolysis . Cell 91 , 447 – 456 ( 1997 ) . 35 . Ishikawa , T . et al . Translocation pathway of protein substrates in ClpAP protease . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 4328 – 4333 ( 2001 ) . 36 . Ortega , J . , Lee , H . S . , Maurizi , M . R . & Steven , A . C . ClpA and ClpX ATPases bind simultaneously to opposite ends of ClpP peptidase to form active hybrid complexes . J . Struct . Biol . 146 , 217 – 226 ( 2004 ) . 37 . Kim , Y . I . et al . Molecular determinants of complex formation between Clp / Hsp100 ATPases and the ClpP peptidase . Nature Struct . Biol . 8 , 230 – 233 ( 2001 ) . Defines the conserved IGF motif that is required for the interaction of AAA + proteins with ClpP . 38 . Joshi , S . A . , Hersch , G . L . , Baker , T . A . & Sauer , R . T . Communication between ClpX and ClpP during substrate processing and degradation . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 11 , 404 – 411 ( 2004 ) . 39 . Keiler , K . C . , Waller , P . R . & Sauer , R . T . Role of a peptide tagging system in degradation of proteins synthesized from damaged messenger RNA . Science 271 , 990 – 993 ( 1996 ) . 40 . Flynn , J . M . , Neher , S . B . , Kim , Y . I . , Sauer , R . T . & Baker , T . A . Proteomic discovery of cellular substrates of the ClpXP protease reveals five classes of ClpX - recognition signals . Mol . Cell 11 , 671 – 683 ( 2003 ) . Proteomics study that greatly expanded the known repertoire of ClpXP substrates . 41 . Neher , S . B . , Flynn , J . M . , Sauer , R . T . & Baker , T . A . Latent ClpX - recognition signals ensure LexA destruction after DNA damage . Genes Dev . 17 , 1084 – 1089 ( 2003 ) . 42 . Ishikawa , T . , Maurizi , M . R . & Steven , A . C . The N - terminal substrate - binding domain of ClpA unfoldase is highly mobile and extends axially from the distal surface of ClpAP protease . J . Struct . Biol . 146 , 180 – 188 ( 2004 ) . 43 . Xia , D . , Esser , L . , Singh , S . K . , Guo , F . & Maurizi , M . R . Crystallographic investigation of peptide binding sites in the N - domain of the ClpA chaperone . J . Struct . Biol . 146 , 166 – 179 ( 2004 ) . 44 . Smith , C . K . , Baker , T . A . & Sauer , R . T . Lon and Clp family proteases and chaperones share homologous substrate - recognition domains . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 6678 – 6682 ( 1999 ) . 45 . Leonhard , K . , Stiegler , A . , Neupert , W . & Langer , T . Chaperone - like activity of the AAA domain of the yeast Yme1 AAA protease . Nature 398 , 348 – 351 ( 1999 ) . 46 . Wickner , S . et al . A molecular chaperone , ClpA , functions like DnaK and DnaJ . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 12218 – 12222 ( 1994 ) . 47 . Weber - Ban , E . U . , Reid , B . G . , Miranker , A . D . & Horwich , A . L . Global unfolding of a substrate protein by the Hsp100 chaperone ClpA . Nature 401 , 90 – 93 ( 1999 ) . 48 . Kim , Y . I . , Burton , R . E . , Burton , B . M . , Sauer , R . T . & Baker , T . A . Dynamics of substrate denaturation and translocation by the ClpXP degradation machine . Mol . Cell 5 , 639 – 648 ( 2000 ) . 49 . Kenniston , J . A . , Baker , T . A . , Fernandez , J . M . & Sauer , R . T . Linkage between ATP consumption and mechanical unfolding during the protein processing reactions of an AAA + degradation machine . Cell 114 , 511 – 520 ( 2003 ) . A study of ATP utilization during substrate denaturation by ClpXP indicates that denaturation proceeds by the repeated application of a constant denaturing force . 50 . Reid , B . G . , Fenton , W . A . , Horwich , A . L . & Weber - Ban , E . U . ClpA mediates directional translocation of substrate proteins into the ClpP protease . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 3768 – 3772 ( 2001 ) . 51 . Burton , R . E . , Siddiqui , S . M . , Kim , Y . I . , Baker , T . A . & Sauer , R . T . Effects of protein stability and structure on substrate processing by the ClpXP unfolding and degradation machine . EMBO J . 20 , 3092 – 3100 ( 2001 ) . 52 . Lee , C . , Schwartz , M . P . , Prakash , S . , Iwakura , M . & Matouschek , A . ATP - dependent proteases degrade their substrates by processively unraveling them from the degradation signal . Mol . Cell 7 , 627 – 637 ( 2001 ) . This paper shows , using well characterized model substrates , that ClpAP - mediated unfolding and degradation is controlled by the structure ( s ) adjacent to the degradation signal , rather than by global thermodynamic stability . 53 . Kenniston , J . A . , Burton , R . E . , Siddiqui , S . M . , Baker , T . A . & Sauer , R . T . Effects of local protein stability and the geometric position of the substrate degradation tag on the efficiency of ClpXP denaturation and degradation . J . Struct . Biol . 146 , 130 – 140 ( 2004 ) . 54 . Prakash , S . , Tian , L . , Ratliff , K . S . , Lehotzky , R . E . & Matouschek , A . An unstructured initiation site is required for efficient proteasome - mediated degradation . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 11 , 830 – 837 ( 2004 ) . Identification of a role for unstructured regions of polypeptides in the initiation of degradation by the proteasome . 55 . Braun , B . C . et al . The base of the proteasome regulatory particle exhibits chaperone - like activity . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 221 – 226 ( 1999 ) . 56 . Liu , C . W . et al . Conformational remodeling of proteasomal substrates by PA700 , the 19S regulatory complex of the 26S proteasome . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 26815 – 26820 ( 2002 ) . 57 . Ye , Y . , Meyer , H . H . & Rapoport , T . A . The AAA ATPase Cdc48 / p97 and its partners transport proteins from the ER into the cytosol . Nature 414 , 652 – 656 ( 2001 ) . 58 . Ye , Y . , Shibata , Y . , Yun , C . , Ron , D . & Rapoport , T . A . A membrane protein complex mediates retro - translocation from the ER lumen into the cytosol . Nature 429 , 841 – 847 ( 2004 ) . 59 . Lilley , B . N . & Ploegh , H . L . A membrane protein required for dislocation of misfolded proteins from the ER . Nature 429 , 834 – 840 ( 2004 ) . References 58 and 59 identify a receptor for p97 in the ER membrane . 60 . Lee , R . J . et al . Uncoupling retro - translocation and degradation in the ER - associated degradation of a soluble protein . EMBO J . 23 , 2206 – 2215 ( 2004 ) . particular ATPase mediates a proposed reaction and to enable the study of its mechanism . Advances in this area will result in a more complete understand - ing of the relationship between ATP hydrolysis and protein remodelling by different types of AAA + pro - tein . The important advances that have been made over the last couple of years in understanding how protease - associated ATPases , such as ClpX and ClpA , engage and unfold their substrates provide a model for the type of work that will move our understand - ing of AAA + - protein function forward over the forthcoming years . 528 | JULY 2005 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S 61 . Langer , T . , Kaser , M . , Klanner , C . & Leonhard , K . AAA proteases of mitochondria : quality control of membrane proteins and regulatory functions during mitochondrial biogenesis . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 29 , 431 – 436 ( 2001 ) . 62 . Sanchez , Y . & Lindquist , S . L . HSP104 required for induced thermotolerance . Science 248 , 1112 – 1115 ( 1990 ) . 63 . Parsell , D . A . , Kowal , A . S . , Singer , M . A . & Lindquist , S . Protein disaggregation mediated by heat - shock protein Hsp104 . Nature 372 , 475 – 478 ( 1994 ) . 64 . Glover , J . R . & Tkach , J . M . Crowbars and ratchets : hsp100 chaperones as tools in reversing protein aggregation . Biochem . Cell Biol . 79 , 557 – 568 ( 2001 ) . 65 . Chernoff , Y . O . , Lindquist , S . L . , Ono , B . , Inge - Vechtomov , S . G . & Liebman , S . W . Role of the chaperone protein Hsp104 in propagation of the yeast prion - like factor [ PSI + ] . Science 268 , 880 – 884 ( 1995 ) . 66 . Shorter , J . & Lindquist , S . Hsp104 catalyzes formation and elimination of self - replicating Sup35 prion conformers . Science 304 , 1793 – 1797 ( 2004 ) . 67 . Glover , J . R . & Lindquist , S . Hsp104 , Hsp70 , and Hsp40 : a novel chaperone system that rescues previously aggregated proteins . Cell 94 , 73 – 82 ( 1998 ) . First in vitro demonstration of Hsp104 activity . 68 . Goloubinoff , P . , Mogk , A . , Zvi , A . P . , Tomoyasu , T . & Bukau , B . Sequential mechanism of solubilization and refolding of stable protein aggregates by a bichaperone network . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 13732 – 13737 ( 1999 ) . 69 . Weibezahn , J . et al . Thermotolerance requires refolding of aggregated proteins by substrate translocation through the central pore of ClpB . Cell 119 , 653 – 665 ( 2004 ) . This paper shows that ClpB , like ClpA and ClpX , threads substrates through its central pore . 70 . Hattendorf , D . A . & Lindquist , S . L . Cooperative kinetics of both Hsp104 ATPase domains and interdomain communication revealed by AAA sensor - 1 mutants . EMBO J . 21 , 12 – 21 ( 2002 ) . 71 . Lee , S . et al . The structure of ClpB : a molecular chaperone that rescues proteins from an aggregated state . Cell 115 , 229 – 240 ( 2003 ) . 72 . Mizuuchi , M . , Baker , T . A . & Mizuuchi , K . Assembly of phage Mu transpososomes : cooperative transitions assisted by protein and DNA scaffolds . Cell 83 , 375 – 385 ( 1995 ) . 73 . Surette , M . G . , Buch , S . J . & Chaconas , G . Transpososomes : stable protein – DNA complexes involved in the in vitro transposition of bacteriophage Mu DNA . Cell 49 , 253 – 262 ( 1987 ) . 74 . Levchenko , I . , Luo , L . & Baker , T . A . Disassembly of the Mu transposase tetramer by the ClpX chaperone . Genes Dev . 9 , 2399 – 2408 ( 1995 ) . 75 . Levchenko , I . , Yamauchi , M . & Baker , T . A . ClpX and MuB interact with overlapping regions of Mu transposase : implications for control of the transposition pathway . Genes Dev . 11 , 1561 – 1572 ( 1997 ) . 76 . Burton , B . M . , Williams , T . L . & Baker , T . A . ClpX - mediated remodeling of Mu transpososomes : selective unfolding of subunits destabilizes the entire complex . Mol . Cell 8 , 449 – 454 ( 2001 ) . 77 . Burton , B . M . & Baker , T . A . Mu transpososome architecture ensures that unfolding by ClpX or proteolysis by ClpXP remodels but does not destroy the complex . Chem . Biol . 10 , 463 – 472 ( 2003 ) . References 76 and 77 establish the mechanistic basis for ClpX function in transposome remodelling . 78 . Jahn , R . , Lang , T . & Sudhof , T . C . Membrane fusion . Cell 112 , 519 – 533 ( 2003 ) . 79 . Rothman , J . E . Lasker Basic Medical Research Award . The machinery and principles of vesicle transport in the cell . Nature Med . 8 , 1059 – 1062 ( 2002 ) . 80 . Whiteheart , S . W . , Schraw , T . & Matveeva , E . A . N - ethylmaleimide sensitive factor ( NSF ) structure and function . Int . Rev . Cytol . 207 , 71 – 112 ( 2001 ) . 81 . Hohl , T . M . et al . Arrangement of subunits in 20S particles consisting of NSF , SNAPs , and SNARE complexes . Mol . Cell 2 , 539 – 548 ( 1998 ) . 82 . Whiteheart , S . W . & Matveeva , E . A . Multiple binding proteins suggest diverse functions for the N - ethylmaleimide sensitive factor . J . Struct . Biol . 146 , 32 – 43 ( 2004 ) . 83 . Pak , M . & Wickner , S . Mechanism of protein remodeling by ClpA chaperone . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 4901 – 4906 ( 1997 ) . 84 . Konieczny , I . & Liberek , K . Cooperative action of Escherichia coli ClpB protein and DnaK chaperone in the activation of a replication initiation protein . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 18483 – 18488 ( 2002 ) . 85 . Hartman , J . J . et al . Katanin , a microtubule - severing protein , is a novel AAA ATPase that targets to the centrosome using a WD40 - containing subunit . Cell 93 , 277 – 287 ( 1998 ) . 86 . Evans , K . J . , Gomes , E . R . , Reisenweber , S . M . , Gundersen , G . G . & Lauring , B . P . Linking axonal degeneration to microtubule remodeling by Spastin - mediated microtubule severing . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 599 – 606 ( 2005 ) . 87 . Babst , M . A protein’s final ESCRT . Traffic 6 , 2 – 9 ( 2005 ) . 88 . Reuber , B . E . et al . Mutations in PEX1 are the most common cause of peroxisome biogenesis disorders . Nature Genet . 17 , 445 – 448 ( 1997 ) . 89 . Watts , G . D . et al . Inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia is caused by mutant valosin - containing protein . Nature Genet . 36 , 377 – 381 ( 2004 ) . 90 . Goodchild , R . E . & Dauer , W . T . Mislocalization to the nuclear envelope : an effect of the dystonia - causing torsinA mutation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 847 – 852 ( 2004 ) . 91 . Naismith , T . V . , Heuser , J . E . , Breakefield , X . O . & Hanson , P . I . TorsinA in the nuclear envelope . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 7612 – 7617 ( 2004 ) . 92 . Yamamoto , S . et al . Expression level of valosin - containing protein is strongly associated with progression and prognosis of gastric carcinoma . J . Clin . Oncol . 21 , 2537 – 2544 ( 2003 ) . 93 . Mirnics , K . , Middleton , F . A . , Marquez , A . , Lewis , D . A . & Levitt , P . Molecular characterization of schizophrenia viewed by microarray analysis of gene expression in prefrontal cortex . Neuron 28 , 53 – 67 ( 2000 ) . 94 . Guan , Z . et al . A spontaneous recurrent seizure - related Rattus NSF gene identified by linker capture subtraction . Brain Res . Mol . Brain Res . 87 , 117 – 123 ( 2001 ) . 95 . Grote , E . , Carr , C . M . & Novick , P . J . Ordering the final events in yeast exocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 439 – 452 ( 2000 ) . 96 . Littleton , J . T . et al . SNARE - complex disassembly by NSF follows synaptic - vesicle fusion . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 12233 – 12238 ( 2001 ) . 97 . Matsushita , K . et al . Nitric oxide regulates exocytosis by S - nitrosylation of N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor . Cell 115 , 139 – 150 ( 2003 ) . 98 . Matveeva , E . A . , Whiteheart , S . W . , Vanaman , T . C . & Slevin , J . T . Phosphorylation of the N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor is associated with depolarization - dependent neurotransmitter release from synaptosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 12174 – 12181 ( 2001 ) . 99 . Huynh , H . et al . Control of vesicle fusion by a tyrosine phosphatase . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 831 – 839 ( 2004 ) . 100 . Rabouille , C . , Levine , T . P . , Peters , J . M . & Warren , G . An NSF - like ATPase , p97 , and NSF mediate cisternal regrowth from mitotic Golgi fragments . Cell 82 , 905 – 914 ( 1995 ) . 101 . Hetzer , M . et al . Distinct AAA - ATPase p97 complexes function in discrete steps of nuclear assembly . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 1086 – 1091 ( 2001 ) . 102 . Woodman , P . G . p97 , a protein coping with multiple identities . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 4283 – 4290 ( 2003 ) . 103 . Lenzen , C . U . , Steinmann , D . , Whiteheart , S . W . & Weis , W . I . Crystal structure of the hexamerization domain of N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein . Cell 94 , 525 – 536 ( 1998 ) . 104 . Beuron , F . et al . At sixes and sevens : characterization of the symmetry mismatch of the ClpAP chaperone - assisted protease . J . Struct . Biol . 123 , 248 – 259 ( 1998 ) . 105 . Matveeva , E . A . , He , P . & Whiteheart , S . W . N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein contains high and low affinity ATP - binding sites that are functionally distinct . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 26413 – 26418 ( 1997 ) . 106 . Karata , K . , Inagawa , T . , Wilkinson , A . J . , Tatsuta , T . & Ogura , T . Dissecting the role of a conserved motif ( the second region of homology ) in the AAA family of ATPases . Site - directed mutagenesis of the ATP - dependent protease FtsH . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 26225 – 26232 ( 1999 ) . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . Online links DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Swiss - Prot : http : / / us . expasy . org / sprot ClpA | ClpB | ClpP | ClpX | FtsH | Hsp104 | Lon FURTHER INFORMATION Phyllis Hanson’s laboratory : http : / / www . hansonlab . wustl . edu SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( table ) Access to this links box is available online . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | JULY 2005 | 529 R E V I E W S