(cid:14) . Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 www . elsevier . nl r locate r econbase The project - based organisation : an ideal form for managing complex products and systems ? Mike Hobday ) ( ) ( ) Science and Technology Policy Research SPRU , Complex Prod . Sys . CoPS Inno ˝ . Cen . , Mantell Building , Uni ˝ ersity of Sussex , Falmer , Brighton , East Sussex BN1 9RF , UK Abstract (cid:14) This paper examines the effectiveness of producing so - called CoPS i . e . , complex high value products , systems , . (cid:14) . networks , capital goods , and constructs in a project - based organisation PBO , as compared with a more traditional functional matrix organisation . A simple model is developed to show how the PBO relates to identified forms of matrix and functional organisation and a case study is used to identify some of the strengths and weaknesses of the two organisational forms for CoPS production . On the positive side , the PBO is an intrinsically innovative form as it creates and recreates new organisational structures around the demands of each CoPS project and each major customer . The PBO is able to cope with emerging properties in production and respond flexibly to changing client needs . It is also effective at integrating different types of knowledge and skill and coping with the project risks and uncertainties common in CoPS projects . However , the PBO is inherently weak where the matrix organisation is strong : in performing routine tasks , achieving economies of scale , coordinating cross - project resources , facilitating company wide technical development , and promoting organisation - wide learning . The PBO can also work against the wider interests of corporate strategy and business coordination . Strategies to stimulate organisational learning and technical leadership include the deployment of coordinators along functional lines to cut across project interests and incentives . Project tracking and guidance at the corporate level is also important for achieving broader business goals . The paper illustrates the wide variety of organisational choices involved in producing CoPS and argues that the nature , composition , and scale of the product in question have an important bearing on appropriate organisational form . q 2000 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . (cid:14) . Keywords : Project - based organisation ; Complex products and systems CoPS ; Functional organisation ; Matrix organisation 1 . Introduction In contrast to the functional and matrix organisa - (cid:14) . tion , the project - based organisation PBO has been put forward as a form ideally suited for managing increasing product complexity , fast changing mar - ) Tel . : q 44 - 1273 - 686758 ; fax : q 44 - 1273 - 685865 . (cid:14) . E - mail address : m . g . hobday @ susx . ac . uk M . Hobday . kets , cross - functional business expertise , customer - focused innovation and market , and technological uncertainty . This applies particularly to high value , (cid:14) . complex industrial products and systems or ‘CoPS’ , the sophisticated high technology capital goods , which underpin the production of goods and ser - vices . Some studies suggests that the PBO is a natural organisational form for CoPS producers , es - pecially when several partner suppliers are engaged with the user through the various stages of innova - 0048 - 7333 r 00 r $ - see front matter q 2000 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . (cid:14) . PII : S0048 - 7333 00 00110 - 4 ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 872 (cid:14) tion and production Hobday , 1998 ; Gann and Salter , . 1998 . Existing firm - level research explores the potential advantages of PBOs , tensions between project - and corporate - level processes , PBO suitability for pro - ducing service - enhanced products , and the nature of (cid:14) PBO behaviours and structures Brusoni et al . , 1998 ; . Gann and Salter , 1998 . Focusing on the project rather than the firm , the new product develop - (cid:14) . ment NPD field points to the benefits of strong projects in NPD , the leadership requirements for (cid:14) ‘heavyweight’ project teams Clark and Wheel - . wright , 1992 , and the need for the greater profes - sionalisation of project management as projects as - sume increasing importance across various high (cid:14) . technology industries Pinto and Kharbandha , 1995 . So far , however , there has been little research on the scale or pace of diffusion of the PBO form , or how the PBO actually operates in practice in the management of CoPS . We know very little about the PBO or how its processes differ from those of various matrix r functional forms of organisation or how disadvantages of the PBO can be overcome in practice . Nor has there been much discussion of the (cid:14) various different types of PBO e . g . , large vs . small . PBOs , single project vs . multiple project PBOs . The aim of this paper is to identify some of the features of the PBO by looking in depth at how CoPS projects are managed in one large PBO , com - paring this with CoPS produced in a functional division of the same company . The purpose of taking a ‘bottom up’ project perspective is to explore the dynamics of project structures , processes , and perfor - mance in the PBO vs . a functional organisation . Although it is outside the scope of the paper to examine corporate - level structures and processes , the case illustrates some of the key advantages and disadvantages of the PBO in the execution of major CoPS projects and draws attention to tensions be - tween project and company - wide processes in PBOs . The paper also suggests how some of the problems intrinsic to the PBO form can be overcome in prac - tice . One of the problems of case study research of this kind is the counterfactual difficulty of knowing what (cid:14) . would have happened e . g . , in terms of performance if another organisational structure had been applied . It is also difficult to attribute particular behavioural (cid:14) and performance attributes e . g . , flexibility , effec - . tiveness , efficiency , and return on investment to particular factors such as organisational form , rather (cid:14) than other factors e . g . , project leadership , company culture , product market differences , and senior man - . agement support . The method adopted to overcome some of these difficulties is to take the case of a single large CoPS supplier which , for particular his - torical reasons , operates a mix of both project - based and functional r matrix forms , addressing similar product markets and clients with the same senior management team . 1 The paper analyses and com - pares two CoPS projects of similar value , duration , technology , and customer , in the two distinct strate - gic business units , one PBO and one functional r ma - trix . By identifying process differences , as well as the advantages and disadvantages of both forms , the paper points to some important limits of the PBO in the management of CoPS projects . It also identifies a modified form of the PBO , termed here the ‘project - led organisation’ , which has been used to overcome some of the limits of the pure PBO . The paper is structured as follows . Section 2 examines the nature of the project management chal - lenge in CoPS . Section 3 then provides a working definition of the PBO and develops a simple model to show how the PBO differs from and relates to other forms of organisation identified in the litera - ture . Section 4 then presents the case of a producer of highly complex , particle accelerator systems (cid:14) . Complex Equipment Inc . to illustrate the advan - tages and disadvantages of the PBO structure , focus - ing on project processes , problems , and performance . Section 5 interprets the evidence arguing that the PBO provides a concurrent and outward - looking ap - proach to project management , while the functional r matrix form embodies a more linear , in - ward - looking and less flexible approach . Section 5 also comments on the underlying economic motiva - tions for adopting a project - based form for CoPS and 1 Although the case study design allows an in - depth compari - son of the different structures and projects within the same firm , the method cannot fully overcome the problem of project unique - (cid:14) ness and history see Section 4 . 1 for a discussion of the limitations of the method and possible ways of overcoming these in future . research . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 873 (cid:14) indicates strategies which can be used e . g . , the deployment of a milder form of PBO , the ‘project - led . organisation’ to resolve corporate strategy and com - pany - wide learning problems inherent in the PBO . 2 . Innovation in CoPS 2 . 1 . What are CoPS ? CoPS are the high - technology , business - to - busi - ness capital goods used to produce goods and ser - vices for consumers and producers . Unlike high vol - ume consumption goods , each individual CoPS is high cost and made up of many interconnected , often (cid:14) customised parts including control units , sub - sys - . tems , and components , designed in a hierarchical (cid:14) manner and tailor - made for specific customers Hob - . day , 1998 ; Walker et al . , 1988 . Often their sub - sys - (cid:14) . tems e . g . , the avionics systems for aircraft are themselves complex , customised , and high cost (cid:14) . Mowery and Rosenberg , 1982 . As a result of their cost , physical scale , and composition , CoPS tend to be produced in projects or small batches , which (cid:14) allow for a high degree of direct user sometimes . owner – operator involvement in the innovation pro - cess , rather than through arms - length market transac - tions as is normally the case in commodity goods . During design and production , small design changes in one part of a system can lead to large alterations in other parts , calling for more sophisti - cated control systems , new materials , and novel de - (cid:14) sign approaches . Once installed , some CoPS e . g . , intelligent buildings and computer integrated manu - . facturing systems further evolve as users expand , (cid:14) optimise , adopt , and operate the system Gann , 1993 ; . Fleck , 1988 . Product complexity , of course , is a matter of (cid:14) . degree . Hobday 1998 puts forward various dimen - sions of product complexity , including numbers of components , the degree of customisation of both system and components , the number of design choices , elaborateness of system architectures , the range , and depth of knowledge and skill inputs re - quired , and the variety of materials and information inputs . According to an amalgam of these dimen - sions , some products can be categorised as ‘ex - tremely complex’ , embodying many highly elabo - rate , customised sub - systems and components , new knowledge and multiple feedback loops in both de - (cid:14) sign , and production e . g . , a new generation military . aircraft . At the other end of the spectrum , there are less complex products where the boundaries of un - certainty are better understood , architectures and components are relatively well - established , reducing (cid:14) the risk inherent in the production of each good e . g . , . a new model flight simulator . In between there are ‘highly complex’ and ‘moderately complex’ goods . In all cases though , ‘complex products’ can be dis - tinguished from simpler or even complicated prod - ucts , where architectures are relatively simple , com - (cid:14) ponents are relatively few in number and usually . standardised , the degree of new knowledge required for each product is fairly constrained and production tasks can be codified , routinised , and automated to produce process efficiency and cost reduction based (cid:14) on volume e . g . , a bicycle or toaster could be de - scribed as ‘simple’ products , whereas a passenger vehicle could be described as ‘complicated’ but not complex , as defined here . Technical progress , combined with new industrial demands have greatly enhanced the functional scope , complexity , pervasiveness , and performance of CoPS (cid:14) e . g . , business information networks , tailored soft - . ware packages , and internet super - servers . The na - ture of CoPS can lead to extreme task complexity , which , in turn , demands particular forms of manage - ment and industrial organisation . 2 . 2 . Industrial inno ˝ ation in CoPS CoPS are often produced within projects which incorporate prime contractors , systems integrators , users , buyers , other suppliers , small - and medium - (cid:14) . sized enterprises SMEs and sometimes government agencies and regulators . Often , these ‘innovation (cid:14) actors’ collaborate together , taking innovation e . g . , . new design decisions in advance of and during production . Sometimes users and suppliers engage in co - engineering throughout the production process . Prime contractors and systems integrators are re - sponsible for managing CoPS projects , which amount to temporary multi - firm r user alliances . Given the nature of CoPS , systems integration , and project management competencies are critical to production ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 874 effectiveness and efficiency . The project is a widely used form of coordination in CoPS . The project is a focusing device which enables different types of innovation actors to agree the fine detail of CoPS development and production . The project is responsi - ble for realising the market , for coordinating deci - sions across firms , for enabling buyer involvement , and for matching technical and financial resources through time . The project exists to communicate design and architectural knowledge and to combine the distinctive resources , know - how , and skills of the collaborators . Because production is oriented to meet the needs of large business users , the project management task is fundamentally different from the mass production (cid:14) . task . As Joan Woodward 1958 , p . 23 put it in her research into UK project - based companies in the 1950s : A those responsible for marketing had to sell , not a product , but the idea that their firm was able to produce what the customer required . The product was developed after the order had been secured , the design being , in many cases , modified to suit the requirements of the customer . In mass production firms , the sequence is quite different : product devel - opment came first , then production , and finally mar - keting . B The specific CoPS in question will shape the form and nature of the project . In the case of very large engineering constructs , entire project - based industrial structures can be called into being by various stake - holders for the purpose of creating a single product . The Channel Tunnel , for example , entailed a massive task of financial , managerial , and technological coor - dination involving hundreds of contractors , at least 208 lending banks and around 14 , 500 employees at (cid:14) . its peak Lemley , 1992 , p . 14 , 23 . By contrast , with (cid:14) smaller CoPS e . g . , flight simulators and telecommu - . nications exchanges much of the project task is carried out within the managerial span of control of a single firm . In CoPS , design - intensity and product complexity lead to many extremely complicated , non - routine (cid:14) . tasks Hobday and Rush , 1999 . Users frequently change their requirements during production , leading to unclear goals , uncertainty in production , and un - predictable , unquantifiable risks . Success and failure are multifaceted and hard to measure . Managers have to proceed from production stage - to - stage with in - complete information , relying on inputs from other suppliers who may be competitors in other projects . In some cases these challenges have led firms to re - organise their entire business activities along pro - ject - based lines , leading to project - based organisa - tional structures . 3 . The nature of the PBO 3 . 1 . Definition and key propositions In contrast to the matrix , functional , and other forms , the PBO is one in which the project is the primary unit for production organisation , innovation , and competition . 2 Although the PBO is commonly used in private manufacturing enterprise , it is also (cid:14) . deployed in other organisations public and private , including the legal profession , consultancy firms , marketing , the film industry , and advertising . While a project can be defined as any activity with a (cid:14) defined set of resources , goals , and time limit e . g . , . for information technology or new materials , within a PBO the project is the primary business mecha - nism for coordinating and integrating all the main (cid:14) business functions of the firm e . g . , production , R & D , engineering , NPD , marketing , personnel , and fi - . nance . (cid:14) Within a pure PBO i . e . , an organisation in which . no other form is present , major projects will em - body most , if not all , of the business functions normally carried out with departments of functional and matrix organisations . In some cases , the project (cid:14) involves a consortium of companies e . g . , Sematech , Airbus , the Channel Tunnel , and the Millennium . Dome . In other PBOs , much or all of the project may be carried out within the boundaries of a single company . Because core business processes are or - ganised within projects rather than functional depart - ments , the PBO is an alternative to the matrix , where business functions are carried out both within pro - jects and along functional lines . In the PBO , the 2 This paper uses the term PBO rather than project - based firm as a single firm may deploy both project - based divisions as well (cid:14) . as functional divisions as in the case example in Section 4 . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 875 knowledge , capabilities , and resources of the firm are built up through the execution of major projects . (cid:14) . Project managers PMs within the PBO typically have very high status and direct control over busi - ness functions , personnel , and other resources . PMs (cid:14) and directors are senior to resource coordinators the nearest equivalent to the functional manager in the . PBO , whose role is to support the needs of projects and PMs and , sometimes , to coordinate business (cid:14) functions across various projects e . g . , technical , hu - man , and financial resources for project bidding , . management , systems engineering , and so on . Because the project is a temporary organisational form , the PBO is inherently flexible and reconfig - urable in contrast with the anti - innovation bias of large integrated , hierarchical organisations described (cid:14) . (cid:14) . by Williamson 1975 and Teece 1996 and the core (cid:14) . rigidities identified by Leonard - Barton 1992 . Within the PBO a project is often a major busi - ness endeavour and the normal mechanism for crea - ting , responding to , and executing new business opportunities . Each project is likely to involve a specific well - defined product and one or a few iden - (cid:14) tified customers . In many cases , the customer often . a user or owner – operator will be closely and di - rectly engaged in primary innovation and production processes , as each project will tend to be critical to the business functioning , performance , and prof - itability of the user . The PBO is widespread in (cid:14) traditional industries e . g . , construction , shipbuild - . ing , and major capital projects , industries that have (cid:14) been regenerated through new technologies e . g . , . aerospace and telecommunications , newly emerging (cid:14) industries e . g . , information and communication . technologies and many other examples of business - to - business , high - technology , high value capital goods . In principle , the PBO is not suited to the mass production of consumer goods , where specialisation along functional lines confers learning , scale , and marketing advantages . However , within large manu - facturing firms the project form is used to organise specific non - routine activities and complex tasks such as R & D , NPD , and advertising campaigns . Also , some large multiproduct firms embody both PBO (cid:14) . and functional divisions or strategic business units to deal with different types of products , technologies , (cid:14) and markets e . g . , producers of both telecommunica - . tions handsets and exchanges . Thus , particular pro - jects may be ‘large’ for a small or medium - sized firm or ‘small’ for a large or very large firm , imply - ing that the manner in which project organisations are established , perceived , and deployed varies with firm characteristics . PBOs organise their structures , strategies , and capabilities around the needs of projects , which often cut across conventional industrial and firm bound - aries . In CoPS industries , there are many different categories of PBO , ranging from large prime contrac - tors , which specialise in project management and systems integration , to tiny specialised sub - contrac - tors , which supply tailored components , software or services . Any one project may combine these groups in a variety of roles , with the same firm acting as prime contractor in some projects and sub - contractor in others . Not all firms within a project are necessar - ily PBOs . Also , PBOs can range from firms servic - ing one single project to firms which execute many (cid:14) hundreds of projects at any one time e . g . , in con - . struction . The structures and business processes of PBOs are likely to be shaped by the changing profile of projects , especially their size , complexity , and dura - (cid:14) . tion . Some PBOs e . g . , in construction are likely to derive most of their income from large projects over which they exercise little direct span of control (cid:14) . Gann , 1993 . In other cases , firms may direct and control particular projects , largely from within the firm , as noted earlier . Major new projects become central innovation events in some CoPS industries , giving rise to new business opportunities and novel technological trajectories . 3 . 2 . Research perspecti ˝ es on the PBO Various bodies of research help inform our under - standing of the position , nature , and advantages of the PBO . At the project level , research on NPD has long recognised the importance of the project for integrating business functions and responding to complex technical challenges for the purpose of de - veloping new products . Clark and Wheelwright (cid:14) . 1992 , for example , describe four basic types of (cid:14) . (cid:14) . organisational structure for NPD : 1 functional ; 2 ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 876 (cid:14) . lightweight project structure ; 3 heavyweight project (cid:14) . structure ; and 4 project - based . In conventional functional r lightweight project structures , PMs tend to be junior to functional managers and have no direct control over resources . In the heavyweight project approach , functions such as marketing , fi - nance , and production tend to be coordinated by managers across project lines , but PMs have high status and direct control over financial resources and people . In their analysis of the influence of management structure on project success , Larson and Gobeli (cid:14) . 1989 show how both project management structure and other variables such as new technology , project complexity , managerial competence , top manage - ment support , project size , and well - defined objec - tives impact on project success . Pinto and Prescott (cid:14) . 1988 , analyse how critical success factors vary over the life cycle of projects , while Pinto and Covin (cid:14) . 1989 show how such factors depend on the type of (cid:14) . product and activity in question . Shenhar 1993 provides insights into the importance of new knowl - edge in project risk and uncertainty , comparing low - with high - technology projects . Focusing on the benefits of the project form , some innovation scholars have argued that projects and project management are the ‘wave of the future in global business’ due to increasing technical and product complexity , shortening time to market win - dows , and the need for cross - functional integration (cid:14) and fast response to changing client needs Pinto and . Kharbanda , 1995 . It is certainly reasonable to as - sume that as market change , risk , and uncertainty increase , the project form will grows in importance in a wide range of industries and tasks . At the firm level , traditional innovation writers have long recognised the advantages of flexible pro - ject - based organisational forms . Burns and Stalker (cid:14) . 1961 made the classic distinction between organic and mechanistic organisational forms , arguing that if a stable routine environment prevailed and the mar - ket was fairly predictable , then firms can reap advan - tage from mechanistic , functional organisational forms with clearly defined job descriptions , stable operational boundaries , and Taylorist methods of working . However , in the case of rapidly changing technological and market conditions , then open and (cid:14) . flexible ‘organic’ styles of organisation and man - agement are required which are able to link functions such as R & D and marketing . 3 3 . 3 . A simple positioning framework for the PBO In order to understand the relationship between the PBO and other types of organisation , Galbraith (cid:14) . 1971 , 1973 describes a range of alternatives from pure functional form through to pure product form , where management structures are centred upon each (cid:14) . product equivalent to the PBO . Building on Gal - (cid:14) . braith’s work , Larson and Gobeli 1987 , 1989 de - scribe three distinct types of matrix . First , is the functional matrix , where the PM is confined to coor - dinating resources , monitoring progress , and report - ing into one or more functional managers . Second , is the balanced matrix , where responsibilities and au - thority for each project are shared between func - (cid:14) . tional and PMs . The third is the product or project matrix , where the PM has authority over personnel , 3 (cid:14) . Building on the work of Burns and Stalker , Mintzberg 1979 points out that appropriate organisational forms are contingent on factors such as market , task , and technology . He describes five (cid:14) . basic organisational forms : a the machine bureaucracy with highly centralised control systems , suited to a stable environment ; (cid:14) . (cid:14) . b the divisional form suited to mass production efficiency ; c the professional bureaucracy made up of flat organisational struc - (cid:14) tures , useful for delegating complex , professional tasks e . g . , in . (cid:14) . universities ; d the simple or entrepreneurial structure , valuable (cid:14) . for its informality and flexibility ; and e the adhocracy , which is a temporary project team design , suited to complex tasks and (cid:14) . turbulent and uncertain markets . Similarly , Teece 1996 proposes (cid:14) . (cid:14) . six categories of firm : 1 stand - alone entrepreneur inventor ; 2 (cid:14) . multiproduct integrated hierarchy ; 3 high flex , Silicon Valley (cid:14) . (cid:14) . (cid:14) . type ; 4 virtual corporation ; 5 conglomerate ; and 6 alliance enterprise . Taking an historical perspective , Miles and Snow (cid:14) . 1986 argue the organisations have evolved from the owner – manager of the 18th century , to the vertical organisation of the mid - 19th century , through to the divisionalised and matrix organi - sational structures suited to the mass production of industrial (cid:14) goods in the mid - 20th century . They argue that a new form the . dynamic network has recently emerged in high technology pro - duction . In the network , large and small firms collaborate to - gether , responding to fast changing market needs . Key business functions such as product design , R & D , manufacturing , and distri - bution are performed by independent firms cooperating together and linked by ‘brokers’ who provide information to network members and coordinating overall operations . In Miles and Snow’s formulation , brokers and partners are similar to Teece’s virtual firm and alliance enterprise , respectively . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 877 finance , and other resources . Finally , the pure prod - uct r project - based form is an extreme form where the business is organised solely around product r pro - ject lines . Interpreting the above literature , Fig . 1 provides a description of six ideal - type organisational forms (cid:14) . ranging from the pure functional form Type A to (cid:14) . pure project form Type F . The various functional (cid:14) departments of the organisation e . g . , marketing , fi - nance , human resources , engineering , R & D , and . manufacturing are represented by F1 to F5 , while notional CoPS projects are represented by P1 to P5 . Type B is a functionally - oriented matrix , with weak (cid:14) project coordination as described in the case study . ‘FMD’ below . Type C is a balanced matrix with stronger project management authority . Type D is a (cid:14) . (cid:14) . (cid:14) . (cid:14) . (cid:14) . Fig . 1 . Positioning the project - based organization . A Functional , B functional matrix , C balanced matrix . D Project matrix . E (cid:14) . Project - led organization . F Project - based organization . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 878 project matrix , where PMs are of equal status to functional managers . Beyond the project matrix , lies a form not identi - (cid:14) . fied in the literature Type E , called here a ‘project - led organisation’ , in which the needs of projects outweigh the functional influence on decision - mak - ing and representation to senior management , but some coordination across project lines occurs . Fi - nally , Type F is the pure PBO as defined in Sec . 3 . 1 , and illustrated below in the case study ‘PBD below’ . Here , there is no formal functional coordination across project lines ; the entire organisation is dedi - cated to one or more CoPS projects and business processes are coordinated within the projects . The positioning diagram helps to contrast the various forms of organisation available and to high - light those most suited for different types of CoPS , accepting that a mixed organisational structure is possible even within a single business unit . Forms A to C are unsuitable to managing the CoPS , because they are not appropriate for performing non - routine , complex project tasks in an uncertain , risky , and changing environment . CoPS projects require ‘super - (cid:14) . heavyweight’ professional PMs or directors , capa - ble of integrating both commercial and technical business functions within the project and building strong lines of external communication both with the (cid:14) . client often the source of the innovation idea and other collaborating companies . These external inno - vation actors typically have different goals , struc - tures and cultures , and the task of the CoPS project director is to skilfully negotiate a path towards suc - cessful completion . The pure PBO is probably best suited for large innovative projects and single project firms , where resources have to be combined and shared with other (cid:14) . firms in the project the multi - firm CoPS project . The PBO is a form suitable for meeting innovative needs , responding to uncertainty , coping with emerg - ing properties , responding to changing client require - ments and learning in real time . By contrast , the PBO is weak where the functional matrix is strong : in coordinating resources and capabilities across pro - jects , in executing routine production and engineer - ing tasks , achieving economies of scale and meeting the needs of mass markets . More broadly the framework implies that in choosing an appropriate organisational form the na - ture , scale , and complexity of the product must be considered . With a balance of small batch , CoPS , and mass produced goods , organisational choices become messy , complex , and dynamic . Mistakes can be very costly . As the product mix evolves , organisa - tions need to change in order to respond to product market needs . 3 . 4 . Gaps in the literatures (cid:14) . While Galbraith 1971 and others provide useful tools for positioning the PBO in relation to other organisational forms , they fall short of examining the PBO itself and do not analyse its advantages and disadvantages . Surveys of project success r failure factors are generally unable to explore intra - project (cid:14) dynamics and tend to ignore the informal , human or . ‘soft’ side of project progress which are so impor - (cid:14) . tant to performance Katz , 1997 . Much of the litera - ture tends to assume products are being developed ‘for the market place’ whereas CoPS are usually (cid:14) . transacted with the user and other suppliers in unique combinations and rarely , if ever , transacted in an arms length market setting . Similarly , while studies of NPD and project per - formance help disentangle the many facets of project success and failure , they do not explore PBO pro - cesses nor do they tend to distinguish between com - plex capital goods and mass - produced products . Nor does the project success literature tend to examine the changing nature of projects through time . This issue is especially important for CoPS projects , which involve several outside innovation partners in differ - ent ways through the various stages of the project cycle . To contribute to an understanding of innovation management in CoPS , Section 4 illustrates how one PBO deploys its resources to create and deliver single complex products . By comparing the progress of CoPS projects in the PBO and functional matrix forms , the case shows how well suited the PBO is for creating and executing large and risky CoPS projects . However , the case also highlights the diffi - culties PBOs face in capturing and transferring pro - ject knowledge with pressures , structures , and rou - tines crowding out learning from one project to another . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 879 4 . The case of complex equipment inc 4 . 1 . Case objecti ˝ es , method , and limitations The purpose of the case study is to assess CoPS project performance and processes and to look at the nature , strengths , and weaknesses of the PBO in comparison with the functional form through the lens of two major projects , one in a PBO division and one in a functional division . The case also examines how PBO disadvantages can be overcome in practice . The case study is a large German - owned pan - (cid:14) . European firm Complex Equipment Inc , which em - ploys around 4000 people and produces a wide range of advanced , high - cost scientific , industrial , and medical equipment . 4 For some years , the company (cid:14) had experienced serious problems delays , cost . over - runs , and customer dissatisfaction in producing (cid:14) CoPS within its functional matrix division called . FMD here in one of its strategic business units , which produced both CoPS and small batch , simpler products . In another strategic business unit , which reports to the same senior management , a pure pro - (cid:14) . ject - based division called PBD had been converted from a matrix organisation to deal solely with large CoPS projects . 5 The senior management wished to learn from the operating experiences of PBD , which had been in pure PBO form for around 2 years . PBD had proved highly successful in meeting customer needs and project performance targets . A key strategic decision was whether or not to implement a pure PBO in FMD , a larger division . The management felt that there were lessons to learn from the good and bad experiences of both organisations . Although both PBD and FMD produced similar CoPS equipment , for geographical reasons the physical merging of the two sites was not an option in the foreseeable future . The research method involved examining the ex - (cid:14) perience of two similar , complex projects termed 4 The name of the company , as well as project names , have been changed to protect confidentiality . 5 PBD corresponds to type F in Fig . 1 , while FMD corresponds to type B . The firm provides an unusual opportunity to compare a PBO with an FMO in a single company , with the same company culture and senior management . . project P in PBD and F in FMD in order to review and compare project processes , problems and perfor - mance and to draw lessons for both organisations . 6 The CoPS in question was an experimental form of synchrotron particle accelerator which is used in sub - micron semiconductor R & D and other scientific applications . The price of each unit was in the order of $ 10 million each and the duration of the projects was around 18 months in each case . The research involved three stages : first , a struc - tured questionnaire was used to gather the views of a sample of practitioners in each project , including scientists , engineers , draftsmen , technicians , and PMs . Views were sought on the detailed , actual experiences of PBD project P and FMD project F and on perceptions of the wider strengths and weak - ness of both organisations . Second , interviews were carried out with senior managers and directors on their perceptions of the projects and each organisa - tions strengths and weaknesses . Third , a workshop was arranged with both groups to feedback results and check the findings were consistent with the experiences of the staff , many of whom had worked for both parts of the organisation and other strategic business units within Complex Equipment Inc . Twenty interviews were conducted for each pro - ject . Information was gathered on origin , history , structure , management , client relations , supplier links , project processes , and performance . The sam - (cid:14) ple consisted of a ‘slice group’ i . e . , representatives of most main functions and seniority levels of the . two projects . Within the case , the research focused on : ﬂ Organisational structure , ﬂ Project management and leadership , ﬂ Team identity and coherence , ﬂ Client and client management , ﬂ Risk management , 6 Project processes refer to patterns of managerial , technologi - cal , and operational practice : the ‘way things are done’ , within the project , including both formal and informal routines . At the broader firm level , processes occur within and across the various (cid:14) functions of the firm e . g . , marketing , production , finance , engi - . neering , R & D , and personnel and occur both formally and infor - mally , shaping the efficiency and effectiveness of a firm . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 880 ﬂ Formal and informal tools and procedures , ﬂ Organisation - wide learning and coordination , ﬂ Project performance , ﬂ Organisational strategies and solutions . Each of these issues is reported upon below in turn , contrasting the functional matrix with the PBO division . Regarding scope and limitations , the research took a ‘bottom up’ look at two real projects , but did not systematically research the broader company pro - (cid:14) cesses or functions e . g . , corporate strategy , quality systems , bid processes , production , purchasing and . cross - departmental communications . Nor could the study look systematically at the relations between project and wider company business processes . Both projects were carried out largely under the control of (cid:14) . the firm e . g . , the degree of co - engineering was low , so although other partners and users were actively involved , the case is not an example of an extensive multi - firm project where developments are shared more equally between partners . In addition , the case refers to the type of PBO conducting a small number of major CoPS projects , rather than the case of a PBO carrying out large numbers of smaller projects simultaneously . Even within this category , the case issues cannot claim to be generally applicable to other large firms producing small numbers of elabo - rate , high value CoPS . In addition , while the case study design enables an in - depth comparison of different projects within divisions of the same firm , the approach cannot fully overcome the problem of project uniqueness and history , as noted in the introduction . Even within the same firm with the same company culture and senior management , each project is still subject to specific factors , which shape overall performance , success and failure , and it is very difficult to normalise for these factors . However , alternative methods of as - (cid:14) sessing project success factors e . g . , cross - sectional . surveys are also limited as they cannot look in - de - pth at the evolution of projects through time , infor - mal practices , and ‘soft’ issues , which are critical to project success . One way of overcoming these diffi - culties in future research may be to expand the number and type of intra - project studies of PBOs in order to identify more CoPS project success factors , links between project performance , and wider busi - ness processes and comparisons between different types of PBOs , including single project and multi - project firms . Accepting these limitations , the case design was able to illustrate some of the features of the PBO for CoPS compared with the functional matrix and ma - jor differences in project processes , advantages , and disadvantages of the two organisational forms . The case also yielded insights into some of the wider organisational issues , especially organisational learn - ing , which featured as a major problem in the case of PBD . Some of these key issues are illustrated below using quotations from PMs , engineers , and other practitioners . 4 . 2 . Organisation structure FMD was run as a functional matrix with lightweight PMs . Projects were resourced by the heads of the functional departments . While PMs were nominally in charge of projects they had no direct staff or control over resources , nor a regular reporting mechanism into senior management . Within the matrix , PMs for CoPS reported in to one of the (cid:14) . functional managers usually engineering . Tradition - ally , FMD was heavily biased towards the needs of the functional departments and standard product lines produced in small batches . However , increasingly CoPS were being processed in FMD leading to problems , as noted earlier . In contrast to FMD , PBD had been organised along project - based lines for about 2 years , with PMs in direct control of project resources , team - building , and project outcomes . The PBO had been an experi - mental move and was widely viewed as a success . As noted earlier , the directors of Complex Equip - ment Inc wished to learn the lessons for the rest of company and in particular wanted to assess whether or not to implement a PBO to resolve CoPS prob - lems at FMD . 4 . 3 . Project management and leadership Because of its functional orientation , the PM of (cid:14) . project F as with other PMs in FMD had little direct control over project resources , nor a heavy - ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 881 weight representation into senior management . This lightweight PM structure had been introduced some years earlier to run alongside the functional organisa - tion to deal with CoPS projects . This led to prob - lems , as described by the PM for project F : A I had no w people working directly for me . They the heads of x the functional departments took people off the pro - ject without telling me . The bosses didn’t come to project meetings and didn’t really know what was going on in the project . B Similarly , the senior manu - facturing engineer noted : A In project F I was not involved or consulted about the original budget esti - w mates . There was no time to do this job the estima - x w tion properly . This happens far too often . It the x project should have been resourced properly at the w x outset but there were conflicts between Jim the PM w x and the resource i . e . , functional managers . B (cid:14) Given the number of functional departments and . bosses in FMD , each with standard reporting sys - tems and procedures , a wide range of reporting requirements and sometimes conflicting demands were placed on the PM for project F . There were five main functional departments : engineering , manufac - turing , marketing , finance , and human resources . Reporting into the five departments absorbed a great deal of time and energy , leading to a reactive , rather than a proactive stance towards risk , client manage - ment , product design , manufacture , and so on . As discussed below , customer relations were also difficult , with the PM looking to functional managers for answers to technical and schedule questions raised by the client , but with little direct contact between the functional managers and the client . This led to delays in dealing with client problems and also to some confusion . In some instances , the two main (cid:14) . sets of client demands commercial and technical (cid:14) were in conflict e . g . , new technical specifications were called for alongside demands to maintain costs . and keep to schedules . These demands led to diffi - cult negotiations with the functional managers and frequently placed the PM for FMD in a difficult position with the client . By contrast in PBD the heavyweight PM had direct control over resources and team personnel , as well as a strong and direct representation into senior (cid:14) . management the company directors . The PBD PM for project P was more senior to other staff in PBD and on equal terms with functional managers in FMD . The PM for project P dealt directly with the client , having both control over , and responsibility for , all technical and commercial issues . PBD r Project P was particularly strong on the intangible , informal activities essential to project (cid:14) success in uncertain environments e . g . , project man - agement , close customer relations , good communica - tions , open honest meetings , and mutual respect . among team members . In PBD r P a good level of communication and trust was built up with sub - con - tractors , both large and small . The PBD r P team was as flexible and responsive to changes in specifica - tion , risks , and so on , as one would hope from a well - managed PBO . As the PM for Project P put it : A In PBD we set up a new team for every project and we tend to work on one or two builds at a time . As the PM I do the overall plan and delegate tasks to team members . I talk to the engineers and technicians every day be - cause working relations are vital . Its a matter of mutual trust and respect . B A manufacturing techni - cian for Project P further explained : A It was a good w x management set up . She the PM knew exactly what to do even though it was a very difficult project . One w x of the suppliers let us down , so Jane the PM went down and ordered a new one from another supplier . She had to bypass the finance department and tell them afterwards . That’s not following the rules , but she judged it necessary to get the job done on time . B However , there were difficulties not only within the project but also in the wider organisation . These were proving difficult to address within the PBO (cid:14) . structure see Section 4 . 8 below . 4 . 4 . Team identity The FMD r Project F team felt that the project was under - resourced , given its size , complexity and de - velopment nature , and that insufficient numbers of full - time technical staff worked on the project at any given time . Most individuals worked on more than (cid:14) . one project some as many as six and few , apart from the PM , felt any identity with Project F . Some team members were under great pressure and two resigned from the company , partly due to the de - mands of Project F . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 882 As one Senior Engineer on Project F stated : A There was not enough team spirit partly because of all the politics between different people in the vari - ous departments . Most of the team worked on sev - eral other projects . They were in and out . B And from a different perspective : A I had no feeling of owner - w ship , neither did the other team members . Jim the x PM was running the project using resources pro - vided from the departments as and when . It should (cid:14) have been handled differently from the outset B Elec - . tronics Engineer , Project F . The PM concurred with these views adding : A The engineer responsible for testing , where we had major difficulties , became overstressed and left the company . We managed to get a replacement from another division , who then discovered serious technical problems with the sys - tem , which had further knock - on affects . B Overall , the project suffered from weak team coherence , poor team spirit , and fragmented commu - nications . This was due in part to initial project under - resourcing , itself a reflection of the weak bar - gaining position of the PM who was unable to insist upon a dedicated team within the functionally - ori - ented organisational structure . These problems were seen as resulting from the functional structure and had occurred before in CoPS projects in FMD , lead - ing to the decision to consider introducing a PBO structure similar to PBD . By contrast , in PBD r Project P the team felt they had achieved a highly effective and professional approach to project management and implementa - tion , with strong team coherence and close identity with Project P . Most of the team were dedicated to Project P and all felt allegiance to it . Project leader - ship and management were viewed as strong by team members and internal communications proceeded well . 4 . 5 . Client and client management The FMD r Project F team had developed poor and confused relations with their client and felt ‘unlucky to have a bad client’ . Early on in the project’s development , the PM had reacted to new client demands for changes in specification by at - tempting to please the customer . However , the PM did not have the time nor authority to carefully negotiate full costings or rescheduling , or to carry out the detailed internal planning needed . This had resulted in unclear business relations . Conflicts de - veloped as team members felt their customer was unwilling or unable to divulge essential information on detailed requirements or to sign off pieces of w x work when requested to : A They the customer inter - fered far too much with the design . They argued about every single nut and bolt . They set the pattern of being able to dominate the design and make us take the risk . This eventually led to the point where w x (cid:14) the customer didn’t trust Jim the PM . B Senior . Mechanical Engineer . Similarly , A we tried to get feedback from the client but we got no help . We decided it was better to be late on delivery than have (cid:14) . a system fail in the field B PM , Project F . Team members also felt let down by their own PM and senior management who did not seem able to sort out the difficulties . To them , seemingly arbi - trary changes in specification were called for causing delays in delivery and severe technical difficulties : A The specification was not properly dealt with . The company was afraid to talk to the customer . You need a high level PM from a business point of view w x on this type of project . Jim the PM was down on (cid:14) the shop floor fire fighting too much B Manufactur - . ing Technician , Project F . However , official client procedures and be - haviours on FMD r Project F were not dissimilar to those of PBD r Project P , coming from a different division of the same buyer organisation . FMD r Pro - ject F team members reacted defensively to client demands , putting problems down to internal cus - tomer politics and commercial inexperience on the client’s part . Project F members perceived requests for changes as the placing of unreasonable demands on the project team who were already stretched and under - resourced . In the absence of clear ‘rules of engagement’ , expectations on both sides of FMD r Project F were difficult to manage and potential risks materialised to the detriment of the project . Team members felt that the responsibility for dealing with these issues rested (cid:14) with the various functional managers e . g . , manufac - turing for delivery , finance for costs , and engineering . for specification changes , while some senior func - tional managers felt that the PM should have dealt with these problems or highlighted them earlier . All ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 883 agreed that client relations were difficult and unclear . A draftsman on Project F summed this up : A We need better contracts and better specification procedures . We have them internally but we don’t have them with the customer . We’re too soft on the customer — we accept costs to us too easily and lose money . Being a big project , it exposed weaknesses in our approach . B By contrast , PBD r Project P members felt that they were fortunate to have a ‘good client’ , who was willing to entrust design and development decisions to them . This was partly due to the involvement of PBD engineers in an early design study for the client , which specified some of the system . How - ever , the team had also developed a shared business ‘negotiation’ mentality , now common in PBD . This assumed , for example , that any requests for changes to specification had to be negotiated between the PM and the client , fully costed and , if necessary , re - flected in extended delivery schedules : A We have very good client relations but if they want to make w x changes to the specification we stop the clock , and (cid:14) . price it . B Engineer , Project P . Although this approach had developed informally (cid:14) in PBD no explicit systems or detailed contractual . arrangements existed over and above those in FMD , the negotiated approach had become standard prac - tice because it helped meet the needs of engineers , especially when confronted with large complex pro - jects where frequent iterations with the client were (cid:14) . needed . The rules e . g . , on specification changes (cid:14) were alluded to in the contract as in the case of . FMD r Project F but also , and more importantly , communicated through the ‘tone’ of day - to - day channels of communication at all levels of the pro - ject . This , in turn , required team ownership of the project and good internal communications . By estab - lishing project ground rules at the initial bid stage , changes to design , day - to - day misunderstandings and other uncertainties could be dealt with in a system - atic professional fashion . In PBD r Project P , most of the liaison with the client was carried out or co - ordinated by the PM who was able to build a good working partnership . As the project progressed , more team members be - came involved directly with the client as the PM entrusted particular team members , at various stages , to take actions with members of the customer’s team . As a result , Project P team members felt that rela - tions with the client were orderly and understood . 4 . 6 . Risk management Regarding risk , three types of risk were identified (cid:14) . in both divisions : a those wholly outside the con - (cid:14) . (cid:14) . trol of the project external ; b those wholly within (cid:14) . (cid:14) . the ambit of the project internal ; and c risks (cid:14) subject to negotiation r internalisation negotiated . risks . In FMD r Project F , the PM was unable to estab - lish a pro - active approach to risk , particularly in relation to risks inherent in customer – supply rela - (cid:14) . tions e . g . , major changes to specification , common in CoPS . Organisationally , the PM felt he A was being torn limb from limb B by the various demands of the functional bosses , unhappy team members and the client . As a result , the PM was unable to estab - lish an orderly business framework for managing client relations from the outset . Failing to meet changing needs , the project team had developed defensive relations with the client . The team mem - bers were unable to manage internal and external risks well , and allowed negotiated risks to emerge . Because of the lack of team coherence and resources , the PM and senior engineers were unable to regu - larly visit the customer or key suppliers to avoid (cid:14) . risks e . g . , delays in the delivery of sub - systems . (cid:14) Because management systems e . g . , internal design . reviews were not carried out regularly , as they should have been , problems of risk were intensified by the failure to share information either in formal or informal meetings . By contrast , partly due to its tightly integrated project structure , PBD r Project P members managed internal and external risks well , and increased their control over negotiated risks . The PM and senior engineers paid regular visits to key suppliers and helped to resolve delays in the delivery of compo - nents and sub - systems . Referring to sub - contractor relations , as one senior engineer on Project P said : A You have to spend a lot of time on this . I went through 19 different suppliers to find two or three really good ones . You pay them a visit and ask questions . It usually takes one min to tell whether they are good or not . And it’s nothing to do with firm size — some of our best suppliers are small ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 884 companies . B The team avoided risks by sharing in - formation in their formal two - weekly review meet - ings , informal meetings and conversations , and regu - lar client and customer visits . The business approach made possible by the ‘su - per heavyweight’ project structure , allowed PBD r Project P to deal with two major sources of (cid:14) . external risk supplier and client relations , allowing space for dealing with unexpected events and scope for internalising negotiated risks . The Project P team felt pleased with the informal way most problems were handled , the only formal risk management tools being a two - page weekly reporting form and the two - weekly project meetings . In the event , despite some problems , Project P progressed well and was (cid:14) delivered on schedule , but slightly over budget see . Section 4 . 9 . On the negative side , senior management at Com - plex Equipment Inc felt that they A did not really know enough about PBD r Project P B , given its im - portance as a new product line for the company as a whole . This had also been the case for other projects carried out in PBD . The lack of regular reporting into senior management created some tensions be - tween project progress and corporate - wide strategies and goals . Company directors felt a degree of project isolation in PBD had created risks in terms of overall marketing strategy and business coordination . Their (cid:14) . solution see below Section 4 . 10 was to set up more regular reporting with PMs along the lines of FMD . 4 . 7 . Formal and informal tools and procedures Both FMD and PBD had fairly typical tools and systems mandated by the company for bid review , cost , and risk management , internal design , and spec - ification change management . In both organisations , there were formal systems for project recording , controlling , and reporting . In FMD , detailed proce - dures were laid down by the functional departments , each with their different goals and needs , leading to a heavy administrative load for FMD projects . In FMD r Project F , actual procedures followed (cid:14) . ‘what happened in practice’ diverged considerably from formal tools and company best management (cid:14) . practices ‘what should have happened’ , as reflected in senior management views and contained in a company toolbook and quality manual . Procedures for the early bid stage , internal design reviews , re - porting to senior management , cost tracking and control , progress monitoring , and risk management were officially in place but were not applied . This was put down to the absence of a coherent team , under - resourcing , time pressures , weak incentives for (cid:14) . team members who reported to functional bosses , and the ‘firefighting’ mode of the PM and team members : A there were no internal design reviews held to ask ‘are we doing the right thing’ . This was a w x very large complex project . Jim the PM was dropped (cid:14) right in it with no commercial backup B Mechanical . Engineer , project F . While Project F was a fairly extreme case , the divergences between formal and actual procedures occurred in other CoPS projects in FMD . Tools and reporting were seen as an added bureaucratic burden , unhelpful in the managing of the project . By contrast , in PBD r Project P the PM was in charge of implementing company tools and proce - dures . The ‘leanness’ and flexibility of formal tools and systems within PBD , which involved no func - tional reporting or negotiating with departmental bosses , meant that tools and procedures were seen as helpful in getting tasks completed , although again there were some differences between official proce - (cid:14) . dures what should have been and real practices (cid:14) . what actually went on , particularly in terms of the informality in the use of tools . Some tools were deployed very sparingly indeed and there were dif - ferences in the ways PMs within PBD used company tools and followed procedures . Informal methods , experience , and trust were viewed as more important than tools and formal procedures on Project P : A The fancy 3D CAD tools w are really ‘boss dazzlers’ . The main thing in project x success is delegating the right tasks to the right people and keeping in close touch . I use my imagina - tion . I sketch things out in order to work out the best way of doing the job before doing the detailed design . We have a process manual but it doesn’t help with detailed design problems . Its experience that (cid:14) . matters B Senior Engineer — Project P . Similarly , a veteran engineer working on the detailed design of Project P explained : A You go down some routes , abandon others , create new ones and so on . You have to proceed even though the next steps are often uncertain . B ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 885 PBD managers , over the past 2 years , had modi - fied and simplified company tools and systems to suit their project needs and successfully resisted the introduction of more elaborate formal management tools and systems . 4 . 8 . Organisation - wide learning and coordination (cid:14) In FMD , organisational learning involving infor - mal knowledge sharing , training , reviews , personnel . development , and technical leadership was centred on the functional departments . In this area FMD as a whole performed well . Younger engineers felt that they had good overall technical leadership from the senior engineers and functional managers . They could see a career ladder within the organisation . Senior engineers had incentives and resources to recruit , train , and retain new younger engineers and techni - cians for their departments . Much of the knowledge sharing and communications occurred in informal settings although there were also training pro - grammes and official seminars and meetings . Infor - mally , groups of engineers exchanged tacit knowl - edge and problem - solving tips through narratives , in what is sometimes called communities of practice (cid:14) . Seeley Brown and Duguid , 1996 . In this important area , FMD out performed PBD . In PBD , despite very good individual project per - formance , in the previous two years the high pres - sured work environment had left little space for formal training or staff development , either in techni - cal or commercial areas . It was apparent that many of the formal and informal activities associated with (cid:14) organisational learning , and improvement e . g . , (cid:14) . post - project reviews PPR , technical mentoring , and . informal communications were not being per - formed : A Since we became project - based , I’ve had no incentive or time to train anyone up . Previously I always looked after two or three younger engineers . w x In the old functional organisation we had space for (cid:14) training and staff development . B Veteran design . engineer , Project P . Lessons learned from particular projects were not shared formally because there were no structures or incentives for cross - project learning or communica - tions . It had become hard to learn from project - to - project , leading to worries within PBD over its long - (cid:14) term effectiveness . The learning ‘silos’ represented . in FMD by functional departments were absent in PBD’s pure PBO . The PPR was viewed by the company as an important mechanism for learning from project - to - project . The official procedure called for a PPR involving all major project contributors , from the bid stage onwards . The PPR should have operated in (cid:14) PBD as a mechanism for capturing lessons good . (cid:14) and bad , sorting out problems e . g . , closing the loop . between bid stage decisions and project outcomes , (cid:14) and building up wider company communications in - . volving project outsiders and senior managers . However , few PPRs had occurred in the past 2 years due to work pressures and the lack of structure and incentives within PBD . Internal markets had devel - oped for good people and the most persuasive and senior PMs often get them , sometimes leading to a skewed performance among projects . At least three other problems of learning and coordination were evident in PBD . The first con - cerned technical leadership . In FMD , this role was played by senior engineers and department man - agers . Younger and newer recruits in PBD were concerned over career development and professional progress because of the dispersion of technical lead - ership across projects . Insecurity was highest to - wards the end of a project when staff were not sure ‘where they would go to next’ . Related to this was the lack of incentives for human resource develop - ment . The PBD structure had reduced the incentive for senior engineers to bring on younger engineers as they had previously done under the functional matrix as a fairly natural thing to do . In FMD there were concrete incentives to groom young staff to improve the performance of various departments , but these incentives did not exist in PBD and no senior indi - viduals had responsibility for this task . The func - tional departments served this role in PBD allowing (cid:14) . space and time for the sharing of knowledge and experience . A second problem was revealed in some of the small projects undertaken in PBD . While the organi - sation was suited to large complex projects , it was overly elaborate for dealing with small routine pro - jects : ‘using a sledgehammer to crack a nut’ as one engineer put it . In particular , there was no real need for a senior PM and a dedicated team to control smaller , especially more routine projects . Treating ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 886 smaller projects ‘as if’ they were major projects had led to heavy overheads and too much bureaucracy in some cases . A third problem concerned cross - project integra - tion and senior management coordination and con - trol . Some major projects had ‘gone their own way’ in PBD and it had become difficult for senior com - pany managers at HQ to keep properly informed and maintain some degree of control and consistency across the activities of PBD . Systems had come to vary somewhat from project - to - project , as PMs exer - cised their discretion over which tools to apply and how to apply them . The basic minimum of formal (cid:14) controls e . g . , for risk management , cost , and design . review were not always adequately applied , as hap - pened in the case of PBD r Project P at the bid stage . Overall , senior management felt that control of PBD had become difficult , especially as the organisation had grown . 4 . 9 . Project performance In FMD r Project F , the initial underestimation of costs produced a knock on effect throughout the project , leading to under - resourcing and , in particu - lar , insufficient full - time staff . As a result , there were major technical problems , the project came in substantially over cost and delivery was late . Both the client and FMD’s senior management considered Project F a failure . There were various causes of the poor perfor - mance . In FMD , PMs did not report directly and regularly to the senior management team to share problems , responsibilities and so on . In Project F , this led to the initial under - resourcing , which pre - vented both team - building and the development of a good team spirit . It was also difficult to rectify the problem later , given the PM’s relatively low status in the organisation . FMD lacked the clear processes and procedures needed for controlling large complex pro - jects . The way the project was managed exacerbated problems with the customer and placed unreasonable demands on team members . Because team coherence and commitment were low , risks materialised , and problems were difficult to address . All in all , the functionally - oriented structure of FMD was not suited either for the setting up or execution of CoPS pro - jects . The heavy functional bias was appropriate for small projects and more standard product lines . In scaling up from simpler to more complex products , the organisation needed a heavier PM structure with direct representation into senior management . By contrast Project P r PBD was considered to be a major technical success and delivered ahead of schedule . However , as noted earlier , the project was completed slightly over budgeted costs , and with a lower level of profit than expected . The costs of two sub - systems had been under - estimated . Neither sub - systems posed special technical or supply challenges , but one probable cause was the informality of PBD’s bid stage r costing process . Team members felt that a slightly more systematic bid process involving more specialists from other projects would have helped avoid bid r costing problems . Also , despite good rela - tions with suppliers , the delivery of some items was late . These problems were dealt with by visits to supplier sites by the PM and senior engineers and risks to the project schedule were averted . Again , the team felt that a little more formality in dealing with suppliers could have avoided some of these prob - lems . Overall , problems on Project P were fairly minor and both the senior management and the customer were pleased with end results . However , there were wider concerns about long - term learning and techni - cal developments as discussed earlier . 4 . 10 . Organisational strategies and solutions In order to overcome the ‘mismatch’ between organisational structure and the needs of large pro - jects , FMD’s management decided to move to a heavyweight project matrix structure , maintaining a (cid:14) functional matrix for standard lines a move from . ‘B’ to ‘D’ in Fig . 1 above . The difficult task of allocating resources between functions and CoPS projects was to be undertaken at senior management level , with project directors responsible for negotiat - ing for and controlling resources . Deploying a heavyweight project structure for CoPS was viewed as more suitable than either the existing functional matrix or the pure PBO , given the need to cope with large numbers of standard items . For major projects , heavyweight PMs would report directly into senior management on a regular basis at the same level as the functional managers . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 887 Recognising the burden placed on PMs in CoPS , FMD also decided for very large projects to split the PM function into two with a commercial PM and a (cid:14) . technical project engineer PE , a practice followed in some projects in PBD . The rationale was to increase the scope for negotiating with the client (cid:14) . A good guy r bad guy B and r other routines and to try to overcome the need for PMs ‘with a super - human range of talents’ as one director put it . The PM would have overall business control of the project , including client relations , progress schedules , tools and procedures , team meetings , and so on . The PE , of equal status to the PM , would be responsible for all technical issues , including specifications , detailed design , construction , sub - system interfacing , and so on . The PE would deal with the client on most technical issues , but would avoid commercial deci - sions , leaving these to the PM . (cid:14) . Reflecting on Project F , the then PM said : A To - day a project like that would have a dedicated team of full - time engineers and a full - time PM . We learned w x a lot from that project F . Big projects with a development side must be handled differently , with different professionals in charge of technical work and commercial issues . We now have a project - based structure for all big projects where people can move in and out of teams . B The dual PM r PE system has both advantages and disadvantages . For the system to work effectively , the PM and PE have to be willing and capable partners , able to share in strategy , decision - making , and team - building . In some organisations , the system becomes accepted as the natural way of doing busi - ness . Sometimes , but not always , the PM is also an (cid:14) . engineer either practising or by background . Re - gardless of background , the PM is responsible for mastering all the skills of managing projects effec - tively and efficiently . In some companies , the PM organises commercial training for other team mem - (cid:14) bers e . g . , on negotiation skills , new tools , and risk . and time management . In addition , the PM function was to become more professionalised in FMD , not only through training but through the fostering of a commercial PM ethos , which values and rewards PMs . Courses on team - building and project management were being ar - ranged , while individuals were being encouraged to engage in various PM associations and introduce (cid:14) standard PM tools and procedures e . g . , for schedul - ing , team - building , bidding , cost control , risk man - . agement , and negotiation methods , along the lines also being followed by PBD . Regarding tools and procedures , it was decided not to introduce highly (cid:14) elaborate PM tools e . g . , for risk management , de - . sign walkthroughs , and cost control , following the lessons of PBD . However , as with PBD , minimum formal processes were mandated . For example , risk management was being built into the design review process so that problems could be communicated , discussed and shared among project staff . Given the composition of FMD , most PMs would be engineers or scientists who had demonstrated the aptitude , skills , and desire to be PMs . People with flair in this direction were to be encouraged and rewarded to undertake commercial PM responsibili - ties , sometimes alongside their technical careers . Alongside the new structure , much more attention would be given to developing a systematic , profes - sional approach to managing client relations and needs , including training in how to establish a busi - ness framework , manage expectations , and negotiate , again along the lines of PBD . Complex and changing clients needs are not unusual in CoPS ; therefore , a pre - emptive , pro - active approach is essential to min - imising risks . Turing to the case of PBD , to address the organi - sational learning problem , PBD’s management de - cided to establish a programme to build space for learning , training , staff development and PPRs , and to make time to reflect on important technical and (cid:14) business issues e . g . , new technical developments , project lessons learned , time management and cross - . project design reviews . To promote the long - term productivity and effectiveness of PBD , younger team members would be encouraged to learn from more experienced staff and to share in some of the ‘tacit’ knowledge , locked up in the heads of otherwise busy , more experienced people . Although learning went on informally at the sin - gle project level , PBD decided to structure and en - able learning to occur in more formal , cross - project (cid:14) settings e . g . , regular cross - project meetings , project management workshops , off - site training and special . technical seminars with outside speakers . To ensure this occurred , PBD put specific people in charge of coordinating particular themes and programmes ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 888 across projects , forming a weak functional line across the major projects of the unit . Other functional tasks were being considered to help coordinate sub - con - tractor relations and risk management procedures . The aim was to ensure consistency in project ap - proaches , to share best practices more widely and to keep senior management at HQ better informed through improved reporting procedures . This amounted to a step ‘back’ to a project - led organisa - (cid:14) tion , but fell short of a project matrix a shift from . ‘F’ to ‘E’ in Fig . 1 . To provide incentives for senior people to give up (cid:14) . project time e . g . , to bring on new recruits a formal mentoring programme was set up with incentives for good performance . PBD also restructured desk lay - outs and coffee spaces to enable more informal communications to occur . Senior management recog - nised that moves in this direction depended on more resources being made available and some degree of organisational slack in the system . However , the high good performance and profitability of PBD justified this long - term investment in learning . Whether or not these formal organisational solu - tions to the problems of organisational learning and career development work effectively remains to be seen . It is possible that moving a step back to a project - led organisation and establishing resource and task coordination may not solve the problem . Ulti - mately , the success of the approach adopted depends (cid:14) . on taking senior and other staff away from project work , which could , of course , be resisted by the PMs who are in a powerful position and could potentially prevent ‘interference’ with project operations . In - evitably , this kind of solution introduces its own tensions into the organisation , in this case pitting shorter - term project needs against wider organisa - tional needs . A key factor in whether or not the new programmes and structures work effectively is the health and dynamics of informal organisational struc - tures and practices which , in turn , reflect the particu - lar culture of a company . As shown by Pisano and (cid:14) . Wheelwright 1995 , informal , personal , and cross - department r divisional relationships play a vital role in ensuring any official form of organisational struc - ture works effectively . Nevertheless , although there can be no ‘mechanistic’ structural solution to prob - lems of organisational learning , it is wise to adopt structures and formal practices that promote learning and match the needs of large projects with organisa - tional structure , which the project - led organisation is formally designed to do . 7 5 . Managing CoPS in PBOs — interpretation This section draws analytical lessons from the case study , interpreting the evidence in relation to project coordination for CoPS . The aim is to provide a framework for interpreting the various organisa - tional choices and strategies available to foster inno - vation in high technology capital goods , networks , constructs , and systems . 5 . 1 . Interpreting the organisational strategies of PBD and FMD As noted above , FMD was initially a Type B (cid:14) . organisation see Fig . 1 , but this led to extreme problems in project management and coordination both internally , and externally with the client and suppliers . In response to the problems , FMD decided (cid:14) . to convert to a project matrix Type D with a heavyweight PM structure in order to allow CoPS to be managed more effectively within the organisation . However , it did decided not move to a PBO (cid:14) . Type F , in order to retain the functional depart - ments needed for standard product lines and batch production . The difficult task of allocating resources between functions and CoPS projects could then be resolved by functional and PMs of equal status , with (cid:14) their senior management in this case company direc - . tors . The directors favoured this arrangement be - cause the emerging CoPS were important new busi - ness opportunities and needed to be understood and supported at the highest level . Regular , direct feed - back on the progress of these projects was vital to the company . By contrast PBD , organised as a Type F pure PBO , had achieved a very good record at the individ - ual project level , but the overall organisation was concerned for its long - run performance in areas such as technical leadership , organisation - wide learning and communications . PBD’s response was to move back from a pure PBO to a project - led organisation 7 The effectiveness of the formal solution adopted at Complex Equipment Inc is an interesting subject for further research . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 889 (cid:14) . Type E in which PMs retain the most senior posi - tions but appoint new resource coordinators along functional or generic task lines which cut across project interests and incentives . This strategy was adopted in PBD to stimulate organisational learning and to provide incentives and resources for greater technical leadership . In PBD task force managers could resolve specific problems and help coordinate , monitor , and improve performance across the whole organisation . 5 . 2 . From linear to concurrent models of project management To illustrate the management advantages of the PBO for CoPS , Fig . 2 contrasts the PM task within a (cid:14) . (cid:14) . Fig . 2 . Comparing project management in functional and project - based organizations . A Functional matrix . B Project - based organization (cid:14) . (cid:14) . (cid:14) . internal coordination . C Project - based organization external coordination . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 890 (cid:14) functional matrix with the weak PM structure Type . (cid:14) B deployed in FMD , with that of a pure PBO Type . F deployed in PBD . Fig . 2A shows the position of the weak PM within the functional matrix , involving multiple lines of communication , control and com - mand , and various department managers . The PM function embodies a linear or sequential model of project management , in which the project passes through various stages and departments in turn . The model also treats the client and suppliers as external to the project . The PM has to perform a highly complex internal task of balancing the various internal interests and meeting the different demands (cid:14) . e . g . , in terms of reporting and quality control of the departments . Similarly , there are many lines of com - munication with team members on the project who (cid:14) . also report primarily to departmental managers to whom they owe their career allegiance , and to other (cid:14) . PMs some in FMD worked on four or five projects . PMs face similar complexities and difficulties in external coordination . To reply to customer requests they often have gain information and commitments from engineering , purchasing , and planning depart - ments . The larger and more complex the project , the more difficult the task of keeping the client informed and responding to requests for changes from the customer . By contrast , Fig . 2B shows the position of the PM in a PBO in relation to the specialist functions within the project . The PM is the main line of communica - tion and can exercise control to coordinate and inte - grate specialists and functions in creative new ways , focusing on the needs of the project . Because there are few internal lines of command and communica - tion to interfere with project objectives , the internal coordination task becomes simpler and clearer . Similarly on the external front , clear strong lines of command and communications can be built up (cid:14) . with the client Fig . 2C . In principle , the PM is able to quickly assess and react to change in client needs and learn from feedback from the client and major component suppliers . The PM has both the responsi - bility and power to react to unexpected events , nego - tiate changes with the client and , if necessary , put suppliers of major components together with the customer to resolve difficult problems . In effect , the PBO embodies a concurrent model of project management . The move to a PBO repre - sents a shift from the linear model of project man - agement , which treats the user and other innovation actors as ‘outside bodies’ , to a concurrent model of project management which is able to integrate all the business functions within the project and includes users and suppliers in the core project processes . For CoPS projects , the concurrent model is potentially very helpful in dealing with uncertainty , risk and emerging properties common in CoPS . 5 . 3 . Economic moti ˝ ations and determinants Underlying the advantages and disadvantages of the two organisational form are economic motiva - tions and determinants . 8 In theory it would be possi - ble to mass produce consumer goods such as cam - corders or hi - fi equipment in a PBO , rather than a functional organisation . Similarly , it would also be (cid:14) possible to produce a large CoPS e . g . , a power . station or a flight simulator in a functional organisa - tion . However , in both cases , the costs of production would be far higher than if the more appropriate organisational form had been adopted . In economic terms , the large functional Chandle - rian firm is most effective at achieving production scale advantages and exploiting economies of scope , systematically converting lower value inputs into higher value outputs . However , these economic drivers are largely irrelevant in CoPS production , because the latter are produced either as one - offs or small - batch items . Therefore , efficiency gains must come from other sources , centred on other forms of organisation . The PBO , with its focus and flexibility , in theory and in contrast with the functional form , (cid:14) . can achieve economies of : a resource allocation — allocating and re - allocating physical and human re - sources when and where they are needed to each (cid:14) . project ; b knowledge management — applying the know - how needed to deal with the technology , as (cid:14) . well as regulator and client needs ; c design optimi - sation — enabling design cycles to be carried out effectively and efficiently by reducing the number of (cid:14) . design r redesign cycles and costs associated with 8 This section draws heavily on ideas and comments provided (cid:14) . by Paul Nightingale SPRU . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 891 additional cycles , caused in CoPS by backward feed - (cid:14) . back loops from later to early design stages ; and d quality — enabling the organisation to produce a complex good to the exact specification and needs of the buyer . Its inability to achieve such economies , indicates that the functional form is economically wasteful as a form of production for one - off projects . As shown above , the PBO can also assist in managing risk and uncertainty , especially important in the many CoPS which exhibit emerging properties (cid:14) unforeseen and unforeseeable features which occur . during design , systems integration and production (cid:14) . Hobday , 1998 . Given that formal planning is lim - ited in its ability to deal with design and production unknowns , then the devolved decision - making al - lowed by the PBO enables a flexible allocation of resources to alleviate these problems when they emerge . Furthermore , the nature of the CoPS project task often changes as clients realise new needs dur - ing the design and production phases , especially in very high value CoPS where production may take two years or more . The PBO , in theory , allows the swift transfer of information to relevant teams and team members who are then in a position to adapt their activities and respond to new contingencies . In short , the functional Chandlerian organisation is appropriate for the mass production of known products with known processes , where the key task is to optimise the production system in order to transform large quantities of lower value inputs into large quantities of higher value outputs , by reducing unit costs . These economies are essentially scale - based . By contrast , each CoPS product and process involves uncertainty . Economies in production come from reduced design cycles and efficient systems integration , made possible by the flexible and effi - cient allocation of knowledge and resources to each good being produced . Therefore , in CoPS , as in mass - produced goods , economic advantages are rooted in appropriate organisational form . The PBO , in principle , is an appropriate organisational form for the technological and market environment of CoPS , allowing for efficient project control and resource coordination . 5 . 4 . Inno ˝ ation ad ˝ antages of the PBO Beyond the economic advantages of the PBO , there are dynamic innovation advantages over the functional form . Realising a CoPS is often a creative and difficult task , involving feedback and learning as the project develops . CoPS not only require innova - tion at the product level but also at the process and organisational levels . Design and production involve many knowledge - intensive , non - routine tasks , and decision - taking under conditions of uncertainty and risk . These intelligent processes cannot be reduced to routine project management procedures and plan - ning . Learning during production is required to as - similate the knowledge required to complete the task of production . Because each CoPS is different , the innovation needs of the product frequently demand experimenta - tion in forms of project management . In short , pro - ject - level innovation is required to produce innova - tive products . Because the PBO creates and recreates organisational structures and processes around the needs of each product and customer it is , in princi - ple , a highly innovative form . Again , in theory at least , the PBO defies the anti - innovation bias of large functional organisations with their semi - perma - nent departments and consequent core rigidities . 9 The challenge of managing innovative CoPS projects is one of integrating business functions , ensuring flexibility and responsiveness to the needs of cus - tomers , and dealing with the emerging properties which inevitably arise in complex products which embody new knowledge . It is also a challenge of thinking beyond current market and product needs to anticipate future needs and especially to convince buyers of the firm’s competence to deliver further new CoPS . 6 . Conclusion Using a case study approach , this paper has com - pared the efficiency and effectiveness of the func - tionally - oriented , matrix organisation with the PBO , pointing to both the strengths and weaknesses of the PBO in the management of CoPS . On the positive 9 In practice , of course , the PBO form may not live up to its innovative potential . Indeed , some project - based sectors are noto - (cid:14) . rious for failing to learn and innovate e . g . , construction . Realis - ing the innovative potential of the project - based organisation is a key challenge for management . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 892 side , the PBO has the potential to foster innovation and promote effective project leadership across the business functions . As resources , technical and other , are formally dedicated to the project , both power and responsibility for project success lie with PMs . The latter , who tend to be ‘super heavyweight’ , can focus on team - building , meeting the clients needs , dealing with technological uncertainties and making a suc - cess out of the project . By contrast , the functional matrix is poorly equipped to coping with the needs of CoPS projects . Along the spectrum of six functional - to - project - based forms , the paper showed that the PBO is an extreme form , having no functional division of labour or task coordination across project lines . All major business functions , including marketing and finance , are coordinated within the project . The PBO is prob - ably best suited for large , risk - intensive projects , where resources have to be combined and shared with other firms in the project . Because of its flexi - bility and focus the PBO form is able to cope well with the emerging properties of CoPS by responding to client needs in real time . The case example showed why the PBO form was more effective than the functional form in integrating different types of knowledge and skill , learning within the project boundary and coping with project risks and uncer - tainties . While the functional matrix embodies an inward - looking , linear form of project management , the PBO embodies a concurrent model of project management which is able to realise innovation in collaboration with clients and suppliers . Because CoPS tend to be major new business endeavours , simultaneous product , process and or - ganisational innovation is required . The PBO is po - tentially an effective form because it creates and recreates new organisational structures around the needs of each product and each major customer . Unlike functional departments , the PBO is temporary and is , therefore , not subject to the anti - innovation bias of functional organisations with their rigid de - marcations and core rigidities . As Section 5 shows , potentially , the PBO boasts significant economic ad - vantages over the functional form in the production of CoPS . On the negative side , the PBO is inherently weak in coordinating processes , resources and capabilities across the organisation as a whole . Individual project success and efficiency , although important , does not necessarily enable a firm to continue to execute projects successfully . Indeed , the case study revealed a problem of ‘learning closure’ around major pro - jects , as there were no structures or incentives in the PBO for cross - project learning or communications . The learning silos , represented by functional depart - ments , are absent in the pure PBO . As a conse - quence , PBOs can suffer from a lack of technical leadership and direction , roles typically played by engineering and R & D managers in functional and matrix organisations . PBOs can also breed insecurity over career development , especially among new re - cruits because of the dispersion of technical leader - ship across projects . By contrast , functional depart - (cid:14) . ments provide space and often time for the sharing of knowledge and experience . In short , the PBO is inherently weak where functional forms are strong : in executing routine production and engineering tasks , achieving economies of scale and meeting the needs of volume production . Cross - project integration and management control can also become a problem in PBOs if projects ‘go their own way’ . Systems may come to vary from project - to - project , as PMs exercise a high degree of discretion over which tools to apply and how to apply them . It may become difficult for senior man - agers to track , control , and respond to the activities of project teams and directors , limiting the firms overall capacity for effective corporate strategy and business coordination . To be most effective the PBO requires that projects are coherently directed towards company - wide market and technology targets . The case example identified various strategies for dealing with PBO weaknesses , particularly the prob - lem of project isolation . To improve coordination in areas such as overall company strategy , regular re - porting channels into company directors were set up . To enable and encourage organisational learning , cross - project communication and technical leader - ship the company moved one stage back from a pure PBO to a project - led organisation . In this arrange - ment PMs retain their senior positions but new re - source and task coordinators along functional lines are appointed , cutting across project interests and incentives , in order to resolve specific problems and help coordinate , monitor , and improve performance across the organisation and a whole . ( ) M . Hobday r Research Policy 29 2000 871 – 893 893 This move back from a pure PBO to a project - led organisation shows the variety of choices involved and the need to match organisational form with the product mix in question . More generally , the paper indicates that the changing nature , composition , and scale of product r s have an important bearing on appropriate organisational forms . The management challenge facing CoPS producers is both to realise the potential of project - based forms for current mar - kets , and to develop the firm’s overall capabilities to exploit and create future market opportunities . Acknowledgements This paper was prepared within the Complex Product Systems Innovation Centre , supported by the UK Economic and Social Research Council . The author would like to thank Paul Nightingale , Stefano Brusoni , Ammon Salter , Andrea Prencipe , Howard Rush , Tim Brady , and two anonymous referees for comments on earlier drafts . The normal disclaimers apply . References Brusoni , S . , Prencipe , A . , Salter , A . , 1998 . Mapping and Measur - ing Innovation in Project - based Firms . SPRU Mimeo , June . Burns , T . , Stalker , G . M . , 1961 . The Management of Innovation . Tavistock , London . Clark , K . B . , Wheelwright , S . C . , 1992 . Organizing and leading A heavyweight B development teams . Californian Management (cid:14) . Review 34 3 , 9 – 28 . Fleck , J . , 1988 . Innofusion or Diffusation ? The Nature of Techno - logical Development in Robotics , ESRC Programme on Infor - mation and Communication Technologies . Working Paper Se - ries , University of Edinburgh . Galbraith , J . , 1971 . Matrix organizational designs — how to combine functional and project forms . Business Horizons , 29 – 40 . Galbraith , J . R . , 1973 . Designing Complex Organizations . Addi - son - Wesley , Reading , MA . Gann , D . M . , 1993 . Innovation in the Built Environment : the Rise of Digital Buildings . Doctoral Thesis , SPRU , University of Sussex . Gann , D . , Salter , A . , 1998 . Learning and innovation management in project - based firms . 2nd International Conference on Tech - nology Policy and Innovation , Lisbon , August 3 – 5 . Hobday , M . , 1998 . Product complexity , innovation and industrial organisation . Research Policy 26 , 689 – 710 . Hobday , M . , Rush , H . , 1999 . Technology management in complex (cid:14) . product systems CoPS : ten questions answered . International Journal of Technology Management , Special Issue : ‘Emerging Trends in Technology Strategy Development’ , forthcoming . (cid:14) . Katz , R . Ed . , The Human Side Of Managing Technological Innovation : a Collection Of Readings . Oxford Univ . Press , New York . Larson , E . W . , Gobeli , D . H . , 1987 . Matrix management : contradic - (cid:14) . tions and insights . Californian Management Review 29 4 , 126 – 138 . Larson , E . W . , Gobeli , D . H . , 1989 . Significance of project man - agement structure on development success . IEEE Transactions (cid:14) . on Engineering Management 36 2 , 119 – 125 . Lemley , J . K . , 1992 . The Channel Tunnel : creating a modern wonder - of - the world , PMNetwork . The Professional Magazine of the Project Management Institute , 14 – 22 , July . Leonard - Barton , D . , 1992 . Core capabilities and core rigidities : a paradox in managing new product development . Strategic Management Journal 13 , 111 – 125 . Miles , R . E . , Snow , C . C . , 1986 . Organizations : new concepts for (cid:14) . new forms . Californian Management Review 28 3 . Mintzberg , H . , 1979 . The Structuring of Organizations . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Mowery , D . , Rosenberg , N . , 1982 . The commercial aircraft indus - (cid:14) . try . In : Nelson , R . Ed . , Government and Technical Progress : a Cross - Industry Analysis . Pergamon , New York . Pinto , J . K . , Covin , J . G . , 1989 . Critical factors in project imple - mentation : a comparison of construction and R & D projects . Technovation 9 , 49 – 62 . Pinto , J . K . , Kharbanda , O . P . , 1995 . Lessons for an accidental profession . Business , 41 – 50 . Pinto , J . K . , Prescott , J . E . , 1988 . Variations in critical success factors over the stages in the project life cycle . Journal of (cid:14) . Management 14 1 , 5 – 18 . Pisano , G . , Wheelwright , S . C . , 1995 . High - tech R & D . Harvard Business Review , 93 – 105 . Seeley Brown , J . , Duguid , P . , 1996 . Organizational learning and communities of practice : towards a unified view of working , (cid:14) . learning , and innovation . In : Cohen , M . D . , Sproull , L . S . Eds . , Organizational Learning . Sage Publication , California , Chap . 3 . Shenhar , A . J . , 1993 . From low - to high - tech project management . (cid:14) . R & D Management 23 3 , 199 – 214 . Teece , D . J . , 1996 . Firm organization , industrial structure , and technological innovation . Journal of Economic Behaviour and Organization 31 , 193 – 224 . Walker , W . , Graham , M . , Harbor , B . , 1988 . From components to integrated systems : technological diversity and integration be - tween the military and civilian sectors . In : Gummett , P . , (cid:14) . Reppy , J . Eds . , The Relations Between Defence and Civil Technologies . Kluwer Academic Publishing , London . Williamson , O . E . , 1975 . Markets and Hierarchies . Free Press , New York . Woodward , J . , 1958 . Management and Technology , London . Lon - don , Her Majesty’s Stationary Office , London .