Tissue structure and inflammatory processes shape viscoelastic properties of the mouse brain Jason M . Millward a , b , Jing Guo c , Dominique Berndt a , b , Jürgen Braun c , Ingolf Sack c * and Carmen Infante - Duarte a , b * Magnetic resonance elastography ( MRE ) is an imaging method that reveals the mechanical properties of tissue , modelled as a combination of " viscosity " and " elasticity " . We recently showed reduced brain viscoelasticity in mul - tiple sclerosis ( MS ) patients compared with healthy controls , and in the relapsing – remitting disease model experi - mental autoimmune encephalomyelitis ( EAE ) . However , the mechanisms by which these intrinsic tissue properties become altered remain unclear . This study investigates whether distinct regions in the mouse brain differ in their native viscoelastic properties , and how these properties are affected during chronic EAE in C57Bl / 6 mice and in mice lacking the cytokine interferon - gamma . IFN - γ (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice exhibit a more severe EAE phenotype , with ampli ﬁ ed in ﬂ ammation in the cerebel - lum and brain stem . Brain scans were performed in the sagittal plane using a 7 T animal MRI scanner , and the ante - rior ( cerebral ) and posterior ( cerebellar ) regions analyzed separately . MRE investigations were accompanied by contrast - enhanced MRI scans , and by histopathology and gene expression analysis ex vivo . Compared with the cerebrum , the cerebellum in healthy mice has a lower viscoelasticity , i . e . it is intrinsically " softer " . This was seen both in the wild - type mice and the IFN γ (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice . During chronic EAE , C57Bl / 6 mice did not show altered brain viscoelasticity . However , as expected , the IFN γ (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice showed a more severe EAE phenotype , and these mice did show altered brain elasticity during the course of disease . The magnitude of the elasticity reduction correlated with F4 / 80 gene expression , a marker for macrophages / microglia in in ﬂ amed central nervous system tissue . Together these results demonstrate that MRE is sensitive enough to discriminate between viscoelastic properties in distinct anatomical structures in the mouse brain , and to con ﬁ rm a further relationship between cellular in ﬂ am - mation and mechanical alterations of the brain . This study underscores the utility of MRE to monitor pathological tissue alterations in vivo . Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher ’ s web site Keywords : experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis ; multiple sclerosis ; magnetic resonance elastography ; brain ; in ﬂ ammation INTRODUCTION Cranial magnetic resonance elastography ( MRE ) is an emerging method that can yield information about the mechanical proper - ties of brain tissue ( 1 ) . MRE achieves a non - invasive " virtual pal - pation " , by using an external vibration source to induce shear waves in the tissue , and detecting these waves using motion - sensitive gradients . The resulting complex - valued shear modulus G * includes the real component G ′ ( the storage modulus ) , which re ﬂ ects tissue elasticity , and the imaginary component G ″ ( the loss modulus ) ( 2 ) , which re ﬂ ects tissue viscosity . Decreased values of G * indicate a reduction in the mechanical rigidity of tis - sue , i . e . a " softening " of the tissue . Changes in the loss tangent given by the phase angle φ , calculated as arctan ( G ″ / G ′ ) , indicate an alteration of the tissue complexity , which may be associated with more severe tissue remodeling and tissue destruction ( 3 ) . Inside the central nervous system ( CNS ) , interactions between neurons , glia , the vasculature and the extracellular matrix , as well as the interstitial and cerebrospinal ﬂ uid compartments , con - tribute to establishing the mechanical properties of CNS tissue . The fact that the brain is composed by different structures with * Correspondence to : C . Infante - Duarte , Institute for Medical Immunology , Charité – Universitätmedizin Berlin , Germany . E - mail : carmen . infante @ charite . de I . Sack , Department of Radiology , Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin , Germany . E - mail : ingolf . sack @ charite . de a J . M . Millward , D . Berndt , C . Infante - Duarte Institute for Medical Immunology , Charité – Universitätmedizin Berlin , Germany b J . M . Millward , D . Berndt , C . Infante - Duarte Experimental and Clinical Research Center , a joint cooperation between the Charité Medical Faculty and the Max - Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine , Berlin , Germany c J . Guo , J . Braun , I . Sack Department of Radiology , Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin , Germany Abbreviations used : ANOVA , analysis of variance ; CNS , central nervous sys - tem ; EAE , experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis ; FoV , ﬁ eld of view ; IFN γ , interferon - gamma ; MOG , myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein ; MRE , magnetic resonance elastography ; MS , multiple sclerosis ; MSG , motion sensi - tizing gradient ; qPCR , quantitative polymerase chain reaction ; SJL , Swiss Jim Lambert ; WT , wild type . Research article Received : 8 October 2014 , Revised : 2 April 2015 , Accepted : 7 April 2015 , Published online in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary . com ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / nbm . 3319 NMR Biomed . 2015 Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd .