POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences Ezra Bruggeman 1 , Oumeng Zhang 2 , Lisa - Maria Needham 1 , 3 , Markus Körbel 1 , Sam Daly 1 , Matthew Cheetham 1 , Ruby Peters 4 , Tingting Wu 2 , Andrey S . Klymchenko 5 , Simon J . Davis 6 , Ewa K . Paluch 4 , David Klenerman 1 , Matthew D . Lew 2 , Kevin O’Holleran 7 , and Steven F . Lee 1 , (cid:0) 1 Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , UK 2 Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering , Washington University in St . Louis , Missouri , USA 3 Department of Chemistry , University of Wisconsin - Madison , Madison , USA 4 Department of Physiology , Development and Neuroscience , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , UK 5 Laboratoire de Biophotonique et Pharmacologie , Université de Strasbourg , Strasbourg , France 6 MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine , University of Oxford , Oxford , UK 7 Cambridge Advanced Imaging Centre , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , UK ABSTRACT : Current methods for single - molecule orientation lo - calization microscopy ( SMOLM ) require optical setups and al - gorithms that can be prohibitively slow and complex , limiting the widespread adoption for biological applications . We present POLCAM , a simpliﬁed SMOLM method based on polarized detec - tion using a polarization camera , that can be easily implemented on any wide - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscope . To make polarization cameras compatible with single - molecule detection , we developed theory to minimize ﬁeld of view errors , used simulations to opti - mize experimental design , and developed a fast algorithm based on Stokes parameter estimation which can operate over 1000 fold faster than the state of the art , enabling near instant determination of molecular anisotropy . To aid in the adoption of POLCAM , we developed open - source image analysis software ; a napari plugin for visualization of high - dimensional diffraction - limited polariza - tion camera datasets , and a website detailing hardware installation and software use . To illustrate the potential of POLCAM in the life sciences , we applied our method to study both alpha - synuclein ﬁbrils and the actin cytoskeleton of mammalian cells . To demon - strate that POLCAM also allows diffraction - limited imaging , we demonstrate POLCAM imaging actin in ﬁbroblast - like cells and the plasma membrane of live human T cells . polarization camera | single - molecule orientation localisation microscopy | SMOLM | super - resolution imaging | multidimensional super - resolution | ﬂuores - cence microscopy | SMLM | Correspondence : sl591 @ cam . ac . uk Single - molecule localization microscopy ( SMLM ) ( 1 – 4 ) is a super - resolution microscopy technique that is widely used in biology to study cellular structures below the diffrac - tion limit ( 5 – 7 ) . Single - molecule orientation localization mi - croscopy ( SMOLM ) is a multidimensional variant of SMLM in which in addition to the precise spatial position , the orienta - tion of individual ﬂuorescent molecules is also measured . The ability to measure the orientation of single molecules provides information about how molecules organize , orient , rotate , and wobble in their environment , which is of key relevance across biological systems ( 8 – 12 ) . The widespread use of SMOLM by the biological imaging community has thus far been limited by the need for complex experimental setups and often computa - tionally expensive image analysis . Additionally , this lack of accessibility has also slowed down the necessary development of a wider range of labeling protocols that are appropriate for SMOLM : labeling methods in which the orientation of the ﬂuo - rescent probe is relatively ﬁxed and rotationally restricted with respect to its target . Fluorescent molecules are not isotropic point sources , i . e . they do not emit light equally in all directions . Fundamentally , ﬂuorescent molecules emit like oscillating electric dipoles : the intensity I of the emitted ﬂuorescence depends on the relative observation direction and follows the relationship I ∝ sin 2 ( η ) , where η is the angle between the observation direction and the orientation of the emission dipole moment of the molecule ( 13 ) . In conventional SMLM experiments , this anisotropic emission is typically not noticeable because , with common SMLM label - ing protocols , ﬂuorescent molecules are free to rapidly wob - ble and rotate with respect to their target ( e . g . due to long linker chains ) , resulting in an orientation - averaged image ( 14 ) . However , when a labeling method is used that restricts the ro - tational freedom of the ﬂuorescent molecules with respect to their target , the anisotropy in the emitted ﬂuorescence allows for the measurement of molecular orientation ( 15 ) . Different approaches have been used to achieve molecular orientation imaging . The image of a single molecule can be ﬁtted using a point - spread function ( PSF ) that includes the position of the molecule ( x , y or x , y , z ) , the orientation of the emission dipole moment ( φ , θ ) ( 16 , 17 ) and often a rotational mobility parame - ter ( 18 ) . As the intensity distribution of a standard PSF does not contain signiﬁcant information about a molecule’s orientation , the PSF can be engineered to increase the orientation informa - tion content . A simple example is imaging slightly out - of - focus to exaggerate the dipole PSF shape ( 19 – 21 ) . More advanced PSF engineering can be performed using a spatial light modula - tor ( 14 , 22 – 25 ) , a special optic ( 26 – 28 ) or pupil splitting ( 29 ) . A drawback of PSF engineering is that the optical setups required are highly complex ( with exception of the Vortex PSF ( 26 ) ) , and are sensitive to optical aberrations ( with exception of pupil splitting ( 29 ) ) as the orientation estimation algorithms rely on simulated dipole PSF models , which can necessitate perform - ing spatially ( in ) variant phase - retrieval to match the PSF model to the experimental PSF ( 26 ) . Additionally , ﬁtting a 5 - or 6 - dimensional dipole PSF model is computationally expensive , making data analysis prohibitively slow . An alternative to PSF engineering is splitting the emission into multiple polarized channels that form separate images on the same camera ( 9 , 30 – 36 ) , multiple detectors ( 37 ) , or using continuous image displacement using a rotating calcite crys - tal ( 38 ) . The advantage of polarized detection - based methods is that the orientation estimation can be performed using sim - ple intensity measurements , and does not necessarily require the ﬁtting of a complex PSF model . As a result , the data analysis is fast and easily compatible with high - throughput data collec - tion . The simplest polarized detection setup splits the emis - sion into 2 orthogonal polarized channels using a polarizing beam splitter ( 30 , 31 ) . This method suffers from some degen - eracies since both an isotropic emitter ( e . g . a freely rotating Bruggeman et al . | bioR χ iv | February 7 , 2023 | 1 – 13 Fig . 1 . Single - molecule imaging using a polarization camera . a ) Schematic of the optical setup that includes the polarization camera and a schematic representation of a small region of the four - directional micropolarizer array ( transmission axis at 0 ◦ , 45 ◦ , 90 ◦ , or - 45 ◦ ) integrated into the sensor . LP linear polarizer , λ / 4 quarter - wave plate , DC dichroic . b ) Deﬁnition of the in - plane angle φ and out - of - plane angle θ that specify the orientation of the emission dipole moment ( arrow ) of a molecule ( structure of Nile red depicted ) . c ) Simulated examples of four single ﬂuorescent molecules . From top to bottom , ( i ) a molecule aligned parallel to the sample plane at - 60 ◦ from the x - axis , ( ii ) aligned with the x - axis , ( iii ) aligned with the optical axis , and ( iv ) a rapidly rotating molecule . For each example , the back focal plane ( BFP ) intensity distribution , image intensity distribution , and corresponding raw polarization camera image are shown . The lines on the BFP and image plane intensity distributions denote the orientation of the polarization . Scale bar 500 nm . d ) Relationship between the average angle of linear polarization ( AoLP ) and the in - plane angle φ of the dipole moment . e ) Relationship between the net degree of linear polarization ( netDoLP ) and the out - of - plane angle θ of the dipole moment of a rotationally immobilized molecule for a 1 . 4 NA oil - immersion objective and no refractive index mismatch between the sample and immersion medium . molecule / ﬂuorescent bead ) , an immobilized molecule with an emission dipole moment oriented at 45 ◦ in between the trans - mission axis of the two channels , or parallel to the optical axis all give rise to equal intensities measured in both chan - nels ( 39 ) . Splitting the emission into 3 or more polarized chan - nels / cameras breaks this degeneracy , but signiﬁcantly compli - cates the experimental setup as multiple optical components are needed to split the ﬂuorescence into four polarized channels and focused on one camera chip or multiple cameras ( 31 , 33 – 36 ) . Here , we present a new experimentally simpliﬁed SMOLM method called POLCAM that uses a polarization camera for four - channel polarized detection . Polarization cameras have become popular in the ﬁeld of computer vision as they pro - vide single - shot multi - channel polarized measurements ( 40 – 43 ) . The pixels of the sensor of a polarization camera are cov - ered by small linear polarizers with transmission axes typically oriented at 0 ◦ , 45 ◦ , 90 ◦ and - 45 ◦ in a 2 × 2 - pixel mosaic pattern that is repeated over the entire sensor ( Fig . 1a ) . As polarizers are integrated into the camera chip , no additional polarization optics are required . Polarization cameras have reached quan - tum efﬁciencies and noise levels that in theory are compatible with single - molecule detection . The ease of use of polariza - tion cameras does come at a cost in the form of instantaneous ﬁeld - of - view ( IFOV ) errors near object edges ( 44 – 46 ) . To make POLCAM robust to IFOV errors , we used vectorial diffraction simulations of single dipole emitters to optimize microscope de - sign and developed a Stokes parameter estimation - based recon - struction algorithm , and a dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm . We validated and characterized our method using samples with known structures ; single ﬂuorophores immobilized on cover glass , in polymer , and lipid bilayer - coated glass beads la - beled with membrane dyes . We next performed SMOLM on amyloid ﬁbrils in vitro and on the actin network of ﬁxed mam - malian cells . To demonstrate that a polarization camera can also be used for polarized diffraction - limited microscopy , we imaged the actin network of COS - 7 cells , and the membrane of live hu - man T cells interacting with an antibody - coated cover glass . Our approach can be easily implemented by switching the regular camera on any single - molecule ﬂuorescence micro - scope for a polarization camera . The camera used in this work is supported by the popular image acquisition software Micro - Manager ( 47 ) , and we provide image analysis software in the form of MATLAB applications for single - molecule and diffraction - limited image analysis and real - time image process - ing and rendering during acquisition and a napari ( 48 ) plugin for processing multi - dimensional diffraction - limited polariza - tion camera image datasets . We envisage that the combina - tion of ease of use , ease of implementation , low cost , improved speed , and open - source software will make POLCAM an acces - sible and powerful tool for the study of molecular orientation across diverse biological applications . Results Measuring molecular orientation using polarized detec - tion . When a ﬂuorescent molecule has one dominant emission dipole moment µ —as is the case for many common ﬂuorescent molecules— its emission resembles the far - ﬁeld emitted by an oscillating electric dipole ( 13 , 15 ) ( Fig . 1b , Supplementary Note S1 ) . When its emission dipole moment is oriented parallel to the sample plane , the electric ﬁeld in the back focal plane of the ob - jective will mainly be linearly polarized along the direction of the emission dipole moment ( Fig . 1c , ﬁrst and second rows ) . If the emission dipole moment is oriented parallel to the optical axis , the electric ﬁeld in the back focal plane of the objective will be radially polarized ( 49 , 50 ) ( Fig . 1c , third row ) . When a molecule is rapidly rotating , it can appear unpolarized ( Fig . 1c , bottom row ) . As the tube lens in conventional wideﬁeld ﬂuores - cence microscopy has a low numerical aperture , the described polarization is mostly conserved in the image plane ( 51 ) . As a result , the angle of the axis of maximum polarization determines 2 | bioR χ iv Bruggeman et al . | POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences Fig . 2 . Single - molecule detection , experimental bias and precision . a ) An unprocessed polarization camera image of SYTOX orange molecules dispersed on a cover glass in PBS . b ) The same image as in panel a but processed to reveal polarization information using a polarization colormap that combines the angle of linear polarization ( AoLP ) , degree of linear polarization ( DoLP ) , and intensity ( S 0 ) in HSV colorspace ( hue = AoLP , saturation = DoLP , value = S 0 ) as illustrated in the colormap cartoon . c ) Examples of 4 SYTOX orange molecules with their emission dipole moment parallel to the sample plane ( molecules 1 and 2 ) , parallel to the optical axis ( molecule 3 ) , and rapidly rotating ( molecule 4 ) . For each , the unprocessed image , estimated Stokes parameter images ( S 0 , S 1 and S 2 ) , AoLP , DoLP , and polarization colormap images are shown . d ) Illustration of a silica microsphere ( 5 µm diameter ) coated using a lipid bilayer ( DPPC + 40 % cholesterol ) . e ) Diffraction - limited image of a cross - section at a z - plane in the middle of a lipid bilayer - coated silica microsphere labeled using the membrane dye Di - 8 - ANEPPS . f ) POLCAM SMOLM reconstruction of a cross - section of a silica microsphere acquired through PAINT with the Nile red - derivative NR4A . Each localization is drawn as a rod with a direction indicating the estimated in - plane angle φ . g ) An experimental bias curve for the estimation of φ generated using a PAINT dataset such as the one shown in panel f . The column of points at the right side of the plot ( at assumed true φ = 90 ◦ ) is due to a physical imperfection of the lipid coating on the bead . The clusters of points around ( - 90 , 90 ) and ( 90 , - 90 ) are due to the fact that φ plus an integer multiple of 180 ◦ remap to the same orientation . h ) Illustration of the angles specifying the orientation of the emission dipole moment . i ) Experimental precision from repeated localization and orientation estimation on AF647 immobilized in PVA . The precision is the measured standard deviation on repeated measurement of the position ( x , y ) , φ , and θ of the same molecule . Photon numbers are averages . Measurements between N = 12 - 40 are used to calculate the standard deviation . A power law was ﬁtted to the data . Bruggeman et al . | POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences bioR χ iv | 3 Fig . 3 . TAB - PAINT imaging of alpha - synuclein ﬁbrils in vitro . a ) A POLCAM SMOLM reconstruction of α - synuclein ﬁbrils , color - coded by the in - plane angle φ of the emission dipole moment of the Nile Red dyes . b ) Diffraction - limited image and SMLM reconstruction of inset ( i ) in panel a . c - e ) Detail of insets ( i ) , ( ii ) , and ( iii ) in panel a , where individual localizations are drawn as rods . The orientation and color of the rods indicate the measured φ . f ) Polar histograms of the ﬁbrils are shown in panel c ( green ) and segments indicated by the dashed boxes drawn in panels d ( red ) and panel f ( yellow and blue ) . The interquartile range ( IQR ) of the distributions is displayed below the respective histograms . g ) Histogram of the avgDoLP of the data shown in panel a , including the avgDoLP threshold used to exclude localizations with high rotational mobility when displaying φ - color - coded reconstructions . h ) Histogram of the number of detected photons per molecule in a single frame for the dataset shown in panel a . The minimum number of detected photons ( 500 photons ) is also indicated . the in - plane orientation φ of the emission dipole moment , and the degree of net linear polarization is related to the out - of - plane orientation θ ( Fig . 1d - e ) . Conventionally , polarizing beam splitters are used to split the detected ﬂuorescence into multiple polarized image chan - nels . The number of photons that are detected from a single molecule in the different channels will depend on the 3D orien - tation and rotational mobility of the molecule . These measured intensities can be used to estimate the angles φ and θ using ana - lytically derived equations . Equations for the case of four polar - ized detection channels ( 0 ◦ , 45 ◦ , 90 ◦ , and - 45 ◦ ) were derived by John T . Fourkas ( 50 ) . Here , we rewrote these expressions in terms of Stokes parameters ( Supplementary Note S2 ) : φ = 1 2 tan − 1 (cid:18) S 2 S 1 (cid:19) = AoLP ( 1 ) θ = sin − 1 (cid:18)r A · netDoLP C − B · netDoLP (cid:19) ( 2 ) where A , B and C are constants that are a function of the half maximum collection angle of the objective α ( Supplementary Note S2 ) and the net degree of linear polarization ( netDoLP ) given by netDoLP = s h S 1 i 2 + h S 2 i 2 h S 0 i 2 ( 3 ) 4 | bioR χ iv Bruggeman et al . | POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences Fig . 4 . dSTORM imaging of actin in ﬁxed HeLa cells . a ) Representative examples of images of single AF488 molecules from the dSTORM datasets of phalloidin - AF488 , unprocessed ( top ) and as an HSV ( hue = AoLP , saturation = DoLP , value = S0 ) colormap ( bottom ) . Scale bar 300 nm . b ) The same as in panel a , but for AF647 . Scale bar 300 nm . c ) POLCAM SMOLM reconstruction of a phalloidin - AF488 dSTORM dataset in the form of a modiﬁed φ - color - coded scatter plot . All localizations with an avgDoLP < 0 . 4 are colored white to indicate they have high rotational mobility . d ) The same as panel c , but for phalloidin - AF647 . e ) Comparison of the distribution of avgDoLP of single molecules from the phalloidin - AF488 and phalloidin - AF647 datasets . f ) Fourier ring correlation curves for the phalloidin - AF488 ( 42 nm FRC resolution ) and phalloidin - AF647 ( 26 nm FRC resolution ) dSTORM datasets . g ) φ - color - coded scatter plot of the full dataset from inset c ( marked by the dashed box ) , displaying only the points with avgDoLP > 0 . 4 ( i . e . white points are removed ) . where the brackets h . . . i refer to averaging over a small region of interest around a single molecule ( 5 × 5 pixels for φ estimation , and 13 × 13 pixels for θ estimation and localization , Supple - mentary Note S3 ) , and S 0 , S 1 and S 2 are the ﬁrst three Stokes parameters : S 0 = ( I 0 + I 45 + I 90 + I 135 ) / 2 ( 4a ) S 1 = I 0 − I 90 ( 4b ) S 2 = I 45 − I 135 ( 4c ) where I 0 , I 45 , I 90 , and I 135 refer to the measured intensities in the four polarized channels . We note that Eq . ( 1 ) is simply the expression for the angle of linear polarization ( AoLP ) ( 52 ) and that Eq . ( 2 ) depends only on the net degree of linear polarization and the objective used . This is in line with our intuition ( Fig . 1c ) . Eq . ( 1 ) and Eq . ( 2 ) are plotted in ﬁgure 1d , e for a 1 . 4 NA oil - immersion objective . We note that estimation of φ using Eq . ( 1 ) is very robust , but that estimation of θ using Eq . ( 2 ) on the other hand is only possible under strict conditions ( perfect rotational immobilization , high signal - to - noise ratio , and no large refractive - index mismatch ) and is more reliably performed with dipole PSF - ﬁtting as will be discussed in more detail in a later section . As a proxy for rotational mobility , we use avgDoLP ( aver - age degree of linear polarization ) which we deﬁne as a local average of the degree of linear polarization ( DoLP ) : avgDoLP = m X i = 1 DoLP i = m X i = 1 vuut S 21 , i + S 22 , i S 20 , i ( 5 ) where m is the number of pixels in the region of interest around the molecule . If instead a dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm is used ( see the section on considering the PSF shape ) , a rotational mobility parameter γ can be estimated that inversely relates to the size of a cone in which the molecule has rotational free - dom ( 18 ) : γ is 1 for perfect immobilization , and 0 for complete rotational freedom . To optimize for single - molecule imaging , we take the pixel - dependent noise of the sCMOS camera into account and correct for polarized background ﬂuorescence . For details , we refer to the Methods and Supplementary Note S3 . Overcoming IFOV errors . In conventional polarization - sensitive ﬂuorescence imaging , where polarizing elements are placed in the optical path , a traditional camera sensor captures the full intensity distribution everywhere in the image plane . However , similar to the operation of conventional color image sensors ( 53 ) , the polarization camera measures the intensity of each polarization channel in a subset of the image ( 1 in 4 pixels ) and the full intensity distributions have to be recovered through interpolation ( 44 – 46 ) . This recovery can be performed accu - rately provided that the pixel size is small enough that the sig - nal that is being measured does not change signiﬁcantly on the spatial scale of a pixel . If this is not the case , any measurements taken from the recovered channels will exhibit what is known as instantaneous ﬁeld - of - view ( IFOV ) errors ( 44 – 46 ) . In standard applications of polarization cameras ( e . g . quality control in the manufacturing industry , removal of reﬂections in images ( 54 ) ) , IFOV errors can be ignored or avoided , as the pixel size can be much smaller than variations in neighboring pixels , and arte - Bruggeman et al . | POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences bioR χ iv | 5 facts mostly appear near the edges of objects . However , when imaging single molecules , the opposite is true as the image of a single emitter varies signiﬁcantly over each pixel , and the lim - ited photon budget prevents the use of a small pixel size . We determined the optimal pixel size for the estimation of molecular orientation using vectorial diffraction simulations ( Supplementary Note S1 and S4 ) . We deﬁne the optimal pixel size as the largest pixel size that still allows for accurate re - covery of the four polarized channels from a single polarization camera image . To assess whether accurate recovery is possible , we used an approach described by Tyo et al . ( 45 ) that checks for overlap between the contributions of different Stokes param - eters in the Fourier transform of the unprocessed polarization camera image ( Supplementary Note S4 . 1 ) . Using this method , we ﬁnd that for our setup ( 1 . 4 NA oil - immersion objective , 650 nm wavelength , sample in an aqueous medium ) optimal sam - pling is achieved at a pixel size of ∼ 60 nm × 60 nm ( Supple - mentary Fig . S6 ) . Practically , a pixel size of 57 . 5 nm × 57 . 5 nm was achieved using a 60 × magniﬁcation objective and the standard polarization camera pixel size of 3 . 45 µm × 3 . 45 µm ( Supplementary ﬁgure S12 ) . The calculated ideal pixel size as a function of wavelength and objective numerical aperture and sample medium can be found in Supplementary ﬁgure S6 . Next , we compared the performance of different algo - rithms ( 44 – 46 ) for Stokes parameter estimation and channel interpolation on simulated polarization camera images of im - mobilized single molecules . We found that a Fourier - based approach ( 45 ) and cubic spline interpolation performed the best ( Supplementary Note S4 . 2 , Supplementary Fig . S7 - S11 ) . Figure 2a shows an experimental polarization camera image of semi - immobilized SYTOX orange molecules on a cover glass . Figure 2b shows the results of the Fourier - based inter - polation . Figure 2c shows examples of the emission of sin - gle molecules taken from this dataset ; two in - plane oriented molecules ( Fig . 2c , molecule 1 and 2 ) , one molecule oriented out of the plane ( Fig . 2c , molecule 3 ) and a rapidly rotating molecule ( Fig . 2c , molecule 4 ) . An example SYTOX Orange dataset is included in the supporting information ( Dataset 1 ) . Experimental accuracy and precision . To measure the ex - perimental accuracy of orientation estimation , silica micro - spheres with a diameter of 5 µm were coated with a lipid bilayer ( DPPC containing 40 % cholesterol , Fig 2d ) as in ( 25 , 29 ) and labeled using different membrane dyes . Polarization - resolved diffraction - limited images were acquired using bulk labeling concentrations of different membrane dyes ( Di - 8 - ANEPPS , DiI , Nile red , and the Nile red derivative NR4A ( 55 ) ) . As ex - pected , the emission dipole moments of Di - 8 - ANEPPS and Nile red orient perpendicular to the membrane surface , and DiI ori - ents parallel to the membrane surface ( Fig . 2e , Supplementary Fig . S13 ) . NR4A and Nile red were used to collect a PAINT ( Point Accumulation for Imaging in Nanoscale Topography ( 4 ) ) dataset of a lipid - coated microsphere to generate an experimen - tal accuracy curve for the in - plane angle φ ( Fig . 2f - g ) . Experimental orientation estimation and localization preci - sion curves as a function of the number of detected photons were generated using single Alexa Fluor 647 ( AF647 ) dyes im - mobilized in poly ( vinyl alcohol ) ( PVA ) . The data points in ﬁg - ure 2i are the measured standard deviation on the repeated mea - surement of the orientation of an AF647 molecule . At 500 de - tected photons ( the default lower threshold on photon number that is used in all datasets ) , we achieve an experimental in - plane angle precision σ φ of 7 . 5 ◦ ( Fig . 2i ) , i . e . the upper bound on σ φ . The precision converges to a lower bound of 1 ◦ at higher pho - ton numbers ( Fig . 2i ) . The experimental localization precision at 500 detected photons is 25 - 30 nm and converges to 5 nm at high photon numbers ( Fig . 2j ) . The same curves generated us - ing simulations with a realistic noise model largely agree with the experimental data ( Supplementary Fig . S15 ) . A complete characterization of the bias and precision on the position , ori - entation , and rotational mobility estimates based on simulations can be found in Supplementary ﬁgures S16 - S20 . TAB - PAINT imaging of alpha - synuclein ﬁbrils in vitro . Orientationally - resolved imaging was demonstrated using amy - loidogenic ﬁbrils of α - synuclein using TAB - PAINT ( Transient Amyloid Binding PAINT ( 4 , 56 ) ) with the ambiphilic oxa - zone dye Nile red ( 57 ) . Nile red has previously been shown to reversibly bind to the hydrophobic regions of the ﬁbril in a deﬁned orientation ( 11 , 27 ) . Therefore , this serves as an excellent test sample for orientation - resolved super - resolution imaging in biologically relevant samples . POLCAM can read - ily super - resolve morphologically consistent α - synuclein ﬁbrils with widths of ∼ 50 nm ( FWHM ) over large ﬁelds of views of ∼ 50 µm × 50 µm ( Fig . 3a - b ) . The super - resolution recon - structions can be color - coded by the measured in - plane angles φ ( Fig . 3a - b ) . Furthermore , the individually detected Nile red molecules can be plotted as short rods demonstrating that the majority of the molecules orient along the long axis of the ﬁb - ril ( Fig . 3c - e ) . All orientations are well sampled without any obvious photo - selection , resolving similar ﬁbrils in all direc - tions ( Fig . 3c - e ) . In addition , no obvious systematic artefacts are observed at known feature sites , for instance at cross points between overlapping ﬁbrils ( 58 ) ( Fig . 3e ) . The narrow distri - butions of individual ﬁbrils can be extracted ( Fig . 2f - i ) where the standard deviations of these distributions range between 7 ◦ and 9 ◦ , which approaches the expected precision for this dataset ( Fig . 2i , ∼ 5 ◦ at 1000 detected photons ) . This indicates that the width of this distribution can not be explained by measurement precision alone , and must partly be due to Nile red molecules binding at a range of orientations that are not exactly parallel to the ﬁbril axis . While a range of avgDoLP and photon values were ex - tracted using POLCAM ( Fig . 3j , k ) , we apply lower limit ﬁl - tering thresholds to ensure high - accuracy results ; ( i ) at least 500 detected photons ( applied to all single - molecule data pre - sented in this work ) , and ( ii ) avgDoLP > 0 . 4 when φ - color - coded data is shown , as localizations with avgDoLP < 0 . 4 are too rotationally free to estimate a meaningful orientation . An example TAB - PAINT dataset is included in the supporting in - formation ( Dataset 2 ) . Taken together , these data demonstrate that POLCAM can accurately measure the in - plane orientation of single dyes and generate high - quality orientation - resolved super - resolution images . dSTORM imaging of actin in ﬁxed HeLa cells . Next , to demonstrate the versatility of POLCAM in a complex environ - ment , we performed orientation imaging in ﬁxed cells . The actin network of HeLa cells was labeled using phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 488 ( AF488 ) and phalloidin - Alexa Flour 647 ( AF647 ) and imaged using dSTORM . In previous literature , these label - ing approaches have been shown to result in rotational restric - tion for AF488 ( where the dyes on average align with the axis of actin ﬁbers ) and rotational freedom for AF647 ( 31 , 36 ) . This 6 | bioR χ iv Bruggeman et al . | POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences Fig . 5 . Improving accuracy and precision by considering the PSF shape . a ) The bias on the estimation of the out - of - plane angle as a function of rotational mobility for the intensity - only algorithm , determined using simulated images of single dipole emitters ( using 1000 photons / emitter , and 10 background photons / pixel ) . A rotational mobility parameter γ = 0 corresponds to total rotational freedom and γ = 1 corresponds to perfect rotational immobilization . b ) The same as panel a but for the dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm . c ) The lateral localization precision as a function of the number of detected photons as determined from simulations ( 10 background photons / pixel , γ = 1 ) . Separate curves are shown for molecules at different out - of - plane orientations . d ) The same as panel c , but for the precision of φ estimation . e ) The computer processing time for the datasets from panel f for the intensity - only algorithm with centroid localization , the intensity - only algorithm with least squares ﬁtting of a rotated asymmetric Gaussian , and the dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm . See Methods for the computer speciﬁcations . f ) A POLCAM SMOLM reconstruction of a 200 × 200 pixel region from ﬁgure 4 with 10 . 000 frames , as analyzed by the intensity - only algorithm ( with rotated asymmetric Gaussian ﬁtting ) and the dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm . Both reconstructions are rendered using approximately the same number of localisations ( 258 . 251 localisations for the intensity - only algorithm , 258 . 172 for the dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm ) . g ) Insets from the regions in panel f that are marked by dashed boxes . The insets display some structural differences between algorithms and an apparent higher resolution of the result of the dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm . difference is likely due to the difference in length of the linker used to conjugate the ﬂuorophores to phalloidin . Single AF488 and AF647 molecules can be easily detected with POLCAM in the cellular environment , and the difference in rotational mo - bility between the constrained AF488 and random AF647 is also evident from the unprocessed single - molecule polarization camera images and processed HSV polarization colormap im - ages ( Fig . 4a - b ) . The difference in rotational mobility between the two labeling approaches is also visible in the resulting super - resolution images ( Fig . 4c - d ) using a colormap where more ori - entationally random areas appear in white ( avgDoLP < 0 . 4 ) and the more ordered appear colored . Analysis of the distribu - tions of the avgDoLP revealed an ordered subset of localizations ( Fig . 4e ) ( 25 % for AF488 and only 5 % for AF648 ) . By ﬁltering these localizations using this empirically determined threshold ( avgDoLP > 0 . 4 ) , a reﬁned POLCAM image of actin in cells ( Fig . 4f ) can be generated that excludes localizations that are too rotationally free to generate an accurate φ estimate ( Fig . 4g ) . The resolution of the super - resolved images was measured us - ing FRC ( Fourier Ring Correlation ( 59 ) ) to be 42 nm for the AF488 dataset and 26 nm for the AF647 dataset ( Fig . 4f ) . The difference in FRC resolution is likely explained by the higher signal - to - noise ratio of the AF647 dataset . Improving accuracy by considering the PSF shape . From equation ( 2 ) , it is clear that the estimation of the polar angle θ will become biased in the presence of rotational mobility , as netDoLP will decrease with increasing rotational mobility . Ad - ditionally , the relationship depends on the refractive index of the sample medium and becomes biased in the presence of noise . As a result , unbiased estimation of θ using Eq . ( 2 ) can only be performed using the previously discussed algorithm ( which we now refer to as the intensity - only algorithm ) when molecules are perfectly immobilized and the signal - to - noise ratio is high . We demonstrate that this limitation can be overcome by addi - tionally taking the shape of the dipole PSF into account . To this end , we adapted the previously published dipole PSF - ﬁtting al - gorithm RoSE - O ( 60 ) for use with a polarization camera . Using simulated images of single ﬂuorescent molecules , we compared the performance of the two algorithms . As expected , the dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm is able to more accurately estimate θ in the presence of rotational mobility ( Fig . 5a , b ) . For in - plane oriented emitters , both algorithms achieve the same localization preci - sion across a wide range of signal - to - noise ratios ( SNR ) , but the dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm outperforms the intensity - only al - gorithm up to 2 - fold for emitters that are oriented out - of - plane ( Fig . 5c ) . Similar to the localization precision , the precision on the estimation of φ is similar for in - plane oriented emitters , but Bruggeman et al . | POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences bioR χ iv | 7 Fig . 6 . Diffraction - limited polarization microscopy using POLCAM . a ) Image processing workﬂow of the napari plugin napari - polcam , demonstrated on an example 3D dataset of a lipid bilayer - coated silica microsphere labeled with the membrane dye Di - 8 - ANEPPS . b ) Workﬂow of the POLCAM - Live software for real - time processing and rendering of polarization camera images during image acquisition . c ) Diffraction - limited polarization camera image of ﬁxed COS - 7 cells labeled with SiR - actin , rendered using a DoLP colormap . An inset marked by a dashed square is shown in unprocessed , DoLP colormap and HSV polarisation colormap . d ) A 3D image of the plasma membrane ( using NR4A ) of a live T cell . e ) Two cross - sections of the T cell shown in panel d . f ) A 3D time - lapse of the movement of the ﬁlopodia of a live T cell rendered using a DoLP colormap . Randomly polarised regions appear blue ( ﬁlopodia ) and more structured and therefor polarised areas ( larger , more smooth sections of the plasma membrane surface ) appear orange . A white triangle tracks the movement of what appears to be a branching point on a ﬁlopodium . the dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm is able to more precisely es - timate φ for more out - of - plane oriented emitters , especially at high SNR ( Fig . 5d ) . A complete comparison of the algorithms can be found in Supplementary ﬁgures S16 - S20 . Figure 5f shows super - resolution reconstructions generated by the two algorithms of a subset ( 200 × 200 pixels and 10 , 000 frames and ∼ 15 localizations / frame ) of the phalloidin - AF488 dSTORM dataset from Fig . 4g . Although both algorithms gen - erated similar - looking reconstructions , zooming in on speciﬁc regions ( Fig . 5g ) seems to conﬁrm that the dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm produces a slightly higher resolution image showing sharper , more pronounced features . A spatial comparison of the φ estimates shows that the widths of the φ distributions gener - ated by the dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm are slightly more nar - row ( Supplementary Fig . S21 ) . On a typical workstation ( see Methods for system speciﬁcations ) , the intensity - only algorithm is > 750 - 3700 times faster ( 2 minutes total processing using centroid localization , and 10 minutes using least squares rotated asymmetric Gaussian ﬁtting ) compared to the dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm ( ∼ 127 hours total processing ) . Therefore , the dipole PSF - ﬁtting algorithm is recommended if the complete 3D ori - entation ( φ , θ ) needs to be estimated , or if the dataset contains 8 | bioR χ iv Bruggeman et al . | POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences dense blinking with overlapping PSFs . This relative compu - tational expense of SMOLM based on dipole PSF - ﬁtting has limited the widespread feasibility of higher throughput exper - iments . If knowledge of φ and the rotational mobility proxy avgDoLP is sufﬁcient , the fast intensity - only algorithm is rec - ommended . Live diffraction - limited polarization microscopy . The combination of instrumental simplicity and fast computation makes POLCAM compatible with real - time image process - ing . We have taken advantage of this advance in two ways : a standalone application for on - the - ﬂy processing and rendering ( POLCAM - Live ) , and a napari plugin ( napari - polcam ) for the open - source multi - dimensional image viewer napari ( 48 ) . Both software take in unprocessed data and convert it into different viewing formats such as polarized channels , Stokes parameter images , and color maps in an easy - to - use interface ( Fig . 6a ) . For experiments that require instant conversion of raw polarization camera data into different formats we developed POLCAM - live , which is highly useful for fast decision - making during experiments , and minimizing common sources of error in po - larimetry , such as photoselection ( Fig . 6b ) that can occur when the excitation beam is not sufﬁciently circular or random at the sample . We use these software tools to illustrate the power of diffraction - limited polarization imaging , demonstrating whole - cell , 3D time - lapse imaging of the plasma membrane in live hu - man T cells using the newly developed probe NR4A ( 55 ) . The 3D images are acquired by axially scanning the objective . The ﬁlopodia of the T cells appear more unpolarized ( white in the HSV colormap in Fig . 6d - e , and blue in the DoLP colormap in Fig . 6f ) , allowing their simple identiﬁcation from cell bodies , which is the subject of intense research interest with regard to surface receptor organisation ( 61 ) ( Fig . 6d - f ) . Their unpolar - ized appearance in POLCAM images is likely due to the fact that they are thin tubes with a diameter below the diffraction limit . The 3D motion of the ﬁlopodia can be tracked over time with a temporal resolution compatible with cellular mobility ( ∼ 1 minute to record a 3D image of a cell , with the temporal resolution limited by the speed of the z - stage ) . Furthermore , POLCAM can be used in a simpliﬁed mode to discriminate or - dered vs non - ordered actin structures based on the DoLP . Using a simple DoLP - colormap , we can distinguish highly ordered re - gions ( yellow ) from more disordered regions ( blue ) in the actin network in COS - 7 cells labeled with SiR - actin ( Fig . 6c ) . Discussion In this work , we present POLCAM , a new method for molec - ular orientation - resolved ﬂuorescence microscopy with a dra - matically simpliﬁed experimental setup that makes use of a po - larization camera . The method can be used in two modes — single - molecule orientation localization microscopy ( SMOLM ) or diffraction - limited polarization ﬂuorescence microscopy— and can be implemented by simply replacing the conventional detector on a wideﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscope with a polar - ization camera . We note that the polarization camera used in this work is supported by the popular image acquisition soft - ware Micro - Manager ( 47 ) . Furthermore , we provide software to improve widespread user adaption , as well as a comprehensive installation guide , a software user manual , and a community - driven labeling protocol repository . This package makes the method much more accessible to the bio - imaging community . We present two SMOLM analysis algorithms for POLCAM ; 1 ) a fast algorithm based on Stokes parameter estimation and simple intensity measurements for robust in - plane angle estima - tion compatible with high - throughput data collection , and 2 ) an unbiased 3D orientation estimation algorithm that ﬁts a dipole PSF model . Due to the computational cost of the PSF - ﬁtting algorithm , it is more suited to the analysis of small datasets . A diffraction - limited polarization colormap ( HSVmap ) can be generated and displayed in real - time during experiments , for which we provide the standalone software POLCAM - Live . In theory , the intensity - only SMOLM algorithm is also fast enough to be compatible with real - time processing , as a 200 × 200 pixel image ( 10 × 10 µm ) with ∼ 15 localizations takes about 10 ms to process , which is less than typical camera exposure times . This could enable molecular orientation event - triggered mi - croscopy ( 62 , 63 ) , something that would be extremely challeng - ing if dipole PSF - ﬁtting is required . Moreover , there is no need for channel registration and lo - calization grouping because single - molecule localization is per - formed on the estimated incident intensity ( S 0 ) on the microp - olarizer array , meaning that all in - plane orientations are equally detectable and no localizations are therefore missed . This has a subtle but important follow - on effect : If a polarization channel has no signal ( because the ﬂuorophore is perpendicular to it ) , the algorithm can still robustly detect the ﬂuorophore from the other channels and measure the azimuthal angle reliably across all φ . Other approaches that include polarized detection may have difﬁculty registering molecules when one or more chan - nels are dim ( 36 ) . Operationally , there is no need for polarization channel - dependent aberration correction , as all channels are perfectly at the same focal plane and any aberrations will also be identical in all four channels . Because of the simplicity of the experimen - tal setup and the absence of moving parts ( all that is required is integrated on the camera chip ) , there is also less opportunity to introduce aberrations in the imaging path or misalignment over time . A possible limitation of POLCAM is that the measurement of θ and γ is biased using the fast intensity - only algorithm . If required , this limitation can be overcome by using PSF - ﬁtting at the expense of computer processing time . Because a polar - ization camera uses polarizers to achieve polarized detection , on average the system is 50 % efﬁcient , as half of the photons that are captured by the objective will be absorbed by the po - larizers . Nevertheless , we demonstrate in this work that this approach is compatible with a wide variety of modern bright single - molecule ﬂuorophores ( e . g . Alexa Fluor 488 , Nile Red and derivatives , SiR , Cy5 , SYTOX Orange ) . The current gener - ation of polarization cameras lacks the sophistication of modern sCMOS cameras in areas such as the quantum efﬁciency of the detector ( 70 % vs . 95 % ) and the presence of onboard denois - ing algorithms . We expect this to improve over time , increasing the appeal of this novel detector for use in the life sciences . Fur - ther improvements to the analysis approach can be made by per - forming a pixel - dependent characterization of any defects of the micropolarizer array or deviation from an ideal micropolarizer array ( 64 ) . The success of a molecular - orientation resolved experiment stands and falls with the labeling approach . It would thus be meaningless to attempt to measure molecular orientation if the Bruggeman et al . | POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences bioR χ iv | 9 relative orientation of a target and the probe is random . There - fore , the use of antibodies with multiple dyes conjugated at ran - dom orientations ( e . g . random lysine labeling ) , or staining us - ing secondary antibodies are likely , not suitable . Currently , the number of labeling protocols that restrict or control the orien - tation and rotational mobility of a ﬂuorophore with respect to their target is still limited and there is a strong need for the de - velopment of more labeling approaches and the discovery of suitable probes . An example of such an attempt is the geneti - cally engineered rigid protein linker POLArIS ( 65 ) . It is likely that many common ﬂuorescent probes are suitable for molecu - lar orientation - resolved microscopy , but they have simply never been evaluated for this purpose . We anticipate that because of the accessibility and compatibility with high - throughput data acquisition , POLCAM will accelerate this much - needed devel - opment and discovery of new probes and expand the current toolkit to cover more biological systems . We note that polarization cameras can also be used for label - free microscopy ( 66 , 67 ) such as single - shot phase contrast microscopy ( 68 ) and polarization - sensitive Fourier ptychogra - phy ( 69 ) , leaving the possibility for multiplexing of ﬂuores - cence and label - free techniques . Overall , we envisage that the combination of POLCAM’s simple implementation and ease of use , computational speed , and open - source software will lead to new biological insight across diverse systems . CODE AVAILABILITY All code used in this work is available on GitHub . The source code and in - staller for the PolCam - SMOLM and PolCam - Live software are available at https : / / github . com / ezrabru / POLCAM - SR and https : / / github . com / ezrabru / POLCAM - Live , and the source code for RoSE - O - POLCAM is available at https : / / github . com / Lew - Lab / RoSE - O _ polCam . The napari plugin for visualization of high - dimensional diffraction - limited polarization camera dataset is available at https : / / github . com / ezrabru / napari - polcam . There is a website associated with this work that contains instructions on setting up hardware and installation and use of the different software : https : / / theleelab . github . io / POLCAM - site / index . html . References 1 . E . Betzig , G . H . Patterson , R . Sougrat , O . W . Lindwasser , S . Olenych , J . S . Bonifacino , M . W . Davidson , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , and H . F . Hess . Imaging intracellular ﬂuorescent proteins at nanometer resolution . Science , 313 ( 5793 ) : 1642 – 1645 , 2006 . 2 . M . J . Rust , M . Bates , and X . Zhuang . Sub - diffraction - limit imaging by stochastic optical recon - struction microscopy ( STORM ) . Nature Methods , 3 ( 10 ) : 793 – 795 , 2006 . 3 . S . T . Hess , T . P . Girirajan , and M . D . Mason . Ultra - high resolution imaging by ﬂuorescence pho - toactivation localization microscopy . Biophysical Journal , 91 ( 11 ) : 4258 – 4272 , 2006 . 4 . A . Sharonov and R . M . Hochstrasser . Wide - ﬁeld subdiffraction imaging by accumulated binding of diffusing probes . PNAS , 103 ( 50 ) : 18911 – 18916 , 2006 . 5 . K . Xu , G . Zhong , and X . Zhuang . Actin , spectrin , and associated proteins form a periodic cytoskeletal structure in axons . Science , 339 : 452 – 456 , 2013 . 6 . A . Szymborska , A . de Marco , N . Daigle , V . C . Cordes , J . A . G . Briggs , , and J . Ellenberg . Nu - clear pore scaffold structure analyzed by super - resolution microscopy and particle averaging . Science , 341 : 655 – 658 , 2013 . 7 . M . etal . Mund . Systematicnanoscaleanalysisofendocytosislinksefﬁcientvesicleformationto patterned actin nucleation . Cell , 174 : 884 – 896 , 2018 . 8 . H . Sosa , E . J . Peterman , W . E . Moerner , and L . S . Goldstein . Adp - induced rocking of the kinesin motor domain revealed by single - molecule ﬂuorescence polarization microscopy . Nat . Struct . Biol . , 8 : 540 – 544 , 2001 . 9 . L . G . Lippert , T . Dadosh , J . A . Hadden , V . Karnawat , B . T . Diroll , C . B . Murray , E . L . F . Holzbaur , K . Schulten , S . L . Reck - Peterson , and Y . E . Goldman . Angular measurements of the dynein ring reveal a stepping mechanism dependent on a ﬂexible stalk . PNAS , 114 ( 23 ) : E4564 – E4573 , 2017 . 10 . A . S . Backer , A . S . Biebricher , G . A . King , G . J . L . Wuite , I . Heller , andE . J . G . Peterman . Single - molecule polarization microscopy of dna intercalators sheds light on the structure of s - dna . Sci . Adv . , 5 : eaav1083 , 2019 . 11 . T . Ding , T . Wu , H . Mazidi , O . Zhang , and M . D . Lew . Single - molecule orientation localization microscopy for resolving structural heterogeneities within amyloid ﬁbrils . Optica , 7 ( 6 ) : 602 – 607 , 2020 . 12 . J . Lu , H . Mazidi , T . Ding , O . Zhang , and M . D . Lew . Single - molecule 3d orientation imaging reveals nanoscale compositional heterogeneity in lipid membranes . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . , 59 : 17572 , 2020 . 13 . L . Novotny and B . Hecht . Principles of Nano - Optics . Cambridge University Press , New York , 2007 . 14 . A . S . Backer , M . P . Backlund , M . D . Lew , and W . E . Moerner . Single - molecule orientation mea - surements with a quadrated pupil . Optics letters , 38 : 1521 , 2013 . 15 . A . S . Backer and W . E . Moerner . Extending single - molecule microscopy using optical fourier processing . J Phys Chem B , 118 : 8313 – 8329 , 2014 . 16 . François Aguet , Stefan Geissbühler , Iwan Märki , Theo Lasser , and Michael Unser . Super - resolution orientation estimation and localization of ﬂuorescent dipoles using 3 - d steerable ﬁl - ters . Opt . Express , 17 ( 8 ) : 6829 – 6848 , Apr 2009 . 17 . K . I . Mortensen , L . S . Churchman , J . A . Spudich , and H . Flyvbjerg . Optimized localization - analysis for single - molecule tracking and super - resolution microscopy . Nature Methods , 7 ( 5 ) : 377 – 381 , 2010 . 18 . Adam S . Backer and W . E . Moerner . Determining the rotational mobility of a single molecule from a single image : a numerical study . Optics Express , 23 ( 4 ) : 4255 – 4276 , 2015 . 19 . M . Böhmer and J . Enderlein . Orientation imaging of single molecules by wide - ﬁeld epiﬂuores - cence microscopy . J Opt Soc Am B , 20 ( 3 ) : 554 – 559 , 2003 . 20 . D . patra , I . Gregor , and J . Enderlein . Image analysis of defocused single - molecule images for three - dimensional molecule orientation studies . J Phys Chem A , 108 : 6836 – 6841 , 2004 . 21 . E . Toprak , J Enderlein , S . Syed , S . A . McKinney , R . G . Petschek , T . Ha , Y . E . Goldman , and P . R . Selvin . Defocused orientation and position imaging ( dopi ) of myosin v . PNAS , 103 ( 17 ) : 6495 – 6499 , 2006 . 22 . M . P . Backlund , M . D . Lew , A . S . Backer , S . J . Sahl , G . Grover , A . Agrawal , R . Piestun , and W . E . Moerner . Simultaneous , accurate measurement of the 3d position and orientation of single molecules . PNAS , 109 ( 47 ) : 19087 – 19092 , 2012 . 23 . A . S . Backer , M . P . Backlund , A . R . von Diezmann , S . J . Sahl , and W . E . Moerner . A bisected pupil for studying single - molecule orientational dynamics and its application to three - dimensional super - resolution microscopy . Applied Physics Letters , 104 : 193701 , 2014 . 24 . O . Zhang , J . Lu , T . Ding , andM . D . Lew . Imagingthethree - dimensionalorientationandrotational mobility of ﬂuorescent emitters using the tri - spot point spread function . Appl . Phys . Lett . , 113 : 031103 , 2018 . 25 . TingtingWu , JinLu , andMatthewD . Lew . Dipole - spread - functionengineeringforsimultaneously measuringthe3dorientationsand3dpositionsofﬂuorescentmolecules . Optica , 9 ( 5 ) : 505 – 511 , May 2022 . 26 . Christiaan N . Hulleman , Rasmus Ø . Thorsen , Eugene Kim , Cees Dekker , Sjoerd Stallinga , and Bernd Rieger . Simultaneous orientation and 3D localization microscopy with a Vortex point spread function . Nature Communications , 12 ( 1 ) : 5934 , October 2021 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 26228 - 5 . 27 . Tianben Ding and Matthew D . Lew . Single - molecule localization microscopy of 3d orientation and anisotropic wobble using a polarized vortex point spread function . Journal of Physical Chemistry B , 125 ( 46 ) : 12718 – 12729 , 2021 . 28 . Valentina Curcio , Luis A . Alemán - Castañeda , Thomas G . Brown , Sophie Brasselet , and Miguel A . Alonso . Birefringent fourier ﬁltering for single molecule coordinate and height super - resolution imaging with dithering and orientation . Nature Communications , 11 : 5307 , 2020 . 29 . OumengZhang , ZijianGuo , YuanyuanHe , TingtingWu , MichaelD . Vahey , andMatthewD . Lew . Six - dimensional single - molecule imaging with isotropic resolution using a multi - view reﬂector microscope . Nature Photonics , December 2022 . ISSN 1749 - 4893 . 30 . T . J . Gould , M . S . Gunewardene , M . V . Gudheti , V . V . Verkhusha , S . - R . Yin , J . A . Gosse , and S . T . Hess . Nanoscaleimagingofmolecularpositionsandanisotropies . NatureMethods , 5 ( 12 ) : 1027 – 1030 , 2008 . 31 . C . A . V . Cruz , H . A . Shaban , A . Kress , N . Bertaux , S . Monneret , M . Mavrakis , J . Savatier , and S . Brasselet . Quantitative nanoscale imaging of orientational order in biological ﬁlaments by polarized superresolution microscopy . PNAS , 7 ( 13544 ) : E820 – E828 , 2016 . 32 . J . H . LewisandZ . Lu . Resolutionofångström - scaleproteinconformationalchangesbyanalyzing ﬂuorescence anisotropy . Nature structural and molecular biology , 26 : 802 – 807 , 2019 . 33 . S . B Mehta , M . McQuilken , P . J . La Riviere , P . Occhipinti , A . Verma , R . Oldenbourg , A . S . Gladfel - ter , andT . Tani . Dissectionofmolecularassemblydynamicsbytrackingorientationandposition of single molecules in live cells . PNAS , page E6352 – E6361 , 2016 . 34 . et al . Ohmachi M . Fluorescence microscopy for simultaneous observation of 3d orientation and movement and its application to quantum rod - tagged myosin v . PNAS , 109 ( 14 ) : 5294 – 5298 , 2012 . 35 . I . Chung , K . T . Shimizu , and M . G . Bawendi . Room temperature measurements of the 3d ori - entation of single cdse quantum dots using polarization microscopy . PNAS , 100 ( 2 ) : 405 – 408 , 2003 . 36 . Caio Vaz Rimoli , Cesar Augusto Valades - Cruz , Valentina Curcio , Manos Mavrakis , and Sophie Brasselet . 4polar - STORM polarized super - resolution imaging of actin ﬁlament organization in cells . Nature Communications , 13 ( 1 ) : 301 , January 2022 . 37 . Joseph S . Beckwith and Haw Yang . Sub - millisecond Translational and Orientational Dynamics of a Freely Moving Single Nanoprobe . The Journal of Physical Chemistry B , 125 ( 49 ) : 13436 – 13443 , December 2021 . 38 . Joseph W . Monaghan , Zachary J . O’Dell , Sanjay Sridhar , Bianca Paranzino , Vignesh Sundare - san , and Katherine A . Willets . Calcite - Assisted Localization and Kinetics ( CLocK ) Microscopy . The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters , 13 ( 45 ) : 10527 – 10533 , November 2022 . Publisher : American Chemical Society . 39 . Matthew R . Foreman and Peter Török . Fundamental limits in single - molecule orientation mea - surements . New Journal of Physics , 13 ( 9 ) : 093013 , September 2011 . ISSN 1367 - 2630 . 40 . Cornell S . L . Chun , David L . Fleming , and E . J . Torok . Polarization - sensitive thermal imaging . Proc . SPIE , Automatic Object Recognition IV , 2234 : 275 – 286 , 1994 . 41 . Viktor Gruev , Rob Perkins , and Timothy York . Ccd polarization imaging sensor with aluminum nanowire optical ﬁlters . Optics Express , 18 ( 18 ) : 19087 – 19094 , 2010 . 42 . Viktor Gruev , Jan Van der Spiegel , and Nader Engheta . Dual - tier thin ﬁlm polymer polarization imaging sensor . Optics Express , 18 ( 18 ) : 19292 – 19303 , 2010 . 43 . Meenal Kulkarni and Victor Gruev . Integrated spectral - polarization imaging sensor with alu - minum nanowire polarization ﬁlters . Optics Express , 20 ( 21 ) : 22997 – 23012 , 2012 . 44 . B . M . Ratliff , C . F . LaCasse , and J . S . Tyo . Interpolation strategies for reducing ifov artifacts in microgrid polarimeter imagery . Optics Express , 17 ( 11 ) , 2009 . 45 . J . S . Tyo , C . F . LaCasse , and B . M . Ratliff . Total elimination of sampling errors in polarization imagery obtained with integrated microgrid polarimeters . Optics Letters , 34 ( 20 ) , 2009 . 46 . Shengkui Gao and Viktor Gruev . Bilinear and bicubic interpolation methods for division of focal plane polarimeters . Opt . Express , 19 ( 27 ) : 26161 – 26173 , Dec 2011 . 47 . Arthur Edelstein , Nenad Amodaj , Karl Hoover , Ron Vale , and Nico Stuurman . Computer con - trol of microscopes using µmanager . Current Protocols in Molecular Biology , 92 ( 1 ) : 14 . 20 . 1 – 14 . 20 . 17 , 2010 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 0471142727 . mb1420s92 . 48 . Nicholas Sofroniew , Talley Lambert , Kira Evans , Juan Nunez - Iglesias , Grzegorz Bokota , Philip Winston , GonzaloPeña - Castellanos , KevinYamauchi , MatthiasBussonnier , DragaDoncilaPop , 10 | bioR χ iv Bruggeman et al . | POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences Ahmet Can Solak , Ziyang Liu , Pam Wadhwa , Alister Burt , Genevieve Buckley , Andrew Sweet , LukaszMigas , VolkerHilsenstein , LorenzoGaifas , JordãoBragantini , JaimeRodríguez - Guerra , Hector Muñoz , Jeremy Freeman , Peter Boone , Alan Lowe , Christoph Gohlke , Loic Royer , An - drea PIERRÉ , Hagai Har - Gil , and Abigail McGovern . napari : a multi - dimensional image viewer for Python , November 2022 . 49 . D . Axelrod . Carbocyanine dye orientation in red cell membrane studied by microscopic ﬂuores - cence polarization . Biophys J , 26 : 557 – 574 , 1979 . 50 . John T . Fourkas . Rapid determination of the three - dimensional orientation of single molecules . Opt . Lett . , 26 ( 4 ) : 211 – 213 , Feb 2001 . doi : 10 . 1364 / OL . 26 . 000211 . 51 . Florian Ströhl , Ezra Bruggeman , Christopher J . Rowlands , Deanna L . Wolfson , and Balpreet S . Ahluwalia . Quantiﬁcation of the NA dependent change of shape in the image formation of a z - polarized ﬂuorescent molecule using vectorial diffraction simulations . Microscopy Research and Technique , 85 ( 5 ) : 2016 – 2022 , 2022 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jemt . 24060 . 52 . M . Born and E . Wolf . Principles of Optics . Cambridge University Press , 7th edition , 2019 . 53 . B . K . Gunturk , J . Glotzbach , Y . Altunbasak , R . W . Schafer , and R . M . Mersereau . Demosaicking : color ﬁlter array interpolation . IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , 22 ( 1 ) : 44 – 54 , January 2005 . ISSN 1558 - 0792 . doi : 10 . 1109 / MSP . 2005 . 1407714 . Conference Name : IEEE Signal Processing Magazine . 54 . Ning Li , Yongqiang Zhao , Quan Pan , and Seong G . Kong . Removal of reﬂections in lwir image with polarization characteristics . Opt . Express , 26 ( 13 ) : 16488 – 16504 , Jun 2018 . doi : 10 . 1364 / OE . 26 . 016488 . 55 . Dmytro I . Danylchuk , Seonah Moon , Ke Xu , and Andrey S . Klymchenko . Switchable sol - vatochromic probes for live - cell super - resolution imaging of plasma membrane organization . Angewandte Chemie International Edition , 58 ( 42 ) : 14920 – 14924 , 2019 . 56 . K . Spehar , T . Ding , Y . Sun , N . Kedia , J . Lu , G . R . Nahass , M . D . Lew , and J . Bieschke . Super - resolutionimagingofamyloidstructuresoverextendedtimesbyusingtransientbindingofsingle thioﬂavin t molecules . Chem . Bio . Chem . , 19 : 1944 – 1948 , 2018 . 57 . D . L . Sackett and J . Wolff . Nile red as a polarity - sensitive ﬂuorescent probe of hydrophobic protein surfaces . Anal . Biochem . , 167 : 228 – 234 , 1987 . 58 . Siân Culley , David Albrecht , Caron Jacobs , Pedro Matos Pereira , Christophe Leterrier , Jason Mercer , and Ricardo Henriques . Quantitative mapping and minimization of super - resolution optical imaging artifacts . Nature Methods , 15 ( 4 ) : 263 – 266 , April 2018 . 59 . Robert P J Nieuwenhuizen , Keith A Lidke , Mark Bates , Daniela Leyton Puig , David Grünwald , Sjoerd Stallinga , and Bernd Rieger . Measuring image resolution in optical nanoscopy . Nature Methods , 10 ( 6 ) : 557 – 562 , June 2013 . 60 . Hesam Mazidi , Eshan S . King , Oumeng Zhang , Arye Nehorai , and Matthew D . Lew . Dense super - resolution imaging of molecular orientation via joint sparse basis deconvolution and spa - tial pooling . IEEE 16th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging ( ISBI 2019 ) , pages 325 – 329 , April 2019 . 61 . Janett Göhring , Lukas Schrangl , Gerhard J . Schütz , and Johannes B . Huppa . Mechanosurveil - lance : Tiptoeing T Cells . Frontiers in Immunology , 13 , 2022 . ISSN 1664 - 3224 . 62 . Dora Mahecic , Willi L . Stepp , Chen Zhang , Juliette Grifﬁé , Martin Weigert , and Suliana Manley . Event - driven acquisition for content - enriched microscopy . Nature Methods , 19 ( 10 ) : 1262 – 1267 , October 2022 . 63 . Jonatan Alvelid , Martina Damenti , Chiara Sgattoni , and Ilaria Testa . Event - triggered STED imaging . Nature Methods , 19 ( 10 ) : 1268 – 1275 , October 2022 . 64 . A . Liberatore , S . Fineschi , G . Capobianco , G . Massone , L . Zangrilli , G . Nicolini , and R . Susino . PolarCam micropolarizer cameras characterization and usage . In International Conference on Space Optics — ICSO 2020 , volume 11852 , pages 358 – 379 . SPIE , June 2021 . doi : 10 . 1117 / 12 . 2599180 . 65 . A . Sugizaki , K . Sato , K . Chiba , K . Saito , M . Kawagishi , Y . Tomabechi , S . B . Mehta , H . Ishii , N . Sakai , M . Shirouzu , T . Tani , andS . Terada . Polaris , aversatileprobeformolecularorientation , revealed actin ﬁlaments associated with microtubule asters in early embryos . PNAS , 118 ( 11 ) : e2019071118 , 2021 . 66 . S . ShuheiShibata , HagenN . Takano , W . and , M . Matsuda , andY . Otani . Video - ratequantitative phase analysis by a dic microscope using a polarization camera . Biomedical Optics Express , 10 ( 3 ) : 1273 – 1281 , 2019 . 67 . Li - Hao Yeh , Ivan E . Ivanov , Syuan - Ming Guo , Bryant B . Chhun , Ezzat Hashemi , May H . Han , and Shalin B . Mehta . uPTI : uniaxial permittivity tensor imaging of intrinsic density and anisotropy . In Biophotonics Congress 2021 ( 2021 ) , paper NM3C . 4 , page NM3C . 4 . Optica Pub - lishing Group , April 2021 . doi : 10 . 1364 / NTM . 2021 . NM3C . 4 . 68 . Ranjan Kalita , William Flanagan , Jonathan Lightley , Sunil Kumar , Yuriy Alexandrov , Edwin Gar - cia , Mark Hintze , Michalis Barkoulas , Chris Dunsby , and Paul M . W . French . Single - shot phase contrast microscopy using polarisation - resolved differential phase contrast . Journal of Biopho - tonics , 14 ( 12 ) : e202100144 , 2021 . 69 . Seungri Song , Jeongsoo Kim , Sunwoong Hur , Jaewoo Song , and Chulmin Joo . Large - Area , High - Resolution Birefringence Imaging with Polarization - Sensitive Fourier Ptychographic Mi - croscopy . ACS Photonics , 8 ( 1 ) : 158 – 165 , January 2021 . 70 . Eugene Hecht . Optics . Addison Wesley , 4th edition , 2002 . Bruggeman et al . | POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences bioR χ iv | 11 Methods Optical setups . Experiments were performed on three very similar wideﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscopes . The SYTOX orange , AF647 immobilized in poly - mer , TAB - PAINT of alpha - synuclein ﬁbrils , and diffraction - limited polarisation imaging of the actin network in COS - 7 cells were performed on ’Microscope 1’ . The dSTORM experiments were performed on ’Microscope 2’ . The lipid bilayer - coated silica microsphere and live T cell experiments were performed on ’Microscope 3’ . ’Microscope 1’ is a wideﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscope ( Eclipse Ti - U , Nikon ) , with the illumination entering the microscope body through the back illumination port . The beams from three free space lasers ( 515 nm , 150 mW , Spectra Physics ; 532 nm , 120 mW , Odic Force Lasers ; and 638 nm , 350 mW , Odic Force Lasers ) were expanded , spectrally and spatially ﬁltered , combined with dichroics , and focused to a spot in the back focal plane of an oil immer - sion objective ( Plan Apo , 60 × A / 1 . 40 oil , DIC H , ∞ / 0 . 17 , WD 0 . 21 , Nikon ) using an achromatic doublet lens ( AC254 - 300 - A , Thorlabs ) . This lens and a periscope were mounted on a linear translation stage to allow manual ad - justment of the beam emerging from the objective and switch between EPI , HILO and TIRF illumination . Approximately circular polarization at the sam - ple plane was achieved using quarter waveplates ( WPQ10M - 514 , WPQ10M - 532 , and WPQ10M - 633 , Thorlabs ) . For diffraction - limited imaging of the actin network in COS - 7 cells , a different laser source was used with a multi - mode ﬁber ( LDI - 7 Laser Diode Illuminator , 89North ) . Fluorescence was ﬁltered by a dichroic beamsplitter ( Di03 - R405 / 488 / 532 / 635 - t1 for AF647 , and Di03 - R532 - t1 for SYTOX Orange and Nile Red , Semrock ) and emission ﬁlters ( BLP01 - 532R for SYTOX Orange ; BLP01 - 635R for AF647 ; BLP01 - 532R and FF01 - 650 / 200 for Nile red , Semrock ) . The ﬂuorescence was focused on a polariza - tion camera ( CS505MUP , Thorlabs ) that was placed directly at the microscope body camera port . The pixel size of the camera is 3 . 45µm × 3 . 45µm , resulting in a virtual pixel size of 57 . 5 × 57 . 5 nm . The microscope PC was a Dell Opti - Plex 7070 Mini Tower running on Windows 10 ( 64 bit ) , with an Intel® Core™ i9 - 9900 processor and 32 GB RAM . ’Microscope 2’ is functionally similar to ’Microscope 1’ , with a different microscope body ( Eclipse Ti - E , Nikon ) , laser source ( Omicron LightHUB with 405 , 488 , 561 and 638 nm lasers , single - mode ﬁber , collimator RC08APC - P01 , Thorlabs ) and a 60 × 1 . 42 NA oil immersion objective ( Olympus , PlanApo N ) . A quadband imaging dichroic ( Di03 - R405 / 488 / 532 / 635 - t1 , Semrock ) and emis - sion ﬁlters were used ( BLP01 - 488R and FF01 - 582 / 64 for AF488 ; BLP01 - 635R for AF647 , Semrock ) . The ﬂuorescence was focused on a polarization camera ( CS505MUP , Thorlabs ) that was placed directly at the microscope body camera port , resulting in a virtual pixel size of 51 . 7 × 51 . 7 nm . Note that because an Olympus objective ( assumes use of an Olympus body with a 180 . 0 mm focal length tube lens ) was used with a Nikon body ( 200 . 0 mm focal length tube lens ) . ’Microscope 3’ is also functionally similar to ’Microscope 1’ , other than the microscope body ( Eclipse Ti - E , Nikon ) , lasers ( Cobolt C - FLEX combiner with 405 , 488 , 515 , 561 and two 638 nm lasers , free space ) coupled into a square - core multi - mode ﬁber ( M97L02 , Thorlabs ) with a custom vibration - motor based mode scrambler , and a 100 × 1 . 49 NA oil immersion objective . A 4f system consisting of two achromatic lenses ( AC254 - 050 - A - ML and AC254 - 100 - A - ML , Thorlabs ) was included in the emission path to demagnify the im - age 2 × , resulting in a total system magniﬁcation of 50 × and thus virtual pixel size of 69 × 69 nm . Imaging dichroics ( and Di03 - R515 - t1 for NR4A and Nile red , and Di03 - R405 / 488 / 532 / 635 - t1 for SiR - actin ; Semrock ) and emission ﬁl - ters ( BLP01 - 532R and FF01 - 650 / 200 for NR4A , BLP01 - 635R for SiR - actin ; Semrock ) were used . A multi - mode ﬁber was used for all diffraction - limited imaging experiments as this allowed us to achieve highly randomized polariza - tion at the sample plane ( compared to using a quarter - wave plate ) , resulting in negligible photoselection . Simulations . The emission of a ﬂuorescent molecule was modeled as the far - ﬁeld of an oscillating electric dipole as previously described in ( 15 ) . The trans - mission of the emission through the micropolarizer array on the camera sensor was modeled for each camera pixel using a Jones matrix J LP for a linear po - larizer with an axis of transmission at an angle η from the x - axis ( 70 ) E 0 = J LP E ( 6 ) J LP = (cid:16) cos 2 η cos η sin η cos η sin η sin 2 η (cid:17) ( 7 ) Unless otherwise speciﬁed , the following system parameters were used : 630 nm emission wavelength , 60 × oil - immersion objective with a numerical aperture of 1 . 4 , a tube lens with a focal length of 200 . 0 mm , physical camera pixel size of 3 . 45 µm . The molecules are placed on a glass - water refractive index interface ( n glass = n oil = 1 . 518 , n water = 1 . 33 ) and in focus . A CMOS camera noise model was used ( Supplementary Note S1 . 6 ) . Image acquisition . On all instruments , acquisition was performed using Micro - Manager ( 47 ) version 2 . 0 . 0 , or Thorcam ( Thorcam v3 . 6 . 0 , Thorlabs ) . All experiments on all three microscopes were performed using epi - illumination ( with the exception of the dSTORM experiment where a steep HILO angle was used ) to easily control the polarization state at the sample plane . Perfectly ran - dom or circular polarization at the sample plane is very challenging to achieve experimentally , so to some degree there will always be a dominant axis of po - larization . Transitioning from EPI to HILO and TIRF will change the amount of photoselection at the sample plane as the dominant axis and degree of ran - domness / ellipticity of the polarization will change in a way that is challenging to quantify and reproduce . Before each experiment and / or change of the in - clination of the excitation beam , the polarization of the excitation beam at the sample is tuned by rotating a quarter wave plate . Alignment is deemed optimal when the DoLP of the background is minimized ( or the appearance of gridding distinctive of polarized background disappears ) . This step is not necessary if lasers are coupled into a multi - mode ﬁber . Image analysis . Single - molecule data analysis was performed using the MAT - LAB application POLCAM - SR , which includes tools for localization , ﬁlter - ing , drift correction , and data visualization . The source code and installer are available on GitHub at https : / / github . com / ezrabru / POLCAM - SR . Diffraction - limited data analysis was performed using custom MATLAB scripts ( MATLAB R2022a , Mathworks ) and a napari ( 48 ) plugin called napari - polcam for processing and visualization of multi - dimensional polarization camera datasets . The source code and installation instructions for napari - polcam are available on GitHub at https : / / github . com / ezrabru / napari - polcam . Refer to Supplementary Note . . . for a detailed descrip - tion of the image analysis pipelines . SYTOX orange on cover glass . Glass coverslips ( VWR collection , 631 - 0124 ) were plasma cleaned for 1 h ( argon plasma cleaner , PDC - 002 , Harrick Plasma ) . An imaging chamber was created on the coverslips using frame - seal slide chambers ( 9x9 mm , SLF0201 , Bio - rad ) . The glass in the chamber was coated with 70 µl of poly - L - lysine ( PLL , 0 . 01 % w / v , P4707 , Sigma - Aldrich ) for 30 min . After removing excess PLL and washing 3 times with ﬁltered PBS ( 0 . 02 µm syringe ﬁlter , Whatman , 6809 - 1102 ) , 50 µl of 1 nM SYTOX Orange ( S11368 , Invitrogen ) was added gently . The sample was imaged straight away . PAINT imaging of lipid bilayer - coated silica microspheres . To prepare the lipid bilayer - coated silica microspheres , a slightly modiﬁed version of the pro - tocol in ( 25 ) was used . First , lipid vesicles of a certain composition are prepared as follows : DPPC ( 850355C , Avanti Polar Lipids ) and cholesterol ( C8667 - 5G , Sigma - Aldrich ) were dissolved in chloroform ( 366927 , Sigma - Aldrich ) to re - spectively 25 mg / ml and 10 mg / ml . A DPPC / 40 % chol mixture was prepared by combining 23 µl DPPC and 20 µl cholesterol . The solvent was evaporated overnight under vacuum . The lipid / cholesterol mixture was rehydrated using 1 ml of Tris - Ca 2 + buffer ( 100 mM NaCl , 3 mM CaCl 2 , 10 mM Tris base , pH 7 . 4 ) and vortexed for 30 seconds . The solution was sonicated using a tip sonicator ( cycles of 45 s on , 15 s off , 60 % amplitude ) for 40 minutes until the solution ran clear . The sonicated solution was centrifuged for 90 s at 14 . 000 rcrf to remove titanium residue from the sonicator probe . Next , silica microspheres with a diameter of 5µm ( 44054 - 5ML - F , Sigma - Aldrich ) were diluted to approximately 2 . 8 mg / ml by centrifuging and replacing the stock buffer with Tris - Ca 2 + . The microspheres and lipid vesicle solutions were heated to 65°C using a heated water bath and mixed together in a 1 : 1 ratio . After 30 minutes at 65°C , the mixtures were slowly cooled down to room tem - perature ( but turning the heating bath off ) . The buffer was gradually replaced by Tris ( 100 mM NaCl , 10 mM Tris base , pH 7 . 4 ) by centrifugation ( 5 minutes at 0 . 3 rcf ) and replacement of two thirds of the supernatant with Tris , repeated 6 times . The lipid - coated microspheres were stored at 4°C and used within less than 2 weeks of preparation . For imaging , the lipid - coated microspheres were added to an Argon plasma - cleaned , PLL - coated cover glass ( VWR collection , 631 - 0124 ) , and 1 nM of NR4A or Nile red was added for PAINT imaging of the lipid bilayer . The Nile red derivative NR4A was provided by Andrey S . Klymchenko at Université de Strasbourg . For diffraction - limited imaging of lipid - coated microspheres , 100 nM dye in PBS was used ( for Nile red , NR4A , and Di - 8 - ANEPPS ) . All buffers ( PBS , Tris , Tris - Ca 2 + ) were ﬁltered before use ( 0 . 02 µm syringe ﬁlter , Whatman , 6809 - 1102 ) . AF647 immobilized in PVA . A polyvinyl alcohol solution ( PVA ) ( 1 % ) was prepared by slow addition of solid PVA into ﬁltered ( 0 . 02 µm syringe ﬁlter , Whatman , 6809 - 1102 ) milli - Q water with stirring . The solution was then heated to 90 ◦ C and stirred for 30 minutes , then removed from the heat with continued stirring for 12 hours . The PVA solution was then ﬁltered ( 0 . 02 µm syringe ﬁlter , Whatman , 6809 - 1102 ) and stored at 4°C . Alexa Fluor 647 ( 500 pM ) was diluted in the 1 % PVA solution , 10 µl was then spin - cast ( 3000 rpm , 45 s ) onto an Ar 12 | bioR χ iv Bruggeman et al . | POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences plasma - cleaned glass coverslip ( ODC - 002 , Harrick Plasma ) and sealed prior to imaging . TAB - PAINT of alpha - synuclein ﬁbrils . To prepare alpha - synuclein ﬁbrils , alpha - synuclein monomer was diluted to 70 µM concentration in PBS ( with 0 . 01 % NaN 3 ) and incubated at 37°C in a shaker ( 200 rpm ) to aggregate for > 24 h . To prepare ﬁbrils for imaging , glass coverslips ( VWR collection , 631 - 0124 ) were plasma cleaned for 1 h ( argon plasma cleaner , PDC - 002 , Harrick Plasma ) . An imaging chamber was created on the coverslips using frame - seal slide cham - bers ( 9x9 mm , SLF0201 , Bio - rad ) . The glass in the chamber was coated with 70 µl of poly - L - lysine ( PLL , 0 . 01 % w / v , P4707 , Sigma - Aldrich ) for 30 min . After removing excess PLL and washing 3 times with ﬁltered PBS ( 20 nm pore ﬁlters ) , 50 µl Tetraspeck beads ( 0 . 1 µM stock , 10x diluted ) were added for lat - eral drift correction . Samples were washed again 3x with ﬁltered PBS and 50 µl of alpha - synuclein ﬁbrils ( diluted to 35 mM monomer concentration , from a 70 mM monomer concentration stock that was stored at 4 degrees ) . Fibrils were stuck to the PLL by pipetting up and down a couple of times in the four corners of the chamber . Before imaging , excess solution is removed , followed by a gentle wash with ﬁltered PBS . 50 µl of the imaging buffer ( 1 nM Nile Red in PBS , diluted from a 1 mM aliquot in DMSO , stored at - 20°C ) is added and the sample is imaged straight away . dSTORM of actin in ﬁxed HeLa cells . HeLa TDS cells were cultured in DMEM ( Gibco , Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % Fetal Bovine Serum ( FBS , Life Technologies ) , 1 % penicillin / streptomycin ( Life Technologies ) , and 1 % glutamine ( Life Technologies ) at 37°C + 5 % CO 2 . Cells were periodically tested for mycoplasma contamination and passaged 3 times per week . Cells were plated at low density on high - precision glass coverslips ( MatTek , P35G - 0 . 170 - 14 - C ) 1 day prior to ﬁxation for dSTORM experiments . Cells were simultaneously ﬁxed and permeabilized in cytoskeleton buffer ( CBS , 10 mM MES , 138 mM KCl , 3 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM EGTA , 4 . 5 % sucrose w / v , pH 7 . 4 ) , + 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) and 0 . 2 % Triton for 6 minutes at 37°C , and further ﬁxed in CBS + 4 % PFA for 14 minutes at 37°C . Post - ﬁxation , cells were washed x3 in PBST ( PBS supplemented with 0 . 1 % Tween ) and permeabilized a second time in PBS + 0 . 5 % Triton for 5 minutes at room temperature . The samples were then washed 3 times in PBST and blocked for 30 minutes in 5 % BSA . Cells were washed x3 in PBST and then incubated with Alexa Fluor™ 488 Phalloidin ( A12379 , Invitrogen , 1 : 50 in PBS ) for 1 h in the dark , followed by x2 washes in PBS . Prior to dSTORM imaging , PBS was re - placed with dSTORM imaging buffer ( base buffer consisting of 0 . 56 M glucose , 50 mM Tris ( pH 8 . 5 ) , and 10 mM NaCl supplemented with 5 U / mL pyranose oxidase ( Sigma , P4234 ) , 10 mM cysteamine ( Sigma , 30070 ) , 40 µg / mL catalase ( Sigma , C100 ) and 2 mM cyclooctatetraene ( Sigma , 138924 ) . Fixed COS - 7 cells labeled with SiR - actin . A commercial slide ( GATTA - Cells 4C , Gattaquant ) was used , containing ﬁxed COS - 7 cells labeled with SiR - actin ( and DAPI , Tom20 with Alexa Fluor 488 , and α - Tubulin with Alexa Fluor 555 . ) Live - cell imaging of the plasma membrane of Jurkat T cells . J8 LFA - 1 cells were incubated overnight ( ∼ 18 h ) in complete - RPMI ( StableCell RPMI - 1640 media ( Sigma ) supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) fetal calf serum ( FCS ) , 1 % ( v / v ) HEPES buffer , and 1 % ( v / v ) pen / strep antibiotics . 1 mL of cells were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in phenol - red free RPMI supple - mented with 1 % HEPES . Round coverslips were rinsed with IPA , MilliQ , dried , and Ar - plasma cleaned for 20 minutes . Grace Bio - Labs CultureWells were at - tached , and the slide was incubated with OKT3 antibody ( provided by the Hu - man Immunology Unit , WIMM , Oxford ) for 30 minutes . The slide was washed 5 times with phenol - red free RPMI supplemented with 1 % HEPES and a ﬁnal wash with phenol - red free RPMI supplemented with 1 % HEPES and 100 nM NR4A before imaging . Live - cell imaging of the plasma membrane of Jurkat T cells . J8 LFA - 1 cells were cultured in complete - RPMI ( StableCell RPMI - 1640 media ( Sigma ) supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) fetal calf serum ( FCS ) , 1 % ( v / v ) HEPES buffer , and 1 % ( v / v ) pen / strep antibiotics ) . 1 ml of cells were collected by centrifuga - tion and resuspended in phenol - red free RPMI supplemented with 1 % HEPES and 200 nM NR4A dye . Round cover slips were rinsed with IPA , MilliQ , dried , and Ar - plasma cleaned for 20 min . Grace Bio - Labs CultureWells were attached , and the slide incubated with OKT3 antibody ( provided by the Human Immunology Unit , WIMM , Oxford ) at 10 µg / ml for 30 minutes . The slide was washed 5 times with phenol - red free RPMI supplemented with 1 % HEPES and a ﬁnal wash with phenol - red free RPMI supplemented with 1 % HEPES and 200 nM NR4A before imaging . OKT3 antibody was provided by the Human Immunology Unit ( WIMM , Oxford ) . J8 LFA - 1 cell line was provided by the research group of Simon Davis . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors thank the Cambridge Advanced Imaging Centre ( CAIC , University of Cam - bridge ) for the use of a microscope for the dSTORM experiments , and the mechanical workshop ( Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry , University of Cambridge ) for build - ing custom parts of optical setups used in this work . We thank Dr . Aleks Ponjavic and Dr . Joseph Beckwith for critical reading of the manuscript . We thank Ms . Laila Elfeky for testing POLCAM software . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS SFL conceived the project . SFL , KOH and MDL supervised the research . EB built the optical setup . EB programmed and performed the simulations . EB , LM and MK acquired data . EB and OZ analysed data . EB programmed the MATLAB applications and napari plugin . OZ adapted the RoSE - O algorithm for polarization cameras . LMN prepared the alpha - synuclein ﬁbrils and dye in polymer samples . RP prepared the dSTORMactinsamples . MKpreparedtheliveT - cellsamples . EB , MCandSDprepared thelipidbilayer - coatedmicrospheresamples . TWprovidedaprotocolforpreparinglipid bilayer - coated microspheres . ASK provided the dye NR4A . SJD provided the J8 LFA - 1 cell line and OKT3 antibodies . EB and SFL wrote the manuscript with input from all authors . COMPETING INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests . Bruggeman et al . | POLCAM : Instant molecular orientation microscopy for the life sciences bioR χ iv | 13