DisMiss False Information : A Value Matter Alisson Puska 1 , Lara Piccolo 2 , and Roberto Pereira 1 1 Federal University of Parana , BR { aapuska ; rpereira } @ inf . ufpr . br 2 The Open University , UK lara . piccolo @ open . uc . uk Abstract . The popularization of social media and the increasing con - sumption and dissemination of information online rise the concerns on the possible impacts of disinformation on a global scale . Although rele - vant progress to tackle disinformation online has been made recently , the problem seems to be still growing in space and complexity , aﬀecting dif - ferent aspects of the society , from personal relationships to entire demo - cratic systems . In this position paper , we argue for the need to under - stand and approach disinformation and misinformation as a sociotechni - cal phenomena in cultures mediated by information and communication technology , in which both universal and speciﬁc values inﬂuence the way people experience the problem . A sociotechical perspective aware of the cultural inﬂuence can inform technical developments of user interfaces and algorithms , as well as the preparation of educational content in a more systemic and socially responsible way . Keywords : Disinformation · Misinformation · Social media · Human - computer Interaction · Values · Culture . 1 Disinformation and misinformation on social media Mobile computing , social media and social application have connected people and made all sort of information available as never before . By boosting the access to information and social interactions , applications such as Facebook and WhatsApp have become key to foster digital literacy and education , including in countries where social and economic inequalities are still prominent . However , if on the one hand social media and social applications have contributed to democratize the access to information and communication technology ( ICT ) , on the other hand they are favouring misinformation and disinformation spread , catalyzing social and cultural changes sometimes with hard and undesirable consequences . Disinformation can be characterized as information intentionally created to trigger , mislead or generate decision errors , manipulate belief systems of in - dividuals and deceive humans [ 1 ] . Online , disinformation is used for cognitive hacking [ 2 ] , in social engineering and human - factors exploitation schemes , to persuade individuals to fall into targeted attacks like spear phishing and mal - ware installation [ 3 , 4 ] or in the creation and dissemination of “false news” and 2 Alisson Puska , Lara Piccolo , and Roberto Pereira hoaxes [ 5 ] . Misinformation , in turn , can be deﬁned as misrepresented informa - tion that causes confusion and are not always intentionally created [ 1 ] . Despite the diﬀerences , both disinformation and misinformation are harmful and chal - lenging . As a matter of simpliﬁcation , in the remainder of this paper the term disinformation will refer to both . The spread of disinformation against vaccines have reduced the results of public health programs to immunize citizens , and some diseases such as yellow fever , measles and poliomyelitis , which have been under control for decades , started infecting people again and causing deaths [ 6 ] . For example , in Brazil , India and Mexico , social applications have been used to disseminate vicious rumours that led to barbaric deaths of innocent victims [ 7 , 8 ] and to inﬂuence elections [ 8 , 9 ] . Although some progress has been made to stop disinformation spreading recently , the impact of disinformation seems to be reaching extreme levels , af - fecting relationships , freedom of expression in personal and professional domains , and threatening democratic systems . In this position paper , we argue that disci - plinary approaches are not enough to deal with the complexity of disinformation spread and impact , and point out to the need for understanding and approaching disinformation as a sociotechnical phenomena in cultures mediated by informa - tion and communication technologies ( ICTs ) . In ICT cultural contexts , both universal and speciﬁc values inﬂuence the way people perceive disinformation , react to it ( or not ) , consume and spread it . Such a sociotechnical and cultural perspective can help us to deal with the problem in a systemic way , being able to design technical solutions and promote information literacy in a more socially responsible way . 2 Values and culture matter ! Diﬀerent countries , regions or even social groups may have their own ways to es - tablish communication , which includes the communication process meta - factors and how they perceive and appropriate received messages . Social media mediated communication is not apart from this sociocultural inﬂuence . Human values , so - cial and economic conditions , educational level and diﬀerent cultural traits seem to both aﬀect and be aﬀected by the way people use social applications to com - municate with each other , produce , share and consume information , also online . Therefore , we argue that any initiative to tackle the disinformation problem must understand their consumption and dissemination as a sociotechnical phenomena in a society increasingly mediated by ICT . By a sociotechnical phenomena we mean that technical systems design , human processing capabilities , socioeco - nomic conditions , human values and cultural aspects must be understood and considered as intertwined to each other . A recent social political event in Brazil related to formal education illustrates this view . Recently , Brazilian universities are suﬀering from funding cuts and po - litical persecution . Political instability has caused the cuts of US $ 2 . 1 billion and the cancel of thousands masters and PhD scholarships . These political measures DisMiss False Information : A Value Matter 3 have been accompanied by a strong movement in social media to undermine social support to universities by producing and sharing disinformation . Since Brazilian government announced funding cuts , a wave of disinformation against public universities has been ﬂagged . According to “Aos Fatos” , a monitoring tool developed at UFMG ( Federal University of Minas Gerais ) , the sharing of nude student image in 350 WhatsApp groups monitored by the tool grew by at least 950 % in 24 hours after the cuts . Most of the shared content used images and recordings to demoralize Brazilian universities and their students to support the cuts made by the government , showing naked students in random contexts , years and situations as if they were a current and common routine in universi - ties [ 10 , 11 ] . In addition , title of dissertations and theses on gender and sexuality were shared without situating the content , using photos from other contexts and public , including other countries , to manipulate people’s opinion . The same piece of information can be used to build perspectives of two oppo - site ideas that appeal to the subjectiveness of individual interpretation , triggering diﬀerent perception and behaviors . By omitting the original context in which im - ages were captured and by omitting or modifying details about the research , the content have a potential to deceive the reader by distorting or ignoring the in - tended meaning and purpose of images and pieces of research . This kind of action put in check the social media democratizing potential , promoting skepticism and outrage behaviors . This example evidences three dimensions that must be addressed when deal - ing with disinformation . The ﬁrst dimension is related to people‘s culture and values : the content explored nudity going against religious values , as they are very appealing to a considerable part of the Brazilian society . In Brazil , What - sApp groups are popular among families to get in touch and share news about their lives , jokes , etc . , and have become a source for disinformation as family members , usually the older and less educated , tend to disseminate any appealing content as if it was ultimately true [ 9 ] . When the information touch something valuable for people , they seem more prone to assume the information is true as if the information carry authority per se and is beyond justiﬁcation , The second dimension is related to formal education and authority . Public universities usually have very competitive and diﬃcult admission process for students and are not able to cope with the demand of a country with more than 200 million people . So most Brazilians have never had the opportunity to experience the environment of a university . Therefore , universities are a distant reality for the majority of Brazilians , especially the the least privileged one . Therefore , people are easily inﬂuenced to believe lots of public money is being wasted by universities ineﬃcient researches and immoral events instead of being applied for high quality education . As there is a lack of trust in formal authorities to whom people may resort to get veriﬁed information from , and as people seem to give credibility to controversial content or to content that agrees with their previous beliefs , social platforms ( e . g . , WhatsApp ) end up becoming a source of authority that certiﬁcates the information quality itself . 4 Alisson Puska , Lara Piccolo , and Roberto Pereira The third dimension is related to technical issues that range from software requirements to user interface and legal norms . WhatsApp is an example of a widespread application digitally including a considerable part of population in Brazil . The application can be used in simple and cheap smartphones and is ac - cessible to most of people , even those still not very familiar with technology . It is very easy to disseminate any content through WhatsApp . However , the appli - cation does not support any sort of veriﬁcation of the information quality , as the authorship of content or history of the content in the platform . For marketing purposes , mobile carriers usually do not restrict data consumption for social me - dia applications such as WhatsApp and Facebook , but they do charge the access to other services online . Hence , people receive unlimited content in their social media groups having no means to check the content in another source , search for additional information , or even report the content to other organization than the application itself . The soil for spreading disinformation becomes fertile ! The three dimensions mentioned above : culture and values , formal and au - thority , and technical issues are contextually dependent . The cultural character - istics of a people , the values they share and the beliefs they hold heavily inﬂuence the way they understand and use social media . The socioeconomic conditions of people and the formal system that regulates and guides their life also play an important role . Finally , the technical system used by people , its interface , un - derlying structure and algorithms will favour certain behaviours while inhibiting others depending on the cultural context they are being used . 3 Towards a Research Agenda Existing literature in Computer Science has focusing mainly on the technical dimension of the problem paying little attention to the cultural and formal ones . Although there is no arguments against the need for technical advancements to stop disinformation spreading , starting by focusing on technical aspects in isolation may not be the most eﬀective way . Technical advancements must be made grounded on the knowledge we gather from understanding the sociocultural context where people live , from understanding their values , preferences , needs , social norms , behavioral patterns , beliefs and demands . Before introducing technical innovations to social groups to tackle misinfor - mation spreading , we suggest a sociocultural contextual analysis considering , for example , whether people have access to resources and knowledge to critically evaluate pieces of information , for example , whether there are external factors or socioeconomic conditions pressuring for disseminating certain positions and intentions , people’s trust in authorities , etc . Only starting by understanding a context and the people living in it we can grasp the particularities of their prob - lems and design good solutions for them . References 1 . Tudjman , M . Mikelic , N . ( 2003 ) . Information science : Science about information , misinformation and disinformation . Proceedings of Informing Science + Information DisMiss False Information : A Value Matter 5 Technology Education , 1513 - 1527 . 2 . Cybenko , G . , Giani , A . , Thompson , P . ( 2002 ) . Cognitive hacking : A battle for the mind . Computer , 35 ( 8 ) , 50 - 56 . 3 . Caputo , D . D . , Pﬂeeger , S . L . , Freeman , J . D . , Johnson , M . E . ( 2014 ) . Going spear phishing : Exploring embedded training and awareness . IEEE Security Pri - vacy , 12 ( 1 ) , 28 - 38 . 4 . Nguyen - Vu , L . , Park , J . , Chau , N . T . , Jung , S . ( 2016 , January ) . Signing key leak detection in Google Play Store . In 2016 International Conference on Information Networking ( ICOIN ) ( pp . 13 - 16 ) . IEEE . 5 . Bazan , S . ( 2017 ) . A New Way to Win the War . IEEE Internet Computing , 21 ( 4 ) , 92 - 97 . 6 . BBC , https : / / www . bbc . com / news / health - 46387167 . Last accessed May 2019 7 . BBC , https : / / www . bbc . com / news / world - latin - america - 46145986 . Last accessed May 2019 8 . BBC , https : / / www . bbc . com / news / world - asia - india - 47797151 . Last accessed May 2019 9 . Folha , https : / / www1 . folha . uol . com . br / amp / poder / 2019 / 05 / 2 - em - cada - 3 - receberam - fake - news - nas - ultimas - eleicoes - aponta - pesquisa . shtml . Last accessed May 2019 10 . AosFatos , https : / / aosfatos . org / noticias / meme - que - critica - manifestacoes - pela - educacao - usa - fotos - de - protestos - antigos / . Last accessed May 2019 11 . AosFatos , : / / aosfatos . org / noticias / foto - de - faixa - com - fora - bolsonaro - e - liberdade - para - lula - de - marco - nao - de - ato - pela - educacao / . Last accessed May 2019