COMMENT METEOROLOGY Why did El Niño flummox long - range weather forecasters ? p . 179 GENETICS Siddhartha Mukherjee’s history of heredity , reviewed p . 178 CHEMISTRY A study of Humphry Davy’s dazzling mix of personas p . 175 NATURAL HISTORY The labs are full but the field is empty p . 172 O n 4 May , two groups reported that they had sustained human embryos in vitro for 12 – 13 days 1 – 3 . Embryos normally implant in the wall of the uterus at around day seven . Until now , no one had reported culturing human embryos in vitro beyond nine days 4 , and rarely have they been sustained for more than seven . This latest advance comes only 21 months after the researchers at the Rockefeller University in New York City ( some of whom are involved in the latest embryo - culturing work ) announced that , under certain conditions , individual human embryonic stem cells can self - organize into structures akin to the developmental stages of embryos soon after implantation 5 , 6 ( see ‘Two advances in human developmental biology’ ) . The cells were obtained from pre - existing stem - cell lines ( derived from 4 – 5 - day - old embryos donated through fertility clinics ) . In principle , these two lines of research could lead to scientists being able to study all aspects of early human development with unprecedented precision . Yet these advances also put human developmental Revisit the 14 - day rule Studies of human development in vitro are on a collision course with an international policy that limits embryo research to the first two weeks of development , warn Insoo Hyun , Amy Wilkerson and Josephine Johnston . Human - embryo research is governed by a policy that aims to accommodate diverse moral concerns . 1 2 M AY 2 0 1 6 | V O L 5 3 3 | N AT U R E | 1 6 9 A NN A T Ä R N H U V U D © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . biology on a collision course with the ‘14 - day rule’ — a legal and regulatory line in the sand that has for decades limited in vitro human - embryo research to the period before the ‘primitive streak’ appears . This is a faint band of cells marking the begin - ning of an embryo’s head - to - tail axis . The 14 - day rule has been effective for permitting embryo research within strict constraints — partly because it has been technologically challenging for scientists to break it . Now that the culturing of human embryos beyond 14 days seems feasible , more clarity as to how the rule applies to different types of embryo research in dif - ferent jurisdictions is crucial . Moreover , in light of the evolving science and its poten - tial benefits , it is important that regula - tors and concerned citizens reflect on the nature of the restriction and re - evaluate its pros and cons . POLICY TOOL The 14 - day limit was first proposed in 1979 by the Ethics Advisory Board of the US Department of Health , Education , and Welfare 7 . It was endorsed in 1984 by the Warnock committee in the United Kingdom 8 , and in 1994 by the US National Institutes of Health’s Human Embryo Research Panel 9 . In at least 12 countries , this limit is encoded in laws governing assisted reproduc - tion and embryo research ( see ‘International agreement’ ) . The rule is also embodied in numerous reports commissioned by gov - ernments , and in scientific guidelines for embryo and assisted - reproduction research . These include China’s 2003 Ethical Guiding Principles on Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research and India’s 2007 Guidelines for Stem Cell Research and Therapy . Some versions of the rule cover embryos created by any means ; others apply only to products of fertilization . Some explicitly refer to gastrulation ( when three differ - ent cell layers appear ) or the formation of the primitive streak ; others mention only the 14 consecutive days of development . In most cases , however , what seems to be crucial is the stage of development that the 14th day typically represents , not the consecutive number of days in culture . The formation of the primitive streak is significant because it represents the ear - liest point at which an embryo’s biologi - cal individuation is assured . Before this point , embryos can split in two or fuse together . So some people reason that at this stage a morally significant individual comes into being . Yet views differ on the moment in devel - opment at which a human embryo obtains sufficient moral status that research on it should be prohibited . Some , for instance , believe that the cut - off is the point of fertilization ; others argue that it comes much later , when the embryo develops into a fetus that can experience pain , exhibit brain activ - ity or survive outside the womb . Revisiting the 14 - day rule might tempt people to try to rationalize or attack the philosophical coherence of the limit as an ethical tenet grounded in biological facts . This misconstrues the restriction . The 14 - day rule was never intended to be a bright line denoting the onset of moral sta - tus in human embryos . Rather , it is a public - policy tool designed to carve out a space for scientific inquiry and simultaneously show respect for the diverse views on human - embryo research . In fact , as a public - policy instrument , the 14 - day rule has been tremendously successful . It has offered a clear and legally enforceable stopping point for research , because the primitive streak can be vis - ibly identified and it is possible to count the number of days that an embryo has been cultured in a dish . The alternatives at each extreme — banning embryo research altogether or imposing no restrictions on embryo use — would not have made for good public policy in a pluralistic society . TWO GOALS Scientific advances are now prompting re - evaluations of other long - established research policies . For instance , it has proved difficult to maintain a previous consensus among funders , regulators and researchers that genetic engineering of human cells is permissible as long as those cells are not sperm , eggs or embryos . The clinical use of mitochondrial - replacement therapies — which cause heritable changes to future generations — was approved last year by the UK government , and deemed ‘ethically permissible’ earlier this year by a committee of the US Institute of Medicine . In 2014 , researchers at the Rockefeller University in New York City placed human embryonic stem cells on plastic discs with patterned surfaces designed to support cell clustering , and treated the cells with a bone growth factor 5 . In one or two days , the cells had arranged themselves into radially symmetric patterns . These mirror — in flattened form — the organization of embryos soon after implantation in the uterine wall . From the outside in , concentric circles of cells form each of the three germ layers that give rise to all fetal tissues : the endoderm , mesoderm and ectoderm cells . These in vitro models even show evidence of primitive - streak - like regions . These self - organizing structures , although embryo - like , are essentially two - dimensional . Other in vitro models have demonstrated some degree of self - organization when human embryonic stem cells are cultured in 3D environments 10 . All these differ from implanted human embryos resulting from a fertilized egg in several ways . But it is plausible that researchers could one day create more comprehensive 3D models 6 . This week , teams led by researchers at the Rockefeller University and the University of Cambridge , UK , report 1 , 2 that they cultured intact human embryos in vitro and obtained interpretable images up to day 12 – 13 . Each team stopped its studies by day 14 in accordance with UK law and international guidelines . The latest work provides compelling insight into how the early human embryo transitions from a floating hollow ball of cells to a three - layered gastrula attached to the uterus . Studies on human embryos sustained in culture could help to clarify whether self - organizing structures truly mimic early human development . Tracking , in real time , the morphological and molecular changes in embryonic cells and the interactions between them during these later days of development , could elucidate the cell - signalling pathways that guide embryo organization and tissue formation . These techniques could shed light on the disorders that result in early pregnancy losses and birth defects , and facilitate clinical applications of stem - cell research . In conjunction with gene - editing tools , they could even help to determine the role of specific genes in human development . STREAKING AHEAD Two advances in human developmental biology Human embryonic stem cells form self - organized spatial patterns . 1 7 0 | N AT U R E | V O L 5 3 3 | 1 2 M AY 2 0 1 6 COMMENT R E F . 5 © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Some might conclude from such developments that policymakers redefine boundaries expediently when the limits become inconvenient for science . If restric - tions such as the 14 - day rule are viewed as moral truths , such cynicism would be war - ranted . But when they are understood to be tools designed to strike a balance between enabling research and maintaining public trust , it becomes clear that , as circumstances and attitudes evolve , limits can be legiti - mately recalibrated . Any decision to revise the 14 - day rule must depend , however , on how well any proposed changes can uphold the rule’s two chief goals : supporting research and accommodating diverse moral concerns . The rule became a standard part of embryo - research oversight through the convergence of deliberations of various national committees over decades . Hun - dreds of medical and scientific associations submitted recommendations , and dozens of public forums were held . Any formal changes to this rule should occur through similar processes of consensus - building involving experts , policymakers , patients and concerned citizens . Ideally , discussion should begin at an international level given the global nature of this research — although tak - ing local cultural and religious differences into account properly would also require national - level debates . A complication is that in many countries , a revision to the 14 - day rule would involve a legislative change . Yet the kind of international dis - course that we envision could facilitate and inform local decisions to amend law or research policy . There are precedents for this type of international discourse . In response to the development of powerful gene - editing technologies such as CRISPR – Cas9 , the US National Academy of Science , the US National Academy of Medicine , Britain’s Royal Society and the Chinese Academy of Sciences jointly hosted an international summit in December last year to discuss sci - entific , ethical and governance issues raised by the research . The second component of this initiative — a science and policy review and report on human gene editing — is ongoing . A PATH FORWARD Scientists have a crucial part to play in this process . In 1985 , when the legality of human - embryo research in the United Kingdom was threatened by a parliamen - tary bill , Nature editors appealed to embry - ologists to submit explanations of their research and its importance — to educate policymakers and the public before undue restrictions on research were passed ( see Nature 314 , 11 ; 1985 ) . Today , researchers of human developmen - tal biology should similarly engage with the public about what they are doing and why it matters . And they should consider design - ing their experiments in a way that , while furthering discovery , also addresses people’s moral concerns . In the immediate future , researchers should work closely with their local research - oversight committees to ensure that they are not at risk of violating current laws or guidelines . There are currently ambi - guities around the legal definition of ‘human embryo’ in some jurisdic - tions , and uncer - tainties around the biological potential of self - organizing , embryo - like structures 6 . Next week , the International Society for Stem Cell Research ( ISSCR ) will release its revised guidelines for stem - cell research . These guidelines are the result of a multi - national , interdisciplinary task force ( which included one of us , I . H . ) with input from stakeholders around the world . One of the goals of these guidelines is to provide a framework for those concerned about how research oversight should proceed in light of new forms of embryo research . In the short term , we think that the ISSCR’s recommended approach to over - sight of work involving human embryos offers a practical path forward — espe - cially if supplemented with input from representatives of the many advisory com - mittees that have adopted the 14 - day rule . Obvious candidates are the UK Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority , the US National Academies of Sciences , Engineering , and Medicine , and the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technol - ogy and Ministry of Health . Close collaboration between these organizations could help to prevent a public backlash and the implementation of reactive , more restrictive limits on research . ■ SEE NEWS & VIEWS P . 182 Insoo Hyun is associate professor of bioethics and philosophy at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine , Cleveland , Ohio , USA . Amy Wilkerson is associate vice - president for research support at the Rockefeller University in New York , New York City , USA . Josephine Johnston is director of research and a research scholar at the Hastings Center in Garrison , New York , USA . e - mail : insoo . hyun @ case . edu 1 . Deglincerti , A . et al . Nature http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature17948 ( 2016 ) . 2 . Shahbazi , M . N . et al . Nature Cell Biol . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3347 ( 2016 ) . 3 . Rossant , J . Nature 533 , 182 – 183 ( 2016 ) . 4 . Carver , J . et al . Hum . Reprod . 18 , 283 – 290 , ( 2003 ) . 5 . Warmflash , A . , Sorre , B . , Etoc , F . , Siggia , E . D . & Brivanlou , A . H . Nature Meth . 11 , 847 – 854 , ( 2014 ) . 6 . Pera , M . F . et al . Nature Meth . 12 , 917 – 919 , ( 2015 ) . 7 . Ethics Advisory Board , Department of Health , Education , and Welfare . HEW Support of Research Involving Human In Vitro Fertilization and Embryo Transfer ( US Government Printing Office , 1979 ) . 8 . UK Department of Health and Social Security . Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilisation and Embryology ( Her Majesty’s Stationary Office , 1984 ) . 9 . Ad Hoc Group of Consultants to the Advisory Committee to the Director , NIH . Report of the Human Embryo Research Panel ( US Government Printing Office , 1994 ) . 10 . Taniguchi , N . et al . Stem Cell Rep . 5 , 954 – 962 ( 2015 ) . INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT Twelve countries ( dark blue ) have laws that restrict in vitro research on human embryos to within the first 14 days of development . In five others ( pale blue ) , nationally commissioned scientific guidelines specify the 14 - day rule . Guidelines issued by the International Society for Stem Cell Research for the global research community also articulate the 14 - day rule . Encoded in law Specified in scientific guidelines Japan Singapore Australia India South Korea UnitedStates Canada Iceland United Kingdom Spain Sweden Netherlands Slovenia Switzerland restricts human - embryo cultures to seven days . Mainland China New Zealand Denmark COMMENT 1 2 M AY 2 0 1 6 | V O L 5 3 3 | N AT U R E | 1 7 1 “The 14 - day rule was never intended to be a bright line denoting the onset of moral status in human embryos . ” © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved .