ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 Living with Noisy Genes : How Cells Function Reliably with Inherent Variability in Gene Expression Narendra Maheshri 1 and Erin K . O’Shea 2 1 Department of Chemical Engineering , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 ; email : narendra @ mit . edu 2 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , FAS Center for Systems Biology , Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology , Harvard University , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02138 ; email : erin oshea @ harvard . edu Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 2007 . 36 : 413 – 34 The Annual Review of Biophysics and Biomolecular Structure is online at biophys . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 36 . 040306 . 132705 Copyright c (cid:2) 2007 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 1056 - 8700 / 07 / 0609 - 0413 $ 20 . 00 Key Words intrinsic noise , extrinsic noise , gene networks Abstract Within a population of genetically identical cells there can be sig - niﬁcant variation , or noise , in gene expression . Yet even with this in - herent variability , cells function reliably . This review focuses on our understanding of noise at the level of both single genes and genetic regulatory networks , emphasizing comparisons between theoretical models and experimental results whenever possible . To highlight the importance of noise , we particularly emphasize examples in which a stochastic description of gene expression leads to a qualitatively different outcome than a deterministic one . 413 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 Gene expression noise : related to the variability in the resulting protein , a dimensionlessquantitydeﬁned as standard deviation of protein number divided by the mean protein number Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414 BACKGROUND . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414 Stochastic Chemical Kinetics as a Random Walk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414 Experimental Measurement and Classiﬁcation of Noise . . . . . . . . . 417 GENE EXPRESSION : MOLECULES , STATISTICS , AND MECHANISMS . . . . . . . . . . . 418 In Vivo Single - Molecule Measurements of Gene Expression and the Statistics of Intrinsic Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 418 Steady - State Protein Distributions of Single Genes and the Nature of Extrinsic Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . 421 Single - Cell Tracking of Gene Expression and the Dynamics of Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 421 A Genome - Wide View of Noise in Single Genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 423 PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER : SIMPLE NETWORKS . . . . . . . . . . 424 Linear Networks and the Importance of Correlated Noise Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 424 Negative Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426 Positive Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 427 Noise and Oscillations . . . . . . . . . . . . 428 OUTLOOK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 430 INTRODUCTION The basic unit of life , a single cell , performs thousands of chemical transformations simul - taneously . Because small numbers of each molecular species are involved , the outcome of intracellular reactions is subject to thermal noise . In addition , these reactions occur in a crowded , dynamic microenvironment that plays a crucial role in determining reaction rate . Hence , the already difﬁcult problem of understanding the design and structure of the thousands of chemical transformations that occur at the cellular level is compounded by the fact that many of these transformations are not completely predictable . Gene expression is a set of chemical trans - formationsthatisfundamentaltoalllife . Since the demonstration of a functional role for stochastic gene expression in phage λ ( 2 ) and a subsequent review by the same authors ( 39 ) , there has been an explosion of studies focused on investigating the origins and consequences of noise in gene expression . Investigators have made progress in this area by ﬁrst establish - ing the molecular mechanisms of noise gen - eration at the single gene level , then building on this knowledge to test and predict its ef - fects on larger regulatory networks . We adopt a similar approach in this review , beginning with recent single - molecule studies that di - rectly measure expression noise and conﬁrm stochastic models , then working toward an understanding of how this noise shapes , and is shaped by , genetic regulatory networks . In light of this topic’s multidisciplinary nature , we emphasize connections between theoret - ical and experimental work , paying special attention to examples in which a stochastic descriptionyieldsaqualitativelydifferentout - come from a deterministic one . BACKGROUND Stochastic Chemical Kinetics as a Random Walk To design and interpret experiments analyz - ing noise in gene expression , it is essential to have some background in the mathematics of stochastic processes . This brief introductory section is designed for readers new to this area and provides references for further reading . Random walks . Imagine a pedestrian exe - cuting a one - dimensional random walk along a line where he or she randomly steps forward or backward . We can discretize the line and label each position as a unique state . The set of all possible states is then the state space of our walk , here an inﬁnite one - dimensional 414 Maheshri · O’Shea A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 state space . Because the probability of moving forward or backward depends only on the cur - rent state of the pedestrian , this random walk is said to be memoryless , or a Markov process . We want to analyze the probability that our pedestrian is in a particular state at some time , given that he or she starts in some initial state : P ( n , t + τ ) = (cid:2) i W ( n , t + τ | i , t ) P ( i , t ) . 1 . The probability , P ( n , t + τ ) , that the pedes - trian is in state n at time t + τ depends on where he or she was previously , at time t ( as - suming each step takes time τ ) , multiplied by the transition probability ( W ) of walking to state n from state i during the period lasting from t to t + τ . Obviously , in his or her one - dimensional random walk , the pedestrian can reach state n in one step only from state n − 1 or n + 1 , and the transition probabilities are constant functions of time . Incorporating this fact , and now taking the continuous time limit , we arrive at a master equation for this process : dP dt = W (cid:2) ( n | n − 1 ) P ( n − 1 ) + W (cid:2) ( n | n + 1 ) P ( n + 1 ) − [ W (cid:2) ( n | n − 1 ) + W (cid:2) ( n | n + 1 ) ] P ( n ) . 2 . The master equation in Equation 2 de - scribes how the discrete probability distribu - tion of the pedestrian’s position evolves con - tinuously in time . The transition probabilities W are now replaced by transition rates W (cid:2) . In general , master equations are difﬁcult to solve . If the spacing between steps becomes very small , the master equation can be simpli - ﬁedtoamoretractablediffusionequationthat describes the movement of our pedestrian in a continuous state space with a diffusion co - efﬁcient , D , proportional to the magnitude of the transition rates : ∂ P ∂ t = D ∂ 2 P ∂ n 2 . 3 . Equation 3 is the Fokker - Planck equation for this system and describes the time evo - lution of the probability distribution of our pedestrian’s position . If the state space is un - bounded , thesolutiontothisequationisanor - mal distribution centered at the pedestrian’s initial position , whose variance increases with time . Application to chemical kinetics . We can think of a chemical reaction as a random walk in the state space of non - negative integers . To see this , let us consider the following master equation that describes a birth - death process of a single molecule : dP ( X ) dt = kP ( X − 1 ) + γ ( X + 1 ) P ( X + 1 ) − [ k + γ X ] P ( X ) . 4 . Each state corresponds to the number of molecules . The transition probabilities , k and γ X , arethemesoscopicproductionanddegra - dation rates of X , respectively ( see Reference 21 for the precise relationship between meso - scopic and macroscopic reaction rates ) . As the average number of molecules becomes large ( 35 ) or , alternatively , when the system vol - ume becomes large at constant concentration of x —van Kampen’s (cid:6) expansion ( 66 ) —we can take an appropriate continuous limit of Equation 4 and recover the following Fokker - Planck equation : ∂ P ( x , t ) ∂ t = ∂ ∂ x ( ( k (cid:2) − γ x ) P ) + ∂ 2 ∂ x 2 (cid:3) ( k (cid:2) + γ x ) 2 P (cid:4) ; k (cid:2) = k / V , x = X / V . 5 . Equation 5 is a diffusion equation with a convective term . The convective term de - scribes the deterministic reaction , driving the probability distribution to the macroscopic steady - state value , whereas the diffusive term describes the noise that causes the distribu - tion to spread around this value . Equation 5 represents the well - known Ornstein - Uhlenbeck process , which arises repeatedly in applications . The steady - state solution can be solved exactly and is a normal distribution , centered on the macroscopic steady state with www . annualreviews . org • Living with Noisy Genes 415 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 CV : coefﬁcient of variation a variance proportional to the diffusive term ( 50 ) . The noise in x , η x , is a dimensionless quantity deﬁned as the standard deviation of the distribution of x divided by the mean value of x , the coefﬁcient of variation ( CV ) . Often the transition probabilities ( the mesoscopic reaction rates ) in the chemical master equation are nonlinear functions of X . If we restrict ourselves to ﬁnding the steady - state probability distribution , we can lin - earize the Fokker - Planck equation around the macroscopic steady state , recovering Equa - tion 5 , the linearized noise approximation . The multidimensional case ( treated in Ref - erence 21 ) , in which X represents a vector of different molecular species , has a multivariate Gaussian as the steady - state solution . Gene expression is a sequential process : Fluctuations at the promoter can be transmit - ted to mRNA levels and ultimately protein levels . Below we consider the birth - death processes of transcription and translation , in which the two - dimensional state space in - cludes both mRNA ( m ) and protein ( p ) num - bers . The transcription rate , k m , is constant ; the translation rate ( k p m ) depends on mRNA number ; and the degradation of both mRNA and protein is ﬁrst order with rates τ − 1 m and τ − 1 p : ( m , p ) k m −−−−→←−−−− ( m + 1 ) / τ m ( m + 1 , p ) ( m , p ) k p m −−−−→←−−−− ( p + 1 ) / τ p ( m , p + 1 ) . 6 . In a sequential birth - death process ( in which any event depends on previous events , but not subsequentevents ) , onecanfactorizethesolu - tion to the linearized noise approximation to yield a useful representation of how the pro - tein noise , η p ( see above ) , depends on various reaction parameters ( 44 ) : η 2 p ≡ σ 2 p (cid:6) p (cid:7) 2 = 1 (cid:6) p (cid:7) H pp + η 2 m H 2 pm H 2 pp H pp / τ p H mm / τ m + H pp / τ p . 7 . The H xy terms measure how the steady - state balance of births and deaths of x depends on y . They are closely connected to the order of the chemical reactions . Because both death pro - cesses are ﬁrst order , H mm and H pp are 1 . Sim - ilarly , because the protein birth process has a ﬁrst - order dependence on the mRNA num - ber , H pm = 1 . This leads to η 2 p = 1 (cid:6) p (cid:7) + 1 (cid:6) m (cid:7) τ m τ m + τ p = 1 (cid:6) p (cid:7) (cid:5) 1 + k p τ p τ m τ m + τ p (cid:6) . 8 . The extent to which protein noise is depen - dent on mRNA noise depends on the rela - tive lifetimes of mRNA and protein . Because mRNAlifetimesaresmallcomparedwithpro - tein lifetimes ( τ m (cid:8) τ p ) , Equation 8 further simpliﬁes to η 2 p = 1 (cid:6) p (cid:7) ( 1 + k p τ m ) . 9 . The k p τ m term represents translational bursts of proteins produced during the short life of each mRNA . In addition , Equation 9 is the basis for understanding why the protein noise ( η p ) due to stochastic chemical events decreases by the square root of 2 when gene expression and protein abundance double ( 64 ) ( see below for more detail ) . The Langevin approach is an alternative approach to deriving a Fokker - Planck equa - tion from a master equation . The Langevin equationforproductionandﬁrst - orderdegra - dation of one species is identical to the deter - ministic differential equation except for the addition of a noise term , ξ : dx dt = k − γ x + ξ . 10 . If ξ is Gaussian - distributed white noise , Equation 10 also represents an Ornstein - Uhlenbeck process and is identical to the Fokker - Planck equation ( Equation 5 ) . The Langevin approach is desirable when one wishes to add noise heuristically into the deterministic equations based on physi - cal reasoning ( 50 ) . For a review on numerical 416 Maheshri · O’Shea A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 techniques developed to solve the equations presented here , see Reference 65 . Experimental Measurement and Classiﬁcation of Noise A cell can be conceptually described by a set of state values ( e . g . , size , shape , and pro - tein number ) . In gene expression studies , the relevant state variable is usually protein ( or mRNA ) number and is typically measured at the single - cell level using a ﬂuorescent pro - tein . The distribution of this state variable , and hence the noise , is then ascertained us - ing either a ﬂow cytometer or ﬂuorescence microscopy ( Figure 1 a ) . Any large dynamical system can be artiﬁ - cially divided into modules . The noise in the pPRM1 YFP pPRM1 CFP YFP C F P E x t r i n s i c I n t r i n s i c YFP C F P G l oba l P a t h w a y GFP Promoter Molecularbiology Microscopy Flow cytometry a b c pADH1 YFP pPRM1 CFP Figure 1 Measuring noise . ( a ) The gene encoding a ﬂuorescent protein is placed under the control of a promoter , allowing gene expression to be monitored . GFP , green ﬂuorescent protein . ( b ) Extrinsic and intrinsic noise contributions are measured by looking at the correlation in the expression of two identical copies of the pheromone - responsive PRM1 gene promoter , within a cell and between different cells . CFP , cyan ﬂuorescent protein ; YFP , yellow ﬂuorescent protein . ( c ) Both pathway - speciﬁc and global expression noise are determined by comparing expression of the pheromone pathway - speciﬁc promoter ( PRM1 ) with that of an unrelated , constitutively expressed promoter ( ACT1 ) . Correlated changes in expression result from global ﬂuctuations in expression capacity , whereas uncorrelated ﬂuctuations result from speciﬁc ﬂuctuations in the pheromone pathway . www . annualreviews . org • Living with Noisy Genes 417 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 Intrinsic noise : an experimentallydeﬁnedcomponentofthetotalnoisethatconsistsofdifferencesintheexpressionofidenticalgenesinthesameintracellularenvironment Extrinsic noise : an experimentallydeﬁnedcomponent of the total noise that consists of differences in identical genes due to differences between cellular environments Pathway - speciﬁc noise : an experimentallydeﬁnedcomponentoftheextrinsicnoisethatconsistsofextrinsicvariationresultingfromcell - to - cell differences in the signaling pathway ( s ) dictating a gene’s expression output of each module can be partitioned into two sources : ( a ) the intrinsic noise , originat - ing from ﬂuctuations internal to the mod - ule , and ( b ) the extrinsic noise , originating from external ﬂuctuations that impinge on the module . Gene expression is one mod - ule of the cellular system and its boundary is operationally drawn around the processes of promoter remodeling , transcription , and translation of a given gene . Random ﬂuctu - ations in these chemical transformations con - tribute to the intrinsic noise in the expres - sion of that gene . Variation in external factors such as the number of ribosomes or transcrip - tion factors contributes to the extrinsic noise in gene expression ( 62 ) . Each noise contribu - tion can be measured using two copies of the same promoter expressing two distinct ﬂuo - rescent proteins in a single cell ( 24 , 49 ) . If both reporters are independent and equiva - lent in their expression , then the difference between the number of each distinct ﬂuo - rescent protein within a single cell , averaged over many cells , is proportional to the intrin - sic noise . The extrinsic noise is proportional to cell - to - cell differences in total ﬂuorescent protein expression ( Figure 1 b ) . One can also distinguish between these two noise sources using multiple copies of a promoter fused to a single ﬂuorescent protein ( 7 , 69 ) . If each copy is independent and equivalent , the degree of correlation between the copies corresponds to the relative contribution of extrinsic noise ( 69 ) . We note that the terms intrinsic noise andextrinsicnoiseusuallyrefertosteady - state ﬂuctuations . Gene - speciﬁc biochemical events lead to intrinsic noise , but many factors could con - tribute to extrinsic noise . For example , ﬂuc - tuations in both the activity of an upstream transcription factor or in ribosome number are extrinsic to the promoter and lead to cor - related ﬂuctuations in identical downstream promoters . To distinguish the ﬂuctuations of the former type from the latter , extrinsic noise can be further subdivided into pathway - speciﬁc noise and global expression noise ( 19 , 34 ) . The degree of correlation between pro - moters controlled by the same pathway gives pathway - speciﬁc noise , whereas correlation between promoters from independent path - ways gives the relative contribution of global noise ( Figure 1 c ) . GENE EXPRESSION : MOLECULES , STATISTICS , AND MECHANISMS In Vivo Single - Molecule Measurements of Gene Expression and the Statistics of Intrinsic Noise Researchers have used stochastic models of gene expression to infer promoter , mRNA , and protein dynamics based on static snap - shots of protein distribution ( see Reference 45 for a review ) . Recent in vivo single - molecule experiments now provide informa - tion on mRNA and protein dynamics to support these models . In these experiments , investigators measured absolute mRNA num - bers and relative protein levels simultane - ously in single Escherichia coli cells ( 28 ) . They measured RNA abundance by introducing an RNA sequence that allowed the mRNAs to bind a ﬂuorescent RNA binding protein and measured relative protein levels with a ﬂuo - rescent protein . These experiments revealed that transcription from a lac / ara hybrid pro - moter occurred in geometrically distributed bursts of mRNA . Such statistics are consistent with a process in which the promoter switches randomlybetweenanONandOFFstate . The lac / ara promoter produced average bursts of ∼ 4 mRNA , and it was inferred that additional induction increased burst frequency . Further - more , the statistics of mRNA partitioning af - tercelldivisionwereclosetoabinomialmodel in which each mRNA had an equal chance of ending up in either daughter cell . Steady - state protein levels were proportional to mRNA levels , demonstrating the validity of the com - mon assumption that protein production is proportional to mRNA levels ( 28 ) . A set of complementary studies focused on measuring protein numbers in single cells 418 Maheshri · O’Shea A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 ( 15 , 71 ) . Whereas actual protein numbers had been inferred previously ( 51 ; see below ) , this set of studies used two complementary methods to measure the statistics of protein production from a repressed lac promoter in E . coli . In the ﬁrst study , single cells were trapped in microﬂuidic chambers containing a ﬂuorogenic substrate that became ﬂuores - cent only on β - gal - mediated hydrolysis . This assay allowed single - molecule detection of β - gal tetramers by monitoring the hydrolysis rate . Protein expression occurred in exponen - tially distributed bursts , with an exponential distribution of protein molecules produced per burst . This is similar to the geometric distribution of mRNA bursts ( the exponen - tial distribution is the continuous time ana - log of the discrete geometric distribution ) . Moreover , steady - state protein numbers were gamma - distributed , as expected if production is exponentially distributed and protein num - bers are halved every cell division . The results correspond to a burst frequency of ∼ 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 per cell cycle and a burst size of ∼ 7 en - zymes ( 15 ) . In the second study , researchers fused the ﬂuorescent protein Venus to Tsr , a bacterial membrane protein . The same lac promoter controlled expression of the Tsr - Venus fusion protein . Because the protein was localized to the membrane , its diffusion was reduced , enabling the detection of sin - gle Tsr - Venus molecules . Fluorescent protein molecules were photobleached on detection so that further production could be moni - tored . Protein expression was also geometri - cally distributed with an average burst size of 4 . 2 molecules and a burst frequency of 1 . 2 per cell cycle ( 71 ) . The statistics of mRNA production have been monitored in two eukaryotic systems : the social amoeba Dictyostelium ( 16 ) and a mammalian cell line ( 48 ) . Both studies ob - served bursts of transcription , again measured using an RNA sequence recognized by a ﬂuo - rescently labeled RNA binding protein ( 16 ) or probe ( 48 ) . In the study of mammalian cells , a tetracycline - inducible promoter ( 29 ) was in - tegrated at a speciﬁc location in the genome , allowing the measurement of transcriptional burst statistics at various levels of gene ex - pression . Surprisingly , an increased level of gene expression corresponded to an increase in the burst size but not the burst frequency of mRNA , in contrast with the E . coli study ( 28 ) . One possible model put forward was that periodic waves of chromatin decondensation set the burst frequency , and the activity of a transcriptional activator set the burst size . Regardless of mechanism , the increased burst size implies that the intrinsic noise does not necessarily decrease monotonically with in - creased expression ( 48 ) , as had been the case for all other genes studied . Finally , transcrip - tion from an endogenous gene encoding the large subunit of RNA polymerase II occurred in bursts of ∼ 120 mRNAs and with the same statistics as the integrated genes above . These in vivo single - molecule studies di - rectly conﬁrm the assumptions made regard - ing the kinetic mechanisms of gene expres - sion ( Figure 2 a ) . Promoters shift randomly between ON and OFF states , with exponen - tially ( geometrically ) distributed times in each state . Production of mRNA during the ON state then occurs in a Poisson ( binomial ) man - ner , leading to an exponential ( geometric ) dis - tribution in the burst size of mRNA and a gamma ( negative binomial ) steady - state dis - tribution of mRNA , when the time spent in the ON state is small relative to the mRNA half - life ( see Reference 48 for the mRNA dis - tribution without this assumption ) . If a pro - moter is always in the ON state , steady - state mRNA numbers are Poisson distributed . Pro - tein production occurs in exponentially ( ge - ometrically ) distributed bursts , leading to a gamma ( negative binomial ) steady - state dis - tribution in protein . In the combined case in which both mRNA and proteins are pro - duced in bursts , protein distributions still re - main gamma distributed ( see References 11 , 15 , 45 ) . Because these models only account for intrinsic noise , the match between these models and the data supports the idea that the variability in the single - molecule experiments arises from intrinsic sources ; this is likely a www . annualreviews . org • Living with Noisy Genes 419 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 Figure 2 Intrinsic and extrinsic noise . ( a ) Stochastic model for intrinsic noise in the expression of a single gene . ( b ) One source of extrinsic noise in the expression of a single gene is variation in population structure , including differences in cell size , shape , and organelle composition . However , even in two identically structured cells , there can still be pathway - speciﬁc variation owing to intrinsic or extrinsic ﬂuctuations in the activities of members of the upstream signaling pathway that affect that gene’s expression . In addition , there can be global variation owing to cell - to - cell differences in overall expression capacity , which may be related to the amount of transcriptional and translational machinery and / or the cell’s metabolic state . 420 Maheshri · O’Shea A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 result of the low level of expression for the protein counting experiments and a possible robustness of mRNA to extrinsic ﬂuctuations in the RNA counting assays ( 28 , 48 ) . These models also suggest that the burst size , fre - quency , and associated rates are a more nat - ural parameterization for the intrinsic noise than the CV . Steady - State Protein Distributions of Single Genes and the Nature of Extrinsic Noise Theabovestochasticmodelsonlydescribethe statistics of intrinsic noise . Early investiga - tions in both E . coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae demonstrated that the absolute value of ex - trinsic noise is maximal at intermediate levels of gene expression and is the dominant source of noise when gene expression is high ( 12 , 24 , 49 ) . Recent studies focused on identifying the sourcesofextrinsicnoise ( Figure 2 b ) , oftenby posing models that incorporate both intrinsic and extrinsic sources , and attempted to pre - dict the distribution of protein expression . Mathematical models that couple gene ex - pression to cell cycle – driven population dy - namics can be useful in distinguishing be - tween different sources of extrinsic noise ( 51 , 69 ) . A study in budding yeast used a struc - tured population model to account for extrin - sic variation owing to population dynamics . The researchers found the presence of an ex - trinsic noise ﬂoor in exponentially growing yeast cells that resulted from the steady - state structure ( e . g . , cell size , shape ) of the popu - lation ( 69 ) . However , extrinsic variability in the expression of the GAL1 gene , which is dominated by extrinsic noise ( 49 ) , could not be completely accounted for by differences in population structure . The additional variabil - ity was suggested to result from ﬂuctuations in an upstream regulator ( 69 ) . Similarly , a study in E . coli usedamathematicalmodeltoaccount for cell cycle – dependent changes in expres - sion owing to gene copy number . Even after such a correction , there was still substantial extrinsic variation ( CV of 40 % ) ( 51 ) . Clearly , Expressioncapacity : an experimentallydeﬁnedquantity that is measured by comparing the expression of a strong , global , constitutively active promoter in different cells GFP : green ﬂuorescent protein extrinsic noise results from more than just dif - ferences in population structure . Experimentally , steady - state protein dis - tributions have been described as both nor - mal and log - normal - like or long - tailed ( 5 , 42 , 51 , 54 ) . If the noise is dominated by ran - dom births and deaths of mRNA and pro - tein , and mRNAs are short - lived , then the protein number should be gamma - distributed ( as seen in References 15 and 71 ) . At low abundance , a gamma distribution would be long - tailed , whereas at higher abundance it would approach a normal distribution . How - ever , when extrinsic noise is dominant , it is difﬁcult to predict what the distribution will be without knowing the source of the noise . A recent study assumed that extrinsic noise was dominated by low - frequency ﬂuc - tuations in the expression capacity of cells ( see Figure 3 ) . A stochastic model that in - corporated a random , slowly ﬂuctuating pro - tein production rate was able to predict the long - tailed steady - state distribution of lacY - promoted green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) in E . coli ( 40 ) . One biological interpretation is that some determinant of expression capac - ity is normally distributed among different cells , leading to the log - normal - like distribu - tion observed . Protein synthesis components such as ribosomes are more likely the deter - minant because mRNA noise measured in the single - molecule studies was primarily intrin - sic ( 28 , 48 ) . Although no factors responsible for these global cell - to - cell differences have been identiﬁed , we speculate that they may be linked to central metabolism . Single - Cell Tracking of Gene Expression and the Dynamics of Noise Real - time tracking of gene expression in sin - gle cells over many generations has been accomplished by combining ﬂuorescent re - porters , ﬂuorescence microscopy , and ei - ther agarose pads or microﬂuidic chambers ( 3 , 14 , 19 , 40 , 51 ) . Investigators recently used this technique to study the quantitative www . annualreviews . org • Living with Noisy Genes 421 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 a c e b d f Intrinsic noise : comparing expression in the same cell Total noise : comparing expression in different cells 80 , 000 60 , 000 40 , 000 20 , 000 P r o t e i n nu m b e r Time ( min ) 0 50 100 τ = 5 min 150 200 250 1 . 4 1 . 2 1 . 0 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 N o r m a li z e d ex p r ess i on ca p ac i t y Time ( min ) 0 50 100 τ = 40 min 150 200 250 80 , 000 60 , 000 40 , 000 20 , 000 P r o t e i n nu m b e r Time ( min ) 0 50 100 150 200 250 8000 6000 4000 2000 P r o t e i n nu m b e r Time ( min ) 0 50 100 150 200 250 8000 6000 4000 2000 P r o t e i n nu m b e r Time ( min ) 0 50 100 τ = 5 min 150 200 250 p1 YFP p1 CFP p1 YFP p1 CFP Figure 3 Simulating intrinsic and global expression noise . ( a ) Red and blue traces represent two different dynamic realizations of the same stochastic simulation . For intrinsic noise traces ( c and d ) , this is analogous to the expression of two identical promoters in one cell . Total noise traces ( e and f ) are analogous to expression from promoters in different cells . Global expression capacity ﬂuctuates slowly ( b ) , with a long autocorrelation time ( associated with division time in E . coli , but not in all cell types ) . Intrinsic noise ( c and d ) ﬂuctuates quickly with a short autocorrelation time ( associated with mRNA degradation if generated by translational bursting ) . Intrinsic noise is greater at lower abundances ( (cid:6) p (cid:7) = 5000 ; panel c ) versus higher abundances ( (cid:6) p (cid:7) = 50 , 000 ; panel d ) . Total noise ( e and f ) can be modeled by introducing low - frequency ﬂuctuations in expression capacity that enter multiplicatively in the mRNA or protein production rate . Trajectories in e and f were generated using the global ﬂuctuations in b . Both e and f follow the trajectory in b , but the differences are washed out to a much greater extent in e where low - abundance mean intrinsic ﬂuctuations are comparable in magnitude . CFP , cyan ﬂuorescent protein ; YFP , yellow ﬂuorescent protein . 422 Maheshri · O’Shea A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 relationshipbetweentranscriptionfactorcon - centration and the steady - state rate of gene expression from a target promoter , a rela - tionship described as a gene regulatory or transfer function ( 51 ) . Single - cell gene reg - ulatory functions were calculated by follow - ing lineages of bacteria growing in real time . Evenaftercompensatingforcellcycle – related effects , there still remained signiﬁcant vari - ation in the expression rate at any particu - lar level of transcription factor ( CV of 40 % ) . Measurement of the expression rate from two identical promoters indicated that the extrin - sic component dominated the total noise . These authors then calculated how long a ﬂuctuation in gene expression persisted by measuring the autocorrelation function of the noise . Fluctuations that were extrinsic in ori - gin had an autocorrelation time of approxi - mately 40 min or one cell cycle , suggesting that cell division contributes signiﬁcantly to extrinsic variation . In contrast , intrinsic ﬂuc - tuations died off quickly with an autocorrela - tion time of less than 9 min , the time resolu - tion of the experiment ; this is not surprising given the fast death of mRNA that drives in - trinsic ﬂuctuations ( 51 ) . Similar experiments done in E . coli grown at various temperatures demonstrated that the measured autocorrela - tion time of the noise coincided with the dif - ferent growth rates ( 3 ) . A Genome - Wide View of Noise in Single Genes The ﬁrst genome - wide view of noise esti - mated intrinsic noise in the expression of each gene in budding yeast , assuming that noise arose from translational bursting ( Equation 9 ) and using experimentally determined es - timates of transcription and translation rates . The results indicated that essential proteins and those involved in large protein complexes tended to have less variation , suggesting a functional need for noise minimization ( 26 ) . Two recent experimental studies in budding yeast now provide a global view of noise in gene expression . Both studies used ﬂow cy - Autocorrelation : the correlation of a quantity ( the gene expression rate or protein number ) with itself over successive time intervals Autocorrelationtime : the characteristic time it takes for a ﬂuctuation ( in gene expression rate ) to decay to the mean ( gene expression rate ) tometry to measure protein abundance and variability at the single - cell level , employing a collection of yeast strains expressing GFP fusion proteins ( 33 ) . These studies used a sin - gle reporter , but by restricting analysis to a small , homogenous subset of cells , they elim - inated most ( but not all ) of the extrinsic noise , which in this study results from population structure . Both studies veriﬁed minimization of the extrinsic noise contribution by using the two - color approach to analyze a smaller subset of genes ( 5 , 42 ) . One study focused on 43 genes involved in four coexpressed transcription modules : stress , proteasome , ergosterol synthesis , and rRNA processing ( 5 ) . These genes were sub - ject to 11 different environmental conditions , and the transient response to each perturba - tion was measured . A second study analyzed noise in ∼ 50 % of the yeast proteome un - der two steady - state conditions—exponential growth in rich or minimal medium ( 42 ) . Both studies reported that intrinsic noise scales in - versely with mean protein abundance with a burst size of ∼ 1200 proteins . This burst could be explained theoretically as corresponding to theaveragenumberofproteinsmadepertran - script if noise were driven by mRNA ﬂuctua - tions ( Equation 9 ) or the average number of proteins made when the promoter is in the ONstate , ifthenoiseweredrivenbypromoter ﬂuctuations ( 5 ) . [ For comparison , transla - tional burst sizes in E . coli for lac - promoted GFP are ∼ 35 proteins per mRNA ( 40 ) . ] This observation leads to the remarkable conclu - sion that post - transcriptional events occur at similar rates for at least half the budding yeast genome in exponential growth conditions . When cells were subject to a perturba - tion , the extent to which the noise in each gene changed depended greatly on the mod - ule to which it belonged ( 5 ) . The authors de - ﬁned a “noise residual , ” which compared the measured noise with the noise predicted by Equation 9 using the measured protein abun - dance . Stress genes had large noise residu - als in contrast with the small noise residu - als of genes in other modules . The second www . annualreviews . org • Living with Noisy Genes 423 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 study used a slightly different noise residual in which they compared the noise of any one gene’s expression with the median noise of all genes with similar expression levels ( 42 ) . They looked for correlations between fac - tors known to inﬂuence noise and the noise residual . Most notably , the type of transcrip - tional regulation correlated strongly with the noise residual . Many noisy genes tend to be regulated by chromatin remodeling factors , which are thought to play a dominant role in promoter ﬂuctuations ( 26 ) . Studies in both yeast ( 7 ) and mammalian cells ( 48 ) suggest that chromatin remodeling is locally corre - lated so that contiguous or homologous genes tend to have correlated ﬂuctuations , and the absolutegenomicpositionaffectstheextentof those correlations . A strong TATA box , which has already been shown experimentally to in - crease noise ( 49 ) , also correlates strongly with noisy genes . In contrast , transcription factors known to disrupt chromatin structure corre - late with low noise genes . Moreover , essential proteins and proteins related to translation , the ribosome , the proteasome , and the secre - tory pathway exhibit low noise as predicted ( 26 ) . A striking conclusion of these studies is the lower limit seen for the noise residual , what one might call an intrinsic noise ﬂoor ( 5 , 42 ) . Genetic networks can mitigate noise further ( see below ) , but at least in budding yeast , in - trinsic ﬂuctuations are not reduced below the Poisson expectation based on protein abun - dance given by Equation 9 . This ﬁnding shouldproveinvaluable , allowingonetoapply a lower bound to the intrinsic noise in larger models of genetic networks in budding yeast . However , we do not expect this bound to ex - ist in general , especially in higher metazoans . In fact , lower abundance does not necessar - ily result in higher intrinsic noise in mam - malian cells ( 48 ) . At the oncogenic c - myc pro - moter , multiple molecular mechanisms could possibly function to reduce noise in its expres - sion ( 17 ) . Requiring a ( nearly ) irreversible se - quence of reactions and multiple factors prior to transcription at the promoter can reduce noisy effects of any one component . The c - myc promoter may also have real - time feed - back control of transcription through several AT - rich enhancer sequences that melt owing to torsional forces produced by RNA poly - merase II during transcription , possibly pre - venting transcription factor binding and af - fecting transcription ( 17 ) . At the other end of the spectrum , many genes can be noisier than this ﬂoor , and they are often highly regulated . There is a natu - ral trade - off between the need to regulate a gene’s expression , providing a wide dynamic range , and the need to control its noise . First , regulation makes gene expression susceptible to ﬂuctuations in upstream factors . Second , a highly regulated gene tends to have mul - tiple promoter states in which slow ﬂuctua - tions , oftencontrolledbychromatinremodel - ing ( 12 , 34 , 49 ) , cause expression noise . Third , a large change in expression rate requires am - pliﬁcation at the level of transcription , fur - ther amplifying noisy promoter ﬂuctuations ( 49 ) . Fourth , there is the potential for regula - tion at the mRNA level . Although this is less important in budding yeast , antisense RNAs , microRNAs , RNAi , and RNA splicing are all involved in regulating expression and could potentially be noisy ( see Reference 59 for a re - cent review ) . Fifth , post - translational mecha - nisms could also play a role ( 61 ) . PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER : SIMPLE NETWORKS Linear Networks and the Importance of Correlated Noise Sources A linear genetic network can be deﬁned as a sequence of genes regulating each other in series . The extrinsic noise in each compo - nentarisesfromtwosources : pathway - speciﬁc noise that is transmitted from the upstream regulators and global noise in the expression capacity of a cell . Investigators studied noise propagation through a linear network in a simple system in E . coli ( Figure 4 a ) using three components : ( component 1 ) a titratable 424 Maheshri · O’Shea A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 Slow Fast Delayednegativefeedback lacI IPTG aTc a PtetO Plam PlacO YFP RFP tetR - CFP b pB pC pA B C A c pR pA R A 2 1 3 2 1 3 Figure 4 ( a ) The two - gene cascade consists of ( 1 ) a lac - promoted tetR – cyan ﬂuorescent protein ( CFP ) fusion driving ( 2 ) a tet - promoted yellow ﬂuorescent protein ( YFP ) , and ( 3 ) a lambda - promoted red ﬂuorescent protein ( RFP ) that serves as a global reporter . The coupling and expression level of ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) are easily modiﬁed by varying [ IPTG ] and [ aTc ] . Figure adapted from Reference 46 . ( b ) Design of a ring oscillator consisting of a ring of three transcriptional repressors , termed the “repressilator” ( 23 ) . ( c ) The boxed section of this design is a delayed negative feedback loop . An activator represses itself through slow activation of a repressor . Embedding a fast positive feedback loop converts this to a relaxation oscillator that functions reliably for a wider range of parameters when noise is signiﬁcant . promoter driving expression of a repressor - ﬂuorescent protein fusion ( R ) , ( component 2 ) an R repressible promoter driving expression of a second ﬂuorescent protein , and ( compo - nent 3 ) a separate strong promoter driving ex - pression of a third ﬂuorescent protein ( 46 ) . Components 1 and 2 represented the linear network , andcomponent3wasusedtocontrol for global ﬂuctuations in gene expression . Us - ing a Langevin approach , they derived equa - tions ( 44 ) topredictthenoiseintheexpression of component 2 as a function of both global noise in component 3 and pathway - speciﬁc noise in component 1 . The model quanti - tatively predicted the noise in component 2 as a function of the other components and provided a straightforward theoretical and ex - perimental recipe for analyzing how noise is transmitted in linear networks ( 46 ) . Perhaps the most interesting qualitative insight from this study was that the correlation of con - nected noise sources can have either ampli - fying or suppressing effects on the noise , and this depends on promoter logic . In the case of www . annualreviews . org • Living with Noisy Genes 425 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 Expression - speciﬁc noise : an experimentallydeﬁnedcomponentoftheextrinsicnoisethatconsistsofextrinsicvariationduetocell - to - cell differences in the expression capacity a repressor , a global ﬂuctuation in cellular ex - pression capacity increases expression of com - ponent 2 but is suppressed by the increased expression of the repressor , component 1 . Although not demonstrated , global ﬂuctua - tions should be amplifying for an activator ( 46 ) . Investigators have studied experimentally and computationally the dynamics of linear cascades of one , two , or three repressors in E . coli ( 30 ) . An inducible promoter controlled ex - pression of the ﬁrst repressor in the cascade , and each repressor acted on the gene immedi - ately downstream . Longer cascades had more ultrasensitive steady - state transfer functions but much slower response times . Moreover , at intermediate induction levels , the transmit - ted noise became signiﬁcant in these systems . It is tempting to speculate that much of the transmitted noise resulted from intrinsic ﬂuc - tuations in members of the cascade , as a re - pressor network would be robust to global ﬂuctuations , but only the total noise was measured . Researchers have also studied noise trans - mission in a natural biological network , the pheromone response pathway in budding yeast ( 19 ) . In this study , the authors devel - oped a strategy to measure the intrinsic noise , pathway - speciﬁc noise , and global expression noise components as discussed above ( see Ex - perimental Measurement and Classiﬁcation of Noise ) and depicted in Figures 1 b and 2 c . The system was subdivided into a linear network consisting of a pheromone input , a pathway subsystem , and an expression sub - system . A pheromone receptor coupled the pheromone input to the pathway subsystem , and pheromone - responsive genes coupled the pathway subsystem to the expression subsys - tem . The subsystems were assumed to be oth - erwise insulated . At high pheromone levels , almost all ( > 75 % ) the cell - to - cell variation could be explained by differences in expres - sion capacity and cell cycle position , similar to other studies in budding yeast ( see above ) . At lower pheromone levels , pathway - speciﬁc noise played a signiﬁcant role ( ∼ 60 % ) in the observed variation , but intriguingly , the total noise was similar to the high pheromone ex - periment . In fact , the expression capacity was not affected by the differences in pathway ac - tivation , but the expression - speciﬁc noise was negativelyaffected . Inthissystem , expression - speciﬁc noise appears negatively correlated with pathway - speciﬁc noise . The mechanism proposed to account for these observations is conceptually similar to what was demon - strated in the E . coli study ( 46 ) —large ﬂuctua - tions in expression capacity are compensated for by correlated ﬂuctuations in pathway - speciﬁc regulators ( 19 ) . Finally , two redundant mitogen - activated protein kinases , Fus3 and Kss1 , lie within the pheromone - response pathway . Signal - ing through Fus3 resulted in half as much pathway - speciﬁc noise as signaling through Kss1 , leading the authors to suggest that the extent of cell - to - cell variation is regulated by the choice of mitogen - activated protein ki - nase ( 19 ) . This is a compelling example of how the choice of signaling component in a branched pathway could affect pathway - speciﬁc noise but because the total noise re - mains constant regardless of choice , the func - tional relevance is unclear . Negative Feedback Both theoretical and experimental investiga - tions demonstrate the ability of negative feed - back to suppress noise ( 9 , 64 ) ( see Reference 34 for review ) . This is an intuitive idea , as po - tentially large ﬂuctuations are quickly stiﬂed by feedback . Recently , the master equation for negative autoregulation of a single gene was solved exactly ( 31 ) . The solution clearly demonstrates that when the rate of repres - sor binding / unbinding is slow compared with its degradation rate , fewer repressors are re - quired to achieve the same average extent of inhibition . At least three factors contribute to the ratio of these two rates : speed of re - sponse , energetic requirements , and ﬁdelity . Fast binding / unbinding requires more pro - teins but results in less noise . The beneﬁts 426 Maheshri · O’Shea A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 of slower binding / unbinding are a switch - like transferfunction , abinaryresponse , andfewer proteins needed , but these come at the cost of a noisier outcome , more energy expended ow - ing to the high protein degradation rate , and a slower transient response . As with any dynamic process , noise can be studied both in the time and frequency domain . A series of studies ( 57 , 58 ) demon - strated that negative feedback not only re - duces noise , but also shifts it to higher fre - quencies : The stronger the feedback and the slower the dynamics of the repressor ( pri - marily through longer repressor half - life ) , the greater the shift . Because a downstream pro - cess only sees frequency components lower than its own characteristic frequency , shift - ing some of the noise to an invisible high - frequency regime aids in attenuation . This spectral shift was recently demonstrated ex - perimentally by measuring the autocorrela - tion time of noise in gene expression from the tetR promoter in E . coli in the absence and presence of negative feedback ( 3 ) . Be - cause low - frequency extrinsic noise is often dominant , a realistic biological implementa - tion of this strategy would have to involve long , slow , cascaded negative feedback sys - tems that may not be able to respond quickly enough to changing stimuli . In the sections above , we focus on exam - ining the noise at the steady state . However , researchers have also analyzed the intrinsic noise in the transient response of a negative feedback system ( 63 ) . In this study , the au - thors solved numerically linearized Fokker - Planck equations using the phenomenolog - ical Hill equation to describe the feedback . In contrast to the steady - state condition , in - creasing feedback strength by either changing the Hill coefﬁcient or the ( repressor ) binding constant did not always lead to a reduction in noise . In addition , initial conditions dra - matically changed the dynamics of the noise . This study illustrates the general challenge of modeling nonlinear processes far from steady state and the danger in extrapolating steady - state results to transient phenomena . Positive Feedback Nonlinear , cooperative positive feedback can leadtomultiplestationarysolutionsofagene’s expressionrate ( 1 , 8 , 25 , 43 , 59 , 70 ) . Stochastic ﬂuctuations have the potential to switch the system between these multiple stable states , with a calculable average frequency based on rates ( 35 ) . Detailed experimental analysis in two sugar uptake systems in two different or - ganisms , lactose in E . coli ( 43 ) and galactose in S . cerevisiae ( 1 ) , demonstrates a shared archi - tecture and the existence of two stable sugar utilization states . The sugar ( or a chemical analog ) activatestheexpressionofsugartrans - porters that positively feedback to increase sugar uptake . In the case of galactose , an em - bedded negative feedback loop is also acti - vated that reduces the strength of the positive feedback . With strong positive feedback , the two stable states are less susceptible to noise - induced transitions . In the galactose system , the strength of positive feedback could be af - fected by modifying the strength of the neg - ative feedback , enabling the discovery of a regime in which noise - induced transitions be - tween the two stable states are fast enough to effectively erase the deterministic bistability predicted ( 1 ) . In the lactose system , investigators ob - served two populations corresponding to each stationary state over an approximately tenfold range of TMG ( thio - methyl - β - d - galactosidase ) concentration ( a lactose ana - log used here ) ( 43 ) . For such bistable systems , two populations are often seen in the bistable region , even after careful preparation of the system in the induced ( or uninduced ) state . The deterministic description would not pre - dict these two populations , and their pres - ence is explained by extrinsic differences be - tween cells . These extrinsic differences were explicitly modeled as global ﬂuctuations in ex - pression capacity that die out on the order of the cell cycle time ( 40 ) ( Figure 3 ) . This allowed the correct dynamical prediction of the protein distribution . When determinis - tic dynamics dominate , a ballistic transition www . annualreviews . org • Living with Noisy Genes 427 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 occursastheentireproteindistributionmoves from one state to the other . When stochas - tic ﬂuctuations are important , a transient bi - modal distribution occurs as cells ﬂuctuate between the two states as they approach the unimodal steady - state distribution . In the lac system , ON cells rapidly introduced into an OFF environment exhibited ballistic dynam - ics . In contrast , OFF cells rapidly introduced into an ON environment exhibited stochastic dynamics ( 40 ) . Noise not only can eliminate determin - istic bistability , it can also create a bistable system when a deterministic description has only one stationary solution . Noncooperative positive transcriptional feedback leads to only one deterministic solution , but introducing noise into the transcription factor promoter interaction results in a bistable system ( 35 ) . In fact , even in systems in which deterministic bistability is possible , large stochastic ﬂuctu - ations lead to bistability for a larger range of biochemical parameter values . A recent theo - retical study considers how noise can induce bistability when enzymatic futile cycles are in - volved ( 52 ) . Let us consider the dynamic in - terconversion of protein X to a phosphoiso - form X ∗ by a relevant kinase and phosphatase . If there is noise in either enzyme’s activity at a frequency lower than the usually fast inter - conversion of X and X ∗ , then a stochastic de - scription leads to a bimodal distribution of X ∗ ( and X ) that corresponds to two bistable states ( 52 ) ( Figure 5 ) . Noise often changes the be - havior qualitatively when the diffusive term in the associated Fokker - Planck equation de - pends on the state variable in a nonlinear fashion . Noise and Oscillations Periodic oscillations in both time and space are present and utilized in biological systems . Whether their role is to keep time , encode information for cell signaling , coordinate di - verse cellular processes , or simply be the con - sequence of a periodic external input , the un - derlying molecular mechanism causing the oscillation has been of great interest . How do biological oscillations remain reliable in the face of noise ? Noise can result in unreliable oscillations , but , conversely , sometimes noise is required for reliable oscillations . It all de - pends on the design . A ring , or phase oscillator , consists of a closed chain of negative feedback elements ( Figure 4 b ) . A synthetic genetic circuit that realizes this design has been built in bacteria ( 23 ) . The presence and strength of sinusoidal - like oscillations rely on the short half - life of each repressor in the circuit . Oscillations tend to be noisy , showing both cell - to - cell and single - cell variation in period . This variation likely arises both from intrinsic ﬂuctuations in theexpressionofeachrepressorthatdominate during periods of low expression and from ex - trinsic ﬂuctuations that affect repressor half - life . When negative feedback is coupled with a large enough time delay associated with tran - scription , translation , protein modiﬁcation , and / or a genetic network , the stationary so - lution is destabilized , resulting in oscillatory behavior ( 13 ) that may be desirable . In fact , negative feedback loops in which the ﬁrst ele - mentactivatesthesecondelement , whichthen downregulates the ﬁrst , are fairly common in nature ( 41 ) ( Figure 4 c ) . One well - studied delayed negative feed - back loop is p53 - Mdm2 , in which ( slow ) p53 expression activates Mdm2 through a ( fast ) protein - protein interaction , ultimately lead - ing to a reduction in p53 expression . An early model ( 37 ) described a complete set of param - etersthatwouldadmitoscillations , andseveral subsequent mechanisms have been proposed ( 18 , 38 , 41 ) . One study demonstrated oscilla - tions in p53 levels in MCF - 7 ( human breast cancer epithelial ) cells on irradiation , charac - terized by repeated pulses of p53 expression ( 36 ) . Increased irradiation raised the proba - bility of multiple pulses ; the timing of the initial pulses was somewhat variable but be - camemoreprecisewithsubsequentpulses , the pulse height varied threefold , and the pulse width was fairly constant ( 36 ) . A second study 428 Maheshri · O’Shea A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 X T 0 k E X X K X X k E X K X T T + + E + + − − + − ( ) + − ( ) − + * * * * 1 2 2 k X X K X X T T + + − ( ) + − ( ) ( ) σ * * Deterministic monostable state Noise - induced bistable states Deterministicconvection Stochasticdiffusion X * P Noisy signalE + pA P X X * E - A a b Figure 5 Noise - induced bistability . ( a ) Many transcription factors are regulated by an enzymatic futile cycle . Here , the transcription factor X is phosphorylated by kinase E + to yield the active phosphoform X ∗ that is competent for activating a downstream gene . Phosphate is removed from X ∗ by the phosphatase E − , completing the cycle . We assume the source of noise is low - frequency extrinsic ﬂuctuations in the kinase E + , although one could also include noise in the phosphatase E − . The relative amount of each phosphoform has an inﬂuence on gene expression and function . ( b ) The black line depicts the state space of numbers of X ∗ , which can vary from 0 to X T . The size and direction of the arrows below correspond to the magnitude and sign of the dynamic forces that govern X ∗ . The red arrows illustrate how the Michaelis - Menten - like deterministic rate equations , listed to the right , drive the numbers of X ∗ to a single stable steady state at X T / 2 . The blue arrows represent the noise , a diffusive term driving X ∗ away from the deterministic steady state , in the nonlinear manner listed to the right . This leads to two stable steady states . Figure based on work in Reference 52 . analyzed in depth the variability in the oscil - lation dynamics observed for many cells ( 27 ) . These authors found that pulse height was highly variable ( CV of 75 % ) , but the peak width and period were less so ( CV of 30 % and 20 % , respectively ) . Moreover , the auto - correlation function of the oscillatory dynam - ics suggested that the extrinsic noise caus - ing these differences died off at ∼ 11 h , or half a cell cycle . Three deterministic models were able to generate the mean behavior of the observed data . To model the variability , the authors recast the deterministic equations into stochastic Langevin equations . Interest - ingly , when the authors used low - frequency noise in the level of production / transcription rate on the order of the autocorrelation time , they were able to recapitulate the observed www . annualreviews . org • Living with Noisy Genes 429 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 variabilityinpulseheightandthesmallervari - ability in pulse width and timing ( 27 ) . Embedding a positive feedback loop in the delayed negative feedback circuit results in a relaxation oscillator ( Figure 4 c ) . This is the molecular oscillator found to drive circadian rhythms across many organisms ( for a re - view , see Reference 10 ) . The activator acti - vates both itself and the repressor , but the dy - namicsofpositivefeedbackismuchfasterthan thedynamicsofnegativefeedback . Therefore , the activator quickly ﬂips from a low to a high level . The repressor slowly builds up until it crosses a critical level that causes the activator to quickly ﬂip back to the low state . The exist - ing repressor is eliminated slowly , but when it dropsbelowathreshold , theactivatorﬂipstoa high state again , driving the oscillation . The - oretical work shows that embedding the posi - tive feedback loop renders the oscillator more robust to stochastic ﬂuctuations ( 6 ) . This de - sign not only drives circadian rhythms , but also the cell cycle ( 20 ) . Eliminating the em - bedded positive feedback in the Xenopus laevis cell cycle led to damped cell cycle oscillations ( 47 ) . Moreover , even when the positive feed - back is weak and in a deterministic setting the activatorisneverabletoﬂipfromthelowstate to high state , stochastic ﬂuctuations can ﬂip this switch and allow the system to oscillate ( 68 ) . This is the hallmark of an excitable sys - tem , in which stochastic ﬂuctuations quickly excite it away from the stationary state and then it slowly relaxes back . In fact , the compe - tent state in Bacillus subtilis corresponds to the slow relaxation of an excitable system driven by noise ( 60 ) . OUTLOOK In this review , we focus on noise in gene ex - pression and its role in transcriptional regula - tory networks . With the exception of our dis - cussion of enzymatic futile cycles ( Figure 5 ) , we neglect the effects of ﬂuctuations in protein - protein and protein - metabolite inter - actions . We hypothesize that some of these ﬂuctuations will affect gene expression , es - pecially the low - frequency ﬂuctuations in ex - pression capacity . One theoretical study ( 22 ) attempts to connect ﬂuctuations in transla - tion rate , a primary determinant of expression capacity , to ﬂuctuations of metabolites , but a thorough investigation will require the mea - surement of global ﬂuctuations of expression capacity in cells in different metabolic con - ditions and the connection of ﬂuctuations in expression capacity to variation in the rele - vant metabolic pathway . In addition , protein - protein and protein - metabolite ﬂuctuations occur fast enough that transport processes can play a dominant role . For example , the spa - tiotemporal oscillations of certain proteins in - volved in E . coli cytokinesis can be explained robustly using a stochastic description ( 32 ) . Finally , both transport ( 4 , 67 ) and reactions ( 55 , 56 ) of molecules are inﬂuenced by the three - dimensional structure of the environ - ment in which they take place , but knowledge of the important structural features and struc - tural dynamics is currently lacking . Most of the examples discussed in this re - view pertain to free - living , fast - growing uni - cellular microbes . Because the importance of the size and timescale of noisy ﬂuctuations depends on the length scale of the reaction environment and timescale of affected dy - namical processes , we expect investigations in different organisms to alter our understand - ing of noise in gene expression . For exam - ple , the autocorrelation time of extrinsic ﬂuc - tuations is not on the order of cell cycle in mammalian systems ( 27 ) , and possibly not in budding yeast ( 19 ) , in contrast to observa - tions in rapidly dividing bacteria ( 51 ) . Pro - tein noise can also depend on subcellular lo - calization of the protein ( 42 ) . This should be further investigated in organisms with het - erogeneous intracellular environments at the organelle level . For example , the packaging of low - abundance proteins in the secretory pathway might result in signiﬁcant variation in their vesicular concentration , as in the case of neurotransmitter release ( 53 ) . Finally , pro - tein concentration , not protein number , is rel - evant for intracellular functions . Methods for 430 Maheshri · O’Shea A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 controlling population structure will not con - trol for concentration in cells in which or - ganelle composition has a large impact on cy - tosolic volume . This review begins with the molecular details of noisy gene expression and pro - gresses to its impact on global cellular pro - cesses and ultimately a selectable phenotype . Will a stochastic description be necessary in any realistic model of biological systems and their evolution ? The answer undoubtedly de - pends on the system being modeled . It may be possible to use a higher - level stochastic de - scription that dispenses with the mechanistic details of how ﬂuctuations arise using a stochastic description , but determining the correct extent of abstraction remains difﬁcult . With current and future advances in experi - mental technology allowing us to spy on ﬂuc - tuations , and the creative application of mod - eling and simulation , our intuition can only improve . SUMMARY POINTS 1 . Both theoretical and experimental investigations have led to stochastic chemical ki - netic models that describe the statistics of intrinsic noise in gene expression . Intrinsic ﬂuctuations in protein number are driven by random births and deaths of mRNA and / or random promoter transitions from an inactive to a transcriptionally compe - tent state . Recent experiments in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes have conﬁrmed these statistics by directly measuring the production of single mRNA and protein molecules . 2 . Sources of extrinsic noise in gene expression include the following : cell - to - cell vari - ation in cell morphology , volume , and size ; expression capacity ( the rate of gene expression owing to differences in transcriptional , translational , and / or metabolic components ) ; and ﬂuctuations in pathway - speciﬁc molecular components that lie up - stream of that gene . 3 . Gene expression noise dynamics can be characterized by its autocorrelation time—the characteristic timescale over which the effects of a single ﬂuctuation persist . Intrinsic noise has a fast autocorrelation time consistent with the mRNA half - life . Extrinsic noise has a longer - lived autocorrelation time that is organism speciﬁc . Modeling ex - pression capacity using the appropriate autocorrelation time has accurately predicted protein distributions . 4 . Global analysis of intrinsic noise in budding yeast indicates that highly regulated genes exhibit expression that is noisier than average . Remarkably , noise is not reduced more than what would be expected for intrinsic noise owing to random births and deaths of mRNA . 5 . Expression noise can be shaped by the architecture of transcriptional regulatory schemes , such as feedback or feedforward loops . Certain combinations of feedback loops drive oscillations in gene expression . Noise in gene expression can either in - crease or decrease the reliability of these oscillations , depending on the regulatory scheme . LITERATURE CITED 1 . Acar M , Becskei A , van Oudenaarden A . 2005 . Enhancement of cellular memory by re - ducing stochastic transitions . Nature 435 : 228 – 32 www . annualreviews . org • Living with Noisy Genes 431 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 2 . Arkin A , Ross J , McAdams HH . 1998 . Stochastic kinetic analysis of developmental pathway bifurcation in phage λ - infected Escherichia coli cells . Genetics 149 : 1633 – 48 3 . Austin DW , Allen MS , McCollum JM , Dar RD , Wilgus JR , et al . 2006 . Gene network shaping of inherent noise spectra . Nature 439 : 608 – 11 4 . Banks DS , Fradin C . 2005 . Anomalous diffusion of proteins due to molecular crowding . Biophys . J . 89 : 2960 – 71 5 . Bar - Even A , Paulsson J , Maheshri N , Carmi M , O’Shea E , et al . 2006 . Noise in protein expression scales with natural protein abundance . Nat . Genet . 38 : 636 – 43 6 . Barkai N , Leibler S . 2000 . Circadian clocks limited by noise . Nature 403 : 267 – 68 7 . Becskei A , Kaufmann BB , van Oudenaarden A . 2005 . Contributions of low molecule num - ber and chromosomal positioning to stochastic gene expression . Nat . Genet . 37 : 937 – 44 8 . Becskei A , Seraphin B , Serrano L . 2001 . Positive feedback in eukaryotic gene networks : cell differentiation by graded to binary response conversion . EMBO J . 20 : 2528 – 35 9 . Becskei A , Serrano L . 2000 . Engineering stability in gene networks by autoregulation . Nature 405 : 590 – 93 10 . Bell - Pedersen D , Cassone VM , Earnest DJ , Golden SS , Hardin PE , et al . 2005 . Circadian rhythms from multiple oscillators : lessons from diverse organisms . Nat . Rev . Genet . 6 : 544 – 56 11 . Berg OG . 1978 . A model for the statistical ﬂuctuations of protein numbers in a microbial population . J . Theor . Biol . 71 : 587 – 603 12 . Blake WJ , Kaern M , Cantor CR , Collins JJ . 2003 . Noise in eukaryotic gene expression . Nature 422 : 633 – 37 13 . Bratsun D , Volfson D , Tsimring LS , Hasty J . 2005 . Delay - induced stochastic oscillations in gene regulation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 14593 – 98 14 . Brehm - Stecher BF , Johnson EA . 2004 . Single - cell microbiology : tools , technologies , and applications . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 68 : 538 – 59 15 . Cai L , Friedman N , Xie XS . 2006 . Stochastic protein expression in individual cells at the single molecule level . Nature 440 : 358 – 62 16 . Chubb JR , Trcek T , Shenoy SM , Singer RH . 2006 . Transcriptional pulsing of a develop - mental gene . Curr . Biol . 16 : 1018 – 25 17 . Chung HJ , Levens D . 2005 . c - myc expression : keep the noise down ! Mol . Cells 20 : 157 – 66 18 . Ciliberto A , Novak B , Tyson JJ . 2005 . Steady states and oscillations in the p53 / Mdm2 network . Cell Cycle 4 : 488 – 93 19 . Colman - Lerner A , Gordon A , Serra E , Chin T , Resnekov O , et al . 2005 . Regulated cell - to - cell variation in a cell - fate decision system . Nature 437 : 699 – 706 20 . Cross FR , Siggia ED . 2005 . Shake it , don’t break it : positive feedback and the evolution of oscillator design . Dev . Cell 9 : 309 – 10 21 . Elf J , Ehrenberg M . 2003 . Fast evaluation of ﬂuctuations in biochemical networks with the linear noise approximation . Genome Res . 13 : 2475 – 84 22 . Elf J , Ehrenberg M . 2005 . Near - critical behavior of aminoacyl - tRNA pools in E . coli at rate - limiting supply of amino acids . Biophys . J . 88 : 132 – 46 23 . Elowitz MB , Leibler S . 2000 . A synthetic oscillatory network of transcriptional regulators . Nature 403 : 335 – 38 24 . Elowitz MB , Levine AJ , Siggia ED , Swain PS . 2002 . Stochastic gene expression in a single cell . Science 297 : 1183 – 86 25 . Ferrell JE Jr , Machleder EM . 1998 . The biochemical basis of an all - or - none cell fate switch in Xenopus oocytes . Science 280 : 895 – 98 26 . Fraser HB , Hirsh AE , Giaever G , Kumm J , Eisen MB . 2004 . Noise minimization in eukaryotic gene expression . PLoS Biol . 2 : e137 432 Maheshri · O’Shea A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 27 . Geva - Zatorsky N , Rosenfeld N , Itzkovitz S , Milo R , Sigal A , et al . 2006 . Oscillations and variability in the p53 system . Mol . Syst . Biol . 2 : 2006 . 0033 28 . Golding I , Paulsson J , Zawilski SM , Cox EC . 2005 . Real - time kinetics of gene activity in individual bacteria . Cell 123 : 1025 – 36 29 . Gossen M , Bujard H . 1992 . Tight control of gene expression in mammalian cells by tetracycline - responsive promoters . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 89 : 5547 – 51 30 . Hooshangi S , Thiberge S , Weiss R . 2005 . Ultrasensitivity and noise propagation in a synthetic transcriptional cascade . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 3581 – 86 31 . Hornos JE , Schultz D , Innocentini GC , Wang J , Walczak AM , et al . 2005 . Self - regulating gene : an exact solution . Phys . Rev . E 72 : 051907 32 . Howard M , Rutenberg AD . 2003 . Pattern formation inside bacteria : ﬂuctuations due to the low copy number of proteins . Phys . Rev . Lett . 90 : 128102 33 . Huh WK , Falvo JV , Gerke LC , Carroll AS , Howson RW , et al . 2003 . Global analysis of protein localization in budding yeast . Nature 425 : 686 – 91 34 . Kaern M , Elston TC , Blake WJ , Collins JJ . 2005 . Stochasticity in gene expression : from theories to phenotypes . Nat . Rev . Genet . 6 : 451 – 64 35 . Kepler TB , Elston TC . 2001 . Stochasticity in transcriptional regulation : origins , conse - quences , and mathematical representations . Biophys . J . 81 : 3116 – 36 36 . Lahav G , Rosenfeld N , Sigal A , Geva - Zatorsky N , Levine AJ , et al . 2004 . Dynamics of the p53 - Mdm2 feedback loop in individual cells . Nat . Genet . 36 : 147 – 50 37 . Lev Bar - Or R , Maya R , Segel LA , Alon U , Levine AJ , Oren M . 2000 . Generation of oscillations by the p53 - Mdm2 feedback loop : a theoretical and experimental study . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 : 11250 – 55 38 . Ma L , Wagner J , Rice JJ , Hu W , Levine AJ , Stolovitzky GA . 2005 . A plausible model for the digital response of p53 to DNA damage . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 14266 – 71 39 . McAdams HH , Arkin A . 1999 . It’s a noisy business : genetic regulation at the nanomolar scale . Trends Genet . 15 : 65 – 69 40 . Mettetal JT , Muzzey D , Pedraza JM , Ozbudak EM , van Oudenaarden A . 2006 . Predicting stochastic gene expression dynamics in single cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 7304 – 9 41 . Monk NAM . 2003 . Oscillatory expression of Hes1 , p53 , and NF - κ B driven by transcrip - tional time delays . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1409 – 13 42 . Newman JRS , Ghaemmaghami S , Ihmels J , Breslow DK , Noble M , et al . 2006 . Single - cell proteomic analysis of S . cerevisiae reveals the architecture of biological noise . Nature 441 : 840 – 46 43 . OzbudakEM , ThattaiM , LimHN , ShraimanBI , VanOudenaardenA . 2004 . Multistability in the lactose utilization network of Escherichia coli . Nature 427 : 737 – 40 44 . Paulsson J . 2004 . Summing up the noise in gene networks . Nature 427 : 415 – 18 45 . Paulsson J . 2005 . Models of stochastic gene expression . Phys . Life Rev . 2 : 157 – 75 46 . Pedraza JM , van Oudenaarden A . 2005 . Noise propagation in gene networks . Science 307 : 1965 – 69 47 . Pomerening JR , Kim SY , Ferrell J , James E . 2005 . Systems - level dissection of the cell - cycle oscillator : Bypassing positive feedback produces damped oscillations . Cell 122 : 565 – 78 48 . Raj A , Peskin CS , Tranchina D , Vargas DY , Tyagi S . 2006 . Stochastic mRNA synthesis in mammalian cells . PLoS Biol . 4 : e309 49 . Raser JM , O’Shea EK . 2005 . Noise in gene expression : origins , consequences , and control . Science 309 : 2010 – 13 50 . Risken H . 1989 . The Fokker - Planck Equation : Methods of Solution and Applications . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . 2nd ed . www . annualreviews . org • Living with Noisy Genes 433 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV311 - BB36 - 20 ARI 3 April 2007 15 : 59 51 . Rosenfeld N , Young JW , Alon U , Swain PS , Elowitz MB . 2005 . Gene regulation at the single - cell level . Science 307 : 1962 – 65 52 . Samoilov M , Plyasunov S , Arkin AP . 2005 . Stochastic ampliﬁcation and signaling in en - zymatic futile cycles through noise - induced bistability with oscillations . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 2310 – 15 53 . Sargent PB , Saviane C , Nielsen TA , DiGregorio DA , Silver RA . 2005 . Rapid vesicu - lar release , quantal variability , and spillover contribute to the precision and reliability of transmission at a glomerular synapse . J . Neurosci . 25 : 8173 – 87 54 . Sato K , Ito Y , Yomo T , Kaneko K . 2003 . On the relation between ﬂuctuation and response in biological systems . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 : 14086 – 90 55 . Savageau MA . 1995 . Michaelis - Menten mechanism reconsidered : implications of fractal kinetics . J . Theor . Biol . 176 : 115 – 24 56 . Schnell S , Turner TE . 2004 . Reaction kinetics in intracellular environments with macro - molecular crowding : simulations and rate laws . Prog . Biophys . Mol . Biol . 85 : 235 – 60 57 . Simpson ML , Cox CD , Sayler GS . 2003 . Frequency domain analysis of noise in autoreg - ulated gene circuits . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 : 4551 – 56 58 . Simpson ML , Cox CD , Sayler GS . 2004 . Frequency domain chemical Langevin analysis of stochasticity in gene transcriptional regulation . J . Theor . Biol . 229 : 383 – 94 59 . Soller M . 2006 . Pre - messenger RNA processing and its regulation : a genomic perspective . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 63 : 796 – 819 60 . S¨uel GM , Garcia - Ojalvo J , Liberman LM , Elowitz MB . 2006 . An excitable gene regulatory circuit induces transient cellular differentiation . Nature 440 : 545 – 50 61 . Swain PS . 2004 . Efﬁcient attenuation of stochasticity in gene expression through post - transcriptional control . J . Mol . Biol . 344 : 965 – 76 62 . Swain PS , Elowitz MB , Siggia ED . 2002 . Intrinsic and extrinsic contributions to stochas - ticity in gene expression . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 : 12795 – 800 63 . Tao Y , Jia Y , Dewey TG . 2005 . Stochastic ﬂuctuations in gene expression far from equi - librium : (cid:6) expansion and linear noise approximation . J . Chem . Phys . 122 : 124108 64 . Thattai M , van Oudenaarden A . 2001 . Intrinsic noise in gene regulatory networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 : 8614 – 19 65 . Turner TE , Schnell S , Burrage K . 2004 . Stochastic approaches for modelling in vivo reactions . Comput . Biol . Chem . 28 : 165 – 78 66 . van Kampen NG . 1992 . Stochastic Processes in Physics and Chemistry . Amsterdam : North - Holland 67 . Verkman AS . 2002 . Solute and macromolecule diffusion in cellular aqueous compartments . Trends Biochem . Sci . 27 : 27 – 33 68 . Vilar JM , Kueh HY , Barkai N , Leibler S . 2002 . Mechanisms of noise - resistance in genetic oscillators . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 : 5988 – 92 69 . Volfson D , Marciniak J , Blake WJ , Ostroff N , Tsimring LS , Hasty J . 2006 . Origins of extrinsic variability in eukaryotic gene expression . Nature 439 : 861 – 64 70 . Weinberger LS , Burnett JC , Toettcher JE , Arkin AP , Schaffer DV . 2005 . Stochastic gene expression in a lentiviral positive - feedback loop : HIV - 1 Tat ﬂuctuations drive phenotypic diversity . Cell 122 : 169 – 82 71 . Yu J , Xiao J , Ren XJ , Lao KQ , Xie XS . 2006 . Probing gene expression in live cells , one protein molecule at a time . Science 311 : 1600 – 3 434 Maheshri · O’Shea A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . Contents ARI 12 April 2006 20 : 14 Annual Review of Biophysics and Biomolecular Structure Volume 35 , 2006 Contents Frontispiece Martin Karplus (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) xii Spinach on the Ceiling : A Theoretical Chemist’s Return to Biology Martin Karplus (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Computer - Based Design of Novel Protein Structures Glenn L . Butterfoss and Brian Kuhlman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 49 Lessons from Lactose Permease Lan Guan and H . Ronald Kaback (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 67 Evolutionary Relationships and Structural Mechanisms of AAA + Proteins Jan P . Erzberger and James M . Berger (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 93 Symmetry , Form , and Shape : Guiding Principles for Robustness in Macromolecular Machines Florence Tama and Charles L . Brooks , III (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 115 Fusion Pores and Fusion Machines in Ca 2 + - Triggered Exocytosis Meyer B . Jackson and Edwin R . Chapman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 135 RNA Folding During Transcription Tao Pan and Tobin Sosnick (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 161 Roles of Bilayer Material Properties in Function and Distribution of Membrane Proteins Thomas J . McIntosh and Sidney A . Simon (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 177 Electron Tomography of Membrane - Bound Cellular Organelles Terrence G . Frey , Guy A . Perkins , and Mark H . Ellisman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 199 Expanding the Genetic Code Lei Wang , Jianming Xie , and Peter G . Schultz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 225 Radiolytic Protein Footprinting with Mass Spectrometry to Probe the Structure of Macromolecular Complexes Keiji Takamoto and Mark R . Chance (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 251 v A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . Contents ARI 12 April 2006 20 : 14 The ESCRT Complexes : Structure and Mechanism of a Membrane - Trafﬁcking Network James H . Hurley and Scott D . Emr (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 277 Ribosome Dynamics : Insights from Atomic Structure Modeling into Cryo - Electron Microscopy Maps Kakoli Mitra and Joachim Frank (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 299 NMR Techniques for Very Large Proteins and RNAs in Solution Andreas G . Tzakos , Christy R . R . Grace , Peter J . Lukavsky , and Roland Riek (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 319 Single - Molecule Analysis of RNA Polymerase Transcription Lu Bai , Thomas J . Santangelo , and Michelle D . Wang (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 343 Quantitative Fluorescent Speckle Microscopy of Cytoskeleton Dynamics Gaudenz Danuser and Clare M . Waterman - Storer (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 361 Water Mediation in Protein Folding and Molecular Recognition Yaakov Levy and José N . Onuchic (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 389 Continuous Membrane - Cytoskeleton Adhesion Requires Continuous Accommodation to Lipid and Cytoskeleton Dynamics Michael P . Sheetz , Julia E . Sable , and Hans - Günther Döbereiner (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 417 Cryo - Electron Microscopy of Spliceosomal Components Holger Stark and Reinhard Lührmann (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 435 Mechanotransduction Involving Multimodular Proteins : Converting Force into Biochemical Signals Viola Vogel (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 459 INDEX Subject Index (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 489 Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 31 – 35 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 509 Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles , Volumes 31 – 35 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 512 ERRATA An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Biophysics and Biomolecular Structure chapters ( if any , 1997 to the present ) may be found at http : / / biophys . annualreviews . org / errata . shtml vi Contents A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . B i o m o l . S t r u c t . 2007 . 36 : 413 - 434 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f U t a h - M a rr i o t L i b r a r y on 02 / 21 / 08 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .