Early endosomal SNAREs form a structurally conserved SNARE complex and fuse liposomes with multiple topologies Daniel Zwilling 1 , Anna Cypionka 2 , Wiebke H Pohl 2 , Dirk Fasshauer 1 , Peter J Walla 2 , 3 , Markus C Wahl 4 and Reinhard Jahn 1 , * 1 Department of Neurobiology , Max - Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , Go¨ttingen , Germany , 2 AG Label - Free Biomolecular Analysis and Single - Molecule Detection , Max - Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , Go¨ttingen , Germany , 3 Department of Biophysical Chemistry , Institute for Physical and Theoretical Chemistry , Technical University of Braunschweig , Braunschweig , Germany and 4 X - ray Crystallography Group , Max - Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , Go¨ttingen , Germany SNARE proteins mediate membrane fusion in eukaryotic cells . They contain conserved SNARE motifs that are usually located adjacent to a C - terminal transmembrane domain . SNARE motifs spontaneously assemble into four helix bundles , with each helix belonging to a different subfamily . Liposomes containing SNAREs spontaneously fuse with each other , but it is debated how the SNAREs are distributed between the membranes . Here , we report that the SNAREs mediating homotypic fusion of early endo - somes fuse liposomes in ﬁve out of seven possible combi - nations , in contrast to previously studied SNAREs involved in heterotypic fusion events . The crystal structure of the early endosomal SNARE complex resembles that of the neuronal and late endosomal complexes , but differs in surface side - chain interactions . We conclude that homo - typic fusion reactions may proceed with multiple SNARE topologies , suggesting that the conserved SNARE structure allows for ﬂexibility in the initial interactions needed for fusion . The EMBO Journal ( 2007 ) 26 , 9 – 18 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7601467 ; Published online 7 December 2006 Subject Categories : membranes & transport Keywords : crystal structure ; early endosomes ; membrane fusin ; proteoliposomes ; SNAREs Introduction SNARE proteins comprise a superfamily of small and mostly membrane - anchored proteins that are key mediators of mem - brane fusion in the secretory pathway . Characteristic feature of each SNARE is a stretch of 60 – 70 amino acids arranged in heptad repeats , which is referred to as SNARE motif and which is usually located adjacent to a single C - terminal transmembrane domain . SNARE motifs are unstructured in solution . However , when appropriate SNARE motifs are combined , they assemble into stable four helix bundles , also termed core complexes , in which each a - helix is repre - sented by a different SNARE motif ( Hong , 2005 ; Jahn and Scheller , 2006 ) . The crystal structures of two distantly related SNARE complexes revealed a high degree of structural con - servation , suggesting that these structures are exemplary for all SNARE complexes ( Sutton et al , 1998a ; Antonin et al , 2002 ) . In both complexes , the SNARE motifs are aligned in parallel in a coiled - coil structure . The core of the bundle is formed by 16 mostly hydrophobic layers of interacting side chains that are oriented perpendicular to the axis . An excep - tion is found in the middle layer ( ‘0’ layer ) that is formed by four polar side chains , including three glutamines ( Q ) and one arginine ( R ) , which are among the most highly conserved residues . According to their position in the bundle , SNARE motifs are classiﬁed into Qa - , Qb - , Qc - , and R - SNAREs ( Fasshauer et al , 1998b ; Bock et al , 2001 ) . Sequence compar - isons of many SNAREs revealed that these classes represent related subfamilies that diverged early in eukaryotic evolu - tion , suggesting that each functional SNARE complex has a QabcR composition ( Bock et al , 2001 ; for a review , see Hong , 2005 ; Jahn and Scheller , 2006 ) . According to the ‘zipper’ hypothesis , assembly of SNAREs residing in the membranes destined to fuse is the key step in membrane fusion . Formation of such ‘ trans ’ - complexes is thought to be initiated at the distal N - terminal ends of the SNARE motifs and then to proceed towards the C - terminal membrane anchors , thus clamping the membranes together and initiating fusion . This concept requires that a complete set of Qa - , Qb - , Qc - , and R - SNAREs is distributed among the membranes , and that each membrane contains at least one SNARE with a transmembrane domain ( Jahn and Scheller , 2006 ) . However , it is less clear which subclasses of SNAREs need to be together on the same membrane for fusion to proceed . In both constitutive exocytosis of yeast and regu - lated exocytosis in neurons , the R - SNARE is predominantly localized on the vesicle , whereas the Q - SNAREs are concen - trated in the plasma membrane , indicating that in this case , the donor membrane contributes the R - SNARE , whereas the Q - SNAREs function as acceptors . However , for intracellular fusion events , the SNARE topologies are less clear . SNAREs recycle via membrane trafﬁcking , resulting in a widespread distribution , which makes it difﬁcult to discern where a given SNARE operates and where it is merely a ‘passenger’ . Furthermore , in homotypic fusion events , both fusing mem - branes contain a full complement of SNAREs , and it thus can not be differentiated which topology allows for assembly ( for a review , see Hong , 2005 ; Jahn and Scheller , 2006 ) . When complementary sets of SNAREs are reconstituted into proteoliposomes , spontaneous fusion is observed ( Weber et al , 1998 ) . Fusion is inhibited by soluble SNARE motifs , is Received : 14 September 2006 ; accepted : 6 November 2006 ; published online : 7 December 2006 * Corresponding author . Department of Neurobiology , Max - Planck - Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , Am Fassberg 11 , 37077 Go¨ttingen , Germany . Tel . : þ 49 551 201 1635 ; Fax : þ 49 551 201 1639 ; E - mail : rjahn @ gwdg . de The EMBO Journal ( 2007 ) 26 , 9 – 18 | & 2007 European Molecular Biology Organization | All Rights Reserved 0261 - 4189 / 07 www . embojournal . org & 2007 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 26 | NO 1 | 2007 EMBO THE EMBO JOURNAL THE EMBO JOURNAL 9 associated with the formation of SNARE complexes , and shows other characteristics of biological fusion reactions involving SNAREs , leading to the widespread application of this approach for the study of SNARE - mediated membrane fusion ( Weber et al , 1998 ; Brandhorst et al , 2006 ) . Rothman and co - workers have used fusion of SNARE - containing lipo - somes to investigate which SNARE topologies result in fusion . In a systematic analysis of yeast SNARE complexes that are involved in trafﬁcking at the Golgi apparatus , they found that only a single of all possible combinations resulted in fusion ( Parlati et al , 2000 ; Paumet et al , 2001 ; Parlati et al , 2002 ) . Donor vesicles contained only one SNARE ( designed as v - SNARE in these studies ) , whereas the acceptor vesicle contained three SNAREs ( t - SNARE ) . These ﬁndings led to the idea that for each SNARE complex , only a single 3 : 1 combi - nation is fusogenic and that this limitation contributes to a SNARE - encoded speciﬁcity of intracellular membrane fusion . Surprisingly , however , the SNAREs identiﬁed as v - SNAREs in these experiments do not belong to the same subfamily . Using yeast endosomal SNAREs , fusion was only observed when the donor vesicle contained the R - SNARE Snc2p ( Paumet et al , 2001 ) . This topology agrees with observations on other SNARE complexes such as neuronal exocytosis . However , when the SNARE complex involved in anterograde trafﬁc from the ER to the Golgi was investigated , the only SNARE functioning as v - SNARE was the Qc - SNARE Bet1p , whereas no fusion was observed when liposomes containing the R - SNARE Sec22 were combined with liposomes contain - ing the three Q - SNAREs Sed5p ( Qa ) , Bos1p ( Qb ) , and Bet1p ( Qc ) ( Parlati et al , 2000 ) . Thus , it remains to be established whether the conserved structure of the SNARE complex also deﬁnes the pathway of SNARE assembly or whether sequence variations in each of the subclasses allow for a higher variety of assembly pathways and thus for more ﬂexibility in deﬁn - ing which combinations of SNAREs are fusogenic . In the present study , we have used the mammalian SNAREs syntaxin 13 ( Qa ) , vti1a ( Qb ) , syntaxin 6 ( Qc ) , and VAMP4 ( R ) as model for a SNARE complex involved in homotypic fusion in order to investigate which combinations of SNAREs are fusogenic . This group of SNAREs has pre - viously been shown to be involved in homotypic fusion of early endosomes ( Brandhorst et al , 2006 ) . Early endosomes comprise sorting organelles that communicate by vesicular trafﬁc with the plasma membrane , the recycling endosome , the trans - Golgi network , and they mature to form late endo - somes and lysosomes ( for a review , see Maxﬁeld and McGraw , 2004 ) . The crystal structure of the complex dis - played a high degree of structural similarity with the pre - viously crystallized neuronal and late endosomal SNARE complexes , showing the typical QabcR composition . Surprisingly , however , we found that upon reconstitution into proteoliposomes , ﬁve of the possible seven combinations of SNAREs resulted in efﬁcient fusion , including two in which each of the liposome sets contained two different SNAREs , suggesting that SNARE topologies permissive for fusion are not dictated by structural elements common to all SNARE complexes . Results Physical properties of the early endosomal SNARE complex Sequence comparison between syntaxin 13 , vti1a , syntaxin 6 , and VAMP4 with the components of neuronal and late endosomal SNARE complexes shows a high degree of con - servation in the amino acids forming the central interacting layers ( 42 out of a total of 64 side chains are identical ; Figure 1 ) . The non - interacting amino acids are less well conserved ( Figure 1 ) , in agreement with previous observa - tions ( Weimbs et al , 1998 ; Bock et al , 2001 ) . For further characterization , the following fragments encompassing the SNARE motifs were expressed and puriﬁed : syntaxin 13 ( residues 182 – 250 ) , vti1a ( residues 115 – 192 ) , syntaxin 6 ( 169 – 232 ) , and VAMP4 ( 47 – 117 ) ( see also Figure 1 ) . Previous work on the neuronal and late endosomal SNAREs has shown that the SNARE motifs are unstructured in solution , but assume a helical conformation when they interact with each other . Whereas in the late endosomal complex an increase in a - helicity was observed only when all four SNARE motifs were combined ( Antonin et al , 2000 ) , Figure 1 Sequence alignment of early endosomal SNAREs ( top ) with the neuronal ( middle ) and late endosomal SNARES ( bottom ) . The alignment is restricted to the seven layers upstream ( layers (cid:2) 1 to (cid:2) 7 ) and eight layers downstream ( layers þ 1 to þ 8 ) of the ionic 0 layer . The amino acids of the 16 layers are shown in red and identical amino acids are shown with a gray shadow . Residues represented in the crystal structure of the early endosomal complex are boxed . Lowercase characters indicate the remaining residues of the afﬁnity tag . Syb2 , synaptobrevin / VAMP2 ; Eb , endobrevin / VAMP8 ; sx13 , syntaxin 13 ; sx1 , syntaxin 1a ; sx7 , syntaxin 7 ; SN25N , SNAP - 25 ( N - terminal region ) ; sx6 , syntaxin 6 ; SN25C , SNAP - 25 ( C - terminal region ) ; sx8 ; syntaxin 8 . Structure and function of early endosomal SNAREs D Zwilling et al The EMBO Journal VOL 26 | NO 1 | 2007 & 2007 European Molecular Biology Organization 10 interactions between the neuronal SNAREs are also observed in certain binary and ternary combinations including , QabR , QacR , Qabc , and Qab ( Fasshauer et al , 1998a ) . Using circular dichroism ( CD ) spectroscopy , we therefore investigated which of the possible combinations of early endosomal SNARE motifs result in increases in a - helicity ( Figure 2A ) . As ex - pected for SNARE core complexes , combination of all four SNARE motifs resulted in a major increase of a - helical content ( Figure 2A , right ) . In addition , two of the four ternary combinations ( QacR , QbcR ) showed signiﬁcant increases , suggesting that these SNAREs are capable of forming partial complexes , a conclusion that was supported when the sam - ples were analyzed by native PAGE ( Supplementary Figure 1 ) . For further characterization , the core complex was puriﬁed by ion - exchange chromatography . The puriﬁed complex migrated as a single peak in size - exclusion chromatography , exhibiting a molecular weight of 38kDa , as determined by multi - angle laser light scattering ( see Supplementary Figure 2 ) , very close to the predicted mass ( 36 . 5kDa ) . Unlike previously characterized SNARE complexes , the puriﬁed early endosomal complex showed a strong tendency for aggregation unless kept in 0 . 5 – 1M salt or 1M urea . Analysis by SDS – PAGE revealed that the complex is par - tially resistant to SDS , as some dissociation into monomers was observable ( Figure 2B ) . This is similar to the late endosomal complex ( Antonin et al , 2000 ) , but differs from the neuronal complex that is fully resistant to SDS denatura - tion at room temperature ( Hayashi et al , 1994 ) . Next , we examined the thermal stability of the complex by monitoring the loss of a - helical content using CD spectroscopy . When the temperature was increased , signiﬁcant unfolding was ob - served only above 80 1 C , with an apparent unfolding transi - tion temperature of 87 1 C ( Figure 2C ) . Subsequent cooling of the sample resulted in refolding , but at a much lower temperature ( between 30 and 40 1 C ; Figure 2C ) , with com - plete refolding being observed only when the sample was incubated overnight at 4 1 C ( not shown ) . Both thermal stabi - lity and unfolding – refolding hysteresis are typical features of SNARE core complexes ( Fasshauer et al , 2002 ) . Crystal structure of the early endosomal SNARE complex The crystal structure of the early endosomal SNARE complex was solved and reﬁned at a resolution of 2 . 7 A˚ ( see Supplementary Table 1 for details of the crystallographic data ) . The overall structure revealed that the SNARE complex forms a four - helix bundle with a left - handed superhelical twist ( Figure 3A ) . The positioning of the Qa - , Qb - , Qc - , and R - SNAREs is identical to the previously crystallized neuronal and late endosomal complexes ( Sutton et al , 1998b ; Antonin et al , 2002 ; see Figure 3A for a backbone overlay with the neuronal SNARE complex ) . As discussed in introduction , the center of all SNARE complexes is characterized by an unusual layer of hydrophilic residues consisting of three glutamines and one arginine . In vti1a , the glutamine is substituted by an aspartate ( see Figure 1 and Supplementary Figure 3 ) . The crystal structure shows that the aspartate occupies the same position as the glutamine in other complexes , and is involved in a similar network of hydrogen bonds ( viz . salt bridges ) with the other layer of amino acids ( Figure 3B ) . In vti1a , D156 of the ‘0’ layer also interacts with N152 on the surface of the vti1a helix and a water molecule ( Figure 3D ) . Sx6 Q197 interacts with the backbone of vti1a D156 and also with sx6 E193 , which in turn interacts with vti1a R157 . Vti1a R157 interacts with sx6 E196 . This outwardly directed network of interactions resembles that observed in the neuronal com - plex , where it originates from R56 of synaptobrevin ( Ernst and Brunger , 2003b ) . The structural features of the other layers are generally similar to those of the neuronal and late endosomal complexes . In layer 6 , the Qc - SNARE syntaxin 6 contains a valine , whereas the late endosomal Qc - SNARE syntaxin 8 contains a glutamate that is involved in additional interactions with surface residues . Such interactions are absent in the early endosomal and the neuronal complexes ( not shown ) . In the previously crystallized SNARE complexes , the SNARE motifs are not only connected by the central interact - ing layers , but also by surface interactions that frequently involve side chains with opposite charges . We have therefore analyzed the crystal structure of the early endosomal com - VAMP4 ( R ) Observed Theoretical non - interacting Refolding Unfolding (cid:1) 220 ( deg c m 2 d m o l – 1 ) Temperature ( (cid:1) C ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 – 5000 – 10 000 – 15 000 – 20 000 – 25 000 – 30 000 60 70 80 90 100 Sx6 ( Qc ) Sx13 ( Qa ) Vti1a ( Qb ) 0 – 2 – 4 – 6 – 8 m deg – 10 – 12 – 14 – 16 – 18 116 Complex M r (cid:2) 1 0 – 3 Monomers 66 45 35 251814 A B C Figure 2 Characterization of complexes formed by early endo - somal SNAREs . ( A ) Interactions between the SNARE motifs of syntaxin 13 , syntaxin 6 , vti1a , and VAMP4 , measured by CD spectroscopy . Changes in ellipticity ( mdeg ) at 220nm were recorded as described in Materials and methods . Gray columns represent theoretically non - interacting ellipticity at 220nm calculated from the CD spectra of the individual proteins ( columns 1 – 4 ) . To obtain the observed CD spectra ( black columns ) of the various combina - tions , the proteins were incubated overnight at 4 1 C using equimolar ratios . Sx13 , syntaxin 13 ; sx6 , syntaxin 6 . ( B ) Analysis of the puriﬁed complex by SDS – PAGE reveals partial resistance to SDS ( Coomassie blue staining ) . ( C ) Thermal unfolding and reconstitu - tion of the puriﬁed early endosomal SNARE complex , 15 m M protein concentration ( 20mM Tris , 1000mM NaCl , 1mM EDTA , 1mM DTT , and pH 7 . 4 ) monitored by CD spectroscopy . Ellipticity at 220nm was recorded as a function of the temperature . The temperature was increased from 4 to 94 1 C at a rate of 60 1 C / h . Unfolding occurred in a steep transition , with T m ¼ 87 1 C . To monitor refolding , the tempera - ture was lowered from 90 to 4 1 C at a rate of (cid:2) 60 1 C / h . Refolding occurred only partially . Structure and function of early endosomal SNAREs D Zwilling et al & 2007 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 26 | NO 1 | 2007 11 plex for surface interactions between different helices . For example , an interaction between the helices of syntaxin 6 and vti1a involves a hydrogen bond between E143 ( vti1a ) and S179 ( sx6 ) ( Figure 3C ) . At a similar ( but not identical ) position in the late endosomal complex , a salt bridge is formed between D157 ( vti1b ) and R164 ( sx8 ) ( Antonin et al , 2002 ) . All of these side chains are conserved between the respective SNAREs of Drosophila and mammals ( Supplementary Figure 4 ) . A complete listing of all surface interactions is shown in Supplementary Table 2 . While the contribution of these surface interactions to the overall stability of the complex is unknown , it is conceivable that they may contribute to the formation of partial complexes and thus inﬂuence assembly kinetics and the speciﬁcity of SNARE complex formation and therefore may also determine possible topological combinations in which homotypic fusion can occur . Liposome fusion mediated by early endosomal SNAREs measured by spectroﬂuorometry Fusion of early endosomes is considered to be ‘homotypic’ , that is , both fusing membranes are similar with respect to their trafﬁcking state and thus , with respect to their major trafﬁcking proteins . Consequently , both of the fusing mem - branes are likely to contain a full complement of early endosomal SNAREs , which in theory would allow the SNAREs to form trans - complexes in any of the possible topological combinations . The highly conserved structure of the early endosomal SNARE complex lends strong support to the notion that all SNARE complexes are four - helix bundles with deﬁned positions for Qa - , Qb - , Qc - , and R - helices . For these reasons , we have used the early endosomal SNAREs as paradigm to reassess whether only a single or several of all possible topological combinations are able to assemble in trans - complexes and induce liposome fusion . His 6 - tagged full - length versions of all four SNAREs were expressed in Escherichia coli and puriﬁed by NTA agarose chromatography , followed by tag removal with thrombin and further puriﬁcation by ion - exchange chromatography . The proteins were reconstituted into proteoliposomes in all possible non - redundant 1 : 3 and 2 : 2 combinations ( Figure 4 ) . In the ﬁrst set of experiments , we used a standard ﬂuor - escence dequenching assay to monitor liposome fusion ( Hoekstra et al , 1984 ) . In these experiments , donor liposomes containing phosphatidylethanolamine labeled with either rhodamine or with NBD were incubated with an excess amount of unlabeled acceptor liposomes . Upon fusion , the labeled phospholipids are diluted with unlabeled phospho - lipids , resulting in a greater average distance of the labeled ﬂuorophores and a decrease of ﬂuorescence resonance en - ergy transfer ( FRET ) , associated with an increase of donor ( NBD ) ﬂuorescence ( ﬂuorescence dequenching ) . Fusion ex - periments were carried out using sets of liposomes , including all seven possible topologies . As control , the liposomes were preincubated with excess amounts of the respective comple - mentary SNAREs ( using variants lacking their transmem - brane domains ) as competitive inhibitors . As shown in Figure 5 , efﬁcient fusion was observed in ﬁve of the seven combinations . In each case , fusion was signiﬁ - cantly faster than that observed with neuronal SNAREs ( Weber et al , 1998 , and own unpublished observations ) , reaching plateau levels after 10 – 20min of incubation . Preincubation with the complementary soluble SNAREs re - sulted in signiﬁcant reduction of fusion activity , although fusion was not completely blocked in all cases . Generally , the fusion - competent 1 : 3 combinations displayed faster fusion Figure 3 Crystal structure of the early endosomal SNARE complex . ( A ) Backbone overlay of the structures of the early endosomal SNARE complex ( in color ) and the structure of the neuronal SNARE complex ( gray ) . QabcR classiﬁcation is indicated next to protein names . ( B ) N - to C - terminal view of the 0 layer containing the unusual aspartate in vti1a ( ribbon - ball - and - stick representation ) . Color , early endosomal SNARE complex ; gray , neuronal SNARE complex . ( C ) Residue E143 builds a salt bridge with the residue S179 . The residue E143 is also sandwiched by residues V182 and V140 , which strengthen polar interactions . In the late endosomal and in the neuronal SNARE complex , this glutamate is conserved and interacts with a conserved arginine that occupies the position equivalent to V182 ( Antonin et al , 2002 ; Ernst and Brunger , 2003a ) . ( D ) Stereo view of the 0 layer , including hydrogen bonds with surface residues and water molecules . Figure 4 Analysis by tricine – SDS – PAGE of the seven sets of lipo - somes containing all possible SNARE combinations . The ﬁgure shows Coomassie blue staining and includes the sets that were used in fusion assays . A 10 m l measure of each liposome preparation was analyzed . Structure and function of early endosomal SNAREs D Zwilling et al The EMBO Journal VOL 26 | NO 1 | 2007 & 2007 European Molecular Biology Organization 12 kinetics and stronger dequenching signals than the two 2 : 2 combinations . To conﬁrm these ﬁndings with an independent assay , we have developed a new assay in which each liposome popula - tion is labeled with different lipid - anchored ﬂuorescent dye ( here Oregon green and Texas red ) . It is expected that a FRET signal is generated upon fusion , as both dyes are residing in the same membrane . Using this approach , we prepared dye - labeled donor and acceptor liposomes using the same SNARE combinations as above . Fusion was then measured by recording acceptor ﬂuorescence using donor and acceptor liposomes in a similar concentration range . As shown in the exemplary traces of Figure 6A , a rapid increase of ﬂuorescence was observed . In comparison to the dequenching assay ( Figure 5 ) , the kinetics was faster and the plateau was reached sooner , which is probably owing to the fact that the signal is mainly caused by the ﬁrst fusion reaction , with subsequent rounds of fusion having only small effects on acceptor ﬂuorescence . No signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence increase was observed when the acceptor liposomes were incubated with the soluble fragment of syntaxin 6 or when acceptor liposomes containing all four Figure 5 Fusion of liposomes reconstituted with early endosomal SNAREs in all possible topological combinations , measured by ﬂuorescence dequenching . The ﬁgure shows exemplary traces of the seven fusion reactions analyzed by ﬂuorescence dequenching . A 5 m l measure of NBD / rhodamine containing donor liposomes was mixed with 35 m l acceptor liposomes and 10 m l buffer ( solid line ) . As control , the acceptor liposomes were preincubated for 1h at room temperature with 10 m l of donor SNARE variants lacking their transmembrane domains ( ﬁnal concentration 15 m M ) as competitive inhibitors ( dotted line ) . Fusion was monitored by increase in NBD ( donor ) ﬂuorescence . The data were normalized to the ﬂuorescence value measured after adding detergent at the end of the reaction . Fusion experiments in which the NBD / rhodamine label was swapped showed similar results . Measurements were performed at 37 1 C with an overall protein concentration of 5 – 15 m M in the liposomes . Structure and function of early endosomal SNAREs D Zwilling et al & 2007 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 26 | NO 1 | 2007 13 SNAREs were used . Furthermore , no ﬂuorescence increase was observed when a combination was used that was non - fusogenic in the dequenching assay ( donor liposomes con - taining syntaxin 13 , acceptor liposomes containing syntaxin 6 , vti1a , and VAMP4 ) . As shown in Figure 6B , the results obtained with this assay were essentially identical with those obtained with the dequenching assay , with ﬁve of the possible seven combinations being fusogenic . Assessment of liposome fusion by ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy All experiments described above use bulk assays that only yield average information about the liposome population . In contrast , confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy allows for detect - ing and distinguishing individual donor and acceptor lipo - somes diffusing through the focal area ( dimensions B 200 – 500 nm ) . We used ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) and ﬂuorescence cross - correlation spectroscopy ( Magde et al , 1972 ; Eigen and Rigler , 1994 ; Schwille , 2001 ) to analyze liposome solutions from fusion experiments . With these methods , it is possible to determine the average num - bers of donor and acceptor liposomes in the focal area , to determine the extent of colocalization of the two types of liposomes ( docking / fusion ) , and to measure particle bright - ness and diffusion times as a rough estimate of particle size . Simultaneously , the ﬂuorescence lifetime of the donor lipo - somes can be determined as a measure for FRET , providing an accurate indicator for membrane fusion . Figure 7A shows cross - correlation curves for three exemp - lary fusion reactions ( all samples were diluted at the end of the reaction ) . A strong cross - correlation signal ( black curve ) was observed for the liposome combination vti1a ( donor ) and syntaxin 13 / syntaxin 6 / VAMP4 ( acceptor ) . This is ex - pected , as after fusion , both dyes are localized in the same particle . In contrast , no cross - correlation was observed when Figure 6 Fusion of liposomes reconstituted with early endosomal SNAREs in all possible topological combinations , measured by a new FRET - based assay . ( A ) Exemplary traces of fusion reaction using FRET . Phosphatidylethanolamine labeled with either Oregon green or Texas red was incorporated together with the indicated SNAREs into donor and acceptor liposomes , respectively . Fusion is monitored by measuring the increase in acceptor ﬂuorescence upon donor excitation . Controls included preincubation of the acceptor liposomes with soluble syntaxin 6 ( see legend to Figure 5 ) , and reconstitution of acceptor liposomes with all four SNAREs in a 1 : 1 : 1 : 1 molar ratio ( dashed line ) . All reactions were carried out at 37 1 C . Acceptor ﬂuorescence was normalized to the starting value . ( B ) Five out of seven SNARE combinations mediate liposome fusion . After the end of the experiment , the data were normalized to the starting value of the acceptor ﬂuorescence and the value at t ¼ 10min was used to compare the different reactions represented as bars ( black ) . Control experiments using soluble SNARE frag - ments or liposomes containing all four SNAREs are shown in light or dark gray . Values are means of 2 – 5 experiments ( 7 s . e . m . or maximal / minimal value ) , except for the negative combinations sx13 þ sx6 / vti1a / VAMP4 and VAMP4 / sx6 þ sx13 / vti1a , which were measured only once . Figure 7 ( A ) Liposome fusion reactions analyzed by ﬂuorescence cross - correlation spectroscopy . Fusion reactions were carried out as in Figure 6 . At the end of the reaction ( 60min ) , the samples were diluted 100 - fold . Examples of cross - correlation curves ( black lines with circles ) and autocorrelation curves of Oregon green - ( light gray lines with squares ) and Texas red - ( gray lines with triangles ) labeled liposomes . Top : a cross - correlation signal is present in thecase of the liposome combination vti1a ( Oregon green ) and syntaxin 6 / syntaxin 13 / VAMP4 ( Texas red ) . Middle : in contrast , no cross - correlation is observed when control liposomes containing all four SNAREs are used . Bottom : similarly , no cross - correlation is ob - served with the non - fusogenic combination of Oregon green lipo - somes containing syntaxin 13 with Texas red liposomes containing vti1a / syntaxin 6 / VAMP4 . ( B ) Corresponding measurements of the donor ( Orgeon green ) ﬂuorescence lifetime decay observed before ( black lines ) and after ( gray lines ) mixing of the same liposome populations . The decrease in donor ﬂuorescence lifetime upon fusion is indicated by a steeper slope of the ﬂuorescence decay after mixing ( logarithmic plot ) . Cross - correlation is based on colo - calization of donor and acceptor ﬂuorescence dyes , whereas the donor ﬂuorescence lifetime decrease is based on FRET in the case of membrane fusion . Hence , a positive cross - correlation signal lacking a corresponding decrease in the donor ﬂuorescence lifetime would indicate a docking interaction rather than fusion . Structure and function of early endosomal SNAREs D Zwilling et al The EMBO Journal VOL 26 | NO 1 | 2007 & 2007 European Molecular Biology Organization 14 control liposomes containing all four SNAREs were used as acceptors . Similarly , no cross - correlation was observed when a non - fusogenic set of liposomes was analyzed ( donor : syntaxin 13 ; acceptor : vti1a / syntaxin 6 / VAMP4 ) . Cross - correlation does not distinguish between docking and fusion . For this reason , we determined the ﬂuorescence lifetime of the same single particles . In all fusion reactions , a decrease of lifetime was observed ( Figure 7B ) , excluding the presence of docked but unfused liposome populations . Next , we determined the degree of cross - correlation for all seven SNARE combinations . Cross - correlation is expressed as the percentage of double - labeled particles with respect to the total number of Texas red - labeled particles , thus allowing for a direct assessment of fusion efﬁciency . As shown in Figure 8 , all of the three fusogenic 1 : 3 combinations showed high cross - correlation , ranging between 50 and 85 % . The exact percentage of fusion efﬁciency likely depends on how well the liposome population numbers and the protein concentra - tions in the liposomes were matched . The two fusogenic 2 : 2 combinations showed colocalization of around 40 % , thus reﬂecting lower fusion efﬁciencies as already observed in the dequenching assay for these combinations ( Figure 5 ) . That , however , was several times higher than the non - fusogenic combinations and the negative controls ( all between 5 and 15 % ) . A similar picture was obtained when donor lifetimes were measured . All fusogenic combinations displayed signif - icant lifetime shortening , with the 2 : 2 combinations again being somewhat lower but signiﬁcantly above the negative controls . We conclude that ﬁve out of seven possible com - binations of early endosomal SNAREs efﬁciently fuse lipo - somes , and that neither fusion nor docking occurs in the remaining two combinations . Discussion In the present study , we have investigated the structure and the fusogenic properties of four SNAREs involved in the homotypic fusion of early endosomes . Despite limited se - quence conservation , the four - helix bundle structure of the early endosomal SNARE complex is highly similar to that of the previously characterized neuronal and late endosomal complexes , lending further support to the view that this core structure is common to all SNARE complexes , and that it deﬁnes the structural end point of SNARE - mediated fusion catalysis . Reconstitution into liposomes revealed that ﬁve out of seven topological combinations are fusogenic , suggesting that multiple pathways of complex nucleation that all con - verge on the same terminal structure are possible . SNAREs are presently considered to constitute the minimal fusion machinery in the secretory pathway . Despite some caveats ( Chen et al , 2006 ; Dennison et al , 2006 ) , fusion of SNARE - containing liposomes is widely being used as read - out for the fusogenic properties of given sets of SNAREs . So far , fusion has only been observed if the liposomes contain one of each SNARE subfamily ( QabcR ‘rule’ ; Weber et al , 1998 ; Parlati et al , 2000 ; Paumet et al , 2001 ; Parlati et al , 2002 ; Brandhorst et al , 2006 ) , conﬁrming that the formation of the conserved four - helix bundle is an absolute requirement for fusion . SNAREs of the same subclass can substitute for each other to a certain extent , both in in vitro assembly ( Fasshauer et al , 1999 ; Yang et al , 1999 ) and in liposome fusion ( McNew et al , 2000 ; Brandhorst et al , 2006 ) . Our data clearly show that fusion catalysis by SNAREs is not limited to only a single topological distribution of the SNAREs between the fusion partners . Both 1 : 3 and 2 : 2 combinations are fusogenic , with the latter being slightly less active ( see Figures 5 and 8 ) . Preliminary observations on liposome fusion involving late endosomal SNAREs also revealed fusion activity by multiple topologies , although with different combinatorial preferences ( D Zwilling and R Jahn , unpublished observations ) . These ﬁndings are in contrast to the fusogenic properties of several sets of yeast SNAREs studied by Rothman and co - workers . For a given set of SNAREs , only a single fusogenic topology was identiﬁed , although the fusogenic combinations were not equivalent ( Parlati et al , 2000 ; Parlati et al , 2002 ; see also Introduction ) . Although many of the combinations tested in these studies violated the QabcR - rule and thus are not expected to fuse , the experiments included many topologies of given QabcR sets that did not show any fusion activity . Figure 8 ( A ) Cross - correlation amplitudes of liposome preparations ( dark gray ) and negative controls ( light gray ) obtained with samples corresponding to the FRET measurements shown in Figure 6 . Cross - correlation amplitudes higher than about 30 % of the autocorrelation amplitudes demonstrate fusion by colocalization of green and red ﬂuorescence in single , fused liposomes . ( B ) Donor ﬂuorescence lifetime reduction observed after mixing of the liposomes ( dark gray ) and corresponding negative controls ( light gray ) simultanesously measured with the cross - correlation - measurements shown in Figure 7A . Cross - correlation measurements can not distinguish docking from fusion , but the simultaneous measurement of the donor ﬂuorescence lifetime reduction allows one to distinguish fused from docked particles . Structure and function of early endosomal SNAREs D Zwilling et al & 2007 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 26 | NO 1 | 2007 15 What may be the reason for these differences ? It is likely that individual SNARE complexes differ in the nucleation reactions that initiate the formation of trans - complexes . Several lines of evidence suggest that SNARE assembly is not a random process , but proceeds via deﬁned and partially helical intermediates that serve as acceptors for the SNAREs contributed by the donor membrane . Detailed investigations of the neuronal complex revealed that assembly involves a labile Qabc intermediate that then binds the R - SNARE synap - tobrevin ( Fasshauer and Margittai , 2004 ) . This intermediate readily recruits a second Qa - SNARE , resulting in a ‘dead - end’ complex that is primarily responsible for the slow fusion kinetics of liposomes containing neuronal SNAREs ( Fasshauer and Margittai , 2004 ) . When the acceptor complex is stabilized , binding of synaptobrevin occurs with subsecond kinetics and liposomes fuse rapidly , reaching plateau levels after 1min ( Pobbati et al , 2006 ) . Our data now suggest that despite the high structural conservation of SNARE core complexes , the composition of these intermediates may not be conserved , possibly owing to differences in surface interactions between the SNARE helices . These differences are likely to have a major impact on the assembly pathway and to deﬁne which topological combinations are fusogenic . In contrast to the neuronal complex , evidence for partial complexes ( at least in solution ) was obtained for only two combinations of early endosomal SNAREs , and these combinations only partially overlap with those observed for the neuronal complex . Intriguingly , there is no correlation between the ability to form partial com - plexes in solution and the ability to serve as an acceptor complex in liposome fusion . When the two interacting com - binations of early endosomal SNAREs are incorporated into liposomes and incubated with liposomes containing the ﬁnal complementary SNARE , one of these combinations is fuso - genic whereas the other one is not . Also , fusion is observed between combinations for which no evidence for partial complexes was found . It remains to be established whether the non - fusogenic combination forms ‘dead - end’ complexes similar to the neuronal complex . Furthermore , other less - stable partial complexes may exist that , however , are either too labile or are associated with structural changes too small to be seen by CD spectroscopy . This could be the case or the fusogenic 2 : 2 combinations that we observed and the reason why they fuse less efﬁciently . What conclusions can be drawn for the function of SNAREs in their native environment ? Liposome fusion may be considered as a ‘bare - bones’ assay that shows the cap - ability of SNAREs as basic fusion catalysts . SNARE reactivity is probably regulated by accessory proteins , such as SM proteins ( Toonen and Verhage , 2003 ) . Such accessory pro - teins may regulate nucleation of SNARE complexes , restrict - ing the fusogenic topologies in native membranes . However , it may be of biological advantage if SNAREs involved in homotypic fusions have greater ﬂexibility than those in - volved in heterotypic fusion events . Early endosomes are a highly dynamic compartment that receive vesicles from different intracellular locations . If only a single topology of SNAREs would be fusogenic , it would require high ﬁdelity in SNARE sorting and recycling . This is less of a problem for heterotypic fusion events , such as fusion of ER - derived vesicles with the Golgi , or fusion of post - Golgi vesicles with the plasma membrane , where both the source and destination compartments are stable and perhaps better capable of maintaining a deﬁned SNARE composition . Materials and methods Molecular cloning and recombinant proteins All full - length constructs for syntaxin 6 , syntaxin 13 , vti1a , and VAMP4 were generated as described ( Brandhorst et al , 2006 ) . The full - length DNA constructs were used as templates for the ampliﬁca - tion of the SNARE core fragments by PCR . The core fragment syntaxin 6 169 – 232 was ampliﬁed using the oligonucleotides 5 0 aaaggatccatgcaggatgagcagttgg3 0 , and 5 0 tattttaagcttttattggcgccgat cactgg3 0 . The core fragment of syntaxin 13 182 – 250 was ampliﬁed using the primers 5 0 aacttattcatatgagggaaacg3 0 and 5 0 atactcgag cacatcttcttgcgag3 0 . The vti1a core fragment 115 – 192 was ampliﬁed using the oligonucleotides 5 0 gggaattccatatgagggcacatctgctggata acacgg3 0 and 5 0 aaagaagctttcagcggttttggatgattcttcg3 0 . VAMP4 47 – 117 was provided by Dr W Antonin . All constructs were subcloned into the pET28a vector . Each clone was veriﬁed by DNA sequencing Recombinant proteins were expressed as His 6 - tagged or GST - tagged fusion proteins and puriﬁed by Ni 2 þ - agarose or glutathione – Sepharose , respectively . The tags of all proteins were removed by using thrombin cleavage . All proteins were further puriﬁed by ion - exchange chromatography . All proteins were 95 % pure , as judged by SDS – PAGE and Coomassie blue staining . Assembly of the early endosomal SNARE complex Assembly was performed as described ( Antonin et al , 2002 ) . The core fragments of VAMP4 , syntaxin 6 , syntaxin 13 , and vti1a were mixed in a 1 : 1 : 1 : 1molar ratio with a total amount of approximately 20mg protein in 20mM Tris – HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 500mM NaCl , 1mM EDTA , and 1mM DTT in an approximate volume of 5ml . The mixture was then dialyzed overnight in 20mM Tris – HCl buffer , pH 7 . 4 , with 1mM EDTA , 1mM DTT , and 1M NaCl . The buffer was then changed to 20mM Tris – HCl buffer , pH 7 . 4 , with 100mM NaCl and 2M urea . After dialysis , the complex was puriﬁed using ion - exchange chromatography ( MonoQ ) and the peak fractions were analyzed by SDS – PAGE . Circular dichroism spectroscopy CD spectroscopy was performed as described ( Fasshauer et al , 1999 ) . Spectra were obtained by measuring the puriﬁed complex at a concentration of 15 m M in a buffer containing 20mM Tris – HCl ( pH 7 . 4 ) and 1000mM NaCl . For the thermal melt experiment , the wavelength was set to 220nm and the temperature to 4 1 C . Then the measurement was started by gradually increasing the temperature to 95 1 C at a rate of 60 1 C / h . Subsequently , the temperature was again lowered to 4 1 C at a rate of (cid:2) 60 1 C / h . Double and triple combinations were investigated by mixing each core fragment to a ﬁnal concentration of 5 m M in 300 m l buffer containing 20mM Tris – HCl ( pH 7 . 4 ) and 1000mM NaCl . Crystallization , diffraction data collection , structure solution , and reﬁnement The early endosomal SNARE complex was prepared in 20mM Tris – HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 500mM NaCl , 1mM EDTA , and 1mM DTT at a concentration of 6mg / ml . Crystallization trials were conducted at room temperature and 4 1 C in sitting drop vapor diffusion format . Initial screens made use of commercial reservoir collections ( Crystal Screen 1 and 2 , Crystal Screen Cryo , PEG / Ion Screen , and Grid Screens from Hampton Research ) and automated dispensing of 200nl drops ( 100nl protein plus 100nl reservoir ) in 96 - well trays . Initial conditions producing micro - crystals were subsequently optimized manually ( 2 m l protein plus 2 m l reservoir drops ) by systematic variation of chemical components in 24 - well trays . Thin crystal plates were ultimately obtained with a reservoir solution of 0 . 1M trisodium citrate dihydrate , pH 5 . 6 , 36 % ( v / v ) 2 - methyl - 2 , 4 - pentandiol , and 0 . 2M Li 2 SO 4 at room temperature . Crystals were ﬂash frozen in liquid nitrogen without additional cryo - protection . Diffraction data were collected at 100K at the PXII beamline of the Swiss Light Source ( Villigen , Switzerland ) on a MarResearch CCD detector . Data from ﬁve crystals were combined to arrive at a complete data set . Diffraction data were processed with the HKL package ( Otwinowski and Minor , 1996 ) . Crystals diffracted slightly anisotropically , yielding incomplete data between Structure and function of early endosomal SNAREs D Zwilling et al The EMBO Journal VOL 26 | NO 1 | 2007 & 2007 European Molecular Biology Organization 16 2 . 7 and 2 . 5A˚ resolution . We conservatively estimated the effective resolution of the structure to be 2 . 7A˚ . The structure of the complex was solved by molecular replacement ( Vagin and Teplyakov , 2000 ) using the late endosomal SNARE complex ( PDB entry 1GL2 ) ( Antonin et al , 2002 ) as the search model . After initial rigid body and positional reﬁnement with CNS ( Brunger et al , 1998 ) , the protein sequences were adjusted by manual model building with MAIN ( www - bmb . ijs . si / doc / index . html ) . Reﬁnement was completed by alternating between reﬁnement cycles ( simulated annealing , positional and B - factor reﬁnement ) and manual inspection . In the ﬁnal stages of reﬁne - ment , water oxygen were manually positioned into vacant spherical peaks of the F o (cid:2) F c difference electron density map . All reﬂections without intensity cutoff were used in the reﬁnement , including incomplete data between 2 . 7 and 2 . 5A˚ resolution . During all reﬁnement steps , 5 % of the reﬂections were set aside for monitoring of the R free factor . Reﬁnement converged at an R work of 24 . 7 % and an R free of 28 . 9 % , maintaining good stereochemistry ( Supplementary Table 1 ) . Coordinates and structure factors have been submitted to the RSCB Protein Databank ( http : / / www . rcsb . org / pdb / ) under accession code 2NPS and will be released upon publication . Liposome preparation and fusion assays All unlabeled and labeled phospholipids were obtained from Avanti Polar Lipids ( Alabaster , AL , USA ) . For the ﬂuorescence dequenching assay ( Hoekstra et al , 1984 ) , liposome preparation and liposome fusion assays were performed as described ( Schuette et al , 2004 ) , except that the Hepes buffer contained 1M KCl ( HB 1000 ) . Further puriﬁcation of liposomes on Nycodenz gradients was omitted . A 5 m l volume of the NBD / rhodamine liposomes was mixed with 35 m l of acceptor liposomes and 10 m l HB1000 or recombinant soluble protein ( total volume ¼ 50 m l ) . Preincubation with recombinant protein was carried out at room temperature for 1h . ( Antonin et al , 2002 in order to show that fusion is SNARE - mediated , soluble SNARE fragments were added as competitive inhibitors . Fusion is inhibited by building cis - SNARE complexes on the liposome surface and inhibition is most efﬁcient with a 1h preincubation at room temperature . ) For measuring fusion by FRET , the lipid mixes contained either 1 . 5 % Oregon green - labeled or Texas red - labeled phosphatidyletha - nolamine . Liposome preparation was as described ( Schuette et al , 2004 ) , except that liposomes were generated on a SMART system Pharmacia Biotech ( m Separation unit , m Precision pump , m Peak monitor ) using a fast desalting column PC 3 . 2 / 10 . Fusion experiments were carried out by mixing 20 m l of each liposome population , adding 10 m l of HB 1000 or recombinant soluble protein as competitive inhibitor . For the FCS measurements , the liposome particle number was adjusted to 1 : 1 . All fusion experiments were carried out at 37 1 C . Two - photon ﬂuorescence cross - correlation spectroscopy The confocal ﬂuorescence correlation setup has been described previously ( Pohl et al , 2006 ) . For cross - correlation analysis , the detection path has been extended by a dichroic mirror ( 590DCXR , AHF Analysentechnik , Tu¨bingen ) , a second APD ( avalanche photodiode , AQR - 13 , Perkin Elmer , Dumberry , Canada ) , and two band pass spectral ﬁlters ( HQ535 / 50 and HQ645 / 70 , AHF Analy - sentechnik , Tu¨bingen ) to separate the ﬂuorescence originating from Oregon green - and Texas red - labeled liposomes , respectively ( Schwille , 2001 ) . Photons detected by both APDs were simulta - neously counted by a single photon counter ( Time Harp 200 , Picoquant GmbH , Berlin ) using a rooter ( PRT400 , Picoquant GmbH , Berlin ) , and analyzed by homebuilt software . Pulsed two - photon excitation was provided by a homebuilt titanium – sapphire laser ( 800nm , 90MHz , 100fs FWHM ) , which allowed for measuring simultaneously the ﬂuorescence lifetime of the ﬂuorescent lipo - somes diffusing through the focus of the confocal microscope setup . For the measurements , the liposome preparations were diluted to a concentration corresponding to about 5 – 20 particles in the focus ( B 10nM ) in a way that the ratio of the particle numbers of Oregon green and Texas red liposomes was close to 1 . Five droplets of 50 m l of each sample were measured three times for 30s . Other methods SDS – PAGE was performed as described ( Laemmli , 1970 ) . For the tricine variant of SDS – PAGE , we followed the procedure of Schagger and von Jagow ( 1987 ) . Protein determination was performed according to Bradford ( 1976 ) . Supplementary data Supplementary data are available at The EMBO Journal Online ( http : / / www . embojournal . org ) . Acknowledgements We thank Ursel Ries for expert technical assistance . DZ acknowl - edges the support of the International Masters / PhD Program ( IMPRS ) ‘Molecular Biology’ . This work was supported in part by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft to PJW ( Emmy - Noether Program ) and to RJ ( SFB 523 , TP B6 ) and by grants of the Fonds der chemischen Industrie to PJW and RJ References Antonin W , Fasshauer D , Becker S , Jahn R , Schneider TR ( 2002 ) Crystal structure of the endosomal SNARE complex reveals common structural principles of all SNAREs . Nat Struct Biol 9 : 107 – 111 Antonin W , Holroyd C , Fasshauer D , Pabst S , Fischer von Mollard G , Jahn R ( 2000 ) A SNARE complex mediating fusion of late endosomes deﬁnes conserved properties of SNARE structure and function . EMBO J 19 : 6453 – 6464 Bock JB , Matern HT , Peden AA , Scheller RH ( 2001 ) A genomic perspective on membrane compartment organization . Nature 409 : 839 – 841 Bradford MM ( 1976 ) A rapid and sensitve method for the quantita - tion of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein – dye binding . Anal Biochem 72 : 248 – 254 Brandhorst D , Zwilling D , Rizzoli SO , Lippert U , Lang T , Jahn R ( 2006 ) Homotypic fusion of early endosomes : SNAREs do not determine fusion speciﬁcity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 2701 – 2706 Brunger AT , Adams PD , Clore GM , DeLano WL , Gros P , Grosse - Kunstleve RW , Jiang JS , Kuszewski J , Nilges M , Pannu NS , Read RJ , Rice LM , Simonson T , Warren GL ( 1998 ) Crystallography & NMR system : A new software suite for macromolecular structure determination . Acta Crystallogr D 54 : 905 – 921 Chen X , Arac D , Wang TM , Gilpin CJ , Zimmerberg J , Rizo J ( 2006 ) SNARE - mediated lipid mixing depends on the physical state of the vesicles . Biophys J 90 : 2062 – 2074 Dennison SM , Bowen ME , Brunger AT , Lentz B ( 2006 ) Neuronal SNAREs do not trigger fusion between synthetic membranes but do promote PEG - mediated membrane fusion . Biophys J 90 : 1661 – 1675 Eigen M , Rigler R ( 1994 ) Sorting single molecules : application to diagnostics and evolutionary biotechnology . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91 : 5740 – 5747 Ernst JA , Brunger AT ( 2003a ) High resolution structure , stability , and synaptotagmin binding of a truncated neuronal SNARE complex . J Biol Chem 278 : 8630 – 8636 Ernst JA , Brunger AT ( 2003b ) High resolution structure , stability , and synaptotagmin binding of a truncated neuronal SNARE complex . J Biol Chem 278 : 8630 – 8636 Fasshauer D , Margittai M ( 2004 ) A transient N - terminal interaction of SNAP - 25 and syntaxin nucleates SNARE assembly . J Biol Chem 279 : 7613 – 7621 Fasshauer D , Antonin W , Margittai M , Pabst S , Jahn R ( 1999 ) Mixed and non - cognate SNARE complexes . Characterization of assembly and biophysical properties . J Biol Chem 274 : 15440 – 15446 Fasshauer D , Antonin W , Subramaniam V , Jahn R ( 2002 ) SNARE assembly and disassembly exhibit a pronounced hysteresis . Nat Struct Biol 9 : 144 – 151 Fasshauer D , Eliason WK , Brunger AT , Jahn R ( 1998a ) Identiﬁcation of a minimal core of the synaptic SNARE complex sufﬁcient Structure and function of early endosomal SNAREs D Zwilling et al & 2007 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 26 | NO 1 | 2007 17 for reversible assembly and disassembly . Biochemistry 37 : 10354 – 10362 Fasshauer D , Sutton RB , Brunger AT , Jahn R ( 1998b ) Conserved structural features of the synaptic fusion complex : SNARE pro - teins reclassiﬁed as Q - and R - SNAREs . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 15781 – 15786 Hayashi T , McMahon HT , Yamasaki S , Binz T , Hata Y , Su¨dhof TC , Niemann H ( 1994 ) Synaptic vesicle membrane fusion complex : action of clostridial neurotoxins on assembly . EMBO J 13 : 5051 – 5061 Hoekstra D , de Boer T , Klappe K , Winschut J ( 1984 ) Fluorescence method for measuring the kinetics of fusion between biological membranes . Biochemistry 23 : 5675 – 5681 Hong W ( 2005 ) SNAREs and trafﬁc . Biochim Biophys Acta 1744 : 120 – 144 Jahn R , Scheller RH ( 2006 ) SNAREs—engines for membrane fusion . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 631 – 643 Laemmli UK ( 1970 ) Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature 227 : 680 – 685 Magde D , Elson E , Webb WW ( 1972 ) Thermodynamic ﬂuctuations in a reacting system – measurement by ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy . Phys Rev Lett 29 : 705 – 708 Maxﬁeld FR , McGraw TE ( 2004 ) Endocytic recycling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5 : 121 – 132 McNew JA , Parlati F , Fukuda R , Johnston RJ , Paz K , Paumet F , So¨llner TH , Rothman JE ( 2000 ) Compartmental speciﬁcity of cellular membrane fusion encoded in SNARE proteins . Nature 407 : 153 – 159 Otwinowski Z , Minor W ( 1996 ) Processing of X - ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode . Methods Enzymol 276 : 307 – 326 Parlati F , McNew JA , Fukuda R , Miller R , So¨llner TH , Rothman JE ( 2000 ) Topological restriction of SNARE - dependent membrane fusion . Nature 407 : 194 – 198 Parlati F , Varlamov O , Paz K , McNew JA , Hurtado D , So¨llner TH , Rothman JE ( 2002 ) Distinct SNARE complexes mediating mem - brane fusion in Golgi transport based on combinatorial speciﬁ - city . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 5424 – 5429 Paumet F , Brugger B , Parlati F , McNew JA , So¨llner TH , Rothman JE ( 2001 ) A t - SNARE of the endocytic pathway must be activated for fusion . J Cell Biol 155 : 961 – 968 Pobbati AV , Stein A , Fasshauer D ( 2006 ) N - to C - terminal SNARE complex assembly promotes rapid membrane fusion . Science 313 : 673 – 676 Pohl WH , Hellmuth H , Hilbert M , Seibel J , Walla PJ ( 2006 ) A two - photon ﬂuorescence - correlation study of lectins interacting with carbohydrated 20nm beads . Chembiochem 7 : 268 – 274 Schagger H , von Jagow G ( 1987 ) Tricine - sodium dodecyl sulfate – polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis for the separation of proteins in the range from 1 to 100 kDa . Anal Biochem 166 : 368 – 379 Schuette CG , Hatsuzawa K , Margittai M , Stein A , Riedel D , Ku¨ster P , Ko¨nig M , Seidel C , Jahn R ( 2004 ) Determinants of liposome fusion mediated by synaptic SNARE proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 2858 – 2863 Schwille P ( 2001 ) Cross - correlation analysis in FCS . In : Rigler R , Elson EL ( eds ) , Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy : Theory and Application , pp 360 – 378 . Springer : Heidelberg Sutton B , Fasshauer D , Jahn R , Bru¨nger AT ( 1998a ) Crystal structure of a core synaptic fusion complex at 2 . 4A˚ resolution . Nature 395 : 347 – 353 Sutton RB , Fasshauer D , Jahn R , Brunger AT ( 1998b ) Crystal structure of a SNARE complex involved in synaptic exocytosis at 2 . 4 A resolution . Nature 395 : 347 – 353 Toonen RF , Verhage M ( 2003 ) Vesicle trafﬁcking : pleasure and pain from SM genes . Trends Cell Biol 13 : 177 – 186 Vagin A , Teplyakov A ( 2000 ) An approach to multi - copy search in molecular replacement . Acta Crystallogr D 56 : 1622 – 1624 Weber T , Zemelman BV , McNew JA , Westermann B , Gmachl M , Parlati F , So¨llner TH , Rothman JE ( 1998 ) SNAREpins : minimal machinery for membrane fusion . Cell 92 : 759 – 772 Weimbs T , Mostov KE , Low SH , Hofmann K ( 1998 ) A model for structural similarity between different SNARE complexes based on sequence relationships . Trends Cell Biol 8 : 260 – 262 Yang B , Gonzalez Jr L , Prekeris R , Steegmaier M , Advani RJ , Scheller RH ( 1999 ) SNARE interactions are not selective . Implications for membrane fusion speciﬁcity . J Biol Chem 274 : 5649 – 5653 Structure and function of early endosomal SNAREs D Zwilling et al The EMBO Journal VOL 26 | NO 1 | 2007 & 2007 European Molecular Biology Organization 18