A Design - Centred Framework for Social Human - Robot Interaction Christoph Bartneck 1 and Jodi Forlizzi 2 1 Department of Industrial Design , Eindhoven University of Technology , the Netherlands 2 School of Design and HCII , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , PA , USA christoph @ bartneck . de , forlizzi @ cs . cmu . edu Abstract Robots currently integrate into our everyday lives , but little is known about how they can act socially . In this paper we propose a definition of social robots and describe a framework that classifies properties of social robots . The properties consist of form , modality , social norms , autonomy , and interactivity . Finally , we provide broad guidelines for the design of social robots . 1 . Introduction Robotics is a broad discipline . The United Nations ( UN ) , in a recent robotics survey , groups robotics into three major categories : industrial robotics , professional service robotics , and personal service robotics ( UN , 2002 ) . Industrial robots have historically represented the vast majority of robotic development , with many deployed in the automotive industry , beginning with the entire automation of a Nissan plant in the 1990s ( MetalForming , 1997 ) . Professional service robots are the subject of a much less practiced field , but it is quickly growing . These robots work in domains inaccessible to people , such as navigating abandoned mines and cleaning up nuclear waste . Personal service robots have the highest expected growth rate . They are estimated to grow from 176 , 500 in 2001 to 2 , 021 , 000 in 2005 — an amazing growth rate ( UN , 2002 ) ! Personal service robots assist people directly in domestic and institutional settings . Many robots interact with people who have no special skills or training to operate the robot . The design and interaction of these robots will be critical , and raises a number of research and design challenges . These personal service robots are now robust enough to be deployed in industrial , institutional , and domestic settings and they have the potential to be greatly beneficial to humankind . However , how these robots should behave and interact with humans — act socially — remains largely unclear . For example , a robot might be perceived as having intentional behavior that is usually only ascribed to living things . Researchers and designers have only just begun to understand these critical issues . In this paper , we attempt to define social robots and present a framework to classify properties of social robots . The properties consist of form , modality , social norms , autonomy , and interactivity . Based on the framework , we provide broad guidelines for the design of social robots . We envision that more specific guidelines will be generated as robots are designed and built to address specific application areas . 2 . Background and Related Work A number of theoretical approaches have been developed to characterize the emerging area of human - robot interactions . A first review of social robots is now available ( Fong , Nourbakhsh , & Dautenhahn , 2003 ) . Several of these approaches are driven by technological advances that enable more natural and lifelike human - robot interactions ( Breazeal , 2003 ; Brooks , 2002 ) . Guidelines for how the social nature of the robot is expressed can be taken from social literature on human social interaction . For example , Goffman described the exchange between two people as taking the form of either a focused or unfocused interaction ( Goffman , 1963 ) . A focused interaction is initiated by an encounter such as eye contact , or a statement made in a particular tone of voice . When the other responds , the interaction moves into the engagement phase , characterized by mutual glances , proximity of one speaker to the other , and gesture . Condon classified communication between two people as taking a number of forms : phatic communication ( small talk ) , record - transmitting or instrumental communication ( focusing on results ) , affective communication , catharsis , and even magic and ritual ( Condon , 1965 ) . Hall described the concept of adumbration as the indications preceding or surrounding formal communications that enable people to engage in a mutual exchange ( Hall , 1964 ) . These are classified as vocal , mechanical , mobile , or terrestrial . To communicate socially , robots might mimic human emotion . Several proposals for an “architecture of emotion” have been made ( Ortony , Clore , & Collins , 1988 ; Trappl , Petta , & Payr , 2003 ) and their application discussed ( Bartneck , 2002 ) . Several researchers have successfully applied some of these theories and concepts to the design of a variety of social robots ( RoboticPerformanceCompany , 2004 ) . 3 . What is a social robot ? Definitions of robots and social robots are continuously under debate . The notion of what a robot is has migrated since its first appearance 1920 in Karel Capek’s play ( Capek , 2001 ) . Here , the term “robot” was coined , and robots were given a negative connotation as evil machines that would subsume mankind . The Robot Institute of America defines a Bartneck , C . , & Forlizzi , J . ( 2004 ) . A Design - Centred Framework for Social Human - Robot Interaction . Proceedings of the Ro - Man2004 , Kurashiki pp . 591 - 594 . | DOI : 10 . 1109 / ROMAN . 2004 . 1374827 robot as “A reprogrammable , multifunctional manipulator designed to move material , parts , tools , or specialized devices through various programmed motions for the performance of a variety of tasks” and the International Standard Organization ( ISO ) in ISO 8373 defines a robot as “An automatically controlled , reprogrammable , multipurpose , manipulator programmable in three or more axes , which may be either fixed in place or mobile for use in industrial automation applications . ” These definitions are clearly targeted to autonomous or semi - autonomous industrial robots and do not take interaction with humans into account aside from the attached safety regulations , such as ANSI / RIA R15 . 06 - 1999 and ISO12100 . The growth in personal service robots necessitates a definition for the kinds of robots that work with people . The International Federation of Robotics ( IFR ) has adopted a preliminary definition of Service Robots as “A robot which operates semi or fully autonomously to perform services useful to the well being of humans and equipment , excluding manufacturing operations . ” What is not explicitly mentioned in this definition is the interaction between people and robots , which is mentioned by Engelhardt ( Engelhardt & Edwards , 1992 ) in his definition of service robots as “Systems that function as smart , programmable tools , that can sense , think , and act to benefit or enable humans or extend / enhance human productivity . ” This definition speaks more about human productivity and less about social interaction , the goals of which are not always productivity . For example , entertainment robots including products such as the Sony Aibo ( Sony , 1999 ) are not exceedingly productive but are still very valuable to their owners . We would like to propose the following definition of a social robot : A social robot is an autonomous or semi - autonomous robot that interacts and communicates with humans by following the behavioral norms expected by the people with whom the robot is intended to interact . This definition implies that a social robot has a physical embodiment . Screen characters or any kind of virtual agent would be excluded by this definition . Recently , a class of robots have been developed that use a screen to display the robot’s head ( RoboticPerformanceCompany , 2004 ) . Because the screen - based head sets an expectation for and a locus of interaction , it can be considered to be a social robot . Autonomy is a requirement for a social robot . A semi - autonomous robot can be defined as social if it communicates an acceptable set of social norms . A completely remote controlled robot cannot be considered to be social since it does not make decisions by itself . It is merely an extension of another human . Communication and interaction with humans is a critical point in this definition . Therefore , robots that only interact and communicate with other robots would not be considered to be social robots . The interaction is likely to be cooperative , but is not limited to it . Also uncooperative behavior can be considered social in certain situations . The robot could , for example , exhibit competitive behavior within the framework of a game . The robot could also interact with a minimum or no communication . It could , for example , hand tools to an astronaut working on a space station ( Goza , Ambrose , Diftler , & Spain , 2004 ) . In our definition , being social is bound to understanding and in some cases , mimicking human activity and the surrounding society and culture , which shapes social values , norms and standards . For example , a robotic butler should comply with established rules of good service . It should anticipate , be reliable , and most of all , be discreet . However , the precise activities are likely to vary between cultures since social values , norms and standards differ between cultures ( Hofstede , 1984 ) . With this definition in place we can now turn to a framework that classifies properties of social robots . 4 . The Framework Our framework takes a design - centered perspective , viewing social robots as products that facilitate co - experience and social interaction ( Forlizzi & Battarbee , 2004 ) . The framework also focuses on the notion of designed form . Design approaches form as the total expression of the product — not just how something appears , but the whole experience of the interacting with the product . Form includes a product’s physical manifestation , materials , and behavioral qualities ( DiSalvo , Gemperle , Forlizzi , & Montgomery , 2003 ) . Designers use form to balance the needs of people , the capabilities of technology , and the context of use into a single product . Figure 1 . Framework for classifying social robots . Our framework ( Figure 1 ) contains the following properties : a . form For the purposes of this investigation , we group form ( shape , materials , and behavioral qualities ) into three categories that suggest social behavior : abstract , biomorphic Bartneck , C . , & Forlizzi , J . ( 2004 ) . A Design - Centred Framework for Social Human - Robot Interaction . Proceedings of the Ro - Man2004 , Kurashiki pp . 591 - 594 . | DOI : 10 . 1109 / ROMAN . 2004 . 1374827 ( mimicking a lifelike object ) , or anthropomorphic ( mimicking a human ) . b . modality We define modality as the number of communication channels engaged . The scale ranges from unimodal to multimodal , and can encompass the visual , auditory , haptic , olfactory and even gustatory channels . c . social norms Social norms assume that much of our behavior is influenced by how other members of our social group behave . As social norms can be defined by the interactions between people , we assert that they can be defined by the interactions between people and robots . We define social norms as a continuum ranging from the robot exhibiting no apparent social norms — for instance , a Furby ( Hasbro , 2004 ) , to exhibiting apparent reciprocal social norms . To our knowledge , scientists and designers have yet to realize this goal . d . autonomy We define autonomy as having the technological capabilities to act on behalf of humans without direct input from humans . Autonomy is expressed as a continuum ranging from no autonomy , to some autonomy , to fully autonomous . e . interactivity We define interactivity as having the potential to exhibit causal behavior — that is , to respond in reaction to interaction with a human . Causal behavior is expressed as a continuum ranging from no causal behavior , to some causal behavior , to fully causal behavior . Figure 2 . Example classifications using the framework . To exemplify how the framework works in practice , we have classified a few examples presented at our CHI2004 Social Robot Workshop ( figure 2 ) . These include iCat ( Breemen , 2004 ) and Leonardo ( Hoffman & Breazeal , 2004 ) . 4 . Applications of the Framework The development of social robots will continue to escalate at an unprecedented pace . Through our research and design work , we have developed numerous ideas for the design of social robots in a variety of contexts . In this section , we propose the following design guidelines for social robots : The form of the social robot should match its abilities . The shape , size , and material qualities of a social robot should match the task it is designed for to avoid false expectations . A humanoid robot , for example , is usually expected to have robust speech recognition capabilities , and users are confused when their expectations are not met . A biomorphic form , such as a dog or cat , may be more appropriate in setting expectations about the robot’s capabilities . The social robot should mimic human - human dialogue in human - robot dialogue and be able to manage communication failures . Social robots should recognize , respond to , and employ where possible all modalities that humans naturally use to communicate . These include verbal cues such as speech , intonation , and tone of voice , and non - verbal cues such as gesture , posture , and stance , among others . However , the robot should only communicate states it actually has . It should not fake emotions if it does not genuine use them for its own benefit . Such a fake would be detected and eventually it would be perceived negatively . The robot should mimic human social norms and be able to provide a consistent set of behaviors . Social robots should be aware of human social rules and norms , and grant privilege to them at all times . When possible , the robot should be aware of its own social role , its world knowledge , and what it does not know . It must be able to deal with uncertainty , and adhere to the ethical principle of least harm . 5 . Conclusion and Future Work – Designing Social Robotic Products In this paper , we have proposed a definition of social robots and described a framework that classifies properties of social robots . The properties include form , modality , social norms , autonomy , and interactivity . In addition , we provided guidelines for good social robot design . Based on the framework , we provide broad guidelines for the design of social robots . We envision that more specific guidelines will be generated as robots are designed and built to address specific application areas . Bartneck , C . , & Forlizzi , J . ( 2004 ) . A Design - Centred Framework for Social Human - Robot Interaction . Proceedings of the Ro - Man2004 , Kurashiki pp . 591 - 594 . | DOI : 10 . 1109 / ROMAN . 2004 . 1374827 Some of the properties we proposed in our framework remain difficult to measure and hence difficult to order on the dimensions . A next step would be to define the properties in more detail and create an order of categories for the ordinal dimensions and measurements for the rational dimensions . We invite interested readers to discuss and refine our proposed definition at this web address : http : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Social _ robot . Acknowledgements This work is funded by NSF IIS - 0121426 . Thanks to our CHI 2004 Social Robot Workshop participants for their valuable input and feedback : A . J . N . van Breemen , Carl DiSalvo , Jill Drury , Guy Hoffman , Helge Hüttenrauch , Peter Kahn and Junji Yamato . The proceedings of the workshop are available at http : / / www . bartneck . de / workshop / chi2004 References Bartneck , C . ( 2002 ) . Integrating the OCC Model of Emotions in Embodied Characters . Proceedings of the Workshop on Workshop on Virtual Conversational Characters : Applications , Methods , and Research Challenges , Melbourne . Breazeal , C . ( 2003 ) . Designing Sociable Robots . Cambridge : MIT Press . Breemen , A . J . N . v . ( 2004 ) . Bringing Robots To Life : Applying Principles Of Animation To Robots . Proceedings of the CHI2004 Workshop on Shaping Human - Robot Interaction - Understanding the Social Aspects of Intelligent Robotic Products , Vienna . Brooks , R . ( 2002 ) . Flesh and Machines : How Robots Will Change Us . New York : Pantheon Books . Capek , K . ( 2001 ) . R . U . R . Mineola : Dover Publications . Condon , J . ( 1965 ) . When People talk with People . In J . Condon ( Ed . ) , Semantics and Communication ( pp . 87 - 107 ) . Boston : Macmillian . DiSalvo , C . , Gemperle , F . , Forlizzi , J . , & Montgomery , E . ( 2003 ) . The Hug : An Exploration of Robotic Form for Intimate Communication . Proceedings of the Ro - Man2003 , Millbrae . Engelhardt , K . G . , & Edwards , R . A . ( 1992 ) . Human - robot integration for service robotics ( Chapter 16 ) . In M . Rahimi & W . Karwowiski ( Eds . ) , Human - robot interaction ( pp . 315 - 346 ) . New York : Taylor & Francis . Fong , T . , Nourbakhsh , I . , & Dautenhahn , K . ( 2003 ) . A survery of socially interactive robots . Robotics and Autonomous Systems , 42 , 143 - 166 . Forlizzi , J . , & Battarbee , K . ( 2004 ) . Understanding Experience in Interactive Systems . Proceedings of the DIS2004 , Cambridge . Goffman , E . ( 1963 ) . Facial Engagements . In E . Goffman ( Ed . ) , Behavior in Public Places ( pp . 83 - 111 ) . Boston : Macmillian . Goza , S . M . , Ambrose , R . O . , Diftler , M . A . , & Spain , I . M . ( 2004 ) . Telepresence Control of the NASA / DARPA Robonaut on a Mobility Platform . Proceedings of the CHI2004 , Vienna . Hall , E . T . ( 1964 ) . Adumbration as a Feature of Intercultural Communication . American Anthropologist , 66 ( 2 ) . Hasbro . ( 2004 ) . Furby . from http : / / www . furby . com Hoffman , G . , & Breazeal , C . ( 2004 ) . Robots that work in collaboration with people . Proceedings of the CHI2004 Extended Abstracts , Vienna . Hofstede , G . ( 1984 ) . Culture’s Consequences , International Differences in Work - Related Values . Beverly Hills : Sage Publications . MetalForming . ( 1997 ) . Tool Changers Enhance Robot Versatility - republished from MetalForming magazine . 2004 , from http : / / www . ati - ia . com / qc20article1 . htm Ortony , A . , Clore , G . , & Collins , A . ( 1988 ) . The Cognitive Structure of Emotions . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . RoboticPerformanceCompany . ( 2004 ) . Valerie the Robo Receptionist . from http : / / www . roboceptionist . com / Sony . ( 1999 ) . Aibo . from http : / / www . aibo . com Trappl , R . , Petta , P . , & Payr , S . ( 2003 ) . Emotions in Humans and Artifacts . Cambridge : MIT Press . UN . ( 2002 ) . United Nations and the International Federation of Robotics . Proceedings of the World Robotics 2002 , New York . Bartneck , C . , & Forlizzi , J . ( 2004 ) . A Design - Centred Framework for Social Human - Robot Interaction . Proceedings of the Ro - Man2004 , Kurashiki pp . 591 - 594 . | DOI : 10 . 1109 / ROMAN . 2004 . 1374827