Three - dimensional analysis of morphogenesis induced by mating pheromone a factor in Saccharomyces cerevisiae MISUZU BABA 1 ' * , NORIO BABA 2 , YOSHINORI OHSUMI 3 , KOICHI KANAYA 2 and MASAKO OSUMI 1 1 Deportment of Biology , Japan Women ' s University , 2 - 8 - 1 Mejirodai , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 112 , Japan 1 Department of Electrical Engineering , Kogakuin University , 1 - 24 - 2 , Nishishinjuku , Shinjuku - ku , Tokyo 163 - 91 , Japan 3 Department of Biology , College of Arts and Sciences , University of Tokyo , 3 - 8 - 1 , Komaba , Meguro - ku , Tokyo 153 , Japan •Present address : Department of Electrical Engineering , Kogakuin University , 1 - 24 - 2 , Nishishinjuku , Shinjuku - ku , Tokyo , 163 - 91 , Japan Summary Ultrastructural analyses of cytoplasmic changes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae X2180 - 1A ( MATa ) that had been treated with a factor were performed by using the freeze - substitution fixation method . After a factor treatment , cells exhibited a pointed projec - tion , which is a unique pattern of oriented cell surface growth . The relationship between projec - tion formation and intracellular organelles was examined using serial thin sections and computer - aided three - dimensional reconstructions . Using these analyses membrane vesicles and other organ - elles were detected , and studies on their dynamic structural reorganization became feasible . Pro - duction of membrane vesicles ( average 65 nm in diameter ) was induced upon exposure of the cells to a factor before projection emergence . The total number of membrane vesicles increased at the early stage and decreased at the late stage of projection formation . Three - dimensional analysis indicated that the vesicles were at first dispersed throughout the cell , then accumulated at the site where the projection formed . Morphological changes and multiplication of the Golgi body were seen during the process of projection formation . Other intracellular organelles ( nucleus , vacuole , rough endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria ) were also rearranged , showing a polar organization of the cytoplasm during projection formation . Key words : S . cerevisiae , a factor , three - dimensional reconstruction , cell surface growth , membrane vesicle . Introduction Mechanisms controlling cell surface growth are import - ant problems in cell biology ( Schnepf , 1986 ) . Budding yeast has a characteristic growth pattern in its mitotic cell cycle , which must be strictly controlled both temporally and spatially . Many mutants have been isolated involving changes in bud initiation and bud growth ( Pringle & Hartwell , 1981 ) . Cell surface growth is mediated by membrane vesicles ( Tschopp et al . 1984 ) . The secretory pathway is being actively investigated in Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( Schekman , 1985 ) . However , the mechanism of localized cell surface growth remains to be unveiled . The sex - specific oligopeptide pheromone , or factor , induces many biochemical changes in its target MATa cells ( Thorner , 1981 ) : ( 1 ) arrest of the cell - division cycle at a specific point , ' start ' , in the Gi phase ( Biicking - Throm et al . 1973 ; Chan , 1977 ) ; ( 2 ) turning on or off of the expression of specific genes including a factor recep - tor and an agglutination substance on the cell surface ( Yoshida & Yanagishima , 1978 ; Kawanabe et al . 1979 ; Hortig et al . 1986 ) . It is known that when haploid ( MATa ) cells are exposed to a factor they stop budding and start a unique morphogenetic process in the form of a Journal of Cell Science 94 , 207 - 216 ( 1989 ) Printed in Great Britain © The Company of Biologists Limited 1989 particular type of localized cell surface growth . The morphological changes induced by a factor are a dose - dependent ( Moore , 1983 ; Ohsumi & Anraku , 1985 ) . When a low dose of a ' factor is added to a MATa cell culture , the cells start enlarging and become spherical for a certain period , then return to the mitotic cell cycle . With a high dose of or factor cells start elongating and extend a pointed projection , which may act as a copu - lation tube ( Duntze et al . 1973 ; Tkacz & Mackay , 1979 ) . There are many organisms that show apical growth : for example , fungal hyphae ( Grove & Bracker , 1970 ; How - ard & Aist , 1979 ; Heath , 1988 ; Roberson & Fuller , 1988 ) , Fucus eggs ( Brawley & Robinson , 1985 ; Kropf et al . 1989 ) and pollen tubes ( Lancelle & Hepler , 1988 ; Tiwari & Polito , 1988 ) . A polarized organization of the cyto - plasm with a cluster of vesicles in the apex has been reported . However , it is a characteristic feature of projec - tion formation induced by a factor that the growth pattern is modulated quite synchronously by a known pheromonal signal ( Cross et al . 1988 ) . This provides a good system in which to analyze the controlling mechan - ism of cell surface growth . To determine precisely the temporal and spatial changes in intracellular organelles during projection 207 formation , we used serial thin sections and the computer graphics technique for a three - dimensional reconstruc - tion . The relationship between projection formation and intracellular organelles could be clearly observed through the outline of the cell by using the transparent display method . In this paper , we show that dynamic changes in intracellular organelles were induced by a factor during the process of projection formation in its target cells . Materials and methods Yeast strain and culture conditions A haploid strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae , X2180 - 1A ( MATa ) , was obtained from the Yeast Genetic Stock Center , Berkeley , CA . Chemicals and a factor were prepared as de - scribed by Ohsumi & Anraku ( 1985 ) . Cells were grown in YEPD medium , which contained 1 % yeast extract , 2 % poly - peptone and 2 % glucose . Exponentially growing cells ( l - OxlO ' mF 1 ) were incubated with 3 ptA - a factor at 30°C for 50min or 80min , and then harvested by centrifugation . As a control , exponentially growing cells were collected by centrifu - gation . Electron microscopy Exponentially growing cells and or factor - treated cells were quickly frozen using melting Freon 23 cooled with liquid nitrogen . The freeze - substitution fixation method we applied was described in a previous paper ( Baba & Osumi , 1987 ) . Thin sections were obtained on a Reichert 0mU3 microtome with a diamond knife . Serial thin sections were mounted on Formvar - coated single - slot grids ( lmmX2mm ) , stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate , and examined with a Hitachi H - 800 electron microscope at 200 kV . Three - dimensional reconstructions and morphometry of organelles Three - dimensional reconstruction of solid models was per - formed by using computer graphics . From the photomicro - graphs the contour lines of cells and organelles were drawn on transparent sheets . The serial contour lines on the transparent sheets were input to the computer system , through a TV camera , and reconstructed by the computer graphics system . The system for computer graphics consists of a LUZEX - 5000 image processor ( NIRECO Corp . ) linked to a TV image digitizer . The details of serial section reconstruction and the morphometry have been described by Baba et al . ( 1986 , 1989 ) . The thickness of the sections was calculated to be 70 - 100 nm by viewing the interference colour related to the section thickness and by determining the number of sections that covered a spherical body of a given diameter . In the three - dimensionally reconstructed models a cell and its organelles were displayed in colour as follows : cell membrane , transparent blue ; filasome , white ; Golgi body , red ; lipid granule , pink sphere ; mitochondrion , orange ; nucleus , dark red ; nucleolus , yellow ; rough endoplasmic reticulum , sky blue ; membrane vesicle , white particle . Stereo pairs of photographs were obtained by reconstructing two models with a 5 ° difference with respect to the vertical axis on the photograph . Volumes of the whole cell , nucleus , mitochondria and vacuoles were measured from the serial contour lines in the computer - aided reconstruction . Results To understand the process of morphological changes in the cells induced by a factor , we prepared serial thin sections of a total of 30 cells from two time points during treatment ( 50min and 80min ) . Light - microscopic observation revealed that cells treated with oc factor for 50 min were arrested completely in G ] phase and more than half of the cells showed the emergence of a projection , while almost all cells treated for 80 min had a pointed projection at various develop - mental stages . We classified these cells into four groups by the shape of the projection . At stage I cells were spherical and in G \ phase , judging from the spindle pole body embedded in the nuclear membrane ( Fig . 1A ) . Changes in the cell wall structure were clearly seen at this stage ; that is , a small area of the cell wall next to a bud scar differentiated into a long filamentous structure in the outermost layer ( Fig . 1A , B , arrows ) . We studied particularly the membrane vesicles that were apparently related to surface growth at all stages . Every electron micrograph of cells at the earliest stage showed numerous membrane vesicles in the cyto - plasm . At stage II , cells that had just started projection formation contained more membrane vesicles than at the earlier stage ( Fig . 2 ) . Only a small number of vesicles were located near the projection . The characteristic outermost layer of the cell wall enlarged and covered the projected area . Every cell had a nucleus with a fixed orientation : i . e . the nucleolus was always located at the side opposite to the projection ( Fig . 2A ) . At stage III , cells had a short projection and more membrane vesicles , which were notably concentrated at the tip of the projection ( Fig . 3 ) . The inner layer of the cell wall ( electron - transparent region ) was very thin in the apical portion of the projection . At stage IV , cells having an elongated projection showed apparently concentrated membrane vesicles in the projection ( Fig . 4A ) . The nucleus moved close to a neck portion of the projection . For further detailed analysis a typical cell from each stage was chosen . Morphological characteristics of vesicles induced by a factor treatment First , we analyzed changes in the membrane vesicles . By serial thin sectioning we could detect the membrane vesicles within the cells . The vesicles were bounded by a smooth spherical unit membrane and the electron density of the interior of the vesicles was fairly high , but apparently heterogeneous ( see Figs 3A , 5B ) . The dimen - sions of all the membrane vesicles in every serial thin section of four cells , which represented the four stages of projection formation , were measured . From the data in Fig . 5A , membrane vesicles in cells after treatment with a high dose of ^ factor were from 47 - 5 nm to 100 nm in diameter ; their average size ( approx . 65 nm ) did not change during projection formation . The most abundant vesicles were about 60 - 70 nm in diameter . Interestingly , the average size of vesicles during a factor treatment ( Fig . 5B ) was smaller than that of the membrane vesicles of a normal mitotic cell cycle during budding 208 M . Baba et al . Fig . 1 . A , B . Two thin sections from a series of 36 serial sections of a spherical cell without a projection ( stage I ) . Cells were treated with 3 fiM - cx factor for 50min . The region of cell wall altered morphologically is shown by arrows , bs , bud scar ; / , lipid granule ; m , mitochondrion ; n , nucleus ; nu , nucleolus ; rer , rough endoplasmic reticulum ; spb , spindle pole body ; v , vacuole ; ves , membrane vesicle . X21000 . Bars , 10 / im . ( Fig . 5A , C ) , which ranged from 60 to HOnm and were on average 85 nm . This suggests that the vesicles around 65 nm in diameter were specifically induced by a factor treatment . As shown in Fig . 5A , the number of membrane vesicles increased from stage I to stage III , then de - creased in stage IV . The total number of membrane vesicles in cells of the four stages was 137 , 235 , 284 and 179 , respectively . Most of these vesicles must participate in cell surface growth , and fuse with the cell membrane at the tip of the projection ( Byers & Goetsch , 1975 ) . At the last stage , the rate of vesicle fusion must exceed that of production . The cell membrane at the apical part of the projection is often undulating , probably as a result of vesicle fusion ( Figs 3A , 5B , arrowheads ) . Morphological characteristics of other organelles induced by ex factor treatment The membrane vesicles must contain cell surface con - stituents , which are finally delivered to the cell mem - brane and cell wall . Both structures contain glycoproteins produced by passing through a secretory pathway from rough endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi body . The localization of rough endoplasmic reticulum did not change much during projection formation . It was located just beneath the cell membrane or around the nuclear membrane . As shown in Fig . 4A and B , rough endoplasmic reticulum around the nuclear envelope was connected to the outer nuclear membrane . The typical elongated cell had rough endoplasmic reticulum cisternae extending towards the projection ( Fig . 4B ) . By applying the freeze - substitution fixation method , we could detect the Golgi body clearly in serial thin sections . We found that the Golgi body also showed dynamic changes in its morphology . Cells of stage I or II possessed a few Golgi bodies , but cells in later stages ( III and IV ) contained more ( Figs2B , 4C ) . In the earlier stages , the Golgi stacks were composed of five to seven cisternae . However , in the later stages , the number of cisternae decreased . The stacks of cisternae sometimes appeared branched . It seems likely that Golgi bodies divide during projection formation . Some serial sections showed membrane vesicles immediately adjacent to the tip of the smooth membrane stack of a Golgi body ( Fig . 4C ) , suggesting that the vesicles induced by a fac - tor originated from the Golgi body . In fungi , filasomes are often found along the hyphal wall just behind the apex ( Hoch & Howard , 1980 ; Howard , 1981 ; Hoch & Staples , 1983 ) . They consist of a core surrounded by filamentous materials . Filasomes have only been reported in actively growing regions of cells prepared by freeze - substitution . We observed a filasome in freeze - substituted cells of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the first time ( Fig . 4C ) . The morphology 3 - D reconstruction of a factor - treated cells 209 • v * TT 2A Fig . 2 . A . A section from a series of 27 serial sections of a cell that has just started to form a projection ( stage II ) . Cells were treated with 3 jiM - a factor for SOmin . B . A consecutive section of A . cw , cell wall ; G , Golgi body ; / , lipid granule ; n , nucleus ; ne , nuclear envelope ; nu , nucleolus ; rer , rough endoplasmic reticulum ; spb , spindle pole body ; u , vacuole ; ves , membrane vesicle . X27000 . Bars , 1 - 0 / im . of filasomes that we observed in a factor - treated cells was quite similar to that reported for many fungi . Since cells treated with a factor were in Gi phase , cytoplasmic microtubules were not prominent in the early stages . After stage III , short microtubules radiated from spindle pole body and they were always observed near the projection ( Fig . 3B ) . However , even when the cells have entered into the projection elongation stage , their microtubules did not extend precisely towards the projection and we never observed microtubules reaching to the tip of the projection . Dynamics of vesicles during the projection formation To obtain information about dynamic changes of mem - brane vesicles and intracellular organelles , we applied computer - aided three - dimensional reconstruction as de - scribed in Materials and methods . First , we studied changes in the distribution of the membrane vesicles within the cells during projection formation . The results are shown in Fig . 6 . In a spherical cell without a projection ( stage I ) , almost all the vesicles were scattered throughout the cell ( Fig . 6A ) . At the time of projection emergence ( stage II ) , the total number of vesicles increased ; they were mostly distributed evenly in the cell , but a slight accumulation was seen in one region where the projection emerged ( Fig . 6B ) . In stage III , the greatest concentration of membrane vesicles appeared at the apical site of the projection ( Fig . 6C ) . The density of the vesicles in the general cell body , but not the tip , became lower than that of stage II . The elongated cell at stage IV contained many membrane vesicles in the projection ; a significant number were still present in the cell body ( Fig . 6D ) . Membrane vesicles in the cell body were randomly distributed at all stages and those in the projection were not arranged linearly or in any other regular manner ( Figs 3 , 5B ) ! At the latest stage , they were located close to the cell membrane as a hemispheri - cal dome clearly shown by stereo - paired photographs produced by computer graphics ( data not shown ) . We investigated the possibility of a special distribution of smaller ( less than 57 - 5 nm in diameter ) or larger vesicles ( more than 75 nm in diameter ) as shown by computer graphics . The results did not suggest noticable localization of these vesicles ( data not shown ) . These results clearly indicate that the vesicles were induced by a factor , were distributed randomly in the cells at the early stage and , once emergence of projection was triggered , were transported towards the tip of the projection . Dynamics of Golgi bodies during the projection formation Golgi bodies of the same cells were reconstructed 210 M . Baba et al . ( Fig . 7A - D ) . In the early stages the Golgi bodies were observed apart from the projection or in the neighbour - hood of the rough endoplasmic reticulum surrounding the nuclear membrane ( Fig . 2B ) . In the process of projection formation , some of the Golgi bodies moved into the projection ( Fig . 7C , D ) . In the early stages membrane vesicles might be produced distant from the projection . Then in the later stages some of the mem - brane vesicles may be produced near or in the projection . Reorganization of other organelles during projection formation Since the transparent display method that we used here enabled us to visualize the cell membrane and intracellu - lar organelles simultaneously , we could analyse the reor - ganization of various organelles and the topological relationship between them in the process of projection formation ( Fig . 8 ) . The cytoplasmic organization of an a - factor - treated cell was rearranged with respect to the • a - • * n \ i I Fig . 3 . A . A section from a series of 49 serial sections of a cell with a short projection ( stage III ) . Cells were treated with 3 / IM - a factor for 80min . The arrowhead indicates the undulating cell membrane . X28000 . B . Cytoplasmic microtubules extending toward the projection . X22000 . civ , cell wall ; m , mitochondrion ; mt , microtubules ; n , nucleus ; nu , nucleolus ; rer , rough endoplasmic reticulum ; spb , spindle pole body ; v , vacuole ; ves , membrane vesicle . Bars , 1 ' 0 / im . 3 - D reconstruction of a factor - treated cells 211 Fig . 4 . Typical elongated cell treated with 3 / iM - ff factor for 80min ( stage IV ) . A , B - Two sections from a series of 47 serial sections . X31000 . C . The projection site of different cell in stage IV . X20000 . civ , cell wall ; / , filasome ; G , Golgi body ; / , lipid granule ; m , mitochondrion ; n , nucleus ; np , nuclear pore ; nu , nucleolus ; rer , rough endoplasmic reticulum ; spb , spindle pole body ; v , vacuole ; ves , membrane vesicle . Bars , l - Ofun . 212 M . Baba et al 70 80 90 Diameter of vesicles 100 110 Fig . 5 . A distribution of vesicle sizes in O " factor - treated cells . ( • • ) stage I ( the cell shown in Fig . 1 ) , ( • • ) stage II ( the cell shown in Fig . 2 ) ; ( A A ) stage III ( the cell shown in Fig . 3 ) ; ( O O ) stage VI ( the cell shown in Fig . 4 ) . ( D • ) niitotic cell . B . Membrane vesicles at the projection site in an a - factor - treated cell . X32000 . The arrowheads indicate the undulating cell membrane . C . Membrane vesicles at the bud portion in niitotic growing cell . X32000 . civ , cell wall ; ves , membrane vesicle . Bars , 100 nm . growing axis of the projection . Distribution of filasomes , shown as white in Fig . 8 , also changed during projection formation . Filasomes in a spherical cell ( stage I ) were observed at the cell periphery ( Fig . 8A , B ) . When the cells were about to form a projection ( stage II ) , the filasomes increased in number ( Fig . 8C , D ) , and then accumulated in the projection ( stage III , Fig . 8E , F ) . At an advanced stage of projection ( stage IV ) , the cell contained filasomes both in the projection and at the cell periphery ( Fig . 8G , H ) . Mitochondria were present at the cell periphery in the early stages as shown by Fig . 8A , B , and were observed near the neck of the projection in the later stages ( Fig . 8E - H ) . Typical large vacuoles shown in stage I ( Fig . 8A , B ) were fragmented into four to seven smaller vacuoles during the process of projection forma - tion , and these fragmented vacuoles were located in the posterior half of the projected cells ( Fig . 8G to H ) . At present the physiological meaning of these changes is not clear . Lipid granules ( pink sphere ) were seen near the nucleus , and their location did not change throughout all the stages . Morphometric analysis Organellar volumes and their ratios to total cell volumes were analysed quantitatively during projection formation by computer - aided reconstruction , and the results are shown in Table 1 . Total cell volumes showed little increase during projection formation . This is character - istic of cells treated with a high dose of a factor , since with a low dose cells expand to a large round shape . Nuclear and mitochondrial volumes remained relatively constant , but vacuolar volumes seemed to decrease , because of fragmentation as discussed above . Discussion This study traced the behaviour of organelles during the process of projection formation induced by a high dose of ex factor . Electron - microscopic studies of a factor - treated cells were first published by Lipke et al . ( 1976 ) . They reported changes in the cell wall structure near the tips of elongated cells . The diffuse material of the outermost layer reported by them may correspond to the long filaments of the outermost layer of cell wall in the freeze - substituted cell . The freeze - substitution fixation method has greatly improved the preservation of intracellular structure such as rough endoplasmic reticulum , Golgi body , membrane vesicles and also cytoskeletal com - ponents ( Howard & Aist , 1979 ; Tanaka & Kanbe , 1986 ; Baba & Osumi , 1987 ) . We clearly detected most of the 3 - D reconstruction of a factor - treated cells 213 membranous structures within yeast cells , and identified filasomes for the first time in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . The most prominent change induced by or factor treat - ment was the appearance of membrane vesicles within the cells . By serial thin sectioning , many membrane vesicles concentrated at the tip of a projection were observed . Further , we applied computer - aided reconstruction in order to get a three - dimensional image of the organization Fig . 6 . Three - dimensionally reconstructed result of the distribution of membrane vesicles in relation to projection formation . A . The cell shown in Fig . 1 . B . The cell shown in Fig . 2 . C . The cell shown in Fig . 3 . D . The cell shown in Fig . 4 . Fig . 7 . A - D . Three - dimensionally reconstructed images of the distribution of Golgi bodies in the same cells shown in Fig . 6 . of membrane vesicles and organelles . By these analyses dynamic rearrangement of the vesicles and organelles were clearly shown . By comparing four stages of projec - tion formation , it was concluded that a factor induces formation of specific membrane vesicles , which are apparently smaller than secretory vesicles in the mitotic cell cycle . Before projection emergence these vesicles are distributed quite evenly in the cytoplasm . Golgi bodies , 214 M . Baba et al . Fig . 8 . Three - dimensionally reconstructed images of a factor - treated cells . The rough endoplasmic reticulum beneath the cell membrane was omitted from the three - dimensional reconstructed model , since intracellular organelles were mostly covered with the rough endoplasmic reticulum . A and B are top and side views of the cell shown in Fig . 1 . C and D are top and side views of the cell shown in Fig . 2 . E and F are top and side views of the cell shown in Fig . 3 . G and H are top and side views of the cell shown in Fig . 4 . bs , bud scar ; / , filasome ; G , Golgi body ; / , lipid granule ; m , mitochondrion ; n , nucleus ; nu , nucleolus ; rer , rough endoplasmic reticulum ; v , vacuole ; ves , membrane vesicle . Table Stage 1 . Quantitative Total cell changes in cell Volume in j * Nucleus organelles during projection formation m 3 ( % of total cell volume ) Mitochondria Vacuoles I II III IV 33 - 3 31 - 8 391 36 - 7 2 - 6 ( 7 - 7 ) 2 - 7 ( 8 - 4 ) 3 - 1 ( 7 - 9 ) 2 - 9 ( 7 - 8 ) 0 - 49 ( 1 - 5 ) 0 - 62 ( 1 - 9 ) 0 - 60 ( 1 - 5 ) 0 - 76 ( 2 - 1 ) 5 - 3 ( 15 - 9 ) 8 - 4 ( 26 - 4 ) 6 - 2 ( 15 - 8 ) 3 - 6 ( 9 - 7 ) which may be the site of vesicle production , were also dispersed . Hence , the vesicles must travel towards the point where the projection emerges by an unknown mechanism . There are two basic questions about the process of projection formation . First , what determines the site of projection emergence ? In the natural mating process between two opposite mating - type cells , the contact site where mutual pheromone concentrations should be high may become the site of cell elongation . In or factor - treated cells in suspension , cell wall structure next to the bud scar was found to be differentiated at the earliest stage . A haploid cell is known to initiate budding adjacent to the previously budded site . Therefore , a predetermined budding site may be more accessible to a factor and become the site of projection emergence . The second question is : what is the mechanism of membrane vesicle movement ? Recently , Ohsumi & Anraku ( 1985 ) reported that Ca 2 + influx is tightly coupled to the initiation of projection formation and Ca ionophore or depletion of Ca by EGTA causes inter - ruption of projection elongation . Therefore , local elev - ation of Ca concentration affects cytoskeletal structures and gives polarity to the cells . Orientation of cytoplasmic microtubules towards the projection was not observed even at stage III . Vesicles associated with microtubules were not observed . Anti - microtubule drugs did not affect the efficiency of projection formation induced by a factor ( data not shown ) . Microtubules may not be involved directly in the process of emergence of a projection or in vesicle movement . Actin organization in S . cerevisiae has been examined using phalloidin or anti - actin antibody ( Kilmartin & Adams , 1984 ; Adams & Pringle , 1984 ) . Recently , Hasek et al . ( 1987 ) analysed actin topology during zygote formation of S . cerevisiae . Preconjugatory cells displayed an asymmetric distribution of actin cyto - skeleton and an overall polarization of the cells preceding cell fusion . Fluorescence microscopy showed that actin dots accumulated at the tip of the projection of a factor - treated cells ( unpublished observation ) . We observed filasomes near the tips of projections . Filasomes are always associated with growing regions of the cell surface or septum in various fungal cells ( Hoch & Howard , 1980 ; Howard , 1981 ; Hoch & Staples , 1983 ; Kobori et al . 1989 ) and a close association between filasomes and the cell membrane has been reported ( Newhouse et al . 1983 ) . The biochemical nature and function of filasomes are not known yet . The filasome is one candidate for the actin dot , which is the only F - actin - containing structure detectable by fluorescence microscopy in cells with an elongated projection produced by a factor treatment . Local Ca 2 + influx may trigger actin reorganization and move membrane vesicles towards the growing point . References ADAMS , A . E . M . & PRINGLE , J . R . ( 1984 ) . Relationship of actin and tubulin distribution to bud growth in wild - type and morphogenetic - mutant Saccharomvces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 934 - 945 . BABA , M . & OSUMI , M . ( 1987 ) . Transmission and scanning electron microscopic examination of intracellular organelles in freeze - substituted fQockera and Saccharomvces cerevisiae yeast cells . J . Electron . Microsc . Techn . 5 , 249 - 261 . BABA , N . , BABA , M . , IMAMURA , M . , KOGA , M . , OHSUMI , Y . , OSUMI , M . & KANAYA , K . ( 1989 ) . Serial section reconstruction using a computer graphics system : Applications to intracellular structures in yeast cells and to the penodontal structure of dogs ' teeth . J . Electron Microsc . Techn . 11 , 16 - 26 . BABA , N . , NAKAMURA , S . , KINO , I . & KANAYA , K . ( 1986 ) . Three - dimensional reconstruction from serial section images by computer graphics . J . Electron Microsc . Techn . 3 , 401 - 406 . BRAWLEY , S . H . & ROBINSON , K . R . ( 1985 ) . Cytochalasin treatment disrupts the endogenous currents associated with cell polarization in fucoid zygotes : Studies of the role of F - actin in embryogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 100 , 1173 - 1184 . BUCKING - THROM , E . , DUNTZE , E . W . , HARWELL , L . H . & MANNEY , T . R . ( 1973 ) . Reversible arrest of haploid yeast cells at the initiation of DNA synthesis by a diffusible sex factor . Expl Cell Res . 76 , 99 - 110 . BYERS , B . & GOETSCH , L . ( 1975 ) . Behaviour of spindles and spindle plaques in the cell cycle and conjugation of Saccharomvces cerevisiae . J . Bad . 124 , 511 - 523 . CHAN , R . K . ( 1977 ) . Recovery of Saccharomvces cerevisiae mating - type a cells from G \ arrest by a - factor . J . Bad . 130 , 766 - 774 . CROSS , F . , HARTWELL , L . H . , JACKSON , C . & KONOPKA , J . B . ( 1988 ) . Conjugation in Saccharomvces cerevisiae . A . Rev . Cell Biol . 4 , 429 - 457 . DUNTZE , E . W . , STOTZLER , D . , BUCKING - THROM , E . & KALBITZER , S . ( 1973 ) . Purification and partial characterization of a " - factor , a mating type - specific inhibitor of cell reproduction from S . cerevisiae . Eur . J . Biochem . 35 , 357 - 365 . GROVE , S . N . & BRACKER , C . E . ( 1970 ) . Protoplasmic organization of hyphal tips among fungi : vesicles and spitzenkorper . J . Bad . 104 , 989 - 1009 . HASEK , J . , RUPES , I . , SVOBODOVA , J . & STREIBLOVA , E . ( 1987 ) . Tubulin and actin topology during zygote formation of Saccharomvces cerevisiae . J . gen . Microbiol . 133 , 3355 - 3363 . HEATH , I . B . ( 1988 ) . Evidence against a direct role for cortical actin arrays in saltatory organelle motility in hyphae of the fungus Saprolegnia ferax . jf . Cell Sci . 91 , 41 - 47 . HOCH , H . C . & HOWARD , R . J . ( 1980 ) . Ultrasmicture of freeze - substituted hyphae of the basidiomycete Laetisaria arvalis . Protoplasma 103 , 281 - 297 . HOCH , H . C . & STAPLES , R . C . ( 1983 ) . Ultrastmctural organization 3 - D reconstruction of a factor - treated cells 215 of the non - differentiated uredospore germling of Uromyces phaseoli variety tvpica . Mvcologia 75 , 795 - 824 . HORTIG , A . , HOLLY , J . , SAARI , G . & MACKAY , V . L . ( 1986 ) . Multiple regulation of STE2 , a mating - type - specific gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Molec . Cell Biol . 6 , 2106—2114 . HOWARD , R . J . ( 1981 ) . Ultrastructural analysis of hyphal tip cell growth in fungi : spitzenkorper , cytoskeleton and endomembranes after freeze - substitution . J . Cell Sci . 48 , 89 - 103 . HOWARD , R . J . & AIST , F . R . ( 1979 ) . Hyphal tip cell ultrastructure of the fungus Fusanum : Improved preservation by freeze - substitution . J Ulstrastruct . Res . 66 , 224 - 234 . KAWANABE , Y . , YOSHIDA , K . & YANAGISHIMA , N . ( 1979 ) . Sexual cell agglutination in relation to the formation of zygotes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . PL Cell Physio ! . 20 , 423 - 433 . KILMARTIN , J . V . & ADAMS , A . E . M . ( 1984 ) . Structural rearrangements of tubulin and actin during the cell cycle of the yeast Saccharomyces . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 922 - 933 . KOBORI , H . , YAMADA , N . , TAKI , A . & OSUMI , M . ( 1989 ) . Actin is associated with the formation of the cell wall in reverting protoplasts of the fission yeast Schizosaccharomvces pombe . J . Cell Sci . 94 , 000 - 000 . KROPF , D . L . , BERGE , S . K . & QUATRANO , R . S . ( 1989 ) . Actin localization during fucus embryogenesis . The Plant Cell 1 , 191 - 200 . LANCELLE , S . A . & HEPLER , P . K . ( 1989 ) . Cytochalasin - induced ultrastructural alterations in Nicotiana pollen tubes . Protoplasma Suppl . 2 , 65 - 75 . LIPKE , P . N . , TAYLOR , A . & BALLOU , C . E . ( 1976 ) . Morphogenic effects of tr - factor on Saccharomvces cerevisiae a cells . J . Bad . 127 , 610 - 618 . MOORE , S . A . ( 1983 ) . Comparison of dose - response curves for fffactor - induced cell division arrest , agglutination , and projection formation of yeast cells . J . biol . Chem . 258 , 13 849 - 13 856 . NEWHOUSE , J . R . , HOCH , H . C . & MACDONALD , W . L . ( 1983 ) . The ultrastructure of Endothia parasitica . Comparison of a virulent with a hypovirulent isolate . Can . jf . Bot . 61 , 389 - 399 . OHSUMI , Y . & ANRAKU , Y . ( 1985 ) . Specific induction of Ca 2 + transport activity in MATa cells of Saccharomyces cerevisiae by a mating pheromone , ft - factor . 7 - biol . Chem . 269 , 10482 - 10486 . PRINGLE , J . R . & HARTWELL , L . H . ( 1981 ) . The Sacchatvmyces cerevisiae cell cycle . In The Molecular Biology of the Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( Strathern J . , Jones , E . W . & Broach , J . , eds ) , pp . 97 - 142 . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . ROBERSON , R . W . & FULLER , M . S . ( 1988 ) . Ultrastructural aspects of the hyphal tip of Sclerotium rolfsii preserved by freeze substitution . Protoplasma 146 , 143 - 149 . SCHEKMAN , R . ( 1985 ) . Protein localization and membrane traffic in yeast . A . Rev . Cell Biol . 1 , 115 - 143 . SCHNEPF , E . ( 1986 ) . Cellular polarity . A . Rev . PI . Physiol . 37 , 23 - 47 . TANAKA , K . & KANBE , K . ( 1986 ) . Mitosis in fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe as revealed by freeze - substitution electron microscopy , j . Cell Sci . 80 , 253 - 268 . THORNER , J . ( 1981 ) . Pheromonal regulation of development in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . In The Molecular Biology of the Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( Strathern , J . , Jones , E . W . and Broach , J . , eds ) , pp . 143—189 . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . TIWARJ , S . C . & POUTO , V . S . ( 1988 ) . Organization of the cytoskeleton in pollen tubes of Pyrus communis : a study employing conventional and freeze - substitution electron microscopy , lmmunofluorescence , and rhodamine - phalloidin . Protoplasma 147 , 100 - 112 . TKACZ , J . S . & MACKAY , V . L . ( 1979 ) . Sexual conjugation in yeast : Cell surface changes in response to the action of mating hormones . J . Cell Biol . 80 , 326 - 333 . TSCHOPP , J . , ESMON , P . C . & SCHEKMAN , R . ( 1984 ) . Defective plasma membrane assembly in yeast secretory mutants . J . Bad . 160 , 966 - 970 . YOSHIDA , K . & YANAGISHIMA , N . ( 1978 ) . Intra - and intergenetic mating behaviour of ascosporgenous yeast . 1 . Quantitative analysis of sexual agglutination . PI . Cell Physiol . 19 , 1519 - 1533 . ( Received 19 January 1989 - Accepted , in revised form , 23 June1989 ) 216 M . Baba et al .