C S C W 15 PhD Digital Media student School of Literature , Media , and Communication , Georgia Tech In this paper we examine the way Information and Communications Technologies ( ICTs ) support forms of community activism that operate outside formal political and institutional channels . By working with activists concerned with issues of housing justice , we are able gain insight into the way ICTs play a role in complement - ing forms of civic engagement that challenges , rather than works with , institutional authority . We argue that ICTs are instrumental in supporting and shaping three alternate information practices - - situating , codification , and scaffolding - - that each serve the goals of direct democratic engagement . We also show how local activist communities engage in these three practices through their varied use of ICTs , including the ways they provide mechanisms for informal but politically significant - - and legitimate - - civic engagement . MS DM 11 Mariam Asad Mariam Asad , Christopher A Le Dantec 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing Civic Participation Illegitimate Civic Participation : Supporting Community Activists on the Ground Papers Co - authored : 2 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty CSCW 2015 C S C W 15 Research Scientist Yahoo Labs Recommender Systems In order for an online review community to be effective to both users and businesses , it is important to under - stand what constitutes a high quality review as perceived by people , and how to maximize quality of reviews in the community . We used over 200 , 000 Yelp reviews available for research to find the factors that contribute to review quality . First , we found the way people vote on reviews , including the sentiment of the text , has a rela - tionship with the tone of the text and the text’s rating , depending on the vote type . The findings of our research suggest that there is a deeper meaning and engagement associated with the three signals “cool , ” “useful , ” and “funny” than their labels suggest . While many would be correct in associating the useful and funny votes as representing reviews with the most amount of information or humor they contain , these signals are actually a proxy for negativity in reviews . A cool vote is more ambiguous in its meaning , but clearly associates with more positive reviews . Understanding these votes , or signals , and how they affect ratings can better inform custom - ers as they come across reviews and take them into account for their own purposes ; ultimately , they could alter one’s perception of a business , for better or worse . PhD CS 14 Saeideh Bakhshi Understanding Online Reviews : Funny , Cool or Useful ? Saeideh Bakhshi , Partha Kanuparthy , David A Shamma Papers Co - authored : 1 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 PhD Student HCI Institute , Carnegie Mellon University Influence and the Social Network We analyzed how the adoption of three Facebook security tools—Login Notifications , Login Approvals and Trusted Contacts—diffused through the social networks of 1 . 5 million people . This work is among the first to quantify how social processes can promote or stifle security tool adoption , with some results that markedly break expectations . Background literature suggests that people who are exposed to more friends who use security tools should be more likely to use those tools themselves . Our results suggest a more nuanced sto - ry—exposure to more friends who use security tools does not always increase one’s own likelihood of adopt - ing those tools . Furthermore , the effect of social proof on security tool adoption varies markedly across tools . These differences in the effect of social influence on adoption across security tools suggest that the design of a security tool affects its potential for social diffusion . Specifically , it seems that security tool adoption does depend on social influence , but only positively for tools that are observable , socially compatible and / or widely adopted among one’s own social network . CS 11 Sauvik Das The Role of Social Influence in Security Feature Adoption Sauvik Das , Adam D Kramer , Laura A Dabbish , Jason I Hong Papers Co - authored : 1 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 Associate Professor HCI Institute , Carnegie Mellon University The Powers of Co - location We present a new technique that allows mobile devices to opportunistically group with one another , thus im - proving their ability to facilitate one - time or spontaneous exchanges of information . In our approach , devices share context with each other , and form groups when these readings are found to be similar to one another . Through a formative study , we examine the limitations of using a single type of context to form groups , and show how leveraging multiple contexts improves our ability to detect and form relevant groupings . We then present DIDJA , a robust software toolkit that automatically collects and analyzes contextual information in order to find and form groups . Through two prototypes , we demonstrate how DIDJA enhances existing user experi - ences , and show how developers can use our toolkit to easily facilitate frictionless collaborations between us - ers and their environment . We then perform an extended experiment and show how DIDJA is able to accurately form groups under realistic conditions . PhD CS 00 Anind Dey Using Multiple Contexts to Detect and Form Opportunistic Groups Adrian A de Freitas , Anind Dey Papers Co - authored : 3 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 Assistant Professor College of Journalism , University of Maryland Journalism and Politics The journalistic curation of social media content from platforms like Facebook and YouTube or from comment - ing systems is underscored by an imperative for publishing accurate and quality content . In this work we study the manifestation of editorial quality criteria in comments that have been curated and selected on the New York Times website as “NYT Picks . ” In particular we examine the relationship between comment selection and comment relevance through the analysis of 331 , 785 comments , including 12 , 542 editor’s selections . We find a robust association between editorial selection and article relevance as well as conversational relevance . Our results are discussed in terms of their implications for reducing journalistic curatorial work load , or scaling the ability to examine more comments for editorial selection , as well as how end - user commenting experiences might be improved . PhD CS 09 Nicholas Diakopoulos The Editor’s Eye : Curation and Comment Relevance on the New York Times Papers Co - authored : 2 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 Assistant Professor Department of Computer Science , University of Nebraska at Omaha Annotation System and Approaches We address shortcomings in current web platforms used in video - based instruction environments like flipped classes and MOOCs . We aim to transform students’ interactions with videos from that of passive viewing to active sense - making through collaboration . In particular , we extend anchored collaboration techniques to embed student - driven discussions within videos at moments in time and space where questions naturally arise while preserving the referential context . We present a pilot deployment of a new system called TrACE in two university classes to better understand the capabilities and limitations of this approach . Our pilot study provides some initial evidence in support of our collaboration techniques , but it also under - scores the importance of instructor intentionality in integrating collaborative online work within the broader course culture . PhD CS 10 Brian Dorn Piloting TrACE : Exploring Spatiotemporal Anchored Collaboration in Asynchronous Learning Brian Dorn , Larissa Schroeder , Adam Stankiewicz Papers Co - authored : 1 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 Assistant Professor HCI Institute , School of Computer Science , Carnegie Mellon University Teamwork Challenges Online collaboration tools enable developers of interactive systems to quickly reach potential users for usability test - ing . Can these technologies serve designers who seek feedback on user needs during the earliest stages of design ? Online needfinding may help designers create products and services that can target a more diverse user population . To explore this , we conducted a feasibility study to compare face - to - face methods with online needfinding sessions . We found that video can sufficiently capture nuanced reactions to preliminary concept storyboards , but that feedback providers need guidance and structure . We then introduce a tool for collect - ing early - stage design feedback from online participants and conduct a case study with a professional design team . The team conducted needfinding activities with local participants , as well as a cost - equivalent number of online participants The case study demonstrates that combining online crowdsourcing with a video survey tool provides a simple and cost - efficient way to collect early - stage feedback . PhD HCC 08 Steven Dow Exiting the Design Studio : Leveraging Online Participants for Early - Stage Design Feedback Xiaojuan Ma , Li Yu , Steven P Dow , Jodi L Forlizzi Papers Co - authored : 4 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 PhD Human - Centered Computing candidate School of Interactive Computing , Georgia Tech Policy and the Legislative Context Copyright law is increasingly relevant to everyday interactions online , from social media status updates to artists showcasing their work . This is especially true in creative spaces where rules about reuse and remix are notoriously gray . Based on a content analysis of public forum postings in eight different online communities featuring different media types ( music , video , art , and writing ) , we found that copyright is a frequent topic of conversation and that much of this discourse stems from problems that copyright causes for creative activities . We identify the major types of problems encountered , including chilling effects that negatively impact technolo - gy use . We find that many challenges can be explained by lack of knowledge about legal or policy rules , includ - ing breakdowns in user expectations for the sites they use . We argue that lack of clarity is a pervasive usability problem that should be considered more carefully in the design of user - generated content platforms . MS HCI 05 Casey Fiesler Understanding Copyright in Online Creative Communities Casey Fiesler , Jessica L Feuston , Amy S Bruckman Papers Co - authored : 2 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 PhD Human Centered Design & Engineering student , University of Washington Hacking and Making Papers Co - authored : 2 The paper examines the motivations , activities , and ideals of people organizing feminist hackerspaces : collab - orative workspaces developed to support women’s creative and professional pursuits . Drawing on interviews , participant observation and archival data collected across the Pacific Northwest over nine months , we show how members of these spaces use small - scale collaborative design and acts of making to work out their place in society in ways that contest widely accepted understandings of hacking , technology , and collaboration . In designing how the space should look , feel , and run , feminist hackerspace members reframe activities seldom associated with technical work ( e . g . , weaving , identity workshops ) as forms of hacking . In so doing , they shift concerns for women in technology from questions of access ( who is included ) to questions of recognition ( who is visible ) while grappling with productive ambiguities in between . MS DM 13 Sarah Fox Hacking Culture , Not Devices : Access and Recognition in Feminist Hackerspaces Sarah Fox , Rachel Rose R Ulgado , Daniela K Rosner CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 PhD Human - Centered Computing student School of Interactive Computing , Georgia Tech Creative Collaborating If you could accomplish a complex , collaborative work task with one tool or many tools working together , which would you choose ? In this paper , we present a case study of GISHWHES ( the “Greatest International Scavenger Hunt the World Has Ever Seen” ) , an annual event in which teams spend one week completing complex , creative tasks . Building on the literature of IT ecosystems , we show how teams used different collections of tools to meet their communication needs . We interviewed team members , finding that most teams used multiple tools during GISHWHES . By analyzing which tools they chose over others for each function , we gain insight into the strengths and weaknesses of these tools , and the complexity surrounding work processes . In light of this com - plexity , this research highlights the importance of designing appropriable tools that can work with unanticipated workflows and mesh well with other tools in a communicative ecology . Joseph Gonzales Towards an Appropriable CSCW Tool Ecology : Lessons from the Greatest International Scavenger Hunt the World Has Ever Seen Joseph A Gonzales , Casey Fiesler , Amy S Bruckman Papers Co - authored : 1 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing MS HCI 14 C S C W 15 PhD Information & Computer Science candidate Department of Informatics , University of California , Irvine Temporality and Rhythms of Work In this paper , we introduce the notion of a temporal logic to characterize sets of ‘organizing principles’ that serve to perpetuate a particular orientation to temporality . We identify a dominant temporal logic , circumscribed time , which suggests that time is chunkable , single - purpose , linear , and ownable . We analyze this logic against the everyday temporal experiences of participants in three ethnographic datasets to identify a set of alternative understandings of time , namely that it is also spectral , mosaic , rhythmic , and obligated . We call this initial typol - ogy porous time . Our goal in positing porous time as an expansion of circumscribed time is to provoke reflec - tion on how temporal logics underpin the ways that people orient to each other , research and design technolo - gies , and normalize visions of success in contemporary life . MS HCI 07 Ellie Harmon Circumscribed time and porous time : Logics as a way of studying temporality Melissa Mazmanian , Ingrid Erickson , Ellie Harmon Papers Co - authored : 1 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 Associate Professor School of Information and Computer Sciences , University of California , Irvine My Mobile , My Friends In this paper , we describe the design process and principles used in the development of a tool to support parents of preterm infants to track health data , Estrellita . We tested Estrellita in the homes of seven families for four months , while following seven additional families without Estrellita . The feedback from this trial , including in - depth interviews , surveys , and log analysis , sheds light on how parents can use a mobile data collection tool to enhance their problem - solving processes about their own health and that of their infants , as well as to share with others who support them in this care . In addition to presenting the design of a recording technology for preterm infants and its use in a real - life setting , the results of this research provide a deep understanding of how technology can and should be used to support home - care of at - risk patients , in which data capture may be unexpected but essential . PhD CS 07 Gillian Hayes Estrellita : A Mobile Capture and Access Tool for the Support of Preterm Infants and their Caregivers Gillian Hayes , Karen Cheng , Sen Hirano , Karen Tang , Marni Nagel , Dianne Baker Papers Co - authored : 4 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 Associate Professor HCI Institute , School of Computer Science , Carnegie Mellon University My Mobile , My Friends How effective are call and SMS logs in modeling tie strength ? Frequency and duration of communication has long been cited as a major aspect of tie strength . Intuitively , this makes sense : people communicate with those that they feel close to . Highly cited research papers have pushed this idea further , using communication as a direct proxy for tie strength . However , this operationalization has not been validated . Our work evaluates this assumption . We collected call and SMS logs and ground truth relationship data from 36 participants . Consistent with theory , we found that frequent or long - duration communication likely indicates a strong tie . However , the use of call and SMS logs produced many errors in separating strong and weak ties , suggesting this approach is incomplete . Follow - up interviews indicate fundamental challenges for inferring tie strength from communication logs . CS , DMath 97 Jason Hong “You Never Call , You Never Write” : Call and SMS Logs Do Not Always Indicate Tie Strength Jason Wiese , Jun - Ki Min , Jason I Hong , John Zimmerman Papers Co - authored : 2 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 Professor HCI Institute , School of Computer Science , Carnegie Mellon University Leveraging the Crowd Eye tracking is a compelling tool for revealing people’s spatial - temporal distribution of visual attention . But quality eye tracking hardware is expensive and can only be used with one person at a time . Further , webcam eye tracking systems have significant limitations on head movement and lighting conditions that result in sig - nificant data loss and inaccuracies . To address these drawbacks , we introduce a new approach that harnesses the crowd to understand allocation of visual attention . In our approach , crowdsourcing participants use mouse clicks to self - report the positions and trajectory for the following valuable eye tracking measures : first gaze , last gaze and all gazes . We validate our crowdsourcing approach with a user study , which demonstrated good accuracy when compared to a real eye tracker . We then deployed our prototype , GazeCrowd , in a crowdsourc - ing setting , and showed that it accurately generated gaze heatmaps and trajectory maps . Such an approach will allow designers to evaluate and refine their visual design without requiring the use of limited / expensive eye trackers . Associate Professor , College of Computing ( 1992 - 97 ) Scott Hudson Social Eye Tracking : Gaze Recall with Online Crowds Shiwei Cheng , Zhiqiang Sun , Xiaojuan Ma , Jodi L Forlizzi , Scott E Hudson , Anind Dey Papers Co - authored : 1 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 PhD Human - Centered Computing student School of Interactive Computing , Georgia Tech The increase of people engaging in personal health tracking provides the opportunity to change the health - care landscape . The data collected through personal trackers can help providers develop more personalized healthcare practices . For those battling chronic diseases and cancers more personalized care can have drastic influence of health outcomes . However , we don’t yet know if the data people are comfortable sharing with their providers is the data that could most benefit their treatment . In this study we compare the health sharing prefer - ences of breast cancer patients , doctors and navigators . We found that discrepancies do exists between what patients are willing to share and the data doctors feel would be useful for aiding treatment . The most significant discrepancy we found was a “loneliness gap” . About a quarter of our participants indicated that they would not share feelings of loneliness or fear with their healthcare providers . However , the doctors and navigators felt that knowing this information could be vital to their treatment as these feelings can affect patients’ mental and phys - ical wellbeing and their ability to receive care . Maia Jacobs Maia L Jacobs , James Clawson , Elizabeth D Mynatt Is there a Doctor in the Room ? Comparing Health Information Sharing Preferences of Cancer Patients , Doctors , and Navigators Papers Co - authored : 1 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 Assistant Professor School of Literature , Media , and Communication , Georgia Tech Community - Based Participatory Research This paper is about the work we do to create productive partnerships in community settings : developing rela - tionships , demonstrating commitments , and overcoming personal and institutional barriers to community - based design research . Sometimes we’re welcomed with enthusiasm , sometimes we’re publicly upbraided for things in and out of our control ; sometimes we choose our partners , sometimes our partners choose us . Across all of these , every community engagement requires a deft touch and a willingness to work for and work with ( and not work on ) the community . By reflecting on the effort and care that went into developing a fruitful community part - nership , by recognizing our own fallibility and missteps , we show how our partnership emerged from a highly contentious history and how it ultimately made the research better . PhD HCC 11 Christopher Le Dantec Strangers at the Gate : Gaining Access , Building Rapport , and Co - Constructing Community - Based Research Christopher A Le Dantec , Sarah Fox Papers Co - authored : 3 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 Assistant Professor Department of Computer Science , Virginia Tech Leveraging the Crowd We’ve all squinted our eyes at an unreadable slide deck or wrinkled our nose at an ugly poster or flyer for a local event . And maybe we can even admit to being responsible for some of these less - than - awesome de - signs . But “everyday design” is tricky because most people don’t have access to a reliable source of useful feedback . To address this , we developed CrowdCrit , a system that allows anyone to submit a visual design , receive crowdsourced feedback from people around the world , and review the aggregated feedback with an interactive visualization . We evaluated CrowdCrit with three studies . In the first study , we compared aggre - gated crowd feedback to expert critiques and identified some promising similarities . In a second study , a poster design contest for a local music festival , people who got crowd feedback reported that it improved their design process . The third study , an experiment conducted on an online design contest site , showed that designers were enthusiastic about crowd feedback and used it to change their designs . PhD HCC 12 Kurt Luther Structuring , Aggregating , and Evaluating Crowdsourced Design Critique Kurt Luther , Jari - lee Tolentino , Wei Wu , Amy K Pavel , Brian P Bailey , Maneesh Agrawala , Bjoern Hartmann , Steven P Dow Papers Co - authored : 1 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 PhD Civil Engineering student School of Civil and Environmental Engineering , Georgia Tech We are in the midst of a new era of experimentation that blends social and mobile computing in support of dig - ital democracy . These experiments will have potentially long lasting consequences on how the public is invited to participate in governance by elected as well as professional officials . In this paper , we look at how data from a purpose - built smartphone app we deployed were incorporated into a three - day urban planning event . The data collected was meant to help inform design decisions for new cycling infrastructure and to provide an alter - nate means for participating in the planning process . Through our analysis , we point to three distinct roles the data played at the event - - as authority , as evidence , and as ambivalent . Each role demonstrates the challenge and potential for turning to crowdsourced data as a form of participation and as a re - source for urban planning . Aditi Misra Christopher A Le Dantec , Mariam Asad , Aditi Misra , Kari Watkins Planning with Crowdsourced Data : Rhetoric and Representation in Transportation Planning Papers Co - authored : 1 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing Civic Participation C S C W 15 Assistant Professor College of Computer & Information Science and College of Health Sciences , Northeastern University Parents play a critical role in facilitating children’s physical activity , as they are an important source of modeling and support . While Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) researchers have explored exergame design for children or adults separately , an important open area of work is identifying design guidelines for family exergames . One question that researchers have increasingly posed is , how can exergames be designed to avoid potential neg - ative consequences of competition ? To address these questions we designed Spaceship Launch , an exergame for parents and kids in lower income neighborhoods , where obesity is most prevalent . We describe our iterative design process : the formative study to identify design opportunities , our resulting system , and our field evalua - tion of the tool . Our findings highlight the impact of SL on physical activity intentions , and how parental prefer - ences for in - game competition were aligned with the psychological needs of relatedness and competence . We conclude with design recommendations for future family - focused exergames . PhD HCC 11 Andrea Parker Herman Saksono , Ashwini Ranade , Geeta Kamarthi , Carmen Castaneda - Sceppa , Jessica A Hoffman , Cathy Wirth , Andrea G Parker Children and Families Spaceship Launch : Designing an Exergame for Families Papers Co - authored : 1 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 UX Designer Riot Games Volunteerism Resource - restricted non - profit organizations ( NPOs ) are often volunteer - based ; their human infrastructure is thus different from conventional organizations . Hence , technologies that work in conventional organizations with a stable workforce may not work in NPOs . Our study revealed a disrupted human infrastructure after an Electronic Health Record ( EHR ) system implementation in a safety net free clinic that served underprivileged patients . The EHR system failed to support the dynamism of volunteer work essential to the free clinic . Spe - cifically the mismatch between the technological and human infrastructures led to diminished volunteer roles , increased workload of employees , and impacted quality of patient care . In turn , employees initiated to recon - cile the disrupted human infrastructure by creating new work roles for volunteers , re - establishing the quality of patient care , and developing workarounds for volunteers to resume their volunteer work . Finally we discuss how the commercial EHR system failed to support the fluid volunteer - based human infrastructure of the free clinic . MS Alumna Jahmeilah Roberson Restructuring Human Infrastructure : The impact of EHR deployment in a volunteer dependent clinic Charlotte Tang , Bryan C Semaan , Yunan Chen , Jahmeilah A Roberson Papers Co - authored : 1 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 Assistant Professor School of Information , University of Michigan Systems in Support of Health & Wellness We conducted an interview study with 22 new mothers about how they share baby photos on Facebook . Mothers share four kinds of baby photos on Facebook : photos where the baby looks “cute” , photos where the baby is doing something funny , photos where the baby is with family or friends , and photos of milestones ( e . g . , crawling , walking ) . Mothers don’t share three kinds of baby photos : low quality photos , photos that convey negativity , or photos that overexpose the child ( e . g . , naked ) . We introduce the concept of privacy stewardship to describe the responsibility parents take on when deciding what is appropriate to share about their children online and when ensuring that family and friends respect and maintain the integrity of those rules . Parents face a tension between the expectation that they will document and archive their children’s social lives , while simul - taneously ensuring that their child’s privacy is protected and identity is carefully stewarded . PhD HCC 12 Sarita Schoenenbeck The Modern Day Baby Book : Enacting Good Mothering and Stewarding Privacy on Facebook Priya Kumar , Sarita Schoenebeck Papers Co - authored : 1 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing C S C W 15 Assistant Professor School of Informatics and Computing , Indiana University , Indianapolis Civic Participation We report on the results of a diary study of the everyday volunteering and help giving of individuals in the mil - lennial generation . We describe the breadth of work structures implicated in volunteering , the social structures implicated in volunteering , and unpack the interdependencies between the two . We analyze the roles that tech - nology plays in volunteering with a particular focus on the forms of infrastructure that are constituted through the work and social structures of this philanthropic activity . Finally , we reflect on design opportunities for infra - structures where work and social structures meet to support more everyday , ubiquitous forms of volunteering . PhD HCC 08 Amy Voida ( Infra ) structures of Volunteering Amy Voida , Zheng Yao , Matthias Korn Papers Co - authored : 2 CSCW 2015 Research by Georgia Tech Alumni , Students , and Faculty 18th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing