Cell , Vol . 121 , 593 – 606 , May 20 , 2005 , Copyright ©2005 by Elsevier Inc . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 03 . 015 Coupling between Clathrin - Coated - Pit Invagination , Cortactin Recruitment , and Membrane Scission Observed in Live Cells Christien J . Merrifield , 1 , 4 , * David Perrais , 2 , 4 and David Zenisek 3 1 MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology Hills Road Cambridge , CB2 2QH United Kingdom 2 Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire de la Synapse CNRS UMR 5091 et Université Bordeaux 2 Institut François Magendie 1 rue Camille Saint Saëns 33077 Bordeaux Cedex France 3 Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology Yale University School of Medicine 333 Cedar Street New Haven , Connecticut 06520 Summary During clathrin - mediated endocytosis , membrane scission marks the isolation of a cargo - laden clathrin - coated pit ( CCP ) from the cell exterior . Here we used live - cell imaging of a pH - sensitive cargo to visualize the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) at single CCPs with a time resolution of seconds . We show that CCPs are highly dynamic and can produce multiple vesicles in succession . Using alternating ev - anescent field and epifluorescence illumination , we show that CCP invagination and scission are tightly coupled , with scission coinciding with maximal dis - placement of CCPs from the plasma membrane and with peak recruitment of cortactin - DsRed , a dynamin and F - actin binding protein . Finally , perturbing actin polymerization with latrunculin - B drastically reduces the efficiency of membrane scission and affects many aspects of CCP dynamics . We propose that CCP inva - gination , actin polymerization , and CCV formation are highly coordinated for efficient endocytosis . Introduction Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) entails the selec - tive concentration of cell - surface receptors in clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) that invaginate and pinch off of the plasma membrane along with their receptor cargo to form clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) ( Mukherjee et al . , 1997 ) . Our understanding of the complex dynamics of CCP nucleation , growth , invagination , and scission is largely based on evidence from static EM images ( Hig - gins and McMahon , 2002 ) that reveal CCPs in various states of invagination ( Heuser , 1980 ) . These observa - tions underpin a widely accepted model of CME in which CCPs nucleate at the plasma membrane , grow through addition of clathrin triskelia to the edges of the nascent CCPs , and progressively invaginate prior to * Correspondence : cjm @ mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk 4 These authors contributed equally to this work . scission ( Kirchhausen , 2000 ; Mukherjee et al . , 1997 ) . Recently , various aspects of this model have been tested by monitoring the dynamics of labeled CCPs in live cells using fluorescence microscopy in a variety of cell types ( Blanpied et al . , 2002 ; Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ; Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Keyel et al . , 2004 ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) . Relatively immobile diffraction - limited CCPs , which form at the plasma membrane and progressively increase in fluorescence before suddenly moving or dimming , are observed . It is thought that the gradual increase in fluorescence of individual fluorescent clathrin spots corresponds to clathrin polymerization and CCP growth , while increased mobility corresponds to the lib - eration of a CCV and dimming corresponds to CCV un - coating ( Blanpied et al . , 2002 ; Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Gai - darov et al . , 1999 ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) . However , diffraction - limited clathrin spots comprise only a subset of a heterogenous population of clathrin - coated structures ( CCSs ) that also includes larger structures ( Blanpied et al . , 2002 ; Rappoport et al . , 2004 ; Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) . Larger CCSs may cor - respond to the larger and topographically more com - plex coated structures seen in deep - etch EM ( Rappo - port et al . , 2004 ) , and , while some evidence suggests that these structures are endocytically active ( Blanpied et al . , 2002 ; Rappoport et al . , 2004 ; Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) , it has also been proposed that these CCSs may be inactive ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) . In addition to the uncertainty surrounding the endo - cytic competence of the differently sized CCSs ob - served in live cells , the relationship between CCP move - ment and membrane scission is also poorly understood ( Santini and Keen , 2002 ) . Using a combination of eva - nescent field ( EF ) and epifluorescence ( Epi ) fluores - cence microscopy , the minute inward movements made by CCPs during the late stages of CME have been monitored in live cells ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . EF microscopy images only those fluorescently labeled or - ganelles within w 100 nm of the lower plasma mem - brane of an adherent cell , while Epi microscopy images organelles both at the plasma membrane and deeper in the cytoplasm ( Steyer and Almers , 2001 ) . Thus , EF and Epi microscopy used in tandem can determine the distance of fluorescently labeled structures from the plasma membrane ( Toomre et al . , 2000 ) , allowing the movement of individual CCPs away from the plasma membrane to be monitored in real time with submicron resolution ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . Using this approach , it was shown that the inward movement of CCPs is presaged by recruitment of the large GTPase dynamin and accompanied by a transient burst of actin polymerization ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . However , it is unclear whether this movement corresponds to CCP invagination or to the movement of newly formed CCVs away from the plasma membrane ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . Thus , it is also unclear when the burst of actin polymerization occurs relative to CCP in - vagination and membrane scission . To resolve these issues , it would be advantageous to Cell594 pinpoint the moment of membrane scission at single CCSs in live cells . In this paper we describe an optical technique for the unbiased detection of single mem - brane scission events by monitoring the accessibility to extracellular protons of a pH - sensitive fluorescent cargo molecule at CCPs , transferrin receptor - phluorin ( Tfnr - phl ) . Using this approach , we reveal several new aspects of CCP dynamics and the formation of CCVs . First , we show using EF microscopy that both diffrac - tion - limited CCPs and larger CCSs can support multi - ple rounds of vesicle creation . Second , we reveal using a combination of EF and Epi microscopy that the move - ment of CCPs away from the plasma membrane begins before scission and most probably corresponds to a late stage in invagination . Third , we show that peak re - cruitment of cortactin , an Arp2 / 3 activator and binding partner of dynamin and filamentous actin ( F - actin ) ( Daly , 2004 ) , coincides with scission . Finally , using lat - runculin - B , a globular actin ( G - actin ) sequestering drug , we show that inhibition of actin polymerization inhibits scission and multiple aspects of CCP dynamics . Col - lectively , our results suggest that CCP invagination and membrane scission are tightly coordinated and that actin polymerization is an essential element of this process . Results Tfnr - phl Colocalizes with CCPs To measure the internalization of receptors at individual CCPs , we generated a fusion construct with super - ecliptic phluorin attached to the extracellular domain of transferrin receptor ( Tfnr - phl ) and transiently expressed this construct in a Swiss 3T3 cell line stably expressing clathrin - DsRed ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ; Merri - field et al . , 2002 ) . Superecliptic phluorin is a pH - sensi - tive variant of GFP in which fluorescence is almost completely quenched on transition from pH 7 . 4 to pH 5 . 5 ( Miesenbock et al . , 1998 ; Sankaranarayanan and Ryan , 2000 ) . Individual cells were imaged by dual - color EF microscopy using an illuminating evanescent field with an approximate depth constant of 100 nm . As seen previously ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) , clathrin - DsRed ap - peared as isolated spots and larger patches scattered across the lower surface of live cells , collectively re - ferred to in this paper as clathrin - coated structures ( CCSs ) . We define CCPs as small , circular CCSs of di - ameter < 500 nm ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . CCSs that are > 500 nm and often asymmetrical have been called large clathrin patches ( LCPs ) , as they may correspond to the large clathrin lattices observed at the lower sur - face of adherent fibroblasts in freeze - etch electron micrographs ( Heuser , 1980 ) . Tfnr - phl appeared as a dif - fuse green fluorescence at the plasma membrane and in more concentrated clusters that colocalized with CCSs ( Figures 1A and 1B ) . To quantify the colocaliza - tion of CCSs and Tfnr - phl spots , we identified isolated CCSs and measured their fluorescence for both clathrin - DsRed and Tfnr - phl ( Figure 1 ) . Of 153 CCSs , 92 % colocalized with spots of Tfnr - phl . In addition , the fluorescence of clathrin and Tfnr - phl at CCSs is propor - tional , showing that CCP size predicts Tfnr - phl loading ( Figure 1C ) . Tfnr - phl at the Majority of CCPs Is Accessible to Changes in Extracellular pH In the past , biochemical ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) and histochemical ( Willingham et al . , 1981 ) probes have been used to distinguish between CCPs and CCVs at the cell surface and to differentiate between stages during CCP invagination ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) . To monitor internalization of Tfnr - phl , we measured its accessibility to external protons by switching the pH of locally perfused buffer between pH 7 . 4 and pH 5 . 5 in synchrony with image acquisition ( see Experimental Procedures ) . After switching from pH 7 . 4 to pH 5 . 5 , Tfnr - phl fluorescence at the plasma membrane and at the majority of CCSs was quenched ( Figure 2A , bot - tom ) , as expected for receptors exposed to the extra - cellular space . However , Tfnr - phl at a minority of CCSs did not quench completely ( Figures 2A and 2B ) , indicat - ing portions of CCSs that became insulated from the cell exterior when the cell was bathed in buffer at pH 7 . 4 and that were only revealed when the fluorescence of exposed Tfnr - phl at the plasma membrane was quenched at pH 5 . 5 . It is expected that Tfnr - phl spots observed at pH 5 . 5 represent portions of CCSs that only recently internalized since CCVs rapidly acidify af - ter formation ( Yamashiro and Maxfield , 1984 ) . Consis - tent with this idea , no Tfnr - phl spots were visible when the same cell was continuously perfused at pH 5 . 5 for 3 min ( Figure 2C ) . When the perfused buffer was cycled , 18 . 4 % of CCSs imaged at pH 5 . 5 colocalized with bright Tfnr - phl spots at steady state ( n = 5 cells , Figures 2D and 2E ) . If we presume that an equal proportion of CCSs become insulated from the cell exterior at pH 5 . 5 as do at pH 7 . 4 , then half of the scission events were not detected by our assay . Thus , our estimate of the number of CCSs that colocalize with recently internal - ized Tfnr - phl at any given time point under these exper - imental conditions is w 36 . 8 % ( i . e . , 2 × 18 . 4 % ) . This fig - ure is similar to earlier results in which 25 . 7 % of CCSs near the plasma membrane of Swiss 3T3 cells were found to be inaccessible to extracellular Ruthenium red ( MW = 858 . 3 ) ( Willingham et al . , 1981 ) . The minority of acid - resistant Tfnr - phl spots that did not colocalize with CCSs may represent vesicles that formed in the absence of detectable clathrin or the cargo of newly uncoated CCVs ( arrow , Figure 2B ) . Inspection of image series acquired at pH 5 . 5 during cycling - pH perfusion revealed that the majority of acid - resistant Tfnr - phl spots appeared suddenly at CCSs ( n = 1700 / 1894 , or 89 . 9 % , in four cells ) , as expected if the spot resulted from CCV budding during the preced - ing period at neutral pH ( Figure 2F ; see also Movie S1 ) . It took w 200 ms to exchange the buffer underneath the cell when the perfused buffer was switched between pH 7 . 4 and pH 5 . 5 and to fully quench Tfnr - phl at the plasma membrane ( data not shown ; see Perrais et al . , 2004 ) . At our image - acquisition rate ( 0 . 5 Hz ) and expo - sure time ( 500 ms ) , this left 1 . 3 s for the buffer at pH 5 . 5 to penetrate any invaginated CCSs and quench the Tfnr - phl within . Clearly , if acid - resistant Tfnr - phl spots were insulated from protons ( MW = 1 ) for 1 . 3 s , they were effectively isolated from the cell exterior . There - fore , we will refer to the first frame in which a pH - resis - tant Tfnr - phl spot was detected at a CCS as the mo - ment of membrane scission . Visualizing Vesicle Formation during Endocytosis 595 Figure 1 . Tfnr - phl Colocalizes with CCPs at the Cell Surface ( A ) Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts stably expressing clathrin - DsRed were transiently transfected with Tfnr - phl and imaged using dual - color EF microscopy . In an example cell , CCPs ap - peared as red spots ( left image ) scattered across the lower surface of the cell . Tfnr - phl ( center image ) colocalized with clathrin - DsRed ( right image ) . The white square in ( A ) is shown magnified in ( B ) . ( B ) Not all CCPs colocalized with Tfnr - phl spots ( arrow ) . ( C ) The fluorescence of 153 randomly se - lected CCPs was quantified for both clathrin - DsRed and Tfnr - phl as detailed in Experi - mental Procedures and plotted . Of 153 CCPs analyzed , 92 % colocalized with Tfnr - phl spots , and brighter CCPs tend to colocalize with brighter Tfnr - phl spots ( straight line , p < 0 . 001 ) . We were concerned that repeated cycling of external pH might adversely affect normal CCP behavior and CME . However , several lines of evidence demonstrate that this is not the case . First , the rate of scission events , albeit slower than previous estimates in fibro - blasts at 37°C ( see Supplemental Data ; Bretscher , 1984 ) , remained constant at 0 . 063 events / min / (cid:2) m 2 over the 15 min of image acquisition ( Figure 2G ) . This sug - gests that pH cycling had no progressively adverse af - fect on the cells . Second , we tested whether the cy - cling - pH protocol led to acidification by the cytosol . Cytosolic acidification to pH 6 . 3 blocks CCP formation in fibroblasts ( Heuser , 1989 ) , and cytosolic acidification to pH 6 . 0 blocks CME in a variety of cell types ( Sandvig et al . , 1987 ) . However , our cycling - pH protocol caused only moderate cytosolic acidification by about 0 . 25 pH units , which is insufficient to significantly inhibit CME ( Sandvig et al . , 1987 ) ( Figure S1 ) . Finally , to determine if ligand uptake still occurred during the cycling - pH protocol , we loaded both buffers with 20 (cid:2) g / ml −1 of hu - man transferrin conjugated to red fluorescent alexa - 568 ( Tfn - A568 ) and detected scission events in 3T3 cells expressing Tfnr - phl . Under EF illumination , Tfn - A568 accumulated at the plasma membrane and became concentrated at pre - existing Tfnr - phl punctae , consis - tent with Tfn - A568 binding to Tfnr - phl at the cell surface ( Figure S2 ; see also Movie S2 ) . Focus series of images acquired before and after cycling - pH perfusion clearly revealed that cells had internalized Tfn - A568 during the cycling - pH protocol ( Figure S2 ; see also Movie S3 ) . Therefore , because we could detect ligand binding to patches of receptor , simultaneously detect scission events at the same patches , and detect ligand accumu - lation within the cell over the time course of the cycling - pH protocol , we conclude that the scission events we detected represent productive rounds of receptor inter - nalization . Multiple Rounds of Scission Occur at CCPs Earlier work using Epi or EF microscopy showed that multiple CCVs appear to emanate from CCPs ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Keyel et al . , 2004 ; Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) . This prompted the suggestion that CCPs are potential “hotspots” for endocytosis , supporting multiple rounds of vesicle formation before being disassembled ( Gai - darov et al . , 1999 ) . More recent work challenged this view and suggested that only newly formed CCPs can support CCV formation and that longer - lived and larger CCSs imaged in live cells do not participate in receptor / ligand internalization ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , we fo - cused on the dynamics of CCSs with respect to the two classes of CCS defined previously : CCP and LCP . We found that 48 . 9 % of 1700 scission events in four cells occurred at CCPs , and 51 . 1 % occurred at LCPs . There - fore , scission events can be detected at all types of CCS irrespective of relative size . Next we looked at the life histories of individual CCPs before and after scis - sion . CCSs at the lower plasma membrane of live Swiss 3T3 cells are highly dynamic at 30°C and show the full spectrum of behaviors previously reported for CCSs : forming de novo , splitting from other CCSs , and disap - pearing and moving ( Figure 3A ) . We examined CCPs that formed de novo and those that were present from the beginning of the imaging session , and we found that 41 % of CCPs at which scission occurred formed de novo during the session , consistent with this class of CCP being involved in CME ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) . The time between appearance of the CCP and the first de - tected scission event was on average 127 ± 5 s ( n = 240 ) , with a median of 100 s ( Figure 3C ) . Next we determined whether multiple events were seen at a given CCS . Indeed , this was often the case , and more than one scission event was detected in 29 % of CCPs ( n = 556 , average number of events = 1 . 59 ± 0 . 4 ; Figure 3D ) and 59 % of LCPs ( n = 229 , average number of events = 3 . 80 ± 0 . 19 ) . Two examples of CCSs with multiple scission events are illustrated in Figures 3A and 3B . One is a CCP that formed de novo , while the other is an LCP that was present throughout image acquisition . For those CCPs with multiple scission events , we found that the average time between suc - cessive rounds of membrane scission was 140 ± 6 s Cell596 Figure 2 . Tfnr - phl at a Minority of CCPs Is Insulated from External pH Changes Swiss 3T3 cells coexpressing clathrin - DsRed and Tfnr - phl were imaged using EF illumination with d = 100 nm . At pH 7 . 4 , Tfnr - phl at the plasma membrane fluoresces brightly ( A , lower left ) . In an image acquired 2 s later at pH 5 . 5 , the fluorescence of Tfnr - phl at the plasma membrane became quenched , and spots of pH - resistant Tfnr - phl were revealed ( A , lower right ) . Note that images of Tfnr - phl at the two pHs are dis - played on different scales so as to better see the acid - resistant Tfnr - phl punctae . The fluo - rescence of clathrin - DsRed was unchanged ( A , upper panels ) . The white squares in ( A ) are shown at higher magnification in ( B ) . CCPs ( circles , upper panels ) colocalize with Tfnr - phl spots at the plasma membrane ( B , lower left ) . One of the Tfnr - phl spots became totally quenched when the pH of the external buffer was changed to pH 5 . 5 ( green circle ) . In contrast , Tfnr - phl concentrated in a neigh - boring CCP was insulated from the pH change ( red circle ) . A minority of insulated Tfnr - phl spots did not colocalize with CCPs ( arrow ) . As shown in ( C ) , in the continuous presence of buffer at pH 5 . 5 , no bright Tfnr - phl spots were visible . ( D ) and ( E ) show an estimation of the proportion of CCPs that colocalized with pH - resistant Tfnr - phl spots . CCPs were automatically picked in images spaced 10 frames ( 40 s ) apart in image se - quences from five cells continually perfused at pH 5 . 5 , and the fluorescence of clathrin - DsRed and Tfnr - phl at each CCP was quanti - fied and plotted ( D ) . A straight line was fit by linear regression ( red line ) , and the upper 99 % confidence bound was calculated ( blue line ) . In cells continuously perfused at pH 5 . 5 , 2 . 6 % ( 37 out of 1566 ) of CCPs were brighter for Tfnr - phl than was predicted by the upper 99 % confidence bound on the line fitted . The analysis was repeated for images taken at pH 5 . 5 from image sequences ac - quired from the same five cells in conjunc - tion with alternating pH ( E ) . Of the 1174 CCPs measured , 21 % ( 255 out of 1174 ) were brighter than the upper 99 % confidence bound calculated for the control data . There - fore , under these acquisition conditions , at any given time , w 18 . 4 % ( i . e . , 21 % − 2 . 6 % ) colocalizes with acid - resistant Tfnr - phl spots . ( F ) shows a plot of Tfnr - phl fluo - rescence at pH 5 . 5 in regions outlined in the image ( same as in [ B ] ) . Events correspond - ing to the sudden appearance of low - pH - resistant spots are marked by red stars . One such event , corresponding to region b , is il - lustrated by four consecutive frames . ( G ) shows the average rate of event occurrence measured every minute for eight cells . Red line shows a linear fit with an ordinate of 0 . 063 events / min / (cid:2) m 2 and a slope of 10 −5 events / min / (cid:2) m 2 . Error bars in ( G ) are ± SEM . ( n = 275 ) , with a median of 112 s ( Figure 3E ) . The distri - bution did not follow a simple exponential distribution , suggesting that multiple kinetic steps are necessary between the successive rounds of scission . Remarka - bly , this latter distribution was not different from the dis - tribution of intervals between formation of CCP and the first scission event ( Figure 3C ; Kolmogorov - Smirnov Z test , p = 0 . 39 ) , suggesting that the kinetic steps for the de novo formation of CCS and scission are similar to the steps required between scission events . Where multiple events were seen at a CCS , one would predict that only part of the CCS cargo would be captured by each scission event . Consequently , the fluorescence of the Tfnr - phl spot at pH 5 . 5 should be only a fraction of the fluorescence of the whole Tfnr - phl patch at pH 7 . 4 . This was indeed the case , as on Visualizing Vesicle Formation during Endocytosis 597 Figure 3 . Characterization of the Relationship between CCSs and the Appearance of Acid - Resistant Tfnr - phl Spots ( A ) Map of the appearance of acid - resistant Tfnr - phl spots in a portion of cell . ( Aa ) The recording was divided into seven consecutive sections 2 min long . Images correspond to clathrin - DsRed fluorescence in the middle of these sections . Note that most CCSs changed during the course of the recording . Cyan dots mark the appearance of acid - resistant Tfnr - phl spots during the corresponding section . Green and red dots correspond to events in the CCSs illustrated in ( B ) . Most dots are located in CCSs . Some dots that are located outside CCSs in these images correspond to transient CCSs that have moved or disappeared at the time of the image . Other dots correspond to spots appearing with no accompanying CCSs . ( Ab ) First frame , corresponding to time 0 . Note that the CCP with events marked in green is not yet formed . The yellow rectangle corresponds to the area used to construct the kymograph in ( B ) . ( Ac ) The trajectory of the two CCSs shown in ( B ) are displayed together with all the events occurring at these structures . ( B ) Kymographs corresponding to the region outlined in yellow in ( A ) . The kymograph was constructed as follows : the maximum pixel in each vertical line was plotted on a horizontal line as a function of time . The two CCSs in the yellow region in ( A ) are visible and are marked by the corresponding green and red dots on the LCa - DsRed channel . Moments of CCP appearance and disappearance are marked by stars . In the Tfnr - phl channel at pH 5 . 5 , moments of acid - resistant - spot appearances are marked by arrowheads . Note that the disappearing CCP ( green dot ) is accompanied by a terminal scission event ( white arrowhead ) . Fluorescence of Tfnr - phl at the two pHs are displayed on different scales . ( C ) Histogram of intervals between de novo CCP formation and first scission event in four cells ( median = 100 s ) . ( D ) Number of events occurring at CCPs . ( E ) Interval between events at isolated CCPs ( median = 112 s , minimal interval = 16 s ) . ( F ) Fluorescence of a circle around Tfnr - phl spots minus an annulus at pH 5 . 5 ( green histogram ) , averaged over two frames after the appear - ance of the pH - resistant spot , for one cell ( 591 events ) . Black histogram is the fluorescence of the corresponding spots at pH 7 . 4 , the annulus ( background estimate ) being taken at pH 5 . 5 . For this cell , the ratio between these two measures was 7 . 9 % ± 3 . 4 % . ( G ) Average fluorescence traces for clathrin ( pH 5 . 5 , red line ) and Tfnr - phl ( pH 5 . 5 , open circles ; pH 7 . 4 , filled circles ) were calculated for both terminal ( Ga ) and nonterminal ( Gb ) endocytic events . In terminal events ( 25 events ) , when CCPs dim shortly after membrane scission , the associated Tfnr - phl spot at both pH 5 . 5 and pH 7 . 4 also dims . In contrast , in nonterminal events ( 20 events ) , the acid - resistant Tfnr - phl signal was rapidly lost , but both the CCP and the associated Tfnr - phl spot remained visible at pH 7 . 4 . Error bars are ± SEM . Cell598 average only 14 % ± 3 % of total Tfnr - phl fluorescence at a patch of receptor was detectable at pH 5 . 5 ( Figure 3F ; 2644 CCSs , eight cells ) . Correcting for the differ - ence in illumination efficiency by EF in vesicles versus plasma membrane ( see Supplemental Data ) , we esti - mated that 23 % ± 5 % of Tfnr - phl available in the vicinity of a CCS is taken up with each scission event . We noticed that approximately half ( 44 % ) of the scis - sion events were associated with disappearance of the attendant CCP ( see Figure 3B for an example ) , and we termed these “terminal events” since no further rounds of scission occurred once the CCP and attendant patch of Tfnr - phl at pH 7 . 4 had disappeared . For 25 terminal events , we were able to track the attendant CCP for up to 25 frames ( 100 s ) following scission or until the CCP disappeared , whichever was longer . We measured the fluorescence of the CCP and the attendant Tfnr - phl fluorescence at both pH 5 . 5 and 7 . 4 ( Figure 3Ga ) . Fol - lowing scission , acid - resistant Tfnr - phl spots dimmed with a half - life of w 30 s . Dimming was most probably due to acidification of newly formed endocytic vesicles ( Yamashiro and Maxfield , 1984 ) , but movement may also have contributed . The attendant CCPs dimmed over a time course similar to that of the newly scis - sioned Tfnr - phl spot ( Figure 3Ga ) , but it was unclear whether CCP dimming was due to clathrin disassembly or movement since only EF illumination was used in this experiment . Terminal events may represent the in - ternalization of an entire CCP or the termination of a hotspot following the last round of scission . We compared these events with 20 “nonterminal events” at CCPs analyzed in the same way as the ter - minal events ( Figure 3Gb ) . In nonterminal events there was only a moderate dip in CCP fluorescence following scission and little change in the Tfnr - phl fluorescence , indicating that the majority of the receptor was left in a patch on the plasma membrane as shown above ( Fig - ure 3F ) . The fluorescence of the new Tfnr - phl vesicle imaged at pH 5 . 5 dimmed with the same kinetics as for terminal events , suggesting that similar mechanisms are responsible for the dimming of newly scissioned Tfnr - phl vesicles in both classes of endocytic event . The Inward Movement of CCPs Culminates in Membrane Scission It was shown previously that the small - range ( nm ) movement of clathrin - DsRed - labeled CCPs away from the plasma membrane can be resolved using a combi - nation of EF and Epi microscopy ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . However , it was not established whether the move - ments measured occurred before or after membrane scission ( Santini and Keen , 2002 ) . To find when mem - brane scission occurs relative to CCP movement , we combined the cycling - pH protocol with an illumination protocol using alternating EF and Epi illumination . To make certain that our results were comparable to previ - ous results ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Merrifield et al . , 2004 ) , we used an Olympus 1 . 65 NA objective and an illuminating EF with a penetration depth of approxi - mately 50 nm ( see Experimental Procedures ) . In one cy - cle of image acquisition , the first image was acquired using EF illumination at pH 7 . 4 . The following frame was acquired 2 s later using Epi illumination at pH 5 . 5 . This cycle was repeated 200 times . We screened image series acquired using Epi illumination for membrane scission events , and the fluorescence of each CCP as - sociated with each scission event was quantified under both EF and Epi illumination . In an example event , a CCP was seen to dim under EF illumination while re - taining constant brightness under Epi illumination ( Fig - ures 4A – 4C ) . After the CCP had dimmed under EF illu - mination , scission occurred ( Figures 4A and 4D ) . The ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) decreased steadily , indicating move - ment of the CCP away from the plasma membrane ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Figure 4E ) , and revealed that scission occurred at a maximal displacement of the CCP from the plasma membrane of approximately 70 nm ( Figure 4F ) . Since this movement occurred before scission , it must have corresponded to CCP inva - gination . Closely following scission , the ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) recovered slightly ( Figure 4E ) as the CCV fluo - rescence under EF and Epi illumination decreased ( see Movie S4 for an overview of this endocytic event ) . To find whether clathrin displacement was generally coordinated with scission , we analyzed 103 scission events from six cells . For each scission event , the fluo - rescence of the associated CCP was quantified under both EF and Epi illumination and temporally aligned to the moment of scission , and each set of traces was normalized and averaged ( Figure 5 ) . On average , under EF illumination , CCPs start dimming w 40 s prior to scission ( Figure 5A ) . In contrast , under Epi illumination , the CCPs tend to brighten as scission approaches , starting w 30 s prior to the scission event , with peak CCP fluorescence coinciding with scission ( Figure 5C ) . If we assume that Epi illumination reveals the total amount of clathrin - DsRed present in the CCP , this ob - servation indicates that scission tends to occur when CCPs are at their largest . Finally , prior to scission , as the CCP fluorescence dimmed under EF illumination , Tfnr - phl also dimmed ( Figure 5B ) , showing that both the CCP and its associated receptor moved away from the plasma membrane together . To follow CCP movement over time , we calculated the ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) for each CCP , normalized it , and calculated the average ( Figure 5E ) . As for the example event ( Figure 4 ) , movement of CCPs away from the plasma membrane begins w 40 s prior to membrane scission , and scission coincides with peak CCP dis - placement ( Figure 5C ) . For each CCP , we converted the ratio EF / Epi to a displacement in nm from the plasma membrane ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) , with “0” being set as the minimum CCP displacement from the plasma mem - brane in the 80 s leading up to membrane scission . On average , the centers of mass of CCP fluorescence moved 40 . 7 ± 3 . 2 nm from the plasma membrane dur - ing invagination ( n = 103 , six cells ) , though many CCPs moved only a small distance ( Figure 5F ) . Moreover , the average included both terminal and nonterminal events . In nonterminal events , the presence of a patch of clathrin left at the plasma membrane would lead to an underestimate of the average distance moved by the budding portion of the CCP . We would thus predict that CCPs involved in terminal events would appear to move further into the cell than those involved in nonter - minal events . To test this idea , we redefined terminal events as those where CCP fluorescence , measured Visualizing Vesicle Formation during Endocytosis 599 Figure 4 . Movement and Membrane Scission Measured at a Single CCP A single CCP labeled with clathrin - DsRed was imaged using EF illumination ( A , upper panel , frames acquired at pH 7 . 4 ) and Epi illumination ( A , middle panel , frames acquired at pH 5 . 5 ) . The CCP colocalized with a spot of Tfnr - phl in frames acquired using EF illumination at pH 7 . 4 ( not shown ) . As time proceeded , the CCP dimmed under EF illumination ( A , upper panel ; B ) but not Epi illumination ( A , middle panel ; C ) . The decrease observed in the ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) indicates that the center of mass of CCP fluorescence moved away from the plasma membrane ( E and F ) , possibly reflecting invagination of the CCP . Shortly after the CCP dimmed , a spot of acid - resistant Tfnr - phl appeared , indicating that membrane scission had occurred at the CCP ( A , lower panel ; D ) . After membrane scission , the newly formed CCV dimmed under Epi illumination , indicating that the vesicle uncoated ( A , middle panel ) . Values after 60 s are not shown , as the denominator became small and introduced excessive noise . Based on the measured penetration depth of the illuminating evanescent field ( 50 nm ) , the ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) was used to calculate CCP displacement from the cell surface ( F ) . This distance measurement is offset such that “0 nm” corresponds to the point of minimal displacement of the CCP from the plasma membrane in the 100 s preceding membrane scission . The CCP moved 67 nm into the cell before scission occurred . under Epi illumination , dimmed to < 50 % of its starting fluorescence in the 40 s following scission . We could not use our original definition of terminal events be - cause we could only rarely track CCPs under Epi illumi - nation for 100 s following scission . Consistent with our prediction , the inward movement made by CCPs in - volved in terminal events was significantly greater than the movement of CCPs involved in nonterminal events ( terminal , 51 . 7 ± 5 . 3 nm , n = 39 ; nonterminal , 33 . 9 ± 3 . 8 nm , n = 64 ; t test p < 0 . 05 ) . Following scission , as CCPs continued to dim on average under EF illumination , the average ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) increased . Several different mechanisms may contribute to this effect , including local uncoating of CCVs , leaving of a patch of clathrin at the plasma mem - brane ( nonterminal events ) , or the rapid decrease of Cell600 Figure 5 . Movement of CCPs Away from the Plasma Membrane Is Coordinated with Membrane Scission Membrane scission events were identified as in Figure 4 . The fluo - rescence of CCPs under each condition was quantified , normal - ized , and aligned to the moment of membrane scission . Error bars are ± SEM . ( A ) Average EF ( clath , pH 7 . 4 ) fluorescence trace from 103 CCPs from six cells . On average , CCP dimming begins approximately 40 s prior to membrane scission . ( B ) Average EF ( Tfnr - phl , pH 7 . 4 ) fluorescence trace for the same set of CCPs . Tfnr - phl fluorescence tends to decrease prior to mem - brane scission . ( C ) Average Epi ( clath , pH 5 . 5 ) fluorescence trace for the same set of CCPs . The average trace peaks at the moment of membrane scission . ( D ) Average Epi ( Tfnr - phl , pH 5 . 5 ) fluorescence trace for the same set of CCPs . ( E ) To measure the relative displacement of CCPs from the plasma membrane in relation to membrane scission , the ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) was calculated for each CCP and temporally aligned to membrane scission , and the whole set of ratio traces was normalized and averaged . CCPs move away from the plasma membrane before membrane scission , as indicated by a decrease in the ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) . Membrane scission occurs at the maximum distance of the CCP from the plasma membrane . Recovery of the ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) after membrane scission may be linked to local CCP un - coating or movement of the remaining clathrin back toward the plasma membrane . ( F ) Frequency distribution of individual CCP displacement at the time of membrane scission . Arrow indicates average displacement . clathrin - DsRed fluorescence following scission under both EF and Epi illumination ( terminal events ) . Occa - sionally , the newly formed CCV clearly moved back closer to the plasma membrane following membrane scission and CCV formation ( Figure S4 ) , and this would also contribute to the rise in average ratio EF / Epi seen after scission . The Arp2 / 3 Activator Cortactin Is Recruited to Sites of Membrane Scission , and Efficient Scission Requires Actin Remodeling Since the inward movement made by CCPs during CME has been shown to coincide with the recruitment of actin and proteins involved in actin polymerization ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) , we wanted to determine if and when these proteins were recruited relative to scission . Several proteins involved in actin polymerization have been linked to CME in mammalian cells ( Qualmann et al . , 2000 ) , and one of these is cortactin , an 80 – 85 kDa protein that activates Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin polymer - ization ( Daly , 2004 ) and binds to F - actin and dynamin ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Weed et al . , 2000 ) . Because it is a strong candidate for linking dynamin and actin poly - merization at sites of CME ( Cao et al . , 2003 ; Schafer et al . , 2002 ) , we wanted to find whether and when cortac - tin is recruited to CCPs relative to membrane scission . Moreover , cortactin tolerates fusion with the red fluo - rescent protein DsRed ( Cao et al . , 2003 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2000 ) , thus enabling a two - color experiment to visu - alize cortactin - DsRed and Tfnr - phl at sites of mem - brane scission in live cells . We cotransfected cortactin - DsRed and Tfnr - phl into Swiss 3T3 cells and illuminated them using an evanes - cent field with a penetration depth of 100 nm . Cortac - tin - DsRed was found to localize to membrane ruffles and discrete spots at the plasma membrane ( Figure 6A ) . We acquired images at 0 . 5 Hz in conjunction with cycling pH and identified membrane scission events as detailed previously . In an example image taken at pH 5 . 5 , cortactin - DsRed spots were found to colocalize only rarely with acid - resistant Tfnr - phl spots ( Figure 6A ) . In a time - resolved series of images of an example membrane scission event , cortactin - DsRed was re - cruited to the prospective site of membrane scission well before scission occurred ( Figure 6B ; see also Movie S5 ) . When we quantified both cortactin - DsRed and Tfnr - phl fluorescence for this example event , we found peak cortactin - DsRed recruitment coincided with membrane scission ( Figures 6B and 6C ) . To find whether cortactin recruitment to sites of membrane scission was a regular occurrence , we identified 266 membrane scission events from three cells and quanti - fied both Tfnr - phl and cortactin - DsRed fluorescence at the site of each scission event . Visual inspection re - vealed that 36 % of scission events were accompanied by the recruitment of detectable amounts of cortactin - DsRed ( Figures 6C and 6D ) . For those events where cortactin - DsRed was detected , recruitment began well before membrane scission and peaked as scission oc - curred . Coincidentally , cortactin - DsRed recruitment fol - lows a similar time course to invagination , starting w 40 s prior to membrane scission ( Figure 6D ) . To find whether actin polymerization was generally necessary for membrane scission in Swiss 3T3 fibro - blasts , we treated cells with 2 . 5 (cid:2) M latrunculin - B for 1 hr and probed for scission events using the cycling - pH protocol ( Figure S5 ) . Using this concentration of latrun - culin - B and incubation time , we were able to inhibit dy - namic actin remodeling in Swiss 3T3 cells stably ex - pressing GFP - β - actin ( data not shown ) but leave the cells with enough structural integrity to withstand the Visualizing Vesicle Formation during Endocytosis 601 Figure 6 . Cortactin Is Recruited to Sites of Membrane Scission ( A ) Image of a portion of a Swiss 3T3 cell expressing cortactin - DsRed ( red ) and Tfnr - phl ( green ) at pH 5 . 5 from an image series acquired with EF illumination ( d = 100 nm ) in conjunction with cycling - pH perfusion ( see Experimental Procedures ) . ( B ) Time - resolved montage of white square in ( A ) . A punctae of Tfnr - phl is visible in frames acquired at pH 7 . 4 ( lower panel ) . As time proceeds , cortactin - DsRed was progressively recruited to the Tfnr - phl punctae ( upper panel ) . At pH 5 . 5 , a Tfnr - phl spot appeared ( middle panel ) at peak cortactin - DsRed fluorescence . ( C ) Quantified fluorescence data from the membrane scission event featured in ( A ) and ( B ) . ( D ) 266 scission events from three cells were divided into those that were positive for cortactin ( 95 events , upper trace ) and those that were not ( 171 events , middle trace ) . The traces were aligned to the moment of membrane scission ( lower trace ) and averaged . In those events where cortactin is recruited , peak cortactin - DsRed recruitment coincides with membrane scission . In the average fluorescence traces , “0” has been set as the average of the first three values . Error bars are ± SEM . mechanical stresses of perfusion . In untreated cells ex - pressing clathrin - DsRed and Tfnr - phl , both CCSs and attendant Tfnr - phl spots were highly dynamic , appear - ing and disappearing in unison at pH 7 . 4 as described earlier ( Figure S5 ) . After treatment with latrunculin - B , the dynamic behavior of CCSs was completely blocked , and we detected an 82 % decrease in the incidence of scission events ( 0 . 25 events / CCP / min for untreated and 0 . 046 events / CCP / min for latrunculin - B - treated cells ) . To conclude , blocking actin polymerization in Swiss 3T3 cells inhibited scission and multiple aspects of CCP dynamics , including CCP formation , movement , and splitting ( Figure S5 ) . Discussion Current Models of CME CME culminates in membrane scission and the forma - tion of vesicles . In this paper we have described a method to detect in live cells , with a temporal resolu - tion of 4 s , the formation of CCVs at single CCSs . We have thus been able to assess the endocytic activity of single CCSs without any preconceived idea of the steps surrounding vesicle formation and compare our findings to current models of CCS dynamics during en - docytosis . Historically , the morphology and dynamics of CCPs during endocytosis have been explored using electron microscopy ( EM ) ( Higgins and McMahon , 2002 ) . Early work using deep - etch - section EM revealed that CCPs at the lower surface of adherent fibroblasts exist in a variety of states of curvature , from flat to hemispheri - cal , and it was suggested that these represent a time series during the formation of CCVs ( Heuser , 1980 ) . Studies using thin - section EM reported CCPs of similar shapes and dimensions and also revealed deeply in - vaginated CCPs with narrow necks surrounded by electron - dense material ( Willingham and Pastan , 1983 ) . Deep - etch EM also revealed CCSs with more complex geometries including hemispherical buds at the edge of large clathrin patches ( Rappoport et al . , 2004 ) and patches with multiple curved domains ( Heuser , 1980 ; Heuser and Anderson , 1989 ) . However , it is not clear whether all of these CCSs reported in fibroblasts repre - sent intermediates in the formation of CCVs . Further - more , EM requires extensive specimen preparation , and it is possible that delicate intermediates during the formation of CCVs may be lost . Clearly , relating static EM images to the rapid and fluid changes in CCP mor - phology that accompany CME in live cells has been a major challenge . In spite of these difficulties , a consensus model for Cell602 the formation of CCVs has emerged ( Kirchhausen , 2000 ) . In this model , the life of a CCP begins when a clathrin lattice is nucleated at the plasma membrane and grows at its edge by incorporation of clathrin triskelia . As the CCP grows , it simultaneously invagi - nates with the aid of accessory proteins and possibly lipid modifications ( Farsad and De Camilli , 2003 ) . In a final sequence of events that remain poorly under - stood , the invaginated CCP closes to form a thin mem - brane neck that is severed in a process involving the large GTPase dynamin ( Praefcke and McMahon , 2004 ) . Scission Can Be Detected at Both Large and Small CCSs Recently , various aspects of this model for CCV forma - tion have been tested in live cells using fluorescence microscopy ( Rappoport et al . , 2004 ) . Analysis of time - resolved , dual - color image series uncovered corre - lations between CCS behavior and the recruitment ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Merrifield et al . , 2004 ) or loss ( Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) of specific proteins in living cells . The dynamics observed agree well with current mod - els of CCV formation . For instance , single CCPs were visualized as they grew de novo on the plasma mem - brane , gradually increasing in intensity over 28 – 80 s de - pending on the cell type and conditions used ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ) . Transformation of a CCP to a CCV was presumed to correspond to an in - crease in lateral motility of a diffraction - limited clathrin spot and was followed shortly thereafter by dimming of the putative CCV , presumably as it uncoated ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ; Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) . However , discrepancies remain in the interpretations because of the difficulty in relating the observed beha - viors to membrane scission . For instance , in one study , confocal microscopy was used to follow the dynamics of CCSs in BSC1 and COS cells ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) . Clathrin was found to accumulate at diffraction - limited spots that formed gradually and subsequently disap - peared along with fluorescent cargo , and it was sug - gested that these , and only these , CCSs represented actively endocytosing CCPs ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) . Since larger CCSs were apparently static , it was suggested that these were not active in endocytosis . In another study using EF microscopy , similar structures were ob - served in HeLa cells , but it was also found that CCVs occasionally budded from larger patches of clathrin ( Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) . Similar events were observed in neuronal dendrites using confocal microscopy ( Blan - pied et al . , 2002 ) . In this paper we have found that CCSs at the lower surface of adherent Swiss 3T3 cells labeled with clathrin - DsRed show the full range of relative size and dynamics described previously in other cell types . We have observed both large clathrin patches ( LCPs ) and smaller , diffraction - limited CCPs , a significant propor - tion of which formed de novo during the imaging exper - iments we describe . The size distribution of CCSs we have observed using EF microscopy is consistent with the heterogeneous population of CCSs at the lower sur - face of fibroblasts observed using EM ( Heuser , 1980 ; Heuser and Anderson , 1989 ) . Using the scission assay described in this paper , we now show that both large and small CCSs can support multiple rounds of scis - sion and , by inference , vesicle formation . In addition , we confirm that mobile CCVs are occasionally seen to bud off of static CCPs ( Figure S4 ) as suggested pre - viously ( Rappoport et al . , 2003 ) . This observation re - mained rare , possibly because the lateral movement of newly formed vesicles was normally too small to distin - guish the vesicle and parent CCS . More often , vesicle budding appears as a nonterminal event ( Figure 3 ) . From these results we suggest that it is not possible to use optical microscopy to define , using size alone , a class of CCS that colocalizes with externally accessible Tfnr - phl but cannot support scission at some stage in its life history . Instead , all classes of CCS are capable of supporting membrane scission . Invagination Is Temporally Coordinated with Scission In an earlier study using a combination of EF and Epi microscopy , it was shown how CCPs disappear from time - resolved EF ( d = 50 nm ) images as they move away from the plasma membrane ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . The disappearance of CCPs under EF illumina - tion was used as a marker for endocytosis , and it was shown that the recruitment of proteins involved in CME was temporally correlated with CCP disappearance ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . However , one problem with this work was that it relied on almost complete dimming of CCPs under EF ( d = 50 nm ) illumination as a marker for internalization , ignoring smaller CCP movements possi - bly related to CCV formation . Furthermore , it was not clear whether CCP movement represented CCP invagi - nation or the movement of a newly scissioned vesicle away from the plasma membrane ( Santini and Keen , 2002 ) . Here we have revisited this issue by using scission events as an unbiased marker for endocytic activity at CCPs and as a temporal reference to probe CCP move - ment relative to membrane scission . The ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) can be used as a relative measure of CCP displacement from the plasma membrane ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) , and a decrease in the ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) over time corresponds to movement of a CCP away from the plasma membrane and deeper into the cell . We have shown that CCSs move away from the plasma mem - brane prior to scission , and , therefore , movement must have corresponded to a late stage in invagination ( Fig - ures 4 and 5 ; Figure S4 ) . The recovery of the ratio EF / Epi following scission may correspond to local uncoat - ing of the CCV as both Epi and EF signals decrease . In addition , movement of scissioned CCVs back toward the plasma membrane following scission may also con - tribute ( Figure S4 ) . CCP Geometry at the Moment of Scission In light of current models for CCV formation , an impor - tant question is whether the CCP movement we have measured using a combination of EF ( d = 50 nm ) and Epi illumination corresponds to the invagination of flat patches of clathrin , the final closure of preinvaginated CCPs , or the transient formation of a more complicated Visualizing Vesicle Formation during Endocytosis 603 geometry . Given the known dimensions of CCVs in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts ( Heuser , 1980 ; Willingham and Pastan , 1983 ) and the depth constant of the illuminat - ing evanescent field ( 50 nm ) , we can calculate the rela - tive decrease in fluorescence that we would expect to see if invagination was due to curvature of a flat lattice of clathrin ( Figure S3 ) . For example , if we consider the CCP featured in Figure 4 , the ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) de - creased 73 % during invagination , which would corre - spond to the movement of the entire CCP 67 nm into the cell . To achieve a similar relative decrease in EF fluorescence via invagination of a flat patch of clathrin to form a sphere , the CCV would have to have a final diameter of approximately 185 nm derived from a flat patch of clathrin 370 nm in diameter ( see Supplemental Data for details of this calculation ) . These dimensions are consistent with the dimensions of larger CCPs and CCVs measured by electron microscopy in fibroblasts ( Heuser , 1980 ; Willingham and Pastan , 1983 ) , and so the inward movements of this particular CCP can be explained by the invagination of a relatively flat patch of clathrin . However , many CCPs moved over small distances in the time leading to scission , and some hardly moved at all ( Figure 5F ) ; in these cases , it seems likely that the CCP was at least partially invaginated well before scis - sion occurred . Furthermore , newly formed CCVs could occasionally be observed moving closer to the plasma membrane following scission ( for example , see Figure S4 ) , as their fluorescence in the EF clearly increased . In this example , the ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) for the newly formed CCV was comparable to the ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) for the CCP at the start of invagination , suggesting that the CCP was already partially invaginated when it started to move away from the plasma membrane . It would be difficult to explain this observation if CCP dimming under EF ( d = 50 nm ) illumination was due entirely to invagination of a flat patch of clathrin . There - fore , the most likely explanation for our data is that CCP movement corresponds to the movement of a partially invaginated CCP to form a transient , deeply invagi - nated CCP , at which point scission occurs ( Figure 7 ; see also Santini and Keen , 2002 ) . The final steps leading to scission may involve clathrin polymerization , as scission tended to coincide with the maximum brightness of CCPs measured using Epi illumination ( Figure 5 ) . This trend was not always obvious in individual traces ( see , for instance , Figure 4 ) , perhaps because the effect is small and hidden by noise . Clathrin recruitment can drive membrane curva - ture in conjunction with epsin ( Ford et al . , 2002 ) , and clathrin assembly may play a role in the very final stages of invagination leading to membrane scission ( Iversen et al . , 2003 ) , which would be consistent with our observation that clathrin recruitment peaks at membrane scission . The Relationship between Actin Polymerization and CME The role played by the actin cytoskeleton in CME in mammalian cells is the subject of much debate ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . Actin polymer - ization does not appear to be essential for CME in all cell types ( Fujimoto et al . , 2000 ) , but clear molecular links have been established between the actin cy - toskeleton and CME ( Cao et al . , 2003 ; Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ; Kessels and Qualmann , 2002 ; Mise - Omata et al . , 2003 ) . We have now shown that the Arp2 / 3 activator cortactin is recruited to some pros - pective sites of membrane scission with a similar time course to CCP movement and that membrane scission and peak cortactin recruitment are coincident . Because cortactin is a marker for F - actin ( Kaksonen et al . , 2000 ) , the timing of cortactin recruitment at sites of membrane scission is consistent with the coincidence of Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin polymerization and CCP disappear - ance ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Merrifield et al . , 2004 ) . These findings are thus consistent with a model in which actin polymeriza - tion aids invagination , perhaps by generating a com - pressive or pushing force ( Giardini et al . , 2003 ; Kak - sonen et al . , 2003 ; Upadhyaya et al . , 2003 ) that is coordinated with scission and helps separate the bud - ding portion of a CCP from its site of formation ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ; Merrifield , 2004 ) . One caveat with this model is that we can detect cor - tactin recruitment to only a minority of scission events . However , it is possible we did not detect all cortactin - recruitment events . Alternatively , cortactin may not la - bel all actin plumes since it is established that actin polymerization accompanies 78 % of CCP invagination events in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . An alternative explanation is that not all scission events at CCPs are equivalent in the consortium of proteins in - volved . The idea that actin polymerization is required for effi - cient CME in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts is strengthened by our finding that the incidence of scission is dramatically inhibited by treatment of the cells with the G - actin - sequestering drug latrunculin - B ( Figure S5 ) . Strikingly , latrunculin - B not only inhibited scission but also blocked multiple aspects of CCP dynamics , including CCP formation , movement , splitting , and disassembly , leaving CCPs effectively paralyzed , as shown pre - viously ( Blanpied et al . , 2002 ; Yarar et al . , 2004 ) . When we looked more closely at the scission events that did occur in cells treated with latrunculin - B , we discovered that all of these events were nonterminal events since no CCPs departed from the cell surface ( Figure S5C ) and neither a budding portion of clathrin nor the acid - resistant Tfnr - phl spot became spatially separated from the parent CCP ( Figure S5F ) . We therefore suggest that scission is normally coordinated with CCP movement and that the physical separation of the budding part of a CCP and its site of formation is aided by actin poly - merization ( Figure 7 ) . To conclude , we have here validated a method to vi - sualize the formation of CCVs containing Tfnr - phl in real time , and this has allowed us to decipher many aspects of CCP dynamics that had remained obscure . Our find - ings provide a new conceptual and experimental frame - work to address the involvement of associated proteins during the course of CME , including those involved in actin polymerization . Moreover , the experimental ap - proach we describe provides a general method to study with great spatial and temporal precision the in - Cell604 Figure 7 . A Model for Coordinated Invagi - nation and Scission at a Single CCP Membrane is black , clathrin is red , and re - ceptors are green lollipops . Dark green indi - cates quenched Tfnr - phl receptors at pH 5 . 5 ; light green indicates fluorescent Tfnr - phl re - ceptors protected from quenching . The dif - ferent steps have been numbered ( I ) through ( IX ) along with the most salient changes in fluorescence . Steps ( II ) – ( VI ) have been repre - sented as a cycle since multiple rounds of scission can occur at a single CCP ( Fig - ure 3 ) . ( I ) A CCP is nucleated de novo at a site on the plasma membrane and grows by poly - merization of clathrin . Tfnr - phl receptor is re - cruited as the CCP grows . The fluorescence of the growing CCP measured using EF and Epi microscopy increases ( Figure 3B and Figure S4 ) . ( II ) The CCP invaginates , indicated by dimming of clathrin fluorescence under EF ( d = 50 nm ) illumination . Clathrin continues to polymerize , indicated by the continued increase of clathrin fluorescence under Epi illumination ( Figure 5 and also Figure S4 ) . Tfnr - phl also dims under EF ( d = 50 nm ) illumination , indicating movement of both clathrin and cargo away from the plasma membrane ( Figure 5 ) . This step may involve actin polymerization since cortactin is recruited ( Figure 6 ) and since scission is largely blocked in latrunculin - B ( Figure S5 ) . ( III ) Scission occurs , as indicated by the sudden appearance of an acid resistant Tfnr - phl spot in images acquired at pH 5 . 5 , while the CCP is the most deeply invaginated , corresponding to the minimum value of ratio EF / Epi ( Figures 4 and 5 and Figure S4 ) . ( IV ) The newly formed vesicle locally uncoats , and the ratio EF / Epi increases ( Figures 4 and 5 and Figure S4 ) . ( V ) The acid - resistant Tfnr - phl spot starts to dim as the newly formed vesicle acidifies . A rapid , local uncoating and recycling of clathrin to the plasma membrane is detected as an increase in the ratio EF / Epi ( clath ) without a net change in total clathrin fluorescence ( nonterminal event , Figure 3G ) . ( VI ) The Tfnr - phl spot disappears as it moves away from the membrane , acidifies to pH 5 . 5 , or fuses with a large endosome . ( VII ) The cycle ends if the plasma - membrane - associated patch of clathrin disassembles , in which case the scission event appears as a terminal event ( Figure 3G ) . ( VIII and IX ) In addition , CCPs were frequently seen to split ( VIII ) and coalesce ( IX ) . These steps have been represented as starting from a state with no budding , but they might occur in other states . These steps require an intact actin cytoskeleton , as they are completely abolished in latrunculin - B ( Figure S5 ) . ternalization of various receptors in many cell types and experimental systems . Experimental Procedures A more detailed version of the Experimental Procedures has been included in the Supplemental Data , including procedures related to experiments performed in Figures S1 – S5 . Cell Culture A stable Swiss 3T3 cell line stably expressing clathrin - DsRed ( clone mLCa - DsRed 9 ) was transfected with Tfnr - phl and prepared for im - aging as described previously ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . For imaging cortactin - DsRed and Tfnr - phl , wild - type cells were cotransfected and grown for 48 hr on coverslips prior to imaging , allowing DsRed to fully mature . Constructs Superecliptic phluorin ( gift of Gero Miesenbock , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , Connecticut ) was amplified by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) and used to replace GFP in jPA5 - hTfnr - GFP ( gift of Gary Banker , OHSU , Portland , Oregon ) to gener - ate Tfnr - phl . To generate cortactin - DsRed , cortactin cDNA was obtained from ATCC ( clone 7425666 ) , amplified by PCR , and direc - tionally cloned into pDsRed - N1 ( Clontech , BD Biosciences , Palo Alto , California ) to generate cortactin - DsRed . Constructs were veri - fied by restriction digest . Imaging For imaging , a lens - type EF microscope similar in layout to that described previously ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) was used with the fol - lowing modifications . For Epi illumination , a Luxeon III blue LED ( 470 nm peak emission ) was coupled into the light path using a custom EF / Epi illumination condenser and drive electronics . Images were acquired using either an Orca II CCD camera ( Hama - matsu , Bridgewater , New Jersey ) or a Cascade 512B ( Roper Scien - tific , Trenton , New Jersey ) driven with Metamorph ( Universal Im - aging Corporation , Downington , Pennsylvania ) . The penetration depth “d” of the EF was estimated as described previously ( Merri - field et al . , 2002 ) . The exit angle of the laser light was 59° – 61° for the Olympus ( 1 . 65 NA ) objective , giving d = 50 nm , and 69° for the Zeiss ( 1 . 45 NA ) objective , giving d = 100 nm . Perfusion System A four - channel perfusion system ( Automate Scientific , San Fran - cisco ) was used to locally perfuse cells as they were being imaged . Custom transistor - transistor logic ( TTL ) electronics were used to control the perfusion system and cycle between perfused buffers of pH 7 . 4 ( containing , in mM : NaCl 135 , KCl 5 , CaCl 2 1 . 8 , MgCl 2 0 . 4 , D - ( + ) - glucose 1 , HEPES 20 , and 2 . 5 % fetal calf serum , adjusted to pH 7 . 4 with NaOH ) and pH 5 . 5 ( same as pH 7 . 4 buffer , except that MES was used instead of HEPES ) , with changeover being trig - gered at the end of each camera exposure . Image Analysis Automated Identification and Measurement of CCPs An automated spot - finding algorithm written in Matlab 5 . 3 ( The Mathworks , Natick , Massachusetts ) was used to identify and per - form measurements on isolated , symmetrical CCPs . The fluores - cence of CCPs in a 0 . 8 (cid:2) m diameter region of interest was found for the CCP in both the clathrin - DsRed and Tfnr - phl images . The center of mass of fluorescence within this region was used to refine the estimate of the x / y coordinates of the CCP . For each candidate CCP , the local background was estimated as the lowest 25th per - centile of the ranked pixel values in a 1 . 8 (cid:2) m diameter annulus centered on the candidate CCP . This background estimate works well for images consisting of sparsely dispersed spots of fluores - cence overlaying a homogenous background . Visualizing Vesicle Formation during Endocytosis 605 Measuring Dual - Color Fluorescence Changes Associated with Membrane Scission All image series were first split into two stacks corresponding to images acquired at pH 5 . 5 and pH 7 . 4 . All initial analyses ( including event selection and tracking ) were performed on image series ac - quired at pH 5 . 5 unless stated otherwise . A combination of Matlab and Metamorph was used for image analysis , employing a strategy described elsewhere ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . Briefly , candidate events were tracked and excised into individual 100 × 50 pixel “ministacks” wherein the object of interest was precisely centered in the green and red halves of each frame . The fluorescence in a 0 . 9 (cid:2) m circle centered on the object of interest was measured , and a user - defined background ( set within a custom program written in Matlab ) was subtracted . All quantified data , including tracking coordinates , local coordinate offset between the red and green channels , fluorescence measurement , and background were trans - ferred to Excel . To measure CCP movement relative to membrane scission , EF / Epi stacks were analyzed as described above . The ratio EF / Epi was calculated for each CCP , temporally aligned to the membrane scission , and averaged . The fluorescence traces asso - ciated with each event ( Tfnr - phl , EF illumination , pH 7 . 4 ; clathrin - DsRed , EF illumination , pH 7 . 4 ; Tfnr - phl , Epi illumination , pH 5 . 5 ; clathrin - DsRed , Epi illumination , pH 5 . 5 ; as displayed in Figure 4 ) were normalized to the average of the three values centered on the membrane scission and averaged . To analyze the relationship between membrane scission and cortactin - DsRed dynamics , EF image series were analyzed as detailed above . Statistics Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism ( San Diego , California ) . All results are given as mean ± standard error unless otherwise stated . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include Supplemental Experimental Pro - cedures , Supplemental References , five figures , and five movies and are available with this article online at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 121 / 4 / 593 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments This work was supported by the McKnight and Kinship foundations ( to D . Z . ) . D . P . was supported by fellowships from the Human Fron - tier Science Program Organization and from the Fondation Re - cherche Médicale . The authors would like to thank Gary Matthews for critical reading of the manuscript . Received : July 29 , 2004 Revised : November 30 , 2004 Accepted : March 4 , 2005 Published : May 19 , 2005 References Blanpied , T . A . , Scott , D . B . , and Ehlers , M . D . ( 2002 ) . Dynamics and regulation of clathrin coats at specialized endocytic zones of den - drites and spines . Neuron 36 , 435 – 449 . Bretscher , M . S . ( 1984 ) . Endocytosis : relation to capping and cell locomotion . Science 224 , 681 – 686 . Cao , H . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Weller , S . G . , Heuser , J . E . , and McNi - ven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 2162 – 2170 . Daly , R . J . ( 2004 ) . Cortactin signalling and dynamic actin networks . Biochem . J . 382 , 13 – 25 . Ehrlich , M . , Boll , W . , Van Oijen , A . , Hariharan , R . , Chandran , K . , Nib - ert , M . L . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2004 ) . Endocytosis by random initia - tion and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 – 605 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2003 ) . Actin assembly and endocytosis : from yeast to mammals . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 287 – 332 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Warren , R . A . , Kessels , M . M . , Keen , J . H . , Heuser , J . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2001 ) . The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 1209 – 1223 . Farsad , K . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2003 ) . Mechanisms of membrane deformation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 372 – 381 . Ford , M . G . , Mills , I . G . , Peter , B . J . , Vallis , Y . , Praefcke , G . J . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2002 ) . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature 419 , 361 – 366 . Fujimoto , L . M . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2000 ) . Ac - tin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Traffic 1 , 161 – 171 . Gaidarov , I . , Santini , F . , Warren , R . A . , and Keen , J . H . ( 1999 ) . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 1 – 7 . Giardini , P . A . , Fletcher , D . A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Compression forces generated by actin comet tails on lipid vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 6493 – 6498 . Heuser , J . ( 1980 ) . Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle formation in fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 84 , 560 – 583 . Heuser , J . ( 1989 ) . Effects of cytoplasmic acidification on clathrin lattice morphology . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 401 – 411 . Heuser , J . E . , and Anderson , R . G . ( 1989 ) . Hypertonic media inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis by blocking clathrin - coated pit for - mation . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 389 – 400 . Higgins , M . K . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2002 ) . Snap - shots of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Trends Biochem . Sci . 27 , 257 – 263 . Iversen , T . G . , Skretting , G . , van Deurs , B . , and Sandvig , K . ( 2003 ) . Clathrin - coated pits with long , dynamin - wrapped necks upon ex - pression of a clathrin antisense RNA . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 5175 – 5180 . Kaksonen , M . , Peng , H . B . , and Rauvala , H . ( 2000 ) . Association of cortactin with dynamic actin in lamellipodia and on endosomal ves - icles . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 4421 – 4426 . Kaksonen , M . , Sun , Y . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2003 ) . A pathway for asso - ciation of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internal - ization . Cell 115 , 475 – 487 . Kessels , M . M . , and Qualmann , B . ( 2002 ) . Syndapins integrate N - WASP in receptor - mediated endocytosis . EMBO J . 21 , 6083 – 6094 . Keyel , P . A . , Watkins , S . C . , and Traub , L . M . ( 2004 ) . Endocytic adap - tor molecules reveal an endosomal population of clathrin by total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 13190 – 13204 . Kirchhausen , T . ( 2000 ) . Clathrin . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 69 , 699 – 727 . McNiven , M . A . , Kim , L . , Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , and Wong , T . W . ( 2000 ) . Regulated interaction between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 187 – 198 . Merrifield , C . J . ( 2004 ) . Seeing is believing : imaging actin dynamics at single sites of endocytosis . Trends Cell Biol . 14 , 352 – 358 . Merrifield , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . , and Almers , W . ( 2002 ) . Im - aging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 691 – 698 . Merrifield , C . J . , Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . , and Almers , W . ( 2004 ) . Neural Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex are recruited to sites of clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis in cultured fibroblasts . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 83 , 13 – 18 . Miesenbock , G . , De Angelis , D . A . , and Rothman , J . E . ( 1998 ) . Visual - izing secretion and synaptic transmission with pH - sensitive green fluorescent proteins . Nature 394 , 192 – 195 . Mise - Omata , S . , Montagne , B . , Deckert , M . , Wienands , J . , and Acuto , O . ( 2003 ) . Mammalian actin binding protein 1 is essential for endocytosis but not lamellipodia formation : functional analysis by RNA interference . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 301 , 704 – 710 . Mukherjee , S . , Ghosh , R . N . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1997 ) . Endocytosis . Physiol . Rev . 77 , 759 – 803 . Perrais , D . , Kleppe , I . C . , Taraska , J . W . , and Almers , W . ( 2004 ) . Re - Cell606 capture after exocytosis causes differential retention of protein in granules of bovine chromaffin cells . J . Physiol . 560 , 413 – 428 . Praefcke , G . J . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) . The dynamin superfam - ily : universal membrane tubulation and fission molecules ? Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 133 – 147 . Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . , and Kelly , R . B . ( 2000 ) . Molecular links between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 150 , F111 – F116 . Rappoport , J . Z . , Taha , B . W . , Lemeer , S . , Benmerah , A . , and Simon , S . M . ( 2003 ) . The AP - 2 complex is excluded from the dynamic pop - ulation of plasma membrane - associated clathrin . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 47357 – 47360 . Rappoport , J . Z . , Simon , S . , and Benmerah , A . ( 2004 ) . Understand - ing living clathrin - coated pits . Traffic 5 , 327 – 337 . Sandvig , K . , Olsnes , S . , Petersen , O . W . , and van Deurs , B . ( 1987 ) . Acidification of the cytosol inhibits endocytosis from coated pits . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 679 – 689 . Sankaranarayanan , S . , and Ryan , T . A . ( 2000 ) . Real - time measure - ments of vesicle - SNARE recycling in synapses of the central ner - vous system . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 197 – 204 . Santini , F . , and Keen , J . H . ( 2002 ) . A glimpse of coated vesicle cre - ation ? Well almost ! Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , E230 – E232 . Schafer , D . A . , Weed , S . A . , Binns , D . , Karginov , A . V . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Dynamin2 and cortactin regulate actin as - sembly and filament organization . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1852 – 1857 . Schmid , S . L . , and Smythe , E . ( 1991 ) . Stage - specific assays for coated pit formation and coated vesicle budding in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 114 , 869 – 880 . Steyer , J . A . , and Almers , W . ( 2001 ) . A real - time view of life within 100 nm of the plasma membrane . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 268 – 275 . Toomre , D . , Steyer , J . A . , Keller , P . , Almers , W . , and Simons , K . ( 2000 ) . Fusion of constitutive membrane traffic with the cell surface observed by evanescent wave microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 33 – 40 . Upadhyaya , A . , Chabot , J . R . , Andreeva , A . , Samadani , A . , and van Oudenaarden , A . ( 2003 ) . Probing polymerization forces by using actin - propelled lipid vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 4521 – 4526 . Weed , S . A . , Karginov , A . V . , Schafer , D . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Kinley , A . W . , Cooper , J . A . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2000 ) . Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 29 – 40 . Willingham , M . C . , and Pastan , I . ( 1983 ) . Formation of receptosomes from plasma membrane coated pits during endocytosis : analysis by serial sections with improved membrane labeling and preserva - tion techniques . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 5617 – 5621 . Willingham , M . C . , Rutherford , A . V . , Gallo , M . G . , Wehland , J . , Dick - son , R . B . , Schlegel , R . , and Pastan , I . H . ( 1981 ) . Receptor - mediated endocytosis in cultured fibroblasts : cryptic coated pits and the for - mation of receptosomes . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 29 , 1003 – 1013 . Yamashiro , D . J . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1984 ) . Acidification of endo - cytic compartments and the intracellular pathways of ligands and receptors . J . Cell . Biochem . 26 , 231 – 246 . Yarar , D . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2004 ) . A dy - namic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 964 – 975 .