- 1 - Fostering social innovation : Identifying lead users for participatory design Nirmal Morjaria Loughborough University Loughborough n . morjaria @ lboro . ac . uk Tracy Ross Loughborough University Loughborough t . ross @ lboro . ac . uk Andrew May Loughborough University Loughborough a . j . may @ lboro . ac . uk ABSTRACT Participatory design fosters the integration of users into the process of generating new products and services . Although a relatively well established technique known to result in useful and usable outcomes , one of its widely recognized limitations is that these outcomes generally lack innovativeness . A probable reason for this is that it integrates individuals possessing typical needs and desires as a platform for generating products and services . By contrast the lead user method known to result in innovative outcomes enables the integration of lead users who possess future needs as opposed to current and typical ones . Therefore , integrating them into participatory design could increase the innovativeness of outcomes . However , mechanisms to recruit lead users are relatively undeveloped , with them vitally including the identification of lead user trends and needs . Furthermore , this complex and incorporated identification process for these lead user trends and needs is largely unexplored , which emphasizes the requirements for studies that not only attempt to extend , but also demystify it for practitioners within alternate domains like participatory design . Consequently , this study , details the process used to identify lead user trends and needs , and provides guidelines of how to recruit lead users for participatory design using it . Finally , methods adopted within this study involved consulting secondary sources of data , and undertaking sixteen semi - structured interviews with market and technology experts . Author Keywords Innovation , Participatory Design , Lead Users ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHItaly ' 13 , September 16 - 20 2013 , Trento , Italy Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2061 - 0 / 13 / 09 . . . $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2499149 . 2499177 General Terms Human Factors ; Participatory Design ; Lead User Method INTRODUCTION Participatory design fosters the integration of users into the process of generating products and services . Initially , this was undertaken to enable democratic expression in the workplace , however , since the 1970s there has been an active belief that such integration leads to useful and usable systems ( Warr , O ' Neill 2004 ) . Whilst participatory design is recognized as a valuable approach to user involvement which instills usefulness and usability into outcomes , there are a number of limitations . Probably , the most widely acknowledged limitation is that through considering the needs and desires as described by users the opportunities for innovation can be overlooked ( Agostini 2009 , Cederman _ Haysom 2009 ) . Similarly , Schuler , Namioka ( 1993 ) has suggested that by considering the existing craft skills of workers as a basis for generating solutions , participatory design does not lend itself to the radical change that must characterize new systems . More generally , unrelated directly to participatory design , but instead its typical outcomes , Agostini , De Michelis et al . ( 2000 ) state that useful and usable outcomes are typically not innovative and vice versa . However , additionally they specify that whilst it is not impossible to generate innovative and useful and usable hybrid outcomes , this only usually occurs amongst the most skilled practitioners . Despite them confirming the possibility of such solutions , disappointingly the authors fail to provide precise guidance as to how they can be developed . Likewise , Warr , O ' Neill ( 2004 ) suggests that the terms creativity and innovation have received very little attention within participatory design , and thus are often considered a black art . Another relatively well rehearsed limitation is that there is an absence of a universal means for recruiting participatory design participants . Supporting this existing literature highlights that different practitioners typically implement variable methods , with some for example seeking a wide user base , whilst others recruit fewer users specifically based upon their skillset and backgrounds ( Kensing , Blomberg 1998 ) . Acknowledging the previously mentioned limitations , the lack of innovativeness of participatory design outcomes appears to arise from considering typical and present user - 2 - needs and desires , therefore not being able to generate outcomes which are above and beyond them . This has said , although the needs and desires stemming from user involvement provide a baseline of information to generate useful and usable outcomes , they also act as constraints limiting the consideration of future issues that are imperative for innovative outcomes . Coinciding with this viewpoint , the initial innovative processes established within management science indicated that radically innovative outcomes arose from exploratory and anticipatory methods which were recognized for not largely considering user needs ( Herstatt , Lettl 2004 ) . Conversely , the less innovative ones which reduced market risk were known to utilize user needs as a platform for product generation ( i . e . market pull ) ( Herstatt , Lettl 2004 ) . Likewise , the lead user method also from management science indicates that typical needs and desires arising from average users are not an ideal platform for generating innovative products , processes and services ( Urban , Von Hippel 1988 , Herstatt , Von Hippel 1992 , Olson , Bakke 2001 , Lüthje , Herstatt 2004 ) . Fundamental to the lead user method is the premise that user needs are not simultaneously encountered by all users , but instead flow across the market steadily reach different users and varying points ( Lüthje , Herstatt 2004 ) . Hence , one individual might experience a need prior to another . Therefore , the lead user method advocates that advanced users termed lead users exist which experience needs prior to the general market population and these users expect high benefits from obtaining a solution to their needs ( Urban , Von Hippel 1988 , Herstatt , Von Hippel 1992 , Olson , Bakke 2001 , Lüthje , Herstatt 2004 ) . Existing literature has demonstrated within a variety of domains that such lead users identified and recruited using the lead user method typically generate innovative and novel outcomes ( Urban , Von Hippel 1988 , Herstatt , Von Hippel 1992 , Olson , Bakke 2001 , Lüthje , Herstatt 2004 , Churchhill , Von Hippel et al . 2009 ) . According to this , the integration of lead users into participatory design processes is potentially one unidentified way to increase the innovativeness of outcomes . More specifically , this is because it leverages the consideration of future needs and desires because they are possessed by lead users . This is as opposed to the more traditional means of considering more typical user needs possessed by general users like within participatory design . Thus these needs possessed by lead users no longer act as constraints but enablers to consider future issues . Unsurprisingly , lead user methods have already been suggested as a method for recruiting participants for participatory design processes ( Kujala , Kauppinen 2004 ) . However , unexpectedly its significant potential to address existing participatory design weaknesses relating to the reduced innovativeness of outcomes is yet to be realized . Subsequently to ( Kujala , Kauppinen 2004 ) , within another study , lead users , although loosely defined , have been integrated into participatory design processes for the generation of home energy management systems ( Kanstrup , Christiansen 2006 ) . Very clearly from these studies there was an apparent discrepancy between the terms used to describe lead users and those more accurately found within management science , where the actual lead user method was established . This discrepancy probably relates to , at least in part , with understanding lead users generally , and the mechanisms for correctly recruiting them , and also the benefits that such correct recruitment can bring to the participatory design community in terms of innovativeness of outcomes . Whilst it is recognized within user innovation that there is still generally a limited understanding of lead users ( Schreier , Prügl 2008 ) , this issue has probably become exacerbated , as the lead user method has recently been transferred and re - established within the alternative domains like participatory design . More specifically , these circumstances have probably arisen due to the relatively fewer applications , and thus lesser experience of the lead user method within such alternative domains . Consequently , further studies are required to highlight the benefits of lead user integration to the participatory design community , and more importantly provide clear and informative guidelines for those design practitioners outside of management science seeking to identify and recruit lead users . Lead user trends and needs are integral to these processes relating to lead user identification and recruitment . This is because once identified such information relating to the first principal lead user characteristic constitutes the main directions when searching for , and recruiting lead users . Specifically , such lead user needs and trends are necessary to determine whether individuals possess the first lead user characteristic . Within further detail , the lead user trends are prevailing views or themes in society resulting in group level behavioral changes . Relatedly , lead user needs are futuristic user needs for particular types of products , processes and services . They arise from individuals undertaking certain tasks that are different to general marketplace users , which place’s them at the forefront of a lead user trend . Given the importance of these trends and needs for identifying lead users , increasing understanding of lead user recruitment within participatory design , and specifically generating recruitment guidelines mentioned earlier requires studies to contribute towards developing the mechanisms for acquiring them ( i . e . trends and needs ) . Especially as surprisingly , knowledge relating to these mechanisms ( enabling identification of trends and needs ) is deficient even in management science where the lead user method originates . Hence , this research focusses upon the initial , but pivotal stage of recruiting lead users with particular emphasis upon enhancing these mechanisms for collecting lead user trends and needs , because they are presently within a state of underdevelopment . Sustainable transport is the application domain of this study because it provides an idealized environment for fostering social innovation . This is due to - 3 - its underlying societal objectives of reducing transport related co2 emissions , and also the well - established and continually highlighted requirements for innovative products , processes and services capable of meeting them within transport policies . More specifically , if collected appropriately , these lead user trends and needs are instruments for fostering social innovation through enabling integration of lead users into collaborative processes like participatory design . This is because such design processes facilitate significant yet continual interaction between designers and users for leveraging the consideration of user needs , which is a prerequisite for generating additionally customized solutions . Additionally , as lead users are an innovative type of user , undertaking participatory design processes with them , offers a nurturing and fertile environment for larger amounts of collaboration amongst such individuals possessing innovation propensity . Such collaboration should increase both chances for social innovation and ultimately delivering the desired solutions within the transport sector which are capable of fulfilling societal objectives ( Department for Transport 2009 ) . The specific components of this paper are an implemented process to collect lead user trends and needs for the sustainable transport sector , alongside the actual resulting outputs . Additionally , of greater significance an outline replication procedure is included which was extracted from this process for assisting others wanting to similarly identify trends and needs , but perhaps within alternate domains . Finally , more importantly , potential ways to use this information to recruit lead users for participatory design studies are described within the future work sections , enabling practitioners outside of user innovation to better understand how to recruit lead users and integrate them into their design processes . LITERATURE REVIEW Although there are some reported variances , typically lead user methods consist of four stages , which are ( 1 ) defining the problem space , ( 2 ) identification of trends and needs , ( 3 ) recruiting lead users , ( 4 ) lead user workshop and concept creation , and evaluation . For a more detailed account of these stages please refer to ( Urban , Von Hippel 1988 ) . Most importantly , initial stages of the lead user method involve collecting future user needs and trends , and once collected they constitute the main directions for searching for lead users . Subsequent sections highlight some of the obstacles discussed within existing literature for collecting this information , and potential ways to counteract them . Since the lead user method is heavily contingent upon collecting the most appropriate trends and needs , it is likely that widespread uptake of these methods requires future research to document and investigate means to acquire this information . This information is probably the most important for identifying lead users , which emphasizes the necessity to collect the correct and most appropriate information . As mentioned previously , lead user trends are prevailing views or themes in the domain which result in group level behavioral changes . Exemplifying this concept , a prevailing view or theme towards the sustainable transport agenda could exist , and consequently multiple individuals might be performing specific tasks and activities that constitute the group level behavioral change . Within this instance , the group level behavioral change might be an increase in cycling , which has stemmed from views towards adopting more sustainable modes of travel . In terms of the lead user method specifically , lead users are individuals ahead of these trends , and therefore they perform certain tasks and activities that places them in this position . Whilst performing these activities they develop needs which lie within the future for others , because they are yet to be encountered by the general marketplace . Therefore , these trends and needs are related , and throughout this research are termed lead user trends and needs . Recollecting , they enable determining whether individuals possess the first lead user characteristic , with both of the essential defining lead user characteristics detailed below . 1 ) Lead users possess needs that are yet to be encountered by the general market place ( Lüthje , Herstatt 2004 , Urban , Von Hippel 1988 ) . 2 ) Lead users have a high expected benefit to obtaining a solution to these needs , and because they realize the benefits of solutions , this provides them with the motivation to initiate innovation efforts ( Lüthje , Herstatt 2004 , Urban , Von Hippel 1988 ) . Currently , despite its importance , existing research provides very little guidance about how to collect lead user trends and needs , apart from suggesting that secondary sources might be consulted , and that interviews with experts are especially valuable ( Lüthje , Herstatt 2004 ) . Crucially , these experts are distinct from the lead users themselves , who later generate products , processes and services in tandem with research and design teams . Instead , these experts typically provide the lead user trends and needs information , which is subsequently used to identify lead users . Such experts termed ‘lead user experts’ have a broad and detailed view of emerging technologies as well as services ( Von Hippel , Thomke et al . 1999 ) . Particularly , the limited amounts of guidance available highlight the necessity to ensure that these experts are most appropriate and suitable to the application domain . However , almost no information is available about the characteristics and qualities that expert’s must possess as well as appropriate sample sizes facilitating an adequate interview process . Moreover , further exacerbating this situation , this already limited information is also controversial . For example there are applications of the lead user method indicating that smaller samples are favorable due to them limiting the opportunities for information overload ( i . e . ( Herstatt , Von Hippel 1992 ) ) , whilst others suggest that broader searches for experts should take place both within the domain under - 4 - consideration and outside ( Lüthje , Herstatt 2004 ) . Information overload is a typically stated yet unaddressed phenomenon within the lead user method , and characterizes negative situations where lead user teams collect excessive amounts of inappropriate information making it difficult to manage and prioritize it . Such situations could occur in whole or part from selecting incorrect and unsuitable experts for interview . Once information overload has occurred , no formal guidance exists of how to manage it , which emphasizes the requirement to collect correct and suitable information first time around . Despite these issues , a generally accepted consensus for collecting lead user trends and needs is to limit sample sizes of experts for interview through their precise and considered selection . This reduces the chances of information overload and provides the best possible opportunities for identifying experts possessing the required intuition , skills , and experience . Practically , this involves developing a detailed understanding of the experts to be interviewed prior to initiating contact , and can be accomplished by viewing online profile information , interests both academic and extra - curricular . Specifically in the case of experts developing solutions , the types of products , processes and services they have created . METHOD Initial stages of this study involved identifying lead user trends and needs . More specifically , secondary sources of information were consulted for this purpose early on . These secondary sources of information were scientific journal and conference papers , media articles as well as existing sustainable transport policies which underpinned the domain . Once a reasonable understanding of the domain and its objectives were acquired , the problem space was bounded and its requirements were documented . More comprehensively , these requirements related to the necessity for innovative products , processes and services that attempted to address the overarching objectives of the sustainable transport sector which were to reduce co2 emissions of the transportation sector . Thereafter , existing solutions of this nature were explored . Within further detail , such exploration sought to understand the commonalities between existing solutions , their objectives and scope alongside the types of users they were designed for . Moreover , the technical components and infrastructures of these solutions were also noted alongside this information . Using this acquired knowledge the scope of solutions to be generated within this study was defined . Whilst undertaking this process any prominent manufacturers and similarly any noteworthy authors who had made significant contributions to the area were listed for further exploration at a later point . To highlight it was recognized that these individuals could potentially be used for the latter interview process which supplemented the consultation of secondary sources . This interview process is known to be especially valuable , however , only when the correct experts are identified as interviewees . Additionally , during this search for information , it is useful to establish widely cited authors , and the issues that they are currently addressing . Such a procedure of following citations provided an opportunity to identify additional potential interviewees that were initially unthought - of . Eventually , it was decided that the experts selected for this interview process would be a mix of transport related academics and technology manufacturers as well as developers . The previously noted solution developers and manufacturers were explored first . This involved reading about their main products , and different ones which they had generated . Where particular products were of interest , alternate views were attained about them through searching consumer rating sites , and also media articles . More specifically , information was determined about the manufacturers including their ethos , mission statement and also the backgrounds of the founders of the company . When potential interviewees were actually solutions developers and not manufacturers there generated solutions were evaluated in the same way , seeking alternative opinions etc . After collecting all of this information which allowed understanding of the solutions , developers , manufacturers and the extent to which their solutions fulfilled the objectives of existing sustainable transport policies , a semi structured interview was composed . This interview sought to obtain trends and needs information and the questions themselves were based upon existing lead user research ( Churchhill , Von Hippel et al . 2009 ) . It consisted of eight questions , with the elementary questions establishing interviewee backgrounds and interests alongside their product information . Latter questions determined the state of the art , which are the highest and most sophisticated systems available presently . Finally , subsequent questions extrapolated upon the state of the art to determine future needs , and also trends underpinning these needs . Interviews were conducted via the telephone , and lasted between 30 minutes to 1 hour . Questions were designed specifically to counteract against the issues of manufacturers or developers providing biased information relating to their own solutions by asking them explicitly to answer from the perspective of alternative solutions . During the final stages of the interviews , interviewees were asked if they were aware of any other individuals who might be able to provide suitable insight . Mostly , they specified another name , which was investigated in the same way , and usually later interviewed . Totally , eight individuals were interviewed out of the fourteen identified names due to interviewee availability and timescales . All interviews were fully transcribed , and the data was analyzed using thematic analysis . Regarding the second set of experts which were transport related academics , prior to conducting interviews there research interests and key publications were viewed . Initially , this information usually came from their online profiles , because the academics tended to list specific interests and major publications upon them . When assessing - 5 - existing research attempts were made to specifically ascertain key issues , established facts and underpinning theories related with the application domain . Upon discovering particularly useful types of information were noted , and thereafter at the end suitably synthesized . Such information was utilized as a trajectory for understanding and composing a second set of questions to interview the transport related academics with . Briefly questions attained views about sustainable transport generally , reinforcing existing views about key issues and established facts , sustainable transport behaviors and trends within them ; Specific user needs arising from trends , and lastly factors prohibiting or facilitating the uptake of sustainable transport solutions and relatedly public transport . Interviews were like the others conducted via telephone and generally lasted between 30 - 60 minutes . They were transcribed in full and analyzed using thematic analysis . Totally , sixteen participants were interviewed which included eight academics and eight manufacturers / solution developers . DATA ANALYSIS : EXTRACTING TRENDS AND NEEDS All interviews were fully transcribed , and then subjected to an in - depth thematic analysis procedure . More specifically , this thematic analysis procedure was utilized to define codes for the data , and extract appropriate themes . Collected data was reviewed several times ensuring that the most relevant themes were identified , driven by theoretically and latent approaches to thematic analysis ( Aronson 1994 ) . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Aims of this research were initiate and contribute towards generating a body of knowledge for increasing understanding about lead user recruitment , specifically through enhancing mechanisms for identifying lead user trends and needs . Furthermore , to simplify the usage of these mechanisms by increasing understanding and thus their accessibility for the participatory design community specifically . Outputs from this study include a number of lead user trends and needs for the sustainable transport sector , but more importantly a potential outline procedure for replicating the process within alternative domains . This was formulated through extracting key issue , strategies and considerations emerging from the process used to collect lead user trends and needs . During this extraction , differing circumstances and situations were carefully acknowledged when determining stages of the procedure , especially if they had the potential to influence outcomes . To emphasize , the benefits of such procedures are that they provide a currently lacking potential systematic and stepwise approach for identifying lead user trends and needs . Most crucially , such systematic and stepwise approaches should not only minimalize issues encountered within previous studies associated with information overload , but also simplify the process overall . Recollecting , information overload is a situation where researchers collect excessive as well as inappropriate lead user trends and needs information , and thus have difficulties managing and prioritizing it . Furthermore , the centralization of this information is critical for reducing or minimalizing controversial and contradictory views arising from future studies , which may become exacerbated in alternative domains such as participatory design . This is because presently there appears to be lesser applications and experience of lead user methods . Next sections describe and present the outline replication procedure generated through this study . Extracted replication procedure Whilst preliminary requiring further development through additional studies the replication procedure is found below : 1 . Consult secondary sources such as scientific journal and conference papers , media articles , and depending upon the domain being explored existing polices to develop an understanding of the domain and its objectives . 2 . Using the conducted research bound the problem space and document any specific requirements that are contained within it . 3 . Identify existing solutions that fulfill the requirements of the problem space , or address key issues within it . Determine commonalities amongst existing solutions , which could include solution objectives and scope , technical hardware and infrastructure , and the users of the system . 4 . Define the scope of solutions to be generated within the current research factoring in all background research conducted within previous stages . Specifically , this includes defining their objectives in outline , and perhaps also considering how future solutions might meet these objectives . 5 . Whilst undertaking this entire process make note of any prominent solution developers , manufacturers , and widely cited authors with an initial view to subsequently interviewing them . When referring to the research specifically , follow any citations to identify additional authors . 6 . Decide on the experts to be interviewed to supplement or complement existing information from the list composed at stage five , and select more than the number you wish to interview recognizing that some might be unavailable within the given timescale . Contrasting and diverse interviewees are recommended and this should probably include a mix of research scientists , manufacturers and solutions developers . Briefly , these individuals should have a strong view of advancements in the area and emerging solutions . Ultimately aim to interview 10 - 20 people . 7 . For manufacturers establish their background , mission statement , as well as ethos and reconsider the solutions they have generated . Where solutions are of particular interest evaluate them further , and obtain alternative opinions about them through viewing consumer rating sites and possibly media articles or press releases . Similarly , for actual solution developer’s review their generated solutions and where they are of particular interest seek further information about them . 8 . Using the information about the manufacturers and solution developers generate interview questions for them . Consider determining the state of the art initially , and having proceeding questions build upon this to factor in future issues . 9 . For the domain related academics generate questions according - 6 - to previous research and that more specifically relating to their own interests and existing publications . This might include establishing facts , key issues and underpinning theories in the domain . 10 . Using the information generate another set of interview questions for the domain related academics which should complement or supplement existing research . Determine major trends within the area , and resulting user needs . Always aim to consider future issues which require the interviewees to extrapolate upon the present . Additionally , extra questions may seek to understand the factors facilitating or prohibiting existing solutions . 11 . Pilot test interview questions to test interpretability . Subsequently actual conduct Interviews via telephone or face to face . Towards the end of the interview request the names of further experts from the interviewee’s opinion , and thereafter consider interviewing them . 12 . Transcribe data , and extract key trends and needs using an appropriate technique such as thematic analysis . 13 . Using the collected needs formulate generic product or service descriptions relating to the collected future needs ( capturing the first lead user characteristic ) . Furthermore , determine either levels of dissatisfaction with existing solutions , desire to modify or generate solutions independently or finally rates of innovation adoption ( capturing the second lead user characteristic of high expected benefit ) . 14 . Create survey and distribute it within a user community to assess their levels of future needs by determining whether they require the generic product or service descriptions . Finally , determine if individuals are dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with existing domain solutions , or whether they would modify or develop their own solutions , or if they are fast adopters of new solutions . 15 . Perform analysis upon survey responses and select lead users . Subsequently described within the data analysis section . Although the nature of this study is largely methodological , the proceeding section documents its outcomes for the purposes of enabling others to understand the form that typical outputs should take when replicating the overall process . Sustainable Transport Behavioral Trends According to the interviews conducted within this research , and other studies ( e . g . ( Greene , Wegener 1997 , Department for Transport 2009 ) ) sustainable transport is broadly defined as reducing CO2 and particulate emissions through selecting the most appropriate transportation choices , as well as clustering communities and facilities to reduce distances travelled . Sustainable transport behaviors are the specific behaviors that individuals undertake which contribute to the overarching sustainable transport agenda , typically addressed within current policy and legislation . Sustainable transport behavior trends are group level behavioral changes contributing to the sustainable transport agenda . Subsequently , those identified within this research are introduced and described in more detail . Generally , increasing greener awareness was an issue emerging from interviews , and more specifically required individuals on both a local and governmental level to acknowledge the importance of reducing transportation related co2 emissions . Such findings are unsurprising given the numerous studies , which have attempted to address issues associated with increasing greener awareness in multiple domains ( i . e . ( Pattinson , Oram et al . 2011 , Booth , Shirt 1998 ) ) Furthermore , another trend emerged about the decrease in car usage and ownership . Numerous attributions were attached to this decrease , including the cost of petrol relative to public transport , and the increasingly implemented planning restraints in town centers , which might reduce the convenience of parking close to commercial attractions . Additionally , attitudinal factors were also stated as further factors creating tendencies for people to drive less , as people were presently more accepting towards alternate transport modes ( i . e . public transport modes ) . Contributing to this reduction , it was often specified that there was lesser car ownership amongst the younger generation with this being ascribed to shifts in perceptions amongst these users . Such perceptual shifts relate to the car being considered more of a practical item by this user group , unlike previously where it was usually thought of as a status symbol . The previous perception of the car as a status symbol accelerated the desire for car ownership ; however , nowadays various technologies such as the mobile phone have probably substituted them from this status and image perspective . Underpinning this trend of reduced car use is the peak car theory , which states that increasing car usage has stabilized after continuous exponential growth within the previous 40 years and various conflicting attributions have been deduced , although , perhaps one of the more promising explanations is the reduction in company car use ( Goodwin 2011 ) . Additionally , a number of participants reported growths in cycling culture and cycling . This might be due to cycling becoming a more commonly accepted phenomena , and individuals understanding the benefits of it . These benefits probably relate to increasing concerns about maintaining healthier lifestyles , the more detailed understanding about sustainable transport and related to this the increased desire to reduce co2 emissions amongst individuals . Such changes may have also stemmed from sustainable transport policies which actively seek to promote alternate forms of transport to the car . Other trends included increasing fuel prices , positive attitudinal changes towards public transport , changes in the car buying market , and the increasing reliability and efficiency of alternatives to the car . Subsequent sections , document some of the related user needs that must be considered when developing innovative products , processes and services for the domain of sustainable transport . - 7 - Lead User Needs Actual outcomes from the technical interviews concretely demonstrate that commonalities exist amongst user needs associated with existing products , processes and services . Therefore , these findings support those recently established by ( Kujala , Kauppinen 2004 ) within user centered design which demonstrate that a common core set of needs can be identified . These user needs are the types of considerations that must be made when developing sustainable transport solutions , and could arise from the previously discussed sustainable transport behavioral trends . Within further detail , general technological trends for the sustainable transport sector included requirements for faster and cheaper technologies , simplification of features and tasks alongside the incorporation of social networking facilities into technologies for leveraging the use of car sharing . Whilst the identified requirements for faster and cheaper sustainable transport solutions are self - explanatory and consistent with technology generally and those found within other domains such as user centered design ( Vredenburg , Mao et al . 2002 ) , other user needs mandating additional description are introduced next . For example , some of the participants suggested that there were requirements to simplify tasks , and consequently achieve more functionality with less features . Specifically , this might refer to sustainable transport solution interfaces , or even the hardware underpinning them . Existing literature has generally referred to such designs as ‘sweet designs’ , because they achieve large amounts in a simplistic way ( Gosling 2007 ) . Such results are in line with studies in human computer interaction and particularly user centered design that have emphasized the requirements to simplify use of technology making it easier to use ( i . e . ( Kujala , Kauppinen 2004 ) ) , which is integral for achieving usability . A further viewpoint which arose frequently was the requirements to integrate social networking sites into sustainable transport solutions such as car sharing websites for increasing trust amongst individuals using them . This is unsurprising as multiple studies have addressed social networking , evaluating its potential for integration into car sharing particularly for leveraging trust , and suggest that it is a beneficial addition for such purposes ( Chan , Shaheen 2012 , Chaube , Kavanaugh et al . 2010 ) . Additionally , further themes arose relating to interoperability and differing types of sustainable transport solutions . In fact , this trend was specified upon multiple occasions , by a variety of interviewees . Practically , this highlights the requirements to aspire for creation of sustainable transport solutions enabling people to use multiple modes of transport within one journey . Such issues might arise on a planning and booking level ( i . e . online journey planners and online ticket booking systems ) , or alternatively within real time when actually travelling . Exemplifying this , one participant discussed the recent developments in real - time mobile application supported ride sharing , and subsequent expansion plans for it to operate seamlessly with other public transport modes . In practice , they stated that car sharing should be seen as a means to extend the public transport network , and hence it might support individuals wishing to use a bus for one part of their journey , a train for another , and finally share a car for the last segment . It was emphasized that technology to facilitate this was required , which would probably include providing real time alerts and notifications for individuals wanting to migrate from one mode of transport to another . Such requirements for interoperability are supported within studies by ( Chan , Shaheen 2012 ) which suggest that although the directions and growth for ridesharing are uncertain , the next decade is likely to include increased interoperability and technological integration . Likewise , with respect to online booking systems , it is considered a simplifying procedure to enable multiple modes of transport to be booked in a singular place . However , there is a distinct lack of such solutions which emphasizes the requirements to implement them . Coinciding with these requirements , ( Sauter - Servaes , Nash 2009 ) suggests that while such booking systems are beneficial , they are almost still non - existent . Supplementing this , they state that despite it being a complicated procedure , there are no technical or scientific reasons prohibiting their creation . Such a situation characterized by the absence of solutions caused one participant to become compelled to create their own solution . More specifically , they created a specialized website providing instructions to overcome difficulties associated with the absence of such multimodal online ticket booking systems . Interrelated to these issues , some participants stated , that the accelerated use of ride sharing was contingent upon centralizing every ride sharing database ensuring that users could search for all rides within one place , instead of visiting several . Moreover , user needs also existed related to the personalization of sustainable transport solutions , and mobile localization which is dependent upon real time information . Broadly speaking , it aids individuals to monitor the actual location of local public transport vehicles in real time , and visually observe upcoming vehicles on their mobile phone screens . Finally , personalization of preferences is a further emerging user need , and suggests that sustainable transport solutions such as journey planners , should learn more about users , based upon their inputted data , and make recommendations according to this . LIMITATIONS AND FURTHER WORK Whilst precautions were taken to ensure data validity , and that appropriate rigor was applied when collecting it , there are limitations that require highlighting . Relating to the sample , although the lead user experts interviewed were precisely selected according to predefined criteria which arose from defining the problem space and existing literature ( Lüthje , Herstatt 2004 ) , arguably there was an opportunity to attain more of them . Also associated with the sample , during the study it was decided to recruit eight - 8 - technology and eight market experts , and interviews ceased when they stopped delivering new insight . Secondly , it was acknowledged that some of the technology experts particularly , were managers of organizations that were creating similar products . Therefore , these technology experts might be biased towards their own products which could reflect itself into the information they provide . Considering this limitation , questions were constructed to explicitly elicit information about alternate products , processes and services for which they were not affiliated . Additionally , the subsequently interviewed eight market experts were largely based within academia , and interestingly their views reinforced those of the previously interviewed technology experts . This provides confidence that this limitation was relatively well counteracted . A further limitation is due to the accelerated rate of technological advancement . It is a widely - established fact that technological advancement is becoming faster resulting in significant changes in products , processes and services and how individuals use them . As the two sets of interviews were undertaken over quite a large amount of time , there is a chance that the problem space or application domain may have evolved in - line with such technological advancement . Obviating against this concern , where data was older , the facts and statements contained within it were cross validated and verified with newer secondary sources of data . For example scientific conference and journal articles as well as media articles . Whilst this exploration has begun , future work involves completing the recruitment of the lead users using the collected lead user trends and needs . These lead users can then potentially serve as participatory design participants . Practically , this involves either composing surveys that contain questions constructed from this information , or performing additional interviews with individuals that could potentially be lead users . The best approach to adopt out of the two is yet to be consistently evidenced and is also controversially documented within lead user and management science literature ( Lüthje , Herstatt 2004 ) . However , from the actual experiences within this research , surveys appear highly appropriate . With regards to adopting this survey based approach , generic product and service descriptions can be formulated which fulfill the future needs identified that place individuals ahead of underlying societal trend ( i . e . first lead user characteristic ) . For instance , one of the questions could establish whether users had needs to monitor their CO2 emissions when travelling through technology . Questions can then be composed that determine an individual’s requirements for them , and hence whether an individual possesses the first lead user characteristic . During this same survey , questions can be composed which measure the second lead user characteristic of high expected benefit . Three choices are available with respect to these questions , either they can determine the dissatisfaction rates with existing domain solutions , or whether an individual is willing to modify or develop their own solutions or finally there adoption rates of novel and innovative products . Regarding potential responses , where individuals are dissatisfied or willing to modify or develop their own solutions or are fast adopters of new products and services this establishes they have the second lead user characteristic of high expected benefit ( Urban , Von Hippel 1988 , Herstatt , Von Hippel 1992 ) . This characteristic identifies whether individuals have the motivation to initiate innovation efforts ( Lüthje , Herstatt 2004 ) . CONCLUSION Although the process undertaken within this study appears to have been relatively successful because it resulted in a number of valuable lead user trends and needs , further studies are required to replicate this process within alternative domains to enhance the validity of these findings . This research must not only be presented within domains where the lead user method is well - established such as user innovation , but also within domains such as participatory and user centered design where lead users have great potential to resolve longstanding weaknesses . It is hoped that this study will establish a foundation for continuing similar research seeking to further develop the mechanisms for recruiting lead users , and relatedly the identification of lead user needs and trends . Finally , such research should enrich understanding of lead user recruitment procedures for the purposes of simplifying their application within domains apart from user innovation where the lead user method originates ( i . e . participatory design ) . REFERENCES 1 . A AGOSTINI , A . , 2009 . Participatory design : An approach to systems design . Presentation Slides edn . http : / / sitiserver01 . siti . disco . unimib . it / itislab / uploads / 2009 / 03 / lez - pd - agostini - 01 . pdf : . 2 . AGOSTINI , A . , DE MICHELIS , G . and SUSANI , M . , 2000 . From user participation to user seduction in the design of innovative user - centered systems . Designing Cooperative Systems - The use of theories and models , , pp . 225 - 240 . 3 . ARONSON , J . , 1994 . A pragmatic view of thematic analysis . The qualitative report , 2 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 - 3 . 4 . BOOTH , M . and SHIRT , P . , 1998 . Raising Environmental Awareness among the Workforce , SPE International Conference on Health , Safety , and Environment in Oil and Gas Exploration and Production 1998 . 5 . CEDERMAN _ HAYSOM , T . , 2009 . A participatory design approach in the engineering of ubiquitous computing systems , . 6 . CHAN , N . D . and SHAHEEN , S . A . , 2012 . Ridesharing in north america : Past , present , and future . Transport Reviews , 3 2 ( 1 ) , pp . 93 - 112 . - 9 - 7 . CHAUBE , V . , KAVANAUGH , A . L . and PEREZ - QUINONES , M . A . , 2010 . Leveraging Social Networks to Embed Trust in Rideshare Programs , System Sciences ( HICSS ) , 2010 43rd Hawaii International Conference o n 2010 , IEEE , pp . 1 - 8 . 8 . CHURCHHILL , J . , VON HIPPEL , E . and SONNACK , M . , 2009 . The Lead User Project Handbook : a practical guide for lead user project teams . http : / / web . mit . edu / evhippel / www / tutorials . htm : . 9 . DEPARTMENT FOR TRANSPORT , 2009 . Low Carbon Transport : A Greener Future . 10 . GOODWIN , P . , 2011 . Three views on ‘Peak Car’ , special issue on ‘A future beyond the car’ , guest editor S . Melia . World Transp Policy Pract , 1 7 ( 4 ) , . 11 . GOSLING , W . , 2007 . Realising Dreams : strategies for deep design . 12 . GREENE , D . L . and WEGENER , M . , 1997 . Sustainable transport . Journal of Transport Geography , 5 ( 3 ) , pp . 177 - 190 . 13 . HERSTATT , C . and LETTL , C . , 2004 . Management of " technology push " development projects . International Journal of Technology Management , 2 7 ( 2 ) , pp . 155 - 175 . 14 . HERSTATT , C . and VON HIPPEL , E . , 1992 . Developing new product concepts via the lead user method : a case study in a „low tech “field . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 9 ( 3 ) , pp . 213 - 221 . 15 . HERSTATT , C . and VON HIPPEL , E . , 1992 . Developing new product concepts via the lead user method : a case study in a „low tech “field . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 9 ( 3 ) , pp . 213 - 221 . 16 . KANSTRUP , A . M . and CHRISTIANSEN , E . , 2006 . Selecting and evoking innovators : combining democracy and creativity , Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on Human - computer interaction : changing role s 2006 , ACM New York , NY , USA , pp . 321 - 330 . 17 . KENSING , F . and BLOMBERG , J . , 1998 . Participatory design : Issues and concerns . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , 7 ( 3 ) , pp . 167 - 185 . 18 . KUJALA , S . and KAUPPINEN , M . , 2004 . Identifying and selecting users for user - centered design , Proceedings of the third Nordic conference on Human - computer interaction 2004 , ACM New York , NY , USA , pp . 297 - 303 . 19 . LÜTHJE , C . and HERSTATT , C . , 2004 . The Lead User method : an outline of empirical findings and issues for future research . R & D Management , 3 4 ( 5 ) , pp . 553 - 568 . 20 . OLSON , E . L . and BAKKE , G . , 2001 . Implementing the lead user method in a high technology firm : A longitudinal study of intentions versus actions . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 1 8 ( 6 ) , pp . 388 - 395 . 21 . PATTINSON , C . , ORAM , D . and ROSS , M . , 2011 . Sustainability and social responsibility in raising awareness of green issues through developing tertiary academic provision : a case study . International Journal of Human Capital and Information Technology Professionals ( IJHCITP ) , 2 ( 4 ) , pp . 1 - 10 . 22 . SAUTER - SERVAES , T . and NASH , A . , 2009 . Increasing Rail Demand by Improving Multimodal Information and Ticketing . Transportation Research Record : Journal of the Transportation Research Board , 211 7 ( - 1 ) , pp . 7 - 13 . 23 . SCHREIER , M . and PRÜGL , R . , 2008 . Extending Lead ‐ User Theory : Antecedents and Consequences of Consumers ' Lead Userness * . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 2 5 ( 4 ) , pp . 331 - 346 . 24 . SCHULER , D . and NAMIOKA , A . , 1993 . Participatory design : Principles and practices . CRC . 25 . URBAN , G . L . and VON HIPPEL , E . , 1988 . Lead user analyses for the development of new industrial products . Management Science , , pp . 569 - 582 . 26 . VON HIPPEL , E . , THOMKE , S . and SONNACK , M . , 1999 . Creating breakthroughs at 3M . Harvard business review , 77 , pp . 47 - 57 . 27 . VREDENBURG , K . , MAO , J . , SMITH , P . W . and CAREY , T . , 2002 . A survey of user - centered design practice , Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems : Changing our world , changing ourselve s 2002 , ACM , pp . 471 - 478 . 28 . WARR , A . and O ' NEILL , E . , 2004 . Getting creative with participatory design , Proc . Participatory Design Conference 2004 , pp . 57 - 60 .