Supporting Initial Trust in Distributed Idea Generation and Idea Evaluation Jana Schumann 1 , Patrick C . Shih 2 , David F . Redmiles 3 , Graham Horton 1 1 Department of Simulation and Graphics Otto - von - Guericke - University Magdeburg Universitätsplatz 2 , 39106 Magdeburg , Germany jana . schumann @ st . ovgu . de , graham . horton @ ovgu . de 2 College of Information Sciences and Technology Pennsylvania State University University Park , PA 16802 USA patshih @ ist . psu . edu 3 Department of Informatics University of California , Irvine Irvine , CA 92697 - 3440 USA redmiles @ ics . uci . edu ABSTRACT Previous research has shown that diversity within distributed collaborative teams can lead to innovation , but trust must exist for the open expression of innovative ideas and establishment of idea credibility . Initial trust is pivotal for distributed teams where team members have never met face - to - face and have only a very limited time to accomplish a task . Our goal is to determine if knowing specific information about other team members could enhance initial trust and improve productivity and satisfaction in idea generation and idea evaluation sessions . In an experiment , we showed that cognitive and affective trust could be successfully enhanced by presenting relevant information elements , such as domain expertise and personal hobbies , and could have positive effects on the quality and quantity of ideas in idea generation sessions as well as the satisfaction of the participants with the rating result in idea evaluation sessions . However , participants receiving personal information often misconstrue this as professional competency . We also describe gender differences observed in the idea generation sessions and discuss how to better design future systems for supporting idea generation and idea evaluation activities . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 5 . 3 . Group and Organization Interfaces : Collaborative computing , Computer - supported cooperative work , Synchronous Interaction . General Terms Design , Experimentation , Human Factors Keywords Trust , creativity , idea generation , idea evaluation , brainstorming , TWAN schema , distributed teams , virtual teams , globalization 1 . INTRODUCTION With the spread of globalization , there is an increased need for collaboration through distributed teams and , consequently , an increased need for technological support . Distributed teams provide some advantages over traditional teams , such as taking advantage of geographically dispersed experts without having to physically relocate them , having greater flexibility , faster responsiveness , and greater diversity of perspectives [ 24 , 29 ] . However , distributed teams encounter challenges due to their distribution and communication limitations . One major issue in distributed teamwork is trust . It is especially critical for fast - forming teams where team members have never met face - to - face . Previous studies have shown that trust forms and develops over time in traditional face - to - face teams ; team members have time to assess one another based on personal interaction and shared experiences [ 15 , 45 ] . Distributed team members often do not have enough time to get the needed information about other team members . It is more difficult to determine whether a person is trustworthy or not , especially if the group’s formation is only temporary . Therefore , trust in distributed teams must be even higher than in traditional teams in order to successfully achieve a shared goal [ 17 ] . Open innovation is increasingly common in the workplace today . Crowd - sourcing and open - source software development platforms allow strangers to collectively contribute to an end product while remaining anonymous . In many instances , people may interact virtually once and never again . Our work aims to understand how we could enhance initial trust with different information elements about team members’ backgrounds , and to see how trust can be incorporated into the design process to improve productivity and satisfaction in idea generation and idea evaluation sessions . We first review prior literature on innovation and trust , and then we delve more deeply into studies that form the basis for our approach . Then , we describe our study’s goals ( and hypotheses ) followed by its design . Thereafter , we discuss the experimental results . Finally , we conclude with a discussion of the results , implications for design , limitations , and future research directions . 2 . MOTIVATION 2 . 1 Understanding the Concept of Trust Many definitions of trust have been proposed in different contexts [ 5 , 23 ] . In general , trust can be considered as the “belief that the trustee will meet the expectations of the trustor” [ 43 ] . Relatedly , researchers have observed that trust can be defined as a belief or confidence about another party’s integrity and benevolence in order to accept vulnerability [ 32 , 39 ] . According to multidimensional trust research , two dimensions of trust have been identified as important to organizations : cognitive trust and affective trust [ 30 ] . Specifically , “cognition - based trust results from deliberate assessment of each other’s characteristics and the process of weighting benefits of trusting over risks , whereas affect - based trust involves one’s emotional bonds and sincere concern for the well - being of the others” [ 21 ] . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . GROUP’12 , October 27 – 31 , 2012 , Sanibel Island , Florida , USA . Copyright 2012 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1486 - 2 / 12 / 10 . . . $ 15 . 00 . 199 Previous research [ 22 , 23 ] has shown that distributed teams develop trust swiftly at the beginning of the project . Iacono considered initial trust in general , but did not differentiate between cognitive and affective trust [ 22 ] . In 2002 , Kanawattanachai found that distributed teams developed a higher degree of cognitive trust than affective trust [ 26 ] . That result supports the swift trust proposition of Meyerson [ 31 ] . Meyerson claimed that cognitive trust is more important than affective trust in a temporary team [ 31 ] . He described a temporary group as an analogy to a “one - night stand” . This so - called swift trust develops within “a finite time span , forming around a shared and relatively clear goal or purpose , and depending on tight and coordinated coupling of activity to achieve success” [ 31 ] . Therefore , converting the individual skills and efforts of strangers into interdependent work in a short period of time poses a major challenge to distributed team collaboration . Our work aims to aid the development of initial trust in distributed teams by building on the concept of cognitive trust and affective trust in a distributed environment . Furthermore , we want to determine whether higher initial trust influences the outcome of idea generation and idea evaluation sessions , which are both part of innovation processes . 2 . 2 Importance of Innovation Innovation is a process and several models exist to describe the different phases of that process . Herstatt defines the first phase of the innovation process as a sequence of generating and evaluating ideas [ 18 ] . Idea generation and idea evaluation are the phases where initial trust is necessary because they are part of the first phase of the innovation process . Idea generation ( or ideation ) “is the creative process of generation , developing , and communicating new ideas , where an idea is understood as a basic element of thought that can be either visual , concrete , or abstract” [ 25 ] . The result of idea generation sessions are usually a large number of ideas , however a good idea does not always appear to be a good idea at first glance . Therefore , an evaluation process that aims to select a limited number of good ideas for further development is crucial for the innovation process . Within innovation processes , two different degrees of newness can be distinguished . New - to - the - world ideas for products or services are called radical innovation , and minor adaptations of products or services are called incremental innovation [ 4 ] . Both kinds of innovation represent opposite ends of the newness spectrum [ 4 ] . More precisely , radical innovations are truly novel or unique technological solutions [ 33 ] , the development or application of new technologies , or state - of - the - art breakthroughs in technology or product category [ 11 ] . Incremental innovations are new products involving only minor or no changes in technology and are also called simple product improvements [ 11 ] . Both degrees of newness are important for innovation processes , and we hope to identify how radical and incremental ideas are affected in teams with different levels of initial trust . 2 . 3 Creativity and Trust To produce both radical and incremental innovation , creativity is necessary . Creativity is the ability to produce work that is both novel ( i . e . original , unexpected ) and appropriate ( i . e . useful , adaptive concerning task constraints ) [ 42 ] . Originality is the hallmark of creative behavior , and ideas are not considered to be creative if they are not new or unusual . Although ideas must be original in order to be called creative , they will not be implemented if they are not feasible . Hence , the usual definition of a good idea is an idea that is both highly original ( or unusual ) and highly feasible ( or useful ) . One way to enhance the creative process is by using so - called creativity techniques . More than 100 creativity techniques can be found in the literature [ 19 ] . In this paper , we focus on electronic brainstorming , a computerized version of the brainstorming technique introduced by Osborn [ 34 ] . Osborn defined brainstorming as " a creative conference for producing a list of ideas - ideas which can be subsequently evaluated and further processed " . We focused on electronic brainstorming because it is one of the most common creativity techniques . Knoll et al . [ 28 ] stated that most of the creativity techniques or idea generation techniques support an associative process with external stimuli , which are received through the five senses of the individual . Thus , brainstorming contains general rules to support a process , which is the basis for many other creativity techniques . As previous research has shown , diversity within a team can lead to innovation in collaboration [ 37 ] , but trust must exist for the open expressiveness of innovative ideas by team members . Trust has a positive characteristic leading to desirable behavior and outcomes , although negative expectations and trust can also occur during collaborations [ 1 ] . Thus , trust plays an important role in innovation , efficiency , and effectiveness of teamwork , as team members do not tend to cross - check each others’ work [ 5 , 23 ] . Moreover , low trust leads to an increase in faulty attributions regarding the source of disagreement in distributed teams [ 41 ] . In low trust environments , trust can be fragile and often fractures rapidly , and team members are more likely to question others’ intentions [ 23 ] . In this work , the main goal of supporting trust in idea generation sessions is to increase the number of radical ideas . Idea generation sessions are about risking vulnerability by writing down unusual ideas . This social effect is called evaluation apprehension . It causes participants to hold back their contributions during the process because they are afraid to be criticized by someone in the group [ 12 ] . Postmes indicated that anonymity reduces this effect [ 36 ] . On the other hand , anonymity can easily lead to social loafing . Social loafing describes the tendency of participants to expend less effort when they believe that their contributions are not needed for the group success [ 27 ] . Previous laboratory experiments showed that while participants reported less perceived level of evaluation apprehension , anonymity made no impact on the creative outcomes [ 2 , 44 ] . Collaros and Anderson are the first to study the effects of perceived team member expertise level on the idea generation outcome . They found that participants in a team full of experts generated ideas of lower originality and feasibility , and they report higher perceived inhibition in idea generation sessions [ 8 ] . Open exchange of information should be promoted since people are more likely to collaborate with individuals they trust [ 23 ] . The literature regarding the correlation of trust and creativity in face - to - face teams remains largely inconclusive . It was found that trust is beneficial to increase creativity in face - to - face teams [ 41 ] , but more recent studies showed that there is no positive impact of trust on creativity in teams [ 7 ] . Similarly , Bidault found that higher trust does not always lead to more creativity [ 3 ] . There seems to be a level of trust that maximizes the creative output . However , no previous research has focused on studying the correlation of trust and idea generation in distributed teams . 200 2 . 4 Rating Behavior and Trust A successful idea generation session typically results in a large quantity of ideas . An evaluation process that aims to select a limited number of good ideas is necessary for further development . An effective method for idea evaluation is necessary to make the right decision whether an idea is original , feasible , or both . If expertise information of team members is not made sufficiently transparent during an idea evaluation session , a lack of trust of other members’ judgment about an idea can easily develop . A lack of commitment can increase due to mistrust . Commitment is important to form a consensus about an idea within a team . The main goal of supporting trust in idea evaluation sessions is to allow the team members to arrive at a consensus while maintaining a reasonable level of satisfaction . Team members have to trust each other regarding their ability to select one or several good idea from an idea pool . There exist many approaches to evaluate ideas . One well - known technique is the SWOT analysis that evaluates ideas based on the following objectives : Strengths , Weaknesses / Limitations , Opportunities , and Threats [ 13 ] . Approaches such as the SWOT analysis are useful for comparing the advantages and disadvantages of a specific idea . To support trust in idea evaluation sessions , we borrow the basic idea of a recommender system in that users are presented with pre - populated ratings provided by other users . Research has shown that showing predictions during the rating process ( e . g . movies ) could influence the users’ rating outcomes [ 10 ] . Similar approach could also work for the evaluation of ideas and result in higher member satisfaction . A large amount of literature regarding trust and decision - making considers recommender systems , e . g . in e - commerce [ 10 ] , recommending and evaluating choices in a virtual community of use [ 20 ] . Recommender systems are useful when too much information is present . Research on decision - making has focused on trust as a variable that affects decision outcomes . In 2009 , Parayitam found that the perception of trustworthiness , when based on the competence of a person , enhances decision quality and commitment , whereas no effects on outcomes can be observed when it is based on relationships [ 35 ] . Rietzschel identified the strong tendency of people to select feasible and desirable ideas at the cost of originality as the main reason for their poor selection performance [ 38 ] . However , no publications could be found containing results about the correlation of trust and idea evaluation in distributed teams . To our knowledge , no studies have analyzed how different levels of trust can impact the idea evaluation session outcomes . In this work , we attempt to study the rating behaviors of participants with higher cognitive trust or higher affective trust . 3 . A TEMPLATE FOR SUPPORTING INITIAL TRUST 3 . 1 Support of Initial Trust The focus of this work is to find out how initial trust can be supported in a distributed team when team members only have a very limited amount of time to accomplish a task , and how trust might improve the work results in distributed teams . Therefore , the approach of the so - called first impression could be used . People make guesses on signs and signals they perceive , which is the seed of trust or distrust and also affect their subsequent behavior [ 9 , 16 ] . Signs and signals , which appear in face - to - face interaction , might or might not appear differently in computer - mediated interaction . Since members of distributed teams often do not have a prior working history and may never meet again , oral exchanges and face - to - face interaction often do not exist [ 23 ] . To enable distributed team members to form a first impression , information about their co - workers could be offered . Research has shown that the availability of information can influence trustworthiness assessments positively [ 40 ] . However , it is not entirely clear which information elements are most supportive for the assessment of team members , especially regarding teams dealing with innovation . One way to support distributed team members with the formation of trustworthiness is to provide opportunities for accumulating personal knowledge and task - relevant background information [ 21 , 26 ] . Feng claimed that , “ developing artifacts to help people to identify others who are similar to themselves or who have similar experiences may be helpful for promoting empathic attitudes that build interpersonal trust ” [ 14 ] . Jarvenpaa and Leidner found that high - performing distributed teams exchanged background and personal information and were socializing more with other members at the very beginning of their project [ 23 ] . Therefore , we aim to determine what information to provide in the beginning of a project to support initial trust in distributed idea generation and idea evaluation sessions . Furthermore , we need to know how this information is correlated to trust . 3 . 2 Information Elements Rusman introduced the TrustWorthiness ANtecedents schema ( TWAN ) as an approach to inform trustworthiness assessments in the initial phase of collaboration [ 40 ] . This is used for the design of measures to accelerate the formation of interpersonal trust . Her study determined the information elements that are important for assessment of trustworthiness . The schema of perceived trustworthiness of a trustee consists of five main categories : communality , ability , benevolence , internalized norms , and accountability . Each of these main categories can be split up in more detailed antecedents . Since our work focuses on affective trust and cognitive trust , we divided the different trustworthiness antecedents into two parts with cognitive trust referring to the main categories of communality , ability , and accountability and affective trust referring to communality , benevolence , and internalized norms . Note that internalized norms are not considered in this paper because they only refer to long - term projects and therefore cannot be integrated in the approach of this paper . Our work focuses on making impact at the start of a project , but also aims to identify how knowing different information could affect different phases of the innovation process—idea generation and idea evaluation . To refine the findings of Rusman , a set of interviews was performed to discover important information elements adapted for the intended subject pool consisting of students . Table 1 . Information Elements Personal # Expertise # Hobbies 14 Experience ( projects ) 15 Gender 13 Specific skills 15 Honorary activities 12 Specialization & interests 14 Age 11 References & awards 14 Nationality 8 Degree & years in the program 12 Taste in music 7 Companies 8 Favorite TV shows 6 Department 7 201 Overall 15 students were asked what personal and professional information they would like to know about team members they have to work with , but have never and will never meet face - to - face . In Table 1 , the summary of the results of our interviews is shown . The table lists criteria ( personal information and expertise ) that the students listed as important , and their frequency ( # ) . 3 . 3 Relation of Information Elements to Trust Information elements can have a direct relationship to the introduced trustworthiness antecedents [ 40 ] . Table 2 provides a summary of the information elements available before the collaboration activities occur and their relationship to TWAN as specified in [ 40 ] . These are factual information that can be used by the participants to know their teammates prior to team activities . In Table 3 , the information elements derived from behavior during the collaboration according to Rusman are shown . They can be perceived by the participants passively through the collaboration process . Table 2 . Available information before collaboration Information element Relation with TWAN Age Communality , Availability , Sharing Gender Communality , Availability , Sharing Nationality Communality , Availability , Sharing Hobbies Communality , Availability , Sharing Honorary activities Communality , Availability , Willingness to help , Faith in intentions , Caring , Friendliness , Commitment , Openness , Sharing Favorite TV shows Communality , Availability , Openness , Sharing , Receptivity Taste in music Communality , Availability , Openness , Sharing , Receptivity Companies , Experience ( projects ) , References & awards Communality , Self - confidence , Knowledge , Reliability Department Communality , Skills , Knowledge Degree & years in the program Communality , Reliability , Consistency , Responsibility , Persistence , Competence Specialization & Interests Communality , Consistency , Persistence , Competence , Knowledge Specific skills Communality , Knowledge , Competence , Skills Table 3 . Information derived from behavior Information element Relation with TWAN Message read by addressed person Availability , Reliability , Responsibility Suggestion / idea Competence , Willingness to help , Sharing , Openness , Commitment , Self - confidence , Persistence , Responsibility Task - status overview ( task , accepted by , deadline , status ) Competence , Reliability , Responsibility Average response Availability , Receptivity , Commitment , Consistency , Responsibility Different information elements affect trust in different ways , so the TWAN schema was divided into affective and cognitive trust . In this construct , the information elements should support affective trust and the expertise information elements should support cognitive trust . 3 . 4 System Design and Implementation Since distributed teams usually collaborate via the Internet , a web - based software tool is one possible way to implement an initial trust template for idea generation and idea evaluation sessions . The prototype consists of a client ( web browser ) and a server ( web server with database ) . The idea generation session consists of two different web pages . The start page of the idea generation session consists of the following : an overview about the different steps of the session to provide an overview for the participants , the task for the session so that the participants know what to do in the next step , information about the technology used in the task in case the participants are not familiar with it , and the profiles of two other participants , depending on the condition to which the participant was randomly assigned . The second web page of the idea generation session consists of four main parts ( see Figure 1 ) . Part ( 1 ) shows the specific task and the brainstorming rules so that the participants are reminded what they are supposed to do and how they are supposed to do it . Part ( 2 ) is a chat window that displays the contributions of the participants . Part ( 3 ) is a pre ‐ defined input mask for the entry of the participant’s contributions . Part ( 4 ) shows the profiles of the two other participants as on the start page . Figure 1 . Idea Generation Session Template The idea evaluation session also consists of two different web pages . The start page of the idea evaluation session consists of the following : an overview about the different steps of the session to provide an overview for the participants , the task for the session so that the participants know what to do in the next step , information about the technology used in the task in case the participants are not familiar with it , and the profiles of two other participants as in the idea generation session . The second web page of the idea evaluation session also consists of four main parts ( see Figure 2 ) . Part ( 1 ) shows the specific task so that the participants are reminded what they are supposed to do and how they are supposed to do it . Part ( 2 ) is the rating area that allows the participant to rate ideas by clicking on the stars . Part ( 3 ) shows the previously rated ideas by two other participants and the average rating of the idea , which represents the final group 202 rating . Part ( 4 ) shows the profiles of the two other participants as on the start page . Figure 2 . Idea Evaluation Session Template 4 . GOALS AND EXPECTATIONS As previously described , the goal of our experiment is to examine whether knowing specific information about collaborators might support trust in distributed idea generation and idea evaluation sessions . Moreover , we would like to determine how trust could impact the idea generation and idea evaluation sessions . Based on the information elements adapted from TWAN , we expect the following : Hypothesis 1a : Knowing personal information of an individual leads to higher affective trust during the distributed idea generation session . Hypothesis 1b : Knowing the expertise information of an individual leads to higher cognitive trust during the distributed idea generation session . If this expectation is satisfied , we must further determine whether an increased trust among distributed team members could affect the contributions generated during idea generation sessions . Since higher affective trust allows team members to express themselves more freely and higher cognitive trust allows team members to focus on assessing the ideas more critically , we form the following hypothesis : Hypothesis 2a : Higher affective trust during the distributed idea generation session leads to more radical ideas . Hypothesis 2b : Higher cognitive trust during the distributed idea generation session leads to more incremental ideas . Similar to the idea generation sessions , we expect to see the following as outcomes of the idea evaluation sessions : Hypothesis 3a : Knowing personal information of an individual leads to higher affective trust during the distributed idea evaluation session . Hypothesis 3b : Knowing that an individual is an expert in a specific field leads to higher cognitive trust during the distributed idea evaluation session . If this expectation is satisfied , we must further determine whether an increased trust among distributed team members could affect the rating behaviors during idea evaluation sessions . Since higher affective trust allows team members to express themselves more freely and since higher cognitive trust allows team members to focus on assessing the ideas more critically , we form the following hypotheses : Hypothesis 4a : Higher affective trust in the distributed idea evaluation session reduces consensus formation within the group . Hypothesis 4b : Higher cognitive trust in the distributed idea evaluation session induces consensus within the group . To investigate the aforementioned hypotheses , a software prototype has been designed and implemented to find out if perceived trustworthiness leads to the hypothesized results . Finally , idea generation literature has traditionally used either all male or all female groups citing important gender differences . However , to our knowledge , no idea generation studies focused on detailing such gender differences , and in studies that involve mixed - gender groups , gender is obviously not carefully controlled . In this study , we control for gender groups and hope to lead to future designs that better account for gender differences . 5 . EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 5 . 1 Participants and Confederates Table 4 . Confederate information ( P = Personal Information ; E = Expertise Information ) Information Confederate 1 Confederate 2 P Age 27 25 Gender male female Nationality American American Hobbies playing basketball and guitar music , photography , swimming Honorary activities dean’s list , athletic department honor roll co - founder of a non - profit association TV shows How I Met Your Mother , Chuck , Seinfeld Sex and the City , The Big Bang Theory , The Simpsons Taste in music rock , indie electronic E Companies & References Google Inc . , Apple Inc . Microsoft Research Awards None Outstanding Research Award Degree M . Sc . Ph . D . Department Computer Science Social Sciences Current year in the program 3rd 5th Specialization & Interests Visualization , software engineering social networks , education Skills Java , C + + , PHP , JSP , JavaScript , Ajax experienced in quantitative and qualitative analysis We recruited 36 participants from UCI for the experiment . 18 of them were male and 18 were female . They were between the ages of 20 and 33 years . The participant pool contained undergraduate as well as graduate students from different departments . The participants were asked to complete a short questionnaire about their background . On a 5 - point Likert scale , all subjects except for one were somewhat familiar with idea generation ( mean = 3 . 77 ) and idea evaluation ( mean = 3 . 94 ) techniques . On a 7 - point Likert scale , most of the participants reported they were comfortable working with strangers ( mean = 4 . 80 ) , they occasionally have 203 online collaboration ( mean = 3 . 77 ) , and they tended to trust strangers slightly ( mean = 3 . 55 ) . Participants worked in groups of three with two of the three being confederates ( computer bots ) . One of the challenges in evaluating ideas in experimental studies is that groupthink tends to dictate the idea flow , and the ideas of participants are often triggered by the ideas generated by other participants in the same session . In this study , confederates were used in order to ensure consistent participant experiences across all experimental conditions . In the idea generation sessions , each confederate entered a predetermined list of ideas at specific time intervals . Each confederate had a list of ten ideas that were applicable to the given topic . Depending on the condition , different profile information of the confederates were shown to the participants . Under condition N , no profile information was shown except for the fact that two other participants are logged in . Under condition P and E , the confederates portrayed the profile information identified in Table 4 . 5 . 2 Independent Variables The study followed a 2 ( gender ) x 2 ( idea generation and idea evaluation sessions ) x 2 ( topic A and topic B ) x 3 ( information element conditions N , P , and E ) counterbalanced , randomly assigned , within - subjects design ( see Table 5 ) . Since there was no significant difference between topic A and topic B , we combined the results in both topic A and B in the analyses . All participants first accomplished an idea generation session and then an idea evaluation session . The ordering of the topics was counterbalanced ; participants either generated ideas about topic A in the idea generation session and then evaluated ideas about topic B in the idea evaluation session or vice versa . Topic A involved ideas for using Facebook as a platform for learning in the classroom setting , and topic B involved ideas for using the iPad2 to assist the elderly . Each participant was randomly assigned to one of three information element conditions . In condition N , the participants did not receive any information about their team members . In condition P , the participants received personal information about their team members . In condition E , the participants received the expertise information of their team members ( see Table 4 ) . Table 5 . Study design Idea Generation ( IG ) & Idea Evaluation ( IE ) Male Female Topic A = > Topic B Topic B = > Topic A Topic A = > Topic B Topic B = > Topic A N P E N P E N P E N P E 5 . 3 Procedure The study took place at a behavioral research lab . Each participant was asked to complete a demographic survey . A research staff member explained the research procedure and asked the participant to provide verbal consent . The subject then received a short training on the use of the system . Each subject logged into the system and generated ideas for 15 minutes with two confederates on the assigned topic . In the idea generation session , the participant was asked to provide a label , a short description , and the advantage for the target group for each idea . Each confederate entered a pre - populated list of ten ideas relevant to the assigned topic into the chat window at a time interval that was designed to emulate the natural thinking and typing speed that one would expect to encounter in a regular idea generation meeting . This was done to ensure that all participants encountered the same ideas across different experimental conditions . After a five - minute break , the participant was asked to fill out a questionnaire about his / her personal trust level during the idea generation activity , as well as the satisfaction with the result of the idea generation session . Then the participant was given a five - minute break . In the idea evaluation session , the participant was given 15 minutes to evaluate six pre - populated ideas that are relevant to a second topic for originality and feasibility on a five - point scale . The system also showed the ratings provided by the confederates . This was done to see if knowing either personal or expertise information about their teammates could alter the participants’ rating behaviors . After a five - minute break , the participants were asked to fill out a questionnaire about their personal trust level during the idea evaluation as well as their satisfaction with the result of the idea evaluation session . The entire study procedure lasted approximately 60 minutes . 5 . 4 Dependent Variables 5 . 4 . 1 Trust and Satisfaction To measure affective and cognitive trust of the participants we used a questionnaire adapted from the TWAN schema [ 40 ] . The cognitive trust measure asked about communality ( 1 question ) , ability ( 3 ) , and accountability ( 5 ) of the participants ( Cronbach’s alpha = 0 . 93 ) . The affective trust measure asked about communality ( 1 question ) and benevolence ( 8 ) of the participants ( Cronbach’s alpha = 0 . 87 ) . Six additional questions were asked to measure the participants’ satisfaction level ( Cronbach’s alpha = 0 . 72 ) . 5 . 4 . 2 Quality and Quantity of Ideas We measured the quantity , diversity , and quality of the ideas generated in the idea generation session . Idea quantity is defined as the number of unique ideas . Idea diversity is measured by the number of idea clusters grouped by similarity . All ideas were clustered and rated independently by two experts for originality and feasibility on a five - point scale . The quality of an idea is defined as a combination of originality and feasibility . The inter - rater agreement coefficient was calculated as shown in previous idea generation studies , which assumed that the ratings were in agreement if the expert ratings fell within one point of each other [ 12 , 38 ] . The two experts agreed on 89 . 3 % of the originality ratings and on 90 . 4 % of the feasibility ratings . Differences were reconciled by averaging the ratings . We further group ideas into radical ideas ( high originality and high feasibility ) and incremental ideas ( above average originality and above average feasibility ) . 6 . RESULTS 6 . 1 Idea Generation Table 6 summarizes the results in the idea generation sessions . To test Hypothesis 1a , 1b , 2a , and 2b , MANOVA was performed . The test showed that there is no effect of gender and topic on the trust level of the participants . The F - test showed that there is a significant effect regarding the different conditions and the trust level of participants in the idea generation session ( F [ 14 , 48 ] = 3 . 52 , p < 0 . 0006 ) . Post - hoc t - tests showed that the participants in both condition P ( t [ 22 ] = 3 . 96 , p < 0 . 0003 ) and condition E ( t [ 22 ] = 3 . 46 , p < 0 . 001 ) developed significantly higher affective trust in the idea generation session than the control group . Participants in condition E also developed significantly higher affective trust than in the control group . Similarly , participants in both condition P 204 ( t [ 22 ] = 3 . 06 , p < 0 . 003 ) and condition E ( t [ 22 ] = 2 . 73 , p < 0 . 006 ) developed significantly higher cognitive trust in the idea generation session than the control group . In regard to affective trust , it was shown that knowing of personal information leads to higher affective trust during the distributed idea generation session . It was surprising to observe that knowing the expertise level also leads to higher affective trust when its primary goal is to support cognitive trust . The same applies to cognitive trust . The results showed that knowing both personal information and expertise level enhance affective and cognitive trust in the idea generation session . Thus , knowing any information ( personal or expertise ) could enhance trust in general . As a result it can be said that the data supports Hypothesis 1a and 1b — knowing expertise and personal information could lead to higher cognitive and affective trust during the idea generation sessions . Table 6 . Idea Generation Results N P E Quantity 4 . 0 ( 0 . 48 ) b 6 . 4 ( 0 . 56 ) a 4 . 3 ( 0 . 54 ) b Diversity 3 . 5 ( 0 . 51 ) b 6 . 0 ( 0 . 48 ) a 3 . 9 ( 0 . 48 ) b Incremental Ideas 1 . 2 ( 0 . 30 ) b 2 . 3 ( 0 . 43 ) a 1 . 1 ( 0 . 29 ) b Radical Ideas 1 . 0 ( 0 . 35 ) b 1 . 6 ( 0 . 15 ) a 0 . 4 ( 0 . 15 ) c Cognitive Trust 4 . 1 ( 0 . 23 ) b 5 . 1 ( 0 . 23 ) a 5 . 1 ( 0 . 18 ) a Affective Trust 4 . 6 ( 0 . 19 ) b 5 . 5 ( 0 . 16 ) a 5 . 2 ( 0 . 17 ) a Satisfaction 4 . 3 ( 0 . 19 ) b 4 . 9 ( 0 . 12 ) a 4 . 5 ( 0 . 17 ) b * The results is displayed as Mean ( Standard Deviation ) , with superscripts denoting the following statistically significant relationships : a > b > c . The participants were also asked about their general satisfaction about the idea generation process . Post - hoc t - tests showed that participants in condition P felt significantly more satisfied than the participants in both condition E ( t [ 22 ] = 1 . 85 , p < 0 . 04 ) and in the control group ( t [ 22 ] = 2 . 55 , p < 0 . 009 ) . This shows that knowing more personal information about the other team members not only resulted in higher trust , but also induced higher satisfaction during the process . In terms of idea quantity , post - hoc t - tests showed that participants in condition P created more unique ideas than in the control group ( t [ 22 ] = 3 . 29 , p < 0 . 001 ) and in condition E with a significance of ( t [ 22 ] = 2 . 68 , p < 0 . 006 ) . Similarly , participants in condition P also created significantly more diverse ideas than in condition E ( t [ 22 ] = 3 . 06 , p < 0 . 002 ) as well as in the control group ( t [ 22 ] = 3 . 56 , p < 0 . 0009 ) . This shows that higher affective trust makes the participants open up more to others and that they are able to express their ideas more freely . This also confirms prior research that participants in a team full of experts reported higher perceived inhibition in idea generation sessions [ 8 ] . In terms of idea quality , post - hoc t - tests showed that participants in condition P tended to produce more radical ideas than in the control group ( t [ 22 ] = 1 . 54 , p < 0 . 06 ) and that the participants in the control group tended to produce more radical ideas than in condition E ( t [ 22 ] = 1 . 54 , p < 0 . 06 ) . Also , participants in condition P created more radical ideas than in condition E ( t [ 22 ] = 5 . 54 , p < 0 . 0001 ) . For incremental ideas , post - hoc t - tests showed that participants in condition P created significantly more incremental ideas than the participants in condition E ( t [ 22 ] = 2 . 26 , p < 0 . 01 ) and in the control group ( t [ 22 ] = 2 . 07 , p < 0 . 02 ) . The enhanced affective trust in condition P provides participants enough confidence to write down more interesting or unusual ideas . This result supports Hypothesis 2a but not Hypothesis 2b—higher affective trust resulted in more radical ideas , but higher cognitive trust did not produce more incremental ideas . Furthermore , it can be claimed that knowing the expertise information of the other participants has a negative influence on producing radical ideas due to the higher perceived inhibition despite the high cognitive trust . In regard to idea originality and feasibility , a significant effect of gender was found ( F ( 2 , 147 ) = 3 . 02 , p < 0 . 04 ) . Post - hoc t - tests showed that female participants on average created more feasible ideas whereas male participants on average created more original ideas ( see Table 7 ) . Table 7 . Gender Differences Female Male Originality 3 . 01 ( 0 . 78 ) b 3 . 25 ( 0 . 87 ) a Feasibility 3 . 97 ( 0 . 77 ) a 3 . 69 ( 0 . 87 ) b * The results is displayed as Mean ( Standard Deviation ) , with superscripts denoting the following statistically significant relationships : a > b . Although no prior idea generation literature focused on gender differences , existing gender in software interfaces suggested that females tend to be more risk - averse [ 6 ] . We believe that this is especially true in a distributed environment where participants do not know their remote teammates , and could lead to females proposing more feasible ideas in order to not provoke undesired responses from their teammates . 6 . 2 Idea Evaluation Table 8 summarizes the results in the idea evaluation sessions . To test Hypothesis 3a , 3b , 4a , and 4b , MANOVA was performed . The test showed that there is no effect of gender and topic on the trust level of the participants . Table 8 . Idea Evaluation Results N P E Originality 3 . 0 ( 0 . 12 ) 3 . 2 ( 0 . 18 ) 2 . 9 ( 0 . 19 ) Feasibility 3 . 8 ( 0 . 15 ) a 3 . 9 ( 0 . 14 ) a 3 . 5 ( 0 . 16 ) b Cognitive Trust 4 . 2 ( 0 . 21 ) c 4 . 8 ( 0 . 15 ) b 5 . 4 ( 0 . 12 ) a Affective Trust 4 . 5 ( 0 . 15 ) b 5 . 0 ( 0 . 21 ) a 4 . 8 ( 0 . 18 ) Satisfaction 4 . 6 ( 0 . 19 ) b 5 . 2 ( 0 . 14 ) a 5 . 1 ( 0 . 19 ) a The F - test showed that there is a significant effect regarding the different conditions and the trust level of participants in the idea evaluation session ( F [ 10 , 52 ] = 3 . 55 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Post - hoc t - tests showed that only the participants in condition P developed significantly higher affective trust in the idea evaluation session than in the control group ( t [ 21 ] = 2 . 07 , p < 0 . 02 ) . As a result it can be stated that knowing personal information leads to higher affective trust in the idea evaluation session . For cognitive trust , Participants in condition E developed higher cognitive trust than in the condition P ( t [ 22 ] = 3 . 03 , p < 0 . 003 ) , and that the participants in the condition P developed higher cognitive trust than in the control group ( t [ 22 ] = 2 . 32 , p < 0 . 01 ) . It makes sense that expertise information has a much stronger influence on cognitive trust , but this also means that personal information could also be misconstrued as domain competency during the idea evaluation process . As a result it can be said that the data supports Hypothesis 3a and 3b — knowing expertise and personal information could lead to higher cognitive and affective trust during the idea evaluation sessions . The participants were also asked about their general satisfaction about the idea evaluation process . Post - hoc t - test showed that participants in both condition P ( t [ 22 ] = 2 . 67 , p < 0 . 006 ) and 205 condition E ( t [ 22 ] = 1 . 97 , p < 0 . 03 ) felt significantly more satisfied than the participants in the control group . This shows that information about other team members in general ( both personal and expertise ) could induce higher satisfaction during the idea evaluation process . This difference , in contrast with the idea generation process in which personal information is more desirable than expertise information , is perhaps due to the generative nature of the idea generation process versus the selective nature of the idea evaluation process . Although participants seem to provide similar original ratings on the ideas presented to them in the idea evaluation sessions , no correlation was found between the ratings of the participants and those provided by the confederates . However , by comparing the average feasibility ratings of all participants in the three conditions , it was found that participants in condition E provided lower ratings than in condition P ( t [ 22 ] = 1 . 93 , p < 0 . 03 ) and in the control group ( t [ 22 ] = 1 . 68 , p < 0 . 05 ) . This means that knowing the expertise information of other team members , participants were led to judge more critically on the feasibility ratings . Our results indicate that higher affective or cognitive trust did not lead to consensus formation as there was no correlation in their rating behavior , but to better satisfaction regarding the result . Thus , the data does not support Hypothesis 4a and Hypothesis 4b —higher cognitive and affective trust levels did not exhibit correlation with consensus formation during the idea evaluation sessions . 7 . DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS The results of the experiment showed that topic and gender differences have little effect on trust in idea generation and idea evaluation sessions . There is , however , a significant effect of knowing information elements of participants’ profiles on their trust level and their output . The study results showed that knowing personal information leads to higher affective trust and knowing expertise information leads to higher cognitive trust , which validated our initial hypotheses . However , what surprised us was that knowing either personal or expertise information of the team members boosted both trust levels . Although cognitive trust is , by definition a type of trust that is based on the perception of domain knowledge and task competency and affective trust is based on the perception of emotional comfort , we found that our participants were not able to clearly distinguish these two dimensions of trust . Essentially , knowing any information about others , regardless of it being personal hobbies or professional knowledge could help the team members relate to and familiarize with each other and therefore lead to higher perceptions of trust . In terms of idea generation , although personal and expertise information are capable of enhancing the participants’ perception of trust overall , the personal informational elements are much more conducive ( more radical and incremental ideas ) whereas the expertise information elements are detrimental to idea generation outcomes ( less radical ideas and no more incremental ideas than the control group ) . This is consistent with the literature , as people tend to be more reserved due to evaluation apprehension when the perceived expertise level is high . In this study , we further showed that knowing personal information about the teammates could reduce that hindrance and lead to sharing more and better ideas . Another important finding is that we found gender differences in the idea generation sessions : female participants created more feasible ideas while male participants created more original ideas in the experiment . Previous literature points to the fact that females tend to be more risk - averse in unfamiliar environments [ 6 ] . Since this research focuses on inducing initial trust on distributed teams filled with strangers , this environment may be especially uncomfortable for female participants to openly share their ideas . Future studies should focus on information elements that will engender lively contributions from the female participants . Similar to idea generation sessions , the study showed that knowing personal information leads to higher affective trust and knowing expertise information leads to higher cognitive trust during the idea evaluation sessions , which validated our initial hypotheses . However , there is a difference in terms of how the information elements affected the trust level across the two phases of creativity . Due to the evaluative nature of the idea evaluation task , participants are much more cognizant of the competency level that the other team members have to offer . The expertise information elements induced higher cognitive trust than both personal information and the control groups . Participants are also much more critical at assessing the feasibility of the ideas presented to them . Our results also showed that neither type of information elements led to better consensus formation . This research has some limitations . The study was conducted with a limited pool of just 36 participants . It would be useful to perform an experiment with a larger number of participants . Computer confederates were used in order to ensure that the participants received consistent treatment across different experimental conditions . Since computer bots cannot simulate human and social behavior completely , it would be interesting to see if the results are influenced if this study is conducted with a group of real participants . Participants consisted of students , and therefore the information elements were adapted to students as well and the results may not be generalizable to professional groups . The information elements used in this study will have to be extended or replaced by other information elements that are more suitable for other settings . Furthermore , this work is based on the TWAN schema , and other researchers may have different interpretations of the proposed schema . This study lasted only about an hour . In a long - term project , the fifth category from the TWAN schema—internalized norms—could be included in the analysis . It would also be interesting to apply that approach in this paper to other distributed group work besides idea generation and idea evaluation sessions . 8 . CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this work , we determined how knowing expertise and personal information of other team members affects trust in a distributed team environment , and how trust influences idea generation and idea evaluation sessions . Our findings support previous trust research by confirming that trust influences the behavior of people in a positive manner . It also supports the two - dimensional trust research dividing trust into affective trust and cognitive trust . We provide basic research about the positive correlation of trust and distributed idea generation as well as idea evaluation . We also found indications that trust support should be carefully considered for gender groups in the innovation process , and this work can be used as a first step for further exploration and design implications . The results of this study show that information elements can be effectively used to support initial trust building in the distributed team environment . The findings of this research can be used to support the development of templates that could provide communication support for distributed teams . Higher affective trust appears to have the ability to reduce evaluation apprehension in the idea generation sessions . Since it was shown that knowing 206 personal information has the biggest influence on affective trust in the idea generation session , developers could incorporate this kind of information in designing interface layouts or group process enhancements for the purpose of an idea generation session . Likewise , interface and group process designers could incorporate expertise information elements to assist distributed idea evaluation sessions . Making the expertise information available could make people more critical about their own evaluation criteria . In general , providing any information is better than providing no information at all , as anything that could help the team members relate and share experiences could help team build trust and make their work more effective . Offering information increases team trust , which is a key factor to success in innovation processes . For future work , other ways of carrying out an idea generation or idea evaluation session could be implemented . For example , a more structured technique for creating ideas could be applied instead of using brainstorming . It would also be interesting to know what information elements are needed when participants are communicating with other mediums such as video and audio chat . Another question is whether the proposed template is scalable for a bigger group . The more information is shown the higher the cognitive load is imposed upon the participants . As another future work , a potential next step could be to create a taxonomy of information elements that are suitable for different participants , tasks , and distributed settings . This knowledge could be used for supporting collaboration , and providing group process designers the possibility to better integrate the trust factor in their processes in a structured and predictable way . Additionally , further research is necessary for understanding how systems can be better designed to encourage more creative contributions from the female participants . 9 . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Nos . 1111446 , 0943262 , and 0808783 . We thank our colleagues for their advice and feedback , especially Drs . Matthew Bietz , Gary Olson , and Filippo Lanubile , as well as the entire CRADL research group at Irvine . We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments . 10 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Al - Ani , B . and Redmiles , D . 2009 . Supporting Trust in Distributed Teams through Continuous Coordination . IEEE Software 99 , 1 ( August 2009 ) , 35 ‐ 40 . [ 2 ] Barki , H . and Pinsonneault , A . 2001 . Small Group Brainstorming and Idea Quality : Is Electronic Brainstorming the Most Effective Approach ? Small Group Research 32 , 2 ( April 2001 ) , 158 - 205 . [ 3 ] Bidault , F . and Castello , A . 2009 . Trust and Creativity : Understanding the Role of Trust in Creativity ‐ Oriented Joint Developments . R & D Management 39 , 3 ( June 2009 ) , 259 ‐ 270 . [ 4 ] Booz , A . 1982 . New Product Management for the 80s . Booz , Allen , and Hamilton Inc . , New York , NY . [ 5 ] Bos , N . , Olson , J . , Gergle , D . , Olson , G . , and Wright , Z . 2002 . Effects of four computer ‐ mediated communications channels on trust development . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems : Changing Our World , Changing Ourselves ( Minneapolis , Minnesota , USA , April 20 – 25 , 2002 ) . CHI’02 . ACM , New York , NY , 135 - 140 . [ 6 ] Burnett , M . M . , Beckwith , L . , Wiedenbeck , S . , Fleming , S . D . , Cao , J . , Park , T . H . , Grigoreanu , V . , and Rector , K . 2011 . Gender Pluralism in Problem - Solving Software . Interacting with Computers 23 , 5 ( September 2011 ) , 450 - 460 . [ 7 ] Chen , M . H . , Chang , Y . C . , and Hung , S . C . 2008 . Social Capital and Creativity in R & D Project Teams . R & D Management 38 , 1 ( January 2008 ) , 21 ‐ 34 . [ 8 ] Collaros , P . A . and Anderson , L . R . 1969 . Effect of perceived expertness upon creativity of members of brainstorming groups . Journal of Applied Psychology 53 , 2 ( April 1969 ) , 159 - 163 . [ 9 ] Cooper , A . , and Bott , M . W . J . 1999 . Influence of Expectancies and Experience on Impression Formation . Journal of Psychological Inquiry 4 ( 1999 ) , 21 ‐ 24 . [ 10 ] Cosley , D . , Lam , S . K . , Albert , I . , Konstan , J . A . , and Riedl , J . 2003 . Is seeing believing ? How recommender interfaces affect users’ opinions . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Fort Lauderdale , FL , USA , April 5 – 10 , 2003 ) . CHI ’03 . ACM , New York , NY , 585 - 592 . [ 11 ] Crawford , M . E . 1994 . New Products Management . 4th Edition . Irwin Inc . , Boston , MA . [ 12 ] Diehl , M . and Stroebe , W . 1987 . Productivity Loss in Brainstorming Groups : Toward the Solution of a Riddle . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53 , 3 ( September 1987 ) , 497 ‐ 509 . [ 13 ] Dosher , M . , Benepe , O . , Humphrey , A . , Stewart , R . , and Lie , B . 1960 ‐ 1970 . The SWOT analysis method . Stanford Research Institute , Mento Park , CA . [ 14 ] Feng , J . , Lazar , J . , and Preece , J . 2004 . Empathy and online interpersonal trust : a fragile relationship . Behaviour and Information Technology 23 , 2 ( March - April 2004 ) , 97 - 106 . [ 15 ] Gabarro , J . J . 1990 . The Development of Working Relationships . In Intellectual Teamwork , J . , Kraut , R . E . , and Egido , C . Galegher Eds . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NY , 79 - 110 . [ 16 ] Good , D . 2000 . Individuals , Interpersonal Relations , and Trust . In Trust : Making and breaking cooperative relations , by D . ( ed . ) Gambetta , 31 - 48 . Blackwell , Oxford , UK . [ 17 ] Hartman , F . 1999 . Teams and team building . In The Technology Management Handbook , R . C . Dorf Ed . CRC Press / IEEE Press , Boca Raton , 8 - 12 . [ 18 ] Herstatt , C . 1999 . Theorie und Praxis der fruehen Phasen des Innovationsprozesses . Management 68 , 10 ( 1999 ) , 72 ‐ 81 . [ 19 ] Higgins , J . M . 1994 . 101 Creative Problem Solving Techniques : The Handbook of New Ideas for Business . New Management Publishing Company . [ 20 ] Hill , W . , Stead , L . , Rosenstein , M . , and Furnas , G . 1995 . Recommending and evaluating choices in a virtual community of use . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Portland , Oregon , USA , April 2 – 7 , 2005 ) . CHI ’05 . ACM , New York , NY , 194 - 201 . [ 21 ] Hung , Y . C . , Dennis , A . R . , and Robert , L . 2004 . Trust in Virtual Teams : Towards an Integrative Model of Trust Formation . In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( Big Island , Hawaii , January 5 - 8 , 2004 ) . HICSS ’37 . IEEE Computer Society , Washington DC . 207 [ 22 ] Iacono , C . and Weisband , S . 1997 . Developing Trust in Virtual Teams . In Proceedings of the 13th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( Wailea , Hawaii , January 07 – 10 , 1997 ) . HICSS ’37 . IEEE Computer Society , Washington DC , 412 ‐ 420 . [ 23 ] Jarvenpaa , S . L . and Leidner , D . E . 1999 . Communication and Trust in Global Virtual Teams . Organization Science 10 , 6 ( June 1999 ) , 791 ‐ 815 . [ 24 ] Jarvenpaa , S . L . , Knoll , K . , and Leidner , D . E . 1998 . Is anybody out there ? Antecedents of trust in global virtual teams . Journal of Management Information Systems 14 , 4 ( March 1998 ) , 29 ‐ 64 . [ 25 ] Johnson , B . 2005 . Design ideation : the conceptual sketch in the digital age . Design Studies 26 , 6 ( November 2005 ) , 613 ‐ 624 . [ 26 ] Kanawattanachai , P . and Yoo , Y . 2005 . Dynamic nature of trust in virtual teams . The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 11 , 3 - 4 ( December 2002 ) , 187 ‐ 213 . [ 27 ] Karau , S . J . and Williams , J . W . 1993 . Social loafing : A Meta - ‐ Analytic Review and Theoretical Integration . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 65 , 4 ( October 1993 ) , 681 ‐ 706 . [ 28 ] Knoll , S . W . and Horton , G . 2010 . Changing the Perspective : Improving Generate thinkLets for Ideation . In Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( Honolulu , Hawaii , January 5 – 8 , 2010 ) . HICSS ’43 . IEEE Computer Society Press , Los Alamitos , 1 - 10 . [ 29 ] Lipnack , J . and Stamps , J . 2000 . Virtual Teams : People Working Across Boundaries with Technology . 2nd Edition . Wiley , New York , NY . [ 30 ] McAllister , D . J . 1995 . Affect ‐ and cognition ‐ based trust as foundations for interpersonal cooperation in organizations . Academy of Management Journal 38 , 1 ( February 1995 ) , 24 ‐ 59 . [ 31 ] Meyerson , D . Weick , K . E . , and Kramer , R . M . 1996 . Swift Trust and Temporary Groups . In Trust in Organizations : Frontiers of Theory and Research , Kramer ( Eds . ) , R . M . and Tyler , T . R . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA , 166 ‐ 195 . [ 32 ] Nooteboom , B . , Berger , H . , and Noorderhaven , N . G . 1997 . Effects of Trust and Governance on Relational Risk . Academy of Management Journal 40 ( 1997 ) , 308 ‐ 338 . [ 33 ] Nystrom , H . 1985 . Product Development Strategy : An Integration of Technology and Marketing . Journal of Product Innovation Management 2 , 1 ( March 1985 ) , 25 ‐ 33 . [ 34 ] Osborn , A . F . 1963 . Applied imagination : Principles and procedures of creative problem solving . 3rd Revised Edition , Charles Scribner ' s Sons , New York , NY . [ 35 ] Parayitam , S . and Dooley , R . S . 2009 . The interplay between cognitive ‐ and affective conflict and cognition ‐ and affect - ‐ based trust in influencing decision outcomes . Journal of Business Research 62 , 8 ( August 2009 ) , 789 - 796 . [ 36 ] Postmes , T . and Lea , M . 2000 . Social processes and group decision making : anonymity in group decision support systems . Ergonomics 43 , 8 ( August 2000 ) , 1252 ‐ 1274 . [ 37 ] Pyysia(cid:31)inen , J . 2003 . Building Trust in Global Inter - Organizational Software Development Projects : Problems and Practices . International Workshop on Global Software Engineering ( May 2003 ) , 69 ‐ 74 . [ 38 ] Rietzschel , E . F . , Nijstad , B . A . , and Stroebe , W . 2010 . The selection of creative ideas after individual idea generation : Choosing between creativity and impact . British Journal of Psychology 101 ( February 2010 ) , 47 - 68 . [ 39 ] Ross , W . and LaCroix , J . 1996 . Multiple Meanings of Trust in Negotiation Theory and Research : A Literature Review and Integrative Model . The International Journal of Conflict Management 7 , 4 ( 1996 ) , 314 ‐ 360 . [ 40 ] Rusman , E . 2011 . The Mind ' s Eye on Personal Profiles - How to inform trustworthiness assessments in virtual project teams . Doctoral Thesis . Open Universiteit Heerlen , The Netherlands . [ 41 ] Simons , T . L . and Peterson , R . S . 2000 . Task conflict and relationship conflict in top management teams : The pivotal role of intragroup trust . Journal of Applied Psychology 85 , 1 ( February 2000 ) , 102 - 111 . [ 42 ] Sternberg , R . J . ( Ed . ) 1988 . The nature of creativity . Cambridge University Press , New York , NY . [ 43 ] Trainer , E . , Al ‐ Ani , B , and Redmiles , D . 2011 . Impact of Collaborative Traces on Trustworthiness . In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering . ( Honolulu , Hawaii , May 21 , 2011 ) . CHASE ’11 . ACM , New York , NY , 40 - 47 . [ 44 ] Valacich , J . S . , Dennis , A . R . , and Nunamaker , J . F . 1992 . Group Size and Anonymity Effects on Computer - Mediated Idea Generation . Small Group Research 23 , 1 ( February 1992 ) , 49 - 73 . [ 45 ] Wilson , J . M . , Straus , S . G . , and McEvily , W . J . 2006 . All in due time : The development of trust in computer ‐ mediated and face ‐ to ‐ face groups . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 99 , 1 ( January 2006 ) , 16 ‐ 33 . 208