Hypothesis Testing in Ecology : Psychological Aspects and the Importance of Theory MaturationAuthor ( s ) : Craig Loehle Reviewed work ( s ) : Source : The Quarterly Review of Biology , Vol . 62 , No . 4 ( Dec . , 1987 ) , pp . 397 - 409 Published by : The University of Chicago Press Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2829456 . Accessed : 11 / 07 / 2012 10 : 59 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . . The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to The Quarterly Review of Biology . http : / / www . jstor . org VOLUME 62 , No . 4 THE QUARTERLY REVIEW OF BIOLOGY DECEMBER 1987 HYPOTHESIS TESTING IN ECOLOGY : PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS AND THE IMPORTANCE OF THEORY MATURATION CRAIG LOEHLE * Savannah River Ecology Laboratory , Drawer E , Aiken , SC 29801 USA ABSTRACT Proper hypothesis testing is the subject of much debate in ecology . According to studies in cognitive psychology , confirmation bias ( a tendency to seek confirming evidence ) and theory tenacity ( persis - tent belief in a theory in spite of contrary evidence ) pervasively influence actual problem solving and hypothesis testing often interfering with effective testing of alternative hypotheses . On the other hand , these psychologicalfactors play a positive role in the process of theory maturation by helping to protect and nurture a new idea until it is suitable for critical evaluation . As a theory matures it increases in empirical content and its predictions become more distinct . Efficient hypothesis testing is often not possible when theories are in an immature state , as is the case in much of ecology . Problem areas in ecology are examined in light of these considerations , includingfailure to publish negative results , misuses of mathematical models , confusion resultingfrom ambiguous terms ( such as " diversity " and " niche ' ) , and biases against new ideas . INTRODUCTION SCIENTIFIC METHOD , statistical rigor , and hypothesis testing are being empha - sized increasingly in ecology . Articles have be - gun to address the question of proper null , or neutral , models , particularly in community studies ( Caswell , 1976a ; Connor and Simber - loff , 1979a , 1986 ; Harvey , Colwell , Silvertown , and May , 1983 ; Simberloff , 1983 ; Strong , 1980 , 1983 ) , although the null models themselves are controversial at this stage ( Gilpin and Dia - mond , 1984 ; Grant and Abbott , 1980 ; Har - vey et al . , 1983 ) . The proper role of theory and mathematics in ecology is also being assessed ( Levin , 1981 ; May , 1981 ; Pielou , 1981 ) . Advo - cates of hypothesis testing are calling for in - creased rigor ( Holling , 1978 ; Hurlbert , 1984 ; Quinn and Dunham , 1983 ; Reckhow and * Present address : Savannah River Laboratory , Bldg . 773 - 42A , E . I . du Pont de Nemours & Company , Aiken , South Carolina 29808 USA . Chapra , 1983 ; Simberloff , 1983 ; Strong , 1983 ; Waggoner , 1975 ) . Finally , articles have begun to address the power of statistical tests for es - timation of process rates ( Nilsson and Nilsson , 1983 ) and detection of lack of differences or failure to reject the null hypothesis ( Toft and Shea , 1983 ) . All of this activity is a sign of ecology ' s in - cipient emergence as a hard science . ( Here " hard science " means a science able to estab - lish theories and laws with predictive and / or explanatory power . ) At such a juncture in the history of a science it is not uncommon to find debate about methods and philosophical is - sues , and ecology is no exception . A question at the heart of these issues is the primacy to be given to the classic hypothetico - deductive ( H - D ) method . The case for the efficacy of the H - D method seems compelling ( Lakatos , 1970 ; Nagel , 1979 ; Platt , 1964 ; Popper , 1959 , 1963 ; Strong , 1980 ) , yet in ecology it is assailed by some and ignored by many . This is a puz - zling problem in need of resolution . Recent ? 1987 by the Stony Brook Foundation , Inc . All rights reserved . 397 398 THE QUARTERLY REVIEW OF BIOLOGY VOLUME 62 results from the psychology of science can help resolve this debate by showing that the H - D method varies in appropriateness according to the state of development of theory . Psycholog - ical studies are also useful here because prob - lem solving is a mental activity , subject to psy - chological biases and shortcomings , rather than an exercise in pure logic . The main psy - chological principles involved are confirmation bias , theory tenacity , and difficulties with men - tal operations on multiple simultaneous hy - potheses . The philosophical framework will be presented , followed by results from the field of psychology and finally discussion of the proper role of and limitations to hypothesis testing in ecology . Exceptions to Hypothesis - Testing First , however , it is necessary to show that many aspects of ecology do not necessarily lend themselves to analysis by the H - D methodol - ogy . Recent emphasis on hypothesis testing has made it fashionable to advocate the framing of every research question as a test of a hypoth - esis that can be falsified . But many research questions are of the " what , when , where " vari - ety , i . e . , they constitute observational or descriptive research . For example : " What is the geographic distribution of ra - dioactivity around a power plant ? " " What is the breeding season of species X ? " " What severity of drought will kill plant Z ? " The results of these studies are maps or dates or quantities . Although sampling designs and statistical tests are usually involved ( e . g . , ANOVA on levels of drought stress in the third example above ) , no hypotheses are being tested - data are merely being amassed for descriptive purposes ; serious hypotheses , af - ter all , have explanatory power : they explain phenomena in terms of history , mechanisms , or evolution . This is the distinction between statistical inference and testing scientific hy - potheses . For example , we estimate the con - tributions of mortality factors A , B , and C for a population . A statistical inference would be that given the means and variances we can state that A is greater than B than C . This is only scientific inference if some theory predicts that A should be larger ( or smaller , etc . ) . Trying to formulate observational ( descriptive ) studies as tests of hypotheses is awkward and mislead - ing . Yet these studies are valuable to science , may require great ingenuity and perseverance , and may be very expensive . During initial exploration of a phenomenon there may be no theory to test . There may be an empirical curve , such as that produced by light saturation during photosynthesis , for which we have no explanation . It may only be possible to establish the magnitude of the ef - fect or perhaps fit a curve through the data . The process of explaining can provide theories ( mechanistic , historical , or evolutionary ) that may be testable ( Bunge , 1967 ) . It is at this point that the hypothesis - testing debate becomes relevant . In the following discussion , descrip - tive studies are not under consideration . HYPOTHETICO - DEDUCTIVE METHOD Sir Karl Popper , one of the great philoso - phers of science of the 20th Century , demon - strated the impossibility of proving a scientific theory true by means of induction , because no amount of supportive evidence assures us that contrary evidence will not be found ( Popper , 1959 , 1963 ) . Inductive logic can only increase our confidence in a theory until data are avail - able that prove the theory to be wholly or partly wrong . His significant principle of demarca - tion states that theories are scientific only if they are potentially falsifiable . Falsification is based on the logical asym - metry between proof and disproof . Consider the hypothesis " All numbers are evenly divisi - ble by 2 . ' Many examples ( " 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 . . . " ) lend support , but only one negative instance , " 3 , " is required for refutation . This asymmetry of proof is strongest in logical subjects , such as mathematics , and becomes weaker as phe - nomena become more complex or more in - fluenced by stochastic factors . Popper realized that , in practice , experi - mental error renders hypothesis testing inex - act . This is why he emphasized testing " risky " predictions . Risky predictions concern phe - nomena that are highly unlikely to occur by chance , are often novel , and are contrary to competing theories or are not predicted by them . Testing risky predictions is efficient . If the prediction is borne out , the hypothesis is strongly corroborated . If not , it is strongly refuted . The fact that the prediction is highly unlikely by chance means that we are less de - pendent on small statistical differences . DECEMBER 1987 HYPOTHESIS TESTING IN ECOLOGY 399 Strong Inference In an extension of Popper ' s work , Platt ( 1964 ) proposed the concept of strong infer - ence . Although Platt was not the first to pro - pose the use of multiple hypotheses ( see Cham - berlin , 1965 , reprinted from 1890 ) , he noted that certain fields , such as biochemistry , are characterized by very rapid progress that is the result of a common research methodology . Sin - gle experiments in these fields are often de - signed to distinguish between at least two or even four or more hypotheses . Such an ap - proach is very efficient and yields rapid prog - ress . Strong inference applies the following steps to every problem in science formally , ex - plicitly , and regularly : ( 1 ) Devise alternative hypotheses ; ( 2 ) Devise a crucial experiment ( or several of them ) , with alternative possible outcomes , each of which will as nearly as possible exclude one or more of the hypotheses ; ( 3 ) Carry out the experiment so as to ob - tain a clean result ; ( 4 ) Recycle the procedure , making sub - hypotheses or sequential hypotheses to refine the possibilities that remain . Using these steps we work our way through a " conditional inductive tree " or " logical tree " in which our experiments , by exclusion , de - termine our choice at each decision point . This is an efficient sequence of steps and , accord - ing to Platt , the fastest method for exploring the unknown so as to reach firm conclusions . In ecology , Step 3 is not usually easy . The difficulties caused by such factors as random - ness , complexity , and unobservable variables are too well known to belabor here . However , experimental difficulties do not provide a com - plete explanation . In addition to these ex - perimental difficulties , I believe that psycho - logical barriers inhibit devising and testing alternative ecological hypotheses . The vague - ness of much theory in ecology makes it diffi - cult to derive explicit hypotheses or predic - tions . Understanding these factors should lead to faster progress in ecology . COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY AND SCIENTIFIC METHOD It is not surprising that there is a difference between hypothesis - testing criteria proposed by philosophers and those used by scientists . Actual data are , after all , rarely so clear - cut as to allow formal logical deductions . In addi - tion , humans are not perfect problem - solving machines . The history of science is full of crea - tive but wrong ideas , many of which persisted for unusually long periods . We have had ani - mal magnetism , N - rays , and Lamarckism , for example . Clearly , science is not a mechanical process for cranking out the truth . Which char - acteristics of the way scientists think and solve problems are consistent with both successes and failures ? Studies of problem solving by scientists can help answer this question . Early work in the psychology of science was largely anecdotal or concerned with overly sim - plistic laboratory problem - solving tasks ( see discussion in Tweney , Doherty , and Mynatt , 1981 ) . Recently , progress has been made using the tools of cognitive psychology , including in - terview techniques , self - reporting of subjects during problem - solving tasks , and analysis of scientific diaries and notebooks ( e . g . , Good - field , 1981 ; Gruber and Barrett , 1974 ) . Confirmation Bias One of the most prominent findings in the psychology of science is a class of phenomena called " confirmation bias , " which is a tendency to try to confirm one ' s theory , or to not seek out or use disconfirming evidence . This can occur even when disconfirming evidence is clearly presented and glaringly contradicts the hypothesis . This type of bias was noted as early as 1890 ( Chamberlin , 1965 ) , and has since been experimentally demonstrated ( Tweney , Doherty , and Mynatt , 1981 ) . Experimental subjects often have difficulty when instructed to find the example that will prove a rule to be false , particularly when the rule is complex . This is an asymmetry in hypothesis gener - ation . It also can be difficult to compare two hy - potheses . It is easier to compare two sets of data against one theory than two theories against one set of data , according to Tweney , Doherty , and Mynatt ( 1981 ) . Additionally , unconscious confirmation bias may creep into the scientific process via exploratory data analysis of large data sets and via the tendency to publish only significant or confirming results ( Selvin and Stuart , 1966 ) . Caswell ( 1976b ) has pointed out that there is a tendency for modelers to show only how their model fits the data , rather than 400 THE QUARTERLY REVIEW OF BIOLOGY VOLUME 62 to subject it to any strong tests . In experiments , scientists have shown far too much confidence in the reliability of small samples ( Tversky and Kahneman , 1971 ) . Small sample sizes produce not just spurious positive results that are con - fusing to everyone , but also a high probability ( around 50 % ) of not detecting an effect that in fact exists ( Tversky and Kahneman , 1971 ) . This problem seems particularly acute in the social sciences , but ecology is not exempt . All of this weakens the efficacy of hypothesis test - ing , even when it is attempted . Theory Tenacity Theory tenacity has also been found to be a significant factor in problem - solving be - havior ( Lakatos , 1970 ; Mitroff , 1974 ; Tweney , Doherty , and Mynatt , 1981 ) . It differs from confirmation bias in that it reflects a commit - ment to basic assumptions ; confirmation bias can occur in cases with no emotional bias merely because it is easier to think of confirm - ing than disconfirming evidence . Mitroff ( 1974 ) found evidence that those scientists in the space program most responsible for ma - jor progress and new ideas were also often un - willing to give up their ideas in the face of contradiction - i . e . , they had high tenacity . The most well - known researchers in a field are often the ones that most strongly denounce a major new idea . In the extreme , some great scientists have drifted into disrepute by cling - ing to a personal hypothesis or outdated ideas . Emotional investment and personal involve - ment in ideas lead to theory tenacity . A clas - sic example in ecology is Raymond Pearl ( Kingsland , 1985 ) , who loudly championed the logistic equation as a law of population growth ( discussed further below ) . If more than one theory is extant , passionate debate may ensue , and sometimes the more vigorous debaters prevail until , and sometimes beyond , the point at which decisive experiments demonstrate the errors in their arguments . Sometimes only one theory ( called the ruling theory by Chamber - lin , 1965 ) is available ; in this instance theory tenacity may be particularly strong because re - jecting it will leave nothing . A bad theory is thought to be better than none . It is to Dar - win ' s credit that on several occasions he gave up a hypothesis without another to replace it , though this caused him great anxiety ( Gruber and Barrett , 1974 ) . Theory Maturation Bunge ( 1968 ) and Tweney , Doherty , and Mynatt ( 1981 ) have proposed that theory and data quality are key concepts for evaluating hypothesis testing methods . In the early stages of theory development it is often unclear ex - actly what predictions the theory makes . As Lakatos ( 1970 ) points out , early versions of a theory may only refer to ideal situations , and elaboration may be required to derive testa - ble predictions . Insistence on testing predic - tions too early is dogmatic falsificationism ( Lakatos , 1970 ) , which may result in prema - ture rejection of a partially correct theory . Ad - ditionally , evidence against an immature the - ory may not be very convincing because of the theory ' s inherent vagueness . When different individuals derive contradictory predictions A and B from theory Y , disproof of prediction A does not necessarily induce us to give up Y . Psychological research backs up this philo - sophical analysis with the finding that prema - ture attempts to falsify hypotheses interfere with problem solving ( Gorman and Gorman , 1984 ) . Theory maturation is necessary before strong inference can be effective . ( See Bunge , 1968 , for philosophical treatment and exam - ples of the maturation process . ) Maturation changes a theory from vague and qualitative to precise and predictive ; its empirical content increases ( Lakatos , 1970 ) . It is often accom - panied by elaboration of experimental , ana - lytical , or mathematical methodologies . Dur - ing this process a theory will be faced with many contrary or unassimilated facts , as well as with competing theories . Theory tenacity then becomes a positive force ( if the theory is a good one ) , which keeps the idea alive in the face of negative evidence . Darwin , Einstein , and Bohr tenaciously clung to theories they felt to be right even when key elements could not be proven or some data were contradictory . Confirmation bias ( conscious or not ) can also be a positive force that results in the ac - cumulation of instances ( facts , case histories , experiments ) that support the theory . This may allow better evaluation of competing theories or refinement of the details of a given theory . Lack of theory maturation leads to stagnation . This occurs when ruling theories are never subjected to rigorous testing , and results in a large mass of unassimilated exceptions . Ecol - DECEMBER 1987 HYPOTHESIS TESTING IN ECOLOGY 401 ogy has been rife with ruling theories that are not effectively tested for long periods ( McIn - tosh , 1980 , 1985 ) . Examples include Huchin - son ' s suggested 1 . 3 size ratio for sympatric com - petitors and the dictum that diversity begets stability . Since it is difficult to perform a critical test of an immature theory , effort in many areas of ecology may be better focused on increas - ing theory maturity rather than trying to prove or disprove the theory . There are many steps that can be taken to increase the maturity of a theory . One of the first steps involves the at - tempt to convert a verbal statement of theory into a more precise form . A general , plausible theory such as " animals gather food in an op - timal way " can lead to a variety of models that attempt to embody the theory ( in this case the plethora of optimal foraging models ) . Plural - ity of thought is useful at this stage . Compar - ing the models can show if their predictions differ , and if so in what ways . In this way , Schoener ( 1983 ) showed that several models of optimal feeding - territory size are special cases of a more general one . Comparisons may also be purely mathematical and may result in a general model or derivation of transformations that can convert one model into another ( e . g . , relations between various sigmoidal growth curves , Grosenbaugh , 1965 ) . Defining the scope of the theory increases theory maturity by enhancing testability and precision . Examination of domains of appli - cation clarifies restrictive assumptions and in - dicates the universality of predictions . For ex - ample , in exploring relations between body size and metabolic rates or life - history parameters , comparison of different taxa ( e . g . , birds vs . mammals ) is useful . Theory scope can also be clarified by enumerating classes of behavior to be predicted or allowed by the theory . For example , by listing the possible ideal types of population behavior around equilibrium ( e . g . , stable , limit cycle ) , May ( 1973 ) clarified the scope of analytic popula - tion theory . Boundary conditions are also im - portant for defining theory scope . They in - clude such factors as environmental variables , spatial relations , and age class structure . A check on the level of maturity of a theory is provided by the criterion of robustness ( Levins , 1966 ) . A theory is robust if two or more lines of argument or types of experiment lead to the same conclusion . If a theory is ro - bust to particular assumptions or data sets , then it is more likely that attempts to test the theory will be successful because test results will be less often compromised by secondary considerations . We may examine robustness by asking : Do different representations ( models ) of the theory make the same predic - tions ? Do different measures of entities in the theory ( e . g . , different diversity measures ) lead to the same results ? Is the mathematical model sensitive to parameter variation , aggregation scheme , or variables left out of the model ? The importance of operational definitions was stressed by Nagel ( 1979 ) . For example , quantifying diversity ( defining it operation - ally ) showed that there are several different types of diversity . The mere attempt to define phenomena operationally can dramatically in - crease theory maturity . A fundamental step in Galileds studies , for example , was distinguish - ing speed , velocity , and acceleration from each other and defining how to measure them . I be - lieve that the lack of operational definitions for system , ecosystem , and community ( among others ) , causes constant problems in ecology . In order to go from theory to experiment , it is often necessary to make deductions ( predictions ) from a theory . Formally stating the logical structure of a theory , perhaps in ax - iomatic or mathematical form ( e . g . , Lewis , 1982 ; Reiners , 1986 ) , makes a theory more well formed and makes deductions easier . Even in the case of a well - formed , mathematically stated theory , the consequences or predictions of the theory are not always obvious . Deriv - ing and clarifying predictions from a theory is an important but difficult step . From New - ton ' s initial inverse square relation for gravity it was not at all self - evident that planets should follow elliptical orbits . Elaboration of the mathematical structure and consequences of a theory can be extensive ; mathematicians are still working out the mathematics associated with the theory of relativity 60 years after Ein - stein . There has been a significant elaboration of the mathematics associated with population genetics and population dynamics in ecology . Other aspects of ecology , such as ecosystem studies , have encountered systems that are analytically intractable so that mathematical elaboration is untenable and simulation is the principal useful tool . Cumulative progress is 402 THE QUARTERLY REVIEW OF BIOLOGY VOLUME 62 slower when simulation is necessary than when analytical solutions are possible . Once predictions have been derived from a theory , experimental methods often become crucial to the theory - maturation process . In ecology new techniques have opened up fields previously blocked and allowed theories to be tested . New techniques include radio tracking of animal movements , and the use of radioac - tive tracers , genetic markers , physiological monitoring equipment , and aquatic micro - cosms . Also key to maturation is the development of new statistical techniques . Estimation of population size relies heavily on mark - recapture methodologies developed specifically for ecology . Multivariate methods , such as detrended correspondence analysis and dis - criminant analysis have allowed community ecology to enter a more quantitative stage of development . A hotly debated issue concerns the development of appropriate null models , particularly for studying community organi - zation and determining the role of competi - tion . Consideration of statistical power and use of proper tests can help prevent incorrect re - jection of a valid theory or spurious confirma - tion of an invalid one ( e . g . , Garsd , 1984 ) . Such operations can help bring a theory to a level of maturity at which more rigorous test - ing is possible . At the same time the utility of the theory will increase because of greater ex - plicitness . When theory quality ( maturity ) in - creases , the distinctions between competing hypotheses become clear enough for unambig - uous experimental testing . Then strong infer - ence can come into play , as Platt ( 1964 ) docu - ments for some fields of science . APPLYING THE RESULTS TO ECOLOGY Opposition to H - D Methods in Ecology In spite of the apparently convincing case made for falsificationism and strong inference , many oppose this program . Roughgarden ( 1983 ) complains , in essence , that that is not how we actually do science and that we do not need formal logic . May ( 1981 ) objects to philosophers telling scientists how to do science . May cites Darwin ' s notebooks ( Gruber and Barrett , 1974 ) , which describe how he ac - tually arrived at his theories , as evidence against the hypothetico - deductive model , not - ing that Darwin did not propose explicit hy - potheses and test them . The H - D method and strong inference , however , are valid no matter how theories are obtained . Dreams , crystal balls , or scribbled notebooks are all allowed . In fact , induction may be used to create em - pirical relations which then become candidates for hypothesis testing even though induction cannot be used to prove anything . Popper was most concerned about the public test of a the - ory : e . g . , now that Mr . Darwin has published his treatise on evolution , what are we to make of it ? How do we judge if it is wrong ? How do we decide if a new version of the theory is better ? Telling evidence on the status of falsifiabil - ity and strong inference in ecology is the rar - ity and weakness of this type of treatment , as pointed out by Strong ( 1980 ) and Connor and Simberloff ( 1986 ) , and the disdain with which such philosophical issues are treated ( e . g . , MacFadyen , 1975 ; Bartholomew , 1982 ) . The vigorous and inconclusive debates about the role of competition ( Connor and Simberloff , 1986 ) , the literature on model evaluation ( Caswell , 1976b ; Loehle , 1983 ) and the vigor - ous debate on the role and appropriateness of null models ( Caswell , 1976a ; Connor and Sim - berloff , 1986 ; Gilpin and Diamond , 1984 ; Grant and Abbott , 1980 ; Harvey et al . , 1983 ) all illustrate that proper hypothesis testing in ecology is an unresolved issue . Historical sum - maries of theory in ecology by McIntosh ( 1980 , 1985 ) further illustrate the lack of strong cor - roboration or disproof of theories and the in - ertia of established theories in ecology . The - ories often muddle along in a plausible but unconfirmed state , often side by side with sev - eral alternatives . A counter - argument is made by Fretwell ( 1975 ) , that by way of the influence of Robert MacArthur the H - D method gained accepta - bility in ecology , resulting in a dramatic in - crease in hypothesis testing in the ecological literature from the 1950s to the 1970s . Al - though this is probably correct ( see Kingsland , 1985 ) , much of the testing , including MacAr - thur ' s and Fretwell ' s work , was , to quote Fret - well , based on " weak data . " The tests were of - ten inconclusive or just mildly confirming ( McIntosh , 1980 , 1985 ; Pulliam , 1980 ) . Gener - ation of hypotheses ( theories ) is important but must be followed by theory maturation and fi - nally by strong tests . DECEMBER 1987 HYPOTHESIS TESTING IN ECOLOGY 403 This , then , is the paradox : An apparently compelling logical argument and successful application of the strong inference method in other fields is viewed with hostility , ignored , or weakly applied in ecology . Applying the concept of theory maturity and results from cognitive psychology ( elaborated above ) en - ables us to resolve the paradox . In particular , we can address behaviors that interfere with efficient hypothesis testing and lead to incon - clusive debates . Bias in Hypothesis Testing Disconfirming evidence may be suppressed when it conflicts with a ruling theory or en - counters journal reviewers exhibiting confir - mation bias or theory tenacity . In a study of the review process in psychology , Mahoney ( 1977 ) submitted two sets of contrived research papers , differing only in their results . He found that disconfirmatory papers ( challenging " ac - cepted " findings ) were less likely to be accepted for publication and less likely to be rated as methologically sound than were confirmatory papers . Van Valen and Pitelka ( 1974 ) cite in - stances of this kind in ecology . On occasion it may be very difficult to publish carefully done research in major ecological journals if the author is " merely " refuting someone else ' s theory without proposing an alternative ( e . g . , Heck , 1976 ) . The publication of disconfirm - ing evidence is crucial to scientific progress be - cause it allows us to refine or reject theories ( Connor and Simberloff , 1979a ) . Theory tenacity among the established sci - entific community can result in strong bias against new theories ( Honig , 1982 ; Horrobin , 1982 ) . The extent of this bias may be such that new theories cannot find an outlet . Lindeman ' s classic paper on trophic structure ( Lindeman , 1942 ) is an outstanding example of this prob - lem ; he could not get it published until Hutch - inson backed him . Many theoretical journals have been founded for the purpose of giving new ideas an outlet - e . g . , Quarterly Review of Biology , Speculations in Science and Technology , Med - ical Hypotheses , and Theoretical Population Biol - ogy , founded by Raymond Pearl , William Ho - nig , David Horrobin , and Robert MacArthur , respectively . Reviewers may also show a ten - dency toward dogmatic falsificationism ( Lakatos , 1970 ) by demanding that authors support a new theory with conclusive evidence . It is rarely possible to propose and prove a the - ory all in one blow , however , because a period of theory maturation and data gathering is necessary first , and because few scientists are both theoreticians and experimentalists . It is , of course , valid to object to theories that are not even , in principle , testable . Publishing Only Positive Results Confirmation bias is exhibited by the fail - ure to report the non - occurrence of something , since only occurrences are considered data . For example , in studies of tree root systems the oc - currence of root grafts is considered an anomaly and is sometimes reported as such . Lack of grafts has generally not been reported because this was considered for many years to be the normal condition . In my own work , my theory ( unpubl . ) predicts that certain trees should not form root grafts , but the data for testing this are the very data not consistently reported . In a more general sense , an experiment that does not show a relationship of some sort may be perceived as a failure . Results of such studies are rarely published . This is documented in psychology by Mahoney and DeMonbreun ( 1978 ) . Of course , in ecology , confounding fac - tors may make it difficult to establish a rela - tionship , so that a careless study will almost certainly turn up nothing . But the converse , that all studies that turn up nothing must have been careless , is not true . A carefully designed and executed study with sufficient statistical power should be considered for publication even if it shows no treatment effect . This is be - cause a lack of effect may be informative when compared with those studies in which an ef - fect was found . Bias Owing to Delays Another factor contributing to theory tenac - ity and confirmation bias is the rigidity as - sociated with long time - scales . The time be - tween writing the first draft of a new proposal and starting field work may easily be three or four years , with an additional few years before the final data are in hand . Such a long delay between hypothesis formation and data anal - ysis may so increase commitment to the hy - pothesis that inherent confirmation bias and theory tenacity tendencies become even stronger . 404 THE QUARTERLY REVIEW OF BIOLOGY VOLUME 62 McIntosh ( 1980 , 1985 ) suggests that in ecol - ogy speculations have often been elevated to the status of laws merely by the passage of time , particularly when the author is prominent . This is likely due to the long delays between publishing a theory and effectively testing it . This may be sharply contrasted to biochemis - try , for example , where , as Platt ( 1964 ) points out , it is sometimes possible to line out alter - native hypotheses at the blackboard in the morning and begin work on the problem in the afternoon , with results available in a few days or weeks . While not all problems are so quickly solved , rapid hypothesis testing makes it far less likely for a researcher to become com - mitted to an idea personally or in public be - fore testing it in the laboratory . It also makes it feasible for a single person or team to tackle all of the alternative hypotheses , in contrast to ecology where it is seldom possible for a sin - gle researcher to test more than one hypothe - sis . [ Tweney ( pers . commun . ) , however , points out that delays can also have a salutary effect by allowing second thoughts or theory matu - ration before a grant is obtained or data ana - lyzed . ] Inconclusive Debates The lack of maturity of much theory in ecol - ogy explains much of the inconclusive wran - gling that takes place ; theory tenacity makes each side in the debate hold to its position , but theory immaturity prevents a conclusive out - come and may even prevent the disputants from discussing the same problem . An exam - ple is the debate over the role of competition in organizing communities ( Connor and Sim - berloff , 1979b , 1986 ; Grant and Abbott , 1980 ; Roughgarden , 1983 ; Simberloff , 1983 ; Strong , 1983 ) . The long debates and confusion about the niche concept are also typical ( Hurlbert , 1981 ) . This type of ambiguity is symptomatic of immature theory . A theory must be unam - biguous before rigorous tests can be made . The basic terms ( primitives , objects ) of a theory are frequently a source of problems in ecology because they are so often ambiguous and not operationally defined . For example , in the debate about determinants of ecosystem stability , it is often not clear what type of sta - bility is being referred to , nor are criteria clear for measuring it ( Connell and Sousa , 1983 ) . In the early theories stating that climax com - munities had the highest diversities , the two primitives in the theory , " diversity " and " cli - max " had several meanings . Diversity was used to mean total number of species ( land area un - specified ) , landscape diversity , number of spe - cies per number of individuals , and informa - tion theoretic measures , of which there are several not necessarily commensurate indices . " Vegetation climax " was understood as the up - land mesic community type toward which landscapes evolved , as vegetation in the prolonged absence of major disturbance ( e . g . , fire ) , or as vegetation in the context of natural disturbances ( e . g . , natural prairie fires ) . An unambiguous test of this theory is not possi - ble until these terms are consistently defined . In addition to being precise , primitives must be operationally defined ( Nagel , 1979 ) . For ex - ample , the words " system " and " ecosystem " are usually vague and not operationally defined . We can rarely be sure that a particular group of organisms is a " system " or an ` ecosystem " because there are no criteria for deciding . Two fir trees 100 miles apart have no measurable interactions yet we may casually refer to them as members of the boreal coniferous " ecosys - tem ' " This is a typological classification , not a functional one . Without clear definitions , de - bates about system properties , dynamics , and organization are guaranteed to be incon - clusive . Lack of Progress Some fairly strong predictive theories in ecology are now reaching a stage of moderate maturity . These include optimal foraging the - ory ( Pyke , 1984 ) , optimal feeding - territory size ( Schoener , 1983 ) , adaptive significance of leaf shape ( Givnish and Vermeij , 1976 ) , relation - ships between body size and physiological functions ( Hofman , 1983 ; Lindstedt and Calder , 1981 ) , and the intermediate distur - bance hypothesis explanation of diversity ( Connell , 1978 ) . For each of these theories , early statements of the theory were incomplete , vague , without criteria for testing , or non - quantitative , but greater precision was gradu - ally attained . In other instances , however , progress is apparently blocked . The long and bitter debate over density - dependent versus density - independent population regulation is DECEMBER 1987 HYPOTHESIS TESTING IN ECOLOGY 405 an example . It is enlightening to examine , in terms of psychological factors and theory maturity , areas where progress is blocked . I will begin by examining the story of Ray - mond Pearl and the logistic model . ( Histori - cal data are from Kingsland , 1985 . ) In the 1920s , Pearl became one of the first biologists to advocate the use of mathematical models for population studies . He focused on the logis - tic model and quickly came to view it as a " law " of population growth . He was very energetic , and by applying the logistic equation to a wide array of problems and publishing these studies in many journals , he succeeded ( where others before him had failed ) in popularizing the logistic model and showing that mathemati - cal models could be useful for population work . At the same time he inspired a heated con - troversy , largely because he oversold the logis - tic model and committed some methodologi - cal errors . His first error may be described in terms of confirmation bias . To illustrate the usefulness of the logistic equation , he fit it to census data for several countries . In most of them , data were only available for half of the curve or less . He showed a strong bias in in - terpreting the fit of these data as " proving " the logistic " law , " when they were generally inade - quate tests . Pearl exhibited extreme theory te - nacity , forgetting objections he himself had raised against earlier authors ( such as that fit to data does not prove explanation ) , ignoring many criticisms , and creating many ad hoc ad - justments to his " law " when it was challenged by contrary data . Perhaps his greatest error was in not understanding his theory ' s level of maturity . A newly proposed theory will almost always need major improvements ; it is imma - ture . The logistic model was no exception . Raising it to the status of a law meant that any deviations from it were due to particular cir - cumstances requiring ad hoc clauses . It was thus rather immune to criticism . Such an ap - proach is bound to be considered arrogant and arouse opposition . In Pearl ' s case confirmation bias and theory tenacity were so extreme that they no longer performed their usual benefi - cial theory - building function but led to rigid - ity and fruitless controversy . In recent years , progress has been slow in community ecology because theory maturity and data quality are often low . This is largely due to the great complexity of communities and the difficulty in controlling or manipulat - ing them . Long time - scales also interfere with execution of informative experiments . Certain debates ( e . g . , the role of competition in struc - turing communities ) are correspondingly full of much heat and little light ( e . g . , Grant and Abbott , 1980 , vs . Connor and Simberloff , 1979b ) ; the experiments are conclusive only to the particular camp conducting them ( if then ) . Theory tenacity tends to make the op - posing camps dig their trenches deeper . This problem is particularly severe in the mathematical treatment of community dy - namics and stability . It is necessary to develop mathematical methodologies and explicit predictions , but model assumptions should be related to biology and predictions should be related to data . In many cases , unfortunately , neither of these developments occur . For ex - ample , many mathematicians have written papers on N - species Lotka - Volterra systems , generally concerning stability properties . Such simple models can be useful for studying fac - tors in isolation or as ideal cases ( e . g . , a sys - tem consisting solely of two competitors , an ideal case that can actually be studied in the laboratory ) . But problems arise from failure to be sure that the factors left out do not affect the property under consideration ( i . e . , stabil - ity ) . On the basis of nonlinear models , it has been postulated that multiple equilibria are likely to occur ( see Holling , 1978 ; Connell and Sousa , 1983 ) . Using linear models , or eliminat - ing competition or refuges from consideration , can change this result completely . Such sim - plifying assumptions are thus part of the sub - ject being studied rather than something to be glossed over . We can see that this problem is significant by noting common assumptions that affect the property being examined but that are untested or nonbiological : the num - ber of species is even ( Roerdink and Weyland , 1981 ) ; no switching of predator diets occurs ; mutualism and omnivory do not occur ; the competition matrix is anti - symmetric ( Porati , Porati , and Vecli , 1978 ) ; the sum of com - partments equals a constant ( Hirata , 1980 ) ; competition coefficients are constant ; or the system is linear and donor controlled . Com - petition is actually excluded from much of net - work theory that is based on static food web models . Such work does not serve to increase the 406 THE QUARTERLY REVIEW OF BIOLOGY VOLUME 62 maturity of community theory , because there is almost no attempt to state or test assump - tions , relate the models to theory , or derive or test predictions . Consequently progress in quantifying community theory is slow . What is needed is progress in the sense of Lakatos ( 1970 ) , where there is an increase in empirical content . Such progress would ( 1 ) constrain the mathematics , ( 2 ) examine the mathematical assumptions , ( 3 ) operationalize the variables in the equations ( how do we measure it ? ) , and ( 4 ) derive predictions for testing . Little of this has taken place . Assumptions are usually vague or unspecified , predictions of the models are not testable , and many of those doing field tests of community theory do not utilize the mathematics . Disconfirming evidence has been virtually ignored by mathematicians examining N - species persistence . For example , it is often as - sumed that an N - species equilibrium point ex - ists or conditions are elucidated for it to exist . But field work shows the importance of spa - tial heterogeneity and disturbance in regulat - ing herbivory and competition and allowing many species to persist in the community ( Connell , 1978 ; Whitham , Williams , and Robinson , 1984 ) . A critical assumption of the models , that interaction coefficients ( e . g . , com - petition and predation ) between any pair of species are independent of the species compos - ing the remainder of the community , has been shown experimentally to be drastically wrong ( Hairston , 1968 ; Neill , 1974 ; Wilbur , 1972 ) . Further , the use of constant competition and predation coefficients ignores the very real im - portance of refuges in preserving species when their populations are low . These and other se - vere criticisms have been ignored ; thus the Lotka - Volterra analyses are often more in the realm of pure mathematics than of ecological theory . Posed as pure mathematics , they are immune to disconfirmation of a scientific kind . They thus easily acquire an aura of absolute truth , when actually no attempt has been made to apply them to real data . Similar comments may apply to other areas of ecology , such as mathematical evolutionary theory ( Van Valen and Pitelka , 1974 ) . Platt ' s ( 1964 ) view can help restore perspec - tive on the role of mathematics . He contends that mathematics is a weak , fine - mesh box that will only hold the phenomenon if it is first caught in a strong , but coarse , logical box . We establish this logical box by the process of strong inference , which establishes the qualita - tive features of the phenomenon . Returning the mathematics to the service of scientific dis - covery requires closer attention to assump - tions , experiments , and theory in relation to the mathematics in question . We must agree that experiments can refute a mathematical re - sult before we admit that the mathematics em - bodies theory . CONCLUSIONS We can now draw some conclusions about the rate at which theory maturation is likely to occur in a particular field and why certain fields of ecology have made more progress than others . When process time - scales are short , as they are , for example , in plant physiology , progress is likely to be rapid , particularly if ex - perimentation is possible . Introduction of mathematical models is likely to speed up this process because it allows sharper predictions that are more easily tested . Thus , there has been rapid progress in physiological ecology ( plant and animal ) , using methods that more closely resemble strong inference . When longer time - scales are involved , the - ory maturation may be rapid if a history of the phenomenon is available . Thus , geology and modeling of tree growth benefit from detailed records of the past ( stratigraphy and tree rings , respectively ) . If time - scales are long , if little history of the system is left , and if the system is complex , then progress is likely to be slow because it will be difficult to define al - ternative hypotheses clearly so as to test them unambiguously . Confirmation bias and the - ory tenacity are then likely to interfere with scientific progress . Studies of community or - ganization ( including the roles of competition and predation ) , ecosystem functioning , demo - graphics , and evolution are susceptible to these problems . Such studies rely on non - experi - mental evidence ( Connor and Simberloff , 1986 ) ; thus , the proper role of hypothesis test - ing , the effect of psychological factors , and the impact of theory maturation are particularly relevant . Long time - scales and noisy complex systems should not , of course , cause despair . Signifi - cant progress can be made by following Pop - per and making risky predictions rather than DECEMBER 1987 HYPOTHESIS TESTING IN ECOLOGY 407 attempting to use only goodness of fit or re - jection of null hypotheses ( Connor and Sim - berloff , 1986 ) . Thus , cognitive psychology and philosophy can make significant contributions to a field like ecology . The symptoms that indicate trou - ble in ecology include terminological muddles ( e . g . , niche theory ) , vociferous but inconclu - sive debates ( e . g . , competition theory ) , lack of progress , and accepted dogmas that have never been corroborated or seriously challenged ( McIntosh , 1980 , 1985 ) . Many areas of ecol - ogy currently exhibit one or more of these symptoms . Understanding the psychological factors of confirmation bias and theory tenac - ity can help clarify the reasons for fruitless de - bates and irrational arguments in ecology . Un - derstanding the concept and process of theory maturation can help prevent dogmatic fal - sificationism and increase the ease with which ecological theories are made more precise and testable . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I would like to thank anonymous reviewers , Paul Bertsch , Peter T . Haug , Stuart Hurlbert , David Ko - vacic , Lyndon Lee , Gary Meffe , John Pinder , David Scott , Richard Seigel , Peter Stangel , and particu - larly Ryan D . Tweney for helpful reviews of manu - script drafts . Sue Novak and Becky Wolf provided editorial assistance and Cynthia Turnipseed and Ca - thy Houck typed the manuscript . This work was supported by Contract DE - AC09 - 76SR00819 be - tween the U . S . Department of Energy and the University of Georgia ' s Savannah River Ecology Laboratory . REFERENCES BARTHOLOMEW , G . A . 1982 . Scientific innovation and creativity : A zoologist ' s point of view . Am . Zool . , 22 : 227 - 235 . BUNGE , M . 1967 . The Search for Truth : Studies in the Foundations , Methodology and Philosophy of Science . Vol . 3 ( II ) : Scientific Research . M . Bunge ( ed . ) . Springer - Verlag , New York . . 1968 . The maturation of science . In I . Lakatos and A . Musgrave ( eds . ) , Problems in the Philoso - phy of Science # 3 , p . 120 - 147 . North - Holland , Am - sterdam . CASWELL , H . 1976a . Community structure : A neu - tral model analysis . Ecol . Monogr . 46 : 327 - 354 . . 1976b . The validation problem . In B . C . Pat - ten ( ed . ) , Systems Analysis and Simulation in Ecol - ogy , Vol . 4 , p . 313 - 325 . Academic Press , New York . CHAMBERLIN , T . C . 1965 . The method of multiple working hypotheses . Science , 148 : 754 - 759 . [ Re - printed from 1890 . ] CONNELL , J . H . 1978 . Diversity in tropical rain forests and coral reefs . Science , 199 : 1302 - 1310 . CONNELL , J . H . , and W . P . SOUSA . 1983 . On the evidence needed to judge ecological stability or persistence . Am . Nat . , 121 : 789 - 824 . CONNOR , E . F . , and D . SIMBERLOFF . 1979a . You can ' t falsify ecological hypotheses without data . Bull . Ecol . Soc . Am . , 60 : 154 - 155 . , and - . 1979b . The assembly of species communities : Chance or competition ? Ecology , 60 : 1132 - 1140 . , and . 1986 . Competition , scientific method , and null models in ecology . Am . Sci . , 74 : 155 - 162 . FRETWELL , S . D . 1975 . The impact of Robert MacArthur on ecology . Annu . Rev . Ecol . Syst . , 6 : 1 - 13 . GARSD , A . 1984 . Spurious correlation in ecological modeling . Ecol . Model . , 23 : 191 - 201 . GILPIN , M . E . , andJ . M . DIAMOND . 1984 . Are spe - cies co - occurrences on islands non - random , and are null hypotheses useful in community ecol - ogy ? In D . R . Strong , Jr . , D . Simberloff , L . G . Abele , and A . B . Thistle ( eds . ) , Ecological Com - munities : Conceptual Issues and the Evidence , p . 297 - 315 . Princeton Univ . Press , Princeton . GIVNISH , T . J . , and G . J . VERMEIJ . 1976 . Sizes and shapes of liane leaves . Am . Nat . , 110 : 743 - 778 . GOODFIELD , J . 1981 . Imagined World : A Story of Scien - tific Discovery . Harper & Row , New York . GORMAN , M . E . , and M . E . GORMAN . 1984 . A com - parison of disconfirmatory , confirmatory , and a control strategy on Wason ' s 2 - 4 - 6 task . Q J Exper . Psych . , 36A : 629 - 648 . GRANT , P . R . , and I . ABBOTT . 1980 . Interspecific competition , island biogeography and null hy - potheses . Evolution , 34 : 332 - 341 . GROSENBAUGH , L . R . 1965 . Generalization and reparameterization of some sigmoid and other nonlinear functions . Biometrics , 21 : 708 - 714 . GRUBER , H . E . , and P . H . BARRETT . 1974 . Darwin On Man : A Psychological Study of Scientific Creativity . E . P . Dutton , New York . HAIRSTON , N . G . 1968 . The relationship between species diversity and stability : An experimental approach with protozoa and bacteria . Ecology , 49 : 1091 - 1101 . HARVEY , P . H . , R . K . COLWELL , J . W . SILVER - 408 THE QUARTERLY REVIEW OF BIOLOGY VOLUME 62 TOWN , and R . M . MAY . 1983 . Null models in ecology . Annu . Rev . Ecol . Syst . , 14 : 189 - 211 . HECK , K . L . , JR . 1976 . Some critical considerations of the theory of species packing . Evol . Theory , 1 : 247 - 258 . HIRATA , H . 1980 . A model of hierarchical ecosys - tems with utility efficiency of mass and its sta - bility . Int . J . Syst . Sci . , 11 : 487 - 493 . HOFMAN , M . A . 1983 . Energy metabolism , brain size and longevity in mammals . Q Rev . Biol . , 58 : 495 - 512 . HOLLING , C . S . 1978 . Adaptive Environmental Assess - ment and Management . John Wiley & Sons , New York . HONIG , W . M . 1982 . Peer review in the physical sciences : An editor ' s view . Behav . Brain Sci . , 5 : 216 - 217 . HORROBIN , D . F . 1982 . Peer review : a philosophi - cally faulty concept which is proving disastrous for science . Behav . Brain Sci . , 5 : 217 - 218 . HURLBERT , S . H . 1981 . A gentle depilation of the niche : Dicean resource sets in resource hyper - space . Evol . Theory , 5 : 177 - 184 . - . 1984 . Pseudoreplication and the design of eco - logical field experiments . Ecol . Monogr . , 54 : 187 - 211 . KINGSLAND , S . E . 1985 . Modeling Nature . Univ . Chicago Press , Chicago . LAKATOS , I . 1970 . Falsification and the methodol - ogy of scientific research programs . In I . Lakatos and A . Musgrave ( eds . ) , Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge , p . 91 - 195 . Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge . LEVIN , S . A . 1981 . The role of theoretical ecology in the description and understanding of popu - lations in heterogeneous environments . Am . Zool . , 21 : 865 - 875 . LEVINS , R . 1966 . The strategy of model building in population biology . Am . Sci . , 54 : 421 - 431 . LEWIS , R . W . 1982 . Theories , structure , teaching , and learning . BioScience , 32 : 734 - 737 . LINDEMAN , R . L . 1942 . The trophic - dynamic as - pect of ecology . Ecology , 23 : 399 - 418 . LINDSTEDT , S . L . , and W . A . CALDER III . 1981 . Body size , physiological time , and longevity of homeothermic animals . Q Rev . Biol . , 56 : 1 - 16 . LOEHLE , C . 1983 . Evaluation of theories and cal - culation tools in ecology . Ecol . Model . , 19 : 239 - 247 . MACFADYEN , A . 1975 . Some thoughts on the be - havior of ecologists . J Anim . Ecol . , 44 : 351 - 363 . MAHONEY , M . J . 1977 . Publication prejudices : An experimental study of confirmatory bias in the peer review system . Cognit . Ther . Res . , 1 : 161 - 175 . MAHONEY , M . J . , and B . G . DEMONBREUN . 1978 . Psychology of the scientist : An analysis of prob - lem - solving bias . Cognit . Ther . Res . , 1 : 229 - 238 . MAY , R . M . 1973 . Stability and Complexity in Model Ecosystems . Princeton Univ . Press , Princeton . . 1981 . The role of theory in ecology . Am . Zool . , 21 : 903 - 910 . MCINTOSH , R . P . 1980 . The background and some current problems of theoretical ecology . Synthese , 43 : 195 - 255 . . 1985 . The Background of Ecology . Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge . MITROFF , I . I . 1974 . Norms and counter - norms in a select group of Apollo moon scientists : A case study of the ambivalence of scientists . Am . Soc . Rev . , 39 : 579 - 595 . NAGEL , E . 1979 . Teleology Revisited and Other Essays in the Philosophy and History of Science . Columbia Univ . Press , New York . NEILL , W . E . 1974 . The community matrix and interdependence of the competition coefficients . Am . Nat . , 108 : 399 - 408 . NILSSON , S . G . , and I . N . NILSSON . 1983 . Are esti - mated species turnover rates on islands largely sampling errors ? Am . Nat . , 121 : 595 - 597 . PIELOU , E . C . 1981 . The usefulness of ecological models : A stocktaking . Q Rev . Biol . , 56 : 17 - 31 . PLATT , J . R . 1964 . Strong inference . Science , 146 : 347 - 353 . POPPER , K . R . 1959 . The Logic of Scientific Discovery . Hutchinson , London . - . 1963 . Conjectures and Refutations : The Growth of Scientific Knowledge . Harper & Row , New York . PORATI , M . I . G . , A . PORATI , and A . VECLI . 1978 . Analytical conditions for the conservative form of the ecological equations . Bull . Math . Biol . , 40 : 257 - 264 . PULLIAM , H . R . 1980 . On digesting a theory . Auk , 97 : 418 - 420 . PYKE , G . H . 1984 . Optimal foraging theory : A crit - ical review . Annu . Rev . Ecol . Syst . , 15 : 523 - 575 . QUINN , J . F . , and A . E . DUNHAM . 1983 . On hy - pothesis testing in ecology and evolution . Am . Nat . , 122 : 602 - 617 . RECKHOW , K . H . , and S . C . CHAPRA . 1983 . Con - firmation of water quality models . Ecol . Model . , 20 : 113 - 133 . REINERS , W . A . 1986 . Complementary models for ecosystems . Am . Nat . , 127 : 59 - 73 . ROERDINK , J . , and A . WEYLAND . 1981 . A general - ized Fokker - Plank equation in the case of the Volterra model . Bull . Math . Biol . , 43 : 69 - 79 . ROUGHGARDEN , J . 1983 . Competition and theory in community ecology . Am . Nat . , 122 : 583 - 601 . SCHOENER , T . W . 1983 . Simple models of optimal feeding - territory size : A reconciliation . Am . Nat . , 121 : 608 - 629 . SELVIN , H . C . , and A . STUART . 1966 . Data - dredging procedures in survey analysis . Am . Stat . , 20 : 20 - 23 . SIMBERLOFF , D . 1983 . Competition theory , hypoth - esis testing , and other community ecological DECEMBER 1987 HYPOTHESIS TESTING IN ECOLOGY 409 buzzwords . Am . Nat . , 122 : 626 - 635 . STRONG , D . R . , JR . 1980 . Null hypotheses in ecol - ogy . Synthese , 43 : 271 - 285 . . 1983 . Natural variability and the manifold mechanisms of ecological communities . Am . Nat . , 122 : 636 - 660 . TOFT , C . A . , and P . J . SHEA . 1983 . Detecting community - wide patterns : Estimating power strengthens statistical inference . Am . Nat . , 122 : 618 - 625 . TVERSKY , A . , and D . KAHNEMAN . 1971 . Belief in the law of small numbers . Psychol . Bull . , 76 : 105 - 110 . TWENEY , R . D . , M . E . DOHERTY , and C . R . MYNATT . 1981 . On Scientific Thinking . Columbia Univ . Press , New York . VAN VALEN , L . , and F . A . PITELKA . 1974 . Intellec - tual censorship in ecology . Ecology , 55 : 925 - 926 . WAGGONER , P . E . 1975 . Idols of the model or bring - ing home the Bacon . In E J . Vernberg ( ed . ) , Phys - iologicalAdaptation to the Environment , p . 547 - 557 . Intext Ed . Publ . , New York . WHITHAM , T . G . , A . G . WILLIAMS , and A . M . ROBINSON . 1984 . The variation principle : In - dividual plants as temporal and spatial mosaics of resistance to rapidly evolving pests . In P . W . Price , C . N . Slobodchikoff and W . S . Gaud ( eds . ) , A New Ecology , p . 15 - 51 . John Wiley & Sons , New York . WILBUR , H . M . 1972 . Competition , predation , and the structure of the Ambystoma - Rana sylvatica com - munity . Ecology , 53 : 3 - 21 .