Current Biology 18 , 91 – 101 , January 22 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 12 . 051 Article Moesin Controls Cortical Rigidity , Cell Rounding , and Spindle Morphogenesis during Mitosis Patricia Kunda , 1 Andrew E . Pelling , 2 Tao Liu , 1 and Buzz Baum 1 , * 1 MRC Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology UCLGower Street London WC1E 6BT United Kingdom 2 London Centre for Nanotechnology & Centre for Nanomedicine UCL17 – 19 Gordon Street London WC1H 0AH United Kingdom Summary Background : During mitosis , animal cells undergo a complex sequence of morphological changes , from retraction of the cell margin and cell rounding at the onset of mitosis to axial elon - gation and cytokinesis at mitotic exit . The molecular mecha - nisms driving the early changes in mitotic cell form and their functional signiﬁcance , however , remain unknown . Here we identify Moesin as a key player . Moesin is the sole Drosophila member of the ERM proteins , which , once activated via phos - phorylation , crosslink actin ﬁlaments to the cytoplasmic tails of plasma membrane proteins . Results : We ﬁnd that the Moesin is activated upon entry into mitosis , is necessary for the accompanying increase in cortical rigidity and cell rounding and , when artiﬁcially activated , is suf - ﬁcient to induce both processes in interphase cells , indepen - dently of Myosin II . This phospho - Moesin - induced increase in cortical rigidity plays an important role during mitotic pro - gression , because spindle morphogenesis and chromosome alignment are compromised in Moesin RNAi cells . Signiﬁ - cantly , however , the spindle defects observed in soft meta - phase cells can be rescued by the re - establishment of cortical tension from outside the cell . Conclusions : These data show that changes in the activity and localization of Moesin that accompany mitotic progres - sion contribute to the establishment of a stiff , rounded cortex at metaphase and to polar relaxation at anaphase and reveal the importance of this Moesin - induced increase in cortical rigidity for spindle morphogenesis and orderly chromosome segregation . In doing so , they help to explain why dynamic changes in cortical architecture are a universal feature of mito - sis in animal cells . Introduction Actin ﬁlaments and microtubules act together to control the dynamic form of animal cells during a wide range of morpho - genetic events [ 1 ] . This collaboration is especially important during cell division , when a failure to coordinate actin - depen - dent changes in cell shape with chromosome segregation , mediated by the microtubule - based spindle , can lead to aneu - ploidy and to the development of cancer [ 2 ] . Changes in the or - ganization and dynamics of actin and microtubule - based cyto - skeletons begin upon entry into mitosis with retraction of the cellmargin [ 3 ] , cell rounding , andtheestablishment ofa mitotic spindle . Once sister - chromatid cohesion is broken , microtu - bule - based forces drive chromosomes to opposite poles of the anaphase cell [ 4 ] . Then , at mitotic exit , the extended spin - dle guides the assembly of a central actin - myosin ring , which divides the entire cell into two [ 5 ] . Whereas the molecular events underpinning the assembly and contraction of the actin - myosin cable during cytokinesis are now relatively well understood [ 5 ] , the mechanisms controlling cell - shape changes at the onset of mitosis and their relationship to spin - dle assembly remain unknown [ 3 , 6 ] . Here we identify Moesin as a key player in this process . Moe - sin is a member of the ERM family of actin - binding proteins [ 7 , 8 ] ( Ezrin , Radixin , and Moesin ) . Although absent from plants and fungi , ERM proteins are highly conserved within the animal kingdom , where they crosslink the plasma membrane to the underlying actin - rich cortex . This is accomplished by the ac - tion of a C - terminal domain that binds actin ﬁlaments and an N - terminal ‘‘ERM’’ domain that binds positively charged resi - dues in the cytoplasmic tails of proteins embedded in the plasma membrane [ 7 ] . In their native form , ERM proteins are folded into an inactive , auto - inhibited structure , in which the C - terminal actin - binding domain is sequestered in a negatively charged pocket within the protein’s N - terminal ERM domain [ 9 ] . In response to signaling , this auto - inhibition is relieved by the phosphorylation of a conserved threonine residue ( T559 in Drosophila ) [ 10 , 11 ] . This is believed to induce a change in protein conformation , causing ERM proteins to assume an open , active structure that promotes membrane - cortical crosslinking [ 12 ] . Activated ERM proteins are thought to play an important role in many cell biological processes , from microvilli formation to the maintenance of Drosophila oocyte polarity [ 13 ] and epithe - lial integrity [ 14 , 15 ] . Despite the many studies carried out on ERM proteins , the analysis of this protein family has been hindered by the functional redundancy exhibited by the three mammalian homologs [ 8 ] . To overcome this problem , we have used the Drosophila S2R + cells [ 16 , 17 ] as a model system in which we can employ RNAi to explore the role of Drosophila’s sole ERM protein , Moesin [ 8 ] , during cell - cycle progression . In doing so we show that active Moesin plays an essential role in the establishment of cortical tension , which drives cell rounding at the onset of mitosis . Signiﬁcantly , both Moesin activation and the establishment of a rigid actin cortex prove to be key requirements for proper spindle assembly and well - orchestrated chromosome segregation . Results Moesin Is Activated at the Onset of Mitosis by Slik - Dependent Phophorylation To begin our analysis , we used Moesin antibodies , together with antibodies generated against the activated form of mam - malian ERM proteins [ 15 ] , to visualize Moesin and the active * Correspondence : b . baum @ ucl . ac . uk pT559 phosphorylated pool of the protein in cycling S2R + cells spread on serum - coated coverslips [ 18 ] . Although Moesin could be easily observed within the cytoplasm and at the cell cortex of interphase cells ( Figure 1A ) , active pT559 - Moesin was detectable only at the onset of mitosis ( Figure 1B ) . P - Moe - sin was ﬁrst seen accumulating at the retracting margins of cells entering prophase ( Figures 1B and 1C , top left ) and was readily detectable at the rounded cortex of metaphase cells ( Figures 1B and 1C , top right ) . The protein then disappeared from the poles of cells undergoing anaphase ( Figures 1B and 1C , bottom left ) , and in telophase was conﬁned to a broad circumferential band at the cell equator marking the site of the future furrow [ 19 ] ( Figures 1B and 1C , bottom right ) . Previ - ous studies in Drosophila identiﬁed Slik / Plkk1 as an important positive regulator of Moesin activation during interphase [ 15 , 20 ] , even though Slik failed to phosphorylate Moesin in in vitro assays [ 15 , 20 ] . By contrast , the kinases regulating ERM protein activation in mammalian cells remain unclear [ 21 – 23 ] . In order to identify kinases involved in the activation of Moesin during mitosis , we used the phospho - speciﬁc Moesin anti - body to carry out an unbiased , cell - based RNAi screen in Dro - sophila Kc cells [ 17 ] . In screening the entire kinome , Slik was the only kinase identiﬁed as a positive regulator of Moesin phosphorylation , during both interphase and mitosis ( Figures 1E and 1F ) . This dependency of Moesin phosphorylation on Slik was veriﬁed by western blotting ( Figure 1F ) , conﬁrming the results of the previous studies in Drosophila [ 15 , 20 ] . Moesin Is Required for Mitotic Cell Rounding and Timely Mitotic Progression Having identiﬁed cell - cycle - dependent changes in the locali - zation of active Moesin and having identiﬁed a key component of the pathway controlling its phosphorylation , we sought to determine the functional signiﬁcance of mitotic Moesin Figure 1 . Moesin Is Activated Downstream of Slik at the Onset of Mitosis and Is Required for Mitotic Cell Rounding ( A – C ) S2R + cells on serum - coated coverslips were ﬁxed and stained for Moesin ( A ) , active P - Moesin ( B ) , or actin ﬁlaments , microtubules , and phospho - histone H3 ( C ) . Arrows in ( B ) show the reduction in polar P - Moesin staining that accompanies anaphase onset . ( D ) Mitotic Moesin , Slik , Rok / Citron , and Myosin II RNAi phenotypes were determined in ﬁxed S2R + cells stained for F - actin ( red ) and microtubules ( green ) . 84 % ( n = 87 ) of Moesin RNAi remained ﬂat compared to 12 . 5 % ( n = 206 ) of control RNAi cells . ( E ) A single kinase , Slik / Plkk1 , was identiﬁed in an RNAi screen in Kc cells as critical for Moesin phosphorylation on Thr559 . ( F ) ThisrequirementforSlikwasconﬁrmedbywesternblottingwithextractsfromKccells , with a - Tubulinasaloadingcontrol . Thesedataarerepresentative of that observed in > 3 westerns . Scale bars represent 5 m m ( A – C ) . Current Biology Vol 18 No 2 92 activation . By using RNAi , we found that a > 95 % reduction in Moesin levels ( Figure 1F ) failed to alter interphase S2R + cell morphology ( see Figures S1A and S1B available online ) . At the onset of mitosis , however , when 87 . 5 % ( n = 206 ) of control cells retracted their peripheral actin - based protrusions and rounded up , the majority ( 84 % [ n = 87 ] ) of metaphase Moesin RNAi cells remained ﬂat ( Figure 1D ) . This phenotype was mimicked by dsRNA - induced silencing of Slik expression ( Figure 1D ) , conﬁrming the importance of Moesin phosphory - lation for this activity [ 7 ] . Because previous studies have sug - gested a role for Myosin II in mitotic cell rounding [ 25 , 26 ] , we also examined the Myosin II RNAi phenotype in S2R + cells . It was clear from this analysis that cells with reduced levels of the light chain of nonmuscle Myosin II ( Squash ) were able to re - tract their margins and initiate cell rounding upon entry into mi - tosis , despite their having obvious defects in cortical organiza - tion ( Figure 1D ) [ 24 ] . Notably , we observed a similar phenotype in cells in which the Myosin II activators Rok / Citron were tar - geted by using RNAi ( Figure 1D ) . These data suggest that although both Moesin and Myosin II play important roles in shaping the cell cortex , during mitosis the two cortical regula - tors are differentially regulated and have distinct functions ; with Moesin playing the dominant role in driving cell rounding . Taking the analysis of the Moesin RNAi phenotype further , we used live cell imaging to follow changes in the cortical orga - nization of control and Moesin RNAi S2R + cells as they passed through mitosis ( Figure 2 and Movies S1 and S2 ) . At the onset of mitosis , control cells retracted their peripheral actin - based protrusions , while maintaining attachment to the surface of the substrate via thin retraction ﬁbers [ 3 , 27 ] ( Figures 1C and 2A ) . They then elongated at anaphase [ 4 ] before initiating bleb - bing prior to the onset of cytokinesis [ 5 ] ( Figure 2A ) . A similar analysis in Moesin RNAi cells passing through mitosis re - vealed a number of defects in cortical dynamics ( Figure 2B and Movie S2 ) . First , the majority of mitotic cells lacking Moe - sin remained ﬂat ( Figure 2B ) , as suggested by the analysis in ﬁxed cells ( Figure 1D and Figure S1B ) . Second , the cortices of these cells , whether round or ﬂat , appeared highly unstable at the metaphase - to - anaphase transition , exhibiting disorga - nized waves of contraction and relaxation ( Figures 2B and 2C and Movie S2 ) , whereas control cells during the same pe - riod maintained tight control over their shape ( Figure 2A and Movie S1 ) . Third , although both control and Moesin RNAi cells developed prominent surface blebs prior to cytokinesis ( Fig - ures 2A – 2C and Figure S2 ) , blebs were reabsorbed within a few minutes in the control , but were not resolved in Moesin RNAi cells until cells respread on the substrate at the comple - tion of cytokinesis ( Figure S2 ) . This conﬁrms a recently proposed role for ERM family proteins in bleb retraction [ 28 ] . Finally , at cytokinesis , Moesin RNAi cells initiated and executed cleavage at a central site to yield two relatively equally sized daughter cells that respread on the substrate ( Figure 2B and Figures S1A and S1B ) . Moesin and a Rigid Cortex Are Required for Proper Spindle Morphogenesis This kinetic analysis of cells passing through mitosis revealed a signiﬁcant delay in the onset of anaphase in Moesin RNAi cells relative to the control ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . A delayed ana - phase is characteristic of treatments that activate the spindle checkpoint [ 29 ] , so this led us to look for defects in spindle organization in S2R + cells with reduced levels of Moesin ( Figure 3 ) . This analysis was performed in parallel in control and Moesin RNAi cells . Moreover , to control for the possible effects of cell shape on spindle morphogenesis , control and experimental cells were imaged after plating on serum - coated coverslips and after being induced to ﬂatten on concanavillin A ( Con A ) - coated substrates [ 30 ] . Whereas spindle defects were relatively rare in control RNAi cells ( 16 % [ n = 32 ] ) , the majority ( 78 % [ n = 41 ] ) of the Moesin RNAi cells exhibited aberrant metaphase spindles ( Figures 3G – 3L ) . Because of this , Moesin was picked up in a recent genome - wide screen for genes Figure 2 . Moesin Is Required for Orderly Progression through Mitosis Control RNAi ( A ) and Moesin RNAi ( B and C ) S2R + cells were imaged with phase contrast microscopy as they progressed through mitosis on serum - coated coverslips . The times of key morphological events accompanying mitotic progression were noted . Scale bars represent 20 m m . Cortical Control of Spindle Morphogenesis 93 Figure 3 . Moesin and an Intact Actin Cortex Are Required for the Morphogenesis and Stability of the Mitotic Spindle ( A – L ) Control RNAi and Moesin RNAi S2R + cells and S2R + cells treated for 2 min with 1 m M latrunculin B were plated on serum - or Con A - coated coverslips ( as indicated ) and stained for microtubules ( green ) , F - actin ( blue ) , and phospho - histone - H3 ( red ) . CNN ( red ) in ( K ) highlights the protruding end of the mitotic spindle . The scale bar in ( E ) represents 10 m m and applies to images in ( A ) – ( E ) and ( G ) – ( K ) . ( F ) and ( L ) are shown at the same scale ( white spots indicate cell edge ) . ( M and N ) Changes in the orientation of GFP - tubulin spindles along x - y axes were measured in representative control ( M ) and Moesin ( N ) RNAi S2 cells with time - lapse confocal microscopy . Spindles in Moesin RNAi cells were signiﬁcantly less stable over time than those in control cells ( p = 0 . 003 ) . ( O ) Moesin RNAi S2 GFP - Tubulin cells were imaged with confocal microscopy as they progressed through mitosis after plating on Con A - coated coverslips . Times were noted . Scale bar represents 5 m m . Current Biology Vol 18 No 2 94 affecting spindle morphogenesis [ 31 ] . Spindles in S2R + cells with reduced levels of Moesin were highly variable in their form , focus , and position ( Figures 3H , 3I , and 3L ) . Spindles of - ten appeared asymmetric , with one long , well - formed half spindle , supported by a centrosome in contact with the cell cortex via long astral microtubules , and a second , short , and badly formed half - spindle ( Figures 3H and 3I ) . We also fre - quently observed Moesin RNAi cells in which centrosomes were detached from the spindle ( Figure 3I and Figure S1B ) and cells in which elongated spindles generate protrusions by deforming the cell cortex ( Figure 3K ) . As might be expected , these defects in spindle morphology were frequently accom - panied by defects in metaphase chromosome alignment and in properly organized chromosome segregation at anaphase ( Figures 3G – 3J ) . Several ﬁndings suggest that spindle defects are not a simple consequence of division in a cell with a ﬂat geometry . First , like their ﬂat counterparts , the occasional rounded mitotic Moesin RNAi cells exhibited long delays in the onset of anaphase ( Figure 2C ) and altered spindles . Sec - ond , we observed > 5 - fold more aberrant spindles in ﬂat Moe - sin RNAi cells induced to adhere on Con A , when compared to ﬂat control cells on Con A . Third , a brief ( 2 min ) treatment of mitotic cells with the actin poison latrunculin B also induced defects in spindle organization and chromosome segregation ( Figures 3B – 3E ) , suggesting that both Moesin and actin are required for spindle stability . Next , we used a time - lapse analysis of GFP - labeled spindles [ 32 ] in Moesin RNAi S2 cells to follow the sequence of events that accompany mitotic progression . To ensure a fair compar - ison of spindles in control and Moesin RNAi cells , this analysis was carried out in rounded RNAi - treated S2 cells immediately after plating onto Con A , prior to cell spreading . It was clear from this time - lapse analysis that the orientation of spindles in the majority of Moesin RNAi cells was relatively unstable ( Figures 3M and 3N ) compared to the control . Moreover , spin - dles in Moesin RNAi cells were observed drifting in X , Y , and Z axes , as if blind to the position of the substrate ( Figures S3C and S3D ) . This kinetic analysis was extended to track spindles in control and Moesin RNAi cells as they progressed from prophase through the completion of mitosis ( Figure 3O and Movies S3 and S4 ) . The results were startling . First , as sug - gested by the analysis in ﬁxed cells , the assembly of a meta - phase plate was slow and abnormal in cells lacking Moesin . Then , at anaphase , elongation of the mitotic spindle appeared profoundly deregulated . In the representative example shown ( Figure 3O ) , four minispindles ( which may correspond to the four Drosophila chromosomal pairs ) remained separated from one another and from the two centrosomes as anaphase was initiated . It was only with the recruitment of centrosomes and the elongation of the cell along one axis that a coherent spindle was generated , an event that was quickly followed by cytokinesis . These data show that the Moesin - actin cortex plays a key role in the generation of a single well - organized spindle and in orderly chromosome segregation . Moesin Is Required for Dynamic Changes in Cortical Rigidity during Mitosis Because Moesin crosslinks actin ﬁlaments to the plasma membrane [ 7 ] , the mitotic defects observed in Moesin RNAi cells could be due to defects in cortical mechanics that result from a failure to secure the actin cortex to the plasma mem - brane . To explore whether this was likely to be the case , we used atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) [ 33 ] to measure the me - chanical properties of the cell cortex in control and Moesin RNAi cells ( Figures 4A – 4C ) . For this analysis , force - displace - ment measurements were made at multiple locations across the diameter of the cell to generate a mechanical proﬁle ( Fig - ures 4A – 4C ) [ 34 , 35 ] . At each position , 3 – 5 independent mea - surements were made , and the average Young’s Modulus ( E , nN / m m 2 = kPa ) was determined ( Figure 4B ) [ 34 , 35 ] . Inter - phase control and Moesin RNAi cells were found to exhibit sim - ilar force - displacement proﬁles ( Figure 4D ) , with a relatively rigid actin - rich lamellipodium and a more deformable cell cen - ter , consistent with previous reports [ 34 – 36 ] . The only measur - able difference between experimental and control cells was acomparativesofteningofthecentralcorticalregionafterMoe - sin RNAi ( Figure 4D ) . Although this was not statistically signiﬁ - cant ( p = 0 . 18 ) , withcellspreadingasaproxyforcorticaltension , this slight softening was found to translate into a reproducible increase in the spread area of Moesin RNAi cells , relative to the control ( Figure S5A ) , which was not due to a change in cell size or to increased adhesion ( Figures S5B and S5C ) . Previous work reported dramatic changes in the mechanical properties of animal cells as they enter mitosis [ 35 ] . We ob - served a similar trend in Drosophila S2R + cells , where mitosis in control cells was accompanied by a w 4 - fold increase in the stiffness of cortex ( n = 12 interphase and n = 10 for mitosis ) and , prior to cytokinesis , by a w 9 - fold increase in rigidity at the site of the future furrow , relative to interphase values ( Fig - ures 4D and 4E and Figure S4 ) . By contrast , Moesin RNAi cells entering mitosis failed to undergo an equivalent increase in cortical stiffness ( Figures 4D and 4E ; n = 9 for interphase and n = 7 for mitosis ) , even when round . This difference between cortical stiffness between control and Moesin RNAi cells was highly signiﬁcant ( p = 6 . 5 3 10 2 7 ) and , for most of mitosis , cor - tical tension in Moesin RNAi cells remained close to levels seen in interphase control cells . At the exit from mitosis , how - ever , a local increase in the stiffness of the furrow region of Moesin RNAi cells was observed that represents a signiﬁcant 3 - fold increase in stiffness relative to the same cells in inter - phase ( Figure S4 ) . This is likely to be the mechanical signature of the contractile actin - Myosin II belt , which successfully exe - cutes cytokinesis even in the absence of Moesin . Active Moesin Is Sufﬁcient to Induce Cortical Stiffening and Cell Rounding in Interphase Cells , even in the Absence of Myosin II Having shown that Moesin is necessary for the generation of cortical tension and for cell rounding during mitosis , we designed two additional experiments to determine whether Moesin activation is also sufﬁcient to induce cell rounding and cortical stiffening . In the ﬁrst experiment , we used a ser - ine / threonine phosphatase inhibitor , calyculin A [ 37 ] , to induce an acute change in the levels of Moesin phosphorylation in ﬂat interphase S2R + cells ( Figures 4F and 4G ) . A dramatic increase in pT559 - Moesin levels was observed within 5 min of drug ad - dition . This indicates that the lack of pT559 - Moesin in inter - phase cells reﬂects the action of one or more phosphatases that catalyze rapid turnover of the modiﬁcation . This activation of Moesin in response to calyculin A was accompanied by a re - traction of the cell margin and cell rounding similar to that seen at the onset of mitosis ( compare Figure 1B and Figure 4F ) and by an increase in cortical stiffness ( E increased from 1 . 7 6 0 . 1 [ n = 10 ] to 2 . 4 6 0 . 1 [ n = 10 ] nN / m m 2 ; p = 0 . 0004 ; Figure 4G ) . Im - portantly , however , rounding and the accompanying increase in cortical rigidity were completely suppressed by prior RNAi - induced Moesin silencing ( E changed from 0 . 9 6 0 . 1 [ n = 10 ] to 0 . 8 6 0 . 1 nN / m m 2 [ n = 10 ] ; Figures 4F and 4G ) , showing that Cortical Control of Spindle Morphogenesis 95 both these events are completely dependent on Moesin activ - ity . Second , to directly test whether Moesin itself is sufﬁcient to alter cell shape and cortical mechanics , we expressed phospho - mimetic and nonphosphorylatable forms of GFP - labeled Moesin in interphase S2R + cells ( Figures 4H and 4I ) . The phospho - mimetic variant , T559D - Moesin , induced a > 2 - fold increase in cortical rigidity ( E = 2 . 9 6 0 . 6 nN / m m 2 [ n = 15 ] ) and rounding in 100 % of cells , preventing them from Figure 4 . Moesin Is Required for Dynamic Changes in Cortical Rigidity during Mitosis ( A – C ) Atomicforcemicroscopy ( AFM ) wasusedtoprobethephysicalpropertiesofcontrolanddsRNA - treatedS2R + cellsatdifferentstagesinthecellcycle . At each position , an average value for the Young’s modulus , E , was calculated after a 200 – 500 nm indentation . ( D ) AFM was used to generate a proﬁle of cortical stiffness at multiple positions across control ( black ) and Moesin RNAi ( gray ) cells . For each position , ﬁve measurements were made in each of cells and the values averaged . Cells were measured in interphase ( n = 7 / 5 , control / RNAi , respectively ) and in early ( n = 3 / 3 ) and late ( n = 4 / 3 ) mitosis . ( E ) Average values were calculated for the cortical stiffness of control and Moesin RNAi cells in interphase and mitosis ( n = 12 and 10 for control cells and 9 and 7 for Moesin RNAi cells , respectively ) . ( F and G ) Control RNAi and Moesin RNAi S2R + cells were treated with 1 nM calyculin A for 10 min , ﬁxed , and stained for pT559 - Moesin ( green ) or probed with AFM in ( F ) . Calyculin A induces a signﬁcant increase in Control RNAi cortical stiffness ( n = 10 ) compared to untreated cells ( n = 10 ) . However , there was no signiﬁcant effect of drug treatment in Moesin RNAi cells ( n = 10 ) compared to untreated cells ( n = 10 ) . ( H andI ) S2R + cellswere transfected withexpression constructs for nonphosphorylatable ( T559A ) Moesin - GFP , phospho - mimetic ( T559D ) , Moesin - GFPor phospho - mimetic ( E20E21 ) Squash - GFP [ 25 , 38 ] , andtheirshape ( onaConAsubstrate ) andstiffness ( onplastic ) wasdeterminedininterphase . T559DMoe - sin - GFP cells were signiﬁcantly stiffer than T559A cells ( p = 0 . 035 , n = 15 cells ) . ( I ) T559D Moesin - GFP prevented interphase control and multinucleate SquashRNAicellsfromspreadingonConA . T559AMoesin - GFPandE20E21Squash - GFPhadnoeffectonthisprocess . Representativeimagesareshown . Scale bars apply across images and represent 10 m m in ( C ) and 5 m m in ( F ) and ( I ) . Values in ( D ) , ( E ) , ( G ) , and ( H ) represent the mean 6 SD ; p < 0 . 05 , unpaired t test , compared with control . Current Biology Vol 18 No 2 96 spreading ﬂat on a Con A - coated substrate ( Figure 4I ) . By con - trast , the nonphosphorylatable form , T559A - Moesin , had little effect on cortical tension ( E = 1 . 2 6 0 . 3 nN / m m 2 [ n = 15 ] ; Figure 4H ) and no effect on cell spreading ( 76 % , n = 61 ; Figure 4I ) . This difference between cortical tension in TD and TA - Moesin - expressing cells was statistically signiﬁcant ( p = 0 . 035 ) . Third , by using a similar assay to test the role of Myosin II in cell rounding , we showed that a phospho - mimetic and constitutively active version of Drosophila Myosin II - GFP [ 38 , 25 ] is unable to mimic the effects of T559D - Moesin ( Figure 4I ) , despite being sufﬁcient to generate stress ﬁbers in these cells ( data not shown ) , and that T559D - Moesin can in - duce rounding in single and multinucleate Squash RNAi cells that lack Myosin II activity ( Figure 4I ) . These data led us to con - clude that Moesin activation is sufﬁcient to induce cortical stiffening and cell rounding in the absence of a signiﬁcant con - tribution from Myosin II activity . Dynamic Control of Cortical Rigidity in Spindle Morphogenesis , Chromosomal Alignment , and Anaphase Spindle Elongation These results demonstrate a role for Moesin in cortical stiffen - ing , cell rounding , and spindle morphogenesis . To test whe - ther the inability to establish a rigid mitotic cell cortex contrib - utes to the observed defects in spindle morphogenesis in Moesin RNAi cells , we suspended control and Moesin RNAi cells in medium containing the tetravalent lectin , Con A [ 39 ] , to stiffen their cortices from the extracellular side ( Figure 5 ) . By applying Con A uniformly in solution , this protocol differs from that used in a previous study of mitosis [ 24 ] . As expected , this treatment signiﬁcantly enhanced cortical rigidity ( Fig - ure 5K , from E = 4 . 3 6 2 . 0 [ n = 10 ] to 6 . 5 6 2 . 3 [ n = 10 ] nN / m m 2 ; p = 0 . 00008 ) . In addition , it led to a 3 - fold reduction in the numbers of metaphase cells with defective spindles ( Figure 5L ) , bringing it into line with the control . This Figure 5 . Defects in Moesin RNAi Metaphase and Anaphase Spindles Are Rescued by Increased Cortical Stiffness ( A – H ) Mitotic Moesin RNAi or control RNAi S2R + cells were placed into suspension in the absence ( A – E ) or presence ( F – H ) of 100 m g / ml Con A . Cells were then ﬁxedinsuspension ( AandD ) orplatedandthenﬁxed ( B , C , E , F – J ) , beforebeingprocessedforvisualizationofF - actin ( red ) , microtubules ( green ) , andphos - pho - Histone 3 ( blue ) . ( C ) Control S2R + cells plated on Con A were treated with 1 m M latrunculin B for 2 min prior to ﬁxation . ( I and J ) Cells expressing TD - Moesin - GFP were stained for microtubules ( red ) and phospho - Histone - H3 ( blue ) . The 5 m m scale bar in ( A ) applies for images ( A ) – ( J ) . ( K ) S2R + cells were placed into suspension in the presence or absence of 100 m g / ml Con A and plated , and cortical tension was probed with AFM . Three measurements were averages per cell and the value quoted is the mean 6 SD for all n cells . Student’s t test was used to determine signiﬁcance . ( L and M ) Spindle defects were quantiﬁed in metaphase and anaphase Control RNAi and Moesin RNAi cells , treated as in ( K ) . Values are represented as mean 6 SD . ( N ) RFP - tubulin and Myosin II - GFP expressing Moesin RNAi S2 cells [ 25 ] were imaged every minute as they progressed through mitosis and cytokinesis . White dots denote limit of a characteristic bleb that fails to retract . 10 m m scale bar applies across time - lapse images . Cortical Control of Spindle Morphogenesis 97 experiment reveals that the restoration of cortical tension is sufﬁcient to restore normal spindle morphogenesis in cells ex - pressing low levels of Moesin . In a similar way , defects in ana - phase spindle organization Moesin RNAi cells ( Figures 3E , 3K , 5D , and 5E , and data not shown ) could be rescued by treat - ment of cells with extracellular Con A . During anaphase , how - ever , a side effect of the Con A treatment in both control and Moesin RNAi cells was the inhibition of axial cell elongation ( Figures 5G and 5H ) . Thus , whereas an increase in the rigidity of the mitotic cell cortex aids metaphase spindle assembly , polar relaxation may help promote spindle elongation [ 4 , 5 , 40 ] . Because the high - level expression of GFP - labeled T559D - Moesin in anaphase cells mimicked the Con A treat - ment by inhibiting spindle elongation ( Figures 5I and 5J ) , the loss of P - Moesin from the cell poles at anaphase ( Figure 1B ) [ 19 ] may contribute to this process . Finally , after an extended period in which Myosin II localization appeared relatively unstable in Moesin RNAi cells ( Figure 5N and data not shown ) , organization of a well - formed elongated mitotic spindle was accompanied by a relatively sudden redistribution of Myosin II to the midzone ( Figure 5N ) , which was quickly followed by narrowing of the equator and cytokinesis ( as seen in Figure 3E ) . Thereafter , Moesin RNAi cells appeared similar in form to control cells , until the next round of mitosis . Discussion In identifying a central role for dynamic changes in the activity and localization of Moesin in the control of mitotic cortical me - chanics and in the establishment of a rigid and rounded mitotic cell cortex , our data help to resolve a long - standing mystery about the molecular machinery involved in the cell - shape changes that accompany entry into mitosis [ 3 ] . These data also suggest a simple molecular mechanism for cell rounding and cortical stiffening in which Moesin rather than Myosin II playsthemajorrole . Wesuggest thefollowingmodel ( Figure6 ) . In ﬂat interphase cells , which express low levels of active Moesin , the majority of actin ﬁlaments are concentrated at the cell edge , where they push perpendicularly on the mem - brane to generate protrusions that promote cell spreading and drive retrograde ﬂow [ 41 ] ( Figure 6B ) . Upon entry into mi - tosis , the phosphorylation , activation , and redistribution of Moesin to the cortex , under the inﬂuence of Slik , then induces a dramatic realignment of cortical actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 6A ) . By crosslinking actin ﬁlaments to the cytoplasmic tails of transmembrane proteins [ 7 ] , Moesin molecules induce ﬁla - ments to take up an orientation parallel to the plane of the plasma membrane ( Figure 6B ) , increasing the bending energy of the cortex ( as measured by AFM ) , countering the formation of protrusions and inducing cells to round up . It is known that this type of cytoskeletal arrangement can promote surface minimization and cell rigidity , because interactions between the ERM domain - containing protein , Band 4 . 1 , the cytoskele - ton , and transmembrane proteins have been shown to act in an analogous fashion to shape the red blood cell [ 42 , 43 ] . In this case , assembly of a cortical mesh is sufﬁcient to give red blood cells the mechanical strength they need to survive passage through capillaries . Signiﬁcantly , we were then able to use these insights gained from the analysis of Moesin RNAi cells to address the func - tional signiﬁcance of cell rounding and the increase in mitotic cortical tension for passage through mitosis . Because Moesin RNAi cells also exhibit defects in the form , position , orienta - tion , and elongation of the mitotic spindle that can be rescued by stiffening the cortex from the outside ( Figures 5F , 5G , 5L , and 5M ) , our data suggest that the metaphase Moesin - actin cortical scaffold acts as a foundation upon which a well - cen - tered and well - structured mitotic spindle is established . This can be relatively easily explained if the Moesin - actin cortex fa - cilitates physical interactions between the plus ends of astral microtubules with a rigid actin cortex [ 44 ] , enabling the spindle to exert force on the cortex . The frequent separation of centro - somes from spindles in cells that lack a rigid actin cortex and the accompanying defects in spindle morphology ( Figures 3G – 3K and 3O ) suggest that this crosstalk between microtubules and the stiff rounded actin - based cortex is translated into the movement of centrosomes toward the cell center , helping to place , shorten , and focus the nascent spindle [ 45 ] . In ﬂy cells with small numbers of chromosomal pairs , this may also be critical for aligning individual subspindles ( Figure 3O ) . We were able to separate the effects of cell rounding and cortical rigidity at metaphase by showing that spindles are cor - rectly assembled in ﬂat , rigid control cells , but are defective in round soft Moesin RNAi cells . However , we would also expect cell rounding to contribute to high - ﬁdelity cell division by act - ing to integrate centrosomes and subspindles into a coherent Figure 6 . ERM Protein Activation and Its Func - tion during Animal Cell Mitosis ( A ) During mitosis , Moesin and Myosin II are acti - vated via distinct Slik and Rho kinase signaling pathways . An important goal of future research will be to identify the molecules coordinating the regulation of Moesin and Myosin II phosphoryla - tion and those mediating crosstalk between the rigidMoesin - actincortexandastralmicrotubules . ( B ) AmodeltoshowhowMoesinmayremodelac - tin ﬁlament organization to shape the cell cortex during passage through mitosis . At the onset of mitosis , Moesin ( green bars ) helps to convert the protrusive lamellipodial actin structures dominat - ingininterphaseintotheuniformcortexcharacter - istic of mitotic cells , in which actin ﬁlaments lie parallel to the plane of the plasma membrane . This leads to cortical stiffening and promotes cell rounding by increasing the bending energy of the membrane . At anaphase , the downregulation of p - Moesinandp - MyosinIIatthecellpolescontrib - utes to polar relaxation and to elongation of the spindle , as a prelude to cytokinesis . Current Biology Vol 18 No 2 98 whole . Finally , after the establishment of a symmetrical and well - positioned spindle and release of the spindle checkpoint , Moesin and Myosin II are lost from the cell poles . This induces polar relaxation [ 5 ] and guides anaphase spindle elongation ( compare Figures 5E and 5G ) , which then deﬁnes the division plane [ 4 ] . Although our analysis has emphasized the distinct roles of Moesin and Myosin II during early mitosis , anaphase , and cy - tokinesis , the orchestration of changes in mitotic cell shape and spindle morphogenesis clearly requires close functional cooperation between the activities of Moesin and Myosin II . Thus , although Moesin can induce rounding in cells in which Myosin II has been silenced ( Figure 4I ) , Myosin II and its up - stream regulators are required at early stages of mitosis for the generation of a spherical metaphase cell ( Figure 1D , [ 6 ] ) and for mitotic cortical tension ( [ 6 ] and data not shown ) . In addition , depending on the timing of nuclear envelope break - down [ 24 ] , Myosin II also plays a role in centrosome separation and the assembly of the mitotic spindle ( [ 24 ] and data not shown ) . Moreover , cortical Myosin II localization is unstable in Moesin RNAi cells ( Figure 5N ) , and its motor activity may drive the chaotic cortical dynamics seen in Moesin RNAi cells entering anaphase . Once the spindle has elongated , however , Myosin II quickly relocalizes to the site at which the spindle and the cortex come into close contact , in a Moesin - ( Figu - re 5N ) and actin - independent fashion [ 46 ] to initiate cytokine - sis . Conversely , Moesin contributes to the rigidity of the furrow even though it is not essential for cytokinesis in ﬂy cells in cul - ture . Understanding this functional cooperation between Moe - sin and Myosin II will require an ultrastructural analysis and it remains to be determined whether the energies involved in Moesin - induced actin realignment will be sufﬁcient to account for mitotic cell rounding without the need to invoke the activity of Myosin motors . What are the implications for our ﬁndings in cell culture for mitosis in a tissue context ? Because spindle morphogenesis in animal cells is dependent on cellular mechanics , we would expect the architecture of a crowded tissue environment to in - ﬂuence the spindle orientation and spindle morphogenesis . In addition , we would expect mitotic defects to occur in epithelial cells after their delamination . This may help to explain why it is that transcriptional regulators that induce of epithelial - to - mes - enchymal transitions during development frequently repress cell division [ 47 ] and may contribute to the high incidence of aneuploidy in metastatic carcinomas [ 2 ] . Conclusion In sum , our data show that Moesin establishes a rigid and uni - form mitotic cell cortex that acts as a ﬁrm foundation upon which a well - formed and properly positioned mitotic spindle is established . Subsequently , at the onset of anaphase , the loss of p - Moesin from the cell poles relaxes polar tension , facilitating elongation of the mitotic spindle as sister chromo - somes are segregated . Good orchestration of mitotic cell - shape changes therefore requires tight control over the activa - tion and localization of Moesin in order to prevent defects in chromosome segregation that may contribute to aneuploidy and to development of cancer . Experimental Procedures Cell Biology and Immunohistochemistry S2R + , S2 , and Kc cells were cultured and processed for RNAi , imaging , and western blotting as previously described [ 17 ] . 13 mm coverslips were preparedbyallowing100 m lofasolutionof15 m g / mlconcanavallinA ( Sigma ) inddH 2 Otodryontheglasssurfaceorbyincubatingcoverslipsovernight in 100 % FCS . For imaging , cells were plated on Con A for 1 – 2 hr or on serum - coated glass overnight . For actin depolymerization , 1 – 40 m M latrunculin B was added to cells plated on Con A for 2 min prior to rapid ﬁxation . For the analysis of spindles in round suspension cells , S2R + cells were resus - pended 30 min ( in normal medium or medium containing 15 m g / ml Con A ) , before being replated onto a serum / Con A - coated substrate for 10 min . Cells were ﬁxed in 4 % formaldehyde in 1 3 PBS for TRITC - phalloidin ( Sigma ) , anti - a - tubulin ( Sigma ) , anti - Moesin ( Cell Signaling Technology ) , and anti - phospho - histone H3 ( Sigma ) staining , and in 10 % TCA for anti - phospho - Moesin ( Cell Signaling Technology ) and anti - a - tubulin ( Sigma ) staining . S2R + cells were transfected with MoesinTD - GFP - , MoesinTA - GFP - , or EE - Squash - GFP - expressing plasmids by Fugene HD . Cells were then replated on serum - coated coverslips 24 – 36 hr later and identiﬁed by the presence of GFP . For live cell imaging , S2 cells were placed in coverslip bottom dishes and imaged with a confocal microscope immediately after - wards . Results of gene - speciﬁc RNAi experiments were validated with a second nonoverlapping dsRNA . Images shown are representative of RNAi phenotypes seen in more than three independent experiments . LacZ / dsRed RNAi was used as a control throughout . Primer sequences , to - gether with the full set of kinases screened and the relevant images , are available on our website at http : / / www . ﬂight . licr . org . Cell size was mea - sured by standard protocols and a CASY counter . In all graphs , averages are plotted as the mean 6 SD . RNAi Screening The kinome RNAi library , targeting 237 Drosophila protein and lipid kinases wasgenerated ( T . L . andB . B . , unpublished data ) and usedaspreviouslyde - scribed to screen for RNAi phenotypes [ 17 ] . In brief , Kc cells were plated intotwo384 - well platescontaining duplicate RNAilibrarieswithaMultidrop dispenser . After 5 days , cells were then ﬁxed with 10 % TCA , labeled with DAPI ( for automatic focusing ) , anti - a - tubulin , and anti - phospho - Moesin an - tibody , and imaged with an automated Nikon 2000E driven by Metamorph software . Cellimageswerethenscreenedblind , byeye , bytwoindependent researchers . Slik was the only reproducible hit identiﬁed . Atomic Force Microscopy For the mechanical AFM analysis , cells were given several hours to settle onto 60 mm tissue - culture dishes . The analysis was then carried out on a combined AFM - ﬂuorescence microscope consisting of an Olympus IX70 inverted optical microscope mounted with a JPK NanoWizard AFM ( JPK Instruments , Berlin ) at room temperature ( MSCT - AUHW AFM cantilevers [ Veeco , Santa Barbara , CA ] ) . These had experimentally determined spring constants of 0 . 02 6 0 . 01 N / m . For determination of the Young’s modulus ( E ) , the AFM tip was brought down onto the top surface of cells with AFM software . Force - displacement curves were measured at 1 Hz , with applied loads of no more than 1 nN . The local E was extracted from the force - displacement curves , at an indentation of 200 – 500 nm , employing the Hertz model according to standard techniques [ 34 , 35 , 48 ] . The analysis was carried out for shallow indentations ( 200 – 500 nm ) into the cell [ 35 ] . This prevented damage to the cell membrane and allowed us to sample the me - chanical properties of the plasma membrane and the actin cortex [ 34 , 35 , 48 ] . For experiments with calyculin A - or GFP - expressing cells , E was mea - sured for the central part of the cortex . In order to measure mechanical pro - ﬁles , the AFM software and closed loop electronics were used to generate force - displacement curves at 11 locations along a preprogrammed 30 – 40 m m line across the center of each cell [ 35 ] . At each location , ﬁve measure - ments are made and averaged . The peripheral two points were not used in calculations to avoid interference of underlying substrate . Mechanical proﬁles presented are averages of n cells ( see Figure legends ) and are plot - ted as the mean 6 SD . For all other data , three measurements were aver - agedpercellandthevalue quoted isthemean 6 SDofallncells . Therefore , forncells , atotalof3nmeasurementsweremade ( seetextforspeciﬁcnand pvalues ) . Forallexperiments , Student’sttestwasusedtodeterminesignif - icance . Supplemental Data Five ﬁgures and four movies are available at http : / / www . current - biology . com / cgi / content / full / 18 / 2 / 91 / DC1 / . Cortical Control of Spindle Morphogenesis 99 Acknowledgments We thank L . Cherbas and the DGRC , S . Cohen , R . Karess , J . Raff , D . Ready , J . Spudich , and N . Tapon for generously providing us with reagents . In ad - dition , we are grateful to S . Carreno and F . Payre for providing MoesinTD - GFPandMoesinTA - GFPexpressionconstructs , andforsharinginformation prior to publication . We thank J . Rosenblatt and G . Charras for their insight - ful comments on the manuscript and A . Ivetic for his inspiration . Finally , we are gratefultothose who sponsored thiswork : P . K . was funded by the LICR and by EU MAIN , A . E . P . was funded by the IRC in Nanotechnology and the Dr . Mortimer and Mrs . Theresa Sackler Trust , T . L . was funded by the LICR , andB . B . wasfundedbytheRoyalSociety , theLICR , andtheEMBOYIPpro - gramme . Received : September 20 , 2007 Revised : November 20 , 2007 Accepted : December 9 , 2007 Published online : January 17 , 2008 References 1 . Goode , B . L . , Drubin , D . G . , and Barnes , G . ( 2000 ) . Functional coopera - tion between the microtubule and actin cytoskeletons . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 63 – 71 . 2 . Jefford , C . E . , and Irminger - Finger , I . ( 2006 ) . Mechanisms of chromo - some instability in cancers . Crit . Rev . Oncol . Hematol . 59 , 1 – 14 . 3 . Cramer , L . P . , andMitchison , T . J . ( 1997 ) . Investigationofthemechanism of retraction of the cell margin and rearward ﬂow of nodules during mitotic cell rounding . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 109 – 119 . 4 . Hickson , G . R . , Echard , A . , and O’Farrell , P . H . ( 2006 ) . Rho - kinase con - trols cell shape changes during cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 16 , 359 – 370 . 5 . Glotzer , M . ( 2005 ) . The molecular requirements for cytokinesis . Science 307 , 1735 – 1739 . 6 . Maddox , A . S . , and Burridge , K . ( 2003 ) . RhoA is required for cortical retraction and rigidity during mitotic cell rounding . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 255 – 265 . 7 . Bretscher , A . , Edwards , K . , and Fehon , R . G . ( 2002 ) . ERM proteins and merlin : integrators atthecellcortex . Nat . Rev . Mol . CellBiol . 3 , 586 – 599 . 8 . Polesello , C . , and Payre , F . ( 2004 ) . Small is beautiful : what ﬂies tell us about ERM protein function in development . Trends Cell Biol . 14 , 294 – 302 . 9 . Pearson , M . A . , Reczek , D . , Bretscher , A . , and Karplus , P . A . ( 2000 ) . Structure of the ERM protein moesin reveals the FERM domain fold masked by an extended actin binding tail domain . Cell 101 , 259 – 270 . 10 . Nakamura , F . , Amieva , M . R . , Hirota , C . , Mizuno , Y . , and Furthmayr , H . ( 1996 ) . Phosphorylation of 558T of moesin detected by site - speciﬁc an - tibodies inRAW264 . 7 macrophages . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 226 , 650 – 656 . 11 . Nakamura , F . , Amieva , M . R . , and Furthmayr , H . ( 1995 ) . Phosphorylation of threonine 558 in the carboxyl - terminal actin - binding domain of moe - sin by thrombin activation of human platelets . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 31377 – 31385 . 12 . Li , Q . , Nance , M . R . , Kulikauskas , R . , Nyberg , K . , Fehon , R . , Karplus , P . A . , Bretscher , A . , and Tesmer , J . J . ( 2006 ) . Self - masking in an intact ERM - merlin protein : an active role for the central a - helical domain . J . Mol . Biol . 365 , 1446 – 1459 . 13 . Polesello , C . , Delon , I . , Valenti , P . , Ferrer , P . , andPayre , F . ( 2002 ) . Dmoe - sin controls actin - based cell shape and polarity during Drosophila mel - anogaster oogenesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 782 – 789 . 14 . Speck , O . , Hughes , S . C . , Noren , N . K . , Kulikauskas , R . M . , and Fehon , R . G . ( 2003 ) . Moesin functions antagonistically to the Rho pathway to maintain epithelial integrity . Nature 421 , 83 – 87 . 15 . Hipfner , D . R . , Keller , N . , and Cohen , S . M . ( 2004 ) . Slik Sterile - 20 kinase regulates Moesin activity to promote epithelial integrity during tissue growth . Genes Dev . 18 , 2243 – 2248 . 16 . Yanagawa , S . , Lee , J . S . , andIshimoto , A . ( 1998 ) . Identiﬁcationandchar - acterizationofanovellineof Drosophila SchneiderS2cellsthatrespond to wingless signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 32353 – 32359 . 17 . Kiger , A . A . , Baum , B . , Jones , S . , Jones , M . R . , Coulson , A . , Echeverri , C . , and Perrimon , N . ( 2003 ) . A functional genomic analysis of cell morphol - ogy using RNA interference . J . Biol . 2 , 27 . 18 . Kunda , P . , Craig , G . , Dominguez , V . , andBaum , B . ( 2003 ) . Abi , Sra1 , and Kette control the stability and localization of SCAR / WAVE to regulate the formation of actin - based protrusions . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1867 – 1875 . 19 . Tsukita , S . , and Yonemura , S . ( 1999 ) . Cortical actin organization : les - sons from ERM ( ezrin / radixin / moesin ) proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 34507 – 34510 . 20 . Hughes , S . C . , and Fehon , R . G . ( 2006 ) . Phosphorylation and activity of the tumor suppressor Merlin and the ERM protein Moesin are coordi - nately regulated by the Slik kinase . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 305 – 313 . 21 . Ivetic , A . , andRidley , A . J . ( 2004 ) . Ezrin / radixin / moesinproteinsandRho GTPase signalling in leucocytes . Immunology 112 , 165 – 176 . 22 . Lee , J . H . , Katakai , T . , Hara , T . , Gonda , H . , Sugai , M . , and Shimizu , A . ( 2004 ) . Roles of p - ERM and Rho - ROCK signaling in lymphocyte polarity and uropod formation . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 327 – 337 . 23 . Kosako , H . , Yoshida , T . , Matsumura , F . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , and Inagaki , M . ( 2000 ) . Rho - kinase / ROCK is involved in cytokinesis through the phosphorylation of myosin light chain and not ezrin / radixin / moesin proteins at the cleavage furrow . Oncogene 19 , 6059 – 6064 . 24 . Rosenblatt , J . , Cramer , L . P . , Baum , B . , and McGee , K . M . ( 2004 ) . Myosin II - dependent cortical movement is required for centrosome separation and positioning during mitotic spindle assembly . Cell 117 , 361 – 372 . 25 . Dean , S . O . , and Spudich , J . A . ( 2006 ) . Rho kinase’s role in myosin recruitment to the equatorial cortex of mitotic Drosophila S2 cells is for myosin regulatory light chain phosphorylation . PLoS ONE 1 , e131 . 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0000131 . 26 . Echard , A . , Hickson , G . R . , Foley , E . , and O’Farrell , P . H . ( 2004 ) . Terminal cytokinesis events uncovered after an RNAi screen . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1685 – 1693 . 27 . Thery , M . , Jimenez - Dalmaroni , A . , Racine , V . , Bornens , M . , andJulicher , F . ( 2007 ) . Experimental and theoretical study of mitotic spindle orienta - tion . Nature 447 , 493 – 496 . 28 . Charras , G . T . , Hu , C . K . , Coughlin , M . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2006 ) . Reas - semblyofcontractileactincortexincellblebs . J . CellBiol . 175 , 477 – 490 . 29 . Pinsky , B . A . , and Biggins , S . ( 2005 ) . The spindle checkpoint : tension versus attachment . Trends Cell Biol . 15 , 486 – 493 . 30 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Mo - lecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1079 – 1088 . 31 . Goshima , G . , Wollman , R . , Goodwin , S . S . , Zhang , N . , Scholey , J . M . , Vale , R . D . , and Stuurman , N . ( 2007 ) . Genes required for mitotic spindle assembly in Drosophila S2 cells . Science 316 , 417 – 421 . 32 . Rogers , S . L . , Rogers , G . C . , Sharp , D . J . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2002 ) . Drosoph - ila EB1 is important for proper assembly , dynamics , and positioning of the mitotic spindle . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 873 – 884 . 33 . Binnig , G . , Quate , C . F . , andGerber , C . ( 1986 ) . Atomicforcemicroscope . Phys . Rev . Lett . 56 , 930 – 933 . 34 . Rotsch , C . , and Radmacher , M . ( 2000 ) . Drug - induced changes of cyto - skeletal structure andmechanics inﬁbroblasts : anatomicforcemicros - copy study . Biophys . J . 78 , 520 – 535 . 35 . Matzke , R . , Jacobson , K . , and Radmacher , M . ( 2001 ) . Direct , high - reso - lution measurement of furrow stiffening during division of adherent cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 607 – 610 . 36 . Rotsch , C . , Braet , F . , Wisse , E . , andRadmacher , M . ( 1997 ) . AFMimaging and elasticity measurements on living rat liver macrophages . Cell Biol . Int . 21 , 685 – 696 . 37 . Hishiya , A . , Ohnishi , M . , Tamura , S . , and Nakamura , F . ( 1999 ) . Protein phosphatase 2C inactivates F - actin binding of human platelet moesin . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 26705 – 26712 . 38 . Karess , R . E . , Chang , X . J . , Edwards , K . A . , Kulkarni , S . , Aguilera , I . , and Kiehart , D . P . ( 1991 ) . The regulatory light chain of nonmuscle myosin is encoded by spaghetti - squash , a gene required for cytokinesis in Dro - sophila . Cell 65 , 1177 – 1189 . 39 . Dai , J . , Ting - Beall , H . P . , Hochmuth , R . M . , Sheetz , M . P . , and Titus , M . A . ( 1999 ) . MyosinIcontributestothegeneration ofrestingcorticaltension . Biophys . J . 77 , 1168 – 1176 . 40 . Werner , M . , Munro , E . , and Glotzer , M . ( 2007 ) . Astral signals spatially bias cortical Myosin recruitment to break symmetry and promote cyto - kinesis . Curr . Biol . 17 , 1286 – 1297 . 41 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assem - bly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . 42 . Hoover , K . B . , and Bryant , P . J . ( 2000 ) . The genetics of the protein 4 . 1 family : organizers of the membrane and cytoskeleton . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 229 – 234 . 43 . Lazarides , E . , and Woods , C . ( 1989 ) . Biogenesis of the red blood cell membrane - skeleton and the control of erythroid morphogenesis . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 5 , 427 – 452 . Current Biology Vol 18 No 2 100 44 . Lansbergen , G . , andAkhmanova , A . ( 2006 ) . Microtubule plus end : ahub of cellular activities . Trafﬁc 7 , 499 – 507 . 45 . Mahoney , N . M . , Goshima , G . , Douglass , A . D . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2006 ) . Making microtubules and mitotic spindles in cells without functional centrosomes . Curr . Biol . 16 , 564 – 569 . 46 . Zhou , M . , and Wang , Y . L . ( 2007 ) . Distinct pathways for the early recruit - ment of Myosin II and Actin to the cytokinetic furrow . Mol . Biol . Cell , in press . Published online October 24 , 2007 . 10 . 1091 / mbc . E07 - 08 - 0783 . 47 . Vega , S . , Morales , A . V . , Ocana , O . H . , Valdes , F . , Fabregat , I . , and Nieto , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Snail blocks the cell cycle and confers resistance to cell death . Genes Dev . 18 , 1131 – 1143 . 48 . Rotsch , C . , Jacobson , K . , and Radmacher , M . ( 1999 ) . Dimensional and mechanical dynamics of active and stable edges in motile ﬁbroblasts investigated by using atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 921 – 926 . Note Added in Proof ArecentreportfromFrancoisPayrereportsasimilarroleforSlikandMoesininmitosisin Drosophila cell culture and in vivo . Cortical Control of Spindle Morphogenesis 101