Documenting the Research Through Design Process Jeffrey Bardzell 1 Shaowen Bardzell 1 Peter Dalsgaard 2 Shad Gross 1 Kim Halskov 2 1 Indiana University Bloomington , IN { jbardzel | selu | shagross @ indiana . edu } 2 Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark { dalsgaard | halskov @ cavi . au . dk } ABSTRACT Documentation of Research through Design ( RtD ) process - es is essential for capturing and translating design knowledge into broader academic knowledge . Moreover , it can support both design and research objectives internally in RtD projects , as well as external concerns such as project management , knowledge dissemination , and education . In spite of this , RtD documentation has received little sus - tained attention in prior work . Building on what prior work there is as well as an in - depth analysis of two markedly different cases , we present a framework for planning and evaluating RtD documentation . The framework addresses three core concerns : the medium of documentation , the per - formativity of documentation , and providing equal support for both research and design . Author Keywords Research through design ; documentation , design process ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Research through design ( RtD ) is the practice of using de - sign thinking , processes , and products as an inquiry meth - odology . It has generated considerable attention in both HCI and design discourses in recent years [ 5 , 14 , 18 , 28 , 30 ] . As a relatively nascent area of research in HCI , there remain some concerns about what RtD is and what it should be . In particular , questions and divisions remain about RtD as a knowledge practice [ 4 , 6 , 23 ] . Recently , Höök and col - leagues [ 21 , 22 ] distinguished between first - order know - ledge ( i . e . , design researchers’ insights and understandings pertaining to particular design situations ) and second - order knowledge ( i . e . , how such a distinctive way of knowing is communicated and represented as more generalized knowledge ) . They articulate a need for design researchers to “develop both better ways of capturing the specificity and richness of design processes beyond anecdotal evi - dence , and better formats for communicating , contesting , and developing this knowledge in academic fora” [ 22 ] . Key to this work of capturing and translating primary de - sign knowledge into broader academic knowledge is how design processes are documented ; design documentation is a key raw material out of which such knowledge is con - structed . Design process documentation appears in diverse forms , including workbooks , journals , project management systems , papers , and more . It also supports RtD in diverse ways . Process documentation supports design in activities of iterative problem framing and problem setting ; it allows RtD practitioners to explore the materiality , form , and in - teractivity simultaneously that generate knowledge about materials pertaining to what it can and can not do , its strengths and limitations , etc . ; documentation both facili - tates ideation , sketching , and prototyping processes as well as subsequent communication and evaluation ; and process documentation records the project’s way - finding—choices made , breakthroughs , challenges , and paths not taken . Simi - larly , process documentation supports research in the ways it facilitates the development of inquiry objectives ; it allows RtD practitioners to record research activities ; it demon - strates and communicates research methods and rigor ; it creates connection to prior work ; it expresses relevant theo - ry ; and it includes data results and their interpretations . More generally , RtD process documentation supports pro - ject management and education and broader dissemination . Influential papers from Koskinen , Binder and Redström [ 25 ] and Zimmerman , Stolterman , and Forlizzi [ 30 ] have pointed out that systematic and comprehensive documenta - tion is often lacking in design research in general , and in RtD in particular . One reason for this is that even though RtD practitioners have various tools and practices at their disposal , they have to come up with their own documenta - tion systems and approaches , often assembled ad hoc out of existing tools and practices from design and / or research . Virtually no literature takes up some of the most practical considerations , such as the following : What should we doc - ument , to what extents , and using which tools / media ? How do we balance the effort of documentation with its reward ? How do we document a dynamic process , where the re - search and / or design focus can change along the way ? How do we balance the need to push a project forward with cap - turing its key moments for reflection ? How do we support individual versus social activities and contributions ? How do we document tacit knowledge and embodied knowledge Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for com - ponents of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . DIS 2016 , June 04 - 08 , 2016 , Brisbane , QLD , Australia Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4031 - 1 / 16 / 06… $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901859 . Critical Practice DIS 2016 , June 4 – 8 , 2016 , Brisbane , Australia 96 ( e . g . , of materials ) ? This paper seeks to make a contribution towards such a practice in three ways . It offers an attempt to think systematically about RtD process documentation , with a special interest in the ( multi - ) medium of RtD docu - mentation , the performative contributions of documentation in an RtD project ( i . e . , what documentation does ) , and the balancing of both design and research needs throughout . We present two case studies from our own RtD experienc - es , based in two different RtD groups within different uni - versities . And finally we propose that the RtD community develop new genres of discourse to support its practice . DOCUMENTING RTD PRACTICE Available research provides insight into existing practices and resources , but none have claimed to offer a comprehen - sive solution to RtD process documentation , and we will argue that all of them emphasize one aspect of the challenge at the expense of others . We begin with design workbooks , as described in Gaver [ 15 ] . Workbooks are “collections of design proposals and other materials drawn together during projects to investigate options for design” ( p . 1551 ) . The main purpose of workbooks is thus to support design : “eve - rything in a design workbook should be addressed as a pro - posal : that is , as indicating a direction and course of action for design . ” [ 15 : 1559 - 1560 ] . For Gaver , the workbook col - lects design proposals . Although he does not explicitly de - fine “proposal” , he characterizes his own proposals as “very rough collages of alternative devices that explored a range of personal and idiosyncratic possibilities” in a design do - main of interest ( 1552 ) . A proposal typically occupies a two - page spread , comprises both images and text , and often exhibits a certain roughness . It facilitates the externalization of ideas , helps project futures , and contributes towards the creation of design spaces . Workbooks are deliberately open , in the sense that they contain a multitude of design pro - posals , and they can be understood as a provisional map - ping and exploration of a design space . Gaver himself stresses that workbooks support design—he says less about their role in research—and moreover they are most impactful in the relatively early design phases of problem setting and ideation . Other work from Gaver’s group at Goldsmiths has presented documentation strategies that better support research , in particular annotated portfo - lios [ 24 ] . In contrast to workbooks , annotated portfolios are intended to extract and communicate research findings through “organising what can be learned from design in terms of annotations which formulate and highlight features of interest in a portfolio [ … ] Annotations are characterised as indexically connected to artefacts , while connoting topics of broader interest” [ 8 : 76 ] . Löwgren proposes that annotated portfolios can be consid - ered a form of intermediate - level knowledge : the knowledge presented in them resides on a level of abstrac - tion between specific designs and generalisable theories . Annotated portfolios reflect a wider interest in the interac - tion design community to examine new ways of developing and communicating research findings that go beyond the traditional formats of academic papers and demos of sys - tems and prototypes , which also underlies the development of pictorials as a novel academic format [ 7 ] . Similarly to annotated portfolios , Dalsgaard et al . [ 12 ] developed maps for design reflection to support the analysis and communi - cation of crucial aspects of design projects , ranging from overarching trends and developments in a design project to specific examinations of how a design concept emerges and is transformed through various representations and manifes - tations . All of this work supports research , but its emphasis is comparatively reflective and retrospective ; that is , anno - tated portfolios and pictorials present work that has already achieved a certain level of maturity ; they do not propel a design forward the way that a workbook does . Taking a different track but in a similar space , Binder & Brandt [ 6 ] propose that a traceable genealogy is an essential component of design research . For them , genealogy refers to an account of the process of a project or experiment situ - ated in relation to one or more research traditions , such as design research , human factors , or art criticism , or everyday discourses , such as public discourses on topics in health and technology . Simply put , if we are to evaluate the knowledge presented in a research contribution , we must be able to trace both the emergence of this knowledge and also within which discourses and practices it can be recognized as “knowledge” in the first place . Genealogy appears to bring together two ideas : first is the processual nature of the RtD activity , and second is familial relation between the RtD project and the body of knowledge it seeks to extend or contribute to . The genealogy appears to serve in a way comparable to that of a Methodology in a scientific project , that is , a descriptive account of the activities or procedures by which the knowledge is generated and by which it can be legitimated , except that instead of scientific methods and their attendant epistemological commitments , the RtD pro - ject typically foregrounds design methods and their episte - mological commitments . This work clarifies at a theoretical level how RtD can positions its processes as rigorous , but it offers few concrete recommendations on how to do it . One more concrete approach is the use of dedicated systems for documenting RtD , such as the Project Reflection Tool described in [ 13 ] . This is a collaborative online system de - signed to support chronological aggregation of files , notes , and reflections of design projects for subsequent analysis . The PRT system is partly inspired by Design Rationale [ 1 ] , an approach to design documentation that focuses on cap - turing the rationale behind design decisions and making it accessible . The intent is that a systematic and thorough ex - amination of the rationale behind design decisions would expose potential flaws in the argumentation for decisions and lead to better and more well - founded decisions . A number of systems have been developed to support design rationale [ 9 ] . However , Design Rationale has had limited success [ 10 ] , and has faced a number of criticisms , one of them being that many design decisions are informed by Critical Practice DIS 2016 , June 4 – 8 , 2016 , Brisbane , Australia 97 tacit knowledge that may not easily be formulated and cap - tured in a system , and that it potentially adds a very large overhead to the work of designers . The limitation of sys - tems such as these , beyond the lack of empirical evidence that they work well , is that with their emphasis on capturing rationales , they offer fewer resources to push the project forward ; they run the risk of feeling in the moment like pure overhead . These approaches variously shed light on different aspects of the problem , but each is also incomplete . Each struggles to support design and research equally , and each struggles to balance pushing the design forward in the moment with supporting reflection and synthetic thinking . At the same time , all also emphasize a relatively small number of val - ues , which provides insight into some of the core qualities of RtD process documentation . One is the role of medium : by that we mean that RtD documentation typically requires the collection of different types of document ( e . g . , images , text , video / animation ) , and often aggregated , disaggregated , and reaggregated for different purposes ( e . g . , to support design ideation , to pitch a direction to a client , to trace the emerging rationale of a project ) . Related is the performa - tivity of much documentation ; RtD process documentation does not merely describe what happens , but it constitutes a form of action—note for example that Gaver’s workbooks are made up of “proposals” and not “representations . ” Fi - nally , all implicitly or explicitly are positioned as resources to facilitate the transition from , in Höök et al . ’s words [ 21 ] , first - order to second - order knowledge , that is , they aim to support RtD . These three qualities , which were not readily apparent to us when we began this research project , have come to shape our understanding of RtD process documen - tation , and came to constitute the core of our analysis of our RtD cases . How we came to this approach we explain in what follows . METHODOLOGY Building on prior work on the RtD process [ 5 , 14 ] , this pro - ject began with a conversation between two RtD groups on the relationships between words / text and objects in RtD . Though the teams have worked in different design spaces— urban computing and media architecture in one case , and critical computing in the other—both found importance and elements of struggle in RtD process documentation . Two concerns in particular—uncertainty about what / how much to document during the process and a recognition that these repositories were not always used well during research re - porting—emerged right away . To begin a collaborative inquiry , we interviewed each other about our RtD processes and documentation practices . The goal was not to uncover facts about practice as a matter of social scientific inquiry ; it was , rather , generative : to use the medium of the interview to call to mind experiences and examples , to bring our intuitions to clarity , to create open - ings to action . Both sides separately constructed interview questions and then interviewed the other side : we were as curious about each other’s questions as we were their an - swers . Each interview lasted about 90 minutes and revolved around fundamental questions such as : What did you doc - ument and why ? Did you use the documentation , and if so , how ? Which individual documentations stand out , and why ? Each interview was audio recorded . Through the back - and - forth a number of issues emerged . One is the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic moti - vation : when does documentation feel motivated by and supportive of—as opposed to a distraction from and burden on—the task at hand ? Another is the problem of actually knowing when a breakthrough occurred ; sometimes it is obvious , but other times something is only understood as a breakthrough in hindsight . Another is the problem of being able to find relevant assets efficiently in the future when needed , whether it is to solve a technical problem solved in the past , to make a presentation for stakeholders , or to sup - port scholarly reporting . More fundamentally for our in - quiry , the interviews made us recall dozens of stories and examples , which began to form a repertoire of RtD and RtD documentation situations . In subsequent meetings , we identified several dozen issues and situations of interest . Using affinity diagramming , and guided in part by our literature review , we arrived at a pre - liminary version of the three aspects of RtD documentation we referenced in the Introduction : the significance of the medium of the documentation , the performative nature of the documentation , and the challenge of equally supporting the design and research aspects of the project . In subsequent meetings , we refined this three - part framework by testing its applicability and resonance with examples—our own and those articulated in related research . During this process , it became clear that our analysis would benefit from a more sustained and close analysis of a finite set of RtD process documentation artifacts . Doing so would allow us to go back in time and reflect on what was happen - ing , what their roles were in the project then , how they were subsequently used ( or not ) . More specifically , we analyzed how each mediated the documentation ( e . g . , as a video , workbook , or project within a project management system ) ; how each didn’t merely represent a fact or piece of infor - mation , but was part of an action or performance ; and how each participated in or contributed towards the research versus design aspects of the project . These analysis became the basis of our case studies ( below ) . THREE ASPECTS OF RTD PROCESS DOCUMENTATION The framework that over time we settled on comprises three particularly resonant elements in our analyses : The Medium of RtD Documentation One of the most basic insights we had into RtD documenta - tion processes was that they involved the aggregation , dis - aggregration , and reaggregation of different kinds of docu - ment , such as images , videos / animations , text , and so forth . We began to focus on how various systems and tools sup - Critical Practice DIS 2016 , June 4 – 8 , 2016 , Brisbane , Australia 98 ported these aggregation practices , and this led us to dwell on the medium . That the medium of a work is central to it is commonplace in the arts and humanities . Synthesizing the position of Timothy Brinkley , philosopher David Davies [ 15 ] writes , “A medium is a set of conventions whereby performing certain manipulations on a kind of physical stuff counts as specifying a certain set of aesthetic properties as a piece . ” The key concepts in this definition are physical ma - terials , conventions , manipulations , and piece . Physical materials—paint , celluloid , spoken words , the body of a ballet dancer—offer both capabilities and constraints . Con - ventions , such as cultural movements ( e . g . , Impressionism ) , genres ( e . g . , sonnets , war documentaries ) , and styles ( e . g . , 80s New Wave fashion ) provide standardized yet trans - gressible means of using , manipulating , and / or shaping those materials . And this conventionalized manipulation of physical material is oriented towards the production of an individual piece , which is coherent and whole . RtD process documentation is different from an artwork in several important ways . It does not necessarily aspire to the level of holistic coherence of a finished artistic piece . Nor does it necessarily seek to perform or innovate upon mate - rials and / or conventions as an artist often does . Yet the basic underlying mechanisms remain the same : an RtD pro - cess workbook is based in a set of materials ( e . g . , a physi - cal book , an electronic document , or a project management system ) ; it leverages certain conventions , such as design sketches with textual annotations , laid out over time to re - veal temporal unfolding / development ; and it gains its co - herence in the ways it is manipulated / aggregated around the purpose of documenting a design project in a certain way . Documents as Speech Acts We began the project often asking what design document is , identifying different examples , and organizing them into different types . We came to recognize that when we shifted the question to what design documents do , we were better able to situate documents in their moments . We saw that they were used in presentations , to support research , to rec - ord a stray thought that might be useful later , to collect dis - parate resources in a single location . We came to see that design documentation often plays a socially performative role , that is , that it contains , among other things , illocution - ary acts . Illocutionary acts is a concept introduced by J . L . Austin [ 2 ] to describe statements that not only describe states of affairs but also have a social force , e . g . , promises , demands , suggestions , bets , and so forth : “I declare you husband and wife” , spoken in a certain situation by a quali - fied individual does not merely describe , but actually changes , social reality . In this way , documentation is not only documenting what has happened but , most important - ly , it acts upon and within the design process . We found that RtD documentation commonly describes a newly acquired design material . It rules in or out certain exemplars , directions , and materials . It demonstrates that a team member was productive in the past week , even though certain to - do items that he had promised to do were not completed . It playfully explores potential directions via sketches . It proposes that a design ought to look / function a certain way and requests financial , material , and human support . It reveals and challenges a shared assumption . It takes credit for a certain breakthrough . It justifies the pro - ject and its key decisions to the funding agency . Many of these acts are not passive recordings of design ; they are design activities themselves . As we began to reread our documentation exemplars , tracing their performative roles dramatically improved our accounts of them and changed how we thought about RtD documentation in the future . Supporting Research and Design One of the difficulties of RtD is that its twin pillars seem to be in conflict with one another . The particularity of design [ 28 ] seems to be in conflict with the generalizing impulses of research [ 11 , 18 , 23 ] . In research , knowledge is trans - mitted verbally , but in RtD it is “embodied in the object” [ 15 ] ) . The scientific epistemological virtue of objectivity appears to conflict with the design virtue of expert subjec - tivity [ 3 ] . Conversely , one might ask whether design prob - lem setting and framing is all that different from formula - tion of research questions and hypotheses ; experiments with design materials and scientific experiments , different in many respects , nonetheless are experiments , guided by the - ories , methods , and communities of practice . Are design and research not merely different variations of inquiry ? If so , then perhaps an alternative theory of inquiry can bring them back into compatibility , even alignment . Indeed , Bas - balle and Halskov [ 5 ] show that design and research in RtD are never fully separate but continuously couple , inter - weave , and decouple . Similarly , Dalsgaard , Halskov and Basballe [ 14 ] introduce the concepts of boundary zones and emergent boundary objects in order to account for how de - sign concepts emerge and are shaped through ongoing ne - gotiations of design interest and research interests . We turn now to our cases , to work through some of these ideas and to tease out some of the choices we make when we docu - ment and their consequences . CASE 1 : “PERSUASIVE ANXIETY” “Persuasive Anxiety” ( PA ) was a design research project that investigated personal informatics from a critical per - spective , with an emphasis on the relationships between personal data tracking and experiences of anxiety . The re - search team also sought to develop practice - informed theo - ry about the relationships between criticality and design . The team comprised three faculty researchers and two Ph . D . students in interaction design . Each of the students was tasked with developing three design directions that critically explore personal informatics and anxiety . Design - er A has a background in interactive fine arts and developed three critical designs that explore “bad” consumption— cigarettes , chocolates , and prescription drug abuse . Design - er B has a background in graphic design and HCI , and lev - eraged his interest in photography to explore how cameras and networks might be used for ( self - ) surveillance . Critical Practice DIS 2016 , June 4 – 8 , 2016 , Brisbane , Australia 99 The project amassed several hundred electronic documents , stored and shared in Dropbox . Documents included several dozen meeting minutes , each comprising a few pages of notes in bulleted text ; documents developed to pre - sent / explain the work to diverse stakeholders ; and data col - lected from an exhibition of the six designs , including hun - dreds of photos , several videos , and qualitative data from an exhibition of the designs . Beyond this general data , each designer had her or his own documentation . Designer A had dozens of sketches and hundreds of photos of inspirations and exemplars , as well as a poster and several slide decks from presentations she did of the work . Designer B kept an RtD workbook . This was not a workbook in Gaver’s sense as described earlier , but in a more traditional sense : a per - sonal workbook containing sketches , inspirations , semantic differentials , reflections , and so forth . He also used mind - mapping software and periodically output his mind map to PDF to share with the team . He also had several slide decks and handouts for presenting to stakeholders . In the following , we focus on Designer B’s workbook , turn - ing to the other documentation to provide context and sup - port as needed . We chose this document in part because it was well curated , provided ample documentation of the project in terms of its design and research objectives , and was in fact used both to support the design process and sub - sequent research writing . As part of this project , Designer B also looked back and reflected on the workbook , which became another source of data for our analysis . We now turn to our analysis of Designer B’s RtD process workbook in light of the four considerations specified earlier . The Medium of RtD Documentation Designer B’s workbook was done in Microsoft Word . It is spread across nearly 60 pages and includes prose ( typically used for reflections ) , bullet lists ( typically used for to - do lists ) , scans of sketches with annotations ( used to document design activities ) , and photos of technical materials with annotations ( used to document material and technical ob - stacles , opportunities , and hacks ) . For analysis purposes , we understand the material substrate of this Word - based work - book to include formatted text , embedded bitmap images , and a document model that manages these elements . It lev - erages a number of conventions of typography and page layout , offering standard text formatting options ( e . g . , para - graphs , numbered and bullet lists , captions ) and page layout options ( e . g . , inserting images within text , wrapping , foot - notes ) . Designer B had to work within these conventions to create an electronic version of a design notebook . For writ - ing and formatting text , Word is quite strong . For sketching , it is basically unusable ; the designer sketched on paper and then scanned the sketches in as bitmaps . Once imported , however , bitmaps were easy to lay out and annotate . Common features of paper notebooks—e . g . , the ability to paste in physical cuttings and images—are missing in Word , though scanning and importing simulates that func - tionality , albeit with higher overhead . Word also lacks the ability to put text at angles or to bend lines of text , as one often does in paper notebooks to fit everything on a single page , the page being an important structural unit in many paper design workbooks . Designer B let Word handle pagi - nation and made no effort to construct well - formed pages . Instead of the physical page being the basic unit of organi - zation , Designer B used logical sections , marked by head - ings and formatted using built - in Word styles . Typical sec - tions reflected meaningful temporal demarcations organized by date as well as substantive ones ( e . g . , to do lists , reflec - tions on theory , documenting technical hacks ) . The overall organization of these sections is temporal and linear ; the most basic unit of analysis was the week . Within each week , he used different materials and conventions to document design activities as well as research activities . Trends also emerged over time . For example , the early part of the workbook contains extended textual quotations and reflections on critical theory , theories of surveillance , and personal informatics research as well as hand - drawn sketches showing his design ideation—not surprising em - phases during the problem setting and framing stage . The later part of the workbook includes documentation of exper - iments with materials , annotated photo walkthroughs of hacks , and photos of circuit boards and disassembled cam - eras—again , not surprising given the prototyping stage that he was in . That all of this work is contained in a single . doc file , which is nearly universally readable both technically and in terms of its stylistic and structural conventions , makes the work accessible at different levels of detail to different stakeholders , including the design researcher dur - ing his process , himself a year later when writing research papers about the project , and the rest of the team for both intellectual and project management reasons . Documents as Speech Acts To offer a close analysis of the illocutionary acts in Design - er B’s workbook , we focus on an example , which occurred within a given week about two thirds of the way through the workbook and process . At this time , Designer B had sketches of a design involving a traditional gumball ma - chine that when the user turns its crank , takes a picture of the user and displays their image as part of a slideshow of similar images inside of the machine . After beginning with last week’s to - do list and asserting his own productivity this week , Designer B announces that two key materials have arrived : a set of webcams and the gumball machine itself . He already had the LCD screen , so the central question of the week was to begin to explore how the three pieces of hardware could be integrated . He talks first about the webcams . He observes that their focal length and depth of field were both different than he had expected . He proposes some alterations to the design to accommodate this . He then takes them apart , offers a com - mentary on their components , their quality , and their capa - bilities . This he documents with a series of photographs and accompanying verbal descriptions . He then turns to con - Critical Practice DIS 2016 , June 4 – 8 , 2016 , Brisbane , Australia 100 necting the web cam and the LCD screen ; to get them to work together , he will need a hack . The next several pages document that hack . Along the way , he discovers some pins on the board that don’t seem to be used ; he consults online forums and finds out that they al - low line - level control over the LCD screen , a feature he didn’t know existed . He can’t think of an application now , either , but he creates a “stub”—a small reminder that this feature is there and could be exploited later on , just in case . In the course of further testing , he discovers that the data stream for the web cam is simply too much for his Arduino controller board . He presents three options , one of which would subsequently be used in the designs . In following pages , he photographically and textually documents his disassembly of the gumball machine , seeking ways to con - nect it to the web cam , LCD screen , and processing board . The hacking of the components that occupied Designer B this week was more than a description of components . It was a social performance—to his managers to demonstrate his productivity that week ; to fellow geeks to demonstrate his hacking achievements ; to stakeholders to justify his design decisions and purchases ; to a version of himself in the future , who would presumably need to be reminded about how each of the components works ; and finally also to himself in the present , having an aesthetic experience involving material play directed at inquiry : “This week” , he writes , “I had intended to [ work on the prototyping method ] but just had too much fun with the Gumball machine and cameras . ” The diverse speech acts from this week—self - legitimations , technical showboating , materials analysis , proposed IT solutions , suggested implications for future work , and self - disclosures— cohered together . Supporting Research and Design Designer B’s RtD process workbook overall suggests that research and design activities worked well together . The discursive conventions of the workbook supported his placement of prose paragraphs developing theory alongside annotated sketches and web cam hacks . The workbook’s sprawling temporal unfolding can accommodate the often emergent movements of thought and emphasis that charac - terize an RtD project . An example shows this at a finer resolution . In the first month of the design process , the group was reading about and attempting to theorize “criticality” in relation to design . The team was playing with a concept that they were calling “critical depth” and it was core to the research interest . The basic insight was that it is easy to be critical in a superficial way , and that doing so is sometimes a “way in” to a “deep - er” kind of criticality . In the meeting minutes around that time , the team asked , “Is it possible to design iteratively from very shallowly critical to more deeply critical ? ” Designer B’s workbook from the following week has 11 pages devoted to this question . Pages 1 - 4 have him devel - oping an analytical vocabulary to describe different aspects of his design ( name , sensual qualities , actions / functions , critical components ) ; each of these he analyzes thematically ( 100 words or so ) ; this leads to insights ( p . 2 ) , in which he views criticality not to inhere within any of his categories ( e . g . , a “critical form” ) but instead in the relations across categories ( e . g . , a design is critical in the relation of its form and actions ) ; he then develops a semantic differential which he uses to analyze an actual advertisement and an AdBuster’s ad ( the latter representing criticality ) . This leads him to a result that seems to be similar to something he read in the research literature , though he does not specify what . Pages 5 - 11 move from analytic work towards constructive design . Specifically , he takes one of his three critical design directions—the gumball machine with embedded camera and LCD screen—and imagines it at three levels of critical depth : from the most superficial towards the deepest . He does so using a combination of sketching along with textual descriptions ; the sketching here is effortful , not quick stick figures but more developed renderings . He imagines a standard gumball machine ( what he calls depth 0 ) , a version of a gumball machine done in the style of H . R . Giger ( level 1 ) , and then a cancerous form of it ( level 2 ) and finally a gun form of it ( level 2 ) . At the end of each sketch - annotation , he then provides a prose analysis . In this analy - sis , he talks about relations among form , function , af - fordances , and criticality of his different variations . He writes , “The Giger Form created questions about mass pro - duction and tradition within the system of gumball ma - chine , while the Cancer and Gun Forms extended this to body issues and harmful actions , respectively . ” Fig . 1 : Standard and “Giger” forms of the gumball machine He then repeats the design exercise , this time changing the form of the gumballs . Instead of gum , he proposes tickers ( strips of paper ) with definitions of candy on them ; in an - other version , instead of receiving candy , the user’s hand is cut off ; in the third variation , instead of candy , the user gets a bubble . Once again , he follows with an analysis . This time , he arrives at a research finding ( i . e . , a contribution to the theory of critical design ) : the more critical depth in the design , the less agency the user appears to have , which sur - prises him , since he expected the opposite . In hindsight , we note that two of his “critical depth” re - search moves made it into his final designs . The Giger look informed one of his designs , though not the gumball ma - Critical Practice DIS 2016 , June 4 – 8 , 2016 , Brisbane , Australia 101 chine , and a year later , during the deployment phase of the designs , the team used tickers instead of gumballs , though instead of putting the definition of candy on them , they put private details about participants’ lives they were able to find on the Internet . In other words , even though the team never did pursue “critical depth” further as a concept , De - signer B’s constructive search in hopes of developing the concept did lead him to productive places . It occurred in a workbook entry that began with theory and analysis , transi - tioned to constructive design , and yielded insights for both the theory and design . Designer B’s workbook offers evi - dence that the supposed gulf between research and design is not so great as it seems in theory ; both are forms of inquiry and can mutually influence one another . CASE 2 : ODENPLAN The Odenplan ( OD ) project was a ten - month collaboration between a design research lab and an architectural firm to develop media architectural components for a metro station at the Odenplan plaza in central Stockholm . The research team was composed of three senior researchers and four Ph . D . students . While the architects considered this a tradi - tional design project , the research team considered their involvement to be an RtD process , in which the design ac - tivities were the catalyst to generate new knowledge and insights into the novel field of media architecture . Thousands of documents and files were created during the project . In addition to individual repositories of documents , two shared systems were in place during the project . The first system was a research lab server . The material stored in the research lab server was primarily images and video files organized in folder correspond to design activities or specific aspects of the design process . The second system , which we will focus on in the following , was a dedicated tool to support design research projects , the PRT . As de - scribed by [ 13 ] , PRT is a web - based system organized around documenting the design process in terms of events , sub - events and notes using time as the organizing principle . During the ten months of the OD project , the design and research activities were documented as 15 events in addi - tion to three short notes . Each entry had a descriptive part representing what occurred during the process and a sepa - rate part where reflections on the process may be entered . Associated with each of the three kinds of elements , the tool supported the upload of still images , video footage , and documents . In addition to a list of all events and sub - events , a timeline visualised the relationship between the various elements according to the unfolding design process . We focus here on the use of the collaborative online PRT system employed by the design research team , since it was developed and used with the specific intent of documenting the RtD process . We will also draw out a specific example of a single document : a video of the Traces design concept . The Medium of RtD Documentation The PRT tool was originally designed to be general , leaving the decision about how to document the process to the pro - ject participants . We consider the material substrate of PRT to be a range of individual documents , primarily text notes and reflections , photos and sketches of both the potential design products and documentation of discussions , e . g . , photos of whiteboards with design reflections , and videos , which were either recordings of design events or video pro - totypes of potential products . PRT offered predefined templates . Users could select to input notes or events , but had no way of altering the tem - plates ; for example , an event would come with an automatic timestamp and text fields labeled “Information” , “Descrip - tion” , “Conclusion” , “Reflections” , and an option to upload media files . The system thus prescribed the types of infor - mation to be documented , and , of equal importance , indi - cated what was not . At the same time , these conventions drove specific patterns of coherence in the material . In the OD case , members of the design research team would typically feed the system with text and visual documents after , rather than during , design events . In this respect , it served as a tool to record and offer an overview of the on - going process , rather than one that supported in - the - moment exploration and discovery . The system inherits many of weblog traits , but adds further elements specific to design research , such as dedicated text fields for reflections and notes on an event . In the OD case , the work of docu - menting the project in PRT was generally perceived to be an additional workload on top of the design research team ' s traditional practice . Much of the content aggregated into the system would likely still have been created—e . g . , sketches , meeting notes , and photos—but the process of aggregating this content , sometimes from multiple members of the de - sign group , took time and was sometimes neglected . For each entry in the system there was a text entry box labeled " Reflections " . After design events , design researchers would sometimes enter design insights ; e . g . , after a concept development workshop , a member of the team would sum - marize her insights from looking at the totality of the con - cepts in light of the design brief . Likewise , they would post reflections relating to their research agenda , e . g . , on how an event had shed light on a specific research question . But in general , very few reflections were entered into the tool , in spite of rich discussions and reflections in the design re - search team throughout the project . Documents as Speech Acts Roughly half of the documents in the PRT related to plan - ning and coordination activities , for instance minutes from meeting and phone conversation between the designers and the architects , and 3D rendering describing the site of the metro plaza . The statements in these documents generally serve to demonstrate how certain events unfolded , and in which sequence . They affirm certain chains of causality , which may be of interest in design research , e . g . , that a giv - en series of events led to a specific design decision . Fur - thermore , they justify the project to funding bodies by demonstrating the actual work involved . Critical Practice DIS 2016 , June 4 – 8 , 2016 , Brisbane , Australia 102 The other half of the documents , and the most elaborate part , documents the design activities in sketches and other design materials . These documents explore what might be , and propose specific design decisions . Most of these entries were fairly brief consisting of only a few hundred words , with three exceptions documenting the main concept devel - opment workshop , its preparation , and the subsequent re - finement of the key ideas developed during the workshop . The preparation event was documented by three images of whiteboards from the meeting turned into three lists of key words and brief sentence capturing key aspect of the plan - ning of the workshop . This part of the documentation was a rather brief and unprocessed summary of the meeting , but a brief note at the end of the summary points to a PDF file with much more structured documentation , namely a sche - matic representation of the design space identified during the meeting together with a diagrammatic representation of four parameters of engagement . The concept development workshop itself was a half - day workshop documented with five sub - events corresponding to the five main activities in the workshop . The textual part documenting the sub - events is in all cases rather brief – either bullet - lists or a couple of sentences . The textual documentation was supported by images of whiteboards from the meeting . Figure 2 : The Traces Virtual Video Prototype We turn from the general use of PRT to a specific example of a single , yet complex , document : a virtual video proto - type of the design concept , Traces . A virtual video proto - type is a video in which a design concept is simulated , often using special effects [ 20 ] . The 30 second video visualises how the LED lights embedded into the OD staircase creates a trace of light behind people as they move ( see figure 2 ) . The Traces video is complex . It was developed as one of the final products from the design research lab , and as such it is the amalgamation of many prior ideas and documents , such as sketches and documents describing potential design concepts . The video served a number of design purposes : firstly , the creation of the video prompted the design re - searchers to make a number of design decisions that drove the design project forward , such as how LEDs would light up , and how they would respond to individual users vs . multiple users , etc . In this respect , the creation of the video prompted design refinement . Secondly , it served as a vehi - cle for communication between the design researchers and the architects , demonstrating the use of media architectural components clearly and in a manner that made it straight - forward for the architects to assess and comment on the potentials of the interactive elements . Thirdly , it served as an end - product for the design researchers’ involvement in the project , in combination with other deliverables such as technical specifications and 3D models . Supporting Research and Design The PRT system was almost exclusively employed by the design research team during the project . The architects were invited to view the ongoing documentation , but they pre - ferred to be kept in the loop via meetings , phone calls , emails , and exchanges of files such as 3D models . Even though the OD project was thoroughly documented , it nev - ertheless represents a very specific selection of information on the project , namely that which might prove important from a design research perspective . The system did little , if anything , to drive the design process forward . However , it proved useful from a research perspective , since it was sub - sequently used as a resource for multiple research contribu - tions . In spite of these benefits to research , which the design research team knew from previous projects , it still proved difficult to ensure that information from the project was put into the system . The primary value from using the system came from employing it retrospectively to analyse the pro - cess and / or specific events , whereas there was less immedi - ate value of entering the content . This represents a profound challenge : how can design researchers ensure that relevant information will be aggregated if it is unclear if and how this might later be of use ; this challenge is greater still if it requires other parties with little or no in - terest in the re - search perspective to take part in entering the content , as was the case with the architects in this project . Even though PRT was primarily used by the design team , it would seem at surface that the documentation in the tool favored documenting aspects related to the design process rather than specific research topics . However , a more care - ful analysis reveals that the design process and hence also the documentation process was driven by both design and research interests . For instance , one of the Ph . D . students investigated ‘space’ as a resource in the design process and several documents , e . g . , images of public plazas and stairs , related directly the Ph . D . project . Another Ph . D . student’s project was about generative design materials , which mir - rored a certain interest in documenting the various materials used throughout the process . Likewise , several of the re - searchers involved in the project had an interest in the role of inspirational materials in the design process , which is carefully documented with images and links to websites presented as sources of inspiration during the workshop . Let us once again consider the Traces video , which visual - ises the idea that the people on the stairs of the Odenplan station would leave behind luminous traces of their pres - ence as they moved about . During the design process , the 3D animations were very important design visualizations Critical Practice DIS 2016 , June 4 – 8 , 2016 , Brisbane , Australia 103 assisting the designers in developing and concretising the design ideas developed at main concept development work - shop . But , perhaps even more importantly , they represented the primary way of communicating the design concept to the collaborators at the architectural firm . From a research perspective , the animations became important elements of a research paper using the OD project as the main case . Three years later , the 3D models used for the animations were used for the production of a virtual video prototype of one of the other design concepts , and subsequently included in a research paper on tools for media architecture [ 26 ] . DISCUSSION The PA and OD cases , though different , were of compara - ble scale with respect to the number of people involved in the projects and the length of the time period each project unfolded . Moreover the participants in both projects han - dled a large number of documents . We first discuss how the two cases relate to the three core concerns—the medium of documentation , the performativity of documentation , and providing equal support for both research and design—and then turn to a discussion of the generative and instrumental capacities of RtD documentation . Comparison of RtD Documentation in the Two Cases The Medium of RtD Documentation The principal medium for the PA project was based on a generic word processor ( Word ) whereas the OD project used the custom designed PRT tool . Both support similar basic materials : text and bitmaps ( PRT also supports video files ) . They differ in the conventions for manipulating these materials and the sorts of “piece” or “wholes” they yield . The word processer offers only generic conventions for organizing a document : pages , columns , paragraphs , para - graph types . In contrast , PRT provides templates that reflect and also enforce the RtD documentation conventions that informed its design . These templates made it easier for team members to understand which types of information they were supposed to enter into the system and how to read entries from other members . The assemblage and manipula - tion of these elements led to very different finished docu - ments , as we explain next . Documents as Speech Acts As we’ve stressed , the shift from thinking about what RtD documentation is to what it does was key for us . Above all , RtD documentation articulates the ongoing refinement and development of design / research ideas within a project con - text . It features proposals , descriptions , justifications , ex - plorations , experiments , and reflections . A key point of difference between the two cases is the role of reflection in documentation . Whereas there was very little evidence of reflection in the PRT system , the Word - based PA work - book had reflections from end to end . We believe in hindsight that this difference has to do with the way the two tools handle the aggregation of diverse design document types . PRT offered a structured warehouse of assets as well as a timeline to provide an overview of the process . PRT managed assets as raw materials in an orga - nized way , but in usage , the aggregation of these raw mate - rials into meaningful narratives occurred for the most part outside of and after the use of PRT—e . g . , as researchers pulled out from PRT elements of interest to their specific research projects , including production of research papers . In contrast , Word—both in its technical features and use conventions—proposes that the work in question is a doc - ument : singular , unified , and coherent regardless of the na - ture and number of its elements . This in turn creates the subtle and ongoing suggestion that as design documents are inserted into it , some narrative should be constructed to explain their place . The PA workbook was not only orga - nized over time ; it also told a story . In contrast to PRT , it was filled with reflections , regardless of design phase . However , the PA Word workbook was created and main - tained by a single designer , although it was routinely shared with many other stakeholders . It is less clear how or wheth - er this document would scale if more than one team mem - ber were to attempt to contribute to it , and similarly ( the present project excepted ) the workbook was not used by other team members in their own research projects . Supporting Research and Design The PRT was developed to be a dedicated system for doc - umenting RtD processes . As such , it presents a markedly different example of RtD documentation than the PA work - book , which exemplified individual documentation using a generic tool . The PA workbook supported both research and design on an ongoing basis ; the two were often inter - woven . The PA workbook most directly makes reference to theory and research hypothesis alongside of documents of the design process , such as sketches . In contrast , although PRT also supported these activities , it was not always clear in the system—e . g . many discussions during the process were informed by documents in PRT , but these discussions were not always captured and put back into PRT . It is worth stressing that both approaches supported subse - quent research activities ; it is just that they did so in differ - ent ways . PRT supported multiple collaborators inputting documentation and also turning to it as a resource in subse - quent research activities , but real - time reflections were only in exceptionally cases entered using the tool . The PA Word workbook supported the real - time juxtaposition of theory , research questions , multimedia design documents , and technical - material explorations ; reflection was the glue that held the document together . However , it did so at the ex - pense of collaboration , and as its narrative became “burned in” during its process of creation , it is more difficult to re - turn to its raw materials without also perceiving them in relation to that narrative . The Need for RtD Discourse Genres A key insight that emerged in this project was that aggrega - tion and reflection are two aspects of the same activity . Ag - Critical Practice DIS 2016 , June 4 – 8 , 2016 , Brisbane , Australia 104 gregation simply refers to the selection of assets for inclu - sion in some other document : a project report , a disserta - tion , a pitch for resources , a portfolio , a data set , an inspira - tion document , a postmortem , etc . Aggregation is always a purposeful activity : it involves decisions about the substan - tive and rhetorical purposes of the document . Further , we observe that such aggregations can be formed into discourses in conventional ways . For example , given the temporal nature of research through design , it is not surprising that some kind of narrative is one of the domi - nant structural forms of this discourse . Part of what seems to be happening in the still emerging discipline of research through design is that we are figuring out what some of those conventions are . We propose that Gaver’s specific conception of “workbooks” and “annotated portfolios” , the emerging format of “Pictorials” , Dalsgaard et al’s notion of “maps for design reflection” , Binder & Brandt’s “genealo - gies”—all of these might be glossed as proposals for stand - ard “genres” of RtD aggregations - as - discourse . Each pro - vides research through design practitioners cues about what elements to aggregate and in what quantity , at which stage in the process , for which audience , and in service of which goals . Eventually , there might be dozens of such genres . We began this paper with a series of practical questions : What should we document , to what extents , and using which tools / media ? How do we balance the effort of docu - mentation with its reward ? How do we document a dynam - ic process , where the research and / or design focus can change along the way ? How do we balance the need to push a project forward with capturing its key moments for reflec - tion ? How do we document tacit knowledge and embodied knowledge ( e . g . , of materials ) ? We tried to answer these questions ourselves and came up short . Instead of concluding with such answers , we instead end with what we believe the RtD community might do to pursue such answers . We propose that the RtD community needs to develop discursive genres that facilitate communi - cative aggregations . There is a technical side of this , which involves the capture , storage , and searchability of RtD pro - cess elements : briefs , sketches , conversations , design pro - posals , crits , prototypes , theoretical resources , whiteboards , experimental results , exemplars , insights , models . The de - velopment of tools , such as PRT , can help with this . But there is also a need to develop our practice . Specifically , we propose the need to develop RtD discursive genres , and even more fundamentally , to recognize the possibility and existence of RtD discursive genres in the first place . Such genres , of which we already have some examples and hope to see many more , will collectively answer the questions with which we began the paper . Our conception of medium can inform the development of such genres by clarifying the “what” of design discourse genres : their materials , conventions for manipulating them , and a sense of the finished “piece” conceived holistically . Many personal design workbooks are never fully “whole , ” but genealogies , annotated portfolios , and maps all strive towards such a fulfillment . A theory of medium brings into focus the need for conventionalized ways of assembling coherent wholes out of concrete materials . Our conception of performativity can inform the develop - ment of such genres by foregrounding the “why” and “how” of design discourse . How can this particular aggre - gation perform some aspect of the RtD activity in the right way for the right audience ( which can of course include oneself in the present or even future ) ? Put another way , what can be eliminated from the document to best serve this goal ? Gaver’s conception of “workbooks” is far more spe - cific and narrow than what we have typically seen in de - signer workbooks . His conception imposes constraints that not only guide the construction of the workbook , but which also crystallizes its limited purpose—making it much easier to fulfill that purpose and to recognize and evaluate it . ( It obviously does not replace the role of traditional work - books . ) Our conception of supporting research and design was not intended to reify a divide between the two . Rather , it was to recognize that RtD comprises a diverse range of activities , and that at certain stages in the process , we often subjec - tively experience ourselves as doing one , and that in those moments , it is easy to lose sight of the fact that we are also doing the other . This can lead to problems in documentation that only reveal themselves much later on . For example , it can exaggerate the apparent gulf between the design - as - particular and knowledge - as - general , because our focus tends to be on one or the other at different times in the pro - cess . At the initial stage of this project , our intention was to ex - amine how documentation supports research and design . However , one of the key insights from the in - depth studies of the two cases is that documentation is itself an act —an RtD act . Documentation is not merely serving in an instru - mental capacity to report on facts and findings ; it is also generative in that it “talks back” to us as designers and re - searchers . This insight has helped us translate nouns— document , sketch , to do list , virtual video prototype—into verbs : to explore , demonstrate , propose , decide , hack , ex - plain , educate , justify , reflect , narrate , pitch . In these verbs , project roles and meaningful units are made more visible , and the pragmatic and epistemic potentials of documenta - tion become clearer . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors thank Indiana University , Aarhus University , the Intel Science and Technology Center for Social Compu - ting and Innovation Fund Denmark ( CIBIS 1311 - 00001B ) for supporting this research . We also thank the reviewers for challenging us to up our game . REFERENCES 1 . Michael Atwood and John Horner . 2006 . Effective Design Rationale : Understanding the Barriers . In A . H . Critical Practice DIS 2016 , June 4 – 8 , 2016 , Brisbane , Australia 105 Dutoit , R . McCall , I . Mistrik , & B . Paech ( Eds . ) Ra - tionale management in software engineering . Springer - Verlag , 73 - 90 2 . John Langshaw Austin . 1962 . How to Do Things with Words . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . 3 . Jeffrey Bardzell and Shaowen Bardzell . 2015 . Human - istic HCI . Morgan & Claypool . 4 . Jeffrey Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , and Lone Koefoed Hansen . 2015 . Immodest Proposals : Research through design and knowledge . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems ( CHI ' 15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2093 - 2102 . 5 . Ditte Amund Basballe and Kim Halskov . 2012 . Dy - namics of research through design . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 58 - 67 . DOI = 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317967 . 6 . Thomas Binder and Eva Brandt . 2007 . Experimental design research : genealogy , intervention , argument , In - ternational association of societies of design research 2007 : emerging trends in design , Hong Kong . 7 . Eli Blevis , Elizabeth Churchill , William Odom , James Pierce , David Roedl , and Ron Wakkary . 2012 . Visual thinking & digital imagery . In CHI ' 12 Extended Ab - stracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2715 - 2718 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2212703 8 . John Bowers . 2012 . The logic of annotated portfolios : communicating the value of ' research through design ' . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 68 - 77 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317968 9 . Janet Burge and David Brown . 1998 . Design Ra - tionale : Types and Tools , Technical Re - port , Worchester Polytechnic Institute , Computer Sci - ence Dept . , retrieved on 03 January 2016 . 10 . Janet Burge , 2008 . Design rationale : Researching un - der uncertainty . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , vol 22 , 311 – 324 . 11 . Peter Dalsgaard and Christian Dindler . 2014 . Between theory and practice : bridging concepts in HCI research . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1635 - 1644 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557342 12 . Peter Dalsgaard , Kim Halskov , and Rune Nielsen , R . 2009 . Maps for design reflection . Artifact Journal , Routledge . 13 . Peter Dalsgaard and Kim Halskov . 2012 . Reflective design documentation . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 428 - 437 . DOI = 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2318020 14 . Peter Dalsgaard , Kim Halskov , and Ditte Amund Bas - balle . 2014 . Emergent boundary objects and boundary zones in collaborative design research projects . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems ( DIS ' 14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 745 - 754 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2600878 15 . David Davies . 2003 . Medium in art . In Jerrold Levin - son , ed . , The Oxford Handbook of Aesthetics . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 181 - 91 . 16 . Christopher Frayling . 1993 . Research in Art and De - sign , Royal College of Art Research Papers series 1 ( 1 ) 1 - 5 . 17 . William Gaver . 2011 . Making spaces : how design workbooks work . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1551 - 1560 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979169 18 . William Gaver . 2012 . What should we expect from research through design ? In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 937 - 946 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208538 19 . Saul Greenberg and Bill Buxton . 2008 . Usability con - sidered harmful ( some of the time ) . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Compu - ting Systems ( CHI ' 08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 111 - 120 . 20 . Kim Halskov and Rune Nielsen . 2008 . Virtual video prototyping . Hum . - Comput . Interact . 21 , 2 ( May 2008 ) , 199 - 233 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327051hci2102 _ 2 . 21 . Kristina Höök , Jeffrey Bardzell , Simon Bowen , Peter Dalsgaard , Stuart Reeves , and Annika Waern . 2015 . Framing IxD knowledge . interactions 22 , 6 ( October 2015 ) , 32 - 36 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2824892 22 . Kristina Höök , Peter Dalsgaard , Stuart Reeves , Jeffrey Bardzell , Jonas Löwgren , Erik Stolterman , and Yvonne Rogers . 2015 . Knowledge Production in Interaction Design . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Con - ference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ' 15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2429 - 2432 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2702653 23 . Kristina Höök and Jonas Löwgren . 2012 . Strong con - cepts : Intermediate - level knowledge in interaction de - sign research . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 19 , 3 , Article 23 ( October 2012 ) , 18 pages . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2362364 . 2362371 24 . Nadine Jarvis , David Cameron , and Andy Boucher . 2012 . Attention to detail : annotations of a design pro - Critical Practice DIS 2016 , June 4 – 8 , 2016 , Brisbane , Australia 106 cess . In Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Making Sense Through Design ( NordiCHI ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 11 - 20 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2399016 . 2399019 25 . Ilpo Koskinen , Thomas Binder , and Jonas Redström . 2008 . Lab , Field , Gallery , and Beyond . Artifact , 2 , 1 . 26 . Henrik Korsgaard , Nicolai Brodersen Hansen , Ditte Basballe , Peter Dalsgaard , and Kim Halskov . 2012 . Odenplan : a media façade design process . In Proceed - ings of the 4th Media Architecture Biennale Confer - ence : Participation ( MAB ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 23 - 32 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2421076 . 2421081 27 . Jonas Löwgren . 2013 . Annotated portfolios and other forms of intermediate - level knowledge . interactions 20 , 1 ( January 2013 ) , 30 - 34 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2405716 . 2405725 28 . Harald Nelson and Erik Stolterman . 2012 . The Design Way : Intentional Change in an Unpredictable World . 2nd ed . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 29 . John Zimmerman , Jodi Forlizzi , and Shelley Evenson . 2007 . Research through design as a method for interac - tion design research in HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 07 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 493 - 502 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240704 30 . John Zimmerman , Erik Stolterman , and Jodi Forlizzi . 2010 . An analysis and critique of Research through Design : towards a formalization of a research ap - proach . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ' 10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 310 - 319 . DOI = 10 . 1145 / 1858171 . 185822 Critical Practice DIS 2016 , June 4 – 8 , 2016 , Brisbane , Australia 107