1 The Role of Designer Expertise in Source Selection During Product Metaphor Generation Nazli Cila , Paul Hekkert , and Valentijn Visch Delft University of Technology , Department of Industrial Design , Delft , The Netherlands { n . cila , p . p . m . hekkert , v . t . visch } @ tudelft . nl Abstract . Metaphors have a communicative role in design that entails a transfer of meaning from an entity ( i . e . source ) to the designed product ( i . e . target ) . In this paper , we investigate the effect of the expertise of designer on the accessibility of the sources that they employ in metaphors . In the study conducted , novice and expert designers were asked to generate metaphors and the sources they selected were used for analysis . The results indicated that , ( 1 ) novices tended to select easily accessible sources whose similarity with the target was obvious , and ( 2 ) experts tended to use sources that are less similar with the target , which are more difficult - to - access in the first place . These results are then discussed in the light of metaphor theories and product design knowledge . Keywords : Product Metaphors , Metaphor Generation , Source Selection , Expertise , Source Accessibility , Target - Source Similarity . 1 Introduction The flyswatter of Atypyk nicely illustrates the power of metaphor use to tell stories through products ( Fig . 1 ) . By associating a flyswatter with a magic wand , the designer of this product wittily brings in a novel approach to get rid of the unwelcomed flies and insects in your house . Actually , killing flies is an activity that is not quite pleasant for the most , and to be able to kill them “magically” without the brutality is a tempting idea in itself . Although the product works as a regular flyswatter rather than with magic in this case , its form leads the users to use it in a creative manner . By means of this product , it is easy to picture people running around in the room and getting rid of flies with a magical “wave and flick” . This gentle movement is also in contradiction with the harshness of the hitting that you would do with a regular flyswatter . For these reasons , the product has a strong humorous and playful dimension that associates the mundane activity of killing flies with the world of fairies and magic . As a matter of fact , this is what the metaphors are used for . They have a communicative role that entails the transfer of meaning from one entity to another . This quality extends the limits of metaphors beyond language . Since metaphors associate two distinct entities in order to attain new meanings , various disciplines make use of them frequently ( e . g . , psychology , linguistics , art , advertising , architecture , music , mathematics , gesture studies , literature , film studies , religion , etc . ) In the design domain , metaphors are used as tools to define the design problem , generate ideas and enhance creativity ( Casakin , 2007 ) , and / or as a communication medium with the users to express meaning and achieve cognitive and affective effects ( Forceville , Hekkert & Tan , 2006 ; Van Rompay , 2008 ) . 2 Fig . 1 . “Bzzzz… . Vlan” fly swatter by Atypyk Design , 2005 To go back to Fig . 1 , in technical terms , the flyswatter is referred as the target of the metaphor , which is the product that is designed for conveying a particular meaning . The magic wand is called the source , namely the entity that is associated with the target to convey that meaning . The generation of product metaphors involves a transfer of an attribute ( s ) from the source to the target . In a typical metaphor generation situation , there are tens , if not hundreds , of possible sources to associate with the target , yet the designer focuses on only one of these . This selection is a highly important decision that determines the comprehensibility and the quality of the metaphor , but little is known about the factors affecting this selection . Metaphor generation and source selection are mostly neglected even in the linguistics domain , where the wealth of research is directed towards metaphor comprehension and appreciation ( Flor & Hadar , 2005 ) . In the literature , it is widely accepted that target and source domains in a metaphor share some attributes , and this similarity is the reason why they are brought together ( Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Kelly & Keil , 2009 ; McCabe , 1983 ; Ortony , Vondruska , Foss & Jones , 1985 ; Tourangeau & Sternberg , 1982 ) . This similarity may be rather obvious and easily accessible ; or it can be based on “deeper” relations and thus more difficult to notice in the first place . In this paper , we address the ease of accessibility of a source based on target - source similarity . We argue that the expertise of designer has an effect on the ability to access sources that have different levels of similarity with the target . For this reason , our aim in this study is to investigate if novice and expert designers tend to use sources with a particular level of similarity with the target while generating metaphors . In the sections that follow , we will first expand on what is currently known about target - source similarity , source accessibility and their relation to expertise in the literature , and then present the study we conducted together with the discussion of the results in the light of metaphor theories and product design knowledge . 3 2 Similarity of target and source Similarity refers to the likeness or resemblance of two entities , and it increases as the number of common features between the entities increases and as the number of distinctive features decreases ( Goldstone , Medin & Gentner , 1991 ) . In metaphor literature , it is acknowledged that the target is seen through the lens of the source by construing attributes that apply to target as corresponding to those that apply to source ( Tourangeau & Sternberg , 1982 ) . This correspondence is on account of the similarity of target and source , which governs the association of these entities with each other . To go back to our example , we see that a flyswatter and a magic wand share many perceptual and conceptual attributes . They somehow look like each other since they have similar size , proportions and construction ( i . e . flat surface attached to a stick ) , and they are held in hand the same way . They are also similar with each other if we abstract their function – they can both make things disappear . In that sense , we can state that the association of the flyswatter with the magic wand is considerably meaningful as they are both used similarly on an abstract level . Still , this association is not very obvious , which is why the connection is a clever one . What the similarity between target and source entails is often investigated in analogy and metaphor literature . Although these descriptions are all given in relation to the semantic qualities of “words” or “concepts” , we maintain that they are also applicable to target - source similarity in product metaphors because they are generic enough to cover all dimensions of an entity , whether it is abstract or tangible . For instance , some scholars argued that perceptual similarity between target and source is essential for metaphoric success ( Johnson & Malgady , 1979 ) , whereas some others maintained that good metaphors have targets and sources that are similar in their functional qualities ; especially in the way they affect our emotional states ( Asch , 1958 ) . In another study , two terms , which are called taxonomical and thematic relations , were defined in order to explain the possible relations between two concepts ( Shoben & Gagne , 1997 ) . The former is a relation that represents the physical resemblance between two objects , and the latter represents the relation between two concepts through a thematic scene . Seitz ( 1997 ) distinguished six types of metaphoric matches that originate from target - source similarity : color , shape , cross modal , physiognomic , psychological - physical and taxonomic . Color and shape matches refer to pairing off shape or color of an entity with another in a nonliteral way , like comparing an egg yolk to sun . Cross - modal matches build an association between various sensory modalities like matching a sound to a smell or visual experience to touch . Physiognomic matches involve attributing emotional qualities to inanimate objects . Psychological - physical matches refer to relating a physical aspect of an object to a psychological characteristic like “ He is very tough ” . Taxonomic matches associate abstract qualities of two distinct things when there is no physical resemblance , like comparing a cheetah to a car . These examples indicate that at the origin of a metaphorical association lies a certain level of similarity between target and source , and the content of this similarity can be based on various aspects of these domains . When it comes to analogy literature , the most common distinction is made between surface similarity and structural or deep similarity between target and source ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ; Goldstone et al . , 1991 ; Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Tseng , Moss , Cagan & Kotovsky , 2008 ; Vosniadou , 1989 ) . The use of these terms are also metaphorical : surface similarity is described as the easily accessible similarity since the similar attributes are on the “surface” , and deep similarity refers to the similarity that is more difficult to notice because the similar attributes are rooted in “deep” . Most of the time , surface attributes are addressed by physical descriptive attributes like color , form , sound , etc . because perceiving tangible attributes are quicker and easier than the others . On the other hand , deep attributes are defined as non - physical 4 abstract qualities . For this reason , it is argued that the ease of accessibility of the surface similarity comes from being based on physical and tangible attributes , whereas deep similarity is difficult to notice since some kind of an abstraction is necessary ( Dahl & Moreau , year ; Goldstone et al . , 1991 ; Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Vosniadou , 1989 ) . However , Vosniadou ( 1989 ) maintains that this argument fails to take into account the status of the similar attributes in people’s underlying representations . If the attributes in question are salient with respect to underlying representations , the easily accessible similarity can also be based on relational , abstract or conceptual properties . For this reason , Vosniadou does not differentiate surface from deep similarity according to its content , and argue that any kind of attribute can be in surface or in deep as long as it is prominent . Regardless of the discrepancies of the arguments related to its content , we can state that the accessibility of a source lies on a continuum that has surface similarity in one end ( i . e . easily accessible similarity ) and deep similarity on the other ( i . e . difficult to access similarity ) . Having a surface similarity with the target makes a potential source to be easily identified when building associations , whereas it is more difficult to find sources that are based on deep similarity because the domains may differ in many subtle ways ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ) . This makes noticing deep similarity relations a more sophisticated way of building associations . Correspondingly , in the problem solving literature poor analogies are ascribed to the tendency to notice superficial attributes while failing to see deep structural relations ( Casakin & Goldschmidt , 2000 ; Vosniadou , 1989 ) . Similarly , designers may also find it difficult to notice the relevant relationships if their problem at hand carry structural similarity but no surface similarity ( Tseng et al . , 2008 ) . For this reason , it is argued that seeing deep similarity between two distinct entities requires expertise ( Casakin & Goldschmidt , 2000 ; Chi , Feltovich & Glaser , 1981 ) , which we will investigate in the next section . 3 The effect of expertise on seeing similarity There is a substantial and long history of work on understanding the differences between experts and novices in various disciplines , including physics , chess , music , sports , architecture , ballet , medicine , etc . However , it is interesting to see that all these studies mainly show a similar trend regardless of the discipline : experts are able to abstract the situation at hand and see the underlying structure , whereas novices’ actions tend to be limited with the surface attributes of the situation . As an example , it is argued that there are fundamental differences in the representations of physics problems among experts and novices ( Chi et al . , 1981 ) . When asked to categorize problems according to the similarity of their solutions , experts mainly use underlying principles as the similarity criteria and novices focus on surface features . For this reason , novices tend to be misled in identifying similar problems because their surface features are different . These kinds of examples are given by many scholars from different fields . It is argued that the acquisition of skills to abstract the essence of the situation and see underlying relations are related to the development of expertise . As maintained in Casakin ( 2007 ) , “Experience in a certain domain allows the generation of abstract or conceptual problem representations and enhances the probability of analyzing a problem more in - depth , by focusing on structural features . ” On the other hand , the fields that are mentioned are domains where the constraints of the problem are well defined , and a limited number of rules apply ( e . g . chess , physics , etc . ) ( Ahmed , Wallace & Blessing , 2003 ) . However , the problems in the design domain are described as ill - defined problems , meaning that there exist many possible solutions 5 and there are no rules to obtain these solutions ( Ahmed et al . , 2003 ; Popovic , 2004 ) . For this reason , the expertise in the design domain is an “adaptive expertise” , which the experts adjust to situations ( Popovic , 2004 ) . Despite this difference , expert designers are also able to see an underlying pattern and make a connection with a solution , which can be from an entirely different context . As Lawson ( 2004 ) aptly puts forward , “Experienced designers have simply seen more and made more connections already than inexperienced designers . ” This brings us to the metaphors , in which Casakin and Goldschmidt ( 2000 ) found out both expert and novice designers are able to employ visual analogies and associations in solving design problems , however using them in a better way requires expertise . Based on this literature , the aim of this study is to investigate the effect of designer’s expertise on the accessibility of the sources that are employed in the metaphors . In other words , we aim to find out if novice and expert designers tend to select sources from different levels of the accessibility continuum . Our hypotheses are : • Novices are likely to select easily accessible sources whose similarity with the target is obvious . • Experts are likely to select difficult - to - access sources whose similarity with the target is less obvious than the sources used by novices . 4 Methodology In the sections that follow , the experimental set - up designed for investigating the hypotheses will be presented . 4 . 1 Participants In this study , 24 expert designers ( 20 male and 4 female ) and 25 novice designers ( 12 male and 13 female ) participated . The expert group comprised of professional designers who had an average of 6 . 5 years of working experience within the field , varying from 2 to 16 years . The novice group included 2 nd year Bachelor students studying in the Industrial Design Department of Delft University of Technology , who took two design courses within the first year of their education . 4 . 2 Experimental Task In order to minimize the possible effect of the product type on the experimental task , four different products were used in the study : MP3 player , chair , nail clipper and self - cleaning trash bin . Each participant generated a metaphor for each one of these products . Two other experimental conditions were also utilized – the time allotted for completing the design ( short - long ) and the intention of the designer to use the metaphor ( pragmatic - experiential ) – however , the effect of these conditions on the ease of accessibility of the source will not be reported in this paper . After getting an introduction on what a product metaphor is and how it is used in the design domain , the participants were given the design tasks one at a time . These tasks were set up by systematically altering the combination of the product type and intention , and their order of presentation to the participants . The design session always followed the sequence of long task ( 40 min . ) – short task ( 8 min . ) – long task 6 ( 40 min . ) – short task ( 8 min . ) , and a break were given in between the first and last two tasks . The whole study took around 2 hours 15 minutes . Upon completing the session , the participants were asked to explain their designs orally and explicitly point out the sources they associated with the target products together with its reasons . Then , they were debriefed and compensated for their participation . 4 . 3 Assessment of Similarity Two naïve judges who were blind to the aims of the study and the experimental conditions scored independently the ease of accessibility of the sources considering the targets they were associated with . They were provided with a questionnaire that includes the sources that are selected by the participants and the targets in random order . The targets and sources were presented to the judges as words , and they were asked to rate word pairs ( e . g . nail clipper – scissors , chair – cloud ) regarding “how easy it is to see the similarity between the items” on a 9 - point - scale . The ratings were then compared , and if there were minimum 3 points of difference between the ratings for each item , the judges reconciled their assessments by discussion and came to a consensus . The remaining scores were averaged to form an overall similarity index . 5 Results The sources employed by participants can be seen in Table 1 . The mean ratings indicate that novices tended to employ sources that are easier to access ( M = 5 . 48 , s = 2 . 59 ) , whereas experts selected sources that are less accessible ( M = 4 . 07 , s = 2 . 71 ) . Table 1 . The sources used by novice and expert designers in our study Sources associated with target products * Expertise Level Nail clipper MP3 player Chair Self - cleaning trash bin Novice Beaver Biting nails Caterpillar Crocodile ( 2 ) Door Finger Fingerprint Guillotine Ladybug Nail polish Nails ( 2 ) Peg Pencil sharpener Scissors ( 3 ) Shark Teeth ( 5 ) Battery Cassette ( 2 ) Cassette player CD ( 2 ) Clef Disco ball Ear ( 3 ) Frog Guitar amplifier Headphones LP player Music note ( 5 ) Music sheet ( 2 ) Turn table Samba balls Walkman Arrow Bottom Car seat Cave Clothing Clouds ( 2 ) Cushion Dinnerware Hammock Mushroom OK hand gesture Sitting human body ( 6 ) Stop sign Trace of butt Vertebrae Broom Canon Cleaner Drain Droid Elephant Flushing toilet ( 2 ) Garbage bag ( 2 ) Maid Paper recycle bin Recycle sign Red cross Rug Soap bar Space pod Trash car Trash tube Wiping hand ( 3 ) Expert Animal Biting nails Cutlery Door Finger Guillotine Heart Cap CD rack ( 2 ) Cloud Comforting stone Dragonfly Ear Headphones Alarm clock Arrow Being in dark Bird nest Birthday decoration Cake Cloud ( 3 ) Automatic vac . Cleaning wipes ( 2 ) Dining plate Dyson fan Chlorine bottle Hourglass Hygienic smell 7 Monster Paper cutter Pencil sharpener Perfume bottle ( 2 ) Pincers ( 3 ) Scissors Snake Stapler Teeth ( 2 ) Vending machine Washing machine Whale iPod nano LP player Microphone Music note Navigating in car Necklace Pirate’s hook Rubik’s cube Roulette Sea shell ( 2 ) Storage box Log Nail bed Pants Piece of a pie Shovel Sitting human body ( 2 ) Supporting hands Tensegrity cons . Thread ball Toilet roll Wheel Jail Kitchen paper roll Lotus leaf Paper bag Shower Transparency ( 2 ) Soap bar Supermarket belt Toilet ( 3 ) Tongue Twisting bolt Windshield vipers * The numbers in brackets indicate the number of participants used that same source In order to investigate the main effects , the data was analyzed using ANOVA on the ratings for the accessibility , with the “order of the presentation of each product” , “product type” and “expertise level” as between - subject factors . With regard to the first two control factors , the results indicated no significant effect on similarity and interaction effect with the expertise . This means that the order we presented the products to the participants and the four product types did not affect the tendency of the participants to employ a particular similarity degree , and the effect of expertise is independent of these two factors . Although not significant , the means of each product for similarity ratings show an interesting trend . MP3 player and self - cleaning trash bin lead to the association of sources that are easier to access , whereas chair and nail clipper lead to the association of difficult - to - access ones ( Fig . 2 ) . Fig . 2 . The means for the accessibility of the sources associated with each product type ANOVA analysis yielded a main effect of expertise on source accessibility F ( 1 , 31 ) = 13 . 39 , p < . 001 , η 2 = . 086 . This finding indicates that expertise significantly influences the accessibility of a source . When combined with the mean scores , our results show that novices tended to employ sources that were easier to access , and experts selected sources that were more difficult - to - access . 8 6 Discussion and Conclusions The research findings indicated that expertise had a significant effect on the selected sources to be employed in the products . Novices were likely to select easily accessible sources whose similarity with the target product was rather obvious when compared with the sources selected by the experts . On the contrary , experts’ preferences were more on the “distant” sources , in which their similarity to target was less obvious . Therefore , both of our hypotheses were supported with the findings that novices used easily accessible sources while experts used more difficult - to - access ones . This means that the abilities of novices are yet to be limited with noticing the sources that are similar to target in terms of the attributes on the surface only . This situation is also apparent when we have a look at the sources that participants selected ( see Table 1 ) . Let’s take the MP3 player task as an example . Some of the examples of the sources that the novices used in their metaphors are music notes , music paper , CD , Walkman , record player , etc . , which are all highly related to a MP3 player but meanwhile this relation is somewhat obvious since they are all in the “music” and “music listening” domain . On the other hand , experts associated sources like dragonfly , Rubik’s cube , seashell , etc . with the MP3 player . The relationship of these entities is quite abstract actually : dragonfly was chosen because it buzzes in your ear , Rubik’s cube was chosen because it is a lovely way of entertainment , and seashell was chosen because you can put it in your ear and listen to the humming of the sea . Compared to the music notes or CD’s , these entities are rather meaningful and novel associations . As can be seen from these examples , novices built more obvious relations but experts used more distant sources in their designs most of the time . Accessing sources that are based on deep common attributes with the target and being able to build associations in between might be a natural tendency that is acquired with expertise because metaphors or analogies that are based on a distant relationship between target and source are deemed more creative and original than those based on close relationships ( Casakin , 2007 ; Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ; Dahl & Moreau , 2002 ) . Bringing two very similar entities together may lead to hackneyed and uninteresting metaphors ( McCabe , 1983 ; Ortony et al . , 1985 ) , and correspondingly , it has been shown in the design literature that distant associations play a significant role in the design of creative products ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ) . In that sense , the tendency of the professional designers to use more distant sources in our study might support their desire to attain interesting metaphors . Our results are preliminary to make generalizations and it requires a follow - up study to investigate if the designs of the experts were more creative , but we argue that with the acquisition of expertise , the designers are likely to prefer more distant and less obvious relationships between target and source . It should be noted that the source whose relationship is obvious with the target does not necessarily mean that it is highly similar to the target at the same time , and vice versa . We acknowledge that they are parallel mostly , but there might be conflicting cases . For instance , in one of the cases the designer associated a lotus flower leaf with a self - cleaning trash bin ( see Table 1 ) . The reason was that the lotus leaf has a special surface structure that repels dirt and water , which eventually provides the plant to clean itself . The transfer of this attribute to the trash bin fulfills the self - cleaning function of the target product . For this reason , a self - cleaning trash bin and a lotus leaf becomes highly similar since they both do self - cleaning . However , seeing this connection might be difficult in the first place because these are two distant entities belonging to different domains and self - cleaning is a rather hidden attribute of a lotus leaf . Especially for a person who is not knowledgeable about this attribute , accessing to this association might be difficult . For this reason , the answer to the questions “how similar these two entities are” is very similar , whereas “how easy it is to see the similarity of these two entities” is not very easy . Thus , we 9 maintain there might be some cases like this that overall similarity of a source with a target differs from the accessibility of this similarity . In this study , we only focused on the accessibility since we consider it one of the main aspects affecting metaphoric quality . Two entities may be quite similar , but as long as seeing this similarity is not very easy , their association leads to clever connections like in the magic wand – flyswatter example ( see Figure 1 ) . In addition to this , we want to say a few words regarding the type of similarity of the sources that are associated with target products . As can be seen in Table 1 , participants employed various sources that have perceptual and / or conceptual similarity with the target products . A summary of the content of these similarity types can be found in Table 2 , together with example associations . We mentioned earlier that some scholars use perceptual similarity and conceptual similarity for referring to surface similarity and deep similarity , respectively ; and some others do not differentiate the content of surface similarity from deep similarity . As Vosniadou ( 1989 ) argues , conceptual and abstract attributes can also be in the surface as long as they are prominent , and vice versa . Within the context of our study , the first argument leads to the assumption that novices would select perceptually similar sources while experts would go for conceptually similar ones . However , our initial analysis on the sources used by the participants shows no such tendency . The entities associated with the target products by novices were also somewhat conceptual as much as the ones associated by experts , and the experts also used perceptually similar sources commonly . For instance , if we take the nail clipper as an example , novices used sources like beaver , shark and crocodile that are conceptually similar to a nail clipper since they all cut something with their teeth in an abstract level . On the contrary , experts associated sources like pincers , scissors and stapler , which are similar to a nail clipper perceptually . For this reason , there is no difference in the tendency to use a particular type of similarity more often among the novice and expert designers . We can state that our sample supports Vosniadou’s view that the surface attributes are not necessarily perceptual , and deep attributes are not conceptual all the time . Table 2 . The types of similarity between target and source Type of similarity Similarity in : Example Perceptual similarity Appearance Form , color , texture , material , size , proportions Chair – Sitting human body Movement The way main body / parts move ( direction , position change , force ) Nail clipper – Guillotine Sound Sounds they make MP3 player – Dragonfly Interaction pattern The way a person uses , holds , etc . Nail clipper – Stapler Conceptual similarity Function The main purpose MP3 player – Walkman Working principle How they work ; the mechanism / structure behind Self - cleaning trash bin – Lotus flower leaf Emotions they evoke What they make people feel Chair – Bird nest Environment / context The environment they are in , the people use them , the time they are used , etc . Nail clipper – Perfume bottle 10 A final remark is about the products used in this study . We mentioned earlier that MP3 player and self - cleaning trash bin was associated with sources that are easier to access , and the case with the nail clipper and chair was the reverse . For the former two , we observed that participants aimed to convey the purpose and usage of the product first , and therefore looked for sources that “do the same” , i . e . plays music or cleans itself . Especially the self - cleaning trash bin is a rather novel product concept , which the participants aimed to make this special function apparent and understandable . For this reason , the similarity of the sources that were associated with these products were obvious , which aims to convey to users the function , usage and interaction pattern as clear as possible . On the other hand , nail clipper and chair are products whose function is fixed and easily understandable . Therefore , we observed that participants were able to experiment with associating various entities with these products without worrying about the functionality . They tried to communicate a specific message , improve the visual look or associate it with an entity just for fun purposes . That’s why we think the sources these products were associated with had a more distant relationship . The product type did not have any statistical effect on our findings , however we acknowledge the fact that certain product types would be more suitable for focusing on a particular level of similarity . To summarize , our results indicate how ease of access affects the selection of a potential source and how different groups of designers behave while selecting a source . Novices used sources that are easier to associate with targets in general , while the tendency of the expert designers was the opposite . The present study is one of the first attempts to investigate how target and source of a metaphor are associated with each other during metaphor generation , yet this issue needs further attention . Metaphors are powerful tools for conveying meaning through the product , and if we are to understand how to make good and creative decisions in this respect , the designers can create comprehensible , aesthetic , interesting and pleasant metaphors , and rich and meaningful user experiences . Acknowledgments . We would like to express our deepest gratitude to our participants from Bleijh , Buro Raak , Fabrique , G - Star , IPV Delft , MMID , Muzus , Natwerk , Scope , Studio Anna Noyons , Van der Veer Designers , Waarmakers , We Are Perspective , Wit Industrial Design , de Wolkenrijders , and to our students . References [ 1 ] Ahmed , S . , Wallace , K . M . , & Blessing , L . T . M . ( 2003 ) . Understanding the differences between how novice and experienced designers approach design tasks . Research in Engineering Design , 14 , 1 - 11 . [ 2 ] Asch , S . E . ( 1958 ) . The metaphor : A psychological inquiry . In R . Taguiri & L . Petrullo ( Eds . ) , Person perception and interpersonal behavior ( pp . 324 - 333 ) . Stanford : Stanford University Press . [ 3 ] Casakin , H . P . ( 2007 ) . Metaphors in design problem solving : Implications for creativity . International Journal of Design , 1 ( 2 ) , 21 - 33 . [ 4 ] Casakin , H . P . , & Goldschmidt , G . ( 2000 ) . Reasoning by visual analogy in design problem - solving : The role of guidance . Environment and Planning B : Planning and Design , 27 , 105 - 119 . [ 5 ] Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . J . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 - 152 . [ 6 ] Christensen , B . T . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2007 ) . The relationship of analogical distance to analogical function and preinventive structure : The case of engineering design . Memory & Cognition , 35 ( 1 ) , 29 - 38 . [ 7 ] Dahl , D . W . , & Moreau , P . ( 2002 ) . The influence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation . Journal of Marketing Research , 39 ( 1 ) , 47 - 60 . 11 [ 8 ] Flor , M . , & Hadar , U . ( 2005 ) . The production of metaphoric expressions in spontaneous speech : A controlled - setting experiment . Metaphor and Symbol , 20 ( 1 ) , 1 - 34 . [ 9 ] Forceville , C , Hekkert , P . , & Tan , E . ( 2006 ) . The adaptive value of metaphors . In U . Klein , K . Mellman , & S . Metzger ( Eds . ) , Heuristiken der Literaturwissenschaft : Einladung zu disziplinexternen Perspektiven auf Literatuur ( pp . 85 - 109 ) . Paderborn : Mentis . [ 10 ] Goldstone , R . L . , Medin , D . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1991 ) . Relational similarity and the nonindependence of features in similarity judgments . Cognitive Psychology , 23 , 222 - 262 . [ 11 ] Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 15 ( 4 ) , 332 - 340 . [ 12 ] Johnson , M . G . , & Malgady , R . G . ( 1979 ) . Some cognitive aspects of figurative language : Association and metaphor . Journal of Psycholinguistic Research , 8 ( 3 ) , 249 - 265 . [ 13 ] Kelly , M . H . , & Keil , F . C . ( 2009 ) . Metaphor comprehension and knowledge of semantic domains . Metaphor and Symbolic Activity , 2 ( 1 ) , 33 - 51 . [ 14 ] Lawson , B . ( 2004 ) . Schemata , gambits and precedent : some factors in design expertise . Design Studies , 25 , 443 - 457 . [ 15 ] McCabe , A . ( 1983 ) . Isolated sentences versus extended contexts . Journal of Psycholinguistic Research , 12 ( 1 ) , 41 - 68 . [ 16 ] Ortony , A . , Vondruska , R . J . , Foss , M . A . , & Jones , L . E . ( 1985 ) . Salience , similes , and the asymmetry of similarity . Journal of Memory and Language , 24 , 569 - 594 . [ 17 ] Popovic , V . ( 2004 ) . Expertise development in product design – strategic and domain - specific knowledge connections . Design Studies , 25 , 527 - 545 . [ 18 ] Seitz , J . A . ( 1997 ) . The development of metaphoric understanding : Implications for a theory of creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 10 ( 4 ) , 347 - 353 . [ 19 ] Shoben , E . J . , & Gagne , C . L . ( 1997 ) . Thematic relation and the creation of combined concepts . In T . B . Ward , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought ( pp . 31 - 50 ) . American Psychological Association . [ 20 ] Tourangeau , R . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( 1982 ) . Understanding and appreciating metaphors . Cognition , 11 , 203 - 244 . [ 21 ] Tseng , I . , Moss , J . , Cagan , J . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2008 ) . The role of timing and analogical similarity in the stimulation of idea generation in design . Design Studies , 29 , 203 - 221 . [ 22 ] Van Rompay , T . J . L . ( 2008 ) . Product expression : Bridging the gap between the symbolic and the concrete . In H . N . J . Schifferstein , & P . Hekkert ( Eds . ) , Product experience ( pp . 333 - 352 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . [ 23 ] Vosniadou , S . ( 1989 ) . Analogical reasoning as a mechanism in knowledge acquisition : a developmental perspective . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and Analogical Reasoning ( pp . 413 - 437 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .