Why Blind - Variation Selective - Retention is an Inappropriate Explanatory Framework for Creativity Comment on “Creative thought as Blind - variation and Selective - retention : Combinatorial Models of Exceptional Creativity” by Dean Keith Simonton Liane Gabora University of British Columbia 2 Abstract Simonton is attempting to salvage the Blind Variation Selective Retention theory of creativity ( often referred to as the Darwinian theory of creativity ) by dissociating it from Darwinism . This is a necessary move for complex reasons outlined in detail elsewhere . However , whether or not one calls BVSR a Darwinian theory , it is still a variation - and - selection theory . Variation - and - selection was put forward to solve a certain kind of paradox , that of how biological change accumulates ( that is , over generations , species become more adapted to their environment ) despite being discarded at the end of each generation ( that is , parents don’t transmit to offspring knowledge or bodily changes acquired during their lifetimes , e . g . , you don’t inherit your mother’s ear piercings ) . This paradox does not exist with respect to creative thought . There is no discarding of acquired change when ideas are transmitted amongst individuals ; we share with others modified versions of the ideas we were exposed to on a regular basis . 3 Campbell was an important philosopher and an original thinker , and the endeavor to revitalize one of his more controversial ideas , the idea that creative thought proceeds through blind variation and selective retention ( BVSR ) is admirably ambitious . Simonton’s [ 7 ] book on the topic won awards , and in the Cambridge Handbook of Creativity , BVSR is described as : “arguably the most ambitious account of Big - C Creativity . It has contributed a very rich repository of results and ideas and numerous specific quantitative predictions , and many ( but not all ) of its claims boast substantial support” [ 6 ] . However , this paper , though interesting and well written , has serious problems . Simonton appears to be attempting to salvage BVSR by dissociating it from Darwinism . This is a necessary move for complex reasons that have been outlined in detail elsewhere ( Gabora [ 3 , 4 ] ) , albeit a significant departure from previous writings by Campbell and Simonton . The problem is : whether or not you call BVSR a Darwinian theory , it is still a variation - and - selection theory , and variation - and - selection was put forward to solve a certain kind of paradox , that of how biological change accumulates — that is , over generations , species become more adapted to their environment—despite being discarded at the end of each generation—that is , parents don’t transmit to offspring knowledge or bodily changes acquired during their lifetimes , e . g . you don’t inherit your mother’s ear piercings . This paradox does not exist with respect to creative thought . There is no discarding of acquired change when ideas are transmitted amongst individuals ; we share with others modified versions of the ideas we were exposed to on a regular basis ( see [ 4 ] ) . 4 Variation - and - selection is useful for explaining adaptive change when there is no mechanism for preferentially generating high quality variants . Lots of possibilities are randomly generated ( the variation - generating phase ) , and the weeding out occurs later , at the selection phase ( the variation - discarding phase ) . But with respect to creativity , there is no need for this kind of explanatory framework because the generation process is biased toward ideas that stand a good chance of being valuable . ( Indeed the author mentions several of the mechanisms responsible for this in this paper : expertise , remote associations , etc . ) The bottom line is that it is not clear what a variation – selection framework buys you with respect to creativity beyond more conventional two - stage theories such as Finke , Ward , and Smith’s [ 2 ] Geneplore model , which proposes that creativity consists of a generative stage followed by an exploratory phase . Stripped of the explanatory strength of the Darwinian framework , what remains of BVSR is the hypothesis that creativity involves ‘blind variations’ and selection , but application of the concepts ‘blindness’ , ‘variation’ , and ‘selection’ to creativity are all questionable . It goes without saying that a creator does not know at the outset exactly how a creative task will be accomplished , so a theory of creativity that distinguishes itself on the basis of claims about ‘blindness’ seems less than useful . The appropriateness of the term ‘variation’ in biology stems from the fact that it is possible to accurately and objectively measure the relatedness of entities . Whether or not two organisms share a common ancestor is clear - cut ; they either are or are not descendents of a particular individual . But with respect to creativity , where concepts and ideas are constantly combined , contrasted , and reinterpreted in light on each other , there is no basis upon which to delineate those ideas that are or are not variants of a given idea . Simonton’s 5 application of the notion of selection is also problematic . The generation of one idea affects the conception of the task , and thus the criteria by which the next is judged . Therefore , successively generated ideas cannot be treated as members of a generation , and are not selected amongst . Creativity is perhaps what more than anything else separates human cognition from that of other species , and as such the development of theories of creativity both presents considerable challenges and holds considerable promise . BVSR is arguably one of the best - known efforts to explain creativity , and I imagine many will be interested to see its latest incarnation . However , it is not clear that this version of the theory successfully overcomes problems that were present in previous versions . References [ 1 ] Bowers KS , Farvolden P , Mermigis L . Intuitive antecedents of insight . In : Smith SM , Ward TB , Finke RA , editors . The creative cognition approach . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ; 1995 . p . 27 – 52 . [ 2 ] Finke R , Ward T , Smith S . Creative cognition : Theory , research and applications . Cambridge : MIT Press ; 1992 . [ 3 ] Gabora L . Creative thought as a non - Darwinian evolutionary process . Journal of Creative Behavior 2005 ; 39 ( 4 ) : 65 – 87 . 6 [ 4 ] Gabora L . Why the creative process is not Darwinian . Creativity Research Journal 2007 ; 19 ( 4 ) : 361 – 5 . [ 5 ] Gabora L . Revenge of the ‘neurds’ : Characterizing creative thought in terms of the structure and dynamics of human memory . Creativity Research Journal 2010 ; 22 ( 1 ) : 1 – 13 . [ 6 ] Kozbelt A , Beghetto RA , RuncoMA . Theories of creativity . In : Kaufman J , Sternberg R , editors . Cambridge handbook of creativity . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press , in press . [ 7 ] Simonton DK . Origins of genius : Darwinian perspectives on creativity . Oxford : Oxford University Press ; 1999 . [ 8 ] Simonton DK . Creative thought as blind - variation and selective - retention : Combinatorial models of exceptional creativity . Physics of Life Reviews 2010 ; 7 ( 2 ) , in press , this issue .