StoryKit : Designing a Mobile Application for Story Creation By Children And Older Adults Alexander J . Quinn 1 , Benjamin B . Bederson 1 , Elizabeth M . Bonsignore 2 , Allison Druin 2 University of Maryland 1 Department of Computer Science 2 College of Information Studies Human - Computer Interaction Lab College Park , MD 20742 USA Contact : aq @ cs . umd . edu ABSTRACT As the capabilities of smartphones and similar mobile devices advance , opportunities increase to use them for meaningful creative tasks . Incorporating text , images , and sounds in documents is commonplace when using desktop office or graphics software . However , multimedia authoring interfaces for mobile devices remain undeveloped . Working with a participatory design group composed of children , older adults , and researchers , we developed StoryKit , an iPhone application for creating and sharing audio - visual stories on an iPhone . Our initial goal was to support children making stories together with older adults as a form of informal learning . To that end , it lets users create books on the touchscreen device by arranging their text , photos , drawings , and sounds on pages , and then sharing them via e - mail and the web . The design of StoryKit uncovered solutions to several general interface challenges that affect a wide range of mobile authoring applications . Thus , we think elements of the StoryKit interaction design may serve as a starting point for developers of mobile document authoring applications . Author Keywords Multimedia authoring , story telling , story authoring , participatory design , integenerational design , mobile authoring . ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Creativity continues to be an essential skill in the emerging creative economy [ 12 ] . Since scientific and technological creativity are tightly intertwined with cultural and artistic creativity [ 31 ] , developing tools for creative expression can help all members of society [ 5 ] . Thus , ensuring open access to creativity - enabling technology is crucial for supporting social equality in the creative economy . With the global proliferation of mobile devices showing no boundaries , we are especially interested in creating mobile creative authoring tools . Storytelling is a creative activity that crosses all cultural boundaries . Numerous research projects [ e . g . , 11 , 16 , 22 , etc . ] and commercial applications [ 26 , 30 , etc . ] have sought to empower users to tell their stories anytime and anywhere , using mobile devices to incorporate the sights , sounds , and ideas encountered in their daily lives . Unfortunately , existing mobile applications lack the kind of content manipulation flexibility found on the desktop , thus limiting the degree to which users can mix and arrange their text , photographs , sounds , and other media to create more sophisticated representations of their ideas in the moment . Most research has been focused on social dynamics of collaboration and sharing [ 4 , 11 ] , the semantics of the composition process [ 22 ] , or on novel presentation mediums [ 12 ] . Meanwhile , the need for stable , general user interface models for mobile authoring persists . On the desktop side , interface models are well - established . When users want to create posters , booklets , slides , and collages , they have countless desktop applications to choose from . Each offers a slightly different way of manipulating the content , but most share basic commonalities that users have come to expect . Images and text are bounded by frames that are moved and resized by dragging from the Figure 1 . A child and her grandmother make a story together on an iPhone . edges . A toolbar selects between tools that can be used to act on specific elements within the document . If a document contains multiple pages , they are arranged in a scrolling panel . These pages can be added , moved , or deleted via the application menu or a side panel , or by simply adding or deleting content at the end of the document . We created StoryKit , a mobile application for story authoring that runs on the Apple iPhone . The design came out of a year - long participatory design process with an intergenerational group composed of children and older adults [ 9 ] . Besides creating the application , we wanted to develop solutions to some of the interface issues that currently challenge most other mobile multimedia authoring applications . StoryKit illustrates these solutions . Initially , our goal was to find out if children , working together with older adults , could edit and create storybooks on mobile devices , and in the process , reap the educational benefits of such informal education experiences . In previous research , we had found that reading scanned children ' s books on the same device was indeed feasible [ 3 ] and that the text could be made readable in the smaller format by incorporating the ClearText method of resizing text within the context of a scanned book page [ 27 ] . With that as a starting point , we set out to design a new application interface to answer the current question . Users create electronic storybooks with StoryKit by entering text , recording and attaching sounds , taking photographs , drawing illustrations on the device ' s touchscreen , or drawing pictures on paper and then photographing that . Users can also attach existing photographs from the device ' s built - in photo album , which in turn can easily be clipped from the web . In addition to creating new books , users can edit existing books , starting with scanned books from the International Children ' s Digital Library ( www . childrenslibrary . com ) [ 8 ] and changing it into a new story . The users ' creations can be shared by uploading to a server and then sending a private web address to the story by e - mail directly from the phone . StoryKit can be downloaded from the iPhone app store by searching for “storykit” in the iPhone App Store . The key contribution of this paper is not the StoryKit application itself , but rather the interaction design lessons learned in the process of building it . These lessons form design guidelines which are applicable to mobile applications for authoring a variety of content , including stories , photo collages , multimedia messages , presentation slides , cartoons , and other kinds of multipage documents . We present improved methods for : • Arranging text and multimedia content on a canvas using a touchscreen , • Creating rich electronic artifacts ( i . e . stories , collages , slides , etc . ) that are also viewed in the same application using some simpler viewing interface , and / or • Sharing creations in a lightweight manner with consideration for users ' privacy . RELATED WORK Many aspects of the prevailing interaction model for manipulating text boxes , image boxes , and other object based content can be traced to the document manipulation facilities of the Xerox Star . Dragging one part of a box or application window moves its location . Dragging the edge resizes it . However , just as Johnson points out in his retrospective view of the Star [ 17 ] , ultimately the ability of the user to do work with the system is determined not by such coarse capabilities , but by thoughtful attention to the interface details and the way tasks are accomplished . Bulterman [ 4 ] surveys several paradigms for structuring content in multimedia authoring in general ( presumably on a desktop computer ) , distinguished by the way the user relates the various multimedia objects ( i . e . chronologically , spatially , hierarchically , etc . ) , which in turn determines the way the rest of the software guides the user to complete an authoring task . It was with the same spirit that we guided the design of StoryKit such that the operations necessary to edit or create a book and its constituent content are determined by the structure of the story . Some research has focused on mobile authoring in specific modalities . For example , Koskinen discusses the range of uses of sound in mobile authoring , distinguishing between intentional and non - intentional sound recording ( i . e . singing versus laughter ) and also between foreground sounds and ambient sounds ( i . e . speaking versus background music ) [ 21 ] . Fröhlich has thoroughly study the space of audiophotographs , a fusion of plain printed photographs with audio recordings taken at the time of photography [ 15 ] . A field trial of an audiophotography prototype found that associating sounds with photographs synergistically enlivened both the sounds and the photographs , and also enhanced the memories associated with the events [ 14 ] . StoryKit also supports users to associate sounds with their stories . Context photography , proposed by Ljungblad , is an idea for augmenting photographs taken with cell phone cameras with data taken with motion and location sensors on the phone [ 23 ] . Mobile authoring and editing of video was studied by Wu , who found that users can reasonably edit video on a PDA device using the key frames and that users preferred location over time , as a way to refer to video segments [ 32 ] . They also explored the technical challenges of uploading video from a mobile device and developed an aggressive uploading algorithm to decide when and what to upload . In the case of StoryKit , we have similar technical challenges because the iPhone hardware is still not powerful enough to comfortably support real - time compression of the sound recordings . Thus , some users may end up waiting for a large WAV sound files to be transmitted over a slow cell carrier network if they share a story with a lot of sound where a faster Wi - Fi wireless connection is not available . SandBoxes is a mobile application for creating collaborative collages of text , images , and sound [ 13 ] . Somewhat similar to StoryKit , it allows the juxtaposition of different kinds of media in one view . However , where StoryKit focuses on the challenges of creating substantial multi - page books , SandBoxes was more of an experiment in novel presentation of small single - page artifacts , such as might be sent by some future version of MMS . Also , its text facilities were designed primarily for adding short captions to photographs , rather than substantial storylines , thus avoiding some of the issues that this papers deals with . Somewhat more similar to the work in this paper , the Mobile Multimedia Presentation Editor allows users to create comic strips , something akin to an illustrated storybook , containing photographs , sounds , and text [ 10 ] . However , their stories include a temporal element somewhat analogous to a PowerPoint presentation with automatic timing . Another key distinction , similar to SandBoxes , is that they were working with less sophisticated hardware with a smaller screen , specifically a 176×208 - pixel ( compared to the iPhone ' s 320×480 - pixel screen ) that does not support touchscreen interactions . Like this work , they endeavored to understand how users want to offer their creations and they focused on refinement of the interface , rather than more social or semantic aspects of storytelling , as many other projects do . They developed four design principles for mobile multimedia authoring , which were all guiding principles in the design of StoryKit : a ) flexibility ; b ) awareness of the task context ; c ) expressiveness ; and ( d ) personalization . Mobile blogging , also akin to story authoring , was studied by Beale as a means to match the capabilities of smart phones with the practice of sharing photos and experiences on blogs with a streamlined interface [ 2 ] . StoryBank , another example of simplified mobile interfaces for storytelling , deployed cell phones with simplified story authoring software – a single photo and a single sound clip per page – to rural villages in India to record local folklore from residents , some of whom were unable to read or write . Children ' s storytelling has long been an integral part of the storytelling literature . Madej provides a detailed account of the history of children ' s storytelling [ 24 ] . An early system example was Kim ' s Isis Story Builder , a desktop application which enabled children to create stories using electronic a building blocks , containing multimedia objects [ 20 ] . KidPad was a collaborative story authoring tool for children that ran on the desktop [ 10 ] . A key feature was that it enabled children to create nonlinear stories using zooming to transition between different contexts . The impact of this method was studied by Boltman , who found that spatial representations of stories helped children develop elaboration skills [ 4 ] . KidPad was also used by the KidStory project , which mixed various mediums to allow children to tell their stories . Cole showed how to enable copresent collaboration by displaying stories on an overhead projector [ 5 ] . Later , the KidStory project enabled children to draw scenes from their story on PDAs and then upload them to the desktop for use in KidPad [ 29 ] . However , at that point , the collaboration was only supported on the desktop side . Fails showed how to use mobile devices to enable children to read and create other stories collaboratively , with each child holding a separate device and the devices showing either a synchronized display or complementary displays ( i . e . the left and right pages of a book ) [ 11 ] . Although StoryKit was also designed with collaboration in mind , StoryKit still assumes that the users will create the stories together on one device , where Fails ' work assumes separate , connected devices . Some special - purpose devices have been developed with the sole goal of enabling users to tell their stories , without respect to authoring . Mäkelä studied how children prefer to communicate using digital photographs for fun and gave design recommendations , among them to enable children to create sets of images and annotate them with text and / or audio [ 25 ] . For adults , Balabanovi created a device to facilitate photo sharing , well before technology like the iPhone was widespread [ 1 ] . InStory was another early mobile example , but blended games , storytelling , and information access in a PDA device [ 6 ] . The iTell system was a desktop software application that endeavored to strengthen users ' ability to tell stories retrospectively using digital photos [ 22 ] . Even larger , Shen described a design for a multiuser tabletop device for sharing photographs as part of personal storytelling [ 28 ] . DESIGN StoryKit was designed by an intergenerational participatory design group composed of 6 children ( ages 8 through 11 ) , 6 older adults , and 6 researchers , including the authors . Over the course of one year , we met six times , including one field trial described later . In two sessions , only the children participated . Design sessions were held in a university research lab using the cooperative inquiry approach [ 10 ] . Because the iPhone is a cell phone requiring a service contract , about half of the devices used were iPhones and half were iPod Touch devices , which support the same software and touchscreen platform , but lack a camera , microphone , and speaker . Each iPod Touch was fitted with a snap - on speaker / microphone accessory . Illustrations using touch drawing were possible with all devices . One of the design sessions is shown in Figure 2 . In the first session , the participants tried other applications on the devices to develop an understanding of the iPhone interface paradigm . We also used the devices to read books using our reading application [ 9 ] . Having tried reading books on the device , we asked them how they would imagine creating books . The participants split into small groups and prepared sticky notes with their ideas . The ideas ranged from very specific to imaginative and scientifically infeasible . We discussed the suggestions as a group and then put them on a whiteboard , grouping similar ideas together to cooperatively find some ideas that the group mostly agreed on . Finally , the participants split into small groups again and made sketches and low - tech prototypes of how they ' d like to create stories . A typical example of the sketches they made is shown in Figure 3 . In subsequent sessions , they tried making stories using the latest version of the application . At each session , participants stretched the expressive capabilities of that version of the application and were engaged in making their stories . Several of the early versions had implementation bugs and the participants complained passionately if the bugs cause them to lose parts of their stories . At each session , they give us specific suggestions for the next round of fixes and new features . In most cases , they created low - tech prototypes to help us understand their ideas . At times , we found that following a series of fine - grained suggestions led to an overall design that didn ' t fit the higher - level design vision of the group , so we rewrote sections of the code . The final session was held in a large park where the children and their older adult partners could spread out and make stories without interference from each other , using animals and other natural elements from the park world as inspiration or photographic subjects for their stories . Participants made elaborate stories consisting of many pages using photographs , drawings , sounds , and extended text narratives . Because it was necessary to develop an entire application from scratch , we had to solve several significant design challenges . The solutions came as the result of all parties – children , older adults , and researchers – using their respective strengths to come to the best design possible . The impact of the children’s advice was directly influential especially on the higher level choices of features , such as how to select colors in the paint mode , how to arrange content on the screen , and how to handle sound . The elders gave us very clear advice on issues such as how they wanted to enter text and how they wanted to share verbal stories using the sound recording . The researchers discussed all of the suggestions and ideas and then developed ways to realize them in code with the available technology . This included many of the lower level implementation details of the interface . We now describe the six primary lessons we learned . Figure 2 . Our intergenerational design group worked in a lab to refine the design of StoryKit . Figure 3 . Description of a few interface ideas drawn by a child during one of the design sessions . Design guideline # 1 : Resizing content The iPhone uses a ubiquitous pinch gesture for adjusting zoom level of a canvas , such as a map or photograph . Treating each visual object as an individual canvas , it is natural to use the pinch gesture for resizing objects . Although this may seem nearly identical to dragging the edges of the frame on a desktop computer , if the user makes an object smaller than the area of two fingertips , it is not possible to enlarge the object in the same way . Therefore , we adopt a one - on - one - off pinch - resize strategy . If the user places one finger on any object , that object is selected and temporarily gets locked input focus . The other finger can be placed anywhere else on the screen to resize the selected object . When both fingers leave the screen , the object is deselected . The one - on - one - off pinch - drag gesture is illustrated in Figure 4 . Controlling the size and position of the object during the pinch gesture is also impractical given a naïve approach . It might seem intuitive to have the object track the fingertips such that the fingertips always remain in the same relative location within the box . However , implementing it in that way results in erratic changes in size and position . If the gap between the fingertips covers only a small proportion of the object , then moving them a small amount will resize the object as a whole by a large amount , resulting in an overly erratic user experience . For example , in Figure 5a , the fingertips cover ¼ the horizontal size of the object . With the naïve approach ( Figure 5b ) , if the user did an expanding pinch gesture increasing the width of the gap between the fingertips by 30 pixels , the width of the object would increase by 120 pixels . Also , assuming the naïve approach , the overall position of the object would also change when the two fingers move , even if the user just wanted to resize . When movements are very small relative to the size of the fingertips , such fine control is difficult . The compromise approach implemented in StoryKit ( Figure 5c ) is to adjust the size of the object by the same number of pixels that the two fingertips move ( i . e . 30 pixels horizontally ) , without scaling to account for the fingertips ' position relative to the object ' s bounds . Also , in this design , objects are only resized ( not moved ) when two fingers are in contact , and only moved ( not resized ) when one finger is in contact with the screen . The advantage of this approach is that the user has more fine control , even when resizing the object from the center . Also , this gives the user separate control for resizing and repositioning . The disadvantage is that the object does not perfectly track the fingertips , so it may feel unnatural to some users . Design guideline # 2 : Attaching sound There are numerous potential ways sound could be incorporated into a page of the storybook , but many possibilities are made impractical by inherent characteristics of the mobile device . If a single sound were associated with each page , then it would need to be long enough to accommodate as much sound or dialog as the user wanted to record . However , this would present a problem when designing undo and redo because there would be no clear feedback about what version of the sound was active . We also considered using a graphical waveform or a counter with the number of seconds in the time clip , but neither of these have any true semantic connection to the user ' s story so we would expect them to be confusing . Another problem with this naïve approach is that if the user turns on record and forgets to stop it , a very large file would be created , taking up limited space on the device and adding to the time required to transmit the stories contents to a server for sharing or archiving . Because of the device ' s limited CPU and the need to reduce overall CPU consumption in order to conserve the battery , the iPhone is not able to encode audio to MP3 or similar formats in real time , so all data must be saved and transmitted uncompressed . Figure 4 . One - on - one - off pinch resizing allows users to resize objects that are two small to manipulate with both fingers at once . Our solution was to enable the user to create multiple sound clips for each page and move them around to associate them with elements in the illustration or text . Each clip is limited to one minute of recording , but an unlimited number of clips may be added to a page . To change or rerecord a sound clip , the user must delete the old sound clip and create a new one . Although this creates an extra step , it saves the ambiguity that would be associated with undo and redo operations of a sound edit . Since the sounds can be dragged over elements in the story , each version is automatically associated with something meaningful to the user . If the user does not reposition a sound , each successive sound is initially positioned along the lower edge of the screen , and moving up as more sounds are added . For example , if the user creates a sound and then re - records it by deleting it ( or undoing its addition ) and creating a new sound , the new sound will appear in a different position so the user can still differentiate between the two versions using spatial memory . Design guideline # 3 : Arbitrary amounts of text We needed to allow the user to add any amount of text . If the design mimicked the expectations of desktop computers , the user might set a size for the text box and then enter the text directly into the text box . However , on a touch interface with only an on - screen physical keyboard , the keyboard occupies about half of the screen . For a large text box , it would be impossible to see the whole thing at full size while typing . Therefore , text entry must be done on a separate text editing screen , without regard to the size of the container . Thus , restricting the amount of text would amount to an opaque restriction . Furthermore , for the public domain books that are included with the StoryKit application , the text was decided by the author of the physical book . If the interface allowed users to enter text directly into the object on the page , then if the user entered a lot of text into a small text box , not all of the text could be visible . This issue was solved by making all text boxes scrollable . When reading a story in StoryKit , if the text overflows the size of the container , it can be scrolled by flicking vertically on the text box . Stories shared on the web also enable scrolling when necessary using DHTML . One drawback to this solution is that if the story is printed or converted to a static PDF file , the overflow text will not be visible . However , since such a presentation also does not support sound playback , this limitation is unavoidable for a mobile multimedia authoring application . Design guideline # 4 : Smooth story creation flow With a desktop application , a new text box or image might be placed in arbitrary locations on the page by the user . StoryKit was initially implemented like this . When children or adults created stories alone , they said they enjoyed the flexibility and the content in the stories they created was carefully arranged . However , we noticed that when they were working together , they were communicating more about text and images they wanted to put in the stories , but spent much less effort arranging things on the page . Having to position each element manually was an interruption and led to visually sloppy stories . Because of the lack of similar mobile applications to compare with , we again considered how new content is positioned in desktop applications . In some , the user selects a tool from a toolbar ( i . e . a new text box tool , etc . ) and drags with a mouse in the content area to define the new text box ' s position . Dragging to select or draw new ( a ) Start state ( just before user does pinch gesture ) ( b ) Naïve method ( BAD ) . Object tracks fingers . Although fingers move by only a small distance , the object changes by 4× as much because the fingers cover only ¼ of the box in each direction . ( c ) StoryKit method ( GOOD ) . Total change in the object size is the same as the pinch gap change . Figure 5 . Comparing the StoryKit method of resizing with the naïve method . The yellow stars denote the effective point where the fingertips contact the touchscreen . rectangles is not a natural part of the interface model on this device , probably because unlike a mouse , which stops at the edge of the screen , a finger cannot easily start and stop a selection rectangle at the edges of the screen . Furthermore , with a touch - based interface , it is not possible to change the cursor shape to indicate that a special tool ( mode ) has been selected , so this would likely lead to confusion . The solution we chose was to start with some default positioning rules that would look reasonable if left unchanged , but still leave the user the flexibility to reposition content as desired . In this case , given a blank page , a new text box is positioned in the lower half of the page and a new image is positioned in the upper half of the page . If there is already content in the default location for the new item , it is placed in the other half of the screen , unless that is also occupied . If both halves of the screen are occupied , a new photograph is allowed to overlap with a text box , since photographs are always positioned in a layer under text boxes . Since hidden defaults can potentially create an opaque mental model , this was among the most difficult design decisions . Although we considered giving the user a way to choose the default page layout , this would have added extra options and clutter to the application . After making the change , the participants in the design group said that it was easier to mix different kinds of content . The stories they created after the design was changed were remarkably neater than before . However , one negative consequence of this policy is that it works best if photographs are square ( aspect ratio of 1 . 0 ) , rather than occupying the whole screen . Therefore , after taking a photograph , the application presents a screen where the photograph is cropped to be square and the user has an opportunity to pan or resize the portion of the original rectangular photograph that remains . Again , it might be possible to create a software option , but for a mobile application , simplicity takes priority over flexibility . Design guideline # 5 : Reading mode While creating a story , tapping most regions of the page results in an action to the page content ( i . e . moving an image , taking a photograph , undo / redo , etc . ) . There are two buttons for moving backward and forward in the book . This density of hotspots is a necessity due to the small screen area , but this would be very distracting when reading a story that is finished or showing it to someone else . Thus , a separate reading mode is required . Initially , we had a button to switch between reading and editing mode on each page . During the discussions , the participants said they were often confused about which mode they were in . We discussed the issue with them , but ultimately addressing the issue required restructuring of the application flow . The final version of StoryKit creates a deeper separation between reading and editing modes . After selecting a book , the user is presented with an option to read , edit , or share the book , along with a set of thumbnails for jumping to specific pages . To edit the book , the user taps Edit , and is then presented with another screen from which pages can be added , rearranged , or deleted . From there , tapping on a specific page opens editing mode to that page . An advantage of this approach is that it puts facilities for adding , deleting , and rearranging pages close in the interface hierarchy to the screen for editing page content . A disadvantage is that switching from editing mode to reading mode requires some extra taps . Design guideline # 6 : Sharing creations privately When creating applications for children or others for whom privacy is a concern , requiring personal information to create an account and share the creations or use basic features should be avoided . This is especially important where a child’s personally identifiable information may be included – which is likely in StoryKit since stories are likely to include pictures and sounds of the creators . Creating the account may be a significant burden for mobile users . For example , the user ' s usual place for storing passwords may not be convenient when using a mobile device away from home or the office . We chose to keep extra overhead of sharing to an absolute minimum . When the user taps the Share button , there is a brief privacy notification ( that their story will be sent to our servers ) , after which the story is synced with the server using a book key comprised of a combination of the device’s unique identifier ( not traceable to the user ) and the book ID . When it is finished , the server returns a private URL for viewing the story and the application pops up a mail composition screen with which the user can e - mail that link directly to a recipient . The link is designed to be resistant to guessing and is not linked to anywhere . Therefore , the story can only be viewed on the web by someone who has received that e - mail from the user . FIELD USE As the final activity with the intergenerational design group , we used StoryKit at a historical national park that features a wide variety of farm animals and equipment to experience and stimulate stories . In addition to the usual design group members , five additional children and four additional older adults joined the activity . Two of the usual older adult design group members were absent so some of the children made their stories with graduate student researchers . Children worked in pairs with an adult while researchers observed and helped organize the activity . The ages of the group members ranged from 4 to 77 years old . Throughout the day , all of the groups made meaningful stories and all participants contributed . The stories incorporated text narratives , photographs of animals ( with iPhones ) , sound recordings of animals , and drawings . A typical example of the stories from that day is shown in Figure 7 . In many cases , the children took photographs during active parts of the day ( e . g . milking a cow ) and then incorporated them into their stories later , together with their elder partners . In some cases , one would create illustrations or photographs while the other would enter the text of the story , with no particular bias toward the child or older adult member doing one or the other . The stories utilized the positioning of content to mix photos , drawings , text , and sounds to enhance the creative expression of the story . Some stories were narratives of the events of the day . Others were fictional compositions unrelated to the farm . Still others blended animals or elements from the park with imaginative ideas to create something new . Despite a hayride and a cow - milking experience , none of the devices were lost at the farm ! Near the end of the day , a researcher conducted semi - structured interviews with four of the elder participants . The responses expressed satisfaction with their experience with the device . When asked , “What feature or features did you like most about the StoryKit application ? ” responses included : " The fact that it’s all in one – the fact that you can do it all in one – it’s a little publishing tool right there in your hand . " " I liked being able to put the images and the text together right away . That was important , the integrative function – we could get words and pictures right now on the page . " “The art / drawing tools and the recording – each is good I like both together . ” However , although all groups used the positioning to create their stories , one older adult found it cumbersome , saying : “We were having trouble moving and placing text . . . The process itself was very clear , but the doing of it was difficult . ” Regarding the cooperative story authoring experience , one commented : “It was a cooperative thing , There wasn’t anything too hard for us to do together . . . . . I liked the fact that I remembered the " A " icon was for typing , and then [ kid ' s name ] was able to remember how to use it , and then I could help him spell what he wanted to say . ” Two challenges emerged through our use of the application . First , some children and older adults found the touchscreen software keyboard to be cumbersome . Comments included : “My frustration was the small keypad , keyboard – it’s a very seems difficult – [ child partner ] with her tiny fingers had no trouble at all . ” " He [ i . e . , child partner ] showed me how to type – I was not as fast because my hands are a little big . . . . " All were able to use it , but some expressed difficulty . The keyboard is a part of the device and cannot be changed by developers . Also , one of the older adults participants expressed frustration with the one - minute time limit imposed on sound clips , saying : “A minute is a little short – but 2 minutes – it would be kind of fun to see what you would like to say in about 2 minutes . ” CONCLUSION Through this experience , we have demonstrated the capability to use an intergenerational participatory design group to develop mobile software for use by children and older adults . Furthermore , through the development of StoryKit , solutions emerged to interaction challenges that limit the expressive range of other applications . Now is an exciting time to be developing mobile creativity - supporting applications because of the surge in adoption of convergence mobile devices that have the ability to support such uses . As the cost of the devices gradually comes down , we expect to see even broader adoption . Never before has a handheld served as a sufficient substitute for a desktop computer for so many different kinds of tasks . Although creative authoring applications for mobile devices are blossoming , usability issues limit the scale of what users can create with them . As we have shown , often the most obvious design is not the best . With the StoryKit design and this rationale , we hope to lay a foundation that will aid those who are trying to push the creative limits of what can be done on handheld touchscreen devices by offering our interaction model as a starting point . Having gained experience with the tool during the design sessions , we are now planning a case study to understand StoryKit can facilitate story creation and informal learning by children working with older adults in their environments . In addition , we plan to continue to refine the interaction details and perform controlled studies to compare our implementations with the naïve methods and with tools developed by others in the near future . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work could not have been accomplished without the support of the National Science Foundation ( # 0839222 ) . Figure 6 . A child and his grandfather create a story together . We also thank our design partners and colleagues in the lab : Alexandra , Aviva , Beth , Brody , Caitlin , Charles , Chloe , Dana , Evan , Greg , Jackie , Jerry , Leshell , Matthew , Mona Leigh , Myles , Naja , Pam , Ruby , Sasha , Sonny , Stan , Stephen , Steven , Tara , Tom , and Wendy . Finally , we thank Anne Rose for essential technical support and advice . REFERENCES 1 . Balabanovi , M . , Chu , L . L . , and Wolff , G . J . Storytelling with digital photographs . Proc . Of The SIGCHI Conf . On Human Factors In Comp . Systems , ACM ( 2000 ) , 564 - 571 . 2 . Beale , R . Mobile blogging : experiences of technologically inspired design . CHI ' 06 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2006 ) , 225 - 230 . 3 . Bederson , B . B . , Quinn , A . , and Druin , A . Designing the reading experience for scanned multi - lingual picture books on mobile phones . Proceedings of the 9th ACM / IEEE - CS joint conference on Digital libraries , ACM ( 2009 ) , 305 - 308 . 4 . Boltman , A . ( October 2001 ) . Children ' s Storytelling Technologies : Differences in Elaboration and Recall . ( Ph . D . Dissertation , University of Maryland ) . 5 . Cole , H . and Stanton , D . Designing mobile technologies to support co - present collaboration . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 7 , 6 ( 2003 ) , 365 - 371 . 6 . Correia , N . , Alves , L . , Correia , H . , et al . InStory : a system for mobile information access , storytelling and gaming activities in physical spaces . Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCHI International Conf . on Advances in computer entertainment technology , ACM New York , NY , USA ( 2005 ) , 102 - 109 . Figure 7 . A story created during the field use at Oxon Hill Farm . 7 . Druin , A . 1999 . Cooperative inquiry : developing new technologies for children with children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , United States , May 15 - 20 , 1999 ) . CHI ' 99 . ACM , New York , NY , 592 - 599 . 8 . Druin , A . , Bederson , B . , Hourcade , J . , et al . Designing a digital library for young children : An intergenerational partnership . The craft of information visualization : readings and reflections , ( 2003 ) , 178 . 9 . Druin , A . , Bederson , B . B . , and Quinn , A . Designing intergenerational mobile storytelling . Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , ACM New York , NY , USA ( 2009 ) , 325 - 328 . 10 . Druin , A . , Stewart , J . , Proft , D . , Bederson , B . B . , Hollan , J . D ( 1997 ) . KidPad : A Design Collaboration Between Children , Technologists , and Educators . In Proc . of ACM Conf . on Human Factors in Comp . Systems ( CHI 1997 ) , pp 463 - 470 . 11 . Fails , J . Mobile Collaboration for Young Children . ( PhD dissertation , University of Maryland , 2009 ) . 12 . Florida , R . The rise of the creative class : and how it ' s transforming work , leisure , community and everyday life . Basic Books , 2004 . 13 . Fono , D . and Counts , S . Sandboxes : supporting social play through collaborative multimedia composition on mobile phones . Proc . of the 2006 20th anniversary conference on Computer supported cooperative work , ACM ( 2006 ) , 163 - 166 . 14 . Frohlich , D . and Tallyn , E . Audiophotography : practice and prospects . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM New York , NY , USA ( 1999 ) , 296 - 297 . 15 . Frohlich , D . A . Bringing Photos to Life with Sounds . London : Kluwer , 2004 . 16 . Frohlich , D . M . , Rachovides , D . , Riga , K . , et al . StoryBank : mobile digital storytelling in a development context . Proc . of the 27th Int’l Conf . on Human factors in computing systems , ACM New York , NY , USA ( 2009 ) , 1761 - 1770 . 17 . Johnson , J . , Roberts , T . L . , Verplank , W . , et al . The Xerox Star : A Retrospective . Computer 22 , 9 ( 1989 ) , 11 - 26 , 28 - 29 . 18 . Jokela , T . , Lehikoinen , J . T . , and Korhonen , H . Mobile multimedia presentation editor : enabling creation of audio - visual stories on mobile devices . Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2008 ) , 63 - 72 . 19 . Jones , M . , Harwood , W . , Buchanan , G . , and Lalmas , M . StoryBank : an indian village community digital library . Proceedings of the 7th ACM / IEEE - CS joint conference on Digital libraries , ACM New York , NY , USA ( 2007 ) , 257 - 258 . 20 . Kim , M . Y . Creative multimedia for children : Isis story builder . Conf . Comp . on Human Factors in Comp . Sys , ACM ( 1995 ) . 21 . Koskinen , Thinking About Sound in Mobile Multimedia , UBICOMP PICS Workshop , 2006 . 22 . Landry , B . M . and Guzdial , M . iTell : supporting retrospective storytelling with digital photos . Proc . of the 6 th Conf . on Designing Interactive systems , ACM ( 2006 ) , 160 - 168 . 23 . Ljungblad , S . , Hakansson , M . , Gaye , L . , and Holmquist , L . E . Context photography : modifying the digital camera into a new creative tool . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM New York , NY , USA ( 2004 ) , 1191 - 1194 . 24 . Madej , K . Towards digital narrative for children : from education to entertainment , a historical perspective . Computers in Entertainment ( CIE ) 1 , 1 ( 2003 ) , 12 - 12 . 25 . Mäkelä , A . , Giller , V . , Tscheligi , M . , and Sefelin , R . Joking , storytelling , artsharing , expressing affection : a field trial of how children and their social network communicate with digital images in leisure time . Proc . Of The SIGCHI Conf . On Human Factors In Comp . Systems , ACM ( 2000 ) , 548 - 555 . 26 . Nokia , LifeBlogs , http : / / www . nokia . com / . 27 . Quinn , A . J . , Hu , C . , Arisaka , T . , Rose , A . , and Bederson , B . B . Readability of scanned books in digital libraries . Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2008 ) , 705 - 714 . 28 . Shen , C . , Lesh , N . , Moghaddam , B . , Beardsley , P . , and Bardsley , R . S . Personal digital historian : user interface design . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM New York , NY , USA ( 2001 ) , 29 - 30 . 29 . Stanton , D . and Neale , H . Designing mobile technologies to support collaboration . Personal and Ubiq . Comp . 7 , 6 ( 2003 ) . 30 . Whrrl . iPhone application in iTunes App Store . 9 / 2009 . 31 . United Nations ( 2008 ) , Creative Economy Report 2008 . The challenge of Assessing the Creative Economy : toward Informed Policy - making . Geneva 2008 . 32 . Wu , C . , Teng , C . J . , Chen , Y . , Lin , T . , Chu , H . , and Hsu , J . Y . Point - of - capture archiving and editing of personal experiences from a mobile device . Personal Ubiquitous Comput . 11 , 4 ( 2007 ) , 235 - 249 .