CBE—Life Sciences Education • 17 : fe5 , 1 – 4 , Summer 2018 17 : fe5 , 1 ABSTRACT Peer instruction , a form of active learning , is generally defined as an opportunity for peers to discuss ideas or to share answers to questions in an in - class environment , where they also have opportunities for further interactions with their instructor . When implementing peer instruction , instructors have many choices to make about group design , assignment format , and grading , among others . Ideally , these choices can be informed by research about the impact of these components of peer instruction on student learning . This essay describes an online , evidence - based teaching guide published by CBE—Life Sciences Edu - cation at http : / / lse . ascb . org / evidence - based - teaching - guides / peer - instruction . The guide provides condensed summaries of key research findings organized by teaching choices , summaries of and links to research articles and other resources , and actionable advice in the form of a checklist for instructors . In addition to describing key features of the guide , this essay also identifies areas in which further empirical studies are warranted . INTRODUCTION Peer instruction is a well - researched active - learning technique that has been widely adopted in college science classes . In peer instruction , the instructor poses a question with discrete options and gives students the chance to consider and record their answers individually , often by voting using clickers . Students then discuss their answers with neighbors , explaining their reasoning , before being given a chance to vote again . Finally , the instructor discusses the answer to the question , often soliciting input from the class . While instructors vary the exact implementation of this process—sometimes eliminating the individual voting process , sometimes using colored cards or a show of hands instead of clickers—the general process is an adaptation of the think – pair – share technique ( Crouch and Mazur , 2001 ) . Peer instruction can improve students’ conceptual understanding and problem - solving skills , an effect that has been observed in multiple disciplines , in courses at different levels , and with different instructors ( for a review , see Vickrey et al . , 2015 ) . Student response to peer instruction is generally positive ; students report that the technique helps them learn course material and that the immediate feedback it pro - vides is valuable . Peer instruction’s value as a teaching approach is unsurprising , as it incorporates many elements known to promote learning . It is a form of cooperative learning , which has been shown to increase student achievement , persistence , and attitudes toward science ( e . g . , Johnson and Johnson , 2009 ) . The peer instruction cycle provides oppor - tunities for all the elements that social interdependence theory identify as necessary for cooperative learning : individual action ; positive interdependence , wherein indi - vidual success is enhanced by the success of other group members ; promotive interac - tion , or actions by individuals to help other group members’ efforts ; and group pro - cessing ( Johnson and Johnson , 2009 ) . It explicitly incorporates opportunities for students to explain their reasoning and engage in argumentation , practices that help students integrate new information with existing knowledge and revise their mental models ( e . g . , Chi et al . , 1994 ) . In addition , as with many types of informal cooperative Jennifer K . Knight † and Cynthia J . Brame ‡ * † Department of Molecular , Cellular , and Developmental Biology , University of Colorado , Boulder , CO 80309 ; ‡ Center for Teaching and Department of Biological Sciences , Vanderbilt University , Nashville , TN 37203 Peer Instruction DOI : 10 . 1187 / cbe . 18 - 02 - 0025 * Address correspondence to : Cynthia J . Brame ( Cynthia . brame @ vanderbilt . edu ) . © 2018 J . K . Knight and C . J . Brame . CBE—Life Sciences Education © 2018 The American Society for Cell Biology . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . It is available to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® ” and “The American Society for Cell Biology ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . CBE Life Sci Educ June 1 , 2018 17 : fe5 EVIDENCE - BASED TEACHING GUIDES 17 : fe5 , 2 CBE—Life Sciences Education • 17 : fe5 , Summer 2018 J . K . Knight and C . J . Brame learning , peer instruction provides opportunities for formative assessment with immediate feedback and thus incorporates opportunities for students to be metacognitive , monitoring their understanding and reflecting on misunderstanding ( McDonnell and Mullally , 2016 ) . In implementing peer instruction , instructors have many choices to make that can impact students’ experience . In this article , we describe an evidence - based teaching guide that condenses , summarizes , and provides actionable advice from research findings ( including many articles from CBE—Life Sciences Education ) . It can be accessed at http : / / lse . ascb . org / evidence - based - teaching - guides / peer - instruction . The guide has several features intended to help instructors : a landing page that indicates starting points for instructors ( Figure 1 ) , syntheses of observations from the literature , summaries of and links to selected papers ( Figure 2 ) , and an instructor checklist that details recommendations and points to consider . The guide is meant to aid instructors as they implement peer instruction and may also benefit researchers new to this area . Some of the questions that serve to orga - nize the guide are highlighted below . WHAT TYPES OF QUESTIONS SHOULD BE USED ? There are a few clear recommendations about the types of questions that are particularly beneficial in peer instruc - tion . First , questions should be chal - lenging enough to provoke interest and discussion , and the greatest gains are seen with the most difficult questions ( Knight et al . , 2013 ; Zingaro and Porter , 2014 ) . Importantly , question difficulty is not necessarily defined by the level of cognitive activity a student engages in to answer the question ( e . g . , Bloom’s application vs . evaluation levels ) . Ques - tions that require lower - order cognitive skills can promote as robust peer discussion as those that require higher - order skills , with discussions on both poten - tially leading to conceptual change ( Knight et al . , 2013 ; Lemons and Lemons , 2013 ) . Further , questions that uncover misconceptions can have particular benefits ( Modell et al . , 2005 ) , in that they expose students to a commonly held incorrect idea and then give them opportunity to discover why that idea is incorrect . Several sources report on different types of questions that instructors use in peer instruction but do not explicitly investigate benefits or limitations of the different types of questions ( e . g . , Turpen and Finkelstein , 2009 , and others within the Question Structure and Purpose section of the guide ) . For example , conceptual questions can be based on applications , case studies , or procedures . Alternatively , questions may be logistical , recall , or algorithmic rather than conceptual . Question format can also vary ; questions are often one best answer multiple choice , but formats such as multiple true – false and free response and questions that promote drawing can also provide benefits . Thus , there are several areas still prime for investi - gation regarding the questions used in peer instruction : V Are there question types or formats that are particularly effective at help - ing students meet particular types of outcomes ? For example , do questions that ask students to illustrate their ideas , or constructively build theoreti - cal models , impact student learning ? V What combinations of question cog - nitive level ( e . g . , Bloom’s level ) and difficulty help promote self - efficacy , conceptual change , and conceptual understanding ? Do different “levels” of questions promote some of these outcomes over others ? FIGURE 1 . Screenshot of the landing page of the guide , which provides readers with an overview of choice points . FIGURE 2 . Screenshot showing a summary of research findings and representative article summaries for one element of peer instruction . CBE—Life Sciences Education • 17 : fe5 , Summer 2018 17 : fe5 , 3 Peer Instruction Teaching Guide WHAT INSTRUCTIONAL PRACTICES PROMOTE PRODUCTIVE PEER INTERACTIONS ? Incentives for students to participate in peer instruction increase student engagement . Low - stakes grading incentives , in which correct and incorrect answers receive equal or very similar credit , result in more robust exchanges of reasoning and more equitable contribution of all group members to the discussion , whereas high - stakes grading incentives tend to lead to domi - nance of the discussion by a single group member ( e . g . , James , 2006 , and others within the Accountability section of the guide ) . Social incentives can also impact peer discussion . For example , randomly calling on groups to explain reasoning for an answer rather than asking for volunteers increases exchanges of reason - ing during peer discussion ( Knight et al . , 2016 ) . Instructor cues that encourage students to explain their rea - soning influence both student behavior and the classroom norms that students perceive . Thus , these cues can have a large impact on the nature of peer discussion ( Turpen and Finkel - stein , 2010 , and others in the Instructional Cues section of the guide ) . Specifically , instructor language that encourages stu - dents to explain their reasoning can lead to higher - quality peer discussion and greater use of scientific argumentation moves ( Knight et al . , 2013 ) . Further , instructor - led discussion of the answer after peer discussion provides clear benefits , particu - larly for weaker students and on more difficult questions ( Smith et al . , 2009 , 2011 ; Zingaro and Porter , 2014 ) . One common practice may have unintended negative conse - quences . Traditional implementation of peer instruction involves displaying the histogram of student responses after students answer individually but before peer discussion . Several lines of work suggest that this practice may bias students toward the most common answer and reduce the value of peer discussion ( Perez et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , instructors may choose to prompt peer discussion that focuses on reasoning before showing the response histogram , and only use the histogram as a summary of student choices after students have shared their reasoning . More generally , instructors have options in how they interact with small groups during peer discussion and during whole - class discussions ( Turpen and Finkelstein , 2009 , and others in the Instructional Cues section of the guide ) . For example , an instructor may sometimes stay in earshot of students but not engage with them during peer discussion to promote autonomy , and at other times may answer student questions or discuss possibilities with small groups . During the discussion of the solution , an instructor may sometimes explain the solution or , alternatively , may encourage students to jointly explain and evaluate the solution . By varying behavior during peer instruc - tion , instructors can provide students with opportunities to engage in a broader range of activities . Within this general rec - ommendation , there are several unanswered questions : V One of the steps that is most commonly omitted during peer instruction is the individual response ( Turpen and Finkel - stein , 2009 ) . Students have been reported to prefer the inclusion of individual thinking time , and it appears to increase discussion time ( Nicol and Boyle , 2003 ; Nielsen et al . , 2014 ) . What is the role of this step in promoting pro - ductive peer discussion ? Can objective measures of student learning be applied to determine its efficacy ? ( Vickrey et al . , 2015 ) . V Several studies indicate that students prefer to use personal response devices during peer instruction but that their use does not appear to impact students’ learning when com - pared with other reporting methods ( such as a show of hands or colored cards ) . The role of anonymity and its potential relationship to stereotype threat has not been investigated , however . Can peer instruction induce stereo - type threat , and if so , can the effect be mitigated by an anon - ymous reporting device or by other instructor interventions ? V Further , stereotype threat is most relevant when people are working at the edge of their ability ( O’Brien and Crandall 2003 ) , and it therefore seems more likely to be a factor for more difficult peer instruction questions . While active - learn - ing approaches have generally been shown to be particularly effective for students from underrepresented groups ( e . g . , Eddy and Hogan , 2014 ) , investigating the nuanced effects within particular groups of students can help instructors make effective choices ( Eddy et al . , 2015 ) . Can personal response devices , which afford anonymity , have particular value for more difficult questions ? WHAT CHALLENGES ARE ASSOCIATED WITH PEER INSTRUCTION ? Finally , it is important to note that there can be challenges to implementing peer instruction . As noted earlier , instructors implement peer instruction differently , leading to classroom norms that can work to enhance or detract from student learn - ing and affect student perceptions . Further , students have many different kinds of discussions during peer instruction , not all focused on the topic and not all centered around the concepts instructors intend . By its very nature , peer instruction allows exposure to others’ ideas , which can lead to better understand - ing but also potentially to shared misconceptions , an effect that may be enhanced among students who feel less confident in the classroom . Thus , the peer discussion part of each clicker ques - tion cycle is truly the key to successful peer instruction . Perhaps due to the reasons cited above , peer instruction does not uni - formly improve students’ course grades . However , it clearly improves students’ use of reasoning and argumentation skills ( Knight et al . , 2013 , 2016 ) , which may contribute to student learning in nonobvious ways . Avoiding the pitfalls discussed in this article and maximizing the benefits of peer instruction require that instructors carefully construct challenging ques - tions and intentionally promote classroom norms that value reasoning and argumentation . REFERENCES Chi , M . T . H . , de Leeuw , N . , Chiu , M - H . , & Lavancher , C . ( 1994 ) . Eliciting self - explanations improves understanding . Cognitive Science , 18 , 439 – 477 . Crouch , C . H . , & Mazur , E . ( 2001 ) . Peer instruction : Ten years of experience and results . American Journal of Physics , 69 , 970 . doi : 10 . 1119 / 1 . 1374249 Eddy , S . L . , Brownell , S . E . , Thummaphan , P . , Lan , M - C . , & Wenderoth , M . P . ( 2015 ) . Caution , student experience may vary : Social identities impact a ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge and thank Adele Wolfson and Kristy Wilson for their thoughtful review . We also thank William Pierce and Thea Clarke for their efforts in producing the Evidence - Based Teaching Guide website . 17 : fe5 , 4 CBE—Life Sciences Education • 17 : fe5 , Summer 2018 J . K . Knight and C . J . Brame student’s experience in peer discussions . CBE—Life Sciences Education , 14 , ar45 . Eddy , S . L . , & Hogan , K . A . ( 2014 ) . Getting under the hood : How and for whom does increasing course structure work ? CBE—Life Sciences Edu - cation , 13 , 453 – 468 . James , M . C . ( 2006 ) . The effect of grading incentive on student discourse in peer instruction . American Journal of Physics , 74 , 689 – 691 . Johnson , D . W . , & Johnson , R . T . ( 2009 ) . An educational psychology success story : Social interdependence theory and cooperative learning . Educa - tional Research , 38 , 365 – 379 . Knight , J . K . , Wise , S . B . , & Sieke , S . ( 2016 ) . Group random call can positively affect student in - class clicker discussions . CBE—Life Sciences Education , 15 ( 4 ) , ar56 . Knight , J . K . , Wise , S . B . , & Southard , K . M . ( 2013 ) . Understanding clicker dis - cussions : Student reasoning and the impact of instructional cues . CBE— Life Sciences Education , 12 , 645 – 654 . Lemons , P . P . , & Lemons , J . D . ( 2013 ) . Questions for assessing higher - order cog - nitive skills : It’s not just Bloom’s . CBE—Life Sciences Education , 12 , 47 – 58 . McDonnell , L . , & Mullally , M . ( 2016 ) . Research and teaching : Teaching stu - dents how to check their work while solving problems in genetics . Jour - nal of College Science Teaching , 46 , 68 – 75 . Modell , H . , Michael , J . , & Wenderoth , M . P . ( 2005 ) . Helping the learner to learn : The role of uncovering misconceptions . The American Biology Teacher , 67 , 20 – 26 . Nicol , D . J . , & Boyle , J . T . ( 2003 ) . Peer instruction versus class - wide discus - sion in large classes : A comparison of two interaction methods in the wired classroom . Studies in Higher Education , 28 , 458 – 473 . Nielsen , K . L . , Hansen , G . , & Stav , J . B . ( 2014 ) . How the initial thinking period affects student argumentation during peer instruction : Students’ experiences versus observations . Studies in Higher Education , 3 , 1 – 15 . O’Brien , L . T . , & Crandall , C . S . ( 2003 ) . Stereotype threat and arousal : Effects on women’s math performance . Personality and Social Psychology Bul - letin , 29 , 782 – 789 . Perez , K . E . , Strauss , E . A . , Downey , N . , Galbraith , A . , Jeanne , R . , & Cooper , S . ( 2010 ) . Does displaying the class results affect student discussion during peer instruction ? CBE—Life Sciences Education , 9 , 133 – 140 . Smith , M . K . , Wood , W . B . , Adams , W . K . , Wieman , C . , Knight , J . K . , Guild , N . , & Su , T . T . ( 2009 ) . Why peer discussion improves student performance on in - class concept questions . Science , 323 , 122 – 124 . Smith , M . K . , Wood , W . B . , Krauter , K . , & Knight , J . K . ( 2011 ) . Combining peer discussion with instructor explanation increases student learning from in - class concept questions . CBE—Life Sciences Education , 10 , 55 – 63 . Turpen , C . , & Finkelstein , N . D . ( 2009 ) . Not all interactive engagement is the same : Variations in physics professors’ implementation of peer instruction . Physical Review Special Topics – Physics Education Research , 5 , 020101 . Turpen , C . , & Finkelstein , N . D . ( 2010 ) . The construction of different class - room norms during peer instruction : Students perceive differences . Physical Review Special Topics – Physics Education Research , 6 , 020123 . Vickrey , T . , Rosploch , K . , Rahmanian , R . , Pilarz , M . , & Stains , M . ( 2015 ) . Re - search - based implementation of peer instruction : A literature review . CBE—Life Sciences Education , 14 , es3 . Zingaro , D . , & Porter , L . ( 2014 ) . Peer instruction in computing : The value of instructor intervention . Computers & Education , 71 , 87 – 96 .