Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Journal Pre - proof Advances in the development of entry inhibitors for sialic - acid - targeting viruses Rick Heida , Yoshita C . Bhide , Matteo Gasbarri , ¨Ozg¨ u n Kocabiyik , Francesco Stellacci , Anke L . W . Huckriede , Wouter L . J . Hinrichs , Henderik W . Frijlink PII : S1359 - 6446 ( 20 ) 30424 - 4 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . drudis . 2020 . 10 . 009 Reference : DRUDIS 2813 To appear in : Drug Discovery Today Accepted Date : 13 October 2020 Please cite this article as : { doi : https : / / doi . org / This is a PDF ﬁle of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance , such as the addition of a cover page and metadata , and formatting for readability , but it is not yet the deﬁnitive version of record . This version will undergo additional copyediting , typesetting and review before it is published in its ﬁnal form , but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article . Please note that , during the production process , errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . © 2020 Published by Elsevier . Advances in the development of entry inhibitors for sialic - acid - targeting viruses Rick Heida 1 , Yoshita C . Bhide 1 , 2 * , Matteo Gasbarri 3 * , Özgün Kocabiyik 3 , Francesco Stellacci 3 , 4 , Anke L . W . Huckriede 2 , Wouter L . J . Hinrichs 1 and Henderik W . Frijlink 1 1 Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmacy , University of Groningen , 9713AV Groningen , The Netherlands 2 Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention , University of Groningen , University Medical Center Groningen , 9713AV Groningen , The Netherlands 3 Institute of Materials , École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne , 1015 Lausanne , Switzerland 4 Institute of Bioengineering , École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne , 1015 Lausanne , Switzerland * These authors contributed equally Corresponding author : Hinrichs , W . L . J . ( w . l . j . hinrichs @ rug . nl ) Highlights  Entry inhibitors might overcome the limitation of viral mutation  Antiviral research benefits from a broad - spectrum approach  Sialic acids can serve as a platform to create broad - spectrum antiviral drugs  Sialic - acid - targeting drugs such as DAS - 181 are promising antiviral strategies  Multivalency is crucial when designing sialic - acid - based receptor analogues Abstract Over the past decades , several antiviral drugs have been developed to treat a range of infections . Yet the number of treatable viral infections is still limited , and resistance to current drug regimens is an ever - growing problem . Therefore , additional strategies are needed to provide a rapid cure for infected individuals . An interesting target for antiviral drugs is the process of viral attachment and entry into the cell . Although J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f most viruses use distinct host receptors for attachment to the target cell , some viruses share receptors , of which sialic acids are a common example . This review aims to give an update on entry inhibitors for a range of sialic - acid - targeting viruses and provides insight into the prospects for those with broad - spectrum potential . Keywords : Viral infection ; antiviral drugs ; viral entry ; sialic acids ; entry inhibitors ; broadspectrum antiviral drugs ; multivalency Introduction Antiviral drugs are highly valuable for slowing down or clearing established viral infections . In addition , most of these drugs can be given prophylactically , which is beneficial for high - risk groups . However , the actual number of treatable viral infections is limited . Of the 219 viruses currently known to be infectious to humans [ 1 ] , only nine are treatable with antiviral drugs [ 2 ] . For this reason , there is an urgent need to investigate further antiviral strategies . Antiviral drugs can interfere with any step of the viral life cycle . An interesting target for antiviral therapy is the process of viral attachment and entry . However , entry inhibitors have seen limited clinical application , with only seven compounds being approved by the US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) for four virus types : human immunodeficiency virus , varicella zoster virus , herpes simplex virus and respiratory syncytial virus [ 2 ] . Moreover , these drugs are not commonly prescribed owing to their expense and the availability of more cost - effective alternatives . Therefore , novel ways of targeting viral entry processes should be urgently explored . Viruses deploy several mechanisms for entry into the host cell , using distinct moieties on the cell membrane as a receptor . Such moieties include sialic acids , which are used as attachment receptor by several viruses . Sialic acids are a family of monosaccharides composed of a nine - carbon backbone . They are typically located at J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f the terminal end of carbohydrate chains , attached to several glycoproteins and glycolipids on the eukaryotic cell membrane . For this reason , sialic acids are highly accessible for protein – ligand and receptor – ligand interactions [ 3 ] . Because of their ubiquitous expression on a wide variety of cell types , sialic acids play a part in many physiological processes [ 4 – 10 ] . Although they are widely found on mucosal tissue and appear in soluble form in mucosal secretions , the exact tissue distribution of sialic acids in the human body remains largely unknown , and the distribution might vary depending on the physiological conditions and gene expression profile of the individual [ 11 ] . Sialic acids exist in different isoforms , depending on chemical substitutions and on the way they are linked to the terminal end of the abovementioned glycoconjugates [ 12 – 14 ] . The most common isoform is neuraminic acid . The two main types of sialic acid found in mammals are two modifications of neuraminic acid : N - glycolylneuraminic acid ( Neu5Gc ) and N - acetylneuraminic acid ( Neu5Ac ) [ 4 ] . In humans , only Neu5Ac is present because humans lack the ability to produce the enzyme CMP - N - acetylneuraminic acid hydroxylase , which converts the acetyl group into a glycolyl group ( Figure 1 ) [ 15 ] . In addition to their role in normal physiology , sialic acids are involved in the interaction of many pathogens with their host cells . Along with parasites and bacteria , a large number of viruses have been shown to interact with sialic acids for cellular attachment and entry [ 3 ] . However , the specific sialic acid derivative that serves as the attachment receptor differs according to the virus strain and depends on the receptor binding site of the viral attachment protein . For this reason , viral tropism is mostly dependent on the location of the attachment receptor . Interestingly , several viruses have been described to be not strictly dependent on sialic acids for J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f attachment and entry , but rather use sialic acids as a co - receptor or enhancer of attachment . At least 16 viral genera have been identified to interact with sialic acids in some way for their entry process , as reviewed elsewhere [ 11 ] . Because of the profound role of sialic acids in the viral entry process , an entry inhibitor that prevents virus attachment to sialic acids would have the potential to serve as a broad - spectrum antiviral drug and might therefore be of high therapeutic relevance . This review provides an overview of the epidemiology of a selection of viruses that use sialic acids as their main cellular receptor to initiate entry , and we discuss the current development status of entry inhibitors targeting these viruses . Both sialic - acid - mimicking and sialic - acid - targeting drugs are discussed to highlight the most promising entry inhibitors , which are those with broad - spectrum activity . Sialic - acid - targeting viruses and the development of entry inhibitors The following sections provide an overview of the most clinically relevant sialic - acid - targeting viruses for which effective antiviral therapy is urgently needed . We discuss current modes of treatment for these viruses and highlight advances in the development of entry inhibitors , if applicable . The chemical structures of the entry inhibitors described in this review are depicted in Table 1 . Because virus – sialic acid binding characteristics at the molecular level have been extensively reviewed elsewhere [ 13 , 17 ] , they are not described in detail here . Influenza viruses Belonging to the Orthomyxoviridae family , the influenza A virus is one of the most prevalent viral pathogens of our time , frequently causing infections in various mammalian and avian species . Seasonal human influenza epidemics , which are J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f associated with the viruses’ susceptibility to undergo antigenic drift [ 18 ] , are still a major threat to high - risk groups such as the elderly and immunocompromised , accounting for 3 million – 5 million cases of severe illness and approximately 500 , 000 deaths every year [ 19 ] . Occasionally , the emergence of new influenza A virus strains can cause even more fatal pandemics [ 20 ] . The genome of influenza A and B viruses comprises eight segments of negative - sense , single - stranded RNA , and is enclosed by a lipid envelope [ 21 ] . The viral envelope is composed of mainly two proteins , haemagglutinin and neuraminidase , which are both crucial for infection . The primary criterion for the classification of influenza A viruses is based on the subtype of haemagglutinin ( H1 – H18 ) and neuraminidase ( N1 – N11 ) , with the virus being named accordingly ( e . g . , H1N1 ) . This indicates there are potentially 198 different influenza A subtypes ; so far , 131 have been detected in nature [ 22 ] . The trimeric haemagglutinin consists of two smaller subunits : HA - 1 and HA - 2 . HA - 1 contains a part of the stalk and forms the globular head domain , which carries the receptor - binding sites for sialic acid and thereby is of utmost importance for viral attachment to the host cell [ 23 ] . HA - 2 forms the main part of the stalk , including the transmembrane region and cytosolic tail of the protein , and harbours the 20 – 23 - amino - acid - long fusion peptide ( 104 ) . The haemagglutinin protein of human - adapted influenza strains initiates cell entry by binding to the trisaccharide sequence Neu5Ac - α ( 2 - 6 ) - Gal - β ( 1 - 4 ) - GlcNAc , also known as 6′ - sialyllactosamine ( 6′ - SLN ) . This sequence , linking Neu5Ac at the α - 2 , 6 position to galactose , is the predominant sialic - acid - containing sequence on human tracheal epithelium and therefore serves as the primary binding site for human influenza A and B strains [ 24 ] . By contrast , avian influenza strains preferentially bind to Neu5Ac , linked at the α - 2 , 3 position to galactose , which is present on the intestinal J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f epithelium of ( aquatic ) birds ( Figure 2 ) [ 25 , 26 ] . These differences in linkage specificity between human - adapted and avian - adapted influenza A strains are an important determinant for their host cell tropism . The binding preference of haemagglutinin from avian and mammalian influenza virus strains for differentially linked sialic - acid subtypes , together with the distribution of these sialic acids and their pH stability , serve as a restrictive factor for zoonotic transmission of influenza and determine which species can be infected successfully [ 27 ] . After the haemagglutinin binds to sialic acids on the host’s respiratory epithelial cells , the virus is internalized by receptor - mediated endocytosis into endosomes . Under acidic conditions , the HA protein undergoes conformational changes that lead to the exposure of the HA - 2 fusion peptide , which facilitates the low - pH - induced fusion of the viral envelope with the endosomal membrane . This consequently causes an influx of H + ions via the M2 ion channel , which in turn leads to the release of the viral ribonucleoprotein into the cytoplasm [ 28 , 29 ] . After replication of the virus has taken place in the host cell , neuraminidase ( also known as sialidase ) is responsible for the enzymatic cleavage of sialic acid residues , with which it facilitates the release of virions into the extracellular milieu [ 30 ] . Prevention of influenza virus infections primarily relies on vaccination . However , vaccines are only moderately effective when they match circulating strains , and they can be ineffective if this is not the case [ 31 ] . This has led to interest in the development of influenza - specific antiviral drugs . For the 2019 – 20 influenza season , four antiviral drugs approved by the FDA were recommended for the treatment of persistent influenza infection in the United States [ 32 ] : orally administered oseltamivir phosphate , inhalable zanamivir , intravenously administered peramivir ( all of which are neuraminidase inhibitors ) and oral baloxavir ( which blocks viral RNA J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f transcription ) . In the European Union and the European Economic Area , only oseltamivir and zanamivir , sold under their respective trade names Tamiflu and Relenza , have been approved for individuals at a high risk of experiencing complications [ 33 ] . Although these drugs have been effective in treating the disease , the emergence of resistance against the currently used antivirals is a major concern for effective treatment and prophylaxis of influenza in the future [ 34 – 37 ] . Therefore , the development of novel drugs or combination therapies that target multiple pathways of the viral replication cycle remains necessary [ 38 ] . In this light , entry inhibitors might be a promising alternative . Entry inhibitors for influenza can be generally divided into two categories on the basis of their mechanism of action . The first category includes compounds that interfere with the initial attachment process of the virus . This can be done by directly targeting host sialic acids or by targeting the receptor - binding domain of the virus , using sialic acid analogues as a decoy receptor . Both of these mechanisms disable the ability of influenza - virus particles to bind sialic - acid molecules on the host cell . The other category includes compounds that bind to the haemagglutinin stalk , affecting the fusion of the viral envelope with the endosomal membrane . Although fusion inhibitors do not block the initial attachment , they do block the release of the viral genome into the cytoplasm and thereby interfere with the last step of the viral entry process . In the past five years , a plethora of novel influenza entry inhibitors have shown potency in vitro [ 39 – 58 ] . An overview of compounds that have been further evaluated in the preclinical or clinical phase is given in Table 1 . Interestingly , only a few of the highlighted entry inhibitors interfere with the initial attachment process of the influenza virus ( i . e . , with the receptor - binding site of haemagglutinin or with sialic acids ) . The primary reason for this is that compounds that target the receptor - binding J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f site need to bind the haemagglutinin protein in such a way that they do not lose efficacy on seasonal mutation of the virus , as is the case with neutralizing antibodies from the host . In this context , it should be remarked that haemagglutinin is found in a trimeric form [ 59 ] . This implies that it ideally binds to three sialic - acid moieties on the cell surface . Such a concept ( i . e . , multiple ligands binding to multiple targets ) is known as multivalency and is highly important in several biological and pathogenic interactions ( Box 1 ) . The concept of multivalency is widely used in the development of potentially broad - spectrum sialic - acid - based receptor analogues , which are described in further detail later in this review . Apart from using multivalent drugs to block the receptor - binding site , another strategy is to use monoclonal antibodies that bind to more conserved parts of the HA1 head domain [ 60 ] . However , none of the abovementioned compounds has been evaluated in clinical trials . Besides targeting haemagglutinin to block the attachment process , another way is to directly target host sialic acids . Arguably the most promising influenza entry inhibitor using this method is DAS - 181 , which is a recombinant fusion protein that can enzymatically cleave terminal sialic acids from carbohydrate chains on the host - cell membrane [ 61 , 62 ] . Because DAS - 181 has shown promising results as a broad - spectrum drug , we discuss it later on in this review . Another study focused on using multivalent proteins derived from the binding domains of bacterial sialidases to target host sialic acids . However , the compounds , which mask the receptor rather than cleaving it , only worked prophylactically , indicating that the virus successfully competed for sialic - acid binding when the same dose was administered therapeutically [ 63 ] . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Most of the compounds that have been evaluated in preclinical or clinical settings target the stalk domain , the part of the haemagglutinin protein that is involved in the fusion process and is generally more conserved [ 64 ] . One interesting example is umifenovir ( trade name : Arbidol ) , a drug that has been licensed in Russia and China and is claimed to have activity against a broad variety of influenza strains [ 65 – 68 ] . The proposed working mechanism is that by interacting with the upper region of the stalk , the drug prevents the low - pH - induced protein rearrangements that are necessary to elicit fusion of the virus with the cell membrane [ 69 ] . Other clinically relevant compounds that target the stalk include monoclonal antibodies [ 70 – 72 ] . Of these , five are currently in clinical evaluation ( Table 2 ) . Parainfluenza virus The Paramyxoviridae family consists of enveloped negative - sense , single - stranded RNA viruses , among which are the parainfluenza viruses . Human parainfluenza viruses ( HPIVs ) are a common cause of respiratory disease in infants , young children , elderly people and immunocompromised individuals [ 73 ] . HPIV infections are the second most prevalent cause of respiratory - disease - related hospitalizations in children under five years of age , after respiratory syncytial virus infection [ 74 ] . Symptoms range from mild and cold - like to more severe , including pneumonia and croup . These symptoms can be worse in patients who are already suffering from chronic airway diseases such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [ 75 ] . Four types of HPIV have been described : HPIV - 1 – HPIV - 4 . Their main outer proteins are haemagglutinin - neuraminidase ( HN ) , which is responsible for attachment to sialic acids , and the fusion protein , which mediates fusion of the virus with the host cell J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f membrane [ 75 ] . All HPIV strains are known to bind to sialic acids , preceding cell entry . HPIV - 1 and HPIV - 3 have been shown to use α - 2 , 3 - linked sialic acids , and HPIV - 3 also binds to α - 2 , 6 - linked sialic acids [ 76 ] . This contrasts with avian influenza viruses , which also bind to α - 2 , 3 - linked sialic acids but are very rarely transmitted from human to human because they have a different linkage specificity [ 77 ] . To our knowledge , the linkage specificity of HPIV - 2 - and HPIV - 4 - binding sialic acids has not yet been described . Because vaccination strategies have not yet proven to be effective in eliminating the disease [ 78 ] , patients suffering from HPIV infection could benefit from antiviral therapy . Currently , no drugs have been approved for treating HPIV infections . Because HPIV needs sialic acids for entry , research has been done regarding the development of suitable antivirals for blocking this mechanism . The HN inhibitor and sialic - acid derivative BCX - 2798 has been proven to effectively protect mice against challenge with a 90 % lethal dose of a chimeric strain of HPIV - 1 , in which the fusion and HN proteins of Sendai viruses were replaced by those of HPIV . Moreover , the compound had prophylactic potential against chimeric HPIV - 3 [ 79 – 81 ] . BCX - 2798 was chemically modified by Eveno et al . to bind covalently to a key catalytic component of the HN protein of HPIV - 1 . Hereafter , HPIV - 1 replication in vitro was reduced by 13 - fold compared with its parent compound [ 82 ] . Research into the compound is still ongoing . Recently , the small molecule CM9 was found to interact with the HN protein in vitro and in vivo , causing the fusion protein to undergo its conformational change prior to the actual attachment of HPIV - 3 to cells , which led to a block in viral infectivity [ 83 ] . It was found that the molecule interacts with the second sialic - acid - binding site of the HN protein without disturbing the receptor - binding capacity of the virus . This J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f proof - of - concept study led to the design of another compound , named premature activating compound - 3066 ( PAC - 3066 ) , which targets the same second sialic - acid - binding site , but is 100 times more effective in vitro than its predecessor [ 84 ] . Aside from these studies , only the recombinant sialidase DAS - 181 has made it into clinical trials . Adenovirus Human adenoviruses ( AdVs ) are non - enveloped double - stranded DNA viruses with a size range of 90 – 100 nm . They belong to the family of Adenoviridae and are divided into seven different species , AdV - A to AdV - G , which can be further classified into more than 60 different subtypes [ 85 ] . Young children are the most susceptible to AdV infection , and account for roughly 80 % of cases . This is mainly due to their lack of humoral immunity against the virus [ 86 ] . A wide variety of symptoms can arise following adenoviral infection , including gastrointestinal and ocular inflammation . Most commonly , however , symptoms manifest in the respiratory tract , and they vary from common cold - like symptoms , such as sneezing and coughing , to pneumonia and bronchitis [ 87 ] . One of the less common symptoms is epidemic keratoconjunctivitis ( EKC ) , or inflammation of the ocular surface tissue , which is caused by AdV - B1 , AdV - E and , in the more severe form , by AdV - D subtypes . EKC is mostly characterized by eye redness , itchiness , soreness and excessive tearing [ 85 ] . Although some antiviral drugs , such as the DNA polymerase inhibitor cidofovir , have been reported to be helpful in treating AdV - related disease in people who have received an organ transplant [ 88 , 89 ] , no drug has been made available to the clinic because the virus is mostly self - limiting and can J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f be cleared within 3 weeks [ 85 ] . However , susceptible patient groups might benefit from broad - spectrum antiviral drugs . The two main receptors for adenovirus attachment are the coxsackievirus - adenovirus receptor ( CAR ) on epithelial cells [ 90 ] and the ubiquitously expressed membrane cofactor protein ( or CD46 ) [ 91 ] . After binding , a second interaction with αV - integrin is necessary for initiation of endocytosis [ 92 , 93 ] . Of all adenovirus strains that have been described to cause EKC , AdV - D37 , AdV - D8 and AdV - D19a account for most severe disease [ 85 ] . Interestingly , all of these strains have been reported to interact with sialic - acid residues for binding to the host cell [ 94 – 96 ] . The reported adenoviruses all share a prevalence for α - 2 , 3 - linked sialic acids , which contrasts with the requirement of human influenza viruses to solely bind α - 2 , 6 - linked sialic acids [ 97 ] . This distinction can be explained by AdVs having a tropism for ocular tissue , where α - 2 , 3 - linked sialic acids are abundant , rather than respiratory epithelium . The ocular tropism of the above adenoviruses also explains the onset of symptoms affecting the eyes [ 98 ] . The AdV - D37 spike protein knob domain has been found to contain three sialic - acid - binding sites , all of which are involved in the interaction with sialic - acid residues that are attached to a GD1a glycan motif on host corneal epithelial cells [ 99 ] . The importance of this interaction was highlighted by the fact that after pretreatment of these cells with GD1a - based monoclonal antibodies and soluble GD1a , inoculation with AdV - D37 did not lead to infection . The implications of these findings for the in vivo setting have not yet been fully elucidated [ 99 ] . In 2005 , Johansson and colleagues were the first to design multiple multivalent 3′ - sialyllactose derivatives , conjugated to human serum albumin , which were able to effectively bind to AdV and inhibit infection in a model of human corneal epithelial cells [ 100 ] . Furthermore , they found that the multivalent molecules yielded a 1000 - J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f fold higher inhibitory effect than the monovalent form , which can be explained by the fact that AdV uses several of its fibre proteins for entry into the host cell . The same group confirmed their findings by using sialic - acid conjugates instead of 3′ - siallylactose and showed that treatment with this compound led to virus aggregation [ 101 ] . On the basis of these results , Spjut et al . designed trivalent sialic acid - based inhibitors that bound to all three of the AdV - D37 sialic - acid - binding sites on its knob domain . The most promising compound , ME0322 , was a potent inhibitor of AdV - D37 in vitro [ 102 ] . Based on this , an even more potent trivalent compound was designed , which was highly effective in cell - attachment and - infection assays [ 103 ] . In addition to binding CAR , the gastroenteritis - causing AdV - G52 was recently found to bind α - 2 , 8 - linked polysialic acids , which are a unique type of post - translationally modified sialic acid that is usually found in brain tissue [ 104 ] . Also , AdV - D26 has recently been shown to rely on sialic acids for cell entry [ 105 ] . Future insights into the binding mechanisms of these viruses might pave the way for new types of potentially broad - spectrum entry inhibitors for sialic - acid - dependent AdV subtypes . Polyomavirus Polyomaviruses include a variety of non - enveloped double - stranded DNA viruses [ 106 ] . Their icosahedral - shaped capsid consists of three proteins , namely VP1 , which is the viral attachment protein and makes up most of the viral capsid [ 107 ] , VP2 and VP3 , which are probably involved in insertion of the viral genome into the host cell nucleus [ 108 ] . Around 14 different human polyomaviruses have been identified [ 109 ] . The two strains that are most infectious to humans are BK virus ( BKV ) and JC virus ( JCV ) , both of which can be further divided into different subtypes [ 107 ] . The newly discovered Merkel cell polyomavirus was recently added to this list [ 110 ] . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Polyomavirus infections are highly prevalent among the global population . An estimated 80 % of humans are infected in their lifetime , with the first infection usually occurring in early childhood [ 107 ] . Mostly , the virus latently resides in the kidneys and peripheral blood , making the infection asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic for the majority of infected individuals [ 111 ] . However , in immune - deficient individuals , the virus might start to replicate again and cause specific disease . In this context , BKV is a common cause of nephropathy , mostly occurring in people who have undergone a kidney transplant [ 112 , 113 ] . By contrast , recurring infections with JCV can lead to progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy . It is thought that JCV infiltrates the brain tissue via B cells in the blood , from where it can cause a lytic infection in myelin - producing oligodendrocytes and in astrocytes [ 114 , 115 ] . In humans , Merkel cell polyomavirus has been found to be the primary cause of Merkel cell carcinoma , which is a highly aggressive form of skin cancer [ 110 , 116 ] . Different types of human polyomavirus interact with different sialic - acid residues on host cells . JCV has been found to interact with α - 2 , 6 - linked sialic acids [ 117 , 118 ] , as well as with α - 2 , 3 - linked sialic acids [ 119 ] . BKV was found to interact with α - 2 , 3 - linked sialic acids only [ 120 ] . Merkel cell polyomavirus has also been found to rely on α - 2 , 3 - linked sialic acids for attachment , although it can use α - 2 , 6 - linked sialic acids as well [ 121 , 122 ] . With knowledge of the receptors used for attachment , it might be possible to design antiviral drugs based on the viral entry mechanism . Using computational screening , Yatawara et al . identified four different compounds that blocked JCV infectivity in an in vitro setting involving the astrocyte cell line SVGA . Of those , the small - molecule inhibitor AY4 was the most effective inhibitor of infection , albeit with low affinity . AY4 was shown to directly bind to the VP1 attachment protein to block J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f viral attachment [ 123 ] . Because the options for treating polyomavirus infections and related diseases are limited , the development of novel antiviral compounds is important . Coronavirus Coronaviruses ( CoVs ) belong to the Coronaviridae family and are enveloped , positive - sense , single - stranded RNA viruses . The abundant spike ( S ) glycoprotein functions as the viral attachment protein . The S protein is composed of two subunits , S1 and S2 : S1 contains the receptor - binding site , whereas S2 contains the fusion machinery [ 124 ] . CoVs are divided into four subtypes ( α , β , γ and δ ) . Of these , only certain α - CoVs ( CoV - 229E and CoV - NL63 ) and β - CoV ( OC43 - CoV , HKU1 - CoV , SARS - CoV , MERS - CoV and the recently emerged SARS - CoV - 2 ) infect humans , and are all thought to be of zoonotic origin [ 124 – 126 ] . CoVs have emerged unexpectedly three times over the past two decades , with the most recent example being the SARS - CoV - 2 pandemic , which causes respiratory disease designated as COVID - 19 [ 126 ] . Overall , most CoVs cause mild respiratory disease varying from cough to fever . However , symptoms can be worse , especially in susceptible groups such as elderly people and individuals with an underlying illness . To manage the current pandemic and prevent future epidemics or pandemics , the development of novel antiviral compounds has become urgent . Many clinical trials of potential antiviral compounds such as nucleoside analogues and corticosteroids have failed [ 127 ] ; thus , other strategies for treating patients are needed to prevent future outbreaks . In that respect , entry inhibitors that target the viral receptor or receptor - binding site of the CoV S protein might be of therapeutic value . Several of the β - CoVs have been shown to interact with sialic acid moieties for J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f cell entry processes . Both OC43 - CoV and HKU1 - CoV specifically target 9 - O - acetylated sialic acids [ 124 , 128 , 129 ] , which are modified sialic acids that are thought to have an important role in many biological and pathological processes [ 130 , 131 ] . Attachment occurs via the receptor - binding site in the S1 domain of the S protein [ 124 , 132 , 133 ] . Recently , the small molecule EK1 , derived from the HR2 domain of the OC43 - CoV spike protein , was found to elicit high fusion - inhibitory activity against various human CoVs , underlining the potential for its development as a broad - spectrum drug [ 134 ] . MERS - CoV interacts with dipeptidyl peptidase 4 as its receptor to enter the cell [ 135 , 136 ] , using α - 2 , 3 - linked sialic acids as a co - receptor for attachment [ 137 , 138 ] . Although monoclonal antibodies that target the sialic - acid - binding S1a domain might provide a synergistic effect in combination treatment regimens , sialic acids do not seem to be essential for MERS - CoV infectiveness [ 139 ] . Enterovirus D68 Enterovirus D68 ( EV - D68 ) is a member of the Picornaviridae family , which is a large family consisting of non - enveloped , single - stranded RNA viruses [ 140 ] . Unlike most other enteroviruses , EV - D68 infects the upper respiratory tract , primarily causing disease in the paediatric population [ 141 ] . In most patients , the virus causes symptoms similar to those of the common cold . However , in some cases , infections are accompanied by acute flaccid myelitis ( AFM ) , a polio - like disorder that is characterized by lesions in the spinal cord , which can eventually cause paralysis [ 142 , 143 ] . Most of these patients suffer from underlying respiratory disease , have a history of organ transplantation or are immunocompromised in another way [ 144 ] . However , whether there is a causal relationship between the virus and AFM pathogenesis is still a matter of debate [ 141 , 145 , 146 ] . The emergence of more J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f severe cases , together with recent outbreaks , have led to an increased interest in the virus and in disease pathogenicity . In recent years , EV - D68 has been found to exploit sialic acids for attachment and for cell entry [ 147 ] . It was found that these sialic acid molecules are terminally linked via α - 2 , 6 - linkers [ 148 ] to intercellular adhesion molecule 5 ( ICAM5 ) , which is found in the upper respiratory tract as well as on neurons [ 149 ] , with the latter providing a possible link to the pathogenesis of AFM . Interestingly , it was found that EV - D68 can also exploit α - 2 , 3 - linked sialic acid in the lower respiratory tract for infection , increasing the probability of the virus successfully infecting its host [ 150 ] . Owing to this , interest in the development of entry inhibitors for the currently untreatable infection has increased . Rhoden et al . were among the first to test existing antivirals for the treatment of EV - D68 in a cell - based assay , one of which was DAS - 181 . They found that the drug was able to reduce the viral cytopathic effect on infection with three EV - D68 strains isolated from the 2014 outbreak , and one prototype strain [ 151 ] . However , it is unclear whether these results can be translated to an in vivo system , partly owing to the lack of suitable animal models . Zika virus The Zika virus ( ZIKV ) is a single - stranded , enveloped RNA virus in the Flaviviridae family . It is transmitted via mosquitoes , but once it has infected a host , it can be transmitted through the congenital and perinatal route , and it can be sexually transmitted [ 152 ] . Infection with ZIKV can affect all age groups and is usually asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic , generally resolving within 2 weeks . However , several reports have indicated that ZIKV infection of pregnant women can cause congenital brain abnormalities of the foetus such as microcephaly , in which the foetus J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f has an abnormally small brain , leading to severe cognitive and motor deficits [ 153 , 154 ] . Although the virus has caused infections only sporadically in the past , several outbreaks have emerged since 2007 , which shows the need for preventive measures [ 152 ] . People are usually advised to use mosquito nets or DEET - containing insect repellents to prevent initial transmission , but pregnant women who have become infected might benefit from antiviral therapy . ZIKV has been shown to infect a range of cells from the reproductive tract , as well as certain brain cell types , including neuronal cells from the foetal brain [ 155 ] . The primary surface protein of ZIKV is the envelope ( E ) protein . It is thought that the E protein interacts with several cellular attachment factors before cell entry , with each individual interaction contributing to its binding avidity to the host cell [ 156 ] . Once the binding strength has reached the threshold , the virus is internalized via clathrin - mediated endocytosis . ZIKV was recently found to use α - 2 , 3 - sialic acids for cell entry , supposedly as a factor contributing to ZIKV internalization after attachment has taken place [ 157 ] . In a study conducted by Fink et al . , it was found that the anti - influenza drug umifenovir caused inhibition of ZIKV infection in a range of cell types , including vaginal and cervical epithelial cells . Although the authors propose that the drug inhibits viral entry , the exact mechanisms of inhibition are unknown [ 158 ] . Additional insights into the entry mechanism and specific attachment factors of ZIKV might lead to specific therapy for pregnant women at risk of infection . Antiviral drugs with broad - spectrum potential Although most studies on antiviral therapies focus on virus - specific pathways , it might be more promising to search for drugs that affect mechanisms common to multiple J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f viruses : for example , the mechanism of viral entry into the host cell . To develop such broad - spectrum entry inhibitors in the context of sialic acid - targeting viruses , they should either target the sialic - acid residues or mimic them by making use of drugs that function as decoy receptors to block the virus from binding to the host cell . Below , both strategies are discussed . Sialic - acid - targeting drugs One of the potentially broad - spectrum antiviral drugs that target the entry pathway is DAS - 181 , a recombinant neuraminidase analogue that cleaves sialic - acid residues from carbohydrate chains on host epithelia . In this way , virus binding to the host cell can be indirectly inhibited . More specifically , DAS - 181 is a fusion protein that contains both the catalytic domain of the sialidase enzyme of Actinomyces viscosus and the anchoring domain of human amphiregulin [ 61 ] . Because the drug is administered via inhalation , it prevents entry of the virus directly at the airway epithelium , which is thought to keep adverse systemic side effects to a minimum [ 159 ] . DAS - 181 is considered to be a promising candidate for the treatment of infections with sialic - acid - targeting viruses that are transmitted via the respiratory tract because it targets the host receptor rather than the virus , and thereby circumvents any losses of efficacy related to viral mutations . Recently , a randomized double - blinded phase IIb clinical trial has been completed regarding the safety and therapeutic efficacy of DAS - 181 for treatment of influenza ( ClinicalTrials . gov identifier : NCT01740063 ) . Results so far have indicated that the inhaled drug is generally well tolerated for up to 7 days [ 159 , 160 ] . Longer treatment periods have shown to lead to symptoms related to systemic reabsorption and to induce DAS - 181 - specific antibodies . A new phase IIb clinical trial has been J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f scheduled to assess the efficacy , safety and pharmacokinetics of DAS - 181 in people who have been hospitalized with severe influenza and require supplemental oxygen ( NCT04298060 ) . In a sub - cohort of the study , DAS - 181 efficacy will also be tested in hospitalized patients who have been infected with other sialic - acid - dependent viruses . In addition , DAS - 181 has shown to be effective for HPIV infections . In preclinical studies , administration of the drug has been shown to lead to a significant reduction in the number of HPIV - infected cells in vitro and in vivo [ 161 ] . Furthermore , the drug has successfully passed a phase II clinical trial in which its efficacy was investigated in immunocompromised patients with parainfluenza infection ( NCT01644877 ) [ 162 ] . DAS - 181 was also shown to have therapeutic potential in the treatment of HPIV - infected individuals who recently underwent haematopoietic stem cell transplantation [ 163 ] . A phase III clinical trial has started recruiting participants for evaluating the treatment of human parainfluenza infections in hospitalized , immunocompromised patients ( NCT03808922 ) . These developments have led the FDA to designate DAS - 181 as both a fast - track and breakthrough therapy . Aside from the promising advances regarding its use for the treatment of influenza and parainfluenza infections , DAS - 181 has shown high therapeutic efficacy against EV - D68 at concentrations in the nanomolar range [ 151 ] . However , concerns have been raised owing to the finding that isolated strains of EV - D68 might evade the drug because they are capable of infecting desialylated cells , although it is not known whether these strains actively circulate in the human population [ 150 ] . The cleavage of viral attachment receptors seems like a promising strategy , but it is uncertain whether the removal of sialic - acid residues from the respiratory epithelium leads to adverse side effects . Concerns over the use of neuraminidase J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f analogues are primarily based on the hypothesis that neuraminidase treatment makes the patient more prone to secondary infections by bacteria such as Streptococcus pneumoniae [ 164 – 166 ] . This possibility was strengthened after treatment with the neuraminidase inhibitor oseltamivir in influenza - infected mice was reported to lead to a decrease in cases of secondary bacterial pneumonia [ 165 ] . Additional concerns were raised over the possibility that cleavage of sialic - acid residues by neuraminidase might expose cryptic receptors that are necessary for the opportunistic bacteria to adhere [ 167 , 168 ] . This hypothesis has been tested in in vivo colonization studies with S . pneumoniae in influenza - infected mice , which showed that DAS - 181 had no effect on bacterial growth or might even reduce the risk of acquiring a secondary bacterial infection [ 169 ] . However , because sialic acids are necessary for several physiological processes , the long - term effects of their removal should be considered carefully . Moreover , another limitation might be that the removal of sialic acids by sialidases could lead to the emergence of highly resistant escape mutants that do not strictly depend on the sialic - acid interaction . Notwithstanding these concerns , DAS - 181 is currently the only compound in advanced clinical development that tackles sialic - acid - targeting viruses by targeting the cellular receptor itself . Sialic - acid analogues Another strategy for broad - spectrum targeting is to mimic the cellular receptor . This can be done by using compounds that function as a decoy , thereby competing with the cellular receptor to bind the virus ( i . e . , competitive - binding inhibitors ) . A number J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f of studies have investigated this possibility for treating sialic - acid - targeting - virus infections , especially infections with influenza viruses . Early studies of the use of sialic - acid - containing compounds to inhibit viral infection primarily investigated naturally occurring soluble substances that contain sialic - acid molecules , such as egg white , serum and respiratory mucus [ 170 ] . These substances were shown to be able to compete with cell - associated sialic acids for the binding of influenza virus . It should be noted that the inhibitory capacity of these molecules was found to be highly dependent on several parameters such as size , rigidity and accessibility to haemagglutinin , as well as on the susceptibility of the substance to being neutralized by neuraminidase molecules [ 170 ] . Other interesting examples of molecules that are thought to contribute to the defence mechanism of the host are mucins [ 171 , 172 ] and surfactant proteins [ 173 – 176 ] , which are produced by cells of the respiratory tract as a component of mucus and contain a wide variety of carbohydrates , including sialic acid . These compounds , which are part of the innate immune system , can function as naturally occurring decoy receptors against intruding sialic - acid - targeting pathogens , leading to aggregation of the virus particles and an enhanced ability of phagocytic cells to recognize such particles , as has been shown recently [ 176 ] . As well as naturally occurring molecules , several synthetic sialic - acid analogues have been tested against influenza , albeit with limited success . The efficacy of these drugs increased markedly with the development of the first multivalent inhibitors , although this success varied for different strains of influenza [ 170 ] . To overcome the problem of strain - dependent efficacy of the inhibitors , research focused on moieties that are essential to most influenza strains , such as 6′ - SLN ( Figure 3 ) . Synthetic compounds containing 6′ - SLN epitopes were shown to J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f effectively inhibit influenza A virus infection in mice , both prophylactically and therapeutically [ 177 , 178 ] . In a series of studies conducted by Papp et al . , sialic - acid - functionalized nanoparticles were shown to effectively inhibit influenza virus infection in vitro by binding to viral haemagglutinin in a multivalent manner [ 179 , 180 ] . Another application of multivalent receptor analogues was introduced by Wang and colleagues , who functionalized liposomes with sialylneolacto - N - tetraose c ( LSTc ) glycans . The compounds , which acted like polymeric receptor decoys , were able to inhibit infection with several influenza strains , both in vitro and in vivo [ 181 ] . To optimize drugs that target the receptor - binding site of influenza , Kwon and colleagues designed multivalent 6′ - sialyllactose - polyamidoamine ( 6′SL - PAMAM ) conjugates with well - defined linker spacings to match the spacing of HA molecules on the viral envelope , and were therefore able to inhibit infection of mice with a lethal dose of H1N1 [ 182 ] . On the basis of this , Günther et al . recently fine - tuned the design of these conjugates to bear more functional groups , and were able to confirm the efficacy of the compounds against various human and avian influenza strains [ 41 ] . Other interesting compounds that target the receptor - binding site are linear polyglycerol sialosides . By optimizing the ligand densities , these compounds were shown to prevent influenza infection in mice in a superior fashion compared with dendritic polyglycerol sialosides . The authors state that the efficacy of dendritic polyglycerol sialosides was probably affected by steric shielding [ 183 ] . Another interesting application of multivalent receptor decoys for the treatment of influenza was introduced recently by Lauster and colleagues , who used bacteriophage capsids functionalized with sialic - acid moieties as a decoy for the virus . With ligand arrangements matching the distance of the receptor - binding sites of trimeric influenza J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f haemagglutinin , the systems were able to multivalently bind to influenza virions , thereby efficiently blocking viral attachment in vitro , ex vivo and in vivo [ 184 ] . Although the concept of sialic - acid - receptor analogues is promising , not many studies have been conducted on this idea in recent years . This lack of interest could be partially attributed to the poor translatability of in vitro results to the clinical setting . The low in vivo effectiveness of sialic - acid - receptor analogues is intrinsic to their mechanism of action ; such compounds are competitive binding inhibitors that interact with the virus , thus preventing the infection just above a certain concentration . On dilution , a usual condition in the in vivo setting , the reversible interaction is lost , and the drug releases an intact virion that can restart an infection cycle , which explains the lack of efficacy in vivo . As such , the drug has a so - called virustatic effect . Arguably , a superior approach would be based on a virucidal mechanism of action . A virucidal drug is able to irreversibly inhibit a virus , so that the inhibition is retained even on dilution ( Figure 4 ) . Compounds that are based on a virucidal mechanism of action enhance the properties of a standard competitive inhibitor because they permanently inactivate the virus . Examples of virucidal compounds are bleach , disinfectants and strong acids , which are all used to deactivate viruses in vitro but are also extremely toxic . Therefore , they are not suitable as drug candidates . One way of designing non - toxic virucidal drugs is to couple decoy receptors to nanoparticles via long , flexible and hydrophobic linkers . The validity of this concept has been shown for heparan sulfate proteoglycans ( HSPGs ) , which are common receptors for many viruses . The modified compounds were shown to bind to several HSPG - targeting viruses in a multivalent manner , leading to irreversible viral deformation , probably owing to a local increase in pressure [ 185 ] . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Recently , this approach has been successfully translated to sialic - acid - targeting viruses using natural molecules as a core . Specifically ,  - cyclodextrins were modified with long and hydrophobic linkers , bearing either 6′ - SLN or 3′ - SLN as functional group . These compounds were able to irreversibly inhibit different strains of human and avian influenza in the nanomolar range . The results were confirmed ex vivo and validated in vivo [ 186 ] . Taken together , sialic - acid - based receptor analogues might hold promise as entry inhibitors for sialic - acid - dependent viruses , especially for influenza . The possibility of using monosaccharides ( such as Neu5Ac ) could pave the way for broad - spectrum antiviral drugs with a virucidal mechanism of action . Concluding remarks and perspectives Because the number of approved antiviral drugs is limited and new virus strains continue to emerge , the urgency of developing novel therapeutic strategies remains high . Despite numerous attempts to find efficient antiviral drugs , in the end , many of them will fail in phase II or III studies : a frequent occurrence in drug development . Therefore , more effort should be put into the development of potent , preferably broad - spectrum antivirals . In addition , the administration route should be considered . For example , respiratory - virus infections are likely to be treated most optimally with antivirals that are administered via the respiratory tract . Because several viruses share a common attachment receptor , we think that focusing on the mechanism of viral entry could open doors to the development of compounds with broad - spectrum activity . Many viruses use sialic - acid residues as their receptor , so this review has focused on the process of viral entry of these sialic - acid - targeting viruses and the current status of J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f entry - inhibitor development , including those which might have broad - spectrum activity . Although numerous studies have been conducted on entry inhibitors targeting this group of viruses , most of the compounds studied have strain - specific targets . Therefore , we think that receptor - targeting compounds that directly interfere with the attachment of the virus to sialic acids , as well as multivalent sialic acid receptor analogues , deserve more attention , because they might have the potential to broadly combat a wide variety of sialic - acid - targeting viruses . Competing interests F . S . is the inventor on patent number WO 2018 / 015465 A1—Virucidal compounds and uses thereof . The author declares no other competing interests . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation ( via a Sinergia grant CRSII5 _ 180323 to F . S . and H . W . F . ) . References 1 Woolhouse , M . et al . ( 2012 ) Human viruses : discovery and emergence . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B 367 , 2864 – 2871 2 De Clercq , E . and Li , G . ( 2016 ) Approved antiviral drugs over the past 50 years . Clin . Microbiol . Rev . 29 , 695 – 747 3 Varki , A . ( 2008 ) Sialic acids in human health and disease . Trends Mol . Med . 14 , 351 – 360 4 Varki , A . ( 2007 ) Glycan - based interactions involving vertebrate sialic - acid - recognizing proteins . Nature 446 , 1023 – 1029 5 Gorog , P . et al . ( 1982 ) Effect of removing sialic acids from endothelium on the adherence of circulating platelets in arteries in vivo . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B 214 , 471 – 480 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 6 Gelberg , H . et al . ( 1996 ) In vivo enzymatic removal of alpha 2 - - > 6 - linked sialic acid from the glomerular filtration barrier results in podocyte charge alteration and glomerular injury . Lab . Invest . 74 , 907 – 920 7 Born , G . V . and Palinski , W . ( 1985 ) Unusually high concentrations of sialic acids on the surface of vascular endothelia . Br . J . Exp . Pathol . 66 , 543 – 549 8 Strilić , B . et al . ( 2010 ) Electrostatic cell - surface repulsion initiates lumen formation in developing blood vessels . Curr . Biol . 20 , 2003 – 2009 9 Wang , B . ( 2012 ) Molecular mechanism underlying sialic acid as an essential nutrient for brain development and cognition . Adv . Nutr . 3 , 465S – 472S 10 Becker , C . G . et al . ( 1996 ) The polysialic acid modification of the neural cell adhesion molecule is involved in spatial learning and hippocampal long - term potentiation . J . Neurosci . Res . 45 , 143 – 152 11 Wasik , B . R . et al . ( 2016 ) Effects of sialic acid modifications on virus binding and infection . Trends Microbiol . 24 , 991 – 1001 12 Angata , T . and Varki , A . ( 2002 ) Chemical diversity in the sialic acids and related α - keto acids : an evolutionary perspective . Chem . Rev . 102 , 439 – 469 13 Blaum , B . S . and Stehle , T . ( 2019 ) Sialic acids in nonenveloped virus infections . Adv . Carbohydr . Chem . Biochem . 76 , 65 – 111 14 Langereis , M . A . et al . ( 2015 ) Complexity and diversity of the mammalian sialome revealed by nidovirus virolectins . Cell Rep . 11 , 1966 – 1978 15 Varki , A . ( 2001 ) Loss of N - glycolylneuraminic acid in humans : mechanisms , consequences , and implications for hominid evolution . Am . J . Phys . Anthropol . 116 , 54 – 69 16 Wang , B . ( 2009 ) Sialic acid is an essential nutrient for brain development and cognition . Annu . Rev . Nutr . 29 , 177 – 222 17 Stencel - Baerenwald , J . E . et al . ( 2014 ) The sweet spot : defining virus – sialic acid interactions . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 12 , 739 – 749 18 Webster , R . G . et al . ( 1982 ) Molecular mechanisms of variation in influenza viruses . Nature 296 , 115 – 121 19 Davidson , S . ( 2018 ) Treating influenza infection , from now and into the future . Front . Immunol . 9 , 1946 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 20 Taubenberger , J . K . et al . ( 2019 ) The 1918 influenza pandemic : 100 years of questions answered and unanswered . Sci . Transl . Med . 11 , eaau5485 21 Taubenberger , J . K . and Morens , D . M . ( 2008 ) The pathology of influenza virus infections . Annu . Rev . Pathol . Mech . Dis . 3 , 499 – 522 22 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) . Types of Influenza Viruses 2019 . 23 Gasparini , R . et al . ( 2014 ) Compounds with anti - influenza activity : present and future of strategies for the optimal treatment and management of influenza . Part I : Influenza life - cycle and currently available drugs . J . Prev . Med . Hyg . 55 , 69 – 85 24 Gambaryan , A . S . et al . ( 1997 ) Specification of receptor - binding phenotypes of influenza virus isolates from different hosts using synthetic sialylglycopolymers : non - egg - adapted human H1 and H3 influenza A and influenza B viruses share a common high binding affinity for 6′ - sialyl ( N - ace . Virology 232 , 345 – 350 25 Ito , T . et al . ( 1998 ) Molecular basis for the generation in pigs of influenza A viruses with pandemic potential . J . Virol . 72 , 7367 – 7373 26 Rogers , G . N . and Paulson , J . C . ( 1983 ) Receptor determinants of human and animal influenza virus isolates : differences in receptor specificity of the H3 hemagglutinin based on species of origin . Virology 127 , 361 – 373 27 Ito , T . ( 2000 ) Interspecies transmission and receptor recognition of influenza A viruses . Microbiol . Immunol . 44 , 423 – 430 28 Dou , D . et al . ( 2018 ) Influenza A virus cell entry , replication , virion assembly and movement . Front . Immunol . 9 , 1581 29 Edinger , T . O . et al . ( 2014 ) Entry of influenza A virus : host factors and antiviral targets . J . Gen . Virol . 95 , 263 – 277 30 Seto , J . T . and Rott , R . ( 1966 ) Functional significance of sialidose during influenza virus multiplication . Virology 30 , 731 – 737 31 Lewnard , J . and Cobey , S . ( 2018 ) Immune history and influenza vaccine effectiveness . Vaccines 6 , 28 32 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) . Influenza Antiviral Medications : Summary for Clinicians 2018 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / flu / professionals / antivirals / summary - clinicians . htm # Table1 ( accessed February 7 , 2019 ) . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 33 European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( 2017 ) Expert Opinion on Neuraminidase Inhibitors for the Prevention and Treatment of Influenza . Review of Recent Systematic Reviews and Meta - Analyses , ECDC 34 Imai , M . et al . ( 2020 ) Influenza A variants with reduced susceptibility to baloxavir isolated from Japanese patients are fit and transmit through respiratory droplets . Nat . Microbiol . 5 , 27 – 33 35 Kormuth , K . A . and Lakdawala , S . S . ( 2020 ) Emerging antiviral resistance . Nat . Microbiol . 5 , 4 – 5 36 Uehara , T . et al . ( 2019 ) Treatment - emergent influenza variant viruses with reduced baloxavir susceptibility : impact on clinical and virologic outcomes in uncomplicated influenza . J . Infect . Dis . 221 , 346 – 355 37 Chesnokov , A . et al . ( 2019 ) Replicative fitness of seasonal influenza A viruses with decreased susceptibility to baloxavir . J . Infect . Dis . 221 , 367 – 371 38 Whitley , R . J . and Monto , A . S . ( 2019 ) Resistance of influenza virus to antiviral medications . Clin . Infect . Dis . 71 , 1092 – 1094 39 Luganini , A . et al . ( 2018 ) The cranberry extract Oximacro® exerts in vitro virucidal activity against influenza virus by interfering with hemagglutinin . Front . Microbiol . 9 , 1826 40 Kadam , R . U . and Wilson , I . A . ( 2018 ) A small - molecule fragment that emulates binding of receptor and broadly neutralizing antibodies to influenza A hemagglutinin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 115 , 4240 – 4245 41 Günther , S . C . et al . ( 2020 ) Antiviral potential of 3′ - sialyllactose - and 6′ - sialyllactose - conjugated dendritic polymers against human and avian influenza viruses . Sci . Rep . 10 , 768 42 Chen , Y . et al . ( 2020 ) Synthesis of a hexavalent betulinic acid derivative as a hemagglutinin - targeted influenza virus entry inhibitor . Mol . Pharm . 17 , 2546 – 2554 43 Hussein , A . F . A . et al . ( 2020 ) Identification of entry inhibitors with 4 - aminopiperidine scaffold targeting group 1 influenza A virus . Antiviral Res . 177 , 104782 44 Gaisina , I . N . et al . ( 2020 ) Optimization of 4 - aminopiperidines as inhibitors of influenza A viral entry that are synergistic with oseltamivir . J . Med . Chem . 63 , 3120 – 3130 45 de Castro , S . et al . ( 2020 ) N - benzyl 4 , 4 - disubstituted piperidines as a potent class of influenza H1N1 virus inhibitors showing a novel mechanism of hemagglutinin fusion peptide interaction . Eur . J . Med . Chem . 194 , 112223 46 Ye , M . et al . ( 2020 ) An oleanolic acid derivative inhibits hemagglutinin - mediated entry of J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f influenza A virus . Viruses 12 , 225 47 Cihan - Üstündağ , G . et al . ( 2020 ) Superior inhibition of influenza virus hemagglutinin - mediated fusion by indole - substituted spirothiazolidinones . Bioorg . Med . Chem . 28 , 115130 48 Memczak , H . et al . ( 2016 ) Anti - hemagglutinin antibody derived lead peptides for inhibitors of influenza virus binding . PLoS One 11 , e0159074 49 Bhatia , S . et al . ( 2020 ) Adaptive flexible sialylated nanogels as highly potent influenza A virus inhibitors . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 59 , 12417 – 12422 50 Nie , C . et al . ( 2020 ) Topology ‐ matching design of an influenza ‐ neutralizing spiky nanoparticle ‐ based inhibitor with a dual mode of action . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 59 , 15532 – 15536 51 Leiva , R . et al . ( 2018 ) Aniline - based inhibitors of influenza H1N1 virus acting on hemagglutinin - mediated fusion . J . Med . Chem . 61 , 98 – 118 52 Li , S . et al . ( 2017 ) Structure - activity relationships of 3 - O - β - chacotriosyl oleanic acid derivatives as entry inhibitors for highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza virus . Bioorg . Med . Chem . 25 , 4384 – 4396 53 Wang , H . et al . ( 2016 ) Design , synthesis and biological evaluation of novel l - ascorbic acid - conjugated pentacyclic triterpene derivatives as potential influenza virus entry inhibitors . Eur . J . Med . Chem . 110 , 376 – 388 54 Wu , W . et al . ( 2015 ) Quercetin as an antiviral agent inhibits influenza A virus ( IAV ) entry . Viruses 8 , 6 55 Wu , W . et al . ( 2015 ) New influenza a virus entry inhibitors derived from the viral fusion peptides . PLoS One 10 , e0138426 56 Wu , W . et al . ( 2015 ) Super short membrane - active lipopeptides inhibiting the entry of influenza A virus . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1848 , 2344 – 2350 57 Chen , X . et al . ( 2015 ) Neoechinulin B and its analogues as potential entry inhibitors of influenza viruses , targeting viral hemagglutinin . Eur . J . Med . Chem . 93 , 182 – 195 58 Sriwilaijaroen , N . et al . ( 2015 ) 6SLN - lipo PGA specifically catches ( coats ) human influenza virus and synergizes neuraminidase - targeting drugs for human influenza therapeutic potential . J . Antimicrob . Chemother . 70 , 2797 – 2809 59 Skehel , J . J . and Wiley , D . C . ( 2000 ) Receptor binding and membrane fusion in virus entry : the influenza hemagglutinin . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 69 , 531 – 569 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 60 Yasuhara , A . et al . ( 2018 ) Isolation and characterization of human monoclonal antibodies that recognize the influenza A ( H1N1 ) pdm09 virus hemagglutinin receptor - binding site and rarely yield escape mutant viruses . Front . Microbiol . 9 , 2660 61 Malakhov , M . P . et al . ( 2006 ) Sialidase fusion protein as a novel broad - spectrum inhibitor of influenza virus infection . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 50 , 1470 – 1479 62 Triana - Baltzer , G . B . et al . ( 2009 ) Inhibition of neuraminidase inhibitor - resistant influenza virus by DAS181 , a novel sialidase fusion protein . PLoS One 4 , e7838 63 Connaris , H . et al . ( 2014 ) Prevention of influenza by targeting host receptors using engineered proteins . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 6401 – 6406 64 Krammer , F . and Palese , P . ( 2019 ) Universal influenza virus vaccines that target the conserved hemagglutinin stalk and conserved sites in the head domain . J . Infect . Dis . 219 , S62 – S67 65 Leneva , I . A . et al . ( 2009 ) Characteristics of arbidol - resistant mutants of influenza virus : Implications for the mechanism of anti - influenza action of arbidol . Antiviral Res . 81 , 132 – 140 66 Leneva , I . A . et al . ( 2005 ) Sensitivity of various influenza virus strains to arbidol . Influence of arbidol combination with different antiviral drugs on reproduction of influenza virus A . Ter Arkh 77 , 84 – 88 ( in Russian ) 67 Leneva , I . A . et al . ( 2019 ) Umifenovir susceptibility monitoring and characterization of influenza viruses isolated during ARBITR clinical study . J . Med . Virol . 91 , 588 – 597 68 Wang , M . et al . ( 2004 ) Efficacy and safety of arbidol in treatment of naturally acquired influenza . Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao 26 , 289 – 293 ( in Chinese ) 69 Kadam , R . U . and Wilson , I . A . ( 2017 ) Structural basis of influenza virus fusion inhibition by the antiviral drug Arbidol . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 114 , 206 – 214 70 Ali , S . O . et al . ( 2018 ) Evaluation of MEDI8852 , an anti - influenza a monoclonal antibody , in treating acute uncomplicated influenza . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 62 , e00694 - 18 71 Deng , R . et al . ( 2018 ) Pharmacokinetics of MHAA4549A , an anti - influenza a monoclonal antibody , in healthy subjects challenged with influenza A virus in a phase IIa randomized trial . Clin . Pharmacokinet . 57 , 367 – 377 72 Hershberger , E . et al . ( 2019 ) Safety and efficacy of monoclonal antibody VIS410 in adults with uncomplicated influenza A infection : results from a randomized , double - blind , phase - 2 , placebo - controlled study . EBioMedicine 40 , 574 – 582 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 73 Henrickson , K . J . ( 2003 ) Parainfluenza viruses . Clin . Microbiol . Rev . 16 , 242 – 264 74 Hall , C . B . ( 2001 ) Respiratory syncytial virus and parainfluenza virus . N . Engl . J . Med . 344 , 1917 – 1928 75 Pawełczyk , M . and Kowalski , M . L . ( 2017 ) The role of human parainfluenza virus infections in the immunopathology of the respiratory tract . Curr . Allergy Asthma Rep . 17 , 16 76 Fukushima , K . et al . ( 2014 ) Terminal sialic acid linkages determine different cell infectivities of human parainfluenza virus type 1 and type 3 . Virology 464 – 465 , 424 – 431 77 Amonsen , M . et al . ( 2007 ) Human parainfluenza viruses hPIV1 and hPIV3 bind oligosaccharides with α2 - 3 - linked sialic acids that are distinct from those bound by H5 avian influenza virus hemagglutinin . J . Virol . 81 , 8341 – 8345 78 Schmidt , A . C . et al . ( 2011 ) Progress in the development of human parainfluenza virus vaccines . Expert Rev . Respir . Med . 5 , 515 – 526 79 Alymova , I . V . et al . ( 2004 ) Efficacy of novel hemagglutinin - neuraminidase inhibitors BCX 2798 and BCX 2855 against human parainfluenza viruses in vitro and in vivo . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 48 , 1495 – 1502 80 Alymova , I . V . et al . ( 2009 ) Efficacy of the novel parainfluenza virus haemagglutinin - neuraminidase inhibitor BCX 2798 in mice – further evaluation . Antivir . Ther . 14 , 891 – 898 81 Watanabe , M . et al . ( 2009 ) Effect of hemagglutinin - neuraminidase inhibitors BCX 2798 and BCX 2855 on growth and pathogenicity of Sendai / human parainfluenza type 3 chimera virus in mice . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 53 , 3942 – 3951 82 Eveno , T . et al . ( 2019 ) Targeting human parainfluenza virus type - 1 haemagglutinin - neuraminidase with mechanism - based inhibitors . Viruses 11 , 417 83 Bottom - Tanzer , S . F . et al . ( 2019 ) Inhibiting human parainfluenza virus infection by preactivating the cell entry mechanism . mBio 10 , e02900 - 18 84 Marcink , T . C . et al . ( 2020 ) Hijacking the fusion complex of human parainfluenza virus as an antiviral strategy . mBio 11 , e03203 - 19 85 Ghebremedhin , B . ( 2014 ) Human adenovirus : viral pathogen with increasing importance . Eur . J . Microbiol . Immunol . 4 , 26 – 33 86 Koirala , B . and Wang , J . P . ( 2014 ) Adenovirus . In Viruses and the Lung ( Fraire , A . et al . , eds ) , pp . 35 – 41 , Springer J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 87 Khanal , S . et al . ( 2018 ) The repertoire of adenovirus in human disease : the innocuous to the deadly . Biomedicines 6 , 30 88 De Oliveira , C . B . R . et al . ( 1996 ) Evaluation of Cidofovir ( HPMPC , GS - 504 ) against adenovirus type 5 infection in vitro and in a New Zealand rabbit ocular model . Antiviral Res . 31 , 165 – 172 89 Legrand , F . et al . ( 2001 ) Early diagnosis of adenovirus infection and treatment with cidofovir after bone marrow transplantation in children . Bone Marrow Transplant . 27 , 621 – 626 90 Bergelson , J . M . et al . ( 1998 ) The murine CAR homolog is a receptor for coxsackie B viruses and adenoviruses . J . Virol . 72 , 415 – 419 91 Gaggar , A . et al . ( 2003 ) CD46 is a cellular receptor for group B adenoviruses . Nat . Med . 9 , 1408 – 1412 92 Mathias , P . et al . ( 1994 ) Multiple adenovirus serotypes use alpha v integrins for infection . J . Virol . 68 , 6811 – 6814 93 Arnberg , N . ( 2009 ) Adenovirus receptors : implications for tropism , treatment and targeting . Rev . Med . Virol . 19 , 165 – 178 94 Arnberg , N . et al . ( 2000 ) Adenovirus type 37 uses sialic acid as a cellular receptor . J . Virol . 74 , 42 – 48 95 Arnberg , N . et al . ( 2000 ) Initial interactions of subgenus D adenoviruses with A549 cellular receptors : sialic acid versus alpha ( v ) integrins . J . Virol . 74 , 7691 – 7693 96 Arnberg , N . et al . ( 2002 ) Adenovirus type 37 binds to cell surface sialic acid through a charge - dependent interaction . Virology 302 , 33 – 43 97 Gagneux , P . et al . ( 2003 ) Human - specific regulation of α2 - 6 - linked sialic acids . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 48245 – 48250 98 Kumlin , U . et al . ( 2008 ) Sialic acid tissue distribution and influenza virus tropism . Influenza Other Respi . Viruses 2 , 147 – 154 99 Nilsson , E . C . et al . ( 2011 ) The GD1a glycan is a cellular receptor for adenoviruses causing epidemic keratoconjunctivitis . Nat . Med . 17 , 105 – 109 100 Johansson , S . M . C . et al . ( 2005 ) Multivalent HSA conjugates of 3′ - sialyllactose are potent inhibitors of adenoviral cell attachment and infection . ChemBioChem 6 , 358 – 364 101 Johansson , S . M . C . et al . ( 2007 ) Multivalent sialic acid conjugates inhibit adenovirus type 37 from binding to and infecting human corneal epithelial cells . Antiviral Res . 73 , 92 – 100 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 102 Spjut , S . et al . ( 2011 ) A potent trivalent sialic acid inhibitor of adenovirus type 37 infection of human corneal cells . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 50 , 6519 – 6521 103 Caraballo , R . et al . ( 2015 ) Triazole linker - based trivalent sialic acid inhibitors of adenovirus type 37 infection of human corneal epithelial cells . Org . Biomol . Chem . 13 , 9194 – 9205 104 Lenman , A . et al . ( 2018 ) Polysialic acid is a cellular receptor for human adenovirus 52 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 115 , E4264 – E4273 105 Baker , A . T . et al . ( 2019 ) Human adenovirus type 26 uses sialic acid – bearing glycans as a primary cell entry receptor . Sci . Adv . 5 , eaax3567 106 Pinto , M . and Dobson , S . ( 2014 ) BK and JC virus : a review . J . Infect . 68 , S2 – S8 107 Boothpur , R . and Brennan , D . C . ( 2010 ) Human polyoma viruses and disease with emphasis on clinical BK and JC . J . Clin . Virol . 47 , 306 – 312 108 Bennett , S . M . et al . ( 2015 ) Role of a nuclear localization signal on the minor capsid Proteins VP2 and VP3 in BKPyV nuclear entry . Virology 474 , 110 – 116 109 Prado , J . et al . ( 2018 ) Human polyomaviruses and cancer : an overview . Clinics 73 , e558s 110 Feng , H . et al . ( 2008 ) Clonal Integration of a polyomavirus in human Merkel cell carcinoma . Science 319 , 1096 – 1100 111 Eash , S . et al . ( 2006 ) The human polyomaviruses . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 63 , 865 – 876 112 Nickeleit , V . et al . ( 1999 ) Polyomavirus infection of renal allograft recipients : from latent infection to manifest disease . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 10 , 1080 – 1089 113 Drachenberg , C . B . et al . ( 2007 ) Polyomavirus BK versus JC replication and nephropathy in renal transplant recipients : a prospective evaluation . Transplantation 84 , 323 – 330 114 Tan , C . S . and Koralnik , I . J . ( 2010 ) Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy and other disorders caused by JC virus : clinical features and pathogenesis . Lancet Neurol . 9 , 425 – 437 115 Sabath , B . F . and Major , E . O . ( 2002 ) Traffic of JC virus from sites of initial infection to the brain : the path to progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy . J . Infect . Dis . 186 , S180 – S186 116 Becker , M . et al . ( 2019 ) Infectious entry of Merkel cell polyomavirus . J . Virol . 93 , e02004 - 18 117 Liu , C . K . et al . ( 1998 ) Infection of glial cells by the human polyomavirus JC is mediated by an N - linked glycoprotein containing terminal alpha ( 2 - 6 ) - linked sialic acids . J . Virol . 72 , 4643 – 4649 118 Neu , U . et al . ( 2010 ) Structure - function analysis of the human JC polyomavirus establishes the LSTc pentasaccharide as a functional receptor motif . Cell Host Microbe 8 , 309 – 319 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 119 Dugan , A . S . et al . ( 2008 ) Direct correlation between sialic acid binding and infection of cells by two human polyomaviruses ( JC virus and BK virus ) . J . Virol . 82 , 2560 – 2564 120 Dugan , A . S . et al . ( 2005 ) An N - linked glycoprotein with α ( 2 , 3 ) - linked sialic acid is a receptor for BK virus . J . Virol . 79 , 14442 – 14445 121 Neu , U . et al . ( 2012 ) Structures of Merkel cell polyomavirus VP1 complexes define a sialic acid binding site required for infection . PLoS Pathog . 8 , e1002738 122 Bauer , P . H . et al . ( 1999 ) Discrimination between sialic acid - containing receptors and pseudoreceptors regulates polyomavirus spread in the mouse . J . Virol . 73 , 5826 – 5832 123 Yatawara , A . et al . ( 2015 ) Small - molecule inhibitors of JC polyomavirus infection . J . Pept . Sci . 21 , 236 – 242 124 Tortorici , M . A . et al . ( 2019 ) Structural basis for human coronavirus attachment to sialic acid receptors . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 26 , 481 – 489 125 Lu , R . et al . ( 2020 ) Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus : implications for virus origins and receptor binding . Lancet 395 , 565 – 574 126 Zhu , N . et al . ( 2020 ) A novel coronavirus from patients with pneumonia in China , 2019 . N . Engl . J . Med . 382 , 727 – 733 127 Zumla , A . et al . ( 2016 ) Coronaviruses — drug discovery and therapeutic options . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 15 , 327 – 347 128 Huang , X . et al . ( 2015 ) Human coronavirus HKU1 spike protein uses O - acetylated sialic acid as an attachment receptor determinant and employs hemagglutinin - esterase protein as a receptor - destroying enzyme . J . Virol . 89 , 7202 – 7213 129 Vlasak , R . et al . ( 1988 ) Human and bovine coronaviruses recognize sialic acid - containing receptors similar to those of influenza C viruses . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 85 , 4526 – 4529 130 Klein , A . and Roussel , P . ( 1998 ) O - Acetylation of sialic acids . Biochimie 80 , 49 – 57 131 Park , S . S . ( 2019 ) Post - glycosylation modification of sialic acid and its role in virus pathogenesis . Vaccines 7 , 171 132 Hulswit , R . J . G . et al . ( 2019 ) Human coronaviruses OC43 and HKU1 bind to 9 - O - acetylated sialic acids via a conserved receptor - binding site in spike protein domain A . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 116 , 2681 – 2890 133 Peng , G . et al . ( 2011 ) Crystal structure of mouse coronavirus receptor - binding domain J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f complexed with its murine receptor . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 10696 – 10701 134 Xia , S . et al . ( 2019 ) A pan - coronavirus fusion inhibitor targeting the HR1 domain of human coronavirus spike . Sci . Adv . 5 , eaav4580 135 Raj , V . S . et al . ( 2013 ) Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 is a functional receptor for the emerging human coronavirus - EMC . Nature 495 , 251 – 254 136 Mou , H . et al . ( 2013 ) The receptor binding domain of the new Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus maps to a 231 - residue region in the spike protein that efficiently elicits neutralizing antibodies . J . Virol . 87 , 9379 – 9383 137 Li , W . et al . ( 2017 ) Identification of sialic acid - binding function for the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike glycoprotein . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 114 , E8508 – E8517 138 Park , Y - J . et al . ( 2019 ) Structures of MERS - CoV spike glycoprotein in complex with sialoside attachment receptors . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 26 , 1151 – 1157 139 Widjaja , I . et al . ( 2019 ) Towards a solution to MERS : protective human monoclonal antibodies targeting different domains and functions of the MERS - coronavirus spike glycoprotein . Emerg . Microbes Infect . 8 , 516 – 530 140 Zell , R . ( 2018 ) Picornaviridae - the ever - growing virus family . Arch . Virol . 163 , 299 – 317 141 Cassidy , H . et al . ( 2018 ) Enterovirus D68 – the new polio ? Front . Microbiol . 9 , 2677 142 Sejvar , J . J . et al . ( 2016 ) Acute flaccid myelitis in the United States , August – December 2014 : results of nationwide surveillance . Clin . Infect . Dis . 63 , 737 – 745 143 Knoester , M . et al . ( 2017 ) Upsurge of enterovirus D68 , the Netherlands , 2016 . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 23 , 140 – 143 144 Holm - Hansen , C . C . et al . ( 2016 ) Global emergence of enterovirus D68 : a systematic review . Lancet Infect . Dis . 16 , e64 – e75 145 Messacar , K . et al . ( 2018 ) Enterovirus D68 and acute flaccid myelitis—evaluating the evidence for causality . Lancet Infect . Dis . 18 , e239 – e247 146 Brown , D . M . et al . ( 2018 ) Contemporary circulating enterovirus D68 strains have acquired the capacity for viral entry and replication in human neuronal cells . mBio 9 , e01954 - 18 147 Liu , Y . et al . ( 2015 ) Sialic acid - dependent cell entry of human enterovirus D68 . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8865 148 Imamura , T . et al . ( 2014 ) Antigenic and receptor binding properties of enterovirus 68 . J . Virol . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 88 , 2374 – 2384 149 Wei , W . et al . ( 2016 ) ICAM - 5 / telencephalin is a functional entry receptor for enterovirus D68 . Cell Host Microbe 20 , 631 – 641 150 Baggen , J . et al . ( 2016 ) Enterovirus D68 receptor requirements unveiled by haploid genetics . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 113 , 1399 – 1404 151 Rhoden , E . et al . ( 2015 ) In vitro efficacy of antiviral compounds against enterovirus D68 . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 59 , 7779 – 7781 152 Plourde , A . R . and Bloch , E . M . ( 2016 ) A literature review of Zika virus . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 22 , 1185 – 1192 153 Mlakar , J . et al . ( 2016 ) Zika virus associated with microcephaly . N . Engl . J . Med . 374 , 951 – 958 154 Schuler - Faccini , L . et al . ( 2016 ) Possible association between Zika virus infection and microcephaly — Brazil , 2015 . MMWR Morb . Mortal . Wkly Rep . 65 , 59 – 62 155 Sirohi , D . and Kuhn , R . J . ( 2017 ) Zika virus structure , maturation , and receptors . J . Infect . Dis . 216 , S935 – S944 156 Hamel , R . et al . ( 2015 ) Biology of Zika virus infection in human skin cells . J . Virol . 89 , 8880 – 8896 157 Tan , C . W . et al . ( 2019 ) Cell surface α2 , 3 - linked sialic acid facilitates Zika virus internalization . Emerg . Microbes Infect . 8 , 426 – 437 158 Fink , S . L . et al . ( 2018 ) The antiviral drug arbidol inhibits Zika virus . Sci . Rep . 8 , 8989 159 Zenilman , J . M . et al . ( 2015 ) Phase 1 clinical trials of DAS181 , an inhaled sialidase , in healthy adults . Antiviral Res . 123 , 114 – 119 160 Moss , R . B . et al . ( 2012 ) A phase II study of DAS181 , a novel host directed antiviral for the treatment of influenza infection . J . Infect . Dis . 206 , 1844 – 1851 161 Moscona , A . et al . ( 2010 ) A recombinant sialidase fusion protein effectively inhibits human parainfluenza viral infection in vitro and in vivo . J . Infect . Dis . 202 , 234 – 241 162 Chemaly , R . F . et al . ( 2018 ) 1715 . A randomized , double - blind , placebo - controlled multicenter phase 2 trial to examine the effects of DAS181 in immunocompromised ( IC ) patients with parainfluenza virus ( PIV ) lower respiratory tract infection ( LRTI ) on supplemental oxygen ( SO ) . Open Forum Infect . Dis . 5 , S50 – S51 163 Salvatore , M . et al . ( 2016 ) DAS181 for treatment of parainfluenza virus infections in J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients at a single center . Biol . Blood Marrow Transplant . 22 , 965 – 970 164 Peltola , V . T . et al . ( 2005 ) Influenza virus neuraminidase contributes to secondary bacterial pneumonia . J . Infect . Dis . ; 192 , 249 – 257 165 McCullers , J . A . ( 2004 ) Effect of antiviral treatment on the outcome of secondary bacterial pneumonia after influenza . J . Infect . Dis . 190 , 519 – 526 166 Zhang , H . ( 2008 ) Concerns of using sialidase fusion protein as an experimental drug to combat seasonal and pandemic influenza . J . Antimicrob . Chemother . 62 , 219 – 223 167 Nicholls , J . M . et al . ( 2008 ) Comment on : Concerns of using sialidase fusion protein as an experimental drug to combat seasonal and pandemic influenza . J . Antimicrob . Chemother . 62 , 426 – 428 168 Duez , J - M . et al . ( 2008 ) Influenza virus infection : don’t forget the role of the mucociliary system ! J . Antimicrob . Chemother . 63 , 421 – 422 169 Hedlund , M . et al . ( 2010 ) Sialidase ‐ based anti – influenza virus therapy protects against secondary pneumococcal infection . J . Infect . Dis . 201 , 1007 – 1015 170 Matrosovich , M . and Klenk , H - D . ( 2003 ) Natural and synthetic sialic acid - containing inhibitors of influenza virus receptor binding . Rev . Med . Virol . 13 , 85 – 97 171 Lamblin , G . and Roussel , P . ( 1993 ) Airway mucins and their role in defence against micro - organisms . Respir . Med . 87 , 421 – 426 172 Scharfman , A . et al . ( 1995 ) Interactions between human respiratory mucins and pathogens . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 23 , 836 – 839 173 Benne , C . A . et al . ( 1995 ) Interactions of surfactant protein A with influenza A viruses : binding and neutralization . J . Infect . Dis . 171 , 335 – 341 174 Hartshorn , K . L . et al . ( 1997 ) Mechanisms of anti - influenza activity of surfactant proteins A and D : comparison with serum collectins . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell . Mol . Physiol . 273 , L1156 – L1166 175 LeVine , A . M . et al . ( 2002 ) Absence of SP - A modulates innate and adaptive defense responses to pulmonary influenza infection . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell . Mol . Physiol . 282 , L563 – L572 176 van Eijk , M . et al . ( 2019 ) Enhanced antiviral activity of human surfactant protein D by site - specific engineering of the carbohydrate recognition domain . Front . Immunol . 10 , 2476 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 177 Gambaryan , A . et al . ( 2002 ) Polymeric inhibitor of influenza virus attachment protects mice from experimental influenza infection . Antiviral Res . 55 , 201 – 205 178 Gambaryan , A . S . et al . ( 2005 ) Polymer - bound 6′ sialyl - N - acetyllactosamine protects mice infected by influenza virus . Antiviral Res . 68 , 116 – 123 179 Papp , I . et al . ( 2010 ) Inhibition of influenza virus infection by multivalent sialic - acid - functionalized gold nanoparticles . Small 6 , 2900 – 2906 180 Papp , I . et al . ( 2011 ) Inhibition of influenza virus activity by multivalent glycoarchitectures with matched sizes . ChemBioChem 12 , 887 – 895 181 Hendricks , G . L . et al . ( 2013 ) Sialylneolacto - N - tetraose c ( LSTc ) - bearing liposomal decoys capture influenza a virus . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 8061 – 8073 182 Kwon , S . J . et al . ( 2017 ) Nanostructured glycan architecture is important in the inhibition of influenza A virus infection . Nat . Nanotechnol . 12 , 48 – 54 183 Bhatia , S . et al . ( 2017 ) Linear polysialoside outperforms dendritic analogs for inhibition of influenza virus infection in vitro and in vivo . Biomaterials 138 , 22 – 34 184 Lauster , D . et al . ( 2020 ) Phage capsid nanoparticles with defined ligand arrangement block influenza virus entry . Nat . Nanotechnol . 15 , 373 – 379 185 Cagno , V . et al . ( 2018 ) Broad - spectrum non - toxic antiviral nanoparticles with a virucidal inhibition mechanism . Nat . Mater . 17 , 195 – 203 186 Kocabiyik , O . et al . ( 2020 ) Non - toxic virucidal macromolecules show high efficacy against influenza virus ex vivo and in vivo . bioRxiv https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 03 . 18 . 996678 187 Mammen , M . et al . ( 1998 ) Polyvalent interactions in biological systems : implications for design and use of multivalent ligands and inhibitors . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 37 , 2754 – 2794 188 Fasting , C . et al . ( 2012 ) Multivalency as a chemical organization and action principle . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 51 , 10472 – 10498 189 Müller , M . et al . ( 2019 ) Mobility - based quantification of multivalent virus - receptor interactions : new insights into influenza A virus binding mode . Nano . Lett . 19 , 1875 – 1882 190 Liese , S . and Netz , R . R . ( 2015 ) Influence of length and flexibility of spacers on the binding affinity of divalent ligands . Beilstein J . Org . Chem . 11 , 804 – 816 191 Haviernik , J . et al . ( 2018 ) Arbidol ( umifenovir ) : a broad - spectrum antiviral drug that inhibits medically important arthropod - borne flaviviruses . Viruses 10 , 184 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 192 Marjuki , H . et al . ( 2014 ) An investigational antiviral drug , DAS181 , effectively inhibits replication of zoonotic influenza a virus subtype H7N9 and protects mice from lethality . J . Infect . Dis . 210 , 435 – 440 193 Triana - Baltzer , G . B . et al . ( 2009 ) Novel pandemic influenza A ( H1N1 ) viruses are potently inhibited by DAS181 , a sialidase fusion protein . PLoS One 4 , e7788 194 Koudstaal , W . et al . ( 2009 ) Pre ‐ and postexposure use of human monoclonal antibody against H5N1 and H1N1 influenza virus in mice : viable alternative to oseltamivir . J . Infect . Dis . 200 , 1870 – 1873 195 Friesen , R . H . E . et al . ( 2010 ) New class of monoclonal antibodies against severe influenza : prophylactic and therapeutic efficacy in ferrets . PLoS One 5 , e9106 196 Boriskin Y , Leneva I , Pecheur E - I , Polyak S . Arbidol : A Broad - Spectrum Antiviral Compound that Blocks Viral Fusion . Curr Med Chem 2008 ; 15 : 997 – 1005 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2174 / 092986708784049658 . 197 Kallewaard , N . L . et al . ( 2016 ) Structure and function analysis of an antibody recognizing all influenza A subtypes . Cell 166 , 596 – 608 198 Paules , C . I . et al . ( 2017 ) The hemagglutinin A stem antibody MEDI8852 prevents and controls disease and limits transmission of pandemic influenza viruses . J . Infect . Dis . 216 , 356 – 365 199 Nakamura , G . et al . ( 2013 ) An in vivo human - plasmablast enrichment technique allows rapid identification of therapeutic influenza A antibodies . Cell Host Microbe 14 , 93 – 103 200 McBride , J . M . et al . ( 2017 ) Phase 2 randomized trial of the safety and efficacy of MHAA4549A , a broadly neutralizing monoclonal antibody , in a human influenza a virus challenge model . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 61 , e01154 - 17 201 Wollacott , A . M . et al . ( 2016 ) Safety and upper respiratory pharmacokinetics of the hemagglutinin stalk - binding antibody VIS410 support treatment and prophylaxis based on population modeling of seasonal influenza A outbreaks . EBioMedicine 5 , 147 – 155 202 Baranovich , T . et al . ( 2016 ) The hemagglutinin stem - binding monoclonal antibody VIS410 controls influenza virus - induced acute respiratory distress syndrome . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 60 , 2118 – 2131 203 Tharakaraman , K . et al . ( 2015 ) A broadly neutralizing human monoclonal antibody is effective against H7N9 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 10890 – 10895 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 204 Kim , J . l . et al . ( 2019 ) Novel small molecule targeting the hemagglutinin stalk of influenza viruses . J . Virol . 93 , e00878 - 19 205 van Dongen , M . J . P . et al . ( 2019 ) A small - molecule fusion inhibitor of influenza virus is orally active in mice . Science 363 , eaar6221 206 Xu , W . et al . ( 2018 ) The antihistamine drugs carbinoxamine maleate and chlorpheniramine maleate exhibit potent antiviral activity against a broad spectrum of influenza viruses . Front . Microbiol . 9 , 2643 207 Fujioka , Y . et al . ( 2018 ) A sialylated voltage - dependent Ca 2 + channel binds hemagglutinin and mediates influenza A virus entry into mammalian cells . Cell Host Microbe 23 , 809 – 818 208 Lin , D et al . ( 2017 ) Potent influenza A virus entry inhibitors targeting a conserved region of hemagglutinin . Biochem . Pharmacol . 144 , 35 – 51 209 Holthausen , D . J . et al . ( 2017 ) An amphibian host defense peptide is virucidal for human H1 hemagglutinin - bearing influenza viruses . Immunity 46 , 587 – 595 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Author biographies Rick Heida Rick Heida received his master’s degree in biomedical sciences at the University of Groningen in the Netherlands in 2017 , with a main interest in microbiology and immunology . Currently , he is pursuing his PhD at the department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmacy at the University of Groningen under the supervision of Henderik W . Frijlink , Anke L . W . Huckriede and Wouter L . J . Hinrichs . His research focuses mainly on the evaluation of antiviral entry inhibitors with broad - spectrum potential and their suitability to be formulated as dry - powder formulations . In line with this , he works on optimizing methods for pulmonary administration of dry - powder formulations in small laboratory animals . Yoshita C . Bhide J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Yoshita C . Bhide completed her PhD in virology and immunology in 2018 at the University of Groningen under the supervision of Anke L . W . Huckriede . Her PhD research focused on improved and cross - protective influenza vaccine evaluation in vivo . She is now working as a postdoctoral researcher with Henderik W . Frijlink . Her current research focuses on in vitro and in vivo evaluation of novel entry inhibitors against influenza viruses . Her research has resulted in several peer - reviewed publications . Being a trained virologist , her research interests are in infectious diseases , especially viral pathogenesis and immune modulation , and the development of vaccines and antivirals . Matteo Gasbarri Matteo Gasbarri received his master’s degree in materials science at the Tor Vergata University of Rome . His master thesis focused on flexible perovskite solar cells and was carried out at the Center for Hybrid and Organic Solar Energy ( CHOSE ) . In 2017 , he joined Saule Technologies , developing new generation perovskite photovoltaic cells . Since September 2017 , he has been a PhD student in the Supramolecular Nanomaterials and Interfaces Laboratory ( SuNMIL ) at École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne ( EPFL ) , under the supervision of Francesco Stellacci . His research is primarily focused on the development and physicochemical understanding of non - toxic broad - spectrum antiviral nanomaterials . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Figure 1 . Chemical structures of the two sialic acids predominantly present in mammals : ( a ) N - acetylneuraminic acid ( Neu5Ac ) and ( b ) N - glycolylneuraminic acid ( Neu5Gc ) . The green ellipse highlights the only difference between the two : the substitution on the carbon atom at position 5 . Neu5Gc is not present in humans because of a mutation in the gene encoding the enzyme CMP ‐ N ‐ acetylneuraminic acid hydroxylase . Figure 2 . Schematic representation of the difference between avian ( blue ) and human ( green ) sialic - acid receptors . The only difference is the linkage between N - acetylneuraminic acid ( Neu5Ac ) and galactose ( Gal ) . In humans , Neu5Ac is linked through an α - 2 , 6 linkage to galactose , whereas for birds , Neu5Ac is linked to galactose via an α - 2 , 3 linkage . In humans , the sequence Neu5Ac - α - ( 2 - 6 ) - Gal - β - ( 1 - 4 ) - GlcNAc is also known as 6′ - sialyl - N - acetyllactosamine ( 6′ - SLN ) . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Figure 3 . Schematic representation of multivalency . ( a ) Multivalent interaction of a virus with its receptors on the host cell . ( b ) Monovalent interaction of a drug with the viral attachment protein . ( c ) Multivalent interaction of a drug with the viral attachment protein . Reproduced , with permission , from [ 188 ] . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Figure 4 . A schematic representation of the virucidal mechanism of action . The virucidal drug first interacts with the virus with kinetic constants K on and K off . If the compound used binds with an irreversible mechanism , a local increase in pressure on the virus leads to its inactivation , driven by a kinetic constant K v . Virus Virucidal Material k on k off k V J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Box 1 . The concept of multivalency in biological systems To the best of our knowledge , the concept of multivalency has been observed with all viral attachment proteins that have been structurally resolved to date . Multivalency is in fact common in biological systems [ 187 ] . It is understood that nature uses it to increase binding strength and consequently selectivity [ 188 , 189 ] . On the basis of this , many receptor analogues have been designed to be multivalent : that is , they were designed as macromolecules containing many repetitive units of the viral receptor to better bind to the virus ( Figure 3 ) . Another advantage of multivalent drugs over monovalent compounds is that a lower dose can be used to elicit the required effect [ 188 ] . The design of these compounds further requires the fine - tuning of several parameters such as scaffold geometry and the flexibility of the linkers , their length and their relative distance [ 182 , 188 , 190 ] . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 48 Table 1 . Structures of compounds discussed in this review Compound Structure In vitro activity Umifenovir ( Arbidol ) Influenza [ 67 ] EC 50 : 12 . 9 µM ± 1 . 4 to 30 . 9 µM ± 0 . 7 a Zika [ 158 , 191 ] EC 50 ( vero cells ) : 12 . 09 µM ± 0 . 77 10 . 57 µM ± 0 . 74 ; IC 50 ( A549 cells ) : 11 µM DAS - 181 ( Fludase ) NA Influenza [ 62 , 192 , 193 ] IC 50 : 0 . 25 nM to 1 . 0 nM a ; EC 50 : 0 . 02 µM to 0 . 75 µM a J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 49 LSTc - bearing liposomes b Influenza [ 181 ] IC 50 : 0 . 04 µM to 0 . 98 µM a 6′SL - PAMAM conjugates Influenza [ 182 ] IC 50 range ( for different compound variations ) : 3 . 4 µM to 220 µM J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 50 Linear polyglycerol sialosides Influenza [ 183 ] IC 50 : 2 . 35 nM + 0 . 83 BCX - 2798 derivative HPIV - 1 [ 82 ] IC 50 : 0 . 39 µM PAC - 3066 HPIV - 3 [ 84 ] IC 50 : 37 µM J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 51 17a Adenovirus - D37 [ 103 ] IC 50 ( HCE cell - binding assay ) : 1 . 4 nM ; IC 50 ( infection assay ) : 2 . 9 nM AY4 JC - polyomavirus [ 123 ] : dose - dependent inhibition from 100 µM to 1 mM EK1 MERS - CoV IC 50 : 0 . 11 µM ; OC43 - CoV IC 50 : 0 . 62 µM [ 134 ] a Range for several strains of influenza A and / or B . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 52 b 6′SL - PAMAM , 6′ - sialyllactose - polyamidoamine ; HPIV , human parainfluenza virus ; LSTc , sialylneolacto - N - tetraose c . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 53 Table 2 . Influenza entry inhibitors in the clinical phase Compound Type Sponsor Proposed target region Clinical status Trial identifier Refs DAS - 181 Sialidase Ansun Biopharma Host sialic acid Phase IIb study completed assessing safety and efficacy in otherwise healthy individuals infected with influenza A Phase I : NCT00527865 ; NCT01173224 ; NCT01651494 Phase II : NCT01037205 ; NCT01740063 ; NCT04298060 [ 61 , 62 , 159 , 192 ] CR6261 Monoclonal antibody US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases HA a stalk region Phase II study completed assessing efficacy of the drug in healthy individuals challenged with H1N1 compared to placebo Phase I : NCT01406418 Phase II : NCT02371668 [ 194 , 195 ] Umifenovir Indole derivative Pharmstandard HA stalk region Phase III study recruiting in China assessing the safety and efficacy of the drug in combination with oseltamivir in hospitalized influenza patients ; phase IV study with unknown status Phase III : NCT03787459 Phase IV : NCT01651663 [ 67 , 69 , 196 ] CT - P27 Monoclonal antibody Celltrion HA stalk region Phase IIb study recruiting assessing the safety and efficacy of the drug in influenza - A - infected patients compared to placebo Phase I : no data posted Phase II : NCT02071914 ; NCT01740063 ; NCT03511066 ; KCT0002211 NA MEDI8852 Monoclonal antibody MedImmune LLC HA stalk region Phase IIb withdrawn ( owing to delay in site enrolment timelines ) Phase I : NCT02350751 Phase II : NCT02603952 ; NCT03903718 [ 70 , 197 , 198 ] MHAA4549A Monoclonal antibody Genentech HA stalk region Phase II study completed assessing efficacy of the drug in hospitalized influenza - A - infected patients compared with oseltamivir Phase I : NCT01877785 ; NCT02284607 Phase 2 : NCT01980966 ; NCT02623322 ; NCT02293863 [ 71 , 199 , 200 ] VIS - 410 Monoclonal antibody Visterra HA stalk region Phase II study recruiting to assess safety and efficacy of the drug in hospitalized influenza - A - infected patients compared with oseltamivir Phase I : NCT02045472 Phase II : NCT02989194 ; NCT02468115 ; NCT03040141 [ 72 , 201 – 203 ] J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 54 a HA , haemagglutinin . Table 3 . Influenza entry inhibitors in the preclinical phase Compound Type Proposed target region Preclinical relevance Refs Sialic acid - functionalized Qβ - bacteriophage capsids Sialic - acid - functionalized bacteriophage capsid Receptor binding site of HA a In vitro and in vivo protection against two H3N2 strains [ 184 ] IY7640 Small molecule inhibitor HA stalk region In vitro protection against H3N2 , H1N1 and influenza B ; in vivo efficacy against H1N1 [ 204 ] JNJ4796 Small molecule inhibitor HA stalk region Protected mice against lethal and sublethal H1N1 influenza challenge after oral administration [ 205 ] Carbinoxamine maleate ; chlorpheniramine maleate Histamine antagonist Endocytic pathway Showed in vivo protection after challenge with H7N9 influenza A virus [ 206 ] 1428A33 / 1 ; 1428B5 / 1 ; F3A19 Monoclonal antibody Receptor binding site of HA In vivo efficacy against the A ( H1N1 ) pdm09 strain [ 60 ] Dialtizem Calcium channel blocker Voltage - gated Ca 2 + channel Ca v 1 . 2 In vivo efficacy against H1N1 [ 207 ] S - KKWK Lipopeptide HA stalk region Prevented HA - 2 rearrangements and subsequent membrane fusion of several H1N1 strains and H3N2 in vitro , and protected mice from lethal infection with H1N1 [ 208 ] Linear polyglycerol sialosides Linear polyglycerol sialosides Receptor binding site of HA In vitro protection against H3N2 and both avian H3N2 and avian H7N1 ; in vivo protection against H3N2 [ 183 ] Urumin Frog - derived peptide HA stalk region of H1 - type HA In vitro efficacy against several H1N1 strains ; in vivo protection against lethal H1N1 influenza A virus infection [ 209 ] 3 ′ - SL - and 6 ′ - SL - linked PAMAM dendrimers PAMAM conjugates Receptor binding site of HA In vivo protection against lethal H1N1 [ 41 , 182 ] Multivalent carbohydrate - binding modules Sialidase derivatives Host sialic acid In vivo protection against lethal H1N1 [ 63 ] a HA , haemagglutinin ; PAMAM , polyamidoamine ; SL , sialyllactose . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f