COGNITIVE SCIENCE Vol22 ( 3 ) 1998 , pp . 319 - 346 ISSN 0364 - 0213 Copyright Q 1998 Cognitive Science Society , Inc . All rights of reproduction in any form reserved . Reading Abraham Lincoln : An Expert / Expert Study in the Interpretation of Historical Texts SAM WINEBURG University of Washington This study explored how historians with different background knowledge read a series of primary source documents . Two university - based historians thought aloud as they read documents about Abraham Lincoln and the question of sla - very , with the broad goal of understanding Lincoln’s views on race . The first historian brought detailed content knowledge to the documents ; the second historian was familiar with some of the themes in the documents but quickly became confused in the details . After much cognitive flailing , the second his - torian was able to piece together an interpretative structure that brought him by the task’s end to where his more knowledgeable colleague began . Data analysis focused on how , lacking detailed content knowledge , this historian was able to regain his intellectual footing , work through confusion , and resist the urge to simplify . Implications of this work for cognitive analyses in history and education are discussed . I . INTRODUCTION The origins of chess are claimed by every people on the globe . The Jews trace the game to King Solomon , who reportedly taught it to his son Rehoboam . The Greeks trace it to the philosopher Xerxes , who passed it down to the young Aristotle . The Mandarin Hansing , the Brahman Sissa , the Persian astronomer Shatrenscha : all claim to have invented the game . It is , however , the Arabs whose claim bears linguistic witness : the declaration “check mate” derives from the Arabic sheik met , the sheik , or king , is dead . In the more modem history of cognitive science , the ancient game of chess has played a central role . It was to chess that the Dutch psychologist deGroot ( 1965 ) turned in his effort to understand complex problem solving . Similarly , Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) took up the movement of bishops and rooks to help us understand the nature of planning , means / end analysis , and problem - solving templates - concepts that still find great currency in the cog - nitive lexicon . DhCt all correspondence to : Sam Wineburg , University of Washington , 3 12 Miller , Box 353600 , Seattle , WA 98195 ; E - Mail : wineburg @ u . washington . edu . 319 320 WINEBURG The pioneering studies of chess masters , together with work on expertise in physics problem - solving ( Larkin , McDermott , Simon , & Simon , 1980 ; Chi , Feltovich , dz Glaser , 198 1 ) provided striking images of expert performance . The quintessential expert , as Glaser summarized the research literature in 1984 , possessed rich networks of highly - elaborated knowledge and myriad problem - solving templates that smoothed the way for the fluid pro - cessing of new information . This process went on with lightening speed and , compared to novices , relative ease . In the decade or so since Glaser’s review , a series of studies have complicated the image of the smooth and efficient expert . For example , Scardamalia and Bereiter’s ( 1991 ) work on written composition revealed that , compared to novices , expert writers took more time executing tasks , detected more problems in their writing , agonized longer over revisions , and spent longer time puzzling about the “rhetorical space” of their compositions . Rather than fluidity and rapidity , the writing process of these experts was characterized by a nag - ging propensity for finding flaws at every comer . Similarly , Wineburg ( 1991 , 1994 ) , in a study comparing university historians and high school history students , found that it was historians , not students , who echoed pangs of doubt about their interpretations , second - guessing themselves and appending strings of qualifications to their conclusions . Novices , on the other hand , quickly formed interpretations and typically never looked back . Both domains - literary writing and historical interpretation - provide a counterpoise to the two domains , chess and physics , that lent us our first - generation images of domain - based problem solving . In both literary writing and historical interpretation , solutions to problems are typically not “discovered” but imposed ( Resnick , 1987 ) . In the annals of physics or chemistry , a flawed solution is generally of “historical note” but not an essential part of understanding current phenomena ( e . g . , it’s hard to imagine chemists losing their job , or even being chagrined , if they couldn’t recount the archaic theory of phlogiston ) . But in a discipline such as history , a flawed approach to a problem ( Beard’s 1912 Economic Znterpretution ofthe Constitution comes immediately to mind ) is still prized and studied by newcomers , not because Beard “got it wrong” ( cf . Palmer , 1959 ) , but because his “wrong - ness” opened up a new way of seeing and asking questions - in short a whole new avenue of “finding problems” ( cf . Getzels , 1979 ) . In mathematics , rising stars make their mark by solving long - standing conundrums ( cf . Kolata , 1994 ) . In history , they do so by inventing conundrums that never go away . Different domains may yield qualitatively different images of expertise . But it is also clear from studies across domains that the problems we put to experts shape the images of problem solving we seek to understand ( cf . Clement , 1989 ) . So argued Schoenfeld ( 1985 ) , who presented an expert in number theory with a problem in geometry , a field this expert had not studied in years . The expert’s protocol bears a certain resemblance to the protocols of expert writers in Scardamalia and Bereiter’s work . Rather than the quick mobilization of knowledge , the expert scratched his head and mumbled , “Hmmm . I don’t exactly know where to start” ( 1985 , p . 21 ) . However , as he worked through the problem , the mathemati - cian was able to improvise on what he did know to reach a solution . His success stood in stark contrast to a group of college students who , despite having more knowledge about this particular topic , were unable to solve the problem . EXPERT / EXPERT STUDY 321 The form of expertise displayed by this mathematician can be thought of as “adaptive” as opposed to “routine” expertise ( Hatano & Inagaki , 1986 ) . Adaptive expertise speaks to the ability to apply , adapt , and otherwise stretch knowledge so that it addresses new situa - tions - often situations in which key knowledge is lacking . Viewed from this vantage point , expertise is less the rapid firing and deployment of knowledge than the ability to pick oneself up after a tumble , work through confusion , and reorient oneself to the problem at hand . These two images of expertise - the nimble and quick problem solver and the resource - ful and persistent bricole’ur - may not be in conflict , but may speak to two different aspects of expertise . Here , the work of Pate1 and Grwn ( 1991 ) provides an important distinction . In presenting problems to a group of physicians , with specialties that ranged from radiol - ogy to cardiology to psychiatry , Pate1 and Groen distinguished between “specific” and “generic” expertise - the former would be what a cardiologist brings to a triple bypass sur - gery , the latter what the radiologist brings . If we needed heart surgery , we would seek the best “specific expert” available . However , if we suffered a heart attack on an airplane we would pray that there was a “generic” expert - an oncologist , an ophthalmologist , some - body with an MD - sitting close by . The present study set out to explore in close detail the specific and the generic forms of expertise in the domain of history . Both participants in this study were experts given pre - vailing definitions in the literature but both differed in the level of factual and conceptual knowledge brought to the task . The task they were given centered around Abraham Lincoln and the question of race in the mid - nineteenth century . The overarching goal of the study was to explore how interpretations are formed when experts draw on different kinds of cog - nitive resources . II . METHOD Participants Two historians were recruited . The first historian ( hereafter referred to as Hl ) has spent a career writing and teaching about Abraham Lincoln and the Civil War . The criteria for recruiting the second historian ( H2 ) were obviously broader : I sought someone in the gen - eral field of American history , but not a specialist in the Civil War period , Abraham Lin - coln , or Reconstruction . Both historians were Caucasian males and held the rank of full professor . Each taught in a department that ranked in the top 25 history departments nationally ( according to the 1995 rankings of US News and World Report ) , and each earned the doctorate from a department consistently ranked among the top three . Together , these historians had written and edited nearly a dozen books and scores of articles . Both had taught undergraduate sur - vey courses spanning all of American history , with the majority of their upper - level and graduate courses in their respective specializations . During IQ’s graduate training , his comprehensive examinations covered the Civil War period , but he had not studied this period extensively since then . 322 WINEBURG Both historians volunteered for the study . Ideally , a crossed - design , in which Hl would have also read documents in H2’s specialization , would have been optimal . However , the busy schedules of both men prevented the extension of this task beyond its original con - fines . Background This study builds on previous work in which protocols were collected from 8 historians as they worked through documents about the Battle of Lexington during the Revolutionary War ( Wineburg , 1991 , 1994 ) . Based on these protocols , a model was formulated to account for historians’ cognitive representations of text . Although historians devoted great effort to creating situation models ( van Dijk & Kintsch , 1983 ) , they also spent considerable time creating a representation ofthe subtext , a model based on implicit textual information that reconstructed authors’ assumptions , beliefs , biases , convictions , commitments , hopes , and fears - in sum , the totality of their world views . Texts vary in the degree to which they dis - close these elements , but even short texts provide hints of authors’ polemical and rhetorical aims , a fact noted by all 8 historians but typically missed by less expert readers ( Wineburg , 1992 ) . As historians moved from document to document , the textual representations they built converged into a cumulative representation of the historical event . This intertextual model , the Event Model , incorporated new details and winnowed out less reliable ones . The Event Model not only integrated information from the textual evidence historians reviewed , but drew on the cognitive resources they brought to the task - their knowledge , skills , beliefs , and personal experiences . In an expansion and elaboration of this model , Leinhardt and Young ( 1996 ) focused on the role played by historians’ theoretical commitments , such as feminism or Marxism , or their particular disciplinary focus , such as economic or social history . Such prior commit - ments led historians to construct what Leinhardt and Young called a “historical read , ” an interpretation in which source material was filtered by and subsumed into larger theoretical frameworks . The historical read was most evident when historians read a familiar docu - ment of their own choosing . However , when asked to step out of their specialization and read a document they had never seen , historians relied on more general problem solving strategies , such as those identified in the study by Wineburg ( 1991 ) . In that study , three disciplinary - specific heuristics were identified : sourcing , or the act of considering the source of the document when determining its evidentiary value ; corrob - oration , in which the details of one document are compared with those of another before accepting such details as fact ; and contextualization , the act of creating a spatial and tem - poral context for a historical event . In particular , the theoretical conceptualization of this last heuristic , contextualizution , was closely tied to - indeed limited by - the aim of the task : the reconstruction of a specific battle on the eve of the American Revolution . But it is one thing to contextualize a discrete event like a battle , that has a fixed beginning , an unfolding , and a clear end . It’s quite another to contextualize a shift in zeitgeist or popular consciousness . This latter aim , cen - tral to understanding changing attitudes toward race in the mid - eighteenth century , requires EXPERT / EXPERT STUDY 323 the building of an abstract model that acknowledges competing ideas , broad shifts in opin - ion , and new ways of conceptualizing social phenomena . A desire to understand something about this broader range of contexts led to the formation of this task . Task Design The overriding goal in task design was to construct a task that would , in the words of Eric - sson and Smith ( 199 1 , p . 1 S ) , “capture superior performance under controlled conditions . ” To do so , more than three hundred documents were reviewed . The goal in selecting docu - ments was to combine canonical texts ( such as excerpts from the Lincoln / Douglas debates ) with lesser - known documents that shed a different light on Lincoln’s views . Key docu - ments from Lincoln’s contemporaries were also sought so that the final set of documents would sample from the range of opinion on slavery and race in the mid - 1800s . The seven documents included three from Abraham Lincoln , one from Stephen A . Dou - glas , and three from historical contemporaries ( see Appendix ) . The three documents from Lincoln spanned 21 years of his life . The earliest was composed when he was a 32 - year - old lawyer traveling up the Mississippi and writing a letter to a close friend ; the second was his rebuttal to Douglas in the first debate at Ottawa , Illinois ; the third , written when Lincoln was already president , came from a meeting with a group of free Blacks about establishing a colony in Central America . The other documents included Douglas’s opening statement at Ottawa ; statements from two religious racists , John Bell Robinson and John Van Evrie ; and a statement from the abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison . Procedure The two historians were taught the think - aloud procedure ( Ericsson & Simon , 1984 ) using an article on bees ( “Busy as a Bee ? ‘ ) from the science section of the New York Times ( July 30 , 1991 ) . They were asked to read this passage out loud and to verbalize everything that they “heard themselves thinking . ” For guidance , they were shown a list of six guidelines for eliciting verbal protocols taken from Perkins ( 198 l ) , such as “say whatever’s on your mind , ” “don’t overexplain or justify , ” “don’t worry about complete sentences , ” and so on . Historians were instructed to read the historical documents with the broad goal of “understanding the light they shed on Lincoln’s views on race . ” Each of the 7 documents was printed on a separate sheet , with the source of the document appearing at the top . His - torians read the documents in the same order but were allowed to go back to earlier docu - ments at any time . During historians ’ “concurrent reporting” ( cf . Ericsson & Simon , 1984 ; Pressley & Afflerbach , 1995 ) my own comments were minimal , only reminding historians to verbalize their thoughts when they fell silent . After each document , historians were asked to give a “retrospective report” on anything else they remembered themselves think - ing . Such retrospective reports are particularly susceptible to the criticisms of the think - aloud method ( Nisbett & Wilson , 1977 ; but see also Ericsson & Simon , 1984 ) . However , such reports offer insights into cognitive processes that are not provided by concurrent reports alone ( Robertson & Ericsson , 1988 ; Wineburg , 1991 ) . During data analysis , a sep - 324 WINERURG aration was maintained between data elicited during the concurrent and retrospective phases of the think - aloud ‘method . Data Analysis Data analysis sought to describe and draw relationships among the different kinds of cog - nitive processes engaged in by historians . Protocols were transcribed verbatim and analysis was systematic . Analysis occurred in four stages . Stage 1 . Protocols were prepared by parsing them into “conceptual units . ” A conceptual unit was defined as a unit of speech that focused on a single idea . A unit could be as short as a few words ( if a single thought was discernible ) and as long as eight lines of the proto - col . If an utterance exceeded eight lines , it was split into two units . Transcripts were pre - pared using an Apple Laser printer with a 1Zpoint typeface and a % - character carriage return . This precision , which might be overwrought elsewhere , was necessary for insuring consistency in applying decision rules for comparing the two protocols . Stage 2 . Protocols were systematically reviewed in order to create a coding scheme . Rather than applying a pre - existing scheme , the goal here was the categorization of cogni - tive phenomena and a careful description of their features . Initially , protocols were reviewed inductively . Working hypotheses were developed , checked , refined , and re - checked in subsequent reviews . In this type of analysis , rigor is achieved by the refinement , addition and elimination of codes , so that the surviving codes bear theoretical significance but never stray far from the empirical data at hand . Stage 3 . Three broad codes were used to characterize each conceptual unit . When a sin - gle unit straddled more than one code , only the dominant code , following Waem ( 1980 ) , was assigned . These comments were self - referential statements that addressed aspects of the historians’ beliefs , personal views , or opinions . These included metacognitive comments that pointed to aspects of confusion , emerging understanding , or the formulation of plans . Also coming under this category were comments addressing affective responses evoked by the texts . Text This code embraced comments that made reference to the explicit and implicit mean - ings of the text . These included comments about literal meaning ( e . g . , the establishment of basic causal connections , the decoding of anaphoric references , etc . ) as well as comments at an interpretative level ( e . g . , a narrowing the range of textual meanings or speculating about what historical actors meant or intended ) . Context Comments coded as contexl were devoted to the establishment of a textual “world” to make the text intelligible . Six sub - codes were generated to capture the distinct aspects of this category ( a full coding scheme , along with decision rules , is available from the author ) : EXPERT / EXPERT STUDY 325 Spatio - temporal comments focused on the physical location of events and of human beings set against concrete geographical settings . Such comments related to the temporal sequence or chronology of events linked in time . Comments about a “mental picture” of events or seeing something in the “mind’s eye” also came under this code . Social - rhetorical comments related to the social demands of situations in which actors sought to persuade others of their points of view . Under this category came comments that fleshed out an intellectual and ideological landscape in which people in the past wrote and spoke . Biographic comments focused on the life histories of individuals , the events that shaped their personal thinking and behavior , their characteristic modes of response , and the kinds of beliefs that framed their conceptual universe . Historiographic comments made reference to the body of historical writing ( the “sec - ondary literature” ) about the past . Linguistic comments addressed the historical meanings of words , terms , and phrases , including speculations about the range of meanings that differ from contemporary conno - tation and denotation . Analogical comments sought to explain past events or behavior by drawing explicit comparisons to other historical periods . A second rater blind to the identity and backgrounds of the historians coded the proto - cols using the three general codes , yielding an acceptable reliability , Cohen’s K = . 86 . Another rater coded contextual comments applying the six sub - codes , Cohen’s K = . 84 . Stage 4 . During this final stage , protocols were coded for other cognitive behaviors . These codes were independent from the codes specified under Stage 3 . Two phenomena were identified for coding : ( 1 ) intertextual linkages , in which historians made explicit ref - erence to previous documents read in the set ; and ( 2 ) the specification of ignorance . This construct referred to instances when historians explicitly acknowledged confusion , expressed puzzlement or wonder , asked questions , or specified gaps in knowledge . Unlike the coding scheme from Stage 3 ( which was applied only to concurrent reporting data ) , the application of these codes included data from both concurrent and retrospective phases . Interrater agreement was tested with a second rater : a 100 % agreement was reached for intertextual linkages ; 96 % for the specification of ignorance . III . RESULTS Length The two protocols differed in length . Hl spent approximately 2 hours and 45 minutes read - ing the documents in comparison to H2’s 1 hour and 50 minutes . The difference in number of words uttered was also considerable : 5073 words for Hl versus 2992 for H2 . Types of Contexts Protocols were coded according to the three categories of Self , Text , and Context . A Chi - square analysis yielded significant differences between the two protocols , x2 ( 2 ) = 16 . 03 , f EXPERT / EXPERT STUDY 327 p c . Ol . For Hl , there were 105 conceptual units . Se & accounted for 9 % ( 9 ) of conceptual units , Text 30 % ( 32 units ) , and Context 61 % ( or 64 units ) . For H2 , there were 77 total con - ceptual units . H2’s respective percentages were 18 % ( 14 units ) Self , 51 % ( 39 ) Text , and 31 % ( 24 units ) Context . These differences reflected several expected results : I - I2 more often than Hl raised questions about his knowledge and monitored his own confusion ( Self ) ; Hl brought more background knowledge to the task , which provided him with more resources for building a context . This pattern carries over to the distribution of comments categorized as Context : 61 % of Hl’s comments fall under context , while only 31 % of H2’s do . Contextual comments were further coded using the six sub - codes . Figure 1 shows the relative frequency of the differ - ent types of contextual comments . The greatest differences occurred in the categories of Social - Rhetorical and Biographic context . These findings reflect an essential difference in the kinds of intellectual resources historians brought to this task . H2 lacked the key ingredient , factual knowledge about Lin - coln , that would allow him to build a biographic context . On the other hand , the task pro - vided him with raw materials for creating a social - rhetorical context . The document set itself included an array of social and rhetorical genres - a campaign debate , a personal let - ter , a newspaper editorial , a public address , and so on - that allowed H2 to draw on related knowledge about these discourse forms in public and private life . Although Figure 1 shows the relative frequency of contextual comments , it does not address differences in kind . Table 1 addresses this by juxtaposing examples from each of the two protocols . In the example from the category of Spatio - temporal context , H2 draws on knowledge of other periods in the history of the Americas ( and the role of climate on Europeans’ New World ventures ) to bring texture to Lincoln’s plan for a Central American colony . On the other hand , Hl’s comments zero in on his extensive knowledge of this event , which he places in a micro - chronological sequence that takes into account the desolation of the Union Army after Bull Run , the deliberations by Lincoln and his advisors about the timing of the Emancipation Proclamation , and the effects on Lincoln of the bloodiest day of the war , the Battle of Antietam , which left 22 , 000 dead and wounded in its wake . A similar pattern in the specificity of comments is evident in Biographic context . H2’s comments indicate some knowledge about Lincoln’s concerns about emancipation , but even here his knowledge is overshadowed by what he doesn’t know . On the other hand , Hl’s comments , in this instance a comment about abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison’s struggles with his son , show intimate familiarity with key figures of this time . Hl’s other comments in this category often spoke to issues of character - people’s idiosyncrasies and mannerisms , their ways of navigating the social world . For example , when reading Docu - ment C , Hl commented on Lincoln’s description of slaves bound together “like so many fish upon a trot - line” ( C . 5 ) . The image provoked Hl’s comment about Lincoln’s character - istic use of words : It has always interested me about this passage how precise Lincoln is in describing a small iron clevis . He doesn’t even say they were chained or anything . . . . People who rode the circuit with [ Lincoln ] as judges . . . the judges and lawyers would ride from one TABLE 1 Examdes of Historians’ Contextual Comments Spatio - Temporal Lincoln’s address on Colonization delivered to o group of freed Black men at the White House on August 14 , 1862 . ( D . 4 ) It is interesting , that Lincoln is , although he has decided on Emancipa - tion , and , as you know , his Cabinet persuaded him to wait until you win a victory . The North was losing battles . Lee and Stonewall Jockson , the second battle of Bull Run and all the rest of it were really the biggest victories the South ever won , I suppose right there , before the middle of August , 1862 . And it was Seward I think who was SecretoF / of State who said , lookie , if you issue an Emancipation Proclamation now it’s going to seem a lost gasp , death - bed repentance and all of that , you’re about out . Wait until you’ve won a victory . And so the Battle of Antietam which was militarily sort of a draw , it was enough of a victory . . . and it did stop the invasion of the North for the moment . [ Hl ] The country is a very excellent one for any people ( D . 10 ) ‘Any people’ except Europeans who died there in great numbers . Europeans were much more successful thriving in the more moderate climates , North American , obove Mexico , South America away from the tropical zones . So it amuses me when he says this country is “a very excellent one for any people . ” [ H2 ] Social - Rhetorical Then support Mr . Lincoln and the Black Republicon party . Who are in favor of the citizenship of the Negro . ( A . 5 ) OK . My reaction so far is that this probably expresses Douglas’s view . That’s his real views , and that he is appealing to his audience . Many of his audience probably share this view . So I don’t think Douglos had to distort his view - l think his views fit in with the views of a lot of people in his audience . [ Hl ] Lincoln’s address on Colonization delivered to a group of freed Black men at the White House on August 14 , 1862 . ( D . 4 ) It’s important that the audience is a group of free Black men . One would assume that he would say things differently to them than to others . Although , maybe not . [ H2 ] Biographic Garrison . . . worked for a shorf time OS the assistant editor of the Genius before beginning his own anti & very periodical in 1831 . ( F . 2 ) What I was thinking about was an incident . . . [ about ] Gar - rison and his son , in about 1870 or 71 . Garrison’s son , who hod fought in the Civil War , wos an editor of The Nation magazine . The Nation was started in 1865 , the magazine that is still going now , started in 1865 . . . . Garrison’s son and The Nation had taken the position that there was so much corruption in the Reconstruction governments that they should be given up , and Garri - son and his son had debated this between themselves for some time . . . . ( The son ] said [ to the father ] there is no need for us to talk about this anymore , we are on exactly opposite sides . He said , we modern people realize , he says , you keep harping bock to this old issue , we modern people reolize that corruption is the big issue . [ Hl ] He belongs to an inferior rote and must alwoys occupy an inferior position . ( A . 1 3 ) I don’t know as much obout Lincoln’s views as I think I do . As I read it and see Douglas , perhaps putting words in Lincoln’s mouth , I’m not quite sure about what I do and don’t know about Lincoln . . . . I know that [ Lincoln was ] very practically aware of the concerns of bringing them together OS if they were equal in the same society . But I don’t know enough about Lincoln’s views to , maybe , moke some other judgments I’ve been moking . [ HZ ] Historiographic In the right to eat the bread which his own hond earns , he is my equal and the equal of Judge Dou - glas , ond the equal of every living man . ( B . 9 ) A staunch critic of Lincoln has cited this passage as example of Lincoln’s sort of two - facedness . . . And that’s what Richard Hofstadter did in his book The American Politico / Tradition published in 1948 . Hofstodter , I think , later changed his views about that . [ Hl ] continued 329 WINEBURG TABLE 1 Contiued Between these extremes of humanity ore the intermediofe races ( G . 2 ) I’m reminded here about Win - throp Jordan’s ( 1968 ) book White over Block , ond how the colors come to be important for English - speaking people . The color of block , the color of white , and what those entoiled psycho - logically apart from race and people , but [ what ] the colors themselves had meant . [ HZ ] linguistic If we deal with those Negroes . . . whose intellects ore clouded by slavery , we have very poor materials to start with . ( D . 6 ) I think , it’d be interesting , one woy is to criticize from today’s standpoint , the really sort of historical way , would be to see whether there were ony abolitionists at the time , you see . . . [ who ] soy it differently . And I think whot we’ve found out in recent studies of aboli - tionists is that many of them thought of it the very same way . [ Hl ] 1 , as well as judge Douglas , am in favor of the race to which I belong having the superior position . ( 8 . 5 ) I’m going bock and rereading the sentence . These 191h - century orators spoke in more complicated sentences . They weren’t used to sound bites . I’m wondering what he means by physical difference - - if it’s simply the color or there are mental traits that he’s thinking about , that he also hos in mind when he refers to “physical differences” ? [ H2 ] If we deol with those Negroes who ore not free at fhe beginning , and whose intellects are clouded by slavery , we hove very poor moteriols to star ! with . ( D . 6 ) Agoin , one might picture that from the present doy standpoint as , kind of racist kind of statement . . . . One might make the some kind of statement today , I mean when one observes in the countries of Eastern Europe hying to adopt to a sort of a free market , and a free politico1 processes . , . . People who’ve not hod experience . . in doing this , one can’t expect that right off they’re going to be oble to do this right away . [ Hl ] How true it is that God renders the worst of human conditions tolerable . ( C . 8 ) His point that “God renders the worst of human conditions tolerable” makes sense in that context . It’s an insight into human nature that’s been confirmed by a lot of others . One example that comes to mind is Alexander Solshenietzen writing about Siberia ond how , like the camps in Siberia for Soviet pris - oners , you get to find out what is structured ond defined rewards in that misery . And that’s what I’m reminded of . [ HZ ] place to another , and Lincoln would be riding on in a buggy , so there’s plenty of time to talk and they’d see a tree and they’d all agree that that’s a beautiful tree , but then it would always be Lincoln , “Well now what does its beauty consist in ? Does its beauty consist in its form ? Does it consist in its color ? Does it consist in the location of the tree , or what ? And this comes up several times . People comment on that Lincoln always seemed to be trying to get to the heart of the matter . . . Not only when he’s president , but even before he’s president . Frequently when Lincoln has said something it’s really not possible - at least I’ve never found it possible - to say what he said in fewer words than he said it . He had boiled it down right to the essence . H2’s characterization of Lincoln here is consistent with other historians’ descriptions . Wills ( 1992 ) notes that Lincoln frequently discussed philology with his personal secretary ( and later Secretary of State under McKinley ) John Hay . Lincoln’s speeches have long been studied by students of oratory for their balanced rhythm and elegant structure . And , perhaps hyperbolically , Lincoln scholar McPherson ( 199 1 ) titled one of his essays about the 16th president , “How Lincoln Won the War With Metaphors . ” WINERURG Overview of the Two Readings Hl’s Reading Although Hl asked several questions in the course of his reading , his protocol is an extended elaboration of views he first laid out during Document A , Douglas’s speech at Ottawa . Here Douglas imputes to Lincoln the belief of God - given equality between the races , the notion that the slave “was endowed with equality by the Almighty and that no human law can deprive him of these rights” ( @ Document A , line 9 , or A . 9 ) . At this early stage in the reading , Hl gave an overview of issues upon which the whole task pivoted : Lincoln accepted that slavery was the law of the land and was on record that he wasn’t going to use force to try to change that law of the land , and so long as slavery existed by the Constitution , Lincoln would support it . So it depends a good bit on what “no human law can deprive him of these rights” - precisely what that means . . . Lincoln certainly over and over stated [ the centrality ] of the Declaration of Independence , just as Douglas said , and he stated [ it ] frequently . . . . That in the “view of God” Blacks were equal - Lincoln right off - it doesn’t sound like Lincoln would put it that way . Here , then , is a telegraphic look at the nexus of issues that influenced Lincoln’s views about slavery : Hl focuses on the relationship between the language of the Declaration of Independence , the constraints of the Constitution , the concept of natural rights ( or what “no human law can deprive him of these rights” means ) , and whether or not God figures into Lincoln’s public position on slavery and emancipation . It is easy to get lost in this swirl of issues . To modern ears , it would seem that if one sub - scribed to the proposition that “all men are created equal” ( a common but overly - simplified distillation of the Declaration of Independence ) the abrogation of slavery would automati - cally follow . However , in the 1850s these issues were more complicated than they might seem now . Although some commentators have viewed Document B as contradictory to Lincoln’s other public statements ( hence Hl’s reference to historian Richard Hoftstader under Historiogruphic Context in Table l ) , Hl sees it instead as “reflective of the complex - ity of Lincoln’s position” ( @ B . 9 ) . A close examination of Lincoln’s response shows aspects that are easily overshadowed by its charged language . Indeed , as Hl pointed out , the only thing Lincoln is willing to con - cede unequivocally to Douglas is that there is a “physical difference between the two races . ” From then on , Lincoln equivocates . Regarding moral or intellectual endowment , there is “perhaps” a difference , Lincoln says . This “perhaps , ” a qualification typically missed by contemporary readers , is crucial , for even to raise the possibility that the races were morally and intellectually equivalent must be viewed against the backdrop of mid - nineteenth century racism ( Fredrickson , 1971 , 1975 ) . As Wills notes ( 1992 , p . 96 ) the agnosticism signaled by “perhaps” constituted the “liberal” position of the day . What might appear to modem readers as a bit of preciosity was to Lincoln and his contemporar - ies a distinction full of implication . Because it is difficult to imagine a world in such agnos - ticism would be viewed as “progressive , ” modern readers tend to view Lincoln’s statements as contradictory and inconsistent , or worse - hypocritical and self - serving . EXPERT / EXPERT STUDY 331 After this point in the task , Hl’s reading was largely an amplification of earlier themes . The most complete statement of his views , a place where his think - aloud took on the cadence and rhythm of a university lecture , came at Document E , the religious justification of slavery offered by John Bell Robinson . In his retrospective report , Hl compared Lin - coln’s position to Robinson’s : Lincoln never connects religion and slavery . In fact , in his Second Inaugural that is the big contrast that he draws , where he says that , in this contest , it’s now nearing its end , it’s March , 1865 . Both sides read the same Bible , both sides pray to the same God . He says it may seem strange that any people should pray to God to justify an institution like slavery . Clearly , I think , to Lincoln , it seems strange , but then , characteristically , in Lin - coln’s way , he says “let us not judge so that we be not judged . ” It seems to me that’s the one time that I can think of where Lincoln mentions God in relation to slavery , and the assumption is that it is absurd for people to pray to God to justify human slavery . That is the characteristic Lincoln view , and he even goes further when he suggests in the fol - lowing sentence or so that it may very well be that God is not on either side . Seems to me that’s the real insight of Lincoln which I’m not sure I’ve seen equaled anywhere . It would be beautiful if we could incorporate that in our foreign policy . . . . When two peo - ple are quarreling one may sympathize with one side but that’s not to say that it’s totally right versus total wrong there , and that we shouldn’t say that God is on our side . That’s not for us to say . And it may very well be that there are a lot of conflicts that God is not on either side . Now that seems to be a degree of detachment , that’s the characteristic about Lincoln that I’m so struck by : the detachment . In the midst of fighting a hard war , I mean people can be detached if they didn’t care who won the war , and there were peo - ple like that , and certainly they were detached , but to fight a hard fight , as hard as any - body , and then be able to be detached at the end and say we must not assume that God is on our side . I don’t think [ God ] is on their side , because I don’t think that God would support slavery , but that’s not to say that God is on our side . And that seems to me to be such a great degree of detachment that I’m not sure anybody can go beyond it . H2’s Reading H2 confronted his lack of knowledge almost immediately . At the third sentence of the first document , he made this admission : As I read this and see Douglas perhaps putting words in Lincoln’s mouth , I’m not quite sure about what I do and don’t know about Lincoln . Douglas makes it sound as if Lin - coln believes they’re equal , Blacks and Whites , on virtually every level , but I don’t know to what extent Lincoln did or did not believe that . I know that he was very prac - tically aware of the concerns of bringing [ the races ] together as if they were equal in the same society at this point , but I don’t know enough about Lincoln’s views to make some other judgments I’ve been making . ( QA . 3 ) In the next document , Lincoln’s rebuttal of Douglas , Lincoln states that he has “no pur - pose to introduce political and social equality” between the races . At this point ( aB . 4 ) II2 paused : “Just rereading the sentence again . Again trying to think about how Douglas’s statement about Lincoln thinking the two were equal could have some truth if it falls out - side the realm of what Lincoln identifies as political and social equality . ” A sentence later ( @ BS ) , H2 stopped again : 332 WINEBURG I’m going back and rereading the sentence . These nineteenth - century orators spoke in more complicated sentences . They weren’t used to sound bites . I’m wondering what he means by “physical difference . ” If it’s simply the color or are there mental traits that he’s thinking about , that he also has in mind when he refers to “physical differences” ? At the end of the document , H2 focused on the question of natural rights and what they might mean with reference to slavery : If Blacks have the “natural rights to life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness” one would assume that liberty and pursuit of happiness would indicate that they cannot be slaves at the same time . Similarly , if Blacks have the “right to eat the bread which his own hand earns , ” that they have the right to the product of their labor , that is the pursuit of happiness or liberty , one form or the other , then if that is a natural right then slavery goes against those natural rights . ( @ B . S ) H2 called attention to this apparent contradiction but did not try to dissolve it . Over the next five documents his reading can be thought of as a prolonged exercise in the specifica - tion of ignorance , in which he made a careful accounting of the knowledge he would need before he could reach judgment . His stance here bears uncanny similarity to the protocols of historians collected by Leinhardt and Young ( 1996 , esp . p . 465 ) . Across Documents C - H , H2 asked , on average , 4 . 2 questions per document , underscoring what he did not know with markers such as “I don’t have enough to go on” or “This makes no sense to me . ” H2’s process of asking questions came to a head at Document E , the statement from John Bell Robinson . Robinson’s religious racism posed a contrast to Lincoln’s views , but the precise nature of this contrast was not immediately apparent . The differences only came into focus , slowly and painstakingly , as H2 backtracked to earlier documents . By the end of Document E , H2’s questions started to take shape . His comments at this point , with notations that indicate links to previous documents , appear in Figure 2 . H2’s point of departure as he backtracked to earlier documents was John Bell Robin - son’s claim that God ordained Africans to their status as slaves . The first link backward was to Lincoln’s response to Douglas ( Document A ) , in which Lincoln focused on physical differences between the races and issue of natural rights . H2 finds no mention , however , of God in Lincoln’s response . From here , in link 2 , the historian searched for Lincoln’s con - nection between slavery and God . This search brought him back again to Document A ( @ A . S ) , a statement in which Douglas imputes to Lincoln the belief that “Negro equality is guaranteed by the laws of God , and that it is asserted in the Declaration of Indepen - dence . ” From Douglas’s claims , H2 moved to Lincoln’s response ( link 3 ) , which connects the Declaration of Independence to issues of emancipation but makes no explicit reference to God . In link 4 , H2 pinpointed a place in Lincoln’s letter to Mary Speed in which slaves and God are explicitly linked , a linkage which gave him a basis for comparing Lincoln’s views to John Bell Robinson’s . It is at the next link , the fifth , that we see a conscious act of refine - ment in H2’s understanding . He returned for the third time to Document B , raising ques - tions about the nature of natural rights and where these rights might come from according to Lincoln . EXPERT / EXPERT STUDY Link 0 - Link 7 - Llnk 6 - Link 6 - Link 4 - Link 3 - Link 2 - Link 1 - start - 333 John Boll Lincoln’s Lincoln’s Mtor Ottawa dob8t . z Ottawa dobate Robinson Document E addrem on to Mary sped Llncokl’s reply Douglas’8 colonlmtlon DOCUt ? WltC to Douglas ot = W DocumentD DoamentB Statomont Figure 2 . Retrospective report for HZ after reading Document E Lincoln also talks about Blacks being endowed with certain things from God , but “usefulness as slave & or a status of slaves isn’t one of the things that he mentions . [ I’m going to ] look at some of the earlier [ documents ] . What I’m looking for is his discussion [ ofl the physical difference between the two and his discussion of natural rights [ to ] see if he links those at all to God . ‘ . @ It was Dough’” who linked Lincoln to believe about the Negro to God and the Declaration of Independence . But in this , 3 . B in Lincoln’s reply , he refers - I’m looking here for reference to God - I’m not finding it but I haven’t finished yet , he refers to the Declaration of Independence . But in the letter to Mary Speed 4 . c he did say “how true it is that God renders the worst of human conditions tolerable . ” But God didn’t render slavery a condition that Blacks ought to find themselves in , according to Lincoln . Lincoln keeps going out of it in these things , he talks about the Declaration of Independence , 5 . B he talks about natural rights - I’m not sure where these come from in his mind - and he talks about natural differences . But he does not bring God into it other than to say that God makes , God allows people to make the worst of human conditions tolerable . 6 . C And that’s a form of mercy , not of any kind of restriction on their status or behavior . What I thought , Douglas’” has accused Lincoln of saying that Blacks had equal rights from the Declaration of Independence and God . Lincoln didn’t say that in these things . [ He didn’t say ] anything about God , just the Declaration of Independence * . ’ and natural rights , wherever those come from . Nore . + Denotes the starting place for the reading . The words in quotation marks are from the current document being read . 0 Numbers refer to the order of links to other documents ; letters refer to the document being referenced . 334 WINEBURG In returning to Document D in link 6 , I - I2 came to view the letter to Mary Speed as a counter to John Bell Robinson . Lincoln connects God and slavery in the Speed letter in order to stress the common humanity of all peoples , not to restrict slaves’ status or behav - ior . When H2 returned to Stephen Douglas’s claims in link 7 , he was now in a position to dispute them . H2’s final link , his eighth , brought him back for the third time to Lincoln’s speech at Ottawa . H2 sees that even in justifying his position against slavery , Lincoln leaves God out of the equation , appealing instead to the natural rights enumerated in the Declaration of Independence . In the course of this zigzagged comment , H2 came to understand that while Robinson appeals to God to justify slavery as a lower form of manhood , Lincoln appeals to God to connect the races in common humanity . Through this intertextual weave , he learned that Lincoln justifies the equality of the races , not by appealing to God , but by appealing to the natural rights in the Declaration of Independence , a reinterpretation so sweeping that Wills ( 1992 ) called it the “Second American Revolution . ” Although H2 started off the task con - fused and full of questions , he ended up with a sophisticated understanding of Lincoln’s position that brought him by the task’s end to an interpretation similar to where his more knowledgeable counterpart , Hl , began . Specification of Ignorance The protocols of the two historians were coded for instances of the specification of igno - rance . There were 21 instances for H2 versus 7 for Hl , 2 = - 2 . 02 , p < . OS , Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test . The nature of each historians’ specification of ignorance reflected similar patterns from other parts of the protocol . Hl’s questions demonstrated the specificity and depth of some - one who has spent a career studying this time period ; each query responded to a particular detail in the documents with no conceptual linkage among the 7 instances . On the other hand , H2’s questions echoed one other until the point when they came together in an inter - pretive outline ( see Figure 2 ) . The difference in how these historians specified what they did not know is illustrated in Table 2 , a point in the task when both responded to the same phrase . For IX ! , Lincoln’s use of the phrase “capable of thinking like White men” is “baffling , ” one which he has to “think about” twice within this short comment . Even then , I - I2 expressed doubt about whether he had enough to go on . In contrast , Hl immediately char - acterized the phrase as an unfortunate choice of words by Lincoln , who used the term “White men” here as a synonym for “free men . ” Hl then laid out different criteria for judg - ing Lincoln , “present day standards” and the “historical way . ” By “present day standards , ” Lincoln lays himself “open to criticism . ” But a different problem faces the historian who wants to contextualize Lincoln . If , in Lincoln’s world , the word “white” was synonymous with “free , ” then Lincoln can hardly be blamed for using a phrase whose meaning was apparent to him and his contemporaries . But how would we know if this interpretation was correct ? Hl’s comment shows us in small compass how historians both formulate hypoth - eses and propose ways of verifying them . Hl proposed a search of the literature of aboli - tionists to see if they , too , used this phrase , a fact that would “weaken the historical EXPERT / EXPERT STUDY TABLE 2 . Comparison of Historians’ Comments at “Capable of Thlnking like White Men” Hl H2 Clearly I think , from the present day standards “Capoble of thinking like White men . ” This is a he’s open to criticism by bringing color into it , “capable of thinking as free men , ” see that’s what we want , it’s not whether they’re White or not . . . I think he meant free men . Not those who have been systematically oppressed , and I think in his view , he just automatically - - he’s never seen White men enslaved . Now White men have been enslaved in various parts of the world , but he had never seen it . So he equated White with free , Black with slaves . It would be interesting - - one way would be to criticize him from today’s standpoint . But the really sort of historical way , would be to see whether there were any abolitionists at the time , you see . . . [ who ] say it differently . And I think what we’ve found out in recent studies of abolitionists is that many of them thought of it the very same way . That is , there were aboli - tionists who were ‘mcists , ” who thought in terms of Whites free , Blacks slaves . So that would dull - - if that’s the case - - that would dull , unless we had people at Lincoln’s time who didn’t make the same error as I would call it that Lincoln made - - it would weaken the his - torical criticism of Lincoln . You can certainly criticize Lincoln from today’s standpoint . From today’s standpoint he should have known bet - ter . baffling stotemem . I have to think about it . I want to read it over again . Cleorly the condi - tion of slavery in his mind has clouded their thinking . It’s give him , given the nation’s poor materials with which to work . Poor materials for whot ? For the nation to work with ? I’m not quite sure . . . . “Capable of thinking like White men” ? Does that mean that they have never been enslaved or that they are so far from sla - very that they don’t think as if they hove ever been slaves ? I’ve got to read it again . I think too much hos been taken out of it for me to appreciate exactly what’s going on in that paragraph . I don’t quite understand the con - text ; I’m a little confused . But clearly , the idea that if we can start with Blacks who haven’t been enslaved , we’re starting with better materials . People who perhaps haven’t had ideas of self - government and self - support beaten out of them by slavery . But I’m not sure if the idea is to take these better materials to some other place , Africa or Centrol America , or if he wants to send the defective materials overseas to these colonies . I’m not quite sure what’s going on . Obviously making an appeal to the free Black audience that they’re the ones who ought to be leading the way . Which makes the most sense ? I’m not sure . criticism of Lincoln . ” In this example , Hl not only specifies his ignorance but lays out an action plan for remedying it . Intertextual Links The two historians differed in the number of times they referred back to previous documents . Hl made 3 intertextual links versus 20 links for H2 , Z = - 1 . 8 , p = . 06 , Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test . During the initial part of the task , neither historian looked back frequently to ear - lier documents . Across Documents B - D , Hl had 1 link , H2 had 2 . However , at Document E , I - I2 made 9 links ( 8 that appear in Figure 2 ) . I - I2 made another 9 links over the final two doc - uments , an indication of his attempt to create a context within the task itself . IV . DISCUSSION This study offers different images of historical expertise ( see Table 3 ) . In many respects , Hl resembled the sure - footed experts from other domains . For him , these documents acti - 336 WINEBURG vated broad associations and extensive declarative knowledge that let him situate docu - ments in an web of chronologically ordered events - sometimes down to the sequence of days within a specific month of the Lincoln presidency . At other times the documents pro - voked seemingly ready - made interpretations , points when the think - aloud took on the qual - ity of a “profess - aloud . ” Hl’s protocol exemplifies the range of ways that historians create historical contexts - ways that go beyond simple notions of situating events in time and space . From Hl’s pro - tocol , we learn how an understanding of the Lincoln - Douglas debates is enriched by knowledge of the life history of Abraham Lincoln and his own development as a thinker . Further , we see the pivotal role played by the establishment of a linguistic context , the rec - ognition that words themselves have histories that must be considered before rushing to judgment or condemnation ( cf . Olson , 1994 ) . We see also how the reading of history takes place against the backdrop of its own interpretative history . When Hl invoked the historian TABLE 3 Features of Expertise as Displayed by Two Historians Aspect Hl Reading Time 165 minutes Definition of Key Issues 4 minutes into task H2 110 minutes 43 minutes into task Lincoln’s views re : slavery Major difference in stance revolve around conflicts between Lincoln and religious between enacted law ( Consti - mcists - while each appeals tution ) , natural law ( as set to God , they do so for opposite down in Dec . of Indepen - reasons . Lincoln’s argument dence ) , and Divine Law . for emancipation springs from his interpretation of natural rights . Specification of Ignorance Confexf Creation Nature of Expertise 7 instances 2 1 instances Each in response to specific tex - Pattern of linked questions that tual details with minimal con - led to search strategy within ceptual linkage between document set . Question asking questions ; explicit strategy of as key to formation of new hypothesis testing for resolving interpretation . textual questions . Knowledge brought to task General forms of context ( e . g . , afforded creation of biographic social - rhetorical ) less depen - context ; seamless interweoving dent on specific topical infor - of knowledge brought to task mation ; creation of intertextual and associations spurred by context within task . specific documents . Encyclopedic knowledge of topic Ability to work through confusion , and its chronology , down to resist the urge to simplify , ond the sequence of days within a regain intellectual footing specific month of the Lincoln despite major gaps in knowl - presidency . Extensive knowl - edge : in short , the ability to edge of familial texts OS well as develop new knowledge even positions of competing inter - when lacking many of the req - pretive schools . uisite tools to do so . EXPERTKXPERT STUDY 337 Richard Hofstadter ( see Table 1 ) he shows how his own position results from an on - going dialogue with a historiographic tradition . Finally , Hl’s protocol allows us to see how his - torians , when generating self - explanations ( cf . Chi & Bassok , 1989 ) , draw analogies with and comparisons to other historical periods . In fact , over the course of his reading , Hl drew twice as many analogies ( 4 ) as H2 . This may be one way that historical expertise differs from expertise in other domains . In sci - ence , for example , there is some indication that the tendency to create analogies varies inversely with knowledge about the target phenomena ( Dunbar , in press ) . Here , at least , the trend went the other way : it was the more knowledgeable historian who made more fre - quent comparisons to other time periods . The protocol of the second historian , H2 , shines a different light on the reading of his - tory . Here , the historian was thrown into unfamiliar territory and , at least initially , responded with confusion . Yet , as he worked through the task , H2’s questions began to cluster around a set of constructs and relationships that proved crucial to his understanding . Despite early stumbling , H2’s adaptive expertise was evident by the task’s end , when an interpretative structure that made sense of these issues came into view . Even with major gaps in background knowledge , H2 succeeded in creating a context to explain this diverse collection of texts . The creation of context lies at the heart of historical expertise , forming the foundation upon which sound historical readings must rest . In examining the protocols of these experts , we are able to surface the very elements that are often hidden in historical mono - graphs : the fits and starts that precede the emergence of an interpretation , the seams that hold together discrete and seemingly contradictory pieces of text . On encountering such an eclectic group of texts , the easiest thing a reader can do is to leave each text as is : each an island unto itself , distanced from its neighboring texts by more than two decades , and sep - arated from our own condition by gaps in time , geography , language , custom , manner , and habit of mind . Creating coherence from this textual melange is a major cognitive achieve - ment . An important question in any study of expertise is how experts get to be that way . In this regard , the present study offers little new , for , like other snapshot studies of expertise , it cannot address what is at base a developmental question . But the study of expertise must also address a second key question : How is it that experts keep learning ? Why do they con - tinue to get smarter from encounters with materials and situations that leave other problem solvers unfazed ( cf . Holyoak , 1991 ; Perkins & Saloman , 1989 ) ? Here , H2’s protocol offers intriguing clues . His zigzagged comments open a window to interpretative processes typically eliminated from historians’ book - length manuscripts . By following H2’s interpretative tracks , we see how his understanding emerges as a result of a dialectical process between the questions he asks and the textual materials he encoun - tered . Expert problem - solving has sometimes been depicted as a unidirectional process in which the knowledge - base of the expert is brought to bear on a particular problem . Here , however , the arrow goes in the other direction : Aspects of the textual case provoked , chal - lenged , and altered the knowledge base of the expert ( cf . Scardamalia & Bereiter , 1991 ) . 338 WINEBURG Novice readers encounter the past in primary documents and judge it . II2 encountered the past in this task and learned from it . Indeed , the dialectical process of reading exemplified by H2 contrasts with how other adult readers performed on this same task . In a previous study ( Wineburg & Foumier , 1994 ) , 14 college history majors and non - majors , all enrolled in a program to become school teachers , read these same documents . Although there was great variety in their responses , two trends stood out . One group took Lincoln’s words at face value , as offering direct access into Lincoln’s mind unmediated by issues of context or the passage of time . They saw the documents written by others , e . g . , those by John Bell Robinson or William Lloyd Garrison , as contributing little to the conversation about Lincoln , since neither doc - ument mentioned the president directly . Other , more careful , readers recognized that they needed a context for Lincoln’s words . But rather than fashioning a context from the raw materials provided by these documents , they selected a context from their contemporary social world . In other words , faced with seeming incongruities in Lincoln’s position , these readers appealed to an array of present social forms and institutions - speech writers , press confer - ences , spin doctors - which allowed them to harmonize discrepant information . In one sense , they possessed sufficient background knowledge to form situation models from low coherence text ( cf . McNamara & Kintsch , 1996 ) . but such models , while adequate for quick , everyday readings , fell far short of mature disciplinary understanding ( cf . Wineb - tug , 1992 ; 1997 ) . In such readings , Lincoln and Douglas become contemporaries in top hats , much like characters from a James Michener novel who happen to dress funny but whose behavior and mannerisms are those of our next - door neighbors . The phenomenon of “presentism , ” the act of viewing the past through the lens of the present , is not some bad habit we’ve fallen into , but is instead our psychological condition at rest . If Lincoln seems to be saying two different things , it is because he is speaking to two different audiences for , in our world , we know exactly why Bob Dole says one thing to Kansas wheat farmers and another to New York City stock brokers . We resolve contra - dictions in Lincoln’s words by turning him into one of us . I - I2 responded differently to these textual contradictions . He assumed , at least as a work - ing hypothesis , that the contradictions he detected in Lincoln may be rooted less in the 16th president’s duplicity than in his own ignorance of the 19th - century . I - Es distrust in his own sense - making abilities may be thought of as a domain - specific form of metacognition , an imperative to read history differently from how we read ordinary expository or narrative text . None of us can stop the spread of activation that occurs when we read certain words - in this case , charged words about race . H2 reacted to these words with heightened affect just as the college students referred to above . But what distinguished his reading was the ability to step back from the first interpretation that came into view . His was a reading that was disciplined in both senses of the word : first , by showing restraint and self - awareness in the face of the first ideas that popped into mind , and , second , in the academic sense of word , by drawing skillfully on professional training that enjoins historians to identify and resist anachronism . EXPERT / EXPERT STUDY 339 I - I2 brought to this task an awareness that words give rise to multiple interpretations , and that the first one we think of may disclose more about ourselves than the people we are try - ing to understand . When I - I2 says in Document B that he does not know “what Lincoln’s saying , ” he does not mean that he can’t figure out the words in the text , but something broader and more encompassing : that he does not understand a world into which a whole segment of the population was born into slavery , a world in which a trip to the market could result in the purchase of human beings . Oppression exists in as many varieties as ever , but the institution of slavery and its accompanying commercial arrangements are difficult to fathom today . In that sense , a chasm separates us from Abraham Lincoln , and before we can understand his views , we must enter into what Lowenthal ( 1985 ; 1989 ) has called a “foreign country . ” It is an approach to reading history that underscores its strangeness , rather than its continuity , with today ( Wineburg , 1997 ) . But what about Hl ? Is he not a virtual resident of the 186Os , so steeped in these events that he can array them with a precision that few of us can equal with events in our own present ? Indeed , for much of his protocol this seemed the case . But his comments on the phrase “think like a White man” ( see Table 2 ) demonstrated that he is a resident of the 2Oth , not the 19th , century . Hl responded to this phrase by outlining a strategy of consulting the documentary record to see if abolitionists also used the phrase “White men” as synonymous for “free men . ” Essentially , he recommended a textual strategy that first gained currency in the field of biblical hermeneutics : the notion that we can understand a word by examining all of its textual occurrences , a method of reading that spurred the creation of the biblical concor - dance . Concordances are useful tools when one is separated from language as a living , breathing entity . Native speakers , however , don’t need them : they speak the language in its own natural context . Hl remains an interloper in the world of the 1860s . Every now and then , a nuance escapes him that signals that he is not a “native speaker . ” He speaks the lan - guage of the 1860s but does so with a slight and sometimes undetectable accent . The protocols of both historians shed light on the active processes of creating historical contexts , of piecing together into stories the bits of life that present themselves as artifacts from another world . The word “creating” is used here deliberately . The process of estab - lishing a historical context is misrepresented by notions of “placing” or “putting” Lincoln into context , verb forms that conjure up images of jigsaw puzzles in which pieces are slot - ted into pre - existing frames . Context , from the Latin contexere , means to weave together , to connect strings in a pattern . The zigzagged weave of H2 or the problem - finding and solving of Hl exemplify the active and creative processes that go into the formation of his - torical interpretations . Radical constructivists might see license here for an approach of anything goes , a kind of Bacchanalian revelry of context creation run amok . But such an interpretation would be misguided . While words may not “fix” or “determine” meaning they sure do constrain it . If one reads Lincoln’s racial views as harsher than John Bell Robinson’s , closer to a van Evrie than a Lloyd Garrison , it is a reading that is wrong , no matter what verbal somer - saults or linguistic contortions that are offered . In this sense , an analogy can be drawn between the act of cooking and the processes of historical interpretation . Elements of the 340 WINEBURG documentary record can be likened to ingredients in a kitchen . The culinary variations one can produce with , say , flour , tomatoes , eggs , cheese , and salt - from pizza to pasta , to quiche and souffle - are endless . But if a group of cooks claimed they could produce ice cream , meat loaf , or aspic from these same ingredients we would send them back to cook - ing school - or worse , recommend a psychiatric evaluation . V . CONCLUSION In contrasting someone who has written books about the Civil War with someone who has not , it is easy to lose track of just how much knowledge this second historian brought to the task : H2 knew the general chronology and sequence of events , he could decipher major fig - ures , he understood the antecedents and aftermath of the Civil War , and so on . However , H2’s factual knowledge is not what stood out . Once he became immersed in these docu - ments , it was what he didn’t know that came to the fore : his way of asking questions , of reserving judgment , of monitoring affective responses and revisiting earlier assessments , his ability to stick with confusion long enough to let an interpretation emerge . It was how he responded in the face of what he didn’t know that allowed him , in short , to learn some - thing new . What might we learn from such a reading that might help us become more thoughtful about the teaching of history in schools ? This question is more pertinent than it might first seem . Although this study bears on the thought processes of historians , it is not the taskfaced by historians . Historians do not go into the archive to find carefully excerpted documents , serially presented , each with an explanatory sentence at the top . If anything , this task resembles a format that many students face in a testing situation , such as the Document - Based Question of the Advanced Placement examination ( cf . Young & Lein - hardt , 1998 ) , in which students have 55 minutes to decipher how 7 - 9 documents speak to a significant historical question . Emerging research on students’ ability to deal with such complexity ( e . g . , Carretero & Voss , 1994 ; Leinhardt , 1993 ; Paxton , 1997 ; Perfetti , Britt , & Georgi , 1996 ; Rouet , Britt , Mason , & Perfetti , 1996 ; Spoehr & Spoehr , 1994 ; Stahl , Hynd , Britton , McNish , & Bosquet , 1996 ; Voss , Wiley , & Kennet , in press ; Wineburg & K Foumier , 1994 ; see Wineburg , 1996 , for review ) shows how challenging this task can be . Only a fraction of the school children who study history ever go on to become profes - sional historians . In that sense , our focus in history instruction has always been liberal rather than vocational . Particularly in high school and college , the history curriculum pos - sesses the potential , often unrealized , to teach students how to sort through contradictory information and come to reasoned conclusions ( Gagnon , 1989 ; Boix Mansilla & Gardner , 1997 ; Wineburg & Wilson , 1988 ) . Tests such as the National Assessment of Educational Progress , which ask “What do our 17 - year - olds know” ( Ravitch & Finn , 1987 ) , serve an important function to be sure . But it may be students’ response in the face of complexity - what they do when they don’t know - which holds the key to their continued learning from the world we call the past . EXPERT / EXPERT STUDY 341 Acknowledgments : My thanks to Earl Butterfield , Allan Collins , Howard Gardner , Jim Greeno , Gaea Leinhardt , Veronica Boix Mansilla , Susan Mosborg , David Olson , and Peter Seixas for comments on a previous draft . This research was supported by a grant from the Spencer Foundation , and that support is gratefully acknowledged . REFERENCES Bard , C . A . ( 1912 / 1935 ) . An economic interpretation of the constitution of the United States . New York : Mac - millan . Boix Mansilla , V . , & Gardner , H . ( 1997 ) . Of kinds of disciplines and kinds of understandings . Phi Delta Kappan , 78 . 381 - 386 . Carretero , M . , & VOSS , J . F . ( 1994 ) . Cognitive and instructional processes in history and the social sciences . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Chase , W . G . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1973 ) . Perception in chess . Cognitive Psychology , 455 - 81 . Chi , M . T . H . , & Bassok , M . ( 1989 ) . Learning from examples via self - explanations . In L . B . Resnick ( Ed . ) , Know - ing , learning , and instruction : Essays in honor of Robert Glaser ( pp . 251 - 282 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbatmr Associates , Inc . Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . J . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 - 152 . Clement , J . ( 1989 ) . Learning via model construction and criticism : Protocol evidence on sources of creativity in science . In J . Glover , R . Romring , & C . Reynolds ( Eds . ) , Handbook of creativity : Assessment , theory , and research ( pp . 341 - 381 ) . New York : Plenum . deGroot , A . D . ( 1965 ) . Thought and choice in chess . The Hague : Mouton . Dunbar , K . ( in press ) . How scientists think : On - line creativity and conceptual change in science . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Conceptual structures and processes : Emergence , discovery and change . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Ericsson , K . A . , & Smith , J . ( 1991 ) . Toward a general theory of expertise : Prospects and limits . New York : Cam - bridge University Press . Ericsson , K . A . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1984 ) . Protocol analysis : Verbal reports as data . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Fredrickson , G . ( 1971 ) . Black image in the White mind : The debate on Afro - American character and destiny , 1817 - 1914 . Middletown , CT : Wesleyan University Press . Fredrickson , G . M . ( 1975 ) . A man but not a brother : Abraham Lincoln and racial equality . Journal of Southern History , 41 , 39 - 58 . Gagnon , P . ( 1989 ) . Historical literacy : The case for history in American education . New York : Macmillan . Gebels , J . W . ( 1979 ) . Problem finding : A theoretical note . Cognitive Science , 3 , 167 - 172 . Glaser , R . ( 1984 ) . Education and thinking : The role of knowledge . American Psychologist , 39 , 93 - 104 . Hatano , G . , & Inagaki , K . ( 1986 ) . Two courses of expertise . In H . Stevenson , H . Azuma , & K . Hakuta ( Eds . ) , Child development in Japan ( pp . 262 - 272 ) . New York : W . H . Freeman . Hofstadter , R . ( 1948 ) . The American political tradition and the men who made it . New York : Vintage . Holyoak , K . J . ( 1991 ) . Symbolic connectionism : Toward third - generation theories of expertise . In K . A . Ericsson & J . Smith ( Eds . ) , Toward a general theory of expertise : Prospects and limits ( pp . 301 - 335 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Jordan , W . D . ( 1968 ) . White over Black : American attitudes toward the Negro , 1550 - 1812 . New York : Norton . Kolata , G . ( 1993 , October 12 ) . At home in the elusive world of mathematics , Princeton University mathematician , John H . Conway . ” The New York Times , pp . B5 , Cl . Larkin , J . , McDermott , J . , Simon , D . , & Simon , H . ( 1980 ) . Expert and novice performance in solving physics problems . Science , 208 , 1335 - 1342 . Leinhardt , G . ( 1993 ) . Weaving instructional explanations in history . British Journal ofEducational Psychology , 63 . 46 - 74 . Leinhardt , G . , & Young , K . M . ( 1996 ) . Two texts , three readers : Distance and expertise in reading history . Cog - nition andInstruction , 14 , 441 - 486 . Lincoln , A . ( 1989 ) . Speeches and writings . ( Volumes 1 and 2 ) . New York : Library of America . Lowentbal . D . ( 1985 ) . The past is a foreign counrry . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Lowenthal , D . ( 1989 ) . The timeless past : Some Anglo - American historical preconceptions . Journal ofAmerican History , 75 , 1263 - 1280 . 342 WINEBURG McNamara , D . S . . & Kintsclt , W . ( 1996 ) . Learning from texts : Effects of prior knowledge and text coherence . Discourse Processes , 22 , 247 - 288 . McPherson , J . M . ( 1991 ) . How Lincoln won the war with metaphors . In J . M . McPherson ( Ed . ) , Abraham Lincoln and the second American Revolution ( pp . 93 - 112 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Nisbett , R . E . , & Wilson , T . D . ( 1977 ) . Telling more than we know : Verbal reports on mental process . Psycholog - ical Review , 84 , 231 - 259 . Olson , D . R . ( 1994 ) . The world on paper : The conceptual and cognitive implications of writing and reading . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Palmer , R . R . ( 1959 ) . The age of rhe democratic revolution . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Pate ] , V . L . , & Groen , G . J . ( 1991 ) . The general and specific nature of medical expertise : A critical look . In K . A . Ericsson & J . Smith ( Ed % ) , Toward a general theory of expertise : Prospects and limits ( pp . 93 - 125 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Paxton , R . J . ( 1997 ) . “Someone with like a life wrote it” : The effects of a visible author on high school history stu - dents . Journal of Educational Psychology , 89 , 235 - 250 . Perfetti , C . A . , Britt , M . A . , & Georgi , M . C . ( 1996 ) . Text - based learning and reasoning . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Perkins , D . N . ( 1981 ) . The mind’s best work Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Perkins , D . N . , & Salomon , G . ( 1989 ) . Are cognitive skills context bound ? Educational Researcher , 17 , 16 - 24 . Ressley , M . , & Afflerbach , P . ( 1995 ) . Verbal reports as data . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Ravitch , D . R . , & Finn , C . E . ( 1987 ) . What do our 17 - year - olds know ? A report on thefirst national assessment of history and literature . New York : Harper & Row . Resnick , L . B . ( 1987 ) . Education and learning to think . Washington , DC : National Academy Ress . Robertson , W . C . , & Ericsson , K . A . ( 1988 ) . Methodological issues in the use of verbal reports as quantitative data Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association , New Orleans , LA . Robinson , J . B . ( 1863 ) . Pictures of slavery and anti - slavery and the benefits of Negro freedom morally , socially , andpolitically considered . Philadelphia : Horton . Rouet , J . F . , Britt , M . A . , Mason R . A . & Perfetti , C . A . ( 1996 ) . Using multiple sources of evidence to reason about history . Journal of Educational Psychology , 88 , 478 - 493 . Scardamalia , M . , & Bereiter , C . ( 1991 ) . Literate expertise . In K . A . Ericsson & J . Smith @ ds . ) . Toward a geneml theory of expertise : Prospects and limits ( pp . 172 - 194 ) . New York Cambridge University Press . Schoenfeld , A . H . ( 1985 ) . Mathematicalproblem solving . Orlando , FL : Academic Ress . Spoehr , K . T . , Jr Sphoer , L . W . ( 1994 ) . Learning to think historically . Educational Psychologist , 29 . 71 - 78 . Stahl , S . A . , Hynd , C . R . , Briaon , B . K . , McNish , M . M . , & Bosquet , D . ( 1996 ) . What happens when students read multiple source documents in history ? Reading Research Quarterly , 31 ( 4 ) , 430 - 456 . van Dijk , T . A . , & Kintsch , W . ( 1983 ) . Srraregies of discourse comprehension . New York : Academic Ress . Voss , J . F . , Wiley , J . , & Kennet , J . ( in press ) . Student perceptions of history and historical concepts . In J . F . Voss & M . Carretero @ is . ) , Learning and reasoning in history . Waem , Y . ( 1980 ) . Thinking aloud during reading : A descriptive model and its application . Scandinavian Journal of Psychology , 2I . 123 - 132 . Wills , G . ( 1992 ) . Lincolnar Gettysburg : The words that remade America . New York : Simon & Schuster . Wineburg , S . S . ( 1991 ) . Historical problem solving : A study of the cognitive processes used in the evaluation of documentary and pictorial evidence Journal of Educational Psychology , 83 , 73 - 87 . Wineburg , S . S . ( 1992 ) . Robing the depths of students’ historical knowledge . Perspectives of zhe American His - torical Association , 30 , 20 - 24 . Wineburg , S . S . ( 1994 ) . The cognitive representation of historical texts . In G . Leinhardt , I . L . Beck , & C . Stainton ( Eds . ) , Teaching and learning in history ( pp . 85 - 135 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Wineburg , S . S . ( 1996 ) . The psychology of learning and teaching history . In R . C . Calfee & D . C . Berliner @ is . ) , Handbook of Educational Psychology ( pp . 423 - 437 ) . New York : Macmillan . Wineburg , S . S . ( 1997 ) . Historical thinking and other unnatural acts . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Historical Association , New York City . Wineburg , S . S . , & Fouruier . J . E . ( 1994 ) . Contextualized thinking in history . In M . Carretero & J . F . Voss ( Ed . % ) , Cognitive and instructional processes in history and the social sciences ( pp . 285 - 308 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Wineburg , S . S . , & Wilson , S . M . ( 1988 ) . Models of wisdom in the teaching of history . Phi Delta Kappan . 70 , 50 - 58 . Young , K . M . , & Leinbardt , G . ( 1998 ) . Writing from primary documents : A way of knowing in history . Written Communication , IS , 25 - 68 . APPENDIX : SET OF DOCUMENTS USED IN STUDY Document A In 1858 , Abraham Lincoln ran against Stephen A . Douglas for a seat in the U . S . Sen - ate . ’ The two engaged in a series of seven public debates which attracted national atten - tion . * Although Lincoln lost the election , he became widely known for his views on slavery . 3 The following is an excerptfrom Douglas’ address to Lincoln in theirfirst debate at Ottawa , Illinois , August 21 , 1858 . 4t If you desire Negro citizenship , if you desire to allow them to come into the State and settle with the White man , if you desire them to vote on an equality with yourselves , and to make them eligible to office , to serve on juries , and to ajudge your rights , then support Mr . Lincoln and the Black Republican party , who are in favor of the citizenship of the Negroa For one , I am opposed to Negro citizenship in any and every form . I believe this govern - ment was made . . . by White men , for the benefit of White men and their posterity forever , and I am in favor of confining citizenship to White men , men of European birth and descent , instead of conferring it upon Negroes , Indians and other inferior races . 6 Mr . Lincoln , following the example and lead of all the little abolition orators , who go around and lecture in the basements of schools and churches , reads from the Declaration of Independence , that all men were created equal , and then asks how can you deprive a Negro of that equality which God and the Declaration of Independence awards to him . 7 He and they maintain that Negro equality is guaranteed by the laws of God , and that it is asserted in the Declaration of Independence . * . . . I do not question Mr . Lincoln’s conscientious belief that the Negro was made his equal , and hence his brother , but for my own part , I do not regard the Negro as my equal , and positively deny that he is my brother’ . . . . [ Lincoln ] holds that the Negro was born his equal and yours , and that he was endowed with equality by the Almighty , and that no human law can deprive him of these rights” . . . Now , I do not believe that the Almighty ever intended the Negro to be the equal of the white man1 l . . . . For thousands of years the Negro has been a race upon the earth , and during all that time , in all latitudes and climates , wherever he has wandered or been taken , he has been inferior to the race which he has there met . 12 He belongs to an inferior race , and must always occupy an inferior position . 13 ( from Lincoln , 1989 , pp . 504 - 505 ) . Document B From Abraham Lincoln’s reply to Stephen A . Douglas at Ottawa , Illinois , August 21 , 1858 . ’ I will say here . . . that I have no purpose directly or indirectly to interfere with the institu - tion of slavery in the States where it exists . * I believe I have no lawful right to do so , and I have no inclination to do SO . ~ I have no purpose to introduce political and social equality between the White and Black races . 4 There is a physical difference between the two , which in my judgment will probably forever forbid their living together upon the footing of per - fect equality , and inasmuch as it becomes a necessity that there must be a difference , I , as 344 WINEBURG well as Judge Douglas , am in favor of the race to which I belong , having the superior posi - tion . 5 I have never said anything to the contrary , but I hold that notwithstanding all this , there is no reason in the world why the Negro is not entitled to all the natural rights enu - merated in the Declaration of Independence , the right to life , liberty , and the pursuit of hap - piness’s I hold that he is as much entitled to these as the White man . ’ I agree with Judge Douglas [ that the Negro ] is not my equal in many respects - certainly not in color , perhaps not in moral or intellectual endowment . 8 But in the right to eat the bread . . . which his own hand earns , he is my equal and the equal of Judge Douglas , and the equal of every living manP ( from Lincoln , 1989 , p . 5 12 ) Document C Abraham Lincoln , writing in a letter to Mary Speed , a personal friend , September 27 , 1841 . ’ By the way , a tine example was presented on board the boat for contemplating the effect of condition upon human happiness2 A gentleman had purchased twelve Negroes in different parts of Kentucky and was taking them to a farm in the Soum3 They were chained six and six together . 4 A small iron clevis was around the left wrist of each so that the Negroes were strung together precisely like so many fish upon a trot - lines5 In this condition they were being separated forever from the scenes of their childhood , their friends , their fathers and mothers , and brothers and sisters , and many of them , from their wives and children , and going into perpetual slavery . . . yet amid all these distressing circumstances . . . they were the most cheerful and apparently happy creatures on board . 6 One , whose offense for which he had been sold was an over - fondness for his wife , played the fiddle almost continually ; and the others danced , sung , cracked jokes , and played various games with cards from day to day . ’ How true it is that “God renders the worst of human conditions tolerable . . T8 ( document cited in Lincoln , 1989 , p . 74 ) . Document D Colonization of freed Blacks was an idea proposed early in the nineteenth century . ’ Many Whites who opposed slavery actively advocated colonization , maintaining that true freedom and equality could be realized only by relocating the Black popt ~ lation . ~ Abraham Lincoln had long favored the idea , and , in 1862 , a sum of money was appropriated by Con - gress to aid in a colonization program . 3 The following is from Lincoln’s ‘Address on Col - onization” delivered to a group offree Black men at the White House on August 14 , 1862 . 4 why . . . should the people of your race be colonized , and where ? 5 If we deal with those who are not free at the beginning , and whose intellects are clouded by slavery , we have very poor materials to start wim6 If intelligent colored men . . . would move in this matter , much might be accomplished . 7 It is exceedingly important that we have men at the beginning capable of thinking as White men , and not those who have been systematically oppressed . . . . * The place I am thinking about having for a colony is in Central America . ’ . . . The country is a very EXPERT / EXPERT STUDY 345 excellent one for any people , and with great natural resources and advantages , and especially because of the similarity of climate with your native land - thus being suited to your physical condition . ” ( from Lincoln , 1989 , p . 368 ) . Document E From Pictures of Slavery and Anti - Slavery : Advantages of Negro Slavery & the Benefits of Negro Freedom Morally , Socially , and Politically Considered by John Bell Robinson , a White pro - slavery spokesperson , Pennsylvania , 1863 . ’ God himself has made them for usefulness as slaves , and requires us to employ them as such , and if we betray our trust , and throw them off on their own resources , we reconvert them into barbarians . 2 Our Heavenly Father has made us to rule , and the Negroes to serve , andifwe . . . set aside his holy arrangements for the good of mankind and his own glory , and tamper with his laws , we shall be overthrown and eternally degraded , and perhaps made subjects of some other civilized nation3 . . . . Colonization in their native land of all the Negroes would be so nearly impracticable , that it will never be done , and no other spot on this green earth will do for them . 4 It would be the height of cruelty and barbarism to send them anywhere else . 5 If they could all be colonized on the coast of Africa , they would fall back into heathenism and barbarism in less than fifty years6 ( from Robinson , 1863 , p . 42 ) Document F From an editorial by William Lloyd Garrison appearing in the Genius of Universal Emancipation , February 12 , 1830 . ’ Garrison ( 1805 - 1879 ) was a leading White abolition - ist and worked for a short time as the assistant editor of the Genius before beginning his own anti - slavery periodical in 1831 . 2 I deny the postulate , that God has made . . . one portion of the human race superior to another . 3 No matter how many breeds are amalgamated - no matter how many shades of color intervene between tribes or nations - give them the same chances to improve , and a fair start at the same time , and the result will be equally brilliant , equally productive , equally grand . 4 Document G From Negroes and Negro “Slavery : ” the First an Inferior Race , the Latter its Normal Condition by John H . Van Evrie , M . D . , Van Evrie , Horton & Co . , New York , 1863 . ’ The Caucasian is white , the Negro is black ; the first is the most superior , the latter the most inferior - and between these extremes of humanity are the intermediate races . . . . 2 As color is the standard and the test of the specific character , revealing the inner nature and actual capabilities of the race , so , too , is it the test and standard of the normal physical condition of the individual . 3 The highest health of the White man is distinguished by a pure 346 WINEBURG and transparent skin , and exactly as he departs from this , his color is clouded and sallow ; while that of the Negro is marked by perfect blackness , and the departure from this is to dirty brown , almost ash - color . . . 4 Every one who practically understands the Negro , knows that the strongest affection his nature is capable of feeling is love for his master - that affection for wife , parents , or offspring , all sink into insignificance in comparison with the strong and devoted love he gives to the superior being who guides , cares , and provides for all his wants . 5 tN ~ re . Material in italics was added at the beginning of the document for introductory purposes and to provide bibliographic information .