T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB : REPORT © The Rockefeller University Press $ 8 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Vol . 167 , No . 6 , December 20 , 2004 1011 – 1017 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200410017 JCB 1011 Processive capping by formin suggests a force - driven mechanism of actin polymerization Michael M . Kozlov 1 and Alexander D . Bershadsky 2 1 Department of Physiology and Pharmacology , Sackler Faculty of Medicine , Tel Aviv University , 69978 Tel Aviv , Israel 2 Department of Molecular Cell Biology , The Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot 76100 , Israel egulation of actin polymerization is essential for cell functioning . Here , we predict a novel phenomenon— the force - driven polymerization of actin ﬁlaments mediated by proteins of the formin family . Formins localize to the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments , but , in contrast to the standard capping proteins , allow for actin polymer - ization in the barbed direction . First , we show that the mechanism of such “leaky capping” can be understood in terms of the elasticity of the formin molecules . Second , R we demonstrate that if a pulling force acts on the ﬁlament end via the leaky cap , the elastic stresses can drive actin polymerization . We estimate that a moderate pulling force of (cid:1) 3 . 4 pN is sufﬁcient to reduce the critical actin concentration required for barbed end polymerization by an order of magnitude . Furthermore , the pulling force increases the polymerization rate . The suggested mecha - nism of force - driven polymerization could be a key element in a variety of cellular mechanosensing devices . Introduction Actin polymerization plays a pivotal role in fundamental cellular processes such as locomotion , cytokinesis , and adhesion . It has been predicted theoretically ( Mogilner and Oster , 1996 ) and recently demonstrated in single filament experiments ( Kovar and Pollard , 2004 ) that actin polymerization produces mechan - ical forces . These forces are apparently responsible for different forms of cell motility and , in particular , extension of cell pro - trusions ( Mogilner and Oster , 2003 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . The principles of thermodynamics predict not only that polymer growth can produce a force but also that an external force can control polymerization ( Hill and Kirschner , 1982 ; Hill , 1987 ) . Pulling forces applied to actin filaments can be developed by myosin - type molecular motors ( Howard , 2001 ) . Force - enhanced actin polymerization could be involved in a large spectrum of cellular mechanisms related to mechanosensitivity such as stress fiber and focal adhesion formation driven by myosin II – mediated contractility or by externally applied forces ( Burridge and Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , 1996 ; Galbraith and Sheetz , 1998 ; Geiger and Bershadsky , 2002 ; Bershadsky et al . , 2003 ) . However , effects of pulling forces on actin polymer - ization have never been studied . A major challenge is to understand the specific mechanisms by which a force can drive actin polymerization in the cell . A variety of actin - binding proteins are known to regulate actin assembly ( Higgs and Pollard , 2001 ; Pantaloni et al . , 2001 ) . Recently , the novel and important family of formin homology proteins was recognized to control actin polymerization ( Pollard , 2004 ; Zigmond , 2004 ) . Notably , one member of this family , diaphanous - related formin mDia1 , has been proposed to mediate the force - dependent assembly of focal adhesions ( Riveline et al . , 2001 ) . The present study suggests a mechanism for force - driven actin polymerization , in which a crucial role is played by formins . Formins are processive cappers The multidomain formin proteins exhibit features of both nucleators and cappers of actin filaments ( Wallar and Alberts , 2003 ; Zigmond , 2004 ) . Formins nucleate actin polymerization and remain persistently bound to the barbed ends of the growing filaments ( Pruyne et al . , 2002 ; Pring et al . , 2003 ; Zigmond et al . , 2003 ; Kovar and Pollard , 2004 ; Romero et al . , 2004 ) walking with them during the course of polymerization ( Higashida et al . , 2004 ) . Based on these observations , formins are considered to be “processive” cappers ( Zigmond et al . , 2003 ) , which , in contrast to the usual capping proteins , allow the actin mono - mers to join the filaments . All formins contain the highly conserved homology domains 1 ( FH1 ) and 2 ( FH2 ) . The FH2 domain binds actin , whereas the FH1 domain mediates formin interaction with another actin - binding protein , profilin ( Watanabe et al . , 1997 ) . The relative role of the two homology domains in the formin processive capping activity is a subject of the ongoing discussion ( Copeland et al . , 2004 ; Kovar and Pollard , 2004 ; Romero et al . , Correspondence to M . M . Kozlov : michk @ post . tau . ac . il ; or A . D . Bershadsky : alexander . bershadsky @ weizmann . ac . il JCB • VOLUME 167 • NUMBER 6 • 2004 1012 2004 ; Zigmond , 2004 ) . Functioning of formins as processive cappers can be divided into a passive “leaky” capping ( Zig - mond et al . , 2003 ) and the ATP - dependent processive motor activity ( Romero et al . , 2004 ) . The leaky cappers do not use any energy sources and slow down actin polymerization by several tens of percents . The processive motors use the en - ergy of ATP hydrolysis ( Dickinson et al . , 2004 ; Romero et al . , 2004 ) and can induce up to a 15 - fold acceleration of fila - ment growth ( Romero et al . , 2004 ) . According to recent pa - pers , the FH2 domains of the majority of formins studied to date ( Bni1p , mDia1 , mDia2 , and FRLa ) ( Pruyne et al . , 2002 ; Li and Higgs , 2003 ; Pring et al . , 2003 ; Copeland et al . , 2004 ; Higashida et al . , 2004 ) and FH1FH2 domains of Bni1 in the absence of profilin ( Kovar and Pollard , 2004 ) can act as leaky cappers . The processive motor activity requires profilin , and , hence , involves FH1FH2 domains ( Higashida et al . , 2004 ; Romero et al . , 2004 ) . The model presented here relies only on the leaky capping properties of formins . At the same time , the predicted effects are applicable also to the proces - sive motors . The key event necessary for formins to behave as leaky cappers is dimerization ( or , perhaps , higher order oligomeriza - tion ) of their FH2 homology domains ( Li and Higgs , 2003 ; Zigmond et al . , 2003 ; Copeland et al . , 2004 ; Moseley et al . , 2004 ; Shimada et al . , 2004 ; Xu et al . , 2004 ) . An FH2 dimer can be regarded as consisting of two hemidimers , each of which can bind to a single actin subunit at the filament barbed end ( Xu et al . , 2004 ) . The monomeric FH2 domains inhibit poly - merization similarly to regular capping proteins ( Shimada et al . , 2004 ; Xu et al . , 2004 ) , whereas the FH2 dimers exhibit properties of leaky cappers . A plausible scenario proposed for the leaky capping is based on the “stair - stepping behavior” of an FH2 dimer associ - ated with an elongating actin filament ( Xu et al . , 2004 ) . While one of the FH2 hemidimers is bound to the protruding actin subunit , the second one detaches from the recessed ( penulti - mate ) subunit , thereby producing a vacancy for a next actin monomer to join the filament ( see Fig . 1 ) . In the next step , the two FH2 hemidimers exchange their roles and polymerization proceeds in a stair - stepping manner . The simplest form of the stair - stepping scenario requires rotation of the formin cap with respect to the filament axis re - sulting from the helical structure of actin filament ( Kovar and Pollard , 2004 ; Pollard , 2004 ) . In case the formin cap is immo - bilized , this should result in rotation of the whole actin fila - ment , which has not been detected in recent experiments ( Kovar and Pollard , 2004 ) . Although this issue remains not completely clear , modifications of the stair - stepping mecha - nism will be , probably , required . Specifically , a “shaft in a bearing” - like connection between actin helix and the FH2 hemidimer ( Kovar and Pollard , 2004 ) can enable the leaky cap - ping without formin rotation . In addition , it is not unambigu - ously established that FH2 binds exactly at the barbed end , as opposed to near the barbed end , and a possibility remains that an FH2 hemidimer binds to more than two actin subunits . The common feature of all models for leaky capping irre - spective of their detail is that the formin cap moves together with the filament end along the filament axis . This movement requires an alternating binding of the two FH2 hemidimers to the barbed end in such a way that at each step of polymeriza - tion the FH2 dimer dissociates from the recessed subunit of the barbed end , hence , preparing conditions for the next step . Essence of this work Here , we predict a phenomenon of force - driven actin polymer - ization based on the phenomenon of leaky capping of actin fila - ments by formins . Our model is equally applicable for the cases where leaky capping is performed by FH2 dimers or FH1FH2 dimers . We will not distinguish between these cases and refer to the leaky capping domains simply as formins . First , we pro - pose that the mechanism of leaky capping is based on the elas - ticity of the formin dimer . This simple idea accounts for all the requirements of leaky capping , including the alternating bind - ing of the formin hemidimers to the barbed end subunits . More - over , predictions of the model agree with the existing data on the critical actin concentrations of polymerization of the free and formin - capped filament ends . Second , we show that if a pulling force is applied to the formin - dimer capping the fila - ment end , the elastic mechanism drives filament growth . Spe - cifically , the critical actin concentration of the barbed end is dramatically reduced compared with that of an uncapped fila - ment , and the rate of polymerization increases . Results and discussion Hypothesis of formin dimer elasticity Model . First , we consider the formin dimer as an elastic mol - ecule , which can undergo deformations accompanied by accu - mulation of elastic energy . In the initial nondeformed confor - mation , the two hemidimers of the formin dimer lie in the same plane , as found for isolated FH2 hemidimers ( Xu et al . , 2004 ) and represented schematically in Fig . 1 ( a1 ) . While binding the new actin monomer , the formin dimer deforms in such a way that the hemidimers are shifted with respect to each other , as il - lustrated in Fig . 1 ( a2 ) . Although binding of formin to the barbed end is shown for simplicity as attachment to the tops of the re - cessed and protruding subunits ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) , it may involve mul - tiple interaction sites at more than two actin subunits . Deforma - tion of formin and , perhaps , the related elastic deformations of the terminal actin subunits result in the elastic energy (cid:1) EL . The exact character of the molecular deformations resulting from capping of the barbed end by formin dimer ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) is not critical for the qualitative essence of the model . In the following sections , we refer to the complex deformation of formin and the barbed end as an effective deformation of the formin dimer . Generally , the elastic energy of the formin dimer deformation (cid:1) EL ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) can be approximated by the quadratic law ( 1 ) where (cid:2) is the effective rigidity of the formin dimer and (cid:3) z is the length of the mutual shift of the formin hemidimers ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) , which , based on the known structure of actin filaments , should be close to 2 . 75 nm ( Lorenz et al . , 1993 ) . The deforma - ε EL 1 2 - - - κ ∆ z ( ) 2 ⋅ ⋅ = , FORCE - DRIVEN ACTIN POLYMERIZATION • KOZLOV AND BERSHADSKY 1013 tion generates an elastic stress , f EL , within the formin dimer ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) . This stress tends to return the dimer to its initial shape with hemidimers lying in the same plane ( Fig . 1 , a3 ) and is determined by the rigidity (cid:2) and the deformation (cid:3) z , ( 2 ) Formin - dimer elasticity explains leaky cap - ping . We next consider the energy changes accompanying each intermediate step of actin polymerization according to the leaky capping scenario . Our consideration depends only on the shift of the formin hemidimers along the filament axis , which is common for all possible mechanisms of the leaky capping . In the state where one formin hemidimer is bound to the protruding subunit of the filament end , while the second formin hemidimer is unbound , the formin dimer is in its relaxed non - deformed conformation ( Fig . 1 , a1 ) . At the next stage , an actin monomer inserts into the exist - ing vacancy between the recessed subunit of the barbed end and the unbound formin hemidimer ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) . This event f EL κ ∆ z ⋅ = . gives rise to energy release , due to binding of the actin mono - mer to the barbed end and to the formin hemidimer . The related changes of the energy will be denoted as (cid:1) AB and (cid:1) AF , respec - tively , the two values being negative as the two binding steps are favorable and result in a decrease of the system’s energy . In case multiple binding sites exist for a formin hemidimer at the barbed end , the energy (cid:1) AF accounts for all of them . Insertion of the new actin monomer also results in defor - mation of the formin dimer ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) . This generates the elas - tic stress f EL and leads to accumulation of positive elastic en - ergy (cid:1) EL ( Eq . 1 ) . In addition , we must take into account that the actin monomers are dissolved at a concentration c A in the aque - ous solution surrounding the actin filament . By joining the barbed end , an actin monomer loses its translational entropy so that the related free energy changes by ( see e . g . , Hill , 1987 ) , where k B T (cid:1) 4 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 21 J (cid:2) 0 . 6 kcal / M is the product of the Boltzmann constant and the absolute temperature , and c W (cid:2) 55 M is the concentration of water molecules . Thus , the total energy change of the actin monomer insertion ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) is ( 3 ) The elastic stress , f EL , generated at this step within the formin cap acts on its hemidimers . It presses one of the hemi - dimers against the protruding subunit of the barbed end ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) , hence , reinforcing binding between them . At the same time , it pulls the second hemidimer attempting to detach it from the recessed subunit of the barbed end ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) thereby weakening the connection between them . This means that the elastic stress f EL fulfills the major requirement of the leaky cap - ping model . It produces an effective asymmetric interaction be - tween the two binding sites in such a way that the hemidimer attached to the recessed subunit of the barbed end tends to de - tach , whereas the one bound to the protruding subunit fastens even more strongly , and hence maintains the connection of the dimer with the actin filament . In the following step , the formin hemidimer detaches from the recessed subunit of the barbed end under the action of the elastic stress f EL ( Fig . 1 , a3 ) . This destroys the favorable ac - tin - formin bonds , but allows the elastic energy to relax . The re - sulting energy change accompanying the detachment is ( 4 ) Comparison with experimental results . Our model accounts for the quantitative data accumulated on formin - mediated polymerization . First , it explains the observa - tion that the FH2 dimers of Bni1 formin do not alter the critical concentration of actin required for barbed end poly - merization ( Pring et al . , 2003 ) . The total energy of one poly - merization cycle consisting of the two intermediate steps , is ( according to Eqs . 3 and 4 ) : ( 5 ) k B – T ln c A c W - - - - - - ⎝ ⎠ ⎛ ⎞ ⋅ ∆ε I ε EL ε AB ε AF k B T ln c A c W - - - - - - ⎝ ⎠ ⎛ ⎞ ⋅ – + + = . ∆ε II ε AF – ε EL – = . c A * ( ) ∆ε tot ∆ε I ∆ε II + , = ∆ε tot ε AB k B T ln c A c W - - - - - - ⎝ ⎠ ⎛ ⎞ ⋅ – = . Figure 1 . Stages of leaky capping driven by pulling force and elasticity of formin dimer . Actin subunits are represented by gray discs . The formin dimer is shown as a bar consisting of blue and pink halves ( hemidimers ) . ( a ) Actin polymerization in the absence of pulling force . ( a1 ) Formin dimer is in a nondeformed state ; it is bound to the protruding but not to the recessed actin subunit , thereby leaving a vacancy for a new actin monomer to insert . ( a2 ) An actin monomer inserts into the existing vacancy and binds to the formin hemidimer and the recessed actin subunit . The two binding events are energetically favorable and accompanied by release of energies (cid:1) AB and (cid:1) AF , respectively . At the same time , the formin dimer and , probably , the terminal actin subunits involved in interaction with formin undergo de - formation , resulting in a relative shift of the formin hemidimers by distance (cid:3) z (cid:2) 2 . 75 nm , characterizing the helix periodicity of an actin filament ( Lorenz et al . , 1993 ) . This results in accumulation of elastic energy (cid:1) EL and development of elastic force f EL ( red arrows ) tending to restore the initial relative position of the formin subunits . ( a3 ) Elastically driven detachment of formin from the recessed actin subunit accompanied by relaxation of the elastic energy , (cid:1) EL → 0 , and elastic force , f EL → 0 , at the expense of the actin - formin binding energy . This results in creation of a new vacancy for the next actin monomer . ( b ) Actin polymerization in the presence of pulling force ( blue arrows ) . Insertion of the new actin monomer ( b2 ) and detachment of formin from the recessed subunit ( b3 ) are facilitated by the pulling force , which reduces the energy of each of these stages by f pull (cid:4) (cid:3) z . As a result , the critical actin concentration required for polymerization at the barbed end is reduced dramatically compared with the critical concentration in the absence of the force . JCB • VOLUME 167 • NUMBER 6 • 2004 1014 If this energy change is negative ( (cid:3)(cid:1) tot (cid:6) 0 ) polymerization proceeds spontaneously , whereas in the opposite case of (cid:3)(cid:1) tot (cid:7) 0 polymerization is energetically unfavorable . A total energy change of zero ( (cid:3)(cid:1) tot (cid:8) 0 ) defines the conditions where no net polymerization proceeds . This means that the existing actin filaments do not change their lengths on average over time . The corresponding actin concentration is the critical con - centration required for polymerization at the barbed end in the presence of the bound formin dimer ( 6 ) The critical concentration ( Eq . 6 ) is determined only by the actin - barbed end binding energy (cid:1) AB and is independent of the fact that the barbed end is capped by formin . As a result , has the same value as the critical concentration for free ac - tin filaments : ( 7 ) This is an expected result because a formin molecule attached to the barbed end influences only the boundary subunits of an actin polymer and , consequently , cannot change the thermody - namic characteristics of the system as a whole , such as the crit - ical concentration . Second , the model accounts for the fact that formins are known to reduce the rate of actin polymerization at the barbed end by several tens of percents ( Kovar et al . , 2003 ; Harris et al . , 2004 ; Pollard , 2004 ; Shimada et al . , 2004 ; Xu et al . , 2004 ; Zig - mond , 2004 ) . It has been recognized that in the absence of any capping protein , the on - rate of the barbed end polymerization ( k on ) is largely controlled by diffusion of actin monomers ( Drenckhahn and Pollard , 1986 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . The fact that formins are able to considerably slow down polymer - ization says that , in this case , the on - rate of the reaction is not limited by diffusion alone but is also determined by the activa - tion energy (cid:1) activ of insertion of actin monomers into the barbed end capped by formin ( Berg and von Hippel , 1985 ; Hanngi et al . , 1990 ) . We suggest that this activation energy arises from the stage of deformation of the formin dimer in the course of insertion of a new actin monomer ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) and / or the stage of detachment of the formin hemidimer from the recessed actin subunit ( Fig . 1 , a3 ) . A thorough analysis of polymerization ki - netics in the presence of an elastic leaky capper including the dynamics of formin exchange at the barbed end , and the kinetic effects of actin monomer concentration requires a detailed mathematical approach and will be published elsewhere . On a qualitative level , this analysis shows that the activation energy has to be of the order of several k B T and results from an inter - play between the formin - actin binding energy (cid:1) AF , the formin dimer elastic energy (cid:1) EL , and the work performed by the elastic stress f EL in the course of the formin monomer detachment from the recessed subunit of the barbed end . In a simplest scenario of leaky capping , the stage of the formin hemidimer detachment accompanied by relaxation of its elastic energy ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) and the following stage of insertion of a new actin monomer requir - ing formin deformation ( Fig . 1 , a3 ) provide equal contributions c AF * c AF * c W exp ε AB k B T - - - - - - - - - ⎝ ⎠ ⎛ ⎞ ⋅ = . c AF * c A * c AF * c A * . = to the effective activation energy . This assumption , along with the requirement that formin slows down actin polymerization by (cid:1) 50 % , implies that the rates of formin detachment from the recessed subunit , actin monomer supply by diffusion , and formin attachment to the new actin subunit have similar values ( unpublished data ) . In this case , the elastic energy has to pos - sess a value close to that of the actin - formin binding energy , (cid:1) EL (cid:2) (cid:1) AF , where the latter can be estimated based of the disso - ciation constant of the actin - FH2 complex of Bni1 ( Pruyne et al . , 2002 ) as (cid:1) AF (cid:2) (cid:5) 22 (cid:4) k B T . According to Eqs . 1 and 2 , the elastic stress developed in the FH2 dimer and corresponding to the elastic energy of (cid:1) AF (cid:2) (cid:5) 22 (cid:4) k B T is whereas the dimer rigidity can be estimated as The rigidity can be related to an effective flexural rigidity k FORM of the formin dimer by k FORM (cid:2) (cid:4) L 3 , where L (cid:2) 10 nm is the linear dimension of the dimer ( Xu et al . , 2004 ) . Esti - mation gives k FORM (cid:2) 10 (cid:5) 26 J (cid:4) m 2 what is of the same order of magnitude as the flexural rigidity of an actin filament k A (cid:8) 6 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 26 J (cid:4) m 2 ( Yasuda et al . , 1996 ) . This may mean that the ter - minal actin subunits contribute considerably to the effective ri - gidity of formin dimer . In addition , it is worth noting that , al - though we have assumed a simplest model for the formin cap elasticity expressed by Eqs . 1 and 2 , the qualitative predictions of the model will also hold for a more general case of a nonlin - ear formin elasticity . The elastic model provides specific predictions about the dependence of leaky capping on the effective rigidity (cid:2) of the formin dimer . Increase or decrease of (cid:2) with respect to the opti - mal value , , must shift the formin dimer properties toward those of a regular rather than leaky capper . Indeed , an exces - sive stiffening of formin dimer , (cid:2) (cid:9) , should eliminate the leaky capping by disfavoring the formin dimer deformation at the stage of insertion of a new actin monomer into the existing vacancy ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) , and , hence , producing a high energy bar - rier of the reaction . In case the formin dimer is too flexible , (cid:2) (cid:10) , the developed elastic force f EL will be insufficiently strong to detach the formin hemidimer from the recessed actin subunit of the barbed end ( Fig . 1 , a3 ) within a relevant time scale . As a result , both the recessed and the protruding subunits will be blocked practically irreversibly . The predicted limited range of formin elasticity enabling the leaky capping can be verified experimentally provided a possibility is found to engi - neer systematically the elastic properties of formin molecules . Importantly , as it follows from the detailed analysis , within the elastic model , the on - rate of the reaction ( k on ) is very sensitive to the formin dimer rigidity (cid:2) because , according to the Arrhenius law , the on - rate depends exponentially on the ac - tivation energy f EL 2 ε EL ∆ z - - - - - - - - 60pN ≈ = , κ * f EL ∆ z - - - - - - - - 0 . 02N m - - - - . ≈ = κ * κ * κ * κ * κ * k on exp ε activ k B T - - - - - - - - - - - - – ⎝ ⎠ ⎛ ⎞ ∼ FORCE - DRIVEN ACTIN POLYMERIZATION • KOZLOV AND BERSHADSKY 1015 ( Hanngi et al . , 1990 ) , which , in turn , depends linearly on the ri - gidity (cid:1) activ (cid:1) (cid:2) . Such strong dependence may explain the con - siderable difference in the observed slowing down of polymer - ization by different formins ( Kovar et al . , 2003 ; Zigmond et al . , 2003 ; Harris et al . , 2004 ) , which may be characterized by dif - ferent values of the rigidity (cid:2) . Structural analysis in conjunction with single molecules measurements is needed to verify agree - ment of this prediction with the known differences in structures and actin polymerization activities of different formins . Pulling force can drive actin polymerization Let us now consider the process of addition of a new actin monomer to the barbed filament end capped by a formin dimer , which is subject to a pulling force . For convenience , we denote by f pull the force pulling one hemidimer , as illustrated in Fig . 1 ( b1 – b3 ) by blue arrows , so that the total pulling force equals 2 f pull . Similarly to the scenario presented in the previous section ( Fig . 1 a ) , the cycle consists of attachment of the actin mono - mer generating elastic deformation of the formin dimer and subsequent detachment of formin hemidimer from the recessed subunit of the barbed end producing a vacancy for the next ac - tin monomer ( Fig . 1 b ) . The pulling force facilitates each of the intermediate stages of this process . Deformation of the formin dimer at the first stage is re - lated to shifting one of the formin hemidimers with respect to the other by (cid:3) z (cid:8) 2 . 75 nm ( Fig . 1 , a2 ) . The force f pull pulling the formin hemidimer in the direction of the shifting ( Fig . 1 , b1 and b2 ) reduces the energy of this event by (cid:1) pull (cid:8) (cid:5) f pull (cid:4) (cid:3) z . As a result , this step becomes more favorable energetically , its energy being ( 8 ) Also , the subsequent step of detachment of the formin hemidimer from the recessed part of the barbed end becomes energetically more favorable . It is accompanied by a shift of the detaching subunit of about the same distance ( (cid:3) z (cid:8) 2 . 75 nm ) along the direction of the force application ( Fig . 1 , b3 ) . The energy change accompanying this step accounting for the effect of the pulling force is ( 9 ) The total energy change of the polymerization cycle , (cid:3)(cid:1) tot (cid:8) (cid:3)(cid:1) I (cid:11) (cid:3)(cid:1) II , is ( 10 ) Based on Eq . 10 , the critical actin concentration corre - sponding to (cid:3)(cid:1) tot (cid:8) 0 upon action of the pulling force becomes exponentially small as compared with the critical concentration in the absence of the force , , which is equal to the critical concentration of a pure barbed end , . Accounting for Eqs . 6 , 7 , and 10 , it is given by ( 11 ) ∆ε I ε EL ε AB ε AF k B T ln c A c W - - - - - - ⎝ ⎠ ⎛ ⎞ ⋅ – f pull ∆ z . ⋅ – + + = ∆ε II ε AF ε EL f pull ∆ z . ⋅ – – – = ∆ε tot ε AB k B T ln c A c W - - - - - - ⎝ ⎠ ⎛ ⎞ ⋅ – 2 f pull ∆ z . ⋅ ⋅ – = c AF pull ⁄ * c AF * c A * c AF pull ⁄ * c A * exp 2 f pull ∆ z ⋅ ⋅ k B T - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - – ⎝ ⎠ ⎛ ⎞ . = Based Eq . 11 , a total pulling force , which is as little as 2 f pull (cid:2) 3 . 4 pN , is predicted to reduce the critical concentration by 10 - fold . The generality of the result ( Eq . 11 ) , according to which the critical concentration decreases exponentially with the pull - ing force , should go beyond any particular model for the formin dimer . Consideration based on general thermodynamics ( Hill , 1987 ) predicts that a pulling force stretching a regular polymer decreases the chemical potential of the polymerized monomers and , consequently , decreases the critical concentra - tion according to an equation similar to Eq . 11 . According to Eq . 11 , polymerization can occur at very low actin concentrations , provided an appropriately strong pulling force is applied to the filament end . However , it is worth noting that in this case diffusion limitations will signifi - cantly slow down the force - driven filament growth . Further - more , at low actin concentrations , additional factors , such as occasional filament severing , which have not been taken into account by the present model , may limit actin polymerization . It is also essential that the pulling force should not be too large ; otherwise , in addition to promoting polymerization , the force may detach the entire formin dimer from the actin fila - ment . According to our estimations presented in the previous section , an elastic force of (cid:1) 60 pN would result in fast separa - tion between the formin hemidimer and the recessed part of the barbed end . If a pulling force of the same order of magnitude is applied to the formin hemidimer attached to the protruding part , the entire connection between FH2 dimer and the barbed end is expected to break within a short time scale . Based on these considerations , we predict that the pulling force per formin hemidimer generated in the system and able to acceler - ate the growth of the actin filament must be in the piconewton range but smaller than several tens of piconewtons . Our discussion was limited to the effects of the pulling force on the critical concentration characterizing the equilibrium properties of the system . However , it is worth noting that the pulling force can , to some extent , also influence the kinetics of polymerization by reducing the activation energy of this process . As has been suggested , the activation energy (cid:1) activ results from the formin cap and limits the rate of actin monomer insertion . Upon the application of force , this activation energy becomes ( 12 ) so that a small pulling force is sufficient to eliminate it , and , hence , to speed the polymerization process . Estimating (cid:1) activ in the absence of the force as few k B T , we obtain that a pulling force of several piconewtons is sufficient to remove the reduc - tion of the polymerization rate imposed by formin and to accel - erate polymerization as compared with the case where the fila - ment ends are capped by the formin dimers . Recently , other mechanisms facilitating actin polymer - ization have been suggested ( Dickinson et al . , 2004 ; Romero et al . , 2004 ) . In a theoretical work by Dickinson et al . ( 2004 ) , it has been proposed that hypothetical filament end - tracking proteins can work as molecular motors , which use the energy of actin driven ATP hydrolysis for enhancement of actin po - lymerization . In line with this theoretical idea , the experi - ε activ pull ⁄ ε activ f pull ∆ z , ⋅ – = JCB • VOLUME 167 • NUMBER 6 • 2004 1016 mental study by Romero et al . ( 2004 ) shows that the barbed end polymerization is dramatically accelerated by a complex of FH1FH2 and profilin , which speeds up the actin - ATP hy - drolysis . The mechanism of the force - driven actin polymer - ization predicted by our model is independent of the ATP hy - drolysis and must produce new effects as well as contribute additively to the action of the ATP - driven motors . Although the mDia1 FH1FH2 domains with profilin do not change the critical concentration of actin polymerization ( Romero et al . , 2004 ) , the pulling force is predicted to considerably reduce this value . The effects of the pulling force on the polymeriza - tion rate have to reinforce the ATP hydrolysis – driven effects . However , it is worth noting that the pulling force effects pre - dicted in this work do not require profilin and , therefore , could be especially pronounced in cell compartments lacking this protein . Conclusions The major result of this work is the proposal of a molecular model predicting force - driven actin polymerization mediated by formin dimers capping the filament ends . We envision several lines of possible experimental verifi - cation of this prediction . First , such force could be applied to the formin caps of actin filaments growing in vitro . This can be done by immobilizing the formin complex and creating a pull - ing force affecting the growing filaments using laser tweezers or hydrodynamic flow . Individual myosin molecules could also produce forces sufficient for significant stimulation of formin - mediated actin polymerization ( Howard , 2001 ) , which can serve as a basis for another kind of in vitro setup . The second approach is probing the elastic properties of formins in single molecule experiments such as atomic force microscopy . Fi - nally , the third direction is to attempt to identify force - driven polymerization in natural cell processes involving actin and formins . In general , this phenomenon can drive processes where a pulling force is produced by myosin interacting with the growing actin filament , provided that the formin complex capping the filament end is anchored at cell cortex or mem - brane . In such a system , tension generated in the filament is transmitted to the formin cap and pulls it away from the mem - brane . A counter force is then developed by the membrane , which may deform , but does not move . This counter force pulls the barbed end via the formin dimer . The proper association of formin with cortex / membrane is crucial for the feasibility of the proposed mechanism . Force - driven polymerization involving only two kinds of proteins could be a key element in a variety of cellular mechanosensing devices including focal adhesions . A similar sort of mechanism could , in principle , explain the force - enhanced self - assembly of other cytoskeletal polymers , e . g . , microtubules . Moreover , one can think about chimeric cap - ping proteins containing built - in elastic elements , which may behave according to the predictions of the present model and , hence , mediate force - enhanced actin polymerization . This hy - pothesis opens an avenue for engineering molecular nano - devices for the local control of filament polymerization using applied force . We are grateful to Tom Shemesh for productive discussions and critical read - ing of the manuscript . The work of M . M . Kozlov is supported by the Human Frontier Science Program Organization , the Israel Science Foundation ( ISF ) , and the Binational USA - Israel Science Foundation ( BSF ) . A . D . Bershadsky holds the Joseph Moss Chair of Biomedical Research and his work is supported by ISF , BSF , and the Minerva Foundation ( Munich , Germany ) . Submitted : 4 October 2004 Accepted : 9 November 2004 References Berg , O . G . , and P . H . von Hippel . 1985 . Diffusion - controlled macromolecular interactions . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biophys . Chem . 14 : 131 – 160 . Bershadsky , A . D . , N . Q . Balaban , and B . Geiger . 2003 . Adhesion - dependent cell mechanosensitivity . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 : 677 – 695 . Burridge , K . , and M . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka . 1996 . Focal adhesions , contrac - tility and signaling . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 : 463 – 518 . Copeland , J . W . , S . J . Copeland , and R . Treisman . 2004 . Homo - oligomerisation is essential for F - actin assembly by the formin family FH2 domain . J Biol Chem . 279 : 50250 – 50256 ; doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M404429200 . Dickinson , R . B . , L . Caro , and D . L . Purich . 2004 . Force generation by cytoskel - etal filament end - tracking motors . Biophys . J . 87 : 2838 – 2854 . Drenckhahn , D . , and T . D . Pollard . 1986 . Elongation of actin filaments is a diffu - sion - limited reaction at the barbed end and is accelerated by inert macro - molecules . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 12754 – 12758 . Galbraith , C . G . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1998 . Forces on adhesive contacts affect cell function . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 : 566 – 571 . Geiger , B . , and A . Bershadsky . 2002 . Exploring the neighborhood : adhesion - coupled cell mechanosensors . Cell . 110 : 139 – 142 . Hanngi , P . , P . Talkner , and M . Borkovec . 1990 . Reaction - rate theory : fifty years after Kramers . Reviews of Modern Physics . 62 : 251 – 341 . Harris , E . S . , F . Li , and H . N . Higgs . 2004 . The mouse formin , FRLalpha , slows actin filament barbed end elongation , competes with capping protein , ac - celerates polymerization from monomers , and severs filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 20076 – 20087 . Higashida , C . , T . Miyoshi , A . Fujita , F . Oceguera - Yanez , J . Monypenny , Y . An - dou , S . Narumiya , and N . Watanabe . 2004 . Actin polymerization - driven molecular movement of mDia1 in living cells . Science . 303 : 2007 – 2010 . Higgs , H . N . , and T . D . Pollard . 2001 . Regulation of actin filament network for - mation through ARP2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse array of pro - teins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 : 649 – 676 . Hill , T . L . 1987 . Linear Aggregation Theory in Cell Biology . Springer Verlag , New York . 305 pp . Hill , T . L . , and M . W . Kirschner . 1982 . Bioenergetics and kinetics of microtubule and actin filament assembly - disassembly . Int . Rev . Cytol . 78 : 1 – 125 . Howard , J . 2001 . Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cytoskeleton . Sinauer , Sunderland , MA . 384 pp . Kovar , D . R . , and T . D . Pollard . 2004 . Insertional assembly of actin filament barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 101 : 14725 – 14730 . Kovar , D . R . , J . R . Kuhn , A . L . Tichy , and T . D . Pollard . 2003 . The fission yeast cytokinesis formin Cdc12p is a barbed end actin filament capping pro - tein gated by profilin . J . Cell Biol . 161 : 875 – 887 . Li , F . , and H . N . Higgs . 2003 . The mouse Formin mDia1 is a potent actin nucle - ation factor regulated by autoinhibition . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1335 – 1340 . Lorenz , M . , D . Popp , and K . C . Holmes . 1993 . Refinement of the F - actin model against X - ray fiber diffraction data by the use of a directed mutation al - gorithm . J . Mol . Biol . 234 : 826 – 836 . Mogilner , A . , and G . Oster . 1996 . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys . J . 71 : 3030 – 3045 . Mogilner , A . , and G . Oster . 2003 . Polymer motors : pushing out the front and pulling up the back . Curr . Biol . 13 : R721 – R733 . Moseley , J . B . , I . Sagot , A . L . Manning , Y . Xu , M . J . Eck , D . Pellman , and B . L . Goode . 2004 . A conserved mechanism for Bni1 - and mDia1 - induced ac - tin assembly and dual regulation of Bni1 by Bud6 and profilin . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 : 896 – 907 . Pantaloni , D . , C . Le Clainche , and M . F . Carlier . 2001 . Mechanism of actin - based motility . Science . 292 : 1502 – 1506 . Pollard , T . D . 2004 . Formins coming into focus . Dev . Cell . 6 : 312 – 314 . Pollard , T . D . , and G . G . Borisy . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell . 112 : 453 – 465 . FORCE - DRIVEN ACTIN POLYMERIZATION • KOZLOV AND BERSHADSKY 1017 Pring , M . , M . Evangelista , C . Boone , C . Yang , and S . H . Zigmond . 2003 . Mech - anism of formin - induced nucleation of actin filaments . Biochemistry . 42 : 486 – 496 . Pruyne , D . , M . Evangelista , C . Yang , E . Bi , S . Zigmond , A . Bretscher , and C . Boone . 2002 . Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end association . Science . 297 : 612 – 615 . Riveline , D . , E . Zamir , N . Q . Balaban , U . S . Schwarz , T . Ishizaki , S . Narumiya , Z . Kam , B . Geiger , and A . D . Bershadsky . 2001 . Focal contacts as mech - anosensors : externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1 - dependent and ROCK - independent mecha - nism . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 1175 – 1186 . Romero , S . , C . Le Clainche , D . Didry , C . Egile , D . Pantaloni , and M . F . Carlier . 2004 . Formin is a processive motor that requires profilin to accelerate ac - tin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell . 119 : 419 – 429 . Shimada , A . , M . Nyitrai , I . R . Vetter , D . Kuhlmann , B . Bugyi , S . Narumiya , M . A . Geeves , and A . Wittinghofer . 2004 . The core FH2 domain of di - aphanous - related formins is an elongated actin binding protein that in - hibits polymerization . Mol . Cell . 13 : 511 – 522 . Wallar , B . J . , and A . S . Alberts . 2003 . The formins : active scaffolds that remodel the cytoskeleton . Trends Cell Biol . 13 : 435 – 446 . Watanabe , N . , P . Madaule , T . Reid , T . Ishizaki , G . Watanabe , A . Kakizuka , Y . Saito , K . Nakao , B . Jokusch , and S . Narumiya . 1997 . p140mDia , a mam - malian homolog of Drosophila diaphanous , is a target protein for Rho small GTPase and a ligand for profilin . EMBO J . 16 : 3044 – 3056 . Xu , Y . , J . B . Moseley , I . Sagot , F . Poy , D . Pellman , B . L . Goode , and M . J . Eck . 2004 . Crystal structures of a Formin Homology - 2 domain reveal a teth - ered dimer architecture . Cell . 116 : 711 – 723 . Yasuda , R . , H . Miyata , and K . Kinosita Jr . 1996 . Direct measurement of the tor - sional rigidity of single actin filaments . J . Mol . Biol . 263 : 227 – 236 . Zigmond , S . H . 2004 . Formin - induced nucleation of actin filaments . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 : 99 – 105 . Zigmond , S . H . , M . Evangelista , C . Boone , C . Yang , A . C . Dar , F . Sicheri , J . For - key , and M . Pring . 2003 . Formin leaky cap allows elongation in the pres - ence of tight capping proteins . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1820 – 1823 .