PHAGOCYTES , GRANULOCYTES , AND MYELOPOIESIS Endocytosis of soluble immune complexes leads to their clearance by Fc (cid:1) RIIIB but induces neutrophil extracellular traps via Fc (cid:1) RIIA in vivo Kan Chen , 1 Hiroshi Nishi , 1 Richard Travers , 2 Naotake Tsuboi , 1 Kimberly Martinod , 3 , 4 Denisa D . Wagner , 3 , 5 Radu Stan , 6 Kevin Croce , 2 and Tanya N . Mayadas 1 1 Center for Excellence in Vascular Biology , Department of Pathology , and 2 Cardiovascular Medicine Division , Department of Medicine , Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ; 3 Immune Disease Institute and Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine , Boston Children’s Hospital , Boston , MA ; 4 Graduate Program in Immunology , Division of Medical Sciences , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ; 5 Department of Pediatrics , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ; and 6 Department of Pathology , Dartmouth Medical School , Hanover , NH Soluble immune complexes ( ICs ) are abundant in autoimmune diseases , yet neutrophil responses to these soluble humoral factors remain uncharacterized . Moreover , the individual role of the uniquely human Fc (cid:1) RIIA and glycophos - phatidylinositol ( GPI ) – linked Fc (cid:1) RIIIB in IC - mediated inﬂammation is still debated . Here we exploited mice and cell lines expressing these human neutrophil Fc (cid:1) RstodemonstratethatFc (cid:1) RIIIBalone , in the absence of its known signaling partners Fc (cid:1) RIIA and the integrin Mac - 1 , internalizes soluble ICs through a mecha - nism used by GPI - anchored receptors andﬂuid - phaseendocytosis . Fc (cid:1) RIIAalso uses this pathway . As shown by intravital microscopy , Fc (cid:1) RIIA but not Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated neutrophil interactions with ex - travascular soluble ICs results in the for - mation of neutrophil extracellular traps ( NETs ) in tissues . Unexpectedly , in wild - type mice , IC - induced NETosis does not rely on the NADPH oxidase , myeloperoxi - dase , or neutrophil elastase . In the con - text of soluble ICs present primarily within vessels , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated neutrophil re - cruitment requires Mac - 1 and is associ - ated with the removal of intravascular IC deposits . Collectively , our studies assign a new role for Fc (cid:1) RIIIB in the removal of soluble ICs within the vasculature that may serve to maintain homeostasis , whereas Fc (cid:1) RIIA engagement of tissue soluble ICs generates NETs , a proinﬂam - matory process linked to autoimmunity . ( Blood . 2012 ; 120 ( 22 ) : 4421 - 4431 ) Introduction Immune complexes ( ICs ) are constantly produced in the presence of foreign antigens . Under normal conditions , circulating ICs are rapidly cleared from the bloodstream by mononuclear phagocytes in the liver and spleen and are of little pathologic signiﬁcance . However , excessive circulating soluble ICs can lodge within the vasculature and eventually accumulate in the extravascular space . The tissue deposition of IgG - ICs is a hallmark of several autoim - mune diseases and is considered a key trigger of inﬂammation in these disorders . 1 However , the mechanisms underlying internaliza - tion of soluble ICs and the downstream physiologic consequences of this process remain largely unexplored . Cell surface receptors for IgG - ICs , known as Fc (cid:1) Rs , play essential roles in IC - induced inﬂammation in mice . A deﬁciency in the Fc common (cid:1) - chain ( (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) , required for the expression of the all murine activating Fc (cid:1) Rs , protects mice from tissue injury in a number of autoimmune models as well as the Reverse Passive Arthus ( RPA ) reaction , a prototypic model of soluble IC - mediated inﬂammation induced by the passive transfer of antibody and antigen . 2 Murine neutrophils express 2 low - afﬁnity activating Fc (cid:1) Rs , Fc (cid:1) RIII and Fc (cid:1) RIV , which rely on the ITAM - containing (cid:1) - chain for expression and signaling . 3 In contrast , human neutro - phils express a unique GPI - anchored Fc (cid:1) RIIIB and a single polypeptide ITAM - containing Fc (cid:1) RIIA for which there are no genetic equivalents in mice or other mammals . 4 The in vivo roles of these 2 uniquely human neutrophil Fc (cid:1) Rs have been recently explored . Expression of human Fc (cid:1) RIIA selectively on neutro - phils , and a fraction of monocytes ( but not macrophages ) restores neutrophil recruitment and susceptibility to glomerulonephritis , rheumatoid arthritis , and the skin RPA reaction in mice lacking their endogenous Fc (cid:1) Rs ( (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) . 5 , 6 Mice expressing either Fc (cid:1) RIIA ( Fc (cid:1) RIIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) or Fc (cid:1) RIIIB ( Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) at comparable lev - els elicit neutrophil accumulation , but only Fc (cid:1) RIIA is responsible for tissue injury , 5 probably through its ability to promote phagocy - tosis , reactive oxygen species generation , degranulation , and leukotriene production . 4 , 7 Thus , neutrophils can be recruited via either of their human Fc (cid:1) Rs , but Fc (cid:1) RIIA links IgG to organ damage . Fc (cid:1) RIIIB is expressed at 4 - to 5 - fold higher levels compared with Fc (cid:1) RIIA in human neutrophils . 8 Thus , we cannot rule out the possibility that Fc (cid:1) RIIIB may alone contribute to tissue injury if expressed at levels seen in human neutrophils . The physiologic role of Fc (cid:1) RIIIB remains enigmatic . In vitro , crosslinking of Fc (cid:1) RIIIB in human neutrophils induces Ca 2 (cid:3) mobilization , 9 promotes actin assembly to prime Fc (cid:1) RIIA effector responses , 10 recruits Fc (cid:1) RIIAto lipid rafts to promote ITAM - based signaling 11 and induces degranulation , but is unable to signal a respiratory burst and phagocytosis . 4 Fc (cid:1) RIIIB’s cytotoxic func - tions described to date rely on Fc (cid:1) RIIA and / or the CD18 integrin Mac - 1 , which physically associate with and may serve as signaling partners for the GPI - linked Fc (cid:1) RIIIB . 4 , 12 Neutrophil Fc (cid:1) RIIIB alone can tether to immobilized soluble ICs under physiologic ﬂow SubmittedDecember26 , 2011 ; acceptedAugust23 , 2012 . Prepublishedonline as Blood First Edition paper , September 6 , 2012 ; DOI 10 . 1182 / blood - 2011 - 12 - 401133 . The online version of this article contains a data supplement . The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment . Therefore , and solely to indicate this fact , this article is hereby marked ‘‘advertisement’’in accordance with 18 USC section 1734 . © 2012 by TheAmerican Society of Hematology 4421 BLOOD , 22 NOVEMBER 2012 (cid:1) VOLUME 120 , NUMBER 22 For personal use only . on December 30 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From conditions 13 , 14 and in vivo predominates over Fc (cid:1) RIIA in interact - ing with soluble ICs that deposit strictly within the vessel wall . 5 On the other hand , Fc (cid:1) RIIA is principally required for neutrophil recruitment when soluble ICs formed both within the vasculature and extravascular space lead to overt inﬂammation . 5 These , along with an association of a low copy number of FCGR3B with predisposition to lupus , 15 , 16 led us to postulate that Fc (cid:1) RIIIB may participate in the removal of soluble ICs . A previous study demonstrated a correlation between FCGR3B copy number poly - morphisms and IgG binding , but IC uptake was not speciﬁcally measured . 15 Here , using mice expressing the human Fc (cid:1) Rs in the absence of murine activating Fc (cid:1) Rs , and the same deﬁcient in Mac - 1 , allowed us to dissect the contribution of , and the pathways engaged by each of the human neutrophil Fc (cid:1) Rs and Mac - 1 in the uptake of soluble ICs . Moreover , we provided evidence that engagement of these uniquely human Fc (cid:1) Rs by soluble ICs in vivo results in physi - ologic outcomes that have potential consequences for tissue homeostasis and autoimmunity . Methods Intravital microscopy Soluble ICs were prepared by mixing BSA and anti - BSA antibody at 4 - 6 times antigen excess as previously described . 17 Leukocyte recruitment in the cremaster muscle venules was evaluated in mice 60 minutes after intravenous injection of preformed soluble ICs or BSA . For RPA , anti - BSA antibody ( 200 (cid:4) g / 300 (cid:4) L ) was injected intrascrotally , followed by the intravenous injection of BSA ( 300 (cid:4) g / 100 (cid:4) L ) . Leukocyte recruitment was evaluated 3 hours later . The procedures for preparation of the cremaster of anesthetized mice and subsequent intravital microscopy were as previously described . 17 For confocal intravital microscopy , circulating blood neutrophils were labeled with an intravenous injection of 5 (cid:4) g AlexaFluor 488 - labeled mAb to Gr - 1 ( RB6 - 8C5 ) . ICs were labeled in vitro with Cy3 - labeled anti – rabbit IgG ( 1 : 40 ) for 20 minutes , and then intravenously injected . Postcapillary venules were selected for analysis of leukocyte - IC interactions . At the end of the experiments , peripheral blood was obtained from the retro - orbital plexus . After RBC lysis , Gr - 1 – positive neutrophils were analyzed for Cy - 3 signal by ﬂow cytometry . Z - stacks of images were captured by an Olympus Fluo View FV 1000 high - speed , multichannel confocal intravital microscope with a 40 (cid:5) water - dipping objective . Images were acquired at a ﬁnal magniﬁcation of 40 (cid:5) by sequential scanning of the 473 - nm green channels and 559 - nm red channels . Stacks of images of 1 - (cid:4) m - thick optical sections were acquired , yielding 3 - dimensional confocal images of venules . Image stacks were subsequently analyzed off - line with Imaris ( Bit - plane ) . First , adherent neutrophils and deposited ICs were rendered as 3D surfaces based on pixel ﬂuorescence - intensity thresholding for FITC ( green ) and Cy - 3 ( red ) , respectively . The neutrophil objects were then used to create a new ﬂuorescent channel consisting solely of Cy - 3 – labeled ICs present on or inside of the neutrophil surface . A new surface object was created based on intensity thresholding for the channel containing only neutrophil - associated IC ( red surface within neutrophils ) . Data were analyzed on a per - image basis as total volume of neutrophil - associated ICs divided by total volume of neutrophils in the image deﬁned by FITC - anti – Gr - 1 signal as regions of interest . For analysis of neutrophil extracellular traps ( NETs ) in vivo , 3 hours after RPA induction , mice were injected with Sytox Green ( 25 nmol ) intravenously , and the cremaster muscle was prepared for intravital confocal microscopy . For each mouse , Sytox Green - positive single NET ﬁbers were counted in 4 - 7 ﬁelds ( 317 . 1 (cid:4) m (cid:5) 317 . 1 (cid:4) m ) in the cremaster preparation and averaged . Data are presented as the average number of ﬁbers ( (cid:6) SEM ) per millimeter squared of tissue . Signals coming from Sytox Green - positive intact cells were excluded from this analysis . For neutrophil depletion , 100 (cid:4) g Gr - 1 antibody was injected intravenously 24 hours before RPA induction . Neutrophil depletion was conﬁrmed by Gr - 1 antibody staining followed by ﬂow cytometric analysis as well as hemavet 950Fs analysis . Adoptive transfer of BMNs Bone marrow – derived neutrophils ( BMNs ) were isolated from femurs and tibias of donor animals using Percoll - gradient centrifugation and stained using the ﬂuorophore 5 - chloromethylﬂuorescein diacetate ( CMFDA ) , ac - cording to the manufacturer’s protocol . A total of 2 . 0 (cid:5) 10 7 stained cells were treated with murine TNF - (cid:7) ( 200 ng / mL for 15 minutes ) , washed and injected intravenously into recipient mice after injection of soluble ICs as previously described . 18 In vitro analysis of immune complex uptake by neutrophils and HEK293 cells expressing human Fc (cid:1) Rs For analysis by confocal microscopy , Alexa - 488 – conjugated Gr - 1 antibody – labeled BMNs were incubated with BSA / anti - BSA IC labeled with Cy3 secondary antibody at 37°C . After incubation for 1 hour and extensive washing , the BMNs were ﬁxed with 2 % paraformaldehyde , placed on slides , and subjected to analysis by confocal microscopy . Serials of Z slices were acquired by confocal microscopy and used to reconstruct 3D images of neutrophils and internalized ICs . HEK293 cells were transiently transfected with Fc (cid:1) RIIIB or Fc (cid:1) RIIA cDNA by lipofectamine . After 24 hours , they were trypsinized , placed on poly - L - lysine – coated coverslips , and incubated with BSA / anti - BSA ICs labeled with Cy3 secondary antibody and Alexa - 488 – conjugated human transferrin ( 10 (cid:4) g / mL ) or 70 - kDa FITC dextran ( 1 mg / mL ) for 1 hour at 37°C . Cells were then washed and ﬁxed with 2 % paraformaldehyde and cover - slipped . All samples were analyzed by an Olympus Fluo View FV 1000 high - speed , multichannel confocal microscope with a 60 (cid:5) oil - dipping objective . For ﬂow cytometric analysis of IC internalization , soluble ICs were prepared by mixing DQ - BSA and anti - BSA antibody . BMNs were incu - bated with DQ - BSA alone or DQ - BSA / anti - BSA ( DQ - sIC ) at 4°C for 1 hour , and were further incubated for 1 hour at 4°C or 37°C to promote IC uptake . Cells were then incubated with allophycocyanin - conjugated Gr - 1 antibody for 15 minutes . Fluorescence associated with Gr - 1 – positive gated neutrophils was evaluated by ﬂow cytometry . BMNs were incubated in the presence of 5mM methyl (cid:8) cyclodextrin , 20 (cid:4) M cytochalasin D , or 80 (cid:4) M dynasore before their incubation with DQ - sIC . For the study of murine Fc (cid:1) RIIB , (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) BMNs expressing human Fc (cid:1) Rs or (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) macrophages were preincubated with 2 . 4G2 ( anti - CD16 / CD32 ) antibody or its isotype control and further incubated with DQ - BSA / anti - BSA ICs at 4°C or 37°C or FITC - BSA – anti - BSA sIC at 4°C for the measurement of IC endocytosis and IC binding , respectively , as detected by ﬂow cytometry . Stable cell line construction and analysis HEK293 cell lines stably transfected with Fc (cid:1) RIIIB or Fc (cid:1) RIIA were obtained via single - cell cloning by serial dilution in 96 - well plates in the presence of G418 ( 800 (cid:4) g / mL ) . Single - cell clones were examined by ﬂow cytometry , and positive clones were then expanded . For the analysis of Cdc42 , stable cell lines were transiently transfected with GFP , GFP - Cdc42 L61 ( constitutively active ) , or GFP - Cdc42 N17 ( dominant negative ) 19 by lipofectamine . After 24 hours , cells were incubated with BSA / anti - BSAICs labeled with Cy5 secondary antibody for 1 hour and acid washed with 0 . 2N acetic acid to remove external bound ICs before subjecting samples to ﬂow cytometric analysis of GFP (cid:3) cells . For the analysis of Rac1 , stable cell lines were transiently transfected with Flag - Epac ( control ) , myc - Rac1 L61 ( constitu - tivelyactive ) , ormyc - Rac1N17 ( dominantnegative ) . 20 After24hours , cellswere incubated with labeled ICs and acid washed . Cells were then ﬁxed with 2 % paraformaldehyde , permeabilized with 0 . 3 % saponin , and stained with anti - ﬂag or anti - myc antibody followed by Alexa - 488 conjugated anti – mouse secondary antibody . Flag (cid:3) or myc (cid:3) cells were then analyzed by ﬂow cytometry . For the analysis of the role of Rho , cells were pretreated with a 4422 CHEN et al BLOOD , 22 NOVEMBER 2012 (cid:1) VOLUME 120 , NUMBER 22 For personal use only . on December 30 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From Rho inhibitor called CT04 ( 1 (cid:4) g / mL ) for 5 hours and then analyzed for IC internalization by ﬂow cytometry as described for the analysis of cdc42 . Analysis of NETs in human and murine peripheral blood neutrophils For analysis of NETs in human neutrophils , anticoagulated whole blood was collected from normal donors under a protocol approved by the Human Use Committee Board of Brigham and Women’s Hospital . The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki . Human neutro - phils were isolated as previously described . 21 Atotal of 2 (cid:5) 10 6 neutrophils , resuspended in HBSS without calcium and magnesium , were seeded into each well of 24 - well tissue culture plates and incubated with BSA , BSA / anti - BSA ICs , RBCs , IgG coated RBCs , dextran sulfate ( 0 . 1 mg / mL ) , or phorbol myristate acetate ( PMA ; 25 ng / mL ) for 3 hours at 37°C with 5 % CO 2 . For experiments with bound BSA / anti - BSAICs , glass coverslips were coated as previously described 5 and placed into each well of 24 - well tissue culture plate . For inhibitor studies , neutrophils were preincubated with 25 (cid:4) M DPI ( reactive oxygen species inhibitor ) , 5mM M (cid:8) CD ( lipid raft inhibitor ) , 20 (cid:4) M cytochalasin D ( cytoD ; inhibitor of actin polymerization ) , 10 (cid:4) M PP2 ( Src inhibitor ) , 30 (cid:4) M piceatannol ( Syk inhibitor ) , 20 (cid:4) M LY29004 ( PI3K inhibitor ) , 1 (cid:4) M PI103 ( PI3K inhibitor ) , 5 (cid:4) M UO126 ( ERK inhibitor ) , or DMSO ( vehicle control ) for 30 minutes before their incuba - tion with BSA / anti - BSA ICs . For antibody blocking experiments , neutro - phils were preincubated with functional blocking antibodies to Fc (cid:1) RIIA ( 10 (cid:4) g / mL , IV . 3 ) and / or Fc (cid:1) RIIIB ( 10 (cid:4) g / mL , 3G8 ) for 20 minutes before an additional 15 - minute incubation with BSA / anti - BSA ICs . At the end of the incubation , supernatant was collected , centrifuged to remove detached cells , and incubated with Sytox Green , at a ﬁnal concentration of 10nM to detect DNA . The plates were read in a ﬂuorescence plate reader ( Wallac victor 1420 multilabel counter ; PerkinElmer Life and Analytical Sciences ) with a ﬁlter setting of 485 ( excitation ) / 535 ( emission ) . For each experiment , ﬂuorescence values were averaged from 2 replicates after the background was subtracted . For analysis of NETs released by murine neutrophils , anticoagulated whole blood was collected from mice . Murine peripheral neutrophils were isolated by red blood cell lysis followed by percoll gradient centrifugation . Cells were incubated with ionomycin ( 4 (cid:4) M ) , BSA - or BSA / anti - BSA in 96 well , glass - bottom plates ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) for 2 hours . Cells were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 15 minutes at room temperature and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 % sodium citrate on ice . After washing and blocking with 3 % BSA , cells were incubated for 16 hours at 4°C in 0 . 3 % BSA with 0 . 5 (cid:4) g / mL rabbit polyclonal anti - CitH3 followed by AlexaFluor - 488 – conjugated secondary antibody for 1 hour at room temperature . Fluorescence images were acquired by a Nikon Eclipse inverted wide - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscope . The percentage of neutrophils with released chromatin was calculated as the ratio of neutrophils with citrullinated histone3 ( CitH3 ) – positiveNETstructurestoCitH3 - positivecells . Statistical analysis All data obtained are presented as the mean (cid:6) SEM . Statistical differences were analyzed with the unpaired t test . P (cid:9) . 05 was considered signiﬁcant . For further details regarding materials and mice , see supplemental Methods ( available on the Blood Web site ; see the Supplemental Materials link at the top of the online article ) . Results Characterization of Fc (cid:1) RIIA - and Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated IC internalization in neutrophils in vitro Neutrophils isolated from Fc (cid:1) RIIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) , Fc (cid:1) RIIA (cid:3) Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) , and (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice were evaluated for their ability to bind soluble ICs composed of FITC - BSAand rabbit – anti - BSA . We used rabbit IgG because its binding to Fc (cid:1) RIIA versus Fc (cid:1) RIIIB followed a similar trend to that of human IgG and therefore could serve as a faithful surrogate of human IgG ( supplemental Figure 1 ) . We observed that Fc (cid:1) RIIIB binding capacity exceeded that of Fc (cid:1) RIIA ( Figure 1A ) despite similar expression levels of both receptors at the mRNA level . 5 Next , the uptake of ICs was assessed using ICs prepared with anti - BSA antibody and BODIPY - conjugated BSA ( DQ - BSA ) . BODIPY only ﬂuoresces after proteolytic digestion in endocytic compartments , thus allowing measurement of IC endocytosis , which was moni - tored by ﬂow cytometry ( Figure 1B ) . No IC uptake was observed in (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) BMNs , whereas (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) BMNs expressing Fc (cid:1) RIIIB or Fc (cid:1) RIIA alone exhibited signiﬁcant IC internalization that was increased in neutrophils expressing both Fc (cid:1) Rs ( Figure 1B ) . DQ - BSA / anti - BSA ﬂuorescence remained in Fc (cid:1) RIIIB neutrophils treated with trypan blue , suggesting that the observed increase in ﬂuorescence was the result of IC internalization ( supplemental Figure 2A ) . IC endocytosis was further conﬁrmed by an approach that exploits the fact that ﬂuorescently labeled secondary antibody has access to surface bound but not internalized ICs when incubated with cells at 4°C ( supplemental Figure 2B ) . Further conﬁrmation of the result that Fc (cid:1) RIIIB can internalize ICs without Fc (cid:1) RIIA was obtained by laser scanning confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy after incuba - tion of Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) or (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) BMN with ﬂuorophore - conjugated Gr - 1 antibody to delineate the plasma membrane surface , and ﬂuorophore - labeled ICs ( Figure 1C ) . Thus , as shown by 3 different methods , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB can endocytose soluble ICs . The inhibitory Fc (cid:1) RIIB on neutrophils may potentially support IC uptake by Fc (cid:1) RIIIB . However , blocking antibody to murine Fc (cid:1) RIIB had no effect on IC internalization by either human Fc (cid:1) R ( supplemental Figure 3A ) , whereas the same blocked the binding of ICs by (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) macrophages ( supplemental Figure 3B ) . This is consistent with the very low level of Fc (cid:1) RIIB mRNA in neutrophils versus macro - phages ( data not shown ) and the largely undetectable Fc (cid:1) RIIB protein on the surface of murine neutrophils . 22 Next , the possibility that the integrin Mac - 1 supports Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated IC uptake was pursued . Neutrophils isolated from Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice lacking this integrin ( Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) ; Mac1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) retained their ability to internalize ICs ( Figure 1D ) . Thus , neither Fc (cid:1) RIIB nor Mac - 1 supports Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated IC uptake . The internalization of GPI - anchored proteins occurs via a lipid raft – dependent , actin polymerization – dependent and dynamin - independent endocytic mechanism . 23 - 25 Whether Fc (cid:1) RIIIB en - gaged a similar pathway was evaluated ﬁrst using well - characterized pharmacologic inhibitors . 26 The lipid raft inhibitor methyl (cid:8) - cyclodextrin ( M (cid:8) CD ) , and an inhibitor of actin polymerization , cytochalasin D , abolished Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - dependent IC uptake ( Figure 1E ) at a dose that had no effect on Fc (cid:1) RIIIB expression , neutrophil viability , or IC binding per se ( data not shown ) . However , a speciﬁc dynamin inhibitor dynasore that inhibited zymosan phagocyto - sis ( data not shown ) failed to affect Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated IC uptake ( Figure 1E ) . The aforementioned inhibitors had similar effects on IC endocytosis by Fc (cid:1) RIIA - expressing murine neutro - phils ( Figure 1E ) . To further characterize IC uptake , we used molecular biologic approaches in a human embryonic kidney 293 ( HEK293 ) cell line transfected with Fc (cid:1) RIIA or Fc (cid:1) RIIIB . Internalization of GPI - anchored proteins is not clathrin or caveolae dependent but parallels those described for ﬂuid - phase uptake . 25 , 27 Cells express - ing either Fc (cid:1) RIIIB or Fc (cid:1) RIIA internalized ICs into endocytic vesicles that cosegregated with a ﬂuid - phase component 70 - kDa dextran but not with transferrin , a marker of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Figure 1F ) . Small Rho GTPases are key players in endocytic processes . 28 Their role was assessed in Fc (cid:1) RIIAor Fc (cid:1) RIIIB ENDOCYTOSIS OF IMMUNE COMPLEXES BY HUMAN FC (cid:1) Rs 4423 BLOOD , 22 NOVEMBER 2012 (cid:1) VOLUME 120 , NUMBER 22 For personal use only . on December 30 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From stably expressing HEK293 cells ( supplemental Figure 4 ) additionally transfected with constitutively active or dominant negative forms of cdc42 or Rac1 , or treated with the speciﬁc Rho inhibitor CT04 . Only the constitutively active form of cdc42 inhibited Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - and Fc (cid:1) RIIA - mediated endocytosis ( Figure 1G ) . The results are consistent with a previous study showing that persistent activation of cdc42 leads to alterations in the actin architecture that are incompatible with GPI - anchored receptor - mediated endocytosis , whereas Rac1 and Rho do not participate in this process . 24 Together , the data suggest that Fc (cid:1) RIIIB and Fc (cid:1) RIIA share a common IC - induced lipid raft – dependent , dynamin - independent , and cdc42 - regulated uptake mechanism described for delivery of GPI - anchored proteins to endocytic vesicles . In vivo , Fc (cid:1) RIIA - mediated contact with soluble ICs results in formation of NETs The physiologic consequence of Fc (cid:1) R - mediated endocytosis was explored in vivo in the RPA reaction in the cremaster muscle induced by the intravenous delivery of BSA and the intrascrotal injection of anti - BSA . The RPA elicits a robust inﬂammatory response associated with deposition of soluble ICs in the intravascular and Figure 1 . Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - and Fc (cid:1) RIIA - expressing neutrophils internalize immune complexes in vitro . ( A ) Mature neutrophils isolated from the bone marrow of (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice expressing Fc (cid:1) RIIA ( IIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) or Fc (cid:1) RIIIB ( IIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) were incubated with FITC - BSA or FITC - BSA / anti - BSA IC ( sIC ) at 4°C . Fluorescence associated with samples was evaluatedbyﬂowcytometricanalysisofGr - 1 – positivegatedneutrophils , arepresentativehistogramofwhichisshown . ( B ) BMNsfromindicatedmice incubatedwithDQ - BSA alone or DQ - BSA / anti - BSA ( DQ - sIC ) at 4°C for 1 hour were further incubated for 1 hour at 4°C , or at 37°C to promote IC uptake . Fluorescence associated with samples was evaluatedbyﬂowcytometricanalysisofGr - 1 – positivegatedneutrophils , representativehistogramsofwhichareshown ( leftpanel ) . Theaveragemeanﬂuorescenceintensities ( M . F . I ) obtained by ﬂow cytometry are shown for each mouse strain ( right panel ) . * * P (cid:9) . 01 , * * * P (cid:9) . 001 , compared with DQ - BSA alone within each genotype . ( C ) FITC - anti – Gr - 1 – labeled BMNs ( green ) from indicated mice were incubated with ICs labeled with Cy3 secondary antibody ( red ) at 37°C and subjected to analysis by laser scanning confocal microscopy . Serials of Z slices were acquired by confocal microscopy ( left panels ) followed by 3D reconstruction and surface analysis ( right panels ) . IC - positive intracellular puncta ( arrow ) in Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - positive neutrophils were also positive for Gr - 1 , another GPI - anchored protein . ( D ) BMNs from Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice or Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) lackingMac1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) ( IIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) / Mac - 1 ) wereincubatedwithDQ - BSA / anti - BSAandassessedasdescribedinpanelB . n . s . indicatesnotsigniﬁcant . ( E ) Internalization ofDQ - BSA / anti - BSAsICbyFc (cid:1) RIIIB ( leftpanel ) andFc (cid:1) RIIA ( rightpanel ) expressingneutrophilspretreatedwithDMSO ( (cid:2) ) , cytochalasinD ( cytD ) , M (cid:8) CD , ordynasore ( Dyn ) was analyzed as in panel B . * P (cid:9) . 05 , compared with DMSO control . ( F ) Fc (cid:1) RIIIB was transiently expressed in HEK293Acells . Transfected cells incubated with soluble ICs labeled with cy3 secondary antibody ( red ) combined with FITC - dextran ( 70 kDa , green , top panel ) or Alexa - 488 – transferrin ( green , bottom panel ) , were evaluated by laser scanning confocal microscopy . Intracellular ICs colocalized with Dextran - containing ( arrowheads ) but not transferrin - containing intracellular compartments . ( G ) Fc (cid:1) RIIA or Fc (cid:1) RIIIB stably expressing HEK293A cells were transfected with GFP or GFP - cdc42N ( dominant negative ) or GFP - cdc42L ( constitutive active ; top panels ) , ﬂag - Control or myc - Rac1N ( dominant negative ) , or myc - Rac1L ( constitutively active ; middle panels ) constructs or pretreated with a Rho inhibitor CT04 ( bottom panels ) . Cells were incubated with cy5 - labeled sICs . Top panels : GFP - positive cells were analyzed for sIC uptake by ﬂow cytometry . Middle panels : Cells were ﬁxed , permeabilized , and stained with anti - myc or anti - ﬂag antibody followed by Alexa488 anti – mouse antibody . Cells positive for myc or ﬂag were analyzed for sIC uptake by ﬂow cytometry . Bottom panels : Cellsweredirectlyanalyzedbyﬂowcytometry . Ofallthetreatments , onlyconstitutivelyactivecdc42 ( arrows ) decreasedsICuptakebyFc (cid:1) RIIIBandFc (cid:1) RIIA . N (cid:10) 3or 4 independent experiments for panelsA - E and G . N (cid:10) 2 independent experiments for panel F . 4424 CHEN et al BLOOD , 22 NOVEMBER 2012 (cid:1) VOLUME 120 , NUMBER 22 For personal use only . on December 30 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From extravascular space . 1 NETs are DNA ﬁbers released by neutrophils on their interaction with microbes , platelets , or systemic lupus erythematosus ICs . 29 , 30 Here we assessed in real - time whether soluble ICs formed in the RPA reaction triggered the formation of NETs in vivo and the role of Fc (cid:1) RIIA and Fc (cid:1) RIIIB in the generation of these structures . Mice were subjected to the RPA , given ﬂuorophore - conjugated anti – Gr - 1 antibody to label neutro - phils and Sytox Green , a ﬂuorescent nucleic acid stain impermeant to living cells , and their cremaster tissue was prepared for intravital microscopy . Robust Sytox Green - positive NETs were observed in the extravascular space of wild - type mice , with a small fraction also localizing within vessels ( Figure 2A ) . These structures were largely absent in wild - type mice injected with BSA alone ( Figure 2A ) . In addition to neutrophils , mast cells and eosinophils can form DNA extracellular traps . 31 , 32 However , the observed NET struc - tures originated from neutrophils and possibly monocytes , as they were absent in wild - type mice immunodepleted of these leukocyte subsets ( Figure 2B ) . Reactive oxygen species – , myeloperoxidase - and neutrophil elastase – dependent pathways of NET formation have been previously described . 33 RPA - induced NET formation was comparable in mice lacking the NADPH oxidase component gp91 phox and wild - type counterparts ( Figure 2B ) . Similarly , NET IIA / γγ - / - IIIB / γ - / - γ - / - D A Surface analysis IIA / γ - / - IIIB / γ - / - γ - / - BSA BSA / anti - BSA N E T s ( n / mm 2 ) PMN - depleted B WT gp91 - / - WT gp91 - / - PMN depleted n . s 0 200 400 600 0 500 1000 1500 2000 WTgp91 - / - Time ( s ) R L U IIA / γ - / - Mac1 - / - WT mpo - / - elastase - / - C * * * * * * n . s 0 50 100 150 WT mpo - / - elastase - / - 0 50 100 150 N E T s ( n / mm 2 ) 0 50 100 150 * * * n . s n . s N E T s ( n / mm 2 ) Figure2 . EngagementofFc (cid:1) Rsresultsintheformationofneutrophilextracellulartrapsinvivo . RequirementforFc (cid:1) RIIAbutnottheNADPHoxidase , myeloperoxidase ( mpo ) , orneutrophilelastase . TheRPAwasinducedinthecremasterofmice . After3hours , thecremastermusclewasexteriorizedforintravitalmicroscopy , andthemicewere given an intravenous injection of Sytox Green , a DNAbinding dye , and tetramethylrhodamine ( TRITC ) conjugated Dextran ( 70 kDa ) , which delineates blood vessels . ( A ) Left panel : NET - like structures ( green ) were observed in wild - type ( WT ) mice subjected to the RPA ( BSA / anti - BSA ) but not in mice given BSAalone that localized primarily to the extravascular space . Scale bar represents 50 (cid:4) m . Middle and right panels : The image ( BSA / anti - BSA ) was subjected to surface analysis of blood vessels ( red ) and extravascular ( blue ) and intravascular ( green ) NETstructures . The analysis conﬁrmed the presence of NET - like structures mostly in the extravascular space with a very small fractionpresentwithinbloodvessels ( arrow ) . ( B ) Toppanels : NET - likestructures ( arrow ) werevisibleinthecremastermuscleofWTmice ( WT , (cid:2) ) , althoughtheywereabsentin WTmicetreatedwithneutrophil - depletingGr - 1antibody ( WT , PMN - depleted ) . NET - likestructureswerevisibleingp91 (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice3hoursafterRPA . Scalebarrepresents50 (cid:4) m . Bottom left panel : A graph of the average (cid:6) SEM of the number of NETs per millimeter squared of cremaster tissue ( n / mm 2 ) for each genotype / condition is shown . N (cid:10) 3 independentexperiments . * * * P (cid:9) . 001 . n . s . indicatesnotsigniﬁcant . Bottomrightpanel : Neutrophilsisolatedfromwild - typeandgp91 (cid:2) / (cid:2) miceweretreatedwithPMA , andROS generation was evaluated in real - time using a luminol - based assay . ( C ) Top panels : NET - like structures were visible in the cremaster muscle of WT , mpo (cid:2) / (cid:2) , and elastase (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice subjected to the RPA . Bottom panel : The quantiﬁcation of NETs was conducted as described in panel B . N (cid:10) 3 or 4 mice per genotype . ( D ) NETosis was evaluated in Fc (cid:1) RIIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) , (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice , and Fc (cid:1) RIIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) / Mac - 1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice subjected to the RPA . Left panels : NET - like structures were present in the cremaster muscle of Fc (cid:1) RIIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) , but not Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) or (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice . In Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) and (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice , Sytox Green was present within cells , which probably reﬂect the presence of permeable neutrophils . Scale bar represents 50 (cid:4) m . Right panels : The quantiﬁcation of NETs for indicated animals was conducted as described in panel B . n (cid:10) 3 mice per group . * * * P (cid:9) . 001 . ( B - D ) Signals coming from Sytox Green - positive intact cells ( arrowhead ) , excluded from this analysis , were similar in all groups . ENDOCYTOSIS OF IMMUNE COMPLEXES BY HUMAN FC (cid:1) Rs 4425 BLOOD , 22 NOVEMBER 2012 (cid:1) VOLUME 120 , NUMBER 22 For personal use only . on December 30 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From formation was comparable in mice lacking myeloperoxidase or neutrophil elastase , and wild - type animals ( Figure 2C ) , indicating that these pathways were not essential for NETosis . Next , the contribution of the human Fc (cid:1) Rs in IC - induced NET formation was evaluated . NETs were absent in (cid:1) - chain – deﬁcient mice albeit Sytox Green did colocalize with Gr - 1 – positive cells in these animals that may reﬂect cell permeabilization because of loss of cell viability . Fc (cid:1) RIIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice subjected to the RPAexhibited extensive NET formation in tissues . In addition to neutrophils , monocytes may contribute to NETosis as Fc (cid:1) RIIA is expressed on 25 % of monocytes in the humanized animals . 5 However , because Fc (cid:1) RIIA is not present on tissue macrophages of Fc (cid:1) RIIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice 5 and NETs are primarily observed in the tissue ( Figure 2A ) , macrophages probably do not contribute to NETs induced by ICs in our model . In contrast to results with Fc (cid:1) RIIA , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) did not exhibit extracellular chromatin ﬁbers but did exhibit Sytox Green within intact neutrophils as also observed in (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice ( Figure 2D ) . Notably , the number of transmigrated cells in Fc (cid:1) RIIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) is twice that observed in Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice in the RPA . 5 Thus , in Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice , we speciﬁcally examined areas with Gr - 1 – positive neutrophils for the presence of NETs . There was no increase in NET - like structures in Fc (cid:1) RIIA (cid:3) IIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice compared with Fc (cid:1) RIIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice ( data not shown ) . Together , our results suggest that Fc (cid:1) RIIIB alone , expressed at the same level as Fc (cid:1) RIIA in our transgenic mice , 5 is not sufﬁcient to induce NETosis . Albeit we cannot rule out the possibility that at much higher expression levels , as that observed in human neutro - phils , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB may contribute to NETosis . Finally , neither Fc (cid:1) RIIA mediated neutrophil accumulation ( data not shown ) nor NET formation ( Figure 2D ) was affected in Fc (cid:1) RIIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) lacking Mac - 1 compared with Fc (cid:1) RIIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) animals , suggesting that Mac - 1 is not required for either of these Fc (cid:1) RIIA functions . Together , our results suggest that soluble ICs in tissues promote NET formation through a process that does not require the NADPH oxidase , myeloperoxidase , or neutrophil elastase and demonstrate that Fc (cid:1) RIIA and Fc (cid:1) RIIIB on neutrophils differ in their ability to generate NETs in vivo . In vitro , endocytosis of soluble ICs by human neutrophils induces NET formation IC - induced NET formation was further characterized in vitro after incubation of human peripheral blood neutrophils with soluble ICs of BSA and anti - BSA and quantitation of DNA released in the supernatant using Sytox Green ( Figure 3A ) as previously de - scribed . 34 Soluble ICs induced signiﬁcant NET formation in neutrophils after 3 hours that was comparable to that observed with PMA at 6 hours . 35 Pretreatment of cells with Diphenyleneiodonium ( DPI ) , a ﬂavoprotein inhibitor of the NADPH oxidase , had no effect on soluble IC - induced NET formation but abolished PMA - induced NET formation ( Figure 3A ) as reported . 33 This is in agreement with the relative lack of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) produced after soluble IC endocytosis versus the robust ROS generation after PMA treatment that is inhibited by DPI ( Figure 3B ) . Fc (cid:1) R - mediated endocytosis of ICs was necessary for NET formation as pretreatment with cytochalasin D or M (cid:8) CD blocked NETs ( Figure 3A ) , whereas these had no effect on PMA - induced NET formation ( data not shown ) . On the other hand , ﬂuid - phase endocytosis per se was not sufﬁcient , as dextran sulfate did not induce NETs ( Figure 3A ) . NETosis also appears to be selective for IC endocytosis as neither phagocytosis of IgG - opsonized RBC nor interaction with plate immobilized ICs ( “frustrated phagocytosis” ) promoted NET formation ( Figure 3A ) . Insights into the mecha - nisms of NET formation were gained using inhibitors of signaling molecules potentially engaged by the ITAM - containing Fc (cid:1) RIIA . Syk and Src inhibitors blocked IC endocytosis and therefore NETs . On the other hand , PI3K inhibitors did not block endocytosis but inhibited NET formation after IC stimulation ( Figure 3A ) . Thus , the PI3K pathway may link to NETosis downstream of Fc (cid:1) R internalization . Receptor - mediated endocytosis , rather than events secondary to IC uptake , is responsible for NETs as these DNA structures were observed within 15 minutes of incubation with ICs and inhibited with functional blocking antibodies to both Fc (cid:1) RIIA and Fc (cid:1) RIIIB ( Figure 3C ) . Antibody to Fc (cid:1) RIIIB alone blocked NET formation , whereas anti - Fc (cid:1) RIIA failed to do so ( Figure 3C ) . This correlated with the ability of only anti - Fc (cid:1) RIIIB to signiﬁcantly block IC binding 36 ( and data not shown ) , and the subsequent endocytosis ( supplemental Figure 5 ) . Incubation of neutrophils with either antibody alone did not induce NETosis ( data not shown ) . NETosis in the presence of functional blocking antibody to Fc (cid:1) RIIA may be explained by the reported ability of IC ligation of Fc (cid:1) RIIIB alone to drive Fc (cid:1) RIIA phosphorylation and its recruitment to lipid rafts . 37 , 38 The individual roles of Fc (cid:1) RIIA and Fc (cid:1) RIIIB in IC - induced NET formation were further assessed in murine neutrophils expressing Fc (cid:1) RIIA or Fc (cid:1) RIIIB alone . Despite the advances in analyzing NETosis in human neutrophils , assay systems to study this process in murine neutrophils in vitro have not been widely reported . NETosis in murine neutrophils was not observed using the DNA release assay , even after PMA treatment for 6 hours ( data not shown ) . Importantly , PMA - induced NET formation in murine and human neutrophils differs 39 , 40 as the kinetics are much slower and the process is much less efﬁcient in murine ( 10 - 16 hours treatment gives 25 % NETosis ) versus human neutrophils . Thus , the assays used in human neutrophils may lack the sensitivity to detect mouse NETs in vitro and were the rationale for establishing a different assay system . Several groups have reported citrullinated histone C3 immunostaining in human neutro - phils and the HL60 granulocyte cell line after stimulation with calcium ionophore . 41 - 43 We adopted this assay to detect NETosis in murine neutrophils , using the calcium ionophore ionomycin as our positive control ( Figure 3D ) . PMA failed to give a consistent response ( data not shown ) and may reﬂect the inefﬁciency of PMA in inducing NETosis in mouse neutrophils 39 , 40 and / or the fact that PMA and ionomycin induce NETosis through different mecha - nisms . 44 Next , we stimulated murine neutrophils expressing either Fc (cid:1) RIIA or Fc (cid:1) RIIIB with ICs . We found that Fc (cid:1) RIIA , but not Fc (cid:1) RIIIB , induced the extracellular release of citrullinated histone 3 – labeled chromatin upon IC stimulation in vitro ( Figure 3D ) , which is consistent with our in vivo results ( Figure 2D ) . Together , our data in human and murine neutrophils suggest that , although Fc (cid:1) RIIIB alone fails to induce NET formation , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB may play a supportive role in Fc (cid:1) RIIA - induced NET formation that we speculate may be through its ability to capture ICs and subse - quently activate Fc (cid:1) RIIA . Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated neutrophil tethering to intravascular ICs in vivo is dependent on neutrophil Mac - 1 A major objective of our study was to test the hypothesis that Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated neutrophil recruitment results in the removal of soluble ICs deposited within the vessel wall . First , the require - ments for Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated neutrophil recruitment were evalu - ated . Fc (cid:1) RIIIB tethers to intravascularly deposited IC to promote slow neutrophil rolling and adhesion to the vessel wall and predominates over Fc (cid:1) RIIA in this function . 5 In this model , 4426 CHEN et al BLOOD , 22 NOVEMBER 2012 (cid:1) VOLUME 120 , NUMBER 22 For personal use only . on December 30 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From preformed soluble ICs injected intravenously rapidly deposit in the postcapillary venules of the cremaster muscle on changes in permeability associated with cremaster exteriorization . 17 Unlike the RPA , IC deposition is largely intravascular in this model and neutrophil recruitment occurs in the absence of detectable endothe - lial activation , platelet deposition , pertussis toxin - sensitive chemo - kine receptors , mast cells , or complement function . 5 , 17 We exam - ined whether Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated neutrophil tethering in this model requires Mac - 1 . Adeﬁciency of Mac - 1 in mice expressing Fc (cid:1) RIIIB ( Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) / Mac1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) completely abolished neutrophil slow rolling and adhesion ( Figure 4A ) despite comparable Fc (cid:1) RIIIB expression in these and Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice ( supplemental Figure 6 ) . To exclude the possibility that Mac - 1 expressed on leukocytes other than neutrophils supports neutrophil Fc (cid:1) RIIIB activity , TNF - primed and CMFDA - labeled (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) , or Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) / Mac1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) BMNs were adoptively transferred into wild - type recipients . TNF priming of adoptively transferred BMNs is required for them to interact with deposited ICs . 18 We found that Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) BMN adhered to intravascular IC in wild - type recipient mice , whereas Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) / Mac1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) BMNs failed to adhere ( Figure 4B ) . Thus , Mac - 1 on neutrophils supports Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - dependent neutrophil tethering to intravascular ICs in vivo . Src - I PP2 Syk - I Pic PI3K - I LY PI3K - I PI103 ERK - I UO126 IgGRBC Bnd BSA Bnd IC RBC Dex Sulf A C Con . Con . α IIIB α IIA α IIA / α IIIB * * * * PMA PMA DPI BSA IC 0 2 4 Fo l d i ndu c t i on B 0 200 400 600 0 50 100 150 PMA + DPI PMA + DMSO Time ( s ) 0 200 400 600 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 BSAsIC Time ( s ) R L U ( X 103 ) Fo l d i ndu c t i on M β CD CytoD 0 2 4 6 8 * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * IC DPI IC IC 0 20 40 60 80 * % o f C i t H 3 + w i t h r e l ease d c h r o m a t i n BSA IC BSA IC IIA / γ - / - IIIB / γ - / - IgG IgG IC BSA D 0 20 40 60 80 - Ionomycin * BSA BSA / anti - BSA CitH3 CitH3 DAPI Merge Figure 3 . Soluble ICs induce NETs in vitro in human neutrophils that is dependent on endocytosis and is NADPH oxidase independent . ( A ) Freshly isolated human peripheral blood neutrophils were incubated without or with BSA , BSA / anti - BSA ICs , RBCs , rabbit IgG - opsonized RBCs , plate - bound BSA ( Bnd BSA ) , plate - bound BSA / anti - BSA ICs ( Bnd IC ) , or dextran sulfate for 3 hours at 37°C in the presence or absence of indicated inhibitors . Neutrophils were incubated with PMA for 6 hours as a positive control . For inhibitor studies , cells were pretreated with DMSO ( (cid:2) ) , diphenylene iodonium ( DPI , ROS inhibitor ) , M (cid:8) CD ( lipid raft inhibitor ) , cytochalasin D ( cytoD ; inhibitor of actin polymerization ) , PP2 ( Src inhibitor ) , piceatannol ( Syk inhibitor ) , LY29004 ( PI3K inhibitor ) , PI103 ( PI3K inhibitor ) , or UO126 ( ERK inhibitor ) for 30 minutes before incubation with BSA / anti - BSAIC for 3 hours . Sytox Green was added to the supernatant of cells to detect DNA . The fold increase in ﬂuorescence in samples compared with that detected in neutrophils incubated with buffer alone was calculated . IC - treated neutrophils released more DNAthan those treated with BSA . Inhibitors of endocytosis blocked NETs . IgG - coated RBCs , bound BSA / anti - BSA ICs , and dextran sulfate failed to induce NETs . N (cid:10) 3 - 20 independent experiments . For cells treated with IC alone , * P (cid:9) . 05 compared to cells treated with BSA . For cells treated with PMAand DPI , * P (cid:9) . 05 compared to cells treated with PMAalone . For cells treated with IC and inhibitors , * P (cid:9) . 05 , * * P (cid:9) . 01comparedtocellstreatedwithICalone . ( B ) HumanneutrophilswereincubatedwithBSAaloneorsICs ( leftpanel ) , orPMAinthepresenceandabsenceof DPI ( right panel ) . Real - time generation of ROS generation was monitored using a luminol - based assay , representative proﬁles of which are shown . N (cid:10) 2 independent experiments . ( C ) Human neutrophils were preincubated with functional blocking antibody to Fc (cid:1) RIIA ( (cid:7) IIA ) , and / or Fc (cid:1) RIIIB ( (cid:7) IIIB ) or their isotype IgG control antibodies for 20 minutes before an additional 15 - minute incubation with sICs . NET formation was inhibited in samples containing an Fc (cid:1) RIIIB blocking antibody . N (cid:10) 3 independent experiments . For cells treated with IC and control IgG , * * P (cid:9) . 01 compared to cells treated with BSA and control IgG . For cells treated with IC and blocking antibodies , * P (cid:9) . 05 compared to cells treated with IC and control IgG . ( D ) Left panel : Murine peripheral blood wild - type neutrophils were incubated with RPMI or ionomycin ( positive control ) for2hoursat37°C . Middlepanel : IndicatedtransgenicmurineneutrophilswereincubatedwithBSAorBSA / anti - BSAICsfor2hoursat37°C . Fixedandpermeabilized cells were stained for CitH3 and DAPI . The percentages of CitH3 - positive cells with released chromatin ( ie , number of neutrophils with NET structures divided by the total number of CitH3 - positive cells (cid:5) 100 ) were determined after the indicated treatments . N (cid:10) 3 independent experiments . Right panel : Representative pictures of Fc (cid:1) RIIA expressing neutrophils treated with BSAor BSA / anti - BSA . Released chromatin ( arrowhead ) colocalized with DAPI - positive extracellular DNA . ENDOCYTOSIS OF IMMUNE COMPLEXES BY HUMAN FC (cid:1) Rs 4427 BLOOD , 22 NOVEMBER 2012 (cid:1) VOLUME 120 , NUMBER 22 For personal use only . on December 30 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From Fc (cid:1) RIIIB and Fc (cid:1) RIIA mediate the clearance of IC in vivo Next , we evaluated in real - time whether Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - recruited neutro - phils internalized intravascular IC deposits in vivo . Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) and (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice were given an intravenous injection of Cy3 - labeled preformed ICs together with ﬂuorophore - conjugated Gr - 1 anti - body , which labels neutrophils , and the cremaster was prepared for confocal intravital microscopy . Z - stack reconstruction of 3D im - ages together with image analysis software revealed that adherent Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - positive neutrophils had signiﬁcant amount of internal - ized ICs ( Figure 4C ) . ICs were not observed within circulating γ - / - IIIB / γ - / - FL2 - H : : FL - Height C oun t A B 0 20 40 60 80 * * 0 1 2 3 4 5 * * 0 2 4 6 8 * A dh es i on ( ce ll s X 10 2 / mm 2 ) R o lli ng V e l o c i t y ( u m / s ) A dh es i on ( ce ll s X 10 2 / mm 2 ) IIIB / γ - / - γ - / - IIIB / γ - / - Mac1 - / - IIIB / γ - / - γ - / - IIIB / γ - / - Mac1 - / - γ - / - IIIB / γ - / - IIIB / γ - / - / Mac1 - / - γ - / - IIIB / γ - / - IIIB / γ - / - / Mac1 - / - IIIB / γ - / - γ - / - IIIB / γ - / - Mac1 - / - IC IC IC D sIC ( Cy3 ) Gr - 1 ( FITC ) Merge FITC / Cy3 Channels FITC - masked Cy3 Single Cell Analaysis C C y3 / t o t a l v ou m e 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 * * * * * IIIB / γ - / - IIA / γ - / - γ - / - IIA / γγ - / - IIIB / γ - / - γ - / - n . s 0 1 2 3 4 M . F . I IIIB / γ - / - γ - / - Figure 4 . The leukocyte integrin Mac - 1 promotes Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated neutrophil recruitment to intravascular ICs and Fc (cid:1) RIIIB mediates IC uptake from within the vessel wall . ( A - B ) Mice were injected intravenously with preformed soluble ICs , and the rolling velocity and adhesion of leukocytes in the cremaster venules were evaluated . ( A ) Representativepicturesofpostcapillaryvenulesfromindicatedmicewithrolling ( arrow ) andadherent ( arrowhead ) neutrophils . InFc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice , ICdepositionslowed thevelocityofrollingneutrophilsandincreasedtheiradhesioncomparedwith (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice , andFc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) micewithoutsolubleICs ( dottedline ) . NeutrophilsofFc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice additionally deﬁcient in Mac - 1 no longer supported slow rolling and adhesion . N (cid:10) 5 mice per group . ( B ) Wild - type mice were given soluble ICs intravenously and TNF - primed bone marrow – derived , CMFDA - labeled neutrophils from Fc (cid:1) RIIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice or the same lacking Mac - 1 ( IIIB / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) / Mac1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) were adoptively transferred via the jugular vein . IC deposition increased adhesion of Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - positive neutrophils , although this was not observed with Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - expressing neutrophils that lacked Mac - 1 . N (cid:10) 4micepergroup . ( C ) SolubleICsgeneratedwithBSAandanti - BSAandincubatedwithCy3 - secondaryantibody ( sIC , Cy3 ; red ) wereinjectedintravenouslytogetherwith FITC - labeledGr - 1antibody , whichlabelsperipheralbloodneutrophils ( Gr - 1 , FITC ; green ) . Thecremasterofanesthetizedanimalswasexteriorized , andneutrophil - vesselwall interactions were examined by intravital confocal microscopy . Left 3 panels : Slices along the Z - axis were acquired and reconstructed into 3 - D Z stacks . The merges of the 2 images are also shown . The images were subjected to surface analysis with Imaris (cid:5) 64 Version 7 . 4 . 2 Software ( Bitplane Scientiﬁc ) . Right 3 panels : Surfaces were created fromCy3 ( red ) andFITCchannels ( green ) . sIC ( red ) withinthecellwasvisualizedbycreatingasurfaceobjectfromFITC - maskedCy3channelin50 % transparentneutrophils . Rightmost panel : Neutrophils were cut with a clipping surface through the FITC channel to visualize Cy3 signal only within the cells . IC internalization was determined by calculating the volume ratio between the 2 surfaces objects created by FITC - masked Cy3 ( red ) and FITC - anti – Gr - 1 ( green ) channels , respectively . There was an increase in theamountofICspresentwithinFc (cid:1) RIIIB - orFc (cid:1) RIIA - positiveneutrophilscomparedwiththatin (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) neutrophils . N (cid:10) 3or4micepergroup . * * P (cid:9) . 01 . * * * P (cid:9) . 001 , compared withICuptakein (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) neutrophils . ( D ) FifteenminutesafterinjectionofBSA – anti - BSAsolubleICs , peripheralbloodwascollected . Gr - 1 – positiveneutrophilswereanalyzedfor Cy3 signal by ﬂow cytometry . Minimal ﬂuorescence was associated with these cells , suggesting that IC uptake did not occur in circulating neutrophils . N (cid:10) 3 mice per group . n . s . indicates not signiﬁcant . 4428 CHEN et al BLOOD , 22 NOVEMBER 2012 (cid:1) VOLUME 120 , NUMBER 22 For personal use only . on December 30 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From neutrophils as assessed by FACS analysis , which indicates that IC uptake occurs at the site of IC deposition ( Figure 4D ) . In Fc (cid:1) RIIA / (cid:1) (cid:2) / (cid:2) mice , neutrophils failed to be appreciably recruited to primarily intravascular ICs as previously described . 5 However , the few interacting neutrophils observed had signiﬁcant levels of intracellular ICs ( Figure 4C ) . Thus , both Fc (cid:1) RIIIB and Fc (cid:1) RIIA can internalize intravascular ICs in vivo , but Fc (cid:1) RIIIB predomi - nates in this process as this receptor plays the major role in recruitment of neutrophils to intravascular ICs . 5 Interestingly , NETs were not observed in this model of largely intravascular ICs ( data not shown ) , which may be the result of plasma DNase activity . The relative absence of inﬂammation after injection of preformed soluble ICs compared with the RPA , and / or location of the ICs , may be key determinants of IC induced NET formation , a fruitful area for future investigation . Discussion Soluble ICs , a hallmark of many autoimmune diseases , are considered key triggers of inﬂammation - induced tissue damage . Yet , unlike IgG - opsonized targets , endocytosis of complexed IgG in vitro has not been reported to trigger cytotoxic responses typically associated with tissue injury , such as a vigorous NADPH oxidase - mediated oxidative burst and degranulation . Our data demonstrate that Fc (cid:1) RIIIB , in the absence of Fc (cid:1) RIIA and Mac - 1 , promotes endocytosis through a common pathway engaged by GPI - anchored proteins and ﬂuid - phase pinocytosis . In vivo , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB interaction with soluble ICs deposited primarily within the vasculature promoted IC uptake , suggesting a potentially novel homeostatic function for Fc (cid:1) RIIIB in removal of soluble ICs lodged in blood vessels . On the other hand , in vivo , on exposure to predominantly tissue localized soluble ICs , Fc (cid:1) RIIA but not Fc (cid:1) RIIIB induced NETs , albeit it is possible that at higher levels of Fc (cid:1) RIIIB , as seen in human neutrophils , this GPI - linked receptor may also promote NETosis . Unlike other stimuli , 33 soluble IC - induced NETosis in wild - type mice unexpectedly did not require the NADPH oxidase , myeloperoxidase , or neutrophil elastase , suggesting that the requirement for these components is stimulus dependent . The deﬁciency in these molecules was in the context of wild - type mice expressing murine rather than human Fc (cid:1) Rs . Thus , the importance of these pathways to NETosis triggered speciﬁcally by the human Fc (cid:1) Rs remains to be addressed . The mode of internalization of IgG via phagocytosis or endocytosis depends on the size of the opsonized complex . Although Fc (cid:1) RIIA and Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - expressing murine neutrophils differ in their ability to phagocytose IgG - opsonized particles , and spread on plate - bound IgG complexes ( frustrated phagocytosis ) , 5 with only Fc (cid:1) RIIA contributing to these processes , both were equally capable of internalizing soluble ICs . Previous in vitro studies have suggested that GPI - linked Fc (cid:1) RIIIB relays signals into cells via its association with Fc (cid:1) RIIA , integrin Mac - 1 ( CD11b / CD18 ) , and / or lipid rafts . 10 , 37 , 38 , 45 , 46 The ability of Fc (cid:1) RIIIB to endocytose ICs in the absence of Fc (cid:1) RIIAor Mac - 1 suggests , for the ﬁrst time , that this receptor is capable of transducing signals independent of its previously described signaling partners . Fc (cid:1) RIIA and Fc (cid:1) RIIIB follow a dynamin - independent , cdc42 - regulated actin - driven pinocytic pathway that does not use the coat proteins , clathrin and caveolin , which is analogous to pathways described for GPI - anchored proteins and ﬂuid - phase endocytosis . 47 This is consistent with Fc (cid:1) RIIIB being a GPI - linked protein present in lipid rafts 8 and the described translocation of Fc (cid:1) RIIA to lipid rafts on binding of IgG - containing targets or Fc (cid:1) RIIIB crosslinking . 11 , 48 , 49 Although both Fc (cid:1) RIIA and Fc (cid:1) RIIIB share a common endo - cytic pathway , Fc (cid:1) RIIA , but not Fc (cid:1) RIIIB , expressed at the same level , promoted the formation of NETs in vivo , a proinﬂammatory event that contributes to host defense but may also be deleterious to the host as it supports thrombosis and autoimmunity . 29 , 50 In vitro , the discrepancy between human and mouse studies in Fc (cid:1) RIIIB’s contribution to NETosis is probably the result of the approaches used to achieve a loss of function of Fc (cid:1) RIIA . In human studies , Fc (cid:1) RIIA functional blocking antibody was used while in mouse studies murine neutrophils with or without Fc (cid:1) RIIA were com - pared . In human neutrophils , even though the ectodomain of Fc (cid:1) RIIA is blocked , the intracellular ITAM motif may still be capable of relaying signals from Fc (cid:1) RIIIB engagement . 51 Together , these data suggest that Fc (cid:1) RIIIB may play a supportive role in NETosis but on its own is unable to induce NETosis . Studies in vitro suggested that PI3K downstream of Fc (cid:1) R - mediated endocyto - sis engages signals necessary speciﬁcally for NETosis . Our data ( that small soluble ICs with predicted size in the nanometer range 48 leads to NET formation , whereas uptake of the larger IgG - RBC ( (cid:11) 3 . 0 (cid:4) M ) or spreading on ICs does not ) suggest that the size of the target and / or IC valency matters . The selectivity of soluble IC uptake for DNA release suggests that distinct Fc (cid:1) R - dependent cellular processes trigger NET formation , whereas the occurrence of NETs in the absence of the NADPH oxidase both in vitro and in vivo challenges the paradigm that the oxidative burst is a prerequi - site for this process . 52 Although the 2 human Fc (cid:1) Rs share a similar route of endocyto - sis , raft - dependent IC uptake by Fc (cid:1) RIIA versus Fc (cid:1) RIIIB may lead to different cellular outputs because lipid rafts are not created equal and can be targeted to different intracellular sites . 53 On the other hand , the inﬂammatory environment may dictate whether Fc (cid:1) RIIIB or Fc (cid:1) RIIA predominate in endocytosis and thus the subsequent cellular response . Fc (cid:1) RIIIB is 4 - to 5 - fold more abundant and has a higher afﬁnity for IgG than Fc (cid:1) RIIA , 36 has a GPI anchor that permits it to protrude further than Fc (cid:1) RIIA , is highly mobile in the membrane bilayer , 8 and is present on the microvilli of human neutrophils . 13 Thus , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB rather than Fc (cid:1) RIIA is probably preferentially engaged by ICs . It is also well suited for removing ICs under homeostatic function as its engage - ment does not trigger cytotoxic responses . On the other hand , inﬂammatory mediators may lead to shedding of Fc (cid:1) RIIIB and favor Fc (cid:1) RIIA interactions with , and subsequent endocytosis of , ICs . 6 , 54 Notably , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB’s role in IC clearance may be relevant only in the context of soluble ICs . Indeed , in the case of ICs immobilized to host tissue as in antiglomerular basement membrane nephritis , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB may collaborate to increase neutrophil recruitment and tissue damage . 5 This is consistent with the ﬁnding that , although copy number polymorphisms leading to lower Fc (cid:1) RIIIB expression increase the risk of systemic lupus erythematosus , a disease associated with soluble ICs , a higher copy number characterizes antineutrophil cytoplas - mic antibody - associated systemic vasculitis , 15 , 16 , 55 a disease associated with in situ ICs . By demonstrating a novel role for neutrophil Fc (cid:1) RIIIB in internalization and removal of soluble ICs deposited in the vasculature , our studies have revealed a previously unappreciated mechanism for clearing soluble ICs . The Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated IC ENDOCYTOSIS OF IMMUNE COMPLEXES BY HUMAN FC (cid:1) Rs 4429 BLOOD , 22 NOVEMBER 2012 (cid:1) VOLUME 120 , NUMBER 22 For personal use only . on December 30 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From and neutrophil - dependent clearance pathway seems to be supple - mentary rather than redundant with the known complement - mediated IC clearance by mononuclear phagocytes because Fc (cid:1) RIIIB specializes in clearing ICs trapped within the vascula - ture , which have probably escaped from complement - dependent clearance in the spleen and liver . 56 A role for leukocytes in clearing ICs in renal capillaries has been suggested by early observations that neutrophil depletion delayed removal of IC deposits in peritubular capillaries by several hours 57 and clear - ance of glomerular ICs and restoration of glomerular architec - ture was preceded by leukocyte recruitment . 58 Notably , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - dependent recruitment to soluble ICs deposited in the vasculature required neutrophil Mac - 1 in cis with Fc (cid:1) RIIIB . Thus , although IC uptake in vitro does not require Mac - 1 , Fc (cid:1) RIIIB - mediated tethering to ICs under physiologic ﬂow conditions requires this integrin . The relative roles of Fc (cid:1) RIIA and Fc (cid:1) RIIIB in human neutro - phils have been previously probed . As both Fc (cid:1) RIIAand Mac - 1 are present under these conditions , whether Fc (cid:1) RIIIB alone can generate intracellular signals that link to a speciﬁc effector response was difﬁcult to ascertain . Our genetic approach allowed us to assign roles for neutrophil Fc (cid:1) RIIA and Fc (cid:1) RIIIB in speciﬁc functions after endocytosis of soluble ICs and provide an explana - tion for why neutrophils express 2 Fc (cid:1) Rs that differ in their membrane anchor and signaling capacity . Acknowledgments This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health ( HL065095 and AR050800 , T . N . M . ; HL102101 , D . D . W . ) and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science ( Postdoctoral Fellow - ship for Research Abroad ; H . N . ) . Authorship Contribution : K . Chen , H . N , R . T . , and N . T . performed the experi - ments and analyzed the data ; K . M . and D . D . W . developed the ionomycin - induced NETosis assay in mouse neutrophils ; R . S . , T . N . M . , and K . Croce conceived the experiments ; K . Chen and T . N . M . analyzed and interpreted the data and wrote the paper and had full access to all original data ; and all authors revised the paper for important intellectual content . Conﬂict - of - interest disclosure : The authors declare no compet - ing ﬁnancial interests . Correspondence : Tanya N . Mayadas , Center for Excellence in Vascular Biology , Department of Pathology , Brigham and Women’s Hospital & Harvard Medical School , 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur , NRB 752O , Boston , MA02115 ; e - mail : tmayadas @ rics . bwh . harvard . edu . References 1 . Mayadas TN , Tsokos GC , Tsuboi N . Mechanisms of immune complex - mediated neutrophil recruit - ment and tissue injury . Circulation . 2009 ; 120 ( 20 ) : 2012 - 2024 . 2 . Ravetch JV , Bolland S . IgG Fc receptors . Annu Rev Immunol . 2001 ; 19 : 275 - 290 . 3 . Nimmerjahn F , Ravetch JV . Fcgamma receptors : old friends and new family members . Immunity . 2006 ; 24 ( 1 ) : 19 - 28 . 4 . Unkeless JC , Shen Z , Lin CW , DeBeus E . Func - tion of human Fc gamma RIIAand Fc gamma RIIIB . Semin Immunol . 1995 ; 7 ( 1 ) : 37 - 44 . 5 . Tsuboi N , Asano K , Lauterbach M , Mayadas TN . Human neutrophil Fcgamma receptors initiate and play specialized nonredundant roles in antibody - mediated inﬂammatory diseases . Immu - nity . 2008 ; 28 ( 6 ) : 833 - 846 . 6 . Tsuboi N , Ernandez T , Li X , et al . Regulation of human neutrophil Fcgamma receptor IIa by C5a receptor promotes inﬂammatory arthritis in mice . Arthritis Rheum . 2011 ; 63 ( 2 ) : 467 - 478 . 7 . Crockett - Torabi E , Smith CW , Kateley JR , Patterson R , Tsai P , Fantone JC . Insoluble im - mune complex - stimulated neutrophil leukotriene B4 production is dependent on Fc gamma RII and Fc gamma RIII and independent of pertussis toxin - sensitive signal transduction pathways . Am J Pathol . 1992 ; 140 ( 3 ) : 613 - 620 . 8 . Selvaraj P , Rosse WF , Silber R , Springer TA . The major Fc receptor in blood has a phosphatidylino - sitol anchor and is deﬁcient in paroxysmal noctur - nal haemoglobinuria . Nature . 1988 ; 333 ( 6173 ) : 565 - 567 . 9 . MaroisL , PareG , VaillancourtM , Rollet - LabelleE , Naccache PH . Fc gammaRIIIb triggers raft - dependent calcium inﬂux in IgG - mediated re - sponses in human neutrophils . J Biol Chem . 2011 ; 286 ( 5 ) : 3509 - 3519 . 10 . Salmon JE , Brogle NL , Edberg JC , Kimberly RP . Fc gamma receptor III induces actin polymeriza - tion in human neutrophils and primes phagocyto - sis mediated by Fc gamma receptor II . J Immu - nol . 1991 ; 146 ( 3 ) : 997 - 1004 . 11 . Huang ZY , Barreda DR , Worth RG , et al . Differen - tial kinase requirements in human and mouse Fc - gamma receptor phagocytosis and endocyto - sis . J Leukoc Biol . 2006 ; 80 ( 6 ) : 1553 - 1562 . 12 . Jones SL , Brown EJ . Functional cooperation be - tween Fcg receptors and complement receptors in phagocytes . In : van de Winkel JGJ , Capel PJA , eds . Human IgG Fc Receptors . Austin , TX : R . G . Landes ; 1996 : 149 - 163 . 13 . CoxonA , Cullere X , Knight S , et al . Fc gamma RIII mediates neutrophil recruitment to immune complexes : a mechanism for neutrophil accumu - lation in immune - mediated inﬂammation . Immu - nity . 2001 ; 14 ( 6 ) : 693 - 704 . 14 . Florey OJ , Johns M , Esho OO , Mason JC , Haskard DO . Antiendothelial cell antibodies medi - ate enhanced leukocyte adhesion to cytokine - activated endothelial cells through a novel mechanism requiring cooperation between Fc (cid:1) RIIa and CXCR1 / 2 . Blood . 2007 ; 109 ( 9 ) : 3881 - 3889 . 15 . Willcocks LC , Lyons PA , Clatworthy MR , et al . Copy number of FCGR3B , which is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus , correlates with protein expression and immune complex up - take . J Exp Med . 2008 ; 205 ( 7 ) : 1573 - 1582 . 16 . Fanciulli M , Norsworthy PJ , Petretto E , et al . FCGR3B copy number variation is associated with susceptibility to systemic , but not organ - speciﬁc , autoimmunity . Nat Genet . 2007 ; 39 ( 6 ) : 721 - 723 . 17 . Stokol T , O’Donnell P , Xiao L , et al . C1q governs deposition of circulating immune complexes and leukocyte Fcgamma receptors mediate subse - quent neutrophil recruitment . J Exp Med . 2004 ; 200 ( 7 ) : 835 - 846 . 18 . LauterbachM , O’DonnellP , AsanoK , MayadasTN . Role of TNF priming and adhesion molecules in neutrophil recruitment to intravascular immune complexes . J Leukoc Biol . 2008 ; 83 ( 6 ) : 1423 - 1430 . 19 . Moreau V , Frischknecht F , Reckmann I , et al . A complex of N - WASP and WIP integrates signal - ling cascades that lead to actin polymerization . Nat Cell Biol . 2000 ; 2 ( 7 ) : 441 - 448 . 20 . Nobes CD , HallA . Rho GTPases control polarity , protrusion , and adhesion during cell movement . J Cell Biol . 1999 ; 144 ( 6 ) : 1235 - 1244 . 21 . Allport JR , Ding HT , AgerA , Steeber DA , Tedder TF , Luscinskas FW . L - selectin shedding does not regulate human neutrophil attachment , rolling , or transmigration across human vascular endothelium in vitro . J Immunol . 1997 ; 158 ( 9 ) : 4365 - 4372 . 22 . Jang JE , HidalgoA , Frenette PS . Intravenous immunoglobulins modulate neutrophil activation and vascular injury through FcgammaRIII and SHP - 1 . Circ Res . 2012 ; 110 ( 8 ) : 1057 - 1066 . 23 . Chadda R , Howes MT , Plowman SJ , Hancock JF , Parton RG , Mayor S . Cholesterol - sensitive Cdc42 activation regulates actin polymerization for endocytosis via the GEEC pathway . Trafﬁc . 2007 ; 8 ( 6 ) : 702 - 717 . 24 . Kumari S , Mayor S . ARF1 is directly involved in dynamin - independent endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol . 2008 ; 10 ( 1 ) : 30 - 41 . 25 . Sabharanjak S , Sharma P , Parton RG , Mayor S . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev Cell . 2002 ; 2 ( 4 ) : 411 - 423 . 26 . IvanovAI . Pharmacological inhibition of endocytic pathways : is it speciﬁc enough to be useful ? Methods Mol Biol . 2008 ; 440 : 15 - 33 . 27 . Mayor S , Riezman H . Sorting GPI - anchored pro - teins . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2004 ; 5 ( 2 ) : 110 - 120 . 28 . Ellis S , Mellor H . Regulation of endocytic trafﬁc by rho family GTPases . Trends Cell Biol . 2000 ; 10 ( 3 ) : 85 - 88 . 29 . Warde N . Autoimmunity : the role of neutrophils in SLE : untangling the NET . Nat Rev Rheumatol . 2011 ; 7 ( 5 ) : 252 . 30 . BorissoffJI , TenCateH . FromNeutrophilExtracellu - larTraps ( NETs ) releasetothrombosis : anover - shootinghost - defensemechanism ? JThromb Haemost . 2011 ; 9 ( 9 ) : 1791 - 1794 . 31 . von Ko¨ckritz - Blickwede M , Goldmann O , Thulin P , et al . Phagocytosis - independent antimicrobial activity of mast cells by means of extracellular trap formation . Blood . 2008 ; 111 ( 6 ) : 3070 - 3080 . 32 . Youseﬁ S , Gold JA , Andina N , et al . Catapult - like 4430 CHEN et al BLOOD , 22 NOVEMBER 2012 (cid:1) VOLUME 120 , NUMBER 22 For personal use only . on December 30 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From release of mitochondrial DNAby eosinophils con - tributes to antibacterial defense . Nat Med . 2008 ; 14 ( 9 ) : 949 - 953 . 33 . Fuchs TA , Abed U , Goosmann C , et al . Novel cell death program leads to neutrophil extracellular traps . J Cell Biol . 2007 ; 176 ( 2 ) : 231 - 241 . 34 . Pilsczek FH , Salina D , Poon KK , et al . Anovel mechanism of rapid nuclear neutrophil extracellu - lar trap formation in response to Staphylococcus aureus . J Immunol . 2010 ; 185 ( 12 ) : 7413 - 7425 . 35 . Brinkmann V , Reichard U , Goosmann C , et al . Neutrophil extracellular traps kill bacteria . Sci - ence . 2004 ; 303 ( 5663 ) : 1532 - 1535 . 36 . Tosi MF , Berger M . Functional differences be - tween the 40 kDa and 50 to 70 kDa IgG Fc recep - tors on human neutrophils revealed by elastase treatment and antireceptor antibodies . J Immu - nol . 1988 ; 141 ( 6 ) : 2097 - 2103 . 37 . Chuang FY , Sassaroli M , Unkeless JC . Conver - gence of Fc gamma receptor IIAand Fc gamma receptor IIIB signaling pathways in human neutro - phils . J Immunol . 2000 ; 164 ( 1 ) : 350 - 360 . 38 . Zhou MJ , Brown EJ . CR3 ( Mac - 1 , alpha M beta 2 , CD11b / CD18 ) and Fc gamma RIII cooperate in generation of a neutrophil respiratory burst : re - quirement for Fc gamma RIII and tyrosine phos - phorylation . J Cell Biol . 1994 ; 125 ( 6 ) : 1407 - 1416 . 39 . Ermert D , Urban CF , Laube B , Goosmann C , ZychlinskyA , Brinkmann V . Mouse neutrophil ex - tracellular traps in microbial infections . J Innate Immun . 2009 ; 1 ( 3 ) : 181 - 193 . 40 . Li P , Li M , Lindberg MR , Kennett MJ , Xiong N , Wang Y . PAD4 is essential for antibacterial innate immunity mediated by neutrophil extracellular traps . J Exp Med . 2010 ; 207 ( 9 ) : 1853 - 1862 . 41 . Neeli I , Khan SN , Radic M . Histone deimination as a response to inﬂammatory stimuli in neutro - phils . J Immunol . 2008 ; 180 ( 3 ) : 1895 - 1902 . 42 . Wang Y , Li M , Stadler S , et al . Histone hypercitrul - lination mediates chromatin decondensation and neutrophil extracellular trap formation . J Cell Biol . 2009 ; 184 ( 2 ) : 205 - 213 . 43 . Wang Y , Wysocka J , Sayegh J , et al . Human PAD4 regulates histone arginine methylation lev - els via demethylimination . Science . 2004 ; 306 ( 5694 ) : 279 - 283 . 44 . Parker H , Dragunow M , Hampton MB , KettleAJ , Winterbourn CC . Requirements for NADPH oxi - dase and myeloperoxidase in neutrophil extracel - lular trap formation differ depending on the stimu - lus [ published online ahead of print July 16 , 2012 ] . J Leukoc Biol . doi : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 1211601 . 45 . Poo H , Krauss JC , Mayo - Bond L , Todd RF 3rd , Petty HR . Interaction of Fc gamma receptor type IIIB with complement receptor type 3 in ﬁbroblast transfectants : evidence from lateral diffusion and resonance energy transfer studies . J Mol Biol . 1995 ; 247 ( 4 ) : 597 - 603 . 46 . Fernandes MJ , Rollet - Labelle E , Pare G , et al . CD16b associates with high - density , detergent - resistant membranes in human neutrophils . Biochem J . 2006 ; 393 ( 1 ) : 351 - 359 . 47 . Howes MT , Mayor S , Parton RG . Molecules , mechanisms , and cellular roles of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2010 ; 22 ( 4 ) : 519 - 527 . 48 . Vieth JA , Kim MK , Pan XQ , SchreiberAD , Worth RG . Differential requirement of lipid rafts for FcgammaRIIAmediated effector activities . Cell Immunol . 2010 ; 265 ( 2 ) : 111 - 119 . 49 . Barnes NC , Powell MS , Trist HM , GavinAL , Wines BD , Hogarth PM . Raft localisation of FcgammaRIIa and efﬁcient signaling are depen - dent on palmitoylation of cysteine 208 . Immunol Lett . 2006 ; 104 ( 1 ) : 118 - 123 . 50 . Fuchs TA , BrillA , Wagner DD . Neutrophil extra - cellular trap ( NET ) impact on deep vein thrombo - sis . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 2012 ; 32 ( 8 ) : 1777 - 1783 . 51 . Edberg JC , Kimberly RP . Modulation of Fc gamma and complement receptor function by the glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - anchored form of Fc gamma RIII . J Immunol . 1994 ; 152 ( 12 ) : 5826 - 5835 . 52 . Papayannopoulos V , ZychlinskyA . NETs : a new strategy for using old weapons . Trends Immunol . 2009 ; 30 ( 11 ) : 513 - 521 . 53 . Lajoie P , Nabi IR . Regulation of raft - dependent endocytosis . J Cell Mol Med . 2007 ; 11 ( 4 ) : 644 - 653 . 54 . Nagarajan S , Venkiteswaran K , Anderson M , Sayed U , Zhu C , Selvaraj P . Cell - speciﬁc , activation - dependent regulation of neutrophil CD32Aligand - binding function . Blood . 2000 ; 95 ( 3 ) : 1069 - 1077 . 55 . Aitman TJ , Dong R , Vyse TJ , et al . Copy number polymorphism in Fcgr3 predisposes to glomerulo - nephritis in rats and humans . Nature . 2006 ; 439 ( 7078 ) : 851 - 855 . 56 . Kavai M . Immune complex clearance by comple - ment receptor type 1 in SLE . Autoimmun Rev . 2008 ; 8 ( 2 ) : 160 - 164 . 57 . Alpers CE , Hudkins KL , Pritzl P , Johnson RJ . Mechanisms of clearance of immune complexes from peritubular capillaries in the rat . Am J Pathol . 1991 ; 139 ( 4 ) : 855 - 867 . 58 . Fries JW , Mendrick DL , Rennke HG . Determi - nants of immune complex - mediated glomerulone - phritis . Kidney Int . 1988 ; 34 ( 3 ) : 333 - 345 . ENDOCYTOSIS OF IMMUNE COMPLEXES BY HUMAN FC (cid:1) Rs 4431 BLOOD , 22 NOVEMBER 2012 (cid:1) VOLUME 120 , NUMBER 22 For personal use only . on December 30 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From online September 6 , 2012 originally published doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2011 - 12 - 401133 2012 120 : 4421 - 4431 Radu Stan , Kevin Croce and Tanya N . Mayadas Kan Chen , Hiroshi Nishi , Richard Travers , Naotake Tsuboi , Kimberly Martinod , Denisa D . Wagner , RIIA in vivo g RIIIB but induces neutrophil extracellular traps via Fc g FcEndocytosis of soluble immune complexes leads to their clearance by http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / content / 120 / 22 / 4421 . full . html Updated information and services can be found at : ( 643 articles ) Phagocytes , Granulocytes , and Myelopoiesis Articles on similar topics can be found in the following Blood collections http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / misc / rights . xhtml # repub _ requests Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at : http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / misc / rights . xhtml # reprints Information about ordering reprints may be found online at : http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / subscriptions / index . xhtml Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at : Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology ; all rights reserved . of Hematology , 2021 L St , NW , Suite 900 , Washington DC 20036 . Blood ( print ISSN 0006 - 4971 , online ISSN 1528 - 0020 ) , is published weekly by the American Society For personal use only . on December 30 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From