Psychology . Journal of the Higher School of Economics . 2015 . Vol . 12 . N 4 . P . 184 – 191 . Abstract The present paper focuses on the most popular form of group creativity , brainstorming . Both advantages and shortcomings of the method were examined . There are a number of factors which determine to a considerable degree the effectiveness of brainstorming . Novelty and variability of ideas exchanged , as well as the size of a brainstorming group are the most important ones . Analysis of scientific literature on this topic showed that inhibiting effects which often take place within a brainstorming session are small in dyads , but increase rapidly with group size . Face - to - face communication among members of a brainstorming group also plays an essential role in their creative performances . This role is rather controversial : face - to - face communication may either stimulate or impede individual creative activity . There are various modifications in traditional brainstorming based on mediated communication among individuals . Brainwriting and electron - ic brainstorming are the most popular . These methods have some advantages over traditional face - to - face brainstorming , such as a higher degree of anonymity , opportunities to contribute ideas simultaneously without waiting to articulate them , and a lower risk of the dominance of one or a few individuals . New methods of group idea generation , comprising advantages of vari - ous forms of brainstorming , tend to occur . Keywords : creativity , brainstorming , electronic brainstorming , cognitive stimulation . Group creativity There are many theories and models of creativity . They focus on various aspects of this concept , such as physio - logical , cognitive , motivational , and social . Some of models pay attention to factors that stimulate individual cre - ative performance . Nowadays various techniques and methods of creativity stimulation exist . Many of them con - sider the exchange of ideas , taking place within group creative activity , as a powerful means to enhance individual creativity . Research on group creativity concentrates on the analysis of the characteristics of a group ( e . g . struc - ture , diversity , size , cohesiveness , coop - eration , autonomy , etc . ) ( Cooper & Jayatilaka , 2006 ) and a task ( e . g . struc - ture , time pressure , complexity , condi - tions , etc . ) . CREATIVITY IN FACE - TO - FACE AND COMPUTER - MEDIATED BRAINSTORMING S . R . YAGOLKOVSKIY This research was supported by the Program for Basic Research at the National Research University Higher School of Economics . Creativity in Face - to - Face and Computer - Mediated Brainstorming 185 One of the most popular formats for creative activity is brainstorming , as it provides an individual with an oppor - tunity to exchange his / her ideas with others and to become familiar with oth - ers’ creative results . Traditional brainstorming Osborn ( 1957 ) , the founder of this concept , regarded it as a method of group problem solving and idea genera - tion which could considerably increase both quality and quantity of ideas gen - erated . If creativity is seen as an ability to think in divergent ways , a group may be a source that provides individuals with opportunities to bring together their experiences , knowledge , and opinions . Hence , a brainstorming group can produce unique conceptual combi - nations . Within a brainstorming session , members of a group can exchange ideas with each other . Various characteristics of this exchange determine to a consid - erable degree the effectiveness of this method . It was shown that “…cognitive facilitation’ takes places when one brainstormer’s idea serves to activate related ideas in the mind of his or her listeners” ( Coskun , Paulus , Brown , & Sherwood , 2000 , p . 310 ) . Characte - ristics of ideas exchanged can be regarded as one of the most important factors of this facilitation . Novelty of ideas exchanged . A num - ber of studies investigated how the exposure of common / original ideas produced cognitive stimulation of cre - ativity . The results of these studies are quite controversial . The study con - ducted by Connolly et al . ( 1993 ) showed that neither rare nor common stimuli affected the quantity of ideas produced by participants . They found no differences in the amount of pro - duced ideas among groups whose mem - bers had been exposed to common and rare ideas , and the control group with no stimulation . Contrary to this , Leggett Dugosh and Paulus in their study ( 2005 ) revealed a strong positive effect of common ideas on idea genera - tion . They explained it by the higher “memorability” of common ideas close - ly related to their accessibility . They also stated that common ideas are bet - ter exemplars of a particular category than uncommon ideas because they are more similar to each other ; and they are more valid , as well ( Stasser & Birch - meier , 2003 ) . Leggett Dugosh and Paulus indicated that results of their study were inconsistent with a simple matching perspective supposing the generation of more uncommon ideas after exposure to uncommon ideas ; and , vice versa , the production of more com - mon ideas after the exposure of com - mon stimuli . Variability of categories . The essen - tial factor in the effectiveness of group brainstorming is the variety of cate - gories considered . Retrieval of informa - tion from long - term memory , taking place under the influence of exposed stimuli , leads to production of ideas that are semantically related to pre - sented stimuli . Hence , the higher the semantic diversity of the exposed stim - uli , the more intensive cognitive stimu - lation may be produced by these stim - uli . Nijstad , Stroebe , and Lodewijkx ( 2002 ) showed in their experiment that under condition of exposure to stimu - lus ideas from a wide range of semantic categories , subjects generated more diverse ideas then they did so under condition of presentation of ideas from 186 S . R . Yagolkovskiy one category . Similar results were obtained in Baruah’s and Paulus’s study ( 2011 ) borne out the importance of diversity of stimulus ideas as a factor of cognitive stimulation . They showed that groups of participants who had focused on a small set of categories pro - duced more ideas and explored more categories than those whose members assigned to one category only . Kohn , Paulus , and Korde ( 2011 ) found that presentation of unrelated stimuli led to the increase of originality of partici - pants’ creative performances . In this context , the number of categories can play an essential role in the originality of ideas generated . It was shown in the study of Rietzschel , Nijstad , and Stroebe ( 2007 ) that concentration on a limited number of categories could lead to deeper exploration inside of them and , consequently , to generation more novel ideas . At the same time , that may be not the case for the great number of categories considered . Shortcomings of traditional brainstorming Brainstorming is the most popular method of group creative activity . However there are numerous short - comings to the method . Among them are evaluation apprehension , free rid - ing , production blocking , and matching ( Diehl & Stroebe , 1991 ) . One more dis - advantage of brainstorming inherent in almost all kinds of group creative activ - ity is that group members concentrate mainly on ordinary ideas and perspec - tives in their discussion . In this case unique ideas could be underestimated . Numerous studies showed that brainstorming is not as effective as it was previously thought to be ( Brown & Paulus , 2002 ; Craig & Kelly , 1999 ; DeRosa , Smith , & Hantula , 2007 ; Litchfield , 2009 ; Nijstad et al . , 2002 ) . Despite effects of inspiration and mutual emotional stimulation , creative performance in nominal groups ( in which participants work alone ) could be higher than in face - to - face brain - storming groups ( Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ; Lamm & Trommsdorf , 1973 ; Mullen , Johnson , & Salas , 1991 ) . The size of a brainstorming group appears to be also an important factor in productivity . Numerous studies on this topic showed that larger groups with 10 and more individuals are not as effective in brainstorming as smaller groups . At the same time , there is a slight discrepancy in the results of these studies . Aiken , Vanjani , and Paolillo ( 1996 ) showed that the opti - mal size of a group to perform verbal brainstorming is 6 or less individuals . Godwin and Restle ( 1974 ) revealed that in a larger group an output is big - ger , but it is more difficult for partici - pants in these groups to reach final decisions on the issue discussed . It was also shown that there is no improve - ment in group performance if the group size increased from 5 to 9 individuals ( Bouchard & Hare , 1970 ) . Numerous studies on this topic stated that inhibiting effects which often take place in brainstorming session are small in pairs , but increase rapidly with group size ( e . g . Nijstad , Stroebe , & Lodewijkx , 1999 ; Coskun et al . , 2000 ) . The role of mediation in brainstorming Face - to - face communication among individuals within a brainstorming session is an essential factor to its productivity . Creativity in Face - to - Face and Computer - Mediated Brainstorming 187 Compensatory adaptation theory ( CAT ) maintains that human brains are more effective in face - to - face com - munication ( Kock , 2007 ) . Commu - nicating in this way , brainstormers get an opportunity to comprehend the meaning of others’ ideas within the holistic conditions , comprising emo - tional and cognitive dimensions . To the contrary , Thatcher and Brown ( 2010 ) assumed that the medi - ated communication can produce a pos - itive effect on creativity . They hypoth - esized that the more mediated commu - nications individuals are engaged in , the higher the level of creativity they have in comparison with those who are involved mostly in face - to - face commu - nication . But results of this study revealed that the mediated communica - tion only indirectly affected creativity . So , within the particular conditions , mediated communication can also be regarded as a factor which enhances indi - vidual creativity . Some modifications of traditional brainstorming based on mediated communications among indi - viduals have appeared , such as brain - writing and electronic brainstorming . Modifications of traditional brainstorming Brainwriting Within a brainwriting session , indi - viduals communicate with each other in a salient written way . This method has some advantages when compared with traditional brainstorming . These are as follows ( Benedek , Fink , & Neubauer , 2006 ) : participants can work simultane - • ously ( they don’t need to wait to artic - ulate their ideas ) ; ideas can be easily recorded ; • individuals are provided with • more anonymity ; there is no risk of dominance of • one or a few participants ; the risk of conflicts is lower than • in face - to - face brainstorming ( Heslin , 2009 ) . Inasmuch as computers have been playing an increasingly crucial role in human activity , making communica - tion easier between people , the new modification of brainstorming combin - ing the advantages of traditional brain - storming and brainwriting has appe - ared , electronic brainstorming . Electronic brainstorming Within an electronic brainstorming session , members of a group can exchange ideas with each other using various computer - based technologies , such as e - mail , chat , social networks , group support systems , based techni - cally on local networks or the Internet ( Dennis , Minas , & Bhagwatwar , 2013 ; Gallupe et al . , 1992 ) . Similar to brain - writing , electronic brainstorming is free of many drawbacks inherent in tra - ditional brainstorming . Members of electronic brainstorming groups can communicate in parallel ways , they are free from apprehension effects . Kerr and Murthy ( 2009 ) in their study examined the role of computer - mediat - ed communication in the performing of tasks involving both divergent and convergent processes . Results of the study showed that individuals who were members of computer - mediated teams produced more ideas working with the divergent components of the tasks ; while individuals communicat - ing with each other in the face - to - face 188 S . R . Yagolkovskiy format outperformed their counter - parts while working with the conver - gent components of the tasks . Contrary to traditional brainstorm - ing , decision quality is higher in large computer - mediated groups , and these groups generated more alternatives than smaller ones ( Hwang & Guynes , 1994 ) . It was shown that large electron - ic brainstorming groups are more effec - tive in generating ideas than nominal groups , whereas small nominal groups outperform electronic brainstorming groups ( DeRosa et al . , 2007 ) . Various personality factors determine individ - ual performance within an electronic brainstorming session , such as domain knowledge , personality type , cognitive ability , and creative skill ( Dennis et al . , 2013 ; Paulus & Yang , 2000 ) . Numerous studies comparing the efficiency of traditional and electronic brainstorming methods obtained con - troversial results . On the one hand , electronic brainstorming looks more effective because of numerous factors , including those mentioned above ( Connolly , Jessup , & Valacich , 1990 ; Valacich , Dennis , & Connolly , 1994 ) . On the other hand , face - to - face brain - storming groups support emotional contacts , nonverbal communication , there being no necessity for their mem - bers to type new ideas , etc . There are some other forms of group creative activity involving computer - mediated communication among indi - viduals . One of these forms is VTASIs ( Virtual Teams with Anonymity and Structured Interactions ) ( Chang , 2011 ) . These teams provide individuals with anonymity , a possibility to com - municate with each other via electronic means , to apply a set of streamlined ideas , and to participate in structured interactions facilitated by an experi - enced team leader . Conclusion In fact , brainstorming has been the most popular method of group creativi - ty so far . There are some essential fac - tors to stimulate idea generation within a brainstorming session . Various com - binations of these factors can be regard - ed as an additional source of the increase in a group creative perform - ance . At the same time , brainstorming possesses some negative characteristics which may inhibit the process of idea generation . To compensate for these shortcomings in the initial method , various modifications of traditional brainstorming have appeared , such as brainwriting and electronic brain - storming . Further research on more effective methods of idea generation with elements of brainstorming and other forms of either individual or group creative activity can be a chal - lenging mission . References Aiken , M . , Vanjani , M . , & Paolillo , J . ( 1996 ) . A comparison of two electronic idea generation tech - niques . Information and Management , 30 ( 2 ) , 91 – 99 . Baruah , J . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 2011 ) . Category assignment and relatedness in the group ideation process . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 47 ( 6 ) , 1070 – 1077 . Creativity in Face - to - Face and Computer - Mediated Brainstorming 189 Benedek , M . , Fink , A . , & Neubauer , A . C . ( 2006 ) . Enhancement of ideational fluency by means of com - puter - based training . Creativity Research Journal , 18 ( 3 ) , 317 – 328 . Bouchard , T . J . Jr . & Hare , M . ( 1970 ) . Size , performance , and potential in brainstorming groups . Journal of Applied Psychology , 54 ( 1 Part 1 ) , 51 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0028621 Brown , V . R . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 2002 ) . Making group brainstorming more effective : recommendations from an associative memory perspective . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 6 ( 11 ) , 208 – 212 . Chang , C . M . ( 2011 ) . New organizational designs for promoting creativity : A case study of virtual teams with anonymity and structured interactions . Journal of Engineering and Technology Management , 28 ( 4 ) , 268 – 282 . Connolly , T . , Jessup , L . M . , & Valacich , J . S . ( 1990 ) . Effects of anonymity and evaluative tone on idea generation in computer - mediated groups . Management Science , 36 ( 6 ) , 689 – 703 . Connolly , T . , Routhieaux , R . L . , & Schneider , S . K . ( 1993 ) . On the effectiveness of group brainstorm - ing : Test of on underlying cognitive mechanism . Small Group Research , 24 ( 4 ) , 490 – 503 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1046496493244004 Cooper R . B . , & Jayatilaka , B . ( 2006 ) . Group creativity : The effects of extrinsic , intrinsic , and obliga - tion motivations . Creativity Research Journal , 18 ( 2 ) , 153 – 172 . Coskun , H . , Paulus , P . , Brown , V . , & Sherwood , J . ( 2000 ) . Cognitive stimulation and problem presen - tation in idea generation groups . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 4 ( 4 ) , 307 – 329 . Craig , T . Y . , & Kelly , J . R . ( 1999 ) . Group cohesiveness and creative performance . Group Dynamics , 3 ( 4 ) , 243 – 256 . Dennis , A . R . , Minas , R . K . , & Bhagwatwar , A . P . ( 2013 ) . Sparking creativity : Improving electronic brainstorming with individual cognitive priming . Journal of Management Information Systems , 29 ( 4 ) , 195 – 215 . doi : 10 . 2753 / MIS0742 - 1222290407 DeRosa , D . M . , Smith , C . L . , & Hantula , D . A . ( 2007 ) . The medium matters : Mining the long - promised merit of group interaction in creative idea generation tasks in a meta - analysis of the electronic group brainstorming literature . Computers in Human Behavior , 23 ( 3 ) , 1549 – 1581 . Diehl , M . , & Stroebe , W . ( 1987 ) . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : toward the solution of a riddle . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 ( 3 ) , 497 – 509 . Diehl , M . , & Stroebe , W . ( 1991 ) . Productivity loss in idea - generating groups : tracking down the blocking effect . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 61 ( 3 ) , 392 – 403 . Gallupe , R . B . , Dennis , A . R . , Cooper , W . H . , Valacich , J . S . , Bastianutti , L . M . , & Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . ( 1992 ) . Electronic brainstorming and group size . Academy of Management Journal , 35 ( 2 ) , 350 – 369 . Godwin , W . F . , & Restle , F . ( 1974 ) . The road to agreement : Subgroup pressures in small group consen - sus processes . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 30 ( 4 ) , 500 – 509 . Heslin , P . A . ( 2009 ) . Better than brainstorming ? Potential contextual boundary conditions to brain - writing for idea generation in organizations . Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology , 82 ( 1 ) , 129 – 145 . Hwang , H . - G . , & Guynes , J . ( 1994 ) . The effect of group size on group performance in computer - sup - ported decision making . Information and Management , 26 ( 4 ) , 189 – 198 . Kerr , D . S . , & Murthy , U . S . ( 2009 ) . Beyond brainstorming : The effectiveness of computer - mediated communication for convergence and negotiation tasks . International Journal of Accounting Information Systems , 10 ( 4 ) , 245 – 262 . Kock , N . ( 2007 ) . Media naturalness and compensatory encoding : the burden of electronic media obsta - cles is on senders . Decision Support Systems , 44 ( 1 ) , 175 – 187 . 190 S . R . Yagolkovskiy Kohn , N . W . , Paulus , P . B . , & Korde , R . M . ( 2011 ) . Conceptual combinations and subsequent creativ - ity . Creativity Research Journal , 23 ( 3 ) , 203 – 210 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10400419 . 2011 . 595659 Lamm , H . , & Trommsdorff , G . ( 1973 ) . Group versus individual performance on task requiring ideational proficiency ( brainstorming ) . European Journal of Social Psychology , 3 ( 4 ) , 361 – 387 . Leggett Dugosh , K . L . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 2005 ) . Cognitive and social comparison processes in brain - storming . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 41 ( 3 ) , 313 – 320 . Litchfield , R . C . ( 2009 ) . Brainstorming rules as assigned goals : Does brainstorming really improve idea quantity ? Motivation and Emotion , 33 ( 1 ) , 25 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11031 - 008 - 9109 - x Mullen , B . , Johnson , C . , & Salas , E . ( 1991 ) . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : A metaanalytic integration . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 12 ( 1 ) , 3 – 23 . Nijstad , B . A . , Stroebe , W . , & Lodewijkx , H . F . M . ( 1999 ) . Persistence of brainstorming groups : how do people know when to stop . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 35 ( 2 ) , 165 – 185 . Nijstad , B . A . , Stroebe , W . , & Lodewijkx , H . F . M . ( 2002 ) . Cognitive stimulation and interference in groups : exposure effects in an idea generation task . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 38 ( 6 ) , 535 – 544 . Osborn , F . A . ( 1957 ) . Applied imagination . New York : Scribner . Paulus , P . B . , & Yang , H . - C . ( 2000 ) . Idea generation in groups : A basis for creativity in organizations . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 82 ( 1 ) , 76 – 87 . Rietzschel , E . F . , Nijstad , B . A . , Stroebe , W . ( 2007 ) . Relative accessibility of domain knowledge and creativity : The effects of knowledge activation on the quantity and originality of generated ideas . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 43 ( 6 ) , 933 – 946 Stasser , G . , & Birchmeier , Z . ( 2003 ) . Group creativity and collective choice . In P . B . Paulus & B . A . Nij - stad ( Eds . ) , Group creativity : Innovation through collaboration ( pp . 85 – 109 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Thatcher , S . M . B . , & Brown , S . A . ( 2010 ) . Individual creativity in teams : The importance of commu - nication media mix . Decision Support Systems , 49 ( 3 ) , 290 – 300 . Valacich , J . S . , Dennis , A . R . , & Connolly , T . ( 1994 ) . Idea generation in computer - based groups : A new ending to an old story . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 57 ( 3 ) , 448 – 467 . Sergey R . Yagolkovskiy , Associate professor , HSE , Ph . D . E - mail : syagolkovsky @ hse . ru Address : * 20 Myasnitskaya str . , Moscow , 101000 , Russian Federation Креативность и мозговой штурм 191 Креативность в классическом и компьютерно - опосредованном мозговом штурме Сергей Ростиславович Яголковский Доцент департамента психологии НИУ ВШЭ , кандидат психологических наук Контакты : syagolkovsky @ hse . ru Резюме В статье анализируются преимущества и недостатки одной из наиболее популярных форм групповой творческой деятельности – мозгового штурма . Его эффективность детер - минируется целым рядом факторов , наиболее важными из которых являются размер груп - пы , а также оригинальность и вариабельность идей , которыми обмениваются ее участники . Анализ научной литературы свидетельствует о том , что негативные факторы , снижающие эффективность мозгового штурма , практически не проявляются в диадах , но их влияние заметно усиливается по мере увеличения размера группы . «Живое» взаимодействие между участниками мозгового штурма также играет важную роль в его успешности . Но эта роль во многом противоречива : в одних случаях такое взаимодействие стимулирует , а в дру - гих — угнетает креативность отдельных членов группы . Существует целый ряд модифика - ций классического мозгового штурма , основанных на опосредованном взаимодействии между его участниками . Наиболее популярными среди них являются «письменный мозго - вой штурм» ( brainwriting ) и «электронный мозговой штурм» ( EBS — electronic brainstor - ming ) . Эти методы обладают рядом преимуществ по сравнению с классическим мозговым штурмом , среди которых более высокий уровень анонимности ; возможность записать воз - никшие идеи без задержки сразу после их появления без необходимости ждать момента , когда закончит озвучивать свои идеи другой участник группы ; низкий риск доминирова - ния одного или нескольких участников группы . В самом ближайшем будущем могут появиться новые формы мозгового штурма , объединяющие преимущества его проанализи - рованных выше модификаций . Ключевые слова : креативность , мозговой штурм , электронный мозговой штурм , когни - тивная стимуляция .