DIS2002 | 265 KEYWORDS Domestic environment , ethnography , patterns of action and technology usage . INTRODUCTION The future domestic environment is currently receiving a great deal of attention from commercial and academic computing sectors as a place of design and IT devel - opment . A key research problem in designing for this environment is to under - stand the everyday character of the home , how people live in the home , what they do when they are at home , and the potential role of technologies within the milieu of domestic activities . With its early focus on business systems and ofﬁce automation the IT community has developed a range of techniques to support design for the workplace . A variety of techniques have emerged that promote an understanding of the nature of organiza - tions and the different forms of interaction that underpin organizational life . A signiﬁ - cant tradition in workplace design has emerged which has been open to consider - able debate over the last three decades . When applied to the home , however , the workplace tradition appears to be inappro - priate . Design approaches that have emerged from the workplace have , quite rightly , been grounded in the core rationali - ties of production , efﬁciency , the organiza - tion of labour , etc . , but it is not at all clear that these rationalities transfer to domestic life . Consequently , different researchers have exploited a number of alternate approaches to understanding the domestic environment in order to inform the development of new technologies for the home . These have most notably included longitudinal studies of the interactional dynamics of computer use in the home , which exploit quantitative techniques [ 26 ] ; cultural probes that seek to analyze the motivations shaping home life , which draw upon art and design tech - niques [ 16 ] ; and ethnographic studies of the socially organized , naturally occurring uses of technology in domestic interac - tion [ 40 ] . In this paper we wish to consider how to support the development of a broad under - Pattern - based Support for Interactive Design in Domestic Settings Designing for future domestic environments offers a chal - lenge for everyone involved in the design of new technolo - gies . The move from the ofﬁce , and working environments in general , has highlighted the need for new techniques for understanding the home and conveying ﬁndings to tech - nology developers . This paper presents a pattern - based approach informing the design of technology for future domestic settings . The approach is based on the original work of Alexander and seeks to support the on - going process of design , rather than the structuring of a corpus of previous work . The paper presents an adapted pattern language framework for structuring and presenting ethno - graphic ﬁeldwork and considers the broad implications of patterns for the development of new technologies for domestic settings . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage , and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . " ACM - 1 - 58113 - 515 - 7 / 02 / 0006 . . . $ 5 . 00 The School of Computer Science and Information Technology The University of Nottingham Jubilee Campus , Wollaton Road Nottingham NG1 8BB , UK . + 44 115 846 6512 andy . crabtree @ nottingham . ac . uk terry . hemmings @ nottingham . ac . uk tom . rodden @ nottingham . ac . uk Andy Crabtree Terry Hemmings Tom Rodden 266 | DIS2002 standing of domestic interactions and tech - nology uses and how these may be best made available to designers . Just as work - oriented design has been compelled to develop a broad understanding of the social character of work and organization [ 17 , 19 , 7 ] , then so too the IT community is now under increasing pressure to develop a broad understanding of the social character of the domestic setting [ 30 , 39 , 21 ] . IT designers increasingly need to be aware of the social circumstances of technology usage in the domestic environment , espe - cially of the everyday activities and interac - tions that shape technology usage in the home . We contribute to the development of this broad understanding by using a pattern language framework to identify generic patterns of social action ( i . e . interaction or action simply put ) and embedded tech - nology usage from the minutiae of ethno - graphic studies of the home . Over the last few years we have sought to exploit the basic principles of pattern languages to convey an understanding of the social organization of various settings [ 28 , 21 ] . In this paper we build upon our initial experi - ences in using descriptive patterns to convey the sociality of technology use in the home . Following success in software engineering [ 13 ] , pattern language frameworks have been championed by members of the HCI community as a vehicle for sharing design solutions [ 3 , 10 , 12 ] . The main focus of existing patterns frameworks is essentially retrospective in character . The general aim has been to mine existing experiences in order to build a set of patterns that convey design problems and solutions to the wider community . Prescriptive solution - based patterns approaches have been comple - mented by descriptive patterns frame - works , which are concerned to illuminate , again retrospectively , work arrangements that commonly occur across a variety of settings , rather than design problems and solutions [ 11 , 28 ] . These patterns frame - works form part of a broader pattern based approach to design where patterns are made available as a resource for design teams [ 18 ] . In this paper we extend the concern with descriptive frameworks by shifting from a retrospective outlook to consider a prospective role for patterns in the design of interactive systems for the home . We are particularly interested in the use of pattern - based approaches as a means of struc - turing the on - going analysis of ethnographic material as part of an on - going process of design . Our aim , then , is not to re - examine previous ethnographic studies in the search for aggregated phenomena but to provide those under - taking ethnographic studies of the domestic environment with a structuring device allowing them to align their research with the broad needs of design . Our turn to a descriptive patterns frame - work as a means of driving an on - going design process reﬂects the lack of a general understanding of the home and is informed by Alexander’s original work where the commonsense notion of place was central to the structuring and presenta - tion of patterns . Our use of such a frame - work is motivated by the appeal to and use of commonsense knowledge of patterns of action ( or “typiﬁcations” ) in everyday design practice [ 37 ] . Typiﬁcation is central to design and descriptive patterns may provide a useful typiﬁcation device , conveying knowledge of day - to - day activities , interactions , and technology uses in the home . We address the role of typiﬁcation in design and then ( re ) turn to consider salient features of Alexander’s patterns framework [ 2 ] in order that we might identify important structural features shaping the development of an adapted framework capable of addressing the broad needs of design in a domestic context . Our adapted pattern language framework provides a means of structuring the results of ethnographic studies of the home and informing design by presenting ﬁndings in terms of patterns of action and technology usage . We provide an overview of an emergent set of patterns and discuss initial experiences in using patterns to drive the design of IT for future domestic settings . THE RELEVANCE OF PATTERNS TO DESIGN The pattern framework outlined in this paper aims to support the design process by providing a resource that conveys the key activities , interactions and technology uses in domestic settings . We take as our starting point previous work undertaken by Sharrock and Anderson [ 37 ] concerning the theory and practice of design to outline the relevance of patterns to the design process . Broadly speaking , design and development problems are “ill - structured problems” lacking deﬁnite criteria to test potential solutions [ 38 ] . Despite radical uncertainty , however , developers nonetheless manage to devise solutions . How do they do this , and do it recurrently , as a routine matter of day - to - day working practice ? Previous studies of engineering practice [ 6 ] suggest that the ill - structured problems that beset design are produced by devel - opers in their conceptualisation of a “design space” . How a developer conceives of the design space ( e . g . the home ) , and the needs of users therein , depends upon his or her position and func - tion in the division of labour ( i . e . on his or her role , competence , and skills ) . Thus , each position in the division of labour ( ethnography , software engineering , and HCI , say ) brings a different conception of the design space to the table resulting in the production of an ill - structured problem of various layers of complexity . Naturally , the heterogeneous design spaces constructed by the parties to development need to be aligned if the ill - structured char - acter of the design problem is to be resolved . It will come as little surprise to say that alignment , and with that the formu - lation of concrete design solutions , is achieved through a locally organized process of “negotiation” . What Sharrock and Anderson were interested in , and what is of relevance here , is how that local process of negotiation is organized by designers and , from our point of view , may therefore be supported . The Commonsense Method of Typiﬁcation In order to answer the question Sharrock and Anderson consulted the work of design practitioners , studying how design spaces are constructed and aligned in actual working practice on the ground ( in contrast to aligned in theory ) . Particular attention was paid to the ways in which users were and are constructed as a developers’ object ( i . e . as persons populating the design space who have distinct needs that technical solutions might be designed to DIS2002 | 267 support ) . What is of interest in the authors’ ﬁndings are not their comments on “the user” per se ( i . e . some generic conceptual deﬁnition ) , but the structure of the work whereby reasonable , mutually intelligible and defensible constructions of “the user” and technically supportable needs were arrived at in practice . Thus , and for instance , it might be suggested that the user might be a secretary , or a manager , or a key oper - ator . Having designated these kinds of users , it was possible to introduce sets of expectations about what they might be trying to do , what they might know about the machine or process in ques - tion and how likely they were to initiate one or another sets of routines . In the terminology developed by Schutz [ 36 ] , “secretary” , “manager” , “key operator” are personal types associated with which are constellations of roles and relationships . In addition to these personal types , our designers also deployed what Schutz calls course of action types . Here the deﬁning char - acteristic is not social identity , gender , organizational position or role , but an envisigeable course of action which is being undertaken . It was around what could reasonably be said about such courses of action that “the user” entered design decision making . This ﬁnding , which is supported by other studies of design practice [ 35 ] , indicates that analysis of the design space is struc - tured or organized to some signiﬁcant extent in terms of typiﬁcation . Typiﬁcation is a commonsense method of constructing shared understandings and , in a design context , of constructing an inter - subjective sense of user activities and needs amongst the various members of the division of labour in the actual course of getting the job of design done . Typiﬁcation and Patterns of Action Typiﬁcation essentially uses commonsense categories of social types – e . g . “secretary” – as a resource to reason about and iden - tify the needs of the particular users that populate the design space . Commonsense categories of social types may be employed in this way as such categories are tied to particular activities or courses of action that deﬁne the social type invoked [ 34 ] . Thus , and for example , “policemen” arrest and prosecute wrongdoers , “waiters” take orders for food and serve at your table , “secretaries” answer phones , arrange meetings , and record minutes , etc . It may be noted that when considering the courses of action which deﬁne a social type , we are no longer considering an isolated individual but the actions of a generic other : policemen not a policeman , waiters not a waiter , secretaries not a secretary . The method of typiﬁcation allows developers to identify generic needs of particular users then , under the commonly known auspices that “these” actions are tied to “this” type of user . Thus , analysis of the design space is rooted in common - sense knowledge of the typical courses of action that the particular social types popu - lating the design space perform : in commonsense knowledge of patterns of action to be precise . In using the commonsense method of typi - ﬁcation and invoking commonsense cate - gories of social types , developers employ common knowledge of patterns of action to construct a reasonable , mutually intelligible and defensible sense of “the user” and to formulate potential design solutions supporting the user’s work . As Sharrock and Anderson put it , The user is introduced into design through the use of typiﬁcatory struc - tures . Our aim has been to show ﬁrst that these structures conform to patterns and second that these patterns can be analysed using the concepts of personal and course of action types … By invoking such typiﬁcatory structures , designers are able to construct the rationale for their design decisions within the ﬂow of the designing . Seen from within the activity of design , in the midst of exploring the design space , these structures enable designers to construct their design worlds . The appeal to and knowledge of patterns of action is an integral part of design practice – a naturally organized lingua franca under - pinning the negotiation central to design , which presupposes the deployment of formal methods . With this point in mind we wish to consider the potential utility of a patterns framework as a means of supporting the design process . In the following section we consider the original patterns framework before presenting an adapted version supporting the identiﬁca - tion of patterns of action and technology usage in ethnographic studies of the home . RETURNING TO ALEXANDER’S PATTERN LANGUAGE Whether concerned with reusability in soft - ware engineering , or the cognitive or social organization of technology in use , the notion of a pattern language for design has its origins in the critique of architecture [ 5 ] . It speciﬁcally emerges from the work of the architect Christopher Alexander [ 1 ] , who was fundamentally concerned to bring an awareness of the use of towns and build - ings to bear on the discipline . The use of buildings necessarily involves social action and has parallels with our own concerns to understand the sociality of the domestic environment . It also suggests a need to return to Alexander’s original conception of patterns rather than to rely on those inspired by the problem - solution focus of his work . In this section we reconsider the original work of Alexander and adapt his pattern framework to support analysis of the design space . Alexander’s foundational observation is that towns and buildings are organized through patterns of actions or “patterns of events” that people take part in over and over again . Being in bed , taking a shower , eating breakfast in the kitchen , sitting in the study writing , walking in the garden , cooking lunch , going to the movies , taking the family out to eat at a restaurant , having a drink at a friend’s house , driving on the highway , and going to bed again are exam - ples used by Alexander to illuminate the point . Our lives are organized through reoccurring patterns of work , leisure , travel , relaxation , and the rest . Although patterns of action are implicated in the daily lives of individuals , a great many patterns are not individualistic but organize “our lives together” as members of society : they are the rules through which our culture maintains itself , keeps itself alive , and it is by building our lives out of these patterns of events , that we are people of our culture . Thus , and for example , each morning people get up , shower , eat breakfast , and drive down the highway to work , where 268 | DIS2002 they together engage in other patterns of activities , such as checking their mail , attending meetings , or going for lunch , etc . A great many of the patterns whereby towns and buildings are organized are thoroughly social in character . In the ﬁrst instance , then , patterns of actions make the social organization of towns and buildings visible . The Essential Interrelation of Patterns and Places In considering the sociality of towns and buildings Alexander also observes that patterns of action are tied to particular places within a society . So taking a shower in a morning is tied to the bathroom , eating breakfast to the kitchen , driving to work to the highway ( and not the sidewalk ) , for example . As Alexander puts it , patterns are always “anchored in space” : I cannot imagine any pattern without imagining a place where it is happening . Furthermore , the patterns of actions out of which any particular place – a bathroom , a kitchen , a highway , etc . – is made up are “rather small” or ﬁnite and deﬁnitive , which provides for their generalization to other such places in a society . Thus , showering may be generalized to bathroom s , eating breakfast to kitchen s , driving to highway s , and so on . Alexander’s framework ties patterns of action to the architectural envi - ronments in which they naturally occur then , and provides a basis for designing future towns and buildings The preliminary objective of pattern analysis in a domestic context is to identify the ﬁnite patterns of actions that are situ - ated in and deﬁne particular places in the home : in kitchens , living rooms , studies , and the other sub - environments that taken together comprise the home as a whole . The primary objective of pattern analysis is to identify the patterns of relationships that obtain between patterns of actions and the material arrangements of place : between a person entering a building and the physical entrance , between people cooking and the physical layout of the kitchen , between people doing individual activities in a communal living room and the spatial char - acteristics of the room , etc . [ 2 ] . Placing analytic emphasis on patterns of relation - ships , Alexander draws our attention to the reoccurring ways in which people interact with their architectural environment and , particularly , with the material arrangements that it is made up of . These patterns of relationships are the primary object of pattern analysis in Alexander’s framework . They elaborate the socially organized ways in which people use the material arrange - ments of place and the problems they encounter in the course of use . Knowledge of these patterns and the prob - lems they embody is made publicly avail - able , along with proposed architectural solutions , through the use of a distinct presentation format , which Alexander describes in the following way : First , there is a [ pattern number , a title and a ] picture , which shows an arche - typal example of [ a ] pattern . Second , after the picture , each pattern has an introductory paragraph , which sets the context for the pattern , by explaining how it helps to complete certain larger patterns . Then there are three diamonds to mark the beginning of the problem . After the diamonds there is a headline , in bold type . This headline gives the essence of the problem in one or two sentences . After the head - line comes the body of the problem . This is the longest section . It describes the empirical background of the pattern , the evidence for its validity , the range of different ways the pattern can be manifested in a building , and so on . Then , again in bold type , like the head - line , is the solution – the heart of the pattern – which describes the ﬁeld of physical and social relationships which are required to solve the stated problem , in the stated context . This solution is always stated in the form of an instruction – so that you know exactly what you need to do , to build the pattern . Then , after the solution , there is a diagram , which shows the solution in the form of a diagram , with labels to indicate its main components . After the diagram , another three diamonds , to show that the main body of the pattern is ﬁnished . And ﬁnally , after the diamonds there is a para - graph which ties the pattern to all those smaller patterns in the language which are need to complete this pattern , to embellish it , to ﬁll it out . In talking of “larger” patterns Alexander may be understood to be talking about the primary patterns that deﬁne place – e . g . making breakfast , lunch or dinner in the kitchen – and in talking of “smaller” patterns he may be understood to be talking about the component patterns that make up a primary pattern – e . g . getting foodstuffs from the refrigerator , implements from drawers , using the cooker or microwave , cleaning the table , etc . While Alexander’s framework stands in need of adaptation to handle the interac - tional details of technology usage in the home , it is in this respect that we believe that an adapted patterns framework and presentation format might be of utility to design . Primary patterns might be under - stood to consist of domestic routines , through which household members struc - ture day - to - day life in the home [ 30 ] . Component patterns might be understood to consist of the everyday activities that make up domestic routines . These phenomena are grossly observable and available to ethnographic study . Combined with an appropriate patterns framework , ethnographic studies might , then , illuminate patterns of action and technological rela - tionships in the home and support the commonsense method of typiﬁcation that underpins analysis of the design space and the formulation of design solutions . Adapting the Framework The original framework might be readily adapted to meet the needs of design by extending the notion of the material arrangements of place to include tech - nology . In doing this , we construe tech - nology in the broad sense of the word to include such things as the humble pen and paper , tables , noticeboards , windows and doors , etc . , as well as sophisticated computing systems . As Venkatesh and Nicosia [ 41 ] put it , we need to look at a whole range of technologies in the home no matter how mundane , [ for ] in order to understand the adop - tion / use issues of computers , one must view the total technological space of the household … very little insights will be gained by looking at computers alone . Thus , and for example , in the course of making breakfast certain pragmatic day - to - DIS2002 | 269 day patterns of relationships involving kettles , toasters , microwaves , radios , TVs , newspapers , and the rest , become apparent . From this simple example it is evident that the patterns of relationships revealed by the adapted framework will consist of patterns of action and tech - nology usage . We take the explication of these patterns to be the goal of pattern analysis in a design context for a number of interrelated reasons . • They elaborate in real world , real time details of interaction what people do in the home . • In such detail , they serve to make visible the social organization of domestic technologies - in - context ( in the kitchen , living room , study , and in the making of dinner , entertaining guests , or doing schoolwork , etc . ) . • They ground design in actual courses of action or use practices that are currently unsupported by computing technology . The core features of the adapted pattern language framework are illustrated in the Table 1 . APPLYING THE ADAPTED FRAMEWORK It is one thing to theorize the characteristics of patterns and to suggest that patterns can provide an analytical orientation for understanding domestic settings . It is another to draw upon ethnographic data in order to identify patterns as real world , real time features of the domestic setting . How , it might be asked , are real world patterns of activities to be found or located and how are we to explicate and make visible the patterns of relationships that bind domestic activities and technology together ? Finding Real World Patterns in Domestic Routines In undertaking studies of the home we are particularly concerned to locate the work implicated in the routine construction of domestic life . The construction of domestic routines enables household members to coordinate and conduct their daily activities in an orderly rather than a haphazard way . In getting up in a morning , household members may take the same routine turns in using the bathroom for example , ensuring that they each get to work on time . Routines are distributed around the various sub - environments that comprise the home and interwoven with the use of technology [ 30 ] . The technologies of the bathroom ( showers , razors , toothbrushes , etc . ) and the kitchen ( toasters , kettles , radios , etc . ) are implicated in daily routines of getting up and getting ready for work , for example . In this respect it might be said that routines articulate large or primary patterns of action that deﬁne particular places within the home , each of which is composed of smaller component patterns . Our ﬁst task is to locate these patterns , but how ? Alexander’s methodology is inadequate for the task as it lacks empirical veracity [ 4 ] , so we have employed “video ethnography” [ 42 ] to locate patterns of action . Specially adapted digital cameras were placed in sixteen volunteer households and used to record everyday domestic interaction . Several key sub - environments ( the kitchen , living room , children’s bedroom , and study where available ) were “wired up” to facili - tate continuous video and audio recording and constitute the locus of our current inquiries . Up to ﬁve miniature , low - light , variable focus , remote cameras and video recorders were installed in each of the key areas and up to eight hours of video footage per day , per camera installation , was recorded . Recording equipment was installed in each of the households for a minimum of ten consecutive days per year over two - years . Camera positions and appropriate times for recording were decided following discussions with the families in their homes and with their agreement . The volunteer families came from a range of socio - economic brackets in the UK , although neither exceptionally poor nor wealthy families were included in the study ( as none volunteered ) . The result of the “video ethnography” resulted in the capture of some 6000 hours of household activity , which is free from intrusion and bias to a remarkable degree 1 . All but one of the fami - lies conducted their affairs without undue concern as to the presence of the video , being concerned to get their activities done rather than worry about what was going onto the video . In practical day - to - day details of “getting activities done” , video ethnography furnishes investigators with ﬁne - grained and phenomenally intact in vivo recordings of everyday family life . In contrast to a mass of notes , anecdotes , vignettes , and disembodied conversations which characterize traditional ethnography , video footage becomes the primary resource enabling direct investigation of the domain . Importantly , and in the manner of Sacks’ [ 33 ] concern with audio recordings , video has the virtue that it is a “good enough” record of what actually happens in the home ( and elsewhere ) , it can be replayed and so it can be studied in an extended way over a period of time , and others can 1 . Patterns of action make the social organization of towns and buildings available . ( Alexander ) 2 . Patterns of action are tied to particular places within a society . ( Alexander ) 3 . The patterns of action out of which any particular place is made up are ﬁnite and deﬁnitive . ( Alexander ) 4 . The ﬁnite and deﬁnitive character of patterns of action provides for their generalization . ( Alexander ) 5 . The primary aim of pattern analysis is to identify the patterns of relation - ships that obtain between patterns of action and the material arrange - ments of place . ( Alexander ) 6 . The notion of material arrangements of place may be extended to include technologies , broadly construed . ( Adaptation ) 7 . Patterns of relationships reveal patterns of technology usage . ( Adaptation ) 8 . Patterns of technology usage make the social organization of domestic technologies - in - context visible . ( Adaptation ) 9 . Patterns of technology usage make unsupported use practices available to the design of future technological arrangements of place . Table 1 . Core elements of the adapted framework 1 It is not our intention to subject the entire corpus to patterns analysis , only to demon - strate the viability of the approach and provide materials to inform our own design work . 270 | DIS2002 look at what the researcher studies and make of it what they will should they disagree with the ﬁndings . Not only can the researcher inspect the domestic environ - ment in interactional details of actual activi - ties being done , then , anyone else can go and see whether what is said about those activities by the analyst is actually so ; and that , as Sacks reminds us , is a tremendous control on seeing whether one is learning anything . Identifying Patterns in the Fieldwork The methodological approach we take to explicating patterns from the video footage is descriptive rather than theoretical in character . In other words , and for sound reasons of social research [ 11 ] , we do not apply the pre - conﬁgured categories of some theoretical framework to codify the video data and detect patterns , but instead furnish “thick descriptions” [ 32 ] of the routine activities that occur in the particular places under study . Thick description stands in contrast to “thin description” , signifying the difference between mere behavioral accounts that describe only what can literally be seen and those characteristics which identify action as the practical action it recognizably is for members . As Ryle [ 32 ] puts it , [ The ] thinnest description of what the person is doing , e . g . pencilling a line or dot on paper … requires a thickening , often a multiple thickening , of a perfectly speciﬁc kind before it amounts to an account of what the person is trying to accomplish , e . g . design a new rigging for a yacht . In order to get beyond the thinnest level of description of what members’ are doing we are obliged to thicken the thin features captured on tape ( audio and video alike ) and we may do this by attending to and describing the following observable phenomena , which are implicated in the production and recognition of meaningful courses of practical action . The prima facie phenomenon made avail - able by the molecular sequences of inter - action on an audio or videotape is a grossly observable layer of talk and , more speciﬁ - cally , a layer of conversational formulations over the unfolding course of which members articulate what it is that they are doing , what event is going on , or what practical project or course of action they are together engaged in here and now . This grossly observable layer of formulations constitutes the starting point for thick description of the practical courses of action occurring on the tape . The analyst’s ﬁrst task is to describe those conversa - tional formulations as they are hearably produced and recognized by parties to the talk ( as questions , answers , objections , challenges , agreements , and the rest ) . While special methods of description may be employed [ e . g . 22 , 23 ] they are not required as formulations do not , in them - selves , display the social organized ways in which courses of actions come to assume the recognizable character that they do for members [ 14 ] . In order to explicate the meaningful char - acter of discrete courses of practical action , the analyst needs to describe the work performed by members in making formulations . This is a feature of naturally occurring interaction that is partially eclipsed through the use of specialized methods of description , which focus on the way in which members’ organize their formulations through various “turn - taking” mechanisms at the expense of the work done by members in taking - turns [ 15 , 27 ] . Description of the work performed by members in making formulations makes the work - practices whereby members organize their work visible . These practices give the work its recognizable character [ 8 ] and their description elaborates distinct patterns of technology usage . The main methodolog - ical procedures for identifying patterns of action and technology usage are summa - rized in Table 2 . It should be noted that the notion of thick description is not to be taken as a claim to have furnished a complete and exhaustive description of all the factors implicated in technology usage in the home . There is a possibility to extend any description , inﬁ - nitely [ 32 ] , and so a child psychologist may extract very different ﬁndings from the video data than parties conducting pattern analysis , for example . Being concerned with socially organized patterns of action and technology usage ( rather than psycho - logical processes etc . ) , we believe that description of the phenomena outlined above are practically adequate however , as they serve to make visible just how and with just what material technologies domestic routines ( reoccurring patterns of action ) are “put together” and organized in the real world , real time interactions of household members . These descriptive practices are embedded in the adapted patterns format , which researchers may “ﬁll in” to identify patterns in their own data and to present ﬁndings to other researchers . Presenting Patterns of Domestic Life The main purpose of identifying patterns of action and technology usage is to allow them to be used as part of an on - going design process . In contrast , to the work of Alexander we are not identifying problems or proposing solutions for some unknown future designer . Rather , we are making the real world , real time sociality of the domestic setting available to a multidiscipli - nary design team . This shift in orientation has required us to return to the original pattern language suggested by Alexander and alter it to reﬂect our new purpose . New pattern languages have emerged for a wide variety of domains . Each pattern language has tended to reﬂect the special - ized demands of its particular domain of utility . By returning to the original pattern language suggest by Alexander we wish to build upon the commonsense notion of place as a means of structuring ethno - graphic studies of routine activities , interac - tions and technology uses that occur in the particular sub - environments that make up the home and as a means of presenting ﬁndings to designers . This section presents the pattern language used to structure and present ﬁndings of patterns that occur in particular sub - envi - ronments . We articulate the pattern 1 . Attend to and describe the grossly observable layer of talk on the videotape as it is hearably produced by the parties to it . 2 . Describe the work done by members’ in the course of making conversational formulations . 3 . Describe the work - practices organizing members’ work . 4 . Describe the patterns of technology usage made visible by members’ work - practices . Table 2 . Core procedures for identifying patterns DIS2002 | 271 language through the presentation of a particular example showing how ethno - graphic data may be organized with a view to explicating patterns of action and tech - nology use . The adapted patterns format is web - based rather than text - based , which not only allows for the greater dissemination of ﬁnd - ings but allows much richer resources to be provided to design than can be contained in a text . Using web technology , the “arche - typal picture” may be replaced with actual video footage that displays the pattern in question . The video may be viewed via a hyperlink embedded in the pattern’s title ( Figure 1 ) . The title consists of a common - sense description ( e . g . “making breakfast” , “doing homework” , “assembling for dinner” , etc . ) . Given the analytic emphasis placed on patterns of technology usage , a sub - heading key technologies is added to the format , listing keywords that describe the technologies used in the video sequence ( e . g . TV , mobile phone , microwave , kitchen table , etc . ) . The “introductory paragraph” is renamed interactional setting of the pattern ( Figure 2 ) This section brieﬂy describes a ) where the pattern occurs ( e . g . in a small kitchen in family home ) ; b ) who is involved in the sequence of interaction ( e . g . one adult female and her young daughter ) ; c ) what the parties to the interaction are doing ( e . g . cleaning the kitchen ) ; and d ) the primary pattern this pattern is a component of ( e . g . doing domestic chores ) . Rather than explain how the pattern “helps to complete certain larger patterns” , hyper - links in this section connect the pattern to a primary patterns log . This provides access to the corpus of component patterns making up the particular primary pattern in question . The job of “explanation” is done , then , by locating the pattern with its family members , each of which may be viewed online by the researcher . The “essence of the problem” is renamed the organizational context of the pattern ( Figure 3 ) and provides a formal summary of the practical issue addressed by the pattern . The “body of the problem” is renamed the work of the pattern ( Figure 4 ) and describes the routine activities that make up the pattern . The work is summed up in a synopsis . The synopsis is followed by a transcript of the talk and description of relevant non - verbal practical actions of the parties to the interaction ( Figure 5 ) . The length of the sequence is speciﬁed by time marks at the beginning and end of the transcript . Partially audible conversational formula - tions are placed in square brackets or marked as [ inaudible ] . Rather than having a “solution” as part of our pattern language we seek to offer an account of the practices taking place . Consequently , the solution part of the orig - inal pattern structure is replaced by the practices ordering the work of the pattern ( Figure 6 ) , which highlights the recognizable social practices implicated in the work’s routine accomplishment . This section describes the familiar , recurring ways in which routine activities ( such as cleaning the kitchen , doing schoolwork , handling the mail , etc . ) “get done” . Description of these reoccurring practices provides for the identiﬁcation of the pattern . Figure 2 : Interactional setting of the pattern Figure 3 : The organizational context Figure 4 : The work of the pattern Figure 5 : A transcript of the talk Figure 1 : The pattern title 272 | DIS2002 The “diagram” is replaced with a more appropriate category to the task at hand , namely the pattern of technology usage ( Figure 7 ) . This section of the format describes the technologies used in the sequence of action as elaborated by the work and the practiced ways in which that work is organized . It is placed above the work of pattern because of its prima facie relevance to design . The “tying paragraph” is renamed connected patterns ( Figure 8 ) and uses hyperlinks to connect the pattern to a patterns index , which provides access to other patterns that use the same key tech - nologies . Connected patterns elaborate the bricolage of patterns of action that revolve around particular technologies and connect partic - ular technologies together in a place . The bricolage of patterns elaborates potential application areas for the design of new technologies . PATTERN SUPPORTED DESIGN FOR THE HOME The previous sections have argued for a shift in the nature of patterns from a struc - turing mechanism where previous solutions or descriptions are aggregated to allow information to be stored for future use . Instead , we suggest that given the lack of general features and principles to underpin design for domestic environments , patterns can instead be used to inform an ongoing process of design . Consequently , this paper has focused on how an analytical orientation to patterns can be used to structure ethnographic data and present ﬁndings to drive analysis of the design space . In this section we wish to brieﬂy review our initial experiences of the use of the adapted patterns framework when considering the design of technologies for the home . Rather , than provide a speciﬁc instance of design we outline broad reﬂec - tions on the utility of the approach . Legacy Issues Perhaps the strongest initial beneﬁt of patterns is as a means of sensitizing designers to the lived reality of domestic life . The adapted patterns framework shows us that the home is a complex tech - nical domain . It may lack sophisticated computing technologies but is nonetheless a technical arena for all that and this insight has important implications for the design of domestic technologies generally . The patterns framework informs us that the home is an evolving social institution whose technical organization is bound to the quotidian needs of its inhabitants . However , the everyday character of technology usage in the home sits uncomfortably with a great deal of current research , which seeks to devise revolutionary solutions under the auspices of the “smart home” . This means that little attention is paid to the current use of technologies in the home . Indeed such an exercise may well be eschewed as the home will ( we are told ) be utterly transformed in the future . There is no need , then , to attend to the here and now as it will be transcended in design [ 24 ] . With that , the day - to - day needs that moti - vate the incorporation of technology into the home are ignored , and to the detriment of design rather than the everyday lives of home dwellers . The success or failure of technological innovations depends on their responding to and adding value to the current historically constituted needs of domestic life [ 25 ] , which suggests a clear need to adopt a legacy perspective towards design for the home . Adopting a legacy perspective means that developers are compelled to get to grips with the requirements of future technolo - gies by addressing the constraints of the present and the past . These constraints routinely manifest themselves within an organizational context , where legacy issues are important to consider when imple - menting new systems [ 20 ] . Importantly , the constraints placed on legacy systems are not purely technical in character . Whatever technical characteristics computers may possess , they are irremediably embedded in an organizational context , which is essentially social in character [ 31 ] . The home is no exception to this , being a socially organized setting regardless of its non - commercial character [ 40 ] . When considering the domestic legacy we are required not only to attend to the technical organization of the home then , but also to the ways in which technology is socially organized and woven into the fabric of daily life [ 30 ] . The adapted patterns framework sensitizes design to the social fabric of domestic life through the explication of patterns of action and technology usage that comprise the domestic legacy . Attending to routine activ - ities in the home , the adapted framework provides the opportunity to identify discrete application areas for the design of novel technologies that resonate with members’ use practices and so supports the construction of the future on top of the present [ 29 ] . Elaborating the Design Space Patterns support the elaboration of the design space through the identiﬁcation of discrete application areas . Discrete appli - cation areas are identiﬁed via the organiza - tion of patterns in the patterns index . The patterns index makes collections of patterns visible , with each collection displaying a bricolage of patterns that coalesce around particular technologies in the home . Collections emerge from the structuring of ethnographic studies in terms Figure 6 : The practices ordering the work of the pattern Figure 7 : The pattern of technology usage DIS2002 | 273 of place and through the connection of patterns that employ the same technology within a place ( such as the kitchen ) . The coalescence of patterns around partic - ular technologies draws attention to impor - tant sites for design in the home . The emergent or self - explicating structure of patterns surrounding the kitchen table ( Figure 9 ) , for example , draws our attention to the signiﬁcance of the kitchen table as a multifunctional technology at the heart of domestic life . The Design Space Surrounding the Kitchen Table The set of empirical patterns of use surrounding the kitchen table illustrates the way in which a pattern approach serves to elaborate the design space . What these patterns serve to do is emphasize that the kitchen table assumes far more practical signiﬁcance in domestic affairs than being an important place to eat meals and socialize [ 24 ] . The bricolage of patterns informs us that the kitchen table is an activity centre around which a great many patterns of use revolve . These patterns inform us that the kitchen table has a number of important uses in the manage - ment of the everyday activities and interac - tions in the home . • It is used as an awareness centre where people place things they are required to take along with them when they leave the home . • It is used as a coordination centre where adults may monitor the doing of schoolwork by children and as a site where young children may be occupied ( doing drawing , crayoning , painting , etc . ) and monitored while adults get on with domestic chores . • It is used as an internal communication centre where mail is sorted and displayed to household members and where notes are written and displayed . • It is used as a shared information production and management centre where shopping lists are constructed , bills are processed , account books and ledgers updated , etc . Indeed , it is used for a host of practical activities that are completely unsupported by current computer - based technologies in the home . Other patterns in the kitchen inform us that the design space is larger than we might initially believe as the kitchen table , to continue with the example , is also connected in action to a range of other technologies : to noticeboards , calendars , diaries , etc . , which raises the possibility of developing distributed systems , devices and displays in the kitchen and around the home . And if such systems and displays are developed , what of interacting with them via mobile devices from outside the home to further augment awareness , coordination , communication , and shared information production and management in the home ? As this brief example hopefully demon - strates ( as there are limits to what can be shown in a short paper ) the adapted patterns framework serves to sensitize us to the patterns of practical actions and technology usage that occur in and deﬁne particular places . It provides empirical resources which designers may use to support their reasoning about what “typi - cally” goes on in particular places and , in considering the bricolage of patterns that coalesce around particular technologies therein , to identify potential application areas for design . Furthermore , in preserving the interaction whereby patterns are produced , patterns may be used to formu - late and sketch out initial design solutions . If we were to try to develop support for email use in the home , for example , then patterns of physical mail use inform us that certain generic interactional practices are at work that may be usefully drawn upon in design : mail is collected at a central point , sorted and irrelevant material disposed of , mail for other people is visibly displayed , and once opened it may well be placed on a noticeboard or placed on a pending pile thereby maintaining awareness of some action to be taken , for example . As this commonly known example indicates , patterns may work as resources for design in some very familiar ways , supporting the commonsense method of typiﬁcation that underpins analysis of the design space . And in preserving the details of interaction , patterns also provide concrete empirical resources supporting more technical prac - tices of scenario construction . CONCLUSION The needs of the home are poorly under - stood and approaches are still being devel - oped to convey a broad understanding of the home to designers . We have seen speciﬁc ethnographic studies [ 9 , 30 ] , cultural probes [ 16 ] , and the use of patterns to structure existing studies of domestic environments [ 21 ] . Although some models of technology in the home have been elab - orated , most notably by Venkatesh [ 41 ] , the area lacks the broad set of approaches and techniques that have emerged to support the development of IT in the workplace . The broad frameworks that have emerged in workplace design , which emphasize organizational structure , process , workﬂow and task , for example , and which provide general conceptual structures for analyzing the design space and organizing design work , are not easily transferable to the domestic setting however , as the home is not characterized by such formal features . Figure 8 : Connected patterns Figure 9 : A pattern index 274 | DIS2002 This is not to say that there is nothing to be learnt from workplace design . Legacy issues are as prominent in the workplace as they are in the home and as our analysis of domestic interaction elaborates , certain design concepts informing workplace design are relevant to understanding the domestic setting . The concepts of aware - ness and coordination , derived from Computer Supported Cooperative Work , are as relevant to understanding the home as they are to work and may serve to guide design in the domestic environment as they have in the workplace . The relevance of workplace design concepts to the analysis of the domestic design space is not an a priori matter , however , but a matter of close and careful inspection and analysis of domestic life . The adapted patterns framework has served to elaborate several broad design concepts that may usefully be oriented to when inspecting and analyzing the domestic design space . In addition to awareness and coordination these also include internal communication , and shared information production and management . Just what these concepts consist of in detail has been , and may continue to be , elaborated through the identiﬁcation of patterns of action and technology usage in the home . In other words , if we are to support shared information production and management in the home , say , then we might proceed by identifying patterns of action and technology usage whereby shared information is produced and managed by household members in various places around the home . The adapted patterns framework provides a socially oriented approach to inspecting and analyzing the home and provides tech - niques for structuring ethnographic studies to identify patterns of action and tech - nology usage from within the milieu of domestic activities . The identiﬁcation of these patterns supports analysis of the domestic design space via the common - sense method of typiﬁcation , elaborating what people typically do in the home , where , and how . Furthermore , the coales - cence of patterns around particular tech - nologies in the home supports the formulation of design solutions supporting the day - to - day needs of inhabitants . A small collection of kitchen patterns has been assembled to support our own design activities and is available as a public demonstration : www . mrl . nott . ac . uk / ~ axc / homepage / ﬁeldwork . htm ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This research was funded by the Equator IRC , EPSRC GR / N15986 / 01 ( www . equator . ac . uk ) and the ACCORD Project , EU Disappearing Computer Initiative IST - 2000 - 26364 ( www . sics . se / accord / ) . REFERENCES 1 . Alexander , C . , Ishikawa , S . , Silverstein , M . , Jacobson , M . , Fiksdahl - King , I . , and Angel , S . ( 1977 ) A Pattern Language , New York : Oxford University Press . 2 . Alexander , C . ( 1979 ) A Timeless Way of Building , New York : Oxford University Press . 3 . Bayle , E . , Bellamy , R . , Casaday , G . , and Erickson , T . ( 1998 ) “Putting it all together : towards a pattern language for interaction design” , SIGCHI Bulletin , vol . 30 ( 1 ) , pp . 17 - 23 . 4 . Borchers , J ( 2000 ) “Interaction design patterns : twelve theses” , position paper presented at the Workshop on Pattern Languages for Interaction Design , The CHI 2000 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , April 2 – 3rd , The Hague , Netherlands : ACM Press . 5 . Brand , S . ( 1994 ) How Buildings Learn , New York : Viking . 6 . Bucciarelli , L . L . ( 1988 ) “An ethnographic perspective on engineering” , Design Studies , vol . 9 ( 3 ) , pp . 159 - 168 . 7 . Button , G . ( ed . ) ( 1992 ) Technology in Working Order : Studies of Work , Interaction , and Technology , London : Routledge . 8 . Button , G . and Harper , R . ( 1996 ) “The relevance of ‘work - practice’ for design” , Computer Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing , vol . 4 ( 4 ) , pp . 263 - 280 . 9 . Crabtree , A . , O’Brien , J . , Nichols , D . , Rounceﬁeld , M . , and Twidale , M . ( 2000 ) “Ethnomethodologically informed ethnography and information systems design” , Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , vol . 51 ( 7 ) , pp . 666 - 682 . 10 . Erickson , T . ( 2000 ) “Lingua francas for design : sacred places and pattern languages , Proceedings of the 2000 Symposium on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS 2000 ) , pp 357 - 368 , August 17 - 19 th , Brooklyn , New York : ACM Press . 11 . Erickson , T . ( 2000 ) “Supporting interdisciplinary design : towards pattern languages for work - places” , in Workplace Studies : Recovering Work Practice and Informing System Design ( eds . Luff , P . , Hindmarsh , J . and Heath , C . ) , pp . 252 - 261 , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 12 . Fincher , S . ( 2000 ) The Pattern Gallery , http : / / www . cs . ukc . ac . uk / people / staff / saf / pattern s / gallery . html DIS2002 | 275 13 . Gamma , E . , Helm , R . , Johnson , R . and Vlissides , J . ( 1995 ) Design Patterns : Elements of Reusable Object - Oriented Software , New York : Addison - Wesley . 14 . Garﬁnkel , H . and Sacks , H . ( 1970 ) “On formal structures of practical action” , Theoretical Sociology : Perspectives and Developments ( eds . M c Kinney , J . C . and Tiryakian , E . ) , pp . 160 - 193 , New York : Apple - Century - Crofts . 15 . Garﬁnkel , H . ( 2001 ) Draft of “Introduction” , to Working Out Durkheim’s Aphorism : Ethnomethodology’s Programme ( ed . Rawls , A . ) , Lanham , Maryland : Rowman and Littleﬁeld . 16 . Gaver , W . , Dunne , A . , and Pacenti , E . ( 1999 ) “Cultural probes” , Interactions , vol . 6 ( 1 ) , pp . 21 - 29 . 17 . Goguen , J . ( 1993 ) “Social issues in requirements engineering” , Proceedings of 1993 IEEE International Symposium on Requirements Engineering , pp . 194 - 195 , San Diego : IEEE Press . 18 . Granlund , Å . and Lafrenière , D . ( 1999 ) A Pattern - Supported Approach to the User Interface Design Process . http : / / www . gespro . com / lafrenid / PSA . pdf 19 . Grudin , J . ( 1990 ) “The computer reaches out : the historical continuity of interface design” , Proceedings of the 1990 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 261 - 268 , Seattle , Washington : ACM Press . 20 . Henderson , P ( ed . ) ( 2000 ) Systems Engineering for Business Process Change , London : Springer - Verlag . 21 . Hughes , J . A . , O’Brien , J . , Rodden , T . , Rounceﬁeld , M . , and Viller , S . ( 2000 ) “Patterns of home life : informing design for domestic environ - ments” , Personal Technologies , vol . 4 , pp . 25 - 38 . 22 . Jefferson , G . ( 1978 ) “Explanation of transcript notation” , Studies in the Organization of Conversational Interaction ( ed . Schenkein , J . ) , xi - xvi , New York : Academic Press . 23 . Jordan , B . and Henderson , A . ( 1995 ) “Interaction analysis : foundations and practice” , Journal of the Learning Sciences , vol . 4 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 - 102 . 24 . Junestrand , S . , Keijer , U , and Tollmar , K . ( 2000 ) “Private and public digital domestic spaces” , International Journal of Human Computer Interaction , vol . 54 ( 5 ) , pp . 753 - 778 . 25 . Keeley , L . ( 2001 ) “The great lie : smart homes – stupid idea ? ” http : / / www . contextmag . com 26 . Kraut , R . , Scherlis , W . , Mukhopadhyay , T . , Manning , J , and Kiesler , S . ( 1996 ) “The Homenet ﬁeld trial of residential internet services” , Communications of the ACM , vol . 39 . ( 12 ) , pp . 55 - 63 . 27 . Lynch , M . ( 1993 ) “Molecular sociology” , Scientiﬁc Practice and Ordinary Action : Ethnomethodological and Social Studies of Science , pp . 203 - 264 , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 28 . Martin , D . , Rodden , T . , Rounceﬁeld , M . , Sommerville , I . and Viller , S . ( 2001 ) “Finding patterns in the ﬁeldwork” , Proceedings of the Seventh European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 39 - 58 , Bonn , Germany : Kluwer Academic Publishers . 29 . Mitchell , W . J . ( 2000 ) e - topia , Massachusetts : MIT Press . 30 . O’Brien , J . , Rodden , T . , Rounceﬁeld , M . , and Hughes , J . A . , ( 1999 ) “At home with the tech - nology” , ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , vol . 6 ( 3 ) , pp . 282 - 308 . 31 . Rodden , T . , Rounceﬁeld , M . , Sommerville , I . , and Viller , S . ( 2000 ) “Social viewpoints on legacy systems” , Systems Engineering for Business Process Change ( ed . Henderson , P . ) , pp . 151 - 163 , London : Springer - Verlag . 32 . Ryle , G . ( 1971 ) “The thinking of thoughts” , University Lectures No . 18 , University of Saskatchewan : Canada . 33 . Sacks , H . ( 1984 ) “Notes on methodology” , Structures of Social Action : Studies in Conversation Analysis ( eds . Maxwell , J . M . and Heritage , J . ) , pp . 21 - 27 , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 34 . Sacks , H . ( 1992 ) “The baby cried . The mommy picked it up” , Lectures on Conversation ( ed . Jefferson , G . ) , Volume I , Part 3 , Spring 1966 , Lecture 1 , pp . 236 - 242 , Oxford : Blackwell Publishers . 35 . Schön , D . A . ( 1988 ) “Designing : rules , types and worlds” , Design Studies , vol . 9 ( 3 ) , pp . 181 - 190 . 36 . Schutz , A . and Luckmann , T . ( 1974 ) The Structures of the Lifeworld , London : Heinemann . 37 . Sharrock , W . W . and Anderson , R . J . ( 1994 ) “The user as a scenic feature of the design space” , Design Studies , vol . 15 ( 1 ) , pp . 5 - 18 . 38 . Simon , H . A . ( 1984 ) “The structure of ill - structured problems” , Developments in Design Methodology ( ed . Cross , N . ) , pp . 145 - 164 , Chichester : Wiley . 39 . Stolzoff , N . , Chuan - Fong Shih , E . , and Venkatesh , A . ( 2000 ) “The home of the future” , Project NOAH Working Paper , University of California , Irvine : Centre for Research on Information Technology and Organizations . 40 . Venkatesh , A . ( 1996 ) “Computers and other inter - active technologies for the home” , Communications of the ACM , vol . 39 ( 12 ) , pp . 47 - 54 . 41 . Venkatesh , A . and Nicosia , F . ( 1997 ) “New tech - nologies for the home - development of a theoret - ical model of household adoption and use” , Advances in Consumer Research , vol . 24 , pp . 522 - 528 . 42 . Virtual Society ? http : / / virtualsociety . sbs . ox . ac . uk / projects / morrison . htm