The Dynamics of Material Artifacts in Collaborative Research Teams Deana D . Pennington Department of Biology , University of New Mexico , MSC03 2020 , Albuquerque , NM 87131 - 0001 , USA ( Phone : + 1 - 505 - 2772595 ; Fax : + 1 - 505 - 2772541 ; E - mail : dpennington @ LTERnet . edu ) Abstract . Boundary objects are material artifacts that mediate the relationship between two or more disparate perspectives . The concept of boundary objects has been demonstrably useful in a variety of research areas ; however , the meaning and function of boundary objects is contested . At issue is the relationship between boundary objects that negotiate between perspectives and those that specify across perspectives . In this study the changing nature of boundary objects in cooperative work is related to the dynamics of evolving problem conceptualization , system design , and enactment within cooperative work settings . Design based research on material artifacts produced by an incipient cross - disciplinary research team during their efforts towards negotiating integrated conceptualizations and specifying shared research agendas is used to generate a more comprehensive model of boundary objects through the life of a project . Key words : eScience , eResearch , cross - disciplinary collaboration , boundary objects , material artifacts , design based research 1 . Introduction Star and Griesemer ( 1989 ) proposed two central activities for translating between different viewpoints in cooperative scienti ﬁ c work : methods standardization and boundary object creation . The ﬁ rst is critical in that established guidelines form a managerial system to which diverse allies can contribute concurrently . The second arises after the ﬁ rst . Once guidelines are established , boundary objects can be constructed . They conceived of boundary objects as an “ analytical concept of those scienti ﬁ c objects which both inhabit several intersecting social worlds and satisfy the informational requirements of each of them . ” Boundary objects were the point of intersection between viewpoints , and the process of creating and managing them was critical for maintaining coherence of the heterogeneous work system . Star and Griesemer ( ibid . ) found four types of boundary objects in their study of a natural history museum , which they recognized was not exhaustive : 1 ) repositories , 2 ) ideal types , 3 ) coincident boundaries , and 4 ) standardized forms . Subsequent work has demonstrated both the utility of the boundary object conceptualization , and its shortcomings for explaining the full range of usage of artifacts in practice . Case studies have further articulated characteristics of these four types , and identi ﬁ ed new types ( Fujimura 1992 ; Perry and Sanderson 1998 ; Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( 2010 ) 19 : 175 – 199 © Springer 2010 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 010 - 9108 - 9 Roth and McGinn 1998 ; Bowker and Star 1999 ) . Boundary objects as theoretical constructs have become common in social science studies in general , and in CSCW studies in particular . The critical role of material artifacts in coordinating work practices is undisputed . However , Lee ( 2007 ) , based on an ethnographic study of incipient collaborative work , implicated an impoverished view of boundary objects as a barrier to more comprehensive understanding of the role of material artifacts in collaborative work . She suggested material artifacts play an alternative role as ‘ boundary negotiating objects ’ . Boundary negotiating artifacts are not constructed from standardized processes ; rather , they assist in the establishment of standard processes . They are used to “ record , organize , explore and share ideas ; introduce concepts and techniques ; create alliances ; create a venue for the exchange of information ; augment brokering activities ; and create shared understanding ” ( p . 333 ) . She suggested that boundary objects may be found primarily in fairly routine or fairly simple work projects , while boundary negotiating objects may be more prevalent in projects that are fairly non - routine and fairly complex , and that more studies of incipient collaborations might help resolve these issues . This paper presents a study of artifacts in incipient collaborative work in a cross - disciplinary science and technology research team . The goal is to develop a better understanding of the relationship between boundary negotiating objects ( sensu Lee 2007 ) and boundary objects ( sensu Star and Griesmer 1989 ) . In this article the latter will be referred to as “ boundary specifying objects ” for clarity , and both types will be referred to as boundary objects ( Figure 1 ) . The questions of interest are “ What is the relationship between boundary objects that negotiate and those that span viewpoints ? ” ; “ What is their relationship with methods standardization ? ” ; and “ How do each enable collaborative work ? ” The paper develops a fuller , dynamic system account of the role of different kinds of artifacts in different phases of collaborative work . This framework provides a basis for integrating the diverse empirical observations of this and prior work . Figure 1 . Terminology used in this paper . The set of all material artifacts contains a set of artifacts that constitute boundary objects — artifacts that bridge different viewpoints . Two classes of boundary objects have been recognized : 1 ) those that specify viewpoints and fully mediate their interaction , and 2 ) those that negotiate interaction between viewpoints . The question of interest in this article is , “ What is the relationship between boundary negotiating and boundary specifying objects ? ” . 176 Deana D . Pennington 2 . Methods 2 . 1 . Study context This study is based on a National Science Foundation Cyberinfrastructure ( CI ) Team project conducted from 2006 to 2009 . The goal of the CI - Team program is development of cross - trained scientists , engineers , and computer scientists able to design , develop , and use emerging technologies . This CI - Team project ( http : / / scidesign . org ) was designed to explore potential mechanisms for enabling collaborative research between scientists and computer scientists ( eResearch or eScience ) . The overarching goal of such research is not just to support the work of scientists , but rather to collaboratively conceptualize and design innovative approaches in both science and technology ( Lawrence 2006 ) . Problem concep - tualization must emerge during interactions between participants . The process for achieving this must include mechanisms for evolving individual ideas into collectively constructed agendas ; advancing vague , ill - de ﬁ ned issues into well de ﬁ ned , tractable problems ; and migrating independent researchers into uni ﬁ ed cognitive systems . These must happen more or less simultaneously , as each is dependent on the others . A key factor known to in ﬂ uence the outcome of such collaborations is the development of common ground between participants ( Olson and Olson 2000 ) . Common ground is the mutual knowledge , beliefs and assumptions that form the basis for meaningful communication ( Clark and Brennan 1991 ) . The CI - Team project focused on building common conceptual ground that could lead to better integrated research efforts between diverse scientists researching broad - scale ecological problems , and computer scientists interested in developing distributed systems . Speci ﬁ cally , participants had to develop an understanding of each other ’ s research interests , which depended on effectively learning relevant vocabulary and concepts across disciplines . Based on that understanding , they had to formulate conceptual linkages between each other ’ s research interests , develop integrated conceptual frameworks , and conceive of innovative collabo - rative research . Participants in the group were recruited based on potential research contribution to the general problem area of climate change and vegetation impacts in the American Southwest , and included twenty ﬁ ve participants roughly equally divided between several scienti ﬁ c ( ecology , geography , anthro - pology ) and computer science ( visualization , data mining , human factors , distributed computing ) disciplines . Participants were a mixture of faculty , their students , and researchers . Common ground was built across these diverse perspectives using a set of group activities over the 3 year project period mediated by the principal investigator . All activities included creation of material artifacts . This article focuses on the changing nature of the material artifacts ; however a brief description of the activities follows to depict the process that produced the artifacts . 177 Collaborative Research Teams Four consecutive group activities were conducted : 1 ) CI - Seminar , 2 ) CI - Vision Workshop , 3 ) CI - Strategy Workshop , and 4 ) CI - Design Workshop . The goal of the CI - Seminar was to expose the scientists to ongoing technical work in many existing eScience projects , re ﬂ ect on how these emerging technologies could be relevant for their own research efforts , and develop relevant technical vocabulary . The CI - Vision Workshop brought the scientists and computer scientists together to initiate learning about each other ’ s research interests and begin to develop a shared research vision . The CI - Strategy Workshop further developed that vision by identifying strategic research directions . Lastly , multiple CI - Design Work - shops targeted research proposal development in each strategic area . Although the overall , four step process was linear , each workshop consisted of complex interactions and iterative activities . Artifact creation was only one mechanism used to enable cross - disciplinary communication , but it was the most continu - ously used intervention throughout the project . A design - based research approach was used to study the role of artifacts in this incipient collaborative team . 2 . 2 . Design based research ( DBR ) approach DBR is an extension of standard design and evaluation methodologies that explicitly maps interventions and their evaluation to extant theory , for the purpose of theory development ( Figure 2 ) . DBR was developed in classroom settings by education researchers in collaboration with teaching practitioners . For a complete review of DBR and its application in education , see the Special Issue of the Educational Psychologist devoted to DBR ( Sandoval and Bell 2004 ) . As Edelson Figure 2 . Logic model showing design based research approach and its application in this study . Theories , with or without formative evaluation , are used to design an intervention . During enactment the designed intervention interacts with exogenous factors to produce outcomes , some of which may have been expected based on theory and formative evaluation , others of which are unexpected . Summative evaluation takes place . Outcomes are explicitly mapped back to the theories that informed the design . The explicit link between scienti ﬁ c theory and summative evaluation is what sets this approach apart from standard evaluation practices . 178 Deana D . Pennington ( 2002 ) stated , DBR “ explicitly exploits the design process as an opportunity to advance the researchers understanding . ” Some CSCW projects already tacitly use the design process in this way . DBR formalizes the approach by making explicit the mapping between theories being tested , designed interventions and intervention outcomes . DBR is a synergistic methodology with case studies and controlled experimentation , which provide a wealth of valuable information about factors that must be considered in real situations and the processes they in ﬂ uence . However , they do not provide practical guidance about how the knowledge gained can be integrated in a real situation in order to achieve speci ﬁ c outcomes . As Sandoval ( 2004 ) states , “ there is a tension between the desire for locally usable knowledge on the one hand and scienti ﬁ cally sound , generalizable knowledge on the other . ” DBR integrates ﬁ ndings from case studies and controlled experiments into contrived activities in real settings with two goals : 1 ) development of theory - based conjectures that are used to manipulate group activities to produce targeted outcomes ; and 2 ) re ﬁ nement of theory based on evaluation of actual outcomes of those activities . Theory and practice are tightly coupled in DBR . DBR experiments with group interventions , recognizing that many factors in live settings cannot be controlled and that important , unanticipated outcomes may emerge as a result of the intervention . These unexpected outcomes provide evidence that can be used in re ﬁ nement of the theory and concepts on which the original conjecture was based . Construction of material artifacts is known to be an important part of enabling group interaction and therefore was incorporated as part of the design of the CI - Team intervention . The changing nature of the constructed artifacts , however , emerged during the process and was recognized as an important , unanticipated outcome . This paper focuses on that outcome and uses it to generate new ways of conceptualizing the role of material artifacts . At the same time , it illustrates the DBR approach and provides an example of its utility in CSCW contexts . 2 . 3 . Material artifacts : theory , concepts and conjecture Frequently in DBR , theories and concepts from a variety of disciplinary perspectives are applied to generate the conjecture from which an intervention may be designed . There is a rich history of research on material artifacts across many disciplines . Two , in particular , informed the design of the CI - Team intervention : 1 ) material artifacts as boundary objects , and 2 ) material artifacts as learning scaffolds . Material artifacts as boundary objects . Voluminous literature exists on boundary objects as theoretical constructs and the application of boundary objects in a wide variety of settings . As mentioned in the introduction , boundary objects are conceived of as artifacts that capture and relate elements from more than one 179 Collaborative Research Teams perspective . In the original conceptualization of Star and Griesemer ( 1989 ) , boundary objects align elements such that individuals can make use of them with no knowledge of any perspective other than their own . Conversely , Lee ( 2007 ) suggested that an alternative use of boundary objects is to negotiate and develop understanding between perspectives . Both perspectives , and others , have demonstrated the critical role of boundary objects in enabling information processing in a group , and are needed in incipient research teams . On the one hand , developing cross - disciplinary understanding is a critical prerequisite to developing integrated conceptual frameworks , from which co - created research ideas can emerge . On the other hand , cross - disciplinary efforts need to proceed as much as possible with only limited understanding of other disciplinary perspectives . Boundary negotiation must lead to boundary speci ﬁ cation that everyone can use to align their research . Boundary negotiation and speci ﬁ cation represent two different general kinds of cognitive processes : divergent and convergent thinking . Divergent and conver - gent thinking processes were initially identi ﬁ ed by Guilford ( 1967 ) as two of six operational intellectual processes . Divergent thinking is the ability to generate a variety of solutions to a problem . Convergent thinking is the ability to deduce a single solution to a problem . In cross - disciplinary research , divergent thinking is needed to explore the problem space in search of potential conceptual connections . Convergent thinking is needed to evaluate those exploratory connections . Material artifacts can enable both kinds of thinking , but it is reasonable to expect that different kinds of material artifacts enable these different kinds of processes . Within CSCW , a substantial research agenda on knowledge cartography exists ( Okada et al . 2008 ) . These tools strive to map knowledge in order to better understand and reason about information . Okada et al . ( 2008 ) categorized these as concept mapping , argument and evidence mapping , issue mapping , web mapping , and thinking maps . These tools are similar in that they all enable explication of thoughts by iconic representation of terms and connections between terms . They differ in the kind of reasoning or audience that they target . For example , concept maps enable representation of the concepts a map creator considers relevant to a topic , and how he structures his knowledge about that topic . Conversely , argument and evidence maps enable explicit representation of the pros , cons , and evidence related to an issue . Either of these could be useful for divergent or convergent thinking activities , depending on how they are used . For instance , concept maps could be used to explore diverse perspectives on how to organize the problem space , a divergent thinking activity . Conversely , concept maps could be used to specify how different perspectives are going to be related in a particular project , a convergent thinking activity . Artifacts produced from either of these approaches , if used within a cooperative group to mediate perspectives , are boundary objects . The kind of boundary object that they represent ( negotiating or specifying ) depends on how they are used by the group . 180 Deana D . Pennington Material artifacts as learning scaffolds . In cross - disciplinary research teams a set of individuals representing diverse perspectives must learn each other ’ s mental models , learn how to fuse those differences into an integrated conceptual framework , and learn how to use that conceptual framework as a springboard to collaborative problem - solving ( Pennington 2008 ) . This depends on exchange of knowledge in ways that are conducive to making sense of a subject without requiring depth of understanding . A fairly limited understanding is suf ﬁ cient . However , it is impossible to know in advance which aspects will be relevant , requiring an exploratory phase of high - level learning that helps frame problem conceptualization . Unfortunately , disciplinary concepts are rarely accessible in forms digestible by those from other disciplines lacking appropriate background ( Jeffrey 2003 ) . Some research has suggested that experts have speci ﬁ c cognitive issues that limit their ability to convey their knowledge to novices ( Hinds and Pfeffer 2003 ) . In particular , as depth of knowledge on a topic increases , experts conceive of the content in increasingly abstract and simpli ﬁ ed ways and are unable to revert to more concrete , detailed descriptions required by novices ( Hinds and Pfeffer ibid . ) . Research in the learning sciences has demonstrated that representations , technological tools , activities , and / or physical artifacts are used by more expert individuals in one - on - one learning situations as temporary supports ( scaffolds ) that improve novice learning ( Davis and Miyake 2004 ) . Once the learner has grasped the target concepts , the scaffold is no longer necessary — differing from the permanent artifacts described as boundary objects . While material artifacts are not the only scaffolding mechanism , they play a critical role in enabling the ﬂ ow of information between individuals . There are two effects : 1 ) the effect on the recipient , for whom information is more easily grasped , and 2 ) the effect on the artifact creator , who must strive to construct an artifact that is easily grasped . In striving to construct an easily grasped artifact , an individual must organize his thoughts and conceptual frameworks in a way that he believes will make sense to the recipient . This requires active thought about what frameworks , other than his own , might make sense . The artifact creator reframes his own mental models in ways that he thinks might resonate with the recipient . In so doing , he is engaging in his own internal manipulation activity that partially incorporates the recipient ’ s perspective . Hence , artifact construction entails learning by both the creator and the recipient , and enables not just the ﬂ ow of information but also the dynamic creation of new mental models that contain linkages between participants . Artifact construction dynamically affords collective learning ( sensu Cook and Brown 1999 ) . Given the conceptual frameworks provided by boundary objects and scaffolding accounts of material artifacts , the conjecture was made that material artifact construction could be a primary mechanism for enabling cross - disciplinary learning and discourse on eScience teams if used in structured , facilitated ways . Typically on these teams material artifacts are constructed in advance ( such as presentation slides ) or occasionally on the ﬂ y ( such as a white 181 Collaborative Research Teams board illustration ) . The conjecture was that centering all group activities on the collective construction of speci ﬁ c kinds of material artifacts and facilitating discourse around those artifacts would better enable the emergence of integrated research ideas . Construction of material artifacts during discourse has the concomitant bene ﬁ t of capturing the content being discussed , which can be subjected to content analysis and provide a mechanism for measuring the change in conceptual integration across disciplines . Therefore , if material artifacts were indeed playing a central role in the exchange of knowledge and ideas then their content should re ﬂ ect the transformation from separate , disciplinary perspectives to more integrated cross - disciplinary frameworks through time . 2 . 4 . Designing theory - based team interactions Based on the above concepts , an intervention was designed to enable cross - disciplinary discourse through the creation of material artifacts . Several key strategies were incorporated : & All interactions between participants were centered around the creation of material artifacts . & All material artifacts produced during the project were captured digitally and incorporated into a web accessible archive . The web archive both contains material artifacts and itself acts as a material artifact . & The CI - Seminar incorporated numerous examples of ways emerging technologies are being used in science . These were made explicit through digitally recording of presentations , and incorporation of slide presentations into the web archive . & Subsequent interactions between scientists and computer scientists iterated between 1 ) divergent thinking activities that supported exploration and learning across the problem space and 2 ) convergent thinking activities that strove to scope speci ﬁ c research areas of interest . Artifact creation was an integral part of both types of activities , and different types of artifacts were necessary for these two different kinds of activities . & Divergent thinking activities , e . g . exploratory learning , were enabled by concept mapping , a commonly used scaffolding mechanism in classroom settings ( Novak and Wurst 2005 ) . Concept maps are diagrams that capture associations between concepts ( Figure 3 ) . The utility of concept maps as a mechanism for enabling interdisciplinary discussion has been demonstrated ( Heemskerk et al . 2003 ; Jeffrey 2003 ) . & Convergent thinking activities , e . g . scoping activities , targeted making conceptual linkages explicit , identi ﬁ cation of potential nexus points between researchers , and progressive narrowing of linked research interests . Use of a diverse array of material artifacts ( wikis , issue visualization , and white - boards ) were explored . 182 Deana D . Pennington 2 . 5 . Enactment and data collection A wiki - based project website ( http : / / scidesign . org ) was designed using the open source content management platform Drupal ( http : / / drupal . org ) . This was linked to the open source course management system Moodle ( http : / / moodle . org ) . The website was used for participants to collectively edit shared documents of a public nature while Moodle was used to manage the CI - Seminar and to organize artifacts from topic speci ﬁ c research areas of interest . Moodle provides a wide variety of tools for group work , including document archives , links to shared resources , forums , wikis and chat . The CI - Seminar was held synchronously at three institutions in a videocon - ferencing environment ( Macromedia Breeze ; http : / / www . adobe . com ) : University of New Mexico , University of Arizona , and Northern Arizona University . Macromedia Breeze was selected because of its digital recording capabilities , lacking in available open source solutions such as AccessGrid ( http : / / www . accessgrid . org ) . All scientists involved in the project attended the seminar ; only students were required to complete assignments . Each session was conducted by remote speakers from across the US and recorded in its entirety . Each remote speaker provided an electronic copy of his presentation that was placed on the Figure 3 . Example concept map from a portion of a map created by a scientist . 183 Collaborative Research Teams website . Relevant papers were provided in Moodle prior to each session . Students were routinely assigned the task of writing about the content . They participated in a written online forum , responded to questions about technical developments in their own ﬁ eld , and wrote about prospective applications of technologies introduced in the seminar in their own ﬁ elds . The CI - Vision Workshop was held shortly after the seminar concluded . Both scientists and IT experts were involved , and the meeting consisted of a divergent thinking activity designed to learn about each other ’ s research interests and explore possible connections followed by a convergent thinking activity to create a shared vision of integrated research . During this workshop concept maps were constructed by each participant regarding their research interests ( Figure 3 ) , after brief training on the approach and the open source CMap Tools software ( http : / / cmap . imhc . us ) . Each participant talked about their own research using their concept map as a scaffolding device . Participants were asked to keep a running log of potential pairwise linkages between themselves and others , a convergent activity . When every participant had presented and exchanged ideas , each individual posted their list of potential linkages on a shared wiki , from which a collective list of potentially interesting research topics was created . That list , and the activity of generating the list , was used to initiate discussion of a broad research vision that encompassed those linkages . The ﬁ nal outcome of this workshop was a written shared vision that was rather ill - de ﬁ ned , but which was collectively generated and incorporated the individual research interests of most participants . Artifacts produced by the CI - Vision Workshop included a repository of individual concept maps , a shared wiki that included individually identi ﬁ ed linkages , and a short statement of the shared research vision . The CI - Strategy Workshop targeted further re ﬁ nement of the shared vision . This workshop began with a restatement of the shared vision and discussion of potential nexus points , which in this case revolved around methods for data analysis and visualization . Participants were asked to draw concept maps of their view of data , analysis and visualization in the context of the shared vision , using seed terms that were suggested by one of the participants ( a divergent thinking activity ) . Eight seed terms were given : distributed data , data analysis , data products , online modeling , modeling processes , decision support , visualization tools , and animation tools . Participants could elect to use any or none of these . Each concept map was collectively viewed and discussed , and an integrated conceptual work ﬂ ow was generated ( a convergent thinking activity ) . Dialogue and interactions around these concept maps led to identi ﬁ cation of three separate cross - disciplinary research areas of interest ; identi ﬁ ed content for two new virtual seminars to develop better cross - disciplinary understanding in those areas ; considered speci ﬁ c training that would enhance the ability of the scientists to envision usefulness of certain technical approaches ; and creation of a novel educational approach for engaging computer science and science students together in a collaborative classroom setting . Material artifacts from this 184 Deana D . Pennington workshop included the concept maps , an integrated conceptual work ﬂ ow , and wiki notes about all of the areas of interest identi ﬁ ed above . Several months later , a CI - Design Workshop was held to design and develop a speci ﬁ c research proposal around one of the identi ﬁ ed research areas . This meeting involved a smaller subset of participants ( 10 ) . The meeting resulted in a cross - disciplinary research design that was collectively generated and engaged all of the participants . During the CI - Design meeting participants sometimes referred to shared artifacts from prior meetings , and created new ones as needed . These artifacts were primarily freeform drawings on whiteboard that were either copied into electronic drawing software or were photographed with a digital camera . Near the end of the meeting a draft proposal outline was collectively generated through one person editing a wiki and projection of the text onto a screen . The ﬁ nal draft was individually edited until an agreed upon draft emerged . 2 . 6 . Data analysis Artifacts were classi ﬁ ed as individually or group constructed . The number of individual and group produced artifacts was counted . Artifacts from the CI - Seminar were excluded because only the students created them . Each remaining material artifact was visually inspected and categorized as : 1 ) boundary negotiating object , or 2 ) boundary specifying object . This categorization was based on how the artifacts were used by the group , following the distinction identi ﬁ ed by Lee ( 2007 ) . Boundary negotiating objects were used to “ record , organize , explore and share ideas ; introduce concepts and techniques ; create alliances ; create a venue for the exchange of information ; augment brokering activities ; and create shared understanding . ” Conversely , boundary specifying objects merged different perspectives in ways that removed the need to interact across disciplines . Artifacts collected were assessed for analytical compatibility . Concept maps from the CI - Vision and CI - Strategy Workshop were matched for comparative analysis of individually produced artifacts . The vision statement from the CI - Vision Workshop was matched to the CI - Design proposal for comparative analysis of group produced artifacts . Artifact content was assessed through semantic analysis as a surrogate measure of cross - disciplinary conceptual integration . Terms were extracted from each artifact and classi ﬁ ed as 1 ) unique to science language , 2 ) unique to information technology language , or 3 ) shared by both . The percentage of terms in each of these three classes for each artifact was tabulated . Pairwise comparisons of individual concept maps collected during the CI - Vision and CI - Strategy Workshops were conducted using functionality provided by CMap Tools . Only concepts in each map ( nodes ) were compared ; connections ( links ) were excluded because many participants did not specify connections between concepts , or used semantically - neutral phrases such as “ leads to ” . Matches were determined through four mechanisms : 1 ) full text match , 2 ) partial 185 Collaborative Research Teams text match , 3 ) keyword , and 4 ) synonym . Keyword and synonym matches were determined based on thesauri and other resources internal to the software . All potential matches identi ﬁ ed by the software were manually checked ; erroneous matches were excluded . Matches based on seed terms provided during the CI - Strategy workshop were excluded . Four concept maps were discarded from the analysis because it was obvious that they had collaborated on parts — sections of their maps were duplicated . A ﬁ fth — the one that was the most comprehensive — was retained . Because the number of terms used in each concept map varied , counts for a given pair differed depending on which concept map was considered the source and which the target . Therefore counts of matches were made in both directions . Pairwise comparisons of terms used in the concept maps were classi ﬁ ed as a comparison between 1 ) two scientists , 2 ) two information technologists , or 3 ) one of each . This classi ﬁ cation was further generalized as 1 ) within discipline comparison and 2 ) between discipline comparison . Basic statistics for each of these were calculated : number of samples , mean count of terms in common , median count , variance and standard deviation . The data were not normally distributed , contained unequal numbers of samples , and the occurrence of values of zero prevented log transformation . Therefore the non - parametric statistical rank sum test was used to analyze differences between groupings . Differences between groups through time were compared . Artifacts were again visually checked to verify that the ﬁ ndings highlighted by the statistical analyses were valid , and to qualitatively assess the ways and degrees to which artifacts not analyzed diverged from those ﬁ ndings . 3 . Results The total number of artifacts produced during the project period was 111 . 20 of these were produced by the group and 91 by individuals ( Figure 4 ) . Ignoring the CI - Seminar artifacts which were all produced by individuals by design , the number of artifacts produced by individuals decreased in number through time from 34 during the CI - Vision Workshop to 0 during the CI - Design working meeting . The number of artifacts produced by the groups varied through time , peaking mid - project . Basic statistical analysis of terms used in concept maps indicates that the number of overlapping terms between paired concept maps was higher for all disciplinary combinations during the CI - Strategy Workshop than during the earlier CI - Vision Workshop ( Table 1 ) . During both the CI - Vision and CI - Strategy Workshops , the highest observed number of terms in common was between pairs of scientists ( CI - Vision mean = 1 . 6 , median = 1 term in common ; CI - Strategy mean = 5 . 7 , median = 5 terms in common ) . Pairs of information technology specialists had fewer terms in common than pairs of scientists ( CI - Vision Workshop mean = 1 . 2 , median = 1 term in common ; CI - Strategy Workshop 186 Deana D . Pennington mean = 3 . 8 , median = 4 terms in common ) . Interdisciplinary pairs had the lowest number of terms in common during the CI - Vision Workshop ( mean = 0 . 3 and 0 . 6 , median = 0 terms in common ) . During the CI - Strategy Workshop they had fewer terms in common that pairs of scientists but more terms in common than pairs of Figure 4 . Counts of the number of material artifacts produced by individuals and by the group in four consecutive activities . Table 1 . Basic statistics from semantic analysis of concept maps created during two activities . Withindiscipline Betweendiscipline Comparison of within and between disciplines SCI / SCI IT / IT SCI / IT IT / SCI CI - Vision Workshop Sample size 90 20 50 50 Signi ﬁ cant difference z = − 6 . 25 P < < 0 . 0002 Mean number of terms n common 1 . 6 1 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 6 Median number of terms in common 1 1 0 0 Variance 2 . 6 1 . 9 0 . 4 1 . 5 CI - Strategy Workshop Sample size 30 6 18 18 No signi ﬁ cant difference z = − 1 . 22 P = 0 . 11 Mean number of terms in common 5 . 7 3 . 8 4 . 6 4 . 4 Median number of terms in common 5 4 4 4 Variance 17 . 1 1 . 8 8 . 4 4 . 3 187 Collaborative Research Teams information technology researchers ( mean = 4 . 6 and 4 . 4 , median = 4 terms in common ) . Concept maps from the CI - Vision Workshop showed a high signi ﬁ cant difference in the number of overlapping terms used by individuals from within the same discipline ( two scientists or two information technology specialists ) compared with the number of overlapping terms used by individuals from differing disciplines ( z = − 6 . 25 , P < < 0 . 0002 ; Table 1 ) . In contrast , there was no signi ﬁ cant difference between the number of overlapping terms used by individuals within the same discipline or differing disciplines at the later CI - Strategy Workshop ( z = − 1 . 22 , P = 0 . 11 ; Table 1 ) . These statistical results indicate that during the CI - Vision Workshop the terms used by two people from the same discipline were more similar that the terms used by two people from different disciplines . During the CI - Strategy Workshop there was no difference in the terms used by two people from the same discipline and two people from different disciplines . The larger degree of overlap in terms overall , and increasing similarity in terms used by cross - disciplinary pairs , suggests that more integrated conceptual frameworks did evolve through the time period represented by these two workshops . There was no reported interaction between participants during this time frame outside of the workshops ; hence one can conclude that the activities conducted within the workshops , including creation of material artifacts , were responsible for enabling the construction of shared conceptual frameworks . The group - produced vision statement from the CI - Vision workshop contained 17 terms unique to either science ( 7 terms , 41 % ) or information technology ( 10 terms , 59 % ) . The group produced proposal contained 58 terms unique to either science ( 32 terms , 55 % ) or information technology ( 26 terms , 45 % ) . 3 newly created compound terms were used in the proposal to represent complex content that integrated concepts from both science and technology . These terms were derived from a whiteboard artifact created during the CI - Design working meeting ( Figure 5 ) . The phrase “ Strategic Data Analysis ” was created to refer to a reasoning and questioning process that was used to align relevant methodologies from science and technology , “ Literate Work ﬂ ows ” was created to refer to the combination of methods ( both scienti ﬁ c and technical ) that the research targeted , and the phrase “ Rasters to Reason ( R2R ) was created to refer to the combined questioning and analytical process . This diagram ( Figure 5 ) was the ﬁ rst boundary specifying object to emerge ; all previous artifacts were used for boundary negotiation . Any of the participants could refer to the diagram and understand their role in the integrated research without understanding the other disciplinary perspective . However , those who participated in the creation of this diagram did have to understand each others ’ perspectives . The diagram not only captured the outcome from all of the prior negotiation that led the group to the point where they were able to align their methods in this way , the construction of this artifact itself dynamically afforded the alignment of methods . Hence , from the perspective of the artifact creators , 188 Deana D . Pennington this diagram served as both a boundary negotiating object ( during its creation ) and also a boundary specifying object ( afterwards ) . In the same way , the proposal also served as both a boundary negotiating and boundary specifying object . None of the artifacts created by the team were used solely as boundary specifying objects . However , from the perspective of technology developers and / or scientists not involved in the research design process , the diagram and proposal could potentially act solely as boundary specifying objects . These individuals are typically brought into a research project after it has been funded . They are not involved in the production of the proposal or the artifacts leading up to the proposal . Hence , the possibility exists that a piece of research or software development identi ﬁ ed in the diagram and proposal could be worked on by an individual without any further negotiation across disciplines . They would simply refer to the proposal or diagram to know how their piece ﬁ t into the bigger cross - disciplinary project . To them , the proposal and diagram would be solely boundary specifying objects . 4 . Conceptual reformulation and discussion 4 . 1 . Role of boundary objects with respect to methods standardization Star and Griesemer ( 1989 ) initially conceived of methods standardization as essential to collaboration . Boundary objects were artifacts produced from the negotiation of those standards , enabling diverse groups to interact via the artifact with little or no knowledge of each other ’ s use of the artifact . Standards were essential for achieving this outcome . Yet substantial collaborative work must occur before methods can be standardized . It is in that situation that Lee ( 2007 ) Figure 5 . Conceptual model of a system enabling interactions between analytical reasoning processes , scienti ﬁ c methods , and information technology tools . This diagram became the primary mechanism for aligning scienti ﬁ c and technical methodological approaches . 189 Collaborative Research Teams conceived of artifacts as boundary negotiating objects . Many of the empirical studies of boundary objects in the CSCW literature describe artifacts that are used for boundary negotiation rather than speci ﬁ cation . For instance , Bodker and Christiansen ( 2006 ) identi ﬁ ed use case scenarios as boundary objects . Eckert and Boujut ( 2003 ) explored the use of design artifacts as boundary objects . Herrmann and Hoffmann ( 2005 ) described work ﬂ ow description as boundary objects . Boujut and Blanco ( 2003 ) conceived of intermediate artifacts as boundary objects that mediate , transform and re - represent information from one perspective into a form that is understandable by another . The progressive alignment and standardization of methods depends on progressively integrating conceptualizations of the target problem ( Figure 6 ) . In the case of eScience research agenda setting , for example , scientists may have a particular analysis they frequently conduct that requires certain kinds of effort . Computer scientists may have advanced techniques that could replace parts of that effort . There is , potentially , an alignment of methods . In order to make that match , scientists and technology experts must articulate their research methods in a way that allows at least one participant to identify the conceptual linkage between methods . Collaborative problem conceptualization is a process of iteratively searching and discovering methods that potentially align , and the articulation of those methods in a format that all collaborators understand and can make use of . Hence , the role of boundary negotiating objects during incipient collaboration is to help generate conceptual linkages from which aligned and standardized methods can emerge . Figure 6 . Conceptual model of interaction between concepts , method alignment , and boundary objects . Participants iteratively explore concepts from different perspectives using boundary negotiating objects until they generate enough conceptual linkages that they are able to align their methods . Once methods are aligned and integrative concepts are available , boundary specifying objects can be produced . This process may also generate new boundary concepts that represent linkages between disciplines , which can potentially evolve into new interdisciplinary knowledge domains . 190 Deana D . Pennington Method alignment and standardization can itself be captured in an artifact . For instance , the whiteboard diagram ( Figure 5 ) represented the alignment of methods across disciplines . These artifacts simultaneously represent the outcome from boundary negotiation ( boundary negotiating object ) and a source to which each participant can refer without knowledge of other perspectives ( boundary specifying object ) . 4 . 2 . Emergence of boundary concepts As conceptual linkages are made and methods are aligned , new boundary concepts emerge ( Figure 6 ) . These concepts re ﬂ ect complex integrated conceptualizations drawn from both perspectives , and new terms may be created that become a shorthand way of referring to them . These boundary concepts are a necessary predecessor of method alignment . However , they can potentially further evolve into a new knowledge domain — a transformational learning outcome . As the number of conceptual linkages increase , integrated conceptual frameworks evolve and the likelihood of emergence of novel , integrated problem conceptualizations increases as well . In that case , rather than participants interacting without knowledge of each others ’ perspective , a new , integrated perspective is established . Duncker ( 2001 ) proposed symbolic coupling and transformation mechanisms that lead to the emergence of boundary concepts and associated terminology and artifacts in cross - disciplinary settings , noting that hybrid concepts that juxtapose specialties and are understood by all participants , if used over a long period of time , can lead to the emergence of new symbolic regimes . Therefore , there are two potential paths that this process may take : 1 ) conceptual links are developed that enable the alignment of methods , from which boundary specifying objects can be created that enable group members to work independently ; and 2 ) conceptual links are developed that enable the alignment of methods , from which a new , integrated perspective emerges that enables group members to work synergistically . Such transformation has been observed in numerous case studies . For instance , shortly after Star and Griesemer ( 1989 ) initially proposed the concept of boundary objects , Bud ( 1991 ) observed that the term “ biotechnology ” serves as a boundary object between biology and engineering domains . He noted that while the meaning of the term was highly ambiguous , the innovative conceptual linkages that emerged surrounding it led to a range of new interdisciplinary approaches . Bud conceived of the term as a boundary specifying object uniting many different , but related , interdisciplinary conceptualizations . Upham ( 2000 ) found nearly identical results in a study of The Natural Step ( TNS ) , an international approach to achieving consensus on sustainable development . TNS itself was found to be highly misunderstood by the professional community , but effective in uniting a number of different organizations involved in environmental impact reduction . In both of these studies , the boundary 191 Collaborative Research Teams negotiating process led to the emergence of new conceptualizations ( boundary concepts ) , new terms representing those conceptualizations ( boundary terms ) that themselves act as boundary objects , and new artifacts explicating those terms and conceptualizations ( boundary objects ) . The conceptualizations themselves con - tinued to evolve in many different ways , transcending the original meaning of the terms and artifacts . Indeed , this is exactly the path that the term “ boundary object ” has taken . The conceptualization of boundary objects has evolved past the original meaning , yet the term “ boundary object ” is itself a boundary object that unites many different but related conceptualizations ! I agree with Lee ( 2007 ) that the original conceptualization of boundary object falls far short of describing the range of material artifacts that are used in settings that merge different communities . Lee chose to constrain the term “ boundary object ” to its original conceptualization and create new terms for other classes of artifacts . I think it makes more sense to recognize that the conceptualization has grown and the meaning of the term with it , given that analogous situations suggest it is not possible to restrain that evolution . I believe that the term “ boundary object ” should refer to any artifact that is used to cross community boundaries , whether it is used for negotiation , for speci ﬁ cation , or for any other boundary crossing process . Regardless of how it is used , it is an artifact at the boundary between communities . The artifacts described by Star and Griesemer ( 1989 ) were merely a subset of the class which I have referred to as “ boundary specifying objects ” in this article . The boundary negotiating artifacts of Lee are another subclass ( Figure 1 ) . There are potentially other subclasses that should be included . For instance , is a term an artifact ? If so , then perhaps there should be a subclass of boundary objects for boundary terms . More explicit understanding of the dynamic interactions between concepts , terms , artifacts and cooperative work through time is needed , rather than focusing just on the artifacts . 4 . 3 . Dynamic model of boundary objects Hutchins ( 1995 , following Marr 1982 : 24 – 27 ) distinguished three levels of description of an information processing system . He referred to these as the computational , algorithmic , and implementation levels of description . Since these terms have many meanings in different communities , I will refer to these as the task , approach , and enactment levels , respectively . The highest level , task , is the functional de ﬁ nition , or what the system is supposed to do ( Magnus 2007 ) . This is the level at which the CI - Team group began . It is also the initial level of the design team described by Lee ( 2007 ) . In incipient collaborations , this task level must ﬁ rst be de ﬁ ned , and conceptual linkages that support the task must be developed and integrated . The second level , approach , describes how the task is going to be accomplished . There may be many different strategic and tactical approaches that could be used for any given task . The third level , enactment , is the level at which the work is actually completed . Given a particular approach , is 192 Deana D . Pennington must be instantiated in concrete ways . To illustrate , a task level statement might be that we are going to design a system for sharing mental models . The approach level might be that we are going to have participants construct and share concept maps . There are other strategic ways that mental models could be shared ( such as a shared wiki , for instance ) , and other tactical mechanisms ( such as issue visualization , for instance ) . The enactment level is the creation of the speci ﬁ c concept mapping software ( such as IHMC CMap Tools , for instance ) and the mechanisms invoked to operationalize use of it . In an existing , stable system these three levels are already speci ﬁ ed . In a nascent system , they must be speci ﬁ ed , and that can only occur in a top down manner . Enactment details cannot be speci ﬁ ed until the task is understood , and the approach to be used has been de ﬁ ned . Therefore , in the course of a project , work on these three levels is temporally based . Speci ﬁ cation of these three levels is the ‘ articulation work ’ described by Schmidt and Simone ( 1996 ) . They distinguished between cooperative work , which is “ constituted by the interdependence of multiple actors who interact through changing the state of a common ﬁ eld of work ” and articulation work , which is “ constituted by the need to restrain the distributed nature of complexly interdependent activities . ” This describes a process of boundary negotiation , in that the goal is to articulate the relationships between distributed activities . The relationships cannot be articulated until they are discovered and negotiated . Their example of cooperative work includes the use of boundary specifying objects that enable participants to work independently . Conversely , they note that articulation work is more complex , should be addressed as an issue in its own right , and is inherently recursive in nature . That is , within any articulation task there are nested articulation tasks — the recursive task , approach , and enactment levels noted above as well as recursive processes within each of these . Schmidt and Simone note that in complex articulation work settings everyday social and communication skills are insuf ﬁ cient , and “ cooperating actors typically use a special category of artifacts which , in the context of a set of conventions and procedures , stipulate and mediate articulation work and thereby are instrumental in reducing its complexity and in alleviating the need for ad hoc communication . ” This suggests that the articulation process , a boundary negotiation process , is enabled by artifacts that mediate articulation work . This describes boundary negotiating objects . To summarize the discussion so far , group work can be separated into two synergistic types : articulation work that is iterative and recursive , and includes task identi ﬁ cation , approach delineation , and enactment , and cooperative work that is achieved through prior articulation work ( Figure 7 ) . Task and approach articulation work are accomplished by recursive mediation and negotiation processes nested within each of these ( Figure 7 ) . Boundary negotiating , method alignment , method standardization , and boundary specifying have temporal contexts that are related to the system articulation or cooperative work that is occurring . The artifacts that are produced by the group will take on 193 Collaborative Research Teams characteristics of the processes that produced them . Once boundaries have been speci ﬁ ed , artifacts will be more permanent taking on the characteristics described by Star and Griesemer ( 1989 ) , and will enable cooperative work in the absence of cross - perspective understanding . Boundary specifying objects are not static , however . They are continually modi ﬁ ed and reused as the system is improved and responds to a changing external environment ( Lutters and Ackerman 2007 ) . Additionally , the complexity of the work being carried out will determine the need for ﬂ exible boundary objects . Routine sequential collaborative work necessitates rigid boundary objects that require no context or additional information for use . More complex , integrated work , such as scienti ﬁ c collaboration , necessitates more ﬂ exible boundary objects . At the other end of the continuum , collaborative groups in the problem conceptualization phase cannot construct boundary specifying objects because there is no standardized methodology , nor are these particularly needed during this phase . Rather , participants need ways to facilitate communication of their individual viewpoints and negotiate a shared conceptual space . Boundary negotiating objects are useful for this purpose . Lee ( 2007 ) described two subclasses of boundary negotiating objects that are particularly useful for this : self - explanation and inclusion artifacts . Self - explanation artifacts are used by individuals for “ learning , recording , organizing , remembering , and re ﬂ ecting ” on their own private perspectives . Examples given include private journals and Figure 7 . Diagram showing relationship between relevant processes at different scales and tool / artifact dynamics . Development of radically new systems depends on interactions between IT experts and domain experts . These interactions can be mediated by boundary negotiation objects that help de ﬁ ne the tasks to be supported , and that integrate boundary concepts , method alignment , and method standardization . Boundary specifying objects may be produced from these and incorporated into the system that is implemented . Normative change requires rethinking of the system , which could be simple improvements , incremental innovation , or radical innovation . Incremental and radical innovation reset the mediation process back to appropriate points in the negotiation phase . 194 Deana D . Pennington tables . Sometimes information captured in these are indirectly shared through inclusion artifacts , which are used to propose new concepts and forms from one perspective to other perspectives . In the CI - Team project , all divergent thinking activities involved individuals creating self - explanation artifacts that were then used as inclusion artifacts for the purpose of learning scaffolding . During boundary negotiation , artifacts may be temporary , partial , may or may not represent all perspectives , and are used to articulate the cooperative task and approach . They serve a critical purpose , as scaffolds for learning and negotiation , at that point in time . For instance , in the CI - Team project , concept maps produced by individuals represented their perspective only , captured only a few terms that described their research interest , and were used to provide high level conceptual context that other individuals could understand and enable learning . They enabled discussion and negotiation of conceptual linkages between participants . Boundary negotiating artifacts may or may not be needed in later phases , and may or may not evolve into other kinds of artifacts . In the CI - Team project participants commonly referred back to earlier boundary negotiating artifacts as a reminder of earlier discussions that had taken place and to renegotiate themes that were interesting but had not been followed up on by the group . Conversely , there were artifacts that were never referred to again after their initial construction . Even if they were discarded , they certainly contributed to later artifacts in the sense that the conceptual linkages that enable construction of later artifacts were themselves enabled by earlier artifacts . Boundary negotiating artifacts may eventually evolve into later boundary specifying objects . The diagram ( Figure 5 ) and proposal that were generated through negotiation across disciplines will be more fully developed into a project plan that speci ﬁ es the work to be carried out in more detail . This project plan will enable some participants to work independently without knowledge of work in other disciplines , though that work will be aligned through the project plan . In between boundary negotiation and boundary speci ﬁ cation , method alignment and standardization processes may produce a set of artifacts that are both boundary negotiating and boundary specifying , depending on the perspective of the individual using the artifact . From the perspective of those producing the artifact , artifact creation dynamically affords negotiation of method alignment and standardization . From the perspective of those who use the artifact later , it speci ﬁ es the boundary . As described earlier , the diagram and proposal are examples of mixed - use boundary objects . Construction of these artifacts requires context , understanding , and agreement between constructors , even if later collaborators can use the artifact without any knowledge of other views . These artifacts provide “ anchors ” that stabilize and constrain subsequent artifact creation . The role of artifacts is more complex than simply providing a path for information ﬂ ow . Artifact construction dynamically affords the construction of conceptual linkages . The process of constructing artifacts is as important , or perhaps more so , than the end product . It is the co - creation of agreed upon 195 Collaborative Research Teams artifacts that forces collaborators to engage each other , not simply to understand alternative views but to construct new mental models that integrate that view into the listener ’ s own conceptual framework . Again , the diagram ( Figure 5 ) and proposal illustrate this concept . Hence , one can conceive of the collective cognitive system growing through the creation of conceptual linkages between participants facilitated by creation of material artifacts . Once the conceptual linkages are present , the artifact is either no longer necessary , or it must change to afford additional linkages . Dynamic linking of mixtures of mental concepts and artifacts is a scaffolding process , using temporary frameworks that support and provide access to meaning . Once the cognitive framework is in place , the scaffold is no longer necessary . Artifact - mediated negotiations between collaborators throughout all phases of system development are instances of scaffolding processes . The position of a team along the continuum from problem ﬁ nding to enactment is not static , nor is it unidirectional . Rather , it is recursive . A new team begins at the task level and migrates through the approach and implementation levels . At any time , changes in understanding may require repositioning back to an earlier level , and renegotiation of boundary objects . The effect of internal and external changes on organizational processes and concomitantly on boundary objects was noted by Subrahmanian et al . ( 2003 ) , who concluded that every structural or information ﬂ ow change in an organization is potentially accompanied by a deterioration of common ground perspectives , which must then be renegotiated . For instance , the CI - Team project iterated multiple times between task and approach as different strategies for integrating across disciplines were negotiated and proposed . If and when funding is received , during enactment a much better understanding of the problem will be obtained , which may require rethinking the approach level , or perhaps even rede ﬁ ning some aspects of the task . This would re ﬂ ect an internal change of organizational processes . Alternatively , working , enacted systems may encounter external changes in the work process that require improvements , such as a technical breakthrough that changes the most effective approach . Innovation , in general , is the process of repositioning the system to higher levels of description in order to achieve new system outcomes ( Figure 7 ) . Continuous or incremental innovation is repositioning to the approach level . Discontinuous , disruptive , or radical innovation is repositioning to the task level . Each of these requires renegotiation of common ground and reconstruction of material artifacts . The CI - Team project itself is a radical innovation based on a new vision of cross - disciplinary collaboration within eScience teams as a learning problem with collective cognition issues in addition to previously recognized sociotechnical issues . 5 . Limitations and future work The proposed model is tentative , based on study of one research team combined with empirical observations by another investigator from one ethnographic study 196 Deana D . Pennington of a design team , and synthesized with empirical ﬁ ndings from a number of other studies . Additional data will hopefully validate , further re ﬁ ne , or contest the model . The proposed model is simply a starting point for building more robust theories of the dynamics of conceptualization , terminology , material artifacts and work in collaborative groups . The model is biased towards groups in which cooperative work is highly creative , autonomous , and targeted towards generation of new conceptualizations . It should be complementary with the many CSCW studies of less creative situations , representing one end of the spectrum that is currently not well understood . As with any design - based research , the methodology itself introduces uncertainties into the interpretation . For instance , it is dif ﬁ cult to nail down the effect of the intervention . Did the unplanned designation of seed terms for the concept maps created during the CI - Strategy Workshop predetermine that the number of overlapping terms would increase , interpreted as representing the formation of new conceptual linkages ? Alternatively , since these seed terms emerged from the participants themselves during discussion , perhaps the analytical methodology is still valid . Would the same pattern of increasing overlap and boundary concept emergence be observed without any intervention ? Certainly , research teams without the same intervention manage to develop conceptual linkages . However , perhaps there are signi ﬁ cant differences in the timing with and without intervention . Additional observations both with and without intervention are needed to disentangle these issues . 6 . Conclusions The dynamics of changing external drivers , system design processes , and mediation level processes in cooperative groups provides a complex arena within which artifacts may take on innumerable , changing forms . This study demonstrates that artifacts not only assist in information processing , they dynamically afford the generation of new and integrated conceptual frameworks , and lead to progressive re ﬁ nement of the conceptualization of a problem from the task , to the approach , to the enactment levels of system description . This evolution towards increasing speci ﬁ cation is re ﬂ ected in an evolution in artifacts , from boundary negotiation objects ( sensu Lee 2007 ) towards boundary speci ﬁ cation objects ( sensu Star and Griesemer 1989 ) . In incipient collaborations boundary negotiating objects enable the construction of standard methods . In later collaborations with stable , enacted systems , standardized methods allow the construction of boundary specifying objects . In between , artifacts that are created to capture and make explicit standardized methods act as both boundary negotiating objects ( during creation ) and boundary specifying objects ( afterwards ) . Changes in the normative environment resets the cooperative work to a higher level of system description , from which new conceptualizations are renegotiated , new artifacts produced and a new evolutionary path is taken . Radical innovation 197 Collaborative Research Teams occurs when the system is reset to the task level , and interactions between people , mediation processes , and artifacts can effectively achieve new conceptualizations . CSCW studies that more explicitly address the dynamic linkages between human thought and the role of artifacts in enabling collective creativity and negotiation in boundary situations are likely to be a productive line of inquiry leading to innovative tools that can enable those processes . Technologies designed to support collaborative work generally target stable , enacted systems where the work can be described . There is a need for technologies that support the process of articulating the system , both in incipient collaborations and in the face of changing requirements . Acknowledgements This work was supported by National Science Foundation grant numbers 0636317 and 0753336 for the CI - Team Demonstration and Implementation Projects : Advancing Cyber - infrastructure Based Science Through Education , Training , and Mentoring of Science Communitie . The author gratefully acknowl - edges the many collaborators involved in these projects , whose comments and insights have been useful . 1 . References Bodker , S . , & Christiansen , E . ( 2006 ) . Computer support for social awareness in ﬂ exible work . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 15 , 1 – 28 . Boujut , J . - F . , & Blanco , E . ( 2003 ) . Intermediary objects as a means to foster co - operation in engineering design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 12 , 205 – 219 . Bowker , G . C . , & Star , S . L . ( 1999 ) : Sorting things out ( pp 389 ) . MIT . Bud , R . ( 1991 ) . Biotechnology in the Twentieth Century . Social Studies of Science , 21 ( 3 ) , 415 – 457 . Clark , H . H . , & Brennan , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Grounding in communication . In L . Resnick , J . Levine , & S . Teasley ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on socially shared cognition ( pp . 127 – 149 ) . Hyattsville , MD : American Psychological Association . Cook , S . D . N . , & Brown , J . S . ( 1999 ) . Bridging epistemologies : the generative dance between organizational knowledge and organizational knowing . Organization Science , 10 ( 4 ) , 381 . Davis , E . A . , & Miyake , N . ( 2004 ) . Explorations of scaffolding in complex classroom systems . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 13 ( 3 ) , 265 – 272 . Duncker , E . ( 2001 ) . Symbolic communication in multidisciplinary cooperation . Science , Technol - ogy , & Human Values , 26 ( 3 ) , 349 – 386 . Eckert , C . , & Boujut , J . - F . ( 2003 ) . The role of objects in design co - operation : communication through physical or virtual objects . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 12 , 145 – 151 . Edelson , D . C . ( 2002 ) . Design research : what we learn when we engage in design . Educational Psychologist , 39 ( 4 ) , 105 – 121 . Fujimura , J . H . ( 1992 ) . Crafting science : Standardized packages , boundary objects , and “ translation ” . In A . Pickering ( Ed . ) , Science as practice and culture ( pp . 168 – 211 ) . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Guilford , J . ( 1967 ) . The nature of human intelligence . New York : McGraw - Hill . Heemskerk , M . , Wilson , K . , & Pavao - Zuckerman , M . ( 2003 ) . Conceptual models as tools for communication across disciplines . Conservation Ecology , 7 ( 3 ) , 8 – 17 . 198 Deana D . Pennington Herrmann , T . , & Hoffmann , M . ( 2005 ) . The metamorphoses of work ﬂ ow projects in their early stages . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 14 , 399 – 432 . Hinds , P . J . , & Pfeffer , J . ( 2003 ) . Why organizations don ’ t “ know what they know ” : Cognitive and motivational factors affecting the transfer of expertise . In M . S . Ackerman , V . Pipek , & V . Wulf ( Eds . ) , Sharing expertise : Beyond knowledge management ( pp . 3 – 26 ) . Cambridge : MIT . Hutchins , E . ( 1995 ) . Cognition in the wild ( pp 381 ) . MIT . Jeffrey , P . ( 2003 ) . Smoothing the waters : observations on the process of cross - disciplinary research collaboration . Social Studies of Science , 33 ( 4 ) , 539 – 562 . Lawrence , K . A . ( 2006 ) . Walking the tightrope : the balancing acts of a large e - Research project . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 15 , 385 – 411 . Lee , C . P . ( 2007 ) . Boundary negotiating artifacts : unbinding the routine of boundary objects and embracing chaos in collaborative work . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 16 , 307 – 339 . Lutters , W . G . , & Ackerman , M . S . ( 2007 ) . Beyond boundary objects : collaborative reuse in aircraft technical support . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 16 , 341 – 372 . Magnus , P . D . ( 2007 ) . Distributed cognition and the task of science . Social Studies of Science , 37 ( 2 ) , 297 – 310 . Marr , D . ( 1982 ) . Vision : A Computational investigation into the human representation and processing of visual information ( pp . 397 ) . Henry Holt and Co . , Inc . Novak , J . D . , & Wurst , M . ( 2005 ) . Collaborative knowledge visualization for cross - community learning . In : S . Tergan , & T . Keller ( Eds . ) , Knowledge and information visualization . Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 3426 , 95 – 116 . Okada , A . , Buckingham Shum , S . , & Sherborne , T . ( 2008 ) . Knowledge cartography ( pp 400 ) . London : Springer . Olson , G . M . , & Olson , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Distance matters . Human - Computer Interaction , 15 , 139 – 178 . Pennington , D . ( 2008 ) . Cross - disciplinary collaboration and learning . Ecology and Society , vol . 13 , no . 2 , pp . 8 [ online ] URL : http : / / www . ecologyandsociety . org / vol13 / iss2 / art8 / Perry , M . , & Sanderson , D . ( 1998 ) . Co - ordinating joint design work : the role of communication and artefacts . Design Studies , 19 ( 3 ) , 273 – 288 . Roth , W . M . , & McGinn , M . K . ( 1998 ) . Inscriptions : toward a theory of representing as social practice . Review of Educational Research , 68 ( 1 ) , 35 – 59 . Sandoval , W . A . ( 2004 ) . Developing elarning theory by re ﬁ ning conjectures embodied in educational designs . Educational Psychologist , 39 ( 4 ) , 213 – 223 . Sandoval , W . A . , & Bell , P . ( 2004 ) . Design - based research methods for studying learning in context : introduction . Educational Psychologist , 39 ( 4 ) , 199 – 201 . Schmidt , K . , & Simone , C . ( 1996 ) . Coordination mechanisms : towards a conceptual foundation of CSCW systems design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 5 , 155 – 200 . Star , S . L . , & Griesemer , J . R . ( 1989 ) . Institutional ecology , ‘ translations ’ and boundary objects : amateurs and professionals in Berkeley ’ s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 – 39 . Social Studies of Science , 19 , 387 – 420 . Subrahmanian , E . , Monarch , I . , Konda , S . , Granger , H . , Milliken , R . , Westerberg , A . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Boundary objects and prototypes at the interfaces of engineering design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 12 , 185 – 203 . Upham , P . ( 2000 ) . Scienti ﬁ c consensus on sustainability : the case of the natural step . Sustainable Development , 8 , 180 – 190 . 199 Collaborative Research Teams