UC Merced Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society Title An fMRI study of the Interplay of Symbolic and Visuo - spatial Systems in Mathematical Reasoning Permalink https : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 3c71w0r8 Journal Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , 26 ( 26 ) ISSN 1069 - 7977 Authors Terao , Atsushi Koedinger , Kenneth R . Sohn , Myeng - Ho et al . Publication Date 2004 Peer reviewed eScholarship . org Powered by the California Digital Library University of California An fMRI study of the Interplay of Symbolic and Visuo - spatial Systems in Mathematical Reasoning Atsushi Terao ( atsushi @ edu . hokudai . ac . jp ) Graduate School of Education , Hokkaido University , Kita 11 Nishi 7 Sapporo , 060 - 0811 JAPAN Kenneth R . Koedinger ( koedinger @ cmu . edu ) Human - Computer Interaction Institute , Carnegie Mellon University 5000 Forbes Ave . Pittsburgh , PA 15213 - 3890 USA Myeong - Ho Sohn ( mhsohn @ andrew . cmu . edu ) Yulin Qin ( yulinQ @ andrew . cmu . edu ) John R . Anderson ( ja + @ cmu . edu ) Department of Psychology , Carnegie Mellon University 5000 Forbes Ave . Pittsburgh , PA 15213 - 3890 USA Cameron S . Carter ( CarterCS @ msx . upmc . edu ) Imaging Research Center , University of California at Davis 1 Shields Ave . Davis , CA 95616 USA Abstract The purpose of this fMRI study was to provide evidence for the mathematician’s belief that mathematical thinking emerges from the interplay between symbolic and visuo - spatial systems . Twelve participants were given algebra word problems and depicted the quantitative relations on a mental number line or made parts of an equation . The regions activated in depicting the picture were also recruited to make an equation . Mathematics is a language . Many scientists say that mathematics is a language to describe the nature of phenomena they are looking at . It is well known that Nicolas Burubaki , a group of mathematicians , stressed the crucial role of formal symbol systems in mathematics . On the other hand , many mathematicians and physicists emphasize the role of visuo - spatial reasoning in mathematics , which recruits qualitative , language - independent representations . For example , Albert Einstein stated “Words and language , whether written or spoken , do not seem to play any part in my thought process . ” As Dehaene , Spelke , Pinel , Stanescu , and Tsivkn ( 1999 ) suggested , mathematical thinking may emerge from the interplay between symbolic and visuo - spatial systems . In this fMRI study , we approach this problem and provide evidence for this kind of mathematical thinking . Psychological studies have revealed that if a problem apparently looks like a pure symbolic task , it can require students to have some visuo - spatial representations . For example , Griffin , Case and Siegler ( 1994 ) showed that the mental “number line” , a qualitative representation of the number system , is crucial readiness for early arithmetic . Lewis used a number - line - like diagram to train undergraduate students having difficulty to solve “compare” word problems ( problems containing more - than or less - than relations ) , and succeeded in improving their performance . Paige and Simon ( 1966 ) proposed that solving word problems is not a simple translation of problem sentences into equations , as Bobrow’s ( 1966 ) STUDENT did , but needs “physical cues , ” a visuo - spatial representation . The 6 th grade students who used our “Picture Algebra” strategy ( Koedinger & Terao , 2002 ) to solve the compare word problem showed relatively high performance . We expect that using this strategy may better prepare students to learn formal algebra . Functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) gives us a new source of information about the mental representations used in mathematics . Dehaene et al . ( 1999 ) showed two different mental representations are used for different tasks . Exact calculation ( e . g . , 4 + 5 = 9 ) elicited left - lateralized activation in the left inferior frontal lobe , together with left angular gyrus and left anterior cingulate . This pattern was interpreted as suggesting that the participants recruited their symbolic systems and did language dependent encoding . Approximation ( e . g . , 4 + 5 is closer to 8 than 6 ) , on the contrary , elicited bilateral parietal lobes activation . This pattern was interpreted as suggesting that the participants recruited visuo - spatial systems and did language independent encoding . Dehaene , Piazza , Pinel and Cohen ( 2003 ) reviewed neuro - imaging and neuropsychological evidence concerning various numerical tasks and proposed a hypothesis that three parietal circuits are related to number processing . The horizontal segment of the intraparietal sulcus ( HIPS ) appears to be a core quantity system , analogous to a mental number line . This area seems to be supplemented by two other circuits . One is the bilateral posterior superior parietal lobule ( PSPL ) , which is considered to be involved in attention orientation on the mental number line . The other is the left angular gyrus , which is likely to support manipulations of numbers in a symbolic form ( e . g . , exact calculation ) . 1327 Dehaene et al . ( 1999 , 2003 ) suspected that mathematical thinking may emerge from the interplay between symbolic and visuo - spatial systems but did not provide direct evidence for this idea . For example , exact calculation and approximation mainly depend on the symbolic system and the visuo - spatial system , respectively , not necessarily a collaboration between these two systems . In this study , we try to provide direct evidence for such a collaboration . We decided to use algebra word problems for three reasons . First , previous psychological research suggests that visuo - spatial reasoning plays a crucial role in solving these problems while they explicitly require students to use symbols ( i . e . , equations ) . This kind of problem is expected to show the interplay between symbolic and visuo - spatial systems . Second , algebra word problems are widely used in school mathematics curriculum , so that we can say the observed interplay is a prevailing form of reasoning , not a special form isolated to a very specific task . Third , there are plenty of studies using algebra word problem , the accumulated findings help us in valid reasoning from our results . If algebra word problems recruit the visuo - spatial system as well as the symbolic system , we should see activation of some visuo - spatial areas when students try to make a correct equation for a problem . To find visuo - spatial areas , we asked our participants to make a pictorial representation of the problem in one condition . This task should activate visuo - spatial areas and most of these areas should also be activated when we ask the participants to make an equation of the same problem in another condition . We especially expect that the two hypothesized parietal visuo - spatial systems , HIPS and PSPL , show activation in both conditions . Method Participants Participants were 12 right - handed , native English speakers . They were recruited by advertisement posted on an electric bulletin board in Carnegie Mellon University . Participants were provided written informed consent in accordance with the Institutional Review Boards at the University of Pittsburgh and at Carnegie Mellon University . Tasks and Design There was one representation factor and four problem factors . They were all manipulated within subjects . The representation factor was the mental representation the participants made from the problems . In the picture condition , the participants draw a mental image describing the critical relations in the problem ; in the equation condition , the participants were required to construct an equation to the problem . Table 1 shows two example problems . Each problem consisted of three problem sentences and used three letters as unknown quantities . The first sentence was an assignment sentence . In the equation condition , the Table 1 : Sample of Problems . Consistent / more - than / intransitive problem Assignment x = A R1 B is 6 more than A . R2 C is 8 more than A . Inconsistent / less - than / transitive _ n problem Assignment x = A R1 A is 6 less than B . R2 B is 2 less than C . Figure 1 : An example of pictures made from problems . participants memorize what letter the “x” is assigned to . In the picture condition , the participants imagined a number line and picked locations for the letters . The second and the third sentences described a qualitative relation between two letters . Hereafter we call them R1 ( meaning “Relation 1” ) and R2 , respectively . Participants could not find a numerical solution to these problems because they did not have a sentence referring to the total amount of the three unknown quantities . For example , if the first problem in Table 1 has the sentence “The total of the three quantities is 44 , ” we can make an equation to find the three quantities like x + ( x + 6 ) + ( x + 8 ) = 44 . In the equation condition , the participants were told that the total sentence would be omitted and were required to make the left side of the correct equation like x + ( x + 6 ) + ( x + 8 ) . For the first problem in Table 1 , the participant can make the parts ( x + 6 ) and ( x + 8 ) from R1 and R2 , respectively . In the picture condition , the participants imagine a picture describing the critical relations in the problem as shown in Figure 1 . For the first problem in Table 1 , the participants can imagine B to the right of the location A on the mental number line and add the distance , 6 , to this picture . When they read and represent R2 , the whole picture can be obtained . A first problem factor was the relation , whether R1 and R2 use more - than or less - than relations . A second problem factor was the consistency , whether the relations used in R1 and R2 were consistent with the correct equation . A more - than problem was labeled either as a consistent problem if the correct equation uses “ + ”or labeled as an inconsistent problem if the correct equation uses “ - ” . We use a similar labeling for the less - than problems . 1328 Figure 2 : The 42 - second structure of an fMRI trial . A third condition was defined in accordance with the target stimuli presented at the end of each problem ( trial ) . The problem was labeled either as a correct problem if the target is the correct target or as an incorrect problem if the target is incorrect . A forth factor was transitivity . This factor was defined by the two relational sentences , R1 and R2 . Considering the picture the participants were required to make seems to be an easy way to explain this factor . For the intransitive problem , an arc will be drawn over another arc as shown in Figure 1 . This will be the case if either the former letter or the latter letter is common in R1 and R2 . For example , R1 and R2 of the first problem in Table 1 use the same latter letter ( A ) , and this is an intransitive problem . For the transitive _ n problem ( n stands for Normal ) , one arc should be drawn at the next position to another arc in the correct picture . A third level of this factor is represented by another problem . This type of problem , called the transitive _ d problem hereafter ( d stands for Delay ) , was made by changing the R1 and R2 of the transitive _ n problem . In the transitive _ d problem , participants in the equation condition are not able to make a part of the equation until they read R2 . They need to remember R1 and make the two parts of the equation when R2 is presented . The purpose of making this unusual problem was to find brain regions which play a role in making equations going beyond simple encoding of problem sentences . Comparing the transitive _ n problem with the transitive _ d problem in the time period of presenting R1 might reveal differences between memory and processing areas but we will not say much about this comparison in this paper . There may be no difference between the transitive _ n and transitive _ d problems in the picture condition because the participants can describe the relation when they see R1 . For example , for the transitive _ d problem made from the second problem in Table 1 ( R1 : “B is 2 less than C . ” ) , the participants can imagine the spatial relation between B and C by just ignoring A used in the assignment sentence . Combinations of the four problem factors ( 2x2x2x3 ) yielded 24 types of problems . The participants went through all of these 24 types in both the picture condition and the equation condition in the MRI scanner , so that each participant encountered 48 problems . The 48 problems were divided into four blocks : two blocks in the picture condition and the other two blocks in the equation condition . Procedure Pre - scan Practice Participants took about 20 minutes of pre - scan practice just before the scan . They went through one block of 12 trials ( problems ) in the picture condition and another block of 12 trials in the equation condition . Half of the participants started with the picture condition and the other half of the participants started with the equation condition . The time course in each trial was the same as the one in the scanner . Event - related fMRI scan Event - related fMRI data were collected by using a singe - shot EPI acquisition on a Siemens 3T scanner , 1500 TR , 30 ms TE , 60 0 flip angle , 210 mm FOV , 26 axial slices / scan with 3 . 2 mm thick , 64x64 matrix , and with AC - PC on the 6 th slice from the bottom . There were 28 scans ( 42 seconds ) for each trial , 12 trials for a block and 4 blocks for each participant . Two of these 4 blocks were for the picture condition and the other two blocks were for the equation condition . Half of the participants started with the first block in the picture condition and proceeded to the second block in the equation condition , the third block in the picture condition , and the last block in the equation condition . The other half of the participants started with the first block in the equation condition , then went through picture , equation , and picture conditions in this order . The protocol of each trial of scan is illustrated in Figure 2 . The three problem sentences appeared on the screen one by one . The assignment sentence was on the screen for 3500 ms ; R1 and R2 were on the screen for 7500 ms . A target equation or picture was presented after the disappearance of R2 . Participants responded to this target by pressing the button . If they thought the target was correct they pressed a button with the index finger of the right hand ; if they thought the target is incorrect , they pressed the other button with the middle finger of the right hand . fMRI data analysis Data processing was conducted using SPM99 software ( http : / / www . fil . ion . ucl . ac . uk / spm / ) . Slice timing was corrected first and images were realigned . Realigned images were normalized to Talairac coordinates . Normalized images were smoothed with an 8 mm FWHM isotropic Gaussian Kernel . Analysis was carried out using the general linear model with a box - car waveform convolved with a hemodynamic response function . Only correct trials were used for analysis . To find brain regions of interest ( ROI ) , a random effects model was used . At the first level , mean images for each participant were created , depicting the subtraction of BOLD response during assignment sentence from BOLD response during R1 in each condition ( picture and equation ) . Data from transitive _ d problems were excluded to do this subtraction because of the unique nature of these problems . At the second level , these mean images were combined in one - sample t - test . We used a height threshold of P < 0 . 0005 1329 Figure 3 : Regions of the brain that show activation in depicting a relation between two quantities in the picture condition as compared to the encoding of the assignment . Figure 4 : Regions of the brain that show activation in constructing parts of an equation in the equation condition as compared to the encoding of the assignment . uncorrected ( t > 4 . 44 ) , with an extent threshold of eight contiguous voxels in an ROI . This analysis should show us the regions activated when constructing a number line to describe a quantitative relation or constructing parts of an equation from this relation . The subtraction between picture and equation conditions might be interesting but we did not conduct it , because this subtraction might hide visuo - spatial areas that are recruited not only in picture condition but also in equation condition . Results Figure 3 shows the brain regions which show activation during the period of R1 as compared to the assignment sentence in picture condition . We can infer that these regions may be related to using a mental number line to depict a relation between two quantities . Figure 4 shows the brain regions in the equation condition obtained by the same subtraction ( R1 - assignment ) . These regions should be related to constructing parts of an equation from sentences . Comparing these two figures , we can see an overlap of activation especially in the parietal lobe ( HIPS and PSPL ) . This means that constructing an equation , which apparently is a symbolic task , recruits the visuo - spatial system . Areas for constructing a mental number line A pattern of bilateral activation was obtained for drawing a mental number line to represent a quantitative relation . As we had expected , the active areas in parietal lobes occupied HIPS and PSPL ( Tarairach coordinates of main peaks : - 40 , - 40 , 48 , Z = 3 . 75 ; - 28 , - 60 , 54 , Z = 4 . 63 ; 38 , - 46 , 48 , Z = 4 . 62 ; 24 , - 68 , 56 , Z = 4 . 12 ) . Activation was also found during constructing a number line from R1 in the bilateral premotor cortices ( - 30 , 2 , 52 , Z = 3 . 79 ; - 46 , 2 , 34 , Z = 3 . 72 ; - 48 , 0 , 50 , Z = 3 . 68 ; 28 , - 2 , 56 , Z = 4 . 52 ; 54 , - 2 , 40 , Z = 3 . 51 ) , bilateral supplementary motor areas ( - 4 , 12 , 56 , Z = 3 . 59 ; 10 , 12 , 54 , Z = 3 . 73 ) , left Broca area ( - 52 , 12 , 4 , Z = 3 . 69 ) , right inferior frontal sulcus ( 54 , 8 , 20 , Z = 4 . 75 ) , left and right insula ( - 32 , 26 , 4 , Z = 4 . 27 ; 36 , 16 , 0 , Z = 4 . 05 ) , left and right corpus striatum ( 20 , - 6 , - 2 , Z = 4 . 49 ; - 24 , - 2 , 6 , Z = 3 . 51 ) , and right DLPFC , dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( - 36 , 34 , 16 , Z = 4 . 07 ) . Activation found in left and right visual cortex should reflect longer exposure to the visual stimulus : The period of R1 was longer than the period of assignment sentence . Areas for constructing an equation A pattern of left - lateralized activation was obtained for constructing parts of an equation from a sentence referring to a relation between two quantities . The bilateral PSPL and left HIPS activation were also found as in the picture condition ( - 34 , - 54 , 46 , Z = 4 . 93 ; 16 , - 62 , 50 , Z = 3 . 85 ) . This means that the hypothesized parietal visuo - spatial system ( Dehaene et al . , 2003 ) was recruited when constructing parts of an equation from a problem sentence . Activation was also found during construction of parts of the equation from R1 in the left premotor cortex ( - 58 , 2 , 28 , Z = 3 . 87 ) , bilateral supplementary motor areas and right Brodmann area 8 ( - 28 , - 2 , 62 , Z = 4 . 00 ; - 14 , 8 , 58 , Z = 3 . 79 ; 0 , 12 , 56 , Z = 4 . 53 ; 34 , 8 , 58 , Z = 4 . 06 ) , bilateral inferior frontal sulci ( - 38 , 8 , 22 , Z = 3 . 44 ; - 48 , 6 , 38 , Z = 4 . 43 ) , left basal ganglia including thalamus and globus pallidus ( - 16 - 10 14 , Z = 4 . 43 ) , right parahippocampal gyrus ( 24 , - 30 , - 2 , Z = 4 . 38 ) , and left and right DLPFC ( 40 , 32 28 , Z = 3 . 95 ; - 36 , 50 , 8 , Z = 3 . 77 ) . To confirm that several brain areas activated in picture condition also showed activation in equation condition , we plotted percent signal change along the time course . The base line for calculating the signal change was set by the average of first two scans . Remember that these areas were found in picture condition and no data from equation condition were used . Data from intransitive problems and transitive _ n problems were combined in each condition . 1330 - 0 . 200 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 811 . 2 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 Scans % S i g n a l C h a n g e i n B O L D R e s p o n s e Picture Intrn + Trn _ n Picture Trn _ d Equation Intrn + Trn _ n Equation Trn _ d - 0 . 200 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 811 . 2 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 Ssans % S i g n a l C h a n g e i n B O L D R e s p o n s e Picture Intrn + Trn _ n Picture Trn _ d Equation Intrn + Trn _ n Equation Trn _ d Left PSPL and HIPS Right HIPS - 0 . 200 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 81 1 . 2 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 Scans % S i g n a l C h a n g e i n B O L D R e s p o n s e Picture Intrn + Trn _ n Picture Trn _ d Equation Intrn + Trn _ n Equation Trn _ d - 0 . 200 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 3 5 7 9 1113 15 1719 21 23 2527 Scans % S i g n a l C h a n g e i n B O L D R e s p o n s e Picture Intrn + Trn _ n Picture Trn _ d Equation Intrn + Trn _ n Equation Trn _ d Right PSPL Right Premotor Figure 5 : Percent signal change in BOLD response in four ROIs found in picture condition . After finding ROIs , the signal change was calculated for each of the four problem types ( picture - - transitive _ d , picture - - others , equation - - transitive _ d , and equation - - others ) and for each participant , and then averaging across the 12 participants . Among many ROIs found in picture condition , because of the limited space of this paper , we only show the percent signal change at left PSPL and HIPS ( - 28 , - 60 , 54 ; The number of voxels is 333 ) , right HIPS ( 38 , - 46 , 48 ; The number of voxels is 303 ) , right PSPL ( 24 , - 68 56 ; The number of voxels is 241 ) , and right premotor cortex ( 28 , - 2 , 56 ; The number of voxels is 220 . ) . These are the four biggest clusters of active voxels . Figure 5 shows the percent signal change in each of these four ROIs . We can see that these areas found in picture condition also played a role , more or less , in equation condition . Other areas found in picture condition also showed a similar pattern of activation . Discussion The results of this experiment indicate that mathematical thinking emerges from the interplay between symbolic and visuo - spatial systems . The hypothesized two parietal visuo - spatial regions ( Dehaene et al . , 2003 ) showed activation not only when participants imagined a picture from a problem sentence but also when participants constructed parts of an equation from the sentence . We cannot deny a possibility that these parietal regions are involved in non - visuospatial mathematical reasoning . But it is reasonable we consider them as picture regions until some evidence is fond for this possibility in brain imaging research . We might expect language areas to show greater activation on these symbolic tasks than in the more visuo - spatial picture task . However , while we found activation in language areas , particularly Broca’s and the inferior frontal sulcus , we did not find clear differences in those areas between the two conditions . Perhaps the language areas are doing different kinds of computations in the two conditions , but we found no evidence to support this claim . Our results seem to be consistent with the recent version of the ACT - R theory ( Anderson et al . , submitted ) . The ACT - R theory hypothesizes several buffers and their locations in the brain . For example , the goal buffer is supposed to be in DLPFC and the imaginal buffer in the parietal lobe . The theory also hypothesizes that production rules are stored in the corpus striatum . We found activation in these regions in this experiment . The recent version of ACT - R theory can predict the percent signal change in BOLD response based on the task analysis . We did a task analysis before conducting this experiment . Constructing an ACT - R model could provide us an explanation about the signal change in this experiment . Readers might suspect that the parietal activation in PSPL and HIPS only reflects longer exposure to the relational sentence R1 ( 7500 ms ) than the assignment sentence ( 4500 ms ) . This effect might be the case but it cannot explain the different pattern of activation between the picture and 1331 equation conditions ( see Figures 3 and 4 ) because it should have the same effect in both conditions . Readers might also suspect that activation of visuo - spatial areas in the equation condition was an effect of use of the mental number line in the picture blocks spilling over to the equation blocks . Because we used a within - subject design , we cannot deny this possibility . Even if it is true , however , it is the effect that we expect in educational settings . Those participants who used visuo - spatial systems on equations may have enhanced their performance . Using a framework of production systems , we can write production rules that represent a purely symbolic processing of a problem sentence . For example , we can think of the following production rule to process R1 : IF x is bind to $ A and R1 says “ $ B is $ N more than $ A THEN represent $ B as x + $ N , where the letter with $ means a variable . Visuo - spatial systems are not necessary if using this kind of production rule but it appears participants still used visuo - spatial reasoning to construct an equation . The following alternative set of production rules illustrates how use of the visuo - spatial systems may make this task easy : IFR1 says “ $ B is $ N more than $ A THEN $ B is to the right of $ A on the number line IF x is bind to $ A and $ B is to the right of $ A on the number line THEN represent $ B using a plus sign , as x + $ N , If the first production is already exists prior to algebra instruction , the second rule is easier to learn , perhaps , then the one above . It has been shown that using a pictorial representation helps students solve algebra word problems ( e . g . , Koedinger & Terao , 2002 ; Lewis , 1989 ) . These results can be interpreted that the students who learned to use visuo - spatial systems improved their ability to solve algebra word problems . Even if the results of this study only show that students can use visuo - spatial systems to solve algebra word problems only after trained with a pictorial representation , this encourages the educational practice of using a pictorial representation as a scaffold of learning . There is an interesting episode in the pre - scan , practice session . A few participants showed bad performance in the equation condition . We asked them what they did to make equations . They revealed that they used a “direct translation” strategy which was similar to the strategy Bobrow’s ( 1966 ) STUDENT used . For example , if R1 says “B is 6 more than A , ” they translated this sentence into the form of “B = 6 + A” before substituting “x” for a quantity . This strategy does not seem to need any visuo - spatial reasoning . The fact that the poor performer first used this kind of strategy suggests that students having difficulty with word problems may not learn to make use of visuo - spatial systems . This study is still in progress and we only have scratched the surface in dada analysis . Further data analysis ( e . g . , statistical comparisons of the two conditions ) should be done and it will provide insight into mathematical thinking . Conclusion Mathematical thinking emerges from the interplay between symbolic and visuo - spatial systems . Algebra word problems , which are widely used in current school curriculum , are not a pure language processing task . They appear to depend on the use of visuo - spatial systems . Conclusion Mathematical thinking emerges from the interplay between symbolic and visuo - spatial systems . Algebra word problems , which are widely used in current school curriculum , are not a pure language processing task . They appear to depend on the use of visuo - spatial systems . Acknowledgments This work was supported by NSF ROLE grant . References Anderson , J . R . , Bothell , D . , Byrne , M . D . , & Lebiere , C . ( submitted ) . An integrated theory of mind . http : / / act - r . psy . cmu . edu / publications / Bobrow , D . G . ( 1966 ) . Natural language input for a computer problem solving system . MAC - TR - 1 , Project Mac . MIT Dehaene , S . , Piazza , M . , Pinel , P . , & Cohen , L . ( 2003 ) . Three parietal circuits for number processing . Cognitive Neuropsychology , 20 , 487 - 506 . Dehaene , S . , Spelke , E . , Pinel , P . , Stanescu , R . , & Tsivkin , S . ( 1999 ) . Sources of mathematical thinking : Behavioral and Brain - imaging evidence . Science , 284 , 970 - 974 . Koedinger , K . R . , & Terao , A . ( 2002 ) . A cognitive task analysis of using pictures to support pre - algebra reasoning . In Proceedings of the Twenty - Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 542 - 547 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Lewis , A . B . ( 1989 ) . Training students to represent arithmetic word problems . Journal of Educational Psychology , 81 , 521 - 531 . Paige , J . M . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1966 ) . Cognitive processes in solving algebra word problem . In B . Kleinmuntz ( Ed . ) , Problem solving : Research , method and theory . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Griffin , S . A . , Case , R . , R Siegler , R . S . ( 1994 ) . Rightstart : Providing the central conceptual prerequisites for first formal learning of arithmetic to students at risk for social failure . In K . McGilly ( Ed . ) , Classroom lessons : Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 1332