Mutant huntingtin inhibits clathrin - independent endocytosis and causes accumulation of cholesterol in vitro and in vivo Eugenia Trushina 1 , { , Raman Deep Singh 2 , 6 , { , Roy B . Dyer 1 , Sheng Cao 3 , 4 , Vijay H . Shah 3 , 4 , Robert G . Parton 7 , Richard E . Pagano 2 , 5 , 6 and Cynthia T . McMurray 1 , 5 , * 1 Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics , 2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , 3 Department of Internal Medicine and 4 Department of Physiology , Gastroenterology Research Unit and Tumor Biology Program , 5 Molecular Neuroscience Program and 6 Thoracic Diseases Research Unit Mayo Clinic , 200 First Street SW , Rochester , MN 55905 , USA and 7 Institute for Molecular Bioscience and Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis , University of Queensland , Queensland 4072 , Australia Received October 16 , 2006 ; Revised and Accepted November 9 , 2006 We show that the mutant Huntington’s disease ( HD ) protein ( mhtt ) speciﬁcally inhibits endocytosis in primary striatal neurons . Unexpectedly , mhtt does not inhibit clathrin - dependent endocytosis as was antici - pated based on known interacting partners . Instead , inhibition occurs through a non - clathrin , caveolar - related pathway . Expression of mhtt inhibited internalization of BODIPY - lactosylceramide ( LacCer ) , which is internalized by a caveolar - related mechanism . In contrast , endocytosis of Alexa Fluor 594 - transferrin ( Tfn ) and epidermal growth factor , internalized through clathrin pathway , was unaffected by mhtt expression . Caveolin - 1 ( cav1 ) , the major structural protein of caveolae binds cholesterol and is responsible for its trafﬁck - ing inside cells . Mhtt interacts with cav - 1 and caused a striking accumulation of intracellular cholesterol . Cholesterol accumulated in cultured neurons expressing mhtt in vitro and in brains of mhtt - expressing ani - mals in vivo , and was observed after induction of mhtt expression in PC - 12 cell lines . The accumulation occurred only when mhtt and cav1 were simultaneously expressed in cells . Knockdown of cav1 in mhtt - expressing neurons blocked cholesterol accumulation and restored LacCer endocytosis . Thus , mhtt and cav1 functionally interact to cause both cellular defects . These data provide the ﬁrst direct link between mhtt and caveolar - related endocytosis and also suggest a possible mechanism for HD neurotoxicity where cholesterol homeostasis is perturbed . INTRODUCTION Huntington’s disease ( HD ) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder with no cure ( 1 ) . The normal function of huntingtin ( htt ) and the mechanism by which mutant huntingtin ( mhtt ) initiates striatal neurotoxicity are unclear . Studies on subcellu - lar localization and identiﬁcation of normal partners suggest that htt could function in vesicular trafﬁcking and endocytosis ( 2 ) . Yeast two - hybrid screens revealed that htt interacts with components of the trafﬁcking machinery . Huntingtin - associated protein 1 ( HAP1 ) was one of the ﬁrst identiﬁed ( 3 – 5 ) . Like htt , HAP1 is enriched in brain ( 3 – 5 ) and associates with microtubules and vesicles . HAP1 partially co - localizes with htt in cells and on sucrose gradient in vitro ( 6 ) . Both htt and HAP1 interact with the trafﬁcking motors , kinesin heavy chain and the dynactin p150 glued , an accessory protein for the microtubule motor protein dynein ( 3 , 4 , 7 ) . In Drosophila , htt associates with Milton , a protein with hom - ology to HAP1 , which is also linked to kinesin - dependent axonal transport of mitochondria ( 8 ) . Functional evidence demonstrating that htt has a role in axonal trafﬁcking has accumulated over the years . Early analy - sis revealed that htt together with HAP1 accumulated on either side of a crushed rat sciatic nerve , suggesting that htt was # The Author 2006 . Published by Oxford University Press . All rights reserved . For Permissions , please email : journals . permissions @ oxfordjournals . org { The authors wish it to be known that , in their opinion , the ﬁrst two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . Tel : þ 1 5072841597 ; Fax : þ 1 5072849111 ; Email : mcmurray . cynthia @ mayo . edu Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 3578 – 3591 doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddl434 actively transported , at least in vitro , from distant cellular sites in both retrograde and anterograde directions ( 6 ) . Whether htt was a cargo or a transport accessory protein was not known at that time . Recently , compelling data obtained in mice ( 9 ) , in Drosophila ( 10 ) and in isolated squid axoplasm ( 11 ) have pro - vided direct functional evidence that htt itself is a trafﬁcking protein , or , at least , strongly inﬂuences the process . In squid axoplasm , expression of a truncated polyglutamine fragment from the androgen receptor inhibits axonal trafﬁcking 3 - fold relative to wild - type . When the same peptide is expressed in dividing SYH - SY5Y cells , neurite outgrowth is prevented upon differentiation with retinoic acid and brain - derived neu - rotrophic factor , suggesting that trafﬁcking defects are microtubule - dependent ( 11 ) . The increased interaction of mhtt with HAP1 and dynactin p150 Glued reduces the associ - ation of HAP1 / dynactin p150 Glued with taxol - stabilized micro - tubules assembled in vitro . Loss of axonal motility induced by mhtt appears to reduce the supply of important cargoes needed for synaptic transmission ( 12 ) . In Drosophila , expression of mhtt also suppresses axonal transport of green ﬂuorescence protein - tagged epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor ( 10 ) or yellow ﬂuorescence protein - tagged amyloid precursor protein ( 12 ) , and promotes vesicle and organelle accumulation in axons . Axonal trafﬁcking defects appear to be a direct con - sequence of mhtt . Expression of either truncated mhtt or expanded polyglutamine regions causes trafﬁcking defects in isolated squid axoplasm where neither a nucleus nor protein synthesis is present ( 11 ) . The observations made in Drosophila essentially mimic those found in mammals ( 9 , 12 ) . Expression of mhtt in mice destabilizes microtubule tracts in primary neurons and alters their morphology ( 13 ) . As measured in real - time imaging experiments , expression of full - length mhtt in mouse models for HD results in defective axonal transport of vesicles and mitochondria very early in development ( 9 ) . Importantly , vesicle transport and uptake of the retrograde dye , ﬂuorogold , is suppressed in animals expressing mhtt with 72 polygluta - mines . Two days after injection into live animals , the uptake of ﬂuorogold in the mhtt - expressing mice is suppressed 3 - fold relative to control animals ( 9 ) . Thus , expression of the full - length endogenous form of mhtt in mice causes loss of trafﬁcking both in vivo and in vitro and is not an artifact of cell dispersal . The importance of trafﬁcking , particularly in neurons , has raised the issue as to whether mhtt causes adverse defects at other steps of trafﬁcking , which might contribute to toxicity . As with the axonal transport machinery , htt has been impli - cated in endocytosis based on its binding partners ( 2 , 14 ) . Htt associates with clathrin , co - localizes with mature clathrin - coated vesicles and decorates clathrin - coated pits ( 15 – 17 ) . Htt may form a complex with clathrin through Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ( HIP1 ) ( 18 – 21 ) . HIP1 directly binds clathrin light chain , a - adaptin A and C and co - localizes with the clathrin coat adaptor , AP2 ( 19 , 22 ) , which promotes actin binding and prevents depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments ( 23 – 25 ) . However , far less is known about the functional links between mhtt and endocytosis . Most of the existing data regarding endocytosis are based on effects of mhtt - interacting partners rather than mhtt itself . For example , loss of HIP1 in HIP1 ( 2 / 2 ) mice causes a neurological deﬁcit in endocytosis of alpha - amino - 3 - hydroxyl - 5 - isoxazolepropionate receptors ( 26 ) . HAP1 regulates the decision of Gamma - aminobutyric acid type A receptors ( GABA - AR ) to recycle back to the cell surface or sort in the lysosome by inhibiting receptor degradation ( 27 ) . However , in these experiments , a role for htt is implied rather than demonstrated . Moreover , no thorough examination of endocytosis has been conducted at the molecular level in primary striatal neurons , the most vul - nerable in HD . We have directly examined the effects of mhtt on endocytosis in primary striatal neurons from HD animals . We ﬁnd that mhtt expression indeed inhibits endocytosis but , surprisingly , does so through a non - clathrin , caveolin - 1 - related pathway . Mhtt expression causes abnormal accumulation of cholesterol both in vitro and in vivo . Mhtt interacts with caveolin - 1 ( cav1 ) , and this functional interaction appears to inﬂuence toxicity since reduction of cav1 expression in mhtt - expressing neurons blocks cholesterol accumulation and restores clathrin - independent endocytosis of BODIPY - lactosylceramide ( LacCer ) . RESULTS Mhtt inhibits clathrin - independent endocytosis To directly test whether expression of mhtt inﬂuences endocy - tosis , we monitored internalization of ﬂuorescent endocytic markers in embryonic ( E17 ) primary striatal neurons from control mice ( 28 ) and mice expressing full - length mhtt with 72 ( HD72 ) ( 29 ) glutamines . In both lines , mhtt is expressed at endogenous levels driven by the endogenous promoter . The majority of cells ( 95 % ) were well - developed neurons ( Fig . 1 ) as estimated by staining with neuron - speciﬁc b III tubulin antibody ( Fig . 1C ) with less than 5 % astroglial con - tamination [ estimated by staining with glia - speciﬁc glial ﬁbril - lary acidic protein ( GFAP ) antibody ] ( data not shown ) . Neurons were previously characterized by the expression of synaptic proteins ( 9 ) and the presence of fully developed synaptic contacts ( Fig . 1E and F ) . The majority of neurons represent GABAergic medium spiny projection neurons , 50 % of which are enkephalin - positive ( 9 , 13 , 30 , 31 ) . Using these cultures , we determined whether expression of mhtt had measurable effect on endocytosis . Internalization by clathrin - dependent endocytosis was visu - alized using Alexa Fluor 594 - labeled transferrin ( Tfn ) ( Fig . 2 ) , a well - characterized marker for this pathway ( 32 ) . We also measured internalization of LacCer ( Fig . 2 ) , which is interna - lized by a caveolar - related mechanism in other cell types ( 33 ) . To our surprise , we found that , in primary neurons , expression of mhtt had no effect on internalization of Tfn but , instead , inhibited entry of LacCer ( Fig . 2A and B ) . In neurons and glial cells from HD72 mice , uptake of LacCer was inhibited 70 % relative to control ( Fig . 2B ) . Inhibition of endocytosis was not limited to LacCer . Internalization of ﬂuorescent albumin , another marker for clathrin - independent , caveolar - related endocytosis , was also inhibited similar to that shown in some other cell types ( 33 , 34 ) ( Fig . 2B ) . Under the same conditions , we observed no effect on internalization of ﬂuores - cently labeled epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , a marker for Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 3579 clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( Fig . 2B ) . No differences were found in control and HD72 neurons in internalization of ﬂuor - escent dextran , the marker for ﬂuid phase endocytosis ( 35 ) ( Fig . 2B ) . These results indicated that expression of mhtt selectively inhibited internalization via a clathrin - independent pathway , whereas other pathways of uptake were apparently not affected . To further characterize the mechanism of marker internaliz - ation in neurons , we tested the effects of pharmacological inhibitors ( Fig . 2C and D ) . Chlorpromazine ( CPZ ) , an inhibi - tor of clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( 34 , 36 ) , blocked Tfn uptake by ~ 80 % but had little effect on LacCer internaliz - ation ( Fig . 2C and D ) . In contrast , pretreatment of cells with nystatin ( speciﬁcally binds to plasma membrane cholesterol and ﬂatten caveolae in other cell types ) ( 37 ) inhibited LacCer uptake by ~ 80 % with minimal effect on Tfn internali - zation . We also found that uptake of LacCer ( but not Tfn ) was blocked by Genistein ( general tyrosine kinase inhibitor ) or by PP2 ( src kinase inhibitor ) ( Fig . 2D ) , as observed in other cell types when caveolar endocytosis is disturbed by speciﬁc inhi - bition of phosphorylation of its major structural protein , cav1 ( 33 , 38 ) . Together , these results demonstrated that ( i ) in primary striatal neurons Tfn and EGF , and LacCer and Albumin , were internalized by distinctly different endocytic mechanisms , ( ii ) uptake of LacCer occurred through a clathrin - independent , caveolar - related pathway and ( iii ) expression of mhtt speciﬁcally inhibits endocytosis through a caveolar - related pathway . Expression of mhtt causes accumulation of intracellular cholesterol in vitro and in vivo Caveolae are characterized by their ﬂask - shaped morphology and are deﬁned by the presence of cav1 ( 39 ) . However , the presence of caveolae in neurons has been controversial . To test whether striatal neurons have caveolar machinery , we determined whether cav1 was expressed in pure cultures of striatal neurons ( glia , 5 % ) , glial cultures and striatal brain tissue from control and mhtt - expressing mice ( Fig . 3 ) . Using speciﬁc antibodies , we found that cav1 was expressed in stria - tal neurons and glial cells from control or HD72 mice as measured by western blot analysis ( Fig . 3A ) . We could also detect cav1 in cultures of striatal tissue ( Fig . 3B ) . In all of these samples , cav1 migrated as a 22 kDa protein indistin - guishable from cav1 found in control endothelial cells ( Fig . 3A and B , En ) and in hippocampal neurons ( Fig . 3A , Hip ) ( 40 ) . Importantly , the level of cav1 expression in HD72 mice was not affected by expression of mhtt ( Fig . 3A and B ) Figure 1 . Integrity of the E17 primary striatal neurons . Confocal images of striatal neurons ( 7 DIC ) co - stained with DAPI as a nuclear stain ( blue ) , and ( A ) tubulin ( green ) and actin ( red ) antibodies , ( B ) kinesin ( red ) and dynactin ( green ) antibodies ; white arrow indicates a synapse , ( C ) tubulin ( red ) . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( D ) Electron micrograph of control neuron showing cell body and neurites ; box is magniﬁed on right ; arrows in inset indicate clathrin - coated pits and vesicles . Formation of clathrin - coated vesicles occurred to the same extent in striatal neurons from both control and HD72 animals . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( E ) Electron micrograph of striatal neuron from control mice showing synaptic integrity . Synaptic contacts are dark regions indicated by the arrows . Scale bar , 0 . 5 m m . ( F ) Both control and HD72 neurons ( 7 DIC ) develop synaptic contacts observed as darkly stained areas of the plasma membranes with for - mation of the synaptic vesicles . HD72 neuron is shown . Scale bar , 100 nm . 3580 Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 or by the age of the animals tested ( Fig . 3B ) . Immunohis - tochemistry conﬁrmed that cav1 was present along the plasma membrane of neurons . Antibody staining was speciﬁc since competing peptides blocked the ﬂuorescence signal ( data not shown ) , and no staining was observed in primary striatal neurons isolated from a cav1 knockout ( CavKO ) mouse ( 41 ) ( Fig . 3C , CavKO ) . Thus , striatal neurons from control and HD72 mice possessed components required for caveolar - related endocytosis . Despite the abundance of cav1 , however , we were unable to detect structures with the classic morphology of caveolae in either control or mhtt - expressing striatal neurons by electron microscopy . No caveolae were observed using electron microscopy in neurons at different times of maturation in culture [ 2 , 6 and 8 days in culture ( DIC ) ] or 2 , 5 and 10 min after LacCer addition . Under all of these conditions , clathrin - coated ves - icles were readily detected and to the same extent observed in neurons from both control and HD72 mice ( Fig . 1D ) . Thus , mhtt did not appear to inhibit LacCer endocytosis by interfering with the formation of caveolae vesicles per se . Cav1 directly binds cholesterol and is involved in its intra - cellular trafﬁcking of caveolar vesicles ( 42 , 43 ) . If mhtt caused inhibition of endocytosis through a cav1 - related pathway , then intracellular trafﬁcking of cholesterol might also be altered . To test this hypothesis , we stained striatal neurons with ﬁlipin , a polyene antibiotic that speciﬁcally binds free cholesterol , and measured its level by ﬂuorescence microscopy ( 42 ) . Indeed , we observed a striking and aberrant accumulation of cholesterol in neurons expressing mhtt ( Fig . 4A ) . Within 12 days after plating , intracellular cholesterol in HD72 neurons accumulated up to 4 - fold relative to control cells ( Fig . 4B ) . This phenomenon was not accompanied by accumulation of cholesterol in the medium . Cholesterol accumulation in cul - tured neurons did not depend on the exogenous cholesterol . Intracellular accumulation was observed whether or not HD72 neurons were cultured in serum - containing or serum - and cholesterol - free medium ( data not shown ) . We found that cholesterol accumulation not only occurred in striatal neurons in vitro but also in the brains of HD72 mice in vivo and directly correlated with the age of the animals . We stained brain slices from 40 - week - old animals with ﬁlipin ( Fig . 4C , right ) ( 44 ) and measured the level of cholesterol using ﬂuorescence microscopy . Similar to the results in primary neurons , quantiﬁcation of the ﬁlipin signal revealed an ~ 4 - fold increase in cholesterol in HD72 mouse brains relative to controls ( data not shown ) . As a second approach , we extracted the lipids from striata of control and HD72 mice ( 17 , 24 , 37 or 60 weeks of age ) and quantiﬁed cholesterol levels by thin layer chromatography ( 45 ) . In agree - ment with the ﬁlipin staining , a similar increase in intracellular cholesterol was measured in 60 - week - old HD72 animals rela - tive to 17 - week - old animals ( Fig . 4D ) . The age - related choles - terol accumulation occurred concomitantly with development of a clasping phenotype , an indicator of disease progression ( Fig . 4C , left ) . Figure 2 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis is selectively inhibited in primary striatal neurons expressing mhtt . ( A ) Differential internalization of BODIPY - LacCer ( green ) and Alexa Fluor 594 - Tfn ( red ) in living primary striatal neurons from control and HD72 mice . Experiments were performed on neurons 7 days after plating and neurons were visualized by confocal microscopy . Optical sections are 0 . 5 m m . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( B ) Internalization of additional ﬂuorescent markers for clathrin and caveolar endocytic pathways in neurons from control ( gray bars ) and HD72 ( black bars ) mice . Data were obtained using conventional ﬂuorescence and are expressed as percent of uptake relative to the control cells . Data represent quantiﬁcation of at least 30 cells from three to 10 independent experiments . (cid:1) P , 0 . 001 . ( C ) Characteri - zation of LacCer and Tfn endocytic pathways in striatal neurons . Application of pharmacological inhibitors indicates that internalization of Tfn and LacCer in striatal neurons displays properties characteristic of clathrin - dependent and cav1 - related pathways , respectively . Experiments were performed on control neurons 7 days after plating . Fluorescence images represent internalization of BODIPY - LacCer ( LacCer ) and Alexa Fluor 594 - Tfn ( Tfn ) in live neurons from control mice with and without drug treatment . Nystatin ( non - clathrin , caveolar - related pathway inhibitor ) and CPZ ( clathrin - dependent pathway inhibitor ) are indicated . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( D ) Quantiﬁcation of inhibition of ﬂuorescent LacCer and Tfn internalization in control primary striatal neurons pretreated with pharmacological inhibitors , Nystatin and CPZ as in ( C ) , Genistein ( general tyrosine kinase inhibitor ) and PP2 ( src kinase inhibitor ) . Data were obtained by image analysis and are expressed relative to uptake seen in untreated control samples . Values are the mean + SD of at least 30 cells in three independent experiments . Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 3581 Accumulation of intracellular cholesterol depends on expression of mhtt We next asked whether the effects observed in mhtt - expressing neurons and HD72 animals were direct consequences of mhtt expression . We developed PC - 12 cell lines in which expression of endogenous levels of human full - length htt ( 26Q ) or mhtt ( 82Q ) could be induced upon addition of doxycycline ( Dox ) , and low to undetectable levels of 26Q or 82Q were detected in the absence of Dox . To more closely mimic neurons , PC - 12 cells were cultured in the presence of nerve growth factor ( NGF ) for 14 days ( before Dox induction ) until cells were fully differentiated and long processes were evident ( Fig . 5A ) . We found that the level of cholesterol accumulation corre - lated directly with mhtt expression . Both differentiated and non - differentiated cells expressing 82Q but not 26Q caused a striking increase in intracellular cholesterol indicating that cholesterol accumulation was a direct and speciﬁc consequence of mhtt expression ( Fig . 5A – D ) . The rise in cholesterol occurred concomitantly with the rise in mhtt protein expression and was never observed when 26Q was expressed ( Fig . 5A – D ) or in the absence of induction . To follow reversibility of choles - terol accumulation in differentiated PC - 12 cells , we induced mhtt expression for 2 days , removed Dox to stop protein expression and cells were assayed for protein levels ( Fig . 5B and C ) or ﬁxed and stained with ﬁlipin at selected time points for up to 3 weeks ( Fig . 5D ) . Full - length mhtt could be detected almost immediately after induction , but protein expression did approach maximum after 6 – 7 days ( Fig . 5B and C ) . Cholesterol began to accumulate as mhtt expression approached its maximum , but the decline in mhtt expression was slow in the differentiated neuron - like cells , and preceded that of cholesterol by at least a week . Thus , mhtt expression appeared to induce a somewhat sustained cholesterol response ( Fig . 5D ) . We also found that induction of mhtt recapitulated the inhi - bition of LacCer uptake that we observed in primary neurons . PC - 12 cells expressing 26Q and 82Q were tested at 13 days after Dox removal for the efﬁciency of internalization of ﬂuorescent LacCer and Tfn . Indeed , confocal imaging revealed that Tfn was successfully internalized in all cells similar to primary neurons in both 26Q and 82Q ( Fig . 5Eand F ) . Incontrast , internalization of LacCer was inhibited in cells expressing 82Q ( Fig . 5E and F ) and occurred concomitantly with the accumu - lation of cholesterol . Thus , induction of mhtt expression recapi - tulated both the inhibition of LacCer uptake and the cholesterol accumulation that we observed in primary neurons . Mhtt interacts with cav1 We next considered potential mechanisms by which mhtt might alter caveolar - related endocytosis and cholesterol homeostasis . We discovered by three independent measures that mhtt inter - acted with cav1 . First , confocal imaging revealed that mhtt co - localized with cav1 in striatal neurons ( Fig . 6A ) . Using a panel of antibodies , we observed that cav1 was not only Figure 3 . Cav1 is expressed in the striatum of control and HD72 mice . ( A ) Expression of cav1 in primary striatal neurons and glia from control ( FVB / N ) and HD72 mice detected with a polyclonal cav1 antibody . Cells were collected 7 days after plating . Neuronal cultures were obtained with 98 % purity . Extracts from hippocampal neurons ( Hip ) and endothelial cells ( En ) , both known to express cav1 , were used as a control . Membranes were probed with GAPDH antibody for loading control . ( B ) Cav1 expression is maintained throughout animal development . Striatal tissue was extracted from age - and gender - matched control ( FVB / N ) and HD72 mice at embryonic day 17 ( E17 ) , postnatal days 3 ( P3 ) and 8 ( P8 ) and at 18 weeks of age ( 18 weeks ) . Tissue extracts were subjected to western analysis with cav1 polyclonal antibody . GAPDH staining was used as a loading control . En indicates endothelial cell lysate , a positive control for cav1 . ( C ) Fluorescence and phase images of striatal ( E17 ) neurons from FVB / N ( control ) , HD72 and cav1 knockout mice ( CavKO ) at 7 days in culture labeled with a cav1 monoclonal antibody . The monoclonal antibody speciﬁcally recognizes cav1 on the plasma membrane . However , expression was also detected throughout the cell using a panel of three different cav1 polyclonal antibodies ( Fig . 6 ) . No cav1 was detected in CavKO neurons using any of the antibodies . Images were acquired using LSM 510 confocal microscope . Scale bar , 10 m m . 3582 Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 present along the plasma membrane ( Fig . 3C , monoclonal anti - body ) but was also present throughout the cytoplasm ( Fig . 6A , polyclonal cav1 antibody ) . When the same neuronal cultures were stained with antibodies speciﬁc for htt ( 2166 Ab ) , we found that cav1 co - localized with htt or mhtt both on the plasma membrane and in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 6A ) . The level of co - localization was similar in HD72 and control neurons . Second , to test whether co - localization was due to an inter - action of cav1 with htt or mhtt , we performed parallel immu - noprecipitation experiments . We found that antibodies to cav1 precipitated both htt and mhtt in mouse brain extracts ( Fig . 6B , lanes 4 and 6 ) . It is well documented that mhtt in cell extracts has slower migration on polyacrylamide gel relative to the wild - type htt ( 46 , 47 ) , and the band can be less discreet due to multiple conformations of the polyglutamine tract . There - fore , mhtt and htt are readily resolved on SDS – PAGE gels . In control samples , the cav1 antibody immunoprecipitated only a single band corresponding to htt ( Fig . 6B , lanes 2 and 4 ) . In mhtt - containing samples , however , we observed a doublet indicating that cav1 interacted with both mhtt and htt ( Fig . 6B , lane 6 , mhtt indicated by a star ) . The reactions were speciﬁc for the primary antibody . Beads alone ( Fig . 6B , lanes 1 , 3 and 5 ) did not precipitate htt or mhtt nor were they immunoprecipitated in reactions using an unrelated hemagglutinin ( HA ) antibody ( Fig . 6B , lane 7 ) . As a third measure , we tested whether mhtt and htt interacted with puriﬁed cav1 . We expressed a full - length cav1 – glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) fusion protein and immobilized it on glutathione - agarose . Beads containing either GST or GST – cav1 were incubated with extracts from striatal tissue from control and HD72 mice or from extracts prepared from pure cul - tures of striatal neurons . We evaluated the interacting proteins in a ‘pull - down assay’ ( 48 ) . Inagreement withimmunoprecipitation studies , both htt and mhtt were pulled down with puriﬁed GST – cav1 ( Fig . 6C ) . Consistent with the immunoprecipitation exper - iments , a single band was observed in tissue or neurons from control animals ( Fig . 6C , lanes 3 and 4 ) , whereas doublets corre - sponding to the htt and mhtt were detected in HD72 samples ( Fig . 6C , lanes 5 and 6 ) . These data demonstrated that puriﬁed cav1 interacted either directly with both htt and mhtt or indirectly with a complex containing these proteins . Knockdown of cav1 expression in neurons from HD72 animals blocked cholesterol accumulation To test whether an interaction of mhtt and cav1 was necessary for the cholesterol trafﬁcking defect , we knocked down cav1 expression in neurons from HD72 animals by transfecting small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) for cav1 ( siCav1 ) . Transfec - tion and internalization of the siRNA was highly efﬁcient as Figure 4 . Cholesterol accumulates in striatal neurons and tissue in vitro and in vivo . ( A ) Fluorescence images of ﬁlipin staining in primary striatal neurons from control ( FVB / N ) and HD72 mice . Control and HD72 neurons were plated side by side , cultured in cholesterol - free medium , ﬁxed at the days indicated and stained with ﬁlipin . Images were taken on an Olympus ﬂuorescence microscope using 100 (cid:2) oil objective . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of ﬁlipin staining in striatal neurons from control ( FVB / N ) and HD72 mice at the indicated days in vitro . Values represent relative ﬂuorescence units and are the mean + SD of at least 30 cells in each of six independent experiments . (cid:1) P , 0 . 001 . Black bars , control mice ; gray bars , HD72 . ( C ) Cholesterol accumulation in brain tissue of HD72 mice increases with age and correlates with progression of neurological abnormalities . ( Right ) Brain slices ( 30 m m ) from control ( FVB / N ) and HD72 mice 40 weeks old stained with ﬁlipin . Box indicates the portion of striatum taken for quantitative analysis . HD72 mice display clasping phenotype ( bottom left ) absent in control mice ( top left ) that coincides with progressive accumulation of cholesterol in brain tissue [ bottom right and ( D ) ] . ( D ) Expression of mhtt causes accumulation of cholesterol in the striatum of HD72 mice in vivo . Striatal tissue was collected from control ( FVB / N ) and HD72 age - matched mice , cholesterol was extracted and measured using thin - layer chromatography ( see Materials and Methods ) . Black bars , control mice ; gray bars , HD72 . Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 3583 judged by the localization and intensity of the co - transfected siRNA - Glo marker ( Dharmacon , Inc . , Chicago , IL , USA ) ( Fig . 7A ) . Under these conditions , we found that cav1 expression was redcued by roughly 75 % relative to untreated HD72 neurons after 10 DIC ( Fig . 7D , Cav1 N20 ) , whereas mhtt expression was not signiﬁcantly altered ( Fig . 7D , htt ) . Remarkably , we observed that neurons transfected by siCav1 failed to accumulate cholesterol relative to their untreated HD72 counterparts ( Fig . 7B , C and E ) or to wild - type FVB control neurons ( data not shown ) . Moreover , rescue of the cholesterol trafﬁcking defect by incubation with siCav1 was accompanied by restoration of LacCer endocytosis ( Fig . 7F and H ) . Treatment with siCav1 did not alter Tfn endocytosis , which was normal in HD72 neurons ( Fig . 7G ) . Thus , loss or reduction of cav1 reversed the defects in caveolar - related functions of endocytosis and intracellular cholesterol trafﬁck - ing , despite the fact that the mhtt expression was maintained at equivalent levels . DISCUSSION Although , htt andmhtt interact with a number ofclathrin coatpro - teins , we show here that mhtt does not inhibit clathrin - dependent endocytosis . Rather , our data indicate that inhibition occurs through a non - clathrin , caveolar - related pathway . This con - clusion is supported by three key ﬁndings . In primary neurons , we ﬁnd that mhtt inhibits internalization of LacCer , a marker for caveolar endocytosis , and impairs intracellular trafﬁcking of cholesterol , a known caveolar - related function . The latter two effects occur in the brain tissues of whole animals as well as in dispersed cultured primary neurons from those animals . Inhi - bition of LacCer internalization and cholesterol accumulation appear to depend on the presence of both mhtt and cav1 ; choles - terol accumulation does not occur in cav1 expressing cells in the absence of mhtt , induction of mhtt in cav1 expressing cells casues both defects , and loss of cav1 in mhtt expressing cells restores normal function . In all of these cases , we observed little to no effect on internalization of classic clathrin - mediated cargo such as Tfn and EGF . Although the latter observation was unexpected , the results suggest plausible models . First , an inhibitory role of mhtt on caveolar - related trafﬁcking does not exclude a role of htt in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . In agreement with this notion , we ﬁnd that loss of htt in striatal neurons inhibits Tfn uptake ( Trushina et al . , unpublished data ) . Second , the effects of mhtt on clathrin - mediated trafﬁcking may occur , but not at the plasma membrane . HIP1 is a clathrin - coat protein also known to modulate endocytosis of GABA receptors and regulate inhibitory transmission ( 27 ) . However , loss of HIP1 ( and presumably loss of the htt / HIP1 interaction ) does not inﬂuence Tfn entry into the cell ( 26 ) . These data raise the possibility that the effects of mhtt on clathrin - mediated vesicu - lar transport may be site - speciﬁc . Most htt interacting partners have been identiﬁed in yeast two - hybrid screens , which provide little information on when and where mhtt interactions might occur . However , even early work suggested that htt might operate at multiple intermediate steps in vesicle maturation ( 49 , 50 ) . Overexpression of truncated HIP1 causes formation of large perinuclear vesicle - like structures containing HIP1 , htt , clathrin and internalized transferrin ( 50 ) . Thus , htt might Figure 5 . Inhibition of LacCer internalization and cholesterol accumulation in cells are a direct effect of mhtt expression . Analysis of mhtt expression and cholesterol accumulation in PC - 12 Tet - On cells harboring a stable integration of full - length human htt ( 26Q ) or mhtt ( 82Q ) . ( A ) Cells were differentiated to the neuronal phenotype . Both lines have little to no background expression without Dox and express similar levels of htt / mhtt upon Dox addition . Time course of 82Q ( B ) and 26Q ( C ) expression in differentiated PC - 12 cells after induction with Dox for 48 h . Protein expression was measured by western blotting with the human speciﬁc htt antibody 2168 at the indicated times . ( D ) Cholesterol accumulation in differentiated parental PC - 12 cells and cells expressing 26Q or 82Q in the presence ( þ Dox ) and absence ( 2 Dox ) of Dox . Only cells expressing 82Q demonstrated increased choles - terol levels with time in culture . (cid:1) P , 0 . 001 . White bar , parental PC - 12 cells ; black bar , 26Q ; gray bar , 82Q . ( E ) Expression of 82Q inhibited the uptake of BODIPY - LacCer relative to 26Q but did not affect internalization of Alexa Fluor 594 - Tfn . Images represent internal optical sections ( 0 . 5 m m ) through a representative PC - 12 cell at day 21 in culture . Internalization of BODIPY - LacCer was reduced in 82Q cells compared with 26Q or parental PC - 12 cells ( data not shown ) . Speciﬁcally , BODIPY - LacCer showed punctate staining throughout the cell in 26Q , but only surface labeling in 82Q cells . Tfn is detected as punctate staining throughout the cell in either cell line . Confocal images were obtained using LSM 510 microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Germany ) ; 100 (cid:2) oil DIC lens ( 1 . 4 n . a . ) , confocal slices were 0 . 5 m m . Laser excitation / emission was set to 543 / 560 nm ( for Alexa Fluor 594 - Tfn ) and 488 / 550 nm ( for BODIPY - LacCer ) . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( F ) Quantiﬁcation of Alexa Fluor 594 - Tfn and BODIPY - LacCer uptake in parental PC - 12 cells and cells expres - sing 26Q and 82Q . (cid:1) P , 0 . 001 . Black bar , parental PC - 12 cells ; striped bar , 26Q ; gray bar , 82Q . 3584 Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 regulate early to late endosome fusion events . Moreover , HIP1 organizes clathrin - coat proteins and stimulates their assembly through its conserved C - terminal domain , known as the I / LWEQ module ( 23 – 25 ) . The I / LWEQ module of HIP1 promotes both its dimerization with HIP1R and its association with the plasma membrane via HIP1R binding to F - actin ( 51 ) . Recently , it has been reported that HEAT domains directly bind membranes through electrostatic interactions with acidic phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( 52 ) . As an interacting partner of HIP1R , htt might also act at the interface between actin ﬁlaments and the lipids of the plasma membrane . Thus , htt or mhtt interactions with clathrin and other trafﬁcking machinery appear to be dynamic and multi - faceted , and the effects of mhtt at the initial events of endocytosis may be , at least , partially separable from down - stream events . Cholesterol is essential for promoting synapse formation and maintaining membrane integrity in CNS neurons ( 53 , 54 ) . Moreover , defects in caveolae and / or perturbation of cholesterol homeostasis have been increasingly implicated in toxic mechanisms for Alzheimer’s disease ( AD ) , Parkinson’s disease , Niemann – Pick Type C and other lipid storage dis - eases ( 55 – 60 ) . Our discovery that mhtt inhibits caveolar - related endocytosis and causes accumulation of cholesterol potentially links HD and other neurodegenerative diseases . In rodent brain , depletion or accumulation of cholesterol can cause neurodegeneration with AD - like symptoms ( 55 ) . In prion disease , glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchoring of prion protein ( PrP ) in the endoplasmic reticulum directs the PrP to the Golgi into cholesterol - rich caveolae - like domains . In caveolae , degradation of PrP slows and appears to be cholesterol sensitive ( 61 ) . On the basis of these data , Prusiner and coworkers have raised the possibility that caveolae may be the sites of PrP misfolding facilitating its conversion to the aggregated , pathogenic form ( 61 ) . Our in vitro and in vivo data demonstrate that inhibition of caveolar - related endocytosis and consequent cholesterol accumulation arises directly from mhtt expression . In other reports , microarray data indicate that transcription of choles - terol biosynthetic enzymes is diminished in human postmortem HD brain ( 62 ) and that cholesterol is low in the brains of R6 / 2 mice ( 63 ) . Thus , both sets of data agree that cholesterol homeo - stasis is perturbed by mhtt expression . Unlike HD72 animals , however , toxicity in R6 / 2 mice is acute and these animals die by 12 weeks . Thus , accumulation of cholesterol may occur early when symptoms are minimal , as in HD72 animals , but syn - thesis is impaired at later stages in the disease progression as animals or humans approach death . In any case , defects in caveolar - related trafﬁcking and cholesterol accumulation are likely to be relevant to the pathophysiology of HD . MATERIALS AND METHODS Animals All procedures involving animals were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee . The following mouse models were used : control FVB / N ( 28 ) with seven glutamines in mouse endogenous htt homolog , homozygous transgenic with full - length human HD cDNA containing 72 ( HD72 ) ( 29 ) CAG repeats ( model was constructed using FVB / N mouse strain ) , cav1 null mice ( CavKO ) ( 41 ) and its parental strain C57BL / 6J ( Bl6 ) . Antibodies and immunocytochemistry Primary antibodies were : mouse monoclonal cav1 ( 1 : 50 , BD Transduction Laboratories , KY , USA ) , rabbit polyclonal cav1 H - 97 ( 1 : 200 ) and N - 20 ( 1 : 200 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . , Santa Cruz , CA , USA ) , rabbit polyclonal cav1 ( 1 : 100 , BD Transduction Laboratories ) , rabbit polyclonal a - synapsin ( 1 : 500 , gift from Dr P . McPherson ) , rabbit anti - GABA ( g - aminobutyric acid ) ( 1 : 12 000 , Sigma , St Louis , MO , USA ) , mouse anti - b III tubulin ( Promega , Madison , WI , USA ) , mouse anti - GFAP Cy3 conjugated ( 1 : 400 , Sigma ) . Secondary antibodies were : goat anti - mouse Cy 5 ( 1 : 1500 , Amersham ) , goat anti - mouse TMR ( 1 : 400 ) , goat anti - rabbit Cy5 ( 1 : 1500 ) and goat anti - rabbit TMR ( 1 : 50 , Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR , USA ) . For blocking experiments , cav1 monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies were preincubated with speciﬁc blocking Figure 6 . Cav1 interacts with both wild - type and mutant htt in striatal neurons and striatal tissue . ( A ) Htt and mhtt colocalize with cav1 in primary striatal neurons in cell body and neurites . Co - localization in control neurons is shown . Confocal images were taken using LSM 510 microscope with 63 (cid:2) ( 1 . 4 n . a . ) DIC oil objective , focal plane was set to ~ 0 . 5 m m . Scale bar , 10 m m . Htt is green ( monoclonal 2166 ) , cav1 is red ( polyclonal Ab ) . No differ - ences were found in co - localization in HD72 neurons . ( B ) Cav1 antibody immunoprecipitated htt ( lanes 4 and 6 ) and mhtt ( lane 6 , star ) from brain extracts of control and HD72 mice . As a control , the 2170 htt antibody immu - noprecipitated htt from control mouse brain ( lane 2 ) . Immunoprecipitates were detected by western blotting with htt 2166 Ab . ( 2 ) Protein - G beads without antibody ( lanes 1 , 3 , 5 ) , ( þ ) protein - G beads crosslinked to htt Ab ( lane 2 ) or cav1 Ab ( lanes 4 and 6 ) . HA is a control - unrelated antibody . ( C ) Both wild - type and mhtt interact with GST - fusion protein containing the full - length cav1 molecule . No interaction in the extracts from striatal tissue of HD72 mice was observed with GST alone ( lane 1 ) . Lane 2 represents positive control from striatal tissue of HD72 mice ; double band corresponds to mhtt ( upper band ) and wild - type htt ( lower band ) as detected with htt 2166 antibody . GST – cav1 pull - down from both tissue lysates ( lanes 3 and 5 ) and cell lysates ( lanes 4 and 6 ) from control ( FVB / N ) and HD72 mice suggest that htt and mhtt interact with cav1 . Equivalent amounts of GST and GST – cav1 were uti - lized as the substrate for binding . Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 3585 peptides overnight according to manufacture’s protocol . Co - localization of htt and cav1 was examined using mouse anti - htt monoclonal antibody 2166 ( 1 : 300 , Chemicon , CA , USA ) and rabbit polyclonal cav1 H - 97 ( 1 : 200 ) . Immunostain - ing was performed as described previously ( 13 , 30 ) . Preparation of neuronal cell cultures Preparation and culturing of primary striatal neurons were performed as described previously ( 13 in Supplementary Material ) . Brieﬂy , mice were anesthetized with ether on gesta - tional day 17 and fetuses were rapidly removed . Fetal brains were extracted and placed in sterile HEPES - buffered saline ( HBS ) ( pH 7 . 3 ) . The ventral part of the medial ganglionic emi - nence ( the developmental precursor to the striatum ) was dis - sected under a microscope . Tissue was placed in 1 mg / 1 ml papain ( Warthington , NJ , USA ) in HBS for 20 min at 37 8 C . After two washes in HBS , the dissociated tissue was triturated in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) containing 10 % Ham’s F12 with glutamine ( Gibco / BRL , Grand Island , NY , USA ) , 10 % heat inactivated fetal calf serum ( Hyclone Laboratories Logan , UT , USA ) and 1 (cid:2) pen / strep antibiotic mixture . Cells were counted , diluted to 3 (cid:2) 10 5 cells / ml , and 2 ml of this stock was placed in each well of a six - well dish containing glass cover slips coated with poly - L - ornithine ( 1 mg / 2 ml sterile borate buffer , pH 8 . 4 ) . Plated cells were maintained in an incubator with 5 % CO 2 at 37 8 C . After 72 h in culture , medium containing serum was replaced with a serum - free neurobasal ( NB ) - based medium ( without gluta - mine , Gibco / BRL , Grand Island ) containing 1 (cid:2) pen / strep antibiotic mixture and 1 (cid:2) B27 supplement ( Gibco / BRL , Grand Island ) ( 64 ) . Quantiﬁcation of neurons and glia using speciﬁc antibody staining ( GFAP for astrocytes and neuron - speciﬁc b III - tubulin ) demonstrates that neurons represent 95 % of cells present on the cover slip . In cases where exper - iments required especially pure neuronal cultures , cells were Figure 7 . siRNA knockdown of cav1 blocks cholesterol accumulation and restores LacCer endocytosis in striatal neurons from HD72 animals . ( A ) High efﬁciency of siRNA transfection in primary neurons . ( Top ) Trans - mission image of primary neurons transfected with si GLO . Red indicates the cytoplasmic localization of ﬂuorescently ( Cy3 ) labeled si GLO RISC - free non - targeting siRNA . Nearly all neurons are transfected using Dharma FECT 3 transfection reagent ; ( middle ) ﬂuorescence image si GLO - positive neurons ( from image at the top ) . ( Bottom ) Representative confocal images of neurons transfected with si GLO . Optical sectioning demonstrates that si GLO resides inside cells in the cytoplasm . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( B ) Filipin ( blue ) stain - ing in neurons cultured for the indicated number of days ( d ) . Culturing neurons for 10 days in the presence of siCav1 blocks cholesterol accumulation . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( C ) Magniﬁed image of 10d þ siCav1 neuron from B co - localizing siGLO and Filipin . Cells taking up siCav1 do not accumulate cholesterol . Flu - orescence ( top ) and transmission ( middle ) images of transfected cells ( marked by si GLO , red ) ; transfected neuron have reduced cholesterol ( bottom ) . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( D ) Western blot of proteins from untreated and siCav1 - treated HD72 neurons probed with speciﬁc antibodies for cav1 ( N - 20 ) , a - tubulin or huntingtin , as indicated . Cav1 is knocked down roughly 75 % of untreated cells . ( E ) Quantiﬁcation of data from ( B ) . ( F ) Internalization of BODIPY - LacCer ( green ) in primary neurons 10 DIC . FVB controls ( top ) , HD72 ( middle ) and HD72 neurons treated with siCav1 . Red is siGLO . ( G ) Endocy - tosis of Tfn is unaffected by siCav1 treatment in HD72 neurons ; ( left ) trans - mission image ; ( right ) ﬂuorescence image of Alexa Fluor 594 - labeled Tfn . ( H ) Quantiﬁcation of LacCer uptake data from ( F ) . Analysis represents com - bined data from three independent experiments where at least 10 cells were imaged . (cid:1) P , 0 . 001 . 3586 Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 treated with cytosine b - D - arabinofuranoside ( Ara - C , Sigma ) to a ﬁnal concentration of 2 m M after 3 and 5 DIC to suppress proliferation of the glia cells . Such conditions allowed obtain - ing fully developed pure striatal neurons exhibiting synaptic activity as judged by staining with synapsin antibody ( 9 ) and EM examination of synaptic contacts . All experiments were performed in neurons 6 – 7 DIC unless speciﬁcally stated . The purity of the neuronal preparations was established using a panel of speciﬁc antibodies . Neuroﬁlamnet and GFAP intensity was used to establish that ~ 90 % of cultures were medium spiny GABAergic projection neurons ( 30 ) with ~ 50 % being enkephalin positive ( 31 ) . Expression of cav1 by western blot was detected using rabbit polyclonal N20 cav1 antibody ( 1 : 3000 , Santa Cruz ) . Monoclonal mouse GAPDH antibody was used for loading control ( 1 : 6000 ; Chemicon ) . Inhibitors and ﬂuorescent markers of endocytosis C 5 - BODIPY - fatty acid labeled analog of LacCer was synthesized and puriﬁed as described previously ( 65 ) . Alexa Fluor 594 - labeled albumin , Tfn and EGF were from Molecular Probes . Striatal neurons plated on poly - L - ornithine - coated glass cover slips were washed with HEPES - buffered MEM ( 10 m M HMEM ) at room temperature and then incubated with BODIPY - LacCer for 10 min at 37 8 C in the incubator with 5 % CO 2 to induce endocytosis . After incubation , the medium was replaced with ice - cold HMEM without glucose , and the culture dishes were transferred to a 10 8 C bath . Fluor - escent lipid present at the cell surface was removed by incu - bating the cells ( six times , 10 min each ) with 5 % fatty acid free BSA in HMEM without glucose at 10 8 C . For other exper - iments , cells were incubated with 7 . 5 m g / ml Alexa Fluor 594 - labeled albumin , Tfn and EGF for 10 min at 37 8 C . Excess of ﬂuorescent markers at the cell surface was removed by acid stripping ( 33 ) . Primary neurons were treated with various inhibitors to differentiate clathrin - dependent from clathrin - independent endocytosis as described ( 66 ) . For inhibition of clathrin - dependent endocytosis , samples were pretreated with 8 m g / ml CPZ ; for disruption of caveolar endocytosis , cells were pretreated with 25 m g / ml nys - tatin . Cells were also preincubated in HMEM containing PP2 ( 10 n M ) or Genistein ( 50 m M ) for 1 h at 37 8 C . Inhibitors were present in all subsequent steps of experiments . The speciﬁcity of each inhibitor treatment was evaluated by monitoring the internalization of ﬂuorescent LacCer and Tfn as endocytic markers . Cell viability was . 90 % for each inhibitor treatment as judged by Trypan blue staining . Fluorescence and confocal microscopy Fluorescence microscopy using an Olympus IX70 ﬂuorescence microscope and quantitative image analysis were performed using 100 (cid:2) oil DIC objective as described ( 33 ) . Cells were imaged using confocal laser scanning microscope LSM 510 ( Carl Zeiss ) with 100 (cid:2) or 63 (cid:2) oil DIC objective ( 1 . 4 n . a . ) with optical section set to ~ 0 . 5 m m as described ( 13 ) . Immunoprecipitation Htt monoclonal antibody 2170 ( Chemicon , Inc . ) , cav1 antibody ( N20 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) and HA tag antibody ( Y - 11 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) were used . Antibodies were absorbed to Protein A / G Agarose Plus ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) for 1 h at room temperature . Agarose beads were washed three times with 1 ml of 0 . 1 M sodium phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 0 and twice with 1 ml of 0 . 2 M triethanolamine , pH 8 . 2 . Antibodies were crosslinked to the agarose by addition of freshly prepared 20 m M dimethylpimelimidate (cid:2) 2HCl in 0 . 2 M triethanolamine , pH 8 . 2 . After incubation for 30 min at room temperature , beads were collected and washed with 1 ml of 50 m M Tris , pH 7 . 5 for 15 min , then washed three times with PBS - T [ PBS contain - ing 0 . 1 % polyoxyethylenesorbitan monolaurate ( Tween - 20 ) ] . Conjugates were stored in PBS - T at 4 8 C . For IP , freshly iso - lated mouse forebrain was placed in 10 ml / gm of lysis buffer ( 10 m M Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 150 m M NaCl , 1 m M EDTA , 1 m M EGTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 5 % NP - 40 , 0 . 2 m M sodium orthovanadate , 2 m g / ml aprotinin , 2 m g / ml leupeptin , 1 m g / ml pepstatin , 1 m M PMSF ) . Tissue was homogenized with 5 – 10 s pulses from a sonicator ( Soniﬁer , Branson ) , incu - bated on ice for 20 min , then clariﬁed at 12 000 g for 20 min at 4 8 C . Supernatant was adjusted to 10 % glycerol and stored at 2 20 8 C . Protein was quantiﬁed with the Advanced Protein Reagent ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) . Two - hundred and forty micro - grams of extract was brought to 1 ml with lysis buffer and 15 m l of 2166 or 10 m l of cav1 agarose conjugate was added . To control for non - speciﬁc absorption to the agarose , mock conjugated A / G Plus Agarose was added to the lysate . Reactions were incubated for 19 – 22 h with rocking at 4 8 C . Agarose was collected by microcentrifugation at 8160 g for 30 s . Supernatants were removed and agarose was washed three times with TNT buffer ( 10 m M Tris , pH 8 . 0 ; 140 m M NaCl ; 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ) , once with TN buffer ( 10 m M Tris , pH 8 . 0 ; 140 m M NaCl ) and once with 50 m M Tris , pH 6 . 8 . Agarose was resuspended in 40 m l of SDS sample buffer ( 58 . 3 m M Tris pH 6 . 8 ; 1 . 67 % SDS ; 5 % glycerol ; 2 . 5 % 2 - mercaptoethanol ; 0 . 002 % Bromophenol blue ) and heated at 55 8 C for 10 min . The agarose along with the lysate was loaded onto SDS – PAGE gels for immunoblotting . Htt was detected with monoclonal antibody 2166 and cav1 was detected with polyclonal antibody N - 20 . Interaction of wild - type or mutant htt with GST – cav1 fusion proteins GST – cav1 fusion proteins were constructed and puriﬁed by afﬁnity chromatography using glutathione - agarose as described ( 48 ) . A total of 50 m g of GST or GST fusion proteins puriﬁed from Escherichia coli strain BL21 ( DE3 ) LysS were bound to 20 m l of glutathione – Sepharose beads ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) and incubated with 300 m l ( ~ 1 mg ) of protein prepared from a lysis buffer containing 50 m M Tris ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 1 % NP - 40 , 0 . 1 % SDS , 0 . 1 % sodium deoxycholate , 0 . 1 m M EGTA and 0 . 1 m M EDTA ( with protease inhibitors ) , at 4 8 C for 2 h or over - night . Extracts from striatal tissue or pure striatal neurons ( E17 ) from control ( FVB / N ) or transgenic HD72 mice have been used . To ensure complete separation of neurons from glia cells , Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 3587 neurons after dissociation were preplated on the plastic 100 mm tissue culture dish for 3 – 5 h at 37 8 C and 5 % CO 2 . Such pro - cedure allows glial cells to attach to the dish , whereas neurons will remain in suspension ( neurons do not attach to the plastic unless a speciﬁc coating substrate such as poly - ornithine is used ) . Neurons were collected , spun down and frozen . Unbound proteins were removed by ﬁve washes with a buffer containing 50 m M Tris ( pH 7 . 7 ) , 200 m M NaCl and 0 . 1 m M EDTA ( with protease inhibitors ) . The speciﬁc bound proteins were released by resuspending beads in 30 – 50 m l of 2 (cid:2) SDS loading buffer and subjected to SDS – PAGE ( 4 – 20 % polyacrylamide gel ) and western blot analysis with mouse anti - htt 2166 ( 1 : 3000 , Chemicon ) , rabbit anti - cav1 ( 1 : 1000 , BD Transduction Laboratories ) and anti - GST ( 1 : 2000 , BD Pharmingen ) speciﬁc antibodies . Horseradish peroxidase - conjugated anti - mouse ( 1 : 24 000 ) or anti - rabbit ( 1 : 2000 , Chemicon ) secondary antibodies were used to visual - ize bound proteins . siRNA experiments All reagents were from Dharmacon , Inc . Primary mouse striatal neurons were ﬁrst evaluated for transfection efﬁciency using si GLO RISC - free non - targeting siRNA with ﬂuorescent label ( Cy3 ) and Dharma FECT 3 transfection reagent . Brieﬂy , neurons from control and HD72 mice were plated on cover slips as described previously and cultured for 2 days in serum - containing medium . On day 3 , the medium was substituted with NB - based serum - free , antibiotic - free medium . Twenty micromolar si GLO RNA in 1 (cid:2) siRNA buffer was used as a stock solution to prepare the ﬁnal 100 n M siRNA solution in antibiotic - free , serum - free medium . To transfect three 35 mm dishes , we used the following protocol . In Tube 1 , 17 . 5 m l of 20 m M siRNA was added to 612 . 5 m l of serum - free medium . In Tube 2 , 14 m l of DharmaFECT 3 was added to 56 m l of serum - free medium . Contents of Tubes 1 and 2 were gently mixed and incubated at room temperature for 5 min . After that , Tubes 1 and 2 were mixed together , incu - bated 20 min at room temperature , 2 . 8 ml of fresh medium was added to bring the total volume to 3 . 5 ml . An aliquot of 1 . 0 ml of the transfection mixture was added to the neurons , and cells were observed under ﬂuorescent microscope every other day up to 14 days . Cells were fed with fresh antibiotic - and serum - free medium every third day after transfection by adding 1 ml of medium to the dish . The identical protocol was used to introduce mouse cav1 ON - TARGETplus SMARTpool siRNA into neurons . Part of the experiments was performed with cav1 siRNA alone , part using si GLO siRNA as a co - transfection reagent with cav1 siRNA to ident - ify transfected neurons in experiments using ﬁlipin staining . Additional neurons were transfected with cav1 siRNA to evaluate the suppression of cav1 expression by western blot . All experiments were performed in triplicates and repeated with two different platings . Filipin staining in neurons and mouse brain sections Striatal neurons from control and HD72 mice were plated on poly - ornithine - covered glass cover slips in six - well culture dishes in the serum containing medium and cultured for 3 days . Medium was switched to NB ( cholesterol - free ) medium , and cells were cultured for additional 12 days . Every third day after switch , 1 ml of medium in the cell culture dish was replaced with 1 ml of fresh NB medium . Cells were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) on days 3 , 6 , 9 and 12 after switch . Cover slips were washed three times with PBS , incubated 30 min with glycine ( 75 mg in 100 ml of PBS ) and ﬁlipin solution ( 100 m g / ml , Polysciences , Inc . , Warrington , PA , USA ) was applied for 30 min at room temperature . Cells were washed in PBS and immediately observed under the ﬂuorescence microscope using 100 (cid:2) magniﬁcation . To evaluate the cholesterol levels in the brain , three control and three HD72 2 - , 6 - and 12 - month - old female mice were deeply anesthetized with injection of 10 m l of 8 mg / ml Ketamine / 1 mg / ml Xylazine per gram of the body weight . Brains were removed after mice were cardioperfused with freshly prepared 4 % PFA . Sections were cut through caudate / putamen in frontal plane at 30 m m thick with an Oxford Vibratome . Sections were stained with ﬁlipin as described earlier . Filipin was detected using UV illumination ( 360 – 370 nm excitation , 420 – 460 nm emission ) with an Olympus AX70 microscope under 10 (cid:2) magniﬁcation . To eliminate photobleaching while focussing and selecting cells or brain area for imaging , 90 % neutrodensity ﬁlter with shat - tering system was used . For every mouse , cholesterol levels were acquired form six consecutive brain slices ( 12 hemi - spheres ) . Experiments in cells were repeated at least three times , 15 – 20 cells were examined for every time point . Statistical signiﬁcance was determined using Student’s t - test . Cholesterol extraction from the brain tissue Brain tissue from normal and HD72 mice was homogenized in 1 ml of PBS . About 100 m l of this suspension was used for protein estimation and remaining 900 m l was used for quantiﬁ - cation of cholesterol . Cholesterol was extracted as described ( 45 ) , and the lower organic phase containing lipids was collected and dried under N 2 . The extracted lipids were then separated by TLC using CHCl 3 / C 2 H 5 OC 2 H 5 / CH 3 COOH , 65 : 15 : 1 ( v / v / v ) as the developing solvent for cholesterol . TLC plates were dried and then stained overnight with iodine . Cholesterol was quantiﬁed by densitometry and comparison with cholesterol standards run on the same TLC plate . Choles - terol content was normalized with protein and expressed as m g / mg of tissue . Inducible PC - 12 cell lines PC - 12 cells were stably transformed with ‘reverse’ Tet - regulated transcriptional activator ( rtTA ) construct that activates transcription of Tet - regulated genes in the presence of doxycycline ( dox ) . Full - length human huntingtin cDNAs with 26 ( control ) and 82 ( pathologic ) glutamines were used to generate stable Tet - On cell lines . The huntingtin cDNAs were subcloned into the Not 1 site of the pTRE - HA vector ( BD Biosciences Clontech ) after the vector was modiﬁed by replacing the region between the Sﬁ I and Hin dIII restriction sites with a linker oligo containing a BsiW1 restriction sequence . Proper orientation , frame and CAG length was con - 3588 Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 ﬁrmed by DNA sequencing . PC - 12 cells stably transformed with reverse rtTA ( BD Biosciences Clonetech ) were co - transfected with the pTRE - Htt plasmids ( 4 . 7 m g ) and pTK - Hyg ( 0 . 3 m g ) ( BD Biosciences Clonetech ) for selection with hygromycin ( 100 m g / ml ) . Individual colonies were collected and analyzed for background expression and induci - bility by doxycycline . Six wild - type and four mutant clonal lines were kept . Cells were maintained at 10 % CO 2 / 37 8 C / 100 % humidity in DMEM supplemented with 10 % horse serum , 5 % fetal calf serum ( Tet approved , Clontech ) , 100 m g / ml geneticin , 75 m g / ml hygromycin , 10 U / ml penicil - lin , 100 m g / ml streptomycin . For induction , PC - 12 cells were plated on poly - ornithine - covered glass cover slips in DMEM with 5 % fetal bovine serum and 10 % horse serum . Cells were differentiated for 14 days by daily addition of NGF ( 100 ng / ml ) . Medium was changed to NB , and dox was added for 2 days at ﬁnal concentration 100 ng / ml . After 2 days , dox was removed , and cells were allowed to stay in culture for 3 weeks . Cell at different time points after addition of dox were collected , and whole cell extracts were subjected to western blotting with htt 2168 monoclonal antibody that speciﬁcally recognized human htt ( 1 : 5000 , Chemicon ) . Parental PC - 12 cells and cells expressing 26Q and 82Q were ﬁxed at different time points after dox addition and stained with ﬁlipin as described previously . Internalization of C 5 - BODIPY - LacCer and Alexa Fluor 594 - labeled Tfn was performed as described above for neurons with one exception . Since PC - 12 cells at late time intervals very easily disattached from the cover slips upon washing or other manipulations , the removal of ﬂuorescent lipid present at the cell surface was done by incubating the cells only three times 20 min each with 5 % fatty acid free BSA in HMEM without glucose at 10 8 . This could explain residual ﬂuorescence at the plasma membrane of the cells . Statistical analysis Data were analyzed using Student’s t - test . P , 0 . 01 was considered statistically signiﬁcant . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL Supplementary Material is available at HMG Online . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Dr C . Spiro for design , construction and characteriza - tion of the inducible PC - 12 lines , Mr K . Johnson for help with mouse breeding , Mr T . A . Christensen and Dr J . L . Salisbury for help with electron microscopy and Mr T . Farnham for help with the manuscript . This work was supported by the Mayo Foundation , Hereditary Disease Foundation ( CTM ) and NIH grants NS40738 ( CTM ) , R01 GM 066359 ( CTM ) , GM - 22942 ( REP ) , GM - 60934 ( REP ) , R01 - 59615 and R01 - 59388 ( VS ) , American Heart Association National Scientist Development Grant AHA04 - 35063N ( SC ) . Conﬂict of Interest Statement . None of the authors have any conﬂict of interest regarding any data described in the present paper . REFERENCES 1 . Bates , G . , Harper , P . , Jones , L . ( eds ) ( 2002 ) Huntington’s Disease . Oxford University Press , New York . 2 . Harjes , P . and Wanker , E . E . ( 2003 ) The hunt for huntingtin function : interaction partners tell many different stories . Trends Biochem . Sci . , 28 , 425 – 433 . 3 . Li , X . J . and Li , S . H . ( 2005 ) HAP1 and intracellular trafﬁcking . Trends Pharmacol . Sci . , 26 , 1 – 3 . 4 . Li , S . H . , Gutekunst , C . A . , Hersch , S . M . and Li , X . J . ( 1998 ) Interaction of huntingtin - associated protein with dynactin P150Glued . J . Neurosci . , 18 , 1261 – 1269 . 5 . Li , S . H . , Hosseini , S . H . , Gutekunst , C . A . , Hersch , S . M . , Ferrante , R . J . and Li , X . J . ( 1998 ) A human HAP1 homologue . Cloning , expression , and interaction with huntingtin . J . Biol . Chem . , 273 , 19220 – 19227 . 6 . Block - Galarza , J . , Chase , K . O . , Sapp , E . , Vaughn , K . T . , Vallee , R . B . , DiFiglia , M . and Aronin , N . ( 1997 ) Fast transport and retrograde movement of huntingtin and HAP 1 in axons . Neuroreport , 8 , 2247 – 2251 . 7 . Engelender , S . , Sharp , A . H . , Colomer , V . , Tokito , M . K . , Lanahan , A . , Worley , P . , Holzbaur , E . L . and Ross , C . A . ( 1997 ) Huntingtin - associated protein 1 ( HAP1 ) interacts with the p150Glued subunit of dynactin . Hum . Mol . Genet . , 6 , 2205 – 2212 . 8 . Stowers , R . S . , Megeath , L . J . , Gorska - Andrzejak , J . , Meinertzhagen , I . A . and Schwarz , T . L . ( 2002 ) Axonal transport of mitochondria to synapses depends on milton , a novel Drosophila protein . Neuron , 36 , 1063 – 1077 . 9 . Trushina , E . , Dyer , R . B . , Badger , J . D . , II , Ure , D . , Eide , L . , Tran , D . D . , Vrieze , B . T . , Legendre - Guillemin , V . , McPherson , P . S . , Mandavilli , B . S . et al . ( 2004 ) Mutant huntingtin impairs axonal trafﬁcking in mammalian neurons in vivo and in vitro . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 24 , 8195 – 8209 . 10 . Gunawardena , S . , Her , L . S . , Brusch , R . G . , Laymon , R . A . , Niesman , I . R . , Gordesky - Gold , B . , Sintasath , L . , Bonini , N . M . and Goldstein , L . S . ( 2003 ) Disruption of axonal transport by loss of huntingtin or expression of pathogenic polyQ proteins in Drosophila . Neuron , 40 , 25 – 40 . 11 . Szebenyi , G . , Morﬁni , G . A . , Babcock , A . , Gould , M . , Selkoe , K . , Stenoien , D . L . , Young , M . , Faber , P . W . , MacDonald , M . E . , McPhaul , M . J . et al . ( 2003 ) Neuropathogenic forms of huntingtin and androgen receptor inhibit fast axonal transport . Neuron , 40 , 41 – 52 . 12 . Gauthier , L . R . , Charrin , B . C . , Borrell - Pages , M . , Dompierre , J . P . , Rangone , H . , Cordelieres , F . P . , De Mey , J . , MacDonald , M . E . , Lessmann , V . , Humbert , S . et al . ( 2004 ) Huntingtin controls neurotrophic support and survival of neurons by enhancing BDNF vesicular transport along microtubules . Cell , 118 , 127 – 138 . 13 . Trushina , E . , Heldebrant , M . P . , Perez - Terzic , C . M . , Bortolon , R . , Kovtun , I . V . , Badger , J . D . , II , Terzic , A . , Estevez , A . , Windebank , A . J . , Dyer , R . B . et al . ( 2003 ) Microtubule destabilization and nuclear entry are sequential steps leading to toxicity in Huntington’s disease . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 100 , 12171 – 12176 . 14 . Paschen , W . and Mengesdorf , T . ( 2005 ) Endoplasmic reticulum stress response and neurodegeneration . Cell . Calcium , 38 , 409 – 415 . 15 . Mattson , M . P . ( 2002 ) Accomplices to neuronal death . Nature , 415 , 377 – 379 . 16 . Velier , J . , Kim , M . , Schwarz , C . , Kim , T . W . , Sapp , E . , Chase , K . , Aronin , N . and DiFiglia , M . ( 1998 ) Wild - type and mutant huntingtins function in vesicle trafﬁcking in the secretory and endocytic pathways . Exp . Neurol . , 152 , 34 – 40 . 17 . Kim , M . , Velier , J . , Chase , K . , Laforet , G . , Kalchman , M . A . , Hayden , M . R . , Won , L . , Heller , A . , Aronin , N . and Diﬁglia , M . ( 1999 ) Forskolin and dopamine D1 receptor activation increase huntingtin’s association with endosomes in immortalized neuronal cells of striatal origin . Neuroscience , 89 , 1159 – 1167 . 18 . Vecchi , M . and Di Fiore , P . P . ( 2005 ) It’s HIP to be a hub : new trends for old - fashioned proteins . J . Cell Biol . , 170 , 169 – 171 . 19 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Kessels , M . M . , Chopra , V . S . , Hayden , M . R . and Drubin , D . G . ( 1999 ) An actin - binding protein of the Sla2 / Huntingtin interacting protein 1 family is a novel component of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles . J . Cell Biol . , 147 , 1503 – 1518 . 20 . Wanker , E . E . , Rovira , C . , Scherzinger , E . , Hasenbank , R . , Walter , S . , Tait , D . , Colicelli , J . and Lehrach , H . ( 1997 ) HIP - I : a huntingtin interacting protein isolated by the yeast two - hybrid system . Hum . Mol . Genet . , 6 , 487 – 495 . 21 . Kalchman , M . A . , Koide , H . B . , McCutcheon , K . , Graham , R . K . , Nichol , K . , Nishiyama , K . , Kazemi - Esfarjani , P . , Lynn , F . C . , Wellington , C . , Metzler , M . et al . ( 1997 ) HIP1 , a human homologue of S . cerevisiae Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 3589 Sla2p , interacts with membrane - associated huntingtin in the brain . Nat . Genet . , 16 , 44 – 53 . 22 . Waelter , S . , Scherzinger , E . , Hasenbank , R . , Nordhoff , E . , Lurz , R . , Goehler , H . , Gauss , C . , Sathasivam , K . , Bates , G . P . , Lehrach , H . et al . ( 2001 ) The huntingtin interacting protein HIP1 is a clathrin and alpha - adaptin - binding protein involved in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Hum . Mol . Genet . , 10 , 1807 – 1817 . 23 . Legendre - Guillemin , V . , Metzler , M . , Lemaire , J . F . , Philie , J . , Gan , L . , Hayden , M . R . and McPherson , P . S . ( 2005 ) Huntingtin interacting protein 1 ( HIP1 ) regulates clathrin assembly through direct binding to the regulatory region of the clathrin light chain . J . Biol . Chem . , 280 , 6101 – 6108 . 24 . Chen , C . Y . and Brodsky , F . M . ( 2005 ) Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ( Hip1 ) and Hip1 - related protein ( Hip1R ) bind the conserved sequence of clathrin light chains and thereby inﬂuence clathrin assembly in vitro and actin distribution in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . , 280 , 6109 – 6117 . 25 . Wesp , A . , Hicke , L . , Palecek , J . , Lombardi , R . , Aust , T . , Munn , A . L . and Riezman , H . ( 1997 ) End4p / Sla2p interacts with actin - associated proteins for endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell , 8 , 2291 – 2306 . 26 . Metzler , M . , Li , B . , Gan , L . , Georgiou , J . , Gutekunst , C . A . , Wang , Y . , Torre , E . , Devon , R . S . , Oh , R . , Legendre - Guillemin , V . et al . ( 2003 ) Disruption of the endocytic protein HIP1 results in neurological deﬁcits and decreased AMPA receptor trafﬁcking . EMBO J . , 22 , 3254 – 3266 . 27 . Kittler , J . T . , Thomas , P . , Tretter , V . , Bogdanov , Y . D . , Haucke , V . , Smart , T . G . and Moss , S . J . ( 2004 ) Huntingtin - associated protein 1 regulates inhibitory synaptic transmission by modulating gamma - aminobutyric acid type A receptor membrane trafﬁcking . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 101 , 12736 – 12741 . 28 . Barnes , G . T . , Duyao , M . P . , Ambrose , C . M . , McNeil , S . , Persichetti , F . , Srinidhi , J . , Gusella , J . F . and MacDonald , M . E . ( 1994 ) Mouse Huntington’s disease gene homolog ( Hdh ) . Somat . Cell Mol . Genet . , 20 , 87 – 97 . 29 . Hodgson , J . G . , Agopyan , N . , Gutekunst , C . A . , Leavitt , B . R . , LePiane , F . , Singaraja , R . , Smith , D . J . , Bissada , N . , McCutcheon , K . , Nasir , J . et al . ( 1999 ) A YAC mouse model for Huntington’s disease with full - length mutant huntingtin , cytoplasmic toxicity , and selective striatal neurodegeneration . Neuron , 23 , 181 – 192 . 30 . Ventimiglia , R . and Lindsay , R . M . ( 1998 ) Characterizing and studying neuron cultures . In Banker , G . and Goslin , K . ( eds ) , Culturing Nerve Cells , 2nd edn , Chapter 5 , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 371 – 393 . 31 . Saudou , F . , Finkbeiner , S . , Devys , D . and Greenberg , M . E . ( 1998 ) Huntingtin acts in the nucleus to induce apoptosis but death does not correlate with the formation of intranuclear inclusions . Cell , 95 , 55 – 66 . 32 . Mukherjee , S . , Ghosh , R . N . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1997 ) Endocytosis . Physiol . Rev . , 77 , 759 – 803 . 33 . Singh , R . D . , Puri , V . , Valiyaveettil , J . T . , Marks , D . L . , Bittman , R . and Pagano , R . E . ( 2003 ) Selective caveolin - 1 - dependent endocytosis of glycosphingolipids . Mol . Biol . Cell , 14 , 3254 – 3265 . 34 . Schubert , W . , Frank , P . G . , Razani , B . , Park , D . S . , Chow , C . W . and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2001 ) Caveolae - deﬁcient endothelial cells show defects in the uptake and transport of albumin in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . , 276 , 48619 – 48622 . 35 . Sabharanjak , S . , Sharma , P . , Parton , R . G . andMayor , S . ( 2002 ) GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev . Cell , 2 , 411 – 423 . 36 . Gustavsson , J . , Parpal , S . , Karlsson , M . , Ramsing , C . , Thorn , H . , Borg , M . , Lindroth , M . , Peterson , K . H . , Magnusson , K . E . and Stralfors , P . ( 1999 ) Localization of the insulin receptor in caveolae of adipocyte plasma membrane . FASEB J . , 13 , 1961 – 1971 . 37 . Rothberg , K . G . , Heuser , J . E . , Donzell , W . C . , Ying , Y . S . , Glenney , J . R . and Anderson , R . G . ( 1992 ) Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell , 68 , 673 – 682 . 38 . Sharma , D . K . , Brown , J . C . , Choudhury , A . , Peterson , T . E . , Holicky , E . , Marks , D . L . , Simari , R . , Parton , R . G . and Pagano , R . E . ( 2004 ) Selective stimulation of caveolar endocytosis by glycosphingolipids and cholesterol . Mol . Biol . Cell , 15 , 3114 – 3122 . 39 . Schnitzer , J . E . , Oh , P . , Pinney , E . and Allard , J . ( 1994 ) Filipin - sensitive caveolae - mediated transport in endothelium : reduced transcytosis , scavenger endocytosis , and capillary permeability of select macromolecules . J . Cell Biol . , 127 , 1217 – 1232 . 40 . Bu , J . , Bruckner , S . R . , Sengoku , T . , Geddes , J . W . and Estus , S . ( 2003 ) Glutamate regulates caveolin expression in rat hippocampal neurons . J . Neurosci . Res . , 72 , 185 – 190 . 41 . Razani , B . , Engelman , J . A . , Wang , X . B . , Schubert , W . , Zhang , X . L . , Marks , C . B . , Macaluso , F . , Russell , R . G . , Li , M . , Pestell , R . G . et al . ( 2001 ) Caveolin - 1 null mice are viable but show evidence of hyperproliferative and vascular abnormalities . J . Biol . Chem . , 276 , 38121 – 38138 . 42 . Simionescu , N . , Lupu , F . and Simionescu , M . ( 1983 ) Rings of membrane sterols surround the openings of vesicles and fenestrae , in capillary endothelium . J . Cell Biol . , 97 , 1592 – 1600 . 43 . Fielding , C . J . and Fielding , P . E . ( 2001 ) Caveolae and intracellular trafﬁcking of cholesterol . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . , 49 , 251 – 264 . 44 . Cuevas , P . , Gutierrez Diaz , J . A . , Dujovny , M . , Diaz , F . G . and Ausman , J . I . ( 1988 ) Freeze - fracture cytochemistry of cholesterol content in neuronal plasma membrane following cerebral ischaemia . Neurol . Res . , 10 , 2 – 6 . 45 . Martin , O . C . , Comly , M . E . , Blanchette - Mackie , E . J . , Pentchev , P . G . and Pagano , R . E . ( 1993 ) Cholesterol deprivation affects the ﬂuorescence properties of a ceramide analog at the Golgi apparatus of living cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 90 , 2661 – 2265 . 46 . Mangiarini , L . , Sathasivam , K . , Seller , M . , Cozens , B . , Harper , A . , Hetherington , C . , Lawton , M . , Trottier , Y . , Lehrach , H . , Davies , S . W . et al . ( 1996 ) Exon 1 of the HD gene with an expanded CAG repeat is sufﬁcient to cause a progressive neurological phenotype in transgenic mice . Cell , 87 , 493 – 506 . 47 . Dyer , R . B . and McMurray , C . T . ( 2001 ) Mutant protein in Huntington disease is resistant to proteolysis in affected brain . Nat . Genet . , 29 , 270 – 278 . 48 . Cao , S . , Yao , J . and Shah , V . ( 2003 ) The proline - rich domain of dynamin - 2 is responsible for dynamin - dependent in vitro potentiation of endothelial nitric - oxide synthase activity via selective effects on reductase domain function . J . Biol . Chem . , 278 , 5894 – 5901 . 49 . Sharp , A . H . , Loev , S . J . , Schilling , G . , Li , S . H . , Li , X . J . , Bao , J . , Wagster , M . V . , Kotzuk , J . A . , Steiner , J . P . , Lo , A . et al . ( 1995 ) Widespread expression of Huntington’s disease gene ( IT15 ) protein product . Neuron , 14 , 1065 – 1074 . 50 . DiFiglia , M . , Sapp , E . , Chase , K . , Schwarz , C . , Meloni , A . , Young , C . , Martin , E . , Vonsattel , J . P . , Carraway , R . , Reeves , S . A . et al . ( 1995 ) Huntingtin is a cytoplasmic protein associated with vesicles in human and rat brain neurons . Neuron , 14 , 1075 – 1081 . 51 . Senetar , M . A . , Foster , S . J . and McCann , R . O . ( 2004 ) Intrasteric inhibition mediates the interaction of the I / LWEQ module proteins Talin1 , Talin2 , Hip1 and Hip12 with actin . Biochemistry , 43 , 15418 – 15428 . 52 . Kegel , K . B . , Sapp , E . , Yoder , J . , Cuiffo , B . , Sobin , L . , Kim , Y . J . , Qin , Z . H . , Hayden , M . R . , Aronin , N . , Scott , D . L . et al . ( 2005 ) Huntingtin associates with acidic phospholipids at the plasma membrane . J . Biol . Chem . , 280 , 36464 – 36473 . 53 . Mauch , D . H . , Nagler , K . , Schumacher , S . , Goritz , C . , Muller , E . C . , Otto , A . and Pfrieger , F . W . ( 2001 ) CNS synaptogenesis promoted by glia - derived cholesterol . Science , 294 , 1354 – 1357 . 54 . Hering , H . , Lin , C . C . and Sheng , M . ( 2003 ) Lipid rafts in the maintenance of synapses , dendritic spines , and surface AMPA receptor stability . J . Neurosci . , 23 , 3262 – 3271 . 55 . Koudinov , A . R . and Koudinova , N . V . ( 2005 ) Cholesterol homeostasis failure as a unifying cause of synaptic degeneration . J . Neurol . Sci . , 229 – 230 , 233 – 240 . 56 . Koudinov , A . R . and Koudinova , N . V . ( 2001 ) Essential role for cholesterol in synaptic plasticity and neuronal degeneration . FASEB J . , 15 , 1858 – 1860 . 57 . Distl , R . , Treiber - Held , S . , Albert , F . , Meske , V . , Harzer , K . and Ohm , T . G . ( 2003 ) Cholesterol storage and tau pathology in Niemann – Pick type C disease in the brain . J . Pathol . , 200 , 104 – 111 . 58 . Puri , V . , Watanabe , R . , Dominguez , M . , Sun , X . , Wheatley , C . L . , Marks , D . L . and Pagano , R . E . ( 1999 ) Cholesterol modulates membrane trafﬁc along the endocytic pathway in sphingolipid - storage diseases . Nat . Cell Biol . , 1 , 386 – 388 . 59 . Bouillot , C . , Prochiantz , A . , Rougon , G . and Allinquant , B . ( 1996 ) Axonal amyloid precursor protein expressed by neurons in vitro is present in a membrane fraction with caveolae - like properties . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 7640 – 7644 . 60 . Hashimoto , M . , Takenouchi , T . , Rockenstein , E . and Masliah , E . ( 2003 ) Alpha - synuclein up - regulates expression of caveolin - 1 and down - regulates extracellular signal - regulated kinase activity in B103 neuroblastoma cells : role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease . J . Neurochem . , 85 , 1468 – 1479 . 61 . Peters , P . J . , Mironov , A . , Jr , Peretz , D . , van Donselaar , E . , Leclerc , E . , Erpel , S . , DeArmond , S . J . , Burton , D . R . , Williamson , R . A . , Vey , M . et al . 3590 Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 ( 2003 ) Trafﬁcking of prion proteins through a caveolae - mediated endosomal pathway . J . Cell Biol . , 162 , 703 – 717 . 62 . Sipione , S . , Rigamonti , D . , Valenza , M . , Zuccato , C . , Conti , L . , Pritchard , J . , Kooperberg , C . , Olson , J . M . and Cattaneo , E . ( 2002 ) Early transcriptional proﬁles in huntingtin - inducible striatal cells by microarray analyses . Hum . Mol . Genet . , 11 , 1953 – 1965 . 63 . Valenza , M . , Rigamonti , D . , Goffredo , D . , Zuccato , C . , Fenu , S . , Jamot , L . , Strand , A . , Tarditi , A . , Woodman , B . , Racchi , M . et al . ( 2005 ) Dysfunction of the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway in Huntington’s disease . J . Neurosci . , 25 , 9932 – 9939 . 64 . Brewer , G . J . , Torricelli , J . R . , Evege , E . K . and Price , P . J . ( 1993 ) Optimized survival of hippocampal neurons in B27 - supplemented Neurobasal , a new serum - free medium combination . J . Neurosci . Res . , 35 , 567 – 576 . 65 . Martin , O . C . and Pagano , R . E . ( 1994 ) Internalization and sorting of a ﬂuorescent analogue of glucosylceramide to the Golgi apparatus of human skin ﬁbroblasts : utilization of endocytic and nonendocytic transport mechanisms . J . Cell Biol . , 125 , 769 – 781 . 66 . Puri , V . , Watanabe , R . , Singh , R . D . , Dominguez , M . , Brown , J . C . , Wheatley , C . L . , Marks , D . L . and Pagano , R . E . ( 2001 ) Clathrin - dependent and - independent internalization of plasma membrane sphingolipids initiates two Golgi targeting pathways . J . Cell Biol . , 154 , 535 – 547 . Human Molecular Genetics , 2006 , Vol . 15 , No . 24 3591