Effect of Surface Chemistry on Tropomyosin Binding to Actin Filaments on Surfaces Philip R . Nicovich , 1 † * Miro Janco , 1 † Tom Sobey , 2 Mehul Gajwani , 1 Peyman Obeidy , 2 Renee Whan , 3 Katharina Gaus , 1 Peter W . Gunning , 2 Adelle CF Coster , 4 and Till B € ocking 1 * 1 ARC Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular Imaging and EMBL Australia Node in Single Molecule Science , School of Medical Sciences , University of New South Wales , Sydney , Australia 2 School of Medical Sciences , University of New South Wales , Sydney , Australia 3 Biomedical Imaging Facility , University of New South Wales , Sydney , Australia 4 School of Mathematics and Statistics , University of New South Wales , Sydney , Australia Received 8 June 2016 ; Revised 24 October 2016 ; Accepted 25 October 2016 Monitoring Editor : Pekka Lappalainen Reconstitution of actin ﬁlaments on surfaces for obser - vation of ﬁlament - associated protein dynamics by ﬂuo - rescence microscopy is currently an exciting ﬁeld in biophysics . Here we examine the effects of attaching actin ﬁlaments to surfaces on the binding and dissocia - tion kinetics of a ﬂuorescence - labeled tropomyosin , a rod - shaped protein that forms continuous strands wrapping around the actin ﬁlament . Two attachment modalities of the actin to the surface are explored : where the actin ﬁlament is attached to the surface at multiple points along its length ; and where the actin ﬁlament is attached at one end and aligned parallel to the surface by buffer ﬂow . To facilitate analysis of actin - binding protein dynamics , we have developed a software tool for the viewing , tracing and analysis of ﬁl - aments and co - localized species in noisy ﬂuorescence timelapse images . Our analysis shows that the interac - tion of tropomyosin with actin ﬁlaments is similar for both attachment modalities . V C 2016 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . Key Words : actin - binding proteins ; in vitro reconstitution ; actin ﬁlament dynamics ; actin – tropomyosin ﬁlament assem - bly ; ﬂuorescence microscopy ; image analysis Introduction A ctin ﬁlaments play a critical role as part of the cytoskel - eton , where they are involved in most cellular processes including determination of cell shape , migration , division , membrane function , and intracellular transport . In muscle cells , actin ﬁlaments are a key component of the contractile apparatus . This enormous functional specialization is dependent on a multitude of actin - binding proteins that associate at the sides or ends of ﬁlaments and regulate ﬁla - ment organization , mechanical properties , dynamics , and interactions in time and space [ dos Remedios et al . , 2003 ; Pollard , 2016 ] . Tropomyosins are a family of actin - binding proteins with over 40 isoforms [ Gunning et al . , 2015a ] . This family con - sists of dimeric coiled - coil proteins that assemble into con - tinuous head - to - tail polymers along the helical grooves of the actin ﬁlament , whereby each tropomyosin associates with up to seven actin monomers [ Holmes and Lehman , 2008 ] . Recent evidence suggests that different tropomyosin isoforms deﬁne functionally distinct actin ﬁlaments and play an essential role in regulating the binding of other actin - binding proteins to the ﬁlament in an isoform - speciﬁc manner [ Gunning et al . , 2015b ] . There are two models for the assembly of tropomyosin - containing actin ﬁlaments . One view is that stochastic nucleation and cooperative binding of tropomyosin to actin ﬁlaments , driven by the overlap between the N - and C - termini of adjacent tropo - myosin dimers , leads to full decoration of the actin ﬁlament [ Holmes and Lehman , 2008 ] . The alternative view is that tropomyosin and actin copolymerize during the elongation of formin nucleated ﬁlaments [ Johnson et al . , 2014 ] . Fluorescence imaging of actin ﬁlaments reconstituted in vitro has emerged as an important tool to observe the kinet - ics of actin polymerization and the interactions with actin - binding proteins at the level of individual ﬁlaments [ J (cid:2) egou et al . , 2011 ; Crevenna et al . , 2015 ; Gressin et al . , 2015 ; Hsiao et al . , 2015 ; Schmidt et al . , 2015 ] . To facilitate observation , actin ﬁlaments are commonly attached to the surface of a modiﬁed glass coverslip at multiple points along their length and appear as curved lines in the ﬂuores - cence image [ Breitsprecher et al . , 2009 ; Smith et al . , 2014 ] . Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online ver - sion of this article . † Equal contribution . * Address correspondence to : Philip R . Nicovich ; E - mail : p . nicovich @ unsw . edu . au or T . B € ocking ; E - mail : till . boecking @ unsw . edu . au Published online 00 Month 2016 in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary . com ) . RESEARCH ARTICLE Cytoskeleton , Month 2016 00 : 00 – 00 ( doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 21342 ) V C 2016 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 1 (cid:2) Alternatively , actin ﬁlaments can be grown inside microﬂui - dic channels from seeds attached to the surface [ Carlier et al . , 2014 ] . These ﬁlaments are tethered to the surface at one end and can be aligned parallel to the surface by main - taining a continuous ﬂow inside the microﬂuidic channel to appear as straight lines in the ﬂuorescence image [ Carlier et al . , 2014 ] . Fluorophore - labeled actin - binding proteins added to surface - bound ﬁlaments can then be observed down to the single - molecule level with timelapse total inter - nal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy . A key question in these reconstitution assays is whether the surface chemistry and in particular the method for anchoring ﬁlaments affects their properties , e . g . , as observed in the effect of different side - binding proteins on actin elongation [ Crevenna et al . , 2015 ] . It is unknown to what extent geometric constraints or ﬁlament motions can hinder the access of side - binding proteins to the ﬁlament . To address this question we compare the interaction kinetics of tropomyosin isoform Tpm1 . 1 with ﬁlaments that are either bound to the surface via multiple tethering points along one side or via a single tethering point at the end of the ﬁla - ment . Tropomyosin binding represents a stringent test of steric hindrance from the surface because the protein forms polymer strands that wrap around the actin ﬁlament . To standardize analysis of curved ( multiply - tethered ) and straight ( singly - tethered ) ﬁlaments in ﬂuorescence images , we developed the General Automated Localization Area Handler ( GALAH ) a MATLAB - based software tool that allows for the backbone tracing and segmentation of unbranched ﬁlaments , ambivalent to curvature , in time - lapse images with low signal - to - noise ratio . Using GALAH , we extracted kymographs and derived the kinetics of Tpm1 . 1 binding and dissociation at the level of single ﬁla - ments . This analysis revealed that both surface chemistry methods are compatible with the binding of tropomyosin to both sides of the ﬁlament . Results Reconstitution of Actin Filaments on Surfaces for Fluorescence Microcopy We compared two strategies for reconstituting actin ﬁla - ments on surfaces , whereby actin ﬁlaments were either teth - ered to the surface at multiple points via biotinylated phalloidin ( Fig . 1A ) [ Vizcarra et al . , 2014 ] or attached at one end via the spectrin – actin complex and aligned with the ﬂow inside a microﬂuidic channel ( Fig . 1B ) [ J (cid:2) egou et al . , 2011 ] . The initial steps for surface modiﬁcation were the same for both approaches . A microﬂuidic device fabri - cated in polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) was mounted onto the surface of a glass coverslip and the glass surface was modiﬁed with a copolymer consisting of poly - L - lysine and biotinylated poly ( ethylene glycol ) followed by streptavidin [ B € ocking et al . , 2011 ] . This surface chemistry reduces nonspeciﬁc adsorption of proteins and allows speciﬁc cap - ture of biotinylated species . For multiple tethering the sur - face was modiﬁed with biotinylated phalloidin and actin ﬁlaments were either assembled outside the microﬂuidic device and introduced into the ﬂow channel or polymerized from monomeric actin inside the ﬂow channel . The ﬁla - ments were then allowed to bind to the phalloidin - modiﬁed surface at a density that largely avoided overlap between ﬁlaments . This procedure resulted in the deposi - tion of curved and randomly oriented ﬁlaments on the sur - face of the cover slip ( Fig . 2A ) . For single tethering , biotinylated spectrin – actin seeds were bound to the surface and monomeric actin was introduced into the ﬂow channel to grow actin ﬁlaments in situ at the barbed ends of the spectrin – actin seeds . In the presence of ﬂow , these end - tethered ﬁlaments were aligned parallel to the surface ( and to each other ) and appeared as straight parallel lines in the ﬂuorescence image ( Fig . 3A ) . Filaments attached via spec - trin – actin seeds had the same orientation with growth occurring in the direction of the ﬂow at the untethered end . Software for Filament Tracing and Extracting Filament Dynamics from Fluorescence Images We developed GALAH , a MATLAB based graphical user interface that traces ﬁlament backbones in ﬂuorescence images and subdivides each ﬁlament into user - deﬁned seg - ments . This segmentation allows for time - domain analysis of different regions on the ﬁlament or simply for curved ﬁl - aments to be linearized and converted into kymographs . A detailed summary of the software is provided in the Supple - mentary Information . The basic steps of the backbone tracing and segmenta - tion algorithms are depicted for a curved ﬁlament in Fig . 2B . The user selects regions of interest in the image and sets an intensity threshold to deﬁne the boundaries of individual ﬁlaments ( Fig . 2B , right panel ; see also step 5 in the Fig . 1 . Schematic representation of the approaches used to immobilize actin filaments to the surface for observation by TIRF microscopy . A . Filament captured at multiple point via biotinylated phalloidin , which is attached to a surface modified with PLL – PEG – biotin and streptavidin . B . Filament grown from a spectrin – actin seed and aligned parallel to the surface using the flow in the microfluidic channel . The spectrin – actin seed is biotinylated and is attached to a surface modified with PLL – PEG 2 biotin and streptavidin . [ Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary . com ] (cid:2) 2 Nicovich et al . CYTOSKELETON software summary ) . These boundaries are then passed to the backbone trace algorithm to generate a single - pixel wide skeleton by morphological thinning . Due to extraneous intensity and noise , this skeleton will often contain branches that are not a part of the desired backbone trace . These undesired features are removed by applying a recur - sive trimming procedure to the skeleton . Finally , the cleaned backbone trace is extended beyond the length of the ﬁlament ( up to its “end caps” ) to obtain well - deﬁned edges in the kymograph representation of the data ( Fig . 2B , middle panel ) . For further analysis the ﬁlament is subdi - vided into segments with a user - deﬁned length and width ( alternating blue and green segments in the right panel of Fig . 2B ) . The segment width is chosen such that it contains any slight movements of the ﬁlament that may have occurred during the experiment , while the length is chosen to balance signal - to - noise with spatial precision along the ﬁlament . From here the original 4D data ( X – Y – time chan - nel ) can be analyzed as 3D data ( X – time channel ) of the now - linear ﬁlaments , taking the cumulative centroid dis - tance as the value for X , through kymographs or time – domain analysis of individual subregions . Figure 3 illustrates how kymographs generated in GALAH can be used to extract the rate of ﬁlament growth in data with very low signal - to - noise ratios . Actin ﬁlaments were grown at the barbed ends of spectrin – actin seeds attached to the surface ( Fig . 3A ) from a G - actin mixture containing a small fraction ( 3 % ) of Atto488 - labeled actin . Low - level incorporation of labeled actin is desirable to min - imize the effects of labeled actin on growth rates and on the association of proteins that bind to the side of the ﬁlament . Filaments assembled with 3 % labeled actin contain on aver - age 1 ﬂuorophore per 100 nm . Filament elongation was imaged by TIRF microscopy ( Fig . 3A ) . In GALAH the Fig . 2 . Detection , skeletonization , and segmentation of curved ( “fixed” ) filaments using GALAH . A . Fluorescence image show - ing fixed filaments stained with AF488 2 phalloidin . B . Left : A user - supplied threshold is used to generate object boundaries in a seg - mented image ( blue ) , which is then dilated by a user - specified distance ( green ) and this object is skeletonized ( red ) . Center : The skeletonized object is trimmed of extra branches ( light red ) . Skeleton ends ( yellow ) along with object end cap ( blue ) center points ( green ) are connected along the shortest path ( purple ) to generate a trace from one extreme of the object to the other . Right : The full trace ( red ) is evenly divided at a user - supplied length and boxes generated ( alternating blue and green segments ) from lines defin - ing a user - specified width normal to this trace . Box centers ( blue ) and intensity values are used for subsequent analyses . [ Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary . com ] Fig . 3 . Detection , skeletonization , and segmentation of straight ( “aligned” ) filaments using GALAH . A . Snapshots from a TIRF timelapse image stack showing elongation of straight ( “aligned” ) filaments over time . The filaments are stained by incorporation of fluorescence - labeled actin monomers . B . Left : a user - supplied threshold is used to generate object boundaries in a segmented image ( blue ) , which is then dilated by a user - specified distance ( green ) and this object is skeletonized ( red ) . Center : skeleton ends ( yellow ) along with object end cap ( blue ) center points ( green ) are connected along the shortest path ( purple ) to generate a trace from one extreme of the object to the other . Right : The full trace ( red ) is smoothed and evenly divided at a user - supplied length and boxes generated ( alternating blue and green segments ) from lines defining a user - specified width normal to this trace . Box centers ( blue ) and intensity values are used for subsequent analyses . C . Kymograph of the fluorescence intensity signal extracted using GALAH from the filament ( marked with an orange box ) in panel A . The edge ( dashed pink line ) representing filament growth yielded an esti - mate for the growth rate of 19 nm / s . [ Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary . com ] CYTOSKELETON Actin – Tropomyosin Filament Dynamics on Surfaces 3 (cid:2) ﬁlaments were segmented using the maximum intensity projection image , which conveniently yields an image of the ﬁlaments at their maximum length . The kymograph generated with this mask shows the growth process ( Fig . 3C ) , whereby the slope of the ﬁlament edge in the kymo - graph ( pink dashed line ) represents the growth rate . The growth rates for the three different ﬁlaments in Fig . 3A were found to be between 19 and 26 nm / s using this meth - od . While we used a projection image to generate the mask for this analysis , it should be noted that segmentation with the GALAH algorithm was also possible using individual frames of the movie without averaging ( Supporting Infor - mation Fig . S2 ) . In contrast , attempts to track ﬁlament lengths via ﬁtting of the images with a two - dimensional Gaussian model failed in this case because of the low signal - to - noise ratio . The backbone trace in GALAH is determined at the pixel level , whereby an optional ﬁlter can be applied to the back - bone to obtain a smoothed trace with subpixel coordinates . While the resulting backbone is less precise than the ﬁla - ment centerline position determined to high resolution by two - dimensional ﬁtting in other software tools ( Supporting Information Fig . S1A ) , the approximate backbone position is sufﬁcient to divide the ﬁlament into regions for intensity - based analysis or to generate kymographs . Importantly , the simple and fast algorithm used in GALAH yields complete backbones with little optimization of parameters for ﬁla - ments with patchy staining or in low signal - to - noise ratio images . In contrast , ﬁtting - based approaches can fail to identify the signal as a continuous ﬁlament under these cir - cumstances and lead to artifacts such as breaking the ﬁla - ment into smaller sections and the appearance of hooked ends that deviate from the ﬁlament backbone ( Supporting Information Fig . S1B ) . Using simulated data the GALAH segmentation algorithm continued to perform reasonably well at signal - to - noise ratios as low as 0 . 97 and very well at signal - to - noise ratios above 1 . 65 ( Supporting Information Figs . S3 and S4 ) as well as at all labeling coverage fractions tested ( as low as 0 . 01 , Supporting Information Fig . S5 ) . Filament segmentation in data with low signal to noise ratio was further improved via two options available in the backbone trace algorithm . Firstly , the average or maximum intensity projection of the ﬂuorescence time series can be used to improve the signal - to - noise ratio so that aggregate data is used to generate the threshold mask and subsequent segmentation . The maximum intensity projection is espe - cially useful in the case of growing ﬁlaments , where the pro - jection includes signal along the full length of the ﬁlament at a higher signal - to - noise than any single frame . Secondly , if a sliding window position ﬁlter is applied to the backbone traces of ﬁlaments , pixel - level deviations can be removed from the ideal backbone . This ﬁltering is particularly bene - ﬁcial for ﬁlaments with relatively straight backbones as the subregion centroids can be smoothed to subpixel precision for more precise alignment to the ﬁlament signal . We have implemented these algorithms in the GALAH software , along with a number of tools to correct for uneven illumination intensities , drift , and channel misalign - ments in the data and facilitate ﬁlament segmentation . Intensity ﬂattening of images , often required because of uneven illumination in the TIRF ﬁeld , is accomplished by high - pass ﬁltering of each image in a data stack . This ﬁlter - ing is performed with built - in MATLAB functions to gen - erate a dilated or blurred image , which is subtracted from the original to generate the high - pass ﬁltered image . Func - tionalities for channel alignment of dual - channel images are provided as well as correction for translational drift of the sample during the imaging window , again utilizing built - in MATLAB functions . These routines are included in the package as a convenience to avoid having to incorporate a separate platform into the data processing workﬂow , though an option for directly exporting the processed image stack exists to allow this package to become a part of an addition - al workﬂow in other studies . The ability to call internal GALAH functions through a command - line interface addi - tionally allows these functions to become part of a larger image processing workﬂow . Processing of data is accom - plished rapidly on a standard 64 - bit desktop computer . Backbone tracing and kymograph extraction of image stacks can be accomplished in seconds allowing for rapid feedback from the user to optimize settings . Labeling of Recombinant Tpm1 . 1 for Fluorescence Microscopy Tropomyosin isoform Tpm1 . 1 contains a single cysteine residue at position 190 and Tpm1 . 1 labeled at this residue retains its ability to bind to actin ﬁlaments [ Ishii and Lehrer , 1985 ] . We produced recombinant Tpm1 . 1 in bac - teria with alanine - serine extension at the N - terminus . This modiﬁcation mimics N - acetylation of tropomyosin in that it increases the afﬁnity of Tpm1 . 1 to actin ﬁlaments [ Coul - ton et al . , 2006 ] . Reaction of recombinant Tpm1 . 1 with a maleimide derivative of Alexa Fluor 647 ( AF647 ) yielded ﬂuorescent Tpm1 . 1 ( Fig . 4A ) , whereby the labeling ratio could be tuned by changing the reaction conditions . The labeling ratio determined by UV – visible light absorption spectroscopy of the protein used in this study was approxi - mately 20 % ( i . e . , 0 . 2 ﬂuorophores per cysteine residue ) . Assuming random incorporation of the dye , this labeling ratio corresponds to a mixture containing 36 % labeled dimers , whereby 89 % of the labeled dimers contain one ﬂu - orophore and 11 % contain two ﬂuorophores . The outcome of the labeling reaction was further investigated using single - molecule photobleaching . Labeled Tpm1 . 1 dimers were sparsely adsorbed onto the surface of a glass cover slip and appeared as diffraction - limited spots in the TIRF image . The majority of spots showed single - step bleaching in traces extracted from timelapse ﬂuorescence movies ( Fig . 4B ) as expected for dimers containing one dye molecule . (cid:2) 4 Nicovich et al . CYTOSKELETON We determined the mean intensity of a single ﬂuorophore by ﬁtting the distribution of step heights with a Gaussian function ( Fig . 4C ) and then determined the number of ﬂu - orophores for each spot present in the ﬁrst frame of the ﬂuorescence movie by dividing the intensity of the spot by the intensity of a single ﬂuorophore . The resulting distribu - tion ( Fig . 4D ) showed that most dimers contained a single label ( 81 % ) , consistent with the labeling ratio determined by spectroscopy . Interaction of Tpm1 . 1 with Fixed and Aligned Actin Filaments To determine whether the immobilization chemistry impacts on the formation and stability of the tropomyosin polymer on actin ﬁlaments , we measured the association and dissociation of Tpm1 . 1 with ﬁxed and aligned ﬁla - ments . Actin ﬁlaments were captured onto the surface via the methods shown in Fig . 1 and stained with Alexa Fluor 488 ( AF488 ) - labeled phalloidin . A solution containing 500 nM AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 was then injected into the ﬂow channel resulting in a rapid increase in Tpm1 . 1 concentra - tion at the surface . A constant ﬂow of the solution contain - ing Tpm1 . 1 was maintained throughout the binding experiment . We then monitored the AF488 – phalloidin and AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 signals using dual color TIRF imaging with a frame rate of 10 Hz to monitor the integrity of the actin ﬁlaments and the colocalization of Tpm1 . 1 with the ﬁlaments . Photobleaching was negligible during the bind - ing reaction under these imaging conditions . The ﬁlaments were segmented using GALAH and analysed to produce curves of the mean ﬂuorescence intensity and kymographs along the ﬁlament in each ﬂuorescence channel as illustrat - ed for a representative ﬁlament in Figs . 5B and 5C . The mean intensity curves reveal the overall gain or loss of ﬂuo - rescent molecules from the ﬁlament . The AF488 – phalloi - din signal remained at a high level over time , but we observed a decrease in the phalloidin signal during the Tpm1 . 1 binding phase , which we attributed to F € orster reso - nance energy transfer between AF488 ( donor ) attached to phalloidin and AF647 ( acceptor ) attached to Tpm1 . 1 . Binding of AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 to the ﬁlament started shortly after its arrival at the surface and reached an equilibrium binding level with 10 – 15 s after nucleation ( Fig . 5C ) . The kymographs of the binding process provided a detailed view of the dynamics along the ﬁlament . The kymograph of the AF488 – phalloidin signal showed an invariant pattern of staining ( Fig . 5B ) conﬁrming that the ﬁlament remained intact during the experiment . The kymograph of the AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 signal revealed that tropomyosin strands nucleated at various locations along the ﬁlaments ( indicated by magenta arrowheads in Fig . 5C ) and grew towards each other until the ﬁlament was ﬂuorescent along its entire length . Despite the complexity of the decoration process revealed by the kymograph , the mean AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 binding curve determined at the ﬁlament level could be approximat - ed with a single exponential binding process ( Fig . 5C ) . We used this simple model to compare the association kinetics of Tpm1 . 1 on ﬁxed and aligned ﬁlaments . The observed binding rates determined by ﬁtting of binding curves from individual ﬁlaments revealed no signiﬁcant difference between the two methods for tethering actin ﬁlaments ( Fig . 5D and Supporting Information Table S1 , mean rates of 0 . 152 and 0 . 196 s 2 1 for ﬁxed and aligned ﬁlaments , respec - tively ; P 5 0 . 195 , unpaired t test with Welch’s correction ) . We conclude that decoration of actin ﬁlaments with AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 at a concentration of 500 nM is a rapid process reaching equilibrium within a few seconds and independent of the mode of ﬁlament anchoring . The introduction of a ﬂuorescent label on Cys - 190 of Tpm1 . 1 can affect its afﬁnity for the actin ﬁlament . As shown above , the labeled Tpm1 . 1 used in this imaging study contains a mixture of unlabeled and labeled Tpm1 . 1 . To further test the competition between labeled and unla - beled Tpm1 . 1 , we imaged the incorporation of labeled Tpm1 . 1 in the presence of increasing concentrations of unlabeled Tpm1 . 1 . The mean ﬂuorescence intensity of the AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 signal measured for a ﬁlament at equilib - rium decreased with increasing concentrations of unlabeled Tpm1 . 1 as expected for increasingly lower label densities . Robust staining along the ﬁlament was observed down to a molar ratio of labeled : unlabeled Tpm1 . 1 of 1 : 7 . The Fig . 4 . Fluorescence labeling of Tpm1 . 1 with a maleimide derivative of AF647 . A . SDS PAGE of AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 with Coo - massie staining ( left ) and fluorescence detection ( right ) . B . Representative single molecule photobleaching traces of AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 . C . Histogram of single molecule intensities . D . Distribution of the number of fluorophores per spot determined for all diffraction - limited spots in an image of AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 dimers adsorbed to the coverslip surface . [ Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlineli - brary . com ] CYTOSKELETON Actin – Tropomyosin Filament Dynamics on Surfaces 5 (cid:2) AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 signal at a molar ratio of 1 : 14 showed a punctate staining pattern rather than continuous stretches of label . Overall we found that unlabeled Tpm1 . 1 does not exclude labeled Tpm1 . 1 from binding to the ﬁlament even when the labeled protein is present in great excess whereby the level of staining suggests that Tpm1 . 1 modiﬁed at Cys - 190 ( with mainly one label per Tpm1 . 1 dimer ) binds with similar afﬁnity ( same order of magnitude ) to actin as unla - beled Tpm1 . 1 . Next we compared the dissociation of Tpm1 . 1 from ﬁxed and aligned ﬁlaments . First the ﬁlaments were stained with AF488 2 phalloidin and then decorated with AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 that was introduced into the ﬂow channel at a concentration of 125 nM , 500 nM or 2 l M for a sufﬁ - cient period of time for binding to reach equilibrium . The excess AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 was washed out with a constant ﬂow of buffer maintained for the duration of the experi - ment , allowing for the observation of the dissociation pro - cess . The ﬂuorescence movies of the AF488 2 phalloidin and AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 signals recorded with an imaging fre - quency of 1 Hz started just before the washout phase . Mean intensity curves and kymographs of the phalloidin signal generated using GALAH showed that the actin ﬁla - ments remained unaffected throughout the experiment ( (cid:2) 7 min ) as was the case in the binding experiments above . On the other hand the kymograph of the tropomyosin sig - nal showed rapid dissociation , presumably initiating at multiple locations along the ﬁlament . The mean AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 intensity of the ﬁlament started to decay towards the end of the washout phase . While the decrease in signal was typically characterized by phases of rapid decay and pausing , the overall dissociation could be approx - imated for most ﬁlaments with a single exponential decay . Figure 6D shows a comparison of dissociation rate con - stants determined using GALAH for different experimental conditions . As expected Tpm1 . 1 dissociation from individ - ual ﬁlaments was independent of the Tpm1 . 1 concentration used during the binding phase ( 125 nM , 500 nM or 2 l M ; P 5 0 . 958 by two - way ANOVA with concentration as the source of variation ) . Interestingly , the immobilization strat - egy had a small but signiﬁcant effect on the rate constant ( P 5 0 . 0019 by two - way ANOVA with surface chemistry as the source of variation ) . Dissociation from aligned ﬁla - ments was on average slightly faster ( k off 5 0 . 019 s 2 1 ) than from ﬁxed ﬁlaments ( k off 5 0 . 012 s 2 1 ) suggesting that arti - facts arising from the immobilization chemistry exist but are relatively modest in these systems . The dissociation rates determined for ﬂow - aligned ﬁlaments additionally showed a greater scatter than the rates determined for multiply teth - ered ﬁlaments , which we attribute to the increased noise resulting from the motion of the untethered ends of the ﬂow - aligned ﬁlaments in and out of the focal plane . An interesting feature observed in a number of kymo - graphs of Tpm1 . 1 binding and dissociation was the pres - ence of two distinct AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 intensity levels ( Supporting Information Fig . S6 ) . These levels were readily discernable in kymographs with low background ﬂuores - cence , in particular in dissociation experiments where ﬂuo - rescent Tpm1 . 1 has been removed from the solution ( Fig . 6C ) . We attribute these levels to stretches of actin ﬁlament decorated on one major groove ( low level ) or both major grooves ( high level ) with AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 . When inter - preted in this way , the kymographs ( Supporting Informa - tion Fig . S6 ) show that nucleation and dissociation of Tpm1 . 1 strands on the two major grooves on opposite sides of the actin ﬁlaments are independent of each other . Discussion Here we investigate the strengths and limitations of tech - nologies that underpin ﬂuorescence microscopy studies of actin ﬁlament and actin - binding protein dynamics in recon - stituted systems . Firstly , we introduce GALAH as a new software package for generating kymographs and time – domain data from segmented ﬁlaments irrespective of cur - vature . Secondly , we compare two methods for attaching Fig . 5 . Analysis of tropomyosin binding . A . Cartoon illustrating tropomyosin binding to actin filaments . B / C . Intensity plots and kymographs of the actin ( B ) and tropomyosin ( C ) signal of a fixed filament during injection of 500 nM AF647 – Tpm1 . 1 into the flow channel . The gray box in panel C indicates the arrival phase of AF647 – Tpm1 . 1 at the surface . The magenta arrowheads on the kymograph in panel C indicate possible nucleation points on the naked actin filament . D . Boxplots of observed tropomyosin binding rates determined at the single filament level in GALAH on filaments that were either tethered at multiple points to the surface ( “Fixed” ) or tethered at the pointed end and aligned in the flow ( “Aligned” ) . Outliers are marked with red crosses . Unpaired t test with Welch’s correction , P 5 0 . 195 . [ Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary . com ] (cid:2) 6 Nicovich et al . CYTOSKELETON actin ﬁlaments to surfaces with respect to their ability to interact with the side - binding protein tropomyosin to assess the effect of steric hindrance and ﬁlament motions on the copolymer . Software for Filament Analysis Several software packages have been developed and made available to the community to facilitate automated analysis of ﬁlaments and ﬁlament networks [ e . g . , Ruhnow et al . , 2011 ; Prahl et al . , 2014 ; Bohner et al . , 2015 ; Ting et al . , 2015 ; Usov and Mezzenga , 2015 ] . These packages are typi - cally optimized for a particular type of ﬁlament and experi - mental design . For example , FIESTA was developed for tracking of microtubule translocation and growth with (cid:3) 2 nm precision for the ﬁlament centerline and (cid:3) 9 nm precision for the tips by ﬁtting a two - dimensional model to the ﬂuorescence images [ Ruhnow et al . , 2011 ] . This approach was recently extended to improve precision of microtubule end - tracking in low signal - to - noise ratio data [ Bohner et al . , 2015 ] . In many studies the precise localiza - tion of ﬁlament backbones with subpixel resolution is not required or not feasible because of low signal - to - noise ratio data . For example , actin - based processes are often analyzed manually using generic tools available in ImageJ or MAT - LAB [ Smith et al . , 2014 ] . These studies as well as rapid inspection of data sets to ascertain trends in the data could beneﬁt from integrated software that can accelerate ﬁlament detection and extraction of ﬂuorescence traces along the length of the ﬁlament in an unbiased fashion . Of particular interest is the capability to linearize curved ﬁlaments in an efﬁcient and reliable manner in order to extract kymo - graphs along the ﬁlament length , regardless of ﬁlament cur - vature or orientation . In this context GALAH ﬁlls the niche between simple built - in ImageJ or MATLAB tools and computationally expensive , though exceptionally precise , Gaussian ﬁtting methods , providing a method for rapid feedback and analysis in ﬁlament tracking and single - molecule binding experiments . Reconstitution of Filaments on Surfaces Reconstitution of actin based processes in vitro and direct observation of their dynamics at the single ﬁlament and sin - gle molecule level by timelapse ﬂuorescence microscopy represents a powerful approach to dissect the role of actin - binding proteins on ﬁlament properties [ Crevenna et al . , 2015 ; Hsiao et al . , 2015 ; Jansen et al . , 2015 ; Johnston et al . , 2015 ] . However , it is important to consider and assess potential artifacts associated with the surface chemis - try of attaching actin ﬁlaments to the surface . A general consideration for using side - binding molecules for immobi - lization is that one side of the actin ﬁlament is in close proximity to the surface . Even though actin ﬁlaments in cells can also be bound to surfaces ( e . g . , to membranes ) , this attachment mode may hinder access of large side - binding proteins ( i . e . , those to be studied in the assay ) to the ﬁlament and thus affect their interaction kinetics . In addition , side - binding proteins used for immobilization may have overlapping binding sites on the ﬁlament with the protein to be studied or could induce structural changes in the ﬁlament [ Crevenna et al . , 2015 ] . To overcome these limitations , actin ﬁlaments can be attached to the surface at one end . For imaging end - tethered ﬁlaments need to be aligned close to the surface by ﬂow . As a result the ﬁlaments undergo increased motions , which could in principle affect the binding of proteins . This might especially be the case for tropomyosins that interact with 6 – 7 actin monomers and form a head - to - tail polymer along its entire length . Here we observed that the kinetics of Tpm1 . 1 binding ana - lyzed at the single - ﬁlament level was indistinguishable for both modes of surface attachment . Dissociation was only marginally faster from aligned ﬁlaments than from ﬁxed ﬁl - aments . Overall these observations suggest that both Fig . 6 . Analysis of tropomyosin dissociation . A . Cartoon illustrating tropomyosin dissociation from actin filaments starting at a defect site in the tropomyosin strand . B / C . Intensity plots and kymographs of the actin ( B ) and tropomyosin ( C ) signal of an aligned filament after wash - out of tropomyosin ( 125 nM ) from the flow channel . The grey box in panel C indicates the wash - out phase of AF647 – Tpm1 . 1 from the flow channel . D . Boxplots of tropomyosin dissociation rate constants determined at the single filament lev - el in GALAH on filaments that were either tethered at multiple points to the surface ( “Fixed” ) or tethered at the pointed end and aligned in the flow ( “Aligned” ) and decorated with tropomyosin at different concentrations . Outliers are marked with red crosses . Two - way ANOVA , P 5 0 . 958 ( concentration as source of variation ) and P 5 0 . 0019 ( surface chemistry as source of variation ) . [ Col - or figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary . com ] CYTOSKELETON Actin – Tropomyosin Filament Dynamics on Surfaces 7 (cid:2) approaches are suitable for reconstituting actin – tropomyo - sin ﬁlament formation . Implications for Actin – Tropomyosin Polymer Formation Our results conﬁrm the general characteristics of the tropo - myosin binding and dissociation process ﬁrst observed in a reconstituted system with actin ﬁlaments immobilized on surfaces via nonspeciﬁcally adsorbed skeletal muscle myosin [ Schmidt et al . , 2015 ] : stable Tpm1 . 1 foci appeared at mul - tiple locations on the ﬁlament during the Tpm1 . 1 wash - in phase and extended rapidly in both directions from these foci until the ﬁlament was uniformly ﬂuorescent . This pro - cess is consistent with random nucleation of multiple tropo - myosin strands on the ﬁlament that then grow towards each other by addition of tropomyosin dimers to their ends . This mode of decoration would be expected to lead to discontinu - ous tropomyosin polymers because Tpm1 . 1 binds to seven actin monomers in the ﬁlament and independent Tpm1 . 1 strands growing towards each other are unlikely to be in reg - ister with each other such that a gap too small to ﬁt a Tpm1 . 1 dimer will persist [ Schmidt et al . , 2015 ] . These gaps of 1 – 6 actin monomers ( approximately 5 – 30 nm long ) in the tropomyosin strand would not be detected as a discon - tinuity in the ﬂuorescence signal ( because the point spread functions of the endmost labels on either side of the gap overlap ) but are potential sites of instability where tropomyo - sin dissociation is rapid . As previously shown for Tpm1 . 6 [ Schmidt et al . , 2015 ] , we indeed observed that Tpm1 . 1 dis - sociation initiated at various locations along the actin ﬁla - ment ( not just the ends of the ﬁlaments ) and these locations may correspond to gap sites . While these gaps could in prin - ciple anneal through a remodeling process [ Vilfan , 2001 ] , this process would likely be too slow for the timescales of processes associated with the cytoskeleton . Overall we observed that the stability of the Tpm1 . 1 polymer of actin formed by decoration of a “naked” actin ﬁlament with tropomyosin is low with a half life of 36 – 58 s on the ﬁlament after Tpm1 . 1 removal from solution . The implication of this observation is that building actin – tropo - myosin polymers with higher stability may require coordi - nation of the assembly process to avoid breaks in the tropomyosin strand , e . g . , by nucleation at deﬁned sites [ Hsiao et al . , 2015 ] or catalysis of actin – tropomyosin co - assembly by actin nucleators [ Johnson et al . , 2014 ] . On the ﬂipside , tropomyosin binding to actin ﬁlaments in the cyto - skeleton may indeed be more dynamic than previously appreciated as shown by the fast turnover of tropomyosin in stress ﬁbres [ Bonello et al . , 2016 ; Tojkander et al . , 2011 ] . Thus , different assembly processes may coexist in the cell for actin – tropomyosin polymer formation . Dissec - tion of these mechanisms will require a combination of experimental approaches including those detailed in this study . Conclusions The GALAH platform provides a convenient and rapid means to segment and analyze immobilized linear biopoly - mers in multichannel timelapse image stacks regardless of the ﬁlament orientation or curvature . Its main advantage lies in a computationally inexpensive but robust algorithm that can detect ﬁlaments with patchy staining or in low signal - to - noise ratio images . Analysis of tropomyosin asso - ciation with and dissociation from actin ﬁlaments attached to the surface either in multiple locations or at the pointed end suggests that the mode of attachment does not hinder the access of small side - binding proteins such as tropomyo - sin to the ﬁlament and has only a small effect on the stabili - ty of the actin – tropomyosin complex . These systems will aid dissection of molecular mechanisms involved in actin – tropomyosin ﬁlament assembly . Materials and Methods Preparation of Flow Cells Coverslips ( Marienfeld superior No . 1 . 5H , 24 mm 3 60 mm ) were sonicated in 100 % ethanol for 30 min , rinsed with Milli - Q , sonicated in a 1 M solution of NaOH for 30 min and ﬁnally rinsed with Milli - Q water . This cleaning procedure was repeated and the coverslips were then dried in an oven at 70 8 C . Microﬂuidic devices with channel dimensions of 11 mm 3 0 . 8 mm 3 0 . 04 mm ( L 3 W 3 H ) were prepared from polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) using replica moulding and cured in an oven at 70 8 C for 2 h . The PDMS device was punctured at the channel ends with a biopsy punch ( 1 mm diameter ) for connecting the device to tubing and the device was then cleaned with isopropanol . The clean coverslip and the PDMS device were then exposed to an air plasma inside a plasma cleaner ( 700 T ) for 3 min and the PDMS device was then placed onto the coverslip to form an irreversible bond between the two components . Finally polyethylene tubing ( PE20 Intramedic , Clay Adams , internal diameter of 0 . 38 mm ) was then inserted into the hole punched at the inlet and outlet of the channels in the assembled device . Coverslip Surface Modiﬁcation Microﬂuidic channels were ﬁlled with a solution of a copol - ymer of poly - L - lysine ( PLL ) and biotinylated poly ( ethylene glycol ) ( PEG ) [ Susos AG , PLL ( 20 ) - g [ 3 . 4 ] - PEG ( 2 ) / PEG ( 3 . 4 ) - biotin ( 20 % ) ] in PBS ( 7 m L , 1 mg mL 2 1 ) and the copolymer was allowed to adsorb to the glass surface for 20 min at room temperature . The outlet tubing of the PDMS device was connected to a syringe pump operated in withdraw mode . Unbound PLL – PEG was washed out with 95 m L of PBS and the channel was loaded with 40 m L of a solution containing 1 % pluronic F127 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) 50 m g mL 2 1 j - casein in PBS . After incubation at room (cid:2) 8 Nicovich et al . CYTOSKELETON temperature for 1 min , the channel was washed with 95 m L of PBS . A solution of streptavidin ( 15 m L , 1 mg mL 2 1 ) in blocking buffer ( 100 mM Tris pH 7 . 5 , 2 mM EDTA , 25 mM NaCl , 0 . 03 % NaN 3 , 0 . 126 % TWEEN 20 , 1 mg mL 2 1 BSA ) was loaded into the channel and incubat - ed for 10 min . Finally the channel was rinsed with 95 m L of PBS to remove unbound streptavidin . Assembly and Capture of Actin Filaments via Biotinylated Phalloidin A solution of biotinylated phalloidin ( 10 m L , 2 m M , Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) was injected into the channel and incubated for 10 min to allow binding of the biotinylated phalloidin to the glass surface coated with PLL – PEG / strep - tavidin . The channel was then washed with 95 m L of buffer G ( 5 mM Tris pH 7 . 8 , 1 mM DABCO , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 01 % NaN 3 , 10 mM DTT , 1 mg mL 2 1 BSA ) . Monomeric actin ( G - actin , Hypermol ) in buffer G was mixed with 1 mM MgCl 2 ( ﬁnal concentration ) and 0 . 2 mM EGTA ( ﬁnal concentration ) and the mixture was incubated for 1 min . Actin polymerization was triggered by addition of 100 mM KCl ( ﬁnal concentration ) and 25 m L of the actin mixture ( ﬁnal actin concentration of 1 mM ) was loaded into the channel at a ﬂow speed 20 m L min 2 1 . The polymerization reaction was carried out inside the ﬂow channel for a total time of 3 min , unbound actin was removed by washing the channel with buffer and then the ﬁlaments attached to the surface were stained with 0 . 15 l M solution of Alexa Fluor 488 - phalloidin ( ThermoFisher Sci - entiﬁc ) in buffer F ( 5 mM Tris pH 7 . 8 , 100 mM KCl , 1 mM DABCO , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM EGTA , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 01 % NaN 3 , 10 mM DTT , 1 mg mL 2 1 BSA ) . Polymerization of Actin Filaments on Surfaces from Spectrin – Actin Seeds Spectrin - actin seeds were isolated as complexes that are associated with short actin ﬁlaments using a published pro - tocol ( Casella et al . , 1986 ) and reacted with a biotinylation reagent containing a (cid:3) 3 nm long linker ( Sulfo Chroma - Link Biotin , Solulink ) . When immobilised on surfaces , these seeds serve as nucleation points for the growth of sin - gle actin ﬁlaments [ J (cid:2) egou et al . , 2011 ] . A solution contain - ing biotinylated spectrin – actin seeds ( 0 . 04 mg mL 2 1 ) in buffer F was injected into the ﬂow channel and incubated for 10 min to allow binding of the biotinylated spectrin – actin seeds to the surface modiﬁed with PLL – PEG / strepta - vidin . Subsequently the channel was washed with buffer G . A solution containing monomeric actin in polymerization buffer was prepared and injected into the channel as described above to initiate actin ﬁlament growth at the spectrin – actin seeds attached to the coverslip surface . Labeled G - actin ( 3 % of Atto488 - labeled rabbit skeletal muscle actin , Hypermol ) was added to the assembly mixture for experiments designed to visualize and measure actin growth . Removal of unbound actin was carried out as described above . For Tpm1 . 1 binding and dissociation experiments , the actin ﬁlaments were stained with Alexa Fluor 488 - phalloidin as described above . Expression , Puriﬁcation , and Labeling of Tpm1 . 1 Expression and puriﬁcation of Tpm1 . 1 was carried out as described previously [ Janco et al . , 2016 ] . The Cys - 190 resi - dues of the Tpm1 . 1 dimer are prone to form a disulﬁde . Thus , Tpm1 . 1 was reduced prior to labeling by incubation in PBS ( pH 7 . 4 ) containing 300 mM NaCl and 20 mM DTT at 37 8 C for 2 h . The buffer was then exchanged with PBS ( pH 7 . 4 ) containing 300 mM NaCl using desalting columns ( Zeba Microspin , 7k MWCO , Thermo Fisher Sci - entiﬁc ) to remove DTT , which would otherwise interfere with the labeling reaction . Tpm1 . 1 was then reacted at Cys - 190 with a ﬁvefold molar excess of Alexa Fluor 647 C 5 - maleimide ( Life Technologies ) at room temperature for 1 h followed by reaction at 4 8 C overnight . Unbound dye was removed using desalting columns . Single - Molecule Photobleaching Coverslips were cleaned as described above and clamped into a magnetic chamber ( Chamlide CMB for 25 mm round coverslip , Live Cell Instruments ) . Labeled Tpm1 . 1 – AF647 ( 0 . 1 nM in buffer F containing 100 nM BSA ) were sparsely adsorbed to the surface of the coverslip during a 10 min incubation at room temperature . Unbound mole - cules were removed by washing the coverslip with buffer . The ﬂuorescence intensity of the single ﬂuorophore was determined from the quantal photobleaching step in single - molecule photobleaching traces of labeled Tpm1 . 1 continu - ously imaged in buffer F , using an exposure time of 300 ms . The measurements were done with the same set - tings of the EMCCD camera as in binding / dissociation experiments . TIRF Imaging of AF647 – Tpm1 . 1 Binding and Dissociation Fluorescence movies of Tpm1 . 1 binding to and dissociation from actin ﬁlaments were acquired using an inverted total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscope ( TILL Photonics ) equipped with a Zeiss 100 3 Plan - Apochromat NA 1 . 46 oil immersion objective , solid state lasers for exci - tation , a beamsplitter for simultaneous dual channel acqui - sition of AF488 2 phalloidin ( 525 / 50 emission ﬁlter ) and AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 ( 697 / 75 emission ﬁlter ) ﬂuorescence using two Andor iXon 897U EMCCD cameras for detec - tion . The microﬂuidic device was mounted on the stage of the microscope . Actin ﬁlaments were captured on the cover - slip surface that forms the bottom of the microﬂuidic chan - nel by one of the methods described above . To image the binding reaction , a solution of AF647 – Tpm1 . 1 ( ranging CYTOSKELETON Actin – Tropomyosin Filament Dynamics on Surfaces 9 (cid:2) from 125 nM to 2 m M ) in buffer F was slowed into the channel while recording timelapse images at a frame rate of 10 frames per second . To image the dissociation process , the solution containing AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 was removed with a continuous ﬂow of buffer F while recording time - lapse images at a frame rate of 1 frame per second . Image Analysis Detection , backbone tracing , and segmentation of actin ﬁl - aments and generation of kymographs of the AF488 2 phalloidin and AF647 2 Tpm1 . 1 signals was car - ried out using GALAH . A detailed description of the soft - ware is provided in the Supporting Information . Acknowledgments The authors thank Guillaume Romet - Lemonne and Antoine J (cid:2) egou for help with implementing the assay using ﬂow - aligning of actin ﬁlaments . This work was supported by grants from the Australian Research Council ( DP130100936 and FT100100411 ) and the National Health and Medical Research Council ( APP1098870 ) . References B € ocking T , Aguet F , Harrison SC , Kirchhausen T . 2011 . Single - molecule analysis of a molecular disassemblase reveals the mecha - nism of Hsc70 - driven clathrin uncoating . Nat Struct Mol Biol 18 : 295 – 301 . Bohner G , Gustafsson N , Cade NI , Maurer SP , Grifﬁn LD , and Surrey T . 2015 . Important factors determining the nanoscale tracking precision of dynamic microtubule ends . J Microscopy 261 : 67 – 78 . Bonello TT , Janco M , Hook J , Byun A , Appaduray M , Dedova I , Hitchcock - DeGregori S , Hardeman EC , Stehn JR , Bocking T , et al . 2016 . A small molecule inhibitor of tropomyosin dissociates actin binding from tropomyosin - directed regulation of actin dynamics . Sci Rep 6 : 19816 . Breitsprecher D , Kiesewetter AK , Linkner J , Faix J . 2009 . Analysis of actin assembly by in vitro TIRF microscopy . Methods Mol Biol 571 : 401 – 415 . Carlier M - F , Romet - Lemonne G , J (cid:2) egou A . 2014 . Actin ﬁlament dynamics using microﬂuidics . Methods Enzymol 540 : 3 – 17 . Casella JF , Maack DJ , Lin S . 1986 . Puriﬁcation and initial charac - terization of a protein from skeletal muscle that caps the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments . J Biol Chem 261 : 10915 – 10921 . Coulton A , Lehrer SS , Geeves MA . 2006 . Functional homodimers and heterodimers of recombinant smooth muscle tropomyosin . Bio - chemistry 45 : 12853 – 12858 . Crevenna AH , Arciniega M , Dupont A , Mizuno N , Kowalska K , Lange OF , Wedlich - Soldner R , Lamb DC . 2015 . Side - binding pro - teins modulate actin ﬁlament dynamics . Elife 4 : e04599 . dos Remedios CG , Chhabra D , Kekic M , Dedova IV , Tsubakihara M , Berry DA , Nosworthy NJ . 2003 . Actin binding proteins : regula - tion of cytoskeletal microﬁlaments . Physiol Rev 83 : 433 – 73 . Gressin L , Guillotin A , Gu (cid:2) erin C , Blanchoin L , Michelot A . 2015 . Architecture dependence of actin ﬁlament network disassembly . Curr Biol 25 : 1437 – 1447 . Gunning PW , Ghoshdastider U , Whitaker S , Popp D , Robinson RC . 2015a . The evolution of compositionally and functionally dis - tinct actin ﬁlaments . J Cell Sci 128 : 2009 – 2019 . Gunning PW , Hardeman EC , Lappalainen P , Mulvihill DP . 2015b . Tropomyosin—master regulator of actin ﬁlament function in the cytoskeleton . J Cell Sci 128 : 2965 – 2974 . Holmes KC , Lehman W . 2008 . Gestalt - binding of tropomyosin to actin ﬁlaments . J Muscle Res Cell Motil 29 : 213 – 219 . Hsiao JY , Goins LM , Petek NA , Mullins RD . 2015 . Arp2 / 3 com - plex and coﬁlin modulate binding of tropomyosin to branched actin networks . Curr Biol 25 : 1573 – 1582 . Ishii Y , Lehrer SS . 1985 . Fluorescence studies of the conformation of pyrene - labeled tropomyosin : effects of F - actin and myosin sub - fragment 1 . Biochemistry 24 : 6631 – 6638 . Janco M , Bonello TT , Byun A , Coster AC , Lebhar H , Dedova I , Gunning PW , B € ocking T . 2016 . The impact of tropomyosins on actin ﬁlament assembly is isoform speciﬁc . Bioarchitecture 6 : 61 – 75 . Jansen S , Collins A , Chin SM , Ydenberg CA , Gelles J , Goode BL . 2015 . Single - molecule imaging of a three - component ordered actin disassembly mechanism . Nat Commun 6 : 7202 . J (cid:2) egou A , Niedermayer T , Orb (cid:2) an J , Didry D , Lipowsky R , Carlier M - F , Romet - Lemonne G . 2011 . Individual actin ﬁlaments in a microﬂuidic ﬂow reveal the mechanism of ATP hydrolysis and give insight into the properties of proﬁlin . PLoS Biol 9 : e1001161 . Johnson M , East DA , Mulvihill DP . 2014 . Formins determine the functional properties of actin ﬁlaments in yeast . Curr Biol 24 : 1525 – 1530 . Johnston AB , Collins A , Goode BL . 2015 . High - speed depolymeri - zation at actin ﬁlament ends jointly catalysed by Twinﬁlin and Srv2 / CAP . Nat Cell Biol 17 : 1504 – 1511 . Pollard TD . 2016 . Actin and actin - binding proteins . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 8 : a018226 . Prahl LS , Castle BT , Gardner MK , Odde DJ . 2014 . Quantitative analysis of microtubule self - assembly kinetics and tip structure . Methods Enzymol 540 : 35 – 52 . Ruhnow F , Zwicker D , Diez S . 2011 . Tracking single particles and elongated ﬁlaments with nanometer precision . Biophys J 100 : 2820 – 2828 . Schmidt WM , Lehman W , Moore JR . 2015 . Direct observation of tropomyosin binding to actin ﬁlaments . Cytoskeleton 72 : 292 – 303 . Smith BA , Gelles J , Goode BL . 2014 . Single - molecule studies of actin assembly and disassembly factors . Methods Enzymol 540 : 95 – 117 . Ting X , Dimitrios V , Feng - Ching T , Gijsje HK , Wei N , Eddy Y , Lee IJ , Jian - Qiu W , Xiaolei H . 2015 . SOAX : a software for quanti - ﬁcation of 3D biopolymer networks . Sci Rep 5 : 9081 . Tojkander S , Gateva G , Schevzov G , Hotulainen P , Naumanen P , Martin C , Gunning PW , Lappalainen P . 2011 . A molecular path - way for myosin II recruitment to stress ﬁbers . Curr Biol 21 : 539 – 550 . Usov I , Mezzenga R . 2015 . FiberApp : an open - source software for tracking and analyzing polymers , ﬁlaments , biomacromolecules , and ﬁbrous objects . Macromolecules 48 : 1269 – 1280 . Vilfan A . 2001 . The binding dynamics of tropomyosin on actin . Biophys J 81 : 3146 – 3155 . Vizcarra CL , Bor B , Quinlan ME . 2014 . The role of formin tails in actin nucleation , processive elongation , and ﬁlament bundling . J Biol Chem 289 : 30602 – 30613 . (cid:2) 10 Nicovich et al . CYTOSKELETON