The Psychology Of Human - Computer Interaction Free Ebooks PDF Book by Stuart K . Card , Thomas P . Moran , Allen Newell Hardcover : 469 pages Publisher : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates ; Revised ed . edition ( February 1 , 1986 ) Language : English ISBN - 10 : 0898598591 ISBN - 13 : 978 - 0898598599 Product Dimensions : 6 . 1 x 1 . 1 x 9 . 2 inches Shipping Weight : 1 . 4 pounds ( View shipping rates and policies ) Average Customer Review : 5 . 0 out of 5 starsÂ Â See all reviewsÂ ( 5 customer reviews ) Best Sellers Rank : # 1 , 181 , 439 in Books ( See Top 100 in Books ) # 129 inÂ Books > Engineering & Transportation > Engineering > Industrial , Manufacturing & Operational Systems > Ergonomics # 484 inÂ Books > Computers & Technology > Computer Science > Human - Computer Interaction # 485 inÂ Books > Engineering & Transportation > Engineering > Industrial , Manufacturing & Operational Systems > Health & Safety Designing human - computer interfaces is still an art , learned best by creating many interfaces and carefully observing how real users interact with them . However , there are many tools from cognitive psychology that , if understood and applied , can yeild at least two benefits . First , by learning what is known about how humans operate , you can avoid many pitfalls in design . Second , you can make quantitative design decisions . This book , though nearly 20 years old , contains much essential material that is unknown to many practitioners in the field ! If you are designing interfaces , on the Web , for PCs , or for information appliances , you should read and understand the basic material in this book , which can never go out of date as long as humans use keyboards and mice with their hands and scan the screen with their eyes . My own recent book , The Humane Interface , is - - in many aspects - - just following in the footsteps of this pathbreaking , pioneering , and important work . The ten or so others out there who have read this monster are probably experiencing a facial tic at my suggestion that it be required reading for all who design software . Its not a quick read , but its definately a page turner . I couldn ' t put it down . I ' m serious . For me , a guy with a solid background in networking and systems architecture but without the classical human factors education required for intelligent product design this one document did a far better job of firmly rooting me in the basics than anything else . Mad props to Norman and Neilsen for pointing me in this direction in the first place . But with this book I finally felt " full . " There were a solid list of findings I ' d never heard of until I ' d opened this book . Not only did this book introduce me to these sorts of things , it also illustrated them to me . I walked away understanding . Like all of my other faves , this book is opened often . I ' ve bought many copies for friends ( with friends like me . . . ) and I reference it often . Its notable that the most leading edge work today related to this topic is being driven by the same guys who wrote this book so long ago . Its among my top five most suggested books for those I know who want to take their design to the next level . Little that I can add to previous reviews . . The definitive work . I read it in ~ 1989 , and it ' s been a continuous source , in every UI I ' ve designed since . . . I revisited the topic about a decade back , and found that little had changed . . That may not longer be the case : there ' s been some good new work on human mental processes in the last decade . GOMS is good , also . First determine the orthogonal spanning set of commands , / then / determine how to implement them , how to group them by used - ness , for usability . Noun - Verb grammar . . Things that have the same function should look and behave the same . Inculcate a coherent user mental model . - SFAIK , we / still / don ' t have a good heuristic book / model for GUIs : it ' s all a bit shrapnel . . - But , we were progressing better towards that goal before the complete gank - wits at Google got hold of UIs . The depth of their uncaring , clueless , ignorance , is lamentable . . Vikings , burning libraries in monasteries . . ( Sergei ; I mean you ! You are a destroyer of accumulated human wisdom . Woo ! Well done . . Not . . ) Most of us who have written GUI design books gained much of our knowledge of human - computer interaction from reading this early book . This book , though little known outside of academic Human - Computer Interaction circles , is one of the most heavily - cited books in the field . It is * the * classic source . The should be required reading for anyone in the Human Factors field , or anyone without a HF degree who wants to build something humans will use . Interaction Design : Beyond Human - Computer Interaction The Psychology of Human - Computer Interaction Human Computer Interaction Handbook : Fundamentals , Evolving Technologies , and Emerging Applications , Third Edition ( Human Factors and Ergonomics ) Psychology : Social Psychology : 69 Psychology Techniques to Influence and Control People with Communication Tricks , NLP , Hypnosis and more . . . ( Psychology , . . . NLP , Social Anxiety , Cognitive Psychology ) Designing the User Interface : Strategies for Effective Human - Computer Interaction ( 6th Edition ) HACKING : Beginner ' s Crash Course - Essential Guide to Practical : Computer Hacking , Hacking for Beginners , & Penetration Testing ( Computer Systems , Computer Programming , Computer Science Book 1 ) How To Analyze People : Body Language and Human Psychology Guide to Mastering Analyzing ( Analyze People , Body Language , Human Psychology , How to Analyze People ) Learning Processing , Second Edition : A Beginner ' s Guide to Programming Images , Animation , and Interaction ( The Morgan Kaufmann Series in Computer Graphics ) Mind Control Mastery 4th Edition : Successful Guide to Human Psychology and Manipulation , Persuasion and Deception ! ( Mind Control , Manipulation , Deception , . . . Psychology , Intuition , Manifestation , ) Human Psychology 101 : Understanding the Human Mind and What Makes People Tick Evil by Design : Interaction Design to Lead Us into Temptation Interdisciplinary Interaction Design : A Visual Guide to Basic Theories , Models and Ideas for Thinking and Designing for Interactive Web Design and Digital Device Experiences Office for Visual Interaction : Lighting Design & Process Sulcata Tortoise Owners Guide . Sulcata Tortoise care , behavior , feeding , enclosures , costs , health , interaction and myths . The Captive Care of Sulcata Tortoises . The Nature of an Ancient Maya City : Resources , Interaction , and Power at Blue Creek , Belize ( Caribbean Archaeology and Ethnohistory ) Interaction and Delimitation of International Legal Orders ( Queen Mary Studies in International Law ) World History Patterns of Interaction ( Reading Study Guide - Spanish Translation ) Constructions of Deviance : Social Power , Context , and Interaction Family Interaction : A Multigenerational Developmental Perspective ( 5th Edition ) Drug ' DNA Interaction Protocols ( Methods in Molecular Biology )