THE STRUCTURE OF SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTIONS T HIS important book ' is a sustained attack on the prevailing image of scientific change as a linear process of ever - increasing knowledge , and an attempt to make us see that process of change in a different and , Kuhn suggests , more enlightening way . In attacking the " concept of development - by - accumulation , " Kuhn presents numerous penetrating criticisms not only of histories of science written from that point of view , but also of certain philosophical doctrines ( mainly Baconian and positivistic philosophies of science , particularly verification , falsification , and probabilistic views of the acceptance or rejection of scientific theories ) which he convincingly argues are associated with that view of history . In this review , I will not deal with those criticisms or with the details of the valuable case studies with which Kuhn tries to support his views ; rather , I will concentrate on certain concepts and doctrines which are fundamental to his own interpretation of the development and structure of science . His view , while original and richly suggestive , has much in common with some recent antipositivistic reactions among philosophers of science - most notably , Feyerabend , Hanson , and Toulmin - and inasmuch as it makes explicit , according to Kuhn , " some of the new historiography ' s implications " ( p . 3 ) , it is bound to exert a very wide influence among philosophers and historians of science alike . It is therefore a view which merits close examination . Basic to Kuhn ' s interpretation of the history of science is his notion of a paradigm . Paradigms are " universally recognized scientific achieve - ments that for a time provide model problems and solutions to a community of practitioners " ( p . x ) . Because a paradigm is " at the start largely a promise of success discoverable in selected and still incomplete examples " ( pp . 23 - 24 ) , it is " an object for further articula - tion and specification under new or more stringent conditions " ( p . 23 ) ; hence from paradigms " spring particular coherent traditions of scientific research " ( p . Io ) which Kuhn calls " normal science . " Normal science thus consists largely of " mopping - up operations " ( p . 24 ) devoted to actualizing the initial promise of the paradigm " by 1 The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . By Thomas S . Kuhn . ( Chicago , University of Chicago Press , i962 . Pp . XiV , I72 . ) All page references , unless otherwise noted , are to this work . 383 DUDLEr SHAPERE extending the knowledge of those facts that the paradigm displays as particularly revealing , by increasing the extent of the match between those facts and the paradigm ' s predictions , and by further articulation of the paradigm itself " ( p . 24 ) . In this process of paradigm development lie both the strength and weakness of normal science : for though the paradigm provides " a criterion for choosing problems that , while the paradigm is taken for granted , can be assumed to have solutions " ( p . 37 ) , on the other hand those phenomena " that will not fit the box are often not seen at all " ( p . 24 ) . Normal science even " often suppresses fundamental novelties because they are necessarily subversive of its basic commitments . Nevertheless , so long as those commitments retain an element of the arbitrary , the very nature of normal research ensures that novelty shall not be suppressed for very long " ( p . 5 ) . Repeated failures of a normal - science tradition to solve a problem or other anomalies that develop in the course of paradigm articulation produce " the tradition - shattering complements to the tradition - bound activity of normal science " ( p . 6 ) . The most pervasive of such tradition - shattering activities Kuhn calls " scientific revolutions . " Confronted with anomaly or with crisis , scientists take a different attitude toward existing paradigms , and the nature of their research changes accord - ingly . The proliferation of competing articulations , the willingness to try anything , the expression of explicit discontent , the recourse to philosophy and to debate over fundamentals , all these are symptoms of a transition from normal to extraordinary research [ p . go ] . Scientific revolutions are inaugurated by a growing sense . . . that an existing paradigm has ceased to function adequately in the exploration of an aspect of nature to which that paradigm itself had previously led the way [ p . 9i ] . The upshot of such crises is often the acceptance of a new paradigm : Scientific revolutions are here taken to be those non - cumulative developmental episodes in which an older paradigm is replaced in whole or in part by an incompatible new one [ p . 9i ] . This interpretation of scientific development places a heavy burden indeed on the notion of a paradigm . Although in some passages we are led to believe that a community ' s paradigm is simply " a set of recurrent and quasi - standard illustrations of various theories , " and that these are " revealed in its textbooks , lectures , and laboratory exercises " ( p . 43 ) , elsewhere we find that there is far more to the paradigm than is contained , at least explicitly , in such illustrations . These " accepted 384 SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTIONS examples of actual scientific practice . . . include law , theory , applica - tion , and instrumentation together " ( p . Io ) . A paradigm consists of a " strong network of commitments - conceptual , theoretical , instru - mental , and methodological " ( p . 42 ) ; among these commitments are " quasi - metaphysical " ones ( p . 41 ) . A paradigm is , or at least includes , " some implicit body of intertwined theoretical and methodological belief that permits selection , evaluation , and criticism " ( pp . i6 - I7 ) . If such a body of beliefs is not implied by the collection of facts ( and , according to Kuhn , it never is ) , " it must be externally supplied , perhaps by a current metaphysic , by another science , or by personal and historical accident " ( p . I7 ) . Sometimes paradigms seem to be patterns ( sometimes in the sense of archetypes and sometimes in the sense of criteria or standards ) upon which we model our theories or other work ( " from them as models spring particular coherent tradi - tions " ) ; at other times they seem to be themselves vague theories which are to be refined and articulated . Most fundamentally , though , Kuhn considers them as not being rules , theories , or the like , or a mere sum thereof , but something more " global " ( p . 43 ) , from which rules , theo - ries , and so forth are abstracted , but to which no mere statement of rules or theories or the like can do justice . The term " paradigm " thus covers a range of factors in scientific development including or somehow involving laws and theories , models , standards , and methods ( both theoretical and instrumental ) , vague intuitions , explicit or implicit metaphysical beliefs ( or prejudices ) . In short , anything that allows science to accomplish anything can be a part of ( or somehow involved in ) a paradigm . Now , historical study does bear out the existence of guiding factors which are held in more or less similar form , to greater or less extent , by a multitude of scientists working in an area over a number of years . What must be asked is whether anything is gained by referring to such common factors as " paradigms , " and whether such gains , if any , are offset by confusions that ensue because of such a way of speaking . At the very outset , the explanatory value of the notion of a paradigm is suspect : for the truth of the thesis that shared paradigms are ( or are behind ) the common factors guiding scientific research appears to be guaranteed , not so much by a close examination of actual historical cases , however scholarly , as by the breadth of definition of the term " paradigm . " The suspicion that this notion plays a determinative role in shaping Kuhn ' s interpretation of history is strengthened by his frequent remarks about what must be the case with regard to science and its development : for example , " No natural history can be inter - 385 DUDLEr SHAPERE preted in the absence of at least some . . . belief " ( pp . i6 - I7 ) ; " Once a first paradigm through which to view nature has been found , there is no such thing as research in the absence of any paradigm " ( p . 79 ) ; " no experiment can be conceived without some sort of theory " ( p . 87 ) ; " if , as I have already urged , there can be no scientifically or empirically neutral system of language or concepts , then the proposed construction of alternate tests and theories must proceed from within one or another paradigm - based tradition " ( p . 145 ) . Such views appear too strongly and confidently held to have been extracted from a mere investigation of how things have happened . Still greater perplexities are generated by Kuhn ' s view that para - digms cannot , in general , be formulated adequately . According to him , when the historian tries to state the rules which scientists follow , he finds that " phrased in just that way , or in any other way he can imagine , they would almost certainly have been rejected by some members of the group he studies " ( p . 44 ) . Similarly , there may be many versions of the same theory . It would appear that , in Kuhn ' s eyes , the concepts , laws , theories , rules , and so forth that are common to a group are just not common enough to guarantee the coherence of the tradition ; there - fore he concludes that the paradigm , " the concrete scientific achieve - ment " that is the source of that coherence , must not be identified with , but must be seen as " prior to the various concepts , laws , theories , and points of view that may be abstracted from it " ( p . i i ) . ( It is partly on the basis of this argument that Kuhn rejects the attempt by philos - ophers of science to formulate a " logic " of science in terms of precise rules . ) Yet if it is true that all that can be said about paradigms and scientific development can and must be said only in terms of what are mere " abstractions " from paradigms , then it is difficult to see what is gained by appealing to the notion of a paradigm . In Kuhn ' s view , however , the fact that paradigms cannot be described adequately in words does not hinder us from recognizing them : they are open to " direct inspection " ( p . 44 ) , and historians can " agree in their identification of a paradigm without agreeing on , or even attempting to produce , a full interpretation or rationalization of it " ( p . 44 ) . Yet the feasibility of a historical inquiry concerning paradigms is exactly what is brought into question by the scope of the term " paradigm " and the inaccessibility of particular paradigms to verbal formulation . For on the one hand , as we have seen , it is too easy to identify a paradigm ; and on the other hand , it is not easy to determine , in particular cases treated by Kuhn , what the paradigm is supposed to have been in that case . In most of the cases he discusses , it is the theory 386 SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTIONS that is doing the job of posing problems , providing criteria for selection of data , being articulated , and so forth . But of course the theory is not the paradigm , and we might assume that Kuhn discusses the theory because it is as near as he can get in words to the inexpressible paradigm . This , however , only creates difficulties . In the case of " what is perhaps our fullest example of a scientific revolution " ( p . I32 ) , for instance , what was " assimilated " when Dalton ' s theory ( paradigm ) became accepted ? Not merely the laws of combining proportions , presumably , but something " prior to " them . Was it , then , the picture of matter as constituted of atoms ? But contrary to the impression Kuhn gives , that picture was never even nearly universally accepted : from Davy to Ostwald and beyond there was always a very strong faction which " regarded it with misgiving , or with positive dislike , or with a constant hope for an effective substitute " ( J . C . Gregory , A Short History of Atomism [ London , I93I ] , p . 93 ) , some viewing atoms as convenient fictions , others eschewing the vocabulary of atoms entirely , preferring to talk in terms of " proportions " or " equivalents . " ( It is noteworthy that Dalton was presented with a Royal Medal , not unequivocally for his development of the atomic theory , but rather " for his development of the Theory of Definite Proportions , usually called the Atomic Theory of Chemistry " ; award citation , quoted in Gregory , p . 84 . ) No , it was certainly not atoms to which the most creative chemists of the century were " committed " - unless ( contrary to his general mode of expression ) Kuhn means that they were " com - mitted " to the atomic theory because they - most of them - used it even though they did not believe in its truth . Further , what else was " intertwined " in this behind - the - scenes paradigm ? Did it include , for instance , some inexpressible Principle of Uniformity of Nature or Law of Causality ? Is this question so easy to answer - a matter of " direct inspection " - after all these years of philosophical dispute ? One begins to doubt that paradigms are open to " direct inspection , " or else to be amazed at Professor Kuhn ' s eyesight . ( And why is it that such historical facts should be open to direct inspection , whereas scientific facts must always be seen " through " a paradigm ? ) But if there are such difficulties , how can historians know that they agree in their identification of the paradigms present in historical episodes , and so determine that " the same " paradigm persists through a long sequence of such episodes ? They cannot , by hypothesis , compare their formula - tions . Suppose they disagree : how is their dispute to be resolved ? On the other hand , where do we draw the line between different paradigms and different articulations of the same paradigm ? It is 387 D UDLEr SHAPERE natural and common to say that Newton , d ' Alembert , Lagrange , Hertz , Hamilton , Mach , and others formulated different versions of classical mechanics ; yet certainly some of these formulations involved different " commitments " - for example , some to forces , others to energy , some to vectorial , others to variational principles . The distinc - tion between paradigms and different articulations of a paradigm , and between scientific revolutions and normal science , is at best a matter of degree , as is commitment to a paradigm : expression of explicit discontent , proliferation of competing articulations , debate over fundamentals are all more or less present throughout the development of science ; and there are always guiding elements which are more or less common , even among what are classified as different " traditions . " This is one reason why , in particular cases , identification of " the paradigm " is so difficult : not just because it is hard to see , but because looking for the guiding elements in scientific activity is not like looking for a unitary entity that either is there or is not . But furthermore , the very reasons for supposing that paradigms ( nevertheless ) exist are unconvincing . No doubt some theories are very similar - so similar that they can be considered to be " versions " or " different articulations " of one another ( or of " the same subject " ) . But does this imply that there must be a common " paradigm " of which the similar theories are incomplete expressions and from which they are abstracted ? No doubt , too , many expressions of methodological rules are not as accurate portrayals of scientific method as they are claimed to be ; and it is possible that Kuhn is right in claiming that no such portrayal can be given in terms of any one set of precise rules . But such observations , even if true , do not compel us to adopt a mystique regarding a single paradigm which guides procedures , any more than our inability to give a single , simple definition of " game " means that we must have a unitary but inexpressible idea from which all our diverse uses of " game " are abstracted . It may be true that " The coherence displayed by the research tradition . . . may not imply even the existence of an underlying body of rules and assumptions " ( p . 46 ) ; but neither does it imply the existence of an underlying " paradigm . " Finally , Kuhn ' s blanket use of the term " paradigm " to cover such a variety of activities and functions obscures important differences between those activities and functions . For example , Kuhn claims that ' ' an apparently arbitrary element . . . is always a formative ingredient " ( p . 4 ) of a paradigm ; and , indeed , as we shall see shortly , this is a central aspect of his view of paradigms and scientific change . But is the acceptance or rejection of a scientific theory " arbitrary " in the same 388 SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTIONS sense that acceptance or rejection of a standard ( to say nothing of a metaphysical belief ) is ? Again , Newtonian and Hertzian formulations of classical mechanics are similar to one another , as are the Einstein , Whitehead , Birkhoff , and Milne versions of relativity , and as are wave mechanics and matrix mechanics . But there are significant differences in the ways in and degrees to which these theories are " similar " - differences which are masked by viewing them all equally as different articulations of the same paradigm . There are , however , deeper ways in which Kuhn ' s notion of a paradigm affects adversely his analysis of science ; and it is in these ways that his view reflects widespread and important tendencies in both the history and philosophy of science today . Because a paradigm is the source of the methods , problem - field , and standards of solution accepted by any mature scientific community at any given time , . . . the reception of a new paradigm often necessitates a redefinition of the corresponding science . . . . And as the problems change , so , often , does the standard that distinguishes a real scientific solution from a mere metaphysical speculation , word game , or mathematical play . The normal - scientific tradition that emerges from a scientific revolution is not only incompatible but often actually incommen - surable with that which has gone before [ p . I02 ] . Thus the paradigm change entails " changes in the standards governing permissible problems , concepts , and explanations " ( p . 105 ) . In connection with his view that concepts or meanings change from one theory ( paradigm ) to another despite the retention of the same terms , Kuhn offers an argument whose conclusion is both intrinsically important and crucial to much of his book . This argument is directed against the " positivistic " view that scientific advance is cumulative , and that therefore earlier sciences are derivable from later ; the case he considers is the supposed deducibility of Newtonian from Einsteinian dynamics , subject to limiting conditions . After summarizing the usual derivation , Kuhn objects that the derivation is spurious , at least to this point . Though the [ derived statements ] are a special case of the laws of relativistic mechanics , they are not Newton ' s Laws . Or at least they are not unless those laws are reinterpreted in a way that would have been impossible until after Einstein ' s work . . . . The physical referents of these Einsteinian concepts are by no means identical with those of the Newtonian concepts that bear the same name . ( Newtonian mass is conserved ; Einsteinian is convertible with energy . Only at low relative velocities may the two be measured in the same way , and even then they must not be conceived to be the same . ) . . . The argument has still not done what 389 DUDLEr SHAPERE it purported to do . It has not , that is , shown Newton ' s Laws to be a limiting case of Einstein ' s . For in the passage to the limit it is not only the forms of the laws that have changed . Simultaneously we have had to alter the fundamental structural elements of which the universe to which they apply is composed [ pp . Ioo - IOI ] . But Kuhn ' s argument amounts simply to an assertion that despite the derivability of expressions which are in every formal respect identical with Newton ' s Laws , there remain differences of " meaning . " What saves this from begging the question at issue ? His only attempt to support his contention comes in the parenthetical example of mass ; but this point is far from decisive . For one might equally well be tempted to say that the " concept " of mass ( the " meaning " of " mass " ) has remained the same ( thus accounting for the deducibility ) even though the application has changed . Similarly , rather than agree with Kuhn that " the Copernicans who denied its traditional title ' planet ' to the sun . . . were changing the meaning of ' planet ' " ( p . I27 ) , one might prefer to say that they changed only the application of the term . The real trouble with such arguments arises with regard to the cash difference between saying , in such cases , that the " meaning " has changed , as opposed to saying that the " meaning " has remained the same though the " application " has changed . Kuhn has offered us no clear analysis of " meaning " or , more specifically , no criterion of change of meaning ; consequently it is not clear why he classifies such changes as changes of meaning rather than , for example , as changes of application . This is not to say that no such criterion could be formulated , or that a distinction between change of meaning and change of application could not be made , or that it might not be very profitable to do so for certain purposes . One might , for example , note that there are statements that can be made , questions that can be raised , views that may be suggested as possibly correct , within the context of Einsteinian physics that would not even have made sense - would have been self - contradictory - in the context of Newtonian physics . And such differences might ( for certain purposes ) be referred to with profit as changes of meaning , indicating , among other things , that there are differences between Einsteinian and Newtonian terms that are not brought out by the deduction of Newtonian - like statements from Einsteinian ones . But attributing such differences to alterations of " meaning " must not blind one to any resemblances there might be between the two sets of terms . Thus it is not so much Kuhn ' s conclusion that is objectionable as , first , the fact that it is based , not on any solid argument , but on the feature of meaning dependence which Kuhn has built into the term 390 SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTIONS " paradigm " ( scientists see the world from different points of view , through different paradigms , and therefore see different things through different paradigms ) ; and second , the fact that this feature leads him to a distorted portrayal of the relations between different scientific theories . For Kuhn ' s term " paradigm , " incorporating as it does the view that statements of fact are ( to use Hanson ' s expression ) theory - laden , and as a consequence the notion of ( in Feyerabend ' s words ) meaning variance from one theory or paradigm to another , calls attention excessively to the differences between theories or para - digms , so that relations that evidently do exist between them are in fact passed over or denied . The significance of this point emerges fully when we ask about the grounds for accepting one paradigm as better than another . For if " the differences between successive paradigms are both necessary and irreconcilable " ( p . i02 ) , and if those differences consist in the para - digms ' being " incommensurable " - if they disagree as to what the facts are , and even as to the real problems to be faced and the standards which a successful theory must meet - then what are the two paradigms disagreeing about ? And why does one win ? There is little problem for Kuhn in analyzing the notion of progress within a paradigm tradition ( and , indeed , he notes , such evolution is the source of the prevailing view of scientific advance as " linear " ) ; but how can we say that " progress " is made when one paradigm replaces another ? The logical tendency of Kuhn ' s position is clearly toward the conclusion that the replacement is not cumulative , but is mere change : being " incom - mensurable , " two paradigms cannot be judged according to their ability to solve the same problems , or deal with the same facts , or meet the same standards . " If there were but one set of scientific problems , one world within which to work on them , and one set of standards for their solution , paradigm competition might be settled more or less routinely . . . . But . . . The proponents of competing paradigms are always at least slightly at cross - purposes " ( pp . I46 - 147 ) . Hence " the competition between paradigms is not the sort of battle that can be resolved by proofs " ( p . I47 ) , but is more like a " conversion experience " ( p . I50 ) . In fact , in so far as one can compare the weights of evidence of two competing paradigms - and , on Kuhn ' s view that after a scientific revolution " the whole network of fact and theory . . . has shifted " ( p . I40 ) , one must wonder how this can be done at all - the weight of evidence is more often in favor of the older paradigm than the new ( pp . I55 - I56 ) . " What occurred was neither a decline nor a raising of standards , but simply a change demanded by the adoption 39I D UDLEY SHAPERE of a new paradigm " ( p . I07 ) . " In these matters neither truth nor error is at issue " ( p . I50 ) ; indeed , Kuhn ' s view of the history of science implies that " We may . . . have to relinquish the notion , explicit or implicit , that changes of paradigm carry scientists and those who learn from them closer and closer to the truth " ( p . i69 ) . Kuhn is well aware of the relativism implied by his view , and his common sense and feeling for history make him struggle mightily to soften the dismal conclusion . It is , for instance , only " often " that the reception of a new paradigm necessitates a redefinition of the corre - sponding science . Proponents of different paradigms are only " at least partially " at cross - purposes . Though they " see different things when they look from the same point in the same direction , " this is " not to say that they can see anything they please . Both are looking at the world " ( p . I49 ) . It is only " in some areas " that " they see different things " ( p . I49 ) . But these qualifications are more the statement of the problems readers will find with Kuhn ' s views than the solutions of those problems . And it is small comfort to be told , in the closing pages of the book , that " a sort of progress will inevitably characterize the scientific enterprise " ( p . i69 ) , especially if that " progress , " whether or not it is aimed toward final truth , is not at least an advance over past error . Nor will careful readers feel reassured when they are asked , rhetorically , " What better criterion [ of scientific progress ] than the decision of the scientific group could there be " ( p . i69 ) ? For Kuhn has already told us that the decision of a scientific group to adopt a new paradigm is not based on good reasons ; on the contrary , what counts as a good reason is determined by the decision . A view such as Kuhn ' s had , after all , to be expected sooner or later from someone versed in the contemporary treatment of the history of science . For the great advances in that subject since Duhem have shown how much more there was to theories that were supposedly overthrown and superseded than had been thought . Historians now find that " the more carefully they study , say , Aristotelian dynamics , phlogistic chemistry , or caloric thermodynamics , the more certain they feel that those once current views of nature were , as a whole , neither less scientific nor more the product of human idiosyncrasy than those current today " ( p . 2 ) . Yet perhaps that deep impression has effected too great a reaction ; for that there is more to those theories than was once thought does not mean that they are immune to criticism - that there are not good reasons for their abandonment and replace - ment by others . And while Kuhn ' s book calls attention to many mistakes that have been made regarding the ( good ) reasons for scien - 392 SCIENTIFIC REVOL UTIONS tific change , it fails itself to illuminate those reasons , and even obscures the existence of such reasons . We must , as philosophers of science , shape our views of the development and structure of scientific thought in the light of what we learn from science and its history . But until historians of science achieve a more balanced approach to their subject - neither too positivistic nor too relativistic - philosophers must receive such presentations of evidence with extremely critical eyes . Certainly there is a vast amount of positive value in Kuhn ' s book . Besides making many valid critical remarks , it does bring out , through a wealth of case studies , many common features of scientific thought and activities which make it possible and , for many purposes , revealing to speak of " traditions " in science ; and it points out many significant differences between such traditions . But Kuhn , carried away by the logic of his notion of a paradigm , glosses over many important differ - ences between scientific activities classified as being of the same tradi - tion , as well as important continuities between successive traditions . He is thus led to deny , for example , that Einsteinian dynamics is an advance over Newtonian or Aristotelian dynamics in a sense more fundamental than can consistently be extracted from his conceptual apparatus . If one holds , without careful qualification , that the world is seen and interpreted " through " a paradigm , or that theories are " incommensurable , ' ' or that there is " meaning variance " between theories , or that all statements of fact are " theory - laden , " then one may be led all too readily into relativism with regard to the develop - ment of science . Such a view is no more implied by historical facts than is the opposing view that scientific development consists solely of the removal of superstition , prejudice , and other obstacles to scientific progress in the form of purely incremental advances toward final truth . Rather , I have tried to show , such relativism , while it may seem to be suggested by a half - century of deeper study of discarded theories , is a logical outgrowth of conceptual confusions , in Kuhn ' s case owing primarily to the use of a blanket term . For his view is made to appear convincing only by inflating the definition of " paradigm " until that term becomes so vague and ambiguous that it cannot easily be withheld , so general that it cannot easily be applied , so mysterious that it cannot help explain , and so misleading that it is a positive hindrance to the understanding of some central aspects of science ; and then , finally , these excesses must be counterbalanced by qualifications that simply contradict them . There are many other facets of Kuhn ' s book that deserve attention - especially his view that a paradigm " need not , 393 D UDLE . SHAPERE and in fact never does , explain all the facts with which it can be confronted " ( p . i8 ) , and his suggestion that no paradigm ever could be found which would do so . But the difficulties that have been discussed here indicate clearly that the expanded version of this book which Kuhn contemplates will require not so much further historical evidence ( p . xi ) as - at the very least - more careful scrutiny of his tools of analysis . DUDLEY SHAPERE University of Chicago 394