Collections and Technical Services Publications and Papers Collections and Technical Services 1 - 1991 Use of information resources by veterinary practitioners Nancy L . Pelzer Iowa State University Joan M . Leysen Iowa State University Follow this and additional works at : http : / / lib . dr . iastate . edu / libcat _ pubs Part of the Library and Information Science Commons The complete bibliographic information for this item can be found at http : / / lib . dr . iastate . edu / libcat _ pubs / 9 . For information on how to cite this item , please visit http : / / lib . dr . iastate . edu / howtocite . html . This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Collections and Technical Services at Iowa State University Digital Repository . It has been accepted for inclusion in Collections and Technical Services Publications and Papers by an authorized administrator of Iowa State University Digital Repository . For more information , please contact digirep @ iastate . edu . Use of information resources by veterinary practitioners Abstract Veterinary practitioners are often isolated from easy access to information in medical or hospital libraries , making necessary the use of a variety of information resources . A survey was conducted to assess the extent to which various information resources were used within the veterinary profession . Most responding veterinarians were small - animal practitioners who used the veterinary literature , colleagues , diagnostic laboratories , continuing education courses , association meetings , and pharmaceutical representatives as sources of information . Books and other practitioners were the preferred information source in critical - care situations , followed closely by diagnostic laboratories and journals . For keeping up - to - date with current advances in veterinary medicine , journals , books , other practitioners , and continuing education were used . University extension services , veterinary medical libraries , and computer applications to information use were not important resources ot most of the respondents . Many veterinarians indicated that they would use library services if they knew more about them . With the trend toward computerization in veterinary practice , it is possible for libraries to help reduce the information isolation of many veterinary practices . Disciplines Library and Information Science Comments Published in Bulletin of the Medical Library Association 79 , no . 1 ( January 1991 ) : 10 – 16 by the Medical Library Association . This article is available at Iowa State University Digital Repository : http : / / lib . dr . iastate . edu / libcat _ pubs / 9 Use of information resources by veterinary practitioners By Nancy L . Pelzer , M . A . Assistant Professor Joan M . Leysen , M . S . L . S . Assistant Professor William Robert Parks and Ellen Sorge Parks Library Iowa State University Ames , Iowa 50011 Veterinary practitioners are often isolated from easy access to information in medical or hospital libraries , making necessary the use of a variety of information resources . A survey was conducted to assess the extent to which various information resources were used within the veterinary profession . Most responding veterinarians were small - animal practitioners who used the veterinary literature , colleagues , diagnostic laboratories , continuing education courses , association meetings , and pharmaceutical representatives as sources of information . Books and other practitioners were the preferred information source in critical - care situations , followed closely by diagnostic laboratories and journals . For keeping up - to - date with current advances in veterinary medicine , journals , books , other practitioners , and continuing education were used . University extension services , veterinary medical libraries , and computer applications to information use were not important resources to most of the respondents . Many veterinarians indicated that they would use library services if they knew more about them . With the trend toward computerization in veterinary practice , it is possible for libraries to help reduce the information isolation of many veterinary practices . The typical veterinary practitioner in the United States is a small business owner , whose practice is located near or in a small city or suburban community . As described by Drake [ 1 ] and Coffee [ 2 ] , the veterinarian is most often isolated from libraries and professional colleagues . While most physicians in private practice have easy access to information resources in medical or hospital libraries , many veterinarians do not , since libraries specializing in veterinary materials are as - sociated directly with the twenty - seven veterinary medical school and research complexes in the United States [ 3 - 4 ] . Thus , of necessity , a variety of infor - mation resources are used by veterinarians in private practice , but the extent to which these resources are used is poorly documented . To investigate the use of various information resources by veterinary practi - tioners , the authors conducted a survey in February 1989 . Many veterinarians do not have easy access to information resources in medical or hospital li - braries , since libraries specializing in veterinary materials are associated directly with the twenty - seven veterinary medical school and research com - plexes in the United States . METHODS As a preliminary step to surveying practitioners , a separate survey that asked for a description of library services available to this group was sent to twenty - seven university - affiliated veterinary medical librar - ies in the United States . Veterinary medical library Bull Med Libr Assoc 79 ( 1 ) January 1991 10 Veterinary information resources Table 1 Veterinary medical library services available to private practitioners ( n = 17 respondents ) Number of libraries Not Avail - avail - Service able able Telephone / mail reference 16 1 Article photocopying 15 2 Computer literature searches 15 2 Lending from the collection 13 4 Guidance in using do - it - yourself literature searches 7 10 Guidance in establishing computer reprint files 2 15 Guidance in using computer - assisted instruction 0 17 services offered to practitioners outside the confines of a university were provided by seventeen respon - dents ( from seventeen states ) ( Table 1 ) . The most com - monly provided services were included in the vet - erinary practitioner survey . Veterinarians practicing in these same seventeen states were surveyed for use of various information resources within the veteri - nary profession ( Appendix ) . Survey questions elicited data on where veterinar - ians found information to support the needs of their practices , on other clinical topics of interest to them , and on computer use for information storage and retrieval or for computer - assisted diagnosis . A cover letter encouraged respondents to add any informa - tion resources that had not been included on the sur - vey instrument . Veterinarians were selected randomly from tele - phone directories . Using the 1989 American Veteri - nary Medical Association Directory ' s figures for total veterinarians listed in each of the seventeen states [ 5 ] , a proportionate number of individuals was se - lected from each state . Thus , states with a higher number of practitioners were accordingly sent a high - er number of surveys and vice versa . FINDINGS Of 548 surveys that reached their destination , 287 ( 52 % ) were returned ; however , not every respondent answered every question . ( The appropriate " n " re - sponse to each survey question is given in the fol - lowing discussion . ) The respondents ( n = 272 ) were evenly split be - tween single practitioners ( 130 ) and group practi - tioners ( 142 ) . The overwhelming majority treated small animals ( 222 ) , followed by mixed - animal prac - tices ( 46 ) , large - animal practices ( 4 ) , and other ( 2 ) ( n = 274 ) . Urban practices ( 103 ) and suburban practices ( 142 ) were prevalent over rural practices ( 35 ) ( n = 280 ) . Most veterinarians read the veterinary literature " sometimes " or " often . " No attempt was made to differentiate book and journal reading in this gen - eral question . INFORMATION RESOURCES USED To determine information - gathering behavior , vet - erinary practitioners were asked to indicate the fre - quency with which they used a variety of information resources within the last year ( Table 2 ) . Responses in the categories " often " and " sometimes " were assessed as positive , while those in the categories " seldom " and " never " were assessed as negative . As expected , most veterinarians read the veterinary literature " sometimes " or " often . " No attempt was made to dif - ferentiate book and journal reading in this general question . Diagnostic laboratories ( a source of expert consultation in addition to laboratory tests ) , contin - uing education courses , association meetings , and pharmaceutical representatives were also popular in - Table 2 Information resources used by veterinary practitioners ( by number and percentage of responses ) Never Seldom Sometimes Often Resource n ( % ) n ( % ) n ( % ) n ( % ) Total responses ( % ) Veterinary literature 0 ( 00 / 0 ) 9 ( 3 % ) 53 ( 19 % ) 224 ( 78 % ) 286 ( 100 % ) Veterinary colleagues 9 ( 3 % ) 25 ( 9 % ) 109 ( 38 % ) 142 ( 50 % ) 285 ( 100 % / c ) Diagnostic laboratory 7 ( 2 % ) 42 ( 15 % ) 75 ( 27 % ) 160 ( 56 % ) 284 ( 100 % ) Continuing education courses 15 ( 5 % ) 41 ( 15 % ) 134 ( 47 % ) 93 ( 33 % ) 283 ( 100 % ) Association meetings 20 ( 7 % ) 56 ( 20 % ) 126 ( 44 % ) 82 ( 29 % ) 284 ( 100 % o ) Pharmaceutical representatives 21 ( 7 % ) 87 ( 31 % ) 119 ( 42°h ) 56 ( 20 % ) 283 ( 100 % ) University extension service 192 ( 67 % ) 64 ( 23 % ) 23 ( 8 % ) 5 ( 2 % ) 284 ( 100 % ) Veterinary medical library 217 ( 77 % ) 51 ( 18 % ) 11 ( 4 % ) 4 ( 1 % ) 283 ( 100 % ) Computer databases 250 ( 88 % ) 24 ( 9 % ) 4 ( 1 % ) 5 ( 2°h ) 283 ( 100 % / ) Bull Med Libr Assoc 79 ( 1 ) January 1991 11 Peizer and Leysen Figure 1 Information resources used for critical care ( n = 286 respondents ) VE1ERIN4RY M OTHER EDIC4L LlE RARN v ' . \ ' k _ _ _ ' _ _ ' ' ' - ' - - 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190 210 230 250 270 290 NUMBER OF RESPONSES ( Respondents could answer more than one category ) formation resources used by these practitioners . Not well used as information resources were university extension services , university veterinary medical li - braries , and computer databases . The low use of uni - versity extension services is probably best explained by the predominance of small - animal practitioners in the survey population . Extension veterinarians tra - ditionally serve farm - animal and public health as - pects of veterinary medicine . When the thirty - five rural practitioners answering the survey were as - sessed separately , responses to this question were var - ied . Thirteen practitioners received regular mailings from extension veterinarians , and eleven made phone calls or wrote letters to them . Twelve of these rural practitioners indicated that they had no contact at all with an extension service . When asked which resources they preferred in crit - ical - care situations ( when a patient ' s life was threat - ened ) , books were ranked first ( 230 responses or 80 % ) ( Figure 1 ) . Emergency care handbooks , formularies , and veterinary therapy texts are probable tools in use by these veterinarians , but further study is needed to confirm the nature of these books . Nearly 60 % of the respondents indicated that they might consult other practitioners or university clinicians , and about one half might use a diagnostic laboratory or consult jour - nals . Little use was made of veterinary medical li - braries , computer databases , or extension services . KEEPING UP - TO - DATE As expected , journals surfaced again as the most im - portant resource for obtaining up - to - date information on current advances in veterinary medicine ( Figure 2 ) . Books and continuing education were important to a smaller number of practitioners . That books were perceived as an important source for " keeping up - to - date " was somewhat disturbing , considering that this information would most likely be one or more years old . Interestingly , thirty - seven practitioners said that they use other practitioners or university clinicians as their most important resource . Responses in the " other " category included diagnostic laboratory , ex - tension service , and salespeople . Three - fourths of responding practitioners read from two to four journals regularly ( 2 journals for 24 % of respondents , 3 journals for 28 % of respondents , and 4 journals for 22 % of respondents ) . Six percent of the practitioners said that they read none or only one journal , while 21 . 5 % said that they read five or more journals regularly . These results correspond closely to those in Drake ' s 1978 report , even though more Bull Med Libr Assoc 79 ( 1 ) January 1991 10 2i 12 Veterinary information resources Figure 2 Most important resource for keeping up - to - date ( n = 270 respondents ) p : ONTI IIVA1t UNIV 80 100 120 140 160 180 NUMBER OF RESPONSES NUING E E PRAC ERSItY I JOURNAILS BOOI ( S * DL1CATION TIltIONENS CLI . INICIANS OTHER 200 220 240 260 280 ( A few respondents supplied more than one resource ) journals are now available [ 6 ] . Based on an analysis of journal citations in the CONSULTANT database , White concluded that small - animal practitioners should be able to keep up - to - date with disease lit - erature by reviewing regularly five key veterinary journals covering their specialty , if used in conjunc - tion with major textbooks or computer databases as needed [ 7 ] . Three of the journals named ( Journal of Small Animal Practice , Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association , and Journal of the American Vet - erinary Medical Association ) were also considered most useful by British practitioners [ 8 ] . In addition to specialty journals , veterinarians in large - animal or mixed practices sometimes need to review the literature on related topics . Veterinarians often provide the first line of defense in public health - related zoonoses . Preventive veterinary medicine is of great economic importance to animal breeders , farmers , and the general populace . Resources on these topics ( produced by government agencies , private corporations , and extension services ) are available in veterinary medical libraries . However , practitioners responding to this survey did not use veterinary med - ical libraries extensively ( Table 3 ) . Some respondents indicated that they used the telephone / mail refer - ence service of the libraries " sometimes " to " often . " Other traditional services to patrons , such as article photocopying , computer literature searches , and book / journal borrowing were " seldom " or " never " That books were perceived as an important source for " keeping up - to - date " was somewhat disturbing , considering that this information would most likely be one or more years old . used . Interestingly , the responding veterinarians in - dicated that they would use these libraries more often if " they knew more about the services offered " or if " the library had a toll - free number to call " ( Table 4 ) . Other considerations ( such as proximity to the li - brary , having a modem , expenses related to using the library , or knowing the hours open ) were given little weight by these practitioners , although one could expect that each could enter seriously into an indi - vidual ' s choice of whether to use a library . A number of individuals who responded to the survey expressed the desire for more contact with these libraries . Regular mailings of information packets were the most frequent type of contact with extension veter - inarians by those survey respondents ( 108 or 44 % ) answering this question ( n = 245 ) . Twenty - eight per - cent of the respondents said that they contacted the extension office , while another 28 % indicated no con - tact at all . The forty - two veterinarians who did not answer this question also can most likely be included in the last category . Bull Med Libr Assoc 79 ( 1 ) January 1991 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 40 60 k k k t 13 Peizer and Leysen Table 3 Veterinary medical library services used ( by number and percentage of responses ) Never Seldom Sometimes Often Service n ( % ) n ( % ) n ( % ) n ( % ) Total responses ( % ) Telephone / mail reference 181 ( 64 % ) 40 ( 14 % ) 41 ( 15 % ) 19 ( 7 % ) 281 ( 100 % ) Article photocopying 237 ( 89 % ) 23 ( 9 % ) 7 ( 3 % ) 0 ( 0 % ) 267 ( 100 % ) Computer literature searches 245 ( 91 % ) 16 ( 6 % ) 8 ( 3 % / 6 ) 1 ( 0 % ) 270 ( 100 % ) Book or journal borrowing 248 ( 91 % ) 17 ( 6 % ) 7 ( 3 % ) 1 ( 0 % ) 273 ( 100 % ) COMPUTER USE While almost one half of responding practitioners had the use of a personal computer in their practice , only 4 % used computers to keep reprint files and only 3 % to search databases for bibliographic information ( Table 5 ) . Apparently , the veterinarians in this survey had little interest in remote databases . The prediction by Pyle that " computer - based telecommunications will be widely accepted by veterinarians " [ 9 ] has yet to materialize in this survey group , although expo - sure to this technology is available to veterinarians through columns and articles in publications such as Veterinary Economics , Veterinary Forum , Practice Man - agement , and Veterinary Computing ( incorporated in Modern Veterinary Practice ) and through the computer sessions and workshops that are appearing at some professional meetings . The idea of computer - assisted diagnosis has obviously yet to catch on among these respondents , as well . Only five respondents ( 4 % ) in - dicated use of this tool . SUMMARY Most responding veterinarians were small - animal practitioners who used the veterinary literature , col - leagues , diagnostic laboratories , continuing educa - tion courses , association meetings , and pharmaceu - tical representatives as information sources . Books and other clinicians were the preferred information source Table 4 Factors that influence veterinary medical library use ( by number and percentage of responses ) Respondents indicated that they Total would use the library more if * n ( % ) responses They knew more about the services offered 209 ( 77 % ) 272 ( 100 % / 6 ) The library had a toll - free number to call 126 ( 46 % ) 272 ( 100 % / 6 ) They had more time 79 ( 29 % ) 272 ( 100 % ) Other ( closer to library , had a modem , knew hours open , less expensive ) 20 ( 7 % / 6 ) 272 ( 100 % ) ' Respondents could answer more than once . The veterinarians in this survey had little interest in remote databases . The prediction by Pyle that " computer - based telecommunications will be wide - ly accepted by veterinarians " has yet to materialize in this survey group . in critical - care situations , followed closely by diag - nostic laboratories and journals . For keeping up - to - date , again journals and books , other practitioners , and continuing education were used . Continuing ed - ucation courses and association meetings as infor - mation sources were probably ranked as they were because of the need for credits to retain licensure in most states . Of course , diagnostic laboratories are a source of clinical test results on specimens taken from patients , as well as clinical interpretation by expert diagnosticians . University extension services , veter - inary medical libraries , and computer applications to information use were not important resources to most of the respondents . As noted by Drake in 1978 , vet - erinary practitioners still appear to underuse infor - mation resources [ 10 ] . The results of this survey corroborate Northup ' s statement that physicians show a tendency " to re - spond to information problems along known path - ways , which are probably established fairly early in Table 5 Personal computer use Does your practice have a personal computer ? ( n = 287 respondents ) " Yes " " No " responses ( % ) responses ( % ) 130 ( 45 % ) 157 ( 55 % ) " yes " responses If " yes , " is it used ( n = 130 respondents ) ( % ) To keep reprint files of book or joumal articles ? 5 ( 4 % ) To search databases for joumal or book information ? 4 ( 3 % ) For computer - assisted diagnosis ? 5 ( 4 % ) Bull Med Libr Assoc 79 ( 1 ) January 1991 14 Veterinary information resources a medical career " [ 11 ] . The findings are similar , also , to Stinson and Mueller ' s ; they reported that physi - cians ' most commonly used information sources were the medical literature , colleagues , professional meet - ings , and continuing education courses [ 12 ] . Woolf and Benson found that the most commonly used sources of reference information by physicians were textbooks and colleagues [ 13 ] . Veterinary medical stu - dents assessed for information - seeking behavior typ - ically used books or handouts and classmates or in - structors for information - neither the veterinary medical library nor computer databases [ 14 ] . But many respondents in this survey indicated that they would use the veterinary medical library if they knew more about these services and if there were access via a toll - free number . One means of enhancing the use of the veterinary medical library and its services would be increased incorporation of information - seeking skills into course objectives throughout the four - year veterinary curriculum . Other means of publicizing a library ' s resources , such as providing descriptions of new materials and services in state veterinary asso - ciation newsletters , need to be explored . The Veter - inary Medical Information Center at Purdue proved to be a valuable library resource program for veter - inarians [ 15 ] . More data are needed on the quality and content of books in veterinarians ' collections . Factors such as age , breadth , and depth of the collections would be useful in determining whether veterinarians are se - lecting the most useful tools in their practices or whether they need to use more outside resources . If , as this study has indicated , books are the basis for many medical decisions , are new editions of these texts purchased regularly ? Veterinarians surveyed by Drake suggested that current information be avail - able in condensed form [ 16 ] , while British veterinar - ians preferred paperbacks in specialized areas and videos illustrating surgical techniques [ 17 ] . Albright hoped that traditional pathways of infor - mation retrieval for health professionals would be broadened to accept the literature search as another essential clinical tool , no different from a good patient history and physical ex - amination or an interpretation of a laboratory test [ 18 ] . According to Gray , however , veterinarians could not spare the time to do their own literature searches and did not want elaborate literature searches or long lists of references , but rather preferred summaries and critical reviews [ 19 ] . Practical limitations in the de - livery and use of these resources necessarily include library funding or practitioners ' willingness to pay . However , with the increasing trend to use computers in veterinary practices [ 20 ] and with the advent of diverse communication networks and CD - ROM tech - nology , the opportunity for libraries to help reduce the information isolation of many veterinary practic - es is increasingly possible . This study indicates that veterinarians continue to rely on personally owned books and journals for information needs despite the " computer revolu - tion " and the availability of library services . CONCLUSION Since the survey sample of 287 respondents was small , the results cannot be generalized to the entire vet - erinary practitioner population . However , when con - sidered in conjunction with other veterinary infor - mation use studies , the findings suggest that practitioners do not frequently use libraries or com - puter information services as information resources . This study indicates that veterinarians continue to rely on personally owned books and journals for in - formation needs despite the " computer revolution " and the availability of library services . REFERENCES 1 . DRAKE MA , WooDs LA . An information service for prac - ticing veterinarians . Bull Med Libr Assoc 1978 Oct ; 66 ( 4 ) : 437 - 40 . 2 . COFFE EG , comp . Directory of information sources . In : LaFrana J , ed . 1989 AVMA directory . Schaumburg , IL : American Veterinary Medical Association , 1989 : 708 - 14 . 3 . JOHNSON KS , Coim - EG . Veterinary medical school li - braries in the United States and Canada 1977 / 78 . Bull Med Libr Assoc 1982 Jan ; 70 ( 1 ) : 10 - 20 . 4 . GRAY DE . Veterinary information : the current situation and future trends . Vet Rec 1976 Apr 3 ; 98 ( 14 ) : 271 - 4 . 5 . LAFRANA J , ED . , op . cit . 6 . DRAKE , op . cit . , 438 . 7 . WHITE ME . Let ' s stop loose talk about the " information explosion . " J Vet Med Educ 1988 Spring ; 15 ( 1 ) : 25 - 6 . 8 . RAw ME . Survey of libraries in veterinary practice . Vet Rec 1987 Aug 8 ; 121 ( 6 ) : 129 - 31 . 9 . PYLE RL . State - of - the - art information management tech - niques for the veterinarian . In : Smith RD , ed . Proceedings , Fifth Symposium on Computer Applications in Veterinary Medicine . Urbana , IL : University of Illinois , College of Vet - erinary Medicine , 1987 : 53 . 10 . DRAKE MA . Creating demand for information : a case study of veterinarians . In : Brenner EH , comp . The infor - mation age in perspective . White Plains , NY : American So - ciety for Information Science , 1978 : 110 - 1 . ( Proceedings of the ASIS annual meeting , v . 15 . ) 11 . NORTHUP DE , MOORE - WEST M , SKiPPER B , TEAF SR . Char - acteristics of clinical information searching : investigation using critical incident technique . J Med Educ 1983 Nov ; 58 ( 1 1 ) : 873 - 81 . Bull Med Libr Assoc 79 ( 1 ) January 1991 15 Peizer and Leysen 12 . STINSON ER , MUELLER DA . Survey of health profession - als ' information habits and needs . Conducted through per - sonal interviews . JAMA 1980 Jan 11 ; 243 ( 2 ) : 140 - 3 . 13 . WOOLF SH , BENSON DA . The medical information needs of internists and pediatricians at an academic medical cen - ter . Bull Med Libr Assoc 1989 Oct ; 77 ( 4 ) : 372 - 80 . 14 . PELZER NL , LEYSEN JM . Library use and information - seeking behavior of veterinary medical students . Bull Med Libr Assoc 1988 Oct ; 76 ( 4 ) : 328 - 33 . 15 . Drake , An information service . 16 . IBID . , 439 . 17 . RAw , op . cit . , 130 . 18 . ALBRIGHT RG . Looking toward the future . In : Albright RG , ed . A basic guide to online information systems for health care professionals . Arlington , VA : Information Re - source Press , 1988 : 249 - 57 . 19 . GRAY , op . cit . , 273 . 20 . Research report : computers benefit veterinary practices . Marketing & Practice Strategies for Companion Animal Practitioners 1989 Jul ; 2 ( 3 ) : 1 . Received August 1989 ; accepted November 1989 APPENDIX Please check or circle all answers that apply to you Type of practitioner : Single Group Small animal Large animal _ _ Mixed Other Practice is located in which area ? Urban _ _ Suburban _ _ Rural In the last year , how often did you use these information sources ? Veterinary literature Veterinary colleagues Association meetings ( national , state ) Continuing education courses Pharmaceutical representatives Diagnostic Laboratory University Vet . Med . Library University Extension Service Computer databases Never Seldom 0 1 0 1 Some - times 22 Often 3 3 Where do you look for critical - care ( life - threatening situ - ations ) information ? University Other clini - Diagnostic clinicians cians labs Books Journals Vet . Med . Computer Extension Library database service Other ( please de - scribe ) Which of the above is your single most important source for " keeping up - to - date ? " How many journals do you read regularly ? Which services offered by your state university ' s college of vet . med . library do you use ? Computer literature searches Article photocopying Book or journal borrowing Telephone / mail reference service Never 0 0 0 0 Seldom 1 1 1 1 Some - times 2 2 2 2 Often 3 3 3 3 Would you use this library more often if : Knew more about services Had more time offered Other ( please It had a toll - free number specify ) to call Most contact with extension veterinarians is through : Regular mailings from them _ _ Your phone calls / letters Other ( please describe ) Does your practice have a personal computer ? Yes _ _ _ No If yes , is it used To keep reprint files of book or journal articles ? To search databases for journal or book information ? For computer - assisted diagnosis ( for example , CONSULTANT software ) ? 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 Bull Med Libr Assoc 79 ( 1 ) January 1991 16