TOOLKITS AS PROBLEM SOLVING ASSISTANTS : AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HOW TO FACILITATE THE USE OF HEURISTICS IN SELF DESIGN PROCESSES Nikolaus Franke Institute for Entrepreneurship and Innovation Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration Nordbergstrasse 15 , 1090 Vienna , Austria nikolaus . franke @ wu - wien . ac . at Peter Keinz Institute for Entrepreneurship and Innovation Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration Nordbergstrasse 15 , 1090 Vienna , Austria peter . keinz @ wu - wien . ac . at Martin Schreier Institute for Entrepreneurship and Innovation Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration Nordbergstrasse 15 , 1090 Vienna , Austria martin . schreier @ wu - wien . ac . at Toolkits as problem solving assistants : An empirical study of how to facilitate the use of heuristics in self design processes Abstract Toolkits for User Innovation and Design have turned out to be successful means of integrat - ing users into the new product development process . But experience shows that the Toolkit approach does not always work well in practice . Due to the high complexity of self design processes and their limited problem solving capabilities , especially novice users often feel overwhelmed by the new task of designing an individualized product on their own . The aim of this study is to give insights on how to improve Toolkits in order to make them effective problem solving assistants providing substantial support to users during self design processes . The results of our experiment show that certain Toolkit functions can help users to employ special problem solving heuristics which enhance the users’ problem solving abilities . These improved problem solving abilities help users to come up with products that better fit their needs and therefore lead to an increased willingness to pay and a higher purchase intention for the self designed product . Introduction Since Eric von Hippel came up with the customer - active paradigm in the 1970s ( von Hip - pel , 1978 ) , customers’ roles have changed dramatically in many industries . Customers are not passive consumers any more who have only the choice of either buying or not buying a new product that has been designed by the manufacturer . Today , customers play a much more ac - tive role : Manufacturers try to integrate users into the new product development process due to the fact that they may possess many of the sticky , need - related information required to come up with successful products ( von Hippel / Katz , 2002 ) . One very promising mean of integrating users into the new product development are Tool - kits for User Innovation and Design . Toolkits are coordinated sets of user - friendly design tools enabling users to develop producible custom products themselves via iterative trial and error . The basic idea behind the Toolkit approach is to bring need - related information and technical problem solving capabilities together at a single locus . But instead of trying to un - derstand the users’ needs deeply and well via such means as market research , manufacturers abandon these costly and time - consuming activities and rather try to shift need - related prod - uct development tasks to users by equipping them with Toolkits ( von Hippel / Katz , 2002 ) . The potential advantages of the Toolkit approach are obvious : as users are allowed to de - velop products on their own , those custom products better fit the users’ individual needs and preferences . In turn , a better preference fit leads to an increased willingness to pay for the self designed product ( Schreier , 2006 ; Franke / Piller , 2004 ) . Although there’s a lot of empirical evidence that the adoption of a Toolkit may lead to benefits for both , the manufacturer as well as the user , the Toolkit approach does not always work well . Designing a customized product is a new , cognitive challenging task , especially for novice users who are not used to engage in such design problems . As they are not professional designers , Toolkit users usually can not rely on approved strategies when designing a custom product . In other words , users often face difficulties in coming up with a satisfying product in the course of self design processes be - cause of a lack of sufficient problem solving capabilities . The interesting question that arises from that observation is how Toolkits for User Innovation and Design themselves should look in order to foster the adoption of effective problem solving heuristics by their users . Despite the fact that Toolkits are widely used , know - how on how to design such instru - ments is rather scarce . Existing literature on this issue is rather vague : on the one hand , there are some conceptual papers decribing interesting hints on the elements a Toolkit should com - prise ( von Hippel / Katz , 2002 ; Randall / Terwiesch / Ulrich , 2005 ) or on general success factors for the design of all kinds of user interfaces ( Gold / Lewis , 1985 ) . Although the suggestions there like implementing a module library or allowing for immediate feedback seem highly reasonable , empirical evidence on their effectiveness is missing . On the other hand , there are some very interesting empirical studies on the design of mass configurators ( Huffmann / Kahn , 1998 ; Dellaert / Stremersch , 2005 ; Randall / Terwiesch / Ulrich , 2003 ) . But as self design within these studies is regarded rather as decision making than as problem solving , they do not draw a complete picture of self design processes . Thus , the findings within these studies are also of limited contribution to the task of making Toolkits highly supportive problem solving assis - tants . Our study attempts to fill this research gap and to come up with empirically proven sugges - tions for the design of Toolkits . In the first step , we conducted an exploratory study trying to identify the most effective problem solving strategies of expert designers when working on a new design problem . We carried out 38 ‘think - aloud’ - interviews with professional industrial designers and architects . Based on the findings of this exploratory study and a comprehensive literature review , we built different versions of one and the same Toolkit . These Toolkit ver - sions respectively differed in only one function and were used within a large - scale experiment aiming to find out whether a ) certain Toolkit functions can trigger the adoption of effective problem solving heuristics by users and b ) the adoption of these problem solving heuristics positively influences the preference - fit of and the willingness to pay as well as the purchase intention for the self designed products . Self design process as problem solving As mentioned above , empirical studies on how to configure self design tools are rather scarce and of limited value in answering the question of how to make Toolkits supportive problem solving assistants . The reason for this is a very dominant decision - making perspec - tive within the relevant literature where designing an individualized product is regarded as a search for the set of values for the product design parameters that maximizes product utility ( Randall / Terwiesch / Ulrich , 2003 ) . In this perspective , users of self design tools face problems when designing a custom product because of their limited information processing capacity . As mass configurators allow manufacturers to offer a wider assortment of customizable products , users may feel overwhelmed by the great variety and dissatisfied because of information over - load ( Huffmann / Kahn , 1998 ; Dellaert / Stremersch , 2005 ) . Self design tools should therefore help to avoid this so - called mass confusion problem by supporting the user to handle much product related information and the great variety of possible products . Most of the existing studies on the design of self design tools point out that the way in which information is pre - sented to the user strongly influences perceived complexity of the process , satisfaction with the individualized product and the willingness to pay for it ( Huffmann / Kahn , 1998 ; Ran - dall / Terwiesch / Ulrich , 2003 ; Dellaert / Stremersch , 2005 ) . Although these studies provide some interesting insights on the configuration of self design tools , they suffer from a very important theoretical shortcoming : as they regard self design as a decision making process , they do not draw a valid picture of the self design process . The situation a novice Toolkit user is confronted with when developing an innovative custom product on his own is not only about assembling , identifying and comparing predefined alternatives and making decisions . Instead , designing an individualized product by using a Toolkit with an infinite solution space is a much more active , highly creative task which comprises the invention of an initial idea , the generation and evaluation of different design alternatives and the exploration of her / his own preferences during the design process . In this study , we regard the task of developing an individualized product as an ill - structured problem . The idea of investigating the task of designing something new through the lenses of the problem - solving paradigm is not new . There are plenty of studies regarding design tasks as problems ( Smith , 1988 ; Guindon , 1990 ) . The term ‘problem’ usually refers to a situation where there is a gap , difference or disparity between the way things are and the way one wants them to be ( Bartee , 1973 ; Smith , 1988 ) . To qualify as a problem , the gap between the current and the desired state must be a ) difficult to bridge or close and b ) important enough to inspire current or prospective solution activities of the individual facing it ( Smith , 1988 ) . ‘Ill - structured’ means that specifications of goals are incomplete and ambiguous , there is no pre - determined solution path and an individual needs to integrate multiple knowledge domains in order to solve the problem ( Simon , 1973 ) . The task of designing a custom product perfectly fits in this definition of an ill - structured problem . As there is no standard product that fully satisfies their individual needs , the Toolkit users take on the challenge of designing a custom product themselves . But usually , they can not rely on approved strategies when fulfilling the design task which is completely new for them ; furthermore users often do not know their preferences for the different product attributes making it hard to evaluate the alternatives gen - erated during the self design process . These considerations show that Toolkit users face diffi - culties in coming up with a high quality design because of a lack of factual and procedural knowledge rather than because of information overload . Interpreting the task of designing a new product via a Toolkit as an ill - structured problem and making the Toolkit an appropriate problem solving assistant leads to the question how problems are solved in general . The predominant concept is the one of the general problem solver . Roughly speaking , problem solving comprises different phases within this approach . An individual facing a problem first generates an internal representation of the problem and than elects a program ( problem solving heuristic ) in order to generate a suitable solution which is evaluated afterwards . If the solution does not lie within a predetermined solution space , the problem solving process is repeated until a satisfying solution is reached ( New - ell / Simon , 1972 ) . The concept of the general problem solver reveals the high relevance of problem solving heuristics : problem solvers employ many different strategies when searching for appropriate solutions to an existing problem ( Srinivasan / Te’eni , 1995 ) . Experienced prob - lem solvers usually know which problem solving heuristic to adopt in a certain situation . In - dividuals facing a completely new task and / or having low problem solving experience can not make use of these ‘experts’ heuristics’ as they do not know ( how to adopt ) them . Based on these considerations , making Toolkits highly supportive problem solving assis - tants especially for novice users implies the need to design Toolkits that allow for , and trigger the adoption of , effective problem solving heuristics . This is the basic assumption underlying our research hypotheses that are discussed next . Research Hypotheses Given the high importance of effective heuristics when solving an ill - structured problem , our first task was to clarify which problem solving strategies are most commonly and success - fully used by professional problem solvers . In addition to a broad literature review , we con - ducted an exploratory study among professional industrial designers and architects . The par - ticipants of this study had to work on design tasks that were novel for them . This was neces - sary to avoid a situation in which an expert designer was able to solve the problem in an auto - mated manner ; this would not involve real problem solving because of the existence of a pre - determined solution path and / or already existing specifications of the goal . On the other hand the design problems had to be representative for the tasks the participants usually have to ful - fil in their professional lives ( van Someren / Barnard / Sandberg , 1994 ) . Carrying out and ana - lyzing 38 ‘think aloud’ - interviews , we were able to identify 12 problem solving heuristics employed by the professional industrial designers and architects in our study . We evaluated these expert heuristics by using a scoring model and taking into account conceptual studies on the design of Toolkits ( Randall / Terwiesch / Ulrich , 2005 ) in order to find the three most impor - tant ones that could be experimentally tested afterwards . The three most relevant problem solving heuristics were : - Use of starting points One of the most important findings of our exploratory study was that professional designers do not start from scratch when they tackle a new design task . Almost all of the interviewees started the design process by searching for already existing designs within virtual or mental stocks of design elements serving as starting points . After having identified appropriate sources of inspiration , the expert designers changed , adapted and developed these pre - existent design elements during the design process . Our observations are in accordance with the findings of several studies investigating design processes in different industries . Fashion designers for example do also use sources of inspira - tion when developing new designs . They modify and combine existing ideas and designs into novel forms during new product development ( Eckert / Stacey , 1998 ) . The same is true for many other expert designers : architects planning new buildings also re - use existing solution chunks ( Chi / Glaser / Farr , 1988 ) . As these starting points are not only stored in electronic data bases but also in the experts’ memory , experience plays a very important role when trying to solve design problems . Professional designers can fall back on comprehensive stocks of pre - existing designs and design elements because of their extensive experience when facing a new design problem . Novices by contrast usually can not make use of these kinds of starting points as they do not posses the knowledge and experience of expert designers . This lack of starting points also negatively influences the self design process of novice Toolkit users . One way to allow Toolkit users to employ the expert’s heuristic ‘use of starting points’ could be the integration of a so - called ‘advanced module library’ . We define the ad - vanced module library as a gallery including pre - fabricated , high quality designs that can be changed and adapted during the self design process . Users can start their design process by choosing one of the ready - made starting points as a basis for their own designs . This reduces complexity of the self design process as the user only has to concentrate on those aspects of the design that do not fit her / his preferences and therefore need to be changed . All other at - tributes of the starting point can be adopted . But starting points also offer another advantage : users exploring the numerous starting points within the advanced module library learn more about their preferences . They identify designs they like and designs they do not like which helps them to scale down their solution space and thereby reducing the complexity of the de - sign problem . In other words , the advanced module library substitutes experience and mental stocks of design elements for novice users enabling them to make use of starting points during the design process . This leads to our first two hypotheses : H I : Users of a Toolkit comprising an advanced module library will more intensively use the heuristic ‘use of starting points’ as users of a Toolkit without an advanced module library . H II : The use of the heuristic ‘use of starting points’ will increase a ) the satisfaction with the self designed product . b ) the willingness to pay for the self designed product . c ) the purchase intention . - Save design Another very important heuristic used by most of the participants of our exploratory study was ‘save design’ . Industrial designers as well as architects saved preliminary versions and different alternatives of designs during the process of solving the design problem . The reasons for generating back - ups of their work were twofold : first , the expert designers wished to ex - ploratory improvements of already suitable designs but also to be able to return to previous versions without a large effort if they did not like the final solution . Second , nearly all expert designers developed more than one possible solution to the design problem . Saving the differ - ent alternatives allowed them to compare and evaluate them during the design process and to make a final decision for the best design . This kind of behaviour is typical for professional problem solvers working on ill - structured problems . Problem solving usually comprises iterative trial and error . This means that there are several problem solving cycles leading to diverse solutions . As the individual working on an ill - structured problem does not have complete specifications of suitable solutions at the beginning of the problem solving process , he / she has to keep previous solutions to be able to compare them with a current solution later on . That’s why problem solvers try to generate external back - ups of their work . This helps to reduce the complexity of the problem solving process as individuals do not have to keep in mind previous solutions and can concentrate on the process of generating a novel solution itself ( Newell / Simon , 1972 ) . This means that exter - nally saving preliminary solutions decreases the load of the working memory of the human problem solver and therefore increases his problem solving capability . Based on these considerations it seems reasonable that Toolkit users could also benefit from the possibility of saving preliminary versions and / or alternative designs externally . If Toolkits had a kind of a ‘storage room’ , users could employ the experts’ heuristic ‘save design’ and store their designs during the self design process . Users of a Toolkit with a back - up function would not have to keep in mind alternative designs which could lead to a reduced complexity of the self design process and to an increased problem solving ability of the users . Thus , we hypothesize : H III : Users of a Toolkit comprising a back - up function will more intensively use the heuris - tic ‘save design’ as users of a Toolkit without a back - up function . H IV : The use of the heuristic ‘save design’ will increase a ) the satisfaction with the self designed product . b ) the willingness to pay for the self designed product . c ) the purchase intention . - Use of external feedback The third very important heuristic we identified while analyzing the findings of our explora - tory study can be referred to as ‘use of external feedback’ . It was interesting to see that many of the professional industrial designers and architects wanted to get feedback on their final solutions from peers . The expert designers asked for feedback for two different reasons : on the one hand the just wanted a judgement on the quality of their design . As the design tasks they were opposed to were new to the participants , they felt they needed some kind of confir - mation that their solution was suitable . On the other hand participants asking colleagues for feedback hoped to get valuable inputs how to improve the solution at hand . The quest for external feedback of our interviewees can easily be explained by the fact that they had to work on a completely novel design task . As described above , design problems can be viewed as ill - structured meaning that the problem solver does not have approved solution paths and exact specifications of permitted goals . This uncertainty is why people seek feed - back on solutions to complex problems ( Srinivasan / Te’eni , 1995 ) . One way to reduce the in - security about the quality of the generated solution is to ‘test’ it by obtaining opinions from other experts . For novice Toolkit users faced with the task of designing a custom product on their own , uncertainty may play an even more important role . The lack of experience in new product development prevents them from being sure about the quality of their designs . To reduce this problem , Toolkit users could try to obtain feedback from persons like friends , family mem - bers or other Toolkit users . Especially the latter are perceived as a valuable source of feed - back as they are taken for competent judges because of the fact that they are also engaged in designing a similar custom product . Therefore providing users with the possibility of present - ing their designs to other Toolkit users and getting feedback and suggestions how to improve them should lead to an increased preference fit , a higher willingness to pay and a higher pur - chase intention . To test these assumptions , we formulated hypotheses V and VI : H V : Users of a Toolkit comprising a peer feedback function will more intensively use the heuristic ‘use of feedback’ as users of a Toolkit without a peer feedback function . H VI : The use of the heuristic ‘use of feedback’ will increase a ) the satisfaction with the self designed product . b ) the willingness to pay for the self designed product . c ) the purchase intention . Method To test the hypotheses stated above , we conducted a comprehensive experiment . The ra - tionale of this study is simple : we invited the participants to design an individualized product via a Toolkit . Before starting the self design process , the participants were randomly assigned to different experimental groups , each of which equipped with a certain version of one and the same Toolkit . These different versions of the Toolkit respectively differed in only one func - tion . After the end of the self design process every participant had to answer a questionnaire measuring the use of the heuristics described above , the satisfaction ( preference fit ) with the self designed product and the willingness to pay as well as the purchase intention for the self designed product . - Research field In order to test our hypotheses , we first had to find a research field meeting several re - quirements : first of all , we were looking for an industry in the B - to - C market where self de - sign via Toolkits was quite new . This was important because of the fact that designing the custom product had to be a novel task to our participants and therefore involve real problem solving . Another very important requirement was to find a product category where design played a dominant role compared to functionality . This guaranteed that the participants had to concentrate on solving an ill - structured design problem with an open solution space when developing the individualized product . Last but not least we were searching for a product that was of a relatively high relevance to our potential participants ensuring that they would accept a certain level of effort when solving the design task . Based on these considerations , we chose the skiing industry as the research field for our study . Product involvement for skis is supposed to be very high among the Austrian popula - tion . But although design is of high importance within this product category , there are hardly any companies in Austria offering their customers Toolkits to customize their skis . Only a small Viennese company called ‘Edelwiser’ is specialized in the production and distribution of individualized carving skis . Edelwiser offers a very basic Toolkit allowing customers to freely design the surface of high quality carving skis . The Edelwiser Toolkit served as the basis for our experiment : we adopted and extended the Toolkit of the company in order to create our experimental stimuli – different versions of one and the same Toolkit only differing in respectively one function . - Participants As already mentioned , it was of high relevance for our experiment that participants had a high product involvement for carving skis and that they were interested in the design of a ski . On the other hand persons participating in our experiment should neither have experience in the design of skis nor be professional designers because of reasons of internal validity . We therefore controlled for these aspects within our questionnaire . To attract only participants seriously participating in the experiment , we tried to make use of self selection effects by an - nouncing that all participants automatically would take part in a lottery and could win their self designed carving skis . We announced our experiment via postings in students’ forums and placards at all Viennese universities . Students seemed to be an adequate population in respect to the external validity of our experiment . The users of the Edelwiser Toolkit are primarily young , urban and sporty people having a strong desire for unique products . Students are supposed to fit in this defini - tion quite well . In total , we had 266 persons participating in our experiment , mostly students . They were 24 years old on average . 52 % of the participants were male . - Experimental setting and measurement in detail Our experiment consisted of two parts : In part I we wanted to test hypotheses I to IV . We asked all participants to design a carving ski using the offered Toolkit . Before the start of the design process , participants were randomly assigned to either the control group or to one of the three experimental groups . Each of these groups was equipped with another version of the Edelwiser Toolkit . The members of the control group had to work with a basic version of the Toolkit . They could neither use adjustable starting points nor a back - up or a peer - based feedback function . Participants within experimental group 1 could design their individual carving ski with a Toolkit extended by an advanced module library . This means that they were allowed to choose to start the design process either from scratch with a white carving ski shape or on the basis of one of 28 high quality ready - made ski designs . Individuals assigned to experimental group 2 were equipped with a Toolkit comprising a back - up function . They could use a kind of storage room in order to back up different versions or alternatives of ski designs during the design process . In contrast to the participants of experimental group 1 , they had no starting points . Within experimental group 3 , participants were provided with a Toolkit extended by an advanced module library as well as a storage room . Participants within all groups were asked to proceed with the self design process until they reached a design they really liked . On average , the design process took our participants 52 minutes . After having finished the design task , all subjects had to fill in a comprehensive questionnaire . This questionnaire comprised constructs to measure the level of usage of the two experts’ heuristics ‘Use of starting points’ and ‘Save design’ that should be fostered by our experimental stimuli as well as at the dependent variables ( ‘Preference Fit’ , ‘Willingness to Pay’ and ‘Purchase Intention’ ) , control variables ( ‘Product Involvement’ , ‘Expertise in the field of design’ ) and some question on demographic data ( e . g . ‘sex’ , ‘age’ and ‘disposable income’ ) . Measuring the adoption of experts’ heuristics by our participants turned out to be the most difficult task within this study . As we could not find any approved scales measuring the prob - lem solving strategies ‘Use of starting points’ and ‘Save design’ , we had to develop valid scales on our own . The usage of the heuristic ‘Use of starting points’ was measured with four 7 - point items showing a Cronbach’s Alpha of 0 . 752 . The scale measuring ‘Save design’ also consisted of four 7 - point items . Reliability check among these items also showed a satisfying Cronbach’s Alpha of 0 . 703 . The items used are presented in the appendix . In contrast , measuring the dependent variables was much easier because we could fall back on proven scales . We measured ‘preference fit’ for example by using three 7 - point items ( see appendix ) taken from two already tested scales ( Schreier , 2006 ; Huffman / Kahn , 1998 ) . Cron - bach’s Alpha was 0 . 832 for these three items . To measure the purchase intention of our par - ticipants we used a Juster scale ( Juster 1966 ) which is an 11 - point probability scale aiming to reflect an individual’s purchase probability . Respondents were asked to estimate the likeli - hood of buying the self designed carving ski . The Juster Scale is considered to be a compara - tively good measure of the actual purchase intention as it consistently achieves higher correla - tions with actual behavior than alternative purchase intention measures ( Uncles & Lee , 2006 ) . Our most important dependent variable was the willingness to pay for the self developed ski design . Due to its high practicability we used an open - ended contingent valuation approach ( Jones , 1975 ; Wertenbroch & Skiera , 2002 ) . Respondents had to state their WTPs for the pair of skis they had developed during the experiment as well as for a pair of carving skis of the same quality but with a white surface . We than subtracted the latter from the former WTP in order to calculate the willingness to pay for the design of the ski ( ‘WTP diff’ ) . We have cho - sen this procedure to avoid biases caused by different assumptions of the participants regard - ing the price of a high quality carving ski . The three different dependent variables are signifi - cantly correlated ( Preference Fit – WTP diff : r = - 0 . 206 , p < 0 . 01 ; Preference Fit – Purchase Intention : r = 0 . 365 , p < 0 . 01 ; WTP diff – Purchase Intention : r = - 0 . 342 , p < 0 . 01 ) . Product involvement as one of our control variables was measured with four 5 - point seman - tic differential items ( anchors were important - unimportant , means a lot to me - means nothing to me , relevant - irrelevant & valuable - worthless ) , adapting the scale invented by Zaichkowsky ( 1985 ) . Reliability check showed a Cronbach’s Alpha of 0 . 789 . Another important control variable was ‘design expertise’ . We controlled for the participants’ expertise in the field of design by using a self developed scale consisting of four 7 - point items with a Cronbach’s Al - pha of 0 . 836 . Part 2 of our experiment was designed to test the hypotheses V and VI . To investigate the effect of feedback given by peers , we had to set up a longitudinal experimental design . The idea was to provide some of our participants that had already designed an individualized ski with feedback on their designs and afterwards let them again work on their skis . Participants of this second part of our study were recruited from the members of experimental group 3 of the first part . They were asked to show up again within 5 to 7 days in order to continue to work on their current ski design or create a completely new one . 78 of the persons who already participated in part I of our study were able to also participate in the second part of our study . They were again randomly divided into two different groups : each subject in experimental group 4 received feedback on its design from three highly ex - perienced users of the Edelwiser Toolkit . These feedbacks included 3 suggestions for further advancement of the design and an evaluation of the design’s quality in each case . The partici - pants were told that they could but not had to follow the feedback on their design when con - tinuing working on it . All subjects within this group received feedback from the same three judges . Subjects in the control group ( control group 2 ) were also allowed to continue working on their designs . In contrast to the participants of experimental group 4 , they did not get feed - back supporting them in improving their designs . In part two of our experiment , the design process required 24 minutes on average . Subjects were again asked to answer a questionnaire which was a shorter version of the one they had already answered in part I of the experiment . This new questionnaire contained questions in order to measure the use of the heuristic ‘Use of external feedback’ and the scales that had already been used to measure the dependent variables in the first part of the experiment . The idea behind the re - measurement of the dependent variables was to be able to investigate the change in these variables caused by the adoption of the heuristic . The problem solving heuris - tic ‘Use of external feedback’ was measured by a self developed scale comprising five 7 - point items ( see appendix ) with a Cronbach’s Alpha of 0 . 944 among them . Figure I illustrates the design of our experiment : Figure I : The experimental design Findings Tables I and II briefly summarize our findings . The first table shows the results answering our hypotheses I , III and V in which we argued that certain Toolkit functions could increase the use of the experts’ problem solving heuristics among novice Toolkit users . We could find support for hypotheses I and V . Hypotheses III had to be rejected . Control group ( Basic Toolkit ) Exp . group 1 Exp . group 2 ( TK with back up function ) Exp . Group 3 Use of Starting Points Save Design Use of Starting Points & Save Design willingness to pay preference fit Use of External Feedback Exp . Group 4 Con . Group 2 ( without Feedback ) Part I of the experiment Part II of the experiment TK = Toolkit purchase intention ( Toolkit with AML ) ( TK with AML & back up function ) ( with Feedback ) AML = Advanced Module Library N Use of Starting Points 1 mean [ std . dev . ] Save Design 2 mean [ Std . dev . ] Use of external Feedback 3 mean [ Std . dev . ] Control group 1 ( Basic Toolkit ) 56 5 . 38 [ 0 . 97 ] 4 . 07 [ 1 . 17 ] - Experimental group 1 ( Toolkit with Advanced Module Library ) 57 4 . 36 [ 1 . 84 ] 4 . 29 [ 1 . 40 ] - Experimental group 2 ( Toolkit with back up func - tion ) 53 5 . 90 [ 0 . 95 ] 3 . 86 [ 1 . 39 ] - Experimental group 3 ( Toolkit with Advanced Module Library and back up function ) 100 4 . 97 [ 1 . 63 ] 4 . 05 [ 1 . 56 ] - Experimental group 4 ( with external Feedback ) 41 - - 2 . 43 [ 1 . 17 ] Control group 2 ( without external Feedback ) 37 - - 6 . 26 [ 1 . 23 ] total p < 0 , 000 4 [ F = 11 . 219 ] n . s . 4 p < 0 . 000 4 [ F = 196 . 95 ] 1 = 7 - Point - Rating - Scale ( 4 Items , α = 0 . 752 ; 1 = heuristic intensely used , 7 = heuristic hardly used ) 2 = 7 - Point - Rating - Scale ( 4 Items , α = 0 . 713 ; 1 = heuristic intensely used , 7 = heuristic hardly used ) 3 = 7 - Point - Rating - Scale ( 5 Items , α = 0 . 944 ; 1 = heuristic intensely used , 7 = heuristic hardly used ) 4 = ANOVA Table I : Differences in the adoption of experts’ heuristics between the experimental groups Table I shows that subjects working with the Toolkit comprising an advanced module li - brary ( experimental group 1 ) employed the heuristic ‘use of starting points’ significantly more intensely ( mean = 4 . 36 , standard deviation = 1 . 84 ) than subjects working with the basic ver - sion of the Edelwiser Toolkit ( mean = 5 . 38 , standard deviation = 0 . 97 ) . As assumed , offering an advanced module library increases the likelihood and convenience of using already exist - ing designs or design elements as sources of inspiration and starting points for the self design process . Hypotheses I is confirmed . The same is true for hypotheses V : Providing participants with external feedback given by other , highly experienced users significantly increased the use of the heuristic ‘use of external feedback’ . In contrast to the subjects in the experimental group 4 ( mean = 2 . 43 , standard deviation = 1 . 17 ) hardly any participants in control group 2 tried to get feedback on their designs ( mean = 6 . 26 , standard deviation = 1 . 23 ) although they had the possibility to ask others for feedback between the two parts of the experiment . Exter - nal feedback seems to be highly appreciated and considered by Toolkit users when working on an individualized product . But obviously , it has to be offered actively . In contrast to hy - potheses I and V , hypotheses III had to be rejected . We could not identify any difference be - tween the subjects of experimental group 2 and those within the other Toolkit conditions re - garding the use of the heuristic ‘save design’ . Having a back up function seems to have no influence on the number of different versions and alternatives that are generated during a self design process . This result could be due to the setting of the experiment and therefore be an artifact . We will come back to this point in the discussion . The results addressing hypotheses II , IV and VI are presented within table 2 . We conducted regression models in order to find out whether the use of the experts’ problem solving heuris - tics had positive influence on the dependent variables . As table 2 shows , we could confirm hypotheses II . Employing the heuristic ‘Use of Starting Points’ positively affected the partici - pants’ satisfaction with and the willingness to pay as well as the purchase intention for the self designed product . In contrast , hypotheses IV had to be rejected . The adoption of the heuristic ‘save design’ did not seem to be of any effect to the dependent variables . Hypotheses VI could be confirmed again . Making use of feedback provided by peers posi - tively influenced the dependent variables that were slightly different in the second part of the experiment . As presented in table 2 , the use of the heuristic ‘use of external feedback’ led to an improved preference fit and an increased willingness to pay as well as a higher purchase intention . Regression Models 1 - 3 : Heuristic ‘Use of Starting Points’ ( H II ) Dependent Variables Preference Fit 4 Willingness to Pay 5 Purchase Intention 6 Independent Variables Coefficient ( stand . ) p ( one - tailed ) Coefficient ( stand . ) p ( one - tailed ) Coefficient ( stand . ) p ( one - tailed ) Use of Starting Points 1 0 . 185 0 . 025 - 0 . 257 0 . 003 0 . 175 0 . 032 n 113 113 113 R² 0 . 034 0 . 066 0 . 031 Adjusted R² 0 . 026 0 . 058 0 . 022 F - Value 3 . 953 7 . 840 3 . 496 P 0 , 049 0 . 006 0 . 064 Regression Models 4 - 6 : Heuristic ‘Save Design’ ( H IV ) Dependent Variables Preference Fit 4 Willingness to Pay 5 Purchase Intention 6 Independent Variables Coefficient ( stand . ) p ( one - tailed ) Coefficient ( stand . ) p ( one - tailed ) Coefficient ( stand . ) p ( one - tailed ) Save Design 2 n . s . n . s . n . s . n . s . n . s . n . s . n 109 109 109 Regression Models 7 - 9 : Heuristic ‘Use of External Feedback’ ( H VI ) Dependent Variables Δ Preference Fit 7 Δ Willingness to Pay 8 Δ Purchase Intention 9 Independent Variables Coefficient ( stand . ) p ( one - tailed ) Coefficient ( stand . ) p ( one - tailed ) Coefficient ( stand . ) p ( one - tailed ) Use of External Feedback 3 0 . 342 0 . 001 - 0 . 194 0 , 045 0 . 277 0 . 007 n 78 78 78 R² 0 . 117 0 . 037 0 . 076 Adjusted R² 0 . 106 0 . 025 0 . 064 F - Value 10 . 091 2 . 958 6 . 294 P 0 . 002 0 . 090 0 . 014 1 = 7 - Point - Rating - Scale ( 4 Items , α = 0 . 752 ; 1 = heuristic intensely used , 7 = heuristic hardly used ) 2 = 7 - Point - Rating - Scale ( 4 Items , α = 0 . 713 ; 1 = heuristic intensely used , 7 = heuristic hardly used ) 3 = 7 - Point - Rating - Scale ( 5 Items , α = 0 . 944 ; 1 = heuristic intensely used , 7 = heuristic hardly used ) 4 = 7 - Point - Rating - Scale ( 3 Items , α = 0 , 763 ; 1 = high preference fit , 7 = low preference fit ) 5 = Difference between hypothetical willingness to pay for self designed and white carving ski 6 = Measured by using an 11 point probability Juster scale ( Juster , 1966 ) 7 = Change in the preference fit after part II of the experiment 8 = Change in the willingness to pay after part II of the experiment 9 = Change in the purchase intention after part II of the experiment Table 2 : Effects of the adoption of problem solving heuristics on Preference Fit , WTP and Purchase Intention Conclusion and future research The results of our experimental study indicate that the problem solving behaviour of Toolkit users can be positively influenced by the design of the Toolkit itself . Two out of three Toolkit functions we proposed turned out to foster the use of effective problem solving heuristics . Offering an advanced module library as well as external feedback provided by peer positively affect the problem solving capabilities of novice Toolkit users . Only the back up function seemed to have no influence on the problem solving behavior of our participants . As men - tioned earlier , we regard this finding as an artifact caused by the experimental setting . Partici - pants on average needed only 52 minutes to come up with their final ski design . Because of this rather short processing time which is not typical for self design processes in real life , par - ticipants did not generate more than 2 different design alternatives on average . As participants only had to keep in mind two or three alternative designs , the value of the back up function decreased . Furthermore we could show that novice users employing the heuristics ‘Use of starting points’ and ‘Use of external feedback’ were more satisfied with the products they generated which also led to an increased willingness to pay and an increased purchase intention . Thus , enhancing the users’ problem solving capability by making the Toolkit an effective problem solving assistant seems to be an important factor of success when adopting the Toolkit ap - proach . The findings of our study shall serve as a guideline for companies planning to offer a Toolkit to their customers . But our findings have to be evaluated against the background of our study . We looked at self design processes from a problem solving perspective interpreting self design tasks as ill - structured problems . This is true for design tasks being new to the problem solver and having an infinite solution space . It would be worth examining if our results also apply to product categories where physical attributes and functionalities of the product rather than the design can be customized and therefore solution spaces are limited by the production system of the manufacturer . Another field that should be subject to future research is the interplay between Toolkits for User Innovation and Design on the one hand and user communities on the other hand . Our suggestions to implement starting points and an external feedback function into Toolkits throw a spot - light on this issue . It is quite obvious that user communities could be of high value to Toolkit users as starting points as well as feedback could be provided by members of user communities . So far , we do not know much about the interplay between Toolkits and user communities . The results of additional studies could be of considerable value for manu - facturers employing Toolkits . Appendix Scales Heuristic ‘Use of Starting Points’ Cronbach’s Alpha = 0 . 752 - I have evaluated many different ideas for ski designs before I started to design my custom ski . - I started to design my custom ski by adapting an existing ski de - sign . - Every element of my ski design was self developed . ( reversed ) - An existing ski design served as a starting point for my own ski design . Heuristic ‘Save Design’ Cronbach’s Alpha = 0 . 703 - I regularly returned to preliminary versions of my design during the design process . - I condemned several ideas for ski designs and returned to earlier ones . - I developed several alternatives of ski designs . - I compared several alternatives of ski designs during the design process . Heuristic ‘Use of External Feedback’ Cronbach’s Alpha = 0 . 944 - I considered suggestions from other persons on the improvement of my ski design . - My final ski design is based on recommendations from other per - sons . - Hints from other persons on my design were very important for the further improvement . - I received feedback on my design from other persons . - I revised the ski design completely on my own ( reversed ) . Preference Fit Cronbach’s Alpha = 0 . 832 - I am very satisfied with my self developed ski design . - Compared to the design of skis available at conventional stores , I prefer my self developed ski design . - My self developed ski design fits my image of an ideal ski design . Product Involvement Cronbach’s Alpha = 0 . 789 - The design of a ski is important / unimportant to me . - The design of a ski means a lot / means nothing to me . - The design of a ski is of high / no relevance to me . - The design of a ski is valuable / worthless for me . Design Expertise Cronbach’s Alpha = 0 . 836 - I like to design things . - I would call myself a designer . - I like to paint and draw . - I have a strong aptitude for designing things . References Bartee , E . ( 1973 ) : A holistic View of Problem Solving ; Management Science , Vol . 20 , 1973 Chi , M . et al . ( 1988 ) : The Nature of Expertise ; Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale NJ . Dellaert , B . ; Stremersch , S . ( 2005 ) : Marketing Mass - Customized Products : Striking a Balance between Utility and Complexity ; Journal of Marketing Research , Vol . 42 ( 2 ) , May 2005 Eckert , C . ; Stacey , M . ( 1998 ) : Fortune Favours only the Prepared Mind : Why Sources of In - spiration are Essential for Continuing Creativity ; Creativity and Innovation Management , Vol . 7 , No . 1 . , 1998 Franke , N . ; Piller , F . ( 2004 ) : Value Creation by Toolkits for User Innovation and Design : The Case of the Watch Market ; Journal of Product Innovation Management , 21 ( 6 ) , 401 - 415 , 2004 Gold , J . ; Lewis , C . ( 1985 ) : Designing for Usability : Key Principles in what Designers think ; Communication of the ACM , Vol . 28 . Guindon , R . ( 1990 ) : Designing the Design Process : Exploiting Opportunistic Thoughts ; Hu - man - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , pp . 305 - 344 , 1990 Huffman , C . ; Kahn , B . ( 1998 ) : Variety for Sale : Mass Customization or Mass Confusion ; Journal of Retailing , Vol . 47 ( 4 ) , 1998 Jones , D . ( 1975 ) : A Survey Technique to Measure Demand under Various Pricing Strategies ; Journal of Marketing 39 , 75 - 77 , 1975 Juster , F . ( 1966 ) : Consumer Buying Intentions and Purchase Probability : An Experiment in Survey Design ; Columbia University Press , New York , 1966 Newell , A . ; Simon , H . A . ( 1972 ) : Human Problem Solving ; Prentice Hall , 1972 Randall , T . ; Terwiesch , C . ; Ulrich , K . ( 2003 ) : User Design of Customized Products ; Working Paper , August 2003 Randall , T . ; Terwiesch , C . ; Ulrich , K . ( 2005 ) : Principles for User Design of Customized Products ; California Management Review , Vol . 47 ( 4 ) , Summer 2005 Schreier , M . ( 2006 ) : The Value Increment of Mass - Customized Products : An empirical As - sessment ; Journal of Consumer Behaviour , 5 ( 4 ) , 317 - 327 , 2006 Simon , H . ( 1973 ) : The Structure of Ill - Structured Problems ; Artificial Intelligence , 4 , 1973 Smith , G . ( 1988 ) : Towards a Heuristic Theory of Problem Structuring ; Management Science , Vol . 34 , No . 12 , December 1988 Srinivasan , A . ; Te’eni , D . ( 1995 ) : Modeling as Constrained Problem Solving : An Empirical Study of the Data Modeling Process ; Management Science , Vol . 41 , No . 3 , March 1995 Uncles , M . ; Lee , D . ( 2006 ) : Brand Purchasing by Older Consumers : An Investigation Using the Juster Scale and the Dirichlet Model ; Marketing Letters , 17 , 17 - 29 , 2006 van Someren , M . ; Barnard , Y . ; Sandberg , J . ( 1994 ) : The Think Aloud Method : A practical Guide to Modelling Cognitive Processes ; Academic Press , London , 1994 von Hippel , E . ( 1978 ) : Successful Industrial Products from Customer Ideas ; Journal of Mar - keting , 42 / 1 , 39 - 49 , 1978 von Hippel , E . ; Katz , R . ( 2002 ) : Shifting Innovation to Users via Toolkits ; Management Sci - ence , Vol . 48 , No . 7 , July 2002 Wertenbroch , K . ; Skiera , B . ( 2002 ) : Measuring Consumers’ Willingness To Pay at the Point of Purchase ; Journal of Marketing Research , 39 ( 2 ) , 228 - 241 , 2002 Zaichkowsky , J . ( 1985 ) : Measuring the Involvement Construct ; Journal of Consumer Re - search , 12 , 341 - 352 , 1985