Int . J . Man - Machine Studies ( 1991 ) 34 , 753 - 7 % Reasoning with cases and hypotheticals in HYPO KEVIN D . ASHLEY Universiry of Pittsburgh , School of Law and Learning , Research and Development Center , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania 15260 , USA HYPO is a case - based reasoning system that evaluates problems by comparing and contrasting them with cases from its Case Knowledge Base ( CICB ) . It generates legal arguments citing the past cases as justifications for legal conclusions about who should win in problem disputes involving trade secret law . HYPO’s arguments present competing adversarial views of the problem and it poses hypotheticals to alter the balance of the evaluation . HYPO uses Dimensions as a generalization scheme for accessing and evaluating cases . HYPO’s reasoning process and various computational definitions are described and illustrated , including its definitions for computing relevant similarities and differences , the most on point and best cases to cite , four kinds of counter - examples , targets for hypotheticals and the aspects of a case that are salient in various argument roles . These definitions enable HYPO to make contextually sensitive assessments of relevance and salience without relying on either a strong domain theory or a priori weighting schemes . 1 . Introduction Learning from past experience is a hallmark of intelligence . Decision makers faced with new problems , benefit from the experience of having attempted to solve past problems or prior cases . For example , government officials facing a hostage crisis , remember previous disastrous attempts at making deals with hostage takers and adhere to a rule of policy derived from those cases : never make deals with hostage takers . When diagnosing a patient with unfamiliar symptoms , a physician under - takes a battery of tests , most yielding no useful results , until finally a particular test leads to a definitive diagnosis . The next time the physician encounters such symptoms , he first tries the test that lead to a productive result in the prior case . A would - be home - owner in a new city tries to determine if the asking price of a house for sale is reasonable . She or he consults the city tax office’s listings to find the sale prices of comparable houses in the immediate neighborhood in order to fix a price based on these past cases . Comparing current problems to past cases is a common and important way of making and justifying decisions . Frequently , there are no other solution methods at hand . Even if there are alternatives , comparing with past cases is a way of checking the reasonableness of , or explaining a proposed decision . Past cases , if the decision maker remembers them , exert an effect on the decision making process . They provide a framework for anaiysing the problem , causing the decision maker to focus on aspects of the probelm that were important in the past . The focus may be mistaken ; the past cases may be misleading . In all of the above examples , the decision maker is not guaranteed to make the best or right decision by referring to past cases . For instance , there may be circumstances in the present case 753 OIEO - 7373 / 91 / 060753 + 44 $ 03 . 00 / o @ 1991 Academic Press Limited 754 K . D . ASHLEY not found before , which would justify making a deal with hostage takers . The case - based justification would then be wrong . Nevertheless , a past case focuses the decision maker on some aspects of the problem . It is instructive to examine how . As the three examples suggest , past cases bear on current decision making in three broad ways : ( 1 ) generalization ; ( 2 ) constrained search ; and ( 3 ) comparative evaluation . Prior cases sometimes support generalizations that can be applied to decision making . A generalization may be a rule that can be applied deductively to solve or classify new problems , or it may be a causal explanation of the result in the case that can be mapped onto a problem analogically . The generalizations identify the parts of a problem that are important and provide a procedure and warrant for reaching a conclusion . In effect , the prior case is a datum from which to infer or derive the generalizations . Depending upon the domain and kind of generalization , the nature of the generalization’s support may vary . It could be primarily statistical given a large sampling of positive and negative case examples . Statistical generalizations are computed dynamically from cases in MBRtalk ( Stantill & Waltz , 1986 ; Stanfill , 1987 ) . The generalizations may be imposed on a domain . The CABARET program represents legal rules whose authority is imposed on a domain by statute but whose technical terms are ill - defined , requiring cases for help in evaluating whether the terms apply ( Rissland & Skalak , 1989 , 1991 ) . A generalized explanation could be derived from a single explanation example as in the CASEY program ( Koton , 198 & , 1988b ) , or , alternatively , from a small collection of positive and negative case examples as in PROTOS ( Bareiss , 1989 ; Bareiss , Porter & Wier , 1987 ) , and GREBE ( Branting , 1991 ) . CBR programs that employ structured explanations of past cases shade into the next category . A prior case may constrain the search for a solution by providing a template for a solution . Instead of solving the problem from scratch , which may involve a relatively weakly focused search through the space of operators and bindings , the reasoner first searches a different space of past solved cases for a case similar to the current problem . That search is easier , at least theoretically , because the past cases are indexed . The reasoner simply follows an index entry to a relevant prior solution and then applies and adapts its solution steps to the current problem . In effect , a past case is a compiled solution . An important subcategory of such search - shortening strategies is keeping track of past problem - solving failures , so as to avoid replicating the doomed solution paths . Research in case - based planning provides some classic examples of this solution adaptation approach , for example Kolodner ( 1983 ) , Kolodner , Simpson and Sycara - Cyranski ( 1985 ) , Hammond ( 1986 , 1987 , 1989 ) . CASEY’s explained cases also serve as compiled solutions to diagnostic problems ( Koton , 19 & , 19886 ) . The PRODIGY program is an extreme example of this approach in which complete histories of the decision - making process for a past case are stored , improving the adaptability of past cases at the expense of complicating the process of saving , finding and applying them ( CarbonelI , 1986 ; Carbonell & Veloso , 1988 ) . Finally , prior cases may provide a means of comparative evaluation . A current REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 755 problem may be evaluated by comparing and contrasting it with prior evaluated cases . The reasoner assigns a value , such as a dollar amount , by extrapolating from similar previous cases of known value . For example , he reasons that a house should be priced a little higher than a previous sale to take into account inflation and an extra bath . In effect , the past cases are data on which to base an argument that the current problem has a particular value , either the same value as in the case or one that may be extrapolated from that value . The evaluations need not be dollar amounts , they may be symbolic classifications as well . My work on HYPO is a good example of symbolic evaluation of problems , by comparing and contrasting them with prior cases ( Ashley , 1988 , 1989 , 1990 ; Ashley & Rissland , 1987 , 1988e , 19886 ) . CABARET integrates HYPO’s case - based evaluation approach with a rule - based approach ( Rissland & Skalak , 1989 , 1991 ) . All case - based reasoning ( CBR ) systems involve some combination of the three methods : generalization , constrained search and comparative evaluation . For example , almost all case - based reasoners employ case indices . In most reasoners , the indices are conceptual indices ; they index the cases by concepts abstracted from the cases . Some amount of generalization is inevitable in the construction and use of such indices . Even a “pure” inductive generalization method requires cases for evaluation . Although theoretically , once a rule has been derived the case or cases on which it is based could be discarded , in practice the cases should be retained . The cases are still useful as examples for explaining the rule , as test cases when the rule needs to be modified , and as justifications for the rule’s existence . Where the rule’s predicates cannot be well - defined , as in many legal rules , the cases are essential for evaluating whether the rule applies to a problem ( e . g . Rissland & Skalak 1991 ; Branting , 1991 ) . The three methods of generalization , constrained search and comparative evaluation are appropriate for different domain types and tasks . They make different demands on the availability of a strong domain theory for analysing and solving problems . ( 1 ) Generalization : a pure generalization approach assumes the availability of a strong domain theory . Indeed , the rules or explanations derived from the cases are part of the domain theory . To the extent that the rules or explanations can be applied deductively , without further recourse to cases , the domain theory is strong . ( 2 ) Constrained search : a constrained search approach may be useful where there are only weak methods for solving a problem . But even if there are stronger analytic solution methods available , the solutions may still involve a lot of search which may , in theory , be shortcut by employing past cases as solution templates . ( 3 ) Comparative evaluation : by contrast , the comparative evaluation method does not assume a strong domain theory . Comparative evaluation by cases is useful where there are no strong domain theories ; it may be the only way of coming up with a value . For example , there is no strong analytic theory for assigning a value to a house from scratch , but there may be some systematic means for estimating its value based on past sales taking into account differences in the house’s features and correcting for appreciation since the date of sale . The different methods also correspond to different tasks . Problems that are likely to have one uniquely right solution are more susceptible to the constrained search 756 K . D . ASHLEY approach or a pure generalization approach . Problems for which there usually is no one right answer but only alternative reasonable answers , are more susceptible to an evaluation approach . Whatever the approach , a common problem is defining and assessing relevant similarities and differences . Is a case similar enough to a problem ? If it is only a partial match , are the differences relevant ? How does one select intelligently among a number of competing more - or - less similar cases ? Assessing relevance is made more complex because it depends highly on context . Generalizations about the importance of particular features may be unwarranted in the light of a problem’s and case’s particular facts or the task at hand . Finally , assuming that relevant similarities and differences can be defined and assessed contextually , what inferences does the CBR system draw from comparing problem to case ? Taking HYPO as a “case” in the history of CBR systems , this article describes and illustrates how HYPO’s design addresses these questions in a manner appropriate for its domain and task . The main resource for information about HYPO is Ashley ( 1990 ) . This article provides a comprehensive summary of that work , a detailed extended example of HYPO in action , and a good basis for comparing and contrasting HYPO and other CBR systems’ domains , tasks and designs . 2 . HYPO’s task and domain HYPO is a case - based reasoning system that generates legal arguments citing prior cases , or precedents , as justifications for legal conclusions about who should win in problem disputes . HYPO’s design represents a hybrid generalization / comparative evaluation approach appropriate for a domain with a weak analytic theory and for tasks that seldom involve just one right answer . The domain is trade secret law . Trade secret law protects the rights of one who has developed competitively valuable information . As long as the owner maintains the information in confidence , the law protects his rights to the information . If anyone uses or discloses the information either in breach of a confidential relationship with the owner or by unfair or illegal means , the owner may recover on a claim of misappropriation of the owner’s trade secret . Trade secret misappropria - tion is one of many kinds of legal claims like copyright infringement , breach of contract , or professional malpractice , each designed to protect various legal personal and property rights from certain kinds of incursions . Many issues arise in determining who should win a trade secret misappropriation claim : the plaintiff , usually the owner of the trade secret who sues for misappropria - tion , or the defendant , the party sued , usually a corporate competitor or a former employee . Suppose the owner has disclosed the information to his employee or to an outsider in negotiations , trying to solicit the outsider’s interest ? Suppose someone learns of the information , not from the owner but by reinventing it him or herself ? Suppose the owner has not taken adequate steps to prevent the information from becoming generally known , or suppose the information becomes generally known despite the owner’s best efforts ? Does the owner have property rights in these situations and is he or she protected from the defendant’s behavior ? Judges and legislative drafters in trade secret law have recognized the difficulty of prescribing rules for deciding all of the issues that arise . A noted authority on trade REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 757 secret law has quoted one court as follows : “Another court , less sanguine about the practicalities of defining a trade secret , has concluded that a ‘trade secret is not necessarily a secret within the common use of that word . It is at best a nebulous concept which * * - is somewhat incapable of definition”’ M & rim ( 1985 ) , Section 2 . 01 , p . 2 - 21 . According to the drafters of the Restatement of To - an authoritative body of rules and commentary setting out trade secret law and other areas of tort law - “ an exact definition of a trade secret is not possible” [ Restate - ment ( First ) of Torts , Section 757 comment b ] . In essence , the drafters of the Restatement provisions on trade secret law recognized that the domain of trade secret law has a weak analytic theory . They took an interesting tack in dealing with this weakness . In order to supplement their definition of a trade secret , they employed factors : An exact definition of a trade secret is not possible . Some fac & rs to be considered in determining whether given information is one’s trade secret are : ( 1 ) the extent to which the information is known outside of his business ; ( 2 ) the extent to which it is known by employees and others involved in his business ; ( 3 ) the extent of measures taken by him to guard the secrecy of the information ; ( 4 ) the value of the information to him and to his competitors ; ( 5 ) the amount of effort or money expended by him in developing the information ; ( 6 ) the ease or difficulty with which the information could be properly acquired or dupkcated by others [ Restatement ( First ) or Torts , Section 757 comment b ] . In other words , in order to compensate for their inability to define adequately trade secrets , the drafters of the Restatement set out six factors that attorneys and judges could use to help assess legal fact situations . The approach . has caught on . “It is most common to discuss trade secrets in terms of the factors - - . tending to define a trade secret” Nimmer ( 1985 ) , pp . 3 - 4 . Factors like the above are generalizations . Unlike rules , they do not specify necessary and sufficient conditions for a conclusion . Instead , they designate collections of facts , commonly observed in cases , that tend to strengthen or‘weaken a plaintiffs argument in favor of a conclusion , such as a legal conclusion that the plaintiff has a trade secret . Factors are a kind of expert legal knowledge employed to make up for the lack of a strong domain theory . For each kind of legal claim , authors of legal reference works and scholarly articles identify factors to look for in assessing the strength or weakness of a party’s position , as well as cases that exemplify the factors and their effect on a decision . Even though there may be no way to set out the ne - aj and sufficient conditions of a claim like trade secrets misappropriation , at least knowing factors , one can identify the facts of a situation that tend toward or awiay from the conclusion that the plaintiff has a winning claim . In order to solve a problem using factors , the first step is to determine the factors that apply . Typically , a case involves a number of competing factors . Some factors favor the plaintiffs claim ; others favor the defendant’s . There has to be some way to resolve or combine the effects of the competing factors . The problem with employing factors to evaluate a dispute is that experts do not agree about the factors’ relative significance . Attorneys , for example , are loathe to make categorical statements that a particular factor is always more important . Nor will they often assign a numerical weight or probability that a particular factor wil1 K . D . ASHLEY control an outcome . This reluctance stems , in part , from attorneys’ awareness that the significance of a factor depends very much on context . While one factor may frequently be more important than another , there is always a case where the opposite is true because , for example , other factors are present in the case . In addition , attorneys are uncomfortable with numerical or statistical weights . Arguing with statistical summaries of cases is uncommon and suspect where the significance of the numbers is debatable and where there is a strong institutional preference for symbolic arguments . Without a scheme for numerically combining the effects of factors , evaluating a case is problematic . If factors had numerical weights , judges might simply identify the competing factors and apply some combining function to assess their net effect , for example plus 0 . 78 or minus 0 . 36 in favor of plaintiff . Such numbers are meaningless for judges and attorneys as a means of evaluating a problem , not least because they are expected to justify their legal conclusions symbolically by citing some legal authorities in support . Legal authorities include statutes , regulations , court - made rules of law , and precedents . There simply are no legal authorities that support numerical weights assigned to factors . In practice , precedents provide a mechanism for evaluating legal situations in terms of factors without a weighting scheme . Given a situation presenting a number of conflicting factors , some favoring a plaintiffs claim and some not , one way to justify an outcome is to cite as a legal authority a precedent that involved some or all of the same conflicting factors . The justification says , in effect : ( 1 ) in the precedent , a prior court resolved the competing factors in favor of a particular side ; ( 2 ) the current situation is analogous to the precedent because it involves the same competing factors ; ( 3 ) therefore , the current dispute should be resolved in the same way . 3 . Justifying conclusions with factors and Casey A series of Venn diagrams illustrates how precedent cases can be used to justify conclusions about a problem analysed in terms of factors . The figures illustrate intuitively how precedents justify resolutions of competing factors . HYPO justifies conclusions about legal problem situations , in particular whether the plaintiff should win or lose its legal claim for misappropriation of trade secrets . The factors used in HYPO are similar to those listed above for trade secret misappropriation claims . In principle , however , the approach could be used for any kind of problem classification for which factors can be identified . For each kind of claim , factors that favor ( or disfavor ) the plaintiffs side are identified by experts . Figure 1 depicts the legal claim of trade secrets misappropria - tion and shows all of the important factors ( fl ) that favor a positive outcome for the plaintiff ( + ) and those that favor a negative outcome ( - ) . In other words , the negative factors favor an outcome for the defendant . A related claim like breach of a nondisclosure agreement , a specialized kind of contract claim , would involve different , though possibly related , factors . A problem can be represented as a collection of competing factors , some of which favor a conclusion and some of which do not . Figure 1 shows a problem situation P and its set of competing factors . In order to justify assigning an outcome REASONING WlTH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 759 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ - - - - - - - - - - - - I - 1 , I Nondisclosure Agreement Claim 1 I i I I I I I Trade Secret Claim I I I I I I I I I I I I 0 I I I I I I I I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - - . I I I - I FIGURE 1 . Representing claims with factors : each claim , trade secrets and breach of a nondisclosure agreement , has its own factors . A problem situation P is represented as a collection of competing factors . Case A arguably justifies resolving P’s factors in favor of plaintiff ( + ) but can be distinguished on the basis of f5 . Case B is more on point than case A . If defendant won case B ( O ( B ) = - ) , B would be a trumping counter - example to case A . to a problem , O ( p ) , one must justify a resolution of the five competing factors . If there were some numerical weighting scheme or hierarchical ordering of factors , this would be the time to use it . Unfortunately , in law , there are no such schemes . Instead an attorney seeks to find a past case that involves the same or a similar collection of factors . Precedents may be represented just like problem situations as collections of competing factors . The difference is that a precedent has been assigned an outcome by an authoritative decision maker , the court . Figure 1 shows a case A that involved some of the same factors as problem P where the outcome was in favor of the plaintiff ( i . e . O ( A ) = + . ) Citing case A , an attorney may argue that problem P should be decided in favor of the plaintiff , just as A was . The attorney could draw an analogy between A and P in terms of the shared factors fl , f2 and f4 . In other words the attorney would argue that where , as in A , factors fl and f2 favor the plaintiff , the plaintiff in P should win as it did in case A , even though here , as there , factor f4 favors the defendant . The shared factors are relevant similarities between A and P . An attorney arguing for the defendant would immediately see a way to respond to the plaintiff’s argument citing case A . Case A is not exactly the same as problem P ; P has two factors that case A does not : factor f3 which favors the plaintiff , and factor f5 which does not . The defendant’s attorney would respond to the argument by distinguishing case A . She would dispute that case A justifies an outcome for plaintiff in P because in P , the extra factor f5 favors the defendant , making the defendant’s position in P stronger than it was in A . From the defendant’s point of view , that unshared factor f5 is a relevant distinction between A and P . The argument context , in particular which side is responding to an opponent’s case , helps to determine if a difference is a distinction . In this partially matched case , it determines which of the two factors is so important a difference as to 760 K . D . ASHLEY distinguish the case . The defendant’s attorney could not claim that f3 was a relevant distinction between A and P . Factor f3 favors the plaintiffs side of the argument . It makes the plaintiffs position stronger in P than it was in A and is a feature that a plaintiffs attorney would emphasize as an extra reason for a favorable decision for plaintiff . Distinctions can also help choose among partially matched cases . Cases D and E in Figure 2 each partially match P . Each has one factor that P does not have . Each was won by the plaintiff . Case D is the better case for the plaintiff to cite however . Case D is not distinguishable from P . If plaintiff cited E , the defendant would point out that f8 makes E a stronger case for the defendant than P . No such distinction applies to case D . Factor f5 actually helps the plaintiff ; it makes case D stronger for the defendant than P , and yet the plaintiff still won . An attorney’s goal in selecting cases to cite is to select a case that is both favorable to his side and which has a maximum of factors in common with the problem situation . In Figure 1 , case B would be a better case to cite for the plaintiff than A . Plaintiff won case B ( O ( B ) = + ) and the set of factors A shares with P is but a subset of those that B shares . In other words , B is more on point relative to P than A . The more on point a case , the better it is for a side to cite , assuming that side won the case . Note that determining how on point cases are involves compar - ing them in terms of set inclusion , not counting how many factors they share with the problem . The on pointness comparison is a partial order . A case F consisting of factors f2 , f3 and f5 is neither less on point nor more on point than case B , but simply incomparable according to this definition . The fact that B shares four factors in common with P , while F shares three , does not make B more on point than F . If the opponent won a more on point case , then that case is the basis of a potent response to an argument , a trumping counter - example . Suppose that in Figure 1 , the Trade Secret Claim f8 + j f O ( E ) = + f ! . / \ , . . . : \ . . J . f . . . . . . . . . . . . . J FIGURE 2 . Selecting among partially matched cases . REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 761 defendant had won case B ( i . e . O ( B ) = - ) . Case B would then be both more on point than case A and opposite in outcome . If plaintit ? % attorney cited A , the opponent would cite B as a counter - example to A , one that effectively trumps plaintiffs point . Defendant’s attorney would argue that A does not justify a decision for the plaintiff when there is a case B that has more in common with P ( i . e . the extra shared pro - defendant factor f5 ) and was won by defendant . To summarize , the Venn diagrams illustrate intuitively how precedents provide a means for justifying resolutions of competing factors and one metric for comparing cases : the overlap of factors relative to a problem . They also suggest that the context of the argument , including problem facts , cases available and the side arguing , can be used to assess symbolically the closeness of match and the factors that are salient in comparing the cases for purposes of the argument . In HYPO , relevant similarities and differences are defined in terms of factors . HYPO selects most on point cases to cite in arguments about a problem and cites various kinds of counter - examples , including trumping counter - examples , when making responses . Factors also enable a different kind of comparison of cases that cannot be illustrated in the context of the Venn diagrams : comparing two cases in terms of the magnitude of the factor in each case . A factor’s magnitude is a measure of how extreme the factor is in a case to which it applies . Suppose factor f2 deals with security measures ; a plaintiff is better off to the extent that it adopted more security measures . In two case @ ntiffs may have adopted security measures , but the plaintiff in case A ma case B . In other wor B . 4 have adopted many more kinds of security measures than in s , the magnitude of factor f2 is greater in case A than in case Factors’ magnitudes can often be represented in terms of numbers , ordered sets and partially ordered sets ; comparisons of a factor’s magnitudes in two cases can be computed by a & rresponding definition of greater or less than . In the case of HYPO’s representation of the security measures factor , magnitudes are compared in terms of whether one case’s set of possible security measures includes the other’s A factor’s magnitude should be distinguished from its significance or weight in an argument . A factor’s weight , as discussed above , cannot be represented with a number or static hierarchy . Nevertheless , a factor’s magnitude may affect argument weight . Although factor f2 weighs in favor of the plaintiff in case A , it would have even more weight if its magnitude were greater in case A . Factor f2 may have a higher magnitude in case B than in case A . All other things being equal , the difference in magnitude may make case A a better case to cite for plaintiff where the problem’s plaintiff also adopted only minimal security measures . In terms of factor magnitudes , Case A is better because the defendant would distinguish case B , pointing out that it involved more security measures than the problem’s plaintiff undertook . Neither do the Venn diagrams illustrate another aspect of reasoning with factors and cases . It often makes sense to speak of a factor as almost applying to a case or , in other words , as a near miss with respect to a case . If a factor could apply to a problem with only a small change in that problem’s facts , then cases that have that factor are almost relevant . In Section 6 . 2 , I define a sense in which a factor is a near miss . 762 K . D . ASHLEY 4 . A legal example of arguing with factors and cases To make the concept of arguing with factors and cases more concrete , and to introduce an extended example of how HYPO reasons with cases , consider a specific legal problem like the following trade secrets dispute . Amexxco , a major oil company , complains about the actions of its former employee named G . Whiz . While working for Amexxco , Mr . Whiz had developed a computer program , called Dipper , for analysing drilling logs of oil wells . Although on the Amexxco payroll since 1980 , Whiz developed the program on his own initiative and without Amexxco’s support . In fact , for four years , Amexxco had repeatedly directed Whiz to drop the Dipper in favor of another approach . Then in a trial experiment conducted by Whiz , the Dipper discovered a major oil well . A year ago in 1987 , in a salary dispute , Whiz quit Amexxw’s employ and entered into an employment contract with Amexxw’s competitor , Exxssinc , to work on wm - puterized analysis of oil drilling logs . Whiz had signed a nondisclosure agreement with Amexxw in which he undertook to maintain confidentiality with respect to all of Amexxw’s trade secrets . Amexxw wants to know what legal rights it has against its former employee , Whiz , and against Exxssinc . An attorney familiar with trade secret law and cases would recognize that Amexxco has a possible legal claim of trade secret misappropriation . Probably she or he would also recognize various stereotypical collections of facts in the problem i . e . factors , some of which strengthen Amexxco’s claim and some of which weaken it . On the one hand , two factors strengthen Amexxco’s claim : ( 1 ) fl : Amexxco adopted some ( at least minimal ) measures to protect its trade secrets , it appears to have secured a nondisclosure agreement from at least one employee . ( 2 ) f2 : it secured a nondisclosure agreement from the particular person , here the former employee , who arguably has taken its trade secrets in the Dipper program . On the other hand , two other factors weaken Amexxco’s claim : ( 1 ) f3 : the employee was the sole developer of the Dipper program , i . e . he performed the work on his own initiative and without Amexxco’s support . ( 2 ) f4 : although the employee had signed the nondisclosure agreement , the agreement did not specifically refer to the Dipper program . Having analysed the strengths and weaknesses of Amexxco’s claim in terms of the competing factors , the question is how should the competing factors be resolved ? There are two possible solutions , either the plaintiff has a valid claim for trade secret misappropriation or it does not . The question may arise in different contexts . At the trial court level , the judge or jury decides the facts that have been proven and , inferentially , the factors that apply to a case . The judge may entertain legal arguments from the disputing parties’ attorneys on the issue of whether the factors are sufficient , or if the factors compete , how to resolve them in determining the victor or in fashioning a charge ( i . e . instructions ) to the jury . If the dispute has reached an appeals court , an appeals judge would entertain similar legal arguments in assessing the correctness of the decision below . For the attorneys representing the competing parties , the questions are : what justifications can they provide in their legal arguments for resolving the competing REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 763 factors in favcr of their side ? What justifications can they expect the opposing attorney to make in support of resolving the competing factors in favor of the other side ? Attorneys need to consider these questions , not only in putting arguments to a judge but in assessing whether they should commence a lawsuit in the first place . In assessing the client’s prospects , they need to consider , hypothetically , the arguments justifying a favorable resolution of competing factors that they or their opponents are likely to be able to prove to a jury . Arguing in terms of factors alone , is not a sufficient justification for a legal argument . Instead , advocates justify a resolution symbolically by citing a similar past case or precedent , one which involved some or all of the same competing factors . Amexxco’s attorney , for example , could not simply argue that Amexxco should win because factors fl and f2 favor its claim . The defendants would respond that factors f3 and f4 support their position . The argument is a stand - off , not just because there are two factors on each side ; it would be a stand - off even if one side could cite more factors than the other . It is a stand - off because neither attorney has cited a legal authority such as a precedent for the conclusion that the competing factors should be resolved in their favor . If there were an authoritative scheme in law which assigned weights to the factors , an attorney could cite the scheme , combine the weights and resolve the conflict . There is , however , no such scheme . The immediate goal of the attorneys then is to find favorably decided past cases that have maximai overlaps of factors in common with the problem . 5 . Brietf overview of HYPO and its outputs HYPO assists attorneys by finding such cases and demonstrating how they can be used in arguments pro and contra a side’s position in the problem . Here , in a brief overview , is how HYPO works . HYPO has 30 trade secrets and related cases in its database of cases , its Case Knowledge Base ( CKB ) . A Case Representation Language has been designed for representing legal cases and problem situations at two levels of abstraction . Legal Case Frames are employed to represent the detailed , lower level facts of a case . In addition , a second language , Fuctuuf Predictes summarizes in a slightly more abstract representation the lower level case facts represented in Legal Case Frames . HYPO also has a library of 13 Dimensions . Dimensions are a knowledge representation construct for representing and reasoning with factors . Each of I - IYPO’s Dimensions represents a factor relevant for trade secrets or related legal claims . The Amexxco problem’s four factors correspond to the following Dimensions : Factor Dimension Favors fl Security - Measures Plaintiff t2 Agreed - Not - To - Dixlose Plaintiff f3 Employee - Sole - Developer Defendant f4 Non & closure - Agreement - Specific Defendant Each Dimension has prerequisites with which HYPO can determine whether the Dimension applies to a case or problem . The prerequisites are defined in terms of Factual Predicates . Saying that a factor applies to a problem means that the 764 K . D . ASHLEY corresponding Dimension’s prerequisites are satisfied by the problem’s Factual Predicates . Each case in the CKB is indexed by the Dimensions that HYPO previously found applicable . From this point on , instead of factors , I will speak in terms of Dimensions . Each of HYPO’s Dimensions , it should be remembered , represents a factor . All of HYPO’s Dimensions are supplied by the designer , not generated by the program . HYPO begins with a problem like the Amexxco case already represented by the user in the Legal Case Frames . A case presented to HYPO for analysis is referred to as the current fact situation ( cfs ) . A case editor provides menu - driven assistance in filling out the problem representation . HYPO has no capability for analysing natural language descriptions of the problem . Once the problem is presented , HYPO analyses it to determine the Factual Predicates and the Dimensions that apply to the problem . In effect , it determines the set of Dimensions that covers the problem . Then HYPO retrieves all of the cases that are indexed by any Dimension that applies to the problem . These are the relevant cases : each shares at least one factor with the problem . HYPO then organizes the relevant cases so that it can select the ones that are most on point to the problem situation . From the most on point cases , it computes the best cases for each side to cite , distinctions between those cases and the problem , and counter - examples to those cases . In making these selections , HYPO performs set operations like those illustrated in the Venn diagrams of Figures 1 and 2 . These operations will be discussed in much more detail . Having identified cases , counter - examples and distinctions , HYPO generates arguments , called 3 - Ply Arguments , to demonstrate how the cases can be used and responded to by each side . The arguments present opposing viewpoints of both sides of the dispute , plaintiff and defendant . They are called “3 - Ply” because they step through three turns , or plies , of an argument citing a precedent . HYPO makes a point for one side by drawing an analogy between the problem and precedent , responds to the point by distinguishing the precedent or citing counter - examples , and rebuts the response by , for example , distinguishing the counter - example . For each of the best cases for each side to cite , HYPO outputs a 3 - Ply Argument . For the Amexxco problem where plaintiff and defendant each have one best case , HYPO automatically outputs two 3 - Ply Arguments . PI + Point for Plaintiff as Side - l : Where : Plaintiff and defendant entered into a nondisclosure agreement . Plaintiff adopted security measures . Even though : Employee defendant was sole developer of plaintiffs product . The nondisclosure agreement did not specifically refer to plaintiffs product . Plaintiff should win a claim for Trade Secrets Misappropriation . Cite : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . 401 F . Supp . 1102 ( E . D . Mich . 1975 ) . ( Response for Defendant as Side - 2 : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . is distinguishable because : In Structural Dynamics , plaintiff adopted more security measures than in Amexxco . In Structural Dynamics , plaintiffs former employee brought product development information to defendant . Not so in Amexxco . REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHE - IICALS 765 Counter - examples : Amoco Production Co . v . Lindley 609 P . 2d 733 ( Okla . 1980 ) , is as on point and held for defendant . j Rebuttal for Plaintiff as Side - l : None . j Point for Defendant as Side - l ; Where : Employee defendant was sole developer of plaintiffs product . The nondis - closure agreement did not specifically refer to plaintiffs product . Even though : Plaintiff and defendant entered into a nondisclosure agreement . Plaintiff adopted security measures . Defendant should win a claim for Trade Secrets Misappropriation . Cite : Amoco Production Co . u . Lindley 609 P . 2d 733 ( Okla . 1980 ) . c Response for Plaintiff as Side - 2 : Counter - examples : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . 401 F . Supp . 1102 ( E . D . Mich . 1975 ) , is as on point and held for plaintiff . 3 Rebuttal for Defendant as Side - l : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . is distinguishable because : In Structural Dynamics , plaintiff adopted more security measures than in Amexxco . In Structural Dynamics , plaintiffs former employee brought product development information to defendant . Not so in Amexxco . Note : Plaintiffs response would be strengthened if : Plaintiffs former employee brought product development information to defendant . Cf . Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . 401 F . Supp . 1102 ( E . D . Mich . 1975 ) HYPO invites the user to select cases manually to try out in arguments for either side . HYPO’s graphic outputs depicting the relevance of cases from the CKB to the problem ( i . e . Claim Lattices , described below ) guide the user as to which cases would be interesting to try out . Here , HYPO generates three arguments for user - selected cases . [ 31 j Point for Plaintiff as Side - l : Where : Plaintiff and defendant entered into a nondisclosure agreement . Plaintiff adopted security measures . Plaintiff should win a claim for Trade Secrets Misappropriation . Cite : Eastern Marble Products Corp . v . Roman Marble Inc . 364 N . E . 2d 799 ( Mass . 1977 ) . + Response for Defendant as Side - 2 : Eastern Marble Products Corp . v . Roman Marble , Inc . is distinguishable because : In Eastern - Marble , plaintiff adopted more security measures than in Amexxco . In Amexxco , employee defendant was sole developer of plaintiffs product . Not so in Eastern - Marble . Counter - examples : Amoco Production Co . v . Lindley 609 P . 2d 733 ( Okla , 1980 ) , is more on point and held for defendant where it was also the case that : the nondisclosure agreement did 766 K . D . ASHLEY not specifically refer to plaintiffs product . Employee defendant was sole developer of plaintiffs product . + Rebuttal for Plaintiff as Side - l : None . [ 41 3 Point for Defendant as Side - l : Where : Employee defendant was sole developer of plaintiffs product . Defendant should win a claim for Trade Secrets Misappropriation . Cite : Wexier v . Greenberg 160 A . 2d 430 ( Sup . Ct . Pa 1960 ) . + Response for Plaintiff as Side - 2 : Wexler v . Greenberg is distinguishable because : In Amexxco , plaintiff adopted security measures . Not so in Wexler . In Amexxco , plaintiff and defendant entered into a nondisclosure agreement . Not so in Wexler . Counter - examples : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . 401 F . Supp . 1102 ( E . D . Mich . 1975 ) , is more on point and held for plaintiff where it was also the case that : Plaintiff adopted security measures . The nondisclosure agreement did not specifically refer to plaintiffs product . Plaintiff and defendant entered into a nondisclosure agreement . j Rebuttal for Defendant as Side - l : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . is distinguishable because : In Structural Dynamics , plaintiff adopted more secuirty measures than in Amexxco . In Structural Dynamics , plaintiffs former employee brought product development information to defendant . Not so in Amexxw . PI j Point for Defendant as Side - l : Where : the nondisclosure , agreement did not specifically refer to plaintiffs product . Even though : Plaintiff and defendant entered into a nondisclosure agreement . Defendant should win a claim for Trade Secrets Misappropriation . Cite : Motorola , Inc . v . Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corp . 366 F . Supp . 1173 ( D . Arizona 1973 ) . + Response for Plaintiff as Side - 2 : Motorola , Inc . v . Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corp . is distinguishable because : In Amexxw , Plaintiff adopted security measures . Not so in Motorola . Counter - examples : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . 401 F . Supp . 1102 ( E . D . Mich . 1975 ) , is more on point and held for plaintiff where it was also the case that : Plaintiff adopted security measures . Employee defendant was sole developer of plaintiffs product . j Rebuttal for Defendant as Side - l : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . is distinguishable because : In Structural Dynamics , plaintiff adopted more security measures than in Amexxw . In Structural Dynamics , plaintiffs former employee brought product development information to defendant . Not so in Amexxw . REASONING WITH CASES AND HYF’OTHETICALS 767 In its 3 - Ply Arguments , HYPO makes a symbolic comparison between a problem and the most relevant precedents in terms of Dimensions . The points in each of the first two arguments cite a case , such as Sr ~ ~ htruZ Dynamics or Amoco , that has some maximal set of Dimensions in common with the problem . The analogy between the case and the problem ( prefaced by the terms “Where” and “Even though” ) recite the shared Dimensions and indicate which side the Dimension favors . “Even though” prefaces Dimensions that favor the opponent of the side making the point . The responses distinguish the cases by pointing out Dimensions that are not shared by the precedent or problem . Also they distinguish cases in terms of magnitude . Where possible , the response also cites a counter - example . In Argument [ l ] , for example , HYPO points out that the Amoco case is as on point as , and contrary to , Structural Dynamics . In Argument [ 3 ] , it points out that Amoco is more on point than and contrary to Eastern Marble . In other words , Amoco is a trumping counter - example . In addition to outputting 3 - Ply Arguments , HYPO has two other kinds of output . First it performs a rudimentary evaluation of the relative strengths of the two side’s arguments which is presented in a case summary . HYPO determines that a side has a stronger argument if it is the only side where not all of its points can be trumped , i . e . not all of its best cases have trumping counter - examples . If both sides have points that are not trumped , HYPO does not attempt to further evaluate the argument . It concludes that each side has a strong argument and presents each side’s best cases . That is the situation in the Amexxco problem for which HYPO generates this summary : On a claim for Trade Secrets Misappropriation , both sides can make a strong argument . Plaintiff can cite the following cases for which there are no more on point counter - examples : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . 401 F . Supp . 1102 ( E . D . Mich . 1975 ) . Defendant can cite the following cases for which there are no more on point counter - examples : Amoco Production Co v . Lindley 609 P . 2d 733 ( Okla . 1980 ) HYPO also outputs a list of suggested hypothetical modiftcations of the problem situation that would strengthen or weaken the plaintiffs side . Depending which side the suggested modification favors , the plaintiff could make additional points by citing new best cases or its existing points could be trumped by new counter - examples . Such suggestions are useful in preparation for trial because an attorney cannot assume that she or he knows or can prove all of the facts that favor her side , or that her opponent will not prove some unfavorable ones . The hypotheticals suggest new facts that she or he may elict from her client or prepare to rebut . HYPO can also pose hypotheticals by pushing a competing Dimension in a case to extremes . An advocate could use such hypotheticals to convince an appellate court that a factor is or is not very important . For the Amexxco problem , HYPO suggests the following hypothetical modifications : Hypotheticals to consider on claim of Trade Secrets Misappropriation in fact 768 K . D . ASHLEY situation of Amexxco : Plaintiffs position would be strengthened in following situations : suppose : Defendant’s access to plaintiffs product information saved it time or expense . Plaintiffs former employee brought product development information to defendant , Cf . Analogic Corp . v . Data Translation , Inc . 358 N . E . 2d 804 ( S . J . C . Mass . 1976 ) Defendant’s access to plaintiffs product information saved it time or expense . Defendant paid plaintiffs former employee to switch employment . Plaintiffs former employee brought product development information to defendant . Cf . Space Aero Products Co . v . R . E . Darling Co . 208 A . 2d 74 ( Ct . App . Md . 1965 ) Defendant’s access to plaintiffs product information saved it time or expense . Defendant paid plaintiff’s former employee to switch employment . Cf . Telex Corp . v . IBM Corp . ( 1 ) 510 F . 2d 894 ( 10 Cir . 1975 ) Plaintiffs former employee brought product development information to defendant . Cf . Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . 401 F . Suppl 1102 ( E . D . Mich . 1975 ) Defandant’s position would be strengthened in following situations : suppose : Plaintiff disclosed its product information in negotiations with defendant . Plaintiff disclosed its product information to outsiders . Cf . Crown Industries Inc . v . Kawneer Co . 335 F . Supp . 749 ( N . D . Ill . 1971 ) Plaintiff disclosed its product information to outsiders . Cf . Midland - Ross Corp . v . Yokana 293 F . 2d 411 ( 3 Cir . 1961 ) Plaintiff disclosed its product information in negotiations with defendant . Plaintiffs product information was about customer business relations . Cf . Automated - Systems v . Service - Bureau 401 F . 2d 619 ( 10 Cir . 1968 ) Plaintiff disclosed its product information to outsiders . Cf . Midland - Ross Corp . v . Sunbeam Equipment Corp . 316 F . Supp . 171 ( W . D . Pa . 1970 ) HYPO computes suggested hypotheticals by using set operations similar to those illustrated in the Venn diagrams . Each hypothetical is based on a potentially more on point case or counter - example , as defined below . If the user wishes , HYPO will instantiate the suggested hypothetical modifications ( that is , create a hypothetically modified version of the problem ) , generate new 3 - Ply Arguments for the modified problem and compare the arguments with those for the old problem version . 6 . Knowledge representation in HYPO The overview discussion has mentioned a number of knowledge sources employed in HYPO including a Case Representation Language , Dimensions for representing factors , the Case Knowledge Base , and standards for evaluating arguments . The knowledge sources are defined more completely here and illustrated in the context of the Amexxco example . The main argument evaluation standards , which are represented procedurally in HYPO , are discussed in Section 7 . 6 . REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 769 6 . 1 . CASE REPRESENTATION LANGUAGE The Case Representation Language is comprised of a two - tiered , frame - based language for representing legal cases and problem situations . The first tier , Legal Case Frames , represents detailed facts involved in the case , and if the case has already been decided , certain aspects of the judicial decision . The second tier , Factual Predicates , summarizes the lower level facts represented in the Legal Case Frames . 6 . 1 . 1 . Legal Case Frames Each case in the CKB , problem situation posed to HYPO , or hypothetical posed by HYPO , has a top - level Legal Case Frame and various underlying sub - frames . The top - level frame contains the case name , citation information , parties to the dispute and their roles as plaintiff or defendant , type of legal claims raised and the decision of the court . For problem situations and hypotheticals , the top - level frame is mostly blank because those cases have not been decided by a court . Here , for example , is the top - level case frame for the Amexxco problem . Top - level Legal Case Frame for Amexxco CASE : Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz SHORT - TITLE : Amexxco CITATION : hypothetical case DATE : 1987 PARTY - LIST : ( Corporate - Party : Amexxco Corporate - Party : Exxssinc Employee - Party : Gwhiz ) ROLE - PARTY - ALIST : ( ( Plaintiff Corporate - Party : Amexxco ) ( Defendant Corporate - Party : Exxssinc Employee - Party : Gwhiz ) ) DECISION - FOR : Nil CLAIMS - HELD - FOR : Nil CLAIM - OR - DEFENSE - LIST : Nil DIMENSIONS - LIST : Nil CASES - CITED : Nil In illustrating frames , the following syntax is employed . The names of slots apear in small capitals followed by a colon ( e . g . PARTY - LIST : ) . The value of the slot is whatever appears after the space following the colon . Often , other instantiated frames from the case appear in a slot value . For example , the Corporate - Party frame whose name is Amexxco appears in the value of PARTY - LIST ; it is written as “Corporate - Party : Amexxco” . Slot values may be lists like the value of the PARTY - LIST slot above . They may also be association lists , like the value of the ROLE - PARTY - ALIST above which indicates that the plaintiff is the Corporate - Party : Amexxco and the defendants are the Corporate - Party : Exxssinc and Employee - Party : Gwhiz . 770 K . D . ASHLEY The underlying frames represent detailed factual objects , relations and events that are typically present in trade secrets disputes . As shown in the following complete list , the frames represent parties to the lawsuit , the parties’ products , alleged confidential information , employment relations involving parties and products and various contracts . For any particular case , its Legal Case Frames are nested ( i . e . some slot values are pointers to other case frames . ) Parties to lawsuit : l Party - To - Lawsuit l Person - Party l Corporate - Party l Employee - Party l Person l Corporation l Employee Product - related : l Product l Intrinsic - Similarities Alleged confidential information : l Knowledge l Security - Breach l Disclosure - Event Employment relations involving parties and products : l Employment l Employment - Change l Product - Worked - On Contracts : l Agreement l Noncompetition - Covenant Nondisclosure - Agreement l Promise l Reliance The easiest way to describe the underlying Legal Case Frames is to focus on parts of the case frame representation of the Amexxco case . Like a number of cases in the CKB , the Amexxco problem involved a “common employee scenario” where an employee allegedly brought confidential information from the plaintiff to the defendant . In the Amexrco fact situation , a former employee brought secrets he developed himself to a competing employer . Here are the underlying Legal Case Frames for representing this scenario . The Employee - party frame shows that G . Whiz was employed by both Amexxco and Exxssinc , the two corporate parties in the suit . NAME : GW ~ CZ Employee - Party : Gwhiz CASE : Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz CASE ROLE : Defendant EMPLOYMENTS : Employment : Of - Gwhiz - By - Amexxco EmploymentOf - Gwhiz - By - Exxssinc REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 771 EMPLOYERS : Corporate - Party : Amexxco Corporate - Party : Exxssinc Details of G . Whiz’s employment by each party are shown in the Employment frames . The dates of employment show that G . Whiz started working for Amexxco in 1980 and then left in 1987 . While employed by Amexxco , he worked on the Dipper product . He started at Exxssinc in 1987 . While at Exxssinc , he worked on Exxssinc’s competing system . There is no information about Whiz’s having signed a non - competition agreement . Employment : Of - Gwhiz - By - Amexxco CASE : Amexxco Production Co . v Gwhiz EMPLOYEE : Employee - Party : Gwhiz EMPLOYER : Corporate - Party : Amexxco STARTING DATE : 1980 ENDING DATE : 1987 THERE IS COVENANT NOT TO COMPETE : Nil THERE IS CHANGE OF EMPLOYERS : Employment - Change : Of - Gwhiz - From - Amexxco - To - Exxssinc PRODUIX WORKED ON : Product - Worked - On : Work - On - Dipper The frame representing the Employment Change indicates that there is no information in the case that G . Whiz received anything of value for switching employers or that he brought any records , devices , or code with him . Note that each slot contains a “Nil” , indicating an absence of information . Employment - Change : Of - Gwhiz - From - Amexxco - To - Exxssinc CASE : Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz FORMER EMPLOYER : Corporate - Party : Amexxco FORMER EMPLOYMENT : Employment : Of - Gwhiz - By - Amexxco VALUE RECEIVED To MAKE CHANGE : Nil RECORDS , DEVICES , CODE BROUGHT BY EMPLOYEE : Nil The employee’s relationship to the products he worked on for each employer are represented in a Product frame for the Dipper , two Product - Worked - On frames , Work - On - Dipper and Work - On - Exxssinc - System ( not shown ) . They indicate that G . Whiz used the same information , Knowledge : About - Dipper on each product . The Work - On - Dipper frame also indicates that Whiz was the sole developer of the Dipper product . Product : Dipper CASE : Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz A KIND OF : Well - Leg - analyzer 772 K . D . ASHLEY PRODU ~ USED FOR : analysing oil wells GENERAL PRODUCT MARKET : Oil Companies COMPETITORS PRODU < JI . ALIST : ( Corporate - Party : Exxssinc Product : Exxssinc - System ) DEVELOPER : Corporate - Party : Amexxco EMPLOYMENT WORKED ON PROJECT LIST : Employment : Of - Gwhiz - By - Amexxco PROJECT DEVELOPMENT START : Nil PROJECT DEVELOPMENT END : Nil PROJECT DEVELOPMENT TIME : Nil EXPENDITURES MADE : Nil KNOWLEDGE USED : Knowledge : About - Dipper SECURITV MEASURES LIST : ( Minimal - Measures ) SECLJRIT ~ BREACH LIST : Nil Product - Worked - On : Work - On - Dipper CASE : Amexxco Product Co . v . Gwhiz PRODUCT : Product : Dipper EMPLOYMENT : Employment : Of - Gwhiz - By - Amexxco KNOWLEDGE EMPLOYED : Knowledge : About - Dipper EMPLOYEE ROLE IN PRODXTION DEVELOPMENT : Sole Developer The knowledge used in connection with the Dipper product is represented in a Knowledge frame . Knowledge : About - Dipper CASE : Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz NAME : About - Dipper KNOWLEDGE ABOUT : Product : Dipper KIND OF KNOWLEDGE : Technical PARTY WITH ACCESS LIST : ( Corporate - Party : Amexxco Corporate - Party : Exxssinc Employee - Party : Gwhiz ) OTHER PERSON WITH ACCESS LIST : Nil NUMBER PERSONS WITH ACCESS : Nil SPECIFIC DISCLOSURE EVENTS : ( Disclosure - Event : Amexxco - Discloses - To - Exxssinc - Via - Gwhiz ) NUMBER DISCLOSEES : Nil PERCENT DISCLOSEES RESTRI ~ D : Nil GENERALLY KNOWN IN INDUSTRY : Nil REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 773 The employee’s switch of employers , work on competing products and use of the same knowledge for each one constitutes a disclosure event and is represented by its own frame . As the frame indicates , the disclosure event was subject to a restriction , a nondisclosure agreement . Disclosure - Event : Amexxco - Discloses - To - Exxssinc - Via - Gwhiz CASE : Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz INFO DISCLOSED : Knowledge : Ahout - Dipper DISCLOSER : Corporate - Party : Amexxco DISCLOSEE : Corporate - Party : Exxssinc How DISCLOSURES MADE : Employment - Change : Of - Gwhiz - From - Amexxco - To - Exxssinc TIME To GENERATE INFO FROM DISCLOSURE : Nil NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENX : Nondisclosure - Agreement : Between - Gwhiz - And - Amexxco - 2 Finally , the frame representing the nondisclosure agreement between G . Whiz and Amexxco indicates that both sides received some consideration and that the agreement did not specifically refer to the Dipper product . Nondisclosure - Agreement : Between - Gwhiz - And - Amexxco - 2 CASE : Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz DISCLOSER : Corporate - Party : Amexxco DISCLOSEE : Employee - Party : Gwhiz CONSIDERATION RECEIVED BY PARTY : Corporate - Party : Amexxco got promise Employee - Party : Gwhiz got employment DID AGREEMENT REFER To PRODUCT : Negative DURATION OF PROHIBITION : Nil EXPRESS OR IMPLIED : Express DATE ENTERED : Nil 61 . 2 . Factual Predicates A language of Factual Predicates has been invented to summarize lower level case facts represented in Legal Case Frames . They are generalized factual statements that confirm whether certain legally significant relationships are true in the case . HYPO infers whether a Factual Predicate is satisfied by using a retrieval method associated with the predicate . The retrieval method tests information about the case contained in the Legal Case Frames . For example , there are Factual Predicates to test whether there is a corporate plaintiff who makes a product that has associated development information ; whether there is an employee who switched from working for plaintiff to working for defendant ; whether the defendant entered into a 774 K . D . ASHLEY nondisclosure agreement with plaintiff ; or whether the defendant saved product development expense relative to plaintiff . For any case or problem , Factual Predicates are recorded in a data structure called an Interpretation Frame . Each Interpretation Frame slot corresponds to a Factual Predicate . Each slot value corresponds to the value of the Factual Predicate in a case or problem . Factual Predicates may have the following values : “Nil” indicating no information , “Negative” indicating false , “Affirmative” indicating true , a name of a specific instantiated underlying case frame , or a slot value from an instantiated case frame . The case frame names and slot values stand for affirmative answers and provide additional information ; they mean that the Factual Predicate’s value is the instantiated case frame itself , or was computed from information contained in the frame’s slots . Every case is analysed using an identical blank Interpretation Frame ; the slot values of the filled in Interpretation Frame differ from case to case . The common employee scenario of the Amenco problem calls into play a set of Factual Predicates illustrated below . Here are excerpts of the completed Interpretation Frame for Amexxco : Excepts from Interpretation Frame for Amexxco CASE : Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz THERE IS A CORPORATE PLAINTIFF : Corporate - party : Amexxco THERE IS A CORPORATE DEFENDANT : Corporate - Party : Exxssinc THEREISANEMPLOYEEDEFENDANT : Employee - Party : Gwhiz PLAINTIFFMAKESAPRODUCT : Product : Dipper PLAINTIFFHASPRODUCTINFORMATION : Knowledge : About - Dipper DEFENDANIMAKESAPRODUCT : Product : Exxssinc - System PLAINTIFF AND DEFENDANT COMPETE : Affirmative EMPLOYEEWORKEDFORPLANTIFF : Employment : Of - Gwhiz - By - Amexxco EMPLOYEEWORKEDFORDEFISNDANT : Employment : Of - Gwhiz - By - Exxssinc EMPLOYEEWORKEDFORBOTHPLANT ~ FFANDDEFENDANT : Affirmative EMPLOYEES WITCHEDFROMWORKING FORPLANTIFFTOWORKMGFORDEFENDANT : Employment - Change : Of - Gwhiz - From - Amexxco - To - Exxssinc EMPLOYEERECEIVEDSOMETHINGOFVALUE TOSWITCHEMPLOYMENT : Nil EMPLOYEEBROUGHTPLAINTIFFSPRODU ~ DEVELOPMENT TOGLSTO DEFENDANT : NII EMPLOYEEWORKEDONPLAINTIFF ~ PRODU ~ P : Product - Worked - On : Work - on - Dipper REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 775 DEEFENDANTHADACCESS TOPLANTIFFSPRODUCTVIAEMPLOYEE : Disclosure - Event : Amexxco - Discloses - To - Exxssinc - Via - Gwhiz DEFFENDANTOREMPMYEEENTEREDINTONONDISCLOSUREAGREEMENTWITHPLAINTIFF : Nondisclosure - Agreement : Between - Gwhiz - and - Amexxco - 2 PLAINTIFFMADESOhlEDISCLOSURESTOOUTSIDERS : Nil TYPEOFPRODUCTINFORMATIONISTECHNICAL : Nil DEFENDANTSAVEDPRODU ~ DEVELOPMENTEXPENSERELATIVETOPLAXNTIFF : Negative PLAINTIFFADOPTEDSECURITYMEASURES : Minimal - measures ~ LAINTIFFDISCLOSEDPRODUCT . INFORMATIONTODEFENDANTINNEGOTIATIONS : Nil EMPLOYEEENTEREDINTONONCOMPETITIONAGREEMENTWITHPLAINTIFF : Nil NONDISCLOSUREAGREEMENTSPECIF ~ CALLYCOVEREDPLAI ~ FF ' SPRODU ~ : Negative EMPLOYEEWASSOLEDEVELOPEROFPLAINTIWSPRODUCI : Sole - Developer By reading the Interpretation Frames’s slots one can summarize the facts of the case . For example , this Interpretation Frame summarizes the facts of Amexxco , which fit into the common employee scenario , that the employee switched from working for plaintiff to working for defendant and had worked on plaintiffs Dipper product and thus was a route by which defendant gained access to information about the product . It also reports that there was no information that the employee received something of value to switch or brought plaintiffs product development tools . The employee however , had entered into a nondisclosure agreement with plaintiff . 6 . 2 . DIMENSIONS HYPO’s 13 Dimensions correspond to 13 factors that affect trade secrets and related claims . They are drawn from the Restatement ( First ) of Torts , Section 757 , and various other legal treatises and law review articles for trade secret law ( such as Gilburne & Johnston , 1982 ; Milgrim , 1985 ; Nimmer , 1985 ) . Authors of such works commonly group together cases that share some important factor . Frequently , the author includes cases won by defendants as well as plaintiffs and cases that show a range of magnitudes of the factor or a variety of additional counterveiling factors . The nature of the factual comparisons is usually evident from the author’s comments or those of the cases reported . The Dimensions are : ( 1 ) Competitive - Advantage - Plantiff strengthened the greater the competitive advantage gained by the defendant . ( 2 ) Vertical - Knowledge - Plaintiff strengthened to the extent that the knowledge does not pertain to customer business methods . 776 K . D . ASHLEY ( 3 ) Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders - Plaintiff strengthened the fewer disclosures to outsiders it has made of confidential information . ( 4 ) Outsider - Disclosures - Restricted - Plaintiff strengthened to the extent that dis - closees are restricted from disclosing confidential information to others . ( 5 ) Consideration - Plaintiff strengthened to the extent that defendant received something of value for entering into contract . ( 6 ) Bribe - Employee - Plaintiff strengthened the more money , stock , or other benefits the defendant gave to plaintiff’s former employees to switch employment . ( 7 ) Noncompetition - Agreement - Plaintiff strengthened to the extent that employee entered noncompetition agreement . ( 8 ) Brought - Tools - Plaintiff strengthened to the extent that former employee brought product - related tools to defendant . ( 9 ) Agreed - Not - To - Disclose - Plaintiff strengthened to the extent that defendant entered into a nondisclosure agreement . ( 10 ) Employee - Sole - Developer - Plaintiff strengthened to the extent that defendant was not the sole developer of the confidential information . ( 11 ) Nondisclosure - Agreement - Specijic - Plaintiff strengthened to the extent that the nondisclosure agreement specifically referred to plaintiffs product . ( 12 ) Disclosure - In - Negotiations - Plaintiff strengthened to extent that it did not disclose secret to defendant in negotiations . ( 13 ) Security - Measures - Plaintiff strengthened the more security measures it took to protect its confidential information . The Security - Measures Dimension , Figure 3 , captures one factor that courts take into account in assessing the strength of a plaintiff’s trade secrets claim : the plaintiff is in a stronger position to the extent that it has adopted more comprehensive security measures to protect the information . The Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders Dimension , Figure 4 , captures another factor : the plaintiff is in a weaker position to the extent that plaintiff made disclosures of the information to more outsiders . Each Dimension is a structured object comprising prerequisites , focal slot , range , comparison type , pro - plaintiff direction and focal slot prerequisite . A Dimension’s prerequisites are a list of Factual Predicates , all of which must be satisfied in a problem for the Dimension to be said to apply . To paraphrase the list of prerequisites of the Security - Measures Dimension ( Figure 3 ) , it requires that there be a corporate plaintiff , who makes a product , about which there is product development information , that there be a corporate defendant who makes a competing product , and that the plaintiff adopt some security measures . Since , as the Amexxco Interpretation Frame indicates , these prerequisites are satisfied , HYPO concludes that the Security - Measures Dimension applies . The focal slot , range , comparison type and pro - plaintiff direction represent a Dimension’s magnitude in a case . They allow cases to which a given Dimension applies to be compared in terms of the magnitude of the Dimension in each case . Focal slots single out the particular facts that make a case stronger or weaker along the Dimension in the sense that the case is a more or less extreme example . The focal slot indicates where to look in a case’s underlying frame representation to find the facts that place the case somewhere along the Dimension . For example , the focal slot of the Security - Measures Dimension indicates that the value of the REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 777 SHORT - TITLE : Security - Measures CLAIMS : Trade Secrets Misappropriation PREREQUISITES : There is a corporate plaintiff There is a corporate defendant Plaintiff makes a product Plaintiff and defendant compete Plaintiff has product information Defendant makes a product Plaintiffs and defendant’s products compete Plaintiff adopted security measures FOCAL SLOT PREREQUISITE : Plaintiff adopted security measures FOCAL SLOT : Plaintiffs Product : SECURITY - MEASURES - LIST RANGE : Minimal - Measures Access to Premises Controlled Restrictions on Entry by Visitors Restrictions on Entry by Employees Product Marked Confidential Employee Trade Secret Program Exists Restrictions on Hardcopy Release Employee Nondisclosure Agreements COMPARISON TYPE : More versus less PRO PLAINTIFF DIREC ~ ON : More FIGURE 3 . The Security - Measures Dimension plaintiffs product’s SECURITY - MEASURES - LAST slot places a case somewhere on that Dimension . The focal slot of the Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders Dimension indicates that the NUMBER - DISCLOSEES slot of the plaintiffs product knowledge frame contains the relevant datum . The range information includes the range of possible values of the focal slots . The pro - plaintiff direction defines the direction in the range that strengthens the plaintiff’s position . HYPO’s Dimensions have five possible types of ranges : binary , partially ordered sets of objects , ordered sets , intervals and number lines . For example , the Security - Measures range comprises sets of security measures partially ordered in terms of set inclusion . The RANGE slot of Figure 3 shows all of the possible measures . Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders , Figure 4 , has an interval range of from 0 to 10 000 Ooo outside disclosees . The comparison type specifies a method for comparing the focal slot values of two cases to which a Dimension applies . Different methods are appropriate for different types of ranges . For Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders , HYPO simply tests which case involved the greater number of disclosees . 778 K . D . ASHLEY SHORT - TITLE : Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders CLAIMS : Trade Secrets Misappropriation PREREQUISITES : There is a corporate plaintiff There is a corporate defendant Plaintiff makes a product Plaintiff and defendant compete Plaintiff has product information Plaintiff made some disclosures to outsiders FOCAL SLOT PREREQUISITE : Plaintiff made some disclosures to outsiders FOCAL SLOT : Plaintiffs Product Knowledge : NUMBER - DISCLOSEES RANGE : 0 to 1ooooooo COMPARISON TYPE : Greater - than versus Less - than PRO PLAINTEF DIRECTION : Less - than FIGURE 4 . The Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders - Dimension . A Dimension is a near miss if all of its prerequisites are satisfied , except the prerequisite associated with the focal slot . The focal slot prerequisite contains the crucial information that places a case somewhere along the Dimension’s range . If the focal slot prerequisite is the only one missing , then the case is potentially close to cases indexed by the Dimension . Near misses indicate Dimensions that the user should consider because they index cases that could be cited in the argument if only small changes were made in the problem , changes that would place the problem somewhere along the Dimension’s range . Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders , shown in Figure 4 , is a near miss with respect to Amexxco because , of all its prerequisites , only the focal slot prerequisite , Plaintiff - made - some - disclosures - to - outsiders , is missing . 6 . 3 . CASE KNOWLEDGE BASE All 30 cases in HYPO’s CKB are represented in Legal Case Frames . At the time of entry into the CKB , each case was analysed by HYPO to determine the Dimensions that apply . The applicable Dimensions were then saved and listed in the top level case frame’s DIMENSIONS - LIST . These Dimensions serve to index the case in the CKB . A general catalogue of all objects in HYPO , the Global Catalogue , has a list of pointers to all 30 cases’ top level frames , a standard inverted file technique . When HYPO seeks all cases in the CKI3 that evidence a particular factor , for example , disclosures to outsiders , it runs through the Global Catalogue list extracting pointers to all cases with the Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders Dimension in the top level case frame DIMENSIONS - LIST . REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 779 7 . HYPO’s processing steps HYPO reasons by comparing problem situations with cases in its CKB and drawing inferences from the comparisons . The process is one of winnowing and clustering the cases in the CKB to make explicit their relationships in an argument about the problem . There are nine steps : ( 1 ) Analyse the problem situation Dimensionally . ( 2 ) Retrieve relevant cases from the CKE ! . ( 3 ) Select relevant cases that are the most on point to the problem . ( 4 ) Select most on point cases that are best for each side to cite . ( 5 ) Compute distinctions between the best cases and the problem . ( 6 ) Identify counter - examples to the best cases . ( 7 ) Evaluate and summarize overall argument . ( 8 ) Generate 3 - Ply Arguments citing the best cases , distinctions and counter - examples . ( 9 ) Generate hypotheticals to strengthen or weaken arguments . HYPO’s process culminates with argument outputs like those illustrated for the Amexxco problem . The following sections describe each step and illustrate it in the context of that problem . 7 . 1 . DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS AND RETRIEVAL OF RELEVANT CASES In HYPO , relevant similarities are shared Dimensions . The set of relevant similarities , S ( c1 , c2 ) , between two cases , cl and ~ 2 , is the intersection of the set of Dimensions that apply to cl and the set of Dimensions that apply to ~ 2 . Cases are said to be “on point” to a problem p , if and only if they are “relevantly similar” to the problem , i . e . S ( c1 , c2 ) is not empty . The set of all cases ci such that ci is a member of the CKB and S ( p , ci ) is not empty is the set of cases that are on point to a problem p , Of’ ( p ) . HYPO also employs a more relaxed definition of relevancy to identify cases that could be relevant to the analysis of the problem . The definition employs the concept of a near miss Dimension . The set of potentially relevant similarities between problem p and case c2 , PS ( p , c2 ) is the intersection of the set of Dimensions that apply or are near misses to p and the set of Dimensions that apply to c2 . The set of cases that are potentially on point to a problem p , POP ( p ) , is the set of all cases ci such that ci is a member of the CKB and PS ( p , ci ) is not empty . Operationally , HYPO determines the sets OP ( p ) and POP ( p ) through Dimen - sional Analysis . First , HYPO tests each Factual Predicate on the problem’s underlying Legal Case Frames and stores the results in the Interpretation Frame . Then , for each Dimension , HYPO compares the Dimension’s prerequisites to the problem’s Factual Predicate values to determine if the Dimension applies or is a near miss . Finally , HYPO retrieves any case in the CKB that is indexed by any Dimension that applies or is a near miss with respect to the problem . The results of the Dimensional Analysis are stored in a Case Analysis Record ( CAR ) . For the Amexxco problem , HYPO prepared the CAR shown in the Appendix . The INTERP - FRAME slot has a pointer to the completed Interpretation Frame for Amexxco . APPLICABLE - DIMENSIONS lists the Dimensions that apply to 780 K . D . ASHLEY Amexxco including Security - Measures . Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders is listed in NEAR - MISS - DIMENSIONS . Pointers to the cases of OF ( p ) and POP ( p ) are contained the the CLAIM - LATXES and EXTENDED - CLAIM - LATTICES slots , ordered , as described below , according to how on - point they are . Perusing the CAR , one sees that HYPO has determined that three legal claims apply to the Amexxco case , trade secrets misappropriation , breach of nondisclosure / noncompetition agreement and breach of contract . That is , for each of these claims , there is at least one CKR case involving the claim which is indexed by at least one of Amexxco’s five applicable Dimensions . The following discussion is focused only on the trade secrets misappropriation claim and the cases and Dimensions regarding it . Since the only cases in the CKB to which the Consideration Dimension applies are contract cases , HYPO treats it as a contracts related Dimension . That Dimension is not involved in HYPO’s treatment of the trade secrets claim in Amexxco . 7 . 2 . SELECTION OF MOST ON POINT CASES Saying that one case , Ci , is more on point than another case , ck , means that the set of relevant similarities between the problem p and ck , s ( p , ck ) is a proper subset of s ( P9 ci ) * Cases that are most on point to the problem are the most relevantly similar of all the on - point cases . The set of most on point cases , MOP , is defined as the set of all cases , ci such that for each ci , there is no on - point case more on point than ci . In other words , MOP is the set of all cases , ci , such that ci is on point and for all other on - point cases ck , either Ci and ck have no similarities in common with the problem situation , ci is as or more on point than c k , or neither is more on point than the other . The set of potentially most on point cases , PMOP , is the set of all cases , ci , such that for each ci , there is no other case ck in POP for which PS ( p , Ci ) is a proper subset Of Ps ( p , ck ) . Operationally , HYPO sorts relevant and potentially relevant cases using Claim Lattices and extended Claim Lattices . A Claim Lattice is a directed acyclic graph . Every node contains pointers to parent and children nodes , a list of Dimensions and a list of cases . The maximal root node’s list of Dimensions ( i . e . the root’s Dimension list ) contains all of the Dimensions that apply to the problem . Each node contains all cases in the CKB such that the intersections of the root’s Dimension list and the lists of Dimensions applicable to each case in the node are the same . The root node’s case list contains all cases in the CKB that have the same set of applicable Dimensions as the problem . In effect , each node defines an equivalence class of cases that are equally on point with respect to the problem . An extended Claim Lattice is like a regular Claim Lattice except that its root’s Dimension list also contains Dimensions that are near misses for the problem . In both kinds of Claim Lattices , the Dimension list of each node contains only Dimensions that are applicable to all of the cases in that node . For the Amexxco problem , HYPO generated the Claim Lattice shown in Figure 5 . The root node represents the four trade secrets Dimensions that apply to the problem . It and successor nodes contain pointers to 13 cases that are on point . Each node shows the Dimensions that the included cases share with the problem and the winners , plaintiff ( n ) or defendant REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 781 GRAPtU + XlE - P OIMENSK * IS . * qna ~ T0 - 0ib¶a scvia CASES : I \ GRhPl + NcQE - 14 I \ DsENsIoNs : Y & NC + ND + T * OiBCbW GlWWNWE - 20 - A # Wll9WSPR % DIM - : . Ap & t4a + ToDisdom msEs : Amocoa SmJcnndDmsmiar FIGURE 5 . Claim Lattice for the Ameuco problem : the root node represents the Amexxco current fact situation and the four Dimensions that apply to it . The root node and successor nodes contain 13 cases that are on point . Each node shows the Dimensions that the included cases share with the problem and the winners , plaintiff ( n ) or defendant ( 6 ) . Cases in nodes closer to the root are more on point . Leaf nodes contain least on point cases . The Amoco ease in the root node is defendant’s most on point case . Plaintiff’s most on point case is Structural Dynamics . ( 6 ) . Cases can be inserted into the Claim Lattice in any order . Inserting a case into the Claim Lattice involves comparing the case with the nodes in a depth first search . The comparison checks the extent to which the set of Dimensions shared by the case and the cfs “covers” the node’s list of Dimensions , that is , whether in a set comparison sense , it is greater than , equal to , less than , or an overlap of the node’s list of Dimensions . The case is inserted just above any nodes containing cases whose set of shared Dimensions is a proper subset of the case’s . The algorithm is described in detail in Ashley ( 19 ! 20 ) , Chapter 8 . Having ordered the relevant cases in a Claim Lattice , selecting the most on point cases is simple . The closer a node is to the root , the more on point its cases are . Starting with the root , HYPO traverses each branch of the Claim Lattice until it finds a case or cases won by a side . Those cases are most on point for that side . In Figure 5 , HYPO does not have to go far to find the plaintiffs and defendant’s most on point cases ; they are in the root node . Structural Dynamics is pro - plaintiff and more on point than any other pro - plaintiff case . Pro - defendant Amoco is more on point than any other pro - defendant case . Comparing how on point cases are relative to a problem , does not entail comparing the number of Dimensions they share with the problem , but the overlaps of the sets of Dimensions they share with the problem . In Figure 5 , neither Motorola nor Wexler is more on point than the other even though the former shares two Dimensions with the problem and the latter only one . The sets of Dimensions each shares with the problem are different . Motorola is more on point than all of its successor cases in the Claim Lattice , however . 782 K . D . ASHLEY HYPO stores the results of the selection process in the Case Analysis Record . Most on point cases are sorted by claim and contained in the MOST - ON - POINT - CASES - BY - CLAIM slot . The potentially most on point cases , garnered from the extended Claim Lattice ( not shown ) are stored in the MOST - ON - POINT - NEAR - MISS - CASES - BY - CLAIM slot . Note that Strucr ~ rul Dynamics is also a pro - plaintiff potentially most on point case . 7 . 3 . SELECTING BEST CASES TO CITE A side in an argument should lead off with its best cases . Since the most on point cases comprise the cases in the CKB that share with the problem the greatest overlap of factors , they are candidates for the best cases to cite for each side in an argument how to decide the problem . There is one qualification , however . A best case should share with the problem at least one Dimension that favored the case’s winner and the side for whom the case is cited . More specifically , the best cases for a side to cite are those of the side’s most on point cases that have at least one applicable Dimension favoring the side . The qualification insures that HYPO will not make a point for a side by citing a case that has no factors which favor the side . Sometimes , a most on point case shares with the problem only factors that favor the opponent . Such a case makes a good counter - example ( i . e . it shows that those pro - opponent factors do not necessitate the opponent’s winning ) but it would not be a good case to lead off an argument for a side . In the Amexxco problem , the best cases to cite happen to include both of the most on point cases ( compare the MOST - ON - POINT - CASES - BY - CLAIM and BEST - CASES - BY - CLAIM slot values for Trade - Secrets - Misappropriation claims in the CAR . ) In the Amoco case , for example , the plaintiff adopted security measures and had a nondisclosure agreement with the defendant , both of which factors favor the plaintiff . Similarly , Structural Dynamics share with the problem at least one Dimension that favors the defendant winner of that case . 7 . 4 . COMPUTING DISTINCTIONS The relevant differences between a problem and a case are reasons why they should have different results . Assume that the outcome of the cited case favored the plaintiff . In HYPO , the set of relevant differences between the problem and cited case is the union of three sets : ( 1 ) the pro - defendant Dimensions that apply only to the problem ; ( 2 ) the pro - plaintiff Dimensions that apply only to the cited case ; and ( 3 ) the shared Dimensions that favor the plaintiff more strongly in the cited case than in the problem . HYPO has procedures for distinguishing a case from a problem . It applies the procedures to each sides’ best cases ( and also to any counter - examples as described below ) and records the results in an Argument Record . Argument Records record information about how a particular case can be used in an argument about a particular problem , including its similarities and differences relative to the problem , counter - examples and hypothetical variations that it motivates . HYPO generates an Argument Record for each best case to cite , for each case manually selected by the user for a 3 - Ply - Argument and for certain counter - examples . HYPO generates all of the information contained in an Argu - REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETKALS 783 ment Record dynamically . The Argument Records for the Amexxco problem are listed in the POINTS slot of the CAR . The Argument Record for the Eastern Marble case , one of the cases Selected manually by the user , is shown below . HYPO fills in the similarities between the Arnexrco cfs and the cited case Eusfern Marble in the SHARED - DIMENSIONS slot . NAME : Arg - Ret - 2 CFS : Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz SIDE - ~ : Plaintiff CLAIM : Trade - Secrets - Misappropriation CITED - CASE : Eastern Marble Products Corp . v . Roman Marble , Inc . SHARED - DIMENSIONS : ( Security - Measures Agreed - Not - To - D & lose ) SIDE - 2 - DISTINCTIONS : ( ( Weaker Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz Eastern Marble Products Corp . v . Roman Marble , inc . Security - Measures Less ( Minimal - Measures ) ( Minimal - Measures Employee - Nondisclosure - Agreements Restrictions - On - Entry - By - Visitors ) ) ( Strong Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz Empioyee - Sole - Developer ) ) MOP - COUNTER - E ~ M ~ L : ( Amoco Production Co . v . Lindley ) AS - OP - COUNTER - E ~ MPL : Nil POTENT - COUNTER - E ~ MPL : Nil BOUNDARY - COUNTER - EXMPL : Nil SIDE - I - HYFQS : Nil SIDE - 2 - HYPOS : Nil RESPONSIVE - ARG - RECX ( Arg - Ret - 1 ) HYPO records the distinctions between a case and a problem in the correspond - ing Argument Record’s SIDE - Z - DISIINC ~ ~ ONS slot . The first distinction list in that slot of Argument Record 2 indicates that Amexxco is weaker than Eastern Marble along the Security - Measures Dimension because Amexxco’s Security measures ( i . e . mini - mal measures ) were less than Eastern Marble’s ( i . e . minimal measures plus employee nondisclosure agreements and restrictions on visitor entry . ) HYPO compares cases along shared Dimensions such as Security - Measures using the focal slot , range , comparison type and pro - plaintiff direction information contained in the Dimension . The second distinction in Argument Record 2 indicates that a Dimension favoring the defendant , Employee - Sole - Developer , applied in Amexxco that does not apply in Eastern Marble . HYPO fhds such differences as these by comparing the cases’ top - level Legal Case Frame DIMENSIONS - LISTS and determining whether the unshared Dimensions favor the opponent of the side citing the case . 784 K . D . ASHLEY 7 . 5 . IDENTIFYING COUNTEREXAMPLES HYPO identifies four kinds of counter - examples . If a side cites a precedent as a case example justifying a decision in its favor , a counter - example is a precedent that is contrary to the cited precedent ( i . e . the opposite side won the counter - example ) and that , in some well - defined sense , parries the thrust of the justification . There are four senses in which a counter - example parries a precedential justification , each corresponding to one of the four types of counter - examples : ( 1 ) Trumping ( 2 ) Potentially trumping ( 3 ) As - on - point or partial ( 4 ) Boundary . A trumping counter - example shares all of the relevant similarities of the precedent to the problem and some additional ones , as well . This kind of counter - example “trumps” the cited precedent . It says , in effect , that when the extra similarities are taken into account , the precedent should not be followed ; the opposite outcome should result . More precisely , the set of trumping counter - examples , TCX ( s , cc ) , that can be cited by a side s in response to a case cc , cited by the opponent , is defined as the set of all most on point cases , ci , such that the outcome of ci favors s and ci is more on point than cc . This definition corresponds to the intuitive idea of a trumping counter - example conveyed in Figure 1 . A potential trumping counter - example is a case that would trump a cited precedent in a somewhat different problem situation . The set of potentially trumping counterexamples , PTCX ( s , cc ) , that can be cited by a side s in response to a case cc , cited by the opponent , is defined as the set of all potentially most on point cases , Ci , such that the outcome of ci favors s and ci is more on point than cc relative to a hypothetically modified problem p’ . Hypothetical problem p’ is equivalent to p plus the near misses ; each Dimension d that is a near miss with respect to p is applicable to p ’ ( i . e . p ’ corresponds to the root node of the extended Claim Lattice . ) Each of these potential counter - examples motivates a suggested hypotheti - cal modification of the problem in which a side would have a new counter - example with which to trump the opponent’s point . As - on - point or partial counter - examples share the same set as , or some non - empty subset of , the set of Dimensions that the cited precedent shares with the problem . If the set is the same , the counter - example is as on point as the cited case and creates doubts about the cited case’s reliability . A partial counter - example shows , somewhat more weakly than a trumping or as - on - point counter - example , that the shared similarities do not always lead to the same outcome as the cited case . A boundary counter - example shows that a particular similarity is not a significant reason for deciding a case . It is a case in which the same similarity would appear to favor a side even more than in the cited case but where the opponent won nevertheless . Concisely , the set , BCX ( s , cc ) of all cases that a side s can cite as boundary counter - examples to a cited case cc is the set of all on - point cases , cj , such that s won cj and there is some Dimension , d , such that cj and cc share d with the problem , and the magnitude of d in cj is greater in favor of s’s opponent than in cc . In other words , although d is a relevant similarity between cc and p , even greater magnitudes of d in a case do not require coming to the same decision as in cc ; witness the boundary counter - example , Cje REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETKALS 785 Operationally , HYPO looks for counter - examples to each side’s best cases to cite and to any case selected manually by the user for a 3 - Ply - Argument . To identify trumping and as - on - point counter - examples , HYPO compares the cited case with each of the other side’s most on point cases . For instance , HYPO compared plaintiffs best case Structural Dynamics and the manually selected Eastern Marble with the defendant’s most on point case Amoco . It compared each plaintiffs case’s set of similarities to the problem with that of Amoco . Since Amoco and Structural Dynamics had equivalent sets of similarities , Amoco is an as - on - point counter - example . Since Eastern Marble’s set of similarities was a proper subset of Amoco’s , Amoco is a trumping counter - example to Eastern Marble . HYPO also found that Structural Dynamics trumped defendant’s manually selected cases , Motorola and Wexler . HYPO employs similar procedures for identifying potentially trumping counter - examples . It compares the cited case with the opponent’s potentially more - on - point cases ( in the MOST - ON - POINT - NEAR - MISS - CASES - BY - CLAIM slot of the Case Analysis Record . ) It found that the Structural Dynamics case was potentially more - on - point than Amoco because , although they are equally on point , Structural Dynamics has one additional Dimension , Brought - Tools , which is a near - miss in the Amexxco problem . HYPO records all counter - examples to a cited case in the Argument Record for that case . Argument Record 2 indicates that HYPO has found a trumping counter - example , the Amoco case , to use against the Eastern Marble case . ( Note the MOP - COUNTER - EXMPL slot value . ) HYPO creates argument links between an Argument Record for a cited case and an Argument Record for a trumping , as - on - point or boundary counter - example . ( If the counter - example does not already have its own Argument Record , HYPO creates one . ) Later , in generating 3 - Ply Arguments , HYPO will follow these links in generating responses to points . For example , HYPO generated an Argument Record ( Arg - Ret - l - shown below ) for the Amoco case . In filling out the Argument Record for the Eastern Marble case , it draws a link to Arg - Ret - 1 to indicate that Amoco is a counter - example . The RESPONSIVE - ARG - RECS slot of the Eastern Marble Argument Record ( Arg - Ret - 2 ) is filled in with a pointer to Arg - Ret - 1 to indicate that a response to citing Eastern Marble is citing its counter - example , Amoco . The Argument Record for the counter - example ( Arg - Ret - 1 ) shows a comparison between the Amoco case and the Amexxco problem . The two are very close ; there are no distinctions . Similarly , Arg - Ret - l’s RESPONSIVE - ARG - RECS slot has a pointer to the Argument Record for Structural Dynamics ( Arg - Ret - 0 , not shown ) to indicate that one way to respond to citing Amoco is by citing Structural Dynamics as an as - on - point counter - example . ( Note the AS - OP - COUNTER - E ~ MPL slot . ) The POTENT - COUNTER - EXMPL slot records the fact that Structural Dynamics is potentially more on point than Amoco . NAME : Arg - Ret - 1 CFX Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz SIDE - ~ : Defendant CLAIM : Trade - Secrets - Misappropriation CITED - CASE : Amoco Production Co . v . Lindley 786 K . D . ASHLEY SHARED - DIMENSIONS : ( Secuity - Measure . 9 Nondisclo ~ e - Agreement - Specific Employee - Sole - Developer Agreed - Not - To - Disclose ) SIDE - 2 - DISTINCrIONS : Nil MOP - COUNTER - EXMPL : Nil AS - OP - COUNTER - EXMPL : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . POTENT - COUNTER - EXMPL : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . BOUNDARY - COUNTER - EXML : Nil SIDE - I - HYPOS : Nil SIDE - ZHYPOS : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . RESPONSIVE - ARG - RECS : Arg - Ret - 0 Boundary counter - examples are a way to respond to an asserted similarity , to show that the similarity does not necessarily mean that an opponent should win . The procedure for finding boundary counter - examples is to check if the Dimensions shared by the cfs and cited case ( from the Argument Record SHARED - DIMENSIONS slot ) index any cases won by Side - 2 even though they are weaker for Side - 2 than the cited case . Boundary counter - examples are sought only for Dimensions whose ranges are , , munber lines , ordered sets of more than two members , or partially ordered sets . These range types support a sense in which a case can be an extreme example of the magnitude of a Dimension . There happen to be no boundary counter - examples in connection with the Ameaxco case . There would have been a boundary counter - example if the CKB contained a case that had all or more of the security measures of Eastern Marble but the defendant had won . HYPO would cite such a case in response to Eastern Marble to show that security measures , though favoring plaintiff , do not guarantee a pro - plaintiff result . 7 . 6 . EVALUATING AND SUMMARIZING OVERALL ARGUMENTS HYPO evaluates the opposing overall arguments by determining whether either side alone can cite untrumped best cases . These are cases with respect to which there are no better cases for the opponent to cite as trumping counter - examples . More concisely , the set of untrumped best cases for a side s to cite , UBCC , is the set of cases , ci , such that ci is a most on point case , s won ci , ci shares some Dimension with the problem that favors s and there is no trumping counter - example for s’s opponent to cite . If both sides have untrumped best cases to cite , HYPO does not select a winner but treats both sides as having strong arguments . HYPO reports its evaluation in a Citation Summary that describes which side has the stronger position and lists each side’s untrumped case . For the Amexxcu problem , HYPO treats both sides as having strong arguments because both have untrumped points to make . REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 787 7 . 7 . GENERATING 3 - PLY ARGUMENTS HYPO outputs a 3 - Ply Argument for each side’s best cases to cite and for any cases selected by the user . The Argument Records are blueprints for 3 - Ply Arguments . For example , Argument [ 2 ] was generated from Arg - Ret - 1 and Argument [ 3 ] came from Arg - Ret - 2 . HYPO makes the first ply , Side - l’s point , by citing the Argument Record’s cited case and drawing an analogy between it and the cfs . As a case cited in a point , the salient features are its relevant similarities , the Dimensions shared by the case and problem . These relevant similarities are stored in the Argument Record’s SHARED - DIMENSIONS slot . HYPO draws the analogy to the cfs by stating a factual description associated with each of the stored Dimensions . The second ply , Side - 2’s response , consists of distinguishing the case cited in the point and citing counter - examples to it . The salient features of a case as distinguished from the cfs are its relevant differences as defined above , certain unshared Dimensions and differences in magnitude of shared Dimensions . HYPO recites Side - 2’s distinctions from the Argument Record’s & DE - ~ - DISTINCTIONS slot . In the response , HYPO also cites each trumping , as - on - point and boundary counter - example that it previously stored in the Argument Record . A trumping counter - example’s salient features are the extra Dimensions that the counter - example shares with the problem that the cited case does not . In describing the trumping counter - example , HYPO emphasizes the counter - example’s extra shared Dimensions relative to the cited case , computed by taking the set difference of the SHARED - DIMENSIONS in the Argument Record for the cited case and that for the counter - example . For instance , in describing Amoco in Argument [ 3 ] as a counter - example to trump Eastern Marble , HYPO emphasizes Amoco’s extra shared Dimension : the employee defendant was the sole developer of plaintiffs product . For a boundary counter - example , the salient feature is the Dimension whose magnitude is more extreme in the counter - example than in the cited case . The third ply , Side - l’s rebuttal , entails distinguishing any of the counter - examples from the cfs . The Argument Record for the counter - example , which HYPO linked to the Argument Record for the cited case , contains those distinctions in its SIDE - 2 - DIsTINcrIONS slot . In Argument [ 21’s rebuttal , the distinctions between the Structural Dynamics counter - example and Amexxco come from the Argument Record for Structural Dynamics ( Arg - Ret - 0 , not shown but referred to in Arg - Ret - 1 as a responsive Argument Record . ) In order to generate the case descriptions in the 3 - Ply Arguments , HYPO takes the list of Dimensions that represent the salient features of the case in a particular argument context . Each Dimension has associated canned textual phrases for asserting that the Dimension applies to a case or that its magnitude is more or less than in another case . HYPO concatenates statements corresponding to the listed Dimensions . This method provides some measure of flexibility in describing cases even with canned textual phrases . 7 . 8 . SUGGESTING AND POSING HYPOTHETICALS Finally , HYPO suggests hypothetical modifications of the problem situation in which a side’s argument would be strengthened or weakened . The modifications involve adding facts to the cfs so that Dimensions , formerly near misses with respect to the 788 K . D . ASHLEY problem , become applicable . As a result of the modifications , new cases become relevant opening up new possible points and responses . Such cases are the targets of HYPO’s suggested modifications ; modifying the cfs as suggested makes it more like a target case . There are two sources of target cases for the modifications . First , the most on point near miss cases in the Case Analysis Record are targets for hypothetical modifications that lead to new argument points . Second , the potentially more - on - point counter - examples listed in an Argument Record are targets leading to new responses . As examples of the first source , each of the suggested hypotheticals in HYPO’s output for Amexxco in Section 5 , corresponds to a most on point near - miss trade secrets case from the Amexxco Case Analysis Record . Some targets would strengthen the plaintiffs position ; others , like the Crown Industries case favor the defendant . A second source of targets for hypotheticals leads to new responses . HYPO suggests posing a variation of the cfs in which the counter - example would trump the cited case . Operationally , if the Argument Record indicates that there are any potentially more - on - point counter - examples to a cited case , HYPO appends a note to the 3 - Ply Argument offering to pose a hypothetical variant of the cfs in which Side - 2’s response would be bolstered . Argument [ 2 ] , for example , contains such a note . It says that the plaintiffs response would be strengthened if its former employee had brought product development information , and it cites the Structural Dynamics case which , as we have seen , is a potentially more - on - point counter - example to Amoco . The salient features of a case cited as a target of a hypothetical variant are some of the target case’s Dimensions that are near misses with respect to the problem . HYPO generates the description of the target case from two lists of Dimensions , those that apply to the target ( from the target’s DIMENSIONS - LIST ) and those that are near misses in the cfs ( from the CAR NEAR - MISS - DIMENSIONS slot . ) HYPO takes the set intersection of those lists of Dimensions , screens them to select only Dimensions that favor the side for whom the hypothetical is suggested and uses the result to describe the salient features of the target . In the Argument [ 2 ] note , for example , HYPO emphasizes the Brought - Tools Dimension as the salient feature of the Structural Dynamics case in this context . When the user selects a suggested hypothetical , HYPO has methods for generating a modified version of the cfs . HYPO creates a specification , a list of changes such as the Dimensions that should be added to the cfs or along which a case should be strengthened or weakened and which side the change should favor . Given a specification , I - TYPO makes a copy of the case to be modified . The copy is identical except that the names of the Legal Case Frame instances are modified to avoid obliterating the case to be modified . Then HYPO implements the changes in the specification using five heuristics and their associated modification methods . As described more fully in Rissland and Ashley ( 1986 ) and Ashley ( 1990 ) , HYPO’s five heuristics for modifying cases hypothetically are : Hl : Make a near miss Dimension apply ; I - D : Strengthen or weaken a case along an applicable Dimension ; REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 789 H3 : Move a case along a related Dimension ; H4 : Make a case extreme along a Dimension ; H5 : Make a case into a near - win given a target . Each heuristic employs modification methods . Some modification methods take a list of Factual Predicates corresponding to the missing prerequisites of a near miss Dimension and add corresponding Legal Case Frames or slot values to the case so that the Dimension applies . Other modification methods are like methods for comparing cases along a Dimension’s range , except that instead of comparing focal slot values , they change the value . These methods are keyed to Dimensions’ range and comparison types . On the user’s command , HYPO employs the heuristics to modify the cfs . For example , suppose the user takes up HYPO’s suggestion in Argument [ 21’s note that the plaintiff’s response could be strengthened if the employee had brought product development tools to the defendant . Using the SfructuruZ Dynamics case as a target and using Hl , HYPO can modify the cfs so that plaintiff can cite Srrucfural Dynamics as a trumping counter - example . Pursuant to Hl , one or more of the target’s Dimensions that were near misses in the cfs , are made to apply in the modified cfs . In particular , the Brought - Tools Dimension is made to apply to the Amexxco problem . HYPO generates the new arguments and helps the user compare them with the previous arguments . The result is a dramatic change in the balance of the argument . Now when HYPO generates a 3 - Ply - Argument citing Amoco for the defendant , there is a new response : + Response for Plaintiff as Side - 2 : Counter - examples : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . 401 F . SUQQ . 1102 ( E . D . Mich . 1973 , is more on point and held for plaintiff where it was also the case that : Plaintiff’s former employee brought product development information to defendant . Compare this response with the former response in Argument [ 2 ] . Now the plaintiff can trump the defendant’s point . ( Note also that in this different context , HYPO’s description of Structural Dynamics changes to emphasize its newly salient aspect . ) The new trumping counter - example tips the strength of the sides’ arguments in favor of plaintiff . HYPO’s new case summary says : On a claim for Trade Secrets Misappropriation , plaintiff can make a stronger argument . Plaintiff can cite the following cases for which there are no more on point counter - examples : Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . 401 F . Supp . 1102 ( E . D . Mich . 1975 ) The new situation is reflected in a new Claim Lattice for the modified version of the Amexxco problem in Figure 6 . The root node now shows that the Brought - Tools Dimension applies to the problem . Structural Dynamics still has all of the Dimensions that apply to the problem . Amoco , however , has been demoted to a successor node . It is now less on point than Structural Dynamics . The Anulogic and Space Aero cases have also become more on point than their former neighbors in Figure 5 . kiFwKNooE - 225 G RA P l + NO D E - 215 II M r n D I M E N S D N S : gg ! J y - bbe l yv . Mw ph y a FIGURE 6 . Claim Lattice for the hypothetically modified A m e xx c o fact situation : since the Bought - Took Dimension now applies to the problem , S tr u c t u r a l D yna m i cs trumps A m o c o . REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 791 On the user’s command , HYPO can also strengthen the defendant’s position . For example , suppose the user takes up HYPO’s suggestion that the defendant’s position could be strengthened if the plaintiff had made disclosures to outsiders and in negotiations with the defendant . With heuristic Hl , HYPO can modify the cfs so that the defendant can cite the Crown Industries case in its favor in a new point to the effect that the plaintiff should lose when it makes such disclosures . Taking Crown Industries as a target , generating the hypothetical involves making the cfs near miss Dimensions , Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders and Disclosure - in - Negotiations , apply to the new cfs . In other words , the hypothetical supposes that Amexxco disclosed its secrets to seven outsiders and in negotiations with the defendant as in Crown Industries . One hypothetical modification leads to others . Adding new points for one side opens up new potential responses for the other . The user can follow a series of hypothetical modifications as far as there are targets . Suppose that the Amexxco cfs were modified , as suggested above , to include disclosures by Amexxco to outsiders so that the Crown Industries case could be cited in a point for the defendant . HYPO would suggest a new way for the plaintiff to make a response . The target is a new case that would then become a potentially trumping counter - example to Crown : the Data General case where the plaintiff won where all of the disclosees agreed to maintain confidentiality . In Data General , an extra Dimension Outsider - Disclosures - Restricted , applies . Once disclosures are added to Amexxco , Outsider - Disclosures - Restricted becomes a near miss . Using Hl , the Amexxco problem can be modified yet again to make Outsider - Disclosures - Restricted apply . Plaintiff can then trump the Crown Industries case by citing Duta General in response . HYPO can also modify the cfs to make it stronger or weaker along an applicable Dimension . For example , assume that the new cfs is the modified Amexxco problem with two newly applicable Dimensions : there were disclosures to seven outsiders ( i . e . Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders applies ) and all of the disclosees agreed to maintain confidentiality ( i . e . Outsider - Disclosures - Restricted applies . ) Using H2 , Hypo can make the newly modified cfs weaker for the plaintiff along the Secrets - DiscZosed - Outsiders Dimension by increasing the number of disclosures to 100 outsiders ( as in another target case from the CKB ) . Using H4 , the cfs could be further weakened to an extreme : 10000 000 disclosures to outsiders , the maximum value of the Dimension’s range ( not an unrealistic figure in these days of mass marketing of software ) . Implicitly , the hypothetical modification raises the question , “Is a secret still confidential if 10000 000 disclosees know it , even if they have agreed to maintain confidentiality ? ” Although HYPO has no understanding of what “secret” or “confidential” mean , it does know that Secrets - Disclosed - Outsiders and Outsider - Disclosures - Restricted are related Dimensions that favor opposite sides and that moving the cfs to extremes along one of the related Dimension’s ( using heuristic H3 ) is likely to create an interesting hypothetical that questions the significance of the other Dimension ( Ashley , 1990 , Ch . 8 ) . 8 . Discussion HYPO evaluates a problem by comparing and contrasting it with cases in its CKB . The 3 - Ply Arguments and suggested hypotheticals make these comparisons explicit . 792 K . D . ASHLEY They present two competing adversarial views of the problem and hypothetical suggestions for strengthening one side or the other . The hypotheticals focus a user on additional factors to look for in a problem situation and the accompanying arguments explain why the new factors are significant . They also allow a user to explore the consequences on an argument of failing to prove that a factor is present . Finally , hypotheticals varying the magnitudes of factors perhaps to extremes , can be used to argue that a factor is or is not very important . HYPO’s computational definitions of relevance and salience make it possible to compare and contrast cases and hypotheticals . This discussion has presented and illustrated computational definitions of some important concepts involving relevance : relevant similarities and differences , more on point , most on point cases , best cases to cite , four kinds of counter - examples , and targets for hypotheticals . There are also computational definitions for describing the salient features of a case selected for any of the four roles it can play in HYPO’s arguments , as a case : ( 1 ) cited in a point ; ( 2 ) distinguished in a response ; ( 3 ) cited as a counter - example ; or ( 4 ) suggested as a target for a hypothetical . These definitions allow HYPO to select and describe cases in a contextually sensitive way . The context of the argument in which the cases are to be used comprises the particular problem facts , the side that is arguing , the other cases in the CKB and their facts , and the role of the case in the argument . HYPO’s computational definitions for selecting relevant cases take all of these contextual elements into account . HYPO judges a case’s relevance by the opportunities it presents for making argument points and responses : whether the case could be used to trump a point , or show that a factor is not always important , or show that a small change in facts could lead to a new point or a new response . The program computes those opportunities dynamically , for any particular problem and body of cases in the CKB . Its process projects the CKB onto the cfs’s particular facts and groups cases into classes of equivalent on pointness . The quality of a match is assessed not only by how close a case is to the problem facts but how close other cases are . If other comparably on point cases compete , counter - example relations are made explicit . In selecting cases , HYPO views the problem from both sides . It determines the best use a side can make of a case , whether a side should lead off with the case in a point or reserve the case for use as a responsive counter - example . Selecting cases from the other side’s viewpoint , HYPO trumps points and attacks similarities with counter - examples and suggests target cases for changing the analysis hypothetically . Having selected a case to cite in an argument role , HYPO also takes context into account in determining the aspects of the case that are salient . In each of the four roles , HYPO generates a different salient description of the case . HYPO’s description of a single case varies with the case’s argument role , the side for whom it is cited , and the particular problem facts . In making these relevance and salience assessments , HYPO does not rely on the existence of a strong domain theory . By taking the argument context into account , it can evaluate some kinds of partial matches even though there is no causal theory for assessing differences . HYPO also avoids a priori hierarchies or numerical weighting schemes to represent a factor’s import . The differences among cases have not been reduced to a number . HYPO’s arguments play out the differences among cases REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICAL23 793 symbolically . Their significance lies in the argument - making opportunities they present . HYPO’s arguments compare favorably with those of actual judges and attorneys recorded in case opinions and briefs . Current fact situations based on four real legal cases were submitted to HYPO , and its 3 - Ply Arguments and hypotheticals were compared with the points and responses made in the attorney’s briefs and judge’s opinions . They were compared in terms of whether HYPO’s evaluation of the relative overall strength of parties’ arguments tallied with the winner , whether HYPO made points and responses for each side citing the same prededents and in the same way as the judges and attorneys , and whether HYPO’s citations and suggested hypotheticals raised the same issues as in the briefs and opinions . As reported in Ashley ( 1990 ) Chapter 10 , there were some striking similarities between HYPO’s outputs and the ways that the judges and attorneys cited and responded to cases . There are other important kinds of legal arguments , other possible ways of justifying a resolution of competing factors , with which HYPO does not deal . An attorney often presents a more technical rationale or explanation of why a problem’s competing factors should be resolved in favor of his or her client . These rationales may invoke statutory and other legal rules and predicates . They may also involve arguing by analogy to past cases in a different sense : mapping a rationale from a past case to the problem . Since HYPO was designed , work has progressed on modeling this more technical legal analysis . The program GREBE maps onto a problem the structure of a court’s rationale for deciding a precedent ( Branting , 1991 ) . CABARET , a program that applies legal rules to the analysis of a problem , invokes a HYPO - like case - based reasoner with Dimensions to justify conclusions that the rules’ legal predicates apply to a problem or not ( Rissland & Skalak , 1991 ) . Both efforts employ cases to evaluate problems but use generalizations differently to generate more abstract , technical explanations of the significance of similarities and differences among cases , with or without structural mapping to the cases . As programs apply more technical legal analysis , they must apply techniques for assessing relevant cases and significant facts in contextually sensitive ways and deal with the fact that there are competing explanations of almost any case . Inevitably , the programs will become computationally more complex ( especially those involving structural mapping ) . Just as the drafters of the Restatement relied on factors , so will AI find Dimensions useful tools where more abstract causal or logical definitions fail or become too computationally expensive to apply . HYPO’s tractable methods for selecting cases and counter - examples will assist programs to select those cases in which to invest computational resources to apply more analytical methods . HYPO’s approach to computing a case’s salient features differently depending on the argument context will help programs decide which similarities or differences are important enough to expend computational resources to explain or rebut . 9 . Conclusion HYPO is a case - based reasoning system that evaluates problems by comparing and contrasting them with cases from its Case Knowledge Base . It generates legal arguments citing the past cases as justifications for legal conclusions about who 794 K . D . ASHLEY should win in problem disputes involving trade secret law . HYPO’s arguments present competing adversarial views of the problem and it poses hypotheticals to alter the balance of the evaluation . HYPO uses Dimensions as a generalization scheme for accessing and evaluating cases . HYPO’s reasoning process and various computational definitions have been described and illustrated , including its definitions for computing relevant similarities and differences , most on point and best cases to cite , four kinds of counter - examples , targets for hypotheticals and the aspects of a case that are salient in various argument roles . These definitions enable HYPO to make contextually sensitive assessments of relevance and salience without relying on either a strong domain theory or a priori weighting schemes . References ASHLEY , K . D . ( 1988 ) . Arguing by analogy in law : a case - based model . In D . H . HELMAN , Ed . Analogy Reasoning : Perspectives of Artijicial Intelligence , Cognitive Science , and Philosophy . Dordrecht , The Netherlands . Kluwer . ASHLEY , K . D . ( 1989 ) . Defining salience in case - based arguments . In Proceedings ZJCAZ - 89 , pp . 537 - 542 . Detroit : International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence , ASHLEY , K . D . ( 1990 ) . Modeling Legal Argument : Reasoning with Cases and Hypotheticais . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . ( Based on Ph . D . thesis , University of Massachusetts , Computer and Information Science Department , 1987 ) . ASHLEY , K . D . & RISSLAND , E . L . ( 1987 ) . Compare and contrast , a test of expertise . In Proceedings AAAZ - 87 , pp . 273 - 278 . Seattle : American Association for Artificial Intelligence . ASHLEY , K . D . & RISSLAND , E . L . ( 1988u ) . A case - based approach to modeling legal expertise . IEEE Expert , 3 , 70 - 77 . ASHLEY , K . D . & RISSLAND , E . L . ( 19886 ) . Waiting on weighting : a symbolic least commitment approach . In Proceedings AAAI - 88 , pp . 239 - 244 . St . Paul , MN : American Association for Artificial Intelligence . BAREISS , E . R . ( 1989 ) . Exemplar - Based Knowledge Acquisition - A Unified Approach to Concept Representation , Classification , and Learning . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . BAREISS , E . R . , PORTER , B . W . & WIER , C . C . ( 1987 ) . PROTOS : an exemplar - based learning apprentice . In Proceedings Fourth International Workshop on Machine Learning , University of California at Irvine , pp . 12 - 23 . BRANTING , L . K . ( 1991 ) . Building explanations from rules and structured cases . International Journal of Man - Machine Studies , 34 , 797 - 837 . CARBONELL , J . & VELOSO , M . ( 1988 ) . Integrating derivational analogy into a general problem solving architecture . In Proceedings of the Case - Base Reasoning Workshop . Clearwater Beach , FL : Defense Research Projects Agency / Information Science and Technology Office . CARBONELL , J . G . ( 1986 ) . Derivational analogy : a theory of reconstructive problem solving and expertise acquisition . In R . S . MXHALSKI , J . G . CARBONELL & T . M . MITCHELL , Eds . Machine Learning : An Artificial Intelligence Approach , Vol . II . Los Altos , CA : Morgan Kaufmann . GILBURNE , M . R . & JOHNSIY ) N , R . L . ( 1982 ) . Trade secret protection for software generally and in the mass market . Computer / Law Journal , III , 211 - 272 . HAMMOND , K . J . ( 1986 ) . CHEF : a model of case - based planning . In Proceedings AAAZ - 86 , pp . 267 - 271 . Philadelphia : American Association for Artificial Intelligence . HAMMOND , K . J . ( 1987 ) . Explaining and repairing plans that fail . In Proceedings ZJCAZ - 87 . Milan , Italy : International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence . HAMMOND , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Case - Based Planning - Viewing Planning as a Memory Task . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . KOLODNER , J . L . ( 1983 ) . Reconstructive memory : a computer model . Cognitive Science , 7 , 281 - 328 . REASONING WITH CASES AND HYPOTHETICALS 795 KOLODNER , J . L . , SIMPSON , R . L . & SYCARA - CYRANSKI , K . ( 1985 ) . A process model of case - based reasoning in problem solving . In Proceedings IJCAZ - 8 . 5 , pp . 284 - 290 . Los Angeles : International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence . KOTON , P . ( 1988 ~ ) . Reasoning about evidence in causal explanations . In Proceedings AAAZ - 88 , pp . 256 - 261 . St . Paul , MN : American Association for Artificial Intelligence . KOTON , P . ( 19886 ) . Using Experience in Learning and Problem Solving . Ph . D . thesis , Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science , Massachusetts Institute of Technology . MILGRIM , R . M . ( 1985 ) . Business Organizations , Milgrim on Trade Secrets , vol . 12 . New York : Matthew Bender . NIMMER , R . T . ( 1985 ) . The Law of Computer Technology . Boston : Warren , Gorham & Lamont . RISSLAND , E . L . & ASHLEY , K . D . ( 1986 ) . Hypotheticals as heuristic device . In Proceedings AAAZ - 86 , pp . 289 - 297 . Philadelphia : American Association for Artificial Intelligence . RISSLAND , E . L . & SKALAK , D . B . ( 1989 ) . Combining case - based and rule - based reasoning : A heuristic approach . In Proceedings IJCAI - 89 , pp . 524 - 530 . Detroit : International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence . RISSLAND , E . L . & SKALAK , D . B . ( 1991 ) . CABARET : statutory interpretation in a hybrid architecture . International Journal of Man - Machine Studies , 34 , 839 - 887 . STANFILL , C . & WALTZ , D . ( 1986 ) . Toward memory - based reasoning . Communications of the ACM , 29 , 1213 - 1228 . STANFILL , C . W . ( 1987 ) . Memory - based reasoning applied to English pronunciation . In Proceedings AAAI - 87 , pp . 577 - 581 . Seattle : American Association for Artificial Intelligence . Appendix : Case Analysis Record for Amexxco CASE : Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz INTERP - FRAME : 1nterpFrame : Amexxco Production Co . v . Gwhiz APPLICABLE - DIMENSIONS : ( Consiakration Security - Measures Nondisclose - Agreement - Specific Employee - Sole - Developer Agreed - Not - To - D & lose NEAR - MIBDIMENSIONS : ( Brought - Took Bribe - Employee Secreti - Dkclosed - Outsiders Competitive - Advantage Vertical - Knowledge Disclosure - In - Negotiations ) CLAIM - LANCES : ( ( Trade - Secrets - Misappropriation Graph - Node - 14 ) ( Breach - Nondisclose - Noncompete - Agreement Graph - Node - 7 ) ( Breach - Of - Contract Graph - Node - O ) ) EXTENDED - CWM - LANCES : ( ( Trade - Secrets - Misappropriation Graph - Node - 47 ) ( Breach - Nondisclose - Noncompete - Agreement Graph - Node - 39 ) ( Breach - Of - Contract Graph - Node - 32 ) ) 796 K . D . ASHLEY MOST - ON - POINT - CASES - BY - CLAIM : ( ( Breach - Of - Contract ( Plaintiff Laff v . John 0 . Butler Co . ) ( Defendant Dougherty v . Salt Hancock Bank & Trust Co . v . Shell Oil Co . Akirksey v . Kirksey ) ) ( Breach - Nondisclose - Noncompete - Agreement ( Plaintiff Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . ) ( Defendant Motorola , Inc . v . Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corp . ) ) ( Trade - Secrets - Misappropriation ( Plaintiff Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . ) ( Defendant Amoco Production Co . v . Lindley ) ) ) MOST - ON - POINT - NEAR - MISS - CASES - BY - CLAIM : ( ( Breach - Of - Contract ( Plantiff ) ( Defendant ) ) ( Breach - Nondisclose - Noncompete - Agreement ( Plaintiff ) ( Defendant ) ) ( Trade - Secrets - Misappropriation ( Plaintiff Analogic Corp . v . Data Translation , Inc . Space Aero Products Co . v . R . E . Darling Co . Telex Corp . v . IBM Corp . ( 1 ) Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . ) ( Defendant Crown Industries Inc . v . Kawneer Co . Midland - Ross Corp . v . Yokana Automated - Systems v . Service - Bureau Midland - Ross Corp . v . Sunbeam Equipment Corp . ) ) ) BEST - CASES - BY - CLAIM : ( ( Breach - Of - Contract ( Plaintiff Laff v . John 0 . Butler Co . ) ( Defendant ) ) ( Breach - Nondisclose - Noncompete - Agreement ( Plaintiff Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . ) ( Defendant Motorola , Inc . v . Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corp . ) ) ( Trade - Secrets - Misappropriation ( Plaintiff Structural Dynamics Research Corp . v . Engineering Mechanics Research Corp . ) ( Defendant Amoco Production Co . v . Lindley ) ) ) POINTS : ( Arg - Ret4 Arg - Ret - 3 Arg - Ret - 2 Arg - Ret - 1 Arg - Ret - 0 )