436 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 48 , NO . 4 , DECEMBER 2005 John McCarthy and Peter Wright Technology as Experience Book Review —Reviewed by R ENEE I . A . M ERCURI Index Terms —Aesthetic experience , experience - based design , technology as experience , user experience . T echnology permeates all aspects of our lives : the Apple Powerbook I happily use to compose this review , the automated voice on the subway that soothingly announces “next stop Belmont” on my commute , and the climate control system in my office that always leaves me with cold fingers as I type . As John McCarthy and Peter Wright , the authors of Technology as Experience , explain , “much more deeply than ever before , we are aware that interacting with technology involves us emotionally , intellectually and sensually . . . We don’t just use technology ; we live with it” [ p . ix ] . McCarthy is a Senior Lecturer in the Department of Applied Psychology at University College , Cork , Ireland , and Wright is a Reader in the Department of Computer Science , University of York , UK . They contend that while there is a great deal of concern with user experience in human – computer interaction ( HCI ) and related fields , both in practice and commentary , it is often unclear what is meant by “experience . ” In this work , the authors strive to give the reader a foundation to better analyze user experience by enabling people who the authors believe to be their primary audience—those who design , use , and evaluate interactive systems—to understand and examine people’s “felt” experience with technology . It is uncertain whether the authors’ “new way of seeing technology” [ p . ix ] will “make lived experience with technology the primary reality in practice and comment in relations between people and technology” [ p . 183 ] . Within the demanding academic language of their book , McCarthy and Wright challenge the design establishment to think dialogically—to engage in a dynamic and continuous dialogue ( with technology ) , whereby “we have a hand in giving shape to a world that is always open and unfinished” [ p . ix ] . Manuscript received May 5 , 2005 ; revised August 16 , 2005 . The reviewer is with the Technical Communication Program and the Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering , Illinois Institute of Technology , Chicago , IL 60616 USA ( email : mercuri @ iit . edu ) . IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / TPC . 2005 . 859719 Book Publisher : Cambridge , MA , and London , UK : MIT Press , 2004 211 pp . , including references and index . Technology as Experience , although containing nine chapters , can essentially be divided into four sections : ( 1 ) An introduction that positions the authors’ view of technology as experience within other views on HCI and sketches the propositions the authors intend to develop in the book , including some preliminary ideas from the pragmatist philosophers of experience ( Chapter 1 , “Living with Technology” ) . ( 2 ) A detailed explanation of the authors’ conceptualization of technology as experience , including a review of previous “turns to practice” and an in - depth look at the contributions of John Dewey and Mikhail Bakhtin , the writers on experience who have most influenced the authors’ work ( Chapters 2 – 5 ) . ( 3 ) Three short case studies , intended not to prove or explain the authors’ ideas , but to give concrete illustrations of technology as lived , felt experience , included to “give readers a feel for what people’s experience with technology looks like when we try to get at the emotional , valuational and dialogical character of it” [ p . 186 ] . Chapter 6 presents a personal experience of internet shopping . Chapter 7 is based on a pilot’s reflections about his experiences and frustrations with a procedure manual and his modification of the procedures based on his flight simulator experience . Chapter 8 attempts to characterize the experience of ambulance control in two different settings , one of which uses a high - tech system to receive emergency calls and dispatch ambulances . ( 4 ) And finally , a conclusion that ties together loose threads and challenges designers to ( i ) design for potential and ( ii ) give the user a surplus of experiences through design , thereby allowing users to tap into their potential for creativity and productivity . The authors explain that “this book will not be the final word on technology as experience ; ” instead , “it is an utterance in a dialogical space that is emerging around HCI . . . We hope that the texture and register of our 0361 - 1434 / $ 20 . 00 © 2005 IEEE IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 48 , NO . 4 , DECEMBER 2005 437 voice in this dialogue is edgy and open , like a provocative comment or question” [ p . 196 ] . Chapter 2 , “Going on from Practice , ” reviews relevant developments in HCI and computer - supported cooperative work since the 1980s . In so doing , the authors review the turn to practice ( i . e . , from theory to practical applications and results of user experience and design ) and argue that “feltness of experience has been underplayed in practice theories” [ p . 21 ] . Chapter 3 , “A Pragmatist Approach to Technology as Experience , ” focuses on the aesthetic contributions of Dewey ( 1859 – 1952 ) , an American considered one of the first and most influential advocates of pragmatism , and the aesthetic and dialogic contributions of Bakhtin ( 1895 – 1975 ) , a Russian philosopher with a “pragmatically oriented theory of knowledge” [ p . 55 ] . By setting out this pragmatist approach to experience , the authors work to connect Dewey’s and Bakhtin’s key aesthetic concepts . Through “The Threads of Experience” in Chapter 4 , the authors ask what a pragmatist account of people’s experience with technology might look like . They also outline ideas ( threads ) to help the reader think more clearly about technology as experience : the sensual , the emotional , the compositional , and the spatio - temporal . These are used to analyze examples of people’s experience with technologies , starting with the movies and moving on to more interactive technologies such as POGO World , an information - technology environment designed to empower children in the creative process of storytelling . The authors explain , “whether we are watching a film , playing a computer game or using a spreadsheet , pragmatism tells us that our experiences do not come to us ready made . ” Rather , as meaning - making creatures , we bring as much to the experience as the filmmaker or designer puts into it” [ p . 21 ] . For example , several movie critics and audience members who have viewed the movie Star Wars : Revenge of the Sith have commented that certain lines spoken by characters in the movie are reminiscent of lines spoken by President George W . Bush , in particular , “If you aren’t with us , you’re against us . ” Although the film is about a fictional galaxy and events “far , far away , ” many viewers have seen their experience with present - world events reflected in the film , whether this was intentional or unintentional on the part of the movie creator . Chapter 5 , “Making Sense of Experience , ” discusses the variety of ways in which people make sense of their experience , in particular by exploring the emergence of self and self - other ( community ) relations . For example , as stated by the authors , as we sit in a movie theater , we may find ourselves thinking about what we are watching in terms of other films , a book we have read , or something happening in our lives at the moment or in the past . If we find the film is not engaging us sufficiently , we may try to work out why by talking to friends about their opinion of the film or reading film reviews . As the authors explain , this amounts to users making sense of experience [ p . 124 ] , an important analytical resource in exploring relationships between people and technology . The content plan of Technology as Experience is comprehensive and consistently followed , beginning with the subsection entitled “plan of the book” in Chapter 1 . McCarthy and Wright reflect on how each chapter builds on and connects to ideas discussed in previous chapters . In the conclusion of each chapter , the authors review the information covered so far and also prepare the reader for the content of the upcoming chapter , introducing concepts and examples to come . Perhaps unintentionally , the book’s presentational plan , which adds ideas like building blocks while reiterating the overall goal of understanding technology as experience , is similar to how mathematics is taught . In mathematics education , operations and concepts are introduced and reiterated as new mathematical functions are introduced . As an educational tool , this building block method is sound and should help the intended audience ( those who design , use , and evaluate interactive systems ) develop a clear understanding and interest in technology as experience . For those who evaluate interactive systems ( and who may also be academic researchers and are a secondary audience of the book ) , the authors’ ideas about felt experience will have some use , either as concepts to rebut or to bring into the evaluator’s research . At the same time , despite the authors’ careful planning and execution , some features of Technology as Experience limit its usefulness as a practical resource in the workplace or in most design and usability courses . The language has a theoretical , academic quality ( e . g . , “Winograd and Flores facilitated the turn to practice in understanding the design and use of technology by unconcealing the pervasiveness of rationalist assumptions [ p . 31 ] ” ) , and the ordering of ideas requires persistence and patience . In areas such as philosophy of design or usability , where coursework may be more esoteric and contemplative in nature , this book would be an excellent resource . This is a shame , as the information in Technology as Experience is valuable and would be useful if it were more easily accessible to everyday practitioners and budding designers . The authors may be correct in their assessment that those who design , use , and evaluate interactive systems need to understand and analyze people’s felt experience with technology . However , if these ideas are to infiltrate beyond academics and theoreticians , the ideas need to be presented in a book whose ideas are more easily accessible . Still , more practically 438 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 48 , NO . 4 , DECEMBER 2005 inclined readers could avoid much of the academic language and slow building of ideas in Technology as Experience by simply reading the conclusions of the first five chapters , the three case studies in Chapters 6 through 8 , and the last few pages of the concluding chapter . It would be nice to see a more accessible guide constructed from these summaries and examples . One way to deliver this information more widely would be through an article in a mainstream publication such as Wired . Technology as Experience is a solid foundation for a feature article discussing trends in user experience and technology design , moving beyond technology as a tool or gadget by emphasizing the research being done in the realm of technology as felt and aesthetic experience . Overall , credit is due to McCarthy and Wright for creating discourse about technology as experience . This discourse is valuable and worthwhile ; otherwise , accessibility would not matter . Credit is also due for the final chapter of the book , where the authors point to potential shortcomings of their approach , which creates a dialogue between two writers—Dewey and Bakhtin—“who are not even mentioned in the same philosophical or social - theoretical conversations” [ p . 184 ] . The authors also admit that another criticism could be that they “have been selective in [ their ] readings of Dewey and Bakhtin , to which [ they ] plead guilty” [ p . 185 ] . However , the authors contend they have done this to advance their understanding of lived , felt experience , without dealing with every one of the influential philosophers’ extensive writings . Within this framework , McCarthy and Wright have put forward valuable ideas on design for technology , despite the previously mentioned shortcomings . The authors demonstrate the power of what could be seen with an aesthetic - experiential lens on technology . If designers , users , and evaluators would take a moment to look through this lens , they will see that it is indeed a powerful one .