Association for Information Systems AIS Electronic Library ( AISeL ) ECIS 2008 Proceedings European Conference on Information Systems ( ECIS ) 2008 An Extended Framework to Investigate ICT Impact on Development at the Micro ( Community ) Level Md . Mahfuz Asraf University of South Australia , ashmy007 @ students . unisa . edu . au Paul Swatman University of South Australia , paul @ swatman . net . au Jo Hanisch University of South Australia , jo . hanisch @ unisa . edu . au Follow this and additional works at : http : / / aisel . aisnet . org / ecis2008 This material is brought to you by the European Conference on Information Systems ( ECIS ) at AIS Electronic Library ( AISeL ) . It has been accepted for inclusion in ECIS 2008 Proceedings by an authorized administrator of AIS Electronic Library ( AISeL ) . For more information , please contact elibrary @ aisnet . org . Recommended Citation Asraf , Md . Mahfuz ; Swatman , Paul ; and Hanisch , Jo , " An Extended Framework to Investigate ICT Impact on Development at the Micro ( Community ) Level " ( 2008 ) . ECIS 2008 Proceedings . 233 . http : / / aisel . aisnet . org / ecis2008 / 233 AN EXTENDED FRAMEWORK TO INVESTIGATE ICT IMPACT ON DEVELOPMENT AT THE MICRO ( COMMUNITY ) LEVEL Md . Mahfuz Ashraf , University of South Australia , ashmy007 @ students . unisa . edu . au Paul Swatman , University of South Australia , paul . swatman @ unisa . edu . au Jo Hanisch , University of South Australia , jo . hanisch @ unisa . edu . au Abstract It has been argued that Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ) can lead to development in developing countries . With this in mind , developing countries have been rushing to implement ambitious ICT projects in rural areas through the direct - indirect supervision of institutions such as , the World Bank , United Nations ( UN ) and other donor / local agencies . The main focus of the interventions has been the implementation the ICT project , rather than understanding their impacts at the recipient level . This lack of understanding has led to many failures of ICT projects reported in the literature . We argue there is a need to understand impacts of ICT projects in their local context considering the participants’ perspectives at the micro ( community ) level . Hence , this paper reports on the development and refinement of an extended framework to investigate ICT impact on development in three village areas in the developing country , Bangladesh . Through an interpretive study we argue that previous studies fail to encapsulate many socio - economic aspects of ICT impact , such as mobility restrictions , attitudes towards women and religious influences , especially at the community level . Our extended framework demonstrates that ICT projects can lead to development , but only when such social constraints are addressed . Keywords : Information and Communication Technologies for Development ( ICT4D ) , Developing countries , Digital - divide , Social constraints . 1 INTRODUCTION The World Bank , the United Nations ( UN ) and other donor agencies are directly - indirectly implementing ambitious multi - million dollar Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ) - supported initiatives or projects in developing countries . These projects aim to unlock the potential of ICT to improve the quality of life for poor , often rural , people . Previously , the initiatives have included a range of pilot projects , such as telecentres , multipurpose community access centres and information kiosks ( Harris 2005 ) . There is much hope for sustainable impact arising from development - oriented ICT interventions , especially in rural areas of developing countries . However , there remains a clear need to demonstrate that such an impact on economic and social development can be expected to arise ( pre - hoc planning ) , or has arisen ( post - hoc evaluation ) , in the regions ( Mbarika , Okoli , Byrd & Datta 2005 ; Meso , Datta & Mbarika 2006 ) . In the past , emphasis has been placed on the supply side ( for example , infrastructure building ) rather than the demand side ( for example , users’ willingness and capacity to acquire / use services ) ( Ashraf , Hanisch & Swatman 2007 ; Heeks 2002 ) . Hence , the main focus of the interventions has been the implementation the ICT for development ( ICT4D ) project , rather than understanding the impact at the micro ( community ) level . This lack of understanding has led to many failures of ICT4D projects reported in the literature ( Heeks 2002 ) . Rather than a top - down imposition of infrastructure approach , with little understanding for their ultimate consequences , we consider there is need to understand impact of ICT4D projects at the local context , which can then inform the policy and strategic levels . The research question framed is : ‘How does an ICT4D project impact participants’ quality of life at the micro ( community ) level ? ’ To address the research question , this paper provides a review and analysis of the ICT impact research , demonstrating there is a broader consideration of what constitutes impact and its assessment , especially for the local context . From this analysis , we develop an extended framework for understanding impact . To support this framework , we provide a summary of field work undertaken in Bangladesh . The findings indicate the utility of the framework , focusing on the impact of an intervention from an extended perspective centred on the community . 2 ICT4D – AN OVERVIEW In general , ICT4D projects are funded by international organizations ( for example , UN , World Bank or AusAid ) or by National organizations ( for example , ICT strategy ) . This usually occurs on the basis of proposals for an ICT - mediated intervention to be developed by another organization , with subsequent implementation within at least one group , community or organization . The ICT4D ' system ' can be evaluated from various perspectives , but especially from three inter - connected levels , which we designate as Macro , Meso and Micro levels . Table 1 explains the layers and some inter - connections . Table 1 : Adoption and Implementation of ICT4D projects . Macro Funding Programmes – provide ( normally on a competitive basis ) financial and other support for ICT4D projects which meet Programme - specific guidelines . Domain interest groups ( DIG ) define the intervention projects and seek funding for them . DIGs may , for example , be national strategically focused bodies or multi - national groups . There is a potential for tension – to be seen within the project proposal ; between the aims of the DIG and the guidelines of the various potential Funding Programmes through which the project may be funded . Meso Projects may be implemented by teams drawn from a range of organization types ( sometimes project teams / leadership and management may be drawn from by the DIG , more often from specialist international consultancies ) . In addition to normal commercial pressure , a tension is potentially observable between the specifications of the project ( the contract to be fulfilled ) and the needs of the end - users . Micro Community or group which is impacted directly by the project – the “participants” and their socio - organizational context . 3 NEED FOR ICT4D IMPACT RESEARCH AT MICRO LEVEL While there is much promise that ICT4D projects will actually lead to development , without rigorous research concerning ICT impact , it is difficult to postulate the extent to which there are influences / changes , and whether these influences are positive for the community or recipients of the intervention . ICT impact research towards development can be undertaken in many ways ; namely evaluating a programme ; tracking change ; monitoring progress ; assessing impact ; and comparing project objectives with outcomes ( IDRC 1993 ) . Generally , the aims of any of these impact evaluations are to see how far the intervention has reached its desired audience , and to identify effects or changes . As such ‘…impact evaluation of ICT - led development projects will enable researchers to understand the extent to which activities reach the people and the magnitude of their effects on people’s welfare’ ( infoDev 2006 , p . 7 ) . In the literature , the ICT4D impact research is predominately at the macro and meso levels rather than the micro level ( Adam & Wood 1999 ) . Though there exists some literature at micro level ( Adam & Wood 1999 ) , little attention has been paid to the participant or recipient perspective ( Huerta & Sandoval - Almazan 2007 ) , which Keniston ( 2002 ) considers an ‘empirical vacuum’ of ICT4D impact research . As we suggested earlier , the conventional practices of ICT4D impact follow a top - down approach where the assessment framework or indicators are generated from the top level . Several authors challenge this approach considering that a bottom - up approach is necessary ( Heeks 1998 ; Mansell & Wehn 1998 ; Huerta & Sandoval - Almazan 2007 ) . These researchers argue that participants within a particular community can themselves describe or decide what constitutes development , as they are conscious of their own well - being . Hence , they suggest that the impact of changes resulting from the ICT4D intervention can easily be understood from the participants’ viewpoints ( Menou & Potvin 2007 ) . Heeks ( 1998 ) supports this notion through identifying users’ actual demands of what they are capable of , and willing to pay for , the services associated with ICT4D initiatives from their points of view . According to Mansell and When ( 1998 , p . 95 ) ‘…ICTs have many revolutionary implications , but in order to achieve their full potential benefits it is necessary to focus on user - oriented and cost effective applications rather than of technology - driven application . ’ Therefore , we contend that ICT enabled development needs to be better understood from the participants’ perspectives , providing another dimension and more rigour to the ICT impact research . 4 EXISTING CHALLENGES OF ICT IMPACT RESEARCH Accepting that ICT impact research towards development may be undertaken in many ways , there are also several conceptual frameworks found in both the academic and practitioner literature . After investigating many of the relevant frameworks , this paper identifies several challenges of ICT impact research . Table 2 presents a summary of the key challenges we have identified and some conceptual frameworks indicating their respective authors . While there are a variety of frameworks for assessing ICT4D interventions , all of those reviewed ( Table 2 ) rely heavily on short - term measures of success , including for example , questionnaires set by donor agencies . None of the frameworks assessed the actual demand of the recipients at micro level . Further , while many of the recent studies concerning consumer adoption and usage of broadband ( Dwivedi , Khan & Papazafeirpopulou 2007 ; Choudrie & Dwivedi 2007 ) appear attractive , these are focused on acceptance and usage of technology which fail to go beyond and understand the socio - economic influences , including the benefits of usage at the community level . This research addresses the need to examine in - depth the impact of ICT on the participants’ quality of life . In addition , many previous frameworks consider indicators for measuring ICT impact towards development which are designed in one context and then applied in another . While it appears attractive to derive indicators from one context and apply them to another , there remains the problem of drawing theories or frameworks from other disciplines without taking into full account the local contexts and issues ( Sahay & Avgerou 2002 ; Mbarika et al . 2005 ) . Heeks ( 2005 ) argues that improved ICT4D interventions need to be associated with local data content and local ICT skills . Table 2 : Current challenges of ICT4D impact ( monitoring & evaluation ) research . Therefore , indicators for measuring ICT impact towards development should either be generated or adapted within their own surrounding local contexts . Hence , further theoretical analysis of the difficulties of ICT4D impact research cannot be ignored . Addressing the challenges in Table 2 , this paper now suggests a conceptual framework for investigating ICT impact towards development at local community or micro level . 5 TOWARDS AN EXTENDED FRAMEWORK Traditionally , ICT impact research towards development has been carried out in order to 1 ) understand the economic / social developmental impact ( Adam & Wood 1999 ) , or 2 ) assess or measure the impact ( impact assessment ) considering different quantifiable indicators ( ITU 2006 ) . This research takes the former perspective of ICT impact research towards development . Having established the need for micro level research and the challenges surrounding existing frameworks , the literature provides a starting point to address the research question from the economic / social developmental perspective . Key Challenges Concept / framework Author ( s ) of ICT impact research Techno - centric approach : little focus on societal perspective . ICT diffusion index at the national level . Indicators are connectivity , access and policy . UN ( 2005 ) Unfocused local agenda : addressing Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) set by UN . ‘Inputs - Outputs - Outcomes’ model . ICT impact assessment ITU ( 2006 ) infoDev ( 2006 ) Difficulty on operationalizing theory : capability approach by Sen ( 2000 ) Assessing impact of e - governance projects in rural India . Assessing ICT impacts on indigenous peoples’ empowerment in Peru . Processes and appropriation of ICT in human development in rural India . Madon ( 2003 ) Gigler ( 2004 ) Garai & Sahadrach ( 2006 ) This top - down prescribed understanding of development : does not reflect users’ actual demands . Evaluating Telecentre in rural areas of developing countries using five indicators ; structural conditions , community characteristics , Telecentre characteristics and information characteristics . An assessment guideline for ICT and gender initiatives in 25 UNDP country offices . Harris ( 2005 ) UNDP cited in Initiative ( 2006 ) Inadequate field testing : heavily depends on local agencies reports based on secondary data and short term success stories only . ICT impact assessment research in evaluating community multimedia centres . Assessment framework for measuring the impact of information on development . Framework for ICT projects evaluation . Guidelines for monitoring and evaluating ICT programmes UNESCO cited in Orbicom ( 2005 ) IRRC cited in Gigler ( 2004 ) CIDA cited in UNESCO ( 2005 ) ; UK Department for International Development’s ( DFID ) cited in IDRC ( 1993 ) Literature on ‘ICT and development’ in developing countries emphasizes that local context and content are important while studying the impact of ICT towards development ( Conradie & Jacobs 2003 ; Krishna & Madon 2003 ; Roman & Colle 2003 ; Avgerou 2006 ) . Once the local context is identified , the next step is to identify the broad areas of development . Previous studies have demonstrated that ICT impacts can be applied in many ways , with various perspectives such as economic , education , health , and so on . Our initial framework focuses on the economic and social areas of development at micro level in rural areas of developing countries , based on the scholarly literature and reports from development agencies . As we focus on the economical and social impact within a specific context , Heeks’ ( 2005 ) information chain model is a useful technique to understand ICT led developmental impact . Figure 1 demonstrates how an individual processes data into information and as such acts upon it to achieve desired outcomes . In this model , data are used as the input which is then processed through assessment ( assessing its relevance ) and applying ( applying assessed data to a specific decision ) ; with information as the output . According to Heeks ( 2005 ) , the information chain model must be understood in its surrounding context of economic , social , data and action resources which assists human beings to transfer data to information . Figure 1 : Heeks’ ( 2005 ) information chain model Supporting Heeks ( 2005 ) , Avergou ( 1998 ) and Gigler ( 2004 ) argue that focusing on technological factors such as rate of technology adoption , Internet hosting and computer ownership volume , should not be the only solution towards ICT led development in developing countries . Access to information via the Internet or telecommunication is not a very difficult task . A greater challenge is the assessment and transformation of that data to meaningful knowledge , as well as the availability of the social resources . Hence , peoples’ capabilities to access and assess data ; and acquire and share knowledge need to be considered in ICT impact research in developing countries . This research views the issues through the lens of Heeks’ ( 2005 ) information chain model as a foundation to improve understanding of the process of outcome / impact of ICT led development from the participants’ perspectives . Figure 2 : An extended framework for investigating ICT impact towards development Input Output Figure 2 summarises this by placing Heeks’ ( 2005 ) model within a contextual framework , taking into account the understanding of ICT - led economic and social development at micro level from the participants’ points of view . Figure 2 is divided into two segments ; 1 ) ICT , act as input , where the aim is to provide technology and support in rural / village areas conducive to an improved standard of living , and 2 ) Development , as the output , which is perceived and experienced by the participants due to the presence of ICT in their localities ( rural / village areas ) . Hence , input is the term used for the programme itself ( ICT intervention’s goal ) and output impact is considered to be the results ( actual impact ) of that input . The two broad developmental facets provide us some areas of development to view in general , and then , Heeks’ ( 2005 ) model enables us to understand the process of ICT led development from the participants’ viewpoints . We propose that our extended framework may be used for deductive study purposes . The following sections describe the context of this research , and the collection and analysis of field data , which are then used to further refine the framework . 6 SETTING THE SCENE Bangladesh , one of the most densely populated countries , has a population of approximately 138 million and an economy primarily based on agriculture . It is considered that ICT has the potential to provide practical and effective enhancement of the economic and social well - being of villagers in Bangladesh . ICT - mediated interventions may deliver information on , for example , farming methods or practices , basic health practices , environmental awareness , access to market pricing , education or training ( Anwer 2007 ) . In this paper , we focus on one particular ICT intervention , the Gonokendra programme , established in 1995 , as a collaborative effort between local communities and the Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee ( BRAC ) , an NGO . A ‘Gonokendra’ is a multi - purpose community access centre which provides computer training and multi - media based information dissemination for villagers . The rural community provides a room ( 400 - 500 square feet ) for the library premises free of cost , and must sign up a body of local members contributing a minimum of Taka 50 , 000 ( US $ 1 = 68 taka ) . BRAC provides an equal matching grant to create a reserve fund for the Gonokendra ( BRAC 2003 ) . The total amount ( at least Taka 100 , 000 ) is then deposited on a fixed term basis in the name of a Trustee Board in a recognized financial institution ( BRAC 2003 ) . The Gonokendra’s recurring expenses , such as the librarian’s salary , electricity and stationery are paid from the monthly interest on this investment . In this way , Gonokendra become financially or operationally self - sustainable within two to three years . 7 RESEARCH METHOD The study is interpretive in nature . An interpretive study ( Walsham 1993 ) is appropriate when the research is about understanding human behaviour within the surrounding context , and where phenomena and contexts are difficult to isolate . To best address the research question , an interpretive study allows the researchers to immerse themselves in the community and gain a rich understanding of the influences of the ICT intervention . This research addresses the need to explore how ICT influences the community in a broader context rather than merely determining levels of adoption and usage . The field study was undertaken from September - December 2006 of three Gonokendras located in different villages in rural Bangladesh . Researchers collected primary and secondary data from each Gonokendra and their surrounding local offices . Gonokendra were selected for this study on the basis of their type , ICT programme availability , the length of time in operation ( minimum 5 years ) and infrastructure facilities , including accommodation for the researchers and transportation . While some of the selection criteria were designed for convenience , the ‘length of time in operation’ criterion was intended to ensure that the intervention was self - sustaining and the impact of the intervention was mature . This was deemed necessary because many externally - funded interventions discontinue soon after the withdrawal of external impetus and funding . A team , comprising both male and female researchers , resided for one month in each village . Primary data were collected through personal taped - interviews , focus group discussions and observations of Gonokendra’s activities . Secondary research included analysis of Gonokendra’s official records , reports and statistics from local public offices . In each village , the Gonokendra’s librarian was the key informant who assisted the researchers to identify potential interviewees , who were then invited to participate in the research . As most of the interviews took place at the Gonokendra premise , the librarian selected potential interviewees who were present during data collection period . With the librarian’s assistance , we sometimes relocated to the guardian’s and local peoples’ residences or workplaces to conduct the interviews . The participants included a minimum of : two officials , one librarian / trainer , eight trainees , six trainees’ guardians and six local people for each village . In addition , on - site observations and five focus group discussions were conducted in each village . During the course of , and following the field trip , an iterative thematic analysis of field notes and interview transcripts ( Miles & Huberman 1994 ) was undertaken under the two broad categories of economic and social development . Within - trip analysis was allowed to influence the evolution of the data collection strategy adopted both in semi - structured interviews and focus groups and in opportunistic observation . In undertaking this research into the impact of the Gonokendra , we consciously aimed not to focus simply on the direct impact of the intervention ( for example , the numbers of villagers trained ) but rather sought to expand the context in which we might identify impact . In particular , we sought to identify the secondary and tertiary impacts of the programme . 8 FINDINGS FROM THE FIELD STUDY In this section , the field results are presented from the participants’ perspectives towards ICT led development . The discussion centres on the economic and social development perspectives as displayed in the extended framework in Figure 2 . 8 . 1 Access to information via technology Our field data revealed almost non - existent ‘computer’ facilities in three villages ( that is , only 8 PCs were available in the entire Gonokendra Chandabari village ) . As the Gonokendra programme is an attempt to include previously excluded villagers into technology and information , one BRAC Regional Manager recalled , Not everyone in Gonokendra villages has the financial capability to buy computers . BRAC Gonokendra has provided computers in this village as a way of introducing computers at a grass roots level ( BRAC Regional Manager ) . Villagers using the Gonokendra also pointed out their financial inability to purchase computers for their own use and welcomed the Gonokendra’s initiatives in providing access to this technology . There was general consensus that access to technology enabled villagers to gain access to information relating to socio - economic development . 8 . 2 Employment opportunity and migration The Gonokendra created employment opportunities in all three villages through the recruitment of official staff , the librarian and assistant trainer from the host village . When respondents were asked to identify what impact in respect of employment opportunities , one of the official staff responded ; Look at me ; I am not sitting idle like other villagers . . . I am earning a reasonable amount of money… . Prosperity has increased in my family . Earlier , I was not financially able to send my daughter in school but now I am sending her… We now have tin house in place of house built in leaves ( BRAC Regional Manager ) . The ICT programme also provided some opportunity for participants to migrate from rural to urban areas . According to another BRAC official , After getting the further training the employee becomes a man with potential … city based companies or NGO’s provide more salaries with those skills so these men switch their jobs and migrant to urban areas ( Focus group ) . The quest for higher income and employment opportunities formed the clear motivation for the participants to migrate to urban areas with a hope of improved standard of living , or to further support their dependents . 8 . 3 Social status : Social status emerged as a sub - theme of economic development with some importance to participants directly or indirectly related with the Gonokendra . Social status , reflected as self - respect and self - confidence both in the family and societal context , was reported on many occasions . Our field data shows a strong positive relationship between income ( employment opportunities ) and social status . We noticed that increases in rural women’s income and status have increased their role in family decision - making and significantly enhanced their status within the family . However , this is not a straightforward benefit when considered in the broader social context . While discussing the social status of librarian / trainer with villagers ( both with librarians / trainers and general rural people ) we found that the contemporary patriarchal and conservative social structures , norms and beliefs still offer less respect even to the working female group . 8 . 4 Education There is no substitute for education and illiteracy is nothing but a curse ( Focus group male ) recalled a carpenter from one Gonokendra village . Parents consider education in general , and Gonokendra computer training in particular , increases knowledge and makes good citizens . Further , eagerness to learn computers overcame some language barriers of trainees . Though the computers used an English interface , which is not the trainee’s local language , their eagerness to learn the computer enabled them to find a way of learning . For example , they memorize MS Window ™ icons in order to run multi - media CDs . One general rural person suggests , It is true that learning computer requires some education but an illiterate or a semi - literate person also can learn computer . People learn to use their tool by using them ( General rural person ) . 8 . 5 Social ( health and legal issue ) awareness Apart from the computer training programme , Gonokendra’s multi - media based information dissemination programme serves the villagers by creating awareness of various social , health and legal issues . In Gonokendra’s multi - media sessions , villagers have the opportunity to access information related to cleanliness ( for example , personal hygiene , household cleanliness ) , knowledge of disinfection , immunization systems , nutrition , family planning , scientific sanitation systems , diarrhoea and institutional health care systems . Access to multi - media sessions gave villagers both awareness , and the ability to act on that awareness . For example , villagers gained knowledge about basic cleanliness which was evident in practice . …my child is now used to washing his hands before taking a meal and after using the toilet ( Guardian ) . However , not all information disseminated by the Gonokendra is uniformly welcome . The Gonokendra’s multi - media sessions disseminate legal information which differs from local customs . For example , the prohibition of child marriage , of dowry in marriage , and of general or poor people participation in salish ( informal village arbitration ) to the participants so that they can practice or act upon it . Dowry ( where bride’s family gives valuable gifts : cash or assets to the groom’s family during marriage ) is considered by the government to be a social curse within rural Bangladesh . While the increase in dowry transactions were generally viewed as a negative social change , several other participants held the view that dowry was helpful in that it ensured that the bride would be well - installed and well - respected when joining the marital household . 8 . 6 Some issues of social constraints to development In this section , we discuss some social constraints on development mentioned by our participants . One of the major social constraints stems from localised religious interpretations . A mobility restriction on women and Purdha ( women’s gown for veiling ) goes against the aim of the Gonokendra development goals . One group of participants held the perception that the Gonokendra’s activities were linked with Christianity , while another group protested that such a viewpoint was simply an absurd rumour . Though it is difficult to extract the ‘truth’ from these two sharply divided views , our field data has at least identified the importance of religious sensitivity and the potentially dire consequences of any strike against the religious sentiment of villagers . We identified instances where women were not allowed by their husbands to attend multi - media sessions . According to our participants , it has been considered a sin if a woman was seen or spoken to by a man unless she was dressed in the Burkha ( women’s gown covering body from head to ankle ) . However , many of our respondents believed that such a viewpoint represented an erroneous interpretation by some religious leaders . It has been the norm ( somewhat weakening over time ) for villagers to seek health related treatments from Kabiraj ( traditional healer ) or Pir - Fakir ( Religious leader ) . Kabiraj and Pir - Fakir , who are mostly illiterate and not authorized by the government , dispense holy water to demonstrate witch - craft to heal patients . Some apparent miracles following such treatment and their consequent attitude and confidence have reinforced peoples’ beliefs in them . Generally , our respondents believed that , although villagers have become aware of scientific treatment , many still rely on traditional treatments . There is a pervasive belief amongst our respondents that it may take considerable time to change peoples’ attitudes to scientific treatments . 8 . 7 Addressing social constraints Our participants believed that tackling social constraints was problematic . We probed possible ways to address social barriers and respondents suggested two main ways : ( i ) continuing education and awareness generation among villagers ; and ( ii ) focusing attention on key decision makers such as influential persons like religious leaders , politicians , and teachers . We witnessed how a few participants addressed social constraints by motivating , inspiring and influencing key decision makers within their society towards a complementary structural change . For example , one female trainee convinced her family to participate at Gonokendra despite the external pressure against her education . People often ask us [ female group ] what would be benefited for you by moving at Gonokendra ? … . But I made my parents understand that from school and Gonokendra I learned so many things……I can also help my father in agriculture by suggesting him to use high breed seeds and organic fertilizer and in legal support by know - how to measure and register the land with proper legal authority ( Focus group ) . Further , we can see that rural people are aware of the national laws against early marriage or dowry payments , but these activities are still routinely practiced in the countryside . Some parents feel that if dowries are not given , their daughter will not be married or may be tortured by her in - laws . Resolving this kind of social constraint remains a fundamental challenge for our respondents . Within the particular social context of Bangladesh , the social , cultural and institutional barriers at the village or local level are poorly documented in the literature ( Obijiofor , Inayatullah & Stevenson 2007 ) . 9 DISCUSSION AND REFINED EXTENDED FRAMEWORK We now consider the interpretation of results through the lens of existing theoretical or conceptual understanding , refining our conceptual framework from Figure 2 . We adopt Heeks’ ( 2005 ) information chain model and Sen’s ( 2000 ) notion of ‘development as freedom’ to understand our field results . We therefore map the field results to the information chain model . Hence , participants gain access to Gonokendra ( access ) ; they participate in multi - media based information dissemination programme and become aware of different social issues . They apply their informed knowledge in their real world , such as family health seeking behaviour and ask others to follow accordingly . Heeks’ ( 2005 ) approach towards development can be very useful as a foundation of ICT related development activities , but questions may arise if the entire context is different ( Heeks 2005 ) . Our field results demonstrated some social constraints or barriers that prevent full development potential . Literature on ICT impact research mainly focuses on poor telecommunication infrastructure and insufficient power supply , illiteracy or language problems , lack of computing skill , motivation and awareness as major obstacles to development ( Dyson 2004 ; Husing 2004 ) . Our field data , however , found that the conventional barriers to development are important but neither insuperable nor , sadly , exhaustive . For example , people can easily access ICT at the Gonokendra located at convenient place in their village . Even language barriers , primarily lack of English proficiency , are not perceived by our participants as a major barrier to learning about computers . However , our research found that barriers resulting from other social situations , such as mobility restrictions of female participants by the local culture ( and so on ) are actually creating impediments to development and their quality of life . We now see , Heeks’s ( 2005 ) uni - directional information chain model as a useful starting point for analysing ICT - mediated intervention initiatives , but as not fully addressing the challenges of the ICT led development from the perspective of the target community . We borrow Sen’s ( 2000 ) notion of development as a process of enlargement of human freedom which ultimately shaped our participants’ perceptions of ICT - mediated intervention . The freedom - centred development concept considers the removal of this kind of socio - economic deprivation of the individual ( Sen 2000 ) . Our field data documents many participants’ attempts to influence their family members in order to gain permission to participate in economic activities ( and their success ) . Therefore , we argue , the ends and means of ICT for development can be achieved by expanding human freedom . Hence in Figure 3 we now present the refined framework , which includes consideration of social constraints that hindered the ultimate process of development . In Figure 3 , the broad right - left arrow represents this inter - connection . Addressing social barriers remains a challenge which , if successfully resolved , can then be linked with development . This interconnection is represented by the broad left - right arrow . Sen’s ( 2000 ) notion of ‘development as freedom’ connects these two parts of our refined framework . Finally , the two broad developmental impacts ( output ) might usefully be compared with the initial statement of desired impact , finally in order to evaluate the programme , and importantly if employed early , potentially to guide modifications to the intervention . . Figure 3 : Refined framework to investigate ICT led development at micro ( community ) level 10 CONCLUSION , LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH This research is an attempt to investigate the impact of ICT - mediated interventions at the micro level ( at the level of target community ) through constructing , and refining on the basis of a significant field study , an extended evaluation framework . The empirical work summarised here is qualitative / interpretive exploratory research . It both considers , and is guided by , the research context and the data from the context of three villages in Bangladesh . We have aimed to analyse our field data and make interpretations based on the participants’ points of view , allowing the aims of the programme being studied to have only a very limited impact . Our aim , then , has been to collect evidence of community perceptions of impact NOT to evaluate the programme within the framework of the expectations of those intervening or those funding the intervention . There is a relative dearth of serious research on ICT impact at the micro level – and specifically from the perspective of the target community . This research attempts to address this gap . As we might expect the donors’ and interveners’ goals for the intervention ( to improve the standard of living in rural areas by providing access to technologies , improving literacy and skills building , infrastructural development and creating awareness amongst uneducated , poor rural people ) are represented in our data and analysis . Also apparent and of significant importance , however , are social constraints that act as ultimate barriers to the development . The previous aspirations are necessary but not sufficient for the development of effective micro level impact . In this research , we collected primary data over specified period of time at three single points where participants were selected through general invitation and through the reference of the librarian . No particular questions were asked to investigate their existing socio - economic condition . Future research should include clustering of the participants on the basis of some common indicators so that they are representatives of each cluster . Another limitation is generalization of the field results . We have no reason to believe that the findings might be different from village to village . Though interpretive case studies do not suggest generalizing the results , future research using different methodologies may assist with generalizing results across the villages . We are concerned that the developmental impact of ICT in a context is not fully understood unless the social constraints are fully addressed . While this research makes a contribution to expanding the scope for impact assessment , and to identifying social constraints ( religious issues , perception of female community members and so on ) , addressing these constraints demands further investigation . One further insight arising from our analysis concerned us greatly . We heard repeatedly that those villagers trained at the Gonokendra were able to leave the village for better paid urban jobs , returning money to their families in the village . Superficially , this is a benefit of the programme . We asked ourselves however , what might be the long term impact of a drift of the young , educated and proactive from the village ? Do we see here the beginning of a slow decay of the village community ? We believe that further expansion of the context to be explored for impact is justified and that further research in this area is required . References Adam , L . & Wood , F . ( 1999 ) . An investigation of the impact of information and communication technologies in sub - Saharan Africa , Journal of Information Science , 25 ( 4 ) , 307 - 318 . Anwer , M . ( 2007 ) . ICT for Better Society , In Proceedings of 9th International Conference on Computer and Information Technology ( ICCIT ) , Bangladesh , 21 - 23 December . Ashraf , M . M . , Hanisch , J . & Swatman , P . ( 2007 ) . ICT intervention towards development in the third world countries : some perspectives of IS research , In Proceedings of 9th International Conference on Computer and Information Technology ( ICCIT ) , Bangladesh . Avgerou , C . ( 1998 ) . How can IT enable economic growth in developing countries ? Information Technology for Development , 8 ( 1 ) , 14 - 15 . Avgerou , C . ( 2006 ) . Taking into account Context in IS research and practice , London School of Economics and Political Science , UK , London . BRAC ( 2003 ) . Project proposal : 2004 - 2009 , Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee , Dhaka . Conradie , P . & Jacobs , S . ( 2003 ) . Bridging the digital divide , Engineering Management , 30 - 33 . Choudrie , J . & Dwivedi , Y . K . ( 2007 ) . Broadband impact on household consumers : Online habits and time allocation patterns on daily life activities , International Journal of Mobile Communications , 5 ( 2 ) , 225 - 241 . Dwivedi , Y . K . , Khan , N . & Papazafeirpopulou , A . ( 2007 ) . Consumer adoption and usage of broadband in Bangladesh , Electronic Government : An International Journal , 4 ( 3 ) , 299 - 313 . Dyson , L . E . ( 2004 ) . Cultural issues in the adoption of information and communication technologies by indigenous Australians , In Proceedings Cultural Attitudes Towards Communication and Technology , Sudweeks . F . & Ess , C . ( Eds ) Murdoch University , Australia , 58 - 71 . Garai , A . and Sahadrach , B . ( 2006 ) . Taking ICT to every Indian village : opportunities and challenges , One World South Asia , New Delhi . Gigler , B - S . ( 2004 ) . Including the excluded - Can ICTs empower poor communities ? In Proceedings of 4th International Conference on the Capability Approach , Italy , 5 - 7 September , 2004 . Harris , R . W . ( 2005 ) . Explaining the success of rural Asian telecentres , In Information systems in developing countries : theory and practice , City University of Hong Kong Press , 83 - 100 . Heeks , R . ( 1998 ) . Foundation of ICTs in Development : Pushing and Pulling , Information Technology in Developing Countries Newsletter , 4 ( 1 ) , 1 - 2 . Heeks , R . ( 2002 ) . Information Systems and Developing Countries : Failure , Success , and Local Improvisations . Information Society , 18 ( 2 ) , 101 - 112 . Heeks , R . ( 2005 ) . Foundation of ICTs in Development : The information chain , e Development Briefing , 3 ( 1 ) , 1 - 2 . Huerta , E . & Sandoval - Almazan , R . ( 2007 ) . Digital - Literacy : problems faced by telecentre users in Mexico , Information Technology for Development , 13 ( 3 ) , 217 - 232 . Husing , T . ( 2004 ) . The impact of ICT on social cohesion : beyond the digital divide , In Proceedings 14th Economic Forum , Krynica Zdrój , Poland , 9 - 11 September . IDRC ( 1993 ) . Measuring the impact of information on development , The International Development Research Centre , Ottawa , ON , Canada . infoDev ( 2006 ) . About us , InfoDev , Washington , retrieved 25 July 2006 , < http : / / www . infordev . org / section / aboutus > . Initiative , C . ( 2006 ) . Gender Indicators , The communication initiative , Canada , retrieved 12 July 2006 , < http : / / www . comminit . com / strategicthinking / steval / sld - 2157 . html > . ITU ( 2006 ) . World Telecommunication / ICT Development Report , International Telecommunication Union , Geneva , Switzerland . Keniston , K . ( 2002 ) . Grassroots ICT projects in India : Some preliminary hypothesis , ASCI Journal of Management , 31 ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) . Krishna , S . and Madon , S . ( Eds ) ( 2003 ) . Digital Challenge : Information Technology in the Development Context , ASHGATE , Aldershot . Madon , S . ( 2003 ) . Studying the developmental impact of e - governance initiatives , In Proceedings of IFIP Working Group 8 . 2 and 9 . 4 , Athens , Greece , 15 - 17 June . Mansell , R . and Wehn , U . ( 1998 ) . Knowledge societies : information technology for sustainable development , Published for and on behalf of the UN , Oxford University Press , NY . Mbarika , V . W . A . , Okoli , C . , Byrd , T . A . and Datta , P . ( 2005 ) . The neglected continent of IS research : A research agenda for sub - Saharan Africa . Journal of the AIS 6 ( 5 ) 130 - 170 . Menou , M . J . and Potvin , J . ( 2007 ) . Toward a conceptual framework for learning about ICT ' s and knowledge in the process of development , retrieved 2 January 2007 < http : / / www . cidcm . umd . edu / > Meso , P . , Datta , P . & Mbarika , V . ( 2006 ) . Moderating information and communication technologies ' influences on socioeconomic development with good governance : A study of the developing countries . Journal of the American Society for Information Science & Technology , 57 ( 2 ) , 186 - 197 . Miles , M . B . and Huberman , A . M . ( 1994 ) . Qualitative data analysis , ( 2 nd edition ) , Sage , CA . Obijiofor , L . , Inayatullah , S . and Stevenson , T . ( 2007 ) . Impact of new ICTs on socio - economic and educational development of Africa and the Asia - Pacific : private , Metafuture , retrieved 1 Nov 2007 , < http : / / www . metafuture . org / Articles / icts . htm > Orbicom ( 2005 ) . From the digital divide to digital opportunities : measuring infostates for development , NRC press , Montreal , Canada . Roman , R . & Colle , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Content creation for ICT development projects : Integrating normative approaches and community demand . Information Technology for Development , 10 ( 2 ) , 85 - 94 . Sahay , S . & Avgerou , C . ( 2002 ) . Introducing the special issue on Information and Communication Technologies in developing countries . ' Information Society , 18 ( 2 ) , 73 - 76 . Sen , A . ( 2000 ) . Development as freedom , ( 1st edition ) , Oxford University Press , New Delhi . UN ( 2005 ) . The digital divide : ICT development indices 2004 In Proceedings United Nations Conference On Trade And Development , New York and Geneva . UNESCO ( 2005 ) . Evaluation of UNESCO ' s multimedia centres , United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organizations . Walsham , G . ( 1993 ) . Interpreting information systems in organizations , Wiley , UK .