P a p e rs May 7 1 1 1995 - C HI ' 95 M O S A IC OF C R E A T I V I TY Multidisciplinary Modelling In HCI Design . . . In Theory and In Practice Victoria Bellotti * ^ Simon Buckingham Shum ^ Allan MacLean * Nick Hammond " ^ * Rank Xerox Research Centre + HCI Group , Dept . Psychology ^ Now at : Apple Computer Inc . 61 Regent Street University of York One Infinite Loop Cambridge York MS : 301 - 4A , Cupertino CB2 lAB , UK YOl 5DD , UK CA 95014 , USA maclean . cambridge @ rxrcjcerox . com { sjbsl , nvhlj @ unix . york . ac . uk victoria @ atg . apple . com ABSTRACT In one of the largest multidisciplinary projects in basic HCI research to date , multiple analytic HCI techniques were combined and applied witiiin an innovative desi ^ context to problems identified by designers of an AV communication system , or media space . The problems were presented to user - , system - and design - analysts distributed across Europe . The results of analyses were integrated and passed back to the designers , and to other domain experts , for assessment . The aim of this paper is to illustrate some theory - based insights gained into key problems in media space design and to convey lessons learned about the process of contributing to design using multiple theoretical perspectives . We also describe some obstacles which must be overcome if such techniques are to be transferred successfully to practice . KEYWORDS : Theory , cognitive modelling , formal methods , design practice , argumentation , design rationale , media spaces , multidisciplinary . INTRODUCTION HCI has become a highly eclectic and multidisciplinary field of applied science and design . A fundamental question we now must ask is , how can the theory base of the science keep up with and inform d e s i ^ at the leading edge of innovation ? A number of empirical studies have analysed the uptake of analytic techniques in design practice , and report that typically , they have been narrow in scope , have lagged behind innovation and have made little impact upon practice [ 2 , 22 , 29 ] . The case for developing formal methods and systematic analytic approaches grounded in relevant thewy has been weakened by this perceived failure to influence design practice . The time and effort involved in systematic analytic approaches to HCI has always been a disincentive for applying them . Traditionally , the view has been that the costs involved are prohibitive other than for large scale or high risk implementations . However , we can argue that since users dislike having to learn the same thing again and again for each new release of a system , there is alwavs Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage , the ACIVI copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear , and notice is given that copying is by permission of ACM . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee and / or specific permission . CHI ' 95 , Denver , Colorado , USA © 1995 ACM 0 - 89791 - 694 - 8 / 95 / 0005 . . . $ 3 . 50 commercial advantage to be gained from getting the interface and interactive style for core functionality r i ^ t first time . This is especially true of innovations for which there are Ukely to be many future releases and upgrades . There can be little doubt about tiie benefits of insight into the imderlying principles involved in complex user and system characteristics and behaviour which can help us understand how to make an interface better , if not right first time [ e . g . 16 , 21 , 27 , 28 ] . Such an understanding can inform design before prototyping and user testing is possible , and can also highlight the reasons for problems which users might have . However , whilst these benefits appear attractive , the problems with the existing techniques must be overcome if they are to be enjoyed . If HCI analytic techniques are to support innovative commercial design they must be able to operate in a multidisciplinary fashion to cope with the broad range of issues arising for today ' s increasingly diverse systems , including multimedia and collaborative applications . Systematic accounts of usability must now transcend the traditional disciplinary boundaries that separate , for example , system , user and design analysis . They must also be able to support non - routine design of more exploratory systems where the problem space is not yet understood . In this paper , we first describe how HCI analytic techniques provid ^ valuable insights when used in ' multidisciplinary modelling consultancy ' for the exploratory design of a user interface in a digital media space development project . Secondly , we discuss a number of lessons for facilitating the transfer of such techniques to innovative design practice . Since the interaction between modellers , domain and practitioners was of central importance , we describe in some detail how the design context and modelling analyses were communicated . AMODEUS : AN HCI MODELLING CONSORTIUM This work is derived from die ESPRIT funded AMODEUS Project , which is now in its sixth and final year . This project has xmdertaken to develop a number of analytical HCI design approaches , with the goal of bringing theory from the cognitive and computing sciences to bear on the analysis of collaborative and multimodal interaction . Briefly , these techniques are as follows : System modelling : formally specifying interactive system structure and behaviour [ 19 ] , also modelling multimodal interfaces as agent architectures with the 146 C H I ' 95 M O S A IC OF C R E A T I V I TY - May 7 1 1 1995 P a p e rs Presentation , Abstraction and Control [ PAC ] framework [ 17 ] . Cognitive user - modelling : modelling the use of cognitive resources using the Interacting Cognitive Subsystems architecture for Cognitive Task Analysis ( CTA ) , and the Soar architecture for problem solving using Programmable User Models ( PUMs ) [ 7 , 26 ] . Interaction modelling : formal specification of a design in terms of interactions between user and system [ 1 ] . Design and integrational frameworks : describing design spaces explicidy ; integration of the contributions of fie above techniques in relation to design problems [ 4 , 6 ] . The final component of die project is to apply and evaluate these approaches widi practitioners [ 13 , 15 ] . These are ambitious and largely unprecedented aims for a single project . The route to applied , multidisciplinary theory has taken the AMODEUS collaborators tiirough several different kinds of work . Initially , effort was devoid to establishing mutual understanding between user - , system - and design - analysts ; next , the focus was on identifying common concepts and interdependency between very different domains of theory [ 4 ] ; finally , we have progressed to studies evaluating the usability of individual tecfmiques [ 9 , 12 ] , and exercises in which we provide HCI ' modelling consultancy ' to development projects in industrial [ 10 ] and innovative design contexts . The work reported here falls into the last class of study . We describe a large scale exercise , conducted by 15 researchers for up to a month each ( in some cases more ) , with the aim of demonstrating the following : • Communication and interdependency between user and system modellers using an integrational design framework . • Successful communication of modelling analyses to designers using an agreed , shared representation of the design problem and rationale . • The value of modelling in HCI design analysis . ECOM : A DIGITAL MEDIA SPACE One of the design projects with whom AMODEUS partners collaborated was a stirongly applied and technologically innovative industrial and academic project called EuroCODE ( European CSCW Open Development Environment ; Esprit Project 6155 ) . It is developing a range of computer mediated communication and CSCW applications to support collaboration among engineers on the Danish Great Belt bridge and tunnel building scheme . AMODEUS worked with the project team whose job it was to develop the most sophisticated , multimedia appUcations . This project team was located at EuroPARC in Cambridge . UK , along witii two members of AMODEUS ( co - authors of this paper ) . This meant that there were good opportunities for communication between members of the two projects . The AMODEUS researchers who were co - located wifli die designers were developing the QOC notation for design space analysis [ 4 , 24 ] . This succinctly expresses as a semiformal network die key design questions being asked , alternative options being considered , and argimientation about them in the form of trade - offs among criteria . Such a representation shows how different design alternatives have addressed a common set of problems . As described shortly , design space analysis played a key role in supporting commimication between modellers and designers . We focused on the design of ECOM , EuroCODE ' s media space , a digital audio - visual ( AV ) communications and messaging system for use over local , high bandwidth and long distance public telecommimications networks . This media space had a well documented design history , based as it was upon at least two existing analogue media spaces , die EuroPARC RAVE system [ 20 ] ; and die Toronto University CAVECAT system [ 25 ] . PROVIDING HCI MODELLING CONSULTANCY The modelling exercise involved the following overlapping phases : QOC analysts monitored die ongoing progress of ECOM ' s design , by interviewing die design team , attending meetings and examining documents and die evolving user interface prototype . Since we wanted to ensure diat die AMODEUS modellers were working widi real problems specified by designers , rather than issues which they might select to show off die strengths of their analytic techniques , we asked each ECOM designer at EuroPARC what tiiey felt were key issues for die design of die ECOM media space . They raised three important issues for media spaces which became the basis for focusing analytic work in AMODEUS . These revolved around how fie system should support : • Making and breaking AV connections . • Displaying general levels of availability for communication , and controllmg person - specific levels of access for different people to connect to oneself . • Controlling audio and video parameters ( frame rate , quaUty and bandwiddi ) . A QOC design space was developed to represent the designers ' rationale around diese issues . This was based on notes from meetings and discussions widi the ECOM designers and anodier media space designer at EuroPARC , plus research literature and experience rf media space use . The design space was verified by the designers as a valid summary of fieir diinking about the prototype . It consisted of about one hundred QOC Questions with related Options and Criteria . Figure 1 gives an example of one of diem . Q1 : How should users control degree of interaction with each other ? O : Allow users to display ' information about their current status or ^ busyness ( social control ) vO : Provide system ' control over access ~ ( technical control ) : Maximise flexibility of social Interactions ^ C : Maximise " privacy Figure 1 : Example of QOC used to represent the designers ' own rationale , prior to modelling . Criteria ( C ) are the bases for deciding among alternative Options ( 0 ) . Questions ( Q ) identify issues which structure alternative Options . Solid Option - Criterion links are positive assessments , and dashed links are negative . An ECOM design document was produced to communicate die design to die AMODEUS modellers . The contents of diis document included : • EuroCODE Project background , and a description of the domain in which ECOM would be used ( bridge construction ) . 147 P a p e rs Papers May 7 - n 1 9 95 - C H I ' PS M O S A IC OF C R E A T I V I TY • A description of target users ( construction supervisors and consultants ) and a possible ECOM use - scenario . • Screendumps of the ECOM prototype and other pre - existing , related media space interfaces for comparison . • Key design issues raised by the designers as the focus for modelling , together with detailed descriptions of how relevant tasks would be accomplished using the ECOM interface or alternative system interfaces . • The QOC desi ^ space showkig the reasoning about the three issues with respect to the existing prototype and related systems . • References to background documents on media space design and relevant literature . The AMODEUS user - , system - and design - analysts were inti - oduced to ECOM and related media spaces at several project meetings , supplemented by email and telephone conversations . There were also direct email exchanges between modellers and the designers fliemselves . The modellers were asked to assess the ECOM design from their own perspective and to submit a report of their contributions to assist in refining the prototype . They were instructed to focus on the issues , alternatives and assessments represented in the design space and to provide input in QOC , or QOC compatible terms , in order to avoid misinterpretation of their design contributions by any fliird party . This enabled the design space analysts to insert these different contributions ( with page references back to the analytic reports ) into the design space to show how they related to each other and to the ECOM designers ' thinking . This modelling - enriched design space then served as an overview and index into the accompanying set of AMODEUS analytic reports . We evaluated the comprehensibility and utility of the modelling and design space integration in several ways . We were especially interested to know if the ECOM design team felt that die modelling input would influence further design , and whether the design space provided a useful summary of tiiat input . Specifically , we assessed the initial design space , the modelling - enriched version and the modelling reports , in the following manner : • The main ECOM interface designer ( Dl ) used the initial QOC ( summarising the team ' s design rationale ) to explain his design to another team member ( D2 ) [ video recorded session ] . • The modelling - enriched QOC design space was separately presented to Dl and D2 , together with the modelling reports which it indexed . The designers gave feedback on the usefulness of the modelling and QOC [ a video recorded session plus a one day workshop ] . • Designer D2 used the modelling - enriched design space to help bring a new team member up to speed with important ECOM design issues [ video recorded session ] . • Modellers presented some of their analyses to a number of media space designers at the CHI ' 94 conference . Presentations were followed by discussion on the potential of such approaches [ 3 hour meeting ] . The next section provides examples of the lessons learned about specific aspects of the media space designs which were examined , ti the following section we step back and describe some of the wider issues related to our experience of the process of applying multiple theory - based perspectives to a design problem . VALUE OF THEORY FOR MEDIA SPACE DESIGN It is important for us to emphasise that there is real value in the output of theoretical analyses . HCI theory is only likely to be accepted by designers , and integrated and applied in practice if we can demonstrate that sigaificant contributions can be made . The AMODEUS analyses provided several design insights for ECOM which seem to be generalisable to other computer mediated communication systems . In this section we outline tiiree examples of how analysts tackled the design of mechanisms for displaying general availability for communication and setting specific accessibility levels . The ECOM interface ECOM inherited its mechanism for displaying general availability from the Toronto CAVECAT system , and a person - specific access control mechanism from EuroPARC ' s RAVE system . In CAVECAT general availability levels correspond to iconic door states which die user can select . If they set their door to open , then both glance ( short , one - way , video - only ) and connect ( two - way AV ) connections are possible ; if it is half open , then only connect is possible ; if it is shut then the recipient of a call must explicitly accept a connection request at the time it is made ; and if it is barred , then no connections are permitted . All users are treated equally in terms of whether they can or cannot connect . The RAVE system uses a mechanism by which users set a permissions list of people allowed to establish each type of AV connection ( glance , vphone : a two - way , AV connection , initiated with a ' r i n ^ g ' protocol allowing the called person to accept or reject die call ; and ojfice - share : a two - way , AV connection used for very long term links between offices ) . CAVECAT ' s general and RAVE ' s person - specific access control mechanisms each have their advantages and disadvantages . In ECOM , it was decided diat the best of both worlds might be achieved by combining these two kinds of access control , allowing users to select from four general availability levels and to choose person - specific exceptions few any level . li f connoc t ^ £ tnajtsagej a jijW I " i - • • - v . - j ; i If • Vindu > wth / ictip« ' ' i . . . Cfl«f / ; > iMr . tiP . vr . . rreme rat® I . KesfliHrno ji " P F ' " " l - c ^ O • ^ pfffj , M . 1 [ tJierVj ( group > ) . . - euriuocifl . . cDn ~ fabar < fi maeicay ' pagani I alujays snapshot j O lunen door open , C glance J 0 luftan floor ajar O canncct < C u " icn door closed ( ^ O message ! 0 u " ien door locked fleuer Figure 2 : ECOM media space prototype user interface . 148 C H I ' 95 M O S A IC OF C R E A T I V I TY - May 7 1 1 1995 P a p e rs Figure 2 shows the interface to ECOM ' s person - specific access control mechanism . By hitting the exceptions button in the main dialogue box ( top left ) , the user brings up the exceptions dialogue box ( right hand side of the screen ) . They then select a user or group ( members are displayed in the scrolling window ) , followed by con , a connecti < Mi type ( one of glance , snapshot , connect and message ) , and finally a state with which this connection exception is to be associated . States range from always , through a series of door states through to never . Thus , when the user sets their general availability using one of the door icons in Ihe top left of the figure , any specified exceptions will overrule the default permissions for that door state , for specified people . The availability of other users can be seen at the time of selecting a connection to them . When making a connection the user selects the target ' s name from the user menu in the top dialogue box and die target ' s availability is shown by a door to the right of a small picture of them . Illustrative modelling insights There is clearly not space in a paper of this size to do full justice to all the analyses carried out on ECOM . Instead , our aim is to illustrate the kinds of insights we gained from the modelling using daee examples : 1 . Avoid confusion between the two separate concepts of general availability and person - specific accessibility ( system architecture modelling and cognitive modelling ) . 2 . Users must have feedback about their cmrent accessibility settings ( cognitive modelling ) . 3 . If access permissions can be applied to groups as well as users , the design must resolve problems of conflicting permissions ( formal system modelling ) . We now describe briefly how the relevant modelling techniques guided the analysts to these conclusions . The architecture modellers and botii of the cognitive modelling groups highlighted the potential for confusing ECOM ' s two concepts of general availability and person - specific accessibility . In CAVECAT , general availability is intended to correspond to the current state of the user . In RAVE , person - specific accessibility corresponds to the user ' s current permissions settings , i . e . , for each other user , which AV connections they request will be accepted and established by the media space . ECOM attempted to combine these two notions , but in doing so confounded them somewhat , resulting in what was an extremely complex and possibly unworkable control mechanism . The architecture modellers recommended that diese concepts should be dealt with separately and the cognitive modellers argued that they arose from two different user concerns which should be supported separately in the interface . The architectiure modellers identified domain , task and system concepts to be dealt with by software handling the making and breaking of coimections . They modelled different ECOM connection types and levels of user availability . Their view was that die system architecture would need to maintain a database of permissions lists of permitted connections for all users and a representation of each user ' s current availability . Each of these would best be handled by different system components . A person ' s availability for communication depends on their current activities which may change from time to time . Whilst a user may be allowed to set a level of general availability , as in CAVECAT , this will not always correspond to their desire to be accessible ( or inaccessible ) to any specific user or group . ECOM gives the user the fiexibiUty to define any set of connections to be permissible at any level . However , this means that the system architecture ' s representation of availability in ECOM may end up being arbitrarily related to accessibility settmgs and consequently somewhat meaningless . The result is highly problematic . A user may forget what access permissions their door state availability levels correspond to . They might also fmd that they can or cannot connect to person X regardless of X ' s apparent door state . The system could show a door state which corresponds to the specific accessibility rather than the general availability level of X ( this was , we later learned , the designer ' s intention ) ; however , this defeats the idea of having separate representations for both availabiUty levels and accessibility . The cognitive modellers showed that ECOM made it hard to separate the task goal of makiug oneself more or less generally accessible ( i . e . , available ) from that of choosing to be more or less accessible to a particular individual or group . The modellers proposed controlling general and specific accessibility levels separately . Furthermore , the user ' s current accessibility would be hard to keep track of due to the complexity of the possible exceptions . They recommended that the setting of person - specific exceptions should only be possible at one level of general availability . O . - Contrtfl geneialsnd / specific access / levels sepsratety / CTA RaportpIO C ; MsfcNng user ' s mpottpiO Q1 : How should / O : Allow users to display »»• / users control t information about • » degree of \ their cun ' ent status or > Interaction w«h \ busyness ( social each other ? \ control ) V D : Provide system control over access C Information IS ^ adequate for ( technical control ) sociatcontnri , puMsnsponpe Maximise flexibility of social Interactions Maximise privacy Consequent Question \ based L ^ n the \ Option to which it is ^ United i Q , Wher«ShOOtd database ol / ; ; : ; usafs ? ; pem ! tf8sbM» ; \ iilstsibsitoesisdl W0i ) «tBffbn ( local ) , PACpia O : Non - duplifiatad , / cemtahssdor , Si / distnbutecl ( non - tocBJ ) . jf ^ CpTfl Figure 3 : Example of how the QOC design space was used to summarise modelling analyses of the initial design space . In this example , the analysis in Figure 1 has been added to by the PAC architecture modellers and the CTA and PUMs cognitive modellers . Figure 3 shows an example of the way in which modelling input to ECOM ' s design , and , in this instance , to solving the problem of confusing general availability and person - specific accessibility , were added to the design space as shown in Figure 1 . These analytic contributions were 149 P a p e rs May 7 1 1 1995 - C HI ' 95 M O S A IC OF C R E A T I V I TY always indexed back into their source in a modelling report so that details of the modelling could be examined . The second contribution we outline is that users must have feedback about their current accessibility . This is all the more important if there are to be any exceptions to accessibility settings . Both of the cognitive modelling analyses identified ( he feedback issue . These suggested that since a user ' s availability levels were not likely to correspond to permissions settings , they would be imable to remember and therefore unable reliably to predict at any given moment whether any other user could make a particular kind of connection to them . This was compounded by the fact that ECOM did not provide a simple way to find out what any other particular user ' s exceptions were . One had to select their name and then inspect each connection type to see what the door state settings were . The third insight we describe came from formal systems modelling ( FSM ) . The complexity of managing media space connections is a good example of an HCI domain warranting the application of formd methods , given their ability to support verification and failure modes analysis . The FSM group formally specified how entities in the system woiUd be defined in terms of their membership of certain sets and the properties they inherited fi - om the sets they belonged to . Thus , users could be members of groups , but users and groups could have different access permissions . The FSM analysis revealed the implementational requirement to resolve conflicting permissions settings . If access permissions are to be applied to groups as well as users , problems arise if users are members of one or more groups with excepted permissions . The designer could opt for the system to apply just the most specific permissions relating to a given user . However , if lie only exceptions relevant to a user related to two groups they belonged to , and those two groups had different permissions , the user would reach an impasse if they attempted a connection which they were simultaneously permitted and not permitted to make , due to their group membership . To summarise , the contribution of the analysts in this design consultancy exercise was to use their approaches to identify usability and implementational flaws in the existing ECOM prototype and to propose a number of alternative solutions to overcome these weaknesses . The modellers ' various contributions to the original design space were combined into a single modelling - enriched space , as shown in Figure 3 . This space also contained figures ( showing example design solutions ) from the analytic AMODEUS reports and annotations providing background information such as application domain constraints or explanations of the contributions to help the reader , together with indexing Unks back to relevant pages in the modelling reports . Assessment of the value of modelling Input As detailed earlier , the ECOM designers were presented with the modelling - enriched design space and flie analytic reports , and were asked to use them in a variety of ways and provide feedback . Overall , their response was that the analytic work had been useful and would certainly influence further design work on the ECOM system . The main designer of the prototype exp ^ ted that the design space would provide a h e l p ^ overview of the issues for subsequent designers , particularly as they might not have ready access to him as he moved to other projects . In this study we did not gather data to be able to make detailed claims about the usefulness of QOC for designers . However , elsewhere we examine the empirical evidence for using design argumentation [ 11 ] . Bodi desi ^ ers commented that the cogmtively motivated design principles and illustrative redesigns of dialogues were helpful , and would be seriously considered for inclusion in future versions of the interface . Since the modelling exercise , the EuroCODE project decided ( for reasons imrelated to AMODEUS ) to pursue a simpler AV facility than the ECOM prototype we analysed . This means diat to date we have not had the opportunity to track the extent to which the modelling recommendations are taken up . However , the issues raised by the designers ( controUmg multiparty access ) will be a core feature of future media spaces , and the insights yielded by modelUng on ECOM are not restricted to diat particular system . To judge the value of modelling , designers need to understand it . For example , the CTA modellers experimented with a dual - format report , in which a column of raw modelling notation on one side of the page was accompanied by another colunm of ' translation ' for the designers to follow the analysis and recommendations . This provoked discussion on how much detail modellers should provide to back up their recommendations . ECOM ' s main designer suggested that it would be useful to have an intermediate - level CTA representation , accessible to a trained designer , to bridge between the raw modelling and analytic conclusions . This is in fact precisely what the CTA approach aims eventually to provide in the form of a tool which semi - automates the modelling process [ 26 ] . A trained human factors designer will te able to inspect a high - level representation of the cognitive model . Elsewhere , we report a study investigating the skills which the current prototype tool requires of its users [ 12 ] . Since modelling requires extra effort , any discussion of benefits must be balanced by the costs . It is extremely difficult to derive a useful measure of the cost / benefit trade - off in this exercise , since the modelling approaches are in many cases still research tools , being developed through exercises such as the ECOM collaboration . Balanced against modelling cost is the cost of generating the ECOM prototype which again is hard to assess , based as it was upon the design and use of other media spaces , and on design meetings involving four other members of the EuroCODE project . We should also emphasise that we adopted a ' modelling consultancy ' paradigm as an effective research strategy for investigating HCI modelling techniques , and not as the envisaged modus operandi for such techniques in the long term . Ultimately , we envisage modellers based at the same site as the designers , familiar with the design context , and able to provide direct input to the design team . This is the way that both analysts and designers ( in this and other design teams with whom we have worked ) say that they would like to work , and under such circumstances costs of modelling would drop significandy . In the real world , of course , such constraints are typicd of large development projects , where different contributing stakeholders operate under time pressure and often with poor opportunities for communication [ 3 , 18 ] . 150 C H I ' 95 M O S A IC OF C R E A T I V I TY - May 7 1 1 1995 P a p e rs A realistic cost / benefit analysis for HCI modelling must therefore be based on modelling tools in use in realistic design contexts by trained practitioners . We have therefore begun to investigate the requirements for training practitioners in a number of diese techniques ( described further below ) . In summary , we cannot yet verify that costs and benefits of HCI modelling were well balanced in this exercise . However , the issues analysed are central to media space design . We maintain that detailed understanding of the usability and implementational implications of design decisions at this early stage will have a pay - off for future systems evolving from the current generation of prototypes . A more detailed report of this modelling exercise is presented in [ 5 ] . LESSONS FOR TRANSFERRING THEORETICAL TECHNIQUES TO DESIGN PRACTICE In addition to the kinds of insights which modelling can offer to designers , we also learned a lot about facilitating the process of applying multiple contributions from the research world to the world of innovative design practice . A key part of our strategy for bringing theory - based techniques into design practice is that sigmficant resources need to be invested not only in the analyses , but also in the delivery mechanisms used to communicate them . This can be thought of as investing effort in the modelling ' s ' user interface ' ( in this exercise , the QOC design space and modelling reports ) to make the ' underlying functionality ' ( the modelUng ) accessible and intelligible to the end - user . As one might expect with such an ambitious exercise , the envisaged process did not run entirely smoothly . We are now in a better position to understand how this ' interface ' can be improved for future exercises . The lessons we draw may assist others seeking to deliver analytic HCI techniques to practitioners . In a number of cases , the points may seem rather unremarkable ; however , we suggest that they are comparable to the user - centred orientation which is taken for granted within the usability community—the principles are in some sense ' obvious ' , but instantiating them is rather more complex , and training others in them even more so . To date , very Uttle attention has been paid to understanding how to make HCI modelling accessible to practitioners . Making modelling less of a ' black art ' If analytic models are to be delivered to designers , they eventudly need to be ' separated ' from the expert modellers who developed them , ti order to understand the skills needed to render a particular formalism useful , one needs to understand the modelling process . Once sufficiently understood , the challenge is to encapsulate this process in appropriate forms to train designers . To date , several studies have been conducted in order to understand the skills which analytic formalisms require from designers [ 9 , 12 ] , and we are developing training to communicate the hands - on practicalities of using techniques [ 8 , 23 ] . Somewhat ironically , we ourselves failed to anticipate the difficulty which our project partners would have with using the QOC notation to summarise their modelling , even after five years of exposure to it . In retrosj ^ t , we should have provided some practical training in using the technique , as we have done for designers over several years . This serves to emphasise that , just as with interactive systems , ' end - user - support ' is essential for analytic HCI techniques . Practically applying an approach draws on very different skills to simply comprehending it in principle . Provide positive as well as negative design critiques A notable feature of the modelling analyses which was clearly highlighted by QOC ' s design argument structures , was die almost exclusively negative character of the assessments made by the analysts of ECOM . This result suggests two things . Firstly , that analysts may , like designers we have observed [ 4 ] , focus on negative characteristics of designs at the expense of understanding what aspects of the design are positive and should be preserved . Secondly , purely critical feedback from modellers is unlikely to endear them to communities of designers , and they must ensure that they recognise and reinforce good design decisions as well as point out flaws . If we reflect on the ' sociology of method uptake , ' it is undeniably the case that new methods and tools are accepted and rejected as much on the basis of the way in which they are presented , and by whorh , as on their technical merit . A sense of ownership of the techniques needs to be engendered on the part of the designers . Practitioners should be respected as fellow professionals , invariably working in more highly constrained environments than researchers . Sharing representations : context and participation There were two main classes of information exchange in the ECOM exercise ; describing die design problem to the modellers , and describing the modelling analyses to the designers . We consider that in both cases the effectiveness of tlK mediating representations could be improved . Firstly , given the that AMODEUS is pan - European , much communication took place via documentation , email , QOC , or analytic notations . The ECOM design document and related background documents constituted aroimd 250 pages of text and design space . However , the modellers still reported that they were missing background context information concemmg desi ^ gods , domain and system constraints and characteristics , users , and tasks to be supported . Had the analysts been more closely linked with the designers and the design context , common experience and informal communication would probably have reduced these documentation problems . In the existing literature , most analytic modelling techniques underplay the importance of access to background information and of participating in the design context prior to formal analytic work . With respect to the design space , the desi ^ ers , although having never encountered die QOC notation before , had little trouble understanding the space when they were asked to verify its contents . When later presented with the modelling - enriched version , they were able to see how die modelling augmented dieir original rationale . In contrast , the AMODEUS members had not participated in the context and discussions which shaped the initial design space . Whilst they had seen many QOC papers and presentations , they found it very hard to make sense of the argumentation , and relied heavily on the ECOM design document to make sense of it . A conclusion to draw from this is that for a terse notation like QOC to be accessible outside the original design team , supplementary detail is needed initially to give context to the analytic representation . Further research is required to 151 P a p e rs May 7 1 1 1995 - C HI ' 95 M O S A IC OF C R E A T I V I TY determine the factors which make argimientation and other shared representations intelligible to Sieir users , particularly in situations where projects restrict the opportunities for participation and appropriate contextual experience . Concretizing theoreticai principles The approaches being developed within AMODEUS place a strong emphasis on the value in design of formal abstractions , whether of task , user cognition , the system , user - system interaction , or the design space and rationale . In contrast , the designers with whom we worked here consistently used concrete representations in the form of interface sketches and mockups , as opposed to the abstract concepts and notations requir ^ in modelling . We have found , both with ECOM and in other modelling consultancy studies , that example sketches of redesigns are an extremely successful way to communicate model - based design insights . Having identified certain principles as critical , the modellers devised simple design examples to satisfy those properties . This provides something concrete to ground understanding and to reflect upon , but is not meant to dictate design—having understood the principle at stake , a designer can tailor an example for a specific solution . Design culture and design formalisins A commitment to design analysis and representation is obviously compatible with large development projects which are hard to manage without additional representations , and with high risk projects where more formal models support rigorous verification . At present , however , such a design cdture is somewhat in contrast to typical media space development teams . By and large , such designers are more comfortable with informal rather than formal analysis , and with constructing working prototypes rather than specifications . Receptivity to HCI modelling will therefore be moderated by design culture—where a given ' culture ' will attract people with particular skills and interests , and discourage others . One obstacle seems to be that the formaUsms u s ^ by theorists presuppose certain process elements early in the lifecycle , such as a formal requirements specification or task analysis . These do not seem to have b ^ n features of the design of ECOM or other media spaces we have considered . A consequence of this ' culture clash ' is that designers rooted in the exploratory , design - by - building culture have not been receptive to die idea of using more abstract system specification techniques , even with appropriate training . This was the general reaction at the meeting we held with media space designers at CHI ' 94 , as well as with the ECOM designers . In contrast , work with a software engineering company who already use formal methods has met with much more positive feedback [ 10 ] . How is this gulf between cultures to be bridged ? A key problem when different cultures meet is lack of mutual understanding . One of the driving forces behind our work within AMODEUS has been to find ways to communicate to practitioners what modellers seek to do , how , and for whom . We are acutely aware of the need to provide sufficient back ^ ound modelling information for designers before attempting detailed discussions . One encapsulation of this background material is a set of executive summaries and short worked examples for each technique , written for designers with whom we are collaborating , and for other interested parties [ 14 ] . Of course , education needs to be two - way , and we are working to understand how HCI modelling techniques can be tailored to the demands of current design practice . Ultimately , we want to see the fruits of research being exploited by practitioners , not just an elite group comprising those who have developed analytic techniques . Consequently , we are challenging the conventional notion within the software engineering community that formal methods are only useful if used within a structured development context from the beginning of a project , through refinement , to implementation . This seriously restricts the class of project in which formal methods can be used , cutting out exploratory design projects . The ECOM modelling exercise exemplifies a strategy of selective formal specification of particularly complex HCI problems in order to maximise the cost / benefit trade - off . Selective modelling is also the envisaged strategy of use for cognitive modelling approaches seeking to develop software tools to support rapid re - modelling [ 7 , 26 . Similarly , when training designers to capture and reflect on their rationale using QOC , we emphasise the different ways in which it may fit into their design context , and the importance of using it strategically to maximise the gain from the effort . In summary , the power and influence of design culture on attitudes to modelling techniques should not be underestimated . In our role as modelling consultants , we explored new ways to communicate modelling to practitioners ( by integrating modelling with QOC , and concretising abstract modelling principles ) . In the longer term , with a view to seeing the techniques in use by designers themselves , we are seeking to adapt the application and delivery of theory - based modelling techniques to the contexts in which they must be used . CONCLUSION There has been considerable debate in recent years over whether the HCI science base has anything to contribute to real design . In the modelling - design exercise reported here , we have demonstrated how f o r r ^ modelling techniques grounded in cognitive science and software engineering Sieory can inform innovative and exploratory user interface design such as that of a digital media space . Moreover , we have explored some of the key issues for communicating such analyses in accessible ways , and for delivering such techniques in forms which are compatible with design practice . We maintain that theoretically grounded HCI design techniques such as these are powerful ways to manage the implementational and c o s t i ve complexity of emergent interface technologies , particularly as they fmd their way into mainstream and large scale software development . However , analytic techniques will only achieve uptake if the end - user requirements of design practitioners are properly understood , and the value of such techniques can be demonstrated . In the exercise reported here , we have made progress in better understanding how to make that match with a design culture which has traditionally shied away from more formally based approaches . ACKNOWLEDGIIflENTS This work is funded by ESPRIT BRA 7040 . We are grateful to our AMODEUS colleagues whose varied perspectives have contributed to the work presented here . Our thanks also to the EuroCODE design team for their cooperation , to 152 C H I ' 95 M O S A IC OF CREATIVITY • May 7 995 P a p e rs the BT , EuroPARC , PARC , SunSoft and U . Toronto media space designers for their feedback , and to the CHI reviewers for their comments . REFERENCES Note : AMODEUS documents are available by WWW & FTP : httpy / www . mrc - apu . cam . ac . uk / amodeus / amodeus . htrnl ftpy / ftp . mrc - apu . cam . ac . uk / pub / amodeus 1 . Barnard , P . J . and Harrison , M . D . Towards a Framework for Modelling Human - Computer Interaction . In Proceedings ofEWHCr92 : East - West Conference in HCI , 1992 , pp . 189 - 196 . 2 . Bellotti , V . Implications ^ Current Design Practice for the Use of HCI Techniques . In Proceedings of HCI ' 88 : People and Computers 7 , 1988 , CUP : Cambridge , pp . 13 - 34 . 3 . Bellotti , V . A Framework for Assessing ApplicabiUty of HCI Techniques . In Proceedings of IFIP INTERACT ' 90 : Human - Computer Interaction , 1990 , Elsevier : Amsterdam , pp . 213 - 218 . 4 . Bellotti , V . Integrating Theoreticians ' and Practitioners ' Perspectives with Design Rationale . In Proceedings of InterCHr93 : Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1993 , ACM Press : NY , pp . 101 - 106 . 5 . Bellotti , v . , Buckingham Shimi , S . and MacLean , A . Assaying Multidisciplinary Modelling Using QOC as a Mediating Design Expression : The ' EuroCODE ' Design Exemplar . Amodeus - 2 Project , Working Paper IDIWP30 , 1994 . 6 . Bemsen , N . O . Structuring Design Spaces . In Adjunct Proceedings of InterCHI ' 93 ( Short Papers ) , 1993 , ACM Press : New York . pp . 211 - 212 . 7 . Blandford , A . and Young , R . M . Developing Runnable User Models : Separating the Problem Solving Techniques from the Domain Knowledge . In HCr93 : People and Computers VIII , 1993 , CUP : Cambridge 8 . Blandford , A . E . and Young , R . M . A tutorial introduction to the PUM Instruction Language . Amodeus - 2 Project , Working Paper UM / WP29 , 1995 . 9 . Buckingham Shum , S . Analyzing the Usability of a Design Rationale Notation . In Design Rationale : Concepts , Techniques , and Use , Moran , T . P . and Carroll , J . M . , ( Ed . ) , LEA : HiUsdale , NJ , ( in press ) . 10 . Buckingham Shum , S . ( Ed . ) Preliminary Modelling of the CERD Flight Sequencing Tool . Amodeus - 2 Project , Working Paper TAIWP23 , 1994 . 11 . Buckingham Shum , S . and Hammond , N . Argumentation - Based Design Rationale : What Use at What Cost ? International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 40 , 4 , 1994 , pp . 603 - 652 . 12 . Buckingham Shum , S . and Hammond , N . Delivering HCI Modelling to Designers : A Framework and Case Study of Cognitive Modelling . Interacting with Computers , 6 , 3 , 1994 , pp . 311 - 341 . 13 . Buckingham Shum , S . and Hammond , N . Transferring HCI Modelling and Design Techniques to Practitioners : A Framework and Empirical Work . In Proceedings of HCI ' 94 : People and Computers IX , 1994 , CUP : Cambridge , pp . 21 - 36 . 14 . Buckingham Shum , S . , Jorgensen , A . , Hammond , N . and Aboulafia , A . ( Eds . ) y ^ nodeus HCI Modelling & Design Approaches : Executive Summaries & Worked Examples . Amodeus - 2 Project , Working Paper TA / WP16 , 1994 . 15 . Buckingham Shum , S . , J0rgensen , A . H . , Aboulafia , A . and Hammond , N . V . Communicating HCI Modelling to Practitioners . In Proceedings of ACM CHr94 : Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1994 , ACM : New York , pp . 271 - 272 ( Vol . 2 ) . 16 . Carroll , J . M . and Rosson , M . B . Deliberated Evolution : Stalking The View Matcher in Design Space . Human - Computer Interaction , 6 , 3 & 4 , 1991 , pp . 281 - 318 . 17 . Coutaz , J . PAC : An Object - Oriented Model for Dialog Desi ^ . In Proceedings of IFIP INTERACTS ? , 1987 , Elsevier : Amsterdam , pp . 431 - 436 . 18 . Curtis , B . , Krasner , H . and Iscoe , N . A Field Study of the Software Design Process for Large Systems . Communications of the ACM , 31 , 11 . 1988 , pp . 1268 - 1286 . 19 . Duke , D . and Harrison , M . Abstract Interaction Objects . Computer Graphics Forum , 12 , 1993 , pp . 25 - 36 . 20 . Gaver , W . , T . , M . , MacLean , A . , LOvstrand . L . , Dourish , P . , Carter , K . and Buxton , W . Realising a Video Environment : EuroPARC ' s RAVE System . In Proceedings of ACM CHI ' 92 : Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM Press : New York : Monterey , CA , 1992 , pp . 27 - 35 . 21 . Gray . W . D . , John , B . E . and Atwood , M . E . The Precis of Project j ^ estine or an overview of a validation of GOMS . In Proceedings of ACM CHI ' 92 : Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1992 , ACM Press : New York , pp . 307 - 312 . 22 . Gugerty , L . The Use of Analytical Models in Human - Computer Interaction . International Journal of Man - Machine Studies , 38 , 1993 , pp . 625 - 660 . 23 . MacLean , A . , Buckingham Shum , S . and Bellotti , V . Design Rationale Tutorial . Tutorials at HCr92 - 94 : British Computer Society HCI Conferences , UK , 1992 - 24 . MacLean , A . , Young , R . M . , BeUotti , V . and Moran , T . Questions , Options , and Criteria : Elements of Design Space Analysis . Human - Computer Interaction , 6 , 3 & 4 , 1991 , pp . 201 - 250 . 25 . Mantei , M . M . , Baecker , R . M . , Sellen , A . J . , Buxton , W . A . S . , MilUgan , T . and Wellman , B . Experiences in the Use of a Me ^ a Space . In Proceedings of ACM CHr91 : Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1991 , pp . 203 - 208 . 26 . May , J . , Barnard , P . J . and Blandford , A . Using Structural Descriptions of Interfaces to Automate the Modelling of User Cognition . User Modelling and Adaptive User Interfaces , 3 , 1993 , pp . 27 - 64 . 27 . Monk , A . , Carroll , J . , Harrison , M . , Long , J . and Yoimg , R . New Approaches to TTieory in HCI : How Should We Judge Iteir Acceptability ? In Proceedings of IFIP INTERACT 90 : Human - Computer Interaction , 1990 , Elsevier : Amsterdam , pp . 1055 - 1058 . 28 . Payne , S . J . Understanding Calendar Use . Human - Computer Interaction , 8 , 2 , 1993 , pp . 83 - 100 . 29 . Rosson , M . , Maass , S . and Kellogg , W . The Designer as User Building Requirements for Design Tools from Design Practice . Communications of the ACM , 31 , 11 , 1988 , pp . 1288 - 1298 . 153