JOURNAL OF RESEARCH IN SCIENCE TEACHING VOL . 47 , NO . 1 , PP . 91 – 119 ( 2010 ) Bridging Scientiﬁc Reasoning and Conceptual Change Through Adaptive Web - Based Learning Hsiao - Ching She , Ya - Wen Liao Institute of Education , National Chiao Tung University , 1001 Ta - Hsueh Rd . , Hsin - Chu City , Taiwan , ROC Received 8 September 2006 ; Accepted 30 March 2009 Abstract : This study reports an adaptive digital learning project , Scientiﬁc Concept Construction and Reconstruction ( SCCR ) , and examines its effects on 108 8th grade students’ scientiﬁc reasoning and conceptual change through mixed methods . A one - group pre - , post - , and retention quasi - experimental design was used in the study . All students received tests for Atomic Achievement , Scientiﬁc Reasoning , and Atomic Dependent Reasoning before , 1 week after , and 8 weeks after learning . A total of 18 students , six from each class , were each interviewed for 1hour before , immediately after , and 2 months after learning . A ﬂow map was used to provide a sequential representation of the ﬂow of students’ scientiﬁc narrative elicited from the interviews , and to further analyze the level of scientiﬁc reasoning and conceptual change . Results show students’ concepts of atoms , scientiﬁc reasoning , and conceptualchange made progress , which is consistent with the interviewing results regarding the level of scientiﬁc reasoning and quantity of conceptual change . This study demonstrated that students’ conceptual change and scientiﬁc reasoning could be improved through the SCCR learning project . Moreover , regression results indicated students’ scientiﬁc reasoning contributed more to their conceptual change than to the concepts students held immediately after learning . It implies that scientiﬁc reasoning was pivotal for conceptual change and prompted students to make associations among new mental sets and existing hierarchical structure - based memory . (cid:1) 2009 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . J Res Sci Teach 47 : 91 – 119 , 2010 Keywords : chemistry ; conceptual change ; technology education ; middle school science Many studies have suggested that a relationship exists between students’ alternative conceptions and reasoning ability ( Lawson & Thompson , 1988 ; Lawson & Worsnop , 1992 ; Oliva , 2003 ) . These studies found that students with better scientiﬁc reasoning skills had fewer alternative conceptions and could more easily change their alternative conceptions . Some other studies have proposed that students’ understanding of scientiﬁc conceptions either hindered or mediated their ability to reason ( Duncan & Reiser , 2007 ; Keselmanm , Kaufman , Kramer , & Patel , 2007 ) . Oliva ( 2003 ) further reported that students with higher levels of formal reasoning tend to change their alternative conceptions more easily . These studies highlight an apparent relationship between conceptual change and scientiﬁc reasoning , but the type of relationship between conceptual change and scientiﬁc reasoning still remains uncertain . Thus , an empirical study to explore the relationship between conceptual change and scientiﬁc reasoning is needed . The author has developed a conceptual change model , the Dual Situated Learning Model , and has evidenced effective conceptual change in middle school students for the topics of air pressure and buoyancy , thermal expansion , heat transfer , dissolution and diffusion , as well as meiosis and mitosis ( She , 2002 , 2003 , 2004a , b ; Tang , She , & Lee , 2005 ) . We believe that there is a great potential to enhance students’ conceptual change as well as scientiﬁc reasoning ability by uniting scientiﬁc reasoning with the Dual Situated Learning Model . Park and Han ( 2002 ) suggested that deductive reasoning is a potential factor in helping students to recognize cognitive conﬂict and to resolve it . Their ideas support our idea that enabling students to recognize Correspondence to : H . - C . She ; E - mail : hcshe @ mail . nctu . edu . tw DOI 10 . 1002 / tea . 20309 Published online 5 August 2009 in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) . (cid:1) 2009 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . theirownchangedideasandwhytheywouldchangeisverycriticalforenablingconceptualchange . Scientiﬁc reasoningcertainlyplaysanimportantroleindoingthis . ParkandHan ( 2002 ) furthersuggestedthatstudents’ deductive reasoning is not always activated and used by students in the process of conceptual change . The conceptual change model of the DSLM includes some ideas related to reasoning , and the design of each dual situated learning event leads students to provide explanations before and after events . But it seems that more emphasis on scientiﬁc reasoning , particularly in requiring students to recognize their own changed ideas and justify why would they change or retain their original ideas , may both increase the effectiveness of the conceptual change and foster students’ scientiﬁc reasoning ability . Thus , this study uses the DSLM ( She , 2002 , 2003 , 2004a , b ; Tang et al . , 2005 ) as the basis for developing a Scientiﬁc Concept Construction and Reconstruction ( SCCR ) Project together with a stronger scientiﬁc reasoning emphasis . We believe that if students can be involved within an individualized digital learning environment , they will be better able to increase their ability for conceptual change and their scientiﬁc reasoning ability . Therefore , thisstudy reports a3 - year digital learning project—SCCR—that was developed based on the Dual Situated Learning Model ( DSLM ) and scientiﬁc reasoning . It is hoped that SCCR can facilitate students’ conceptual change as well as scientiﬁc reasoning ability . Moreover , this study hopes to uncover the relationship between conceptual change and scientiﬁc reasoning . Literature Review Reasoning Reasoning is one of the oldest research areas in psychology . It pertains to the process of drawing conclusions from principles and from evidence ( Wason & Johnson - Laird , 1972 ) , moving on from what is already known to infer new conclusions or to evaluate a proposed conclusion . Anderson ( 1990 ) refers to reasoning as the mental processes involved in generating and evaluating logical arguments . Reasoning skills include clariﬁcation , basis , inference , and evaluation ( Ennis , 1987 ) . Clariﬁcation skills require identifying and formulating questions , analyzing elements , and deﬁning terms ( Schunk , 1999 , p . 289 ) . Basis skills address the fact that conclusions about a problem are supported by the information from personal observations , statements by others and previous inferences . It is important to judgethecredibilityofasource , distinguishingbetweenfact , opinion , andreasonedjudgment ( Schunk , 1999 , p . 290 ) . Inference skills differ , depending on whether the scientiﬁc reasoning involved proceeds inductively or deductively . Induction is the process whereby general rules , principles , and concepts are developed from observation and knowledge of speciﬁc examples ( Pellegrino , 1985 ) . Inductive reasoning proceeds from speciﬁc facts to general conclusions , and it is the main reasoning process used by scientists to arrive at generalizations or scientiﬁc laws ( Wadsworth , 1996 , p . 113 ) . Individuals reason inductively when they extract similarities and differences among speciﬁc objects and events , and then arrive at generalizations or conclusions , which are tested by applying them to new experiences or used to predict future speciﬁc instances . Individuals retain their generalizations as long as they are effective , and they may modify them when they experience conﬂicting evidence . Deductive reasoning is the process of reasoning from one or more general statements on what is known in order to reach alogically certain conclusion ( Johnson - Laird , 2000 ; Rips , 1999 ) . It ofteninvolvesreasoning from one or more general statements regarding what is known to a speciﬁc application of the general statement . Wadsworth ( 1996 , p . 113 ) noted that deductive reasoning is reasoning from premises to conclusions or from the general to the speciﬁc . Inferences or conclusions based on deductive reasoning are necessarilytrueonlyifthepremisestheyarederivedfromaretrue . Whenindividualsreasondeductively , they proceed from general concepts ( premises ) to speciﬁc instances ( conclusions ) to determine whether the latter follow from the former . A deduction is valid if the premises are true and if the conclusion follows logically from the premises ( Johnson - Laird , 1985 ) . Johnson - Laird and Byrne ( 1991 , p . 3 ) point out that deductive reasoning is a central intellectual ability , which is necessary in order to : formulate plans ; evaluate alternative actions ; determine the consequences of assumptions and hypotheses ; interpret and formulate instructions ; develop rules and general principles ; pursue arguments and negotiations ; weigh evidence and assess data ; to decide between competing theories ; and as a result to solve problems . 92 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching Evaluation skill involves using criteria to judge the adequacy of a problem solution . Evaluation also involves deciding what ought to happen next , which is formulating hypotheses about future events , assuming that one’s problem - solving is correct so far . It is very important to ensure that questions are properly posed , that data from adequate sources are available and used to draw inferences , and that relevant criteria are employed for evaluation . Individuals can use reasoning to analyze complex information efﬁciently and make associations with existing cognitive structures . This occurs because long - term memory ( LTM ) networks become more complex and better linked as individuals grow , which in turn reduces the cognitive loading of working memory ( WM ) ( Schunk , 2000 , p . 224 ) . Sweller ( 1988 ) states that optimum learning occurs in humans when the load on working memory is kept to a minimum , thereby facilitating changes in the long - term memory . Scientiﬁc Reasoning and Conceptual Change Many researchers have suggested that conceptual change involves deep restructuring , not only in the concepts , but also in the ways of reasoning ( Furio , Calatayud , Barcenas , & Padilla , 2000 ; Gil & Carrascosa , 1994 ) . In general , conceptual changes are associated with other changes , such as viewing phenomena in new ways ; and changes in interests , attitudes , or assumed values by the community ( Andre & Windschitl , 2003 ; Chambers & Andre , 1997 ; Pintrich & Schunk , 1996 ) . These changes also correspond with new ways of reasoning and new approaches for solving scientiﬁc problems ( Duschl & Gitomer , 1991 ; Hashweh , 1986 ) . Conceptual change must not be considered merely as a change in content ( Hewson & Thorley , 1989 ) . Thus , it is necessary to associate conceptual change with scientiﬁc reasoning , because science teaching is usually centered on declarative knowledge ( knowing ‘‘ what’’ ) and neglects the procedural and explicative type ( knowing ‘‘ how’’ and ‘‘why’’ ) ( Kuhn , 1993 ) . Moreover , Parkand Han ( 2002 ) suggested deductive reasoning as a potential factor in helping students to recognize and resolve cognitive conﬂict . In short , recognizing their changed ideas , and the reasons for the changes , is critical for conceptual change to occur . Lawson ( 2003 ) has discussed the relationship existing between students’ alternative conceptions and their reasoning ability . In order to modify alternative conceptions , students need to be aware of their own alternative conceptions and scientiﬁc conceptions , together with the evidence and reasoning that questions thevalidity of the alternative conceptions . In other words , theymust be able to see logically how the evidence supports the scientiﬁc conceptions and contradicts the prior alternative conceptions . Lawson and Weser ( 1990 ) did a further study to measure pre - to post - instruction change among college students and found that less skilled reasoners were initially more likely to hold a variety of nonscientiﬁc beliefs about life and were less likely to change some , though not all , of those beliefs . Lawson and Worsnop ( 1992 ) again found that the moreskilledreasonersinasampleofhighschoolstudentswerelesslikelytoholdpre - instructionalalternative conceptions regarding evolution and special creation . On the other hand , Oliva ( 2003 ) examined the relationship that exists between the degree of structural coherence in students’ conceptions ( structuralization ) and the probability of conceptual change . The results show that students with higher levels of formal reasoning change their alternative conceptions more easily whentheydisplayahigher levelofinitialstructuralization . Itis possiblethatstudentswiththe highestlevel of formalreasoning thought may have the necessary cognitiveand metacognitiveabilities to effect asudden and global change , in which case structuralization may facilitate this process . In addition , many studies have also noted that those students with higher levels of formal reasoning present with preconceptions that are more structured , though they also tend to change their alternative conceptions with greater ease ( Oliva , 2003 ; Trumper & Gorsky , 1993 ) . From the other point of view , one of the studies indicated that a group of students that were givencritical reasoning and writing activities made progress on both of HIV knowledge and critical reasoning of HIV ; however , the group of students that were given critical reasoning about realistic scenarios in the context of HIV activities only made progress on HIV knowledge ( Keselmanm et al . , 2007 ) . The authors explain that critical reasoning activities alone did not sufﬁciently promote students’ understanding of scientiﬁc conceptions ; therefore , they are not able to use their scientiﬁc knowledge to reach an accurate conclusion when reasoning about the HIV scenario . This implies that scientiﬁc knowledge is crucial for supporting students’ ability to reason in the HIV context . The other study also reports a similar idea regarding students’ lack of understanding of gene and proteins hindering their ability to reason ( Duncan & Reiser , 2007 ) . SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 93 Journal of Research in Science Teaching Though these studies have either suggested that students with a higher level of scientiﬁc reasoning would be able to change their alternative conceptions more easily or students with better understanding of scientiﬁc conceptions would mediate their ability of reasoning ; there is still a lack of empirical study to conﬁrm the relationship between scientiﬁc reasoning and conceptual change . Moreover , none of the previous studies has directly examined whether students’ conceptual change and scientiﬁc reasoning ability can be promoted through a well - designed conceptual change model with an emphasis on scientiﬁc reasoning . Therefore , there are still many unsolved questions : ( 1 ) Can students’ conceptual change and their scientiﬁc reasoning ability be promoted using DSLM with an emphasis on scientiﬁc reasoning ? ( 2 ) What are the relationships among students’ conceptual change , scientiﬁc reasoning ability , and their knowledge of atoms ? ( 3 ) Can students’ scientiﬁc reasoning ability be developed over time ? Perspectives of Conceptual Change and Dual Situated Learning Model ( DSLM ) Conceptualchange hasbeenamajorresearch areaofscience educationoverthe pastthreedecades ( Duit & Treagust , 2003 ) . As a foundation for this , Posner and Strike’s work describing the conditions necessary for conceptual change is the most inﬂuential theory in science education ( Posner , Strike , Henson , & Herzog , 1982 ; Strike & Posner , 1985 ) . The focus of Posner et al . ’s theory is from an epistemological perspective that explicitlyincludesstudent’sjudgmentsandopinionsabouttheirownconceptions , aperspectivethatconcerns the nature of knowledge and the nature of knowledge acquisition and justiﬁcation . However , it is possible to facilitate conceptual change from other perspectives , and the ontological perspective is also widely used for studying students’ understanding of scientiﬁc concepts . Chinn and Brewer ( 1993 ) deﬁne ontological beliefs as ‘‘beliefs about the fundamental categories and properties of the world’’ ( p . 17 ) . Similarly , Bliss ( 1995 ) describes students’ ontological understanding about the world in terms of how they perceive the basic nature ofobjectsandevents . Manyresearchers incognitivepsychologyhaveproposedtheoriesforthewaysstudents develop a conceptual understanding of science concepts from ontological viewpoints ( Carey , 1985 ; Chi , Slotted , & Lieu , 1994 ; Haggard , 1992 ; Vosniadou & Brewer , 1987 ) . Though these models differ in many respects , their theories share a similar view of conceptual understanding from ontological perspectives . Lately , motivational perspectives have become very popular in the ﬁeld of conceptual change . Vosniadou and Brewer ( 1994 ) suggest that various motivational beliefs about the learner and about learning could also act as presuppositions that either facilitate or constrain conceptual change . In contrast , Pintrich ( 1999 ) suggested that motivational beliefs might not have a direct inﬂuence on conceptual change , although as presuppositions or theories about the learner and the learning , these beliefs may support or constrain conceptual change . Most studies consider only one perspective of conceptual changes in their model or theory : epistemological , ontological , or social / effective . However , more recently several researchers have studied conceptual change from multidimensional perspectives ( Mbajiorgu , Ezechi , & Idoko , 2007 ; Savinainen , Scott , & Viiri , 2005 ; She , 2004b ; Venville & Treagust , 1998 ) . The Dual Situated Learning Model ( DSLM ) clearly shares the idea of multidimensional perspectives in terms of epistemology , ontology , and motivation . Alternative conceptions describe the situation where students hold incomplete or inaccurate understandings of scientiﬁc phenomena ( Driver & Easley , 1978 ; Osborne & Cosgrove , 1983 ) . It has been shown to be pervasive , stable and often resistant to change through classroom instruction ( Osborne & Cosgrove , 1983 ; Osborne & Gilbert , 1980 ) . The alternative conceptions indicated the positive respect to the student’s self - constructed conceptions and the thought construction process comparing to the term of misconceptions ( Clement , 1993 ) . The DSLM considers students’ alternative conceptions to be a very important consideration in providing students the opportunity to be actively involved in the process of reconstructing their alternative conceptions and of moving toward a more complete and accurate scientiﬁc conception . The DSLM ( She , 2002 , 2003 , 2004a , b ) emphasizes the nature of science concepts and students’ ontological together with epistemological beliefs of science concepts , as its major theoretical constructs for conceptual change . In this context ( She , 2004a , b ) , situated learning means that the learning process of conceptual change should be situated in the nature of science concepts and students’ beliefs of these science conceptsinordertodeterminewhatessentialmentalsets ( amentalsetisaframeofmindinvolvinganexisting model for representing a particular phenomena or information ) are needed for constructing a more scientiﬁc 94 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching view of the concepts . Many scientiﬁc concepts are hard to understand ( e . g . , buoyancy ) and tend to need more than one particular mental set for constructing the concept . The term ‘‘dual’’ indicates that two essential components are important for conceptual change to occur and these components are interacting with each other . There are threeduals which are critical for constructing each dual situated learning event . The ﬁrstdual is to consider both the nature of science concepts and students’ beliefs regarding these science concepts . The second dual is to create dissonance with students’ pre - existing knowledge and provide a new mental set for them to achieve a more scientiﬁc view of the concept . The third dual is to arouse students’ motivation and to challenge their ontological and epistemological beliefs regarding science concepts . Though Posner et al . ’s conceptual change model and the DSLM share the idea of creating cognitive conﬂict ; however , there are many differences between these two models . The author has pointed out that conceptual change cannot occur simply by creating cognitive dissonance ; instead , students must be provided with new mental sets in addition to creating dissonance ( She , 2002 , 2004a , b ) . Moreover , students often hold an alternative conception because the concept is at a relatively high hierarchical level that subsumes more essential underlying concepts , and so a series of events are necessary to help students’ conceptual change succeed ( She , 2002 ) . On the other hand , Pintrich , Marx , and Boyle ( 1993 ) pointed out that Posner et al . ’s . ( 1982 ) conceptual change model is overly rational and focuses only on students’ cognition , without considering the way in which students’ motivational beliefs and the roles of individuals in a classroom learning situation can inﬂuence conceptual change . Obviously , Posner et al . did not consider the perspectives of motivation and ontology in conceptual change ; and did not consider students actively engaged in the process . In contrast , the DSLM considers the three aspects of epistemology , ontology , and motivation as its main theoretical constructs . The DSLM emphasizes that students should be actively engaged in the conceptual change learning process . In order to implement this theory , the DSLM has been developed as a six stage learning / instructional model ( Table 1 ) . Stage 1 : Examining attributes of the science concept , which provides information about the essential mental sets needed to construct a scientiﬁc view of the concept . Stage 2 : Probing students’ alternativescientiﬁc conceptions which require probing the students’ beliefs concerning the science concept . Stage 3 : Determining which mental sets students lack for the construction of a more scientiﬁc view of the concepts . Stage4 : Designingdualsituatedlearningevents , accordingtostage3resultsshowingwhichmental sets student lack . Stage 5 : Instructing with dual situated learning events , to give students the opportunity to make predictions , provide explanations , confront dissonance , and construct a more scientiﬁc view of the concepts . Stage 6 : Instruction using a challenging dual situated learning event , so the students can apply the mental sets they have acquired to a new situation in order to ensure that successful conceptual change has occurred . Features of the DSLM As described previously , one of the major features of the DSLM is to create dissonance with students’ pre - existing knowledge in order to arouse students’ curiosity andinterest and challenge their epistemological andontologicalbeliefsofthescience concepts . Motivationisembodiedin thedesignandthelearningprocess of a dual situated learning event , which requires students to actively engage in the event prediction , visualize whatactuallyhappensandexplain whyitis different fromtheir prediction , therebystimulatingtheircuriosity and interest . Second , providing the new mental set should be the platform on which knowledge reconstruction can occur . Students must comprehend and believe the new mental set in order for conceptual change to happen . This can be fostered by any type of instructional activity , such as analogy , modeling , discrepant events , and inquiry activities , as long as they provide students with opportunities to visualize what actually happens in order to reconstruct new mental sets . Third , all of the situated learning events should be designed according to the nature of the science concepts and students’ beliefs of scientiﬁc conceptions . In other words , the information on which and how many particular mental sets the students lack for restructuring the science concept would determine which and how many speciﬁc dual situated learning events need to be designed to supplement this deﬁciency and to foster conceptual change . My previous study ( She , 2002 ) proposed that the concepts having a higher hierarchical level subsume underlying concepts , thus making it more difﬁcult for higher - level conceptual SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 95 Journal of Research in Science Teaching changes to occur . The number of dual situated learning events required would depend on the number of mental sets that students lack for constructing a more scientiﬁc view of the concepts . More importantly , each dual situated learning event should be connected with the others , and would need to build upon a prior dual situated learning event . The last feature provides an opportunity for challenging students to see whether they can really apply to another situation the mental sets that they have revised or constructed , thus demonstrating a successful conceptual change . The design of a challenging dual situated learning event requires that , in order to succeed inthechallengingevent , studentsmustacquirealloftheparticularmentalsetsthattheypreviouslylackedand that were reconstructed through a series of dual situated learning events . The application of the DSLM instructional approach has evidenced effective conceptual change in middle school students for the topics of air pressure and buoyancy ( She , 2002 ) , thermal expansion ( She , 2003 ) , heat transfer ( She , 2004b ) , dissolution and diffusion ( She , 2004a ) , and meiosis and mitosis ( Tang et al . , 2005 ) . The design of each dual - situated learning event begins with a driving question targeted to the alternative scientiﬁc conceptions commonly found in students . The students are required to provide an answer and an explanation . Followed by the driving questions , various activities such as graphic and text illustrations , Table 1 Descriptions of dual situated learning model theory Dual Situated Learning Model Descriptions Functional Dimensions of the DSLM Theory Stage 1 : Examining the attributes of the science concept This stage provides information about which essential mental sets are needed to construct a scientiﬁc view of the concepts The nature of scientiﬁc concepts is the crucial part of DSLM that determines whether conceptual change can be achieved . For instance , some concepts may be classiﬁed as process , or higher hierarchical level , or abstract , or invisible , etc . These attributes of science concepts should be analyzed before the planning of dual situated learning events Stage 2 : Probing students’ alternative scientiﬁc conceptions This involves probing the students’ beliefs concerning the scientiﬁc concept Students’ beliefs of scientiﬁc concepts are another crucial part of DSLM , which determine whether conceptual change can be successful . These would pinpoint what alternative conceptions students have Stage 3 : Analyzing which mental sets that students lack It would pinpoint which and how many particular mental sets students lack for restructuring the science concepts based upon the ﬁrst pair of DSLM theory The nature of science concepts and students’ belief of science concepts provide the basis for determining particular mental sets students need for conceptual change Stage 4 : Designing dual situated learning events The design of event is based particular mental sets students lack , so a further series of events can be designed . Each event would include the ideas of second and third dual of DSLM theory The design of each event needs to emphasize creating dissonance with students’ original beliefs of science concept , and providing new mental set . Moreover , the design also considers increasing students’ motivation and challenging their beliefs of the concepts Stage 5 : Instructing with dual situated learning events Each event provides students an opportunity to make predictions and provide explanations before and after the event , and to further explain why they changed their conceptions or retained their original conceptions During the instruction , each event allows students to confront their beliefs of science concepts , and stimulates their curiosity and interest by challenging their epistemological and ontological beliefs of science concepts . Moreover , each event also provides students new mental sets where knowledge reconstruction can occur Stage 6 : Instructing with challenging situated learning event It provides an opportunity for the students to apply the mental sets they have acquired to a new situation , ensuring that successful conceptual change to occur The design of a challenging situated learning event needs to combine all of the particular mental sets that students previously lacked and that now have been reconstructed through a series of dual situated learning events 96 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching simulated 2D animations , 3D animations , simulated experiments , analogies are provided . The design of these activities must create dissonance and provide students with new mental sets , challenge their ontological and epistemological beliefs , and motivate them to reconstruct the mental sets they lack . The same driving question is asked again , and also requires students to provide an answer and an explanation for the events . Though the conceptual change model includes scientiﬁc reasoning , and the design of each dual situated learning event requests students to provide explanations , whether the DSLM has any impact on students’ scientiﬁc reasoning ability has not been previously studied . Park and Han ( 2002 ) assumed that reasoning plays an important role in conceptual change . However , due to various unknown reasons , reasoning is not always activated and used spontaneously in students’ minds in the process of conceptual change . Thus the DSLM may not be efﬁcient for fostering the use of scientiﬁc reasoning skills by students . It is clear that the critical point is determining how to make the instructional design able to activate students’ scientiﬁc reasoning . Therefore , we have modiﬁed the dual - situated learning event to involve an increased amount of scientiﬁc reasoning . The students are required to provide an answer and their reasoning for the driving questionbeforeproceeding with various activities . The samedrivingquestionis asked again after theevent to examine the students’ conceptual change as well as their reasoning changes . In order to activate students’ use ofscientiﬁcreasoning , therefore , we speciﬁcally restructuretheprocess toletstudentsviewtheiranswers and thereasoningbehind theanswersbothbeforeandafterevents , aswellasviewingthecorrectanswers . Wealso furtherrequeststudentstoprovideareasonwhytheychangeorstaywith theiroriginalconceptsafterlearning the events . This is intended to force students’ minds to be spontaneously involved in the process of scientiﬁc reasoning and conceptual change . It is predicted that enhancing scientiﬁc reasoning to maximize the DSLM more powerfully can facilitate both students’ conceptual change and their scientiﬁc reasoning ability . Previous Research on Students’ Alternative Conceptions Involving Atoms Garnett , Garnett , and Hachling ( 1995 ) reviewed previous studies on students’ alternative conceptions regardingtheparticulatenatureofmatter , andspeciﬁcallypointedoutthatsomestudentsconsideratomstobe alive . Harrison and Treagust ( 1996 ) reported that high school students consider atoms to be either visible underamicroscopeortoosmalltosee , arenotsurewhetherallsubstancescontainatoms , consideratomstobe alive like cells and able to grow and divide , consider atoms to be balls or spheres but are not sure about the components inside atoms , view the texture of atoms as being most like a hard polystyrene sphere , are not aware ofelectronshellorelectronclouds , andhaveaconsistentimageofatomsasbeing protectedbyanouter shell . Lee , Eichinger , Anderson , Berkheimer , and Blakeslee ( 1993 ) found similar results about the size of molecules , so that even after instruction , students still believed they could see molecules with a microscope . Lee et al . ( 1993 ) showed that students believe atoms to be hard . Grifﬁths and Preston ( 1992 ) reported that students believe all atoms weigh the same , atoms are ball - shaped , there is nothing inside atoms , something exists between atoms , and electrons move within the shell . Overall , these studies have indicated similar alternative conceptions , such as atomic structure , components , shape , size , and properties ; arrangement of electrons and its movement ; whether all substances contain atoms ; that all atoms weighed the same ; and the sizeof molecules . The design of the atomic relatedWeb - based program for atomic structurein thisstudy uses thesestudents’alternativeconceptions , foundin thepreviousstudies noted above , asoneofthemajor sources for the design of learning events to facilitate students’ conceptual change . Web - Based Learning and Adaptive Learning Technology Web - based learning has certain unique properties , such as easily accessed and almost unlimited resources , various visual and audio forms of information presentation , and synchronous and asynchronous communication that can overcome temporal and distance constraints on learning . These qualities have led educational researchers and practitioners to consider it as a potential tool for improving teaching and learning , and developments of Web - based learning have also captured the attention of science educators . Except for providing an authentic Web - lab experience , all learning activities seem possible on the Web . Accessing the Web and incorporating Web - based learning into teaching activities are considered fundamental skills of science teachers in the 21st century ( Didion , 1997 ) . SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 97 Journal of Research in Science Teaching In terms of the effectiveness of Web - based learning , some studies report that students gain more in conﬁdence or achievement with computers in a Web - based course ( Leasure , Davis , & Thievon , 2000 ; Marbach - Ad , Rotbai , & Stavy , 2008 ) , while others ﬁnd that students enrolled in a Web - based course perform worsethanconventional studentsinthe ﬁnalexam ( Wang & Newlin2000 ) . Oneofthestudies usingcomputer assisted instructional materials found that they are effective in reaching comprehension and application levels of cognitive domain , although they are not effective in changing students’ alternative conceptions of photosynthesis for an experimental group of students compared to a conventional group ( Cepni , Tas , & Kose , 2006 ) . The consensus of the effectiveness for using computer / Web - based learning in education seems varied . Tuvi and Nachmias ( 2001 ) , using a taxonomy modiﬁed from that of Mioduser , Nachmias , Oren , and Lahav ( 2000 ) , reviewed 93 Websites focusing on introducing atomic structures and found the following similarities : text was the primary means of presenting information ; automatic / human and technical / content - based help were used in less than 18 % ; less than 6 % had interactive images , animation and sound ; none of those websites were inquiry - based ; and memorizing was the main cognitive process . These studies point out the following critical problems foundin most Web - based learning programs designed for science education . First , it is clear that science teaching and learning theories are absent in most of the science Web - learning programs . Second , pedagogical considerations are also not considered in the design of the Web - learning programs . Third , the multimedia capability is not fully used to enhance students’ science learning . Therefore , this study attempts to employ the Dual Situated Learning Model ( DSLM ) and scientiﬁc reasoning for the development of a Web - based science learning program in order to facilitate students’ conceptual change and scientiﬁc reasoning involving atoms . Tobeeffective , theWeb - basedlearningmustnotonlyallowstudentstonavigatebetweendifferentpages but must help students to better achieve their learning goals . It is also necessary to provide more sophisticated mechanisms that modify the navigation alternatives by a procedure for individual student adaptation . Adaptive learning technology can be useful in any application area where the system is expected to provide people with different learning content or links based on different goals , prior knowledge , and personal features such as age , interests , and preferences ( Brusilovsky , 1997 ) . One approach is the adaptive technique of sensitive links which connect hyper - documents whose availability and contents depend on the state of teaching ( Brusilovsky & Anderson , 1998 ) . Thereby , the student’s knowledge of each concept is used to guide him / her towards the appropriate documents ( Carro , Moriyon , Pulido , & Rodriguez , 1999 ) . Other approach is adaptive feedback which is designed on the basis of hypotheses and activities made during the learning process by each learner . This is different from pre - deﬁned feedback which has the same answer for each student ( Veerman , Andriessen , & Kanselaar , 2000 ) . In short , the adaptive learning system takes features of the user as the sources of the adaptation , and further provides different feedback and / or learning modules based on the user model . Adaptive learning technology enables the system to offer ﬂexible solutions that dynamically adapt content to ﬁtindividual real - time learning needs . The adaptivelearning technologies have been implemented in the ﬁeld of education , such as distance education ( Brusilovsky , 1995 ; Saba , 2000 ) , adaptive tutoring ( Sessink , Beeftink , & Tramper , 2007 ) , and online discussion ( Du , Havard , & Li , 2005 ) . Most of the studies focus on developing and using different types of adaptive techniques in the design of adaptive learning in education , and only a limited study reports the impact of adaptive learning in education . One of the studies reports that dynamic online discussion environments in which students learn beyond the course goal paves the way for surface to deep learning ( Du et al . , 2005 ) . The other study reports that the experimental group students who received the adaptive feedback learning design improved signiﬁcantly more in students’ understanding of the processes and in applying the knowledge to new situations compared to the group who received pre - deﬁned feedback ( Veerman et al . , 2000 ) . The DSLM has been implemented in the classroom for several topics and has evidenced success in fostering students’ conceptual change within the classroom setting . But one previous limitation of implementing the DSLM in classroom teaching is that it cannot provide students with different learning feedback or contents on the basis of different alternative conceptions and reasoning patterns . In addition , many scientiﬁc concepts are invisible and abstract in nature , so that the use of models and analogies or simulation would make it morepossible to foster students’ constructionsor reconstructions of morescientiﬁc view of the concepts . Therefore , this study moves one step beyond classroom instruction to an adaptive 98 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching multimedia web - learning approach . It seems to be a very promising direction , which may maximize the efﬁciency and effectiveness of conceptual change and scientiﬁc reasoning . Purpose This study explores the potential of maximizing students’ success with both conceptual change and scientiﬁc reasoning ability by incorporating both scientiﬁc reasoning and the DSLM into the design of an adaptivedigitallearningprogram . Aone - group pre - , post - , andretentionquasi - experimentaldesignwas used in the study . It examines the effects on students’ performance on the Atomic Achievement Test ( AAT ) , Scientiﬁc Reasoning Test ( SRT ) , and Atomic Dependent Reasoning Test ( ADRT ) . In addition to quantitative data , a ﬂow map is used to providea sequential representation of the ﬂow of students’ conceptual frameworks as elicited in interviews . This framework is further analyzed from two major parts : complexity of scientiﬁc reasoning and quantity of conceptual change . Moreover , the relationships among students’ scientiﬁc reasoning , atomic concepts , and atomic dependent reasoning are also examined . Methods Participants A total of 108 eighth graders recruited from three classes of a middle school participated in this study . There were 60 boys and 48 girls . These three classes’ students were taught by the same physical science teacher . The physical science teacher is willing to try new way of instruction and involved in the study . There were 25 classes of students for each grade level ( 7th , 8th , and 9th grade levels ) , and total of about 75 classes overall in the school . All of the classes are heterogeneous . Students were mixed with different achievement levels when they ﬁrst entered school at the 7th grade level . The physical science achievement of these three classes of students was about average for the 8th grade level of their school . Learning Materials Design of SCCR Content : Unit on Atoms . An eight - person panel was involved in the development of theatomunit : twoscienceeducators , fourmiddleschoolphysicalscienceteachers , andtwoscienceeducation graduates . The design of the unit on atomic structure was based upon the six stages of the DSLM described earlier . Four topics were covered in developing a series of dual situated learning events : ( 1 ) Elements and compounds : identify compounds and elements , where compounds can be separated into elements through chemical means . ( 2 ) Atomic structure : the components of atoms and their properties as well as the motion of electrons . ( 3 ) Arrangementofelectronsandchemicalreactivityofelements : thearrangement ofelectronsina noble gas is stable because there are eight electrons in the outer shell ; alkali metals ( e . g . , Sodium and Potassium ) have greater chemical reactivity because there is only one electron in the outer shell of the atom . ( 4 ) Atomic and chemical reactions : the nature and number of electron transfers occurring while two different atomsreactwitheachothertoformacompound ; therelationshipbetween theelectronsdonor / receiptandthe electron arrangement of atoms during a chemical reaction . It is clear thatstudents’ alternativeconceptions ofatomsare due to the invisibilityof moleculesand their dynamic nature , making it more difﬁcult to construct concepts related to atoms . Therefore , the design of each web - based dual situated learning event in this unit emphasizes providing students with visualizations for the 2D - and 3D - models to help them build more scientiﬁc views of atomic structure . For example , one of the 2D atomic models lets students interacting with it to understand the number of electrons distributed at each shell , andthenumberofprotonsandneutronsintheatomicnucleus ( Figure1 ) . Theother3Datomicmodelprovides students with more clear ideas about the dynamic movement of electrons around the nucleus . Each dual situated learning event requires students to provide an answer and their reasons to the driving questionbeforeproceeding with various activities . The samedrivingquestionis asked again after theevent to examine the students’ conceptual change as well as their reasoning changes . In addition towriting down their reasons , students also are required to choose the best reasons for what they had written down . This is because the system needs to have each individual student’s choices of answers and reasons made before and after events inordertoquicklygenerateanappropriateHTMLpageforeach individualstudent . Inordertoactivate SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 99 Journal of Research in Science Teaching Figure 1 . The 2D - atomic structure model . 100 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching students’ use of scientiﬁc reasoning , therefore , we speciﬁcally restructure the process to let students view both of their answers and written reasons before and after events , as well as the correct answers ; and then to request that students justify why they changed or stayed with their original thoughts after the learning events . This draws students into the process of scientiﬁc reasoning as well as conceptual change ( Figure 2 ) . Throughout the unit on atoms , students need to use both deductive and inductive scientiﬁc reasoning for tasks such as : formulating plans , analyzing elements , evaluating alternative ideas , determining the consequence and hypothesis , identifying variables , making inferences , making clariﬁcations , making justiﬁcations , making conclusions based upon observations , experimenting , processing rules and general principles , judging the credibility of a source ; distinguishing between fact , opinion and reasoned judgment , weighing evidence and assessing data , deciding between competing theories , developing concepts / rules / principles from observation and knowledge of speciﬁc examples , extracting similarities and differences among speciﬁc objects and events , arriving at generations and conclusions , testing generations by applying them to new experiences or using them to predict future speciﬁc instances . Learning of Atomic Activities . Two examples of atomic activities are provided to show how dual situatedlearningeventscanhelpstudentstoconstructandreconstructtheirunderstandingofatomicconcepts . The ﬁrst example was purposely designed to help students construct how different compounds are composed of different atoms and how different atoms have different properties . Several driving questions were initiated : Are different compounds composed of the same kind of atom ? Do all atoms have the same mass , size , and properties ? Students need to provide their answers and their reasons before the events . Following the driving questions , a series of dual situated learning events were provided : ( 1 ) Different compounds are composed of different atoms : demonstrations of how the electroanalysis of water produces oxygen and hydrogen , the reaction of magnesium and hydrochloride , etc . ( 2 ) Different atoms have different properties : demonstrations of how hydrogen can create explosions , how oxygen can light a stick of incense , goldand silver , etc . ( 3 ) . Historical views about atoms and their properties : videos oftheories andexperiments proposed by Pythagoras , Democritus , Dalton , etc . Then similar major driving questions were asked again Figure 2 . Students answers and reasoning before and after the web - based dual situated learning events . SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 101 Journal of Research in Science Teaching right after the events and students provided their answers and reasons again . Students would view their answers and reasons from before and after the events , as well as the correct answers , and they were further requested to justify why they had changed or retained their original thoughts after learning the events . The second examples were designed to help students construct why some element are more stable than others . Several driving questions were initiated : Why are sodium and potassium unstable in air and why do they react more easily with other substances ? Why are helium , argon , and neon stable ? Why is chloride unstableincomparisonwithanoblegas ? Followingdrivingquestions , aseriesofdualsituatedlearningevents were provided . ( 1 ) . Macroscopic representations : demonstrations of how sodium burns easily with a yellow ﬂame , potassium reacts easily with air and loses its shine , etc . ( 2 ) . Microscopic representations : a series of animation of 2D argon , neon , potassium , and sodium atomic structure were presented individually to show students the number , arrangement , and movement of electrons at each shell , and the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of each atom . ( 3 ) Microscopic representations : a series of animations of 2D argon , neon , and sodium ( or chloride or potassium ) atomic structures were presented simultaneously . Students can understand the similarities and differences among those different atoms , speciﬁcally the number and arrangement of electrons in each shell , and the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of each atom . ( 4 ) . The periodic table was presented for making comparison among different atoms . Then similar major driving questions were asked again right after and students provided their answers and reasons again . Students again viewed their answers and reasoning from before and after the events , as well as the correct answers , and they further provided the reasons why they changed or retained their original thoughts after learning the events . Dynamic Generation of HTML Pages . Our study describes a dynamic generation of web - based learning content based on the DSLM and reasoning . These contents are deﬁned by means of learning tasks that correspond to basic conceptual units , and rules which described how learning tasks are divided into subtasks . Adaptation is implemented by presenting students with different HTML pages depending on their prior alternative conceptions and their previous reasoning results . In addition , the adaptive feedback of comparison HTML page of student’s previous concept and scientiﬁc reasoning , changed concept and scientiﬁc reasoning , and correct concepts also are dynamically generated for each individual student . The SCCR platform was the FreeBSD running on an Apache WWW server . The core of the SCCR system was programmed in PHP , Perl , Java Applet , Java script , and works with MySQL to efﬁciently handle extremely large data sets and analytical programs . Instruments Atomic Achievement Test ( AAT ) . The AAT is a multiple choice diagnostic instrument that was developed to measure students’ atom - related conceptions before , directly after , and 3 - month after receiving the atomunitofthe SCCRdigitallearning program ( Appendix 2 ) . Thecontent validitywas established by the samepanelofeightevaluators , ensuringthattheitemswereproperlyconstructedandrelevanttotheatomunit web - learning materials we developed . The questions requiring students to use deeper information processing ability are mainly concerned with analysis and synthesis . There are nine items for topic 1 , and the other three topics all have eight items , for a total of 33 items . Students receive one point for each question they answer correctly , so the possible score is 33 . The Cronbach’s a of the AAT was 0 . 74 for the pretest , 0 . 90 for the posttest , and 0 . 93 for the retention - test . Scientiﬁc Reasoning Test ( SRT ) . The SRT is a two - tier multiple - choice diagnostic instrument developed to measure students’ scientiﬁc reasoning before , directly after , and 2 months after receiving the atom unit of the SCCR digital learning program ( Appendix 3 ) . The SRTwas originally developed by Lawson ( 1978 ) and modiﬁed in 2000 . It measures students’ deductive reasoning for aspects of conservation , proportional thinking , identiﬁcation and control of variables , probabilistic thinking , correlative thinking and hypothetic - deductive ability . There are 12 items , and each item contains two tiers . In the ﬁrst tier students choose the answer , and in the second tier theyuse the scientiﬁcreasoning abilities mentioned above . Students need to answer both tiers correctly in order to receive one point , so the highest possible score is 12 . Cronbach a of the SRTwas 0 . 78 for the pretest , 0 . 76 for the posttest , and 0 . 78 for the retention - test which is close to the Lawson’ s result of Cronbach a . 102 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching Atomic Dependent Reasoning Test ( ADRT ) . The ADRT is a two - tier multiple choice diagnostic instrument that was developed to measure the degree of students’ conceptual change involving atom - related concepts before , directly after , and 2 months after receiving the atom unit of the SCCR digital learning program ( Appendix 4 ) . The content validity was established by the same panel of eight evaluators , ensuring that the items were properly constructed and relevant to the atom unit Web - learning materials we developed . There are eight items for each topic , and each item contains two - tiers , with the ﬁrst tier to check students’ scientiﬁc conceptions / alternative conceptions , and the second tier to justify their response by telling why they selected that response . Students use scientiﬁc reasoning while answering the second - tier of the ADRT . There are 32 items and each item has two tiers . Students need to answer both tiers correctly in order to receive one point , so the highest possible score is 32 . The Cronbach a of ADRTwas 0 . 88 for the pretest , 0 . 95 for the posttest , and 0 . 95 for the retention - test . Interview Analysis . Students’ interview results were transcribed and then analyzed by a ﬂow map method ( Anderson & Demetrius , 1993 ) . A ﬂow map is constructed by diagramming the interviewee’s verbalization of thought as it unfolds . The map also displays the sequence of complex thought patterns expressed by the interviewee . This method of analyzing cognitive structure based on respondents’ narrative , has been employed in several studies and it has been suggested that ﬂow map analyses are a useful and valid method of representing students’ conceptual frameworks in science ( Anderson , Randle , & Covotsos , 2001 ) . By using the ﬂow map method , this study evaluated the complexity of students’scientiﬁc reasoning and quantity of conceptual change in two major parts . Concerning the complexity of scientiﬁc reasoning , four levels of scientiﬁc reasoning modiﬁed from Hogan , Nastasi , and Pressley’s study ( 2000 ) were used in this study : Generativity ( G ) , Elaboration ( EL ) , Justiﬁcation ( J ) , and Explanation ( Ex ) ( see Figure 3 for an example ) . About one ﬁfth of the interviewee’s Figure 3 . Flow Map of Atomic Composition . Note 1 : Scientiﬁc reasoning : Generativity ( G ) , Elaboration ( EL ) , Justiﬁcation ( J ) , Explanation ( EX ) . Note2 : Conceptualchange : Progress ( PG ) , Maintain - Correct ( MTC ) , Maintain - Partial Correct ( MTPC ) , Maintain - incorrect ( MTIC ) , Retrogress ( RTG ) . SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 103 Journal of Research in Science Teaching results were checked by the second coder and the inter - rater reliability is 0 . 89 . These levels can be described as follows . ( 1 ) Generativity ( G ) : the number of students’ own observation , ideas , or conjectures . For instance , ‘‘Idonotknow’’wascodedasG0becausestudentsdidnotansweranythingrelevant ; and‘‘electrons move randomly’’ was coded as G1 since there was one idea presented by the student . G0 and G1 represent students receive 0 and 1 score for G level , respectively . ( 2 ) Elaboration ( EL ) : the number of scientiﬁc concepts used to describe and explain the concepts . For instance , ‘‘electrons have a charge and atoms do not’’ was coded as EL1 since only one scientiﬁc conceptionwasusedtodescribetheideaofelectronswithacharge ; ‘‘Anatomcanbedivided , andit can be divided into electrons with a nucleus at the center of the atom . ’’ was coded as EL2 since two scientiﬁc concepts were presented to describe two components of the atom . ( 3 ) Justiﬁcation ( J ) : thenumberofaspectsbasedonevidence , inferenceorexperimentsusedtosupport theideasorassertions . Forinstance , ‘‘themassofanatomisalmostequaltotheneutronplusproton because the mass of electrons is very small ; ’’ was coded as J1 since one inference was used to explain the mass of the atom . ‘‘The mass of an atom is almost equal to the neutron plus proton because the mass of electron is very small , and if an atom loses one electron that would not change the massof theatom ; ’’ was codedas J2 since two different inferences were usedto explain why the mass of an atom is equal to the neutron plus proton . ( 4 ) Explanation ( Ex ) : the number of proposed rules or mechanisms used to explain the concepts or assertions . For instance , ‘‘chlorine and bromine can react easily with sodium , because the most stablearrangementofelectronsis8 . ’’wascodedasEx1sincetheproposedruleof‘‘themoststable arrangement of electrons is 8’’ was used to explain why chlorine can react easily with sodium . ‘‘Chlorine and bromine can react easily with sodium because the most stable arrangement of electronsis8 . Bothchlorineandbrominestillneedoneelectron , andbothofthemlackoneelectron on their outer shell , so their outer shell electron arrangement is either 7 or 17 . Therefore , sodium would give chlorine or bromine 1 electron , and thus they easily react with sodium ; ’’ was coded as Ex2sincetwoproposedrulesof‘‘themoststablearrangementofelectronsis8’’and‘‘theoutershell lacks one electron’’ are used to explain why chlorine and bromine can react with sodium easily . To quantify conceptual change , several categories were measured as follows : ( 1 ) Correct concept : whether students’ alternative conceptions decrease or increase throughout the learning . ( 2 ) Natureandquantityofconceptualchanges : thenatureandquantityofconceptualchangeareshown by the number of linkages between pre - and post - ﬂow map , or between post - and retention - ﬂow map , or between pre - and retention - ﬂow map ( see Figure 3 for an example ) . ( 2a ) Progress ( PG ) : the number of linkages shows to what extent the student’s concepts improved ( Figure 5 ) . ( 2b ) Maintain - correct ( MTC ) : the number of linkages shows to what extent the student’s concepts were maintained correctly . ( 2c ) Maintain - partial correct ( MTPC ) : the number of linkages shows to what extent the student’s concepts were maintained as partially correct . ( 2d ) Maintain - incorrect ( MTIC ) : the number of linkages shows to what extent the student’s concepts were maintained as partially incorrect . ( 2e ) Retrogression ( RTG ) : the number of linkage shows to what extent the student’s concepts retrogressed . Procedure . All of the students received the Web - based DSLM learning program for ten class periods . A pretest of ADRT , the SRT , and the AAT were administered to all students before the instruction in their regular classroom . These instruments werepiloted bytheother threeclasses ofstudents . One andeightweeks respectively after the instruction , a posttest and a retention test of the ADRT , SRT , and AAT were administered in their regular classroom . In addition , 18 students from three classes ( six students from each class ) were interviewed and fully recorded by audio tape before , directly after , and 2 months after learning . Ten questions ( Appendix 1 ) were used to interview students’ understanding about atomic conceptions each time of an hour . Students were selected for interviews based on the following basis : two high achievers 104 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching ( onemaleandonefemale ) , twomiddleachievers ( onemaleandonefemale ) , andtwolowachievers ( onemale and one female ) . Results Atomic Achievement Test ( AAT ) Table 2 presents the descriptive statistics of the pre - , post - , and retention test results for the AATs . It can be seen that students made great progress from pre - test to post - test ( from 12 . 71 to 20 . 02 ) . They also made slight gains from post - to retention test ( from 20 . 02 to 21 . 04 ) . Repeated measures of ANOVAwere used to examine any increases in mean scores for the pre - test , post - test and retention test . The table shows an increase in pre - , post - , and retention - test mean scores that also reached statistical signiﬁcance ( F ¼ 91 . 25 , p ¼ 0 . 000 ) . The Mauchly’s test of sphericity was not signiﬁcant , sothe sphericity assumption of F was used . The Sidak test used to perform post - hoc analysis suggests that the post - testscore is signiﬁcantlyhigher than pre - test score ( p ( post > pre ) ¼ 0 . 000 ) , andthe retention - test scorewas signiﬁcantly higher than pre - test ( p ( retention > pre ) ¼ 0 . 000 ) . Atomic Dependent Reasoning Test ( ADRT ) Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the pre - , post - , and retention test of the ADRT . It shows that studentsmadegreatprogressfrompre - topost - testoftheADRT ( from9 . 39to18 . 61 ) . However , studentswere not able to retain the same level of performance for the retention of the ADRT ( from 18 . 61 to 16 . 89 ) . Repeated measures of ANOVA were used to examine any increase in pre - , post - , and retention test of ADRT mean scores . This indicates that the increases in pre - , post - and retention - test mean scores also reached statistical signiﬁcance ( F ¼ 119 . 24 , p ¼ 0 . 000 ) . The Mauchly’s test of sphericity was not signiﬁcant , so the sphericity assumption of F was used . The Sidak test suggests that the post test score is signiﬁcantly higher than pre - test score ( p ( post > pre ) ¼ 0 . 000 ) , post - test is signiﬁcantly higher than retention - test score ( p ( post > retention ) ¼ 0 . 009 ) , and the retention test score was signiﬁcantly higher than pre - test ( p ( retention > pre ) ¼ 0 . 000 ) . Scientiﬁc Reasoning Test ( SRT ) Table 2 presents the descriptive statistics of the pre - , post - , and retention of the SRT . This shows that students made great progress from pre - to post - test of the SRT ( from 4 . 09 to 4 . 17 ) . This shows that students made progress from pre - to post - test and from post - to retention test of the SRT ( from 4 . 17 to 4 . 96 ) . Table 2 Repeated measures ANOVA of pre - , post - , and retention of Atomic Achievement Test ( AAT ) , Atomic Dependent Reasoning Test ( ADRT ) , and Scientiﬁc Reasoning Test ( SRT ) Mean SD F - Value of Repeated Measures ANOVA Post - Hoc Comparisons Atomic Achievement Test ( AAT ) 91 . 25 * * * Pre - test 12 . 71 4 . 01 Post - test 20 . 05 8 . 53 Post - test > Pre - test Retention - test 21 . 04 7 . 54 Retention > Pre - test Atomic Dependent Reasoning Test ( ADRT ) 119 . 24 * * * Pretest 9 . 39 4 . 46 Post - test > Pre - test Post - test 18 . 61 7 . 44 Post - test > Retention Retention - test 16 . 89 8 . 65 Retention > Pretest Scientiﬁc Reasoning Test ( SRT ) 9 . 70 * * * Pre - test 4 . 09 1 . 98 Post - test 4 . 17 2 . 35 Retention > Pretest Retention - test 4 . 96 2 . 73 Retention > Posttest * * * p (cid:2) 0 . 000 . SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 105 Journal of Research in Science Teaching Repeated measures of ANOVAwere used to examine anyincrease in pre - , post - , and retention test of the SRT mean scores . This indicates that the increases in pre - , post - , and retention - test mean scores reached statistical signiﬁcance ( F ¼ 9 . 70 , p ¼ 0 . 000 ) . The Mauchly’s test of sphericity was signiﬁcant at 0 . 05 , so the Huynh - Feldt of F was used . The Sidak test suggests that the retention - test score is signiﬁcantly higher than pre - test ( p ( retention > pre ) ¼ 0 . 000 ) , and retention - test score was signiﬁcantly higher than post - test ( p ( retention > post ) ¼ 0 . 009 ) . Multiple Regression Analysis This section examines whether students’ degree of conceptual change would increase as their scientiﬁc reasoning ability increased . Therefore , the stepwise regression method was used to explorewhether the post - SRTor post - AAT test would be most important for predicting the post - ADRT scores , and whether retention - SRT or retention - AAT would be the most important for predicting the retention - ADRT scores . Results indicated that the best single predictor for post - ADRT sores was the post - SRT followed by post - AAT scores . The standardized regression coefﬁcient for post - SRT , and post - AATwere 0 . 36 and 0 . 33 . Together post - SRT and post - AAT accounted for 33 . 7 % of the variance in post - ADRT scores ( Table 3 ) . Results indicated that the best single predictor for retention - ADRT scores was retention - AAT scores followed by retention - SRT . The standardized regression coefﬁcient for retention - AAT and retention - SRT were 0 . 64 and 0 . 30 . Together , retention - AAT and retention - SRT accounted for 67 . 1 % of the variance in retention - ADRT scores . Interview Results Students were interviewed with 10 questions before , immediately after and 2 months after instruction , with the results transcribed and analyzed by a ﬂow map method . Therefore , ten ﬂow maps were generated after each interview for each individual and each ﬂow map contains students’ pre - , post - , and retention - interview together . Flow map data were analyzed in two parts : complexity of scientiﬁc reasoning and degree of conceptual change . Complexity of Scientiﬁc Reasoning For analyzing the complexity of scientiﬁc reasoning , four levels of scientiﬁc reasoning , Generativity ( G ) , Elaboration ( EL ) , Justiﬁcation ( J ) , and Explanation ( Ex ) were used in this study . Each ﬂow map generated separate scores on G , EL , J , Ex for the pre - , post - , and retention - interview three parts . Table 4 summarizes the means of students’ complexity of scientiﬁcreasoning , and repeated measures of ANOVA of ﬂow map from pre - interview , post - interview and retention - interview stages . The Mauchly’s test of sphericity was not signiﬁcant for most of the level of scientiﬁc reasoning across questions , thus the sphericity assumption of F was used . With exceptions , Mauchly’s test of shpericity was signiﬁcant for questions4 , 5 , and6Generativity ( G ) , questions7Justiﬁcation ( J ) , andquestions8 – 10Explanation ( Ex ) ; thus the Huynh - Feldt of F was used . Moreover , the Sidak test was further performed for post - hoc analysis , when repeated measures F value is statistically signiﬁcant , for comparing pre - , post - , and retention - interview Table 3 Stepwise multiple regression summary for relationships among Atomic Dependent Reasoning Test ( ADRT ) , Atomic Achievement Test ( AAT ) , and Scientiﬁc Reasoning Test ( SRT ) Signiﬁcant Predictor Variable StandardizedRegressionCoefﬁcients Multiple R R 2 Cumulative % of Variance Explained Post - test of Atomic Dependent Reasoning Test ( ADRT ) Post - test of Scientiﬁc Reasoning Test ( SRT ) 0 . 36 26 . 2 % Post - test of Atomic Achievement Test ( AAT ) 0 . 33 0 . 60 0 . 35 33 . 7 % Retention test of Atomic Dependent Reasoning Test ( ADRT ) Retention test of Atomic Achievement Test ( AAT ) 0 . 64 63 . 9 % Retention test of Scientiﬁc Reasoning Test ( SRT ) 0 . 30 0 . 82 0 . 68 67 . 1 % 106 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching Table 4 Repeated measures ANOVA of students’ use of scientiﬁc reasoning in the pre - , post - , and retention - ﬂow map for 10 interview questions Levels of Scientiﬁc ReasoningInvolvingConceptUnderstanding Pre - FlowMap Post - FlowMap RetentionFlowMap F - Value of RepeatedMeasuresANOVA Post - Hoc Comparisons Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD ( 1 ) Chemical compound and elements Generativity ( G ) 9 . 67 3 . 90 3 . 61 2 . 66 1 . 61 2 . 75 62 . 37 * * * Pre > post , pre > retention , post > retention Elaboration ( EL ) 3 . 72 3 . 20 3 . 89 2 . 70 7 . 22 4 . 65 13 . 43 * * * Retention > pre , retention > post Justiﬁcations ( J ) — — — — 0 . 22 0 . 94 1 . 00 — Explanations ( EX ) — — — — — — — — ( 2 ) Shape and structure of atoms Generativity ( G ) 1 . 83 0 . 99 1 . 39 0 . 61 0 . 94 0 . 87 4 . 00 * Elaboration ( EL ) 0 . 67 0 . 97 0 . 39 0 . 70 1 . 78 1 . 00 11 . 85 * * * Retention > pre , retention > post Justiﬁcations ( J ) — — — — 0 . 06 0 . 24 1 . 00 — Explanations ( EX ) — — — — — — — — ( 3 ) Movement of electrons Generativity ( G ) 0 . 72 0 . 58 0 . 22 0 . 55 0 . 00 0 . 00 11 . 84 * * * Pre > post , pre > retention Elaboration ( EL ) 0 . 39 0 . 61 0 . 94 0 . 54 1 . 28 0 . 46 14 . 12 * * * Post > pre , retention > pre Justiﬁcations ( J ) — — — — — — — — Explanations ( EX ) — — — — — — — — ( 4 ) Arrangement of electrons within atom Generativity ( G ) 1 . 33 0 . 49 0 . 89 0 . 32 1 . 39 0 . 98 3 . 29 Pre > post Elaboration ( EL ) 0 . 78 0 . 73 2 . 22 0 . 88 2 . 33 1 . 28 17 . 58 * * * Post > pre , retention > pre Justiﬁcations ( J ) 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 11 0 . 32 0 . 06 0 . 24 1 . 55 — Explanations ( EX ) — — — — — — — — ( 5 ) Composition of gold atom and iron atom Generativity ( G ) 2 . 33 1 . 57 1 . 67 1 . 03 1 . 17 0 . 62 6 . 62 * Pre > retention Elaboration ( EL ) 1 . 22 1 . 73 2 . 22 1 . 44 1 . 33 1 . 19 3 . 18 Justiﬁcations ( J ) 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 28 0 . 58 0 . 17 0 . 51 2 . 26 — Explanations ( EX ) — — — — — — — — ( 6 ) Composition of atom Generativity ( G ) 1 . 28 0 . 96 0 . 17 0 . 38 0 . 22 0 . 43 15 . 10 * * * Pre > post , pre > retention Elaboration ( EL ) 1 . 50 1 . 82 4 . 50 1 . 20 5 . 39 2 . 33 32 . 36 * * * Post > pre , retention > pre Justiﬁcations ( J ) 0 . 17 0 . 51 0 . 22 0 . 43 0 . 17 0 . 38 0 . 14 — Explanations ( EX ) — — — — — — — — ( 7 ) Stability of noble gas Generativity ( G ) 0 . 94 0 . 54 0 . 33 0 . 49 0 . 39 0 . 50 13 . 38 * * * Pre > post , pre > retention Elaboration ( EL ) 0 . 17 0 . 38 0 . 33 0 . 69 0 . 28 0 . 58 00 . 38 — Justiﬁcations ( J ) 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 78 0 . 55 0 . 83 0 . 99 10 . 34 * * Post > pre , retention > pre Explanations ( EX ) — — — — — — — — ( 8 ) Stability among sodium , potassium , and noble gas Generativity ( G ) 0 . 22 0 . 43 0 . 11 0 . 32 0 . 33 0 . 49 1 . 36 Elaboration ( EL ) 1 . 00 0 . 77 0 . 33 0 . 49 0 . 33 0 . 69 6 . 48 * Pre > post , pre > retention Justiﬁcations ( J ) 0 . 11 0 . 32 0 . 33 0 . 59 0 . 28 0 . 46 1 . 48 — Explanations ( EX ) 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 33 0 . 59 0 . 11 0 . 32 4 . 86 * ( Continued ) SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 107 Journal of Research in Science Teaching results . It indicates that there was a decrease in pre - , post - , and retention - ﬂow map of Generativity ( G ) mean scores that reached a statistically signiﬁcant difference level for questions 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 6 , 7 , and 10 . In addition , theirpost - hocresultssuggestthateither ( 1 ) pre - orpost - Generativity ( G ) meanscoresaresigniﬁcantlygreater than the retention - of Generativity ( G ) ; or ( 2 ) the pre - Generativity ( G ) mean score is signiﬁcantly greater than thepost - Generativity ( G ) meanscore . Ontheotherhand , itindicatesthatthereisanincreaseinpre - , post - , and retention - ﬂowmapofElaboration ( EL ) meanscoresthatreachedastatisticallysigniﬁcantdifferencelevelfor questions 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , and 8 . In addition , their post - hoc results suggests that either : ( 1 ) most of their retention - or post - Elaboration ( EL ) mean scores are signiﬁcantly greater than the pre - Elaboration ( EL ) mean score ; or ( 2 ) that their post - Elaboration ( EL ) mean score is signiﬁcantly greater than the pre - Elaboration ( EL ) mean score . It also shows that there is an increase in pre - , post - , and retention - ﬂow map of Justiﬁcation ( J ) mean scores that reached a statistically signiﬁcant difference level for questions 7 and 10 ; and their post hoc results suggest that either their retention - or post - Justiﬁcation ( J ) mean scores are signiﬁcantly higher than the pre - Justiﬁcation ( J ) mean scores ; or thattheir post - Justiﬁcation ( J ) mean score is signiﬁcantly higher than the pre - Justiﬁcation ( J ) mean score . Some of the mean scores of justiﬁcation and explanation are very small which need to be noted . It also shows that there is an increase in their pre - , post - , and retention - test of Explanation ( EX ) mean scores that reached a statistically signiﬁcant difference level for questions 8 and 9 ; and the Sidak test results indicate that their post - Explanation ( EX ) mean scores are signiﬁcantly higher than the pre - Explanation ( EX ) mean score . Figures 4 and 5 clarify the distribution of mean score of students’ level of scientiﬁcreasoning at pre - and post - test . Before instruction , it shows students’ levels of scientiﬁc reasoning primary are at Generativity ( G ) and Elaboration ( EL ) , with almost no Explanation ( EX ) level appearing ( Figure 5 ) . After instruction , Elaboration ( EL ) becomes the major level of reasoning used by students ; Justiﬁcations ( J ) and Explanations ( EX ) increase substantially , although Generativitiy ( G ) decreased substantially ( Figure 6 ) . Two months after learning , the level of Elaboration ( EL ) increased for several topics . In short , students’ use of levels of scientiﬁc reasoning progressed from Generativity ( G ) to Elaboration ( EL ) and then Justiﬁcation ( J ) and explanation ( EX ) after they received the learning program . Quantity ( Measure ) of Conceptual Change Quantity of Correct Concept . Table 5 presents the descriptive statistics for the mean scores of correct concept and repeated measures of ANOVA . The Mauchly’s test of sphericity was not signiﬁcant then the ( 9 ) Reactions of chlorine and bromine , with sodium Generativity ( G ) 0 . 33 0 . 60 0 . 06 0 . 24 0 . 28 0 . 46 2 . 53 Elaboration ( EL ) 0 . 78 1 . 00 0 . 33 0 . 59 0 . 39 0 . 78 1 . 69 Justiﬁcations ( J ) 0 . 39 0 . 78 0 . 61 0 . 92 0 . 44 0 . 78 0 . 36 — Explanations ( EX ) 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 67 0 . 97 0 . 17 0 . 38 6 . 70 * Post > pre ( 10 ) Stability between hydrogen atom and hydrogen molecule Generativity ( G ) 0 . 39 0 . 50 0 . 06 0 . 24 0 . 06 0 . 24 8 . 50 * Pre > post , pre > retention Elaboration ( EL ) 0 . 56 0 . 51 0 . 50 0 . 62 0 . 44 0 . 62 0 . 24 — Justiﬁcations ( J ) 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 50 0 . 51 0 . 50 0 . 62 7 . 29 * Post > pre , re - tention > pre Explanations ( EX ) 0 . 11 0 . 47 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 06 0 . 24 0 . 59 — N ¼ 18 . * p (cid:2) 0 . 05 . * * p (cid:2) 0 . 01 . * * * p (cid:2) 0 . 000 . Table 4 ( Continued ) Levels of Scientiﬁc ReasoningInvolvingConceptUnderstanding Pre - FlowMap Post - FlowMap RetentionFlowMap F - Value of RepeatedMeasuresANOVA Post - Hoc Comparisons Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD 108 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching sphericity assumption of F was used for most of the question . With only one exception in question 8 , Mauchly’s test of sphericity was signiﬁcant thus the Huynh - Feldt of F was used . It indicates that there is an increase in the mean scores of correct concepts from pre - , post - , and retention - ﬂow maps , and all reached statistically signiﬁcant effect across different topics . It is because all of the repeated measures of ANOVA across 10 interview question all reached statistically signiﬁcant difference levels ; therefore , the Sidak tests were further performed . In general , the post - hoc analysis suggests that either post - test score is signiﬁcantly higher than pre - test score or the retention - test score is signiﬁcantly higher than pre - or post - test across different topics . Quantity of Conceptual Change . For analyzing the quantity of conceptual change , ﬁve categories : PG , MTC , MTPC , MTIC , andRTGwereusedinthisstudy . EachﬂowmapwouldgenerateseparatescoresforPG , MTC , MTPC , MTIC , and RTG from pre - to post - interview , and then post - to retention - interview . The mean scores of the quantity of conceptual change from pre - to post - , post - to retention , and pre - to retention are presented in the following . For pre - to post - interview , the mean scores of the progress ( PG ) category was higher than any other category across most of the ten topics , except for one topic , where maintain - partial correct ( MTPC ) was the highest . The mean scores for Progress ( PG ) ranged from 3 . 22 to 0 . 39 , maintain - correct category ( MC ) ranged from 0 . 00 to 0 . 86 , maintain - partial correct ( MTPC ) ranged from 0 . 00 to 1 . 06 , maintain - incorrect ( MTIC ) ranged from 0 . 00 to 1 . 17 , and Retrogress ( RTG ) ranged from 0 . 00 to 0 . 94 ( Figure 6 ) . For post - to retention interview results , the mean scores of the progress ( PG ) category were higher than other categories for about ﬁve topics , the mean scores of the maintain - correct category ( MTC ) were higher than any other category for four topics , and maintain - partial correct ( MTPC ) was the highest for one topic . The mean scores for PG ranged from 2 . 28 to 0 . 11 , MC ranged from 1 . 39 to 0 . 17 , MTPC ranged from 0 . 06 to Figure 4 . Distribution of means of students’ level of scientiﬁc reasoning across 10 interview results before instruction . Figure 5 . Distribution of means of students’ level of scientiﬁc reasoning across 10 interview results after instruction . SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 109 Journal of Research in Science Teaching 0 . 56 , MTIC ranged from 0 . 00 to 0 . 28 , and RTG ranged from 0 . 06 to 0 . 78 for post - to retention - interview ( Figure 7 ) . From the pre - to retention - interview , it was found that the means scores of progress ( PG ) category remained highest for about eight topics , and the mean scores of maintain - correct ( MTC ) category remained highest for about two topics . The mean scores for PG ranged from 2 . 50 to 0 . 44 , MC ranged from 0 . 00 to 1 . 17 , MTPC ranged from 0 . 00 to 0 . 50 , MTIC ranged from 0 . 00 to 0 . 50 , and retrogress ranged from 0 . 00 to 0 . 61 for pre - to post - interview . Discussion and Conclusions This study reports an adaptive web learning project that was developed based on the Dual Situated Learning Model ( DSLM ) and scientiﬁc reasoning in order to promote middle students’ conceptual change as Figure 6 . Distribution of conceptual change across 10 interview results from pre - to post - test . Table 5 Repeated measures ANOVA of students’ correct concepts in the pre - , post - , and retention - ﬂow map for 10 interview questions Correct Concepts Pre - Test Post - Test Retention - Test F Value of RepeatedMeasuresANOVA Post - Hoc Comparisons Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD ( 1 ) Chemical compound and elements 6 . 11 2 . 27 8 . 11 2 . 30 7 . 22 2 . 88 6 . 55 * Post > pre ( 2 ) Shape and structure of atoms 2 . 89 1 . 37 2 . 17 1 . 25 5 . 39 2 . 36 21 . 06 * * * Retention > pre , retention > post ( 3 ) Movement of electrons 1 . 56 0 . 62 1 . 94 0 . 64 2 . 06 0 . 42 7 . 64 * Retention > pre ( 4 ) Arrangement of electrons within atom 0 . 72 0 . 58 2 . 00 1 . 28 2 . 33 1 . 28 14 . 14 * * * Post > pre , retention > pre ( 5 ) Composition of gold atom and iron atom 2 . 44 1 . 25 5 . 17 2 . 33 0 . 322 1 . 87 18 . 26 * * * Post > pre , post > retention ( 6 ) Composition of atom 2 . 00 2 . 43 6 . 00 2 . 06 6 . 78 2 . 94 34 . 45 * * * Post > pre , retention > pre ( 7 ) Stability of noble gas 0 . 72 0 . 58 3 . 11 2 . 37 2 . 94 2 . 04 13 . 28 * * * Post > pre , retention > pre ( 8 ) Stability among sodium , potassium , and noble gas 2 . 11 1 . 37 3 . 39 2 . 17 2 . 28 1 . 71 3 . 77 * Post > retention ( 9 ) Reactions chlorine and bromine , with sodium 1 . 33 1 . 28 3 . 89 2 . 65 3 . 06 2 . 71 9 . 38 * * Post > pre , retention > pre ( 10 ) Stability between hydrogen atom and hydrogen molecule 1 . 11 0 . 68 2 . 28 1 . 27 2 . 89 1 . 13 19 . 74 * * * Post > pre , retention > pre * p (cid:2) 0 . 05 . * * p (cid:2) 0 . 01 . * * * p (cid:2) 0 . 000 . 110 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching well as scientiﬁc reasoning ability . The study examines the effectiveness of students’ conceptual change involving atomic related concepts as well as their scientiﬁc reasoning through both qualitative and quantitative methods . For quantitative results , it shows an increase in pre - , post - , and retention - test mean scores that reached statistically signiﬁcant effect for AAT , SRT , and ADRT . This demonstrates that students’ concepts of atoms , scientiﬁc reasoning , and conceptual change all made progress throughout the learning of the SCCR atom unit . One possible explanation for why students made progress from pre - to post - SRTand then to retention - SRT , butdid not reach statistically signiﬁcant levels from pre - to post - SRTis that SRT speciﬁcally focuses on measuring students’ conservation , proportional thinking , identiﬁcation and control of variables , probabilistic thinking , correlative thinking and hypothetic - deductive ability . Our design of the SCCR atom unit purposely focused on the broader ability of scientiﬁc reasoning , which includes the use of inductive and deductive reasoning abilities in the construction of atomic - related conceptions : analyzing elements ; evaluating alternative ideas ; determining consequences ; making inferences , clariﬁcations , and justiﬁcations ; making conclusion based upon observation , experiment , and previous inference ; processing rules and general principles ; judging the credibility of a source ; distinguishing between fact , opinion and reason judgment ; weighing evidence ; extracting similarities and differences among speciﬁc objects and events ; and deciding between competing theories . Therefore , the effect on the immediate SRT may not be large enough to reach a statistically signiﬁcant difference . The students’ use of scientiﬁc reasoning results moved from Generativity ( G ) to Elaboration ( EL ) after learning from the program , and the use of Justiﬁcation ( J ) and Explanation ( EX ) also appeared more often after learning . This demonstrates the effectiveness of speciﬁcally designing each dual situated learning event with scientiﬁc reasoning . It also supports the idea that students’scientiﬁc reasoning ability can be developed within a short period if the design of learning events carefully addresses this ability . Our result is inconsistent with theDuncan andReiser ( 2007 ) study , which foundthattherewas nosubstantial improvement in students’ reasoning after 5 weeks of instruction regarding molecular genetics . They attributed the absence of substantial improvement in students’reasoning to the lack of a cognitive model of reasoning in the design of learning content . This supports our study that scientiﬁc reasoning ability would be improved if with a well - designed model as the basis for the development of learning materials . The quantity of correct concepts indicates that there is an increase in pre - , post - , and retention - mean scores of the correct concepts that reached statistically signiﬁcantly effect across 10 topics . It supports the conclusion that the results of students’scores of AAT made statistically signiﬁcant progress from pre - , post - to retention - test . Our ﬁnding supports two studies that the use of Web - based learning programs can improve students’ scientiﬁc achievement ( Cepni et al . , 2006 ; Marbach - Ad et al . , 2008 ) . The quantity of conceptual change shows that the mean scores of the progress ( PG ) category are higher than any other category across most of the topics from pre - to post - interview . This supports the conclusion that the results of students’ scores of ADRT made signiﬁcant progress from pre - and post - test . However , the mean scores of the progress ( PG ) category are higher than other categories for about half of the topics , and the mean scores of the maintain - correct category ( MTC ) were higher than other category for four topics , and the mean scores of the maintain - partial correct ( MTPC ) was the highest for only one topic from post - to retention - interview . This might explain why students’ scores of the ADRT decreased Figure 7 . Distribution of conceptual change across 10 interview results from post - to retention - test . SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 111 Journal of Research in Science Teaching slightly from post - test to retention - test . Our result is inconsistent with Cepni et al . ( 2006 ) study , which found that their computer assisted materials did not change students’ alternative conceptions related to photosynthesis . It is possible to ascribe this result to the fact that their instructional materials were not speciﬁcally developed based on an effective conceptual change model . Our study adds empirical evidence that takes speciﬁc pedagogical considerations , the DSLM and scientiﬁc reasoning , in the design of the Web - learning program which successfully promotes students’ concepts of atoms , scientiﬁc reasoning , and conceptual change . Our ﬁnding is different from one of the Web - based learning studies ( Tsui & Treagust , 2007 ) which reported that multiple representations may not sufﬁciently develop all students’ genetic reasoning and reconstruction of genetics conceptions . This may result from their development of Web - based learning materials which lack an effective conceptual change and scientiﬁc reasoning model . On the other hand , one of the major reasons making SCCR successful is the use of an adaptive Web - based learning environment . SCCR provides students with adaptive feedback of comparison HTML pages which activate students’ use of scientiﬁcreasoning to justify why they change their original scientiﬁc conceptions , which turn out to be quite effective in improving their scientiﬁc concept , conceptual change , and the level of scientiﬁc reasoning . It supports Veerman et al . ( 2000 ) study , that the experimental group students who received adaptive feedback learning design improved signiﬁcantly more in students’ understanding the processes and applying the knowledge in new situations than the pre - deﬁned feedback group . Regressionindicatedthatthebestpredictorforpost - ADRTwaspost - SRT , followedbypost - AATscores . This implies that students’ post - ADRTwould increase as their post - SRT increased . It can be interpreted that students’ conceptual change could be increased as their scientiﬁc reasoning was increased after learning . Immediately after learning , students’ scientiﬁc reasoning contributes more to their conceptual change than with the concepts students hold . This supports previous researchers’ suggestions that conceptual change involvesdeeprestructuring , notonlyintheconcepts , butalsointhewayofreasoning ( Furioetal . , 2000 ; Gil & Carrascosa , 1994 ) ; that conceptual change must not be considered merely as a change in content ( Hewson & Thorley , 1989 ) ; and that a relationship exists between students’ alternative conceptions and reasoning ability ( Lawson , 2003 ) . Moreover , our study provides much more relevant results for supporting the contention that students’ conceptual change would be enhanced as their scientiﬁc reasoning ability increased immediately after learning . Differing from previous research , we found that the best predictor for retention - ADRT scores was retention - AAT , followed by retention - SRT scores . This implies that students’ retention - ADRT would increase as their retention - AAT increased . Two months after learning , students’ grasp of correct concepts contributes more to their conceptual change than scientiﬁc reasoning after 3 - month of learning . It is very interesting that students’ conceptual change would be enhanced more as their grasp of correct concepts increased instead of their scientiﬁc reasoning 2 months after learning . Why would the patterns differ between immediately after learning and 2 months after learning ? One possible explanation is that students’ use of scientiﬁc reasoning is critical for conceptual change to occur during the process of conceptual change . Scientiﬁc reasoning helps them to reason and justify why concepts are reasonable for them to believe and further helps the concepts to become their own concepts . Their brains areworkingonmakingconnectionsamongmanyconceptionsandalready - existedconceptionswhiletheyare using reasoning to attain the conceptions . If students change their conceptions successfully 2 months after learning , this means the process of consolidation has ﬁnished and they have made changes in an already established network so that a modiﬁed set of hierarchical organizations is established and stabilized . According to research on the brain , the ﬁrst stage of consolidation involves interactions between hippocampus and the parahippocampal region , while the second stage of consolidation involves a similar interplay between the cortical association areas and the parahippocampal region ( Eichenbaum & Cohen , 2001 ) . Parahippocampal neurons receive direct inputs from many cortical areas . Parahippocampal neurons have an unusual capacity for prolonged ﬁrings following discrete events ( Suzuki , Miller , & Desimone , 1997 ; Young , Otto , Fox , & Eichenbaum , 1997 ) , and cells in this region may rapidly support the coding of event sequences through the interactions with the hippocampus . Initially cortical association is believed to depend on the parahippocampal regions to supply linkages between their representations . In addition , by simultaneously driving cells in cortical areas and activating their intracortical connections , these linkages 112 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching would be expected to mediate the ultimate development of context and nodal properties in the cortical associationareas ( Eichenbausm & Cohen , 2001 ) . Thisindicates thatscientiﬁcreasoningisastrategythatacts to trigger the hippocampus , parahippocampal region and cortical areas to make association among the new representations / conceptions with existing representations / conceptions that we already have . Once the consolidation is accomplished , the entire hippocampal circuit would no longer be necessary for the existence of events , sequence , and nodal representations ( Eichenbaum & Cohen , 2001 ) . This implies that scientiﬁc reasoning may not be needed to recall the already existing scientiﬁc conceptions once consolidation has been completed . On the other hand , McClelland , McNaughton , and O’Reilly ( 1995 ) proposed that cortical representations involve systematic organizations of related items in parallel , multidimensional hierarchies . Once a set of hierarchical organizations is established and stabilized , it is difﬁcultto smoothly add new items , which can explain why alternative scientiﬁc conceptions are more difﬁcult to change . This is because such novel trainingcauses changesin analready established network , resultingin catastrophic interference among the already - existing items ( McCloskey & Cohen , 1989 ) . New training alters a network to identify the new item , butsuch learning results in network modiﬁcations that interferewith the previously developed ability to correctly identify the old information . This can explain why conceptual change is difﬁcult . In contrast , if students successfully change their alternative conceptions , that means they may have acquired the correct scientiﬁc conceptions through the use of scientiﬁc reasoning for making associations with existing hierarchically organized conceptions , which results in changes to already - existing networks as the consolidation process ﬁnishes . All these aspects together become part of their long - term memory . Squire and Kandel ( 1999 , p . 21 ) indicated that long - term memory involves changes in the structure of nerve cells . Depending upon the type of learning , the nerve cells involved can make more / fewer and stronger / weaker connections . They further suggested that the switch from short - term memory to long - term memory facilitation is a switch from a process - based memory to a structure - based memory ( p . 146 ) . This can explain our observation that students change their scientiﬁc conceptions successfully 2 months after learning , meaning they already formed long - term memory that had become structure - based memory . Therefore , they would not necessary depend reasoning to recall speciﬁc scientiﬁc conceptions 2 months after learning since they already had become part of their structure - based memory ( semantic memory ) . The AAT assesses students’ memorization of conceptions of atom - related concepts , and the ADRT measures the degree of students’ conceptual change involving atom - related concepts . Once students’ conceptual change is successful , it would become their long - term structure - based memory , so students ADRT would be more closely related with their AAT scores . This indicates thatAATand ADRTare both testing students’ long - term memory 2 months after learning . Implications Severalimplicationsderivefromtheﬁndingsofthestudy . Resultsindicatethatthebestpredictorofpost - ADRT is post - SRT , and the best predictor of retention - ADRT is retention - AAT . This may be interpreted to indicate that students’ scientiﬁc reasoning contributes more to their conceptual change than to the concepts students hold right after learning . On the contrary , students’ conceptual changewould be further enhanced as their grasp of correct concepts increased instead of their scientiﬁc reasoning improving 2 months after learning . Brain research provides important concepts and convincing explanations for our interesting regression results . The following are the two main insights of the study : ( 1 ) Scientiﬁc reasoning is critical for conceptual change to happen during learning . It is avery important strategy for students to make associations among new mental sets with already - existed hierarchical structure - based memory . This provides the science teacher and science educator directions for helping students reconstruct scientiﬁc conceptions more efﬁciently . ( 2 ) . Once students’ conceptual change is successful and it has become structure - based memory ( semantic memory ) , then the scientiﬁc reasoning may not necessary be required to recall the already - established correct scientiﬁc conceptions . This implies that students can more quickly and efﬁciently recall correct scientiﬁc conceptions once their conceptual change is successful . It would be worth to bring neuroimaging study ( EEG and fMRI ) to investigate how the brain works during conceptual change and scientiﬁc reasoning process . SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 113 Journal of Research in Science Teaching Our results conﬁrm that the DSLM is efﬁcient for facilitating students’ conceptual changes , especially , as we integrated it here with scientiﬁc reasoning and deployed it in an adaptive digital learning environment . This further demonstrates that the DSLM can be effective in fostering students’ conceptual change in a web - learning environment as well as in the classroom . The study provides evidence that conceptual change can be possible if the instruction approach is supported by well - developed educational models or theories . This research is based on work supported and funded by the National Science Council ( NSC 93 , 94 , 95 - 2511 - S - 009 - 002 ) , Taiwan , R . O . C . References Anderson , J . R . ( 1990 ) . Cognitive psychology and its implications ( 3rd ed . ) New York : Freeman . Anderson , O . R . , & Demetrius , O . J . ( 1993 ) . A ﬂow - map method of representing cognitive structure based on respondents’ narrative using science content . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 ( 8 ) , 953 – 969 . Anderson , O . R . , Randle , D . , & Covotsos , T . ( 2001 ) . Theroleofideationalnetworksinlaboratoryinquiry learning and knowledge of evolution among seventh grade students . Science Education , 85 ( 4 ) , 410 – 425 . Andre , T . , & Windschitl , M . ( 2003 ) . Interest , epistemological belief , and intentional conceptual change . In : G . M . Sinatra & P . R . Pintrich ( Eds . ) , Intentionalconceptualchange ( pp . 173 – 197 ) . NJ : LawrenceErlbaum Association . Bliss . ( 1995 ) . Piagetandafter : Thecaseoflearningscience . Studiesin ScienceEducation , 51 , 139 – 172 . Brusilovsky , P . ( 1995 ) . AdaptivelearningwithWWW : TheMoscowStateUniversityProject . In : P . Held & W . F . Kugemann ( Eds . ) , Telematics for education and training ( pp . 252 – 255 ) . Amsterdam : IOS . Brusilovsky , P . ( 1997 ) . Distributed intelligent tutoring on the web . Paper presented at the 8th world conference of the AIED society , Kobe , Japan . Brusilovsky , P . , & Anderson , J . , ( 1998 ) ACT - R electronic bookshelf : An adaptive system for learning cognitive psychology on the Web . Paper presented at The 3rd World Conference of the WWW , Internet & Intranet , Orlando , Florida . Carey , S . ( 1985 ) . Conceptual change in childhood . Cambridge , MA : Bradford Books , MIT Press . Carro , R . M . , Moriyon , R . , Pulido , E . , & Rodriguez , P . ( 1999 ) . Teaching tasks in an adaptive learning environment . In : H . Bullinger & J . Ziegler ( Eds . ) , Human - computer interaction ( pp . 740 – 744 ) . Munich : Lawrence Erlbaum Associated . Cepni , S . , Tas , E . , & Kose , S . ( 2006 ) . The effects of computer - assisted material on students’ cognitive levels , misconceptions and attitudes towards science . Computers and Education , 46 ( 2 ) , 192 – 205 . Chambers , S . , & Andre , T . ( 1997 ) . Gender , prior knowledge , interest , and experience in electricity and conceptual change text manipulations in learning about direct current . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 34 ( 2 ) , 107 – 123 . Chi , M . T . H . , Slotta , J . D . , & Leeuw , N . D . ( 1994 ) . From things to processes : A theory of conceptual change for learning science concepts . Learning and Instruction , 4 , 27 – 43 . Chinn , C . A . , & Brewer , W . F . ( 1993 ) . Theroleofanomalousdatainknowledgeacquisition : Atheoretical framework and implications for science instruction . Review of Educational Research , 63 , 1 – 49 . Clement , J . ( 1993 ) . Using bridging analogies and anchoring intuitions to deal with students’ preconceptions in physics . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 ( 10 ) , 1241 – 1257 . Didion , C . J . ( 1997 ) . TheWorld Wide Web hasarrived—Science educators must get aboard it . Journal of College Science Teaching , 26 , 435 . Driver , R . , & Easley , J . ( 1978 ) . Pupils and paradigms : A review of literature related to concept development in adolescent science students . Studies in Science Education , 5 , 61 – 684 . Du , J . , Havard , B . , & Li , H . ( 2005 ) . Dynamic online discussion : Task - oriented interaction for deep learning preview . Educational Media International , 42 ( 3 ) , 207 – 218 . Duit , R . , & Treagust , D . F . ( 2003 ) . Conceptual change : A powerful framework for improving science teaching and learning . International Journal of Science Education , 25 ( 6 ) , 671 – 688 . 114 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching Duncan , R . G . , & Reiser , B . J . ( 2007 ) . Reasoning across ontologically distinct levels : Students’ understandings of molecular genetics . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 44 ( 7 ) , 938 – 959 . Duschl , R . , & Gitomer , D . ( 1991 ) . Epistemological perspectives on conceptual change : Implications for educational practice . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 28 ( 9 ) , 839 – 858 . Eichenbaum , H . , & Cohen , N . J . ( 2001 ) . From conditioning to conscious recollection : Memory systems of the brain . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Ennis , R . H . ( 1987 ) . A taxonomy of critical thinking dispositions and abilities . In : J . B . Baron & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Teaching thinking skills : Theory and practice ( pp . 9 – 26 ) . New York : W . H . Freeman . Furio , C . , Calatayud , M . L . , Barcenas , S . L . , & Padilla , O . M . ( 2000 ) . Functional ﬁxedness and functional reduction as common sense seasonings in chemical equilibrium and in geometry and polarity of molecules . Science Education , 84 ( 5 ) , 545 – 565 . Garnett , P . J . , Garnett , P . J . , & Hachling , M . W . ( 1995 ) . Students’ alternative conceptions in chemistry : A review of research and implications for teaching and learning . Studies in Science Education , 25 , 69 – 95 . Gil , D . , & Carrascosa , J . ( 1994 ) . Bringing pupils’ learning closer to a scientiﬁc construction of knowledge : A permanent feature in innovations in science teaching . Science Education , 78 ( 3 ) , 301 – 315 . Grifﬁths , A . K . , & Preston , K . R . ( 1992 ) . Grade - 12 students’ misconceptions relating to fundamental characteristics of atoms and molecules . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 29 ( 6 ) , 611 – 628 . Haggard , P . ( 1992 ) . Multi - sensory control of coordinated movement . In : J . J . Summers ( Ed . ) , Approaches to the study of motor control and learning ( pp . 195 – 231 ) . Amsterdam : North Holland . Harrison , A . G . , & Treagust , D . F . ( 1996 ) . Secondary students’ mental models of atoms and molecules : Implications for teaching chemistry . Science Education , 80 ( 5 ) , 509 – 534 . Hashweh , M . Z . ( 1986 ) . Towards an explanation of conceptual change . European Journal of Science Education , 8 ( 3 ) , 229 – 249 . Hewson , P . W . , & Thorley , N . R . ( 1989 ) . The conditions of conceptual change in the classroom . International Journal of Science Education , 11 ( 5 ) , 541 – 553 . Hogan , K . , Nastasi , B . K . , & Pressley , M . ( 2000 ) . Discourse patterns and collaborative scientiﬁc reasoning in peer and teacher - guided discussions . Cognition and Instruction , 17 ( 4 ) , 379 – 432 . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1985 ) . Deductive reasoning ability . In : R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Human abilities : An information - processing approach ( pp . 173 – 194 ) . New York : Freeman . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 2000 ) . Thinking : Reasoning . In : A . Kazdin ( Ed . ) , Encyclopedia of psychology ( pp . 75 – 79 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Johnson - Laird , P . N . , & Byrne , R . M . J . ( 1991 ) . Deduction . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Keselmanm , A . , Kaufman , D . R . , Kramer , S . , & Patel , V . L . ( 2007 ) . Fostering conceptual change and critical reasoning about HIVand AIDS . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 44 ( 6 ) , 844 – 863 . Kuhn , D . ( 1993 ) . Science as argument : Implications for teaching and learning scientiﬁc thinking . Science Education , 77 ( 3 ) , 319 – 337 . Lawson , A . E . ( 1978 ) . Development and validation of the classroom test of formal reasoning . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 15 ( 1 ) , 11 – 24 . Lawson , A . E . ( 2003 ) . The neurological basis of learning , development and discovery . London : Kluwer Academic Publishers . Lawson , A . E . , & Thompson , L . ( 1988 ) . Formal reasoning ability and misconception concerning genetics and natural selection . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 25 ( 9 ) , 733 – 746 . Lawson , A . E . , & Weser , J . ( 1990 ) . The rejection of nonscientiﬁcbeliefs about life : Effects ofinstruction and reasoning skills . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 27 ( 6 ) , 589 – 606 . Lawson , A . E . , & Worsnop , W . A . ( 1992 ) . Learning about evolution and rejecting a belief in special creation : Effects of reﬂective reasoning skill , prior knowledge , prior belief and religious commitment . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 29 ( 2 ) , 143 – 166 . Leasure , A . R . , Davis , L . , & Thievon , S . L . ( 2000 ) . Comparison of student outcomes and preferences in a traditional vs . World Wide Web - based baccalaureate nursing research course . Journal of Nursing Education , 39 , 149 – 154 . SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 115 Journal of Research in Science Teaching Lee , O . , Eichinger , D . C . , Anderson , C . W . , Berkheimer , G . D . , & Blakeslee , T . D . ( 1993 ) . Changing middle school students’ conceptions of matter and molecules . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 ( 3 ) , 249 – 270 . Marbach - Ad , G . , Rotbai , Y . , & Stavy , R . ( 2008 ) . Using computer animation and illustration activities to improve high school students’ achievement in molecular genetics . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 45 ( 3 ) , 273 – 292 . Mbajiorgu , N . M . , Ezechi , N . G . , & Idoko , E . C . ( 2007 ) . Addressing nonscientiﬁc presuppositions in genetics using a conceptual change strategy . Science Education , 91 ( 3 ) , 419 – 438 . McClelland , J . L . , McNaughton , B . L . , & O’Reilly , R . C . ( 1995 ) . Why there are complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex : Insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory . Psychological Review , 102 ( 3 ) , 419 – 457 . McCloskey , M . , & Cohen , N . J . ( 1989 ) . Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks : The sequential learning problem . In : G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation , 24 ( pp . 109 – 165 ) . New York : Academic Press . Mioduser , D . , Nachmias , R . , Oren , A . , & Lahav , O . ( 2000 ) . Web - based learning environments ( WBLE ) —Current technological and pedagogical state . Journal of Research on Computing in Education , 33 ( 1 ) , 55 – 76 . Oliva , J . M . ( 2003 ) . The structural coherence of students’ conceptions in mechanics and conceptual change . International Journal of Science Education , 25 ( 5 ) , 539 – 561 . Osborne , R . J . , & Cosgrove , M . M . ( 1983 ) . Children’s conceptions of the changes of state of water . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 20 ( 9 ) , 825 – 838 . Osborne , R . J . , & Gilbert , J . K . ( 1980 ) . A technique for exploring students’ views of the world . Physics Education , 15 ( 6 ) , 376 – 379 . Park , J . , & Han , S . ( 2002 ) . Using deductive reasoning to promote the change of students’ conceptions about force and motion . International Journal of Science Education , 24 ( 6 ) , 593 – 609 . Pellegrino , J . W . ( 1985 ) . Inductive reasoning ability . In : R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Human abilities : An information - processing approach ( pp . 195 – 225 ) . New York : W . H . Freeman . Pintrich , P . R . ( 1999 ) . Motivational beliefs as resources for and constraints on conceptual change . In : W . Schnotz S . Vosniadou & M . Carretero ( Eds . ) , New perspectives on conceptual change ( pp . 33 – 50 ) . Oxford : Elsevier Science Ltd . Pintrich , P . R . , Marx , R . W . , & Boyle , R . A . ( 1993 ) . Beyond cold conceptual change : The role of motivation beliefs and classroom contextual factors in the process of conceptual change . Review of Educational Research , 63 ( 2 ) , 167 – 199 . Pintrich , P . R . , & Schunk , D . H . ( 1996 ) . Motivation in education : Theory , research , and applications . Ohio : Merrill . Posner , G . J . , Strike , K . A . , Hewson , P . W . , & Gertzog , W . A . ( 1982 ) . Accommodation of a scientiﬁc conception : Toward a theory of conceptual change . Science Education , 66 ( 2 ) , 211 – 227 . Rips , L . J . ( 1999 ) . Human modes of quantiﬁcational reasoning . In : S . B . Cooper & J . K . Truss ( Eds . ) , Models and computability ( pp . 353 – 365 ) . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Saba , F . ( 2000 ) . Why there is no ‘‘signiﬁcant difference’’ between face - to - face and distance education ? Distance Education Report , 4 ( 13 ) , 1 – 4 . Savinainen , A . , Scott , P . , & Viiri , J . ( 2005 ) . Using a bridging representation and social interactions to foster conceptual change : Designing and evaluating an instructional sequence for Newton’s third law . Science Education , 89 , 175 – 195 . Schunk , D . H . ( 1999 ) . Learning theory : An educational perspective . New Jersey : Prentice Hall . Sessink , O . D . T . , Beeftink , H . H . , & Tramper , J . ( 2007 ) . Proteus : A lecturer - friendly adaptive tutoring system preview . Journal of Interactive Learning Research , 18 ( 4 ) , 533 – 554 . She , H . C . ( 2002 ) . Concepts of higher hierarchical level required more dual situational learning events for conceptual change : A study of students’ conceptual changes on air pressure and buoyancy . International Journal of Science Education , 24 ( 9 ) , 981 – 996 . She , H . C . ( 2003 ) . DSLM instructional approach to conceptual change involving thermal expansion . Research in Science and Technological Education , 21 ( 1 ) , 43 – 54 . 116 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching She , H . C . ( 2004a ) . Facilitating changes in ninth grade students’ understanding of dissolution and diffusion through DSLM instruction . Research in Science Education , 34 ( 4 ) , 503 – 526 . She , H . C . ( 2004b ) . Fostering ‘‘radical’’ conceptual change through dual situated learning model . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 41 ( 2 ) , 142 – 164 . Squire , L . R . , & Kandel , E . ( 1999 ) . Memory : From mind to molecules . New York : Scientiﬁc American Library . Strike , K . A . , & Posner , G . J . ( 1985 ) . A conceptual change view of learning and understanding . In : L . T . West & A . L . Pines ( Eds . ) , Cognitive structure and conceptual change ( pp . 211 – 231 ) . Orando , Florida : Academics press . Suzuki , W . A . , Miller , E . K . , & Desimone , R . ( 1997 ) . Object and place memory in the macaque endocrinal cortex . Journal of Neurophysiology , 78 ( 2 ) , 1062 – 1081 . Sweller , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognitive load during problem solving : Effects on learning . Cognitive Science , 12 ( 2 ) , 257 – 285 . Tang , H . Y . , She , H . C . , & Lee , Y . M . , ( 2005 ) The impact of DSLM instruction on middle school students’ conceptual change involving mitosis and Meiosis . Paper Presented at the National Association for Research in Science Teaching 2005 World Conference , Dallas , Texas . Trumper , R . , & Gorsky , P . ( 1993 ) . Learning about energy : The inﬂuence of alternative frameworks , cognitive levels , and closed mindedness . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 ( 7 ) , 637 – 648 . Tsui , C . Y . , & Treagust , D . F . ( 2007 ) . Understanding genetics : Analysis of secondary students’ conceptual status . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 44 ( 2 ) , 205 – 235 . Tuvi , I . , & Nachmias , R . ( 2001 ) . Current state of Web sites in science education—Focus on atomic structure . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 10 ( 4 ) , 293 – 303 . Veerman , A . L . , Andriessen , J . E . B . , & Kanselaar , G . ( 2000 ) . Learning through synchronous electronic discussion . Computers & Education , 34 , 269 – 290 . Venville , G . J . , & Treagust , D . F . ( 1998 ) . Exploring conceptual change in genetics using a multidimensional interpretive framework . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 35 ( 9 ) , 1031 – 1055 . Vosniadou , S . , & Brewer , W . F . ( 1987 ) . Theories of knowledge restructuring in development . Review of Educational Research , 57 ( 1 ) , 51 – 67 . Vosniadou , S . , & Brewer , W . F . ( 1994 ) . Mental models of the day / night cycle . Cognitive Science , 18 , 123 – 183 . Wadsworth , B . J . ( 1996 ) . Piaget’s theory of cognitive and affective development : White Plains . NY : Longman . Wang , A . Y . , & Newlin , M . H . ( 2000 ) . Characteristics of students who enroll and succeed in psychology web - based classes . Journal of Educational Psychology , 92 ( 1 ) , 137 – 143 . Wason , P . , & Johnson - Laird , P . ( 1972 ) . Psychology of reasoning : Structure and vontent . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Young , B . J . , Otto , T . , Fox , G . D . , & Eichenbaum , H . ( 1997 ) . Memory representation within the parahippocampal region . Journal of Neuroscience , 17 ( 13 ) , 5183 – 5195 . Appendix 1 : Interview Questions ( 1 ) Please describe your understanding about chemical compounds and chemical elements . In addition , provide examples for each of them and further make explanations to differentiate them . ( 2 ) Please describe the shape and structure of atoms . ( 3 ) Can electrons move ? Please describe the movement of electrons . ( 4 ) Please describe the arrangement of electrons . How many electron shells exist in an atom ? ( 5 ) Are all atoms the same ? Are gold and iron made of the same kind of atom ? ( 5a ) If so , why do the properties of gold differ from properties of iron ? ( 5b ) If not , what are the reasons making them different ? ( 6 ) Can atoms be divided into any other substances ? If yes , please describe the properties of substances and further compare their similarities and differences . SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 117 Journal of Research in Science Teaching ( 7 ) Do you think a noble gas is stable ? Provide your explanations . ( 8 ) Compare the stability among sodium , potassium and noble gas , and further provide explanations . ( 9 ) Pleasedescribewhichoneoftwocompounds ( chlorineorbromine ) reactwithsodiummuchmore easily ? Further provide explanations . ( 10 ) Compare the stability of hydrogen atom and hydrogen molecule . Further provide your explanations . Appendix 2 : Atomic Achievement Test ( AAT ) Example Question Which one is correct about the properties of particles ? ( 1 ) Atomic mass and size for all elements are the same . ( 2 ) All chemical compounds are composed of the same kinds of atoms . ( 3 ) Atoms consist of a nucleus and electrons . ( 4 ) Electrons are charge - free . Appendix 3 . Scientiﬁc Reasoning Test ( SRT ) Example Question ( Lawson , 1978 ) FarmerBrown was observing the mice that live in his ﬁeld . He discovered that all of them were either fat or thin . Also , all of them had either black tails or white tails . This made him wonder if there might be a link between the size of the mice and the color of their tails . So he captured all of the mice in one part of his ﬁeld and observed them . Below are the mice that he captured . Do you think there is a link between the size of mice and the color of their tails ? ( 1 ) Appears to be a link . ( 2 ) Appears not to be a link . ( 3 ) Cannot make a reasonable guess . Because ( 1 ) There are some of each kind of mouse . ( 2 ) There may be a genetic link between mouse size and tail color . ( 3 ) There were not enough mice captured . ( 4 ) Most of the fat mice have black tails while most of the thin mice have white tails . ( 5 ) As the mice grew fatter , their tails became darker . Appendix 4 : Atomic Dependent Reasoning Test ( ADRT ) Example Question The following diagrams A – D show the number of electrons and their arrangement for four different kinds of atoms . Which one of the atoms is very stable and does not easily react with other substances ? 118 SHE AND LIAO Journal of Research in Science Teaching ( 1 ) B and D ( 2 ) B , C , and D ( 3 ) A and B ( 4 ) C and D Because ( 1 ) It is more stable if there are fewer electron shells . ( 2 ) It is more stable if there are more electron shells . ( 3 ) It is more stable if the outermost shell either has two electrons for one - shell atom or eight electrons for a multi - shell atom . ( 4 ) It is more stable as long as the shell has two electrons . SCIENTIFIC REASONING AND CONCEPTUAL CHANGE 119 Journal of Research in Science Teaching