This article describes and discusses the detailed pro - cedures followed by two intergenerational teams com - prising the researchers and a group of eight grade - six elementary students ( ages 11 to 12 years ) and a group of six third - grade elementary students ( ages 8 to 9 years ) , respectively , in designing two prototype Web portals intended for use by elementary school students . These procedures were based on three design theories : Con - textual Inquiry , Participatory Design , and Cooperative Inquiry . The article also presents and describes the two resulting Web portal prototypes and discusses the design criteria employed by the teams . Conclusions are elabo - rated on the basis of this research experience regarding how such a design process should be conducted in the context of an intergenerational team , and what character - istics young users expect to ﬁnd in Web portals that they will use to support their informational needs in terms of elementary school projects and assignments . Introduction In a growing number of countries , students in elementary schools are using the Web to ﬁnd information for class pro - jects and assignments . Accompanying this development has been increasing research interest in how such students under - take their information seeking , what problems they encounter in this process , and how any problems might be alleviated . One possibility is to focus attention upon the portal that pro - vides the initial entry point to the Web’s rich information store . Do existing portals , whether designed with adults or speciﬁcally with children in mind , offer the features and facilities that in fact young users themselves would choose ? The ﬁrst premise behind the research reported in this article was that it might be possible to design new portals that better reﬂect the wishes of elementary school students . The task of designing a portal might have been undertaken solely by the research team , based upon a critical evaluation of existing portals and in the light of existing research litera - ture generated by themselves as well as others . In fact , this ap - proach was not selected . Rather , we chose to situate ourselves within the community of usability researchers who argue that children as well as adults ( though not necessarily in quite the same way ) can play an active role in designing information technologies—in this case a Web portal . Our second premise , then , was that a portal for elementary students should be de - signed with active participation from that user community . This article presents two Web portal designs produced by intergenerational teams : The ﬁrst was designed by a team comprising eight grade - six students and three adult re - searchers ; the second was designed by a team of six grade - three students and the same three adults . It discusses the methodological approaches adopted by the two teams , ana - lyzes the resulting portals , and from this analysis elaborates preliminary design criteria for a children’s Web portal . Sub - sequent articles will discuss the design process as revealed by a detailed analysis of the individual drawings completed by the students and the session discussions , and the students’ responses to the idea of a Web portal designed using 3 - D navigational techniques . Usability Studies The term “usability” in the context of technology design refers to the ability of a user to easily and intuitively under - stand and effectively employ components displayed in the interface ( Head , 1997 ; Nielsen , 2000 ; Rose , Shneiderman , & Plaisant , 1995 ; Rubin , 1994 ) . As Rubin ( 1994 ) argues , it is concerned with the design of a product that meets users’ needs , and involves usefulness ( the degree to which a prod - uct enables users to achieve their goals and a measure of their motivation for using it ) , effectiveness ( the ease of use ) , learnability ( the users’ ability to operate the system with some deﬁned level of conﬁdence after a predetermined amount and period of training and the ability to relearn the system after periods of inactivity ) , and attitude ( likability or the users’perceptions , feelings , and opinions of the product ) . Usability , then , is rooted in the operational experience of the JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY , 55 ( 13 ) : 1140 – 1154 , 2004 Designing Web Portals in Intergenerational Teams : Two Prototype Portals for Elementary School Students Andrew Large , Jamshid Beheshti , Valerie Nesset , and Leanne Bowler Graduate School of Library and Information Studies , McGill University , 3459 McTavish , Montreal , Quebec H3A 1Y1 , Canada . E - mail : { andrew . large , jamshid . beheshti , valerie . nesset , leanne . bowler } @ mail . mcgill . ca ReceivedOctober16 , 2003 ; revisedDecember17 , 2003 ; acceptedJanuary16 , 2004 © 2004 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . • Published online 13 July 2004 in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) . DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi . 20069 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 1141 user . Nielsen identiﬁes ﬁve attributes of a usable interface : 1 ) it is easy to learn , 2 ) it is efﬁcient to use , 3 ) it is easy to remember , 4 ) it causes few errors , and 5 ) it is pleasant to use ( as interviewed by Head , 1999 ) . Rose , Shneiderman , & Plaisant ( 1995 ) consider usability studies as being crucial to technology development because the user’s perception of a system is critical to its success . For Scaife , Rogers , Aldrich , & Davies ( 1997 ) , “The real issue would seem . . . to be not one of whether involving users is good or bad but rather how to more effectively engage them in the design process . ” Usability studies now are ﬁrmly rooted in the technology design process for children’s technologies just as they are for adults , but with one signiﬁcant difference : In the case of children’s technologies , until recently , usability testing was carried out by adults rather than the target audience itself . As Hanna and her colleagues at Microsoft’s Hardware Ergonomics and Usability Department ( 1999 ) comment , “Usability research with children has often been considered either too difﬁcult to carry out with unruly subjects or un - necessary for an audience that is satisﬁed with gratuitous animations and funny noises . ” Designers now , however , are beginning to adapt and adopt design theories suitable for the speciﬁc needs of children as designers of children’s technologies . Conceptual Framework Aspects of three design theories—Contextual Inquiry , Participatory Design , and Cooperative Inquiry—constituted the conceptual framework for this intergenerational design team research . • Contextual Inquiry is described by Beyer and Holtzblatt ( 1999 ) as “a state - of - the - art approach to designing products directly from a designer’s understanding of how the customer works . ” The aims of Contextual Inquiry are to reveal the de - tails and motivations of people’s work , to make customers’ needs real to the designers , to use customer data as the basis of decision making , and to create a shared understanding of the data by researchers and users . It calls for researchers to collect data in the users’own environment by observing them performing typical activities . The use of low - tech paper pro - totypes , pictorial diagramming , and concrete techniques lends itself to work with children . Although Contextual In - quiry does not involve users in all aspects of the design process , it does provide a framework for users’opinions and suggestions to be heard and considered by the designers . Its emphasis on a team approach and concrete methods of picto - rial ﬂowchart data analysis make it applicable and appropri - ate in a child - centered context . • Participatory Design is based on the premise that users are the best qualiﬁed to determine how to improve their work and work life ( Carmel , Whitaker , & George , 1993 ) . It seeks com - promise rather than consensus as an end goal . As Fleming ( quoted in Bilal , 2002 ) notes , “Through this approach , users move out of roles such as observer , approver ‘knowledge repository’ . . . and into roles such as peer codesigner , design owner , expertise contributor , and self - advocate . ” Prototyping is integral to the Participatory Design methodology ; design - ers collaborate as peers with the users in a mutual learning process . • Cooperative Inquiry , developed by Druin and her colleagues at the University of Maryland , combines techniques from various design methodologies that have proved useful when working with children ( Druin , 1999 ) . It is grounded in theo - ries of cooperative design involving a multidisciplinary part - nership with children , ﬁeld research , and iterative low - tech and high - tech prototyping . A truly cooperative approach , Cooperative Inquiry treats children as full design partners— equals to the professional adult designers on the team . Professional designers and users ( children ) of the technol - ogy are partnered in intergenerational design teams with the understanding that full participation of users requires train - ing and active cooperation . For Druin ( 1999 ) , in the same way that Contextual Inquiry was developed as an attempt , “ . . . to capture the complexity and somewhat ‘messy’ real - life world of the workplace , ” Cooperative Inquiry seeks to capture the complexity and “messiness” of a child’s world . The members of the design team make use of such Contex - tual Inquiry methods as brainstorming and interviewing in order to capture users’ tasks , roles , and design ideas ( Druin , 2002 ) . Cooperative Inquiry also uses techniques from Participatory Design—direct collaboration between the in - tergenerational team in the development of low - tech proto - types . Children and adults work together in small groups , brainstorming about the existing “technologies . ” Gradually the children become comfortable working as critics , design - ers , and inventors . Druin considers children from the ages of 7 to 10 years old to be the ideal design partners because they are able to develop ideas from abstract concepts , but are still open to exploring new ideas ( Druin , 1999 ) . From Contextual and Cooperative Inquiry we took the idea of a team approach to the design and production of low - tech prototypes . Prototyping is integral to the Participatory Design methodology , since cooperative prototyping involves heightened user participation and “supports mutual learning by promoting cooperative communication” ( Carmel et al . , 1993 ) . The principles of Participatory Design are suitable for design projects involving children , where the school or home environment substitutes for the workplace , their creativity and enthusiasm thrive within a ﬂexible structure , and educa - tional techniques have long stressed the beneﬁts of mutual learning . Cooperative Inquiry treats children as full design partners—equals to the professional adult designers on the intergenerational team . Children and the Design Process A growing number of researchers have adopted a child - oriented approach to designing information systems of vari - ous kinds ( for example , Druin , 1996 , 1999 , 2002 ; Druin , Bederson , Boltman , Miura , Knotts - Callahan , & Platt , 1999 ; Bilal , 2002 , 2003 ; Hanna , Risden , & Alexander , 1997 ; Hanna et al . , 1999 ; Kafai , 1999 ; Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , 2002 ; Large , Beheshti , Nesset , & Bowler , 2003a , b ) . They argue that children have a lot to offer in the design process as a whole and that it is advisable to include them in all aspects 1142 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 of it . Not all researchers , however , share their views . Nielsen ( 2002 ) , for example , agrees about respecting the needs of children as expressed by children , and from this it would seem that he is in favor of involving children in the design process ; to the contrary , he believes that children are inca - pable of overcoming many handicaps , such as impatience that prevents them from being able to critique sites for us - ability issues and make suggestions for improvement . Druin ( 2002 ) concedes at least one difﬁculty in the inclusion of children in the design process : young children have difﬁculty verbalizing their thoughts , especially those dealing with abstract concepts and actions . KidPad is an outcome of Druin’s efforts in employing Cooperative Inquiry as a design approach . Based on existing storytelling software called Pad (cid:1)(cid:1) , KidPad offers a zoom feature that supports and encourages the creation of nonlin - ear stories . She believes that although children “may not be programmers or engineers , they are experts in what they want and why they want it” ( Druin , Stewart , Proft , Bederson , & Hollan , 1997 ) . This belief propelled her to try to incorporate children’s ideas into working software . In the design of KidPad , the participation of the children allowed the adult designers to develop software that met the children’s needs . QueryKids , developed on the KidPad architecture , offers the search options of a virtual zoo with a map and images of ani - mals that can be zoomed in on and then used as search crite - ria , a world area where the children can browse the animal database using geographical criteria , and a search area that provides the ability to “visually specify and manipulate queries” ( Druin , 2002 ) . Druin and her colleagues have since used an intergenerational team to design the International Children’s Digital Library , which was launched in late 2002 ( Druin et al . , 2003 ) . Children and Web Portal Design Research into the design of Web portals by children , for children , is still in its infancy , but already there are indications that more effective and appropriate portals for children are re - quired . As Bilal ( 2000 ) observes , because of perceived short - comings in many existing children’s search engines , many children actually prefer to use adult search engines . She is now herself investigating how grade - seven students in middle school might design Web search engine interfaces ( Bilal , 2003 ) . Although she describes her approach as participatory design , with the participants as full design partners , unlike in Druin’s methodology , no adults were involved in the design process . The 11 grade - seven children worked individually— there was no design team as such . In the ﬁrst stage of the study Bilal had her participants each draw an interface on paper and on the verso list the purposes of the interfaces . After a short break the students used a commercial children’s Web portal , Yahooligans ! , to search for information . They then discussed what they liked and disliked about it and noted the features they would want to add to their original drawings . Bilal inter - viewed the students individually to discover their rationale for adding these features . She then repeated the same procedure with KidsClick , another children’s Web portal . Bilal con - cludes that “children are able to design screen layouts , dictate the features they need , and describe what these features should look like . ” She strongly recommends that designers of children’s search engines not only ensure that their engines are “cool” but also that they offer high usability . Using a modiﬁed version of Contextual Inquiry , Large , Beheshti , and Rahman ( 2002 ) chose a focus group approach to critique existing children’s Web portals . From the out - comes of four focus groups , each including students be - tween the ages of 11 and 13 , they developed a list of design criteria for children’s Web portals . The groups focused on the screen design and organization , navigability , and usabil - ity of four different existing children’s Web portals . One re - searcher acted as a participant observer , interacting with the children , while the other researcher took notes . Rather than striving for consensus , in order to promote a “permissive en - vironment” ( Krueger , quoted in Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , 2002 ) , the researchers encouraged the children to provide a variety of opinions and to express their own points of view . They found the focus group approach suitable for this type of research ; although they recognize that peer pressure and the presence of more domineering children may play a part in group dynamics , they were satisﬁed that each child had his or her say . For the most part , their results are consistent with Bilal’s ﬁndings concerning children’s likes and dislikes about existing children’s Web portals . They conclude that children are very capable of evaluating portals and making constructive suggestions as to how they might be improved to facilitate children’s information seeking . These various studies , then , indicate that children are capable of critiquing existing Web portals designed for their age group and of making suggestions for their improvement . Furthermore , children are capable of expressing their own design ideas for Web portals through drawing techniques . This , along with the work by Druin , led us to believe that the next step should be to involve children alongside adults in intergenerational design teams that would attempt to pro - duce designs for low - level , Web portal prototypes . Methodology Initial Exploratory Studies At the outset , we were uncertain as to how we should begin the design sessions . Speciﬁcally , we could not decide whether initially to view and evaluate existing portals and then begin our design activity , or whether to invite the team’s design ideas at the outset and only later critically review existing por - tals . By adopting the latter approach we might hope to avoid unduly inﬂuencing the students’ own ideas . On the other hand , we were concerned as to whether the students would be able to begin the design process unless they ﬁrst looked at exemplars on the Web . We therefore decided to undertake several exploratory studies with a few children between the ages of 8 and 13 ( covering the ages of the children we should subsequently be working with in the design teams ) . As a JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 1143 result of these studies , we decided in the case of the grade - six team to start with brainstorming and only later to analyze existing portals , but with the grade - three team to begin with a critical discussion of selected children’s and adult portals . A fuller discussion of the exploratory studies can be found in Large and colleagues ( 2003a ) . The Teams The design teams included student volunteers from the grade - three and grade - six classes in an elementary school located in a middle - class suburb of Montreal as well as one male and two female researchers . The grade - six ( G6 ) team included eight students ( four boys and four girls ) . At the beginning of the sessions , in January 2003 , the oldest was 12 years and 2 months , the youngest 11 years and 8 months . Six spoke only English at home , and the remaining two spoke both English and French . They had Internet experience , ranging from 2 years minimum to 6 years maximum ( by their own estimations ) . The grade - three ( G3 ) team included six students ( three boys and three girls ) . At the outset of the sessions in March 2003 , one student was quite a bit older ( 9 . 5 years ) than the others , who were still 8 years old ( with birthdays in May , June , and July ) . Five spoke only or mainly English at home , but one spoke mainly French . All claimed Internet experi - ence and had used it both in school and at home . The Sessions The sessions took place during the elementary school lunchtime break ( 70 minutes ) in the art room equipped with a high - speed Internet line . The research team used its own lap - top computer with a 16 - inch screen and detachable remote keyboard and remote electronic mouse ( facilitating use by in - dividual team members seated around a table ) . Unless dis - rupted by holidays or school trips , the sessions were held twice per week ( Mondays and Wednesdays ) . The content of the sessions was based on an information architecture matrix constructed by Large , Beheshti , and Cole ( 2002 ) for use in designing children’s Web portals . A typical session involved some / all of the following : a quick resume of the previous ses - sion ( while the children ate their packed lunches ) , team dis - cussion of portal features , brainstorming about portal design , viewing existing portals on the Web , individual drawing of portals , and consensus building . In the case of the G3 team , sessions ﬁve and onward ended with a physical game ( such as “Simon Says” ) . All the sessions were audio taped , and notes were also taken by one of the research assistants . All the drawings were copied for later analysis . In total , the G6 team held 13 sessions and the G3 team 9 sessions . The session con - tent of the two teams is outlined in Tables 1 and 2 . Exit Interviews With G6 Team The principal investigator and one research assistant , after the completion of the sessions , held individual 30 - minute in - terviews with each G6 team member lasting to clarify and TABLE 1 . Timetable for G6 team sessions . Session Content 1 Introduction to project ; project objectives ; brainstorming on a team name ; discussion of user questionnaire 2 Analysis of questionnaire returns ; discussion of Web portal characteristics ; pencil drawing by each team member of a Web portal screen 3 Discussion of drawings ; identiﬁcation of portal features ; online critique of 8 Web portals ( Alfy , AltaVista , Ask Jeeves , Google , Fact Monster , KidsClick , Lycos Zone , Yahooligans ! ) 4 Review of progress ; small group discussion of portal search options ; whole group discussion of search options 5 Online information searches on 10 Web portals or digital libraries ( Ask Jeeves , Google , Fact Monster , International Children’s Digital Library , Internet Public Library Kidspace , KidsClick , PubMed , RefDesk , Web Brain , Yahoo ) to review their search options ; evaluation of these options 6 Discussion of e - mail and chat facilities ; color drawings of a conventional portal 7 Discussion of help facilities ; online critique of help facilities on 8 Web portals / digital libraries ( Ask Jeeves , Google , Internet Public Library Kids Zone , KidsClick , Lycos Zone , MSN , Yahoo , Yahooligans ! ) 8 Screen layout design for conventional portal ; discussion and online viewing of 3 - D portals ; color drawings of 3 - D portals 9 Consensus building on design layout for one team conventional portal 10 Critique of HTML mock - up of conventional portal 11 Critique of version 1 of Photoshop conventional portal prototype ; brainstorming on 3 - D portal 12 Final review of conventional portal prototype ; presentation by students of prototype to class teacher ; completion of team questionnaire 13 Discussion of G3 team portal ; discussion of 3 - D portals TABLE 2 . Timetable for G3 team sessions . Session Content 1 Introduction to project ; project objectives ; brainstorming on a team name ; online critique of 4 Web portals ( KidsClick , Lycos Zone , Google , Yahooligans ! ) 2 Selection of team name ; review of session 1 ; online critique of 3 Web portals ( Alfy , Ask Jeeves for Kids , Yahooligans ! ) ; discussion of help , keyword searching , chat rooms ; pencil / colored marker drawing by individual team members of a Web portal screen 3 Completion of drawings from session 2 ; journal writing ; discussion of drawings ; online searches on 3 Web portals ( KidsClick , MSN , Yahooligans ! ) 4 Discussion of information seeking ; individual student drawings ; discussion of drawings ; online critique of 4 Web portals ( Ask Jeeves for Kids , Fact Monster , HotBot , MSN ) ; drawing by individual team members 5 Discussion of composite drawing ( made by research assistant ) ; merging individual student drawings ; coloring of composite drawing by individual team members ; discussion of portal name 6 Discussion of new composite drawing ; critique of G6 team’s portal ; modiﬁcations to composite drawing 7 Critique of version 1 of Photoshop portal prototype 8 Final review of portal prototype ; completion of team questionnaire 9 Discussion and online viewing of 3 - D portals ; comparison of G3 and G6 portals verify our interpretations of their drawings . The students were shown one - by - one copies of the individual drawings they had made in various sessions and were asked to describe and discuss them . The interviews were taped and later de - tailed notes were made from the tapes . Individual interviews were not conducted with the G3 team , as their drawings were very straightforward . Questionnaire In order to provide a basis for design decisions , the stu - dent members of the G6 team were asked to conduct be - tween sessions 1 and 2 a short questionnaire survey among all their grade - six colleagues to determine their Internet likes and dislikes . We decided that this would prove too difﬁcult for G3 team members to undertake , or indeed for grade - three students to complete , and therefore this was not included in the G3 methodology . The questionnaire was completed by 39 students ( includ - ing the eight design team members themselves ) , or about 56 % of the grade - six students in the school . All respondents had used the Internet to ﬁnd information for school projects . By far the most commonly selected portal was Google ( 28 responses ) , followed by Yahoo ( 8 ) , MSN ( 2 ) , and one re - sponse each for AltaVista , HotBot , Ask Jeeves , Discovery , Sympatico , and MetaCrawler . When asked which three things they liked about using the Internet for school projects , the most popular was its speed ( 19 responses ) , followed by lots of information ( 15 ) , pictures ( 9 ) , good information ( 9 ) , easy to use ( 8 ) , always has what you want ( 2 ) , many sites ( 2 ) , and its multilingual content ( 2 ) . Their dislikes were irrele - vant information ( 17 ) , advertisements ( 17 ) , too much infor - mation ( 9 ) , adult sites / “bad things” ( 7 ) , slowness ( 6 ) , “bad sites” ( 4 ) , and four students said they liked everything . Finally , they were asked what they would change . Most votes went for making it more speciﬁc / accurate / relevant ( 10 ) , less information ( 7 ) , better search engines ( 4 ) , eliminating pop - up ads ( 4 ) , making it faster ( 3 ) , better information ( 2 ) , and no change ( 4 ) . This information was utilized in many session discussions to provide a focus for design decisions . Low - Tech Portal Mockup Once a design consensus had been reached by the teams ( in the case of the G6 team , in session 10 , and for the G3 team in session 6 ) on a portal design ( using an HTML mockup in the former case and a composite drawing in the latter case , both completed by research assistants ) , the design was passed over to a professional graphic artist . For each team he then converted the design to a screen mockup using Photo - shop . This mockup was modiﬁed by the students and redrawn by the artist in two iterations for each team . The two ﬁnal mockups , one for each team , constitute the low - tech Web portal prototypes . For each prototype , three separate screens were designed—the opening search screen , a results display screen , and the ﬁrst level of a help screen . The graphic artist did not attend any sessions or meet with the students . Discussion of Methodology The use of intergenerational design teams incorporating young children is still quite unusual , and this is the ﬁrst time that this technique has been used , to our knowledge , in the design of Web portals . It is therefore worth casting a critical eye over the methodology that was employed to identify both strengths and weaknesses . The Design Teams The two design teams comprised eight and six students , respectively . Initially we planned to involve just six students in the ﬁrst design team involving grade - six students . Al - though somewhat arbitrary , we thought it would be sufﬁ - ciently large to generate discussion and to give the students conﬁdence in their numerical if not age superiority , but not too large as to prove unwieldy . The sessions were planned for the Montreal winter , however , and we were afraid that illness would adversely affect student attendance . For that reason alone we increased the number of students in the G6 team to eight . In the event , at no session were there fewer than six students present , only on two occasions were as many as two students absent , and in half the sessions all eight turned up . In the exit questionnaire completed by seven of the eight G6 students , ﬁve of them thought six students would have been a better number , although two did prefer eight . From our experience with the G6 sessions , as well as from the exploratory studies conducted prior to the sessions , we concluded that it would be preferable to have fewer grade - three students in the team . It seemed probable ( as in - deed was the case ) that these younger students would require more individual attention , and perhaps of more signiﬁcance , would ﬁnd it hard to reach a consensus . We therefore opted for six students in the G3 team , and took our chances with illness or absenteeism . All six students attended six out of the nine sessions , and only in one case was more than one student missing . These attendance ﬁgures , however , are a lit - tle misleading . In the last three of the nine sessions several students only attended a part of the 70 minutes’ allocated time ; they were enticed to organized basketball games in the school gymnasium and , in the emerging spring climate , to the playground outside . In the exit questionnaire , four stu - dents answered the question on team size : three of them thought six members to be ideal , while the other preferred between four and six students . All but one said they would suggest that their friends volunteer for any future a design team ; the dissident said it would depend on whether it clashed with a school activity such as basketball . As for the adults , three attended each of the G3 and G6 sessions : one person always took notes ( despite the back - up audio taping ) , one led the discussion , and the third was on hand to deal with any individual needs from a student . When using a design - team approach , it is vital to build a strong sense of team spirit . In particular , it was important to avoid the suggestion that the adult team members were sur - rogate teachers rather than genuine colleagues engaged in a 1144 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 1145 shared task . The researchers always wore casual clothing and were called by their ﬁrst names . The school’s art room offered a relatively informal setting . A team moniker ( The Web Wonders for the G6 team , and the Web Wizards for the G3 team ) was chosen , and team t - shirts for everybody were bought . The students quickly seemed to accept the adult presence without awkwardness or restraint . Although the adults tried to play the role of collaborators rather than leaders , it would be misleading to portray them as “big kids . ” Inevitably their contributions were different from those of the students , and they did focus and direct the session activities . In the case of the G6 team , as time be - came shorter and the design process more complex , this leadership role became more apparent ; in the case of the G3 team , a greater degree of leadership was necessary from the outset . The school in which the research was conducted is rela - tively small : There were two grade - six classes of around 70 students in total sharing an open - plan room , and three grade - three classes with about the same total number of stu - dents . The students in each of the teams , therefore , knew each other to some extent , at least , before we began working with them , even if they were not all from the same class . This probably also helped to cement a team spirit quickly , making it possible to achieve a lot in a relatively small num - ber of design sessions . Undoubtedly , student contributions to the design process were not uniform in either team . Differences were more marked in the G3 team , where one student in particular im - pressed us with her ideas , whereas another found it difﬁcult to focus on the work at hand as well as to collaborate either with her peers or us adults . It was much more demanding for us to work with the younger than the older students : not sur - prisingly , their attention span was shorter ( at least for dis - cussions and brainstorming ; they most enjoyed making drawings of portals ) . The younger G3 girls and boys were less bothered by gender issues than the older students ; in the G6 team the students assembled around the table in two dis - tinct clusters : boys on one side and girls on the other . The Sessions It is important to maintain interest , and to this end , the activities in any one session were varied : Discussions , brain - storming , viewing , and drawing were mixed to ensure con - tinued engagement . The children would have liked to have seen a working portal rather than a low - level prototype in the form of screen designs by the end of the sessions . Indeed , they would have enjoyed seeing a real , working portal de - velop session by session . At the same time , this would have proved a wasteful process , as designs changed over the ses - sions and paper mockups really did make sense in the early design stages . We had neither the human nor the computing resources , in any case , to proceed in this fashion . Children can come up with ideas that adults might not think of ( Druin , 1996 ) , but a downside is that they may want things included in the design that are impossible to realize . Yet constantly reminding children that certain things cannot be built may inhibit their creativity . Hanna , Risden , and Alexander ( 1997 ) advise researchers to ground the chil - dren’s expectations before they start the usability sessions by explaining exactly what the process will be . We tried to fol - low this advice , but it was not always easy . For example , the G6 students wanted the portal in some way to help them ﬁnd relevant information when their searches were proving un - successful ; it was difﬁcult to explain to them why this in practice was so difﬁcult to achieve . Consensus Building The most difﬁcult task we encountered with both teams was building a consensus among the students . In the case of the G6 team , we had hoped that the results from the initial user questionnaire survey would provide evaluation criteria that could be referred to during brainstorming . The survey did provide criteria ( such as fast response time and high rel - evance of retrieved documents ) that could be applied to aspects of the portal design . But it did not help us resolve minor issues such as the selection of a name for the portal or major issues such as an overall design metaphor . On a few occasions we broke into two smaller brainstorming groups , but this did not appear to work very well and was not espe - cially popular with the students ( ﬁve out of the seven stu - dents answering the design team questionnaire said they preferred one large group to two small groups ) . We can only speculate on the reasons for this unpopularity : it may be that the quieter students could not so easily sit back and listen to the discussion , while the more vocal students liked a bigger audience ; it could also be that all the students had grown familiar with the larger group dynamic and felt more com - fortable in it . Despite such problems , consensus among the team mem - bers was reached fairly easily on many important issues , such as the functionality of the conventional portal . Opin - ions on screen layout and color were more varied , but again consensus was reached ( probably helped by the decision to incorporate personalization into the portal that would allow users to select , for example , different color combinations ) . At the same time , freewheeling discussions among the team members , while not always reaching a decision , were a rich source of ideas and helped the adults to understand their younger colleagues’ points of view . Consensus building was even more challenging with the G3 team . The students demonstrated a strong sense of own - ership over their own individual ideas , and they wanted to see them realized in the ﬁnished portal . Compromise was not easily achieved , yet in the end a ﬁnal portal design was cre - ated . They would be satisﬁed so long as some part of their individual design had been incorporated into the emerging group design . For example , one student complained that his drawing had not been utilized in the team portal , but was to - tally reassured when we pointed out that two buttons ( Back and Forward ) present in his drawing had been incorporated into the portal design . 1146 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 Number of Sessions Did we hold the right number of sessions for each team ( 13 for G6 and 9 for G3 ) ? Our concern was to avoid boring or tiring the students by holding too many sessions . We could have explored all aspects of portal design more fully had we allocated more sessions , but we were wary of doing this . Indeed , we had been concerned at the outset as to whether student attention would remain focused over several weeks . In the event , we may have misjudged student com - mitment , at least among the G6 team . In the exit question - naire , four of the seven students from the G6 team said we had held too few sessions , three said just enough , and no one thought there had been too many sessions . One commented , “I think it was fun doing this Web portal but I thought you kind of rushed us . ” Of the ﬁve G3 students to answer the same question , four thought the number of sessions was just right , and one thought it not enough . Despite holding fewer sessions with this team , their endurance was lower than that of the older students . Children as Designers Scaife and his colleagues ( 1997 ) question whether children can play an equal role alongside adults in the design process . They consider the Participatory Design model to be effective for a team comprised of adult users who can view each other as peers , but infeasible when dealing with children . They do not believe that children have the time , knowledge , or expertise to fully participate in a truly collaborative process . Our students in both teams did express themselves cogently on functional components in a portal as well as fun aspects , and we did in - teract with them , thereby generating ideas that we would not necessarily have developed on our own . At the same time , the students were constrained by lack of knowledge about inter - face design principles , and it would be fallacious to underplay this fact . It would be fairer to say that the children and the adults in each team played different but complementary roles . The former clearly expressed their likes and dislikes in an ideal portal , and on occasion defended these views against our questioning . For example , the G3 team members were adamant that they wanted keyword searching even after we had discussed the difﬁculties they often encountered in cor - rectly spelling search terms . The G6 team students wanted to see both keyword and natural language search features , and both teams stressed the importance of translation facilities— of the interface content and any retrieved documents . How did the students like their experience of belonging to a portal design team ? In session 12 and session 8 , respectively , the students in the G6 and G3 teams were asked to complete a short questionnaire about their reactions to being on the de - sign team . Asimpliﬁed and redesigned version of the G6 team questionnaire was used with the G3 team members . Children’s Experience All seven students who answered the G6 team question - naire said they would recommend their friends to volunteer for a similar team . Overall , it seems fair to say that the stu - dents enjoyed their experience and learned from it . From the sessions , they liked best of all drawing portals ( six out of seven votes ; one student liked brainstorming best ) . When asked what they enjoyed least , three answered “nothing , ” and two said looking at existing portals on the Web . What did the students say they had learned from their experience ? These are their responses : • Takes a lot of people to build a Web portal . • Everything . • It isn’t as easy as it seems to make a Web portal . • It’shardtodesignaWebportalandtrytoagreeoneverything . • It’s rewarding to see the ﬁnal outcome . • I learned that virtual reality might be fun but it’s hard work . • One student summed up in the questionnaire the feelings shared , it seems , by all : “I had a lot of fun and I learned a lot of new things” ( Also relayed to us later by their teacher . ) What about the younger students in the G3 team ? In their exit questionnaire they said they liked just about everything they did : learning more about Web portals , looking at Web portals on the computer , drawing design ideas , talking about ideas , and playing games at the end of the sessions . To quote from their responses , they learned “that computers are cool , ” “how to design in a team , ” and “to be a good friended ( sic ) , ” the last comment gratifyingly from the student who had found socialization within the team so difﬁcult . The Low - Tech Portal Prototypes Two design ideas emerged from the G6 team : ( 1 ) a conven - tional portal in which search boxes and directories provided routes to information retrieval and ( 2 ) a more radical three - dimensional ( 3 - D ) design ( referred to by the team as “virtual reality” ) where users would move through a ﬁrst - person 3 - D environment browsing for information . In the case of the 3 - D portal , time was insufﬁcient to undertake a design , but the team did generate a number of 3 - D scenarios for possible future development ; these will be discussed in a separate arti - cle . The G3 team also produced a design for a conventional portal , but not for a 3 - D portal . These two conventional portal designs each comprise three screens : the opening search screen , a results screen , and a help screen . In practice , more screens will be required in the working prototype ( for exam - ple , an Advanced Search screen , and additional screens to expand upon the kinds of help provided ) , but we felt that we had gone as far as possible in the team sessions . For several reasons it was decided to conﬁne each portal to just one broad subject area . We thought that it would make the design task more concrete , especially in the case of a 3 - D design , to focus upon one subject . We also had in mind the fact that subsequently we have to build working proto - types that can be tested by grade - six and grade - three students and are capable of conducting searches against actual docu - ments in a Web environment . This task is more straightfor - ward for us if we can restrict the topical range of the portal . As the portal is intended to help students seek information in JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 1147 support of class assignments and homework , we wanted to choose in each case a subject area that related to the curricu - lum , at least in Quebec . We opted for a grade - six portal that would help students to ﬁnd information about Canadian his - tory and a grade - three portal that would help students to ﬁnd more general information about Canada . The G6 Team Portal Althoughallstudentsonthedesignteamwerefamiliarwith Web portals , none of them hitherto had seen a portal designed speciﬁcally for young users . When shown Yahooligans ! , Lycos Zone , KidsClick , and Ask Jeeves for Kids , they were rather dismissive of them . They told us that they preferred to use the likes of Google , MSN , and Yahoo , as did their fellow students , as revealed in the initial grade - six user questionnaire ( see above ) . This did not come as a surprise to us . All seven students in our two exploratory studies ( Large et al . , 2003a ) as well as the 23 students ( of a similar age ) in our earlier focus groups ( Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , 2002 ) had been equally unfamiliar with children’s Web portals . It is also in line with ﬁndings by Bilal ( 2000 ) among her group of grade - seven students . It is striking , however , that even in their ﬁrst pencil draw - ings , completed in the second session , the team members were already expressing design ideas that were greatly at variance with the “adult” portals with which they were familiar . To emphasize this point , a drawing by one student from session 2 is reproduced in Figure 1 ( at this point the requirement to focus the portal speciﬁcally on Canadian his - tory had not been introduced ) . Like the “adult” portals they had used , this portal includes a keyword search box . In most other respects , however , it differs from the likes of Google or MSN by including two photographs dominantly in the cen - ter of the screen , a menu on the left side including entries such as “Ask a teacher , ” “Good Books” suitable for various grades , and “New Games (cid:1) rating” that are targeted at young users , and icons for new and best books . History Trek The opening screen of the completed G6 portal is shown in Figure 2 ( of course , color , though not reproduced here , plays an important role in the design ) . The team chose to call the portal “History Trek : A Canadian History Site . ” All agreed that the name should reﬂect the portal’s function of serving as a gateway to information about Canadian history . A secondary consideration was to convey by its name the fact that the portal had been designed by young people for young people , while not sounding infantile ( the students were very conscious of their age and the need to distance themselves from their less mature juniors ) . The name was chosen relatively late in the process and did not prove con - tentious . We have argued elsewhere that a portal’s name is important to young users and can inﬂuence them positively or negatively ( Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , 2002 ; Large , Beheshti , & Cole , 2002 ) . The design metaphor for this screen ( and the subsequent screens ) is the Canadian ﬂag . Maple leaves ( the national emblem appearing on the Cana - dian ﬂag ) provide the background motif , as and appear on each side of the portal name . The left and right side vertical borders are colored red , and the center section of the screen white , reﬂecting the colors of the Canadian ﬂag . The icons FIG . 1 . Early design ideas ( session 2 ) for a portal from one boy in the G6 team . FIG . 2 . Opening screen of the G6 portal . 1148 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 used to present e - mail and chat facilities are beavers , closely associated with Canada . The portal mascot , Willy the Web Wonder , prominently located in the center of the screen , is also based on the maple leaf . The portal offers several approaches to information seek - ing : a keyword search box and a natural language search box in the top right , a topic menu on the left ( the topics them - selves are initial suggestions and will be modiﬁed in the high - tech prototype once the database content has been es - tablished in detail ) , an alphabetical browser , and a scrollable timeline . This variety of approaches was discussed at some length by the team ; the student members argued that it would not confuse users and that it is important to cater for the dif - fering preferences of individual information seekers . In this same vein , the portal also has a hyperlink to other Web por - tals ( examples suggested included Google , MSN , and Yahoo , but not other “children’s portals” like Yahooligans ! ) in case users wish to explore other options . The students , in - ﬂuenced by their experience with portals such as Google , also wanted an advanced keyword search feature that would allow Boolean term combination and phrase searching ( the detailed design of this implementation was not undertaken by the team ) . The students liked the idea of the scrolling timeline ( suggested by one of the adults ) and thought it would be useful for a portal dealing with historical content . Two buttons under the title caption enable a search to be re - stricted to sites with visual and audio content ( strongly urged by one student and accepted by the others as useful ) . The students were familiar with the potential dangers posed by e - mail and especially Internet chat rooms ; it had been emphasized to them both in school and at home . In par - ticular they discussed , very knowledgeably in some cases , the need to control entry to any chat room provided through a registration and monitoring process . They also discussed the opportunities for distraction presented by e - mail and chat on a portal whose primary purpose was to help students ﬁnd information for school projects and other assignments . At the same time , they recognized the beneﬁts for learning offered by an opportunity to share information and ideas . On balance , they felt that the portal should offer both e - mail and chat features . Games and quizzes likewise were recognized as having a distraction component , but the students consid - ered that on a portal targeted at young people there should be some entertainment element . They thought that the best way to reconcile this conﬂict was to incorporate a trivia quiz that would be related to the Canadian history focus of the portal . The students’school administratively operates in English , but teaching ( and the accompanying assignments ) is con - ducted both in English and French . In grade six , for example , only English Language and Literature and Mathematics are taught through the medium of English ; all other subjects are taught using French . Furthermore , Montreal is an extremely cosmopolitan city in which many languages are spoken . As a consequence , the students are very conscious of language issues . The students in the G6 team at an early stage in de - sign emphasized that all interface screens must be available in at least French and English . The button labeled “En Français” ( and “In English” when the interface is displayed in French ) toggles between the two languages . The team discussed in several sessions an alternative in - terface design that would employ 3 - D rather than conven - tional design principles—rather like in a 3 - D game , users would explore the Web by moving avatars through virtual space . A majority , but not all , of the students were enthusias - tic about such an approach . All agreed , however , that it should complement rather than replace any conventional portal : for some students , and / or for some purposes , one might be preferred over the other . The button marked “Go Virtual” in Figure 2 would transfer users from the conven - tional to the 3 - D interface ( although in our current research it will not be possible to develop a 3 - D interface ) . The students greeted favorably the idea of interface per - sonalization , although they did not understand the meaning of this term—the students opted to use “My site” ( in the bot - tom left of the screen ) , although it may be no clearer in its meaning ( when the portal was eventually shown to the G3 team its members did not understand what this icon does ) . As to which elements should be capable of personalization , the team suggested colors , icons , and script fonts . The provi - sion of personalization probably helped to gain a consensus in the team for the design and layout of the portal interface . In the early stages of the design process we tried to focus attention upon functionality and to leave interface design is - sues as much as possible to one side . This proved effective , since by the time issues of layout , color , font , icons , and so on emerged , we already had agreement within the team on the various capabilities that must be provided via the inter - face . Nevertheless , individual opinions were ﬁercely voiced in layout and design before consensus was established through several iterations as a composite design slowly emerged from the individual designs made by team mem - bers . The adoption of the Canadian metaphor considerably simpliﬁed matters as it implied certain colors and design motifs . The graphic artist also played a role in the process . It was his responsibility to adapt the hand drawings to mockup screens , and his suggestions , ﬁltered through team discus - sions of draft designs , helped us determine what was and what was not feasible to present in a limited space ( the stu - dents preferred to avoid vertical or horizontal scrolling ) . Early in the design process the students had expressed skepticism about the help features typically found on portals . In this respect , they conformed to opinions and indeed be - havioral patterns found in our earlier research ( Large , Beheshti , & Moukdad , 1999 ; Large & Beheshti , 2000 ) . The G6 students told us they ignored such help features when using portals , and / or found the so - called help to be of little or no use . They said that they needed help in how to ﬁnd infor - mation , and that is precisely the kind of help they never received . If such in - context help could be provided , they were all for including it in their portal , and they believed that students then would avail themselves of it . The large icon of Willy the Web Wonder serves both as the portal mascot and the means to elicit help . It links to “Willy’s Help Page , ” JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 1149 reproduced in Figure 3 . The critical item here is “Help me with my search , ” which should offer guidance on term selection and search strategy ( a problem for us to tackle when building the high - tech portal in the next stage of the research ) . The second menu item will lead to a brief descrip - tion and explanation of the portal itself and its components . The students thought it would be useful to be able to consult an expert , such as a librarian , when doing a class assignment , most probably in conjunction with the e - mail and / or chat facilities already discussed . Finally , from this page , users can ﬁnd out about the design team itself , the Web Wonders . The students had mixed views here . On the one hand , they liked the idea that users could ﬁnd out something about the team members and the design process ; they were disappointed when we tried to explain ethical issues involved in research with children that prevented us from identifying them indi - vidually , or even giving the name of their school . On the other hand , interestingly , they were afraid that the portal’s credibility with students might be undermined if children were revealed to have been actively involved in the portal’s design . The layout and colors used in this help screen are con - sistent with those in the opening search screen ( and indeed the results screen ) . The opportunity to switch between English and French is offered from a button on this screen , and another button returns users to the initial Home screen . The team devoted quite a lot of time to discussing how re - trieved documents should be presented to users . The younger team members wanted enough information on each item and written in language that they could understand to enable ac - curate relevance judgments to be drawn , but they also wanted to avoid long statements that would limit the number of records displayed on a screen . The approach adopted by the KidsClick portal offered a good example to follow . At the same time , the idea was to retain the metaphor and layout used in the other screens and to display the keyword and nat - ural language search boxes , the six topic icons , and the Willy help mascot . The result can be seen in Figure 4 . Little space has been left for the actual hit displays . A “translate” button appears at the end of each item ; this would provide a transla - tion of English documents into French , and vice versa . The students appreciated that they could encounter spelling problems when entering keywords or natural - language sentences ; spell checking was considered essential in a portal for young people . A misspelled word would prompt the portal to respond by presenting one or more words that the user may have intended ( we opted for the Google phrase , “Did you mean . . . ? ” ) . The G3 Team Portal , KidSearch Canada Even at a ﬁrst glance , the G3 team portal’s opening search screen visually is quite different from that of the G6 portal ( Fig . 5 ) . It is designed on the concept of a student’s desk , and sittingonthedeskareacomputer , aglobe , amusic“Discman , ” a ﬂowerpot , and a mouse holding a sign . ( This real mouse represents , of course , a computer mouse . ) Above the desk is a shelf of books , and attached to the wall on either side of the computer is a bulletin board holding several notes and a FIG . 3 . Help screen in G6 portal . FIG . 4 . Result display screen in G6 portal . FIG . 5 . Opening screen , G3 portal . 1150 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 poster . The design as a whole has a Canadian ﬂavor ( the por - tal deals with Canada and is entitled KidSearch Canada ) : The computer’s background screen represents the Canadian ﬂag , and the surﬁng moose on the poster is an animal associ - ated with Canada . Despite the differing design metaphors , the functionality in the G3 portal is not so very different from that of the G6 portal . It offers three approaches to information retrieval . Keywords can be entered in the searchbox on the computer’s screen ; the students were aware of the small space afforded users for this purpose , but were too attached to their design concept to modify this . The letters on the keyboard are not intended to type keywords but to provide an alphabetic entry to searching—again , the team discussed the possibility for confusion , but decided to retain this device . The books on the shelves represent the menu topics . The G3 team did not propose several features present in the G6 Portal : natural - language searching , advanced keyword searching , or links to other search engines . The globe is used to switch interface languages between English and French and will spin when clicked . The “Disc - man” is intended to search for and then play music . The bulletin board provides access to e - mail , a chatroom , help , and personalization . ( Labeled as “color change” by the stu - dents who did not understand the meaning of the term per - sonalization . ) The poster is for decorative purposes only , which generated criticism from the G6 team when they looked at the portal : They thought users would be surprised when it did not prove to be an active link to something . The petals on the ﬂower provide “fun stuff”—games , jokes , a quiz , and suggested books to read about Canada . Not sur - prisingly , the younger students in this team were less con - cerned than the G6 team about integrating entertainment with informational objectives , although they did appreciate and discuss the distraction factor . Their compromise was that the fun aspects of the portal should be related to the portal’s Canadian theme . The help screen ( Fig . 6 ) maintains the desktop theme , but from an up - close position ; this allows detail around the computer to be eliminated . The globe has been kept to per - mit language switching from this screen . The menu entries are very similar to those on the G6 portal ( in this case the design team called itself the Web Wizards ) . The display screen ( Fig . 7 ) uses the computer screen to present hits , and like the G6 portal , incorporates spell check - ing ( especially necessary with these younger students ) , an option to switch interface language , and access to help . Again , as in the G6 portal , the G3 team wanted a translation engine to convert retrieved documents from English to French or French to English . Only in session 9 , after the G3 low - tech prototype had been designed , was the question of a 3 - D portal raised with the team . From our experience with the G6 team , we had de - cided that it was simply too difﬁcult for the younger students to produce preliminary drawings of 3 - D portals in the absence of working models to show them . Therefore , we did no more than show them one or two very preliminary 3 - D mockups to get their feedback in the ﬁnal session . As a con - sequence , there was no possibility for them to include any kind of link from their conventional portal to a “virtual” portal , as did the G6 team . Web Portals for Elementary School Students What can we learn about designing Web portals for young students from the work of these design teams ? Al - though we should be cautious about overgeneralization from the work of just 14 students , 3 adults , and 2 teams , certain pointers can be identiﬁed . Despite the students’familiarity with regular “adult” Web portals rather than children’s portals , and certainly in the case of the G6 team an initially negative reaction to examples on the Web of the latter , it is clear from a cursory examination of both the G6 and especially the G3 team portals that their design has not followed that of Google , MSN , or the other portals they use at home and school . When left to design their own portals , these young students did produce their own designs that are intended to meet their own sense of taste and FIG . 6 . Help screen in G3 portal . FIG . 7 . Result display screen , G3 portal . JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 1151 purpose . If children are not using the children’s portals cur - rently available on the Web , as evinced both by these stu - dents and earlier studies ( Large , Beheshti , & Rahman , 2002 ; Bilal , 2000 , 2003 ; Nielson , 2002 ) , we suggest it is either because they are unaware of their existence , or if aware of them , do not ﬁnd them to be either visually or functionally attractive . This leads to a second point : children want a portal that uses such devices as colors and images to enliven the design , but not at the expense either of clarity or operational useful - ness . It is wrong to think that children would opt for as many colors , animations , and sounds as can be ﬁtted on a screen anymore than they want a bland interface with minimal visual attractiveness ( see also the results from our focus group ses - sions with children in Large et al . , 2002 ) . The students in our teams ( and especially in the older team ) recognized that the purpose of a portal was to help them ﬁnd information and not to entertain them ; they were very leery about including games and jokes on their portals for fear of distracting users from their primary task . The students were also aware of the reduc - tion in system response times that images can occasion ( and fast response was an important criterion for them ) ; this was another reason for them to be cautious about including games . They compromised by including limited entertainment with the intention of providing some light relief for overtaxed stu - dents , without unduly distracting them or slowing things down too much . At the same time , they were attracted by a thematic design concept ( Canada in the G6 portal ) or a metaphor ( a student’s desktop in the G3 portal ) that seemed to provide them with a unity of purpose for their portals—of course , this was facilitated by the restricted subject coverage of these two particular portals . The design criteria for user in - terfaces ( in terms of color combinations , layout , fonts , and so on ) , advanced by “experts” such as Shneiderman ( 1998 ) and Galitz ( 2002 ) , are not so far removed from the criteria em - ployed by our two teams . Their interfaces are not the blaze of conﬂicting colors and wildly gyrating animations that some adults might have supposed . The students , and especially those in the G6 team , appre - ciated the central role of the portal for information retrieval . It is interesting to note that for these students , keyword searching was the ﬁrst choice . The portal should be able to accept one or more keywords and then ﬁnd the information of relevance to the searcher . Although recognition has been claimed to be more straightforward than recall ( Borgman , Hirsh , Walter , & Gallagher , 1995 ) , in practice , for these chil - dren at any rate , this only seemed to be true if the directory topics presented at the ﬁrst level of any menu corresponded very closely with the users’concepts . For example , it was far easier for the children to ﬁnd information about tigers by using that word in a keyword search than to associate it with , say , the broader concept of “animals” in a menu . This is the reason why their next most popular means of searching was via an alphabetic menu , where tiger could be sought under the letter T ( and not under A for animal ) . Both portals did provide the third approach via a menu of topics , but it was the least interesting option for them . This focus on keyword searching was not shaken , even for the G3 team members , by their spelling shortcomings . They told us that they liked to enter their search concept as one or more keywords . Children are not averse to using help offered by a portal , but they will do so only if it truly helps them in their primary task—ﬁnding relevant information ( Large & Beheshti , 2000 ) . They have very little tolerance for help functions that simply do not help them in this task . They do not appreciate the problems of providing such help in the wildly heteroge - neous world of the Web , but if these problems cannot be sur - mounted , it may be better to omit help altogether . The students were well informed of the dangers lurking in chat rooms . They appreciated the advantages that chatting with students , teachers , and other experts could offer in a learning environment , but made it clear that this would only be tolerated if entry to the chat room could be controlled reliably . The ways in which results are displayed are critical , from the students’ perspective , to the effectiveness of the portal . Although their own designs may have conﬂicted with this expressed need , they did clearly emphasize the importance of providing a brief but accurate summary of a document’s content in language that young people will understand . They all in the past had encountered problems in selecting rele - vant items from long lists of hits . This is in keeping with ﬁndings from our earlier studies ( Large & Beheshti , 2000 ; Large et al . , 2002 ) . The sense of control over their environment that interface personalization offers was very attractive to the students on both teams , although it was difﬁcult to choose a good term to express this concept . From their own discussions it was ap - parent to them ( and us ) that a shared age does not mean shared views in such matters as color combinations and image selection . They liked the idea of individual users being able to control these aspects of the interface , while ap - preciating that if they opted for the kind of design metaphors used in the two prototype portals , the opportunity for radical personalization is reduced . Finally , it is important to emphasize the rapid develop - ment phases through which young people pass . We can talk about children’s versus adults’ portals , but this masks the re - ality that at least in the case of children , it is unrealistic and misleading to lump them all into one group regardless of age . If someone were to be shown our two prototypes and asked to guess which one was produced by the G3 team and which by the G6 team , it seems unlikely that many would get it wrong . Both teams were very conscious of age considera - tions throughout the design sessions . When viewing Web portals such as Alfy or Lycos Zone , for example , the G6 stu - dents would comment that they might be ﬁne for young kids , but not for themselves . We asked each team to comment upon the other’s ﬁnal prototype : the G6 team members were impressed by the imaginative nature of the G3 portal , but added that it was very suitable for younger students but not for themselves ; the G3 team members liked the G6 design but felt it was appropriate for older students rather than themselves . This does make it difﬁcult , perhaps impossible , 1152 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 to design a portal whose functionality and interface presen - tation are appropriate even for students who are all in ele - mentary grades . Limitations of the Study This study was subject to several limitations . First , the children in both grades three and six were drawn from the same school , located in a middle - class suburb of Montreal . The children all had access to the Internet from home as well as school , and the grade - six students in particular were used to drawing upon the Web as an information resource for school assignments . It is difﬁcult to know whether students drawn from schools in lower socioeconomic areas of the city would have manifested the same skills in portal design . Secondly , only students from two grades participated in the research , and again caution should be employed in generalizing to stu - dents in other grades . Thirdly , only 14 students in total were involved in the project , and although randomly selected from volunteers , there is no way of knowing how representative they may be even of their own classes and school . Finally , the teams worked for a relatively short duration—a few weeks ; it would be interesting to prolong this experience over several months . Although our two teams gelled successfully , Druin and her colleagues ( 2003 ) believe that at least six months is necessary to complete the socialization process between the children and the adults in an intergenerational team . Conclusions In this article we have described the methodology used to design two low - tech Web portal prototypes constructed for elementary school students in grades three and six . We have also discussed the design criteria that have emerged from this process . What lessons have been learned from our reliance upon intergenerational design teams to develop low - tech portals ? Team and Session Design • The low - tech design process requires active participation of the team members—both the younger and the older members . • Six students and three adults seems to be the ideal size for an intergenerational team to design a low - tech prototype portal . To facilitate cooperation , to reduce the number of design sessions required , and to minimize anxiety , it is preferable that the students are already acquaintances . • When working with children it is important to prepare care - fully the content of each session so that it progresses smoothly , but at the same time the adults in the team must be willing and able to modify plans if they are not seen to be working well . • The number of sessions should be limited to no more than about a dozen to maintain the students’ active involvement and commitment to the process , especially in the case of younger students . • The length of a session is best limited to around 1 hour . • Sessions should include a mix of activities to avoid monot - ony and to account for children’s short attention span . In the case of younger students , this might include playing games that are unconnected with the task in hand . • It is important to ground the children’s expectations of what might be achieved ; although we pointed out on several occa - sions that the design sessions would terminate with low - level nonfunctional rather than high - level functional Web portals , some students , especially in G6 , were a little disap - pointed that their portals would not actually work on the Web ( of course , they will do this at a later stage in our research project ) . • Complex and / or difﬁcult concepts must be presented in the sessions in a “child - friendly” style to ensure that they are understood . • Students , regardless of their age , seem to enjoy most the task of designing and drawing the portal on paper . Collaboration and Team Work • Adults and children in the teams have different roles in a col - laborative context . In the case of younger students , adults play a greater role as leaders than in teams involving older students . • It is preferable to involve all the members of the team , rather than dividing the members into several subgroups , in discus - sions and brainstorming sessions . • Consensus building , while difﬁcult with younger students in grade three , is attainable for older students ; compromise may be easier to achieve . • In the case of the grade - three students , it was important to let them see that each of them had contributed in some tangible way to the ﬁnal design , even if their contribution was minor ( like the inclusion of a “Back” button in the G3 portal to en - sure that at least one idea from one boy’s drawing had been incorporated ) . • Students in mixed - gender groups work well together and are probably better than single - gender groups ( although we have not experimented with the latter ) . • Students take pleasure in developing a new portal as a mem - ber of an intergenerational team . They learn that teamwork requires compromise , designing a portal is a complex and difﬁcult but rewarding endeavor , and that the entire process is “fun . ” • Elementary school students as young as grade three can work with adults as design partners , but the latter will per - force have to provide leadership within the group while striving to avoid adopting the role of teacher rather than collaborator . What lessons have we learned so far about children’s per - spectives on designing Web portals ? • The portal design of the G6 team differs in both presentation and functionality from that of the G3 team . • Children are very aware of what they like and what they do not like , and are willing to express their views unreservedly . • While the majority of children are using “adult” portals such as Google and Yahoo ! , when given the opportunity to design their own , they produce ones that are signiﬁcantly different from adult portals both in design and functionality . • Familiar metaphors play an important role . • A 3 - D design metaphor seems to be a useful complement to the conventional portal interface , at least for some students ( this is a matter that we hope to explore further in subsequent research ) . • Children like to retrieve from the Web images , animation , and sound sequences , but they do not want such multimedia features to be integrated into a portal if this means sacriﬁc - ing operational clarity and response time . • Children do not necessarily prefer a gaudily colored interface , although color and design in general are important for them . • The name of the portal is important ; it should accurately convey the portal’s function while at the same time be intel - ligible and appealing to young users . • Students , particularly those in grade six , appreciate the im - portance of multiple efﬁcient and effective mechanisms for retrieving information . They want both keyword and natural language searching capabilities , as well as browsable subject and alphabetic directories . • In - context help facilities , rather than general help screens , should be present in portals . • Reasonable recall and high precision are critical in retrieving information for class projects . • In a bilingual educational environment , students want trans - lation facilities . • Although children are aware of the dangers of unsupervised connectivity ( chat rooms and e - mails ) , they like the integra - tionoftheseservicesintoaportalinacontrolledenvironment . • Search results should be displayed clearly and include a brief summary of the content of the retrieved Web pages . • Personalization is desirable . Children are increasingly using the Web to access educa - tional and entertainment materials . They want portals that not only facilitate effective information retrieval , but also are engaging . It is desirable and feasible to design and con - struct portals incorporating features that are requested by children . One way to achieve this objective is at the outset to create intergenerational teams comprised of elementary school students and adults . Through participatory tech - niques , prototype low - tech portals can be constructed , based on which captivating and effective children’s portals can then be developed . Further Directions The next stage in the research will be to evaluate both portals in an operational classroom setting using grade - six and grade - three students to determine whether in practice their designs really do meet with the approval of their target audience and whether they are effective in retrieving infor - mation for a class project . We are currently building from the G6 mockup a functioning prototype portal . We are also as - sembling a database of Web links dealing with Canadian his - tory and of likely relevance to elementary school students that will be searched by the portal . It is our intention to repeat this process with the G3 team portal . Acknowledgments The authors express their gratitude to the school board , the school principal , and the teachers for their full cooperation . JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 1153 They are indebted enormously to their 14 young colleagues on the design teams who contributed so enthusiastically their ideas and without whom the research could not have taken place . The ﬁnancial support of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada is gratefully acknowledged . References Beyer , H . , & Holtzblatt , K . ( 1999 ) . Contextual design . ACM Interactions , 6 ( 1 ) , 32 – 42 . Bilal , D . ( 2000 ) . Children’s use of the Yahooligans ! Web search engine : 1 . Cognitive , physical , and affective behaviors on fact - based search tasks . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 51 ( 7 ) , 646 – 665 . Bilal , D . ( 2002 ) . Children design their interfaces for Web search engines : A participatory approach . Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Canadian Association for Information Science ( pp . 204 – 214 ) . Toronto , Ontario : CAIS . Bilal , D . ( 2003 ) . Draw and tell : Children as designers of Web interfaces . Humanizing information technology : From ideas to bits and back . Proceedings of the 66th ASISTAnnual Meeting ( pp . 135 – 141 ) . Medford , NJ : Information Today . Borgman , C . L . , Hirsh , S . G . , Walter , V . A . , & Gallagher , A . L . ( 1995 ) . Children’s search behavior on browsing and keyword online catalogs : The Science Library Catalog Project . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 46 ( 9 ) , 663 – 684 . Carmel , E . , Whitaker , R . , & George , J . ( 1993 ) . PD and Joint application design : Atransatlantic comparison . Communications of the ACM , 36 ( 4 ) , 40 – 48 . Druin , A . ( 1996 ) . A place called childhood . Interactions , 3 ( 1 ) , 17 – 22 . Druin , A . ( 1999 ) . Cooperative Inquiry : Developing new technologies for children with children . Proceedings of CHI ’99 ( pp . 592 – 599 ) . Pittsburgh , PA : ACM Press . Druin , A . ( 2002 ) . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour and Information Technology , 21 ( 1 ) , 1 – 25 . Druin , A . , Bederson , B . , Boltman , A . , Miura , A . , Knotts - Callahan , D . , & Platt , M . ( 1999 ) . Children as our technology design partners . In A . Druin ( Ed . ) , The design of children’s technology ( pp . 51 – 72 ) . San Francisco : Morgan Kaufmann . Druin , A . , Bederson , B . B . , Weeks , A . , Farber , A . , Grosjean , J . , Guha , M . L . , Hourcade , J . P . , Lee , J . , Liao , S . , Reuter , K . , Rose , A . , Takayama , Y . , & Zhang , L . ( 2003 ) . The International Children’s Digital Library : Descrip - tion and analysis of ﬁrst use [ online ] . First Monday 8 ( 5 ) . Retrieved from http : / / www . ﬁrstmonday . dk / issues / issue8 _ 5 / druin / index . html Druin , A . , Stewart , J . , Proft , D . , Bederson , B . , & Hollan , J . ( 1997 ) . KidPad : A design collaboration between children , technologists , and educators [ online ] . Proceedings of CHI ’97 , Atlanta , GA . Retrieved from http : / / www1 . acm . org / sigs / sigchi / chi97 / proceedings / brieﬁng / ajd2 . htm Galitz , W . O . ( 2002 ) . The essential guide to user interface design ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Hanna , L . , Risden , K . , & Alexander , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Guidelines for usability testing with children . Interactions ( September – October ) , 9 – 14 . Hanna , L . , Risden , K . , Czerwinski , M . , & Alexander , D . ( 1999 ) . The role of usability research in designing children’s computer products . In A . Druin ( Ed . ) , The design of children’s technology ( pp . 4 – 26 ) . San Francisco : Morgan Kaufmann . Head , A . ( 1997 ) . Web usability and essential interface design issues . Pro - ceedings of the 18th National Online Meeting ( pp . 157 – 163 ) . Medford , NJ : Information Today . Head , A . ( 1999 ) . Web redemption and the promise of usability . Online , 23 ( 6 ) , 20 – 32 . Kafai , Y . ( 1999 ) . Children as designers , testers , and evaluators of educa - tional software . In A . Druin ( Ed . ) , The design of children’s technology ( pp . 51 – 72 ) . San Francisco : Morgan Kaufmann . Large , A . , & Beheshti , J . ( 2000 ) . The Web as a classroom resource : Reac - tions from the users . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 51 ( 12 ) , 1069 – 1080 . 1154 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—November 2004 Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , & Cole , C . ( 2002 ) . Information architecture for the Web : The IA matrix approach to designing children’s portals . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 53 ( 10 ) , 831 – 838 . Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , & Moukdad , H . ( 1999 ) . Information seeking on the Web : Navigational skills of grade - six primary school students . Proceed - ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the American Society for Informa - tion Science ( pp . 84 – 97 ) . Medford , NJ : Information Today . Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , Nesset , V . , & Bowler , L . ( 2003a ) . Children as Web portal designers : Where do we start ? In W . C . Peekhaus & L . F . Spiteri ( Eds . ) , Bridging the digital divide : Equalizing access to information and communication technologies . Proceedings of the 31st Annual Confer - ence of the Canadian Association for Information Science ( pp . 139 – 152 ) . Halifax , Nova Scotia : CAIS . Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , Nesset , V . , & Bowler , L . ( 2003b ) . Children as de - signers of Web portals . In Humanizing information technology : From ideas to bits and back ( pp . 142 – 149 ) , Proceedings of the 66th ASIST Annual Meeting . Medford , NJ : Information Today . Large , A . , Beheshti , J . , & Rahman , T . ( 2002 ) . Design criteria for children’s Web portals : The users speak out . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 53 ( 2 ) , 79 – 94 . Nielsen , J . ( 2000 ) . Designing Web usability . Indianapolis : New Riders Publishing . Nielsen , J . ( 2002 ) . Kids’ corner : Website usability for children . Retrieved from http : / / www . useit . com / alertbox / 20020414 . html Rose , A . , Shneiderman , B . , & Plaisant , C . ( 1995 ) . An applied ethnographic method for redesigning user interfaces . Proceedings of DIS ’95 , Sympo - sium on Designing Interactive Systems : Processes , Practices , Methods , & Techniques ( pp . 115 – 122 ) . Ann Arbor , MI : ACM . Rubin , J . ( 1994 ) . Handbook of usability testing : How to plan , design , and conduct effective tests . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Scaife , M . , & Rogers , Y . ( 1999 ) . Kids as informants : Telling us what we didn’t know or conﬁrming what we knew already . In A . Druin ( Ed . ) , The design of children’s technology ( pp . 27 – 50 ) . San Francisco : Morgan Kaufmann . Scaife , M . , Rogers , Y . , Aldrich , F . , & Davies , M . ( 1997 ) . Designing for or designing with ? Informant design for interactive learning environ - ments . Proceedings of CHI ’97 : Human Factors in Computing Systems . Atlanta , March 1997 . Retrieved from http : / / www1 . acm . org / sigs / sigchi / chi97 / proceedings / paper / ms Shneiderman , B . ( 1998 ) . Designingtheuserinterface : Strategiesforeffective human - computer interaction ( 3rd ed . ) . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley .