Mechanosensitive calcium signaling in response to cell shape changes promotes epithelial tight junction remodeling by activating RhoA Saranyaraajan Varadarajan 1 , Rachel E . Stephenson 1 , Eileen R . Misterovich 1 , Jessica L . Wu 1 , Ivan S . Erofeev 2 , Andrew B . Goryachev 2 , and Ann L . Miller 1 * 1 Department of Molecular , Cellular , and Developmental Biology , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor 2 Centre for Synthetic and Systems Biology , University of Edinburgh * Corresponding Author : Ann L . Miller Department of Molecular , Cellular , and Developmental Biology 5264 Biological Science Bldg . 1105 N . University Ave Ann Arbor , MI 48109 - 1085 annlm @ umich . edu Running title : Calcium - mediated tight junction remodeling Keywords : Calcium signaling , mechanotransduction , mechanosensitive calcium channel , active RhoA , ZO - 1 , tight junctions , epithelial barrier function , Xenopus laevis , cell shape changes , junction elongation , junction contraction Abbreviations : GBD , GTPase - binding domain ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; GAP , GTPase - activating protein ; GsMTx4 , Grammostola Mechanotoxin # 4 ; LUT , lookup table ; MSC , mechanosensitive calcium channel ; RhoA - GTP , active RhoA ; ROI , region of interest ; TRP , Transient Receptor Potential ; ZnUMBA , Zinc - based Ultrasensitive Microscopic Barrier Assay Abstract : Epithelia maintain an effective barrier by actively remodeling cell - cell junctions in response to mechanical stimuli . Cells often respond to mechanical stress through activation of RhoA and dynamic remodeling of actomyosin . Previously , we found that local leaks in the epithelial tight junction barrier are rapidly repaired by localized , transient activation of RhoA , a process we termed “Rho flares” , but how Rho flares are initiated remains unknown . Here , we discovered that intracellular calcium flashes occur in Xenopus laevis embryonic epithelial cells undergoing rapid remodeling of tight junctions via activation of Rho flares . Calcium flashes originate at the site of leaks and propagate into the cell . Depletion of intracellular calcium or inhibition of mechanosensitive calcium channels ( MSC ) reduced the amplitude of calcium flashes and diminished the activation of Rho flares . Furthermore , MSC - dependent calcium influx was necessary to maintain global barrier function by regulating repair of local tight junction proteins through efficient contraction of junctions . Collectively , we propose that MSC - dependent calcium flashes are an important mechanism allowing epithelial cells to sense and respond to local leaks induced by mechanical stimuli . Introduction : The ability of epithelial tissues to establish and maintain a selective paracellular barrier is crucial for development of multicellular organisms and proper function of vital organs ( Ivanov et al . , 2010 ; Luissint et al . , 2016 ; Marchiando et al . , 2010 ; Moriwaki et al . , 2007 ) . The dynamic nature of epithelial tissues during development and organ homeostasis requires cells to change shape and remodel their cell - cell junctions during tissue - generated forces including cell division , extrusion , and intercalation ( Gudipaty and Rosenblatt , 2016 ; Guillot and Lecuit , 2013 ; Varadarajan et al . , 2019 ) . Remarkably , epithelia are able to maintain barrier function despite this remodeling ( Higashi et al . , 2016 ; Rosenblatt et al . , 2001 ; Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) . However , the mechanisms by which epithelial cells remodel their cell - cell junctions without compromising barrier function is not fully understood . In vertebrates , epithelial barrier function is regulated by the apical junctional complex , including tight junctions ( TJs ) and adherens junctions ( AJs ) ( Zihni et al . , 2016 ) . Claudins and Occludin , transmembrane TJ proteins , interact with their counterparts on neighboring cells and polymerize within the membrane to form a network of TJ strands that selectively regulate the passage of small ions and macromolecules between the cells ( Claude and Goodenough , 1973 ; Furuse et al . , 1998 ; Staehelin et al . , 1969 ) . TJ strands are connected to the underlying actomyosin array by the zonula occludens ( ZO ) family of scaffolding proteins , thereby coupling barrier function to actomyosin - mediated cells shape changes ( Fanning et al . , 1998 ; Furuse et al . , 1998 ; Itoh et al . , 1999 ; Van Itallie et al . , 2017 ) . Although it is known that mechanical stress leads to a global increase in permeability to macromolecules ( Cavanaugh et al . , 2006 ; Cohen et al . , 2008 ; Samak et al . , 2010 ) , much less is known about how cells respond to these leaks . We recently reported the occurrence of short - lived leaks associated with cell - generated mechanical forces in the developing Xenopus epithelium ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) . During Xenopus gastrulation , the epithelial monolayer covering the animal cap of the embryo undergoes frequent cell divisions and morphogenetic movements , requiring elongation of cell - cell junctions to accommodate cell shape changes . Leaks were associated with elongating junctions and happened at sites where TJ proteins were locally reduced . Leaks were dynamically repaired by localized , short - lived activations of the small GTPase RhoA , which we termed “Rho flares” ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) . Rho flares are associated with local membrane protrusion at the site of leaks , suggesting that RhoA may be activated by a membrane tension - mediated mechanosensitive pathway . Calcium signaling plays a key role in transducing mechanical forces into biochemical signals during cell shape changes ( Christodoulou and Skourides , 2015 ; Sahu et al . , 2017 ) . Calcium signaling varies from long - range calcium waves to subcellular calcium transients , both of which are controlled precisely in space and time to modulate cytoskeleton - mediated cell shape changes . Calcium signaling is required for local RhoA activation during mechanical events including wound healing ( Benink and Bement , 2005 ; Clark et al . , 2009 ) , cell migration ( Pardo - Pastor et al . , 2018 ) , and dendritic spine enlargement ( Murakoshi et al . , 2011 ) , suggesting the possibility of calcium - mediated RhoA activation during TJ remodeling . Elevation of intracellular calcium following a mechanical stimulus is mediated by influx of extracellular calcium through mechanosensitive calcium channels ( MSCs ) in the plasma membrane or calcium release from the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) ( Shao et al . , 2015 ) . Plasma membrane localized MSCs – including the Piezo and Transient Receptor Potential ( TRP ) families – allow calcium influx in response to local and / or global changes in membrane tension or curvature ( Coste et al . , 2010 ; Gudipaty et al . , 2017 ; Liu and Montell , 2015 ; Miyamoto et al . , 2014 ; Mochizuki et al . , 2009 ; Shi et al . , 2018 ) . For example , during cell migration , MSCs mediate transient calcium influx at lamellipodia and focal adhesions to guide the direction of migration ( Ellefsen et al . , 2019 ; Wei et al . , 2009 ) . However , the role of MSCs in force - dependent remodeling of TJs has not been elucidated . Here , we investigate whether calcium signaling and MSCs are involved in TJ remodeling using live imaging of the gastrula - stage Xenopus epithelium . We show that a local intracellular calcium increase follows paracellular leaks in response to cell - cell junction elongation . We demonstrate that this intracellular calcium increase is required for the Rho flare - mediated TJ repair pathway and is dependent on MSCs . Finally , we show that MSC - mediated calcium influx regulates local junction contraction through robust Rho activation and is required to repair and maintain an intact barrier during cell shape changes . Results : Epithelial barrier leaks induce a local intracellular calcium increase Intracellular calcium signaling has been implicated in TJ biogenesis , establishment of barrier function , and actomyosin - mediated cell shape changes ( Christodoulou and Skourides , 2015 ; Gonzalez - Mariscal et al . , 1990 ; Nigam et al . , 1992 ; Suzuki et al . , 2017 ) . Thus , we hypothesized that intracellular calcium signaling might be involved in Rho flare - mediated TJ repair of local leaks . To test this idea , we performed Zinc - based Ultrasensitive Microscopic Barrier Assay ( ZnUMBA ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) ) in gastrula - stage Xenopus embryos ( Nieuwkoop and Faber stage 10 . 5 - 12 ) expressing probes for intracellular calcium and active Rho ( tagBFP - C2 ( Yu and Bement , 2007 ) and mCherry - 2xrGBD ( Benink and Bement , 2005 ; Davenport et al . , 2016 ) ) . The C2 domain of PKC β , when bound to calcium , is recruited from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane , and is capable of detecting both local and global calcium increases . High - speed live imaging demonstrated that calcium increases locally at sites of leaks ( Fig . 1 A ) . FluoZin - 3 intensity increased prior to the local calcium increase at the site of Rho flares , indicating a leak , ( Fig . 1 B ) and returned to baseline following the increase in calcium and active Rho , indicating restoration of barrier function ( Fig . 1 B and Video 1 ) . To better evaluate the spatial origin of the calcium increase at Rho flares , we generated a kymograph at the site of the Rho flare . The kymograph shows that the intracellular calcium increase originates at the plasma membrane and spreads asymmetrically into the cells adjacent to the membrane ( Fig . 1 D ) . Asymmetric intracellular calcium increase is proportional to the active Rho intensity in each of the cells adjacent to the membrane ( Fig . 1 , C - D and Video 2 ) . Because Rho flares precede TJ reinforcement ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) , we next examined whether the local calcium increase precedes ZO - 1 reinforcement . Indeed , quantification revealed that the local calcium increase precedes ZO - 1 reinforcement ( Fig . 1 , C and E ) . Together , these results show that the local calcium increase originates at sites of leaks and is followed by ZO - 1 reinforcement . Intracellular calcium flash precedes Rho flares during local ZO - 1 reinforcement To better characterize the temporal dynamics of the intracellular calcium increase , we imaged GCaMP6m ( Chen et al . , 2013 ) , a genetically encoded calcium probe with faster kinetics but reduced spatial sensitivity compared to C2 . We detected a transient increase in calcium in cells adjacent to the junction with the Rho flare ( Fig . 2 A ) with a duration of 72 . 72 ± 9 . 13 s ( Fig . 2 B ) , hereafter referred to as a “calcium flash” . Calcium flashes associated with Rho flares differ from calcium waves previously described during Xenopus gastrulation because they are restricted to the cells neighboring the junction exhibiting a Rho flare ( Fig . S1 , A - B and Video 3 ) . In contrast , calcium waves originate in 2 - 4 cells and propagate to neighboring cells within minutes ( Wallingford et al . , 2001 ) ( Fig . S1 , C - C’ and Video 3 ) . When observed with GCaMP6m , calcium flashes occur after the decrease in ZO - 1 and precede Rho flares by ~ 40 - 50 s ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) . The intensity of GCaMP6m decreases as reinstatement of ZO - 1 is initiated ( Fig . 2 D and Video 4 ) . As Rho flares vary in size and amplitude , we hypothesized that the amplitude of the calcium flash scales with Rho flare amplitude . To evaluate this idea , we plotted the area under the curve for calcium and active Rho for individual flares . Indeed , we observed that higher intensity calcium flashes generally correlated with higher intensity , sustained Rho flares ( Fig . 2 E and Video 5 ) . To evaluate junction contraction in relation to the calcium flash , we measured the vertex - to - vertex junction distance of the cell - cell junctions where Rho flares occur over time . We found that junction elongation preceded the calcium flash , and a rapid contraction of the junction immediately followed the calcium flash and Rho flare ( blue trace , Fig . 2 F ) . Of note , we observed that the initiation of junction contraction occurs during the peak of the calcium flash , and the stabilization of junction length occurs as the calcium level returns to baseline . Taken together , our results support a role for calcium flashes in promoting Rho flare - mediated TJ reinforcement through contraction and stabilization of cell - cell junctions . Intracellular calcium flash is required for Rho flare activation and ZO - 1 reinforcement Calcium is required for Rho activation during local cell shape changes including epithelial wound healing , cell migration , and dendritic spine enlargement ( Clark et al . , 2009 ; Murakoshi et al . , 2011 ; Pardo - Pastor et al . , 2018 ) . However , whether calcium is required for local Rho activation and ZO - 1 reinforcement at leaks remains unknown . To test this question , we chelated intracellular calcium using BAPTA - AM , a cell - permeable calcium chelator that chelates intracellular calcium without disrupting calcium - dependent cadherin adhesion . BAPTA - AM alone treatment led to an increase in the frequency of calcium waves ( Fig . S2 A ) , which disrupted our ability to observe calcium flashes . Calcium waves are dependent on ER - mediated calcium release ( Wallingford et al . , 2001 ) , so we blocked them using the IP 3 channel blocker , 2 - APB , in addition to chelating intracellular calcium with BAPTA - AM ( Fig . 3 A ) . Upon treatment with BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB ( Fig . 3 A’ ) , the intensity of calcium flashes was reduced compared to vehicle ( DMSO ) ( Fig . 3 , B - D’ and Video 6 ) . Active Rho was also significantly reduced at sites of ZO - 1 loss when intracellular calcium was chelated ( Fig . 3 , B , C , E , and E’ , and Video 6 ) . Finally , we observed that ZO - 1 breaks were more severe , lasted longer , and failed to be reinstated in intracellular calcium chelated embryos compared to vehicle controls ( Fig . 3 , B , C , F and F’ , and Video 6 ) . Together , our results suggest that intracellular calcium increase is required for both Rho flare activation and efficient ZO - 1 reinforcement . Mechanosensitive calcium channel - dependent calcium influx is required for Rho - mediated reinforcement of ZO - 1 Plasma membrane localized MSCs play an important role in mediating local calcium influx in response to changes in local membrane tension ( Canales et al . , 2019 ; Ellefsen et al . , 2019 ) . Rho flares occur following junction elongation ( Fig . 2 F ) and loss of ZO - 1 ( Fig . 2 D ) , a scaffolding protein that connects TJ transmembrane proteins to the underlying actin cytoskeleton , suggesting a possible change in membrane tension due to detachment of membrane from the underlying actin cytoskeleton . Furthermore , Rho flares are associated with apical plasma membrane deformation ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) and a local calcium increase that originates at the plasma membrane ( Fig . 1 D ) . Together , these observations suggest that calcium influx may be mediated by MSCs . First , we evaluated the temporal association of membrane protrusion ( tagBFP - membrane ) and Rho flares ( mCherry - 2xrGBD ) . The kymograph at the site of a Rho flare showed that membrane protrusion ( blue , Fig . 4 A ) expands with a similar timing to the increase in Rho activation ( magenta , Fig . 4 A ) supporting a mechanosensation - based mechanism . Therefore , to test if MSCs are responsible for the calcium flash preceding Rho flares , we blocked MSCs using Grammostola Mechanotoxin # 4 ( GsMTx4 ) , a peptide from spider venom . GsMTx4 decreases the sensitivity of MSCs to changes in membrane tension , thereby blocking calcium influx mediated by Piezo1 and TRP channels ( Fig . 4 B ) ( Bae et al . , 2011 ; Bowman et al . , 2007 ; Gnanasambandam et al . , 2017 ) . MSC - mediated calcium transients are required for tissue homeostasis and proper development ( Hunter et al . , 2014 ) . Therefore , we used GsMTx4 at a low concentration such that embryos successfully develop to gastrula stage , and the overall morphology of cell - cell junctions is not altered . With GsMTx4 - treatment , we observed a significant decrease in the calcium flash associated with Rho flares ( Fig . 4 , C - E and E’ ) , indicating that the calcium flashes preceding Rho flares are mediated by MSCs . Further , with GsMTx4 treatment , the amplitude and duration of Rho flares were significantly reduced compared to vehicle ( water ) ( Fig . 4 , C - D , F , and F’ ) . Although both vehicle - and GsMTx4 - treated embryos showed an initial increase in active Rho at the site of ZO - 1 loss , Rho flares were lower in intensity and short - lived in GsMTx4 - treated embryos ( Fig . 4 F ) . In addition , by measuring the normalized intensity of ZO - 1 over time , we found that the amount of ZO - 1 loss prior to Rho activation was comparable between vehicle - and GsMTx4 - treated embryos ( I 1 , Fig . 4 G ) . However , treatment with GsMTx4 significantly reduced ZO - 1 reinforcement compared to vehicle controls ( Fig . 4 , C - D , G , and G’ ) . Of note , GsMTx4 treatment did not alter active RhoA accumulation at the contractile ring in dividing cells ( Fig . S2 B ) , or steady state levels of active RhoA ( Fig . S2 , C - C’ ) , or the downstream targets of active RhoA ( Fig . S3 , D - E ) at cell - cell junctions . Together , these findings demonstrate that MSC - mediated calcium influx is required for both robust Rho flare activation and efficient reinforcement of ZO - 1 . Mechanosensitive calcium channel - mediated calcium influx is required for proper epithelial barrier function and local junction contraction Rho flare - mediated ZO - 1 reinforcement is required to repair local leaks and maintain paracellular barrier integrity . Our results show that a calcium increase follows local leaks ( Fig . 1 B ) , and blocking MSCs leads to impaired Rho activation and ZO - 1 reinforcement ( Fig . 4 , F and G ) . Therefore , we hypothesized that MSC - mediated calcium influx is required to maintain an intact paracellular epithelial barrier . To detect transient leaks in the barrier , we performed ZnUMBA in vehicle - or GsMTx4 - treated embryos . With GsMTx4 treatment , the whole - field intensity of FluoZin - 3 increased over time compared to vehicle controls ( Fig . 5 , A and B ) , indicating a global barrier disruption . However , global barrier disruption could be the result of failure to repair local leaks associated with ZO - 1 loss . Therefore , we next analyzed the frequency of Rho flares in vehicle - and GsMTx4 - treated embryos . The frequency of Rho flares increased significantly in GsMTx4 - treated embryos compared to the matched controls ( Fig . 5 C and Video 7 ) , suggesting an increase in local leaks . To examine if local leaks were contributing to global barrier disruption , we analyzed individual junctions associated with local FluoZin - 3 increase . With GsMTx4 treatment , local FluoZin - 3 increased repeatedly at the site of ZO - 1 loss ( single and double white arrows , Fig . 5 E ) compared to vehicle controls where the local FluoZin - 3 increase was resolved following robust activation of Rho flares and ZO - 1 reinforcement ( Fig . 5 , D - E and Video 8 ) . Of note , in GsMTx4 - treated embryos , a Rho flare failed to be activated following an initial increase in local FluoZin - 3 ( yellow arrow , Fig . 5 E ) . Collectively , these findings suggest that MSC - mediated robust activation of Rho flares and ZO - 1 reinforcement is required to resolve local leaks to maintain the overall paracellular barrier integrity . Following TJ breaks , Myosin II activation through a Rho / ROCK - mediated signaling pathway is required for efficient ZO - 1 reinforcement via local junction contraction ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) . So , we asked whether reduced ZO - 1 reinforcement observed in GsMTx4 - treated embryos was a result of reduced junction contraction . We found that rapid contraction of the junction immediately following the Rho flare was significantly reduced in GsMTx4 - treated embryos compared to vehicle controls ( Fig . 5 , F and F’ ) . Further , to track the local contractile regions within individual junctions , we generated kymographs of a cell - cell junction projected from vertex - to - vertex . In GsMTx4 - treated embryos , we observed a dramatic loss of junction contraction and lack of ZO - 1 reinforcement following Rho flares ( black bracket , Fig . 5 G ) compared to robust contraction and ZO - 1 reinforcement in controls . Additionally , kymographs highlighted that in GsMTx4 - treated embryos there are many short - lived Rho flares , which often repeat at the same site and yet remain unable to reinforce ZO - 1 ( orange arrows , Fig . 5 G and Fig . S3 A ) . Furthermore , we observed reduced F - actin accumulation at the site of short - lived Rho flares in GsMTx4 - treated embryos ( Fig . S3 , B - C and Video 9 ) . Taken together , our results show that MSC - mediated calcium influx is required for actomyosin mediated local junction contraction through robust and sustained Rho activation , and thereby efficient reinforcement of ZO - 1 . Discussion : Epithelial tissues adapt to mechanical cues by remodeling their cell - cell junctions and associated cytoskeleton to maintain tissue homeostasis and barrier function . We previously showed that physiological mechanical stimuli – like junction elongation that happens in response to cell shape changes – cause short - lived , local paracellular leaks ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) . However , it was unclear how cells sense local leaks and remodel cell - cell junctions without compromising overall barrier integrity . Using genetically encoded calcium probes , we observed intracellular calcium flashes during TJ remodeling . Calcium flashes in our study were of longer duration ( 72 . 72 ± 9 . 13 s ) compared to single - cell calcium transients ( ~ 26 - 40 s ) that mediate apical cell constriction during Xenopus neural tube closure ( Christodoulou and Skourides , 2015 ; Suzuki et al . , 2017 ) . The difference in the duration of these calcium transients could be that during apical constriction , the calcium increase is mediated by intracellular calcium stores . Previous studies have shown that intracellular calcium increase precedes TJ formation and establishment of epithelial barrier function ( Gonzalez - Mariscal et al . , 1990 ; Nigam et al . , 1992 ) . However , these studies used a calcium switch model and found that the timescale of TJ formation following calcium increase is significantly slower ( ~ 50 minutes ) than that of TJ reinstatement following a barrier breach and calcium flash described here ( ~ 1 - 2 minutes ) . In addition , we demonstrate that local leaks and ZO - 1 reduction precede the calcium flash , suggesting that the calcium increase is a consequence of paracellular leak rather than a cause . Thus , our work is the first to suggest that intracellular calcium is a critical regulator of barrier function when cells change shape in an intact epithelium . Our results also revealed that the intracellular calcium increase originated at the plasma membrane following a leak ( Fig . 1 , D , and Fig . S1 , D - E ) , suggesting that the calcium increase could be mediated locally by plasma membrane - localized calcium channels or a local membrane rupture . However , previous work from our lab suggested that the plasma membrane is indeed intact at the site of leak ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) . Furthermore , we think it is likely that plasma membrane tension changes locally when the transmembrane TJ proteins uncouple from the cortical actin cytoskeleton upon loss of the scaffolding protein , ZO - 1 . We demonstrated that calcium increase following local ZO - 1 loss is mediated by MSCs , supporting the idea that in epithelial cells , change in local membrane tension led to local activation of MSCs ( Shi et al . , 2018 ) . Given that both the Piezo and TRP families are mammalian MSCs capable of gating calcium influx , it will be interesting in future studies to investigate the relative role of MSCs blocked by GsMTx4 , specifically Piezo1 and TRPC6 , in TJ remodeling ( Bae et al . , 2011 ; Spassova et al . , 2006 ) . Further , it is clear that local calcium increase spreads throughout the cell , thus we cannot rule out the possibility that MSC - mediated calcium influx induces calcium release from intracellular calcium stores . Both calcium transients and RhoA activation are modulated locally and globally in response to mechanical stimuli ( Acharya et al . , 2018 ; Benink and Bement , 2005 ; Clark et al . , 2009 ; Pardo - Pastor et al . , 2018 ) . Our results demonstrate intracellular calcium increase as a key signal for activation of Rho flares . We observed that perturbation of intracellular calcium using a cytoplasmic calcium chelator in conjunction with an IP 3 R blocker ( BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB ) reduced RhoA activation at sites of ZO - 1 loss to a greater extent compared to the MSC blocker ( GsMTx4 ) . The difference in the degree of inhibition could be potentially due to altered tissue tension resulting from physical removal of the vitelline for BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB but not GsMTx4 experiments , or due to a calcium - independent effect of BAPTA - AM on the actin cytoskeleton ( Saoudi et al . , 2004 ) . Furthermore , our results show that despite the spreading of calcium throughout the cell , Rho flares are spatially confined to the site of paracellular leaks . This suggests that calcium may regulate RhoA activity by modulating the activity of a specific Rho GEF or Rho GAP , not by direct regulation of RhoA . For example , intracellular calcium increase could activate RhoA via PKC α - mediated activation of a Rho GEF ( Holinstat et al . , 2003 ) , or CaMKII - mediated crosstalk between active Cdc42 and RhoA ( Benink and Bement , 2005 ; Murakoshi et al . , 2011 ) . Interestingly , our observation that in GsMTx4 - treated cells , Rho flares were activated but at a significantly lower intensity and shorter duration , suggests an additional calcium - independent mechanism to initiate activation of RhoA . In addition to regulating the activity of RhoA , MSC - mediated intracellular calcium increase is important for reinforcement of ZO - 1 , given that both intracellular calcium chelation , and blocking MSCs , inhibited reinforcement of ZO - 1 . This loss of ZO - 1 reinforcement is due to reduced active RhoA - mediated junction contraction , presumably due to the loss of ROCK / Myosin II activation at the site of leaks ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) . Previous studies have demonstrated that chelation of intracellular calcium or inhibition of RhoA activity hinder the association of ZO - 1 with the actin cytoskeleton ( Nusrat et al . , 1995 ; Stuart et al . , 1994 ) . Thus , our study is the first to reveal that calcium promotes ZO - 1 recruitment and reinforcement at TJs by regulating RhoA activation . Given that myosin light chain kinase ( MLCK ) is activated by calcium / calmodulin , and active MLCK stabilizes ZO - 1 at TJs ( Yu et al . , 2010 ) , it is possible that calcium regulates ZO - 1 reinforcement at TJs via MLCK activation in parallel to RhoA activation . Expression and activity of MSCs , including Piezo1 and TRPV4 , enhanced global barrier function by up - regulation or post - translational modification of junctional proteins ( Akazawa et al . , 2013 ; Sokabe et al . , 2010 ; Zhong et al . , 2020 ) . Consistent with this finding , using live imaging and a highly sensitive barrier assay , we observed MSC - mediated calcium influx is required to maintain global barrier function . Interestingly , the increased global paracellular permeability appears to be a cumulative effect of failure to fix local leaks . When MSCs were blocked , Rho flares often failed to be activated immediately following the leak , and when Rho flares were weakly activated , they tended to repeat at the site of the leak in attempts to reinforce ZO - 1 . In conclusion , we find mechanically - triggered calcium influx is an important feature of the mechanism by which epithelial cells sense and respond to transient leaks in barrier function ( Fig . 5 H ) . Calcium flashes mediated by MSCs are required for local junction contraction through robust and sustained Rho activation and thereby efficient TJ reinforcement . However , when local leaks fail to be repaired by low intensity , short duration Rho flares , global barrier function is weakened . Thus , MSC - mediated local calcium influx may serve as a mechanotransduction mechanism to specifically relay biochemical signals only to sites of paracellular leaks , without affecting overall TJ structure and function in a dynamic epithelial tissue undergoing various cell shape changes . Figure legends : Figure 1 : Epithelial paracellular leaks induce a local intracellular calcium increase ( A ) Time lapse images ( Fire LUT ) of FluoZin - 3 dye , membrane calcium probe ( tagBFP - PKC β - C2 ) , and active Rho ( mCherry - 2xrGBD ) . Calcium increase ( white arrows ) follows a leak indicated by increase in FluoZin - 3 fluorescence ( yellow arrows ) at the site of Rho flare ( yellow arrowheads ) . Time 0 s represents start of Rho flare . ( B ) Quantification of experiments shown in A . Top : Schematic showing regions of interest ( ROIs ) and used to quantify Rho flares , calcium ( C2 ) , and FluoZin - 3 . Bottom : Graph of mean normalized intensity shows the leak ( FluoZin - 3 ) precedes the increases in local calcium and active Rho . Shaded region represents S . E . M . n = 18 flares , 10 embryos , 6 experiments . ( C ) Time lapse images ( FIRE LUT ) of BFP - ZO - 1 , membrane calcium probe ( mNeon - PKC β - C2 ) , and active Rho ( mCherry - 2xrGBD ) . Local calcium increase ( white arrows ) is spatially localized to the site of ZO - 1 decrease ( yellow boxed region ) and Rho flare ( yellow arrowheads ) . ( D ) Top : Cell view of an embryo expressing membrane calcium probe ( mNeon - PKC β - C2 , green ) and active Rho probe ( mCherry - 2xrGBD , magenta ) . The yellow arrow indicates the 5 - pixel wide region used to generate the kymograph . Bottom : Kymograph shows that calcium increase originates at the junction and spreads . ( E ) Quantification of experiments shown in C . Graph of mean normalized intensity shows that local calcium increases simultaneously with the increase in active Rho . Shaded region represents S . E . M . n = 19 flares , 15 embryos , 8 experiments . Figure 2 : Intracellular calcium increase precedes Rho flares during local ZO - 1 reinforcement ( A ) Time lapse images of calcium ( GCaMP6m , green ) and active Rho ( mCherry - 2xrGBD , magenta ) . Calcium flash occurs in cells adjacent to the junction with the Rho flare ( yellow arrowheads ) . Time 0 s represents start of Rho flare . ( B ) Dot plot of calcium flash duration ( full duration at half maximum , FDHM ) . Error bar represents mean ± S . E . M . n = 11 flashes , 11 embryos , 10 experiments . ( C ) Montage of the junction indicated by the blue box in A ( FIRE LUT ) . A calcium flash ( GCaMP6m ) follows a local loss of ZO - 1 ( BFP - ZO - 1 , yellow boxed region , enlarged below ) and precedes the Rho flare ( mCherry - 2xrGBD , yellow arrowhead ) . ( D ) Quantification of experiments shown in C . Top : Schematic showing regions of interest ( ROIs ) used to quantify Rho flares , calcium , and ZO - 1 . Bottom : Graph showing calcium intensity increase follows a decrease in ZO - 1 and precedes an increase in active Rho . Shaded region represents S . E . M . n = 20 flares , 15 embryos , 12 experiments . ( E ) Dot plot of area under the curve for calcium ( green ) and active Rho ( magenta ) curves in D showing the correlation ( solid black lines ) of calcium intensity and corresponding Rho flare intensity . n = 20 flares , 15 embryos , 12 experiments . ( F ) Graph showing calcium flash ( GCaMP6m ) follows junction elongation and precedes Rho - mediated junction contraction and stabilization of length . Shaded region represents S . E . M . n = 17 flares , 14 embryos , 11 experiments . Figure 3 : Intracellular calcium flash is required for Rho flare activation and ZO - 1 reinforcement ( A ) Schematic of cytosolic calcium chelation using BAPTA - AM and blocking IP 3 R - mediated calcium release from the ER using 2 - APB . ( A’ ) Schematic showing BAPTA - AM and 2 - APB treatment after removal of vitelline envelope . ( B - C ) Time - lapse images ( FIRE LUT ) of BFP - ZO - 1 , calcium ( GCaMP6m ) , and active Rho ( mCherry - 2xrGBD ) . Embryos were treated with 0 . 5 % DMSO ( vehicle , B ) or 20 µM BAPTA - AM and 100 µM 2 - APB ( calcium chelation , C ) . Calcium chelation resulted in more severe ZO - 1 breaks ( yellow boxes , enlarged below ) and decreased Rho activity ( yellow arrowheads ) at the site of ZO - 1 loss . Time 0 s represents the start of ZO - 1 decrease . ( D - F ) Graphs of mean normalized intensity of calcium ( GCaMP6m , D ) , active Rho ( E ) and ZO - 1 ( F ) at the site of ZO - 1 loss over time in vehicle ( DMSO , solid lines ) or calcium chelation ( BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB , dashed lines ) embryos . Shaded region represents S . E . M . DMSO : n = 10 flares , 7 embryos , 7 experiments ; BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB : n = 13 flares , 8 embryos , 8 experiments . ( D’ - F’ ) Area under the curve for calcium ( D’ ) and active Rho ( E’ ) was calculated from D and E , respectively . Scatter plot of change in ZO - 1 intensity ( F’ ) was calculated from F . I 1 and I 2 represent average intensity of ZO - 1 from individual traces from time 0 - 50 s and 400 - 450 s , respectively . Error bars represent mean ± S . E . M . ; significance calculated using Mann - Whitney test . Figure 4 : Mechanosensitive calcium channel - dependent calcium influx is required for Rho - mediated reinforcement of ZO - 1 ( A ) Left : Cell view of an embryo expressing membrane probe ( membrane - tagBFP , blue ) and active Rho probe ( mCherry - 2xrGBD , magenta ) . Yellow arrow indicates the 2 - pixel wide region used to generate the kymograph . Right : Kymograph shows that membrane protrusion increases with Rho flare . Green arrow indicates the start of membrane protrusion and Rho flare . ( B ) Schematic showing that GsMTx4 inhibits MSC - mediated calcium influx in response to changes in membrane tension induced by stretch or curvature . ( C - D ) Time - lapse images ( FIRE LUT ) of BFP - ZO - 1 , calcium ( GCaMP6m ) , and active Rho ( mCherry - 2xrGBD ) . Embryos were treated with water ( vehicle , C ) or 12 . 5 µM GsMTx4 ( MSC inhibitor , D ) . MSC inhibition resulted in a decrease in calcium influx , short duration , low intensity Rho flares ( yellow arrowheads ) , and decreased ZO - 1 reinforcement at the site of ZO - 1 loss ( yellow boxes , enlarged below ) . Time 0 s represents the start of Rho flares . ( E - G ) Graphs of mean normalized intensity of calcium ( GCaMP6m , E ) , active Rho ( F ) , and ZO - 1 ( G ) at the site of ZO - 1 loss over time in vehicle ( water , solid lines ) or MSC inhibition ( GsMTx4 , dashed lines ) embryos . Shaded region represents S . E . M . Vehicle : n = 13 flares , 6 embryos , 6 experiments ; GsMTx4 : n = 17 flares , 7 embryos , 6 experiments . ( E’ - G’ ) Area under the curve for calcium ( E’ ) and active Rho ( F’ ) were calculated from E and F , respectively . ( G’ ) Scatter plot of change in ZO - 1 intensity ( G’ ) was calculated from G . I 1 and I 2 represent average intensity of ZO - 1 from individual traces at time - 25 : 25 s and 400 : 450 s , respectively . Error bars represent mean ± S . E . M . ; significance calculated using Mann - Whitney test . Figure 5 : Mechanosensitive calcium channel - mediated calcium influx is required for proper epithelial barrier function and local junction contraction ( A ) Time - lapse images ( orange hot LUT ) of epithelial permeability tested using ZnUMBA ( FluoZin - 3 ) . Embryos were treated with water ( vehicle , top ) or 12 . 5 µM GsMTx4 ( MSC inhibitor , bottom ) . Time 0 s represents the start of the time - lapse movie . ( B ) Graph of mean normalized intensity of whole - field FluoZin - 3 for vehicle ( water ) or GsMTx4 - treated embryos . Blocking MSCs increased global FluoZin - 3 intensity over time compared to vehicle . Shaded region represents S . E . M . Vehicle : n = 6 embryos , 4 experiments ; GsMTx4 : n = 6 embryos , 4 experiments . ( C ) Frequency of Rho flares in vehicle ( water ) and GsMTx4 - treated embryos . Frequencies from paired experiments are color matched . Error bars represent mean ± S . E . M . ; significance calculated using paired two - tailed t - test ; n = 5 embryos , 4 experiments . ( D - E ) Montage of representative junctions from A ( FIRE LUT ) . Blocking MSCs with GsMTx4 causes repeated increases in local FluoZin - 3 ( white arrows ) , reduced ZO - 1 ( BFP - ZO - 1 ) reinforcement ( yellow boxes , enlarged below ) , and reduced duration of Rho flares ( mCherry - 2xrGBD , yellow arrowheads ) at sites of ZO - 1 loss . Repeated FluoZin - 3 increase is indicated by double white arrows , and failure to activate Rho flare after FluoZin - 3 increase is indicated by yellow arrow . ( F - F’ ) Graph of change in junction length for junctions with Rho flares in vehicle ( water ) and GsMTx4 - treated embryos . Shaded region represents S . E . M . ( F’ ) Scatter plot of change in junction length was calculated from F . I 1 and I 2 represent average length of junction from individual traces from time - 20 - 20 s and 200 - 240 s , respectively . Error bars represent mean ± S . E . M . ; significance calculated using Mann - Whitney test . Vehicle : n = 10 flares , 6 embryos , 6 experiments ; GsMTx4 : n = 16 flares , 7 embryos , 6 experiments . ( G ) Kymographs of BFP - ZO - 1 ( magenta ) and active Rho ( mChe - 2xrGBD , green ) from representative junctions projected vertex - to - vertex over time for vehicle ( water ) and GsMTx4 - treated embryos . Kymographs highlight the repeating , short duration Rho flares , loss of local junction contraction , and reduced ZO - 1 reinforcement upon GsMTx4 treatment . ( H ) Model showing mechanism by which mechanosensitive calcium signaling regulates epithelial barrier function . Top : 3D view of epithelial cells . Bottom : en face view of the junction highlighted showing the spatiotemporal calcium and RhoA signaling following mechanical stimuli . Materials and Methods : DNA constructs and mRNA preparation : GCaMP6m was generated by PCR amplifying the GCaMP6m sequence from pGP - CMV - GCaMP6m ( Addgene plasmid # 40754 , ( Chen et al . , 2013 ) ) and ligating it into the BamH1 and EcoR1 sites in pCS2 + . BFP - PKC - β - C2 and mNeon - PKC - β - C2 were generated by PCR amplifying the C2 domain of Xenopus laevis PKC - β from pCS2 + / eGFP - PKC - β - C2 ( Yu and Bement , 2007 ) and ligating into the XhoI and EcoR1 sites in pCS2 + / N - tagBFP2 . 0 and pCS2 + / N - mNeon , respectively . All constructs were verified by sequencing . pCS2 + / mCherry - 2xrGBD ( probe for active Rho , ( Davenport et al . , 2016 ) ) , pCS2 + / BFP - ZO - 1 ( human ZO - 1 , ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) ) , and pCS2 + / BFP - membrane ( probe for membrane , ( Higashi et al . , 2016 ) ) were previously reported . All plasmid DNAs were linearized with NotI , except BFP - ZO - 1 which was linearized using KpnI . mRNA was in vitro transcribed from linearized pCS2 + plasmids using the mMessage mMachine SP6 Transcription kit ( Ambion ) and purified using the RNeasy Mini kit ( Qiagen ) . Transcript size was verified on 1 % agarose gel containing 0 . 05 % bleach and Millennium RNA markers ( Invitrogen ) . Xenopus embryos and microinjection : All studies conducted using Xenopus laevis embryos strictly adhered to the compliance standards of the U . S . Department of Health and Human Services Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the University of Michigan Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee . Eggs from Xenopus were collected , in vitro fertilized , and dejellied as previously reported ( Miller and Bement , 2009 ; Woolner et al . , 2009 ) . Dejellied embryos were stored at 15 ° C in 0 . 1x Mark’s Modified Ringers solution ( MMR ) containing 10 mM NaCl , 0 . 2 mM KCl , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM MgCl 2 , and 0 . 5 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 . Embryos were microinjected in the animal hemisphere with mRNA either twice per cell at the two - cell or once per cell at the four - cell stage . Injected embryos were allowed to develop to gastrula stage ( Nieuwkoop and Faber stage 10 . 5 – 12 ) at 15 ° C or 17 ° C . The amount of mRNA per 5nl of microinjection volume was as follows : BFP - PKC - β - C2 , 100 pg ; mNeon - PKC - β - C2 , 100 pg ; GCaMP6m , 500 pg ; mCherry - 2xrGBD , 50 pg ; BFP - ZO - 1 , 50 pg ; BFP - membrane , 12 . 5 pg and Lifeact - GFP 10 pg . Microscope image acquisition : Live imaging of gastrula stage Xenopus embryos was performed on an inverted Olympus Fluoview 1000 Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope equipped with a 60X supercorrected Plan Apo N 60XOSC objective ( numerical aperture ( NA ) = 1 . 4 , working distance = 0 . 12mm ) using mFV10 - ASW software . Embryos were imaged in a custom chamber made of a 0 . 8 mm thick metal slide with a 5 mm hole in the center and two coverslips stuck on both sides of the hole with a thin layer of vacuum grease , lightly compressing the embryo between the coverslips . Embryos were mounted in 0 . 1x MMR , and the imaging chamber was inverted to image the epithelial cells in the animal hemisphere at room temperature using the Olympus Fluoview 1000 as previously described ( Reyes et al . , 2014 ) . Live imaging of calcium and Rho flares was generally captured by scanning the top 3 apical Z - planes ( step size of 0 . 5 µm ) and acquired sequentially by line scanning to avoid bleed - through between channels . Global calcium ( GCaMP6m ) , Rho flares , and ZO - 1 were acquired at a 2 µs / pixel scanning speed , 5 s time interval , and 1 . 5 - 2x zoom . Local calcium ( mNeon - PKC - β - C2 ) , Rho flares , and membrane or ZO - 1 were acquired at a 4 µs / pixel scanning speed , 10 s time interval , and 2x zoom . For ZnUMBA , 8 apical Z - planes were acquired at an 8 µs / pixel scanning speed , 21 s time interval , and 1 . 5x zoom . Drug treatments : The intracellular calcium chelator BAPTA - AM ( Cayman , 15551 ) and IP 3 R blocker 2 - APB ( Sigma , D9754 ) were resuspended in DMSO as a 20 mM or 25 mM stock , respectively , aliquoted and stored at - 20°C . Prior to treatment , the translucent vitelline envelope of gastrula - stage embryos was physically removed using sharp forceps as previously described ( Sive et al . , 2007 ) . Naked embryos were allowed to recover in 0 . 1x MMR for 30 minutes . Following recovery , embryos were incubated for 1 hour prior to imaging at 15°C in either 0 . 5 % DMSO ( vehicle ) or a mixture of 20 µM BAPTA - AM and 100 µM 2 - APB in 0 . 1x MMR . The MSC blocker GsMTx4 ( Smartox , 08GSM001 ) was resuspended in water as a 500 µM stock , aliquoted , and stored at - 20°C . Prior to use , GsMTx4 was diluted to a concentration of 25 µM in water , mixed with mRNA , and a total of 1ng was microinjected into each embryo at the 2 - 4 cell stage . Live imaging barrier assay : Zinc - based Ultrasensitive Microscopic Barrier Assay ( ZnUMBA ) was performed as previously reported ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) . Gastrula - stage albino embryos expressing mCherry - 2xrGBD and BFP - ZO - 1 or BFP - PKC - β - C2 were microinjected with 10 nl of 1 mM FluoZin - 3 containing 100 µM CaCl 2 and 100 µM EDTA into the blastocoel . FluoZin - 3 - injected embryos were allowed to recover from microinjection for 5 minutes in 0 . 1x MMR . Following recovery , embryos were mounted in 0 . 1x MMR containing 1 mM ZnCl 2 and imaged immediately using confocal microscopy . Immunofluorescence staining : Albino embryos injected with vehicle ( water ) or 12 . 5 µM GsMTx4 were fixed and immunostained as previously reported ( Arnold et al . , 2019 ) . At gastrula - stage , embryos were fixed overnight at room temperature with a mix of 1 . 5 % PFA , 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde , 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 , Alexa Fluor 647 phalloidin ( 1 : 1000 , Thermo Fisher Scientific , # A22287 ) in a 0 . 88x MT buffer containing 80 mM K - PIPES , 5 mM EGTA , and 1 mM MgCl 2 , pH 6 . 8 with KOH . Fixed embryos were quenched for 1 hour at room temperature with 100mM sodium borohydride in 1x PBS and blocked overnight in 10 % FBS , 5 % DMSO and 0 . 1 % NP - 40 in 1x Tris - buffered Saline . Animal hemisphere of the bisected embryos were incubated overnight in anti - P - MLC ( 1 : 100 , Cell Signaling Technologies , # 3671 ) in blocking solution , washed 3x with blocking solution , and incubated overnight in anti - rabbit Alexa 488 IgG ( 1 : 200 , Thermo Fisher Scientific , # A11008 ) and Alexa Fluor 647 phalloidin ( 1 : 1000 ) . Embryos were washed and mounted in VECTASHIELD ( VWR , # 101098 - 042 ) . Image processing and quantification : Image processing and analysis were performed using Image J ( Fiji ) . Sum intensity projections of the Z - series were used for all quantification , and confocal images of time - lapse movies represented in all figures are sum projections of 3 apical Z - planes ( 1 . 5 µm ) , with the exception of FluoZin - 3 ( 8 apical Z - planes , 4 µm ) . Quantification of calcium dynamics during Rho flares : Calcium dynamics at Rho flares were measured using a circular region of interest of 2 . 5 µm diameter drawn at the site of flares , spanning the membrane and cytoplasm adjacent to the membrane , manually tracked over every frame to account for in - plane drifting in live tissue , and normalized to baseline of 1 . Cytosolic calcium ( GCaMP6m ) was calculated for each frame using the formula , F normalized = ( F / F baseline ) , where F baseline represents the average calcium intensity of the first 150 s . Local calcium ( PKC - C2 ) was calculated for each frame using the formula , F = ( F flare – F background ) and normalized to a baseline of 1 , where F baseline represents the average calcium intensity of first 100 s and F background represents the cytoplasmic C2 intensity measured using an ROI of same size . An average of three independent measurements of calcium dynamics at each Rho flare was considered one data point ( n = 1 ) . For accurate measurement of calcium flash dynamics using the cytoplasmic soluble calcium probe ( GCaMP6m ) , Rho flares were selected from cells that exhibited an isolated Rho flare that was not interrupted by a multicellular travelling calcium wave for 500 s prior to and after the initiation of Rho flares . Intensity and duration of Rho flares and ZO - 1 were measured at the site of Rho flares using a small circular ROI ( GCaMP6m : 0 . 8 µm ; PKC - C2 : 2 . 5 µm ; and Fluozin - 3 : 2 . 2 µm ) and normalized to a nearby reference junction without Rho flares using ROI of same size to account for photobleaching and drifting in the Z - plane . The increase in Rho activity at the start of the Rho flare was aligned to time 0 s as previously described ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) , with the exception of Fig . 3 . For Fig . 3 , as calcium chelation ( BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB ) significantly reduced the intensity of Rho flares , we adopted an alternate method to align time 0 s in the graph to the frame before the rapid decrease in ZO - 1 ; the decrease in ZO - 1 was defined as a 5 % decrease in normalized ZO - 1 intensity for at least 3 out of 4 consecutive frames . Duration of calcium flash : Duration of the calcium flash was quantified by measuring the full duration at half - maximum ( FDHM ) of the individual normalized calcium flashes at sites of Rho flares . FDHM ( seconds ) was measured manually by calculating the duration at 50 % of the maximum amplitude above the baseline of 1 on the ascent and descent of the calcium transient . Experiments where calcium increased less than two - fold over the baseline were eliminated from the analysis . FDHM was plotted in a scatter plot . Area under the curve : Area under the curve for active Rho flares and calcium flashes was quantified using GraphPad Prism 9 . 0 by applying area under the curve ( AUC ) analysis of the individual traces . AUC analysis was applied to all points in the peaks above the baseline of 1 , and peaks less than 10 % of the increase from the baseline to the maximum Y - value were ignored . Individual AUC values for each Rho flare or calcium flash were plotted in a scatter plot . Frequency of Rho flares : Rho flare frequency was measured manually using Image J , by counting the number of Rho flare occurrences at cell - cell junctions in the whole field of imaging from the start of the time - lapse movie . Rho flares where the local active RhoA intensity increased and was sustained at the junctions for a span of 4 - 5 frames ( 84 s - 105 s ) was included in the analysis . Global barrier function : Global barrier function was quantified by measuring the whole field intensity of Fluozin - 3 signal , including junctional and cytoplasmic , over time using an ROI of 141 . 12x141 . 12 µm . Time 0 s represents the start of image acquisition , which began immediately following mounting of the embryo injected with Fluozin - 3 in 0 . 1x MMR containing 1 mM ZnCl 2 . Each timepoint was measured , and baseline was normalized to 1 by dividing the individual value by the average of the first 84 seconds . Junction length : Length of the cell - cell junction was quantified using ZO - 1 as junctional marker . Using Image J , a 0 . 3 µm wide segmented line was drawn on the junction with Rho flares to trace the junction from vertex - to - vertex . Length of the line was measured for every other frame by manually advancing and adjusting the line to accommodate cell shape changes through the time lapse movie . Each junction was measured in triplicate , and baseline was normalized to 1 by dividing the individual value by the average of the first 6 data points . Construction of kymographs : Kymographs from vertex - to - vertex of a cell - cell junction were constructed as previously described ( Stephenson et al . , 2019 ) . Briefly , cell - cell junctions were digitized using ZO - 1 as junctional marker . Each horizontal line in the kymograph was generated by measuring the intensity of ZO - 1 and active Rho using 0 . 75 µm circular ROIs positioned at points along the length of the cell - cell junction . Kymographs were constructed by stacking and center aligning the horizontal lines from successive time frames . Apical cell perimeter : Apical perimeter of the cell was quantified using ZO - 1 to identify cell boundaries . Using Image J , a segmented line was drawn to trace the boundary of the cells with a calcium flash and neighboring cells without a calcium flash over time . The perimeter of the cell was measured for every time point by manually adjusting the line to accommodate cell shape changes . Change in apical perimeter was calculated by subtracting the current perimeter from the initial perimeter ( average perimeter over the first 3 time points ) . Intensity of F - actin and P - MLC : Junctional and cytoplasmic intensity of F - actin and P - MLC were quantified in Image J . Junctional intensity was measured using a 2 . 07 µm wide segmented line to trace a bicellular junction ( excluding vertices ) and the matched cytoplasmic intensity was measured using a 10 . 4 µm circular ROI . Ratio of junctional / cytoplasmic F - actin or P - MLC was calculated by dividing the intensity at the junction by the intensity in the cytoplasm for each cell . Statistical analysis : Statistical analysis and standard error of the mean ( S . E . M . ) were calculated in GraphPad Prism 9 . 0 . Statistical analysis between two groups was measured using a two - tailed , unpaired Mann - Whitney U test , with the exception of flare frequency and intensity of actomyosin . The statistical significance of frequency of Rho flares was measured using a two - tailed , paired Student’s t - test . Statistical significance of F - actin and P - MLC intensity at the junctions and junction / cytoplasm ratio was measured using a One - way ANOVA test . Acknowledgements : We thank W . M . Bement for pCS2 + / mCherry - 2xrGBD and pCS2 + / eGFP - PKC - β - C2 constructs as well as current and former members of the A . L . Miller laboratory for providing helpful discussion and feedback on experiments . This work was supported by NIH grant ( 2R01 GM112794 ) to A . L . Miller , a predoctoral fellowship from the American Heart Association ( 20PRE35120588 ) to S . Varadarajan , and BBSRC grants BB / P01190X and BB / P006507 to A . B . Goryachev . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Author contributions : S . Varadarajan and A . L . Miller conceptualized the study ; S . Varadarajan , R . E . Stephenson , and A . L . Miller developed the methodology ; S . Varadarajan performed the majority of experiments and data analysis ; J . L . Wu performed the experiment and analyzed data for Fig . S3 ; E . R . Misterovich analyzed the data for Fig . 2F , Fig . 5 F and F’ ; I . S . Erofeev constructed the kymographs for Fig . 5G ; S . Varadarajan and A . L . Miller wrote the original draft of the manuscript with input from R . E . Stephenson ; All authors revised the manuscript ; A . L . Miller and A . B . Goryachev acquired funding ; A . L . Miller supervised the study . References : Acharya , B . R . , A . Nestor - Bergmann , X . Liang , S . Gupta , K . Duszyc , E . Gauquelin , G . A . Gomez , S . Budnar , P . Marcq , O . E . Jensen , Z . Bryant , and A . S . Yap . 2018 . A Mechanosensitive RhoA Pathway that Protects Epithelia against Acute Tensile Stress . Developmental cell . 47 : 439 - 452 e436 . Akazawa , Y . , T . Yuki , H . Yoshida , Y . Sugiyama , and S . Inoue . 2013 . Activation of TRPV4 strengthens the tight - junction barrier in human epidermal keratinocytes . Skin Pharmacol Physiol . 26 : 15 - 21 . Arnold , T . R . , J . H . Shawky , R . E . Stephenson , K . M . Dinshaw , T . Higashi , F . Huq , L . A . Davidson , and A . L . Miller . 2019 . Anillin regulates epithelial cell mechanics by structuring the medial - apical actomyosin network . Elife . 8 . Bae , C . , F . Sachs , and P . A . Gottlieb . 2011 . The mechanosensitive ion channel Piezo1 is inhibited by the peptide GsMTx4 . Biochemistry . 50 : 6295 - 6300 . Benink , H . A . , and W . M . Bement . 2005 . Concentric zones of active RhoA and Cdc42 around single cell wounds . Journal of Cell Biology . 168 : 429 - 439 . Bowman , C . L . , P . A . Gottlieb , T . M . Suchyna , Y . K . Murphy , and F . Sachs . 2007 . Mechanosensitive ion channels and the peptide inhibitor GsMTx - 4 : history , properties , mechanisms and pharmacology . Toxicon . 49 : 249 - 270 . Canales , J . , D . Morales , C . Blanco , J . Rivas , N . Diaz , I . Angelopoulos , and O . Cerda . 2019 . A TR ( i ) P to Cell Migration : New Roles of TRP Channels in Mechanotransduction and Cancer . Front Physiol . 10 : 757 . Cavanaugh , K . J . , T . S . Cohen , and S . S . Margulies . 2006 . Stretch increases alveolar epithelial permeability to uncharged micromolecules . American journal of physiology . Cell physiology . 290 : C1179 - 1188 . Chen , T . W . , T . J . Wardill , Y . Sun , S . R . Pulver , S . L . Renninger , A . Baohan , E . R . Schreiter , R . A . Kerr , M . B . Orger , V . Jayaraman , L . L . Looger , K . Svoboda , and D . S . Kim . 2013 . Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity . Nature . 499 : 295 - 300 . Christodoulou , N . , and P . A . Skourides . 2015 . Cell - Autonomous Ca ( 2 + ) Flashes Elicit Pulsed Contractions of an Apical Actin Network to Drive Apical Constriction during Neural Tube Closure . Cell reports . 13 : 2189 - 2202 . Clark , A . G . , A . L . Miller , E . Vaughan , H . Y . E . Yu , R . Penkert , and W . M . Bement . 2009 . Integration of Single and Multicellular Wound Responses . Current Biology . 19 : 1389 - 1395 . Claude , P . , and D . A . Goodenough . 1973 . Fracture faces of zonulae occludentes from " tight " and " leaky " epithelia . The Journal of cell biology . 58 : 390 - 400 . Cohen , T . S . , K . J . Cavanaugh , and S . S . Margulies . 2008 . Frequency and peak stretch magnitude affect alveolar epithelial permeability . Eur Respir J . 32 : 854 - 861 . Coste , B . , J . Mathur , M . Schmidt , T . J . Earley , S . Ranade , M . J . Petrus , A . E . Dubin , and A . Patapoutian . 2010 . Piezo1 and Piezo2 Are Essential Components of Distinct Mechanically Activated Cation Channels . Science . 330 : 55 - 60 . Davenport , N . R . , K . J . Sonnemann , K . W . Eliceiri , and W . M . Bement . 2016 . Membrane dynamics during cellular wound repair . Molecular biology of the cell . 27 : 2272 - 2285 . Ellefsen , K . L . , J . R . Holt , A . C . Chang , J . L . Nourse , J . Arulmoli , A . H . Mekhdjian , H . Abuwarda , F . Tombola , L . A . Flanagan , A . R . Dunn , I . Parker , and M . M . Pathak . 2019 . Myosin - II mediated traction forces evoke localized Piezo1 - dependent Ca ( 2 + ) flickers . Commun Biol . 2 : 298 . Fanning , A . S . , B . J . Jameson , L . A . Jesaitis , and J . M . Anderson . 1998 . The tight junction protein ZO - 1 establishes a link between the transmembrane protein occludin and the actin cytoskeleton . J Biol Chem . 273 : 29745 - 29753 . Furuse , M . , H . Sasaki , K . Fujimoto , and S . Tsukita . 1998 . A single gene product , claudin - 1 or - 2 , reconstitutes tight junction strands and recruits occludin in fibroblasts . The Journal of cell biology . 143 : 391 - 401 . Gnanasambandam , R . , C . Ghatak , A . Yasmann , K . Nishizawa , F . Sachs , A . S . Ladokhin , S . I . Sukharev , and T . M . Suchyna . 2017 . GsMTx4 : Mechanism of Inhibiting Mechanosensitive Ion Channels . Biophysical Journal . 112 : 31 - 45 . Gonzalez - Mariscal , L . , R . G . Contreras , J . J . Bolivar , A . Ponce , B . Chavez De Ramirez , and M . Cereijido . 1990 . Role of calcium in tight junction formation between epithelial cells . The American journal of physiology . 259 : C978 - 986 . Gudipaty , S . A . , J . Lindblom , P . D . Loftus , M . J . Redd , K . Edes , C . F . Davey , V . Krishnegowda , and J . Rosenblatt . 2017 . Mechanical stretch triggers rapid epithelial cell division through Piezo1 . Nature . 543 : 118 - 121 . Gudipaty , S . A . , and J . Rosenblatt . 2016 . Epithelial cell extrusion : Pathways and pathologies . Seminars in Cell and Developmental Biology . Guillot , C . , and T . Lecuit . 2013 . Mechanics of epithelial tissue homeostasis and morphogenesis . Science . 340 : 1185 - 1189 . Higashi , T . , T . R . Arnold , R . E . Stephenson , K . M . Dinshaw , and A . L . Miller . 2016 . Maintenance of the Epithelial Barrier and Remodeling of Cell - Cell Junctions during Cytokinesis . Current biology : CB . 26 : 1829 - 1842 . Holinstat , M . , D . Mehta , T . Kozasa , R . D . Minshall , and A . B . Malik . 2003 . Protein kinase Calpha - induced p115RhoGEF phosphorylation signals endothelial cytoskeletal rearrangement . The Journal of biological chemistry . 278 : 28793 - 28798 . Hunter , G . L . , J . M . Crawford , J . Z . Genkins , and D . P . Kiehart . 2014 . Ion channels contribute to the regulation of cell sheet forces during Drosophila dorsal closure . Development . 141 : 325 - 334 . Itoh , M . , M . Furuse , K . Morita , K . Kubota , M . Saitou , and S . Tsukita . 1999 . Direct binding of three tight junction - associated MAGUKs , ZO - 1 , ZO - 2 , and ZO - 3 , with the COOH termini of claudins . The Journal of cell biology . 147 : 1351 - 1363 . Ivanov , A . I . , C . A . Parkos , and A . Nusrat . 2010 . Cytoskeletal Regulation of Epithelial Barrier Function During Inflammation . The American journal of pathology . 177 : 512 - 524 . Liu , C . , and C . Montell . 2015 . Forcing open TRP channels : Mechanical gating as a unifying activation mechanism . Biochem Biophys Res Commun . 460 : 22 - 25 . Luissint , A . C . , C . A . Parkos , and A . Nusrat . 2016 . Inflammation and the Intestinal Barrier : Leukocyte - Epithelial Cell Interactions , Cell Junction Remodeling , and Mucosal Repair . Gastroenterology . 151 : 616 - 632 . Marchiando , A . M . , W . V . Graham , and J . R . Turner . 2010 . Epithelial barriers in homeostasis and disease . Annual review of pathology . 5 : 119 - 144 . Miller , A . L . , and W . M . Bement . 2009 . Regulation of cytokinesis by Rho GTPase flux . Nat Cell Biol . 11 : 71 - 77 . Miyamoto , T . , T . Mochizuki , H . Nakagomi , S . Kira , M . Watanabe , Y . Takayama , Y . Suzuki , S . Koizumi , M . Takeda , and M . Tominaga . 2014 . Functional role for Piezo1 in stretch - evoked Ca2 + influx and ATP release in Urothelial cell cultures . Journal of Biological Chemistry . 289 : 16565 - 16575 . Mochizuki , T . , T . Sokabe , I . Araki , K . Fujishita , K . Shibasaki , K . Uchida , K . Naruse , S . Koizumi , M . Takeda , and M . Tominaga . 2009 . The TRPV4 cation channel mediates stretch - evoked Ca2 + influx and ATP release in primary urothelial cell cultures . The Journal of biological chemistry . 284 : 21257 - 21264 . Moriwaki , K . , S . Tsukita , and M . Furuse . 2007 . Tight junctions containing claudin 4 and 6 are essential for blastocyst formation in preimplantation mouse embryos . Dev Biol . 312 : 509 - 522 . Murakoshi , H . , H . Wang , and R . Yasuda . 2011 . Local , persistent activation of Rho GTPases during plasticity of single dendritic spines . Nature . 472 : 100 - 104 . Nigam , S . K . , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , and R . B . Silver . 1992 . Changes in intracellular calcium during the development of epithelial polarity and junctions . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 89 : 6162 - 6166 . Nusrat , A . , M . Giry , J . R . Turner , S . P . Colgan , C . A . Parkos , D . Carnes , E . Lemichez , P . Boquet , and J . L . Madara . 1995 . Rho protein regulates tight junctions and perijunctional actin organization in polarized epithelia . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 92 : 10629 - 10633 . Pardo - Pastor , C . , F . Rubio - Moscardo , M . Vogel - González , S . A . Serra , A . Afthinos , S . Mrkonjic , O . Destaing , J . F . Abenza , J . M . Fernández - Fernández , X . Trepat , C . Albiges - Rizo , K . Konstantopoulos , and M . A . Valverde . 2018 . Piezo2 channel regulates RhoA and actin cytoskeleton to promote cell mechanobiological responses . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 115 : 1925 - 1930 . Reyes , C . C . , M . Jin , E . B . Breznau , R . Espino , R . Delgado - Gonzalo , A . B . Goryachev , and A . L . Miller . 2014 . Anillin regulates cell - cell junction integrity by organizing junctional accumulation of Rho - GTP and actomyosin . Current Biology . 24 : 1263 - 1270 . Rosenblatt , J . , M . C . Raff , and L . P . Cramer . 2001 . An epithelial cell destined for apoptosis signals its neighbors to extrude it by an actin - and myosin - dependent mechanism . Current biology : CB . 11 : 1847 - 1857 . Sahu , S . U . , M . R . Visetsouk , R . J . Garde , L . Hennes , C . Kwas , and J . H . Gutzman . 2017 . Calcium signals drive cell shape changes during zebrafish midbrain – hindbrain boundary formation . Molecular biology of the cell . 28 : 875 - 882 . Samak , G . , T . Suzuki , A . Bhargava , and R . K . Rao . 2010 . c - Jun NH2 - terminal kinase - 2 mediates osmotic stress - induced tight junction disruption in the intestinal epithelium . American journal of physiology . Gastrointestinal and liver physiology . 299 : G572 - 584 . Saoudi , Y . , B . Rousseau , J . Doussiere , S . Charrasse , C . Gauthier - Rouviere , N . Morin , C . Sautet - Laugier , E . Denarier , R . Scaife , C . Mioskowski , and D . Job . 2004 . Calcium - independent cytoskeleton disassembly induced by BAPTA . Eur J Biochem . 271 : 3255 - 3264 . Shao , X . , Q . Li , A . Mogilner , A . D . Bershadsky , and G . V . Shivashankar . 2015 . Mechanical stimulation induces formin - dependent assembly of a perinuclear actin rim . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 112 : E2595 - 2601 . Shi , Z . , Z . T . Graber , T . Baumgart , H . A . Stone , and A . E . Cohen . 2018 . Cell Membranes Resist Flow . Cell . 175 : 1769 - 1779 e1713 . Sive , H . L . , R . M . Grainger , and R . M . Harland . 2007 . Removing the Vitelline Membrane from Xenopus laevis Embryos . CSH Protoc . 2007 : pdb prot4732 . Sokabe , T . , T . Fukumi - Tominaga , S . Yonemura , A . Mizuno , and M . Tominaga . 2010 . The TRPV4 channel contributes to intercellular junction formation in keratinocytes . The Journal of biological chemistry . 285 : 18749 - 18758 . Spassova , M . A . , T . Hewavitharana , W . Xu , J . Soboloff , and D . L . Gill . 2006 . A common mechanism underlies stretch activation and receptor activation of TRPC6 channels . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 103 : 16586 - 16591 . Staehelin , L . A . , T . M . Mukherjee , and A . W . Williams . 1969 . Freeze - etch appearance of the tight junctions in the epithelium of small and large intestine of mice . Protoplasma . 67 : 165 - 184 . Stephenson , R . E . , T . Higashi , I . S . Erofeev , T . R . Arnold , M . Leda , A . B . Goryachev , and A . L . Miller . 2019 . Rho Flares Repair Local Tight Junction Leaks . Developmental cell . 48 : 445 - 459 e445 . Stuart , R . O . , A . Sun , M . Panichas , S . C . Hebert , B . M . Brenner , and S . K . Nigam . 1994 . Critical role for intracellular calcium in tight junction biogenesis . J Cell Physiol . 159 : 423 - 433 . Suzuki , M . , M . Sato , H . Koyama , Y . Hara , K . Hayashi , N . Yasue , H . Imamura , T . Fujimori , T . Nagai , R . E . Campbell , and N . Ueno . 2017 . Distinct intracellular Ca ( 2 + ) dynamics regulate apical constriction and differentially contribute to neural tube closure . Development . 144 : 1307 - 1316 . Van Itallie , C . M . , A . J . Tietgens , and J . M . Anderson . 2017 . Visualizing the dynamic coupling of claudin strands to the actin cytoskeleton through ZO - 1 . Mol Biol Cell . 28 : 524 - 534 . Varadarajan , S . , R . E . Stephenson , and A . L . Miller . 2019 . Multiscale dynamics of tight junction remodeling . Journal of cell science . 132 . Wallingford , J . B . , A . J . Ewald , R . M . Harland , and S . E . Fraser . 2001 . Calcium signaling during convergent extension in Xenopus . Current Biology . 11 : 652 - 661 . Wei , C . , X . Wang , M . Chen , K . Ouyang , L . S . Song , and H . Cheng . 2009 . Calcium flickers steer cell migration . Nature . 457 : 901 - 905 . Woolner , S . , A . L . Miller , and W . M . Bement . 2009 . Imaging the cytoskeleton in live Xenopus laevis embryos . Methods Mol Biol . 586 : 23 - 39 . Yu , D . , A . M . Marchiando , C . R . Weber , D . R . Raleigh , Y . Wang , L . Shen , and J . R . Turner . 2010 . MLCK - dependent exchange and actin binding region - dependent anchoring of ZO - 1 regulate tight junction barrier function . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 107 : 8237 - 8241 . Yu , H . Y . E . , and W . M . Bement . 2007 . Control of local actin assembly by membrane fusion - dependent compartment mixing . Nature Cell Biology . 9 : 149 - 159 . Zhong , M . , W . Wu , H . Kang , Z . Hong , S . Xiong , X . Gao , J . Rehman , Y . A . Komarova , and A . B . Malik . 2020 . Alveolar Stretch Activation of Endothelial Piezo1 Protects Adherens Junctions and Lung Vascular Barrier . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol . 62 : 168 - 177 . Zihni , C . , C . Mills , K . Matter , and M . S . Balda . 2016 . Tight junctions : From simple barriers to multifunctional molecular gates . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology . 17 : 564 - 580 . - 200 - 100 0 100 200 300 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 3 . 5 1 2 3 Time ( s ) N o r m a li z e d I n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) C a l c i u m no r m a li z e d i n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) Active Rho FluoZin - 3 Calcium ( C2 ) A B Low High - 100 0 20 40 60 100 140 200 - 300 - 500 300 80 5 µ m 2 µ m Z O - 1 C a l c i u m ( C 2 ) A c t i ve R ho Time ( s ) Calcium ( C2 ) / Active Rho 10 µm 5 µm 40 s Calcium ( C2 ) Merge 6 m i n ActiveRho - 300 - 200 - 100 0 100 200 300 400 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 1 2 3 4 Time ( s ) N o r m a li z e d I n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) C a l c i u m n o r m a li z e d i n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) Active Rho Calcium ( C2 ) ZO - 1 E C D 5 µ m - 42 0 21 63 84 252 357 - 105 210 F l uoZ i n - 3 C a l c i u m ( C 2 ) A c t i ve R ho Time ( s ) 105 Low High Rho flare , FZ - 3 Ca 2 + reference Active Rho , FZ - 3 flare reference Calcium ( C2 ) flare - background = = background F i gu r e 1 D C Rho flare ZO - 1 Ca 2 + Reference Active Rho = ZO - 1 flare reference Calcium = flare pre - ZO - 1 break - 205 - 55 - 40 0 - 15 15 45 120 270 Time ( s ) Z O - 1 C a l c i u m ( G C a M P 6 m ) A c t i ve R ho 5 µ m High Low 2 µ m A 0 - 40 - 205 15 45 270 Time ( s ) C a l c i u m C a l c i u m A c t i ve R ho 10 µm - 300 - 200 - 100 0 100 200 300 400 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 Time ( s ) N o r m a li z e d I n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) Active Rho Calcium ( GCaMP6m ) ZO - 1 E F Calciumflash 0 50 100 150 F DH M ( s ) B - 200 - 100 0 100 200 300 400 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 3 Time ( s ) N o r m a li z e d I n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) C h a n g e i n j u n c t i o n l e ng t h ( µ m ) Active Rho Calcium ( GCaMP6m ) Length Calcium Active Rho 0 200 400 600 800 A r ea u nd e r t h e c u r v e F i gu r e 2 A Vehicle ( DMSO ) Calcium chelation ( BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB ) 265 150 0 - 150 300 325 375 450 750 900 Time ( s ) 315 Z O - 1 C a l c i u m ( G C a M P 6 m ) A c t i ve R ho 5 µ m 2 µ m 265 150 0 - 150 300 325 375 450 750 900 Time ( s ) 315 5 µ m 2 µ m Z O - 1 C a l c i u m ( G C a M P 6 m ) A c t i ve R ho Low High D E F - 150 0 150 300 450 600 750 900 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 ZO - 1 Time ( s ) N o r m a li z e d I n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) DMSO BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB - 150 0 150 300 450 600 750 900 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 Active Rho Time ( s ) N o r m a li z e d I n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) DMSO BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB - 150 0 150 300 450 600 750 900 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 Calcium ( GCaMP6m ) Time ( s ) N o r m a li z e d I n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) DMSO BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB Vehicle ( DMSO ) BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB - 1 0 1 2 4 5 C h a ng e i n i n t e n s i t y = I 2 - I 1 ZO - 1 * p = 0 . 0312 B Intracellular calcium chelation C a 2 + i n E R Extracellular Cytosol Calcium channel Calcium chelator ( BAPTA - AM ) Ca 2 + IP 3 R 2 - APB D ’ E ’ F ’ A ’ C Vehicle ( DMSO ) BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB 0 100 200 300 400 800 Calcium A r ea u nd e r t h e c u r ve * p = 0 . 0099 Vehicle ( DMSO ) BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB 0 200 400 600 1000 2000 Active Rho A r ea u nd e r t h e c u r ve * p < 0 . 0001 AP VP Vitelline removed Intact embryo Recover for 30 minutes Treated with DMSO or BAPTA - AM + 2 - APB for 90 minutes De - vitellinized embryo F i gu r e 3 - 500 - 250 0 250 500 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 Active Rho Time ( s ) N o r m a li z e d i n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) Vehicle GsMTx4 - 500 - 250 0 250 500 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 Calcium Time ( s ) N o r m a li z e d i n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) Vehicle GsMTx4 Vehicle GsMTx4 0 1 2 3 C h a ng e i n i n t e n s i t y = I 2 - I 1 * p = 0 . 0015 ZO - 1 G - 500 - 250 0 250 500 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 ZO - 1 Time ( s ) N o r m a li z e d i n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) Vehicle GsMTx4 I 1 I 2 F E G’ F’ E’ - 480 0 10 20 40 90 Time ( s ) - 130 - 70 255 500 Z O - 1 C a l c i u m ( G C a M P 6 m ) A c t i ve R ho 5 µ m 2 µ m C Vehicle ( water ) D GsMTx4 5 µ m 2 µ m - 500 - 205 - 125 0 10 25 65 100 200 300 400 500 Low High Z O - 1 C a l c i u m ( G C a M P 6 m ) A c t i ve R ho Time ( s ) A B Extracellular Cytosol Membrane stretch Ca 2 + Membrane curvature Ca 2 + GsMTx4 10 µm Membrane / Active Rho 60 s 5 µm Membrane Merge Active Rho 3 . 5 m i n Control GsMTx4 0 200 400 600 800 A r ea und e r t h e c u r ve * p = 0 . 0028 Calcium Control GsMTx4 0 200 400 600 800 1000 A r ea und e r t h e c u r ve Active Rho * p = 0 . 0012 F i gu r e 4 - 504 - 252 - 21 0 21 168 105 126 420 504 Time ( s ) Z O - 1 F l uoZ i n - 3 A c t i ve R ho 5 µ m 2 µ m Low High A C B 0 252 504 1008 1512 20 µm Time ( s ) High Low G s M T x4 20 µm V e h i c l e ( w a t e r ) 0 500 1000 1500 1 2 3 4 Time ( s ) N o r m a li z e d I n t e n s i t y ( a . u . ) Vehicle ( water ) GsMTx4 D F H Vehicle ( water ) GsMTx4 - 504 - 252 0 21 84 168 420 504 252 Time ( s ) Z O - 1 F l uoZ i n - 3 A c t i ve R ho 5 µ m 2 µ m Low High Global FluoZin - 3 Global FluoZin - 3 Active Rho ZO - 1 5 µm 4 20 s Merge Junction length T i m e V e h i c l e ] Rho flare Junction contraction Junction length T i m e Active Rho ZO - 1 5 µm 420 s Merge G s M T x 4 Repeating short duration Rho flares ] Lack of junction contraction Vehicle GsMTx4 0 2 4 6 8 10 F r e qu e n cy o f R h o f l a r es ( F l a r es / m i n / µ m 2 ) x 10 - 5 * p = 0 . 0160 E - 200 - 100 0 100 200 300 400 - 4 - 2 0 2 Time ( s ) C h a ng e i n j un c t i on l e ng t h ( µ m ) Vehicle GsMTx4 I 1 I 2 F’ C h a ng e i n j un c t i on l e ng t h I 2 - I 1 ( µ m ) Vehicle GsMTx4 - 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 0 2 * p = 0 . 0003 G MSC Loss of ZO - 1 ↑ Ca 2 + Rho flare Junction elongation Mechanosensitive calcium influx Rho flare activation Sustained RhoA mediated junction contraction Local ZO - 1 reinforcement repairs local barrier leaks F i gu r e 5