JOURNAL OF MEMORY AND LANGUAGE 38 , 177 – 202 ( 1998 ) ARTICLE NO . ML972550 Relations versus Properties in Conceptual Combination Edward J . Wisniewski and Bradley C . Love Northwestern University We evaluate the hypothesis that people interpret noun - noun combinations by ﬁrst attempting to ﬁnd a plausible relation in which the constituents play different functional roles ( as in ‘‘a hawk that preys on robins’’ for robin hawk ) . If they do not succeed , they then attempt as a last resort to derive an interpretation based on properties of the modiﬁer ( ‘‘hawk with a red breast ’’ ) . In one study , combinations with plausible relations were more often interpreted with properties when their constituents were highly similar . In a second study , property and relation interpreta - tions of the same combination were selectively primed . In a ﬁnal study , we show that property interpretations characterize the meanings of a number of familiar combinations in the English language . Taken together , the results of these studies run counter to the view that concepts are combined by ﬁrst attempting to link them by a relation . We describe other reasons to doubt this view and discuss the implications of our ﬁndings for models of conceptual combination . (cid:113) 1998 Academic Press People frequently combine concepts to pro - portant for at least two reasons . First , it pro - vides a methodology for investigating the na - duce new coherent representations , as in un - derstanding a sentence . In cognitive psychol - ture of concepts ( Hampton , 1987 ; Markman & Wisniewski , 1997 ; Medin & Shoben , 1988 ; ogy , there has been much recent interest in one particular aspect of conceptual combination : Murphy , 1988 ) . For example , studies of con - ceptual combination have identiﬁed ways in how people interpret novel noun - noun combi - nations ( Coolen , van Jaarsveld , & Schreuder , which prototype theories need to be extended ( Medin & Shoben , 1988 ) as well as differ - 1991 ; Gerrig & Murphy , 1984 ; Gagne & Sho - ben , 1997 ; Hampton , 1987 ; Murphy , 1988 , ences between the structure of superordinates and basic level concepts ( Markman & Wis - 1990 ; Shoben , 1993 ; Shoben & Gagne , 1997 ; Smith , Osherson , Rips , & Keane , 1988 ; Wis - niewski , 1997 ) . Second , novel combinations typically occur niewski , 1996 , 1997 ) . A general aspect of lan - guage is that people create novel combinations in communicative contexts and serve a variety of functions ( see Downing , 1977 ; Wisniewski , and listeners have little trouble comprehend - ing them . For example , one of the authors 1997 , for detailed discussions ) . They are used to designate signiﬁcantly new categories , as in easily understood the novel combinations os - trich steak , ostrich burger , ostrich meat , and the examples involving ostrich above . These phrases use new combinations of old terms to ostrich ranch , which were recently mentioned in a brief news story about the increasing pop - capture changes in reality which may become ularity of ostrich farming in this country . commonplace . Combinations also convey in - Studying how concepts combine is im - formation in a concise and efﬁcient way . For example , football parking designates an area for parking one’s car while attending a foot - The second author was supported by the Ofﬁce of Na - ball game . Even though this phrase is ellip - val Research under the National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship Program . The ﬁrst au - tical , readers generally understand what it thor thanks Bob Dylan for providing part of the inspiration means . Finally , combinations function as for this work . anaphora in that they are used to refer back Address correspondence and reprint requests to Edward to a previous referent . In doing so , they help J . Wisniewski , Department of Psychology , Northwestern University , Evanston , IL 60208 . link information to the appropriate referent 177 0749 - 596X / 98 $ 25 . 00 Copyright (cid:113) 1998 by Academic Press All rights of reproduction in any form reserved . AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 121 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 178 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE and establish cohesion in discourse contexts Although subjects produce these two types of interpretations in the laboratory , research - ( Garrod & Sanford , 1994 ) . Studying novel combinations can illuminate how these func - ers have assumed that only thematic relation interpretations are psychologically signiﬁcant . tions are achieved . In order to develop a processing - level In particular , a popular view is that people ﬁrst attempt to derive an interpretation that ( algorithmic ) account of how people combine concepts , one must identify the important phe - involves a thematic relation and only derive a property interpretation if there is no plausible nomena of conceptual combination . These phenomena deﬁne the generality to be at - relation between the usual referents of the modiﬁer and head noun concepts ( Downing , tained by a model and help to constrain its processing assumptions . Recently , Wisniew - 1977 ; Gagne & Shoben , 1997 ; Shoben & Gagne , 1997 ; Wisniewski & Gentner , 1991 ) . ski ( 1996 ) examined a large sample of peo - ple’s interpretations of novel combinations On this view for example , people would inter - pret robin hawk by ﬁrst attempting to ﬁnd with the goal of identifying the signiﬁcant phenomena associated with conceptual com - a thematic relation in which robin and hawk plausibly play different functional roles ( as in bination . People’s interpretations fell into two basic categories . One kind of interpretation ‘‘hawk that preys on robins’’ ) and only if there was no plausible relation would they attempt involved a thematic relation between the ref - erents of the modiﬁer and head concepts . For a property interpretation ( as in ‘‘hawk with a red breast’’ ) . example , a robin hawk could mean ‘‘a hawk that preys on robins . ’’ In property interpreta - There are two arguments that have led to this hypothesis . One is derived from the claim tions , people asserted that one or more proper - ties of the modiﬁer concept apply in some that people rarely produce property interpreta - tions in communicative contexts . Downing way to the head concept , as in ‘‘hawk with a red breast , ’’ for robin hawk . Sometimes these ( 1977 ) apparently did not ﬁnd property inter - pretations among novel combinations that she interpretations refer to an entity which shares many properties of both constituents ( e . g . , a sampled from several kinds of discourse mate - rials . However , when she gave subjects novel robin hawk could refer to a bird that is cross between a robin and a hawk ) . combinations , they interpreted a number of them in this manner . To explain this asymme - Wisniewski ( 1996 ) also noted that there were important conceptual distinctions be - try , Downing suggested that an interpretation involving a property : tween these kinds of combinations . For exam - ple , in robin hawk interpreted with a thematic relation as ‘‘a hawk that preys on robins , ’’ . . . may be a last - resort [ italics added ] or default relationship , considered by the addressee when no the modiﬁer refers to a robin and the head other useful underlying relationship seems plausi - noun refers to a type of hawk . The meaning ble ; and it also suggests a difference in speaker and of the combination speciﬁes a relationship in hearer strategies . ( p . 830 ) which the entities play different functional roles . In this example , robin would play the Like Downing , Shoben and Gagne ( 1997 ) role of the prey and hawk the role of the pred - doubt that occurrences of property interpreta - ator . However , in robin hawk interpreted with tions are very common in everyday speech a property as ‘‘a hawk with a red breast , ’’ the and writing . They come to similar conclusions modiﬁer refers to a property of a robin rather about these interpretations : than to a robin . There is no relationship be - tween a robin and a hawk in which they play We do not dispute that property matches occur ; different functional roles . Rather , the meaning however , we contend that property matches are the refers to a hawk that resembles a robin in interpretation of last resort . . . . [ italics added ] We some respect ( i . e . , in having a red breast like also doubt that the occurrence of these property matches is very common in everyday speech and a robin does ) . AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 122 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 179 CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION writing . None for example , appeared in our corpus . ever , this approach does not address the inter - ( p . 35 ) pretations in which the modiﬁer noun is taken to refer to a property . . . . these kinds of interpretations are secondary to the strategy of relation assignment . That is , people In another approach , called the ‘‘competi - will always [ italics added ] try to assign a thematic tion among relations in nominals’’ ( CARIN ) relation to a combination ; however if they are un - model , people use distributional knowledge of able to assign a relation , they seek a metaphorical thematic relations associated with how a noun or property matching solution . ( p . 47 ) has previously combined to interpret a combi - nation containing that noun ( Gagne & Shoben , Wisniewski and Gentner ( 1991 ) put forth a different argument for the primacy of relation 1997 ; Shoben & Gagne , 1997 ) . In addition , the modiﬁer’s combinatorial history has a interpretations . They noted that relation inter - pretations generally preserve the meaning of greater influence on interpretation ( see Gagne & Shoben , 1997 , for evidence ) . For each noun in the combination whereas prop - erty interpretations use the modiﬁer in an ex - example , when mountain is used as a modiﬁer it typically instantiates a locative relation ( as tended sense ( i . e . , the modiﬁer refers to one of its properties ) . For example , the relation in mountain stream , mountain resort , moun - tain goat , etc . ) and is only rarely involved interpretation of book magazine as ‘‘a maga - zine that reviews books’’ preserves the usual in other types of relations ( mountain range ) . Therefore , people are biased to interpret a referents of book and magazine . In contrast , a property interpretation of book magazine novel combination such as mountain ﬁsh as ‘‘ﬁsh found in the mountains’’ by using their such as ‘‘a thick magazine’’ refers to a prop - erty of books rather than to a book . Given the knowledge that mountain has previously com - bined with other nouns in a similar manner . general goals of communication , people may initially assume that a combination involves Like the concept specialization model , the CARIN model does not address interpreta - the usual meanings of its constituents and thus ﬁrst look for a relation interpretation . Like tions in which the modiﬁer noun is taken to refer to a property but rather captures interpre - other researchers , Wisniewski and Gentner ( 1991 ) suggest that interpreting combinations tations involving a relation between the usual referents of the constituents . by relations is ‘‘a very natural strategy for combining concepts’’ and that ‘‘people prefer Although a number of researchers have ar - gued that relation interpretation is the basic this strategy’’ ( p . 266 ) . This view of the primacy of relation inter - strategy for combining nouns , we are unaware of any research that directly evaluates this pretations also manifests itself in processing models of conceptual combination . Several claim . Some studies show that property inter - pretations are not infrequent ( e . g . , Markman & approaches exclusively focus on how a rela - tion is determined which plausibly holds be - Wisniewski , 1997 ; Wisniewski , 1996 ; Wis - niewski & Markman , 1993 ) . On ﬁrst glance , tween the usual referents of the constituents of a combination . For example , in the concept these ﬁndings might argue against the primacy of relation interpretations . However , in all of specialization model ( Cohen & Murphy , 1984 ; Murphy , 1988 ) the modiﬁer and head these studies , subjects were given experi - menter - constructed combinations whose con - nouns are represented as schemata or frames . One interprets a noun - noun combination by stituents were either arbitrarily paired or were highly similar . Both of these factors are very ﬁlling a slot of the head noun with the modiﬁer noun . Thus , one might interpret robin hawk by likely to yield combinations which do not have plausible relation interpretations ( which ﬁlling the prey slot in hawk with the modiﬁer concept robin in deriving the meaning ‘‘a could then lead people to generate property interpretations as a last resort ) . In the case of hawk that preys on robins . ’’ In effect , this slot - ﬁlling process captures a relation between combinations with highly similar constituents ( e . g . , whiskey beer ) , it is often the case that a the usual referents of the constituents . How - AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 122 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 180 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE plausible relation does not exist between the terpretations did not have plausible thematic relations between their constituents . As a re - constituents ( though there are exceptions , as Experiment 1 will show ) . In general , highly sult , these interpretations could have been generated as a last resort when a plausible similar things play the same role in a relation . Because highly similar things are so alike , relation did not exist . At the very least , it is unclear from previous research whether prop - they also tend to share those characteristics which are required of the potential ﬁller of a erty interpretation is an important strategy for combining nouns , outside of the laboratory . role . For example , both whiskey and beer can play the object role in the drink relation be - In this paper , we evaluate the assumptions that ( a ) relation interpretation is the basic cause they are both beverages that one can drink . However , in order to derive a plausible strategy used to understand combinations and that property interpretations are derived only relation interpretation , the constituents must play different roles in the relation . Thus , whis - as a last resort , and ( b ) people have a strong bias to produce combinations involving rela - key beer cannot be interpreted with the drink relation because both constituents are plausi - tions in which the constituents play different , functional roles . Together , we refer to these ble ﬁllers for the ( same ) object role . In con - trast , wine drinker does have this relation in - assumptions as the last resort hypothesis . In evaluating this hypothesis , we will examine terpretation because wine and drinker can play different roles : wine can play the object role the possibility that both relation and property strategies are important and useful in combin - whereas drinker can play the agent role . To examine this view , we re - examined Wis - ing concepts and that people are more ﬂexible in both their interpretation and production of niewski’s ( 1996 ; Experiment 2 ) stimuli and intuitively assessed whether there were rea - combinations . Resolving these issues has im - portant theoretical implications for research sonably plausible relations between the con - stituents . In our judgment , there was no plau - on conceptual combination . Finding that prop - erty interpretation is a strategy of last resort sible relation between the constituents of 31 of the 32 combinations that were highly simi - would imply that it is not a signiﬁcant phe - nomenon to be seriously addressed by theories lar ( e . g . , pistol riﬂe , organ piano , apple pear , robin canary ) and no plausible relation be - or models of conceptual combination . Rather , it tends to occur under very special circum - tween the constituents of 16 of the 32 combi - nations which were arbitrarily paired ( e . g . , stances ( e . g . , when researchers ask subjects to interpret experimenter - selected novel combi - fork scarf , stool hotel , saxophone couch , pine - apple piranha ) . We then compared Wis - nations that do not have plausible relation in - terpretations ) . Alternatively , ﬁnding that prop - niewski’s classiﬁcation of the interpretations for the combinations to our judgments about erty interpretation is an important and useful strategy suggests a number of important issues the constituents of these combinations . For those constituents we judged not to have a to be addressed by theories and models . For example , what factors inﬂuence the tendency plausible relation , only 12 . 3 % of the interpre - tations of their corresponding combinations to use one or the other strategy ? Why do peo - ple use different strategies ? involved relations ( the others involved proper - ties ) . For constituents that we judged to have We conducted several experiments to ex - amine these issues . In the ﬁrst study , we revis - plausible relations ( e . g . , those which formed book pamphlet , apartment piano , motorcycle ited the effect of high constituent similarity on interpretation . Even though high similarity screwdriver , cow cabbage ) , 66 . 5 % of the in - terpretations of their corresponding combina - typically prevents relation interpretations , a number of studies indirectly suggest that high tions involved relations . Thus , although Wis - niewski ( 1996 ) found that subjects readily similarity could also facilitate the use of the property interpretation strategy . Thus , we at - produce property interpretations , our analysis suggests that the combinations with these in - tempted to create combinations whose constit - AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 122 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 181 CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION uents were both highly similar and could plau - between similar concepts and more easily de - termine these differences ( Gentner & Mark - sibly play different roles in a thematic relation . We used these combinations to assess whether man , 1994 ) . In regard to conceptual combination , some interpretation is also a function of the similar - ity between the constituents of a combination evidence suggests that people generate prop - erty interpretations by comparing the modiﬁer and is not determined solely by whether there is a plausible relation ( as suggested by the to the head noun and looking for a difference between them that could form the basis of the last resort hypothesis ) . In Experiment 2 , we examined the effects of prior use of relation interpretation ( Wisniewski , 1996 , Experiment 2 ) . For example , people might interpret zebra versus property interpretation strategies on their subsequent use . If strategies are ﬂexibly horse by comparing zebra and horse and not - ing that a zebra has stripes but a horse does applied , prior use of one strategy may inﬂu - ence the tendency to use that strategy later . not . They then could use this difference to produce the interpretation ‘‘horse with Finally , in Experiment 3 , we re - examined the relative prevalence of property and relation stripes’’ for zebra horse . As previous research implies , it should be easier for people to ﬁnd meanings associated with combinations that are part of the English language . As noted , such differences ( and more of them ) for com - binations with highly similar constituents . For Downing ( 1977 ) found an asymmetry between production and interpretation which formed example , it should be easier to ﬁnd the differ - ence ‘‘has stripes versus does not have the basis for her view that property interpreta - tion was a last resort strategy . stripes’’ between zebra and horse than be - tween zebra and clam . EXPERIMENT 1 We can take advantage of this difference in the ease of ﬁnding differences between con - Previous research indirectly suggests that high similarity between the constituents of a cepts to examine whether property interpreta - tion is a last resort strategy . On this view , combination facilitates the tendency to pro - duce property interpretations . Many studies interpretation depends on there being a plausi - ble relation in which the constituents can play suggest that when people are explicitly in - structed to compare mental representations , different roles . In cases in which a plausible relation does exist between constituents , the they use the commonalities between these rep - resentations to ﬁnd their differences ( Mark - inﬂuence of similarity on property interpreta - tion should not be a factor because this strat - man & Gentner , 1993ab ; Markman & Wis - niewski , 1997 ; Gentner & Markman , 1994 ) . egy will only be triggered if a plausible rela - tion does not exist . For example , people Several studies show that subjects not only list more commonalities for similar than for should interpret book magazine with a relation as in ‘‘a magazine that reviews books’’ or dissimilar concepts but also more differences . For example , people list more commonalities ‘‘a magazine that sells books’’ ( assuming that these relations are plausible ) and thus similar - and differences for kitten and cat than for kit - ten and newspaper . Importantly , the differ - ity will not affect property interpretation . Al - ternatively , if property interpretation is not a ences are conceptually related to the common - alities , suggesting that ﬁnding commonalities last resort strategy , then interpretation should also be a function of the similarity between leads to the ﬁnding of differences . For exam - ple , when subjects list ‘‘has wheels’’ as a com - the constituents and thus similar combinations should have property interpretations despite monality of car and motorcycle they also tend to list ‘‘has four wheels versus two wheels’’ having plausible relations between their con - stituents . as a difference ( Markman & Gentner , 1993a ) . Even though virtually any property of the Note that this alternative hypothesis is based on the important premise that plausible items in a dissimilar pair will be a difference , people ﬁnd it easier to generate differences relations exist between the constituents of a AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 122 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 182 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE similar combination . As noted in the Introduc - pated as part of a course requirement . 23 sub - jects participated in the plausibility task and tion , plausible relations generally do not exist between highly similar entities . However , 34 subjects in the interpretation task . Materials . 10 pairs of novel noun - noun there are some highly similar nouns whose referents nevertheless can play different roles combinations were used for the interpretation task . For each pair , one combination had in the same thematic relation ( they are difﬁcult to ﬁnd ) . For example , a musician could play highly similar constituents ( e . g . , goose vul - music for dancers , with musician ﬁlling the ture ) and one combination had constituents agent role and dancer ﬁlling the object role . that were less similar ( e . g . , ﬁsh vulture ) . Ac - Thus , dancer musician could plausibly be in - cording to our intuitions , the constituents of terpreted as ‘‘a musician who plays music for each combination of a pair could be plausibly dancers . ’’ In the ﬁrst study , we use such nouns linked by the same relation . For example , to test the last resort hypothesis . Speciﬁcally , goose vulture could describe a vulture that we created pairs of novel combinations with eats a dead goose , and ﬁsh vulture could de - three important characteristics . First , in each scribe a vulture that eats a dead ﬁsh . Table 1 pair one combination was similar ( e . g . , dancer shows the pairs of combinations and the rela - musician ) and the other was dissimilar ( e . g . , tion that was assumed to plausibly link the mourner musician ) . Second , both combina - entities named by the constituents . tions could involve the same relation ( e . g . , We also selected relations that people typi - ‘‘plays for’’ ) . Third , according to our intu - cally use in producing combinations . All of itions , it was at least as plausible that the refer - the relations are speciﬁc instantiations of the ents of the highly similar constituents could general relations that Levi ( 1978 ) proposed be involved in that relation as those of the less as characterizing most familiar combinations similar constituents . ( see Table 1 ) . They also ﬁt the categories To test the last resort hypothesis , one group suggested by Downing ( 1977 ) . In addition , of subjects judged the plausibility of the similar Table 1 lists some familiar combinations entities being involved in the relation relative whose meanings involve the same or similar to the dissimilar entities being involved in that relations . relation . For example , they were asked to judge We also attempted to use the same nouns the relative plausibility of ‘‘a vulture that preys for both the similar and dissimilar combina - on dead geese’’ ( similar entities ) compared to tions and to use them in the same position as that of ‘‘a vulture that preys on dead ﬁsh’’ ( dis - head noun or as modiﬁer noun . We designed similar entities ) . This task allowed us to assess the stimuli in this way so as to insure that the relative plausibility of entities being involved differences between interpretations were not in a relation , independent of the interpretation due to differences between the nouns or their process ( which we are suggesting is also inﬂu - positions used in the conditions . As Table 1 enced by the similarity of the constituents of a shows , each pair of combinations involved the combination ) . The goal was to verify that there same head noun and there is 80 % overlap be - were plausible thematic relations between simi - tween the modiﬁers of the similar and dissimi - lar entities . A different group of subjects then lar combinations . ( These constraints are difﬁ - interpreted the combinations whose constituents cult to achieve given the other constraints that named those entities ( e . g . , goose vulture , ﬁsh must hold between the stimuli . ) vulture ) . We then examined if constituent simi - In order to assess the plausibility of similar larity inﬂuenced interpretation even though entities linked to a thematic relation relative plausible relations existed between similar enti - to dissimilar entities linked by that relation , ties named by the constituents . we constructed descriptions which linked the Method entities by the relation . These descriptions were typed onto paper with two descriptions Subjects . The subjects were undergraduates from Northwestern University who partici - listed side by side , corresponding to each pair AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 122 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 183 CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION TABLE 1 Similar and Dissimilar Combinations and a Plausible Relation That Links Their Constituents ( Experiment 1 ) Similar combination Dissimilar combination Plausible relation Familiar combination dancer musician mourner musician plays music for jazz musician car truck yarn truck transports garbage truck yarn string book string tied around neck tie kidnapper killer painter killer kills cop killer newspaper brochure spear brochure about college brochure spear chisel barrel chisel chisels wood chisel goose vulture ﬁsh vulture eats sparrow hawk book magazine kidnapper magazine about sports magazine barrel box goose box contains toolbox painter photographer car photographer photographs wedding photographer Note . An example of familiar combination is presented which involves that relation or a very similar one . of combinations ( e . g . , ‘‘a vulture that eats For the interpretation task , the 10 pairs of combinations were randomly divided into two dead ﬁsh’’ and ‘‘a vulture that eats dead geese’’ for ﬁsh vulture and goose vulture , re - groups of 10 , subject to the constraints that only one combination from a pair appear in a spectively ) . Note that the actual noun - noun combinations did not appear with these de - group and that each group contain equal num - bers ( 5 ) of similar and dissimilar combina - scriptions . Otherwise , subjects may have in - terpreted the combinations and then compared tions . Four interpretation forms were con - structed by typing the combinations of each their interpretations to the descriptions . Thus , our task would have measured the relative of the two groups on the left side of a piece of paper in two different random orders . A plausibility of interpretations rather than the relative plausibility of thematic relations . second set of four interpretation forms was created in a manner analogous to the creation One description was typed on the left side of the paper and the second description was of the ﬁrst set . Procedure ( plausibility task ) . Subjects read typed on the right side . Below the descriptions was a number scale from 1 to 5 , with both 1 instructions telling them that they would see descriptions of things , presented two a time and 5 indicating ‘‘much more plausible . ’’ The 1 was directly below the leftmost description ( one on the left and one the right ) . Their task was to judge which description names a more and the 5 was directly below the rightmost description . A rating form was constructed by plausible thing and to indicate how much more plausible one description is than the typing the pairs of descriptions in a random order , with 5 pairs on one sheet and 5 pairs other . To illustrate , they were given the de - scriptions , ‘‘a hatchet for pounding in nails , ’’ on the second . Whether a description was typed on the left or right side was randomly and ‘‘a hatchet for pounding in telephone poles , ’’ and told that it was the experimenter’s determined with the constraint that half of the descriptions on each side of the paper corre - intuition that the former description was more plausible . sponded to similar combinations and half to dissimilar combinations . A second rating Subjects were instructed to rate the rela - tive plausibility of the descriptions by cir - form was created by interchanging the de - scriptions typed on the left and right sides . cling a number from 1 to 5 , with 1 indicating that the description on the left is much more Two more rating forms were created by re - versing the order of the two sheets of paper plausible than the one the right and 5 indicat - ing that the description on the right was of these forms . AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 123 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 184 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE much more plausible than the one on the left . scale ( 3 . 0 ) ; t ( 22 ) (cid:129) 5 . 56 , p (cid:155) . 001 , by a sub - jects analysis , but fell short of reliability in Subjects were told to circle 2 if they thought the description on the left was more plausible the item analysis , t ( 9 ) (cid:129) 1 . 73 , p (cid:155) . 10 . For 8 of the 10 pairs , the description involving the than the one on the right , but 4 if they thought the one on the right was more plausi - similar constituents was rated as more plausi - ble ( the binomial probability is less than . 055 ble than the one on the left . They were to circle 3 if they thought the descriptions were that 8 or more pairs would show this result by chance ) . The two exceptions were ‘‘a pho - equally plausible . Finally , subjects were told that some de - tographer who photographs cars’’ and ‘‘string that is tied around a book’’ which were judged scriptions may name things which they had never seen before ( like the descriptions of the more plausible than ‘‘a photographer who photographs painters’’ and ‘‘string tied around hatchets ) but that they should not equate unfa - miliarity with plausibility . They were also told yarn , ’’ respectively . In general , these results indicate that subjects rated the descriptions in - to make their decisions carefully but not to agonize over them for a long time . The task volving relations between similar constituents as more plausible than those involving the cor - took about 10 minutes to complete . An equal number of subjects ( 6 ) ﬁlled out three of the responding relations between dissimilar con - stituents . rating forms and 5 subjects ﬁlled out the fourth rating form . Overall , 76 . 5 % of the ratings were at the midpoint or higher , indicating that subjects Procedure ( interpretation task ) . A different group of subjects read instructions indicating very often viewed the relation between the similar constituents as at least as plausible as that they would read a few noun - noun phrases which they had probably never seen in print or the relation between the dissimilar constit - uents . Table 2 shows the percentage of judg - heard someone say ( e . g . , earthquake school ) . Subjects were to pretend that they had just ments that were at the midpoint or higher for each pair . heard each phrase in a conversation and to think of what the person meant when they said Interpretation task . A research assistant who did not know the purpose of the study such a phrase . Subjects were to think of the most plausible meaning of the phrase and to examined each interpretation and classiﬁed it into one of ﬁve categories . An interpretation write down this meaning to the right of each noun - noun phrase . They did not have to pro - was scored as a relevant relation if it referred to the relation on which a pair of combinations vide a detailed meaning but the meaning should also not be vague . The task typically was matched . ( The rater used the actual de - scriptions from the plausibility task to make took 15 minutes to complete and a subject was randomly assigned to an interpretation form . these judgments . ) For example , goose vulture and ﬁsh vulture were matched on the eats rela - Results tion . Therefore , ‘‘a bird that preys on the car - casses of geese’’ was scored as a relevant re - Plausibility task . Because of the counterbal - ancing of the left and right position of a de - lation for goose vulture . An interpretation was scored as other relation if it referred to rela - scription , the mapping of the rating scale onto the relative plausibility of a description was tion between the constituents , but not to the one on which a pair of combinations was reversed half of the time . Thus , ratings were transformed to create a consistent mapping matched . For example , newspaper brochure and spear brochure were matched on the with increasing ratings indicating increasing relative plausibility for the descriptions in - about relation . However , ‘‘a brochure inside a newspaper’’ was scored as an other relation volving similar constituents . The average rela - tive plausibility rating for descriptions involv - for newspaper brochure . An interpretation was scored as property if it attributed a prop - ing similar constituents was 3 . 38 . This rating was reliably higher than the midpoint of the erty of one constituent to another ( e . g . , ‘‘hard - AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 123 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 185 CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION TABLE 2 Percentage of Time That Relation between Similar Entities ( Left - Hand Side ) Was Judged as Least as Plausible as the Relation between Dissimilar Entities ( Right - Hand Side ) ( Experiment 1 ) A chisel for chiseling spears / a chisel for chiseling barrels 74 A vulture that eats dead geese / a vulture that eats dead ﬁsh 87 A magazine about books / a magazine about kidnappers 100 A box that contains barrels / a box that contains geese 78 A photographer who photographs painters / a photographer who photographs cars 39 A musician who plays music for dancers / a musician who plays music for mourners 100 A truck that transports cars / a truck that transports yarn string that tied around a book / string 100 that is tied around yarn 39 A killer who killed a kidnapper / a killer who killed a painter 83 A brochure about newspapers / a brochure about spears 70 bound , thick magazine’’ for book magazine ) relative plausibility for similar versus dissim - ilar constituents . Thus , this ﬁnding is not di - or if its referent was something with properties of both constituents ( e . g . , ‘‘someone who is rectly relevant to the evaluation of the last resort hypothesis . accomplished in both ﬁelds’’ for dancer musi - cian ) . Finally , an interpretation was scored as Importantly , when subjects did interpret combinations with thematic relations they other if it did not ﬁt into one of the other four categories . For these interpretations , subjects most often used the relation that we had se - lected for the plausibility rating task , regard - typically gave vague or uninformative mean - ings ( e . g . , ‘‘a vehicle’’ for car truck ) . One less of whether the combination had similar or dissimilar constituents ( compare the pro - of the authors also scored the interpretations . Agreement between the research assistant and portions of relevant relations versus other rela - tions in Figure 1 ) . In principle , subjects could author was high ( 92 % ) and differences in scor - ing were resolved by discussion . The data have used a number of relations to interpret these combinations , but when they did pro - from two of the 23 subjects were discarded because half of their interpretations were duce relation interpretations , they frequently used the selected relation ( 65 % of the time for scored as other . In analyzing the data from the remaining subjects , other responses were similar combinations and 74 . 4 % of the time for dissimilar combinations ) . Thus , our sub - discarded ( 11 . 8 % for similar combinations and 8 . 1 % for dissimilar combinations ) . jects considered the selected thematic rela - tions to be the most important and useful rela - Figure 1 shows the percentage of relevant relation , other relation , and property interpre - tions for interpreting the phrases . tations for the similar and dissimilar combi - Discussion nations . The percentage of property interpre - tations was reliably higher for similar than These results undermine the last resort hy - pothesis , which suggests that : ( a ) people inter - for dissimilar combinations ( 65 . 7 % versus 16 . 4 % ) : t ( 31 ) (cid:129) 9 . 70 , p (cid:155) . 001 ( subjects ) ; pret a novel combination by ﬁrst attempting to ﬁnd a plausible relation between the constit - t ( 9 ) (cid:129) 7 . 50 , p (cid:155) . 001 ( items ) . In contrast , the percentage of relevant relation interpretations uents , and ( b ) if a plausible relation does not exist , they then derive a property interpreta - was reliably higher for dissimilar than for similar combinations ( 62 . 2 % versus 22 . 3 % ) : tion . In this study , relations existed between similar constituents which subjects judged as t ( 31 ) (cid:129) 6 . 85 , p (cid:155) . 001 ( subjects ) ; t ( 9 ) (cid:129) 4 . 48 , p (cid:155) . 002 ( items ) . The proportion of other more plausible than corresponding relations between dissimilar constituents . Thus , if pro - relations was also higher for dissimilar com - binations but we had not determined their cessing had operated in the manner suggested AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 123 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 186 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE FIG . 1 . Percentage of property , relevant relation , and other relation interpretations for similar and dissimilar combinations ( Experiment 1 ) . by the last resort hypothesis , then similar com - dancer musician and always gave property in - terpretations . In contrast , they readily used binations should have yielded more interpreta - tions involving these relations . this relation to interpret mourner musician ( 53 % of the time , using property interpreta - Instead , a striking ﬁnding obtained , oppo - site to this prediction : a majority of interpreta - tions 29 % of the time ) . The results also suggest that the thematic tions of similar combinations involved proper - ties ( 66 % ) , whereas a majority of interpre - relations which we examined were not un - usual or atypical of those that people use in tations of dissimilar combinations ( 62 % ) involved the relations that subjects rated as interpreting novel combinations . In particular , they were the most common thematic rela - more plausible for the similar constituents . For example , subjects believed that ‘‘a box that tions used in the relation interpretations of both the similar and dissimilar combinations . contains a barrel’’ was more plausible than a ‘‘a box that contains a goose . ’’ However , Further , the dominant interpretations for the dissimilar combinations generally involved other subjects used this relation in their inter - pretations of barrel box only 22 % of the time these relations . and instead primarily gave property interpreta - EXPERIMENT 2 tions ( 78 % of the time ) . In contrast , subjects readily used this thematic relation to interpret The last resort hypothesis implies a strict order of processing in which people are goose box ( 71 % of the time , using property interpretations 12 % of the time ) . As another strongly biased to ﬁrst construct relation inter - pretations and then only attempt property in - example , subjects believed that ‘‘a musician who plays music for dancers’’ was more plau - terpretations if there is no plausible relation which holds between the constituents . How - sible than ‘‘a musician who plays music for mourners . ’’ However , other subjects never ever , the results of the ﬁrst study suggest that interpretation is not solely mediated by the used this relation in their interpretations of AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 123 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 187 CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION plausibility of relations between constituents property prime condition was identical to the relation prime condition except that a second but is also affected by the similarity of the constituents . Thus , because interpretation is group of subjects ﬁrst interpreted combina - tions with very plausible property interpreta - affected by other characteristics of the constit - uents , it is more ﬂexible than is implied by tions but no plausible relation interpretations . In a control condition , a third group of sub - the last resort hypothesis . Another way to explore this ﬂexibility is to jects interpreted the test combinations without previously interpreting relation or property examine contextual factors that may affect the tendency to use a strategy . For example , if primes . This study also differs from the previous interpretation is more ﬂexible than implied by the last resort hypothesis , then the use of one studies of conceptual combination in that we did not attempt to prime speciﬁc interpre - strategy may prime its subsequent use . In par - ticular , if one strategy does not dominate over tations with those speciﬁc interpretations . Rather we intended to prime the general strat - the other , then it should be possible to selec - tively prime a strategy . In contrast , the last egy of relation or property interpretation by its previous use . Such priming effects would resort hypothesis implies that it should be very difﬁcult to selectively prime a strategy . In ef - be closely related to certain problem solv - ing and perceptual set effects ( Bugelski & fect , it should not be possible to prime relation or property interpretations , because people Alampay , 1961 ; Luchins , 1942 ) . For exam - ple , subjects shown a series of animals per - have a bias to produce relation interpretations which is at ceiling . ceive an ambiguous reversible stimulus as a rat whereas those shown a series of people Some ﬁndings suggest that the use of a spe - ciﬁc relation to interpret a combination primes perceive the same stimulus as a man ( Bugel - ski & Alampay , 1961 ) . In this example , sub - the tendency to interpret another combination using the same relation . Gerrig and Murphy jects were differentially primed to use a gen - eral interpretation strategy ( i . e . , either inter - ( 1988 ; Experiment 4 ) had subjects read a dis - course context which led them to interpret a pret stimuli as animals or as people ) and were then more likely to apply the primed strategy novel combination with a particular relation . For example , they read about a woman carv - to a stimulus which had both a plausible in - terpretation of an animal and of a person . ing a trumpet out of a stale olive and then read the phrase trumpet olive . This interpreta - Method tion then increased the likelihood of interpre - ting a subsequent combination ( i . e . , kitten Subjects . The subjects were 67 undergradu - ates from Northwestern University . They par - apple ) with the same relation ( see also Sho - ben , 1993 , for a similar ﬁnding ) . ticipated either as part of a course requirement or were paid . Unlike this previous work , which primed speciﬁc relations , we attempt to differentially Materials . 10 pairs of novel combinations were selected as primes . Each pair of items prime the tendency to use relation and prop - erty interpretation strategies . There were two had the same head noun but a different mod - iﬁer . By the judgments of the authors , one conditions with one intended to prime prop - erty interpretations and one relation interpreta - item of a pair ( the relation prime ) had a very plausible relation interpretation but no plausi - tions . In the relation prime condition , one group of subjects were ﬁrst presented with ble property interpretation whereas the second item ( the property prime ) had a plausible combinations that had very plausible relation interpretations but no plausible property inter - property interpretation but no plausible rela - tion interpretation . For example , one pair con - pretations . They generated interpretations for these combinations . Then subjects interpreted sisted of dollar bill beggar and skunk beggar . The former combination has a plausible rela - test combinations which had both plausible relation and property interpretations . The tion interpretation ( ‘‘beggar who begs for dol - AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 123 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 188 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE TABLE 3 Primes and Test Items Used in Experiment 2 Property primes Relation primes Test items bus truck clothing truck spear chisel skunk beggar dollar bill beggar encyclopedia writer motorcycle bicycle grocery bicycle ant vegetable razor insult girlfriend insult dinosaur scientist umbrella tree fruit tree snake spear zebra tablecloth holiday tablecloth whale boat sleeping pill sermon adultery sermon painter photographer bullet sprinter adidas sprinter book magazine roller coaster dinner birthday dinner mourner musician butcher surgeon kidney surgeon kidnapper killer lar bills’’ ) but no plausible property interpreta - someone would plausibly mean by it . Some tion . On the other hand , the latter combination of the phrases might have obvious meanings has no plausible relation interpretation but can and other phrases might have meanings which be plausibly interpreted by using a property of were not so obvious . Subjects were told that the modiﬁer ( e . g . , ‘‘beggar who smells bad ’’ ) . when a meaning came to mind ( but not before Table 3 shows the pairs . then ) they should press the space bar on the 10 test combinations were selected which computer keyboard . They were to try to think had both plausible relation and property inter - of the meaning as quickly as they could . After pretations , according to our intuitions . Table they had pressed the space bar , they would be 3 also shows the test items . For example , book prompted to type in the meaning of the phrase . magazine could mean ‘‘a magazine that re - The instructions stated that the ﬁrst part of views books’’ or ‘‘a magazine that sells the task ( determining the meaning ) would be books’’ ( relation interpretations ) . Or , it could timed but not the part involving the typing in mean a ‘‘thick magazine’’ ( a property inter - of that meaning . After subjects typed in the pretation ) . Whale boat could mean ‘‘a boat meaning they had thought of , they were to used for whale watching’’ or ‘‘a boat for hunt - press the tab key . The computer would then ing whales’’ ( relation interpretations ) or it instruct them to gently rest an index ﬁnger on could mean ‘‘a very big boat’’ ( property inter - the space bar and get ready for the next trial . pretation ) . As a ﬁnal example , spear chisel After reading the instructions , subjects be - could mean ‘‘a chisel used to make spears’’ gan the task by pressing a key on the computer or ‘‘a tool used for sharpening the point of a keyboard . Subjects in the relation prime con - spear’’ ( relation interpretations ) . Alterna - dition ﬁrst interpreted the relation primes ( the tively , it could mean ‘‘a chisel that is long’’ or 10 combinations which had plausible relation ‘‘a sharp chisel’’ ( property interpretations ) . 1 interpretations but not plausible property in - Procedure . Subjects read instructions indi - terpretations ) . Then they interpreted the 10 cating that they would see phrases presented test combinations . Subjects in the property on a computer screen , one at a time . They prime condition ﬁrst interpreted the property were to read each phrase and to think of what primes ( the 10 combinations which had plau - sible property interpretations but not plausible 1 As illustrated by these examples , a combination might relation interpretations ) . They then interpreted have multiple property or relation interpretations . For the the same 10 test combinations . Each subject purpose of this study , it is only relevant that the combina - in the prime conditions saw the primes in a tions have at least one plausible interpretation of each kind . different random order . They also were un - AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 123 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 189 CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION TABLE 4 aware that the stimuli were divided into primes and test items . Subjects in the neutral Proportion of Relation and Property Interpretations as a Function of Condition ( Experiment 2 ) condition only interpreted the 10 test combi - nations . Every subject in the three conditions Relation Property saw the test items in a different random order . Condition interpretations interpretations Subjects proceeded through the task at their own pace : they ﬁrst saw a combination , then Relation prime . 628 . 372 Neutral . 547 . 453 pressed the space bar when they had thought Property prime . 323 . 677 of a meaning , then typed in the meaning , and then pressed the tab key to go onto the next trial . The computer recorded the time from the onset of a combination to when the subject property ( e . g . , ‘‘a boring person’’ for encyclo - pedia writer ) . In the latter case , the person pressed the space bar . The task typically took 15 minutes to complete . Subjects were ran - could be boring because the person writes en - cyclopedias ( a relation interpretation ) or be - domly assigned to the relation priming , prop - erty priming , and neutral conditions , with ap - cause the person talks about lots of tedious facts ( a property interpretation ) . On rare occa - proximately equal numbers of subjects partici - pating in each condition . sions ( 1 . 1 % of the time ) , a subject typed two interpretations ( e . g . , ‘‘either a big boat or a Results boat used for whaling’’ for whale boat ) . In these cases , both interpretations were scored . Scoring . The interpretations of the test items were gathered together and sorted by As a check for accuracy , the other author scored a randomly selected 15 % of the inter - test item . One of the authors examined each interpretation and classiﬁed it into one of three pretations ( he was also unaware of whether an interpretation was produced in the relation , categories : relation , property , or other . He was unaware of whether the interpretation was property , or neutral condition ) . The authors agreed on 97 . 9 % of their classiﬁcations . produced in the relation , property , or neutral condition . An interpretation was scored as re - Results . The data from 3 of the 67 subjects were discarded because at least half of their lation if it explicitly referred to a relation be - tween the constituents ( e . g . , ‘‘someone who interpretations were scored as other . These subjects were from the neutral condition . For plays an instrument for those in mourning’’ for mourner musician ) or strongly implied a the remaining subjects , interpretations scored as other were discarded from analyses ( they relation ( e . g . , ‘‘a musician used at funerals’’ implies that the musician plays music for accounted for a small percentage of re - sponses—less than 4 % in each condition ) . Ta - mourners ) . An interpretation was scored as property if it attributed a property of one con - ble 4 shows the proportion of property and relation interpretations for each condition . As stituent to another ( e . g . , ‘‘a sad musician’’ or ‘‘a musician who writes or sings sad songs’’ predicted , the relation condition had the high - est percentage of relation interpretations are both based on the salient property of grief that characterizes mourners ) or if it involved ( 62 . 8 % ) whereas the property condition had the lowest percentage ( 32 . 3 % ) and thus the combining properties of both constituents ( e . g . , interpreting book magazine as ‘‘a piece highest percentage of property interpretations . In the neutral condition , the percentage of re - of literature that has binding and pages like a book , with the pictures of a magazine’’ ) . Fi - lation interpretations was in between that of the relation and property conditions ( 54 . 7 % ) . nally , an interpretation was scored as other if it failed to relate the constituents to each other Using percentage of relation interpretations as the dependent measure , a one - way ANOVA in some manner ( e . g . , ‘‘used for meaning of words’’ for encyclopedia writer ) or if it could revealed a highly reliable effect for type of condition : F ( 2 , 62 ) (cid:129) 11 . 71 , MSE (cid:129) 5023 . 8 , not be unambiguously scored as a relation or AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 123 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 190 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE p (cid:155) . 001 ( subjects ) ; F ( 2 , 18 ) (cid:129) 52 . 20 , MSE interpretations , compared to 67 . 7 % property responding when subjects had been primed to (cid:129) . 2405 , p (cid:155) . 001 ( items ) . The percentage of relation interpretations was reliably higher for use such a strategy . A smaller but statistically reliable priming effect was also obtained for the test combinations when they were inter - preted in the relation condition than in the relation responding . Compared to the neutral condition ( which had 54 . 7 % relation re - neutral condition , by an item analysis : t ( 9 ) (cid:129) 2 . 64 , p (cid:155) . 03 . This difference did not reach sponding ) , there was 62 . 8 % relation re - sponding when subjects had been primed to reliability in the subject analysis ; t ( 43 ) (cid:129) 1 . 35 , p (cid:155) . 19 . On the other hand , for 17 of 22 use such a strategy . For several reasons , this pattern of ﬁndings subjects in the relation condition the propor - tion of relation interpretations was greater suggests that relation and property interpreta - tion strategies are on more equal footing than than the average proportion of relation inter - pretations in the neutral condition ( p (cid:155) . 04 , suggested by the last resort hypothesis . First , the last resort hypothesis claims that people by a binomial test ) . Finally , the percentage of relation interpretations was reliably higher in ﬁrst attempt to interpret a combination by de - termining a plausible relation between constit - the neutral condition than in the property con - dition : t ( 40 ) (cid:129) 3 . 14 , p (cid:155) . 004 ( subjects ) ; t ( 9 ) uents . However , this claim does not predict that relation interpretations should increase in (cid:129) 9 . 72 , p (cid:155) . 001 ( items ) . Comparing the percentage of relation inter - the relation condition relative to the neutral condition . Presumably , prior to interpreting the pretations across test items , all 10 items had lower percentages of relation responding in test items , subjects in the relation condition were interpreting the primes in the way that the property condition compared to their cor - responding percentages in both the neutral and they normally interpret combinations . Thus , it is unclear why applying the usual strategy for relation conditions . 8 of the 10 items had higher percentages of relation responding in combining concepts should increase the ten - dency to apply the usual strategy . Second , the the relation condition compared to the neutral condition . hypothesis claims that property interpretation is a strategy of last resort . However , our simple It was also clear that the relation and prop - erty primes were interpreted in terms of rela - priming manipulation succeeded in greatly in - creasing the tendency to produce property in - tions and properties , respectively ( thus con - ﬁrming our intuitions which motivated their se - terpretations to the point where this strategy was the dominant one applied to combining lection ) . By one author’s judgment , 90 . 9 % of the relation primes were interpreted by using concepts in the property condition . A striking ﬁnding was the extent to which relations . For example , dollar bill beggar was interpreted by 20 of the 22 subjects in the rela - subjects in the two priming conditions used different strategies and arrived at very differ - tion condition by using a relation ( i . e . , beggar that begs for dollar bills ) . In contrast , 92 . 1 % of ent interpretations for the same combinations . In the relation condition , subjects produced the property primes were interpreted by using properties . For example , skunk beggar was in - relation interpretations almost 63 % of the time , but in the property condition subjects terpreted by 18 of 19 subjects by using a prop - erty ( i . e . , a foul smelling beggar ) . When other produced property interpretations almost 68 % of the time . For example , more than half the responses are eliminated , these percentages were 92 . 7 % and 94 . 2 % , respectively . time subjects in the relation condition inter - preted ant vegetable as ‘‘a vegetable eaten by Discussion ants , ’’ kidnapper killer as ‘‘a killer who kills kidnappers , ’’ and snake spear as ‘‘a spear The results provide evidence for selective priming of interpretation strategies in concep - used to kill snakes . ’’ In contrast , subjects in the property condition interpreted these same tual combination . In the neutral ( no prime ) condition , 45 . 3 % of responses were property combinations more than half the time as ‘‘a AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 123 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 191 CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION very small vegetable , ’’ ‘‘a killer who is also senting several examples of thematic relations between pairs of objects . Nevertheless , subjects a kidnapper , ’’ and ‘‘a curvy spear , ’’ respec - tively . Even when there was an especially listed properties in justifying their ratings . It also appears that the demand characteris - strong tendency in one condition to interpret a combination in one way , priming in the other tic explanation and the last resort strategy can - not simultaneously apply to the ﬁndings . If condition counteracted this tendency . For ex - ample , virtually every subject in the property subjects are already strongly predisposed to interpret combinations with thematic relations condition interpreted spear chisel in terms of properties ( e . g . , ‘‘long , pointy chisel’’ ) but al - ( as implied by the last resort hypothesis ) then subjects in the relation prime condition should most a third of the subjects in the relation condition interpreted this combination as a not be inﬂuenced by a demand characteristic to produce even more of these interpretations . ‘‘chisel for making spears . ’’ Likewise , every subject in the relation condition interpreted Yet , there were more relation interpretations in this condition than in the neutral condition . dinosaur scientist as ‘‘a scientist who studies dinosaurs’’ but almost one - third of the sub - Also , in the property prime condition , one might expect that the demand characteristic jects in the property condition interpreted this combination as ‘‘a very old scientist . ’’ would cause subjects to suppress the relation interpretations that they were strongly predis - A possible concern about the ﬁndings is that they resulted from a demand characteristic . In posed to generate . 2 Thus , the last resort hy - pothesis predicts that subjects in the property particular , because the primes could only plau - sibly be interpreted with one strategy , subjects prime condition should be slower to generate property interpretations than subjects in the may have thought that the experimenter in - tended them to use that strategy for subsequent relation prime condition should be to generate relation interpretations . To examine this possi - test combinations as well . For several reasons , we believe that this alternative account is not bility , we computed the median RT for prop - erty interpretations for subjects in the property likely . First , a demand characteristic is more of concern in the case in which the experimenter prime condition ( discarding RTs for relation interpretations ) and the median RT for relation explicitly provides the interpretations of the primes in contrast to the present study in which interpretations for subjects in the relation prime condition ( discarding RTs for property subjects generated their own interpretations of the primes . In the latter case , subjects would be interpretations ) . The average median RT for property interpretations in the property prime less certain about which kinds of interpretations that the ‘‘experimenter wanted’’ because they condition was actually slightly faster than the RT for relation interpretations in the relation were producing the interpretations themselves . Second , the demand characteristic explanation prime condition—2384 msecs versus 2461 msecs , respectively ( this difference was not presupposes that subjects can clearly distin - guish property and relation interpretations . reliable , t (cid:155) 1 ) . In sum , the ﬁndings provide more support However , recent studies suggest that subjects blur this distinction ( Wisniewski & Bassok , for the view that relation and property inter - pretation strategies are both cognitively useful 1997 ) . In one study , subjects listed commonali - ties and differences between objects . To illus - and important ways of combining concepts . Thus , there is not a strict order of processing trate the task , they were shown properties of objects that were identiﬁed as commonalities with a single , strongly dominant tendency to - wards relation interpretation followed by and differences . Nevertheless , subjects also listed thematic relations as commonalities and property interpretation as a last resort . differences between objects . In another study , subjects judged the thematic relatedness be - tween objects and provided explanations of 2 We thank an anonymous reviewer for bringing this possibility to our attention . their ratings . The task was illustrated by pre - AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 124 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 192 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE EXPERIMENT 3 a last resort strategy used only when there is no other useful relationship that seemed plausible In the previous studies , we evaluated the ( Downing , 1977 ; page 830 ) . ﬁrst part of the last resort hypothesis by exam - We interpret Downing’s view as implying ining tendencies to generate relation and prop - that people do not or only rarely produce com - erty interpretations for experimenter - con - binations with property meanings and that she structed novel combinations . In this study , we found property interpretation in combinations evaluate the second part of the last resort hy - presented to subjects because these combina - pothesis by examining the meanings of combi - tions lacked plausible thematic relations be - nations that people produce . Importantly , tween constituents . Thus , in trying to make Downing’s ( 1977 ) hypothesis that property in - sense of the meaning of these combinations , terpretation is a last resort strategy was based subjects relied on an unusual fallback strategy on a comparison between production and inter - ( i . e . , property interpretation ) . ( Downing does pretation of novel combinations . In one study , not report the combinations that were used or she analyzed the meanings of novel combina - whether she examined them to see if they had tions which appeared in three sources of text plausible relation interpretations . ) ( written descriptions by subjects of a brief ﬁlm In the present study , we revisited the as - sequence in which a boy engages in various sumption that people have a strong bias to play and work activities , the general news sec - produce combinations whose meanings in - tion of an issue of the San Francisco Chronicle , volve a thematic relationship between their and two novels by Richard Brautigan ) . Down - constituents . We followed up Downing’s ing then divided the combinations into ﬁve study for several reasons . First , Downing’s categories on the basis of the referent of the analysis involved novel combinations coined head noun ( human , animal , plant , natural ob - on one occasion by one speaker whereas we ject , synthetic object ) and within each category examined the meanings of conventional ranked the frequency of property meanings and names that were used frequently enough to various types of relation meanings ( she did have been explicitly encoded in reference not report the actual frequencies of meanings ) . manuals . Because they are part of a language , Downing found that property meanings were they have been used by multiple speakers on absent in three of the categories ( plants , natural multiple occasions . Thus , we can be more cer - objects , synthetic objects ) , ranked last in hu - tain that these conventional combinations mans , and ranked second in animals . In con - have a fair degree of functional utility in com - trast , when subjects were given combinations munication and cognition . As a result , ﬁnding in these categories to interpret , property mean - property meanings among these combinations ings were absent only in humans , ranked ﬁrst would constitute stronger evidence for their or second in three categories ( plants , animals , importance . Second , the description of Down - synthetic objects ) , and ranked third in natural ing’s analysis is ambiguous—she does not re - objects . 3 She concluded that property mean - port the size of her sample or the absolute ings were absent in production but favored in frequencies of property versus relation mean - interpretation . Based on this asymmetry , she ings . Third , her sample may not have been then suggested that property interpretation is very representative . One of her sources was apparently descriptions of only a small num - 3 In Downing’s analysis , she refers to property interpre - ber of activities performed by a boy . She also tations as comparison relationships . She also had a cate - gory for combinations with many properties of both con - relied on several books written by Richard stituents which she refers to as half / half . In her study of Brautigan who was an unusual person and production , this category was ranked third in humans , tied writer ( see Abbot , 1989 , for a biography ) . for ﬁrst in animals , and last in synthetic objects . It was In our study we examined a very large sam - absent in plants and natural objects . In interpretation , it ple of familiar noun - noun combinations ( more was tied for ﬁrst in humans and plants and was absent in the other categories . than a thousand ) . They were selected from a AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 124 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 193 CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION number of sources and spanned a wide range other source for artifacts was The Facts on File Visual Dictionary ( 1986 ) . As noted in of noun referents , especially animals , plants , and artifacts . The primary goal of the analysis the preface , this dictionary ‘‘lists terms and notions which designate the many elements of was to obtain a reasonably accurate estimate of the relative frequency of property and rela - everyday life in an industrial , post - industrial , and developing society , ’’ organized into a tion meanings in the English language . We used these estimates to further assess the last wide range of categories . From this source , we selected two large artifact categories ( clothing resort hypothesis . A secondary goal was to obtain some idea of the range of the kinds of and personal items ) which did not overlap with those chosen from the ofﬁce supply cata - property and relation meanings that character - ize familiar combinations in English . Whereas log . Finally , we collected a random sample of combinations from the Random House Web - there have been some very inﬂuential analyses of meanings of familiar combinations ( e . g . , ster’s College Dictionary ( 1995 ) . Procedure . One of the authors analyzed the Levi , 1978 ) we are not aware of analyses which are derived from systematic sampling animal , plant , and artifact combinations . For the animals and plants , he read through the of a large number of such phrases . pages of Reader’s Digest North American Method Wildlife ( 1992 ) that described the six catego - ries above and examined any noun - noun com - Materials . We examined a large set of com - binations that named animals , plants , and arti - binations . Because the category of wildﬂow - ers was relatively long ( 175 pages ) , he only facts . We also selected a sample of combina - tions from a dictionary in order to look at a read every third page for this category . The author picked out a combination and judged wider range of nouns . Animal and plant terms came from the book Reader’s Digest North whether the corresponding entity was named for a functional / thematic relation that it shared American Wildlife ( 1992 ) . It is an illustrated guide to 2 , 000 plants and animals , describing with the referent of the modiﬁer ( a relation interpretation ) or whether the entity was 8 broad categories of wildlife : mammals , birds , reptiles and amphibians , ﬁsh , inverte - named for some type of resemblance it had to the modiﬁer ( a property interpretation ) . On a brates , trees and shrubs , wildﬂowers , non - ﬂowering plants , and mushrooms . For each few occasions , there was more than one mod - iﬁer noun that was part of the combination . animal and plant , the book lists its common name , shows a picture of it , and describes its For example , in the case of the California sage thrasher , there is a functional relation between identifying features , habitat , and other im - portant information . We arbitrarily selected thrasher and California ( location ) and one be - tween thrasher and sage ( location ) . In these for analysis three of the four animal categories ( discarding invertebrates ) and three of the four few cases , the author made two judgments . There were also a few occasions in which the plant categories ( discarding nonﬂowering plants ) . Artifact terms came from two sources : head noun that would typically refer to an entity was not present . Instead the entity was a catalog called the Ofﬁce Stores Program Catalog ( 1995 ) which provides a large range given the name of another entity which it re - sembled in some way . For example , one fun - of ofﬁce supplies to Northwestern University faculty and staff . The catalog is divided into gus is called pig’s ear rather than pig’s ear fungus . This fungus is perceptually similar to many categories of supplies and provides pic - tures and descriptions of each artifact . From a pig’s ear ( in color , shape , and size ) . These combinations were scored as property inter - this source , we arbitrarily selected the catego - ries books , clips and clamps , desk accessories , pretations as they involve the mapping of properties from one entity ( e . g . , pig’s ear ) to fans and heaters , furniture , janitorial supplies and equipment , knives , lunchroom supplies , a second entity ( e . g . , fungus ) . In making his judgments , the author relied on the descrip - scissors , staplers , and waste receptacles . An - AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 124 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 194 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE tions of the entity and the color picture . He a few occasions he was unable to determine whether the meaning referred to a property or also consulted other sources which sometimes included more information for making a judg - relation ) . The sample contained combinations with a wider range of different types of nouns ment . These sources included a book on mush - rooms and other fungi ( Dermek , 1989 ) , a Pe - than the artifact , plant , and animal samples and thus appeared to yield a wider range of terson ﬁeld guide to Paciﬁc Coast ﬁshes of North America ( Eschmeyer , Herald , & Ham - speciﬁc types of relation and property mean - ings . As a result , the author did not attempt mann , 1993 ) , the Reader’s Digest Magic and Medicine of Plants ( 1986 ) , and the Random to differentiate the relation and property meanings into more ﬁne - grained categories . House Webster’s College Dictionary ( 1995 ) . On a few occasions , the author was unable to Inter - rater reliability . One author classiﬁed a randomly selected subset of 15 % of the com - determine if a meaning referred to a property or relation interpretation . binations from each of the three categories animal , plant , and artifact , which had been The author carried out a similar analysis in regard to the artifacts . For this analysis , he classiﬁed by the other author . There was high agreement on whether a meaning referred to also consulted the Random House Webster’s College Dictionary ( 1995 ) when he was un - a relation interpretation or property interpreta - tion . The authors agreed on 94 . 8 % , 91 . 5 % , sure of a judgment . In addition , the combina - tions found in the Ofﬁce Stores Program Cat - and 93 . 3 % of their classiﬁcations for the plant , animal , and artifact combinations , respec - alog ( 1995 ) often contained many noun mod - iﬁers . To make the analysis more manageable , tively . Overall , there was 93 . 2 % agreement for these combinations . In terms of the more the author arbitrarily made a single judgment per combination , based on the head noun and speciﬁc property and relation categories ( see the Appendix ) , the authors agreed on 88 . 7 % , the immediately preceding modiﬁer noun . In looking over the combinations , the au - 94 . 4 % , and 83 . 3 % of their classiﬁcations for the plant , animal , and artifact combinations , thor was also able to derive a set of categories that tended to characterize most of the mean - respectively . One author also classiﬁed a randomly se - ings of the combinations . For example , a very common functional relationship between the lected 15 % of the combinations from the dic - tionary sample which had been classiﬁed by constituents of a combination was location . Many combinations referred to entities which the other author . Again , there was high agree - ment between classiﬁcations ( 97 . 0 % ) . were located in or on the referent of the mod - iﬁer ( e . g . , mountain sheep , wall clock ) . As Results another example , some combinations referred to entities whose overall shape resembled that Meanings that we were unable to classify were discarded from all analyses ( 5 . 6 % , 8 . 2 % , of the referent of the modiﬁer ( e . g . , cauli - ﬂower fungi , peninsula table ) . The Appendix 2 . 9 % , and 6 . 8 % of the meanings for the ani - mal , plant , artifact , and dictionary samples , describe these categories and provides exam - ples of them from the analysis . respectively ) . Table 5 shows the proportions of relation and property interpretations for The other author examined noun - noun com - binations in the Random House Webster’s combinations from the various categories . Overall , 70 . 9 % of the combinations had rela - College Dictionary ( 1995 ) . He opened the dic - tionary to a randomly selected odd - numbered tion meanings and 29 . 1 % had property mean - ings . Although relation meanings were domi - page and examined the combinations on that page and the following page . He repeated this nant in production , property meanings were not rare and characterized almost thirty per - process until he obtained 200 noun - noun com - binations . Based on the interpretation pro - cent of the combinations that people produced . Almost half of the plant combinations had vided in the entry for the combination , he clas - siﬁed its meaning as property or relation ( on property meanings and there were several sub - AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 124 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 195 CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION TABLE 5 that indicated the places in which they were typically found ( e . g . , mountain sheep , harbor Proportions of Relation and Property Meanings for Combinations Samples from Animal , Plant , and Artifact porpoise , prairie falcon , ground ivy , desert Categories , and the Dictionary ( Experiment 3 ) lily ) . In contrast , artifacts were primarily named for interactions that they had with other Category n Relations Properties artifacts—e . g . , about 30 % of the combina - tions involved nominalizations with the mod - Animals 298 . 61 . 39 Mammals 42 . 67 . 33 iﬁer and head nouns referring to objects that Birds 108 . 81 . 19 play different roles in the verb which had been Fish 63 . 27 . 73 nominalized ( e . g . , glass cleaner , diving suit , Reptiles 85 . 60 . 40 pencil holder , shaving brush , teaser comb , Plants 311 . 54 . 46 neck tie ) . Another common relation among the Wildﬂowers 186 . 55 . 45 Trees & shrubs 79 . 61 . 39 artifact combinations was the contains / holds Mushrooms 46 . 35 . 65 relation , probably because our sample con - Artifacts 598 . 86 . 14 tained ofﬁce supplies and furniture which of - Personal items 73 . 88 . 12 ten functioned to organize artifacts and to Clothing 104 . 62 . 39 maximize work space . Furniture 178 . 90 . 10 Books 19 1 . 00 0 In the property meanings , the referent of Clocks 5 . 80 . 20 the combination was often related to the mod - Desk accessories 59 . 95 . 05 iﬁer in terms of perceptual properties such as Fans & heaters 6 . 83 . 17 appearance , overall shape , color , and so on . Janitorial supplies 64 . 95 . 05 For example , in plants , a distinctive part of Knives 7 . 86 . 14 Lunchroom supplies 50 . 94 . 06 the plant often resembled some common en - Scissors 5 . 80 . 20 tity and was thus named using that entity as Staplers 9 . 78 . 22 the modiﬁer . The Appendix provides many Clips 8 . 63 . 38 examples of these resemblance relationships . Waste receptacles 12 . 92 . 08 Dictionary 194 . 67 . 33 Discussion An important claim that led to one version of the last resort hypothesis—that property meanings rarely occur in production—was not categories in which property meanings domi - nated—65 . 2 % of the mushroom combina - supported in our analysis of a large number of combinations taken from the domains of ani - tions and 73 % of the ﬁsh combinations had property meanings . One third of the combina - mals , plants , and artifacts . The results show that among combinations used to name animals tions in the random sample from the diction - ary had property meanings . and plants , over 40 % involved property mean - ings . Although the relative proportion of prop - There was a fairly large difference between the proportions of property meanings for arti - erty meanings was considerably less among combinations used to name artifacts ( about facts versus natural kinds . Only 14 . 2 % of the artifact combinations had property meanings 14 % ) , it was not an extremely small proportion . And , for the broad category of clothing , nearly compared to 42 . 5 % for animals and plants . However , one broad category of artifacts 40 % of the combinations involved property meanings . Some notable examples of artifacts ( clothing ) had a higher than overall average of property meanings ( 38 . 5 % ) . that had property meanings included bikini briefs ( overall shape ) , rake comb ( function , Table 6 presents the proportions of different types of property and relation meanings for overall shape ) , accordion pleat ( part - part ) , leg - of - mutton collar ( overall shape ) , pen knife the animal , plant , and artifact combinations . The dominant relation was location—animals ( function , overall shape ) , blanket sleeper ( func - tion ) , saddle bag ( overall shape ) , plier stapler and plants were often named using modiﬁers AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 124 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 196 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE TABLE 6 Proportions of Different Types of Relation and Property Meanings for Animal , Plant , and Artifact Combinations ( Experiment 3 ) Category Properties Relations Prop Animals object - part . 29 location . 63 color / pattern . 18 named after . 10 part - part . 14 part . 08 function / behavior . 13 eats . 07 overall shape . 10 when active . 05 size . 06 object - nom . 04 sound . 03 other . 02 appearance . 03 human resource (cid:155) . 01 hybrid . 02 taste (cid:155) . 01 smell (cid:155) . 01 other (cid:155) . 01 Plants object - part . 49 location . 56 color / pattern . 13 human resource . 13 overall shape . 09 part . 11 appearance . 08 named after . 07 part - part . 07 when active . 04 smell . 03 eats . 04 function / behavior . 03 object - nom . . 02 size . 03 causes . 02 hybrid . 01 attract . 01 taste . 01 other (cid:155) . 01 small . 01 Artifacts overall shape . 32 holds / contains . 19 hybrids . 20 object - nom . 16 part - part . 17 location . 15 function / behavior . 14 part . 14 resemblance . 14 nom - instrument . 11 object - part . 02 made of . 08 size . 01 named after . 05 collection . 04 object - instrument . 04 state - instrument . 02 when active . 02 connects to (cid:155) . 01 depicts (cid:155) . 01 other (cid:155) . 01 ( function ) , bulldog clip ( function ) , owl clip a last resort . In Experiment 1 , one group of subjects judged thematic relations between ( part - part ) , scooter stool ( function , part - part ) , and tower cart ( size ) . ( See Appendix for deﬁni - pairs of similar entities to be more plausible than the corresponding relations between pairs tions of these classiﬁcations . ) of dissimilar entities . However , a different GENERAL DISCUSSION group of subjects was much more likely to give property interpretations to the combina - Taken together , the results of these studies suggest that property interpretation is an im - tions involving the similar entities . At the same time , they interpreted a majority of the portant strategy in understanding noun - noun combinations and not one that is employed as dissimilar combinations with the thematic re - AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 124 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 197 CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION lations that they had judged to more plausibly terpret book magazine using a property as in ‘‘a thick book . ’’ apply to the constituents of the similar combi - nations . This result is incompatible with the Importantly , the ﬁnding that prior use of the relation interpretation strategy increased its view that subjects only produce property inter - pretations of combinations when plausible subsequent use is incompatible with the view that people’s usual strategy is to attempt a thematic or functional relations do not exist between their constituents . relation interpretation . This view would not predict that previously engaging in the usual The results of Experiment 1 go beyond those previous studies that have also showed strategy will subsequently increase the use of that strategy . The results also suggest that it that highly similar combinations are interpre - ted with properties ( Markman & Wisniewski , is relatively easy to increase the tendency to generate property interpretations . Such a ten - 1997 ; Wisniewski , 1996 ; Wisniewski & Markman , 1993 ) . In those studies , researchers dency seems at odds with the view that prop - erty interpretation is a strategy of last resort . created novel combinations by pairing highly similar nouns without regard to whether the Finally , in Experiment 3 , we examined a large sample of combinations which have be - constituents could plausibly participate to - gether in a thematic relation . As our analysis come part of the English language . In contrast to our previous studies , which constrained described in the Introduction suggests , this procedure very often creates combinations subjects to generate interpretations of experi - menter - provided combinations , this study in - which cannot be plausibly linked by a the - matic relation . Thus , the previous ﬁnding that vestigated combinations which had been pro - duced by speakers . We found that while a subjects generate property interpretations for highly similar combinations is consistent with majority of the combinations had relation meanings , property meanings were not rare the last resort strategy . However , our ﬁndings show that high similarity between constituents and characterized almost 30 % of our sample . This ﬁnding does not agree with Downing’s facilities property interpretation and does not just prevent relation interpretations ( as im - ( 1977 ) or Shoben and Gagne’s ( 1997 ) claim that property meanings are not present in com - plied by the previous studies ) . In Experiment 2 we examined the effects binations that people produce . It was the ap - parent lack of such meanings in production of prior generation of property and relation interpretations on subsequent interpretations . that led researchers to suggest that they are only generated during interpretation as a last Subjects interpreted novel combinations which had either highly plausible property or resort . In sum , our ﬁndings suggest that there is relation interpretations ( but not both ) . As a result , subjects were induced to primarily use not a general , strong bias to interpret combina - tions by using any particular strategy . We either property or relation interpretation strate - gies . Subjects then tended to interpret combi - demonstrated that at least some factors— structural properties of constituents ( i . e . , simi - nations which had both property and relation interpretations using the primed strategy . For larity of their representations ) and context ( i . e . , prior use of a process ) —can affect example , after generating relation interpreta - tions such as ‘‘beggar who asks for dollar whether property or relation interpretations dominate . In Experiment 1 , property interpre - bills’’ for dollar bill beggar and ‘‘chisel for making pottery’’ for pottery chisel , subjects tations characterized the vast majority of inter - pretations for similar combinations ( even tended to interpret book magazine using a re - lation as in ‘‘a magazine that discusses though they had plausible relation interpreta - tions ) and relation interpretations character - books . ’’ However , after producing property interpretations such as ‘‘begger who smells ized the great majority of interpretations of dissimilar combinations . In Experiment 2 , the bad’’ for skunk beggar and ‘‘very sharp chisel’’ for knife chisel , subjects tended to in - strategy which dominated interpretation de - AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 124 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 198 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE pended on whether it had been previously down on the pedal . ’’ At the same time , car is organized together in memory with truck , used . Thus , because it is possible to selec - tively manipulate the dominance of one strat - train , plane , and so on , as subcategories of vehicle . This organization is based on overlap - egy over the other , our ﬁndings suggest that both strategies are important in combining ping properties rather than on the basis of dif - ferent functional relationships between these concepts . Below we describe several other reasons to categories . Thus , both thematic relations between enti - doubt that people interpret combinations by ﬁrst attempting to link the constituents by a ties and overlapping properties shared by enti - ties are important in forming categories . Of thematic relation , using property interpreta - tion as a last resort strategy . First , we note course , conceptual combination is a special case of category formation in which two ex - that the interpretation of novel combinations is a special case of category formation and that isting category representations are combined to create a new subcategory of the head noun category formation depends both on thematic relations and properties . Second , we suggest ( Murphy , 1988 ) . For example , seafood and sausage can be combined to create a new sub - that using nouns to refer to their properties plays an important function in communica - category of sausage called seafood sausage which differs from other kinds of sausage in tion . In concluding , we discuss the implica - tions of our results for models of conceptual a variety of ways , most notably in being made out of seafood rather than some type of meat . combination . Given that conceptual combination is a type Categorization of category formation , it seems reasonable that relation and property interpretation strat - Both relations and properties are important in category representations . On the one hand , egies would both be important in combining concepts . these representations capture relations be - tween entities . For example , events repre - The Use of Nouns to Refer to Properties sented by scripts typically capture relations in which objects play different functional roles The present ﬁndings suggest that construing a noun to refer to its properties is an important ( Bower , Black , & Turner , 1979 ; Schank & Abelson , 1977 ) . To illustrate , a restaurant strategy used in conceptual combination . This kind of construal also forms the basis of a script might include the serving relation , which speciﬁes that a waiter or waitress serves major theory of metaphor understanding which assumes that nouns have dual reference food to a customer . In this example , the waiter plays the agent role of the serving relation ( Glucksberg & Keysar , 1990 ; Glucksberg , Manfredi , & McGlone , 1997 ) . When used lit - ( i . e . , the server ) , the food the object role ( i . e . , what is served ) and the customer the recipient erally , a noun refers to its typical category , but when used metaphorically it refers to role ( i . e . , the person served ) . At the same time , category representations are also based on properties which it exempliﬁes . For example , in the literal statement ‘‘my job at the jail , ’’ overlapping properties or resemblance rela - tionships . For example , there may be a fast jail refers to a jail , but in the nominal meta - phor ‘‘my job is a jail’’ it refers to prototypical food restaurant script and a formal restaurant script which are stored in the same memory properties of a jail ( e . g . , conﬁnement ) . It is interesting to speculate about why peo - location because they share properties which make them restaurant scripts ( and not because ple use nouns to refer to properties . Typically , adjectives play this role in language . How - they have a functional relationship between them ) . As another example , object categories ever , sometimes a property associated with a noun rather than an adjective may better cap - like car represent relations in which entities play different functional roles such as ‘‘a ture the sense of a property of an entity that needs to be named . For example , a zebra mus - driver operates the car by pushing the foot AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 125 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 199 CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION sel is a mollusk that has recently populated is cooking something , or who has been burnt taking a roast out of the oven . The hotness of the Great Lakes . The outside of its shell is characterized by a pattern of approximately an oven may conjure up a particularly vivid and visceral experience as opposed to the parallel , curved , black stripes on a whitish background . Although this mollusk could be more abstract phrase extremely hot . Note that this reason for using nouns to refer to proper - named the striped mollusk , its stripes have some striking similarities to those of a zebra’s . ties seems different from ﬁrst one given above . For example , whereas smelly fails to Thus , zebra mussel may be a more accurate name for this mollusk than striped mussel . It capture the sense of bad smell which skunk captures , extremely hot and oven seem to cap - is easy to ﬁnd other examples in which a prop - erty of a noun’s typical referent more speciﬁ - ture a similar degree and sense of hotness . cally characterizes a situation than an adjec - Models of Conceptual Combination tive referring to the more general property . Skunk cabbage could have been called smelly The present ﬁndings have several implica - tions for models of conceptual combination . cabbage but the smell of this plant is strikingly similar to the smell of a skunk ( as those who First , because they suggest that property inter - pretation is an important and not uncommon have stepped on one know ) . Also , the sword - ﬁsh could have been called the pointy - nosed phenomenon , a complete model must account for such interpretations and the factors which ﬁsh but the overall appearance of a sword bet - ter captures the appearance of the nose of a are likely to lead to their occurrence . How - ever , a number of approaches currently pro - swordﬁsh . Nouns may also refer to properties when vide single - process accounts of relation inter - pretation ( Cohen & Murphy , 1984 ; Coolen et there is no adjective that appropriately charac - terizes a situation . ( See Glucksberg et al . , al . , 1991 ; Gagne & Shoben , 1997 ; Murphy , 1988 ; Shoben & Gagne , 1997 ; but see Wis - 1997 , for a related discussion . ) For example , map turtles have patterns on their backs which niewski , 1997 , for a dual - process proposal ) . The present ﬁndings complicate the model - are map - like in appearance . There does not seem to be an adjective counterpart which de - ling of how concepts combine because they suggest that there are two signiﬁcant ways scribes this situation . As another example , al - ligators are the largest reptiles , with big jaws , that people use to combine concepts rather than one . long tails , and knobby ridges on their skin . In like fashion , alligator snapping turtles are the Second , the results from the ﬁrst and second experiments provide some constraints on a largest freshwater turtles , with big jaws , long tails , and knobby ridges on their shells . Thus , processing account of how nouns combine . In particular , the ﬁndings rule out a serial pro - alligator is an appropriate term , that suc - cinctly refers to this complex of properties . cessing model in which people ﬁrst attempt to interpret a combination with a thematic re - Again , there is no corresponding adjective which refers to this set of properties , and it lation and only then attempt a property inter - pretation if there is no plausible thematic rela - seem cumbersome to capture this information with a series of adjectives . tion . Experiment 1 provides especially strong evidence against this strict order of pro - Finally , nouns may be used instead of ad - jectives because they ground a situation di - cessing . In particular , the fact that similar combinations had very plausible relation inter - rectly in experiences to which we can readily relate . For example , one could refer to a par - pretations yet were frequently interpreted with properties argues against this type of model . ticularly hot desert as an extremely hot desert . Alternatively , one might use the phrase oven Future work needs to develop a processing account in which property interpretation plays desert . However , the hotness of ovens has been directly experienced by anyone who has a much more signiﬁcant role in how nouns are combined than has previously been thought . opened an oven door and peered in while it AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 125 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 200 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE APPENDIX indicated when the referet was to be used ( e . g . , nightgown , raincoat ) . Categories of Relation and Property Eats . The modiﬁer named something that Meanings Used to Characterize Familiar either ate the referent or was eaten by the Combinations ( Experiment 3 ) referent ( e . g . , northern grasshopper mouse , Relation Categories acorn woodpecker , gopher snake , cow pars - nip , beargrass , butterﬂy weed ) . Location . For an animal or plant , the mod - iﬁer indicated its typical habitat ( e . g . , moun - Nominalizations ( nom - object , instrument - nom ) . In some combinations , the head noun tain lion , harbor porpoise , common ground dove , orchard oriole , caveﬁsh , pine mush - was derived from a verb with the modiﬁer typically functioning as one of the cases asso - room , water celery ) . For an artifact , the mod - iﬁer indicated where it was typically used or ciated with the verb . Usually , the modiﬁer ﬁt the object case ( e . g . , sapsucker , ﬂycatcher , found ( e . g . , wall clock , room cabinets , desk stapler , lapel microphone ) . staple remover , stationary holder ) though on occasion it ﬁt the instrument case ( e . g . , vac - Human resource . The modiﬁer and head noun concepts were linked by a relation that uum cleaner ) . Sometimes , the modiﬁer was nominalized and the head noun functioned as described a resource which was important to human beings . Some examples included : ﬂy one of the cases ( e . g . , in drafting stool and storage hutch , stool and hutch function as the agaric , a fungus from which a poison used to be prepared for killing ﬂies ; birthwort , a plant instrument case in the verbs draft and store , respectively ) . whose roots were thought to ease the pain of childbirth ; sugar maple , a tree whose sap is Holds / contains . For a variety of artifacts , the referent of the combination functioned to boiled to produce sugar ; and , northern fur seal , which is valued for its lustrous pelt . hold or contain the referent of the modiﬁer ( e . g . , pencil cup , book rack , coat hook , printer Part . The modiﬁer named a part of the head noun referent ( e . g . , ﬁn whale , boneﬁsh , pore cart ) . Depicts . Some artifacts involved symbolic fungi , bur cucumber , shagbark hickory ) . Named after . The modiﬁer named a person , depictions of the referent of the modiﬁer . For example , road atlas is an atlas which shows group of people , or company for which the referent was named after . In the case of an representations of roads rather than actual roads , and caution sign symbolically depicted animal or plant , the person was typically its discoverer ( e . g . , MacGillivray’s warbler was caution with the words ‘‘caution wet ﬂoor’’ printed on it . named for an orinthologist and the Douglas ﬁr was named after a botanist ) . On the other Property Categories hand , artifacts were sometimes named after their manufacturers ( e . g . , lipton tea , Bausch & Object - part . The referent of the modiﬁer resembles the referent of a part of the combi - Lomb magniﬁers ) or for people for whom they were intended to be used ( e . g . , executive chair , nation ( usually in terms of shape ) . For exam - ple , the northern pintail refers to a bird whose banker’s clip ) . Made of . Some combinations referred to ar - tail has the shape of a pin , the eastern fence lizard has scales that resemble those of a tifacts made out of a substance named by the modiﬁer ( e . g . , quartz clock , wire sorter , latex fence , spiderﬂowers have ﬂowers which are shaped like spiders , the birdfoot violet has gloves , wood furniture , steel scissors ) . When active . For animals and plants , the leaves which have the shape of birdfeet , and the snowshoe hare refers to a hare whose feet modiﬁer sometimes indicated when the refer - ent was typically active or when it ﬁrst ap - resemble those of a snowshoe in terms of hav - ing dense pads . peared during the year ( e . g . , winter mush - room , springcress , evening grosbeak , night Part - part . The referent of the modiﬁer has a part which resembles a part of the referent snake ) . For artifacts , the modiﬁer sometimes AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 125 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 201 CONCEPTUAL COMBINATION Coolen , R . , van Jaarsveld , H . J . , & Schreuder , R . ( 1991 ) . of the combination . For example , porcupine The interpretation of isolated novel nominal com - ﬁsh refers to a ﬁsh with spines which resemble pounds . Memory & Cognition , 19 ( 4 ) , 341 – 352 . the quills of a porcupine , the mule deer refers Dermek , A . ( 1989 ) . The spotter’s guide to mushrooms to a deer whose ears resemble those of a mule , and fungi . New York : Dorset Press . and the willow oak refers to a tree whose Downing , P . ( 1977 ) . On the creation and use of English compound nouns . Language , 53 , 810 – 842 . leaves resemble the leaves of a willow . Eschmeyer , W . N . , Herald , E . S . , & Hammann , H . ( 1983 ) . Color / pattern . The color or texture pattern A ﬁeld guide to Paciﬁc coast ﬁshes of North America . of the referent of the modiﬁer resembles that Boston : Houghton Mifﬂin Company . of the referent of the combination . For exam - The facts on ﬁle visual dictionary ( 1986 ) . New York : ple , the snow goose has white down which is Facts on File Publications . Gagne , C . L . , & Shoben , E . J . ( 1997 ) . Inﬂuence of the - ﬂuffy like snow , the leopard lizard has spots matic relations on the comprehension of modiﬁer - just as leopards do , the fox grape refers to a noun combinations . Journal of Experimental Psy - plant with leaves whose undersides are cov - chology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 23 , 71 – ered with whitish or redish woolly hairs , the 87 . salmon entolomoa ( a mushroom ) is salmon - Garrod , S . C . , & Sanford , A . J . ( 1994 ) . Resolving senten - colored , and the cardinal ﬂower has red ﬂow - ces in a discourse context : How discourse representa - tion affects language understanding . In M . A . Gerns - ers which are the color of the female cardinal . bacher ( Ed . ) , Handbook of psycholinguistics . New Overall shape . The shape of the referent of York : Academic Press . the modiﬁer resembles the overall shape of Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1994 ) . Structural align - the referent of the combination ( e . g . , candy ment in comparison : No difference without similar - barrel cactus , guitar ﬁsh , peninsula table ) . ity . Psychological Science , 5 , 152 – 158 . Gerrig , R . J . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1992 ) . Contextual inﬂu - Appearance . The referent of the combina - ences on the comprehension of complex concepts . tion bears a striking resemblance overall to the Language and Cognitive Processes , 7 , 205 – 230 . referent of the modiﬁer or the usual referent of Glucksberg , S . , & Keysar , B . ( 1990 ) . Understanding met - the combination . For example , the bird’s nest aphorical comparisons . Beyond similarity . Psycho - fungus looks very similar to a bird’s nest with logical Review , 97 , 3 – 18 . Glucksberg , S . , Manfredi , D . A . , & McGlone , M . S . eggs in it . ( 1997 ) . Metaphor comprehension : How metaphors Behavior / function . The referent of the com - create new categories . In Ward , T . B . , Smith , bination shares a behavior or function of the S . M . , & Vaid , J . ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An inves - referent of the modiﬁer . For example , the mole tigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . salamander burrows , the kangaroo rat hops , 327 – 350 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychologi - cal Association . the surgeon ﬁsh uses a switchblade - like spine Levi , J . N . ( 1978 ) . The syntax and semantics of complex as a defense mechanism , the pen knife can be nominals . New York : Academic Press . clipped on front pocket just like a pen can be , Luchins , A . S . ( 1942 ) . Mechanization in problem solving . the bulldog clip has a strong grip analogous Psychological Monographs , 54 ( 6 ) , Whole No . 248 . to the one of a bulldog , and the compass plant Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993a ) . Structural align - has leaves which point in a north - and - south ment during similarity comparisons . Cognitive Psy - chology , 23 , 431 – 467 . direction . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993b ) . Splitting the REFERENCES differences : A structural alignment view of similar - ity . Journal of Memory and Language , 32 , 517 – 535 . Abbot , K . ( 1989 ) . Downstream from trout ﬁshing in Markman , A . B . , & Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1997 ) . Similar and America : A memoir of Richard Brautigan . Santa Bar - different : The differentiation of basic level catego - bara , CA : Capra Press . ries . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Bower , G . H . , Black , J . B . , & Turner , T . F . ( 1979 ) . Scripts Memory , and Cognition , 23 , 54 – 70 . in memory for text . Cognitive Psychology , 11 , 177 – Medin , D . L . , & Shoben , E . J . ( 1988 ) . Context and struc - 210 . ture in conceptual combination . Cognitive Psychol - Bugelski , B . R . , & Alampay , D . A . ( 1961 ) . The role of ogy , 20 , 158 – 190 . frequency in developing perceptual sets . Canadian Murphy , G . L . ( 1988 ) . Comprehending complex concepts . Journal of Psychology , 15 , 205 – 211 . Cognitive Science , 12 , 529 – 562 . Cohen , B . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1984 ) . Models of concepts . Cognitive Science , 8 , 27 – 58 . Murphy , G . L . ( 1990 ) . Noun phrase interpretation and AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 125 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML 202 WISNIEWSKI AND LOVE conceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Webster’s collegiate dictionary . ( 1995 ) . New York : Ran - Language , 29 , 259 – 288 . dom House . Ofﬁce stores program catalog . ( 1995 ) . Evanston , IL : Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1996 ) . Construal and similarity in con - Northwestern University General Services Adminis - ceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Lan - tration . guage , 35 , 434 – 453 . Reader’s digest magic and medicine of plants . ( 1986 ) . Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1997 ) . When concepts combine . Psy - Pleasantville , NY : The Reader’s Digest Association , chonomic Bulletin & Review , 4 , 167 – 183 . Inc . Wisniewski , E . J . , & Bassok , M . ( 1997 ) . Stimulus compat - Reader’s digest North American wildlife . ( 1992 ) . Pleas - ibility with comparison and integration . Manuscript antville , NY : The Reader’s Digest Association , Inc . submitted for publication . Schank , R . ( 1972 ) . Conceptual information processing . Wisniewski , E . J . , & Gentner , D . ( 1991 ) . On the combina - New York : Elsevier . torial semantics of noun pairs : Minor and major ad - Schank , R . C . , & Abelson , R . ( 1977 ) . Scripts , plans , justments to meaning . In G . B . Simpson ( Ed . ) , Un - goals , and understanding . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Shoben , E . J . , & Gagne , C . L . ( 1997 ) . Thematic relations derstanding word and sentence ( pp . 241 – 284 ) . Am - and the creation of combined concepts . In Ward , sterdam : North Holland . T . B . , Smith , S . M . , & Vaid , J . ( Eds . ) , Creative Wisniewski , E . J . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1993 ) . The role thought : An investigation of conceptual structures of structural alignment in conceptual combination . and processes ( pp . 31 – 50 ) . Washington , DC : Ameri - Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual Conference of can Psychological Association . the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 1083 – 1086 ) . Smith , E . E . , Osherson , D . N . , Rips , L . J . , & Keane , M . Boulder , CO : Erlbaum . ( 1988 ) . Combining prototypes : A modiﬁcation model . Cognitive Science , 12 , 485 – 527 . ( Received January 2 , 1997 ) Urdang , L . , & Abate , F . R . ( 1983 ) . Idioms and phrases ( Revision received June 30 , 1996 ) index . Detroit , MI : Book Tower . AID JML 2550 / a011 $ $ $ 125 01 - 13 - 98 09 : 48 : 34 jmla AP : JML