nATuRe RevIeWS | MIcrobIology vesiculation affects the dynamics of surface modulation ; that is , removal of OmpT and accumulation of glycine - modified lipid A . They cultured wild - type and hyper - vesiculating V . cholerae strains in the presence of the cationic AMP polymyxin B ( PMB ) , which induces the lipid A modification pathway , or in medium supplemented with four amino acids to increase the levels of ToxR , the transcriptional repressor of OmpT . The hyper - vesiculating strain accumulated modified lipid A more rapidly than the wildtype , possibly sup - ported by the OMV - dependent depletion of unmodified LPS . Similarly , outer membrane depletion of OmpT occurred much faster in the hypervesiculating strain , with OMVs removing OmpT from the surface . Moreover , the observed faster accumulation of modified lipid A and OmpT removal in the hypervesiculating strain correlated with faster adaptation to PMB and bile salts . In sum , the findings suggest that upon host colonization , increased vesiculation accelerates the modulation of the cell surface composition , which confers resistance to host - derived antimicrobial peptides and bile salt . Andrea Du Toit sulfate­reducing bacterium , methano­ genic archaea and the strain mK­D1 , belonging to the lokiarchaeota . mK­D1 grew best at 20 °C and in a medium supplemented with amino acids and baby milk powder . Despite these optimized conditions , mK­D1 showed a lag time of 3 – 6 months and a doubling time of 14 – 25 days . nevertheless , after 7 years of further enrichment culturing , the authors obtained a syntrophic co­culture of an archaeon belonging to the Methanogenium genus and mK­D1 , which they named ‘ Candidatus Prometheoarchaeum syntrophicum’ , after Prometheus , a god from Greek mythology who shaped humans out of mud and gave them fire . Further physiological character­ izations showed that ‘ Ca . Prometheo­ archaeum syntrophicum ’ is a small anaerobic coccus that forms unusual , elaborate protrusions , blebs and extra­ cellular vesicles and lives in aggregates surrounded by extracellular polymeric substances . Its membrane consists of typical archaeal isoprenoid lipids and the cells show no signs of eukaryotic organelles . Furthermore , it can degrade amino acids anaerobically through symbiotic interspecies formate and hydrogen transfer with its syntrophic partner . These results led the authors to propose one potential route of eukaryogenesis , in which an oxygen­ consuming bacterium became entan­ gled in the extracellular protru sions of an Asgard archaeon , which lived in a syntrophic relationship with a third partner , a sulfate­reducing bacterium . They further suggest that the Asgard archaeon then engulfed and endo­ genized the future mitochondrion , which helped the Asgard archaeon to adapt to and exploit rising oxygen levels in the environment . The isolation of ‘ Ca . Prometheo­ archaeum syntrophicum ’ sets the stage for further exploration of the origin of eukaryotes . Ursula Hofer R e s e aRc h hi g h l i g h t s volume 18 | mARCH 2020 | 123 C r e d i t : V l a d y s l a v S i a b e r / A l a m y S t o c k P h o t o ORIGInAL ARTIcLE Zingl , F . G . et al . Outer membrane vesiculation facilitates surface exchange and in vivo adaptation of Vibrio cholerae . Cell Host Microbe h ttps : / / do i . o r g / 10 . 101 6 / j . ch o m . 2019 . 12 . 002 ( 2019 ) ORIGInAL ARTIcLE Imachi , H . & Nobu , M . K . et al . Isolation of an archaeon at the prokaryote - eukaryote interface . Nature 577 , 519 – 525 ( 2020 ) RELATED ARTIcLE Eme , L . et al . Archaea and the origin of eukaryotes . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 15 , 711 – 723 ( 2017 ) OuTBREAk Of A nOVEL cOROnAVIRuS Since mid­ December 2019 , several cases of a pneumonia­ like disease ( with symptoms including fever , difficulty in breathing , cough and invasive lesions on both lungs ) of unknown cause have emerged in the central Chinese city of Wuhan ( WHo ) . Chinese authorities made a preliminary determination that the causative agent is a novel coronavirus ( 2019­nCov ) , and other respiratory pathogens have been ruled out as the cause ( WHo ) . A consortium of researchers , government agencies and institutes released six sequences of the coronavirus associated with the outbreak in Wuhan on virological . org and on Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data ( GISAID ) . Phylogenetic analysis indicated that the new virus clusters with the severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) ­related coronavirus clade , and the virus has since been isolated . So far ~ 400 confirmed infections with the new coronavirus as well as several deaths have been reported in China ( Nature ) , although scientists at Imperial College in london estimated that the number of cases in Wuhan was likely to be closer to 1 , 700 . In addition , the virus has spread to Thailand , Japan , South Korea and the united States , and additional cases in other countries are likely . Coronaviruses comprise a large family of viruses that cause respiratory and intestinal infections in animals and humans , including middle east respiratory syndrome ( meRS ) and SARS . SARS first emerged in the Guangdong province , China , causing the 2002 – 2003 epidemic . The virus spread rapidly among humans , affecting ~ 8 , 000 individuals in more than 30 countries and causing the death of ~ 800 patients . SARS and meRS coronaviruses likely originated in bats and have been transmitted directly to humans from market civets and dromedary camels . on the basis of initial epidemiological investigations , the pneumonia­ like cases in Wuhan have been linked to a seafood and animal market , which might point to a zoonotic origin of the new coronavirus ( CDC ) . The market has since been closed for environmental sanitation and disinfection , and environmental specimens from that and other markets are being collected and tested . The un health agency has urged China to continue the efforts to identify the source , reservoirs and possible intermediate hosts of the new virus . The Wuhan Health Commission reported that “the possibility of limited human­to­human transmission cannot be ruled out” and infections of the health­care workers as well as infections of family members suggest that person­ to­person spread is occurring ( Nature ) . Response measures have been implemented in Wuhan , and ongoing investigations are focussing on understanding the epidemiology , the source , clinical manifestation , transmission routes , global risk assessment and the development of diagnostic tests ( Science ; WHo ) . The WHo has called a meeting to decide whether to declare a public­ health emergency of international concern ( The Washington Post ) . Andrea Du Toit In the news