Peptide regulation of co ﬁ lin activity in the CNS : A novel therapeutic approach for treatment of multiple neurological disorders Alisa E . Shaw , James R . Bamburg ⁎ Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Molecular , Cellular and Integrative Neuroscience Program , Colorado State University , Fort Collins , CO 80523 - 1870 , United States a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Available online 20 February 2017 Co ﬁ lin is a ubiquitous protein which cooperates with many other actin - binding proteins in regulating actin dy - namics . Co ﬁ lin has essential functionsin nervous systemdevelopment including neuritogenesis , neurite elonga - tion , growth cone path ﬁ nding , dendritic spine formation , and the regulation of neurotransmission and spine function , components of synaptic plasticity essential for learning and memory . Co ﬁ lin ' s phosphoregulation is a downstream target of many transmembrane signaling processes , and its misregulation in neurons has been linked in rodent models to many different neurodegenerative and neurological disorders including Alzheimer disease ( AD ) , aggression due to neonatal isolation , autism , manic / bipolar disorder , and sleep deprivation . Cogni - tive and behavioral de ﬁ cits of these rodent models have been largely abrogated by modulation of co ﬁ lin activity usingviral - mediated , genetic , and / orsmallmoleculeorpeptidetherapeuticapproaches . Neuropathicpaininrats from sciatic nerve compression has also been reduced by modulating the co ﬁ lin pathway within neurons of the dorsal root ganglia . Neuroin ﬂ ammation , which occurs following cerebral ischemia / reperfusion , but which also accompaniesmany other neurodegenerativesyndromes , ismarkedlyreducedbypeptidestargetingspeci ﬁ cche - mokine receptors , which also modulate co ﬁ lin activity . Thus , peptide therapeutics offer potential for cost - effective treatment of a wide variety of neurological disorders . Here we discuss some recent results from rodent modelsusingtherapeuticpeptideswithasurprisingabilitytocrosstherodentbloodbrainbarrierandalterco ﬁ lin activity in brain . We also offer suggestions as to how neuronal - speci ﬁ c co ﬁ lin regulation might be achieved . © 2017 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Dendritic spines Co ﬁ lin phosphoregulation Cognitive disorders Psychiatric disorders Neuropathic pain Sleep deprivation Rodent models Contents 1 . Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 2 . Co ﬁ lin as a therapeutic target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 3 . Co ﬁ lin phosphoregulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 4 . Modulating co ﬁ lin activity alleviates de ﬁ cits in rodent models of neurological disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 5 . ROS and neurodegeneration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 6 . Challenges in delivery of peptide therapeutics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 7 . Challenges in cellular speci ﬁ city of peptide therapeutics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Pharmacology & Therapeutics 175 ( 2017 ) 17 – 27 Abbreviations : A β , β - amyloidpeptideproducedfromamyloidprecursorproteininAD ; AD , Alzheimerdisease ; ADF , actindepolymerizingfactor ; AMPA , α - amino - 3 - hydroxy - 5 - meth - yl - 4 - isoxazolepropionicacid ; APP , amyloidprecursorprotein ; APPsw , humanAPPwithSwedishmutation ; Arp2 / 3complex , actin - relatedproteins2 / 3complex ; CCR2andCCR5 , G - protein coupled chemokine receptors ; CIN , chronophin , a co ﬁ lin phosphatase ( aka pyridoxal - 5 ′ - phosphate phosphatase ) ; CNS , central nervous system ; CPP , cell penetrating peptide ; CTD , C - terminaldomain ; DAPTA , D - alapeptide T - amide ( D - ala - STTTNYT - amide ) ; DOCK , dedicatorofcytokinesis ; DS , Downsyndrome ; F - actin , ﬁ lamentousactin ; G - actin , globularactin ( mono - meric ) ; HIV , human immunode ﬁ ciency virus ; LIMK , a co ﬁ lin kinase with a LIM domain ; LTD , long - term depression ; LTP , long - term potentiation ; nArgBP2 , neural Abelson - related gene - bindingprotein2 , productoftheSorbs2geneNLG1 : neuroligin1 ; NMDA , N - methyl - D - aspartate ; NOX , NADPHoxidase ; Pak , p21 - activatedkinase ; PDZ , astructuraldomain ﬁ rstidenti ﬁ ed intheproteinsPSD - 95 , Dlg1andZO - 1 ; PKC α , proteinkinaseCalpha ; PP2B , proteinphosphatase2B ( akacalcineurin ) ; PrP C , cellularprionprotein ; PS1 2 , presenilin1withM146LandL286V mutations ; PS1 Δ E9 , humanpresenilin1missingexon9 ; pS3peptide , theS3peptidephosphorylatedonserine3 ; RanBP9 , Ranbindingprotein9 ; RAP - 310 , anallD - aminoacidversionof DAPTA ; ROCK , Rho kinase ; ROS , reactive oxygen species ; S3 peptide , The N - terminal 16 amino acids of mammalian co ﬁ lin ; Shank3 , SH3 and multiple Ankyrin repeat domains 3 , also known as ProSAP2 ; SPAR , spine - associated Rap GTPase - activating protein ; Srv2 , named for suppressor of RAS2 - val19 allele 2 . Also known as cyclase associated protein ( CAP or Srv2 / CAP ) ; SSH , slingshot phosphatase ; TAT , transactivator of transcription from the human immunode ﬁ ciency virus ; T β 4 , thymosin β 4 ; Tpm , tropomyosin ; WAVE1 , Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein - family verprolin homologous protein 1 . ⁎ Corresponding author at : Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Colorado State University , Fort Collins , CO 80523 - 1870 , United States . E - mail address : James . Bamburg @ colostate . edu ( J . R . Bamburg ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2017 . 02 . 031 0163 - 7258 / © 2017 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Pharmacology & Therapeutics journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / pharmthera 8 . Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Con ﬂ ict of interest statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 1 . Introduction Neurological and neurodegenerative disorders leading to cognitive and / or behavioral de ﬁ cits are among the most devastating in terms of their ﬁ nancial impact on the economy and their disruption of family life . Alzheimerdisease ( AD ) alonehasaveryhighprevalence , andiscur - rently listed as the 6th leading cause of death for all Americans , despite underreporting . Currently 5 . 4 million Americans , including 32 % of peo - ple over the age of 85 , are living with the disease . This has a huge eco - nomic impact , with payments in 2016 of $ 236 billion ( from Medicare , other insurance providers , as well as out - of - pocket expenditures ) , plus assistance valued at $ 221 billion from unpaid caregivers , who provide 83 % of care needed by those suffering from AD . By 2050 , cases are projected to increase to 13 . 8 million . Despite this , AD has no pharmaco - logicaltreatmentswhichcanpreventor reversethelossof synapsesand neuronal connectivity that underlies AD symptomsand fatality . Instead , all the current Food and Drug Administration - approved drugs for AD work to bolster cognition by increasing neurotransmitter signaling ( Alzheimer ' s Association , 2016 ) . For other neurological disorders such as autism and manic / bipolar disorder , there are therapies that can help control symptoms , but none that truly help correct the molecular mechanisms that have been disrupted . Genetic mutations associated with the less prevalent familial forms of AD result in the overproduction or lack of clearance of the amyloid - β ( A β ) peptide , which accumulates and is eventually deposited in amy - loid plaques . Although thecognitive declineof ADsubjectsis not related directly to plaque burden ( Tu , Okamoto , Lipton , & Xu , 2014 ) , much of the current focus on therapeutics for AD has been on the development of monoclonal antibodies against A β or its aggregates , including the drugs aducanumab , gantenerumab , and solanezumab which are cur - rently in phase III clinical trials ( Cavanaugh , Pippin , & Barnard , 2014 ; Panza et al . , 2016 ) . Interim results from double blind studies have suggested aducanumab reduces plaques and A β in human and AD mouse brain and slows somewhat the cognitive decline in humans ( Sevigny et al . , 2016 ) . However , solanezumab , was recently reported to have failed in slowing the cognitive decline of patients with mild to moderate AD ( Le Couteur , Hunter , & Brayne , 2016 ) . Although monoclonal antibodies have been very effective in some diseases and are important cancer treatments ( Scott , Wolchok , & Old , 2012 ) , their cost must be considered , especially for a chronic disease like AD that affects millions of people . The average annual cost per pa - tient of the top 9 monoclonal antibody drugs was $ 200 , 000 in 2012 ( Shaughnessy , 2012 ) . At this amount , treating the more than 5 mil - lion AD sufferers in the US with monoclonal antibody therapy would cost over 1 trillion dollars per year . Antibodies are not the only option for biologically - designed disease interventions . Peptide drugs offer opportunities for rational design and speci ﬁ city , withrelativelyinexpensiveproduction ( $ 100 / g ) , andahigher than average success rate at clinical trials ( 26 % success rate for peptide drugs vs . 10 % for all classes of drugs ) ( Otvos , 2014 ; Otvos & Wade , 2014 ) . Although lower developmentand production costs do not always result in a sustainable cost to the patient ( Hartung , Bourdette , Ahmed , & Whitham , 2015 ) , currently available peptides drugs , although highly variable in cost , are still signi ﬁ cantly less expensive than monoclonal an - tibody therapy ( Otvos , 2014 ) . There are peptide drugs in development for treatment of AD , but the focus continues to be on the disruption of A β aggregation ( Funke & Willbold , 2012 ; Sun , Funke , & Willbold , 2012 ) . Focusing so exclusively on one approach ( minimizing A β ) seems far too risky for such a costly , common , and devastating disease . What about targeting other downstream processes ? 2 . Co ﬁ lin as a therapeutic target The actin cytoskeleton is critical for all aspects of neuronal develop - ment , including formation of neurites , directed outgrowth of axons and dendrites , andtheformationofsynapses . Indendriticspines , thepostsyn - aptic structures on excitatory synapses in the hippocampus and cortex , actin dynamics modulate the insertion of ion channels and the morpho - logical changes associated with long - term potentiation ( LTP ) and long - term depression ( LTD ) , electrophysiological correlates for memory for - mation . Morphological and functional alterations in dendritic spines are observed in human subjects and / or genetic mouse models of AD ( Calabrese , Wilson , & Halpain , 2006 ; Dorostkar , Zou , Blazquez - Llorca , & Herms , 2015 ; Rust , 2015 ) , Down syndrome ( Belichenko et al . , 2004 ) , Fragile X syndrome ( Grossman et al . , 2010 ) , schizophrenia and autism ( Blundell et al . , 2010 ; Copf , 2016 ; Foote , Qiao , Graham , Wu , & Zhou , 2015 ; Liuetal . , 2016 ; Qiao , Foote , Graham , Wu , & Zhou , 2014 ) , sleepdep - rivation ( Havekes et al . , 2016 ) , and manic / bipolar disorder ( Zhang , Q et al . , 2016 ; Lee et al . , 2016 ) . Co ﬁ lin , along with the less - abundant but related protein actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) , is a critical regulator of the actin cytoskel - etoninmanysystems , includingdendriticspines , themajorpostsynaptic structures on excitatory synapses in brain . In vitro , ADF and co ﬁ lin sever actin ﬁ laments , but through their cooperative binding to F - actin , they can also stabilize and saturate short actin ﬁ laments ( Andrianantoandro & Pollard , 2006 ; Chan , Beltzner , & Pollard , 2009 ; Chen & Pollard , 2011 ) . Because co ﬁ lin is about 12 fold more abundant in neurons than ADF ( Garvalov et al . , 2007 ) , we will henceforth exclusively refer to co ﬁ lin in this review . Dendritic spines undergo dynamic changes during learning andmemory ( Kennedy , 2016 ) , andco ﬁ lin plays a major role in dendritic spine shape and volume ( Bamburg & Bernstein , 2016 ; Lei , Omotade , Myers , & Zheng , 2016 ; Rust , 2015 ) . In vivo co ﬁ lin collaborates with many other actin binding proteins to dynamically remodel the actin cy - toskeleton into actin meshworks , branched or linear ﬁ lament arrays , or short F - actin networks , which through assembly dynamics and treadmilling alters membrane structure and organization ( Fig . 1 ) . Muta - tions in some of these collaborating proteins or their regulatory factors may lead to developmental , neurological , or psychiatric disorders ( Liu , 2011 ; Moon & Winshaw - Boris , 2013 ) . Activation of co ﬁ lin under condi - tions of oxidative stress may lead to its dimerization and formation of linear bundles of 1 : 1 co ﬁ lin - actin ( rods ) within neurites , affecting trans - port and synapse function ( Bamburg & Bernstein , 2016 ; Chen & Wang , 2015 ) . Active co ﬁ lin also competes for actin ﬁ lament binding with myo - sin II motors to alter contractility ( Kanellos et al . , 2015 ; Wiggan , Schroder , Krapf , Bamburg , & DeLuca , 2017 ; Wiggan , Shaw , DeLuca , & Bamburg , 2012 ) . Myosin II , the major myosin form associated with actin ﬁ lament contraction and tension , is found in spines where it plays a role in maintenance of mushroom - shaped spine heads , as well as in the dynamics of spine protrusion and retraction , and in the cluster - ing of glutamate ( AMPA receptor ) subunits important for proper spine function ( Kneussel & Wagner , 2013 ) . Thus , co ﬁ lin regulation of myosin II - F - actin interaction may be as important to spine function as its ability to disassemble andremodel theactin structures within spines . Although the levels of expression and / orregulationof other actin modulatory pro - teins can mediate alterations in dendritic spine shape and dynamics that occur in many neurodegenerative or neurological disorders , accumulat - edevidencesuggestsacentralroleforco ﬁ linphosphoregulationinspine modulation ( Zhou , Homma , & Poo , 2004 ) . Although alternative explana - tions may exist for many of the results reviewed below , our intention is to provide a unifying model rather than many divergent ones to explain the cognitive and behavioral de ﬁ cits and how these are normalized in 18 A . E . Shaw , J . R . Bamburg / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 175 ( 2017 ) 17 – 27 the animal models described . Thus , alternative explanations are not explored . 3 . Co ﬁ lin phosphoregulation Dephosphorylation of co ﬁ lin phospho - ser3 is required for co ﬁ lin binding to actin and is mediated by the relatively speci ﬁ c but unrelated phosphatases , slingshot ( SSH ) and chronophin ( CIN ) ( Huang , DerMardirossian , & Bokoch , 2006 ; Mizuno , 2013 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . Mammals ex - press multiple isoforms of SSH ( Ohta et al . , 2003 ) , one of which changes in expression along with actin dynamics and co ﬁ lin phosphorylation during hippocampal development ( Lauterborn et al . , 2016 ) . Although phospho - co ﬁ lin is inactive in binding to actin , it does activate phospho - lipase D1 leading to production of membrane phosphatidic acid ( Han et al . , 2007 ) . Such effects of phospho - co ﬁ lin are usually not investigated although this activity could dramatically alter transmembrane signaling since some upstream regulators of Rho family GTPases , such as DOCK2 , need to bind phosphatidic acid before they can be activated by phos - phatidylinositol phosphates to serve as guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rho family GTPases ( Ammar , Kassas , Bader , & Vitale , 2014 ; Nishikima et al . , 2009 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . Several DOCK family proteins are expressed in neurons ( Gadea & Blangy , 2014 ) . Ser3 - phosphorylated co ﬁ lin has been found to be associated with various isoforms of the 14 - 3 - 3 family of scaffolding proteins . Increasing expression of 14 - 3 - 3 ζ increases the ser3 phosphorylated pool of co ﬁ lin ( Gohla & Bokoch , 2002 ) . Co ﬁ lininteractionwith14 - 3 - 3isalsomediated by a recognition motif that includes co ﬁ lin ser23 / 24 , but mutation of these two residues to ala has no effect on either ser3 phosphorylation or 14 - 3 - 3 binding to the ser3 phosphorylated form ( Gohla & Bokoch , 2002 ) . However , either or both ser23 / 24 can be phosphorylated by PKC α , and this modi ﬁ cation ( or expression of a phosphomimetic form inwhichglutamates aresubstituted atthesepositions ) results inprefer - ential binding to 14 - 3 - 3 ζ . In mast cells , PKC α phosphorylation of ser23 / 24 is used as a mechanism to inactivate co ﬁ lin through 14 - 3 - 3 binding and promote F - actin polymerization necessary for cessation of degran - ulation and histamine release ( Sakuma et al . , 2012 ) . 14 - 3 - 3 also binds to a protein kinaseD1 phosphorylated motif inSSH , helping tomaintain SSH in its inactive state ( Eiseler et al . , 2009 ; Nagata - Ohashi et al . , 2004 ; Soosairajah et al . , 2005 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . Rapid activation of co ﬁ lin in response to ephrin A transmembrane signaling in neurons is dependent upon SSH , which is also localized to dendriticspinesinmatureneurons ( Zhou , Jones , & Murai , 2012 ) . There - quirement of the calcium / calmodulin - activated phosphatase calcine - urin ( aka PP2B ) for SSH - mediated co ﬁ lin activation ( Zhou et al . , 2012 ) , suggests dephosphorylation of either SSH or another SSH effec - tor may be the regulated step ( Mizuno , 2013 ; Wang , Shibasaki , & Mizuno , 2005 ) . SSH activation and co ﬁ lin dephosphorylation may be transient , as occurs during early phases of high frequency stimulation leading to LTP ( Gu et al . , 2010 ) , but spine shrinkage and retraction rath - er than enlargement will occur if SSH ( and thus co ﬁ lin ) remains active , such as during LTD ( Zhou et al . , 2004 ; Zhou et al . , 2012 ) . Indeed , the spine shrinkage that occurs in LTD is mechanistically separate from the depression in ion channel activity ( functional LTD ) . Both are down - stream of PP2B activation by calcium , but blocking the spine shrinkage by inhibiting co ﬁ lin activation does not block the ion channel depres - sion ( Zhou et al . , 2004 ) . Furthermore , spine growth may also be en - hanced by actin polymerization stimulated by phospho - co ﬁ lin - dependent activation of phospholipase D1 ( Calabrese , Saf ﬁ n , & Halpain , 2014 ; Han et al . , 2007 ) . Although less well - studied than SSH , a major role for the phospha - tase CIN in dendritic spine plasticity has been suggested by recent ﬁ nd - ings . CIN knock out mice have increased phospho - co ﬁ lin levels and greatly enlarged spines on glutamatergic neurons , whereas CIN overex - pressing mice have more immature spines with small heads ( Kim et al . , 2016 ) . Surprisingly , the CIN overexpressing mice with small spines show enhanced LTP and LTD induction ( enhanced plasticity ) , whereas o Fig . 1 . Modulation of actin and dendritic spine morphology by co ﬁ lin and ancillary proteins . Actin dynamics and network formation depend upon nucleation factors , cross - linkers and G - actin subunit availability . Nucleation factors in spines include formins , involved in linear ﬁ lament growth such as ﬁ lopodial extensions for initial spine formation , and the Arp2 / 3 complex , which nucleates branched ﬁ lament networks ( Spence & Soderling , 2015 ) . The role of cross - linkers , such as ﬁ lamin , drebrin , and α - actinin , and the cross - linking and contractile motor myosin II , in creating the actin meshworks that contribute to spine morphology is still being elucidiated ( Chazeau & Giannone , 2016 ; Ivanov , Esclapez , Pellegrino , Shirao , & Ferhat , 2009 ; Kneussel & Wagner , 2013 ; Korobova & Svitkina , 2010 ; Segura et al . , 2016 ) . In addition to changes in dendritic spine shape and volume during LTP and LTD ( structural plasticity ) , changes in ion channel surface expression and activity ( functional plasticity ) mediate synaptic transmission ef ﬁ ciency . Both processes rely on regulation of the actin cytoskeleton and myosin motors ( Chazeau & Giannone , 2016 ; Kneussel & Wagner , 2013 ; Lei et al . , 2016 ; Spence & Soderling , 2015 ) . Co ﬁ lin works in concert with many other proteins to regulate actin ﬁ lament dynamics , most notably as a factor to promote actin severing and depolymerization , allowing spine shrinkage for LTD , although co ﬁ lin activity may be transiently required for actin polymerization - dependent processes such as LTP ( Gu et al . , 2010 ) . Atsaturatingconcentrations ( * ) co ﬁ linpromotesstabilizationofF - actinbutinhibits myosin II from binding actinand thus modulates myosin II - mediated contractile activity , which is necessary for synaptic functions including ion channel traf ﬁ cking . In neurons undergoing oxidative stress , co ﬁ lin - saturated ﬁ laments can bundle into rods , sequestering co ﬁ lin and compromising synaptic function ( Bamburg & Bernstein , 2016 ) . Co ﬁ lin can also remove Arp2 / 3 complex - branched ﬁ lament networks ( Chan et al . , 2009 ) , although a co ﬁ lin - related protein ( glial maturation factor , GMF ) has evolved with greater ef ﬁ ciency in this function ( Poukkula et al . , 2014 ; Ydenberg et al . , 2013 ) . Co ﬁ lin competes for F - actin binding with some proteins , such as drebrin ( Grintsevich & Reisler , 2014 ) and long isoforms of tropomyosins ( Tpms ) , but short Tpms allow and may enhance co ﬁ lin effects ( Bryce et al . , 2003 ; Janco et al . , 2016 ) . Other proteins work in conjunction with co ﬁ lin to modulate actin dynamics : coronin1b ( crn ) enhances the recruitment of co ﬁ lin to F - actin ( Mikati , Breitsprecher , Jansen , Reisler , & Goode , 2015 ) ; actin interacting protein 1 ( Aip ) enhances the severing ability of co ﬁ lin and its complete disassembly of F - actin ( Gressin , Guillotin , Guérin , Blanchoin , & Michelot , 2015 ; Jansen et al . , 2015 ; Nadkarni & Brieher , 2014 ; Ono , Mohri , & Ono , 2004 ) . Srv2 enhances the dissociation of co ﬁ lin from co ﬁ lin - actin monomers , or it can enhance co ﬁ lin - mediated ﬁ lament depolymerization from both ends of uncapped ﬁ laments ( Balcer et al . , 2003 ; Chaudhry et al . , 2014 ; Johnston , Collins , & Goode , 2015 ) . The source and maintenance of the G - actin pool in spines is less well understood . Monomer pools in brain are composed primarily of pro ﬁ lin - actin and T β 4 - actin complexes ( Devineni et al . , 1999 ) , with pro ﬁ lin - actin being preferentially used for formin - mediated ﬁ lament elongation ( Lee et al . , 2013 ) . Pro ﬁ lin and T β 4 inhibit Arp2 / 3 complex nucleation of ﬁ laments and thus serve as a gatekeeper for the switchbetween Arp2 / 3 - branched networks and linear arrays ( Pernier , Shekhar , Jegou , Guichard , & Carlier , 2016 ; Rotty et al . , 2015 ; Suarez et al . , 2015 ; Vitriol et al . , 2015 ) . 19 A . E . Shaw , J . R . Bamburg / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 175 ( 2017 ) 17 – 27 CIN knock out mice show large de ﬁ cits in both LTP and LTD . These re - sults suggest that receptor traf ﬁ cking and insertion and not spine size may be the most functionally important aspect of co ﬁ lin - mediated actin dynamics in spines ( Gu et al . , 2010 ; Kim et al . , 2016 ) . The only known mechanism of CIN regulation is via its ATP - dependent binding and release by the chaperone heat shock protein 90 ( Huang , Minamide , Bamburg , & Bokoch , 2008 ) . This mechanism may operate in spines . The majority of ATP utilized by neurons maintains ionic ho - meostasis and cytoskeletal dynamics ( Bernstein & Bamburg , 2003 ; Gisselsson , Toresson , Ruscher , & Wieloch , 2010 ) . Since mitochondria are found in only ~ 20 % of spines ( Xu et al . , 2014 ) , it is quite likely that ATP levels may ﬂ uctuate rapidly in spines due to their small volume and highly active Na + / K + and Ca 2 + ATPases working to restore mem - brane potential after depolarization . Co ﬁ lin is inactivated with respect to actin binding through phos - phorylation by the relatively speci ﬁ c kinases LIM kinase ( LIMK ) 1 and 2 and the related TES kinase 1 and 2 . Although TES kinases may be expressed in some neurons ( Toshima , Toshima , Suzuki , Noda , & Mizuno , 2001 ) , LIM kinases appear to be the major neuronal co ﬁ lin ki - nases . Whereas mice in which LIMK2 was knocked out had minimal ab - normalities in dendritic spine structure and function , those in which LIMK1 , or one of its upstream activators Rho kinase ( ROCK2 ) , was knocked out had de ﬁ cits in spatial learning , alterations in LTP and spine structure abnormalities ( Meng , Zhang , Tregoubo , Falls , & Jia , 2003 ; Meng et al . , 2002 , 2004 ; Zhou , Meng , Asrar , Todorovski , & Jia , 2009 ) . LIMK1 palmitoylation is critical for both targeting and function of LIMK1 in spines ( George , Soares , Montersino , Beique , & Thomas , 2015 ) , as is its phosphorylation on thr508 by various isoforms of p21 - activated kinase ( Pak ) and Rho kinase , suggesting LIMK1 activation and co ﬁ lin phosphorylation take place at the membrane . SSH can de - phosphorylate LIMK1 as well as phospho - co ﬁ lin , thus having both direct and indirect effects on co ﬁ lin activation ( Soosairajah et al . , 2005 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . Co ﬁ lin phosphoregulation is signi ﬁ cantly shifted from the norm in rodent models of many neurological disorders , including AD ( Woo , Boggess , et al . , 2015 ; Woo , Zhao , et al . , 2015 ; Zhao et al . , 2006 ) , autism ( Duffney et al . , 2015 ; Liu et al . , 2016 ) , manic / bipolar disorder ( Lee et al . , 2016 ) , sleep deprivation ( Havekes et al . , 2016 ) , neonatal isolation ( Tada et al . , 2016 ) , and neuropathic pain ( Qiu et al . , 2016 ) ( Table 1 ) . Dendritic spine shrinkage occurs as a result of co ﬁ lin hyperactivation ( dephosphorylation ) and has been observed in hippocampal neurons during establishment of long - term depression ( Fig . 2 ; Zhou et al . , 2004 ) , and in neurons of the hippocampus but not the prefrontal cortex of sleep deprived mice ( Havekeset al . , 2016 ) . Neonatal ratssubjected to social isolation exhibit increased aggression as juveniles , and this corre - lates with increased co ﬁ lin phosphorylation in the prefrontal cortex ( Tada et al . , 2016 ) . Together , these ﬁ ndings demonstrate that co ﬁ lin ac - tivity within different CNS neuronal populations is uniquely responsive to the speci ﬁ c input . Furthermore , inhibition of the 14 - 3 - 3 family pro - teins in mice by expression of an isoform - independent inhibitory pep - tide ( difopein ; Fig . 2 ) leads to a loss in dendritic complexity and spine density in forebrain excitatory neurons , and schizophrenia - related be - havioral phenotypes ( Foote et al . , 2015 ; Qiao et al . , 2014 ) . Although downstream targets of 14 – 3 - 3 proteins are many , a signi ﬁ cant decline in ser3 phospho - co ﬁ lin levels were observed in these mice , suggesting the possibility that co ﬁ lin hyperactivation leads to spine loss . Given the centralrole of co ﬁ lin in the regulation of actin dynamics , it is not surprising to ﬁ nd that co ﬁ lin activity is altered in AD and other neurological disorders . Although a shift in the phospho - co ﬁ lin pool is certainly not indicative of direct co ﬁ lin involvement , dysregulation of co ﬁ lin is an intriguing hypothesis for a common causative event in many seemingly unrelated neurological and degenerative disorders Fig . 2 . Overviewofsomedendriticspinesignalingpathwaysofimportancetothisreview . Co ﬁ linisinhibitedinbindingtoactinbyphosphorylationandisactivatedbydephosphorylation . Activeco ﬁ lincanseverF - actin , orbindcooperativelytosaturateandstabilizepiecesofF - actin , aselaboratedinFig . 1 . Co ﬁ linbindingtoF - actinalsocompeteswithmyosinII , inhibitingits contractileactivity . Thesitesofinhibitionbytheco ﬁ lin - derivedS3andphosphoS3 ( pS3 ) peptidesareshown . LIMkinases ( LIMK ) andslingshotphosphatases ( SSH ) thatregulateco ﬁ linare themselvessubjecttoregulationinresponsetomanydifferentreceptorsindendriticspines , onlysomeofwhichareshownhere . TheC - terminaldomain ( CTD ) ofNLG1isgeneratedbythe activityofthesameprotease ( γ - secretase ) thatcleavesAPPtogenerateA β inAD . Abbreviationsusedinthis ﬁ gureandnotde ﬁ nedelsewhereare : Pak - interactingexchangefactor β ( PIX ) , an activator of Rac1 and Rap1 ; Pak inhibitory domain ( PID ) ; G - protein coupled receptor ( GPCR ) , which , when activated , stimulates nucleotide exchange on the alpha subunit of a heterotrimeric G protein , stimulating adenylcyclase ( AC ) to make cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) , which activates protein kinase A ( PKA ) anchored via A kinase anchoring protein ( AKAP ) , but whose response is limited by lowering cAMP via activation of a phosphodiesterase ( PDE ) ; ionotropic glutamate receptors and signaling proteins are organized by multidomain scaffolding proteins including postsynaptic density protein 95 ( PSD - 95 ) , and synapse - associated protein PSD - 95 - associated protein / guanylate kinase - associated protein ( SAPAP / GKAP ) ; protein kinase D1 ( PKD ) phosphorylates and inactivates SSH ; RanBP9 interacts with integrin dimers that contain the β 1 subunit ( α / β 1 ) . 20 A . E . Shaw , J . R . Bamburg / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 175 ( 2017 ) 17 – 27 Table 1 Disease / disorder models used in the studies discussed in this review . Disease model Intervention Co ﬁ lin response Outcome Reference AD ( APPsw / PS1 Δ E9 ) PrP c knockout ( APPsw / PS1 Δ E9xPrnp − / − ) ? Rescued axonal degeneration , synaptic markers , learning & memory de ﬁ cits , & early death Gimbel et al . , 2010 AD ( APPsw / PS1 Δ E9 ) Reduce RanBP9 ( APPsw / PS1 Δ E9xRanBP9 ± ) ↓ Reduced synaptic damage , gliosis , A β accumulation . Rescued LTP & memory Woo , Boggess , et al . , 2015 AD ( APPsw / PS1 Δ E9 ) Reduce Co ﬁ lin ( APPsw / PS1 Δ E9xCo ﬁ lin ± ) ↓ Reduced synaptic protein loss , gliosis . Rescued LTP & contextual memory Woo , Zhao , et al . , 2015 AD ( APPsw / ﬂ o / lon / PS1 M146L / L286V ) TAT - pS3 peptide injection ↓ Improved e - phys , working memory ( T - maze ) & novel object recognition Deng et al . , 2016 AD ( A β injection into ventricle , 5 ng in 2 . 5 μ l ) Scyllo - inositol co - injection with A β ? Reduce synaptic loss & activation of microglia Jin & Selkoe , 2015 AD ( APPsw , du , iow / NOS2 − / − ) Oral RAP - 310 peptide ? Improved learning & memory in a radial arm water maze Ruff , 2014 Aggression ( neonatal isolation ) Expression of co ﬁ lin S3A in the medial prefrontal cortex ↑ Normalized aggressive behavior and glutamatergic transmission Tada et al . , 2016 Autism ( Shank3 + / Δ E21 ) TAT - pS3 peptide injection ↓ Rescued social de ﬁ cits , reduced repetitive behaviors , normalized NMDAR , synaptic actin localization & e - phys Duffney et al . , 2015 Autism ( Shank3 + / Δ E21 ) CA Rac1 virus injection ↓ Rescued social de ﬁ cits & normalized NMDAR e - phys Duffney et al . , 2015 Autism ( NLG1 − / − ) TAT - NLG - CTD injection or slice treatment ↓ Restored co ﬁ lin phosphorylation & LTP Liu et al . , 2016 Brain in ﬂ ammation ( LPS injection ) DAPTA peptide injection ? Decreased neuroin ﬂ ammatory response ( activated microglia & astrocytes ) Rosi et al . , 2005 Manic / Bipolar ( Sorbs2 Δ E12 ) Sorbs2 encodes nArgBP2 None performed ? Impaired memory & dendritic development Zhang , Q et al . , 2016 Manic / Bipolar ( nArgBP2 siRNA ) Expression of Pak inhibitory domain or active co ﬁ lin S3A ↑ Rescued dendritic spine morphology in culture Lee et al . , 2016 Neuropathic pain ( nerve constriction ) Oral RAP - 103 ( DAPTA analog ) ? Reduced pain - related behaviors , microglial activation & monocyte in ﬁ ltration Padi et al . , 2012 Neuropathic pain ( nerve constriction ) ROCK inhibitor Y - 27632 injection ↑ Reduced pain - related behaviors & decreased LIMK & co ﬁ lin phosphorylation Qiu et al . , 2016 Neuropathic pain ( nerve constriction ) TAT - S3 peptide injection ↑ Reduced pain - related behaviors Qiu et al . , 2016 Neuropathic pain ( nerve constriction ) Simvastatin ( HMG CoA reductase inhibitor ) ↑ Reduced pain - related behaviors , Rho membrane targeting , & LIMK & co ﬁ lin phosphorylation Qiu et al . , 2016 Schizophrenic behavior ( 14 - 3 - 3 inhibitory peptide ) None Performed N / A Reduced levels of phospho - co ﬁ lin & spine density Foote et al . , 2015 Schizophrenic behavior ( 14 - 3 - 3 ζ knockout ) Clozapine ? Improved behavior but does not reverse spine defects Cheah et al . , 2012 ; Jaehne et al . , 2015 Sleep deprivation Expression of co ﬁ linS3D or knock - out of cAMP phosphodiesterase - 4A5 ↓ Reduced spine loss & de ﬁ cits in synaptic plasticity ( e - phys ) and improved long - term memory Havekes et al . , 2016 Stroke ( ischemia - reperfusion ) DAPTA peptide injection ? Improved neurological behavior , & reduced neuronal apoptosis & ROCK expression Li et al . , 2016 Traumatic brain injury ( rat ) AcSDKP peptide from Thymosin β 4 ? Improved sensimotor function , spatial learning & spine number Zhang , Y et al . , 2016 21 A . E . S h a w , J . R . B a m b u r g / P h a r m a c o l o g y & T h e r a p e u t i c s 175 ( 2017 ) 17 – 27 that provides a potential therapeutic target . As discussed below , the ﬁ ndingthatthebehavioralorcognitivede ﬁ citsofdiseasemodelrodents can be ameliorated by modulatingco ﬁ lin expression or activity strongly implicates co ﬁ lin dysregulation as an important effector of the de ﬁ cits ( Table 1 ) . 4 . Modulating co ﬁ lin activity alleviates de ﬁ cits in rodent models of neurological disorders A β interacts with many synaptic proteins including the cellular prion protein ( PrP C ) , NMDA receptor , ephrin type B - 2 receptor , immunoglobin constantdomaingammareceptorIIb , pairedimmunoglobulin - likerecep - tor B , metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 ( mGluR5 ) and β 1 - integrin ( Benilova & DeStrooper , 2013 ; Um et al . , 2013 ; Woo , Boggess , et al . , 2015 ) . Many of these synaptic proteins have been linked to effectors modulating co ﬁ lin phosphoregulation . Indeed , PrP C was found to be nec - essary for cognitive de ﬁ cits in a mouse AD model ( Table 1 ; Gimbel et al . , 2010 ) . PrP C is a required co - receptor for binding of A β to β 1 - integrin ( Woo , Zhao , et al . , 2015 ) and mGluR5 ( Haas et al . , 2016 ) . Furthermore , A β - binding to β 1 - integrin signals in a PrP C - dependent manner through RanBP9 , a scaffolding protein and nuclear import factor , leading to co ﬁ lin dephosphorylationbySSH ( Woo , Boggess , etal . , 2015 ) . Inamousemodel of AD ( Table 1 ) , decreasing RanBP9 or co ﬁ lin expression by crosses with RanBP9 or co ﬁ lin hemizygous mice results in protection from learning and memory defects in a contextual fear conditioning response , indicat - ing the importance of co ﬁ lin activity levels in hippocampal learning and memory ( Woo , Boggess , et al . , 2015 ; Woo , Zhao , et al . , 2015 ) . Smallmoleculeinhibitorsofco ﬁ linfunctionincludethenaturalprod - ucts , phalloidin and jasplakinolide , both of which inhibit co ﬁ lin binding to F - actin . However , these compounds are highly toxic to cells and thus cannot be used to interrogate the role of co ﬁ lin in cellular processes . Therefore , studies aimed at elucidating co ﬁ lin function have relied on modulating co ﬁ lin phosphoregulation by expression of constitutively active S3A mutants or by expression of an inactive phospho - mimetic formofco ﬁ lin , S3EorS3D , whichisassumedtoblockdephosphorylation of endogenous phosphorylated co ﬁ lin ( Gu et al . , 2010 ; Konakahara , Ohashi , Mizuno , Itoh , & Tsuji , 2004 ; Popow - Wozniak , Mazur , Mannherz , Malicka - Blaszkiewicz , & Nowak , 2012 ) . Peptides known to affect co ﬁ lin activity levels by modulating its phosphorylation have been in use for some time ( Aizawa et al . , 2001 ; Zhou et al . , 2004 ) . The S3 peptide con - taining the ﬁ rst 16 amino acids of co ﬁ lin inhibits co ﬁ lin phosphorylation by LIMK and thus increases co ﬁ lin activity in cells ( Aizawa et al . , 2001 ) . Although not directly demonstrated , a ser3 phosphorylated version of this peptide ( pS3 ) , like the expressed phospho - mimetics of the protein , presumably inhibits the dephosphorylation of co ﬁ lin by phosphatases , thus inhibiting co ﬁ lin activation ( Zhou et al . , 2004 ) . The presence of the pS3 peptide or expression of the S3E phosphomimetic mutant of co ﬁ lin - 1 in neurons interferes with insertion of new AMPA receptors in dendritic spines subjected to chemical or electrical LTP , whereas the presence of the S3 peptide or expression of the constitutively active co ﬁ lin S3A interferes with spine enlargement that follows chemical or electrical LTP stimulation ( Gu et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , unlike LTD in which channel depression is independent of co ﬁ lin , both components of LTP , theincreaseinfunctionalglutamatereceptorsonspinesandtheincrease in spine size , are co ﬁ lin - dependent processes . Recently a therapeutic approach utilizing the pS3 peptide was ap - pliedtoanADmousemodel ( Table1 ; Dengetal . , 2016 ) . ThepS3peptide was rendered cell permeable by inclusion of the highly basic protein transduction domain ( GRKKRRQRRRPQ ) of the human immunode ﬁ - ciency virus ( HIV ) TAT protein . Administration of this peptide , but not a scrambled peptide or the TAT peptide alone , by i . v . injection of 10 pmol / g once daily for 7 days signi ﬁ cantly increased phospho - co ﬁ lin but not total co ﬁ lin in cortical slices of this AD mouse line ( Deng et al . , 2016 ) . Surface expression of both NMDA and AMPA receptors was par - tiallycorrected bythis treatment , as wastheelectrophysiologicalbehav - ior ( LTP ) of brain slices from the TAT - pS3 peptide injected animals but not from animals injected with the TAT peptide alone . Improvements in working memory ( T - maze ) and novel object recognition also oc - curred exclusively in the TAT - pS3 peptide - injected group . The cell permeable TAT - S3 and TAT - pS3 peptides also have been used to reduce or eliminate de ﬁ cits in several other neurological disor - der rodent models ( Table 1 ) . Mice with a hemizygous de ﬁ ciency in the postsynaptic scaffolding protein Shank3 exhibit autism - like traits in - cluding social de ﬁ cits and increased repetitive behaviors . These de ﬁ cits were linked with decreased NMDA receptor localization to synapses due to misregulation of the synaptic actin cytoskeleton . Injecting Shank3 ± mice with TAT - pS3 rescued these autism - like defects and nor - malized NMDA receptor and synaptic actin localization ( Duffney et al . , 2015 ) . Furthermore , wild type mice in which co ﬁ lin phosphorylation has been inhibited by blocking the LIMK signaling pathway develop the social de ﬁ cits of the autistic mice , supporting the role of co ﬁ lin in theautisticbehavior ( Duffney et al . , 2015 ) . Other autistic mouse models have been developed by expression of mutations in , or gene knock out of , transmembrane proteins linking pre - and post - synaptic compart - ments ( Lin , Frei , Kilander , Shen , & Blatt , 2016 ) . It remains to be deter - mined if all of these have in common the downstream regulation of co ﬁ lin , althoughforoneoftheseproteins , neuroligin1 , co ﬁ linregulation plays a central role ( see Section 7 below ) . Other psychiatric disorders also may arise from alterations in co ﬁ lin activity in dendritic spines . Deletion of neural Abelson - related gene - binding protein 2 ( nArgBP2 ) in mice results in impaired spine develop - ment and memory along with manic / bipolar behaviors ( Zhang , Q et al . , 2016 ; Lee et al . , 2016 ) . nArgBP2 knock - down mice develop excitatory glutamatergic synapses along dendritic shafts but not in spine heads , suggesting altered synaptic receptor traf ﬁ cking . These mice also dem - onstrate increased Pak phosphorylation and reduced co ﬁ lin activity , in conjunction with increased WAVE1 activity . WAVE1 enhances actin ﬁ l - ament branching by Arp2 / 3 complex ( Sloane & Vartanian , 2007 ) , sug - gesting that excessive branched ﬁ lament formation may be causing the defect . Normal spine function can be rescued in these mice by inhibiting Pak , or by expressing an active ( non - phosphorylatable ) co ﬁ lin ( S3A ) while sequestering WAVE1 by targetingit to mitochondria ( Lee et al . , 2016 ) . Although not yet tested in animal models , peptide modulation of co ﬁ lin activity may also be useful in the treatment of Down syndrome ( DS ; aka trisomy 21 ) . Overexpression of a DS cell adhesion molecule has important consequences in neuronal proliferation , maturation , and synaptogenesis that appear to be mediated via a Pak - dependent pathway activating LIMK and inactivating co ﬁ lin ( Perez - Nunez et al . , 2016 ) . Another chromosome 21 overexpressed protein , DS critical region1protein , aregulatorofcalcineurin , modulatesaxonaloutgrowth and brain derived neurotrophic factor - induced growth cone guidance via local protein synthesis and co ﬁ lin phosphoregulation ( Gehler , Shaw , Sarmiere , Bamburg , & Letourneau , 2004 ; Wang W . et al . , 2016 ) . Furthermore , DS critical region 1 protein also interacts with Fragile X mental retardation protein , with which it may share a common pathway leading to intellectual disability ( Wang , Zhu , Chang , & Min , 2012 ) . Painful neuropathies result from a variety of neuronal injuries and metabolic diseases ( Jensen & Finnerup , 2014 ) . Many studies have shown that synaptic ampli ﬁ cation of signals in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord enhances chronic neuropathic pain , and such signals are accompanied by changes in actin organization and spine morphology ( Tan , Chang , Zhao , Hains , & Waxman , 2011 ) . In a study of neuropathic pain induced in rats by a chronic constriction injury of the sciatic nerve , pain alleviation , inferred through behav - ioral analysis , was provided by inhibiting ROCK and LIMK , and most interestingly , by the TAT - S3 peptide ( Table 1 ) . This suggests that in - creased co ﬁ lin activity reduces pain transmission signaling ( Qiu et al . , 2016 ) . Thememoryde ﬁ citsassociatedwithsleepdeprivationhavebeenas - sociated with spine shrinkage and loss within the hippocampus . The 22 A . E . Shaw , J . R . Bamburg / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 175 ( 2017 ) 17 – 27 de ﬁ cits are modeled in mice de ﬁ cient in the cyclicAMP - degrading phosphodiesterase - 4A5 , which reduces LIMK activation downstream of G - protein coupled receptors ( Fig . 2 ) , and appear to arise from co ﬁ lin hyperactivation in the CA1 region of the hippocampus . Both memory and spine de ﬁ cits can be blocked in sleep deprived mice as well as in cyclicAMP - degrading phosphodiesterase - 4A5 knockoutmicebyhippo - campalexpressionofS3Dco ﬁ lin . Thiswasachievedthroughmicroinjec - tion of an adeno - associated virus expressing S3D driven by a promoter that is active in glutamatergic excitatory neurons in the hippocampus ( Havekes et al . , 2016 ) . Similarly , the aggressive tendencies of neonatally - isolated rats can be corrected by modulating co ﬁ lin activity through virus - mediated local expression of full - length co ﬁ lin . In this case , hyperphosphorylation ( reduced activity ) of co ﬁ lin is counteracted by expression of constitutively active co ﬁ lin S3A ( Tada et al . , 2016 ) . Al - though this approach is not peptide therapy per se , it suggests that local synthesis of co ﬁ lin activity - modulating peptides ( such as S3 or a pS3 mimetic form such as S3D ) within neuronal sub - populations might be applicable to a wide variety of neuro - behavioral issues . Our expanding knowledge of nanovehicles ( restructured toxins and viruses ) for deliv - ery of genetic material into the CNS makes this approach one that could become viable for therapeutic delivery in the future ( Ovsepian , O ' Leary , Ntziachristos , & Dolly , 2016 ) . 5 . ROS and neurodegeneration In addition to phosphoregulation , changes in oxidation also alter co ﬁ lin and actin dynamics . The overproduction of reactive oxygen spe - cies ( ROS ) isassociatedwithmostneuroin ﬂ ammatoryandneurodegen - erative disorders ( Fischer & Maier , 2015 ; Hsieh & Yang , 2013 ) . Mical , an actin - binding NADPH oxidase , produces ROS in response to the Semaphorin neuronal growth cone repellants ( Hung et al . , 2010 ) . ROS produced by Mical is able to oxidize actin on methionine 44 and 47 , which increases actin ' s critical concentration for assembly 10 fold . Co ﬁ lin bound to F - actin represses the ability of Mical to oxidize F - actin but co ﬁ lin also greatly accelerates the depolymerization of Mical oxi - dized F - actin ( Grintsevich et al . , 2016 ) . A speci ﬁ c methionine sulfoxide reductase is able to reverse the oxidation of actin , making this another pathway for localized co ﬁ lin - mediated actin assembly regulation ( Hung , Spaeth , Yesilyurt , & Terman , 2013 ) . ROS can also directly modulate co ﬁ lin in two different ways . Direct oxidation of co ﬁ lin cys 139 and 147 to sulfenic acid impairs its actin binding . This oxidation occurs in response to hydrogen peroxide production in migrating ﬁ broblasts , and expression of a double cysteine mutant ( C139 , 147A ) that cannot be oxidized impairs cell spreading ( Cameron et al . , 2015 ) . It is unclear whether this oxidation of co ﬁ lin occurs in dendritic spines , however , in neurons , co ﬁ lin activation under conditions of mild oxidative stress results in formation of an intermolecular disul ﬁ de bond between cys 147 and cys 39 of a second co ﬁ lin ( Bernstein , Shaw , Minamide , Pak , & Bamburg , 2012 ; Pfannstiel et al . , 2001 ) . This modi ﬁ cation does not interfere with co ﬁ lin binding to F - actin and , in vivo , mayactually occur between co ﬁ lin that is already bound to short pieces of F - actin , contributing to the generation of co ﬁ lin - actin rods ( Bamburg & Bernstein , 2016 ; Chen & Wang , 2015 ) , which have a co ﬁ lin : actin stoichiometry of 1 : 1 ( Minamide et al . , 2010 ) . At least two distinct pathways regulate the production of ROS re - quired for co ﬁ lin sequestration into rods . One pathway is dependent upon one or more isoforms of membrane NADPH oxidase ( NOX ) and is mediated by PrP C working as a co - receptor with many other trans - membrane receptors ( Walsh , Minamide , et al . , 2014 ) . This pathway for ROS generation is utilized by proin ﬂ ammatory cytokines and A β peptides to induce rods with a time to half - maximum response of about 6 h . Overexpression of PrP C in the absence of an external inducer is suf ﬁ cient for initiating this NOX - dependent rod formation . However , inhibition of NOX or using neurons from PrP C - null mice does not affect their ability to form rods induced by mitochondrial inhibitors , anoxia / hypoxia , or excitotoxic levels of glutamate . Rods formed by these latter inducers have a time to half - maximum response of about 10 – 15 min . Based on the observation that anoxia and hypoxia induce co ﬁ lin - actin rods in neurons of cultured hippocampal slices ( Davis et al . , 2009 ) , a role for co ﬁ lin - mediated synaptic de ﬁ cits in cerebral ischemia ( stroke ) and in neuroin ﬂ ammation has also been suggested . Indeed , a small peptide ( AcSDKP ) derived from the actin monomer sequestering protein thymosin β 4 ( T β 4 ) was shown to improve sensimotor function and spine numbers in a rat model of traumatic brain injury , although its mechanism for doing so appears to involve its ability to decrease sub - stance P - mediated neuronal injury ( Zhang , Y et al . , 2016 ; Table 1 ) . Nev - ertheless , these ﬁ ndings beg the question : could co ﬁ lin modulatory peptides also be developed that are effective in treating neuroin ﬂ am - mation and stroke ? The answer appears to be yes , although the discov - ery of such a peptide was quite serendipitous , arising from studies on HIV . To develop speci ﬁ c reagents to inhibit HIV infection of cells , peptides derived from the HIV envelope protein gp120 were tested for inhibiting viral uptake . One peptide was further modi ﬁ ed to enhance cell binding and peptide stability . This peptide , D - ala - Peptide T - Amide ( DAPTA ) , an octapeptide with the sequence D - ala - STTTNYT - amide , was found to be an antagonist of G - protein - coupled chemokine receptors CCR2 and CCR5 ( Padi et al . , 2012 ; Polianova , Ruscetti , Pert , & Ruff , 2005 ) used by HIV to gain cell entry . Activation of many chemokine receptors leads to a rapid dephosphorylation of co ﬁ lin and a corresponding decline in phalloidin stained F - actin ( Cameron et al . , 2010 ) , whereas inhibition of co ﬁ lin activation through stimulation of the Rac1 , LIMK , co ﬁ lin pathway blocks entry of CCR5 - tropic HIV - 1 viruses ( Anand , Zhao , Nagaraja , Robinson , & Ganju , 2013 ) . CCR5 is also implicated in the in - ﬂ ammatory process in AD . Administration ( i . v . ) of DAPTA to rats that were chronically treated with lipopolysaccharide to induce brain in - ﬂ ammation dramatically inhibited the neuroin ﬂ ammatory response ( activated microglia and astrocytes ) ( Rosi , Pert , Ruff , McGann - Gramling , & Wenk , 2005 ) . DAPTA also protects against focal cerebral ischemia - reperfusion injury in rats ( Li et al . , 2016 ; Table 1 ) . Although the mechanism of this protection is not known , a similar peptide discussed below has been shown to inhibit and reverse co ﬁ lin - actin rods induced in neurons by proin ﬂ ammatory cytokines ( Ruff , 2014 ; Walsh , Minamide , et al . , 2014 ) . 6 . Challenges in delivery of peptide therapeutics The TAT fusion peptides used in the previously cited papers to alter phosphoregulation of co ﬁ lin affect biological processes in the brain , as evidenced by changes in electrophysiology and neuronal biochemistry after intravenous peptide injection . Nearly three decades after the dis - coveryofTAT , thereisstill debateinthe ﬁ eldabout howcellpenetrating peptides ( CPPs ) function , likely because multiple complex and variable mechanisms can take place simultaneously ( Bechara & Sagan , 2013 ; Trabulo , Cardoso , Mano , & PedrosodeLima , 2010 ) . Researchhasfocused on various ways to improve or quantify the ability of CPPs to cross the blood brain barrier ( Sancini et al . , 2013 ; Zou , Ma , Wang , Yang , & Liu , 2013 ; Zhang , D et al . , 2016 ) . Although TAT is used frequently , there may be CPPs superior in brain permeability , including the 18 amino acid vascular endothelial cadherin - derived peptide pVEC ( Elmquist , Hansen , & Langel , 2006 ) , which demonstrated improved in - ﬂ ux characteristics and less brain ef ﬂ ux than TAT . Yet even pVEC shows extensive accumulation in organs other than brain , including spleen , liver and kidney ( Stalmans et al . , 2015 ) . However , these mea - surements were made with the cell penetrating peptide alone . Each fu - sion of a CPP to a cargo can alter transport dynamics and must be assessed individually . Another concern with peptide drugs is their stability . Most peptides are rapidly degraded by proteolysis . Modi ﬁ cation of peptide drugs to overcome this is part of the drug design process . Possible modi ﬁ cations include incorporation of D - stereoisomer amino acids ( such as in the 23 A . E . Shaw , J . R . Bamburg / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 175 ( 2017 ) 17 – 27 peptide DAPTA ) , N - terminal acetylation , C - terminal amidylation , or fu - sion to a very stable protein such as human serum albumin ( Weinstock , Francis , Redman , & Kay , 2012 ; Wang , M et al . , 2016 ) . The peptides used inthe above studies werei . v . injected , whichis notanidealdeliverysys - temforadrugtreatmentinchronicdisease . Thereareadditionalhurdles to overcome to make a peptide drug orally - deliverable , including protecting the peptide from degradation in the digestive tract and en - suring suf ﬁ cient absorption across the intestinal wall . These hurdles are so signi ﬁ cant that as of 2015 there was only one clinically useful oral formulation of a peptide drug ( desmopressin ) ( Choonara et al . , 2014 ; Karsdal et al . , 2015 ) . Despite these hurdles , DAPTA and related peptides under develop - ment offer some hope in the treatment of cognitive and motor disor - ders . RAP - 310 , an all D - amino acid version of DAPTA ( ASTTTNYT ) without the C - terminal amide , is reported to improve memory and learning in AD model mice ( Ruff , 2014 ) . Furthermore , this peptide is orally deliverable . A similar peptide , RAP - 103 ( all D - amino acid TTNYT ) , was able to attenuate rodent neuropathic pain , and like DAPTA , blocked G - protein - coupled chemokine receptors ( Padi et al . , 2012 ) . For structured peptides , substituting D - amino acids for the natu - rally occurring L - amino acids givesa mirror image peptide that does not usuallymaintainhighaf ﬁ nityinteractionswithnaturalbindingpartners of the L - amino acid peptide . The similar biological activity of DAPTA , RAP - 103 , and RAP - 310 suggest that the multiple hydroxyl and amide side chainsof theaminoacids mightbe ofmore importance than these - quence . In this regard , it is of interest that scyllo - inositol , a six carbon sugaralcoholwithalternatingupanddownorientationsofthehydroxyl groups , inhibits A β - induced degenerative changes in neurons in vitro and in AD mice ( Jin & Selkoe , 2015 ; McLaurin , Golomb , Jurewicz , Antel , & Fraser , 2000 ) . Could the neuroprotective effects of DAPTA , RAP - 310 and scyllo - inositol arise from their ability to bind a common target ? Anti - in ﬂ ammatory effects through cytokine receptor antago - nism are one possibility ( Li et al . , 2016 ) . More speculatively , all of these reagents might interact with PrP C or other proteins involved in ROS production and co ﬁ lin - actin rod formation ( Walsh , Kuhn and Bamburg , 2014 ) . RAP - 310 is able to block rod formation at picomolar levels ( Ruff , 2014 ) . Unfortunately , RAP - 310 is currently mired in a legal battle , preventing its effective development as an AD or HIV ther - apeutic ( Borchers , 2015 ) . 7 . Challenges in cellular speci ﬁ city of peptide therapeutics In the studies reported above , mice treated with the co ﬁ lin - modulating TAT peptides did not exhibit any acute or overt toxicity from short - term treatment , but there are still concerns that altering the activity of a protein critical for regulation of the actin cytoskeleton in all cells over the periods of time necessary to treat a chronic disease could have deleterious consequences . Gaining speci ﬁ city by limiting the drug ' s action to the cell type affected by AD is one approach to lim - iting the side effects of a new potential AD treatment . There are many neuron - speci ﬁ c signaling pathways that regulate co ﬁ lin phosphoryla - tion levels , most of them mediated by proteins found localized at or near postsynaptic densities ( Bellot et al . , 2014 ; Spence & Soderling , 2015 ) . Some of these pathways may be restricted to subsets of neurons in speci ﬁ c brain regions , such as the Pak3 - mediated pathway involved in X - linked mental retardation ( Allen et al . , 1998 ) . Theoretically , one could target pathways that either inhibit co ﬁ lin phosphatases or acti - vate co ﬁ lin kinases . To date , no neuronal speci ﬁ c pathways are known that target slingshot , although such a regulatory pathway may exist for certain members of the protein kinase D family , which inactivate SSH by phosphorylation of ser402 ( Barisic et al . , 2011 ; Doppler et al . , 2014 ) . In contrast , there are many known neuronal speci ﬁ c pathways for the activation of LIMK ( Spence & Soderling , 2015 ; Tejada - Simon , 2015 ) . Many of these start 3 or 4 steps upstream of LIMK , although the further upstream the pathway is modulated , the less speci ﬁ c that modulation will be . Mice that are de ﬁ cient in neuroligin 1 ( NLG1 ) , the postsynaptic binding partner of neurexin ( Lisé & El - Husseini , 2006 ; Song , Ichtchenko , Sudhof , & Brose , 1999 ) , have de ﬁ ciencies in synapse de - velopment and spine function that have been linked to autism and other psychiatric disorders ( Blundell et al . , 2010 ; Phillips & Pozzo - Miller , 2015 ) . Surprisingly , these de ﬁ cits in NLG1 knock out mice appear to be independent of the expression of the NLG1 trans - membrane domain but arise through increased activity of co ﬁ lin in spines due to the loss of signaling from the proteolytically cleaved 126 amino acid NLG1 C - terminal domain ( CTD ) ( Liu et al . , 2016 ; Suzuki et al . , 2012 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . The NLG1 - CTD enhances the phosphory - lation of co ﬁ lin by binding to and downregulating SPAR , a GTPase - activating protein . Loss of SPAR leads to increased activity of Rap1 / Rac1 in spines , which , presumably via Pak and LIMK1 , increases co ﬁ lin phosphorylation ( Fig . 2 ) . Delivery of TAT - NLG1 - CTD to neu - rons in hippocampal slices of NLG1 knock out mouse brain restores phosphorylation of co ﬁ lin and alleviates most of the electrophysio - logical de ﬁ cits in LTP and LTD ( Liu et al . , 2016 ) ( Table 1 ) . This rescue is not achieved when the NLG1 - CTD is truncated by 4 amino acids , removing a known PDZ - binding motif , a common structural domain shared by the major postsynaptic density protein PSD - 95 ( Romero , von Zastrow , & Friedman , 2011 ) . SPAR is a PDZ domain - containing protein and through its PDZ domain interacts with the 7C - terminal residues of the NLG1 - CTD ( Li , Zhang , Cao , Wu , & Shi , 2006 ) . Although further studies are needed to develop higher af ﬁ nity NLG1 - CTD pep - tides for binding to and causing SPAR degradation , such a peptide might provide a neuron - speci ﬁ c enhancer of co ﬁ lin phosphorylation , working upstream of LIMK activation . 8 . Conclusions The neuronal cytoskeleton , consisting of actin ﬁ laments , intermedi - ate ﬁ laments and microtubules , is dynamic and regulates virtually every aspect of neuronal development and function . Neuro ﬁ laments have been deemed important in motor neuron disease ( Bruijn , Miller , & Cleveland , 2004 ) , and microtubules play major roles in organization of neurite polarity and compartmentalization , as well as in vesicular transport ( Romaniello , Arrigoni , Bassi , & Borgatti , 2015 ) . Several drugs that function by stabilizing microtubules have made it into clinical trials for treatment of neurodegenerative diseases ( Eira , Silva , Sousa , & Liz , 2016 ) . Actin ﬁ laments , whichare themajor dynamic structuralelement within postsynaptic densities , have been understudied as potential tar - getsfor modulatingsynaptic function . Herewe bring to attention recent studieswhichdemonstratethatcontrolofactindynamicsthroughmod - ulation of co ﬁ lin activity has the potentialto decrease or eliminate func - tional synaptic de ﬁ cits in neurodegenerative , psychiatric , and pain disorders . Peptide reagents , with their potential for high target and cell type speci ﬁ city , low cost , and possibly long term stability through use of D - amino acids , might be the future direction for research in this area . Con ﬂ ict of interest statement Alisa E . Shaw has no con ﬂ ict of interest . James R . Bamburg brie ﬂ y served on the scienti ﬁ c advisory board of Rapid Pharmaceuticals , the companythatdeveloped DAPTAand RAP - 310 . Hehas no ﬁ nancialinter - est or any current relationship with the company or individuals within it . Acknowledgments The time and effort in preparation of this article was supported by theNationalInstitutes of Healthgrant AG049668toJRBand fromgener - ous donations to our research program . We thank Laurie Minamide , Ty - ler Wallace and O ' Neil Wiggan for their input during the writing of this manuscript . 24 A . E . Shaw , J . R . Bamburg / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 175 ( 2017 ) 17 – 27 References Aizawa , H . , Wakatsuki , S . , Ishii , A . , Moriyama , K . , Sasaki , Y . , Ohashi , K . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Phos - phorylation of co ﬁ lin by LIM - kinase is necessary for semaphorin 3A - induced growth cone collapse . Nature Neuroscience 4 , 367 – 373 . Allen , K . M . , Gleeson , J . G . , Bagrodia , S . , Partington , M . W . , MacMillan , J . C . , Cerione , R . A . , et al . ( 1998 ) . PAK3 mutation in non - syndromic X - linked mental retardation . Nature Genetics 20 , 25 – 30 . Alzheimer ' s Association ( 2016 ) . Alzheimer ' s disease facts and ﬁ gures . Alzheimer ' s & Dementia 12 , 459 – 509 . Ammar , M . - R . , Kassas , N . , Bader , M . - F . , & Vitale , N . ( 2014 ) . Phosphatidicacidinneuronal development : Anodeformembraneandcytoskeletalrearrangements . Biochemie107 , 51 – 57 . Anand , A . R . , Zhao , H . , Nagaraja , T . , Robinson , L . A . , & Ganju , R . K . ( 2013 ) . N - terminal Slit2 inhibits HIV01 replication by regulating the actin cytoskeleton . Retrovirology 2013 ( 10 ) , 2 . Andrianantoandro , E . , & Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Mechanism of actin ﬁ lament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / co ﬁ lin . Molecular Cell 24 , 13 – 23 . Balcer , H . I . , Goodman , A . L . , Rodal , A . A . , Smith , E . , Kugler , J . , Heuser , J . E . , etal . ( 2003 ) . Co - ordinatedregulationofactin ﬁ lamentturnoverbyahigh - molecular - weightSrv2 / CAP complex , co ﬁ lin , pro ﬁ lin , and Aip1 . Current Biology 13 , 2159 – 2169 . Bamburg , J . R . , & Bernstein , B . W . ( 2016 ) . Actin dynamics and co ﬁ lin - actin rods in Alzheimer disease . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) 73 , 477 – 497 . Barisic , S . , Nagel , A . C . , Franz - Wachtel , M . , Macek , B . , Preiss , A . , Link , G . , etal . ( 2011 ) . Phos - phorylation of Ser402 impedes phosphatase activity of slingshot 1 . EMBO Reports 12 , 527 – 533 . Bechara , C . , & Sagan , S . ( 2013 ) . Cell - penetrating peptides : 20 years later , where do we stand ? FEBS Letters 587 , 1693 – 1702 . Belichenko , P . V . , Masliah , E . , Kleschevnikov , A . M . , Villar , A . J . , Epstein , C . J . , Salehi , A . , etal . ( 2004 ) . Synaptic structural abnormalities in the Ts65Dn mouse model of Down Syn - drome . Journal of Comparative Neurology 480 , 281 – 298 . Bellot , A . , Guivernau , B . , Tajes , M . , Bosch - Morató , M . , Valls - Comamala , V . , & Muñoz , F . J . ( 2014 ) . The structure and function of actin cytoskeleton in mature glutamatergic dendritic spines . Brain Research 573 , 1 – 16 . Benilova , I . , & DeStrooper , B . ( 2013 ) . PromiscuousAlzheimer ' samyloid : Yetanotherpart - ner . Science 341 , 1354 – 1355 . Bernstein , B . W . , & Bamburg , J . R . ( 2003 ) . Actin - ATP hydrolysisisa majorenergydrainfor neurons . Journal of Neuroscience 23 , 1 – 6 . Bernstein , B . W . , Shaw , A . E . , Minamide , L . S . , Pak , C . W . , & Bamburg , J . R . ( 2012 ) . Incorpora - tion of co ﬁ lin into rods depends on disul ﬁ de intermolecular bonds : Implications for actinregulationandneurodegenerativedisease . JournalofNeuroscience32 , 6670 – 6681 . Blundell , J . , Blaiss , C . A . , Etherton , M . R . , Espinosa , F . , Tabuchi , K . , Walz , C . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Neuroligin - 1 deletion results in impaired spatial memory and increased repetitive behavior . Journal of Neuroscience 30 , 2115 – 2129 . Borchers , C . ( September 17 , 2015 ) . Dispute over HIV treatment featured in movie sparks lawsuit . Boston Globe . Bruijn , L . I . , Miller , T . M . , & Cleveland , D . W . ( 2004 ) . Unraveling the mechanisms involved in motor neuron degeneration in ALS . Annual Review of Neuroscience 27 , 723 – 749 . Bryce , N . S . , Schevzov , G . , Ferguson , V . , Percival , J . M . , Lin , J . J . , Matsumura , F . , etal . ( 2003 ) . Speci ﬁ cation of actin ﬁ lament function and molecular composition by tropomyosin isoforms . Molecular Biology of the Cell 14 , 1002 – 1016 . Calabrese , B . , Saf ﬁ n , J . M . , & Halpain , S . ( 2014 ) . Activity - dependentdendriticspineshrink - age and growth involve downregulation of co ﬁ lin via distinct mechanisms . PLoS One 9 ( 4 ) , e94787 . Calabrese , B . , Wilson , M . S . , & Halpain , S . ( 2006 ) . Developmentandregulationofdendritic spine synapses . Physiology 21 , 38 – 47 . Cameron , J . M . , Gabrielsen , M . , Chim , Y . H . , Munro , J . , McGhee , E . J . , Sumpton , D . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Polarized cell motility induces hydrogen peroxide to inhibit co ﬁ lin via cyste - ine oxidation . Current Biology 25 , 1520 – 1525 . Cameron , P . U . , Saleh , S . , Sallmann , G . , Solomon , A . , Wightman , F . , Evans , V . A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Establishment of HIV - 1 latency in resting CD4 + T - cells depends on chemokine - induced changes in the actin cytoskeleton . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107 , 16934 – 16939 . Cavanaugh , S . E . , Pippin , J . J . , & Barnard , N . D . ( 2014 ) . AnimalmodelsofAlzheimerdisease : Historical pitfalls and a path forward . ALTEX 31 , 279 – 302 . Chan , C . , Beltzner , C . C . , & Pollard , T . D . ( 2009 ) . Co ﬁ lin dissociates Arp2 / 3 complex and branches from actin ﬁ laments . Current Biology 19 , 537 – 545 . Chaudhry , F . , Jansen , S . , Little , K . , Suarez , C . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Blanchoin , L . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Autonomous and in trans functions for the two halves of Srv2 / CAP in pro - moting actin turnover . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) 71 , 351 – 360 . Chazeau , A . , & Giannone , G . ( 2016 ) . Organization and dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton during dendrite spine morphological remodeling . Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 73 , 3053 – 3073 . Cheah , P . S . , Ramshaw , H . S . , Thomas , P . Q . , Toyo - Oka , K . , Xu , X . , Martin , S . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric behavior defects arise from 14 - 3 - 3 ζ de ﬁ - ciency . Molecular Psychiatry 17 , 451 – 466 . Chen , Q . , & Pollard , T . D . ( 2011 ) . Actin ﬁ laments severingby co ﬁ lin is more important for assembly than constriction of the cytokinetic contractile ring . Journal of Cell Biology 195 , 485 – 498 . Chen , B . , & Wang , Y . ( 2015 ) . Co ﬁ lin rod formation in neurons impairs neuronal structure and function . CNS & Neurological Disorders - Drug Targets 14 , 554 – 560 . Choonara , B . F . , Choonara , Y . E . , Kumar , P . , Bijukumar , D . , du Toit , L . C . , & Pillay , V . ( 2014 ) . A review of advanced oral drug delivery technologies facilitating the protection and absorption of protein and peptide molecules . Biotechnical Advances 32 , 1269 – 1282 . Copf , T . ( 2016 ) . Impairmentsindendritemorphogenesisasetiologyforneurodevelopmental disorders and implications for therapeutic treatments . Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 68 , 946 – 978 . Davis , R . C . , Maloney , M . T . , Minamide , L . S . , Flynn , K . C . , Stonebraker , M . A . , & Bamburg , J . R . ( 2009 ) . Mapping co ﬁ lin - actin rods in stressed hippocampal slices and the role of cdc42 in amyloid - beta - induced rods . Journal of Alzheimer ' s Disease 18 , 35 – 50 . Deng , Y . , Wei , J . , Cheng , J . , Zhong , P . , Xiong , Z . , Liu , A . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Partial amelioration of synaptic and cognitive de ﬁ cits by inhibiting co ﬁ lin dephosphorylation in an animal model of Alzheimer ' s disease . Journal of Alzheimer ' s Disease 53 , 1419 – 1432 . Devineni , N . , Minamide , L . S . , Niu , M . , Safer , D . , Verma , R . , Bamburg , J . R . , et al . ( 1999 ) . A quantitative analysis of G - actin bidning proteins and the G - actin pool in developing chick brain . Brain Research 823 , 129 – 140 . Doppler , H . , Bastea , L . I . , Borges , S . , Spratley , S . J . , Pearce , S . E . , & Storz , P . ( 2014 ) . Protein kinase d isoforms differentially modulate co ﬁ lin - driven directed cell migration . PLoS One 9 ( 5 ) , e98090 . Dorostkar , M . M . , Zou , C . , Blazquez - Llorca , L . , & Herms , J . ( 2015 ) . Analyzingdendriticspine pathologyinAlzheimer ' sdisease : Problems and opportunities . ActaNeuropathologica 130 , 1 – 19 . Duffney , L . J . , Zhong , P . , Wei , J . , Matas , E . , Cheng , J . , Qin , L . , etal . ( 2015 ) . Autism - likede ﬁ cits in Shank3 - de ﬁ cient mice are rescued by targeting actin regulators . Cell Reports 11 , 1400 – 1413 . Eira , J . , Silva , C . S . , Sousa , M . M . , & Liz , M . A . ( 2016 ) . The cytoskeleton as a novel ther - apeutic target for old neurodegenerative disorders . Progress in Neurobiology 141 , 61 – 82 . Eiseler , T . , Doppler , H . , Yan , I . K . , Kitatani , K . , Mizuno , K . , & Storz , P . ( 2009 ) . Proteinkinase D1 regulates co ﬁ lin - mediated F - actin reorganization and cell motility through sling - shot . Nature Cell Biology 11 , 545 – 556 . Elmquist , A . , Hansen , M . , & Langel , U . ( 2006 ) . Structure - activity relationship study of the cell - penetrating peptide pVEC . Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1758 , 721 – 729 . Fischer , R . , & Maier , O . ( 2015 ) . Interrelation of oxidative stress and in ﬂ ammation in neu - rodegenerative disease : Role of TNF . Oxidative Metabolism and Cell Longevity 2015 , 610813 . Foote , M . , Qiao , H . , Graham , K . , Wu , Y . , & Zhou , Y . ( 2015 ) . Inhibition of 14 - 3 - 3 proteins leads to schizophrenia - related behavioral phenotypes and synaptic defects in mice . Biological Psychiatry 78 , 386 – 395 . Funke , S . A . , & Willbold , D . ( 2012 ) . Peptides for therapy and diagnosis of Alzheimer ' s dis - ease . Current Pharmaceutical Design 18 , 755 – 767 . Gadea , G . , & Blangy , A . ( 2014 ) . Dock - familyexchangefactorsincellmigrationanddisease . European Journal of Cell Biology 93 , 466 – 477 . Garvalov , B . K . , Flynn , K . C . , Neukirchen , D . , Meyn , L . , Teusch , N . , Wu , X . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Cdc42 regulates co ﬁ lin during the establishment of neuronal polarity . Journal of Neuroscience 28 , 13117 – 13129 . Gehler , S . , Shaw , A . E . , Sarmiere , P . D . , Bamburg , J . R . , & Letourneau , P . C . ( 2004 ) . Brain - derived neurotrophic factor regulation of retinal growth cone ﬁ lopodial dynamics is mediated through actin depolymerizing factor / co ﬁ lin . Journal of Neuroscience 24 , 10741 – 10749 . George , J . , Soares , C . , Montersino , A . , Beique , J . C . , & Thomas , G . M . ( 2015 ) . Palmitoylation of LIM kinase - 1 ensures spine - speci ﬁ c actin polymerization and morphological plas - ticity . eLlife 4 , e06327 . Gimbel , D . A . , Nygaard , H . B . , Coffey , E . E . , Gunther , E . C . , Laurén , J . , Gimbel , Z . A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Memory impairment in transgenic Alzheimer mice requires cellular prion protein . Journal of Neuroscience 30 , 6367 – 6374 . Gisselsson , L . , Toresson , H . , Ruscher , K . , & Wieloch , T . ( 2010 ) . Rho kinase inhibition pro - tects CA1 cells in organotypic hippocampal slices during in vitro ischemia . Brain Research 1316 , 92 – 100 . Gohla , A . , & Bokoch , G . M . ( 2002 ) . 14 - 3 - 3 regulates actin dynamics by stabilizing phos - phorylated co ﬁ lin . Current Biology 12 , 1704 – 1710 . Gressin , L . , Guillotin , A . , Guérin , C . , Blanchoin , L . , & Michelot , A . ( 2015 ) . Architecture de - pendence of actin ﬁ lament network disassembly . Current Biology 25 , 1437 – 1447 . Grintsevich , E . E . , & Reisler , E . ( 2014 ) . Drebrininhibits co ﬁ lin - induced severing of F - actin . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) 71 , 472 – 483 . Grintsevich , E . E . , Yesilyurt , H . G . , Rich , S . K . , Hung , R . - J . , Terman , J . R . , & Reisler , E . ( 2016 ) . F - actin dismantling through a redox - driven synergy between Mical and co ﬁ lin . Nature Cell Biology 18 , 876 – 885 . Grossman , A . W . , Aldridge , G . M . , Lee , K . J . , Zeman , M . K . , Jun , C . S . , Azam , H . S . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Developmental characteristics of dendritic spines in the dentate gyrus of Fmr1 knockout mice . Brain Research 1355 , 221 – 227 . Gu , J . , Lee , C . W . , Fan , Y . , Komios , D . , Tang , X . , Sun , C . , et al . ( 2010 ) . ADF / co ﬁ lin - mediated actin dynamics regulate AMPA receptor traf ﬁ cking during synaptic plasticity . Nature Neuroscience 13 , 1208 – 1215 . Haas , L . T . , Salazar , S . V . , Kostylev , M . A . , Um , J . W . , Kaufman , A . C . , & Strittmatter , S . M . ( 2016 ) . Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 couples cellularprion protein to intracel - lular signalling in Alzheimer ' s disease . Brain 139 ( Pt 2 ) , 526 – 546 . Han , L . , Stope , M . B . , deJesus , M . L . , OudeWeernink , P . A . , Urban , M . , & Wieland , T . ( 2007 ) . Direct stimulation of receptor - controlled phospholipase D1 by phospho - co ﬁ lin . The EMBO Journal 26 , 4189 – 4202 . Hartung , D . M . , Bourdette , D . N . , Ahmed , S . M . , & Whitham , R . H . ( 2015 ) . The cost of mul - tiple sclerosis drugs in the US and the pharmaceutical industry . Neurology 84 , 2185 – 2192 . Havekes , R . , Park , A . J . , Tudor , J . C . , Luczak , V . G . , Hansen , R . T . , Ferri , S . L . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Sleep deprivation causes memory de ﬁ cits by negatively impacting neuronal connec - tivity in hippocampal area CA1 . eLife 5 , e13424 . Hsieh , H . L . , & Yang , C . M . ( 2013 ) . Role of redox signaling inneuroin ﬂ ammation andneu - rodegenerative diseases . Biomedical Research International 2013 , 484613 . Huang , T . Y . , DerMardirossian , C . , & Bokoch , G . M . ( 2006 ) . Co ﬁ lin phosphatases and regu - lation of actin dynamics . Current Opinion in Cell Biology 18 , 26 – 31 . 25 A . E . Shaw , J . R . Bamburg / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 175 ( 2017 ) 17 – 27 Huang , T . Y . , Minamide , L . S . , Bamburg , J . R . , & Bokoch , G . M . ( 2008 ) . Chronophinmediates an ATP - sensing mechanism for co ﬁ lin dephosphorylation and neuronal co ﬁ lin - actin rod formation . Developmental Cell 15 , 691 – 703 . Hung , R . J . , Spaeth , C . S . , Yesilyurt , H . G . , & Terman , J . R . ( 2013 ) . SelR reverses mical - mediated oxidation of actin to regulate F - actin dynamics . Nature Cell Biology 15 , 1445 – 1454 . Hung , R . J . , Yazdani , U . , Yoon , J . , Wu , H . , Yang , T . , & Gupta , N . ( 2010 ) . Mical links semaphorins to F - actin disassembly . Nature 463 , 823 – 827 . Ivanov , A . , Esclapez , M . , Pellegrino , C . , Shirao , T . , & Ferhat , L . ( 2009 ) . Drebrin A regulates dendriticspineplasticityandsynapticfunctioninmatureculturedhippocampalneu - rons . Journal of Cell Science 122 ( Pt 4 ) , 524 – 534 . Jaehne , E . J . , Ramshaw , H . , Xu , X . , Saleh , E . , Clark , S . R . , Schubert , K . O . , etal . ( 2015 ) . In - vivo administrationofclozapine affects behaviorbutdoesnotreverse dendriticspine def - icits in the 14 - 3 - 3 ζ KO mouse model of schizophrenia - like disorders . Pharmacology and Biochemistry of Behavior 138 , 1 – 8 . Janco , M . , Bonello , T . T . , Byun , A . , Coster , A . C . , Lebhar , H . , Dedova , I . , et al . ( 2016 ) . The im - pactoftropomyosinsonactin ﬁ lamentassemblyisisoformspeci ﬁ c . BioArchitecture6 , 61 – 75 . Jansen , S . , Collins , A . , Chin , S . M . , Ydenberg , C . A . , Gelles , J . , & Goode , B . L . ( 2015 ) . Single - molecule imaging of a three - component ordered actin disassembly mechanism . Nature Communications 6 , 7202 . Jensen , T . S . , & Finnerup , N . B . ( 2014 ) . Allodynia and hyperalgesia in neuropathic pain : Clinical manifestations and mechanisms . Lancet Neurology 13 , 924 – 935 . Jin , M . , & Selkoe , D . J . ( 2015 ) . Systematic analysisof time - dependent neural effects of sol - uble amyloid β oligomers in culture and in vivo : Prevention by scyllo - inositol . Neurobiology of Disease 82 , 152 – 163 . Johnston , A . B . , Collins , A . , & Goode , B . L . ( 2015 ) . High - speeddepolymerizationatactin ﬁ l - ament ends jointly catalysed by twin ﬁ lin and Srv2 / CAP . Nature Cell Biology 17 , 1504 – 1511 . Kanellos , G . , Zhou , J . , Patel , H . , Ridgway , R . A . , Huels , D . , Gurniak , C . B . , et al . ( 2015 ) . ADF and co ﬁ lin1 control actin stress ﬁ bers , nuclear integrity , and cell survival . Cell Reports 13 , 1949 – 1964 . Karsdal , M . A . , Riis , B . J . , Mehta , N . , Stern , W . , Arbit , E . , Christiansen , C . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Les - sons learned from the clinical development of oral peptides . British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 79 , 720 – 732 . Kennedy , M . B . ( 2016 ) . Synaptic signaling in learning and memory . Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 2016 ( 8 ) , a016824 . Kim , J . E . , Kim , Y . J . , Lee , D . S . , Kim , J . Y . , Ko , A . R . , Hyun , H . W . , et al . ( 2016 ) . PLPP / CINreg - ulates bidirectional synaptic plasticity via GluN2A interaction with postsynaptic pro - teins . Scienti ﬁ c Reports 6 , 26576 . Kneussel , M . , & Wagner , W . ( 2013 ) . Myosin motors at neuronal synapses : Drivers of membrane transport and actin dynamics . Nature Reviews Neuroscience 14 , 233 – 247 . Konakahara , S . , Ohashi , K . , Mizuno , K . , Itoh , K . , & Tsuji , T . ( 2004 ) . CD29integrin - andLIMK1 / co ﬁ lin - mediated actin reorganization regulates the migration of haematopoietic pro - genitor cells underneath bone marrow stromal cells . Genes to Cells 9 , 345 – 358 . Korobova , F . , & Svitkina , T . ( 2010 ) . Molecular architecture of synaptic actin cytoskeleton in hippocampal neurons reveals a mechanism of dendritic spine morphogenesis . Molecular Biology of the Cell 21 , 165 – 178 . Lauterborn , J . C . , Kramár , E . A . , Rice , J . D . , Babayan , A . H . , Cox , C . D . , Karsten , C . A . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Co ﬁ lin activation is temporally associated with the cessation of growth in the developing hippocampus . Cerebral Cortex ( 2016 Apr 12 . pii : bhw088 , Epub ahead of print ) . Le Couteur , D . G . , Hunter , S . , & Brayne , C . ( 2016 ) . Solanezumab and the amyloid hypoth - esis for Alzheimer disease . BMJ 355 , i6771 . Lee , S . E . , Kim , Y . , Han , J . K . , Park , H . , Lee , U . , Na , M . , etal . ( 2016 ) . nArgBP2 regulates excit - atory synapse formation by controlling dendritic spine morphology . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113 , 6749 – 6754 . Lee , C . W . , Vitriol , E . A . , Shim , S . , Wise , A . L . , Velayutham , R . P . , & Zheng , J . Q . ( 2013 ) . Dy - namic localization of G - actin during membrane protrusion in neuronal motility . Current Biology 23 , 1046 – 1056 . Lei , W . , Omotade , O . , Myers , K . R . , & Zheng , J . Q . ( 2016 ) . Actin cytoskeleton in dendritic spine development and plasticity . Current Opinion in Neurobiology 39 , 86 – 92 . Li , X . , Zhang , J . , Cao , Z . , Wu , J . , & Shi , Y . ( 2006 ) . SolutionstructureofGOPCPDZdomainand its interaction withtheC - terminalmotifofneuroligin . Protein Science15 , 2149 – 2158 . Li , L . , Zhi , D . , Shen , Y . , Liu , K . , Li , H . , & Chen , J . ( 2016 ) . Effects of CC - chemokine receptor 5 onROCK2andP - MLC2expressionafterfocalcerebralischaemia - reperfusioninjuryin rats . Brain Injury 30 , 468 – 473 . Lin , Y . - C . , Frei , J . A . , Kilander , M . B . C . , Shen , W . , & Blatt , G . J . ( 2016 ) . A subset of autism - associated genes regulate the structural stability of neurons . Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience 10 ( Article 263 ) . Lisé , M . F . , & El - Husseini , A . ( 2006 ) . The neuroligin andneurexinfamilies : From structure to function at the synapse . Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 63 , 1833 – 1849 . Liu , J . S . ( 2011 ) . Molecular genetics of neuronal migration disorders . Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports 11 , 171 – 178 . Liu , A . , Zhou , Z . , Dang , R . , Zhu , Y . , Qi , J . , He , G . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Neuroligin 1 regulates spines andsynapticplasticityviaLIMK1 / co ﬁ lin - mediatedactinreorganization . JournalofCell Biology 212 , 449 – 463 . McLaurin , J . , Golomb , R . , Jurewicz , A . , Antel , J . P . , & Fraser , P . E . ( 2000 ) . Inositol stereoiso - mersstabilizeanoligomericaggregateofAlzheimeramyloidbetapeptideandinhibitAbeta - induced toxicity . Journal of Biological Chemistry 275 , 18495 – 18502 . Meng , Y . , Takahashi , H . , Meng , J . , Zhang , Y . , Lu , G . , Asrar , S . , etal . ( 2004 ) . RegulationofADF / co ﬁ lin phosphorylation and synaptic function by LIM - kinase . Neuropharmacology 47 , 746 – 754 . Meng , Y . , Zhang , Y . , Tregoubo , V . , Falls , D . L . , & Jia , Z . ( 2003 ) . Regulationofspine morphol - ogyandsynapticfunctionbyLIMKandtheactincytoskeleton . ReviewofNeuroscience 14 , 233 – 240 . Meng , Y . , Zhang , Y . , Tregoubov , V . , Janus , C . , Cruz , L . , Jackson , M . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Abnormal spine morphology and enhanced LTP in LIMK - 1 knockout mice . Neuron 35 , 121 – 133 . Mikati , M . A . , Breitsprecher , D . , Jansen , S . , Reisler , E . , & Goode , B . L . ( 2015 ) . Coronin en - hances actin ﬁ lament severing by recruiting co ﬁ lin to ﬁ lament sides and altering F - actin conformation . Journal of Molecular Biology 427 , 3137 – 3147 . Minamide , L . S . , Maiti , S . , Boyle , J . A . , Davis , R . C . , Coppinger , J . A . , Bao , Y . , etal . ( 2010 ) . Iso - lation and characterization of cytoplasmic co ﬁ lin - actin rods . Journal of Biological Chemistry 285 , 5450 – 5460 . Mizuno , K . ( 2013 ) . Signaling mechanisms and functional roles of co ﬁ lin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation . Cellular Signalling 25 , 457 – 469 . Moon , H . M . , & Winshaw - Boris , A . ( 2013 ) . Cytoskeleton in action : Lissencephaly , a neuronal migration disorder . Interdisciplinary Reviews in Developmental Biology 2 , 229 – 245 . Nadkarni , A . V . , & Brieher , W . M . ( 2014 ) . Aip1 destabilizes co ﬁ lin - saturated actin ﬁ la - ments by severing and accelerating monomer dissociation from ends . Current Biology 24 , 2749 – 2757 . Nagata - Ohashi , K . , Ohta , Y . , Goto , K . , Chiba , S . , Mori , R . , Nishita , M . , et al . ( 2004 ) . A path - way of neuregulin - induced activation of co ﬁ lin - phosphatase Slingshot and co ﬁ lin in lamellipodia . Journal of Cell Biology 165 , 465 – 471 . Nishikima , A . , Fukuhara , H . , Su , W . , Hongu , T . , Takasuga , S . , Mihara , H . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Se - quentialregulationofDOCK2dynamicsbytwophospholipidsduringneutrophilche - motaxis . Science 324 , 384 – 387 . Ohta , Y . , Kousaka , K . , Nagata - Ohashi , K . , Ohashi , K . , Muramoto , A . , Shima , Y . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Differential activities , subcellular distribution and tissue expression patterns of three members of Slingshot family phosphatases that dephosphorylate co ﬁ lin . Genes and Cells 8 , 811 – 824 . Ono , S . , Mohri , K . , & Ono , K . ( 2004 ) . Microscopic evidencethat actin - interacting protein 1 actively disassembles actin - depolymerizing factor / co ﬁ lin - bound actin ﬁ laments . Journal of Biological Chemistry 279 , 14207 – 14212 . Otvos , L . , Jr . ( 2014 ) . Peptide - based drug research and development : Relative costs , com - parative value . Pharmaceutical Outsourcing 15 , 16 – 20 . Otvos , L . , Jr . , & Wade , J . D . ( 2014 ) . Current challenges in peptide - based drug discovery . Frontiers in Chemistry 8 ( 2 ) , 62 ( 2014 Aug ) . Ovsepian , S . V . , O ' Leary , V . B . , Ntziachristos , V . , & Dolly , J . O . ( 2016 ) . Circumventing brain barriers : Nanovehicles for retroaxonal therapeutic delivery . Trends in Molecular Medicine 22 , 983 – 993 . Padi , S . S . , Shi , X . Q . , Zhao , Y . Q . , Ruff , M . R . , Baichoo , N . , Pert , C . B . , etal . ( 2012 ) . Attenuation ofrodentneuropathicpainbyanorallyactivepeptide , RAP - 103 , whichpotentlyblocks CCR2 - andCCR5 - mediatedmonocytechemotaxisandin ﬂ ammation . Pain153 , 95 – 106 . Panza , F . , Seripa , D . , Solfrizzi , V . , Imbimbo , B . P . , Lozupone , M . , Leo , A . , et al . ( Oct 6 , 2016 ) . Emerging drugs to reduce abnormal β - amyloid protein in Alzhemier ' s disease pa - tients . Expert Opinion on Emerging Drugs , 1 – 15 ( Epub ahead of print ) . Perez - Nunez , R . , Barraza , N . , Gonzalez - Jamett , A . , Cardenas , A . M . , Barnier , J . V . , & Caviedes , P . ( 2016 ) . Overexpressed Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule ( DSCAM ) deregu - lates P21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) activity in an in vitro neuronal model of down syn - drome : Consequencesoncellprocessformationandextension . NeurotoxicityResearch 30 , 76 – 87 . Pernier , J . , Shekhar , S . , Jegou , A . , Guichard , B . , & Carlier , M . F . ( 2016 ) . Pro ﬁ lin interaction with actin ﬁ lament barbed ends controls dynamic instability , capping , branching and motility . Developmental Cell 36 , 201 – 214 . Pfannstiel , J . , Cyrklaff , M . , Habermann , A . , Stoeva , S . , Grif ﬁ ths , G . , Shoeman , R . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Human co ﬁ lin forms oligomers exhibiting actin binding activity . Journal of Biological Chemistry 276 , 49476 – 49484 . Phillips , M . , & Pozzo - Miller , L . ( 2015 ) . Dendritic spine dysgenesis inautism related disor - ders . Neuroscience Letters 601 , 30 – 40 . Polianova , M . T . , Ruscetti , F . W . , Pert , C . B . , & Ruff , M . R . ( 2005 ) . Chemokine receptor - 5 ( CCR5 ) is a receptor for the HIV entry inhibitor peptide T ( DAPTA ) . Antiviral Research 67 , 83 – 92 . Popow - Wozniak , A . , Mazur , A . J . , Mannherz , H . G . , Malicka - Blaszkiewicz , M . , & Nowak , D . ( 2012 ) . Co ﬁ lin overexpression affects actin cytoskeleton organization and migration of human colon adenocarcinoma cells . Histochemistry and Cell Biology 138 , 725 – 736 . Poukkula , M . , Hakala , M . , Pentinmikko , N . , Sweeney , M . O . , Jansen , S . , Mattila , J . , et al . ( 2014 ) . GMF promotes leading - edge dynamics and collective cell migration in vivo . Current Biology 24 , 2533 – 2540 . Qiao , H . , Foote , M . , Graham , K . , Wu , Y . , & Zhou , Y . ( 2014 ) . 14 - 3 - 3proteinsare requiredfor hippocampallong - termpotentiationandassociativelearningandmemory . Journalof Neuroscience 34 , 4801 – 4808 . Qiu , Y . , Chen , W . Y . , Wang , Z . Y . , Liu , F . , Wei , M . , Ma , C . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Simvastatin attenu - ates neuropathic pain by inhibiting the RhoA / LIMK / co ﬁ lin pathway . Neurochemical Research 41 , 2457 – 2469 . Romaniello , R . , Arrigoni , F . , Bassi , M . T . , & Borgatti , R . ( 2015 ) . Mutations in α - and β - tubulin encoding genes : Implications in brain malformations . Brain & Development 37 , 273 – 280 . Romero , G . , von Zastrow , M . , & Friedman , P . A . ( 2011 ) . Role of PDZ proteins in regulating traf ﬁ cking , signaling , andfunctionofGPCRs : Means , motif , andopportunity . Advances in Pharmacology 62 , 279 – 314 . Rosi , S . , Pert , C . B . , Ruff , M . R . , McGann - Gramling , K . , & Wenk , G . L . ( 2005 ) . Chemokine re - ceptor5antagonist D - Ala - peptideT - amidereducesmicrogliaandastrocyteactivation within the hippocampus in a neuroin ﬂ ammatory rat model of Alzheimer ' s disease . Neuroscience 134 , 671 – 676 . Rotty , J . D . , Wu , C . , Haynes , E . M . , Suarez , C . , Winkelman , J . D . , Johnson , H . E . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Pro ﬁ lin - 1 serves as a gatekeeper for actin assembly by Arp2 / 3 - dependent and - independent pathways . Developmental Cell 32 , 54 – 67 . Ruff , M . R . ( 2014 ) . PeptidesfortreatingAlzheimer ' sdiseaseandrelatedconditions . United States patent application . , pub . No . : US 2014 / 0322252 A1 , pub . Date : Oct . 30 , 2014 , app # 14 / 263 , 560 . 26 A . E . Shaw , J . R . Bamburg / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 175 ( 2017 ) 17 – 27 Rust , M . B . ( 2015 ) . Novel functions for ADF / co ﬁ lin in excitatory synapses - lessons from gene - targeted mice . Communicative & Integrative Biology 8 , e1114194 . Sakuma , M . , Shirai , Y . , Yoshino , K . - I . , Kuramasu , M . , Nakamura , T . , Yanagita , T . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Novel PKC α - mediated phosphorylation site ( s ) on co ﬁ lin and their potential role in terminating histamine release . Molecular Biology of the Cell 23 , 3707 – 3721 . Sancini , G . , Gregori , M . , Salvati , E . , Cambianica , I . , Re , F . , Ornaghi , F . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Functionalization with TAT - peptide enhances blood - brain barrier crossing in vitro of nanoliposomes carrying a curcumin - derivative to bind amyloid - β peptide . Journal of Nanomedicine and Nanotechology 4 , 3 . Scott , A . M . , Wolchok , J . D . , & Old , L . J . ( 2012 ) . Antibody therapyof cancer . NatureReviews Cancer 12 , 278 – 287 . Segura , I . , Lange , C . , Knevels , E . , Moskalyuk , A . , Pulizzi , R . , Eelen , G . , et al . ( 2016 ) . The ox - ygen sensor PHD2 controls dendritic spines and synapses via modi ﬁ cation of ﬁ lamin A . Cell Reports 14 , 2653 – 2667 . Sevigny , J . , Chiao , P . , Bussiere , T . , Weinreb , P . H . , Williams , L . , Maier , M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . The antibodyaducanumab reducesA β plaquesinAlzheimer ' s disease . Nature537 , 50 – 56 . Shaughnessy , A . F . ( 2012 ) . Monoclonal antibodies : Magic bullets with a hefty price tag . BMJ 2012 ( 345 ) , e8346 . Sloane , J . A . , & Vartanian , T . K . ( 2007 ) . WAVE1 and regulation of actin nucleation in myelination . The Neuroscientist 13 , 486 – 491 . Song , J . Y . , Ichtchenko , K . , Sudhof , T . C . , & Brose , N . ( 1999 ) . Neuroligin 1 is a postsynaptic cell - adhesion molecule of excitatory synapses . Proceedingsof the NationalAcademy of Sciences of the United States of America 96 , 1100 – 1105 . Soosairajah , J . , Maiti , S . , Wiggan , O . , Sarmiere , P . , Moussi , N . , Sarevic , B . , etal . ( 2005 ) . Inter - playbetweencomponentsofanovelLIMkinase - slingshotphosphatasecomplexreg - ulates co ﬁ lin . The EMBO Journal 24 , 473 – 486 . Spence , E . F . , & Soderling , S . H . ( 2015 ) . Actin out : Regulation of the synaptic cytoskeleton . Journal of Biological Chemistry 290 , 28613 – 28622 . Stalmans , S . , Bracke , N . , Wynendaele , E . , Gevaert , B . , Peremans , K . , Burvenich , C . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Cell - penetrating peptides selectively cross the blood - brain barrier in vivo . PLoS ONE 10 , e0139652 . Suarez , C . , Carroll , R . T . , Burke , T . A . , Christensen , J . R . , Bestul , A . J . , Sees , J . A . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Pro ﬁ lin regulates F - actin network homeostasis by favoring formin over Arp2 / 3 com - plex . Developmental Cell 32 , 43 – 53 . Sun , N . , Funke , S . A . , & Willbold , D . ( 2012 ) . Asurveyofpeptideswitheffectivetherapeutic potential in Alzheimer ' s disease rodent models or in human clinical studies . Mini - Reviews in Medicinal Chemistry 12 , 388 – 398 . Suzuki , K . , Hayashi , Y . , Nakahara , S . , Kumazaki , H . , Prox , J . , Horiuchi , K . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Activity - dependent proteolytic cleavage of neuroligin - 1 . Neuron 76 , 410 – 422 . Tada , H . , Miyazaki , T . , Takemoto , K . , Takase , K . , Jitsuki , S . , Nakajima , W . , etal . ( 2016 ) . Neo - natal isolation augments social dominance by altering actin dynamics in the medial prefrontal cortex . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113 , 7097 – 7105 . Tan , A . M . , Chang , Y . W . , Zhao , P . , Hains , B . C . , & Waxman , S . G . ( 2011 ) . Rac1 - regulated dendriticspineremodelingcontributestoneuropathicpainafterperipheralnervein - jury . Experimental Neurology 232 , 222 – 233 . Tejada - Simon , M . V . ( 2015 ) . Modulation of actin dynamics by Rac1 to target cognitive function . Journal of Neurochemistry 133 , 767 – 779 . Toshima , J . , Toshima , J . Y . , Suzuki , M . , Noda , T . , & Mizuno , K . ( 2001 ) . Cell - type - speci ﬁ c ex - pression of a TESK1 promoter - linked lacZ gene in transgenic mice . Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 286 , 566 – 573 . Trabulo , S . , Cardoso , A . L . , Mano , M . , & Pedroso de Lima , M . C . ( 2010 ) . Cell - penetrating peptides — Mechanisms of cellular uptake and generation of delivery systems . Pharmaceuticals 3 , 961 – 993 . Tu , S . , Okamoto , S . , Lipton , S . A . , & Xu , H . ( 2014 ) . OligomericA β - inducedsynapticdysfunc - tion in Alzheimer ' s disease . Molecular Neurodegeneration 9 , 48 . Um , J . W . , Kaufman , A . C . , Kostylev , M . , Heiss , J . K . , Stagi , M . , Takahashi , H . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 is a coreceptor for Alzheimer A β oligomer bound to cellular prion protein . Neuron 79 , 887 – 902 . Vitriol , E . A . , McMillen , L . M . , Kapustina , M . , Gomez , S . M . , Vavylonis , D . , & Zheng , J . Q . ( 2015 ) . Two functionally distinct sources of actin monomers supply the leading edge of lamellipodia . Cell Reports 11 , 433 – 445 . Walsh , K . P . , Kuhn , T . B . , & Bamburg , J . R . ( 2014b ) . Cellular prion protein : A co - receptor mediatingneuronalco ﬁ lin - actinrodformationinducedby β - amyloidandproin ﬂ am - matory cytokines . Prion 8 , 375 – 380 . Walsh , K . P . , Minamide , L . S . , Kane , S . J . , Shaw , A . E . , Brown , D . R . , Pulford , B . , etal . ( 2014a ) . Amyloid - β and proin ﬂ ammatory cytokines utilize a prion protein - dependent path - way to activate NADPH oxidase and induce co ﬁ lin - actin rods in hippocampal neu - rons . PloS One 9 , e95995 . Wang , W . , Rai , A . , Hur , E . M . , Smilansky , Z . , Chang , K . T . , & Min , K . T . ( 2016b ) . DSCR1 isre - quiredforbothaxonalgrowthconeextensionandsteering . JournalofCellBiology213 , 451 – 462 . Wang , Y . , Shibasaki , F . , & Mizuno , K . ( 2005 ) . Calcium signal - induced co ﬁ lin dephosphor - ylation is mediated by Slingshot via calcineurin . Journal of Biological Chemistry 280 , 12683 – 12689 . Wang , M . , Zhi , D . , Wang , H . , Ru , Y . , Ren , H . , Wang , N . , et al . ( 2016a ) . TAT - HSA - α - MSH fu - sion protein with extended half - life inhibits tumor necrosis factor - α inbrain in ﬂ am - mation of mice . Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 100 , 5353 – 5361 . Wang , W . , Zhu , J . Z . , Chang , K . T . , & Min , K . T . ( 2012 ) . DSCR1 interacts with FMRP and is required for spine morphogenesis and local protein synthesis . The EMBO Journal 31 , 3655 – 3666 . Weinstock , M . T . , Francis , J . N . , Redman , J . S . , & Kay , M . S . ( 2012 ) . Protease - resistant pep - tide design . Biopolymers 98 , 431 – 442 . Wiggan , O . , Schroder , B . , Krapf , D . , Bamburg , J . R . , & DeLuca , J . G . ( 2017 ) . Co ﬁ lin regulates nuclear architecture through a myosin - II dependent mechanotransduction module . Scienti ﬁ c Reports 7 , 40953 . Wiggan , O . , Shaw , A . E . , DeLuca , J . G . , & Bamburg , J . R . ( 2012 ) . ADF / co ﬁ lin regulates acto - myosin assembly through competative inhibition of myosin II binding to F - actin . Developmental Cell 22 , 530 – 543 . Woo , J . A . , Boggess , T . , Uhlar , C . , Wang , X . , Khan , H . , Cappos , G . , et al . ( 2015b ) . RanBP9 at the intersection between co ﬁ lin and A β pathologies : Rescue of neurodegenerative changes by RanBP9 reduction . Cell Death & Disease 6 , 1676 . Woo , J . A . , Zhao , X . , Khan , H . , Penn , C . , Wang , X . , Joly - Amado , A . , et al . ( 2015a ) . Slingshot - co ﬁ lin activation mediates mitochondrial and synaptic dysfunction via A β ligation to β 1 - integrin conformers . Cell Death and Differentiation 22 , 921 – 934 . Xu , S . , Liu , G . , Bao , X . , Wu , J . , Li , S . , Zheng , B . , etal . ( 2014 ) . Rosiglitazonepreventsamyloid - β oligomer - induced impairment of synapse formation and plasticity via increasing dendriteandspinemitochondrialnumber . JournalofAlzheimer ' sDisease39 , 239 – 251 . Ydenberg , C . A . , Padrick , S . B . , Sweeney , M . O . , Gandhi , M . , Sokolova , O . , & Goode , B . L . ( 2013 ) . GMF severs actin - Arp2 / 3 complex branch junctions by a co ﬁ lin - like mecha - nism . Current Biology 23 , 1037 – 1045 . Zhang , Q . , Gao , X . , Li , C . , Feliciano , C . , Wang , D . , Zhou , D . , etal . ( 2016b ) . Impaireddendritic development and memory in Sorbs2 knock - out mice . Journal of Neuroscience 36 , 2247 – 2260 . Zhang , D . , Wang , J . , & Xu , D . ( 2016a ) . Cell - penetratingpeptidesasnoninvasivetransmem - brane vectors for the development of novel multifunctional drug - delivery systems . Journal of Controlled Release 229 , 130 – 139 . Zhang , Y . , Zhang , Z . G . , Chopp , M . , Meng , Y . , Zhang , L . , Mahmood , A . , et al . ( 2016c ) . Treat - ment of traumatic brain injury in rats with N - acetyl - seryl - aspartyl - lysyl - proline . Journal of Neurosurgery , 1 – 14 2016 May 20 . ( Epub ahead of print ) . Zhao , L . , Ma , Q . L . , Calon , F . , Harris - White , M . E . , Yang , F . , Lim , G . P . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Role of p21 - activated kinase pathway defects in the cognitive de ﬁ cits of Alzheimer disease . Nature Neuroscience 9 , 234 – 242 . Zhou , Q . , Homma , K . J . , & Poo , M . ( 2004 ) . Shrinkage of dendritic spines associated with long - term depression of hippocampal synapses . Neuron 44 , 749 – 757 . Zhou , L . , Jones , E . V . , & Murai , K . K . ( 2012 ) . EphAsignalingpromotesactin - baseddendritic spine remodeling through slingshot phosphatase . Journal of Biological Chemistry 287 , 9346 – 9359 . Zhou , Z . , Meng , Y . , Asrar , S . , Todorovski , Z . , & Jia , Z . ( 2009 ) . A critical role of Rho - kinase ROCK2 in the regulation of spine and synaptic function . Neuropharmacology 56 , 81 – 89 . Zou , L . - L . , Ma , J . - L . , Wang , T . , Yang , T . B . , & Liu , C . - B . ( 2013 ) . Cell - penetrating peptide - mediated therapeutic molecule delivery into the central nervous . Current Neuropharmacology 11 , 197 – 208 . 27 A . E . Shaw , J . R . Bamburg / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 175 ( 2017 ) 17 – 27