Pattern Recognition Letters 67 ( 2015 ) 81 – 90 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Pattern Recognition Letters journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / patrec comRAT - C : A computational compound Remote Associates Test solver based on language data and its comparison to human performance ✩ Ana - Maria Olte¸teanu ∗ , Zoe Falomir Cognitive Systems Department , Spatial Cognition Research Centre , Universität Bremen , Enrique - Schmidt - Str . 5 , Bremen 28359 , Germany a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Available online 9 June 2015 Keywords : Computational creativity Remote Associates Test Cognitive systems Knowledge base Language corpus Cognitive modeling a b s t r a c t Discovering the processes and types of knowledge organization which are involved in the creative process is a challenge up to this date . Human creativity is usually measured by psychological tests , such as the Remote Associates Test ( RAT ) . In this paper , an approach based on a speciﬁc type of knowledge organization and pro - cesses which enables automatic solving of RAT queries is implemented ( comRAT ) as a part of a more general cognitive theoretical framework for creative problem - solving ( CreaCogs ) . This aims to study : ( a ) whether a convergence process can be used to solve such queries and ( b ) if frequency of appearance of the test items in language data may inﬂuence knowledge association or discovery in solving such problems . The comRAT uses a knowledge base of language data extracted from the Corpus of Contemporary American English . The results obtained are compared to results obtained in empirical tests with humans . In order to explain whysomeanswersmightbepreferredoverothers , frequencies ofappearanceofthequeriesandsolu - tions are analyzed . The diﬃculty encountered by humans when solving RAT queries is expressed in response times and percentage of participants solving the query , and a signiﬁcant moderate correlation between hu - man data on query diﬃculty and the data provided by this approach is obtained . © 2015 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction In the quest to achieve human - like artiﬁcial intelligence , some of the attributes considered the hardest to replicate are creativity [ 14 ] and creative problem - solving . Humans might be biased against at - tributing creativity to machines [ 17 ] , possibly because of considering it a highly deﬁning human trait . However research on animal tool use [ 23 ] and frameworks for studying creativity in animals [ 5 , 21 ] show that creativity is not limited to the human realm alone . The study of cognitively - inspired computational creativity can beneﬁt both artiﬁcial intelligence and cognitive science . For artiﬁcial intelligence , it can show us the way towards more versatile , ﬂexible and robust artiﬁcial agents and artiﬁcial cognitive systems . For cog - nitive science , it can provide us with the better understanding of our own creativity . Various theoretical proposals have been made on the nature of creativity [ 8 , 18 , 19 ] . However , the ﬁeld of computational creative problem - solving combines ( i ) the generative powers of creativity with ( ii ) the constraints and evaluative functions implicitly involved ✩ This paper has been recommended for acceptance by Lledó Museros . ∗ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 49 17665547510 . E - mail addresses : amoodu @ informatik . uni - bremen . de , amo _ odu @ yahoo . com ( A . - M . Olte¸teanu ) , zfalomir @ informatik . uni - bremen . de ( Z . Falomir ) . in problem - solving , thus providing a well - balanced tool to study computational creativity . From the cognitive systems perspective , one of the major un - solved questions about creative problem - solving is what kind of knowledge organization and processes endow the human cognitive system with creative abilities . The particular characteristics of cre - ative problem - solving in humans ( e . g . remote association , functional ﬁxedness , incubation , insight ) , together with data on such abilities ( i . e . performance time , speciﬁc errors , quantity and domain of as - sociations , quality of elaboration ) can be used to try to understand and model such knowledge organization and processes . In order to reﬁne hypotheses about which kinds of knowledge organization and processes enable creative problem - solving in humans and in the implementation of cognitive systems which manifest such cre - ativity , such hypotheses need to be implemented in systems which can be tested with creativity tests comparable to the ones given to humans . Various psychological tests have been used to measure creativ - ity ; some of the most widely used in the ﬁeld are the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking ( TTCT ) ( for a critical review see [ 22 ] ) . Some tests reach up to empirically studying insight [ 16 , 25 ] . However , in - sight problems take a long time to administer to humans , and would need signiﬁcant amounts of problem - speciﬁc common - sense knowl - edge to be given to artiﬁcial systems aiming at replicating the human performance . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . patrec . 2015 . 05 . 015 0167 - 8655 / © 2015 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 82 A . - M . Olte¸teanu , Z . Falomir / Pattern Recognition Letters 67 ( 2015 ) 81 – 90 Thus , a good starting point for testing any assumptions about prin - ciples of knowledge organization and processes in creative problem - solving is to use a smaller task , which enlists abilities similar to in - sight problem - solving , though providing enough human data for a rich comparison between human performance and the performance of the automated solver . Such a task is the Remote Associates Test ( RAT ) , initially proposed by Mednick and Mednick [ 28 ] . The following work is focused on the design , implementation and analysis of a computational solver which can answer RAT queries in a cognitively inspired manner . This automated RAT solver presents a speciﬁc type of knowledge organization and implements one of the processes in a previously proposed theoretical framework for creative problem - solving [ 30 , 31 ] . An artiﬁcial cognitive system or other computational system which solves the Remote Associates Test does not exist to our knowl - edge . Furthermore , computational creativity work , though having im - plemented a series of systems in a wide array of domains – e . g . poetry [ 13 ] , painting [ 12 ] , mathematics [ 24 ] , magic trick making [ 33 ] , etc . – does not generally focus on implementing systems capable of solving tasks used in the empirical assessment of creativity . The rest of this paper proceeds as follows . The RAT test is pre - sented in Section 2 . The relationship between the RAT test and the principles of the CreaCogs theoretical framework is presented in Section 3 , together with an explanation about how a process of this framework has been adapted for the RAT . The set - up of the proposed RAT problem - solver is presented in Section 4 , where the knowledge used , the system’s knowledge organization and the solving process are described . Section 5 presents a hypothesis on why some answers are chosen by humans when multiple answers are available . This hypothesis analyzes frequency data to propose an explanation for human preferred answers and deﬁne item contribution . Section 6 . 1 presents the results obtained with the computational RAT without using frequency data , and compares these to human normative data [ 10 ] . Plausible answers are also reached by the system and discussed . An empirical analysis on preferred answers using frequency data is presented in Section 6 . 2 . The correlation observed between fre - quency results calculated using the hypothesis and diﬃculty of test items for humans ( represented by response time data and percentage of people solving each test ) is described in Section 6 . 3 . A discussion of the results is presented in Section 7 , followed by conclusions and further work in Section 8 . 2 . The Remote Associates Test ( RAT ) The Remote Associates Test proposed by Mednick and Mednick [ 28 ] is meant to measure creativity as a function of the participant’s ability to associate multiple remote items . Mednick believed that the creative process , independent of domain , has an associative basis [ 27 ] . He stated that the ability to “bring mutually remote ideas into con - tiguity facilitates creative solving” and believed that “the organization of an individual’s associations will inﬂuence the probability and speed of attainment of a creative solution” [ 27 ] . In order to account for these theoretical assumptions , Mednick proposed and reﬁned the Remote Associates Test [ 28 ] as an empirical tool for investigating creativity . The RAT has been amply used in the literature [ 2 , 9 , 15 ] . It takes the following form : given three word items , the participant has to ﬁnd a fourth term , which is common or can be connected to all of them . For example , the following three items are given : cottage , Swiss , cake ; and the participant has to come up with a fourth related term . An an - swer considered correct in this case according to the studies by Med - nick and Mednick [ 28 ] is cheese , because of the following associates : cottage cheese , swiss cheese and cheese cake . In Mednick’s opinion , the RAT requires the participant to “form as - sociative elements into new combinations by providing mediating con - nective links” [ 27 ] . After Mednick’s proposal , the RAT , originally implemented in English , has also been implemented in other languages , including Japanese [ 4 ] , Jamaican [ 20 ] , Hebrew [ 29 ] and Dutch [ 11 ] . Worthen and Clark [ 34 ] differentiated between two types of items which appeared in the test by Mednick and Mednick [ 28 ] : structural remote associates and functional remote associates . They posited that functional associates ellicit a non - language relationship ( i . e . like the one between bird and egg ) and structural associates triggered items previously associated in the same syntactic structure ( e . g . black and magic ) . They proposed a remote associate test based on functional as - sociates ( FRAT ) . Bowden and Jung - Beeman [ 10 ] focused on obtaining normative data for compound remote associates ( i . e . those obtained from a syntactical compound , like a phrase or a compound noun ) , which are similar to the structural remote associates from Worthen and Clark’s categorization . Assuming that different types of knowl - edge will be necessary to solve the compound Remote Associates Test ( cRAT ) versus the functional Remote Associates Test , this paper chose to focus on a cRAT solver , and used the existing normative data [ 10 ] as a comparison point . The stimuli given in the test are meant to be “remote” from each other , as Mednick considered their juxtaposition might enable the participant to “draw a spark” . This “spark” might be similar to some - thing popularly known as “the ﬂash of insight” . Indeed , the RAT is gen - erally an interesting benchmark to initially test associative mecha - nisms used in creative problem - solving because performance in the RAT has been correlated with performance in insight problems [ 32 ] . Such a correlation might point to similar association - based search processes in both types of problems . Results are thus available to the solver in a similar phenomeno - logical manner when solving the RAT and when solving insight prob - lems . When solving the RAT , the answer word seems to pop - up in the participant’s consciousness in a similar manner in which a produc - tive representation or a way of solving the problem appears in insight problems in the illumination phase . Thus , participants cannot report on their solving process [ 6 ] and the ‘‘aha ! ’’ experience is similar to that encountered when successfully solving insight problems [ 9 ] . In our opinion , this happens in both cases due to a search process based on associations to the initial items in the problem space . The ‘‘aha ! ’’ effect happens when a group of implicit associations converges upon a possible solution or a new representation structure ( i . e . a different way to see the problem ) . The following section explains the framework and mechanism this opinion is based on , after which such a mechanism is imple - mented and the assumption tested in a RAT solver . 3 . The Creative Cognitive problem - solving theoretical framework ( CreaCogs ) and the convergence process of association For a cognitive agent , the organization of its knowledge base is rel - evant as it can make computationally easier certain processes which help in creative problem - solving . Encountering items in a similar context can build associations in the agent’s knowledge base that can be further used to : ( i ) search for a problem solution , ( ii ) transform the initial objects in the problem , and ( iii ) formulate or reformulate the problem in a way that makes it solvable for the agent [ 31 ] . For this purpose , the CreaCogs framework proposed [ 30 , 31 ] to use a knowledge organization system on three levels for modeling vari - ous creative problem - solving tasks : L1 : a subsymbolic level , which encodes the various features of ob - jects ( shape , color , material , motion trajectory , etc . ) in similar - ity based feature maps ; L2 : a concept level , at which each object known is encoded sym - bolically ; L3 : a structured representation level , which encodes larger repre - sentation structures and templates in the context of which the A . - M . Olte¸teanu , Z . Falomir / Pattern Recognition Letters 67 ( 2015 ) 81 – 90 83 Fig . 1 . An upward creative search process . concept has been encoded ( problem templates , multiple con - cepts in a certain relationship , or a set of actions applied in a certain order to such objects ) . Each level is grounded in the previous level . The subsymbolic level ( L1 ) encodes sensorial representation obtained through experience . It is used for grounding concepts ( L2 ) and for searching for objects or concepts with similar features , on various feature dimensions . The structured representation level ( L3 ) provides the ability to switch be - tween various contexts in which a particular object or concept has been encountered , thus allowing for re - representation , since one of the major issues in creative problem - solving and insight is the ability to re - represent the given problem space . In human creative problem - solving , a set of objects or problem elements is given , and a certain solution state is requested ( this so - lution state might be ambiguous or can lend itself to multiple inter - pretations ) . Human participants generally manifest functional ﬁxed - ness [ 1 , 7 , 16 ] , which means they tend to consider a particular subset of the given objects as being relevant , together with certain problem - solving routines which are familiar to the solver and generally as - sociated to those objects . Creative problem - solving generally entails the ability to break this functional ﬁxedness [ 3 , 26 ] and to look at the problem in a new way , by representing different objects as rel - evant or by ﬁnding a productive problem - solving template . This type of search for a productive problem template is supported by the CreaCogs framework [ 30 ] and its processes . One of these processes involves taking the initially given concepts or objects of the problem and searching for the structured representations in which that con - cept was involved in one’s experience . This process aims to ﬁnd a sub - set of such structured representations or problem templates which overlap with the solution . One can then use these productive prob - lem templates to represent the problem or parts thereof . In this asso - ciative search process , one can either : ( a ) converge upon a productive problem template or structured representation , when multiple concepts and the solution re - quired are associated with it ; ( b ) ﬁnd productive parts of representation which need creative construction in order to become a productive representation of the problem . Let us explain the CreaCogs [ 30 ] formalization of this process : given the problem elements c 1 and c 2 , and an expected solution sol 4 , the set of problem templates PT is explored until a problem template ( PT x ) which contains a suitable solution ( sol x ) is found . Fig . 1 shows an upward creative search process , where a system has a set of problem templates PT in its knowledge base . This set of problem templates is searched for items in which the given elements of the current problem , c 1 and c 2 have been involved , selecting prob - lem representations which overlap with the solution sol 4 . This up - ward creative search process has been adapted for the RAT solver as Fig . 2 shows . Therefore , given an initial RAT query of three items , c 1 , c 2 and c 3 , the various representation structures in which the concepts have participated are activated from the knowledge base – these are ( c 1 , c a ) , ( c 2 , c b ) and ( c 3 , c c ) . A result item common to these represen - Fig . 2 . RAT solving from upward process . tation structures should be found – here called the convergence term , denoted as c x . If multiple results items are found , a convergence space is obtained . In the case of the RAT solver , there is no need of a lower subsym - bolic representation ( L1 ) in CreaCogs since the lexical representation of the concepts is obtained from the corpus ( L2 ) . The following sec - tion presents details of how this process was implemented in an au - tomated RAT solver . 4 . The computational RAT problem - solver for compound tests ( comRAT - C ) This section describes how the computational RAT for compound tests ( comRAT - C ) problem - solver is formulated , the knowledge base content ( Section 4 . 1 ) and organization ( Section 4 . 2 ) , and the solving process when a query is made ( Section 4 . 3 ) . 4 . 1 . The RAT knowledge base To build the RAT knowledge base ( RAT - KB ) the proposed system is endowed with knowledge from language data , speciﬁcally n - grams parsed out of the publicly available , genre - balanced Corpus of Con - temporary American English ( COCA ) . 1 First , the approx . 1 million 2 most frequent 2 - grams of this corpus are pruned ( based on the part of speech the data is classiﬁed as ) , in order to remove items not relevant for the RAT task . This step uses the tags the data came with , which are indexed according to the UCREL CLAWS7 Tagset . 3 As a result , 219 , 438 items are obtained , those categorized with the tags displayed in Table 1 . These are further compressed to 205 , 602 unique items , ignor - ing case differences – the frequency data of various forms is added to - gether . However , this set of items includes plurals as separate forms . Note that this dataset is not initially related to any RAT given to humans – that is , there is no a priori evidence on whether useful items for such a task where present in the dataset or not . 4 . 2 . Knowledge aquisition and organization by association The comRAT is presented sequentially with each of the prese - lected 2 - gram sequences of the corpus , and it is endowed with three types of atomic knowledge structures : Concept , Expression and Link . When a 2 - gram is presented to the system , it is registered as an Ex - pression . The system then checks if it is aware of the concepts con - tained in this expression – any concept that is unknown is added to its Concept list . A bidirectional Link is attached to each of the Concept s in the presented Expression . After a while , each Concept is thus con - nected by Link s to all the other Concept s it has formed an expression with , thus forming a hub of incoming connections . 1 Corpus of Contemporary American English ( COCA ) : http : / / corpus . byu . edu / coca / 2 The initial dataset contains 1 , 048 , 720 items . 3 For a complete list of the UCREL CLAWS7 Tagset see : http : / / ucrel . lancs . ac . uk / claws7tags . html 84 A . - M . Olte¸teanu , Z . Falomir / Pattern Recognition Letters 67 ( 2015 ) 81 – 90 Table 1 Set of tags used for extraction of items from 2 - grams of the Corpus of Contemporary American English . Tag Description Example FU unclassiﬁed word FW foreign word chateau JJ general adjective blue ND1 singular noun of direction north NN common noun , neutral for number sheep , cod NN1 singular common noun book , child NN2 plural common noun books , children RA adverb , after nominal head else , galore REX adverb introducing appositional constructions namely RR general adverb down RT quasi - nominal adverb of time now , tomorrow VB0 be , base form ﬁnite , imperative , subjunctive VVG - ing participle of lexical verb giving , working VVN past participle of lexical verb given , worked Table 2 Example activation of linked items for query cottage , Swiss and cake . ( cottage + ∗ ) OR ( ∗ + cottage ) ( Swiss + ∗ ) OR ( ∗ + Swiss ) ( cake + ∗ ) OR ( ∗ + cake ) cottage cheese Swiss Alps cake batter cottage garden Swiss army cake decorating cottage industries Swiss ball cake ﬂour cottage . . . Swiss chard cake layer . . . cottage Swiss cheese carrot cake . . . cottage Swiss chocolate cheese cake Note that some of the RAT queries might refer to compound nouns which will appear unsplit in the corpus . Thus , after all the expressions have been acquired by comRAT , it proceeds to compare each Concept with other known Concept s , in order to obtain knowl - edge about compound words , which are not marked by the tagset in Table 1 . If comRAT recognizes a Concept as part - of another Concept , it will then try to match the second part of the assumed compound ( lexical unit ) to the other Concept s it knows . If the match is success - ful , this compound word is also added as an Expression , and a Link is set between its composing lexical units . This concludes the knowledge acquisition and organization pro - cess , then comRAT is ready to accept queries . 4 . 3 . Query solving process Whenever a three - item query is received , each of the three items is activated . Then , all the Concept s which are Link ed to the ﬁrst three active items are activated . This implies activation of all the Concept s which have been previously observed in an Expression , independent of whether they appeared in the ﬁrst or second position . Thus , as Table 2 shows , the second item in all two - item Expression s which contain the initial query items become active too . It is worth noting that every activation proceeds based on the Link s of each of the three Concept s activated by the query , and no list of corpus Expression s is built anymore . The comRAT checks for answers by searching its most activated concepts . Fig . 3 shows the activated items for the query illustrated in Table 2 . Note that the initial RAT items – cottage , Swiss and cake – illustrated in green have activated their connected concepts ( in blue ) . Two of the initial RAT query items have converged upon the an - swer chocolate ( in yellow ) . However , all RAT items have activated the Concept cheese ( in red ) . This high activation allows the Concept cheese to be considered as a response , on which the activation of the comRAT converges . Initially , the comRAT is set up to offer as answer the Concept found with the highest activation . If multiple items are activated from the three different Concept s , then different plausible answers are ob - tained . In the next section , a formalization of the frequencies related Fig . 3 . Visual depiction of the search and convergence process . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) to the different plausible answers in the corpus is presented . Note that , as multiple items might be activated from all three Concept s , a different answer to that obtained by the test developed by Med - nick and Mednick [ 28 ] could be offered . Then , an analysis of the fre - quencies of all plausible answers is important to compare the answer selected by the human participants of the RAT and the answer se - lected by the comRAT . Note also that some expressions which com - pose the correct answer in Mednick’s test might not be present in the pre - selected 2 - grams extracted from the corpus , and other items might arise as the answer by association to the items in the query . If no three - item convergence is found , the comRAT proposes the ﬁrst encountered item on which convergence from two query items has happened . 5 . Analysis of frequencies for ﬁnding preferred answers and item contribution In this section , an analysis of the frequencies of appearance of the three query items and the frequencies of the plausible solutions ob - tained by comRAT - C is set up in order to try to answer the following research questions : Q1 . Can the preference of humans for an answer over another be related to the frequency of using this word in language ? A . - M . Olte¸teanu , Z . Falomir / Pattern Recognition Letters 67 ( 2015 ) 81 – 90 85 Q2 . Is there a frequency - based inﬂuence of the query items over the various answers ? The following probabilistic approach is used in order to extract suitable frequency data from RAT - KB which could be comparable to the results obtained in the RAT test carried out by human partici - pants . First of all , let us deﬁne W as the set containing all the words in the RAT knowledge base ( KB ) , W = { w 1 , w 2 , w 3 , . . . , w m } and E as the set of two - word ( or 2 - gram ) expressions extracted from the Corpus of Contemporary American English , E = { e 1 , e 2 , e 3 , . . . , e n / e k = ( w i w j ) } . As all RAT - KB words are acquired from 2 - gram sequences , ∀ w i , ∃ e k ∈ E / e k = ( w i w j ) or e k = ( w j w i ) ( both combinations can exist ) . This is , for each known word w i , there exists at least one expression e k which has this word as the ﬁrst or second term . This is exempliﬁed by the concepts boathouse and houseboat , which are composed by : ( w i w j ) (cid:6) = ( w j w i ) . However , as we addressed compound RAT queries which are thought to depend more on structure than on semantics this does not make a difference . Therefore , from now on , ( w i w j ) will also refer to ( w j w i ) implicitly . For each of the given query items – w a , w b and w c – the RAT - KB contains a set of expressions in which they are included in combina - tion with other terms such as : E a = { ( w a w 1 ) , ( w 2 w a ) , ( w 3 w a ) , . . . , ( w a w (cid:7) 1 ) , ( w a w (cid:7) 2 ) , . . . , ( w a w m ) } E b = { ( w b w 1 ) , ( w 12 w b ) , ( w 30 w b ) , . . . , ( w b w (cid:7) 1 ) , ( w b w (cid:7) 2 ) , . . . , ( w b w n ) } E c = { ( w c w 9 ) , ( w 12 w c ) , ( w 2 w c ) , . . . , ( w c w (cid:7) 1 ) , ( w c w (cid:7) 2 ) , . . . , ( w c w p ) } Let us deﬁne a RAT query as q abc = ( w a , w b , w c ) where w a , w b and w c are the three items given in the test , and the set of answers to a RAT query as S abc = { w (cid:7) i ∈ e a ∩ e b ∩ e c | w (cid:7) i ∈ W , e a ∈ E a , e b ∈ E b , e c ∈ E c } . In order to ﬁnd out the inﬂuence of each item of the query in the ﬁnal solution , the frequencies of appearance of the expressions involved in the query are analyzed . For that , let us assume ﬁrst the probability of choosing the three query terms is equal P [ w a ] = P [ w b ] = P [ w c ] = 1 / 3 For all possible answer terms w (cid:7) i ∈ S abc , the likelihood that they will be the preferred answer if frequency of use is the factor deciding the preferred answer , is calculated as follows : P [ w (cid:7) i | w a ] = m (cid:2) i = 1 ( w a w (cid:7) i ) m (cid:2) i = 1 w a ( 1a ) P [ w (cid:7) i | w b ] = n (cid:2) i = 1 ( w b w (cid:7) i ) n (cid:2) i = 1 w b ( 1b ) P [ w (cid:7) i | w c ] = k (cid:2) i = 1 ( w c w (cid:7) i ) k (cid:2) i = 1 w c ( 1c ) The total probability that a particular answer to the RAT w (cid:7) i ∈ S abc may be the preferred response based on frequency of expressions is P [ w (cid:7) i ] = 1 / 3 · ( P [ w (cid:7) i | w a ] + P [ w (cid:7) i | w b ] + P [ w (cid:7) i | w c ] ) ( 2 ) ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) are applied for all the plausible solutions w (cid:7) i ∈ S abc and w p is deﬁned as the preferred answer based on frequency as follows : w p = max ( P [ w (cid:7) i ] ) where i = 1 to the total number of plausible solutions to the RAT ac - cording to the KB . Table 3 SomeRATqueriesandtheircorrect ( w (cid:7) 1 ) andplausible ( w (cid:7) 2 ) answers obtained automatically by comRAT - C . RAT query Answers w a w b w c w (cid:7) 1 w (cid:7) 2 High District House SCHOOL STATE Health Taker Less CARE RISK Cat Number Phone CALL HOUSE Chamber Mask Natural GAS DEATH Self Attorney Spending DEFENSE BILL Fight Control Machine GUN POLITICAL Off Military First BASE PAY French Car Shoe HORN COMPANY Cry Front Ship BATTLE WAR Change Circuit Cake SHORT DESIGN Child Scan Wash BRAIN BODY Mill Tooth Dust SAW GOLD Home Sea Bed SICK WATER Bayes’s theorem is applied a posteriori to see how much each of the given terms contributed to ﬁnding preferred answer w p P [ w a | w p ] = P [ w a ] · P [ w p | w a ] P [ w p ] ( 3a ) P [ w b | w p ] = P [ w b ] · P [ w p | w b ] P [ w p ] ( 3b ) P [ w c | w p ] = P [ w c ] · P [ w p | w c ] P [ w p ] ( 3c ) Thus , for each solution ( preferred or not ) in S abc , a triple c abc , p can be calculated for the contributions of each term to solution w p c abc , p = ( P [ w a | w p ] , P [ w b | w p ] , P [ w c | w p ] ) where the max ( P [ w a | w p ] , P [ w b | w p ] , P [ w c | w p ] ) determines which term ( w a , w b or w c ) was the most relevant when selecting the solu - tion w p for the q abc . 6 . Experimentation and results This section presents the experiments carried out to evaluate comRAT - C and explains the results obtained regarding : ( i ) the auto - matic answers provided by comRAT compared to the answers offered by humans ( Section 6 . 1 ) , ( ii ) the answer preference hypothesis based on frequency data ( Section 6 . 2 ) and ( iii ) the correlation of the fre - quency of automatic answers with human normative data as pertain - ing to query diﬃculty ( Section 6 . 3 ) . 6 . 1 . Results regarding comRAT - C For comparison of performance , the normative data from [ 10 ] is used . The results show that out of the 144 items used in Bowden and Jung - Beeman’s test , 64 are answered correctly 4 by the proposed system . The Appendix ( see Supplementary Material ) provides a de - tailed list of correct answers when all three expressions formed by the query items and the correct answer where known . Furthermore , in more than 20 cases , the comRAT - C obtained a dif - ferent answer w (cid:7) 2 which can be considered a plausible answer , that is , a response that a human may deem viable , although it is not the an - swer considered by Bowden and Jung - Beeman’s normative data ( see some examples in Table 3 ) . Some of these plausible answers ( w (cid:7) 2 ) are interesting since they are surprising examples of different “cre - ative response” or remote association convergence from the system . 4 Correctness in this case is considered as the exact answer provided by the system on its ﬁrst try . 86 A . - M . Olte¸teanu , Z . Falomir / Pattern Recognition Letters 67 ( 2015 ) 81 – 90 Fig . 4 . Diagram of results : ( a ) top left – correct , plausible and not answered items ; ( b ) top right – number of known items per query ; ( c ) down – distribution of knowledge items over items answered . Table 4 Analysis of the accuracy of responses provided by the system . RAT items in KB ∅ I II III Total Answer Correct 0 0 17 47 64 Plausible 2 11 12 1 26 Types Not solved 4 23 27 0 54 Total 6 34 56 48 Accuracy 30 . 36 % 97 . 92 % Other answers ( w (cid:7) 2 ) arise more obviously from data regularity , bring - ing forth associates that are common to all three query items , but hardly interesting from a creative perspective . The system in its cur - rent form cannot differentiate between those two . An explanation for these two cases can be that interesting plausible answers ( w (cid:7) 2 ) are responses which form new concepts with the three items in the query , while not surprising plausible answers ( w (cid:7) 2 ) are composed by attributes which are perhaps characteristic of many items ( or form an attribute - concept pair ) . In this case , the frequencies of such items or their part - of - speech tag might endow the system with the ability to differentiate between surprising ( i . e . less frequent ) and regular plau - sible answers . The performance of the system can be also assessed by analyzing the information acquired by its knowledge base ( KB ) . For example , an interesting issue is to check in how many cases all three expressions suggested by the query were inside the KB , and how did the system perform in case only two items where present . Fig . 4 illustrates the performance of comRAT - C as relating to the content of its KB . The proportion of correct , plausible and not solved items as relating to all 144 RAT queries is shown in Fig . 4 ( a ) . The pro - portion of queries for which 0 , 1 , 2 or all three items are known as relating to all 144 RAT queries is shown in Fig . 4 ( b ) . The distribution of knowledge ( as expressed in number of items known per query ) to answer performance is shown in Fig . 4 ( c ) . As Table 4 summarizes , in the cases where comRAT - C had all three items in its KB , its accuracy of response was at 97 . 92 % . If comRAT - C only knew the expressions formed by two query items and the correct answer , it found correct answers in 30 . 36 % of the cases . 5 Note that some plausible answers in Table 3 were obtained when comRAT - C had only two query items in its KB , instead of three . Some plausible answers were offered de - spite the “correct” term being in comRAT - KB because convergence items are equal for the comRAT - C if frequency data is not taken into account . Although queries with only two known items yielded only a 30 . 36 % performance , this proved that associative principles can add robustness to the system and help ﬁnd solutions even in the case where knowledge is incomplete . For the rest of the items in the test by Bowden and Jung - Beeman [ 10 ] , comRAT - C simply did not have enough knowledge to respond . 6 . 2 . Results regarding the preferred convergence : empirical results In this section , an analysis is carried out to check whether the items preferred by humans as an answer match the hypothesis pro - posed in Section 5 that frequency of items may inﬂuence selection of preferred answers . In order to answer question Q1 , let us consider four queries from the normative dataset which were answered correctly and had multi - ple plausible interesting answers . Note that very common attribute - concept combinations are avoided ( i . e . those including little , great , only , big , etc . ) : 1 . High District House . Answer : School 2 . Chamber Mask Natural . Answer : Gas 3 . Self Attorney Spending . Answer : Defense 4 . Back Step Screen . Answer : Door Table 5 shows the frequency - based probability for each answer ( P [ w (cid:7) i ] ) obtained by comRAT - C by applying ( 2 ) ( see the rest of the data for preferred answers in the Appendix in Supplementary Mate - rial ) . Note that the answers are arranged in decreasing order of P [ w (cid:7) i ] ( the maximum located left ) . In all four queries , the ﬁrst answer ( w (cid:7) 1 ) , which offers the highest probability , is also the one which is consid - ered correct in the normative data . These results show that an artiﬁcial agent with such a KB may be able to answer the RAT queries by convergence of items in a similar way as it is done by humans when they are answering the test by Bowden and Jung - Beeman [ 10 ] . This is further discussed in Section 7 . In order to answer question Q2 , let us analyze the contribution of the three query items ( w a , w b , w c ) to the preferred responses in the normative data ( w (cid:7) 1 ) , presented in Table 6 , where the highest con - tributing item is shown in bold . As Table 6 indicates , for the ﬁrst query , the item w a or high is the one that inﬂuence most in selecting school as the answer , since it is the combination which more fre - quently appears in the KB . The rest of results can be read similarly . According to Table 5 , the frequency or commonness of the query items in the KB inﬂuences the preferred answer . When the ﬁrst item strongly contributes to a particular response , and the two responses are close in probability , changing the order of the three query items to show the strongly contributing items ﬁrst might help change the an - swer provided by the human participants . Let us exemplify this using data in Table 6 : in the RAT query high - district - house , where the an - swer school is preferred , note that if the answers school and court would have the same frequency of appearance in the KB , providing the query in the order district - house - high might produce a change in the preferred answer to court . A full list of frequency based results for preferred answers and the item contribution to each of them is provided in the Appendix ( see Supplementary Material ) . 5 This can be considered a bonus , since humans are normally assumed to answer correctly the queries for which they know all three items . A . - M . Olte¸teanu , Z . Falomir / Pattern Recognition Letters 67 ( 2015 ) 81 – 90 87 Table 5 Frequency - based probability for the multiple answers ( w (cid:7) i ) of four RAT queries . Query w (cid:7) 1 w (cid:7) 2 w (cid:7) 3 w (cid:7) 4 w (cid:7) 5 w (cid:7) 6 w (cid:7) 7 w (cid:7) 8 w (cid:7) 9 w (cid:7) 10 w (cid:7) 11 High district house School Court Historic U . S . Oﬃcials Oﬃce Water State Suburban Light Church P [ w (cid:7) i ] 0 . 1850 0 . 0306 0 . 0069 0 . 0061 0 . 0046 0 . 0034 0 . 0033 0 . 0027 0 . 0012 0 . 0012 8 . 8E - 4 Chamber mask natural Gas Death P [ w (cid:7) i ] 0 . 1162 0 . 0240 Self Aatorney spending Defense Bill Personal Private P [ w (cid:7) i ] 0 . 0767 0 . 0146 0 . 0059 0 . 0056 Back step screen Door Porch P [ w (cid:7) i ] 0 . 0485 0 . 0063 Table 6 Contribution of the three query items ( w a w b w c ) when deciding about an answer . RAT query ( w a w b w c ) w (cid:7) i P [ w (cid:7) i ] P [ w a | w (cid:7) i ] P [ w b | w (cid:7) i ] P [ w c | w (cid:7) i ] High district house School 0 . 1850 0 . 60 0 . 40 0 . 00 Court 0 . 0306 0 . 07 0 . 83 0 . 10 Chamber mask natural Gas 0 . 1162 0 . 24 0 . 43 0 . 33 Death 0 . 0240 0 . 45 0 . 50 0 . 05 Self attorney spending Defense 0 . 0767 0 . 25 0 . 47 0 . 27 Bill 0 . 0146 0 . 32 0 . 03 0 . 65 Back step screen Door 0 . 0485 0 . 34 0 . 02 0 . 64 Porch 0 . 0063 0 . 66 0 . 19 0 . 14 Table 7 Frequency - based probability for the multiple answers of four queries . MST stands for mean solution time , and % PS stands for percentage of participants solving the task in maximum time allowed ( 15 s ) . RAT query ( w a w b w c ) Answer ( w (cid:7) i ) P [ w (cid:7) i ] % PS in 15 s MST ( s ) High district house School 0 . 1850 55 5 . 59 Chamber mask natural Gas 0 . 1162 53 5 . 86 Self attorney spending Defense 0 . 0767 4 8 . 42 Back step screen Door 0 . 0485 0 – 6 . 3 . Results regarding the correlation between diﬃculty of task for humans and frequency of answers in comRAT - C In the results obtained , a correlation between the frequency based probability of comRAT - C answers ( P [ w (cid:7) i ] ) and the diﬃculty of the RAT query in Bowden’s normative data was observed . As Table 7 shows , the percentage of participants that could solve a particular RAT query decreased with the probability ( P [ w (cid:7) i ] ) to trigger that answer . The time taken to solve a query increased the lower the probability to trigger the answer . This observation yielded another analysis , to check for such corre - lation on more data . The probability that an answer will appear given the frequency data ( P [ w (cid:7) i ] ) : ( i ) correlates positively with human data on how many people can solve the test and ( ii ) correlates negatively on how fast they can solve it . Table 8 shows a summary of correlations ( r ) and signiﬁcance ( p ) values for all the 48 answers ( which appear in the normative data and for which the three query items appear in the KB ) , related to the amount of participants solving the query in 7 , 15 or 30 s . After further analysis , the results in Table 9 showed that this cor - relation was due to the ﬁrst two terms – P [ w (cid:7) i | w a ] and P [ w (cid:7) i | w b ] , with the third term P [ w (cid:7) i | w c ] not playing a role . 7 . Discussion A discussion is provided in this section about the following as - pects : ( i ) the limitations and perspectives of the current automated RAT solver performance ( comRAT - C ) according to the results in Section 6 . 1 ; ( ii ) the results obtained regarding the preferred RAT an - swer according to Section 6 . 2 ; ( iii ) the correlation observed with hu - man data explained in Section 6 . 3 and ( iv ) general matters on the process applied and creative problem - solving . ( i ) comRAT - C solver performance , limitations and perspectives The initial comRAT problem - solver’s performance is satisfactory , despite not using frequency data . The current limitation on perfor - mance comes from lacking expression knowledge in the KB for solv - ing some of the normative data queries . The system can easily come up with different answers ( w (cid:7) i ) in the form of other items associated with all three query items ( the ﬁrst converged upon item is proposed ) , or when data for only two of the three items is stored in its KB . The percentage of correct answers found on ﬁrst convergence proves the associative principles proposed here are worthy of further investigation . The comRAT - C solver can sometimes ﬁnd the correct solutions even if it only has two known items in its KB . It is hard to com - pare the amount of knowledge stored in the system with the knowl - edge stored in the human counterpart , for the obvious reason that we cannot directly measure such knowledge in humans . Thus there is no Table 8 Correlation between probability based on frequency ( P [ w (cid:7) i ] ) and human data , and its signiﬁcance ( p ) . MST stands formeansolutiontime , and % PSstandsforpercentageofparticipantssolvingthetaskinmaximumtimeallowed 7 , 15 or 30s . Measure % PS in 7 s % PS in 15 s % PS in 30 s MST in 7 s MST in 15 s MST in 30 s Correlation P [ w (cid:7) i ] r = 0 . 45 r = 0 . 41 r = 0 . 49 r = − 0 . 39 r = − 0 . 3 r = − 0 . 52 Signiﬁcance p < 0 . 002 p < 0 . 004 p < 0 . 002 p < 0 . 007 p < 0 . 04 p < 0 . 001 88 A . - M . Olte¸teanu , Z . Falomir / Pattern Recognition Letters 67 ( 2015 ) 81 – 90 Table 9 Correlation based on P [ w (cid:7) i | w a ] , P [ w (cid:7) i | w b ] and P [ w (cid:7) i | w c ] . MST stands for mean solution time , and % PS stands for percentage of participants solving the task in maximum time allowed 7 , 15 or 30 s . Measure % PS in 7 s % PS in 15 s % PS in 30 s MST in 7 s MST in 15 s MST in 30 s Correlation P [ w (cid:7) i | w a ] r = 0 . 38 r = 0 . 33 r = 0 . 4 r = − 0 . 29 r = − 0 . 25 r = − 0 . 33 Correlation P [ w (cid:7) i | w b ] r = 0 . 40 r = 0 . 44 r = 0 . 53 r = − 0 . 43 r = − 0 . 26 r = − 0 . 33 Correlation P [ w (cid:7) i | w c ] r = − 0 . 11 r = − 0 . 18 r = − 0 . 07 r = 0 . 11 r = 0 . 04 r = 0 . 05 Correlation P [ w (cid:7) i | w a ] + P [ w (cid:7) i | w b ] r = 0 . 47 r = 0 . 45 r = 0 . 51 r = − 0 . 41 r = − 0 . 30 r = − 0 . 41 strong evidence whether when humans do not ﬁnd the right answer it is because of lack of knowledge of the required expressions , or be - cause of the diﬃculty of the associative search over remote items . The ability of the system to ﬁnd the correct answer , even in some of the cases in which only two items are known , validates the associa - tive principles used here , proving them to be of interest for creative problem - solving in ﬂexible conditions , with noisy or incomplete in - formation . However , in the case of knowing only two items , humans have an advantage . After having converged upon a possible answer from two different initial query items , a human can estimate the likelihood that the combination of the possible answer with the third item of the query is a valid semantical construction , or could be a new com - pound concept , even if that particular human has never encountered that particular concept before . The proposed system obviously does not yet have this constructive ability of matching a potential answer to a potential new concept , in order to estimate the validity of the answer . The limitations on performance due to lacking n - gram knowledge could be overcome by extracting knowledge for more corpora , or get - ting items with lower frequency from the current corpus . A computational functional RAT ( comRAT - F ) solving a functional variant of the Remote Associates Test ( FRAT ) could be implemented following the same principles of comRAT - C but focusing on the func - tional relationships , if given enough initial functional knowledge ( i . e . ontology based knowledge of item category ) . Implementing a comRAT - F and comparing it to FRAT human performance , to comRAT - C and to cRAT human performance might provide more insight into the general processes involved in RAT tasks , and on whether speciﬁc modiﬁcations of process and performance appear when solving the different variants . The proof of concept presented in this paper uses lexical sym - bolic information because of ease of access to both training data ( lex - ical corpuses ) and human performance data in the literature – e . g . the compound RAT normative data by Bowden and Jung - Beeman [ 10 ] . However , we posit same process to be able to yield results with other parts of concepts – e . g . visual data . However , a visual RAT test will ﬁrst need to be built and validated for human participants ﬁrst . A further point of interest are the generative abilities of the sys - tem . A system that can solve RAT problems by organizing its knowl - edge to recognize associative combinations can also generate RAT problems . The way generative abilities could help the further study of processes hypothesized here will be explained in the following sections . ( ii ) Preferred items selection As multiple results can be obtained for a RAT query , a mechanism was proposed to support the further study of why certain answers are preferred by people . Data was obtained on : ( a ) the probability of obtaining certain answers based on frequency of items and ( b ) the probability of the contribution of each query item to a particular an - swer . The four cases in which three items were known and multiple an - swers were proposed support the proposed mechanism of preference ( Table 5 ) . However not enough data is present in order to strongly validate this hypothesis . In future studies , more data may be collected in the following ways : ( a ) manually ﬁnding frequency of n - grams for those queries for which knowledge is incomplete ( e . g . missing expressions which connect the third term to the answer ) . It might be that those n - grams are not in the initial corpus because they are not very frequent ; ( b ) using other corpora of language data separately or ﬁnding a way to meaningfully integrate them ( and their frequency rat - ings ) with the current corpus ; ( c ) using the generative capabilities of the comRAT - C solver to put together a set of RAT queries for which the automated solver will have enough multiple answers to be able to validate the hypothesis . For example , comRAT could be used exhaustively to determine a large set of queries for which it has multiple answers and frequency data . The next step would be to admin - ister that compound RAT to a human population , in order to gather data on preference . Such data could then be analyzed to check whether and to what extent it conﬁrms frequency - based preference . ( iii ) Correlation of frequency of answers in the KB with diﬃculty to solve queries from human data A moderate correlation with strong signiﬁcance was observed between the frequency of answers in the language KB and the percentage of participants solving the respective queries . An inverse moderate correlation with strong signiﬁcance was observed between probability of item selection and response times . This correlation was mainly due to the probability of the ﬁrst and second terms of the query . This correlation is not strong enough to enable us to build a pre - dictive mechanism of human response times and general query dif - ﬁculty based on frequency . However , the signiﬁcance of this correla - tion shows that the probability of comRAT ﬁnding an answer can be used as a contributing factor in such a predictive mechanism . Further hypotheses need to be explored as to understand what other factors are responsible for the rest of the variation . The generative abilities of comRAT could further be used to val - idate the correlation obtained here between probability to ﬁnd an answer and query diﬃculty for human solvers . For example , RAT queries with high and low probability to ﬁnd the answer could be produced , in order to empirically check whether such queries consis - tently present two categories of diﬃculty for human solvers . Other potential sources of diﬃculty which can be investigated us - ing comRAT can be , but are not limited to ( a ) the order in which RAT query items appear in expressions which contain them . Presenting RAT queries in which the words given are the ﬁrst part in the expressions needed to solve the query versus presenting queries in which given words are the second part might inﬂuence the diﬃculty of the test . This is , if the given words are w a , w b , w c , there might be a difference of diﬃculty for human participants in ﬁnd - ing w x between : ( i ) a query which is solved ﬁnding ( w a , w x ) , ( w b , w x ) , ( w c , w x ) , and ( ii ) a query which is solved ﬁnding A . - M . Olte¸teanu , Z . Falomir / Pattern Recognition Letters 67 ( 2015 ) 81 – 90 89 ( w x , w a ) , ( w x , w b ) , ( w x , w c ) . Furthermore , presenting queries in which all given items occupy the same position ( be it ﬁrst of second ) in the solving expression versus queries in which the given words occupy different positions might be a further source of diﬃculty . This is , there might be a difference of diﬃ - culty for human participants in ﬁnding w x between ( iii ) same position queries - like the ones in ( i ) and ( ii ) , and ( iv ) mixed queries , like ( w x , w a ) , ( w b , w x ) , ( w x , w c ) . comRAT can further be used to explore such questions by modeling such hypotheses ; ( b ) part of speech inﬂuence : noun – noun links and adjective – noun links might bring about different degrees of diﬃculty . The Tagset data which has been used for pruning in comRAT could further be used to disseminate between these categories ; ( c ) semantic inﬂuences : semantic domain involvement or overlap from the query items might also inﬂuence diﬃculty ; etc . ( iv ) The process applied and its relation to creative problem - solving The comRAT - C system is a step further towards the implementa - tion of the theoretical framework CreaCogs [ 30 , 31 ] – speciﬁcally the use of associative links for problem - solving via convergence . The sys - tem proposed here models a convergent way of ﬁnding an answer , with a pop - up effect of such an answer . Thus , the query elicits the knowledge of the agent , an implicit search over that knowledge base happens , and the answers come up as a result of convergent activa - tion from different initial conceptual points . This is not problem - solving in its classical form . However , it is a form of search , in which the next possible states are the items as - sociated with the objects offered in the query – which is taken to represent the initial problem state . The problem space becomes the cognitive space of all the associations the agent can ﬁnd to the initial problem state in its knowledge base . In this case , three different lexi - cal items ﬁnd the fourth element ( answer ) because they converge on it by associative power . The initial items can act as initial constraints of the search , because of the way the knowledge base of the system is organised . What is called here the pop - up or the “aha ! ” effect is the “sud - den” appearance of the solution item ( or a possible solution item ) in the attention of the agent via a convergence of the associative mecha - nism . It is possible that this is what happens at much higher levels of complexity , and with much deeper constraints , in insight problem - solving . Testing that hypothesis requires however the encoding of large amounts of common sense knowledge , and ﬁnding more hu - man data on empirical insight problems . As the quantity of existing insight problems is not very large , their uniqueness makes them hard to classify and a signiﬁcant effort is required to encode enough com - mon sense knowledge in an artiﬁcial system to support the solving of such problems , a case by case approach might be required , with the implementation of different insight problems . 8 . Conclusions and further work In this paper , an approach to a creative cognitive problem - solving framework is implemented to solve the Remote Associates Test ( RAT ) automatically using a knowledge base ( KB ) of language data extracted from the Corpus of Contemporary American English . The RAT is gen - erally used for measuring creativity in humans . Therefore , the results provided by the implementation of the RAT are compared to those obtained in previous RATs carried out on human participants in order to hyphotesize on an associationist creative cognition paradigm . A computational Compound Remote Associates Test solver based on language data ( comRAT - C ) is developed in two versions : ( v1 ) tak - ing into account the associative connections among the concepts in the KB coming from the language corpus ; and ( v2 ) taking into ac - count the associative links among the concepts in the KB and also the frequency of their appearance . A formalization for the comRAT - C based on frequency data is pro - posed , together with a method for measuring ( i ) the answer preferred by the agent / system and ( ii ) the contribution of each query item to the chosen answer . The experimental results obtained by comRAT - C ( v1 ) showed that out of the 144 items used in the test by Bowden and Jung - Beeman [ 10 ] , using the COCA corpus , 64 are answered correctly , this is , pro - vided by the system on its ﬁrst try . Moreover , more than 20 of other obtained answers can be considered plausible answers , that is , an - swers that a human may deem viable . The accuracy of response of the comRAT - C compared to human data is at 97 . 92 % in the cases where the three query items plus answer were present in its KB , while it is 30 . 36 % in the cases when there were only two query items plus an - swer in its KB . Humans are normally assumed to answer correctly the queries for which they know all three items , so this proved that asso - ciative principles can add robustness and help ﬁnd solutions even in the case where knowledge is incomplete . The results obtained by comRAT - C ( v2 ) based on frequencies showed that an artiﬁcial agent with such a KB will be able to an - swer the RAT queries by convergence of items in a similar way as it is done by humans when they are answering the test by Bowden and Jung - Beeman [ 10 ] . A moderate inverse correlation has been observed between time taken to solve a query by humans and the probabil - ity of ﬁnding a speciﬁc answer in the KB . And a moderate correlation has been observed between the percentage of participants solving the test and the probability of ﬁnding a speciﬁc answer in the comRAT - C KB . Both correlations proved highly signiﬁcant . However , the set of queries and corpus used has not yielded enough multiple answers for the model of predicting preferred answer to be validated . Never - theless , for the four queries for which multiple interesting answers have been found , the model predicted the preferred answer in 100 % of the cases , therefore showing promise for further testing on more extensive data . In summary , the contributions of this paper are the following : ( i ) implementing principles from a theoretical framework ( CreaCogs ) in a proof - of - concept RAT solver . The good per - formance of comRAT shows that the principles of CreaCogs are useful when modeling creative problem - solving tasks and worthy of further study ; ( ii ) enabling a comparability between human RAT solving and ar - tiﬁcial cognitive system RAT solving . This allows the further study of varied and more reﬁned hypotheses on the knowledge organization and types of processes used by humans when solving RAT type problems ; ( iii ) formalizing answer probability as to enable frequency based measurements of the contribution of each item to the answer ; ( iv ) describing an answer preference hypothesis , while formalizing the tools needed to test it . This hypothesis can now be empiri - cally tested . Whether rejected , accepted or revised , it will shed further light into the cognitive principles of why certain an - swers are more compelling than others for human solvers ; ( v ) observing and describing a moderate signiﬁcant correlation between comRAT’s probability to ﬁnd an item and the diﬃ - culty of RAT queries for human participants . The RAT has not yet been studied thoroughly in the literature from a computational knowledge - organization paradigm . This puts us in the position to be able to suggest a large amount of further work . These suggestions can be narrowed to three categories : 1 . Analysing semantic inﬂuences : The frequency of expressions might not be the only item having an impact on the memory of RAT solvers . A second possibly contributing factor is the presence of two or all three of the query items in the same semantic cate - gory . Part of our data could be parsed to give some answers to this question in the future . 90 A . - M . Olte¸teanu , Z . Falomir / Pattern Recognition Letters 67 ( 2015 ) 81 – 90 2 . Comparison to other categories of RAT problems : Further differ - ences between structural remote associates , functional remote as - sociates as deﬁned by Worthen and Clark [ 34 ] and the semantic associates that might result from the use of an ontology also need to be explored . Constructing , validating and automating a RAT test based on data which is not lexical ( i . e . a visual RAT ) would be of special interest for exploring associative mechanisms in both human participants and via computational means . A visual RAT could present items which visually occur together in the world , while avoiding lexical associates . Empirically testing the perfor - mance of humans in such queries as compared to lexical queries would help extend the study of Remote Associates to different domains . 3 . Computationally building controlled compound Remote Associates Tests and human performance prediction : Due to the way it encodes data , the system proposed can solve RAT problems and could be able to reverse - engineer its own process : thus to set - up RAT tests for humans . A system able to generate RAT queries ( comRAT - G ) could be used to control speciﬁc variables – like frequency and semantic domain – as to design Remote Associates Tests with dif - ferent conditions . Taking these variables into account , comRAT - C could be used to model hypotheses into human performance predictions . Acknowledgments The support by the European Commission through FP7 Marie Curie IEF actions under project COGNITIVE - AMI ( GA 328763 ) , by the Universität Bremen and by the Bremen Spatial Cognition Centre SFB / TR 8 is acknowledged . Supplementary material Supplementary material associated with this article can be found , in the online version , at 10 . 1016 / j . patrec . 2015 . 05 . 015 . References [ 1 ] R . E . Adamson , Functional ﬁxedness as related to problem solving : a repetition of three experiments , J . Exp . Psychol . 44 ( 4 ) ( 1952 ) 288 . [ 2 ] P . I . Ansburg , Individual differences in problem solving via insight , Curr . Psychol . 19 ( 2 ) ( 2000 ) 143 – 146 . [ 3 ] R . Arnon , S . Kreitler , Effects of meaning training on overcoming functional ﬁxed - ness , Curr . Psychol . 3 ( 4 ) ( 1984 ) 11 – 24 . [ 4 ] Y . Baba , AnanalysisofcreativitybymeansoftheRemoteAssociatesTestforadult revised in Japanese ( JARAT FORM A ) , Jpn . J . Psychol . 52 ( 6 ) ( 1982 ) 330 – 336 . [ 5 ] A . M . Bailey , W . F . McDaniel , R . K . Thomas , Approachestothestudyofhighercogni - tive functions related to creativity in nonhuman animals , Methods 42 ( 1 ) ( 2007 ) 3 – 11 . [ 6 ] H . Ben - Zur , Automatic and directed search processes in solving simple semantic - memory problems , Memory Cogn . 17 ( 5 ) ( 1989 ) 617 – 626 . [ 7 ] H . G . Birch , H . S . Rabinowitz , Thenegativeeffectofpreviousexperienceonproduc - tive thinking , J . Exp . Psychol . 41 ( 2 ) ( 1951 ) 121 . [ 8 ] M . Boden , The Creative Mind : Myths and Mechanisms , Routledge , London , 2004 . [ 9 ] E . M . Bowden , M . Jung - Beeman , Aha ! insight experience correlates with solution activation in the right hemisphere , Psychon . Bull . Rev . 10 ( 3 ) ( 2003 ) 730 – 737 . [ 10 ] E . M . Bowden , M . Jung - Beeman , Normative data for 144 compound remote associate problems , Behav . Res . Method Instrum . Comput . 35 ( 4 ) ( 2003 ) 634 – 639 . [ 11 ] S . A . Chermahini , M . Hickendorff , B . Hommel , DevelopmentandvalidityofaDutch version of the remote associates task : an item - response theory approach , Think . Skills Creat . 7 ( 3 ) ( 2012 ) 177 – 186 . [ 12 ] S . Colton , The painting fool : stories from building an automated painter , in : Com - puters and Creativity , Springer , 2012 , pp . 3 – 38 . [ 13 ] S . Colton , J . Goodwin , T . Veale , Full - FACE poetry generation , in : Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Computational Creativity , 2012 , pp . 95 – 102 . [ 14 ] S . Colton , G . A . Wiggins , Computational creativity : the ﬁnal frontier ? in : ECAI , 2012 , pp . 21 – 26 . [ 15 ] J . Dorfman , V . A . Shames , J . F . Kihlstrom , Intuition , incubation , andinsight : implicit cognition in problem solving , in : G . Underwood ( Ed . ) , Implicit Cognition , Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1996 , pp . 257 – 296 . [ 16 ] K . Duncker , On problem solving , Psychol . Monogr . 58 ( 5 , Whole no . 270 ) ( 1945 ) i - 113 . [ 17 ] A . Eigenfeldt , A . Burnett , P . Pasquier , Evaluating musical metacreation in a live performance context , in : Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Computational Creativity , 2012 , pp . 140 – 144 . [ 18 ] L . Gabora , Creative thought as a non Darwinian evolutionary process , J . Creat . Be - hav . 39 ( 4 ) ( 2005 ) 262 – 283 . [ 19 ] J . Guilford , The Nature of Human Intelligence , McGraw - Hill , New York , 1967 . [ 20 ] M . A . Hamilton , “Jamaicanizing” the Mednick remote associates test of creativity , Percept . Mot . Skills 55 ( 1 ) ( 1982 ) 321 – 322 . [ 21 ] J . C . Kaufman , A . B . Kaufman , Applyinga creativity framework to animalcognition , New Ideas Psychol . 22 ( 2 ) ( 2004 ) 143 – 155 . [ 22 ] K . H . Kim , Can we trust creativity tests ? A review of the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking ( TTCT ) , Creat . Res . J . 18 ( 1 ) ( 2006 ) 3 – 14 . [ 23 ] W . Köhler , TheMentalityofApes , Liveright , NewYork , 1976 ( Originallypublished in 1925 ) . [ 24 ] D . B . Lenat , AM : An Artiﬁcial Intelligence Approach to Discovery in Mathematics as Heuristic Search , Technical Report , DTIC Document , 1976 . [ 25 ] N . R . Maier , Reasoninginhumans . II . Thesolutionofaproblemanditsappearance in consciousness . , J . Compar . Psychol . 12 ( 2 ) ( 1931 ) 181 . [ 26 ] T . McCaffrey , Innovation relies on the obscure a key to overcoming the clas - sic problem of functional ﬁxedness , Psychol . Sci . 23 ( 3 ) ( 2012 ) 215 – 218 , doi : 10 . 1177 / 0956797611429580 . [ 27 ] S . Mednick , The associative basis of the creative process . , Psychol . Rev . 69 ( 3 ) ( 1962 ) 220 . [ 28 ] S . A . Mednick , M . Mednick , RemoteAssociatesTest : Examiner’sManual , Houghton Miﬄin , 1971 . [ 29 ] B . Nevo , I . Levin , Remoteassociatestest : assessmentofcreativityinHebrew , Meg - amot 24 ( 1978 ) 87 – 98 . [ 30 ] A . - M . Olte¸teanu , Two general classes in creative problem - solving ? An account based on the cognitive processes involved in the problem structure - represen - tation structure relationship , in : T . Besold , K . - U . Kühnberger , M . Schorlemmer , A . Smaill ( Eds . ) , ProceedingsoftheWorkshop“ComputationalCreativity , Concept Invention , andGeneralIntelligence” , PublicationsoftheInstituteofCognitiveSci - ence , 01 - 2014 , Institute of Cognitive Science Osnabrück , 2014 . [ 31 ] A . - M . Olte¸teanu , From simple machines to Eureka in four not - so - easy steps . To - wards creative visuospatial intelligence , in : V . Müller ( Ed . ) , Philosophy and The - ory of Artiﬁcial Intelligence , Synthese Library , Springer , Berlin , in press . [ 32 ] J . W . Schooler , J . Melcher , The ineffability of insight . , in : T . Ward , R . Finke ( Eds . ) , The Creative Cognition Approach , The MIT Press , 1995 , pp . 249 – 268 . [ 33 ] H . Williams , P . W . McOwan , Magic in the machine : a computational magician’s assistant , Front . psychol . 5 ( 2014 ) 1283 . [ 34 ] B . R . Worthen , P . M . Clark , Toward an improved measure of remote associational ability , J . Edu . Meas . 8 ( 2 ) ( 1971 ) 113 – 123 .