CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 1 Investigating User Expectations on the Roles of Family - shared AI Speakers Sunjeong Park , Youn - kyung Lim Department of Industrial Design KAIST ( Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology ) Daejeon , Korea , Republic of { sunny0414 , younlim } @ kaist . ac . kr ABSTRACT AI assistants that use a voice user interface ( VUI ) , such as AI speakers , have become popular in family homes . However , it is still unclear what roles the AI speaker can support within the family unit . We investigated the roles of an AI speaker as a family - shared technology . By conducting a one - week participatory user study , we discovered that family members’ co - ownership toward the AI speaker was the key in the development of its family - oriented roles . Our findings showed seven domains of user expectations on these roles , and we realized that all the expectations can be represented as family cohesion . In addition , privacy awareness was emphasized regarding personal supports . Finally , we discuss a new perspective for AI speaker design and offer two suggestions : 1 ) leveraging human - likeness to develop its potential roles of supporting the unit of a family and 2 ) interpreting the home context to seamlessly connect family and personal supporting roles . Author Keywords AI speaker ; Family ; Participatory design study ; CSS Concepts • Human - centered computing ~ Human computer interaction ( HCI ) • Human - centered computing ~ User studies INTRODUCTION VUI - based intelligent assistants have proliferated in various guises , and the AI speakers , such as Amazon Echo and Google Home , are usually placed in family homes . The family home is a shared environment where the AI speaker naturally becomes a shared device among family members . Recent studies have investigated user experience on AI speakers in the home environment [ 1 , 5 , 6 , 9 , 17 , 29 , 30 , 33 , 38 ] . However , some of these studies have focused on home only as a living environment , and many other studies that considered family home were still limited in perspective of understanding the individual user’s experience and little is known about the possible roles that AI assistants can support within families . Our work is to fill this gap by identifying 1 ) families’ perceptions of an AI speaker when adopting it as a shared technology in their home and 2 ) families’ expectations on the roles of a family - shared AI speaker . We conducted 1 - week - long participatory user studies and post interviews with 8 families , each living in a family unit . The participatory user study consisted of activity toolkits ( Figure 1 , Table 2 ) . The study toolkits were designed to 1 ) help participants create their own imagined AI speaker as a family shared technology , and 2 ) investigate user expectation on the roles of the imagined AI speaker from various aspects . We intentionally did not provide an actual AI speaker to unlimit the potential feature space to the currently available ones . By analyzing the outcomes from the participatory studies and the answers given during the post interviews , we found that family members’ sense of co - ownership of an AI speaker is an important basis for developing family - oriented role expectations . We also discovered the seven domains of the family - oriented role expectations which interestingly converged into the need for family cohesion . In addition , participants emphasized the importance of inter - member privacy regarding personal features . Our three main contributions are summarized as follows . The first is the description of the seven domains of the roles of an AI speaker as a shared technology in the family unit , which can provide a useful direction for designing new services for family - oriented AI speakers . The second contribution is to discover the importance of reconsidering an AI speaker , with the emphasis on its co - ownership among family members to enhance its potential . The third contribution is to provide key areas to consider when designing a family shared AI speaker , including 1 ) the importance of illuminating the human - likeness of an AI speaker regarding its social ability in family environments , and 2 ) the need for contextual considerations of social and private situations to enable family and personal support seamlessly within the home . RELATED WORKS VUI use in shared spaces and family homes The recent popularity of VUI has sparked research from various perspectives in the HCI community . Before the emergence of AI speakers , researchers studied the systems as VUIs built into smartphones ( which are commonly termed as IPAs ) , and conducted studies to understand users’ mental Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI ' 20 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6708 - 0 / 20 / 04… $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376450 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 2 models and their experiences with such interfaces . Recent studies on user experiences and their perceptions about IPAs revealed that the presence of other people can impact users’ interaction styles [ 8 , 19 , 28 ] . For example , users are more likely to speak colloquially in private and are more reluctant to use IPAs in public because of the possibility of social embarrassment [ 8 , 37 ] . Even when users attempted to speak to the IPA as if it were a person , they found it difficult to interact in human - like conversations in public [ 19 ] . Therefore , many users prefer to use IPAs alone rather than in social situations [ 16 ] . These studies imply that VUIs should be designed to consider the contextual difference that occurs in the presence of other people . When VUIs are built into speakers ( e . g . , Amazon Echo or Google Home ) , research regarding the multiuser context is illuminated [ 29 ] . AI speakers are naturally subjected to multiuser situations due to their physical placement in home environments , where one device is shared by multiple family members . A recent study on the context of AI speakers’ use found that the most dominant location for AI speaker use was in homes , but such interactions usually occurred when alone [ 38 ] . This indicates that the current AI speaker has some barriers for users when interactions occur in a multiuser context . Another study revealed that user experiences with conversational interfaces are highly affected when other people are present even if they are close acquaintances [ 4 ] . Users thought about the best ways to speak out commands and adjusted their utterances but were less able to pay attention to the conversation because they were easily distracted by the acquaintances . This implies that users experience an increased mental load when interacting in a multiuser context ; therefore , that context must be considered when designing AI speakers . Another recent study investigated how AI speakers has been adopted into and engaged in a family environment [ 26 , 30 ] . Because the AI speaker becomes intertwined with the family’s ongoing activities , family members considered addressing the AI speaker as a social interaction , which should be formulated in the family’s current social setting when other family members are present [ 30 ] . Additionally , the AI speakers were naturally exposed to multiparty conversations ; thus , users had to work collaboratively or take turns to produce requests which currently had technological limitations [ 28 , 30 , 31 ] . Privacy tensions in public contexts were also another issue that needed attention , differentiated from interactions in a personal context [ 5 , 17 ] . Although many studies have been conducted in family home contexts , they are still limited in revealing usage patterns [ 33 ] , revealing the obstacles to voice interfaces [ 1 , 24 , 34 ] , and in focusing on conversational aspects [ 1 , 7 , 30 ] . It is also known that discovering new features of the AI speaker in a family environment is more challenging [ 33 ] and AI speakers are usually abandoned or reduced to minimal use [ 6 ] . An interesting discovery from a previous study on the user journey of an AI speaker revealed that users’ recognition of the AI speaker’s roles forms an important stage in fostering their prolonged use [ 6 ] . Therefore , we narrowed our focus on identifying the AI speaker ' s roles in homes particularly through the family - oriented perspective . Shared technologies in family homes Families share various types of technologies among family members at home . Because the home is a complex space with numerous social relationships , technologies affect family dynamics . Shared technologies based on media , such as televisions , encourage people to gather around the technology , which positively affects family socialization [ 3 , 22 , 36 ] . In contrast , personal devices or individual use of technologies may cause social disconnections [ 18 , 25 ] . Shared technologies in the context of a family home have to both embrace the needs of multiple users and support data sharing among the family members . Therefore , privacy concerns arise between family members [ 10 , 27 , 39 ] that may affect intrafamily trust [ 35 ] . Many users have mentioned a need for authentication or access control [ 10 , 39 ] . The usage patterns and ownership of family - shared technologies are highly affected by the spatial layouts of homes , and users perceive the technology as being co - owned when it is physically placed in a shared space [ 3 , 11 , 12 ] . A recent study on soundscapes in homes also framed the influence of technologies that produce sounds in the context of social and private spaces [ 20 ] . However , the authority of smart devices was often biased to the installer [ 11 ] . An AI speaker is inevitably adopted into a family home as a shared technology which is shared by multiple members and placed in a shared space . The speaker ' s intelligence gives it a high potential for positively affecting family relationships , catering to the needs of multiple members , and controlling data sharing . Therefore , we illuminate AI speakers from the perspective of family - shared technology to develop the potential roles it can fulfill in the context of a family home . METHOD The goal of this study was to investigate user expectations on the role of an AI speaker as a family - shared technology and to understand the family nature . What people expect from an AI speaker—and why—may differ among different families , and such differences should be reflected when understanding user expectations of a family AI speaker . Therefore , we conducted and analyzed a participatory design study where the family members co - imagined their own AI speaker , and we used a qualitative approach to understand each family’s expectations in depth . Participants We recruited participants in family units via social media posts on different websites . These posts stated that at least two of the family members must participate in the entire process , which included both the participatory design study and a post interview . We framed our study as a “Family participatory design study with playful activities intended to understand user expectations on a family AI speaker” . Note that to avoid any potential bias , we did not inform participants that we were also attempting to understand the Figure 1 . a ) Packaged toolkits given to the participants ( left ) , and b ) Examples of provided stickers ( right ) CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 3 nature of families regarding their expectations of an AI speaker . We designed a pre - screening survey to gather demographic information of the family members living together and their experience as a family with an in - home AI speaker . Via this survey , we recruited 8 families and the members of each family who actively participated in the study are listed in bold ( Table 1 ) ; our goal was to recruit families with various types of compositions and experiences with using a family AI speaker in their possession . Each family was compensated 80 , 000 KRW for participation . All of our participants were Korean families . According to Hofstede’s Individualism versus collectivism in cultural dimensions theory [ 13 , 14 ] , Korea has a collectivist culture , and thus the rights of families supersede those of the individual . Although our study is limited by the participants’ nationality , we believe that this population set provides a good start for investigating family - oriented potential of AI speakers . Table 1 . Participating families , location of their homes , their compositions , and their experience using an AI speaker . The composition included all the family members currently residing together . The participants who actively participated in the study are listed in bold . The family ' s experience with using an AI speaker is noted as yes ( Y ) or no ( N ) ; if yes , the length of such use is also listed . Family Location Composition Experience ID of home with AI speaker F1 Urban Husband ( 59 ) , Wife ( 54 ) Y / 1 year F2 Urban Sister 1 ( 27 ) , Sister 2 ( 23 ) N F3 Urban Mother ( 52 ) , Daughter ( 26 ) , Y / 6 months Father ( 56 ) , Son ( 23 ) F4 Rural Father ( 28 ) , Mother ( 30 ) , N Son 1 ( 2 ) , Son 2 ( 2 ) F5 Urban Father ( 38 ) , Mother ( 35 ) , N Daughter ( 3 ) , Son ( 0 ) F6 Urban Son ( 30 ) , Daughter ( 27 ) , Y / 6 months Mother ( 55 ) F7 Rural Son ( 29 ) , Daughter ( 25 ) , Y / 6 months Father ( 60 ) , Mother ( 55 ) F8 Rural Husband ( 30 ) , Wife ( 29 ) Y / 1 year Family participatory design study Inspired by the concepts of probes and toolkits [ 21 , 32 ] , we designed the study to foster the participants’ perceptions of an AI speaker as a family - shared technology and to help the participants shape their expectations of the AI speaker more explicitly . We wanted family members to share their thoughts openly during the study process and reflect them in the study outcomes . Therefore , we intended to include playful activities that would enable participants to enjoy the study and foster abundant conversations within the family . The participants reported that these activities enabled them to share and coordinate their preferences through conversations . The developed study was trialed with a family that consisted of a husband and wife , after which we made some improvements to the activities . Our 7 - day study was structured with explicit daily purposes ; each day included one or more activities ( Table 2 ) . Throughout the activities , we did not directly ask the family members to describe the roles they expected on the AI speaker until DAY 6 . We intended to diversify the participants’ expectations along various aspects from DAY 1 to DAY 6 , and on DAY 7 , we inquired explicitly about participants ' expectations of AI speaker’s roles , allowing them to express their opinions on this topic in a more informed manner . Table 2 . The contents of the one - week participatory design study . The study is structured in four sections o f DAY 1 , DAY 2 , DAYS 3 – 6 , and DAY 7 . This table shows the purpose and sub - activities of each section . Days Purpose and sub - activities DAY 1 Preparing an adoption of a family AI speaker Activity 1 : Express thoughts about your family Activity 2 : Express thoughts about your family members Activity 3 : Imagine adopting an AI speaker into your family DAY 2 Positioning the AI speaker in family’s everyday life Activity 1 : When can the AI speaker be involved in the family’s weekly schedule ? Activity 2 : How can the AI speaker be involved in the family home ? Activity 3 : Make a physical appearance of your family’s AI speaker DAY 3 - Living with the family AI speaker 6 Activity 1 : Feature - level ideation while living with your family AI speaker DAY 7 Reflections on living with your family AI speaker Activity 1 : Write a letter to your family AI speaker The study kit was designed and packaged in a well - organized way , and provided to each family ( Figure 1 - a ) . Unlike many participatory design studies with family [ 23 ] or regarding smart homes [ 39 ] , we asked the participants to complete the study kit in their own homes without any researcher involvement . This was to 1 ) enable comfortable conversation among the family members and 2 ) help them be immersed in the most natural context of family homes to reflect the family perspective in the study . We sent instant messages to remind , check , and keep track of participants to complete activities by the designated day . Some of the activity kits contained stickers and images ( Figure 1 - b ) , instead of open - ended raw materials [ 40 ] , to inspire the participants and help them express their ideas more effectively . However , we emphasized that our focus is not on ‘which’ sticker the participants used , but on the CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 4 meanings that the participants connoted when applying the stickers and the conversations they had during each activity . DAY 1 : Preparing an adoption of a family AI speaker DAY 1 aimed to foster the perspective of family sharing of AI speakers and help the family capture their initial thoughts about adopting an AI speaker into the family . DAY 1 consisted of a series of three activities . In Activity 1 , participants discussed their thoughts about their own families and expressed images on a blank piece of paper . Similarly , in Activity 2 , participants expressed their feelings about all their family members and about the relationships between the members . In this activity , we did not mention any definition of " family members " ; instead , we let the participants unconsciously define the meaning of family and include the members that fit their own definitions . In Activity 3 , the participants were asked to select a representative image of their family AI speaker from among the stickers ( or draw one ) and place it on the outcome of Activity 2 . The participants subsequently expressed their expectations of relationship with an AI speaker in relation to each family member and in relation to the entire family . DAY 2 : Positioning the AI speaker in family’s everyday life Because an AI speaker is involved in users’ everyday lives , it is important to discover its role within a family [ 17 , 30 , 33 ] . DAY 2 aimed to explore the role of an AI speaker in a family’s everyday life . In Activity 1 , participants were asked to fill out a weekly timetable . This timetable was designed to display the timelines of all the family members on one sheet of paper in parallel to help participants easily see when the family members might be sharing time together or spending time individually . Next , the participants were asked to color in the time slots in which the AI speaker could be involved . They were asked to use different colors to infer the different intents of the colored time slots . In Activity 2 , participants were asked to draw a map of their home and place the stickers of meaningful ‘things ( e . g . , furniture , home appliances , and devices ) ’ on the outcome sheet . There were no strict guidelines about drawing an exact floor plan since we wanted to understand the participants’ perceptions of the structure and composition of their home . Similar to Activity 1 , participants were asked to color the physical space or objects with which the AI speaker could be involved . These activities were intended to give participants a chance to develop an overview about how the AI speaker could be involved in their lives and to initiate detailed expectations regarding the roles of the AI speaker . In Activity 3 , participants drew a physical appearance of the AI speaker and gave it an identity . The toolkit consisted of a transparent cylinder containing blank white paper in the cylinder , both of which were in the Day 2 toolkit ( 2 ) shown in Figure 1 - a . Nametag , mouth , and ear stickers were also provided . The participants were asked to construct the AI speaker’s appearance on the paper using stickers and insert the paper into the transparent cylinder by facing the drawing part out . Finally , the participants were asked to name their AI speaker . After this creative process , we asked participants to place the AI speaker anywhere in their homes , which was after having reflected on the physical space of homes in Activity 2 . Throughout this activity , we expected the participants to share their expectations on the AI speaker traits and placement regarding its role in the family . DAY 3 - 6 : Living with the family AI speaker From DAY 3 to DAY 6 , we asked the participants to “live with” the family AI speaker they made and to perform feature - level ideations . In that activity kit , we provided memo papers for participants to write down what they wanted to be able to tell the AI speaker and what they wanted to hear from the family AI speaker , based on voice interactions . The participants were asked to fill out these memos as they thought of such ideas and to put the memos into the AI speaker mock - up . During these 4 days , the participants engaged in the activity whenever they came up with the ideas both individually and in family groups . It was not mandatory to fill out all the provided memo papers . This activity was designed to give participants a chance to immerse themselves in the experience of living with their designed family AI speaker and enabled them to perform feature - level ideations in everyday contexts . DAY 7 : Reflections on living with your family AI speaker The goal of DAY 7 was to obtain overall insights on the family AI speaker by making the participants reflect on their participatory design experiences over the week . Letter papers were provided , and the participants were asked to write a letter to the AI speaker they had been living with . We asked them to include 1 ) how their lives had changed pre - and post - AI speaker adoption and 2 ) what roles the family AI speaker took in the family . We also asked them to explain whether there were any differences in the role of the AI speaker from the time immediately after the adoption to the time of writing the letter . The purpose of this activity was to give participants a chance to reflect on the process of adopting , assigning an identity to , and living with the AI speaker . Post interview The post interview was conducted with groups of each family unit to reveal the in - family discussions that occurred during the weeklong participatory design process . The post interview of each family was conducted within 6 days after finishing the study . The interviews were semi - structured , and we flexibly adjusted questions based on the participants’ responses . The interviews began with basic questions investigating the participants’ prior experiences with possessing the commercialized family AI speaker . The main purpose of the post interviews was to allow participants to explain their participatory design processes and their design outcomes . We asked them to explain each of the activities one by one in sequence ; then , additional questions were asked at the discretion of the researcher . At the end of the explanations about each day ' s activities , we asked what role they expected the AI speaker to play . Finally , we asked them Figure 2 . The AI speakers created by F2 ( left ) and F6 ( right ) from DAY2 Activity3 . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 5 about their thoughts and feelings regarding the participatory design activity and the AI speaker . Each interview was conducted for about 60 minutes , and audio was recorded with the participants’ consent . Data analysis The audio recordings from the post interviews were transcribed by the researchers to become familiar with the data . The participatory design study outcomes were also collected after the post interviews . The outcomes from DAY 1 and DAY 2 were drawings , while the outcomes from DAY 3 to DAY 7 all consisted of handwritten text . The details in the drawings were rigorously probed during the post interviews ( including the colors chosen and the positioning of each drawing ) ; thus , the drawn outcomes served as supportive data for the post interviews . The text outcomes were all transcribed to typewritten text by the researchers . All the collected data described above were analyzed using a thematic analysis [ 2 ] . The initial coding was conducted by two researchers who reviewed the data iteratively until the patterns emerged . After all the data were coded , we generated the initial themes by grouping the codes . The two researchers and one support researcher reviewed the themes and iteratively refined them by repeatedly analyzing the data . After two months of this recursive process and discussions , we defined the names of the main themes . The transcribed quotes and study outcomes presented in the results are representative of each theme . All the researchers had backgrounds in human - computer interaction ( HCI ) and experiences in conducting qualitative data analysis . This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) . RESULTS Co - ownership as a basis of forming family - oriented role expectations Participants designed the family AI speaker from the perspective of ‘owned by the family unit’ . This perspective was naturally elicited by the participatory design activities on DAY 1 and DAY 2 ( Figure 2 ) , which enabled participants to naturally co - develop the common ground of their family . This perspective was strengthened by the sharing of their expectations of the AI speaker and giving it an identity . These discussions caused the participants to develop perceptions regarding the family and became a background theme of family co - ownership of the AI speaker . This co - ownership was commonly mentioned by the participants . “ Since it is our co - owned speaker , it will affect the whole family . We wanted to indicate its relationship with the family by placing it in the center . ” F1 “We felt increased ownership toward the AI speaker after we named it . ” F2 The co - ownership among the family members clarified and broadened their expectations on the role of an AI speaker in supporting the family unit rather than multiple individuals . The participants described how their perceptions on the roles of the AI speaker changed as the co - ownership formed during the study . The participants frequently mentioned their perceptual changes when describing their study outcome from DAY 1 during the post interviews . We also found these perceptual changes mentioned in the reflection letters , which was the activity from DAY 7 . “ The expectations focused on how it can support us , not individuals . This was because we shared our thoughts and expectations regarding our speaker . The expected roles could have been different if we had performed this study individually . ” F1 , quote from DAY 1 F2 was a family with no experience using an AI speaker . They explained how their perceptions changed while participating in the weeklong study . At the beginning of the study , they related their prior experiences with using a personal assistant ( Siri on their smartphones ) , to build an initial mental model of the AI speaker and they considered its role as supporting each family member individually . However , after building up the co - ownership by sharing family reflections , they refined their role expectations in directions that enhanced the family connection . “ AI speaker’s main role developed into one of connecting our family members . We thought this was an appropriate role for ‘our’ assistant because we do not have enough time for family . Regarding our whole family , there were so many things it had to learn about us . ” F2 On the other hand , F8 was a family who had been using an AI speaker for a year . They compared their perceptions on their current use of an AI speaker and those of the AI speaker they designed . They were almost in the abandonment stage with their current AI speaker at the time when they began participating in this study . They occasionally used a few basic functions , such as playing music , but often turned its power off when it was discharged . They indicated that the main reason for their abandonment was that it was unclear for them how the AI speaker could be utilized in the family setting , even though they were familiar with most of its functional features . With presence of co - ownership , they perceived the AI speaker that they designed during the study differently and expected it to assume family - oriented roles . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 6 “ Since the AI speaker we currently use was not initially explained as a ‘family’ assistant , it was ambiguous what functions we could use in family setting . However , the perception of ‘our’ assistant , Lisa [ their name for the designed AI speaker ] , broadened and clarified its role boundaries to better support our family as a whole . ” F8 User expectations about the AI speaker’s roles in terms of family cohesion Based on the clear role expectations of family supporting , participants were able to express their feature - level expectations explicitly . These detailed expectations were probed through the activities from DAY 2 to DAY 6 . The domains of the expectations emerged from participants’ cognizing about when the family spends collaborative time in Activity 1 of DAY 2 and reflecting on the in - home activities regarding the physical space of the home in Activity 2 of DAY 2 . These expectations became more concrete and specific in the activities of DAYS 3 – 6 . The participatory design study outcomes and the post interviews revealed that participants’ expectations of the AI speaker were unified into the role of family cohesion . Participants wanted to focus on and intensify the family relationships through use of the AI speaker . Keeping the family safe with a human - like voice ( F2 , F6 , F8 ) Families regarded their homes as protected places where family members gather and socialize . Therefore , families considered security as a basic feature for home , and that all family members should be aware of it . Reflecting on this perception of home , families wanted to focus on their family gathering in homes without concerns of safety by relying on an AI speaker . Other than the automated security features of smart homes , participants expected human - like colloquial features to deceive strangers . F8 was concerned about an intruder breaking into their home when it was empty for extended periods . They expected the AI speaker to help keep the home safe by speaking in human - like voices when strangers were hovering around their home . “We’ll be away from home for a long time and worried about security . I wanted it to act as if someone is at home . ” F8 These expectations were not limited to situations in which the home was left empty . F2 was sisters in their 20 ' s living by themselves , and they often worried about safety because no male family member lived with them . They emphasized the need for the AI speaker to have an absolutely human - like male voice to deceive strangers . “ We want it to reliably keep us safe . It should speak in a male voice after 10 PM , and act as if there were a male family member in our home . For example , when the Yelp delivery driver is at the door it could say something such as ‘We’re coming ! ’ in man’s voice . Therefore , it should act more like a real person , not a machine . ” F2 Keeping family members engaged in quotidian time with verbal interactions ( F1 , F4 , F5 , F7 , F8 ) From the outcomes of DAY 2 - Activity 1 , we identified that families often spend their coexisting time without a specific purpose or performing a regular activity . The participants expected the AI speaker to help the family members be more engaged during this quotidian time , such as during daily family conversations or when taking care of the children . Because the quotidian time that families spend together relies on verbal interactions , the desired features utilized the VUI traits that provide conversational support . F1 was a family consisting of a husband and a wife in their late 50 ' s and they usually spend time together at home . They shared hobbies such as listening to classical music and they had common interests . Because they enjoyed conversing about their common interests , they wanted the AI speaker to become involved in their conversations by providing more information related with their interests that can expand their knowledge and deepen their conversations . “ We love listening to classical music together , and my wife often tells me about what she has read in books about classical music or musicians . We’d like the AI speaker to tell us more about them , and discuss them with us . ” F1 The families with babies ( F4 and F5 ) had to spend most of their time with their babies . Sometimes they wished they could spend their time more meaningfully when physically being next to babies . Mothers of F4 and F5 wanted the time they spent on infant care to be more meaningful by enhancing their engagement with babies . F5 had a 3 - year - old toddler able to talk . This F5 mother wanted to spend her time more efficiently and to engage more with her baby ; thus , she wanted the AI speaker to have a third - party conversation with her and her baby in their second language to improve both their language skills and to help educate her child . F4 was a family with 2 - year - old twins . This F4 mother wanted the AI speaker to help her put her babies to sleep while helping them feel closer . “When falling asleep , babies want me to lie beside them . They check constantly by touching me . However , until they fall asleep , I just have to lie beside them with the light off in the dark , and I cannot do anything else . I want the AI speaker to read books in my voice until the babies go to sleep . Through my voice and physical contact , they can develop a stable attachment bond . ” F4 Proactively supporting the family’s co - resting ritual ( F4 - F6 , F8 ) Families considered the family resting time at home as a precious ritual . This resting time was often regular in each family , such as at dinnertime after everyone returned home or spare time after putting the babies to sleep . Many of the families watched TV or Netflix during these resting periods , and they prepared for the family resting by ordering food or flipping through channels . They wanted the AI speaker to take the burden of the preparations for family resting time to CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 7 increase relaxing moments with family . Interestingly , the participants emphasized the importance of the AI speaker being proactive regarding these features because they considered co - resting and its preparations as a set of regular activities that the AI speaker could easily predict . The families expected the AI speaker to understand the components of ‘co - resting’ ( e . g . , the regular routine of resting , what they usually do when taking a rest , and what they have to prepare before the rest periods ) in each family . F8 was a family consisting of a husband and a wife who enjoyed watching Netflix together . When they returned home after grocery shopping or doing outdoor chores on the weekend , they wanted to tell the AI speaker ‘We are so tired . We want to have dinner and rest in a short time’ . Through this utterance , they wanted the AI speaker to order food delivery and find and play a Netflix movie . They expected the AI speaker to understand the meaning of the family ‘taking a rest’ and to proactively support the preparations , since this was a patterned activity for them . “I just want to say that I need to take a rest . I don’t want to have to give it commands one by one . ” F8 Husband and wife of F4 , who had baby twins , had couple’s time every night after putting the babies to sleep . Because the babies sleep at a regular time , they had preferred TV programs for each day of the week . They expected the AI speaker to prepare for their rest periods because they did not want to waste any of their resting time . “ Our resting time is only about an hour . Because we do not remember the channel number of the programs of each day , it takes us a while flipping through channels to find the right channel . We want the AI speaker to tune to the right channel when we turn the TV on . ” F4 Managing the family reminiscence through a shared interface ( F1 - F3 , F5 , F8 ) Families wanted to reminisce about their memorable moments . The participants expected the AI speaker to support their reminiscences to strengthen the family relationships . From the post interview , we discovered that the participants perceived revisiting their shared memories through personal interfaces ( e . g . , smart phones ) as personal activities—even when they were talking about those memories with other family members . They emphasized the importance of having a shared interface for sharing memorable moments together with family members , which would enhance the meaning and value of reminiscences for their family . Therefore , the participants stated that managing their reminiscences was an appropriate role for the AI speaker , which is a co - owned presence . F8 participated in this study shortly after coming back from family travel abroad . They expected the AI speaker to gather the pictures taken with their personal smartphones and show them on the larger shared display ( e . g . , TV ) to help them fully indulge in enjoyable recollections of their family trip . Furthermore , they wanted to wrap up the trip together by writing reviews for the Airbnb via the AI speaker . “ I received a notification that the host of Airbnb wrote us a guest review . I wanted the AI speaker to read it for us . We wanted to check the review and write a review together through the AI speaker . That would make us feel that we were wrapping up our trip together . ” F8 F5 was a family with a baby in the language development stage . They expected the AI speaker to record charming anecdotes from the baby and to share those records within the family for reminiscences . “ My daughter often says lovely phrases , and I want the AI speaker to record those anecdotes as a family manager . I want to remember them and share them with family members later . ” F5 These findings indicate that a memorable moment can be anything that deepens its value by being shared within the family . To fulfill users ' expectations for reminiscences , an AI speaker should understand what a memorable moment might be and how it can be shared within the family . Sharing family chores within the family through data logging ( F1 - F7 ) To maintain a family routine and perform housework , family members divided the family chores . For proper division and taking turns with chores , they had to share to - do lists or detailed information about each chore . For this type of communication , participants preferred to talk face - to - face or to get a real - time response to ensure that the details were properly delivered . However , the problem was that they frequently forgot to update the to - do list or inform its details . Because these chores are mundane , the families did not want to expend additional effort to manage them methodically or to remember the details . Therefore , the participants expected the AI speaker to manage the list and update the status of the chores shared among the family members . The AI speaker could ensure that all the family members were aware of the details of each task via data logging . The sisters in F2 had significantly different working hours . Because their available time for housework was different , they had to share a to - do list of chores . They expected the AI speaker to log their housework via a smart home system and share the unfinished to - do list within the family . “ We live together , but our life patterns are completely different . I have to send my sister a message about the today’s chores ( e . g . , taking out the trash , doing laundry , etc . ) every morning . I would like the AI speaker to remember these chores and inform my sister after she wakes up . It is burdensome for me to remember these and sometimes I forget to message her . ” F2 F4 was a family with baby twins . The father loaded the babies’ bags in the mother’s car in the morning on his way to work ; then , the mother dropped the babies off at the daycare center . Because they did not have their own garage , their Figure 3 . Describing the family members of F2 . They included their mom and dad as family members although they did not live together . They expressed each member’s personality with stickers and colors and placed the members in a circular shape by alternately positioning the parents and the sisters to express their need to stay connected . The yellow line enclosing the family and the handshake sticker indicated their expectations of the AI speaker’s role in connecting the family members . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 8 parking spaces were not fixed . They expected the AI speaker to log the location of where one’s spouse parked the car and share it with both of them . “ To load the bags in the morning , I have to find where my wife parked her car . She sometimes forgets to tell me where the car is , and I have to look for it for 20 minutes . I want the AI speaker to tell me where the car is . ” F4 F5 was a dual - income family , and a grandmother came to their home every morning to babysit . Because the grandmother and mother took turns with childcare , they always exchanged briefings on the baby’s conditions before one took over the baby’s care . They expected the AI speaker to log details about the baby to support these briefings . “ When I get back from work , my mom tells me when she fed the baby , when the baby slept , how long he slept , and about his bowel movements . Because she relies on her memory , these reports aren ' t that accurate . I want the AI speaker to remember these details to support our briefings . ” F5 Sharing schedules for family socialization while maintaining an awareness of inter - member privacy ( F2 , F3 , F6 , F7 ) The family members made daily efforts to increase and maintain the time they shared together . They shared and coordinated their schedules not only for planned special events such as family nights , but also to find times they could spend together during their everyday lives , such as getting home early to have dinner together . The participants expected the AI speaker to support these efforts by sharing their schedules among the family members . “ I think I would use the AI speaker more frequently when some of the family members are not at home . I want it to be our linkage for gathering the family members . ” F7 The intrafamily socialization reflected each family’s perceptional boundary of family , which was not limited to the members who were physically living together . The sisters of F2 who lived apart from their parents wanted to share their schedules with their parents , rather than only between themselves . This desire was based on their perceptions of family members ; they considered their parents also as family and included them in both activities on DAY 1 that involved describing their family , as shown in Figure 3 . Because the sisters could not meet with their parents often , they described their family as connected through phone calls . We found that these phone calls were regarded as family time in F2 , and they expected the AI speaker to share family schedules and manage the times for family phone calls . This indicates that the definition of " family being together " can differ depending on the family and should be considered when sharing schedules . “ Because I can see my sister at home every day , I want to make more effort to keep close to my parents . Also , because my work hours are irregular , my parents and I have troubles managing the times to have phone calls . ” F2 However , some participants were reluctant to share their schedules unreservedly with other family members . These concerns on inter - member privacy were not emphasized in existing works on AI speakers or smart homes [ 11 , 17 ] , but there were similar concerns from users who share tracking data within the family [ 27 , 35 ] . Our participants were tolerant of an AI speaker accessing their personal data in smart phones but emphasized that it should maintain their privacy . They indicated the need for authentication and access control to protect each family member’s privacy . “ Sometimes it [ the AI speaker ] must protect my personal information from other family members . For example , if I am secretly planning a girls’ night out , it shouldn’t be shared with parents . I want the AI speaker to have a single presence but to enable each member to set private and public limits on personal information with authentication . ” F3 Repairing emotional conflicts between family members as a trustworthy listener ( F1 , F8 ) The participants expected the AI speaker to enhance their family bond by helping them reconcile when conflicts occur . They expected an AI speaker to have passive roles such as a listener or a content provider rather than mediating the family communications proactively to solve conflict . The wife in F1 wanted to obtain personal comfort from the AI speaker after an emotional conflict with her husband . She expected the speaker to be a good listener and suggest content for comfort . “ Sometimes I get emotionally hurt by family members . I want to tell the AI speaker about my feelings . It would be helpful if it could respond with content that could comfort me . It doesn’t have to notice my feelings proactively . ” F1 More interesting was the reason why she expected to get comfort from the AI speaker . She expected it based on trust that the speaker will maintain family privacy from outsiders . “ I don’t want to talk about in - family troubles to outsiders . I want the AI speaker to listen to my feelings and comfort me because it would keep our family’s secrets . ” F1 Figure 4 . Participants sectioned their homes into shared and personal spaces by dividing the image using lines ( left ) or drawing boxes with different colors ( right ) . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 9 As we could see from the quotes of F1 , emotional conflicts within the family can be sensitive problems , and families may hesitate to talk about those conflicts without trust . Even with such sensitivity , it was also clear that there is some potential room for an AI speaker—if done carefully—to act in a support role to help resolve emotional conflicts . Privacy awareness when supporting personal features in family homes With mainly supporting family - oriented roles , some participants expected the AI speaker to provide additional personal support for individual family members . They expected the basic features that are typically available in IPAs , such as setting alarms , checking a calendar , or taking notes with VUI . interestingly , these expectations on personal supports were limited to personal spaces , such as their own rooms , due to the concerns about inter - member privacy . Since personal support may include private information , participants thought that those features should be available only in personal spaces to preserve their privacy . The connection between privacy awareness and personal space reflects the participants’ perceptions of sectioning their home into shared and personal spaces , which was revealed by Activity 2 in DAY 2 ( Figure 4 ) . Participants indicated that each personal space has its owner and emphasized that those spaces reflect the owner’s personal preferences . They put stickers of things the owner liked on the personal spaces in Activity 2 of DAY 2 . They expected the AI speaker to reflect the personal preferences of the owner in personal spaces . “ When I play music with AI speaker in my room , I want to get song recommendations based on the data in my smartphone app . ” F2 Although these expectations of personal support cannot be overlooked for additional conveniences in the home , the participants emphasized that the main identity of the AI speaker is to take a supporting role for the family unit . DISCUSSION Reconsidering an AI speaker as a presence with co - ownership to develop its potential By perceiving the AI speaker as a shared technology , participants developed co - ownership over it . This co - ownership has revealed a new domain of family - oriented roles for an AI speaker in family homes . These potential roles are not yet enabled in existing AI speakers , even while some of them are technically feasible . We think that the most important reason for this is that the speakers have not been considering the family context from the family - oriented view . Current AI speakers are still struggling to find their roles in the family context . Previous studies on how end - users utilize existing in - home AI speakers discovered that their use is typically limited to playing music , voice control of smart homes , and weather inquiries , which are similar to the features of IPAs [ 30 , 33 ] . This indicates that the current AI speakers are not enhancing their value as either a co - owned presence or as a family assistant ; instead , they are stagnating as a VUI - based AI technology that provides only limited functionality for controlling home devices or supporting rudimentary tasks . Concerning stagnation , our findings suggest the direction through AI speaker’s roles in the family context . It should be reconsidered as a presence that enables family members to perceive co - ownership of it . By redefining the AI speaker ' s role in the family context , starting from co - ownership , our findings suggest new design directions that would enable AI speakers to develop their potential in the family context . We make two suggestions in the following sections that can be starting points for designing an AI speaker from this perspective : 1 ) leveraging human - likeness to develop its potential roles in supporting family units and 2 ) interpreting the home context to seamlessly connect family and personal supports to bridge the gap between the roles of current AI speakers supporting multiple individuals and the new roles of supporting the family unit . Leveraging the human - likeness of an AI speaker for a family home Based on our findings , families expect human - likeness from the AI speaker from a social ability perspective . Because the AI speaker is shared in an environment where multiple family members co - exist , participants expected it to be intertwined in the family dynamics . For example , they expected the AI speaker to reduce the burden of their mental load when formulating commands in the presence of other people , which was also an addressed problem of VUI in previous work [ 4 ] . We suggest designing the AI speaker by providing the human - likeness user experience . Give an understanding of family dynamics or rituals Users would be able to experience that the AI speaker is understanding their family by the AI speaker managing multiple smart home technologies in the role of a comprehensive organizer . For example , the AI speaker could support family cohesion by comprehensively organizing multiple technologies for a specific purposeful domain ( e . g . , supporting family chores or resting ) . With the AI speaker accessible to the families’ data , including that of smart home devices and the members’ schedules , the family dynamics around who is usually responsible for house chores or family rituals on when and how they gather together can be inferred . In the domain of family chores , an AI speaker should be able CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 10 to bridge the gap among family members sharing chores by assigning to - do lists and the member in charge by understanding of family dynamics and schedules . On the other hand , to fulfill the family ' s fundamental need for resting , which involves focusing on family relationships in a relaxed environment , the AI speaker could automate rest preparations by understanding family rituals and suggesting family gatherings around media such as the TV . Have proactive solutions for ambiguous user inputs The AI speaker can be perceived as being able to read between the lines by preparing a proactive set of solutions for ambiguous user inputs . Our findings on the domains of supporting rest and repairing emotional conflicts require the AI speaker to understand the implicit meanings of users’ natural language . Families connoted the need to receive action - based supports from the AI speaker with it being able to read between the lines . When the families were physically exhausted or mentally hurt , they wanted to provide simple utterances such as “We want to take a rest” or talk about their emotional pain . For example , when users say “We want to take a rest” , the AI speaker can automatically turn on the TV , order a usual snack , and dim the light , etc . By executing a well - curated set of commands without users manually giving each command , users would feel mentally less burdened . Adjust proactiveness of action depending on domain AI speakers can be more naturally intertwined into families by fulfilling the user expectations of the AI speaker’s social ability through adjusting its proactiveness depending on domain . In line with the view of Stolterman [ 15 ] , an AI speaker ' s ability to modulate the proactiveness of its voice output would be more appropriate than possessing only a uniform and fixed tone of voice . In the domain of supporting the family ' s quotidian time , the AI speaker has to emphasize its conversational capabilities with proactiveness . Participants expected the AI speaker to enhance family conversations by being engaged and acting as a moderator . Interpreting home context to enable both family and personal support Our findings showed that the participants definitely wanted the AI speaker to take a supporting role in the family unit . Moreover , some participants in our study expected the AI speaker to also be responsible for supporting personal features that would seamlessly facilitate their in - home lives . The tendency to expect personal features that were limited to personal spaces implies that contextual information about space type should be considered when designing AI speakers . Differentiate the features depending on social or private situations Regarding the inter - member privacy problems , it would be sensible for the AI speaker to avoid personal and private information in shared spaces . This could be managed by differentiating the supported features depending on the space type . For example , providing schedule briefings or reading text messages out loud in the in the living room would be unhelpful , but such actions would be reasonable in an individual’s personal space . Adjust service customization based on the family - shared or personal space To provide more reasonable support , the AI speaker can adjust the referred data to conform to the space type when the same feature is supported within both contexts . For example , the preferences of all family members should be considered when recommending content in the living room , but it would be experienced as more customized to consider only a user ' s personal preferences in that user ' s personal space . Extend the interpretation on the home context with understandings of the social and private situations Since the participants’ most important criterion of personal supports was inter - member privacy , the AI speaker should understand the home context dependent on the presence or absence of other family members , which can be framed as social and private situations within the home . This indicates that users want to be able to expect personal support that includes revealing private information in the living room ( which is physically a shared space ) when home alone . We emphasize the importance of contextual understanding to bridging the gap between the current role of AI speakers supporting multiple individuals and this new domain of a family - oriented role , namely , supporting family cohesion . CONCLUSION The findings from this participatory user study explicate the potential of the AI speaker as a family - shared technology . Based on co - ownership of the AI speaker among family members , participants expected family - oriented support . Their expectations about family support were unified into the role of family cohesion and categorized into seven domains . In addition , participants emphasized the inter - member privacy regarding the personal support from the family - shared AI speaker . This paper suggests that AI speakers should be reconsidered as family - shared technology to develop its potential role in the family context . Furthermore , it is essential to design human - likeness for the family AI speaker through enabling users to experience its social ability . Finally , we suggest interpreting the home context by considering both social and private situations to enable family and personal support seamlessly within the home . ACKOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported by Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation ( IITP ) grant funded by the Korea government ( MSIT ) ( No . 2016 - 0 - 00564 , Development of Intelligent Interaction Technology Based on Context Awareness and Human Intention Understanding ) . We would like to thank Eujeen Hwang for proofreading the English writing . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 11 REFERENCES [ 1 ] Erin Beneteau , Olivia K . Richards , Mingrui Zhang , Julie A . Kientz , Jason Yip , and Alexis Hiniker . 2019 . Communication Breakdowns Between Families and Alexa . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 243 , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300473 [ 2 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2008 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology . 3 , 2 ( July 2008 ) , 77 - 101 . [ 3 ] A . J . Bernheim Brush and Kori M . Inkpen . 2007 . Yours , mine and ours ? sharing and use of technology in domestic environments . In Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Ubiquitous computing ( UbiComp ’07 ) . Springer - Verlag , Berlin , Heidelberg , 109 – 126 . [ 4 ] Heloisa Candello , Claudio Pinhanez , Mauro Pichiliani , Paulo Cavalin , Flavio Figueiredo , Marisa Vasconcelos , and Haylla Do Carmo . 2019 . The Effect of Audiences on the User Experience with Conversational Interfaces in Physical Spaces . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 90 , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300320 [ 5 ] Eugene Cho . 2019 . Hey Google , Can I Ask You Something in Private ? In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 258 , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300488 [ 6 ] Minji Cho , Sang - su Lee , and Kun - Pyo Lee . 2019 . Once a Kind Friend is Now a Thing : Understanding How Conversational Agents at Home are Forgotten . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1557 – 1569 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322332 [ 7 ] Leigh Clark , Nadia Pantidi , Orla Cooney , Philip Doyle , Diego Garaialde , Justin Edwards , Brendan Spillane , Emer Gilmartin , Christine Murad , Cosmin Munteanu , Vincent Wade , and Benjamin R . Cowan . 2019 . What Makes a Good Conversation ? Challenges in Designing Truly Conversational Agents . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 475 , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300705 [ 8 ] Benjamin R . Cowan , Nadia Pantidi , David Coyle , Kellie Morrissey , Peter Clarke , Sara Al - Shehri , David Earley , and Natasha Bandeira . 2017 . “What can i help you with ? ” : infrequent users’ experiences of intelligent personal assistants . In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services ( MobileHCI ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 43 , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3098279 . 3098539 [ 9 ] Stefania Druga , Randi Williams , Cynthia Breazeal , and Mitchel Resnick . 2017 . “Hey Google is it OK if I eat you ? ” : Initial Explorations in Child - Agent Interaction . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 595 – 600 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3084330 [ 10 ] Serge Egelman , A . J . Bernheim Brush , and Kori M . Inkpen . 2008 . Family accounts : a new paradigm for user accounts within the home environment . In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ’08 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 669 – 678 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1460563 . 1460666 [ 11 ] Christine Geeng and Franziska Roesner . 2019 . Who’s In Control ? Interactions In Multi - User Smart Homes . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 268 , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300498 [ 12 ] Alexis Hiniker , Sarita Y . Schoenebeck , and Julie A . Kientz . 2016 . Not at the Dinner Table : Parents’ and Children’s Perspectives on Family Technology Rules . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1376 – 1389 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2819940 [ 13 ] Geert Hofstede and Gert J . Hofstede . 2005 . Cultures and organizations : Software of the mind ( Vol . 2 ) . New York : Mcgraw - hill . [ 14 ] Geert Hofstede . 2011 . Dimensionalizing cultures : The Hofstede model in context . Online readings in psychology and culture . 2 , 1 ( December 2011 ) . [ 15 ] Lars - Erik Janlert and Erik Stolterman . 2017 . Things That Keep Us Busy : The Elements of Interaction . The MIT Press . [ 16 ] Matthias Jöst , Jochen Häußler , Matthias Merdes , and Rainer Malaka . 2005 . Multimodal interaction for pedestrians : an evaluation study . In Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces ( IUI ’05 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 59 – 66 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1040830 . 1040852 [ 17 ] Josephine Lau , Benjamin Zimmerman , and Florian Schaub . 2018 . Alexa , Are You Listening ? Privacy Perceptions , Concerns and Privacy - seeking Behaviors with Smart Speakers . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 12 Interact . 2 , CSCW , Article 102 ( November 2018 ) , 31 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274371 [ 18 ] Rich Ling . 2008 . New Tech , New Ties : How Mobile Communication Is Reshaping Social Cohesion . The MIT Press . [ 19 ] Ewa Luger and Abigail Sellen . 2016 . “Like Having a Really Bad PA” : The Gulf between User Expectation and Experience of Conversational Agents . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 5286 – 5297 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858288 [ 20 ] Stine S . Lundgaard and Peter Axel Nielsen . 2019 . Personalised Soundscapes in Homes . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 813 – 822 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322364 [ 21 ] Tuuli Mattelmäki . 2005 . Applying probes – from inspirational notes to collaborative insights . International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts . 1 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 83 - 102 . [ 22 ] Margaret Morrison and Dean M . Krugman . 2001 . A Look At Mass and Computer Mediated Technologies : Understanding the Roles of Television and Computers in the Home . Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media . 45 , 1 ( 2001 ) , 135 - 161 . [ 23 ] Diego Muñoz , Bernd Ploderer , and Margot Brereton . 2019 . Position Exchange Workshops : A Method to Design for Each Other in Families . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 109 , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300339 [ 24 ] Chelsea Myers , Anushay Furqan , Jessica Nebolsky , Karina Caro , and Jichen Zhu . 2018 . Patterns for How Users Overcome Obstacles in Voice User Interfaces . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 6 , 1 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173580 [ 25 ] Erick Oduor , Carman Neustaedter , William Odom , Anthony Tang , Niala Moallem , Melanie Tory , and Pourang Irani . 2016 . The Frustrations and Benefits of Mobile Device Usage in the Home when Co - Present with Family Members . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1315 – 1327 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901809 [ 26 ] Thao Phan . 2019 . Amazon Echo and the Aesthetics of Whiteness . Catalyst : Feminism , Theory , Technoscience . 5 , 1 ( 2019 ) . [ 27 ] Laura R . Pina , Sang - Wha Sien , Teresa Ward , Jason C . Yip , Sean A . Munson , James Fogarty , and Julie A . Kientz . 2017 . From Personal Informatics to Family Informatics : Understanding Family Practices around Health Monitoring . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2300 – 2315 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998362 [ 28 ] Martin Porcheron , Joel E . Fischer , and Sarah Sharples . 2017 . “Do Animals Have Accents ? ” : Talking with Agents in Multi - Party Conversation . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 207 – 219 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998298 [ 29 ] Martin Porcheron , Joel E . Fischer , Moira McGregor , Barry Brown , Ewa Luger , Heloisa Candello , and Kenton O’Hara . 2017 . Talking with Conversational Agents in Collaborative Action . In Companion of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 Companion ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 431 – 436 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3022198 . 3022666 [ 30 ] Martin Porcheron , Joel E . Fischer , Stuart Reeves , and Sarah Sharples . 2018 . Voice Interfaces in Everyday Life . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 640 , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174214 [ 31 ] Stuart Reeves . 2017 . Some conversational challenges of talking with machines . In : Talking with Conversational Agents in Collaborative Action , Workshop at the 20th ACM conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ' 17 ) , Portland , Oregon , USA . [ 32 ] Elizabeth B . - N . Sanders and Pieter J . Stappers . 2014 . Probes , toolkits and prototypes : three approaches to making in codesigning . International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts . 10 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 5 - 14 . [ 33 ] Alex Sciuto , Arnita Saini , Jodi Forlizzi , and Jason I . Hong . 2018 . “Hey Alexa , What’s Up ? ” : A Mixed - Methods Studies of In - Home Conversational Agent Usage . In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 857 – 868 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196772 [ 34 ] Selina J . Sutton , Paul Foulkes , David Kirk , and Shaun Lawson . 2019 . Voice as a Design Material : Sociophonetic Inspired Design Strategies in Human - Computer Interaction . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 323 Page 13 ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 603 , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300833 [ 35 ] Asimina Vasalou , Anne - Marie Oostveen , and Adam N . Joinson . 2012 . A case study of non - adoption : the values of location tracking in the family . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 779 – 788 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145321 [ 36 ] Alessondra Villegas . 2013 . The Influence of Technology on Family Dynamics . Proceedings of the New York State Communication Association . 2012 , 1 ( 2013 ) . [ 37 ] Linda Wulf , Markus Garschall , Julia Himmelsbach , and Manfred Tscheligi . 2014 . Hands free - care free : elderly people taking advantage of speech - only interaction . In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Fun , Fast , Foundational ( NordiCHI ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 203 – 206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2639189 . 2639251 [ 38 ] Xi Yang , Marco Aurisicchio , and Weston Baxter . 2019 . Understanding Affective Experiences with Conversational Agents . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 542 , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300772 [ 39 ] Yaxing Yao , Justin Reed Basdeo , Smirity Kaushik , and Yang Wang . 2019 . Defending My Castle : A Co - Design Study of Privacy Mechanisms for Smart Homes . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 198 , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300428 [ 40 ] Jason Yip , Tamara Clegg , Elizabeth Bonsignore , Helene Gelderblom , Emily Rhodes , and Allison Druin . 2013 . Brownies or bags - of - stuff ? domain expertise in cooperative inquiry with children . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 201 – 210 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485763