Actin Network Architecture Can Determine Myosin Motor Activity Anne - Cécile Reymann , 1 Rajaa Boujemaa - Paterski , 1 Jean - Louis Martiel , 1 Christophe Guérin , 1 Wenxiang Cao , 2 Harvey F . Chin , 2 * Enrique M . De La Cruz , 2 Manuel Théry , 1 † Laurent Blanchoin 1 † The organization of actin filaments into higher - ordered structures governs eukaryotic cell shape and movement . Global actin network size and architecture is maintained in a dynamic steady state through regulated assembly and disassembly . Here , we used experimentally defined actin structures in vitro to investigate how the activity of myosin motors depends on network architecture . Direct visualization of filaments revealed myosin - induced actin network deformation . During this reorganization , myosins selectively contracted and disassembled antiparallel actin structures , while parallel actin bundles remained unaffected . The local distribution of nucleation sites and the resulting orientation of actin filaments appeared to regulate the scalability of the contraction process . This “ orientation selection ” mechanism for selective contraction and disassembly suggests how the dynamics of the cellular actin cytoskeleton can be spatially controlled by actomyosin contractility . A ctin filament networks comprise a large variety of different structures . Their spa - tial organization supports complex cell - shape regulation . The dynamics and mechanical properties of these structures result from the assembly of polarized actin filaments . Filopodia , retraction fibers , and centripetal fibers are built of parallel filaments ( 1 , 2 ) . Stress fibers and trans - verse arcs have filaments arranged in antiparallel orientations ( 3 , 4 ) . The lamellipodium is a dense array of branched filaments ( 5 ) . The global architecture of the actin cytoskel - eton is maintained through coordinated actions of a large number of regulatory proteins that mod - ulate filament assembly and disassembly ( 6 ) , as well as through contractility driven by myosin motor proteins ( 7 ) . Myosin motor proteins can also promote filament disassembly ( 8 ) . Collect - ively , these observations have supported a mech - anism in which the coupling between myosin contractility and filament disassembly ensures a temporal synchrony between actin retrograde flow at the front and filament disassembly at the rear of migrating cells ( 9 ) . Central to this coupling mechanism is that filaments are selected for contraction or disas - sembly , but it is not known what factors deter - mine the response to myosin contractile forces ( 10 ) . Here , we used micropatterning methods to assemble geometrically controlled and polarized actin filament networks ( 11 ) to evaluate how the overall polarity of actin filament architectures de - termines their response — reorganization and / or disassembly — to myosin contractile forces . Actin filament growth on bar - shaped micro - patterns covered with the Wiskott - Aldrich syn - drome protein pWA domain , an actin - promoting factor , leads to the formation of a dense mesh - work on the micropatterned region and parallel array of filaments with barbed ends oriented away from the nucleation site out of this re - gion ( 11 ) ( movie S1 ) . Addition of myosins to the polymerization mix — including Arp2 / 3 complex , profilin , and actin monomers — allowed us to in - vestigate the contraction of this network ( fig . S1 ) . We used double - headed ( HMM ) myosin VI ( 12 ) , a processive pointed end – directed motor that could sustain continuous force and motility without the need for self - assembly into minifilaments . Green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) – tagged myo - sins and Alexa 568 – labeled actin monomers allowed real - time tracking of actin growth and myosin - induced reorganization ( F1 Fig . 1 ) . Myo - sins associated with the network and induced a clear two - phase process constituted by the defor - mation of actin networks followed by a massive filament disassembly of the condensed central meshwork ( Fig . 1A and movie S2 , short bars ) . Depending on the geometry of the pattern , this two - phase process could lead to the formation of a disassembly wave ( fig . S2 , long bars ) . We then tested if a barbed end – directed myosin had a similar effect on network reorganization . Mus - cle myosin II bipolar filaments induced a two - phase deformation - disassembly of the network REPORT 1 InstitutdeRecherchesenTechnologiesetSciencespourleVivant ( iRTSV ) , Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire et Végétale , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique ( CNRS ) – Commissariat à l ' Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives ( CEA ) – Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique ( INRA ) – Université Joseph Fourier ( UJF ) , Grenoble , 38054 , France . 2 Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry , Yale University , New Haven , CT 06520 , USA . * Present address : Department of Biochemistry , Weill Cornell Medical College , New York , NY 10065 , USA . † To whom correspondence should be addressed : manuel . thery @ cea . fr ( M . T . ) ; laurent . blanchoin @ cea . fr ( L . B . ) A 48 min 2 min 121 min Myosin VI 0 50 100 0 120 60 Myosin II Myosin VI actinin 55 min 13 min 157 min 158 min 48 min 304 min 2 min 121 min 48 min B C a c t i n den s i t y ( a . u . ) position on linescan ( μ m ) 0 50 100 0 120 60 13 min 157 min 55 min a c t i n den s i t y ( a . u . ) 0 50 100 0 120 60 48 min 304 min 158 min a c t i n den s i t y ( a . u . ) 20 μ m 20 μ m 20 μ m deformation disassembly disassembly disassembly disassembly disassembly contraction contraction contraction max min max min max min position on linescan ( μ m ) position on linescan ( μ m ) Fig . 1 . Myosin - induced actin meshwork contraction and disassembly . ( A ) Time series of myosin VI – induced network contraction on a bar - shaped micropattern . Actin filaments were visualized with fluorescent monomers . “ Fire ” look - up table color - coding reveals variations in actin network densities , quantified with a line scan along the bar at different time points . Actin density peaks because of network deforma - tion after 48 min then falls off because of network disassembly . ( B ) Same as ( A ) with muscle myosin II – induced contraction . ( C ) Same as ( A ) with 100 nM a - actinin in the polymerization mix . www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 000 MONTH 2012 1 MS no : RE1221708 / BPO / CELL BIOL similar to myosin VI , although the extent of de - formation before disassembly was local and less pronounced ( Fig . 1B and movie S3 ) , presum - ably because of resistance from filament cross - linking ( 13 ) . Consistent with this interpretation , the actin filament cross - linker , a - actinin , also minimized myosin VI – induced macroscopic de - formation before network disassembly ( Fig . 1C , fig . S3 , and movie S4 ) . Varying myosin con - centration revealed that deformation and dis - assembly occurred above different concentration thresholds depending on the reticulated actin network ( fig . S3 ) . Parallel and polarized filaments emerging from the micropatterned regions with their barbed ends oriented outward ( 11 ) did not contract and disassemble with either myosin VI or II ( Fig . 1 , A and B , and movies S2 and S3 ) . Perhaps net - works composed of randomly oriented filaments can contract and disassemble , whereas parallel filament arrays cannot . To understand the contri - bution of actin filaments ’ polarity during acto - myosin contraction , we used evanescent wave microscopy to follow in real time the effect of myosin on a growing branched network ( fig . S4 and movie S5 ) . Networks did not contract in the presence of myosin VI when they remained as individual patches of branched and parallel fila - ments . When individual subnetworks interacted in antiparallel orientation , myosin rapidly induced a deformation of the network by its alignment into antiparallel bundles ( fig . S4 and movie S5 ) . This “ orientation selection ” for selective con - traction and disassembly of antiparallel filaments by myosin was further tested on networks of con - trolled polarity and architecture . Filaments nucle - ated on an eight - branch radial array lead to the formation of all the diversity in actin organiza - tion found in a cell , a meshwork of branched and randomly oriented actin filaments on the micro - pattern , bundles of aligned antiparallel filaments in the most central part of the array , and bundles of aligned parallel filaments in the distal part of the array ( 11 ) ( F2 Fig . 2A ) . This defined distinction between zones containing parallel , antiparallel , or branched filament organizations ( Fig . 2G ) en - abled us to characterize the region - selectivity of myosin - induced reorganization . Myosin VI was chosen to induce contraction forces on these actin architectures because it is a pointed end – oriented motor and can pull on filaments with their barbed ends pointing out of the micro - patterns ( fig . S5 and movie S6 ) . The addition of myosin VI in solution led to the rapid contrac - tion of the antiparallel bundles and branched meshwork , followed by their disassembly ( Fig . 2B , central black hole after 1640 s ; Fig . 2 , C and D ; and movies S7 and S8 ) . The parallel bun - dles remained unperturbed and continued to elongate until the monomers freshly released by central disassembly were consumed ( Fig . 2 , D and E , and movie S8 ) , although myosins were present on these bundles ( Fig . 2F ) on which they could move ( fig . S6 ) . These processes could also be monitored on larger structures in which antiparallel networks were easier to visualize ( fig . S7 ) . Thus , myosin - induced contraction is specific to bundles of antiparallel filaments and branched meshwork , and myosin - induced disassembly of these structures further supplies actin mono - mers for the growth of parallel filament bundles ( Fig . 2G ) . Next , we further characterized the contraction properties of bundles of antiparallel filaments and branched meshwork . We compared the effect of myosins on actin rings in which the pro - portion of antiparallel filaments zones were finely controlled ( F3 Fig . 3A ) . Filaments assemble into branched meshwork on full rings ( Fig . 3A ) . On Fig . 2 . Regioselective action of myosins . ( A ) Time series of network assembly on an eight - branch actin - nucleating radial array . ( B ) Time series of myosin VI – induced architecture selective contraction and disassembly ( actin , myosin , and an overlay are shown ) . ( C ) Kymograph of actin fluorescence along a parallel bundle [ blue dashed line in ( B ) 5180 s ] and central region of actin filaments [ dashed green circle in ( B ) 5180 s ] , showing the different localization of elongation and contraction and of dis - assembly . ( D ) Fluorescence intensity of a central zone [ dashed green circle in ( B ) ] and a parallel bundle [ blue dashed line in ( B ) ] over time . ( E ) Length variations of parallel bundles over time in the absence or presence of myosins . ( F ) Line scan of fluorescence intensity along a parallel bundle confirming myosin presence all along . ( G ) Schematic representation of the final architecture on an eight - branch actin - nucleating radial array in the absence or presence of myosins in solution . MONTH 2012 VOL 000 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 2 REPORT MS no : RE1221708 / BPO / CELL BIOL dotted rings , filaments formed branched mesh - work on the dots but specifically formed bundles of antiparallel filaments between the dots ( Fig . 3A ) . The proportion of bundles of antiparallel filaments thus scales inversely with the number of dots in constant - sized rings . We monitored actin network contraction and deformation upon the addition of myosin ( Fig . 3B and movie S9 ) . We measured the fluorescence intensity of actin and myosin in all angular sectors of the rings during contraction ( Fig . 3 , C and D ) . Myosins first accumulated on the actin network without generating global deformation ( Fig . 3D , green curve before time 0 ) . Above a critical accumu - lation of myosins , deformation started ( Fig . 3D , blue curve time 0 ) . Network deformation was coupled to network disassembly ( Fig . 3D , red curve ) . In addition , the total amounts of actin and myosin decreased following a decay pattern similar to that of the radius of both full and dotted rings ( Fig . 3D ) . As a consequence , the density of actin was constant during contraction ( fig . S8 ) . Each sector of the rings followed three distinct phases during remodeling ( Fig . 3E ) : first , a delay phase during which filaments were aligned ; second , a fast - contraction phase with a constant rate ; and finally , a third phase during which the network was highly compacted at the ring center and the contraction slowed down . We measured the rate of the fast - contraction phase , because it reflects the main amplitude of change in sector size . We compared the contraction rates of rings with continuous or dotted nucleating regions . Dot number and spacing were chosen to vary the ratio r between the total length of branched meshwork , P branched ( P b or Pb on fig - ures ) , and the ring ’ s perimeter , P . The contraction rate increased significantly as the ratio r decreased ( Fig . 3F and movie S10 ) . Thus , for a given actin structure , the contraction rate is determined by the relative proportions of antiparallel bundles and branched meshwork . The contraction rate of an in vivo structure , such as the cytokinetic ring , increases in proportion to its size , a process termed scalability , although no molecular determinants of the underlying mech - anism have been established ( 14 , 15 ) . To evaluate the respective contributions of ring size and com - position to the contraction rate , we varied the ring perimeter P and the portion of this perimeter that nucleates a branched meshwork P b indepen - dently ( F4 Fig . 4A and movie S11 ) . When P and P b increased equally , the contraction rate was unaffected , although the ring size increased ( see black and blue rings in Fig . 4A ) . Thus , no scalability is observed when the proportion of antiparallel bundles and branched meshwork is maintained constant during size increase . When P was increased and P b kept constant , the contraction rate increased ( see the pairs : black , red rings and green , blue rings in Fig . 4A ) . Sca - lability is thus only observed when the size in - crease of the actin structure is coupled to an increase of the proportion of antiparallel bundles . These results demonstrate that contraction rate variations result from the proportion of anti - parallel filament bundles , which is controlled by the size of and distance between nucleation re - gions . In all conditions tested , the velocity , V , was proportional to the ratio P / P b ( fig . S9 ) . These observations could be captured by a simple phys - ical model in which the contraction force was proportional to the amount of myosins per unit length of filament , and the friction drag was pro - portional to the length of branched meshwork ( Fig . 4B ) . In this model , network disassembly by myosins plays a passive role because it sim - ply prevents the elastic reaction , which could arise from network compaction during contraction , but a more active role of network disassembly during contraction remains possible . Thus myosins act on actin networks in a manner that depends on the actin filament ori - entation . Parallel filaments align and elongate , whereas antiparallel filaments contract and dis - assemble . We term such rules in myosin selec - tivity an “ orientation selection ” mechanism that anti - parallel branched meshwork Actin filaments A B D 40 60 80 100 120 60 80 100 120 140 160 X ( μ m ) fast contraction phase slow contraction phase 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 - 600 - 400 - 200 0 200 400 600 N o r m a li z ed s e c t o r s i z e Time ( s ) contraction delay continuous nucleating region dotted nucleating regions C E 1 1 / 2 1 / 4 Y ( μ m ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 V e l o c i t y , ( n m / s e c ) * * * * * * r = P b / P = t = 0 4 min 8 min 12 min 16 min 20 min 24 min t = 0 4 min 8 min 12 min 16 min 20 min 24 min 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 F l uo r e sc en c e i n t en s i t y ( a . u . ) Myosin accumulation Network deformation and disassembly 0 . 2 0 0 10 20 30 40 R ad i u s ( μ m ) Myosin accumulation Network deformation and disassembly Time ( min ) 0 1 . 2 F 10 20 30 - 10 - 20 - 30 0 10 20 30 - 10 - 20 - 30 Time ( min ) Myosin Actin Radius 20 μ m Fig . 3 . The proportion of antiparallel filaments regulates network contraction rate . ( A ) Schematic representation of actin networks nucleated on full and dotted rings . ( B ) Time series of myosin - induced contraction of actin networks nu - cleated from full ( top ) and dotted ( bottom ) rings . ( C ) Il - lustration of automated network contraction analysis ( see materials and methods ) . Each circle represents a time point . ( D ) The radius and total fluorescence intensities of both actin and myosin were recorded for all angular sectors over time . ( E ) Ring constriction kinetics . Time series of length values ( red dots ) could be fitted by three distinct phases ( black line ) . ( F ) Fast - contraction phase velocity measurements were compared among various ring compositions . www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 000 MONTH 2012 3 REPORT MS no : RE1221708 / BPO / CELL BIOL should not induce a global cell collapse but should instead support the overall spatial coor - dination of different actin structures by regulat - ing their specific reorientation , deformation , and disassembly . References and Notes 1 . L . P . Cramer , T . J . Mitchison , J . Cell Biol . 131 , 179 ( 1995 ) . 2 . D . Vignjevic et al . , J . Cell Biol . 160 , 951 ( 2003 ) . 3 . L . P . Cramer , M . Siebert , T . J . Mitchison , J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1287 ( 1997 ) . 4 . A . B . Verkhovsky , T . M . Svitkina , G . G . Borisy , J . Cell Biol . 131 , 989 ( 1995 ) . 5 . T . M . Svitkina , A . B . Verkhovsky , K . M . McQuade , G . G . Borisy , J . Cell Biol . 139 , 397 ( 1997 ) . 6 . T . D . Pollard , G . G . Borisy , Cell 112 , 453 ( 2003 ) . 7 . C . Veigel , C . F . Schmidt , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 163 ( 2011 ) . 8 . L . Haviv , D . Gillo , F . Backouche , A . Bernheim - Groswasser , J . Mol . Biol . 375 , 325 ( 2008 ) . 9 . C . A . Wilson et al . , Nature 465 , 373 ( 2010 ) . 10 . C . M . Brawley , R . S . Rock , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 9685 ( 2009 ) . 11 . A . - C . Reymann et al . , Nat . Mater . 9 , 827 ( 2010 ) . 12 . E . M . De La Cruz , E . M . Ostap , H . L . Sweeney , J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 32373 ( 2001 ) . 13 . G . H . Koenderink et al . , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 15192 ( 2009 ) . 14 . A . Carvalho , A . Desai , K . Oegema , Cell 137 , 926 ( 2009 ) . 15 . M . E . Calvert et al . , J . Cell Biol . 195 , 799 ( 2011 ) . Acknowledgments : We thank C . Sykes and J . Faix for muscle myosin II protein , F . Senger for image analysis , and K . John for discussions regarding the computational model . This work was supported by grants from Human Frontier Science Program ( RGP0004 / 2011 awarded to L . B . and E . M . D . L . C . ) , Agence Nationale de la Recherche ( ANR - 08 - BLANC - 0012 awarded to L . B . ) , Institut National du Cancer ( INCA - 2011 - 141 awarded to M . T . ) , NIH ( GM097348 awarded to E . M . D . L . C . ) , and a Ph . D . Fellowship from the Irtelis program of the CEA ( awarded to A . C . R . ) . E . M . D . L . C . is an American Heart Association Established Investigator , an NSF Career Award recipient ( MCB - 0546353 ) , and a Hellman Family Fellow . The use of micropatterned substrates to control actin network self - assembly is protected by patent EP2011 / 063676 . The data reported in this manuscript are tabulated in the main paper and in the supplementary materials . Supplementary Materials www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / VOL / ISSUE / PAGE / DC1 Materials and Methods Figs . S1 to S9 References ( 16 – 21 ) Movies S1 to S11 9 March 2012 ; accepted 1 May 2012 10 . 1126 / science . 1221708 Fig . 4 . The proportion of branched meshwork regulates the scalability of ring contraction . ( A ) Respective effects of size and proportion of branched mesh - work in contraction kinetics . We varied the ring perimeter P and the length of that perimeter nucleating a branched meshwork P b independently . Images show an early time point during actin network assembly on micropatterned dots . Fast - contraction phase velocity measurements were compared among various ring configurations . ( B ) Model description . Filaments assemble into antiparallel bundles between nucleation regions ( left scheme ) . Nucleation regions ( wide black bar , right scheme ) generate branched actin meshwork . The contraction force is proportional to the density of myosins per unit length of filament , r , to the force per myosin head , f , and to the portion of the perimeter made of the relevant network , P a for the antiparallel bundles and P b for the branched meshwork . Myosin density is constant over the entire perimeter P = P a + P b . Antiparallel bundles have a friction drag negligible compared with that of the branched meshwork in which the effective friction coefficient , h , has two origins : an external drag due to network anchoring on the nucleation region and an internal drag due to entanglement of filament branches . The balance between the total contraction force and the frictional drag sets the contraction velocity V , which appeared to be proportional to the ratio P / P b as observed in all our experiments . MONTH 2012 VOL 000 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 4 REPORT MS no : RE1221708 / BPO / CELL BIOL