Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Transport in Growth Cone Motility and Axon Guidance Citation Dent , Erik W , and Frank B Gertler . “Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Transport in Growth Cone Motility and Axon Guidance . ” Neuron 40 . 2 ( 2003 ) : 209 – 227 . Copyright © 2003 Cell Press . As Published http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0896 - 6273 ( 03 ) 00633 - 0 Publisher Elsevier Version Final published version Accessed Mon Jan 21 15 : 05 : 44 EST 2019 Citable Link http : / / hdl . handle . net / 1721 . 1 / 83929 Terms of Use Article is made available in accordance with the publisher ' s policy and may be subject to US copyright law . Please refer to the publisher ' s site for terms of use . Detailed Terms The MIT Faculty has made this article openly available . Please share how this access benefits you . Your story matters . Neuron , Vol . 40 , 209 – 227 , October 9 , 2003 , Copyright  2003 by Cell Press Review Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Transport in Growth Cone Motility and Axon Guidance ganism , by isolating neurons in a relatively simple , easily manipulated , two - dimensional environment , we have learned much about the cytoskeleton and its role in motility and guidance . Our focus in this review will be on the final common target of signaling cascades in the Erik W . Dent * and Frank B . Gertler Biology Department 68 - 270 Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 growth cone , the actin , and the microtubule cytoskele - ton and the proteins to which they bind directly . There are several aspects of cytoskeletal signaling which , due Recent studies indicate the actin and microtubule cy - toskeletons are a final common target of many signal - to the scope of this piece , we will not emphasize . First , there has been much effort to elucidate the signaling ing cascades that influence the developing neuron . Regulationofpolymerdynamicsandtransportarecru - cascades downstream of specific axon guidance recep - tors , and especially prominent in these studies is the cial for the proper growth cone motility . This review addresses how actin filaments , microtubules , and importance of Rho GTPases , which are known to play an important role in axon outgrowth and pathfinding their associated proteins play crucial roles in growth conemotility , axonoutgrowth , andguidance . Wepres - in vivo and in culture . This work has been thoroughly covered in a number of recent reviews and so will not ent a working model for cytoskeletal regulation of di - rected axon outgrowth . An important goal for the fu - be discussed here ( Dickson , 2002 ; Huber et al . , 2003 ; Lee and Van Vactor , 2003 ; Luo , 2000 , 2002 ; Meyer and ture will be to understand the coordinated response of the cytoskeleton to signaling cascades induced by Feldman , 2002 ; Mueller , 1999 ; Song and Poo , 2001 ) . Second , a number of reviews have focused on the simi - guidance receptor activation . larities between cytoskeletal reorganization in growth cone guidance and those associated with neuronal mi - Introduction Ramo´n y Cajal first described the growth cone in 1890 gration and polarization of axons and dendrites ( see reviews by da Silva and Dotti , 2002 ; Feng and Walsh , from sections of embryonic spinal cord stained with silver chromate ( Cajal , 1890 ) . Amazingly , Cajal correctly 2001 ; Lambert de Rouvroit and Goffinet , 2001 ) ; these topics will also not be discussed in detail here . By focus - described the growth cone from his fixed specimens as “a concentration of protoplasm of conical form , en - ing on the cytoskeleton in relation to axon outgrowth and guidance , we hope to provide a framework for those dowed with amoeboid movements . ” However , it wasn’t until 1907 that Harrison , using newly devised tissue cul - studying guidance cues , their receptors , and down - stream signaling cascades in their efforts to connect ture techniques in conjunction with long - term time - lapse observation , provided definitive proof that the these pathways to the molecules that ultimately control morphological and mechanical responses of neurons to growth cone was indeed a motile structure . In doing so he demonstrated unambiguously that axons extended their environment . Throughout this review we will refer to several mor - from a single neuronal cell body , rather than from a merging of cells into the elongated cylindrical shape of phological features of the growth cone . Starting at the distalextentofthegrowthcone , filopodiaormicrospikes the mature neuron ( Harrison , 1907 ) . Importantly , Speidel ( 1933 ) confirmed Harrison’s observation in a living em - are narrow cylindrical extensions capable of extending tens of microns from the periphery of the growth cone bryo . In his descriptions of isolated neural tissue from R . pipiens embryos , Harrison wrote , “… [ these ] experi - ( Figure 1 ) . Lamellipodia are flattened , veil - like exten - sions at the periphery of the growth cone . We will also ments show that two elementary phenomena are in - volved in nerve development : ( a ) the formation of the refer to different regions of the growth cone following the operational definitions of previous work ( Bridgman primitive nerve fiber through extension of the neuro - blastic protoplasm into a filament—protoplasmic move - and Dailey , 1989 ; Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Smith , 1988 ) . These regions include the peripheral ( P ) domain , ment ; ( b ) the formation of the neurofibrillae within the filament—tissue differentiation…” ( Harrison , 1910 ) . It is composed primarily of lamellipodia and filopodia ; the this protoplasmic movement of the growth cone and the transitional ( T ) domain , a band of the growth cone at underlying dynamic cytoskeletal structures ( neurofi - the interface of the P domain and the central ( C ) domain ; brillae ) that are the subject of this review . and theC domain , composed ofthicker regionsinvested In this review , we focus in particular on the cytoskele - by organelles and vesicles of varying sizes . Generally , tal dynamics of actin and microtubules in neurons that growth cones from all species examined to date contain have been studied in culture . The high - resolution optical filopodia and lamellipodia , as well as P , T , and C do - methods available to image cultured neurons have per - mains , although the shapes and sizes of the domains mitted detailed study of cytoskeletal dynamics at a sub - and number of filopodia and lamellipodia vary dramati - cellular level , which have been technically impossible cally . Before describing what is currently known about for the most part in neurons of living animals . Although growth cone cytoskeletal dynamics and how these dy - clearly it will be important to expand these studies into namic structures play an essential role in motility and the complex three - dimensional environment of the or - guidance , it is necessary to delineate the morphological changes that occur as a growth cone is converted into a stable axon shaft . * Correspondence : ewdent @ mit . edu Neuron210 Figure 1 . Growth Cones Vary in Shape and Size Differential interference contrast images of two hippocampal growth cones in culture . Growth cones can exhibit a wide variety of shapes and sizes . An example of a “filopod - ial”growthconeisshownatleftanda“lamel - lipodial” growth cone is shown at right . Gen - erally , growth cones contain both filopodia andlamellipodiaandperipheral ( P ) , transition ( T ) , and central ( C ) regions , although these vary dramatically in shape and size . Both growthconesareshownatthesamemagnifi - cation . Stages of Axon Outgrowth thus extrapolations of the phases outlined a year earlier for chicken sensory neurons . Subsequent studies dem - Early phase contrast studies of growth cone dynamics showed that the rate of advance and the shape of the onstrated that PC12 cells , rodent sympathetic ( Aletta and Greene , 1988 ) , and cortical neurons ( Kalil , 1996 ) growth cone were linked . Studies in sympathetic neu - rons demonstrated that the rate of growth cone advance progressed through the same phases of development during formation of new axons . All of the above studies directly correlated with the size and dynamics of lamelli - podia and filopodia ( Argiro et al . , 1984 , 1985 ) . Quantita - documented growth cone motility and random out - growth in cell culture ; however , growth cone motility tive analysis of filopodia from dorsal root ganglion neu - ronsdemonstratedthatfilopodialmovementandgrowth and axon outgrowth in the developing embryo also is known to occur through protrusion , engorgement , and cone advance were directly correlated as well ( Bray and Chapman , 1985 ) . This group showed that growth cones consolidation ( Godement et al . , 1994 ; Halloran and Kalil , 1994 ; Harris et al . , 1987 ) . However , in vivo outgrowth exhibited retrograde flow of material from the peripheral to the central region andinto the axon shaft itself . Impor - is not random , but directed to specific postsynaptic targets . We propose that the difference between ran - tantly , they also demonstrated that the growth cone undergoes a systematic maturation that is continuously dom or induced outgrowth in culture and directed out - growth in vivo is likely to be that gradients of guidance repeated during elaboration of the axon . This maturation process consists of the following series of events : filo - cues bias one side of the growth cone to progress through these stages toward ( by an attractant ) or away podia and lamellipodia form at the leading edge of the growth cone , followed by flow of the filopodia around from ( by a repellent ) the guidance cue more rapidly than the other side of the growth cone . Thus , axon guidance the lateral aspects of the growth cone and subsequent retraction of filopodia at the base of the growth cone . can be thought of as directed protrusion , engorgement , and consolidation . These investigators also proposed that filopodial move - ments were driven by the flow of actin filaments and In the mammalian central nervous system ( CNS ) , ax - ons often elongate past their eventual targets and only associated proteins , which make up the filopodia and lamellipodia ( see below ) . later branch into these targets through a process of delayed interstitial axon branching ( O’Leary et al . , 1990 ; Nevertheless , these phase - contrast images were in - capable of discerning fine details of growth cone struc - Kalil et al . , 2000 ) . This process of forming a growth cone from an axon shaft also occurs through protrusion , en - ture . With the invention of video - enhanced contrast dif - ferential interference contrast ( VEC - DIC ) microscopy gorgement , and consolidation , with the new axon branching off of the parent axon ( Figure 2 ) . Therefore , ( Allen , 1985 ) , it was possible to determine that growth cones from the mollusk Aplysia californica progressed axon guidance , through directed turning or branching , occurs through a conserved mechanism . The rest of the through three morphologically distinct stages to form new axon segments ( Goldberg and Burmeister , 1986 ) . review will elaborate the underlying cytoskeletal mecha - nisms that regulate protrusion , engorgement , and con - These stages are termed protrusion , engorgement , and consolidation ( Figure 2 ) . Protrusion occurs by the elon - solidation , leading to directed outgrowth . gation of filopodia and lamellipodia ( often between two filopodia ) , apparently through the polymerization of ac - Pioneering Studies in Growth Cone Cytoskeleton Although microtubules ( MTs ) , microfilaments ( filamen - tin filaments . Engorgement occurs when veils become invested with vesicles and organelles , likely through tousactinorF - actin ) , andneurofilamentswereobserved in sections of nervous system tissue under the electron both Brownian motion and directed microtubule - based transport . Consolidation occurs as the proximal part microscope throughout the 1950’s and 1960’s ( Hughes , 1953 ; Nakai , 1956 ) , it was not until the experimental of the growth cone assumes a cylindrical shape and transport oforganelles becomesbidirectional , thusadd - studies of Wessels’ group that MTs and F - actin poly - mers were shown to be necessary for neurite outgrowth ing a new distal segment of axon . These three stages , iterated many times , give rise to the elongated axon . ( Yamada et al . , 1970 , 1971 ) . Yamada and colleagues incubated chick embryo dorsal root ganglia cultures in The three stages outlined for Aplysia neurons were Review211 Figure 2 . StagesofAxonandBranchGrowth Three stages of axon outgrowth have been termed protrusion , engorgement , and con - solidation ( Goldberg and Burmeister , 1986 ) . Protrusion occurs by the rapid extensions of filopodia and thin lamellar protrusions , often between filopodia . These extensions are pri - marily composed of bundled and mesh - like F - actin networks . Engorgement occurs when microtubules invade protrusions bringing membranous vesicles and organelles ( mito - chondria , endoplasmic reticulum ) . Consoli - dation occurs when the majority of F - actin depolymerizesintheneckofthegrowthcone , allowing the membrane to shrink around the bundle of microtubules , forming a cylindrical axon shaft . This process also occurs during the formation of collateral branches off the growth cone or axon shaft . cytochalasin B ( CB ) , which at high concentrations re - MTs did not immediately affect the filopodia but eventu - ally resulted in retraction of the axons ( Yamada et al . , sults in F - actin depolymerization , and colchicine , which at highconcentrations causesMT depolymerization . Ex - 1971 ) . From these studies it can be concluded that F - actin is the primary cytoskeletal element that main - posure to CB induced retraction of growth cone filo - podia , which made the growth cone adopt a club - like tains the growth cone shape and is essential for proper axon guidance , whereas MTs are essential for giving appearance and resulted in cessation of axon out - growth . However , subsequent experiments in dissoci - the axon structure and serve an important function in axon elongation . ated culture ( Dent and Kalil , 2001 ; Lafont et al . , 1993 ; Marsh and Letourneau , 1984 ) , in the grasshopper limb Subsequentstudiessuggestedthattherewasactually an interaction between the F - actin cytoskeleton and ( Bentley and Toroian - Raymond , 1986 ) , in the Xenopus retinotectal system ( Chien et al . , 1993 ) , and in the Dro - MTs . Bray and colleagues demonstrated that after addi - tion of colchicine , neurites retracted , as demonstrated sophila peripheral nervous system ( Kaufmann et al . , 1998 ) demonstrated that CB - induced F - actin depoly - by others ( Yamada et al . , 1970 ) , but that depolymer - ization of MTs also caused new growth cone - like merization actually resulted in continued extension but caused misdirected outgrowth . Depolymerization of lamellipodial and filopodialprotrusions along the usually Neuron212 Figure 3 . Actin Filaments and Microtubules Are Polarized Polymers Actin filaments in vitro are capable of adding and removing ATP - actin and ADP - actin from both the barbed and pointed ends . However , the equilibrium constant for ATP dissociation is greater at the pointed end . Consequently , at steady - state , actin filaments devoid of actin - associated proteins undergo slow treadmilling through the addition of ATP - actin to the barbed end and release of ADP - actin from the pointed end ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Actin filaments also exhibit aging , in which ATP - actin is hydrolyzed rapidly to ADP - pi - actin , followed by a slow dissociation of the (cid:1) - phosphate , giving ADP - actin . Microtubules are also polarized structures with (cid:2) / GTP - (cid:3) - tubulin dimers adding to the plus or growing end and (cid:2) / GDP - (cid:3) - tubulin dimers dissociating from the minus end . Microtubules also contain an internal mechanism of GTP hydrolysis that occurs rapidly , giving a “GTP - cap” to the polymers . They also exhibit posttranslational modifications ( detyrosination shown here ) that correlate with the age of the polymer . quiescent axon shaft ( Bray et al . , 1978 ) . The authors 1981 ; Tennyson , 1970 ) , but not during the initial axon outgrowth of hippocampal ( Shaw et al . , 1985 ) and corti - concluded that MTs suppress actin polymerization in the axon shaft , which maintains the axon in a cylindrical cal ( E . W . D . , unpublished data ) neurons in culture . Trans - genic mice lacking axonal neurofilaments are viable , form . Another group , using EM after stabilization of the cytoskeleton , documented that MTs oftentimes abut or with few abnormalities in their neural connections ( Eyer and Peterson , 1994 ) . Furthermore , Drosophila develop run parallel to F - actin bundles in peripheral regions of the growth cone ( Letourneau , 1983 ) . Thus , we have fullyfunctionalnervoussystemswithoutneurofilaments . Although neurofilaments are clearly an important cy - known for more than twenty years that there is likely to be a dynamic interplay between cytoskeletal elements . toskeletal component during development of the verte - brate nervous system ( Lin and Szaro , 1995 ) , their func - To understand this interplay , it is necessary to identify what cytoskeletal components are present in growth tion in growth cone motility and axon guidance is unknown . Therefore , this review will focus on actin fila - cones and what higher - order forms they take . ments and microtubules . Actin Filaments The Growth Cone Cytoskeleton Is Composed of Polarized Polymers Actin filaments are helical polymers composed of actin monomers , often referred to as globular actin ( G - actin ) The two principle cytoskeletal components in growth cones are actin filaments and microtubules ( Figure 3 ) . ( Figure 3 ) . Neurons contain approximately equal amounts of nonmuscle isotypes of actin , (cid:3) - actin and (cid:1) - actin However , in developing peripheral nervous system neu - rons , neurofilaments are also present in the axon and ( Choo and Bray , 1978 ) , although most research has fo - cused on the (cid:3) - actin isotype . It is not known if these C domain of the growth cone ( Bunge , 1973 ; Shaw et al . , Review213 two isotypes of actin have distinctive functions in neu - mers are assembled from one (cid:2) - tubulin subunit and one (cid:3) - tubulin subunit , resulting in an (cid:2) / (cid:3) dimer . In mammals rons and growth cones , although both their mRNA and protein show differential regulation in neurons ( Bassell there are six known (cid:2) - tubulin genes and seven known (cid:3) - tubulin genes . Of these , three (cid:2) - tubulins ( (cid:2) 1 , (cid:2) 2 , and et al . , 1998 ; Gunning et al . , 1998 ) . It is also not known whether the composition of individual actin filaments (cid:2) 4 ) and five (cid:3) - tubulins ( I , II , III , IVa , and IVb ) are found in brain ( reviewed in Luduena , 1998 ) . These (cid:2)(cid:3) - tubulin in growth cones is homogeneous , composed of either (cid:3) - actin or (cid:1) - actin , or heterogeneous , containing both heterodimers are arranged in a linear array of alternating (cid:2) - and (cid:3) - tubulin subunits , which forms a protofilament (cid:3) - actin and (cid:1) - actin . Globular actin can exist as ATP - actin , ADP - pi - actin , ( Figure 3 ) . Between 11 and 15 protofilaments constitute the wall of the microtubule ( usually 13 in mammalian and ADP - actin ( Figure 3 ) . Although ATP - and ADP - actin can associate and dissociate from both barbed and cells ) , giving rise to a tubular structure approximately 25 nm in diameter ( Luduena , 1998 ) . Because these (cid:2)(cid:3) pointed ends in vitro , ADP - actin dissociation from the pointed ends is kinetically favored ( Pollard and Borisy , dimers are arranged in a head - to - tail configuration , the MT is inherently polarized , with one end termed the 2003 ) . This results in slow addition of monomers at the barbed end and slow dissociation of monomers at “plus” end and the other the “minus” end . In most cells the plus end of the MT grows and shrinks , while the the pointed end . In growth cones , the barbed end of the actin filament generally faces the distal membrane and minus end of the MT is inherently unstable and shrinks unless it is stabilized , presumably by minus end capping the pointed end faces theT region . Actin is also modified as it “ages . ” G - actin polymerizes onto actin filaments proteins . Neuronal MTs can be extremely stable and long lived ( Li and Black , 1996 ) . Therefore , nervous sys - as ATP - actin and is hydrolyzed first to ADP - p i - actin and then finally into ADP - actin upon phosphate release . In - tem tissue is likely to be an excellent source of MT minus end capping proteins . terestingly , several actin - associated proteins have been found to bind preferentially to these different forms of Any MT present in a neuron is likely to be a heteroge - neous polymer composed of several combinations of actin ( Gungabissoon and Bamburg , 2003 ) . In growth cones , F - actin content is highest in the P (cid:2) / (cid:3) dimer isotypes . However , the actual isotypic makeup of individual MTs in neurons is not known . Nevertheless , and T regions of the growth cone and diminishes to varying levels in the C region of the growth cone ( Figure it appears that different isotypes may confer distinct properties to the MT . For example , in vitro studies have 4 ) . The bulk of F - actin forms two types of arrays . A polarized bundled array of F - actin composes the core shown that MTs composed exclusively of (cid:2)(cid:3) III - tubulin are more stable than those assembled from (cid:2)(cid:3) II - tubulin of filopodia and often extends proximally into the T re - gion of the growth cone ( Figure 4 ) . These bundled ( Schwarz et al . , 1998 ) and less sensitive to vinblastine and taxol , well - known microtubule destabilizing and F - actin structures are generally termed F - actin ribs or actin ribs if they are present within the lamellipodial P stabilizing drugs , respectively ( Derry et al . , 1997 ; Khan and Luduena , 2003 ) . Other studies indicate that different and T regions of the growth cone . F - actin can also adopt a meshwork - like array . It is this meshwork array of (cid:2) - and (cid:3) - tubulin isotypes can change microtubule plus end dynamics ( Bode et al . , 2003 ; Panda et al . , 1994 ) . (cid:3) III - F - actin that forms the bulk of the lamellipodia in the P region of the growth cone ( Bridgman and Dailey , 1989 ; tubulin is generally found only in postmitotic neurons . Interestingly , the upregulation of this isotype in gliomas Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ; Smith , 1988 ) . and in lung and prostate cancer correlates with the grade of malignancy and resistance to taxol ( Katsetos F - actin can also take the form of other dynamic and stable structures in the growth cone . Dynamic comet - et al . , 2003 ; Ranganathan et al . , 1998 ; Verdier - Pinard et al . , 2003 ) . like structures that emanate from the T region and ex - tend into the P region are termed intrapodia ( Dent and A major way in which tubulin and MTs are functionally modified is by several forms of posttranslational modifi - Kalil , 2001 ; Katoh et al . , 1999 ; Rochlin et al . , 1999 ) . The actin structure of intrapodia forms an elongated mesh - cation including tyrosination / detyrosination , acetyla - tion , phosphorylation , polyglutamylation , andpolyglycy - work array , similar to the tails of bacterial and viral pathogens , about 1 – 2 (cid:4) m wide and up to 5 – 10 (cid:4) m in lation ( reviewed in Luduena , 1998 ) . Free (cid:2) / (cid:3) - tubulin dimers generally contain a C - terminal tyrosine residue length ( Rochlin etal . , 1999 ) . Thus , intrapodiaare ahybrid of the bundled and meshwork arrays that compose the on the (cid:2) subunit . However , after assembly into microtu - bules , this tyrosine residue can be cleaved by tubulin bulk of growth cone F - actin . Actin can also adopt an arc - like structure in the T region of the growth cone that carboxypeptidase , yielding detyrosinated tubulin ( re - viewed in Barra et al . , 1988 ; MacRae , 1997 ) . The penulti - has distinct kinetics from lamellipodial and filopodial actin ( Schaefer et al . , 2002 ) . Other forms of F - actin in - mate amino acid , glutamate , can also be cleaved , giving delta2 - tubulin ( Lafanechere and Job , 2000 ) . Most of clude puncta , located within the central region of the growth cone and axon shaft , and a thin subplasmalem - these modifications occur at the highly divergent C ter - minus of both (cid:2) - and (cid:3) - tubulins , which is exposed on mal cortical meshwork in the axon shaft ( Letourneau , 1983 ; Schnapp and Reese , 1982 ) . These actin puncta the outside of the MT . However , acetylation occurs at lysine - 40 of (cid:2) - tubulin , which faces the MT lumen ( No - and subplasmalemmal network appear to be quite sta - ble because they are insensitive to long - term incubation gales et al . , 1999 ) . It is well known that MTs are heterogeneous polymers with the F - actin capping or G - actin sequestering drugs CB and latrunculin A , respectively ( Dent and Kalil , 2001 ) . in terms of posttranslational modifications . As an exam - ple , individual neuronal MTs have been shown to be Microtubules Microtubules are polarized structures composed of tu - highly acetylated and sparsely tyrosinated at their minus ends , with a fairly abrupt transition to highly tyrosinated bulin dimers assembled into linear arrays . Tubulin di - Neuron214 Figure 4 . Distribution of Actin Filaments and Microtubules in Growth Cones ( A ) A small , rapidly extending hippocampal neurongrowthconewasfixedandsimultane - ously labeled for F - actin ( with phalloidin ) , ty - rosinated MTs ( tyr - MTs ) , and acetylated MTs ( ace - MTs ) with specific antibodies . Note the prominent F - actin bundles and the splaying of tyr - MTs into the actin - rich region , often along the F - actin bundles . Acetylated MTs are much farther back in the C region and axonshaftanddonotcolocalizewithF - actin . ( B ) Alarge , pausedhippocampalgrowthcone fixed and labeled as above . Note the halo of F - actin around the prominent looped micro - tubules in the C region . Tyr - MTs also extend into the actin - rich P region , but ace - MTs are limited to the central region and do not show colocalization with F - actin . Both growth cones are shown at the same magnification . and sparsely acetylated at their plus ends ( Figure 3 ; ner , 1991 ) . This splaying is thought to result from MT dynamics ( Rochlin et al . , 1996 ) . MTs can also adopt a Brown et al . , 1993 ) . Although degree of acetylation and detyrosination of microtubules correlates directly with looped morphology when growth cones are in a paused state ( Figure 4B ; Dent and Kalil , 2001 ; Dent et al . , 1999 ; the age of the microtubule , these modifications do not confer stability to the microtubule ( Khawaja et al . , 1988 ) . Morfini et al . , 1994 ; Tanaka and Kirschner , 1991 ; Tsui et al . , 1984 ) . Interestingly , this looped morphology was However , it is likely that such posttranslational changes , like the hydrolysis of ATP - actin to ADP - actin , affect recently discovered to be associated with synapse for - mation in the Drosophila neuromuscular junction ( Roos binding of associated proteins and thus interactions with other cytoskeletal components and intracellular et al . , 2000 ) . To sprout new synaptic boutons , the MT loop would transiently break down , allowing MT poly - signaling pathways ( Bonnet et al . , 2001 ; Boucher et al . , 1994 ; GurlandandGundersen , 1995 ; Kreitzeretal . , 1999 ; merization and transport , followed by reformation of the loop at both the old and newly formed synaptic bouton . Larcher et al . , 1996 ; Liao and Gundersen , 1998 ) . MTs form a dense parallel array in the axon shaft . It was thought that MTs rarely extended into the pe - riphery of the growth cone and were inhibited by the When they enter the growth cone , they generally splay apart ( Figure 4A ; Dailey and Bridgman , 1991 ; Forscher dense F - actin meshwork present in the P region ( Forscher and Smith , 1988 ) . However , others had found and Smith , 1988 ; Letourneau , 1983 ; Tanaka and Kirsch - Review215 that MTs were often present in the P region of fixed and istry , functional studies ( i . e . , knockout and overexpres - sion phenotypes , GFP - labeling and dynamic localiza - stained growth cones , sometimes extending well into tion , immunoelectron localization , and determination of filopodia ( Dailey and Bridgman , 1991 ; Gordon - Weeks , temporal and spatial activation patterns ) have yet to be 1991 ; Letourneau , 1983 ) . Once fluorescently labeled performed on many of these proteins . Furthermore , very MTs were observed with time - lapse fluorescent micros - few studies have directly placed ABPs downstream of copy , it became obvious that they could rapidly extend specific guidance receptors . Examples include studies into and retract from the peripheral actin - rich regions demonstrating that Ena / VASP proteins function down - of growthcones . In fact , overa period of tensof minutes , stream of both Netrin / DCC and Slit / Robo pathways ( Ba - MTs can explore almost the entire P region of the growth shaw et al . , 2000 ; Colavita and Culotti , 1998 ; Gitai et al . , conethrough dynamicpolymerization / depolymerization 2003 ) , Cofilin functions in the Semaphorin3A / Neuropilin and transport ( Dent and Kalil , 2001 ; Dent et al . , 1999 ; pathway ( Fritsche et al . , 1999 ; Aizawa et al . , 2001 ) , Pro - Kabir et al . , 2001 ; Schaefer et al . , 2002 ; Tanaka and filin functions in the Dlar pathway ( Wills et al . , 1999 ) , Kirschner , 1991 , 1995 ) . AbLIM functions in the Netrin / DCC pathway ( Gitai et al . , 2003 ) , Capulet functions in the Slit / Robo pathway ( Wills Polymer Dynamics et al . , 2002 ) , and Abl functions in the Slit / Robo and Dlar Actin filaments and MTs are in a constant state of flux . pathways ( reviewed in Moresco and Koleske , 2003 ) . In An essential feature of both polymers is that they are general , the role of ABPs in nonneuronal cells have been required by the cell to exist sometimes in a stable state explored more extensively ( reviewed in Pollard and Bo - and other times as dynamic structures . For neurons risy , 2003 ) . Nevertheless , the complement of ABPs differ to extend long axons and dendrites and steer these between neuronal and nonneuronal cells . Therefore , it processes to their eventual synaptic partners , they must will be important to determine how the expression and exert precise control over the dynamics of both actin activities of these neural - specific ABPs are orchestrated filaments and MTs . To accomplish these tasks , neurons in growth cones during outgrowth and pathfinding . For contain a complex set of actin - and MT - associated pro - example , are they localized to analogous structures in teins in addition to the variety of isoforms and posttrans - nonneuronal cells and growth cones ( i . e . , leading edge , lational modifications mentioned above ( Gordon - Weeks , filopodia , actin bundles ) ? What protein complexes exist 2000 ) . Furthermore , some cytoskeletal - associated pro - between actin and ABPs in the growth cone and how teins are able to influence both actin filaments and MTs are these regulated ? One important area of future study ( Rodriguez et al . , 2003 ) . will be to determine how these ABPs are involved in Actin Filament Dynamics signaling cascades from guidance cues , such as Ne - The dynamics of actin filaments are regulated by both trins , Semaphorins , Slits , and Ephrins , to the actin cy - their intrinsic polarity and a cornucopia of actin - associ - toskeleton . ated proteins . More than twenty proteins bind directly Microtubule Dynamics to F - and / or G - actin and have been localized immunocy - Like F - actin , MT dynamics are influenced by their asso - tochemically to the growth cone ( Table 1 ) . We will refer ciated proteins and by their intrinsic properties . In neu - to these proteins throughout the text as actin binding rons , microtubules generally assume a plus end distal proteins ( ABPs ) . It is beyond the scope of this review distribution in the axon and a mixed polarity distribution , to discuss indetail how each of theseproteins is thought with both plus and minus end distal MTs in dendrites to function . Furthermore , most of the functional studies ( Baas et al . , 1989 ) . The plus ends of MTs exhibit a prop - of these proteins have been done in nonneuronal cells erty termed dynamic instability , where they cycle and may not always translate directly to neurons . Later through periods of growth and shrinkage , punctuated in the review we will discuss how some of these proteins by occasional pauses ( Mitchison and Kirschner , 1984 ) . may function in axon guidance . The transition from growth to shrinkage is termed catas - Generally , ABPs can be divided into several catego - trophe , and the transition from shrinkage to growth is ries based upon their function . These categories include termedrescue ( Figure3 ) . Oneconsequenceofthisintrin - proteins that ( 1 ) bind and / or sequester actin monomers , sic dynamic instability of MTs is that they are capable ( 2 ) nucleate actin filaments , ( 3 ) cap the barbed or ( 4 ) of efficiently probing the intracellular space ( Holy and pointed ends of actin filaments , ( 5 ) act as barbed end Leibler , 1994 ; Mitchison and Kirschner , 1984 ) . anticapping proteins , ( 6 ) severF - actin , ( 7 ) bundle , cross - The dynamic instability of microtubules was first di - link , or otherwisestabilize F - actin , and ( 8 ) anchor F - actin rectly observed in vivo in fibroblasts ( Sammak and Bo - to membrane adhesions or specific regions of the mem - risy , 1988 ; Schulze and Kirschner , 1988 ; Walker et al . , brane . However , many of these proteins are probably 1988 ) and later in Xenopus spinal neurons ( Tanaka and capable of functioning in several of these categories Kirschner , 1991 ; Tanaka et al . , 1995 ) . However , it was depending on the internal state of the growth cone , the onlyrecently thatmicrotubuledynamic parameterssuch area in which they are localized , and whether or not they as time spent extending , retracting , and pausing as well are phosphorylated . Nevertheless , it is interesting to as catastrophe and rescue frequencies were measured note that the sheer number and complexity of interac - in livingneurons ( Kabir etal . , 2001 ; Schaefer etal . , 2002 ) . tions of these ABPs indicates that actin filaments are In these studies Forscher and colleagues used large probably always well decorated and almost certainly paused growth cones from Aplysia , which are particu - never exist in the “naked” state shown in the cartoon larly advantageous for imaging cytoskeletal dynamics in Figure 3 . due to their large size and very slow growth rates . In Although most of the proteins listed in Table 1 have the future it will be important to demonstrate directly how MT dynamics change as growth cones turn toward been localized to the growth cone by immunocytochem - Neuron216 Table 1 . Actin Binding Proteins in the Growth Cone Protein Localization in GC Proposed Function References a Abl / Arg b unknown tyrosine kinase , filament Moresco and Koleske , organization 2003 AbLIM ( unc - 115 ) b unknown crosslinking , membrane Lundquist et al . , 1998 anchor ADF / cofilin throughout , high in T / C severing , recycling Meberg and Bamburg , region 2000 ; Endo et al . , 2003 (cid:2) - Actinin throughout bundling Sobue and Kanda , 1989 ; Sobue , 1993 Arp2 / 3 throughout , high in T and nucleating , side binding Goldberg et al . , 2000 C regions Calponin throughout myosin ATPase inhibitor Plantier et al . , 1999 CAP ( capulet ) b unknown G actin buffer , Wills et al . , 2002 sequestration , turnover Ciboulot b unknown monomer binding , Boquet et al . , 2000 recycling Clipin C ( coronin ) throughout membrane anchoring Nakamura et al . , 1999 Cortactin throughout nucleation , membrane Du et al . , 1998 ; Weaver anchor et al . , 2003 Ena / VASP family ( Mena , punctate throughout but barbed end anticapping Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Bear VASP , Evl ) concentrated at tips et al . , 2002 of filopodia Fascin prominent along actin ribs bundling , filament Cohan et al . , 2001 stabilization Filamin throughout bundling , filament Letourneau and Shattuck , stabilization 1989 GAP - 43 / Neuromodulin punctate throughout GC barbed end capping / Dent and Meiri , 1992 ; ( GAP - 43 , CAP - 23 , anticapping He et al . , 1997 ; MARCKS ) Frey et al . , 2000 Gelsolin throughout GC but severing , capping Tanaka et al . , 1993 ; Lu et concentrated along al . , 1997 actin ribs Dpod1 ( Pod - 1 ) c throughout bundling , MT crosslinking Rothenberg et al . , 2003 Profilin ( chickadee ) throughout monomer binding Faivre - Sarrailh et al . , 1993 ; Wills et al . , 1999 ; Kim et al . , 2001 ERM family ( Ezrin , throughout GC but barbed end capping Paglini et al . , 1998 ; Radixin , Moesin ) concentrated along Castelo and Jay , 1999 actin ribs Myosin family ( Ic , IIa , IIb , punctate , variable transport of cargo along Rochlin et al . , 1995 ; Va , c VI , X ) localization actin / MTs , retrograde actin Lewis and Bridgman , flow , contractility , bundling 1996 ; Evans et al . , 1997 ; into actin ribs Suter et al . , 2000 ; Zhou and Cohan , 2001 ; Berg and Cheney , 2002 Spectrin / Fodrin throughout , prominent in membrane anchoring Letourneau and Shattuck , central region 1989 ; Sobue , 1993 Synapsin I , II , III C region and actin ribs nucleating Fletcher et al . , 1991 ; Benfenati et al . , 1992 ; Ferreira et al . , 2000 Talin punctate throughout , high membrane anchoring Letourneau and Shattuck , in C region 1989 ; Sydor et al . , 1996 Thymosin - (cid:3) 4 throughout sequestration , G - actin Roth et al . , 1999 buffer , filament turnover Tropomodulin throughout pointed end capping , Watakabe et al . , 1996 ; filament stabilization Fowler , 1997 Tropomyosin ( 5a / b ) throughout side binding , filament Letourneau and Shattuck , 1989 ; stabilization Schevzov et al . , 1997 Vinculin punctate throughout membrane anchoring Sydor et al . , 1996 ; Steketee and Tosney , 2002 N - WASP punctate , high in C region monomer binding , Ho et al . , 2001 nucleation a These are only representative articles ; many more have generally been published on each protein . b These proteins have not been specifically localized to the growth cone but bind actin and play an important role in axon guidance . ( There are several proteins that have been found in nonneuronal cells that may be found in the growth cone but have yet to be localized there , and a whole host of proteins that are known to bind to these actin - binding proteins but do not bind actin directly . These proteins have not been included in the table . ) c Also known to bind microtubules or act as a microtubule - associated protein . Review217 attractive or away from repulsive axon guidance mole - polymers . This movement occurs through the action of molecular motors . Molecular motors are well known for cules . There have been a number of indirect studies , plus a transporting vesicles and organelles throughout the cy - toplasm on F - actin and MTs , but they are also capable few studies in which MTs have been directly observed in the growth cone , that implicate MT dynamics as a of directed movement of the cytoskeletal polymers themselves . MovementofF - actinandMTshasanumber key event in axon outgrowth , guidance , and branching . The first direct demonstration of microtubule dynamics of implications for axon outgrowth and guidance . Retrograde F - Actin Flow in living neurons was performed in both Xenopus neural tube cultures and in grasshopper limb in situ ( Sabry et A well - documented phenomenon in growth cones is termedretrograde actinflow ( Forscherand Smith , 1988 ) . al . , 1991 ; Tanaka et al . , 1993 ) . These authors showed that MTs were capable of dynamic exploration of the This constitutive phenomenon occurs as ATP - actin is assembled into filaments near the membrane in the dis - entiregrowthconeandinterconvertedbetweensplayed , looped , and bundled arrays on the order of minutes . tal P region of the growth cone and is transported rear - ward into the T region of the growth cone as polymeric Furthermore , they demonstrated that orientation of MTs toward the future direction of outgrowth was an early F - actin ( Lin and Forscher , 1995 ; Suter and Forscher , 2000 ) . In the T region the F - actin , now composed of step in pathfinding , both in culture and in situ ( Sabry et al . , 1991 ; Tanaka and Kirschner , 1995 ; Tanaka et al . , ADP - actin monomers , is likely severed and depolymer - ized by several proteins including gelsolin and ADF / 1995 ) . Other work , in which neurons were fixed and stained after visualization of growth cone motility and cofilin ( see Table 1 ) . The ADP - actin becomes recycled into ATP - actin and the cycle is repeated ( Gungabissoon turning , confirmed and extended these observations by showing that the dynamic ( tyrosinated ) pool of MTs was and Bamburg , 2003 ) . The rearward transport of F - actin in the P region of instrumental in both axon outgrowth toward a cellular target and the turning away of growth cones from inhibi - the growth cone occurs in both filopodia and lamelli - podia ( Dent and Kalil , 2001 ; Lin and Forscher , 1993 , tory substrate bound proteins ( Challacombe et al . , 1997 ; Lin and Forscher , 1993 , 1995 ; Rochlin et al . , 1996 ; Ta - 1995 ; Mallavarapu and Mitchison , 1999 ; Schaefer et al . , 2002 ; Welnhofer et al . , 1997 , 1999 ) and is a myosin mo - naka and Kirschner , 1995 ; Williamson et al . , 1996 ) . Re - cent studies demonstrate directly that MTs are trans - tor - drivenprocess ( BrownandBridgman , 2003a ; Diefen - bach et al . , 2002 ; Lin et al . , 1996 ) . This is sometimes ported in the axon and growth cones and how MTs dynamically reorganize when forming axon branches referred to as actin treadmilling but actually is motor - driventransport . Thedifferenceisthatifapolymertread - ( Dent and Kalil , 2001 ; Dent et al . , 1999 ; Kabir et al . , 2001 ; Schaefer et al . , 2002 ; Wang and Brown , 2002 ) . Another mills , the monomers within the polymer do not move ; rather , they polymerize from one end and depolymerize study has recently shown that MTs can serve an instruc - tive role for growth cone turning toward guidance cues from the other . This appears as movement because the polymer as awhole changes position , butthe monomers ( Buck and Zheng , 2002 ) . Like actin filaments , MT dynamics are regulated by a within the polymer do not . Transport of F - actin has been number of MT - associated proteins ( MAPs ) ( reviewed in demonstrated directly by either following photoactiva - Cassimeris and Spittle , 2001 ) . For this review we will tion / photobleaching of a small segment of the polymer limit ourselves to those microtubule binding proteins ( MallavarapuandMitchison , 1999 ; OkabeandHirokawa , ( MBPs ) that have been shown to bind tubulin / MTs di - 1991 ) or by tracking speckled filaments and following rectly and have been localized to the growth cone . There them over time ( Ponti et al . , 2003 ) . If F - actin treadmilled , are fewer MBPs than ABPs in growth cones , but the list a small labeled region would remain stationary within is growing quickly ( Table 2 ) . Many MBPs that were first the P domain of the growth cone . This does not appear discovered in neurons were ascribed the role of stabiliz - to be the case . All live cell imaging of the growth cone ers of MTs ( MAP1B , MAP2 , tau ) and termed structural after labeling actin filaments indicates that marked or MAPs ( Matus , 1991 ) . Other MBPs were grouped as MT speckled filaments move retrogradely at rates of 1 – 7 motors ( dynein and kinesins ) ( Sheetz et al . , 1989 ) . These (cid:4) m / min , depending on the neuronal cell type analyzed two distinctions generally still hold , although the diver - ( Dent and Kalil , 2001 ; Mallavarapu and Mitchison , 1999 ; sity of MBPs has increased greatly . Furthermore , there Schaefer et al . , 2002 ) . Interestingly , when two growth are a number of interesting MBPs that copolymerize cones interact , turning toward one another , retrograde with MTs , termed plus end tracking proteins ( (cid:5) TIPs ) F - actin flow decreases along the axis of contact ( Lin ( Carvalho et al . , 2003 ; Schuyler and Pellman , 2001 ) . and Forscher , 1995 ) . This decrease in F - actin flow is These proteins have been implicated in plus end MT thought to be induced by the engagement of a clutch dynamics and linking MTs with actin - associated pro - mechanism that bridges the F - actin cytoskeleton with teins in the cell cortex ( Galjart and Perez , 2003 ) . How - cell adhesion molecules ( Suter and Forscher , 2000 ) . The ever , few of these proteins have been studied in the engagement of this “clutch , ” through an unknown pro - growth cone ( Morrison et al . , 2002 ; Stepanova et al . , tein complex , attenuates retrograde flow , allowing pro - 2003 ) . The functions of these proteins in axon outgrowth trusion to occur in front of the adhesion point and fa - and guidance will undoubtedly yield many insights into voring MT invasion behind the adhesion point ( Suter et how MTs respond to guidance cues and how they inter - al . , 1998 ) . act with F - actin and other intracellular targets . Currently , the exact nature of the myosin motor ( s ) that drive retrograde flow remain somewhat controversial . One group , using microchromaphore - assisted laser in - Polymer Transport In addition to polymer dynamics , F - actin and MTs also activation ( micro - CALI ) on chick dorsal root ganglion growth cones , showed that inhibition of myosin Ic undergo directed movement through the cytoplasm as Neuron218 Table 2 . Microtubule Binding Proteins in the Growth Cone Localization in Protein Growth Cone Proposed Function References a CRMP / TUC family high in C region , MT stabilization , Byk et al . , 1996 ; Fukata ( TUC4 , 4b , CRMP1A , 2A , Bs ) extends into T / P orientation , vesicle et al . , 2002b ; Quinn et al . , regions transport 2003 ; Yuasa - Kawada et al . , 2003 Dishevelled - 1 along MTs in C / T / P stabilization of MTs Krylova et al . , 2000 domains Doublecortin high in C region , may stabilization of MTs Francis et al . , 1999 extend into T / P regions Dynein / Dynactin complex b throughout minus end directed motor , Abe et al . , 1997 ; plus end targeting Niethammer et al . , 2000 EB1 , 3 MT ends dynamics / stabilization of Morrison et al . , 2002 ; MTs Stepanova et al . , 2003 Katanin throughout severing of MTs Ahmad et al . , 1999 Kinesin family ( Eg5 , Kinesin , high in C region , minus end motor Ferhat et al . , 1998 ; KIF2A ) may extend into T / P Morfini et al . , 1997 , regions 2001 ; Homma et al . , 2003 Lis1 high in C region , plus end targeting Sasaki et al . , 2000 may extend into T / P regions MAP1B b high in C region , may dynamics / stabilization Gordon - Weeks and Fischer , extend into T / P regions of MTs 2000 ; Gonzalez - Billault et al . , 2001 MAP2B , C b high in C region , can dynamics / stabilization of Fischer et al . , 1986 ; extend into T / P regions MTs , a - kinase anchoring Davare et al . , 1999 ; protein ( AKAP ) Ozer and Halpain , 2000 ; Sanchez - Martin et al . , 2000 MCAF7 / short stop / kakapo b throughout MT - actin linker Lee and Kolodziej , 2002 mDia b high in C region , can dynamics / stabilization Arakawa et al . , 2003 extend into T / P regions of MTs Stathmin family high in C region , may dynamics / stabilization Di Paolo et al . , 1997a , 1997b ; ( SCG10 / Stathmin / RC3 / SCLIP ) extend into T / P regions of MTs Mori and Morii , 2002 Tau b high in C region , can dynamics / stabilization Black et al . , 1996 extend into T / P regions of MTs a These are only representative articles ; many more have generally been published on each protein . Several other MT - binding proteins , such as APC , BPAG - 1 , CLIP - 170 , and CLASPs , found to play important roles in nonneuronal cells are also likely to exist in growth cones but have yet to be localized there . b Also known to bind actin or act as an actin - associated protein . caused a marked decrease in retrograde flow , whereas reduce actin ribs without noticeable actin depolymeriza - tion . These data are consistent with a study that showed inhibition of myosin IIB slightly increased retrograde flow rates ( Diefenbach et al . , 2002 ) . Another group , growth cones from myosin IIB knockout mice also had decreased numbers of actin ribs and a smaller lamellar working with myosin IIB knockout mice , showed that retrograde flow was increased , similar to the aforemen - area ( Bridgman et al . , 2001 ) . Furthermore , localized ap - plication of collapsing agents to one side of the growth tioned study ( Brown and Bridgman , 2003b ) . However , thisgroup didnot findanyevidence ofmyosin Icstaining cone is capable of inducing repulsive turning through actin rib loss ( Zhou et al . , 2002 ) . Actin rib loss also in the T or P regions of the growth cone , implicating a different myosin , possibly myosin IIA , as the primary causes decreases in the number of MTs on the side of the growth cone nearest the source of collapsing factor , motor behind retrograde flow . Future experiments using selective inhibition of each myosin family member alone implicating signaling between F - actin bundles and MTs . Interestingly , a recent study has shown that myosin II and in combination will likely sort out this enigma . Interestingly , myosin II has also been implicated as activity , by overexpressing myosin light chain kinase , is important in both attractive and repulsive guidance an important factorfor F - actin bundling ingrowth cones . Cohan and colleagues have recently shown that phar - pathways ( Kim et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , in addition to actin bundling / stabilizing proteins , such as (cid:2) - actinin , fascin , macological inhibition of myosin light chain kinase , which effectively inhibits myosin II , decreases the num - filamin , and tropomyosin , myosin II plays an important role in regulating actin rib dynamics , growth cone ber of actin ribs in growth cones by merging adjacent actin ribs , resulting in growth cone collapse ( Zhou and spreading , and axon guidance . Microtubule Transport Cohan , 2001 ) . Thus , myosin II somehow functions to keep bundled F - actin arrays separated in the growth Microtubule transport has generated much controversy in recent years , mainly centering on the form that MTs cone , maintaining the growth cone in a spread state . The way in which myosin II accomplishes this feat is take when they are transported . However , recent ad - vances in imaging cytoskeletal dynamics show that a currently not known . Nevertheless , both physiological and nonphysiological agents that induce growth cone number of dynamic processes are involved in con - structing and maintaining the microtubule array in axons collapse , some presumably acting through myosin II , Review219 and growth cones during development ( reviewed in Tanaka et al . , 1995 ; Williamson et al . , 1996 ) . All of these studies specifically targeted actin and / or MT dynamics . Baas , 2002 ; Black , 1994 ; Brown , 2003 ) . We will concen - Therefore , it is likely that outgrowth , guidance , and trate on the studies pertinent to axon outgrowth and branching are all linked to the level of activity of F - actin pathfinding . and MTs , which are probably controlled by the activity MTs are assembled at the centrosome , which is lo - of upstream components , such as Rac . Interestingly , in cated in the neuronal cell body . However , they do not fibroblasts , polymerizing MTs are thought to stimulate remain attached to the centrosome , as occurs in several Rac activity ( Waterman - Storer et al . , 1999 ; Wittmann other cell types , but are severed by katanin and rapidly and Waterman - Storer , 2001 ; Wittmann et al . , 2003 ) . transported away from the cell body ( anterogradely ) into Therefore , there is probably bidirectional signaling be - axons , with their plus end leading , by dynein - driven tween cytoskeletal elements and proteins with which transport ( Ahmad et al . , 1998 , 1999 ; Dent et al . , 1999 ; they are associated . GalloandLetourneau , 1999 ; Slaughter etal . , 1997 ; Wang On the cytoskeletal level , the process of axon guid - and Brown , 2002 ; Yu et al . , 1996 ) . During this transport , ance shares many similarities with the process of polar - MTs also polymerize and depolymerize ( Dent and Kalil , ization and chemotaxis in nonneuronal cells ( Song and 2001 ; Wang and Brown , 2002 ) , consistent with the fact Poo , 2001 ; Rodriguez et al . , 2003 ) . In this sense the that the axon contains high levels of tyrosinated MTs , growth cone too is a polarized structure . A recent model a posttranslational modification associated with highly that has emerged to explain the underlying microtubule dynamic MTs ( Baas and Black , 1990 ) . Surprisingly , MTs reorganization that accompanies polarization and chemo - are also capable of rapid retrograde movement as well taxis has been termed microtubule capture ( Gundersen , ( Dent et al . , 1999 ; Wang and Brown , 2002 ) . Thus , retro - 2002 ) . This phenomenon has been most thoroughly grade movement , depolymerization , and severing are studied in budding yeast and polarizing fibroblasts and all possible mechanisms for redistributing MTs during may take place in the neuronal growth cone as follows . axon retraction and branch pruning ( Ahmad et al . , 2000 ; Dynamic microtubules probe the intracellular environ - Dent et al . , 1999 ; Gallo and Letourneau , 1999 ; Wang and ment . During this process , theplus ends of microtubules Brown , 2002 ) . comeintocontactwithF - actin - richcorticaland / oradhe - However , the bulk of MTs in axons are stationary at sion sites ( Fukata et al . , 2002a ; Krylyshkina et al . , 2003 ) . any given time , probably attached to the axonal mem - When microtubules contact these cortical sites along brane skeleton , neurofilaments , and other MTs ( re - the inner membrane , microtubule tip - associated pro - viewed in Brown , 2003 ) . If most MTs are stationary , how teins act as “ligands” for “receptors” in these actin - are new MT arrays constructed in rapidly elongating rich regions . Such a ligand / receptor complex has been axons ? As random or directed axon outgrowth occurs , a documented in fibroblasts in which activated Rac1 / combination of MT polymer transport , tubulin transport , Cdc42 demarcate active regions along the cell cortex MT dynamics , MT severing / breaking , and possibly local andactas“receptors , ”alongwithIQGAP1 , totransiently tubulinsynthesiscontributestoareadilyaccessiblepool capture the plus end microtubule tip binding protein of tyrosinated tubulin . This polymerization - competent CLIP - 170 ( Fukata et al . , 2002b ) . This interaction is be - tubulin exists throughout the axon but at a higher con - lieved to convey signals between the cell cortex and the centration in areas undergoing active growth . These ac - cytoskeleton that allow for continued actin dynamics tive areas include the growth cone of the parent axon and membrane insertion needed for polarization and and dynamic areas along the axon shaft , some of which chemotaxis ( Gundersen , 2002 ) . develop into axon branches . A possible scenario for Can this model for fibroblast polarization be applied how F - actin / MT dynamics and transport in the growth to the polarization and turning of a growth cone toward cone regulates directed protrusion , engorgement , and or away from guidance cues ? Many of the same ABPs consolidation follows . and MBPs found to be instrumental in fibroblast polar - ization exist in neurons as well ( Tables 1 and 2 ) . Thus , A Model for Cytoskeletal Regulation of Axon it is likely that microtubules will be found to interact Outgrowth and Guidance transiently with cortical structures in the growth cone , As mentioned above , we have considered axon guid - which may allow localized insertion of membrane and ance as the process of favored axon outgrowth toward signaling proteins essential for growth in a preferred or away from a particular region . Thus , axon guidance direction ( Zakharenko and Popov , 1998 ) . Nevertheless , can be thought of as a process of biasing the extension / this process of transient MT capture is unlikely to be retraction of one side of the growth cone or axon shaft , sufficient for directed growth to continue . If so , there as in the case of collateral branching , compared to the should be some mechanism operating in tandem that other side ( reviewed in Tanaka and Sabry , 1995 ) . How allows MT stabilization and recruitment of more MTs can this model be reconciled with the convincing evi - in the favored direction of growth . When microtubule dence that exists in Drosophila that axon branching , dynamics have been recorded in living growth cones , turning , and outgrowth are distinct processes , de - microtubules have never been shown to attach to the pending on the level of Rac activity in the neuron ( Ng actin - rich cortex for more than a few seconds ( Dent and et al . , 2002 ) ? We propose that the key to resolving this Kalil , 2001 ; Dent et al . , 1999 ; Kabir et al . , 2001 ; Schaefer apparent paradox is to keep in mind that many studies et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , it is unlikely that growth cone turning have shown that both guidance and branching can be involves “pioneer” microtubule capture on one side of selectively inhibited without affecting axon outgrowth the growth cone , followed by recruitment of other micro - per se ( Buck and Zheng , 2002 ; Challacombe et al . , 1996 , tubules along the pioneer MT . If transient interactions are not sufficient , then what 1997 ; Dent and Kalil , 2001 ; Marsh and Letourneau , 1984 ; Neuron220 Figure 5 . Hypothetical Model for the Cy - toskeletal Reorganization Underlying Growth Cone Turning Stagesofgrowthconeturninginanattractivegradient ( pinkshading ) . Allstagesareinrefer - ence to the area of interest ( black circle ) . Stage 1 : F - actin takes the form of dynamic bundled filaments ( in filopodia ) and mesh - work array ( in lamellipodia ) . We assume that there are balanced F - actin dynamics across the growth cone . MTs form a thick bundle in the axon shaft and splay apart in the growth cone , stochastically exploring the P region . Stage2 : Whenachemoattractantisdetected , F - actin selectively polymerizes on the side of the growth cone toward the attractant , form - ingincreasednumbersoffilopodiaandlamel - lipodia . This bias of actin polymerization to onesideofthegrowthconecauseslesspoly - merization on the opposite side , favoring shrinkage / retraction of lamellipodia and filo - podia . Microtubules continue stochastically probing the P region but may be transiently captured at actin - rich regions and undergo fewer catastrophes when they interact with F - actinbundlesontherightsideofthegrowth cone . Stage 3 : Numbers and size of F - actin bundles ( ribs ) increase and are stabilized by actin - bundling proteins and linkages to the substrate . Because MTs exploring the actin - rich side of the growth cone are maintained in the polymerized state longer than the MTs on the opposite side , they may be selectively posttranslationally modified . Stage 4 : F - actin is depolymerized , capped , and stabilized into puncta and a subplasmalemmal network . MTsare subsequently stabilized by recruitment ofstabilizing MBPs , causing them to bundlein the newly oriented axon shaft . process would be required ? It is likely that proximal ( Bentley and O’Connor , 1994 ; Lin et al . , 1994 ) . This pref - erential protrusion can take the form of filopodia , lamelli - stabilization of MTs is important ( Mack et al . , 2000 ) . Indeed , when microtubules have been pharmacologi - podia / ruffles , and intrapodia ( Figure 5 , stage 2 ) . Thus , actin anticapping and leaky capping proteins , such as cally stabilized on one side of the growth cone by focal uncaging of taxol , growth cones turn toward the side in Ena / VASP proteins and GAP - 43 , respectively , are likely to play important roles in this initial protrusion phase whichMTshavebeenstabilized ( BuckandZheng , 2002 ) . Conversely , when the microtubule - destabilizing drug because these proteins are known to enhance actin polymerization ( Bear et al . , 2002 ; Dent and Meiri , 1998 ; nocodazole is locally applied to one side of the growth cone , turning to the opposite side occurs ( Buck and He et al . , 1997 ; Lanier et al . , 1999 ) . Additionally , actin - capping proteins may be inactivated in these regions Zheng , 2002 ) . If local stabilization / destabilization of the microtubule array is instrumental in directional guid - of protrusion . These newly formed protrusions must then be stabi - ance , then there must be an intrinsic mechanism for this tooccur . AsnotedinTable2 , therearemanymicrotubule lized against retraction . Any number of F - actin bundling / stabilizing proteins are likely to be essential for the con - stabilizing / destabilizing proteins found in growth cones . Furthermore , neurons are one of the few cell types that tinued protrusion of filopodia and lamellipodia ( Table 1 ) . Also , gelsolin has been found to destabilize filopodia , contain high levels of posttranslationally modified tu - bulin ( acetylated , detyrosinated , delta2 - tubulin ) that possibly through its capping ability , allowing retraction to take place ( Lu et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , gelsolin and other correlate with microtubule stability ( Challacombe et al . , 1996 ; Dent and Kalil , 2001 ; Paturle - Lafanechere et al . , capping proteins may be inactivated locally . Further - more , it is not sufficient to simply stabilize these F - actin 1994 ; Williamson et al . , 1996 ) . One possible scenario for the underlying cytoskeletal structures because they are subject to myosin - based retrograde transport , resulting in growth cone collapse involvement in directed protrusion , engorgement , and consolidation in response to an attractive cue is as fol - ( Ahmad et al . , 2000 ; Gallo et al . , 2002 ) . Instead , the bundled and crosslinked actin filaments must be stabi - lows ( Figure 5 ) . Obviously , similar mechanisms are in - volved when a growth cone turns in response to a re - lized through a mechanism that involves adhesion to the substrate ( Suter and Forscher , 2000 ) . In addition , pulsive cue . We assume that there is balanced actin polymerization and depolymerization across the growth severing / recycling proteins such as cofilin and profilin may be activated to keep the level of free G - actin and cone over time , when the growth cone is involved in random locomotion . This would result in balanced pro - barbed ends high for continued polymerization ( Endo et al . , 2003 ; Meberg and Bamburg , 2000 ) . trusion / retraction so that the growth cone would main - tain a straight trajectory . When a chemoattractant is Because MTs stochastically explore the growth cone P region , certain MTs may be transiently captured at detected on one side of the growth cone , F - actin - driven protrusion is favored on that side of the growth cone actin - richregions ( Figure5 , stage2 ) throughinteractions Review221 of microtubule tip binding proteins with ABPs , or they lapse microscopy , we are beginning to tease out the details of F - actin and MT dynamics and transport as may be less likely to undergo catastrophe when in asso - ciation with F - actin bundles ( Buck and Zheng , 2002 ; they function in directed outgrowth . There are many actin binding and tubulin binding proteins that have Dent and Kalil , 2001 ; Schaefer et al . , 2002 ; Zhou et al . , 2002 ) . It follows that by polymerizing and / or being tran - been found in the growth cone but whose functions in axon guidance are just beginning to be discerned . siently captured on one side of the growth cone , those microtubules are more likely to be acetylated and dety - Obviously , high - resolution imaging in cell culture will provide important clues into the function of actin and rosinated because the enzymes responsible for these modifications act only on MTs and not free tubulin ( Con - MTs . However , it is essential to relate these findings back to the living organism . The many elegant genetic tin and Arce , 2000 ; MacRae , 1997 ) . As mentioned above , these posttranslational modifications may allow prefer - studies in C . elegans , Drosophila , zebrafish , and mice and the molecular studies in chick , grasshopper , and ential binding of stabilizing MBPs to those specific MTs . WhentheprocessofMTpolymerizationanddepolymeri - Xenopus have provided crucial knowledge about how growth cones are guided to their targets in the living zation , coupled with transient MT capture at actin - rich regions , local membrane delivery ( engorgement ) , and organism . For the most part , these in vivo studies have supported the findings in cell culture , validating this proximal MT stabilization , is iterated many times over a period of minutes , preferential turning in the direction methodology for studying growth cone motility and di - rected outgrowth . These studies from nonmammalian of chemoattractant occurs ( Figure 5 , stage 3 ) . If a chem - orepellent is encountered instead of a chemoattractant , organisms have also substantiated the importance of proteins whose functions have been conserved over the preferential interactions and stabilization would oc - cur on the side of the growth cone opposite to the millions of years of evolution . Nevertheless , there has been a paucity of studies of repellent . In either case , the result would be the same— directional guidance . cytoskeletal dynamics in in vivo or in situ preparations from vertebrates and none that we know of from intact To continue to turn , the proximal growth cone must consolidate into a cylindrical shaft ( Figure 5 , stage 4 ) . mammalian preparations . We now have the means to genetically and pharmacologically manipulate neurons This process has received relatively little attention to date but would have to include the selective downregu - while imaging them in complex environments , at high resolution and over extended periods of time ( Danuser lation of dynamic F - actin and MTs . One interesting ob - servation is that acetylated and detyrosinated MTs are and Waterman - Storer , 2003 ; Yuste et al . , 2000 ) . It will be revealing to probe these complex environments to rarely found in the P region of the growth cone but become prevalent in the C region concomitant with a determine how cytoskeletal dynamics contribute to axon outgrowth , guidance , and branching in the intact marked decrease in F - actin in the same region ( Challa - combe et al . , 1997 ; Dent and Kalil , 2001 ) . Thus , it will developing nervous system . The coming years promise to yield many advances in our understanding of the be interesting to see if these posttranslational modifi - cations of tubulin result in recruitment of proteins that coordinated dynamics of the actin and MT cytoskele - tons and the proteins that link them in neurons as well suppress F - actin polymerization and / or favor depoly - merization . This would cause F - actin dynamics to be as other systems ( Rodriguez et al . , 2003 ) . The most exciting findings are likely to bridge the present gap suppressedandleaveastablepunctateandsubplasma - lemmal network of F - actin quite resistant to depolymeri - in knowledge of how guidance factors transduce their signals to the cytoskeleton and the subsequent re - zation . These stable , short actin filaments may be asso - ciated with adhesion points along the axon shaft and sponse of the cytoskeleton to yield directed axon out - growth . play a role in maintaining the structure of the axon . Acknowledgments Conclusions and Future Directions This review has presented a working model for cytoskel - We would like to thank members of the Gertler laboratory for critical etal reorganization during axon elongation and turning . reading of the manuscript and stimulating discussions , especially JoeLoureiro , JamesBear , CraigFurman , SheilaMenzies , andGeral - We have proposed that axon guidance results from dineStrasser . Wewouldalsoliketothankthereviewersforconstruc - directed protrusion , engorgement , and consolidation . tive comments on the manuscript . Funding for this project was Thus , although axon outgrowth , guidance , and branching provided by NIH F32 - NS045366 ( E . W . D . ) and NIH R01 - GM68678 are differentially susceptible to cytoskeletal perturba - ( F . B . G . ) . tions , we believe they are likely to be a continuum , rather thantrulydistinctprocesses . Nevertheless , tosubstanti - References ate this hypothetical model , it will be necessary to image Abe , T . K . , Tanaka , H . , Iwanaga , T . , Odani , S . , andKuwano , R . ( 1997 ) . actin filaments and microtubule dynamics in growth The presence of the 50 - kDa subunit of dynactin complex in the cones that are exposed to gradients of chemoattrac - nervegrowthcone . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 233 , 295 – 299 . tants and chemorepellents both in culture and in vivo . Ahmad , F . J . , Echeverri , C . J . , Vallee , R . B . , and Baas , P . W . ( 1998 ) . It will also be important to test the functions of ABPs Cytoplasmic dynein and dynactin are required for the transport of and MBPs by high - resolution imaging of cytoskeletal microtubules into the axon . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 391 – 401 . dynamics after knocking out or overexpressing spe - Ahmad , F . J . , Yu , W . , McNally , F . J . , andBaas , P . W . ( 1999 ) . An essen - cific proteins . tial role for katanin in severing microtubules in the neuron . J . Cell We are in a very exciting time in the cell biology of the Biol . 145 , 305 – 315 . growthcone . Duetotheadvancesingenetics , molecular Ahmad , F . J . , Hughey , J . , Wittmann , T . , Hyman , A . , Greaser , M . , and Baas , P . W . ( 2000 ) . Motor proteins regulate force interactions manipulations , protein labeling , and fluorescent time - Neuron222 betweenmicrotubulesandmicrofilamentsintheaxon . Nat . CellBiol . Boquet , I . , Boujemaa , R . , Carlier , M . F . , and Preat , T . ( 2000 ) . Ciboulot regulates actin assembly during Drosophila brain metamorphosis . 2 , 276 – 280 . Cell 102 , 797 – 808 . Aizawa , H . , Wakatsuki , S . , Ishii , A . , Moriyama , K . , Sasaki , Y . , Ohashi , K . , Sekine - Aizawa , Y . , Sehara - Fujisawa , A . , Mizuno , K . , Goshima , Boucher , D . , Larcher , J . C . , Gros , F . , andDenoulet , P . ( 1994 ) . Polyglu - Y . , and Yahara , I . ( 2001 ) . Phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase tamylation of tubulin as a progressive regulator of in vitro interac - is necessaryfor semaphorin 3A - induced growthcone collapse . Nat . tions between the microtubule - associated protein Tau and tubulin . Neurosci . 4 , 367 – 373 . Biochemistry 33 , 12471 – 12477 . Aletta , J . M . , and Greene , L . A . ( 1988 ) . Growth cone configuration Bray , D . , and Chapman , K . ( 1985 ) . Analysis of microspike move - and advance : a time - lapse study using video - enhanced differential ments on the neuronal growth cone . J . Neurosci . 5 , 3204 – 3213 . interference contrast microscopy . J . Neurosci . 8 , 1425 – 1435 . Bray , D . , Thomas , C . , and Shaw , G . ( 1978 ) . Growth cone formation Allen , R . D . ( 1985 ) . Newobservationsoncellarchitectureanddynam - in cultures of sensory neurons . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 75 , 5226 – icsbyvideo - enhancedcontrastopticalmicroscopy . Annu . Rev . Bio - 5229 . phys . Biophys . Chem . 14 , 265 – 290 . Bridgman , P . C . , and Dailey , M . E . ( 1989 ) . The organization of myosin Arakawa , Y . , Bito , H . , Furuyashiki , T . , Tsuji , T . , Takemoto - Kimura , and actin in rapid frozen nerve growth cones . J . Cell Biol . 108 , S . , Kimura , K . , Nozaki , K . , Hashimoto , N . , and Narumiya , S . ( 2003 ) . 95 – 109 . Control of axon elongation via an SDF - 1alpha / Rho / mDia pathway Bridgman , P . C . , Dave , S . , Asnes , C . F . , Tullio , A . N . , and Adelstein , in cultured cerebellar granule neurons . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 381 – 391 . R . S . ( 2001 ) . Myosin IIB is required for growth cone motility . J . Neu - Argiro , V . , Bunge , M . B . , and Johnson , M . I . ( 1984 ) . Correlation be - rosci . 21 , 6159 – 6169 . tween growth form and movement and their dependence on neu - Brown , A . ( 2003 ) . Axonaltransportofmembranousandnonmembra - ronal age . J . Neurosci . 4 , 3051 – 3062 . nous cargoes : a unified perspective . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 817 – 821 . Argiro , V . , Bunge , M . B . , and Johnson , M . I . ( 1985 ) . A quantitative Brown , J . , and Bridgman , P . C . ( 2003a ) . Role of myosin II in axon study of growth cone filopodial extension . J . Neurosci . Res . 13 , outgrowth . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 51 , 421 – 428 . 149 – 162 . Brown , M . E . , and Bridgman , P . C . ( 2003b ) . Retrograde flow rate is Baas , P . W . ( 2002 ) . Microtubule transport in the axon . Int . Rev . Cytol . increased in growth cones from myosin IIB knockout mice . J . Cell 212 , 41 – 62 . Sci . 116 , 1087 – 1094 . Baas , P . W . , and Black , M . M . ( 1990 ) . Individual microtubules in the Brown , A . , Li , Y . , Slaughter , T . , and Black , M . M . ( 1993 ) . Composite axonconsistofdomainsthatdifferinbothcompositionandstability . microtubules of the axon : quantitative analysis of tyrosinated and J . Cell Biol . 111 , 495 – 509 . acetylated tubulin along individual axonal microtubules . J . Cell Sci . Baas , P . W . , Black , M . M . , andBanker , G . A . ( 1989 ) . Changesinmicro - 104 , 339 – 352 . tubule polarity orientation during the development of hippocampal Buck , K . B . , and Zheng , J . Q . ( 2002 ) . Growth cone turning induced neurons in culture . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 3085 – 3094 . by direct local modification of microtubule dynamics . J . Neurosci . Barra , H . S . , Arce , C . A . , and Argarana , C . E . ( 1988 ) . Posttranslational 22 , 9358 – 9367 . tyrosination / detyrosination of tubulin . Mol . Neurobiol . 2 , 133 – 153 . Bunge , M . B . ( 1973 ) . Fine structure of nerve fibers and growth cones Bashaw , G . J . , Kidd , T . , Murray , D . , Pawson , T . , and Goodman , C . S . of isolated sympathetic neurons in culture . J . Cell Biol . 56 , 713 – 735 . ( 2000 ) . Repulsive axon guidance : Abelson and Enabled play oppos - Byk , T . , Dobransky , T . , Cifuentes - Diaz , C . , and Sobel , A . ( 1996 ) . ingrolesdownstreamoftheroundaboutreceptor . Cell 101 , 703 – 715 . Identification and molecular characterization of Unc - 33 - like phos - Bassell , G . J . , Zhang , H . , Byrd , A . L . , Femino , A . M . , Singer , R . H . , phoprotein ( Ulip ) , aputativemammalianhomologoftheaxonalguid - Taneja , K . L . , Lifshitz , L . M . , Herman , I . M . , and Kosik , K . S . ( 1998 ) . ance - associated unc - 33 gene product . J . Neurosci . 16 , 688 – 701 . Sorting of beta - actin mRNA and protein to neurites and growth Cajal , S . R . y . ( 1890 ) . A ` quelle e´poque apparaissent les expansions cones in culture . J . Neurosci . 18 , 251 – 265 . des cellules nerveuses de la moe¨lle e´pinie ` re du poulet ? Anatomo - Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , mischer Anzeiger 21 – 22 , 609 – 639 . Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . , Carvalho , P . , Tirnauer , J . S . , andPellman , D . ( 2003 ) . Surfingonmicro - and Gertler , F . B . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins tubule ends . Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 229 – 237 . and actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 , Cassimeris , L . , and Spittle , C . ( 2001 ) . Regulation of microtubule - 509 – 521 . associated proteins . Int . Rev . Cytol . 210 , 163 – 226 . Benfenati , F . , Valtorta , F . , Chieregatti , E . , and Greengard , P . ( 1992 ) . Castelo , L . , and Jay , D . G . ( 1999 ) . Radixin is involved in lamellipodial Interaction of free and synaptic vesicle - bound synapsin I with stability during nerve growth cone motility . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 1511 – F - actin . Neuron 8 , 377 – 386 . 1520 . Bentley , D . , andO’Connor , T . P . ( 1994 ) . Cytoskeletaleventsingrowth Challacombe , J . F . , Snow , D . M . , and Letourneau , P . C . ( 1996 ) . Actin cone steering . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 4 , 43 – 48 . filament bundles are required for microtubule reorientation during Bentley , D . , and Toroian - Raymond , A . ( 1986 ) . Disoriented pathfind - growth cone turning to avoid an inhibitory guidance cue . J . Cell Sci . ing by pioneer neurone growth cones deprived of filopodia by cyto - 109 , 2031 – 2040 . chalasin treatment . Nature 323 , 712 – 715 . Challacombe , J . F . , Snow , D . M . , and Letourneau , P . C . ( 1997 ) . Dy - Berg , J . S . , and Cheney , R . E . ( 2002 ) . Myosin - X is an unconventional namic microtubule ends are required for growth cone turning to myosin that undergoes intrafilopodial motility . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , avoid an inhibitory guidance cue . J . Neurosci . 17 , 3085 – 3095 . 246 – 250 . Chien , C . B . , Rosenthal , D . E . , Harris , W . A . , and Holt , C . E . ( 1993 ) . Black , M . M . ( 1994 ) . Microtubule transport and assembly cooperate Navigational errors made by growth cones without filopodia in the to generate the microtubule array of growing axons . Prog . Brain embryonic Xenopus brain . Neuron 11 , 237 – 251 . Res . 102 , 61 – 77 . Choo , Q . L . , and Bray , D . ( 1978 ) . Two forms of neuronal actin . J . Black , M . M . , Slaughter , T . , Moshiach , S . , Obrocka , M . , and Fischer , Neurochem . 31 , 217 – 224 . I . ( 1996 ) . Tau is enriched on dynamic microtubules in the distal Cohan , C . S . , Welnhofer , E . A . , Zhao , L . , Matsumura , F . , and Yama - region of growing axons . J . Neurosci . 16 , 3601 – 3619 . shiro , S . ( 2001 ) . Role of the actin bundling protein fascin in growth Bode , C . J . , Gupta , M . L . , Suprenant , K . A . , and Himes , R . H . ( 2003 ) . cone morphogenesis : localization in filopodia and lamellipodia . Cell The two alpha - tubulin isotypes in budding yeast have opposing Motil . Cytoskeleton 48 , 109 – 120 . effects on microtubule dynamics in vitro . EMBO Rep . 4 , 94 – 99 . Colavita , A . , and Culotti , J . G . ( 1998 ) . Suppressors of ectopic UNC - 5 Bonnet , C . , Boucher , D . , Lazereg , S . , Pedrotti , B . , Islam , K . , De - growthconesteering identifyeightgenesinvolved inaxonguidance noulet , P . , and Larcher , J . C . ( 2001 ) . Differential binding regulation in Caenorhabditis elegans . Dev . Biol . 194 , 72 – 85 . of microtubule - associated proteins MAP1A , MAP1B , and MAP2 by tubulin polyglutamylation . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 12839 – 12848 . Contin , M . A . , and Arce , C . A . ( 2000 ) . Tubulin carboxypeptidase / Review223 microtubules association can be detected in the distal region of G . E . , and Baas , P . W . ( 1998 ) . Expression of the mitotic motor protein Eg5 in postmitotic neurons : implications for neuronal development . neural processes . Neurochem . Res . 25 , 27 – 36 . J . Neurosci . 18 , 7822 – 7835 . da Silva , J . S . , and Dotti , C . G . ( 2002 ) . Breaking the neuronal sphere : regulation of the actin cytoskeleton in neuritogenesis . Nat . Rev . Ferreira , A . , Kao , H . T . , Feng , J . , Rapoport , M . , and Greengard , P . Neurosci . 3 , 694 – 704 . ( 2000 ) . Synapsin III : developmental expression , subcellular localiza - tion , and role in axon formation . J . Neurosci . 20 , 3736 – 3744 . Dailey , M . E . , and Bridgman , P . C . ( 1991 ) . Structure and organization of membrane organelles along distal microtubule segments in Fischer , I . , Shea , T . B . , Sapirstein , V . S . , and Kosik , K . S . ( 1986 ) . Ex - growth cones . J . Neurosci . Res . 30 , 242 – 258 . pression and distribution of microtubule - associated protein 2 ( MAP2 ) in neuroblastoma and primary neuronal cells . Brain Res . Danuser , G . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2003 ) . Quantitative fluo - 390 , 99 – 109 . rescent speckle microscopy : where it came from and where it is going . J . Microsc . 211 , 191 – 207 . Fletcher , T . L . , Cameron , P . , De Camilli , P . , and Banker , G . ( 1991 ) . The distribution of synapsin I and synaptophysin in hippocampal Davare , M . A . , Dong , F . , Rubin , C . S . , and Hell , J . W . ( 1999 ) . The neurons developing in culture . J . Neurosci . 11 , 1617 – 1626 . A - kinase anchor protein MAP2B and cAMP - dependent protein ki - nase are associated with class C L - type calcium channels in neu - Forscher , P . , and Smith , S . J . ( 1988 ) . Actions of cytochalasins on rons . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 30280 – 30287 . the organization of actin filaments and microtubules in a neuronal growth cone . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 1505 – 1516 . Dent , E . W . , andKalil , K . ( 2001 ) . Axonbranchingrequiresinteractions between dynamic microtubules and actin filaments . J . Neurosci . Fowler , V . M . ( 1997 ) . Capping actin filament growth : tropomodulin 21 , 9757 – 9769 . in muscle and nonmuscle cells . Soc . Gen . Physiol . Ser . 52 , 79 – 89 . Dent , E . W . , and Meiri , K . F . ( 1992 ) . GAP - 43 phosphorylation is dy - Francis , F . , Koulakoff , A . , Boucher , D . , Chafey , P . , Schaar , B . , Vinet , namically regulated in individual growth cones . J . Neurobiol . 23 , M . C . , Friocourt , G . , McDonnell , N . , Reiner , O . , Kahn , A . , et al . ( 1999 ) . 1037 – 1053 . Doublecortin is a developmentally regulated , microtubule - associ - ated protein expressed in migrating and differentiating neurons . Dent , E . W . , and Meiri , K . F . ( 1998 ) . Distribution of phosphorylated Neuron 23 , 247 – 256 . GAP - 43 ( neuromodulin ) in growth cones directly reflects growth cone behavior . J . Neurobiol . 35 , 287 – 299 . Frey , D . , Laux , T . , Xu , L . , Schneider , C . , andCaroni , P . ( 2000 ) . Shared and unique roles of CAP23 and GAP43 in actin regulation , neurite Dent , E . W . , Callaway , J . L . , Szebenyi , G . , Baas , P . W . , and Kalil , K . ( 1999 ) . Reorganization and movement of microtubules in axonal outgrowth , and anatomical plasticity . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 1443 – 1454 . growth cones and developing interstitial branches . J . Neurosci . Fritsche , J . , Reber , B . F . , Schindelholz , B . , andBandtlow , C . E . ( 1999 ) . 19 , 8894 – 8908 . Differential cytoskeletal changes during growth cone collapse in Derry , W . B . , Wilson , L . , Khan , I . A . , Luduena , R . F . , and Jordan , M . A . response to hSema III and thrombin . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 14 , ( 1997 ) . Taxol differentially modulates the dynamics of microtubules 398 – 418 . assembled from unfractionated and purified beta - tubulin isotypes . Fukata , M . , Watanabe , T . , Noritake , J . , Nakagawa , M . , Yamaga , M . , Biochemistry 36 , 3554 – 3562 . Kuroda , S . , Matsuura , Y . , Iwamatsu , A . , Perez , F . , and Kaibuchi , K . DiPaolo , G . , Antonsson , B . , Kassel , D . , Riederer , B . M . , andGrennin - ( 2002a ) . Rac1 and Cdc42 capture microtubules through IQGAP1 gloh , G . ( 1997a ) . Phosphorylation regulates the microtubule - desta - and CLIP - 170 . Cell 109 , 873 – 885 . bilizing activity of stathmin and its interaction with tubulin . FEBS Fukata , Y . , Itoh , T . J . , Kimura , T . , Menager , C . , Nishimura , T . , Shiro - Lett . 416 , 149 – 152 . mizu , T . , Watanabe , H . , Inagaki , N . , Iwamatsu , A . , Hotani , H . , and Di Paolo , G . , Lutjens , R . , Osen - Sand , A . , Sobel , A . , Catsicas , S . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2002b ) . CRMP - 2 binds to tubulin heterodimers to pro - Grenningloh , G . ( 1997b ) . Differential distribution of stathmin and mote microtubule assembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 583 – 591 . SCG10 in developing neurons in culture . J . Neurosci . Res . 50 , 1000 – Galjart , N . , and Perez , F . ( 2003 ) . A plus - end raft to control microtu - 1009 . bule dynamics and function . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 48 – 53 . Dickson , B . J . ( 2002 ) . Molecular mechanisms of axon guidance . Sci - Gallo , G . , and Letourneau , P . C . ( 1999 ) . Different contributions of ence 298 , 1959 – 1964 . microtubule dynamics and transport to the growth of axons and Diefenbach , T . J . , Latham , V . M . , Yimlamai , D . , Liu , C . A . , Herman , collateral sprouts . J . Neurosci . 19 , 3860 – 3873 . I . M . , and Jay , D . G . ( 2002 ) . Myosin 1c and myosin IIB serve opposing Gallo , G . , Yee , H . F . , Jr . , and Letourneau , P . C . ( 2002 ) . Actin turnover roles in lamellipodial dynamics of the neuronal growth cone . J . Cell isrequiredtopreventaxonretractiondrivenbyendogenousactomy - Biol . 158 , 1207 – 1217 . osin contractility . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 1219 – 1228 . Du , Y . , Weed , S . A . , Xiong , W . C . , Marshall , T . D . , and Parsons , J . T . Gitai , Z . , Yu , T . W . , Lundquist , E . A . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . , and Barg - ( 1998 ) . Identification of a novel cortactin SH3 domain - binding pro - mann , C . I . ( 2003 ) . The netrin receptor UNC - 40 / DCC stimulates axon tein and its localization to growth cones of cultured neurons . Mol . attraction and outgrowth through enabled and , in parallel , Rac and Cell . Biol . 18 , 5838 – 5851 . UNC - 115 / AbLIM . Neuron 37 , 53 – 65 . Endo , M . , Ohashi , K . , Sasaki , Y . , Goshima , Y . , Niwa , R . , Uemura , T . , Godement , P . , Wang , L . C . , and Mason , C . A . ( 1994 ) . Retinal axon and Mizuno , K . ( 2003 ) . Control of growth cone motility and morphol - divergence in the optic chiasm : dynamics of growth cone behavior ogy by LIM kinase and Slingshot via phosphorylation and dephos - at the midline . J . Neurosci . 14 , 7024 – 7039 . phorylation of cofilin . J . Neurosci . 23 , 2527 – 2537 . Goldberg , D . J . , and Burmeister , D . W . ( 1986 ) . Stages in axon forma - Evans , L . L . , Hammer , J . , and Bridgman , P . C . ( 1997 ) . Subcellular tion : observations of growth of Aplysia axons in culture using video - localization of myosin V in nerve growth cones and outgrowth from enhanced contrast - differential interference contrast microscopy . J . dilute - lethal neurons . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 439 – 449 . Cell Biol . 103 , 1921 – 1931 . Eyer , J . , and Peterson , A . ( 1994 ) . Neurofilament - deficient axons and Goldberg , D . J . , Foley , M . S . , Tang , D . , and Grabham , P . W . ( 2000 ) . perikaryal aggregates in viable transgenic mice expressing a neuro - Recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex and mena for the stimulation of filament - beta - galactosidase fusion protein . Neuron 12 , 389 – 405 . actin polymerization in growth cones by nerve growth factor . J . Faivre - Sarrailh , C . , Lena , J . Y . , Had , L . , Vignes , M . , and Lindberg , U . Neurosci . Res . 60 , 458 – 467 . ( 1993 ) . Location of profilin at presynaptic sites in the cerebellar Gonzalez - Billault , C . , Avila , J . , and Caceres , A . ( 2001 ) . Evidence for cortex ; implication for the regulation of the actin - polymerization the role of MAP1B in axon formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2087 – 2098 . state during axonal elongation and synaptogenesis . J . Neurocytol . Gordon - Weeks , P . R . ( 1991 ) . Evidence for microtubule capture by 22 , 1060 – 1072 . filopodial actin filaments in growth cones . Neuroreport 2 , 573 – 576 . Feng , Y . , and Walsh , C . A . ( 2001 ) . Protein - protein interactions , cy - Gordon - Weeks , P . R . ( 2000 ) . Neuronal Growth Cones , Volume 37 toskeletal regulation and neuronal migration . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . ( Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press ) . 2 , 408 – 416 . Ferhat , L . , Cook , C . , Chauviere , M . , Harper , M . , Kress , M . , Lyons , Gordon - Weeks , P . R . , and Fischer , I . ( 2000 ) . MAP1B expression and Neuron224 microtubule stability in growing and regenerating axons . Microsc . stability of microtubules enriched in detyrosinated tubulin is not a direct function of detyrosination level . J . Cell Biol . 106 , 141 – 149 . Res . Tech . 48 , 63 – 74 . Kim , Y . S . , Furman , S . , Sink , H . , and VanBerkum , M . F . ( 2001 ) . Cal - Gundersen , G . G . ( 2002 ) . Evolutionary conservation of microtubule - modulin and profilin coregulate axon outgrowth in Drosophila . J . capture mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 296 – 304 . Neurobiol . 47 , 26 – 38 . Gungabissoon , R . A . , andBamburg , J . R . ( 2003 ) . Regulationofgrowth Kim , Y . S . , Fritz , J . L . , Seneviratne , A . K . , and VanBerkum , M . F . ( 2002 ) . cone actin dynamics by ADF / Cofilin . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 51 , Constitutively active myosin light chain kinase alters axon guidance 411 – 420 . decisions in Drosophila embryos . Dev . Biol . 249 , 367 – 381 . Gunning , P . , Hardeman , E . , Jeffrey , P . , and Weinberger , R . ( 1998 ) . Kreitzer , G . , Liao , G . , and Gundersen , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Detyrosination Creatingintracellularstructuraldomains : spatialsegregationofactin of tubulin regulates the interaction of intermediate filaments with and tropomyosin isoforms in neurons . Bioessays 20 , 892 – 900 . microtubules in vivo via a kinesin - dependent mechanism . Mol . Biol . Gurland , G . , and Gundersen , G . G . ( 1995 ) . Stable , detyrosinated mi - Cell 10 , 1105 – 1118 . crotubules function to localize vimentin intermediate filaments in Krylova , O . , Messenger , M . J . , andSalinas , P . C . ( 2000 ) . Dishevelled - 1 fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 1275 – 1290 . regulates microtubule stability : a new function mediated by glyco - Halloran , M . C . , and Kalil , K . ( 1994 ) . Dynamic behaviors of growth gen synthase kinase - 3beta . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 83 – 94 . conesextendinginthecorpuscallosum oflivingcorticalbrainslices Krylyshkina , O . , Anderson , K . I . , Kaverina , I . , Upmann , I . , Manstein , observed with video microscopy . J . Neurosci . 14 , 2161 – 2177 . D . J . , Small , J . V . , and Toomre , D . K . ( 2003 ) . Nanometer targeting of Harris , W . A . , Holt , C . E . , and Bonhoeffer , F . ( 1987 ) . Retinal axons microtubules to focal adhesions . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 853 – 859 . with and without their somata , growing to and arborizing in the Lafanechere , L . , and Job , D . ( 2000 ) . The third tubulin pool . Neuro - tectum of Xenopus embryos : a time - lapse video study of single chem . Res . 25 , 11 – 18 . fibres in vivo . Development 101 , 123 – 133 . Lafont , F . , Rouget , M . , Rousselet , A . , Valenza , C . , and Prochiantz , Harrison , R . G . ( 1907 ) . Observations on the living developing nerve A . ( 1993 ) . Specificresponsesofaxonsanddendritestocytoskeleton fiber . Anat . Rec . 1 , 116 – 118 . perturbations : an in vitro study . J . Cell Sci . 104 , 433 – 443 . Harrison , R . G . ( 1910 ) . The outgrowth of the nerve fiber as a mode Lambert de Rouvroit , C . , and Goffinet , A . M . ( 2001 ) . Neuronal migra - of protoplasmic movement . J . Exp . Zool . 9 , 787 – 848 . tion . Mech . Dev . 105 , 47 – 56 . He , Q . , Dent , E . W . , and Meiri , K . F . ( 1997 ) . Modulation of actin fila - Lanier , L . M . , Gates , M . A . , Witke , W . , Menzies , A . S . , Wehman , A . M . , mentbehaviorbyGAP - 43 ( neuromodulin ) isdependentonthephos - Macklis , J . D . , Kwiatkowski , D . , Soriano , P . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 1999 ) . phorylationstatusofserine 41 , theproteinkinaseCsite . J . Neurosci . Mena isrequired for neurulationand commissureformation . Neuron 17 , 3515 – 3524 . 22 , 313 – 325 . Ho , H . Y . , Rohatgi , R . , Ma , L . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2001 ) . CR16 Larcher , J . C . , Boucher , D . , Lazereg , S . , Gros , F . , and Denoulet , P . forms a complex with N - WASP in brain and is a novel member of ( 1996 ) . Interaction of kinesin motor domains with alpha - and beta - a conserved proline - rich actin - binding protein family . Proc . Natl . tubulin subunits at a tau - independent binding site . Regulation by Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 11306 – 11311 . polyglutamylation . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 22117 – 22124 . Holy , T . E . , andLeibler , S . ( 1994 ) . Dynamicinstabilityofmicrotubules Lee , S . , and Kolodziej , P . A . ( 2002 ) . Short Stop provides an essential as an efficient way to search in space . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA link between F - actin and microtubules during axon extension . De - 91 , 5682 – 5685 . velopment 129 , 1195 – 1204 . Homma , N . , Takei , Y . , Tanaka , Y . , Nakata , T . , Terada , S . , Kikkawa , Lee , H . , and Van Vactor , D . ( 2003 ) . Neurons take shape . Curr . Biol . M . , Noda , Y . , and Hirokawa , N . ( 2003 ) . Kinesin superfamily protein 13 , R152 – R161 . 2A ( KIF2A ) functions in suppression of collateral branch extension . Cell 114 , 229 – 239 . Letourneau , P . C . ( 1983 ) . Differences in the organization of actin in the growth cones compared with the neurites of cultured neurons Huber , A . B . , Kolodkin , A . L . , Ginty , D . D . , and Cloutier , J . F . ( 2003 ) . from chick embryos . J . Cell Biol . 97 , 963 – 973 . Signaling at the growth cone : ligand - receptor complexes and the control of axon growth and guidance . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 26 , Letourneau , P . C . , and Shattuck , T . A . ( 1989 ) . Distribution and possi - 509 – 563 . bleinteractionsofactin - associatedproteinsandcelladhesionmole - cules of nerve growth cones . Development 105 , 505 – 519 . Hughes , A . ( 1953 ) . The growth of embryonic neurites . A study on cultures of chick neural tissues . J . Anat . 87 , 150 – 162 . Lewis , A . K . , and Bridgman , P . C . ( 1992 ) . Nerve growth cone lamelli - podiacontaintwopopulationsofactinfilamentsthatdifferinorgani - Kabir , N . , Schaefer , A . W . , Nakhost , A . , Sossin , W . S . , and Forscher , zation and polarity . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 1219 – 1243 . P . ( 2001 ) . ProteinkinaseCactivationpromotesmicrotubuleadvance inneuronalgrowthconesbyincreasingaveragemicrotubulegrowth Lewis , A . K . , and Bridgman , P . C . ( 1996 ) . Mammalian myosin I alpha lifetimes . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 1033 – 1044 . is concentrated near the plasma membrane in nerve growth cones . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 33 , 130 – 150 . Kalil , K . ( 1996 ) . Growth cone behaviors during axon guidance in the developing cerebral cortex . Prog . Brain Res . 108 , 31 – 40 . Li , Y . , and Black , M . M . ( 1996 ) . Microtubule assembly and turnover in growing axons . J . Neurosci . 16 , 531 – 544 . Kalil , K . , Szebenyi , G . , and Dent , E . W . ( 2000 ) . Common mechanisms underlyinggrowth coneguidance andaxon branching . J . Neurobiol . Liao , G . , and Gundersen , G . G . ( 1998 ) . Kinesin is a candidate for 44 , 145 – 158 . cross - bridging microtubules and intermediate filaments . Selective binding of kinesin to detyrosinated tubulin and vimentin . J . Biol . Katoh , K . , Hammar , K . , Smith , P . J . , and Oldenbourg , R . ( 1999 ) . Ar - Chem . 273 , 9797 – 9803 . rangement of radial actin bundles in the growth cone of Aplysia bag cellneuronsshowstheimmediatepasthistoryoffilopodialbehavior . Lin , C . H . , and Forscher , P . ( 1993 ) . Cytoskeletal remodeling during Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 7928 – 7931 . growth cone - target interactions . J . Cell Biol . 121 , 1369 – 1383 . Katsetos , C . D . , Herman , M . M . , and Mork , S . J . ( 2003 ) . Class III beta - Lin , C . H . , and Forscher , P . ( 1995 ) . Growth cone advance is inversely tubulin in human development and cancer . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton proportional to retrograde F - actin flow . Neuron 14 , 763 – 771 . 55 , 77 – 96 . Lin , W . , andSzaro , B . G . ( 1995 ) . Neurofilamentshelpmaintainnormal Kaufmann , N . , Wills , Z . P . , and Van Vactor , D . ( 1998 ) . Drosophila morphologies and support elongation of neurites in Xenopus laevis Rac1 controls motor axon guidance . Development 125 , 453 – 461 . culturedembryonicspinalcordneurons . J . Neurosci . 15 , 8331 – 8344 . Khan , I . A . , and Luduena , R . F . ( 2003 ) . Different effects of vinblastine Lin , C . H . , Thompson , C . A . , and Forscher , P . ( 1994 ) . Cytoskeletal on the polymerization of isotypically purified tubulins from bovine reorganization underlying growth cone motility . Curr . Opin . Neuro - brain . Invest . New Drugs 21 , 3 – 13 . biol . 4 , 640 – 647 . Lin , C . H . , Espreafico , E . M . , Mooseker , M . S . , and Forscher , P . ( 1996 ) . Khawaja , S . , Gundersen , G . G . , and Bulinski , J . C . ( 1988 ) . Enhanced Review225 Myosin drives retrograde F - actin flow in neuronal growth cones . Morabito , M . , andTsai , L . H . ( 2000 ) . NUDELisanovelCdk5substrate that associates with LIS1 and cytoplasmic dynein . Neuron 28 , Neuron 16 , 769 – 782 . 697 – 711 . Lu , M . , Witke , W . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . , andKosik , K . S . ( 1997 ) . Delayed retraction of filopodia in gelsolin null mice . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 1279 – Nogales , E . , Whittaker , M . , Milligan , R . A . , and Downing , K . H . ( 1999 ) . High - resolution model of the microtubule . Cell 96 , 79 – 88 . 1287 . Luduena , R . F . ( 1998 ) . Multiple forms of tubulin : different gene prod - Okabe , S . , andHirokawa , N . ( 1991 ) . Actindynamicsingrowthcones . J . Neurosci . 11 , 1918 – 1929 . ucts and covalent modifications . Int . Rev . Cytol . 178 , 207 – 275 . Lundquist , E . A . , Herman , R . K . , Shaw , J . E . , and Bargmann , C . I . O’Leary , D . D . , Bicknese , A . R . , DeCarlos , J . A . , Heffner , C . D . , Koester , S . E . , Kutka , L . J . , and Terashima , T . ( 1990 ) . Target selection by corti - ( 1998 ) . UNC - 115 , a conserved protein with predicted LIM and actin - binding domains , mediates axon guidance in C . elegans . Neuron cal axons : alternative mechanisms to establish axonal connections in the developing brain . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 55 , 21 , 385 – 392 . 453 – 468 . Luo , L . ( 2000 ) . Rho GTPases in neuronal morphogenesis . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 1 , 173 – 180 . Ozer , R . S . , andHalpain , S . ( 2000 ) . Phosphorylation - dependentlocal - ization of microtubule - associated protein MAP2c to the actin cy - Luo , L . ( 2002 ) . Actincytoskeletonregulationinneuronalmorphogen - toskeleton . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3573 – 3587 . esis and structural plasticity . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 601 – 635 . Paglini , G . , Kunda , P . , Quiroga , S . , Kosik , K . , and Caceres , A . ( 1998 ) . Mack , T . G . , Koester , M . P . , and Pollerberg , G . E . ( 2000 ) . The microtu - Suppression of radixin and moesin alters growth cone morphology , bule - associated protein MAP1B is involved in local stabilization of motility , and process formation in primary cultured neurons . J . Cell turning growth cones . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 15 , 51 – 65 . Biol . 143 , 443 – 455 . MacRae , T . H . ( 1997 ) . Tubulin post - translational modifications— Panda , D . , Miller , H . P . , Banerjee , A . , Luduena , R . F . , and Wilson , L . enzymes and their mechanisms of action . Eur . J . Biochem . 244 , ( 1994 ) . Microtubule dynamics in vitro are regulated by the tubulin 265 – 278 . isotype composition . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 11358 – 11362 . Mallavarapu , A . , andMitchison , T . ( 1999 ) . Regulatedactincytoskele - Paturle - Lafanechere , L . , Manier , M . , Trigault , N . , Pirollet , F . , Mazar - ton assembly at filopodium tips controls their extension and retrac - guil , H . , and Job , D . ( 1994 ) . Accumulation of delta 2 - tubulin , a major tion . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1097 – 1106 . tubulin variant that cannot be tyrosinated , in neuronal tissues and Marsh , L . , and Letourneau , P . C . ( 1984 ) . Growth of neurites without in stable microtubule assemblies . J . Cell Sci . 107 , 1529 – 1543 . filopodial or lamellipodial activity in the presence of cytochalasin B . Plantier , M . , Fattoum , A . , Menn , B . , Ben - Ari , Y . , Der Terrossian , E . , J . Cell Biol . 99 , 2041 – 2047 . and Represa , A . ( 1999 ) . Acidic calponin immunoreactivity in postna - Matus , A . ( 1991 ) . Microtubule - associated proteins and neuronal tal rat brain and cultures : subcellular localization in growth cones , morphogenesis . J . Cell Sci . Suppl . 15 , 61 – 67 . under the plasma membrane and along actin and glial filaments . Meberg , P . J . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Increase in neurite out - Eur . J . Neurosci . 11 , 2801 – 2812 . growth mediated by overexpression of actin depolymerizing factor . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by J . Neurosci . 20 , 2459 – 2469 . assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . Meyer , G . , and Feldman , E . L . ( 2002 ) . Signaling mechanisms that Ponti , A . , Vallotton , P . , Salmon , W . C . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and regulate actin - based motility processes in the nervous system . J . Danuser , G . ( 2003 ) . Computational analysis of f - actin turnover in Neurochem . 83 , 490 – 503 . cortical actin meshworks using fluorescent speckle microscopy . Mitchison , T . , andKirschner , M . ( 1984 ) . Dynamicinstabilityofmicro - Biophys . J . 84 , 3336 – 3352 . tubule growth . Nature 312 , 237 – 242 . Quinn , C . C . , Chen , E . , Kinjo , T . G . , Kelly , G . , Bell , A . W . , Elliott , R . C . , Moresco , E . M . Y . , and Koleske , A . J . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of neuronal McPherson , P . S . , and Hockfield , S . ( 2003 ) . TUC - 4b , a novel TUC morphogenesis and synaptic function by Abl family kinases . Curr . familyvariant , regulatesneuriteoutgrowthandassociateswithvesi - Opin . Neurobiol . 13 , 1 – 10 . cles in the growth cone . J . Neurosci . 23 , 2815 – 2823 . Morfini , G . , DiTella , M . C . , Feiguin , F . , Carri , N . , and Caceres , A . Ranganathan , S . , Benetatos , C . A . , Colarusso , P . J . , Dexter , D . W . , ( 1994 ) . Neurotrophin - 3 enhances neurite outgrowth in cultured hip - and Hudes , G . R . ( 1998 ) . Altered beta - tubulin isotype expression in pocampal pyramidal neurons . J . Neurosci . Res . 39 , 219 – 232 . paclitaxel - resistant human prostate carcinoma cells . Br . J . Cancer Morfini , G . , Quiroga , S . , Rosa , A . , Kosik , K . , and Caceres , A . ( 1997 ) . 77 , 562 – 566 . Suppression of KIF2 in PC12 cells alters the distribution of a growth Rochlin , M . W . , Itoh , K . , Adelstein , R . S . , and Bridgman , P . C . ( 1995 ) . cone nonsynaptic membrane receptor and inhibits neurite exten - Localization of myosin II A and B isoforms in cultured neurons . J . sion . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 657 – 669 . Cell Sci . 108 , 3661 – 3670 . Morfini , G . , Szebenyi , G . , Richards , B . , andBrady , S . T . ( 2001 ) . Regu - Rochlin , M . W . , Wickline , K . M . , and Bridgman , P . C . ( 1996 ) . Microtu - lation of kinesin : implications for neuronal development . Dev . Neu - bule stability decreases axon elongation but not axoplasm produc - rosci . 23 , 364 – 376 . tion . J . Neurosci . 16 , 3236 – 3246 . Mori , N . , and Morii , H . ( 2002 ) . SCG10 - related neuronal growth - asso - Rochlin , M . W . , Dailey , M . E . , andBridgman , P . C . ( 1999 ) . Polymerizing ciated proteins in neural development , plasticity , degeneration , and microtubules activate site - directed F - actin assembly in nerve aging . J . Neurosci . Res . 70 , 264 – 273 . growth cones . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 2309 – 2327 . Morrison , E . E . , Moncur , P . M . , and Askham , J . M . ( 2002 ) . EB1 identi - Rodriguez , O . C . , Schaefer , A . W . , Mandato , C . A . , Forscher , P . , Be - fiessitesofmicrotubulepolymerisationduringneuritedevelopment . ment , W . M . , andWaterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2003 ) . Conservedmicrotu - Brain Res . Mol . Brain Res . 98 , 145 – 152 . bule - actin interactions in cell movement and morphogenesis . Nat . Mueller , B . K . ( 1999 ) . Growth cone guidance : first steps towards a Cell Biol . 5 , 599 – 609 . deeper understanding . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 22 , 351 – 388 . Roos , J . , Hummel , T . , Ng , N . , Klambt , C . , and Davis , G . W . ( 2000 ) . Nakai , J . ( 1956 ) . Dissociated dorsal root ganglia in tissue culture . Drosophila Futsch regulates synaptic microtubule organization and Am . J . Anat . 99 , 81 – 129 . is necessary for synaptic growth . Neuron 26 , 371 – 382 . Nakamura , T . , Takeuchi , K . , Muraoka , S . , Takezoe , H . , Takahashi , Roth , L . W . , Bormann , P . , Bonnet , A . , and Reinhard , E . ( 1999 ) . beta - N . , and Mori , N . ( 1999 ) . A neurally enriched coronin - like protein , thymosin is required for axonal tract formation in developing zebra - ClipinC , isanovelcandidateforanactincytoskeleton - corticalmem - fish brain . Development 126 , 1365 – 1374 . brane - linking protein . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 13322 – 13327 . Rothenberg , M . E . , Rogers , S . L . , Vale , R . D . , Jan , L . Y . , and Jan , Y . - N . Ng , J . , Nardine , T . , Harms , M . , Tzu , J . , Goldstein , A . , Sun , Y . , Dietzl , ( 2003 ) . Drosophila Pod - 1 crosslinks both actin and microtubules G . , Dickson , B . J . , and Luo , L . ( 2002 ) . Rac GTPases control axon and controls targeting of axons . Neuron 39 , 779 – 791 . growth , guidance and branching . Nature 416 , 442 – 447 . Sabry , J . H . , O’Connor , T . P . , Evans , L . , Toroian - Raymond , A . , Kirschner , M . , and Bentley , D . ( 1991 ) . Microtubule behavior during Niethammer , M . , Smith , D . S . , Ayala , R . , Peng , J . , Ko , J . , Lee , M . S . , Neuron226 guidance of pioneer neuron growth cones in situ . J . Cell Biol . 115 , growth cone steering by substrate - cytoskeletal coupling . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 227 – 240 . 381 – 395 . Suter , D . M . , Espindola , F . S . , Lin , C . H . , Forscher , P . , and Mooseker , Sammak , P . J . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1988 ) . Direct observation of micro - M . S . ( 2000 ) . Localization of unconventional myosins V and VI in tubule dynamics in living cells . Nature 332 , 724 – 726 . neuronal growth cones . J . Neurobiol . 42 , 370 – 382 . Sanchez - Martin , C . , Ledesma , D . , Dotti , C . G . , and Avila , J . ( 2000 ) . Sydor , A . M . , Su , A . L . , Wang , F . S . , Xu , A . , and Jay , D . G . ( 1996 ) . Talin Microtubule - associated protein - 2 located in growth regions of rat and vinculin play distinct roles in filopodial motility in the neuronal hippocampal neurons is highly phosphorylated at its proline - rich growth cone . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 1197 – 1207 . region . Neuroscience 101 , 885 – 893 . Tanaka , E . M . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1991 ) . Microtubule behavior in Sasaki , S . , Shionoya , A . , Ishida , M . , Gambello , M . J . , Yingling , J . , the growth cones of living neurons during axon elongation . J . Cell Wynshaw - Boris , A . , and Hirotsune , S . ( 2000 ) . A LIS1 / NUDEL / cyto - Biol . 115 , 345 – 363 . plasmic dynein heavy chain complex in the developing and adult nervous system . Neuron 28 , 681 – 696 . Tanaka , E . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1995 ) . The role of microtubules in growth cone turning at substrate boundaries . J . Cell Biol . 128 , Schaefer , A . W . , Kabir , N . , and Forscher , P . ( 2002 ) . Filopodia and 127 – 137 . actin arcs guide the assembly and transport of two populations of microtubules with unique dynamic parameters in neuronal growth Tanaka , E . , andSabry , J . ( 1995 ) . Makingtheconnection : cytoskeletal cones . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 139 – 152 . rearrangements during growth cone guidance . Cell 83 , 171 – 176 . Schevzov , G . , Gunning , P . , Jeffrey , P . L . , Temm - Grove , C . , Helfman , Tanaka , J . , Kira , M . , and Sobue , K . ( 1993 ) . Gelsolin is localized in D . M . , Lin , J . J . , and Weinberger , R . P . ( 1997 ) . Tropomyosin localiza - neuronal growth cones . Brain Res . Dev . Brain Res . 76 , 268 – 271 . tion reveals distinct populations of microfilaments in neurites and Tanaka , E . , Ho , T . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1995 ) . The role of microtu - growth cones . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 8 , 439 – 454 . bule dynamics in growth cone motility and axonal growth . J . Cell Biol . 128 , 139 – 155 . Schnapp , B . J . , and Reese , T . S . ( 1982 ) . Cytoplasmic structure in rapid - frozen axons . J . Cell Biol . 94 , 667 – 669 . Tennyson , V . M . ( 1970 ) . The fine structure of the axon and growth cone of the dorsal root neuroblast of the rabbit embryo . J . Cell Biol . Schulze , E . , and Kirschner , M . ( 1988 ) . New features of microtubule 44 , 62 – 79 . behaviour observed in vivo . Nature 334 , 356 – 359 . Tsui , H . T . , Lankford , K . L . , Ris , H . , and Klein , W . L . ( 1984 ) . Novel Schuyler , S . C . , and Pellman , D . ( 2001 ) . Microtubule “plus - end - organization of microtubules in cultured central nervous system tracking proteins” : the end is just the beginning . Cell 105 , 421 – 424 . neurons : formation of hairpin loops at ends of maturing neurites . J . Schwarz , P . M . , Liggins , J . R . , and Luduena , R . F . ( 1998 ) . Beta - tubulin Neurosci . 4 , 3002 – 3013 . isotypes purified from bovine brain have different relative stabilities . Verdier - Pinard , P . , Wang , F . , Martello , L . , Burd , B . , Orr , G . A . , and Biochemistry 37 , 4687 – 4692 . Horwitz , S . B . ( 2003 ) . Analysis of tubulin isotypes and mutations Shaw , G . , Osborn , M . , andWeber , K . ( 1981 ) . Arrangementofneurofil - fromtaxol - resistant cellsbycombinedisoelectrofocusing andmass aments , microtubules and microfilament - associatedproteins in cul - spectrometry . Biochemistry 42 , 5349 – 5357 . tured dorsal root ganglia cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 24 , 20 – 27 . Walker , R . A . , O’Brien , E . T . , Pryer , N . K . , Soboeiro , M . F . , Voter , W . A . , Shaw , G . , Banker , G . A . , and Weber , K . ( 1985 ) . An immunofluores - Erickson , H . P . , and Salmon , E . D . ( 1988 ) . Dynamic instability of indi - cence study of neurofilament protein expression by developing hip - vidual microtubules analyzed by video light microscopy : rate con - pocampal neurons in tissue culture . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 39 , 205 – 216 . stants and transition frequencies . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 1437 – 1448 . Sheetz , M . P . , Steuer , E . R . , and Schroer , T . A . ( 1989 ) . Themechanism Wang , L . , and Brown , A . ( 2002 ) . Rapid movement of microtubules and regulation of fast axonal transport . Trends Neurosci . 12 , in axons . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1496 – 1501 . 474 – 478 . Watakabe , A . , Kobayashi , R . , and Helfman , D . M . ( 1996 ) . N - trop - Slaughter , T . , Wang , J . , and Black , M . M . ( 1997 ) . Microtubule trans - omodulin : a novel isoform of tropomodulin identified as the major port from the cell body into the axons of growing neurons . J . Neu - binding protein to brain tropomyosin . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 2299 – 2310 . rosci . 17 , 5807 – 5819 . Waterman - Storer , C . M . , Worthylake , R . A . , Liu , B . P . , Burridge , K . , Smith , S . J . ( 1988 ) . Neuronalcytomechanics : theactin - basedmotility and Salmon , E . D . ( 1999 ) . Microtubule growth activates Rac1 to pro - of growth cones . Science 242 , 708 – 715 . mote lamellipodial protrusion in fibroblasts . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 45 – 50 . Sobue , K . ( 1993 ) . Actin - based cytoskeleton in growth cone activity . Weaver , A . M . , Young , M . E . , Lee , W . L . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Inte - Neurosci . Res . 18 , 91 – 102 . gration of signals to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , Sobue , K . , and Kanda , K . ( 1989 ) . Alpha - actinins , calspectin ( brain 23 – 30 . spectrin or fodrin ) , and actin participate in adhesion and movement Welnhofer , E . A . , Zhao , L . , and Cohan , C . S . ( 1997 ) . Actin dynamics of growth cones . Neuron 3 , 311 – 319 . and organization during growth cone morphogenesis in Helisoma neurons . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 37 , 54 – 71 . Song , H . , andPoo , M . ( 2001 ) . Thecellbiologyofneuronalnavigation . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , E81 – E88 . Welnhofer , E . A . , Zhao , L . , and Cohan , C . S . ( 1999 ) . Calcium influx altersactinbundledynamicsandretrogradeflowin Helisoma growth Speidel , C . C . ( 1933 ) . Studies oflivingnerves II . Activities ofameboid cones . J . Neurosci . 19 , 7971 – 7982 . growth cones , sheath cells , and myelin segments , as revealed by prolonged observation of individual nerve fibers in frog tadpoles . Williamson , T . , Gordon - Weeks , P . R . , Schachner , M . , and Taylor , Am . J . Anat . 52 , 1 – 79 . J . ( 1996 ) . Microtubule reorganization is obligatory for growth cone turning . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 15221 – 15226 . Steketee , M . B . , and Tosney , K . W . ( 2002 ) . Three functionally distinct adhesions in filopodia : shaft adhesions control lamellar extension . Wills , Z . , Bateman , J . , Korey , C . A . , Comer , A . , and Van Vactor , D . J . Neurosci . 22 , 8071 – 8083 . ( 1999 ) . ThetyrosinekinaseAblanditssubstrateenabledcollaborate withthe receptorphosphataseDlar tocontrolmotor axonguidance . Stepanova , T . , Slemmer , J . , Hoogenraad , C . C . , Lansbergen , G . , Neuron 22 , 301 – 312 . Dortland , B . , DeZeeuw , C . I . , Grosveld , F . , vanCappellen , G . , Akhma - nova , A . , and Galjart , N . ( 2003 ) . Visualization of microtubule growth Wills , Z . , Emerson , M . , Rusch , J . , Bikoff , J . , Baum , B . , Perrimon , in cultured neurons via the use of EB3 - GFP ( end - binding protein N . , and Van Vactor , D . ( 2002 ) . A Drosophila homolog of cyclase - 3 - green fluorescent protein ) . J . Neurosci . 23 , 2655 – 2664 . associated proteins collaborates with the Abl tyrosine kinase to control midline axon pathfinding . Neuron 36 , 611 – 622 . Suter , D . M . , and Forscher , P . ( 2000 ) . Substrate - cytoskeletal cou - pling as a mechanism for the regulation of growth cone motility and Wittmann , T . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2001 ) . Cell motility : can guidance . J . Neurobiol . 44 , 97 – 113 . Rho GTPases and microtubules point the way ? J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3795 – 3803 . Suter , D . M . , Errante , L . D . , Belotserkovsky , V . , and Forscher , P . ( 1998 ) . TheIgsuperfamilycelladhesionmolecule , apCAM , mediates Wittmann , T . , Bokoch , G . M . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2003 ) . Review227 Regulation of leading edge microtubule and actin dynamics down - stream of Rac1 . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 845 – 851 . Yamada , K . M . , Spooner , B . S . , and Wessells , N . K . ( 1970 ) . Axon growth : roles of microfilaments and microtubules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 66 , 1206 – 1212 . Yamada , K . M . , Spooner , B . S . , and Wessells , N . K . ( 1971 ) . Ultrastruc - ture andfunction ofgrowth conesand axonsof culturednerve cells . J . Cell Biol . 49 , 614 – 635 . Yu , W . , Schwei , M . J . , and Baas , P . W . ( 1996 ) . Microtubule transport and assembly during axon growth . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 151 – 157 . Yuasa - Kawada , J . , Suzuki , R . , Kano , F . , Ohkawara , T . , Murata , M . , and Noda , M . ( 2003 ) . Axonal morphogenesis controlled by antago - nistic roles of two CRMP subtypes in microtubule organization . Eur . J . Neurosci . 17 , 2329 – 2343 . Yuste , R . , Lanni , F . , and Konnerth , A . ( 2000 ) . Imaging Neurons : A Laboratory Manual ( Cold Spring Harbor , NY : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ) . Zakharenko , S . , and Popov , S . ( 1998 ) . Dynamics of axonal microtu - bules regulate the topology of new membrane insertion into the growing neurites . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1077 – 1086 . Zhou , F . Q . , and Cohan , C . S . ( 2001 ) . Growth cone collapse through coincident loss of actin bundles and leading edge actin without actin depolymerization . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1071 – 1084 . Zhou , F . Q . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and Cohan , C . S . ( 2002 ) . Focal loss of actin bundles causes microtubule redistribution and growth cone turning . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 839 – 849 .