268 Supporting Collaborative Information Analysis with Interactive Visualization Dong Chen College of Information Sciences and Technology Pennsylvania State University University Park , PA 16802 Email : dxc360 @ ist . psu . edu I . I NTRODUCTION Collaborative information analysis is a form of sensemaking wherein a team identiﬁes , analyzes , and represents a complex information space of facts and relationships to evaluate causal hypotheses . A common example of collaborative information analysis is crime investigation ; a variety of putative facts are assembled , including ﬁnancial records , witness observations and interviews , and social connections of various sorts among persons of interest , from which investigators collaboratively assess means , motives , and opportunities , articulate and inves - tigate hypotheses . Other examples include intelligence analy - sis , scientiﬁc research , and social learning . While tools such as the i2 Analysts Notebook are widely used in the intelligence community , they are not developed for collaborative use . Supporting team coordination and awareness has been a well - known issue in CSCW , and becomes even more challenging in the task of complex information analy - sis . We have developed a collaborative information analysis tool , CAnalytics , which provides an integrated workspace for information collection and analysis , as well as features to support team awareness . We conducted a classroom study with analysts - in - training and learned their feedback . The result is mixed . Participants reported increased engagement in the task , improved team awareness , and more efﬁcient information organization and analysis . Meanwhile , we observed several breakdowns , exposing implications for future design . II . R ELATED W ORK The i2’s Analyst’s Notebook and and PARC ACH 1 are widely used tools for information analysis , and provide struc - tured support for link analysis and analysis of alternative hy - potheses , respectively . Jigsaw [ 1 ] is a recent research effort to facilitate information analysis of large numbers of documents . The tool extracts data objects including people , location , and times , and represent them in multiple views . However , these tools lack serious collaboration support . Analysts must coordinate work by manually sharing notebooks or graphs . This has the consequence that the tools are employed only at speciﬁc points in an analysis , often only in the early stages during which analysts are working on their own . 1 Analyst’s Notebook : http : / / www - 03 . ibm . com / software / products / en / analysts - notebook , ACH : http : / / www2 . parc . com / istl / projects / ach / ach . html Goyal et al . [ 2 ] reported several lab experiments investi - gating the effect of individual tool features on collaborative information analysis . Their work provides evidence of tool effect but focused on relatively simple lab tasks . Chin et al . [ 3 ] conducted an observation study of intelligence analysts , and examined the strategies and tools they applied . Their study is important as it sheds light on how real professional analysts work . It is usually difﬁcult to study professional analysts over an extended period of time due to safety and privacy issues . As an alternative , Kang and Stasko [ 4 ] studied how student analystswho were soon to become professionalscompleted in - class intelligence projects . Their result was valuable in understanding long - term analytic process . Our study follows their approach and makes one step further by deploying our advanced visual analytic tool in class . III . M ETHOD We developed a web - based collaborative information anal - ysis tool , CAanlytics . The tool supports information gathering through document annotation . Unlike in other entity - based sys - tems e . g . Entity Workspace [ 5 ] and Jigsaw [ 1 ] which employs natural language processing techniques to automatically detect entities in documents , we use manual annotation to gather objects of interest . This allows for greater user control in information gathering ; users can decide their own information granularity and information interest that best suits their ad - hoc analytic needs . CAnalytics displays the annotated objects through multi - ple coordinated visualizations , including spreadsheets , maps , timelines , and node - link graph . These views are informed by an earlier paper prototype study [ 6 ] , in which participants spontaneously created visual representations to solve a crime scenario . The tool supports coordination and awareness through real - time collaborative editing . Multiple users can collaboratively create information in real - time , or they can access the system individually and work on their own . The system maintains a persistent log of time - stamped individual activities , and broadcasts peripheral notiﬁcations and a dedicated history view to teammates . We deployed CAanlytics in an undergraduate intelligence analysis course in a US university . The course is designed for college students to learn intelligence analytic skills and to be (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:8)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:14)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17) 269 Fig . 1 . CAnalytics user interface trained to become a professional intelligence analyst . There - fore participants in this study have preliminary knowledge of analytic techniques and are familiar with practice of the intelligence community . 73 students from two classes of that course employed CAnalytics for a one - week - long team project ( 3 people in a team ) , trying to solve a series of bank robberies with provided materials including witness report , media news , and video capture . Several data collection methods were em - ployed , including surveys , open - ended questionnaires , system logs , and their group report . IV . P RELIMINARY R ESULT Over the week , students created 1919 data objects and 1636 relationships . Students appreciated that they could con - currently contribute and share created objects in real time . One participant described CAnalytics as “an analysts notebook that multiple people could work on at once . . . [ and ] an analysts version of a Google Doc . ” Participants compared their expe - rience with CAnalytics with the time when they did not have CAnalytics . Previously they had to split their work by tools since they could not work on the same tool at the same time . CAnalytics provided an integrated analytic environment and students found themselves more closely coupled and easier to build on others contribution . The awareness features were received well . In the survey 88 % of the students rated positively on their group awareness . In the open - ended questionnaire , they commented on how the awareness was achieved through the tools , e . g . , ‘the history function shows what teammates has done and enables me to continue to contribute in a team direction’ . Such awareness also made students more engaged to the task since they felt ‘peace at mind’ knowing that their teammates were also working efﬁciently . Meanwhile , participants also reported several breakdowns . For example , students reﬂected that they had problem making annotation collectively . While the system helped them stay aware of “what” information teammates had gathered ( through sharing of annotation ) , they were less aware of “how” they should model the data , e . g . one member may annotate a bank as a location , and another member may annotate it as an organization , which causes confusion . V . D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE WORK Through the classroom study , we found that our collabo - rative information analysis prototype facilitated information analysis , supported group awareness , and made teamwork engaging . Extra support is yet needed for strategic awareness . Due to our desire to conduct the study in a naturalistic environment , participants were not observed in a controlled environment , which brought a lot of variables that could not be measured . The classroom study exposes hypotheses , which needs to be validated in controlled lab studies . I will improve the tool based on the ﬁndings and re - evaluate it using both ﬁeld studies and lab studies . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] J . Stasko , C . G¨org , and R . Spence , “Jigsaw : supporting investigative analysis through interactive visualization , ” Information Visualization , vol . 7 , no . 2 , pp . 118 – 132 , 2008 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / ivi . sagepub . com / lookup / doi / 10 . 1057 / palgrave . ivs . 9500180 [ 2 ] N . Goyal and S . R . Fussell , “Effects of Sensemaking Translucence on Distributed Collaborative Analysis , ” in CSCW ’16 Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , 2016 . [ 3 ] G . Chin Jr , O . A . Kuchar , and K . E . Wolf , “Exploring the analytical processes of intelligence analysts , ” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2009 , pp . 11 – 20 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1518704 [ 4 ] Y . - a . Kang and J . Stasko , “Characterizing the intelligence analysis process : Informing visual analytics design through a longitudinal ﬁeld study , ” in 2011 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology ( VAST ) . Ieee , oct 2011 , pp . 21 – 30 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org / lpdocs / epic03 / wrapper . htm ? arnumber = 6102438 [ 5 ] E . a . Bier , S . K . Card , and J . W . Bodnar , “Principles and tools for collaborative entity - based intelligence analysis . ” IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics , vol . 16 , no . 2 , pp . 178 – 91 , 2010 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed / 20075480 [ 6 ] J . M . Carroll , M . Borge , and S . Shih , “Cognitive artifacts as a window on design , ” Journal of Visual Languages & Computing , vol . 24 , no . 4 , pp . 248 – 261 , 2013 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S1045926X13000207