Spencer A . Freeman Sergio Grinstein Phagocytosis : receptors , signal integration , and the cytoskeleton Authors’ addresses Spencer A . Freeman 1 , Sergio Grinstein 1 , 2 1 Program in Cell Biology , The Hospital for Sick Children , Toronto , Ontario , Canada . 2 Keenan Research Centre of the Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute , St . Michael’s Hospital , Toronto , Ontario , Canada . Correspondence to : Sergio Grinstein Program in Cell Biology The Hospital for Sick Children 555 University Ave . Toronto , Ontario M5G 1X8 , Canada Tel . : + 1 416 813 5727 Fax : + 1 416 813 5028 e - mail : sergio . grinstein @ sickkids . ca Acknowledgement We thank Dr . Johnathan Canton and Dr . Valentin Jaumouille for their helpful comments . S . A . F . is supported by a Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada post - doctoral fellowship . Research in the authors’ laboratory is supported by the Canadian Institutes for Health Research grants MOP7075 , MOP102474 and MOP4665 . The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest . This article is part of a series of reviews covering Monocytes and Macrophages appearing in Volume 262 of Immunological Reviews . Summary : Phagocytosis is a remarkably complex and versatile process : it contributes to innate immunity through the ingestion and elimina - tion of pathogens , while also being central to tissue homeostasis and remodeling by clearing effete cells . The ability of phagocytes to per - form such diverse functions rests , in large part , on their vast repertoire of receptors . In this review , we address the various receptor types , their mobility in the plane of the membrane , and two modes of recep - tor crosstalk : priming and synergy . A major section is devoted to the actin cytoskeleton , which not only governs receptor mobility and clus - tering but also is instrumental in particle engulfment . Four stages of the actin remodeling process are identiﬁed and discussed : ( i ) the ‘rest - ing’ stage that precedes receptor engagement , ( ii ) the disruption of the cortical actin prior to formation of the phagocytic cup , ( iii ) the actin polymerization that propels pseudopod extension , and ( iv ) the termi - nation of polymerization and removal of preassembled actin that are required for focal delivery of endomembranes and phagosomal sealing . These topics are viewed in the larger context of the differentiation and polarization of the phagocytic cells . Keywords : immunoreceptor , receptor mobility , crosstalk , single - particle tracking , phagocytic synapse , mechanosensing Introduction : the heterogeneity of phagocytes and of phagocytosis Phagocytosis , the recognition and ingestion of particles lar - ger than 0 . 5 l m into membrane - bound vacuoles known as phagosomes , is a critical process in development , tissue homeostasis , and immunity . Phagocytosis appeared early in evolution : it is evident in unicellular organisms that use it for nutrition , while dedicated phagocytes appeared in multi - cellular organisms even before they developed a vascular system . Professional phagocytes are confronted with a diver - sity of particles , ranging from pathogens to apoptotic cells ; this necessitates a variety of distinct receptors to recognize , engage , and initiate phagocytosis of these disparate targets . In addition , phagocytes use ancillary receptors to gain infor - mation of the context in which a particle is encountered . This well - orchestrated receptor crosstalk sets the stage for pro - or anti - inﬂammatory responses . Generally , professional phagocytes can mount appropriate responses to their targets Immunological Reviews 2014 Vol . 262 : 193 – 215 Printed in Singapore . All rights reserved © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 0105 - 2896 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 193 by ( i ) implementing a ‘division of labor’ between function - ally distinct cell populations ; ( ii ) differentiating or polariz - ing according to their microenvironment ; or ( iii ) combining the input of multiple receptor types to prime , synergize , or antagonize signaling before , during , or after phagocytosis . This introduction brieﬂy describes the ﬁrst two strategies , while the remainder of the article discusses in detail the third , i . e . signal integration . Macrophages , the prototypic and best - studied phagocytic cells , are used as a reference . The intrinsic capacity of macrophages to ingest and degrade targets and to present antigens varies widely depending on the tissue where the macrophages reside . Division of labor is therefore necessary to optimize immune function . In some instances , this occurs by delegating deﬁned steps of the pro - cess to other cells residing in the same tissue . An example of the former mode is provided by subcapsular sinus macro - phages , which can effectively sample their environment yet have limited ability to degrade and present antigens . These cells probe the draining afferent lymph for antigens and trans - fer them to more effective antigen - presenting cells ( APCs ) , e . g . follicular B cells and dendritic cells ( DCs ) ( 1 – 6 ) . A similar handover occurs in the gut ; resident macrophages can probe the intestinal lumen for food antigens and transfer these to underlying DCs ( 7 ) . Division of labor can also involve recruit - ment of cells extrinsic to the affected tissue . Resident macro - phages have the ability to summon auxiliary cells to sites of infection , to buttress their microbicidal , inﬂammatory , and antigen - presenting capacity . In addition to calling the right accessory cells into action , macrophages also have the intrinsic , rather plastic ability to change their phenotype / activation state . The initial classiﬁca - tion of these phenotypes was a linear scale ranging from M1 , or classically activated , macrophages to M2 , or alternatively activated , macrophages . It has been appreciated recently that macrophage activation may be better described using a broader spectrum ( 8 , 9 ) . This model maintains the descrip - tion of a classically activated macrophage state , while alterna - tively activated macrophages can be segregated into wound healing and regulatory , and the cells can exist in meta - stable ‘shades’ anywhere in between these three types ( 9 ) . The mac - rophage activation phenotype can be inﬂuenced by a variety of micro - environmental cues , including cytokines produced by innate and adaptive immune cells , G protein - coupled receptor ( GPCR ) ligands , Toll - like receptor ( TLR ) ligands , and the presence of phagocytic targets like apoptotic cells ( 9 ) . There is even evidence that macrophage activation is directly inﬂuenced by the cell shape and degree of adhesion ( 10 ) . Depending on their activation state , macrophages respond to phagocytic targets differently . Thus , immuno - globulin G ( IgG ) - coated particles are more effectively engaged and internalized by M1 than M2 cells , while the opposite is true for apoptotic bodies ( 11 ) . Their polariza - tion also dictates the mode and extent of interaction of macrophages with the adaptive immune system and is key to the proper responsiveness toward danger signals and the accurate distinction between self , altered - self , and non - self . Clearly , there are both hard - wired ( division of labor ) and plastic ( polarization ) mechanisms that impinge upon phagocytosis and the associated responses . These processes are comparatively slow and rely on differential receptor expression and other transcriptional effects . In addition , however , there is a more acute response whereby macro - phages process information about their targets and sur - roundings without altering receptor expression . This response involves the interaction of phagocytic receptors with co - receptors , their segregation into micro - domains , and the regulation of their positioning and mobility within the plasma membrane ( 12 , 13 ) . This review focuses on these early steps of phagocytosis , with emphasis on receptor crosstalk and the role of the cytoskeleton in signal integration . Phagocytic receptors Diversity of ligands , heterogeneity of targets , and multiplicity of phagocytic receptors A large variety of ligands are recognized by phagocytic cells ( 14 ) . Their effective recognition required the evolution of a remarkable number of receptors with distinct selectivity ( Table 1 ) . Multiple receptor types are co - expressed in single phagocytes and collaborate in the detection and ingestion of particles ( Fig . 1 ) , which generally display a diverse array of identifying molecular patterns and adherent opsonins . However , not all the receptors engaged in the course of phagocytosis are phagocytic receptors : some serve to prime or modulate the response , yet are incapable of initiating particle engulfment . TLRs and GPCRs , which produce inside - out activation of phagocytic integrins , fall into this category ( Fig . 2 ) . Indeed , it has been challenging to deﬁne and categorize bona ﬁde phagocytic receptors . The most reliable operational deﬁnition relies on ectopic expression : a receptor can be regarded as phagocytic if it is able to support particle ingestion upon heterologous expression in an otherwise non - phagocytic cell type . This criterion © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 194 Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton applies to Fc c receptors that recognize the Fc portion of opsonizing IgG ( 15 ) and to the pattern - recognition receptor Dectin - 1 that recognizes fungal polysaccharides ( 16 ) . How - ever , even this seemingly stringent deﬁnition can be ambig - uous . The heterologous expression of receptors like TIM - 4 promotes the uptake of apoptotic bodies , yet TIM - 4 is thought to function merely as a tether ( 17 ) or at best a co - receptor working in conjunction with integrins to medi - ate phagocytosis ( 18 ) . It is fair to state that because other potential phagocytic co - receptors are inevitably expressed in putatively non - phagocytic cells , even heterologous expres - sion is an imperfect criterion , and whether any single receptor type sufﬁces to initiate and support phagocytosis is not clear . Cells that are not normally phagocytic can internalize deﬁned targets under special situations . In a setting of surg - ing apoptosis , such as during tissue injury or involution , otherwise quiescent cells develop the ability to ingest their neighbors . Healthy kidney epithelial cells expressing kidney injury molecule - 1 ( KIM - 1 / TIM - 1 ) engulf proximal apopto - tic and necrotic cells ( 19 ) . Similarly , during involution of the mammary gland following weaning , viable epithelial cells remove their apoptotic neighbors utilizing CD36 and a v b 3 integrin ( 20 ) . Thus , neither the deﬁnition of a phago - cytic receptor nor that of a professional phagocyte is straightforward and unambiguous . Spatial and temporal considerations are critical to the effective engagement of phagocytic receptors , and both the phagocyte and the target dictate the outcome . The size , shape , and stiffness of the particle all inﬂuence the rate and extent of engulfment ( 21 – 23 ) . This is important because macrophages need to take up small , rigid bacteria and also large , pliable apoptotic corpses . In this regard , it is becom - ing apparent that the underlying molecular machinery dif - fers when macrophages internalize small ( e . g . 1 l m ) versus large ( ≥ 5 l m ) particles , even when identical ligands and receptors are involved ( 24 – 26 ) . Moreover , phagocytes often have to contend with particles of elaborate shape , like fungal hyphae or spiral Campylobacter . Not only is the geometry of these targets challenging but also the distribution of ligands R e c e p t o r m o b i l i t y resting state primed state engagement Fc receptors ( e . g . Fc γ RIIA ) Integrins ( e . g . CR3 / Mac - 1 ) Scavenger receptors ( e . g . CD36 ) ( limited mobility ) ( increased mobility ) tethered ( immobile ) chemokines , TLR ligands IgG C3bi F - actin Time A B C Fig . 1 . Receptor mobility is controlled by the actin cytoskeleton . ( A ) In the resting state , the lateral diffusion of Fc receptors , integrins , and scavenger receptors within the plasma membrane is conﬁned by fences consisting of pickets attached to an F - actin meshwork . ( B ) Upon stimulation by chemokines or TLR ligands , macrophages undergo actin remodeling that causes membrane rufﬂing . As cortical F - actin becomes more branched and dynamic , receptors are less conﬁned and diffuse more freely , becoming primed for target encounter . ( C ) Upon engagement by phagocytic targets , receptors become tethered to their ligands and , in some cases ( e . g . integrins ) , to the actin cytoskeleton , rendering them immobile . TLR , Toll - like receptor . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 195 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton on their surface may not be homogeneous , leading to asyn - chronous activation of different receptors during the inges - tion process . Despite such pronounced differences , all phagocytic tar - gets share a key common property : they present to the phagocyte multivalent arrays of ligands . This feature is crit - ical for the activation of phagocytic receptors , which are invariably activated by clustering laterally in the plane of the membrane . Thus , unlike GPCRs or growth factor receptors that undergo transmembrane conformational changes upon association with their ligands , phagocytic receptors are stimulated when their local density is elevated as they become immobilized by closely apposed stationary ligands . The gamut of phagocytic receptors is large and complex ( Table 1 ) , and few have been studied in detail . For simplic - ity , this section concentrates on Fc receptors , Dectin - 1 , inte - grins , and scavenger receptors , which are representative of different groups . Fc c receptors and IgG - opsonized pathogens Fc c receptors bind the Fc portion of IgG with a 1 : 1 stoichi - ometry , thereby linking innate and adaptive immune responses . There are six human Fc c receptors ( Fc c RI , Fc c RIIA , Fc c RIIB , Fc c RIIC , Fc c RIIIA , and Fc c RIIIB ) , with varying ability to bind the different IgG subclasses in the soluble and immune - complexed forms ( 27 ) . The glycosyla - Table 1 . Human phagocytic receptors and their ligands Receptors Ligands References Opsonic receptors Fc receptorsFc c RI ( CD64 ) † High afﬁnity IgG1 = IgG3 > IgG4 * ( 27 , 208 ) Fc c RIIa ( CD32a ) Low to medium afﬁnity IgG1 > IgG2 , IgG3 , IgG4 * ( 27 , 208 ) Fc c RIIc ( CD32c ) Low - afﬁnity IgG1 , IgG3 , IgG4 * ( 27 , 208 ) Fc c RIIIa ( CD16a ) High afﬁnity IgG3 , low to medium afﬁnity IgG1 > IgG4 * ( 27 , 208 ) Fc a RI ( CD89 ) IgA1 , IgA2 ( 209 ) Fc e RI IgE ( 210 ) CR1 ( CD35 ) C1q , C4b , C3b , mannan - binding lectin ( 211 ) IntegrinsCR3 ( a M b 2 , CD11b / CD18 , Mac - 1 ) iC3b , Factor X , factor H , t - PA , ﬁbrinogen , kininogen , ﬁbronectin , collagens , elastase , plasminogen , ICAM , GPIb , denatured proteins ( 212 , 213 ) CR4 ( a X b 2 , CD11c / CD18 , gp150 / 95 ) iC3b , ﬁbrinogen , ICAM , denatured proteins ( 46 , 212 , 214 – 216 ) a 5 b 1 ( VLA - 5 ) Fibronectin , osteopontin ( 46 ) Pattern - recognition receptors Dectin - 1 ( CLEC7A ) ‡ b 1 , 3 - glucans ( 217 ) CD14 Lipopolysaccharide - binding protein ( 218 ) Mannose receptor ( CD206 ) Mannan ( 219 ) BAI1 Lipopolysaccharide ( 220 ) Scavenger receptors CD36 § Plasmodium falciparum - infected erythrocytes ( 221 ) MARCO Bacteria ( 222 ) Scavenger receptor A ( CD204 ) Lipopolysaccharide , lipoteichoic acid ( 223 , 224 ) Apoptotic corpse receptors PS receptorsTIM - 4 Phosphatidylserine ( 110 , 111 ) BAI1 Phosphatidylserine ( 225 ) Stabilin - 2 Phosphatidylserine ( 226 ) CD300f Phosphatidylserine ( 227 ) TAM receptors Gas6 , protein S ( 228 , 229 ) LRP1 ( CD91 ) C1q / calreticulin ( 230 ) Integrins a V b 3 MFG - E8 , Del - 1 , vitronectin , vWF , PECAM - 1 , tenascin , BSP , osteopontin , thrombospondin , LAP - TGF b , ﬁbrinogen ( 46 , 49 , 51 ) a V b 5 MFG - E8 , Del - 1 , vitronectin , osteopontin , BSP ( 46 , 51 , 231 ) Scavenger receptors CD36 Oxidized lipids including PS and PC ( 232 ) SCARF - 1 C1q opsonized PS ( 233 ) * Afﬁnity descriptions are for IgGs in immune complexes . Monomeric IgG1 and IgG4 only bind Fc c RI and monomeric IgG3 binds Fc c RI and Fc c RIIIA . † Expressed four - to ﬁvefold higher in M1 versus M2 macrophages . ‡ Expressed 20 - fold higher in M2 versus M1 macrophages . § Expressed > 30 - fold higher in M2 versus M1 macrophages . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 196 Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton tion of antibodies , which is required for Fc c R binding , can also vary ( circulating human antibodies display 30 distinct glycans ) , conferring additional heterogeneity to the binding afﬁnity of Fc receptors ( 28 ) . Fc c Rs possess either an immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation or inhibitory motif ( ITAM or ITIM , respectively ) , and several types of activating Fc c Rs are co - expressed by macrophages along with the inhibitory Fc c RIIB ( 29 ) . The clustering of activating Fc c Rs results in the phosphorylation of ITAMs present within the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor ( as is the case with Fc c RIIA and Fc c RIIC ) , or in an associated FcR common c - chain ( as with Fc c RI and Fc c RI - IIA ) ( 30 ) . ITAM phosphorylation is carried out , in part , by Src - family kinases ( Lyn , Lck , and Hck speciﬁcally ) , creating a docking site for the SH2 domains of the tyrosine kinase Syk ( 30 ) , which can itself phosphorylate neighboring ITAM tyrosines . Emanating signaling cascades result in the activa - tion of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) , phospholipase C ( PLC ) , and exchange factors that activate GTPases to collectively drive phagocytosis ( 31 ) . Engagement of the inhibitory Fc c RIIB results in the recruitment of the SH2 domain - containing inositol 5 0 - phosphatase ( SHIP ) to the plasma membrane , opposing the activating signal by converting the PI3K product phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - tris - phosphate [ PtdIns ( 3 – 5 ) P 3 ] into phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 - bis - phosphate [ PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ] ( 32 ) . The balance between activating and inhibitory Fc c recep - tors has a signiﬁcant impact on phagocytosis . Indeed , dele - tion of Fc c RIIB increases phagocytosis of IgG - coated targets ( 33 ) and exacerbates autoantibody - induced arthritis ( 34 ) . Because activating and inhibitory Fc c Rs share the same ligands , the balance of their responses is largely deter - mined by the expression levels of the different receptors . How the expression of the inhibitory Fc c RIIB is controlled is not completely understood , but cytokines such as IL - 33 and IL - 4 increase its expression ( 35 ) . Interestingly , cells residing in the marginal zone of the spleen , positioned to directly sense circulating antibodies , have been implicated in IL - 33 release upon binding glycosylated IgG via the lec - tin receptor DC - SIGN ( 28 , 35 ) . Glycosylation of antibodies may therefore tune the interaction between macrophages and adaptive immune cells by controlling Fc c RIIB expres - sion . Dectin - 1 and fungal pathogens The cell wall of fungi is composed of glucans , mannans , glycoproteins , and chitin . To meet the challenge of the wide array of fungal pathogens , macrophages express a set of C - type lectin receptors ( CLRs ) that recognize , engage , and facilitate their phagocytosis . CLRs are a type of pattern - rec - ognition receptor that bind carbohydrate structures ( 36 ) . Dectin - 1 is one such CLR that binds b - 1 , 3 - glucans ( 16 ) . Dectin - 1 is a member of the group II CLRs , deﬁned as cal - cium - dependent lectins with a single carbohydrate - recogni - tion domain . Also found within this group are the Dectin - 2 GPCR extended integrin bent integrin RapGTP Talin RapL RacGTP V i n c u l i n RIAM PLC branchedactin polymerization CalDAG EPAC cAMP dynamicmembrane TLRs ( e . g . TLR4 ) extended integrin RapGTP Talin RapL MyD88 PI3K PIP 3 RacGTP V i n c u l i n RIAM WAVE complex Arp2 / 3 complex dynamicmembrane A B Fig . 2 . Receptor priming for phagocytic encounters . ( A ) Integrins , including Mac - 1 / CR3 , undergo inside - out activation in response to GPCR stimulation that in turn activates Rap . The Rap GEFs — CalDAG and Epac — are activated by second messengers , DAG and cAMP , respectively . Active ( GTP - bound ) Rap recruits the effectors RapL and RIAM / talin that disrupt interactions between integrin subunits . GPCRs also activate Rac GTPases to stimulate Arp2 / 3 nucleation via the WAVE regulatory complex , leading to dynamic membrane rufﬂing . ( B ) TLR ligands rapidly activate Rap and Rac GTPases , leading to the inside - out activation of integrins and dynamic membrane rufﬂing , respectively . TLR , Toll - like receptor ; GPCR , G protein - coupled receptor ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; RIAM , Rap1 - GTP - interacting adapter molecule . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 197 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton family of CLRs ( Dectin - 2 , Mincle , CLECSF8 , and CLEC5A ) ( 36 , 37 ) . While all members of the family are likely impor - tant , Dectin - 1 has gained particular attention , as human deﬁciencies result in increased susceptibility to fungal infec - tions ( 38 , 39 ) . In addition to their dissimilar chemical composition , the geometry and ﬂexibility of the cell wall of individual fungi inﬂuence their recognition by Dectin - family CLRs . Opportunistic fungal pathogens have diverse geometry ( e . g . spherical versus ﬁlamentous ) , and their cell wall can be dis - continuous , depending on the stage of growth . These parame - ters affect the exposure of b - 1 , 3 - glucans . Accordingly , Dectin - 1 responds to b - 1 , 3 - glucans on zymosan particles and spherical C . albicans , but not ﬁlamentous C . albicans ( 40 , 41 ) ; some degree of cell wall deformation is required for Dectin - 1 to access its ligand ( 40 , 42 ) . Src - family kinases ( SFKs ) and Syk are also instrumental in triggering phagocytosis via Dectin - type CLRs . Dectin - 1 con - tains an ITAM - like motif within its cytoplasmic domain , able to directly recruit Syk , while Dectin - 2 and Mincle require association with the ITAM - containing Fc c chain , and CLEC5A associates with DAP12 ( 36 , 37 , 43 ) . As with Fc receptors , some CLRs contain inhibitory ITIMs in their cyto - plasmic domain and recruit inhibitory phosphatases includ - ing SHP1 and SHP2 ( 36 ) . As is the case for other phagocytic receptors , Dectin - fam - ily members are thought to activate in response to lateral clustering . It is therefore puzzling that soluble b - 1 , 3 - glu - cans , which are multivalent ligands , are nevertheless ineffec - tive as stimuli ( 41 ) . One possible explanation is that macrophages engaging particulate fungi form a ‘phagocytic synapse’ ( 41 ) . This structure has been likened to the de novo contacts formed between lymphocytes and APCs , called immune synapses ( 44 ) . Dectin - 1 accumulates at sites of contact between macrophages and yeast , and this coincides with the exclusion from the same region of the CD45 and CD148 phosphatases ( 41 ) . CD45 and CD148 can dephos - phorylate the activating tyrosine residue of SFKs , and their exclusion from the activation zone may therefore sustain and amplify Dectin - 1 signaling ( 41 ) . Integrins , complement , and mechanosensing Integrins are heterodimeric cell adhesion molecules com - prised of combinations of one a - and one b - subunit , of which there are 18 and 8 types respectively , collectively forming 24 different heterodimers ( 45 , 46 ) . Several inte - grins have been implicated in phagocytosis ( Table 1 ) . Of these , a M b 2 ( also known as Mac - 1 or CR3 ) has been stud - ied most extensively ; it was shown to be remarkably pro - miscuous , capable of binding at least 30 different ligands , including plastic ! As a result , unlike the more speciﬁc recep - tors exempliﬁed above , a M b 2 can mediate the phagocytosis of both opsonized and non - opsonized targets ( 47 , 48 ) . This feature is shared by other integrins , whose ligand selectivity therefore can overlap extensively ; for example , both a M b 2 and a X b 2 ( CR4 ) can bind iC3b , ﬁbrinogen , ICAM , and denatured proteins ( Table 1 ) . In addition to detecting opsonized and unopsonized for - eign particles , integrins are also essential for the removal of apoptotic corpses ( efferocytosis ) ( 49 , 50 ) . Interestingly , in - tegrins such as a v b 3 and a v b 5 do not bind the apoptotic cells directly , but instead use bifunctional molecules like milk fat - globule EGF factor 8 ( MFG - E8 ) ( 51 ) , or develop - mental endothelial locus - 1 ( Del - 1 ) ( 52 ) as bridging adapters ( Table 1 ) . The importance of integrins in efferocytosis is becoming increasingly apparent : inability to remove apopto - tic cells efﬁciently can cause systemic lupus erythematosus , and deﬁciencies in integrin ligands ( 53 ) , as well as integrin polymorphisms ( 54 – 56 ) , are associated with increased risk of lupus . Integrins exist in active and inactive conﬁgurations . In their bent conformation , integrins have a closed headpiece that is unable to bind ligands ( 57 ) . Destabilization of the bent conformation and interaction of the transmembrane domain of the a and b subunits favor integrin extension , headpiece opening and exposure of the ligand - binding site ( 57 – 59 ) . These conformational changes , which are required for activation , are brought about by ‘inside - out’ signaling ( 60 ) . Various inside - out activation pathways exist , such as those involving Epac ( exchange proteins directly activated by cAMP ) and CalDAG ( calcium and diacylglycerol - regulated guanine nucleotide exchange factor I ) . All , however , con - verge at one critical node : the stimulation of Rap GTPases , master regulators of integrin activation ( Fig . 2 ) . Once acti - vated and engaged , integrins mediate outside - in signaling and phagocytosis . In the case of a M b 2 - mediated phagocyto - sis , Rho - family GTPases are stimulated and are ultimately required for the actin polymerization and myosin - based contractility that drive particle internalization ( 61 , 62 ) . Para - doxically , active integrins also stimulate Rap ( 63 ) , generat - ing a positive feedback loop connecting outside - in with inside - out signaling . By linking the tail of their b subunit to the cytoskeleton , active integrins can also act as mechanosensors , relaying biophysical information about the target and potentially generating additional feedback loops ( 21 ) . In this regard , it © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 198 Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton is noteworthy that particle deformability , measured by Young’s modulus , varies greatly between animal cells , including apoptotic corpses ( approximately 1 kPa ) ( 64 ) , and rigid foreign objects like bacteria ( > 100 MPa ) ( 65 , 66 ) . It is therefore conceivable that mechanosensing via integrins may serve to distinguish self from non - self . Scavenger receptors , jack - of - all - trades in phagocytosis Scavenger receptors , originally identiﬁed by their ability to recognize and remove modiﬁed lipoproteins , also contribute to the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells and pathogens . They are structurally diverse and , as a result , recognize a wide variety of ligands that include danger - associated molecular patterns , including the modiﬁed lipoproteins , and various sorts of exogenous ligands ( 67 ) ( Table 1 ) . Because they were deﬁned based on functional features , it is hardly surprising that scavenger receptors are structurally heterogeneous . They are divided into eight subclasses , and several of these likely participate in pathogen phagocytosis , as they have the ability to bind Gram - positive and Gram - negative bacteria . These include Class A ( SR - A1 , MARCO , SRCL ) , Class B ( SCARB1 , CD36 ) , Class E ( LOX1 ) , Class F ( SCARF1 ) , Class G ( CXCL16 ) , and Class H ( Stabilin - 1 , Stabilin - 2 ) ( 67 ) . Some members of these classes also interact with apoptotic bodies and hence take part in efferocytosis . While their competence to bind ligands has been well established , it is less clear whether engagement of scavenger receptors sufﬁces to initiate phagocytosis . They may serve as co - receptors , acting in conjunction with integrins , and / or may act synergistically with TLRs to prime the activation of other bona ﬁde phagocytic receptors ( 68 , 69 ) . Receptors : conﬁnement and mobility Because they are activated in response to clustering , phago - cytic receptors must be able to move laterally in the plane of the membrane . This would not be regarded as an impedi - ment in the context of the ﬂuid mosaic model , which pre - dicts that embedded proteins — like receptors — undergo free ( Brownian ) two - dimensional diffusion along the bilayer . However , it is now appreciated that the situation is far more complex and that the mobility of transmembrane proteins is restricted by tethering or by the presence of diffusional barriers ( 70 ) ( Fig . 1 ) . Tethering is thought to involve direct , stable association of transmembrane proteins with the underlying membrane - associated cytoskeleton ( MSk ) , a comparatively stable actin - based mesh closely apposed to the plasmalemmal bilayer . Even when not directly linked to the MSk , membrane proteins and even lipids experience its inﬂuence indirectly . The immobilized tethered proteins and their tightly associated boundary lipids act as stationary ‘pickets’ that obstruct the free passage of unattached mole - cules , limiting their mobility ( 70 , 71 ) . The arrangement of the pickets can be such that conﬁnement zones are gener - ated , which preclude the escape of proteins from within the fenced - in area for extended periods of time . Some molecules cross the boundary between conﬁnement zones more quickly ( within microseconds ) , a process that has been termed ‘hop - diffusion’ ( 71 ) . The net result of these modes of attachment and conﬁnement is a 20 - to > 50 - fold decrease in the diffusion rate of membrane proteins ( 70 ) , compared to that experienced by similar proteins reconstituted in a pure lipid bilayer , i . e . a ﬂuid mosaic . The presence of a diffusion - limiting cytoskeletal mesh has several implications from the perspective of phagocytic receptors . By curtailing their mobility , the MSk can limit the spontaneous aggregation of unoccupied ( and hence unstimulated ) receptors , acting as a ‘safety’ to prevent pre - mature and inappropriate receptor triggering ( 72 – 74 ) . However , inability of the receptors to cross boundaries suf - ﬁciently rapidly when exposed to multivalent ligands could detract from their ability to cluster and respond . This liabil - ity can be counteracted in various ways . If the density of receptors within the zone sculpted by the MSk is high , their co - conﬁnement can promote collisions and meta - sta - ble interactions , which could in fact increase sensitivity ( 75 ) . Indeed , immune receptors including the TCR ( 76 ) , BCR ( 73 ) , and Fc e RI ( 77 , 78 ) form nanoclusters that are believed to lower the threshold of responsiveness toward multivalent ligands ( 79 , 80 ) . Moreover , the structure of the MSk , and hence the mobility of receptors , can be altered by stimulation of regulatory pathways or by the im - munoreceptors themselves . Agonists that promote cytoskele - tal remodeling can prime the phagocytic response by facilitating receptor mobilization and coalescence . An extreme case is that of integrins , which in quiescent phago - cytes are largely conﬁned . Measurements of a M b 2 mobility by ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching revealed that nearly 80 % of the integrin was immobile in untreated cells ( 81 ) . A striking increase in mobility was observed when the cells were treated with agents , like phorbol esters , known to prime the phagocytic response ( 81 ) . In addition , the initial ligation of a small number of phagocytic recep - tors could itself promote cytoskeletal reorganization , enhancing the mobility of adjacent unengaged receptors , thereby initiating a positive feedback cascade . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 199 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton The concepts described above are summarized in schematic form in Fig . 1 . Fig . 1A illustrates the conﬁning effect of the actin - based MSk , which in resting cells constrains the lateral displacement of phagocytic receptors by tethering or by trap - ping them within corrals delimited by picket fences . In Fig . 1B , addition of a priming agent has caused remodeling of the MSk , possibly by conversion from a rigid formin - depen - dent mesh to a more open and dynamic Arp2 / 3 - dependent structure . The resulting discontinuities in the mesh enable fas - ter and longer range displacement of the receptors that will more effectively contact and cluster underneath the ligands on the target particle . The mobility of the receptors then decreases drastically as they attach to the multivalent particle and become tethered to cytoskeletal elements generated locally de novo by the stimulation process ( Fig . 1C ) . Sequestra - tion of actin by the ligated receptors may liberate unengaged receptors in the vicinity , increasing their mobility and ability to merge with the cluster . Signal integration : receptor crosstalk As intimated in the ﬁrst section , phagocytes are rarely exposed to a single stimulus , but are instead confronted with heterogeneous particles bearing multiple types of ligands . Moreover , the phagocytes encounter soluble ligands that impinge on other , non - phagocytic receptors , which nevertheless affect the outcome of the response . The com - plexities arising from such sequential or coincident receptor activation , designated generically as crosstalk , are the subject of the following section . Receptor crosstalk can result in priming , i . e . an improve - ment in the readiness to perform phagocytosis induced by prior exposure to environmental factors . In addition , simul - taneous engagement of multiple receptors at the time of phagocytosis can either synergize or antagonize the response . Antagonistic crosstalk , particularly signals that antagonize TLRs , was recently reviewed ( 82 ) , and we there - fore address priming and synergy crosstalk in more detail below . Priming We deﬁne priming as any conditions or events that facilitate the interaction of phagocytic receptors with their targets . Three distinct modes of priming are entertained in this sec - tion : one refers to the unmasking and stabilization of cryptic ligand - binding sites of receptors ; the second deals with the increased lateral mobility of receptors in the plane of the membrane , and the third with the increased probability of encountering a particle , stemming from the extension , and movement of cellular protrusions bearing receptors . Exposure and stabilization of ligand - binding sites The phagocytic integrins — typically a M b 2 — best illustrate priming by enhanced exposure of binding sites . A number of inﬂammatory stimuli , the effects of which can be conve - niently mimicked by phorbol esters , promote the transition of the integrins from a bent ( closed ) conformation to an extended ( open ) conformation ( 59 , 83 ) . The closed , low - afﬁnity state of integrins is maintained by interactions between the transmembrane domains of their a and b subunits ( 59 ) and can be destabilized by binding of stimula - tory proteins to the integrin cytoplasmic tails . In macro - phages , potential destabilizers ( i . e . activators ) include talin and RapL , which are both recruited to integrins by active Rap GTPases ( 84 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . Talin contains an N - terminal 4 . 1 / ezrin / radixin / moesin ( FERM ) head domain that binds the cytoplasmic tail of b - integrin subunits , and a C - terminal helical rod domain with actin - binding regions as well as several sites capable of binding F - actin adapters ( 85 , 86 ) . The head domain of talin is sufﬁcient to prime integrins for ligand binding by disrupting the interaction between their transmembrane domains ( 87 – 89 ) . The recruitment of talin to integrins requires the activation of Rap GTPases . In its active state , Rap1 binds and recruits the effector Rap1 - GTP - interacting adapter molecule ( RIAM ) , an adapter that brings talin to integrins ( 59 ) . Rap1 / talin can also mediate the acti - vation of a M b 2 by RIAM - independent mechanisms that have not been fully elucidated ( 90 , 91 ) . Rap1 - GTP also binds RapL , a small effector mostly com - prised of a Ras - association domain . RapL binds to the a sub - unit of integrins ( Fig . 2 ) and has been implicated in the activation of a M b 2 ( 92 ) , although it is not clear whether it is required for the initial conformational extension step . Instead , RapL may function to stabilize the open conﬁgura - tion of the integrin , perhaps in a manner akin to kindlins . Like talin , kindlins contain a FERM domain and interact with integrins yet do not appear to prime them in the same fash - ion ( 86 , 93 ) . Kindlins are not required for the initial inte - grin extension but rather promote the clustering of activated heterodimers ( 94 ) . The priming of integrins invariably requires the activation of Rap GTPases ( Fig . 2 ) , and constitutive activation of Rap sufﬁces to induce target binding and phagocytosis . Rap - spe - ciﬁc guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( Rap GEFs ) are tar - gets of stimulation by GPCRs and also by TLRs , constituting © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 200 Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton a critical node in the crosstalk between these receptors and the integrins ( 95 ) . The best characterized Rap GEFs are Epac1 and Epac2 , and CalDAG ( 96 ) . As the name implies , Epac is activated by cAMP , the quintessential second messen - ger , produced from ATP by adenylyl cyclase ( 96 ) . cAMP is rapidly generated upon stimulation of several GPCRs , including some chemokine receptors ( Fig . 2A ) . CalDAG is activated by a different second messenger , namely diacyl - glycerol , produced primarily by PLC - catalyzed cleavage of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( 96 ) . While PLC also can be activated by GPCRs , this arm of the Rap GTPase activation sequence is more often stimulated by engagement of immune receptors . Indeed , cross - linking macrophage Fc c receptors activates Rap and thereby increases the binding of complement - ops - onized targets , in a diacylglycerol - dependent manner ( 97 ) . Lastly , stimulation of TLRs also leads to a robust activation of Rap in macrophages ( 95 , 98 ) . The mechanism connect - ing TLRs to Rap - GTP is not entirely understood , but appears to involve the activation of Epac1 by cAMP ( 99 , 100 ) . In summary , Rap - GTP functions as a master regulator of integrin activation and as a node for receptor crosstalk , translating the input of TLR , immunoreceptor , and chemoki - ne receptor signals to prime phagocytosis by integrins . Conformational extension and stabilization of the open con - ﬁguration of the integrins account for the observed priming ( Fig . 2A , B ) . Increased receptor mobility Like other transmembrane proteins , phagocytic receptors are conﬁned by the cytoskeletal picket fence . This has been vali - dated for Fc c R , CD36 , and integrins ( 75 , 101 – 103 ) and is most likely to apply to other types of phagocytic receptors as well . To the extent that their mobility is restricted , prim - ing could conceivably enhance their binding efﬁciency by improving the ability of the receptors to diffuse in the membrane . This seems to be the case for the phagocytic integrins . As discussed above , integrins have very limited mobility in unstimulated phagocytes . The cytoskeletal struc - tures that maintain the diffusion - limiting fences , however , can be modiﬁed by priming agents , facilitating the escape of integrins ( Fig . 1 ) . Remarkably , the same cytokines and TLR agonists that induce inside - out activation of the integrins also cause rearrangement of the cortical skeleton ( 104 ) , fostering greater integrin mobility ( 103 ) . A sizable fraction of Fc c Rs was also found to be conﬁned in macrophages ( 101 ) , a feature shared by other immunore - ceptors . In B lymphocytes , for instance , the BCR has similarly restricted motion ( 73 ) . In the latter system , pre - treatment with TLR agonists reduced the fraction of conﬁned receptors and increased BCR diffusion overall ( SF , SG , Michael Gold , unpublished observations ) . This in turn allowed more frequent collisions between BCRs resulting in greater signaling , particularly in response to low densities of membrane - bound antigen . While not documented directly , it is most likely that a similar priming effect would be exerted by TLR agonists on Fc c R , accounting , at least in part , for the potentiating effect of LPS on the phagocytosis of ops - onized targets ( 105 ) . Generation of membrane protrusions To maximize efﬁciency , most experimental models of phagocytosis involve exposure of the phagocytes to large numbers of particles , which are often forcibly sedimented onto the surface of the cells by centrifugation . While effec - tive and convenient , this paradigm is not a faithful recon - struction of the in vivo situation , where the density of targets is much lower and their likelihood of randomly colliding with the surface of the phagocyte ( and hence of becoming attached to phagocytic receptors ) must be considerably smaller . To overcome this limitation , macrophages and DCs continuously emit membrane protrusions that make encoun - ters with target particles much more likely ( 101 , 104 , 106 ) ( Fig . 2B ) . This surveillance activity is driven by the actin cytoskeleton and underlies also the macropinocytosis that myeloid cells use to sample the environment for the pres - ence of antigens ( 107 ) . The signals that initiate and sustain the ‘basal’ rufﬂing of macrophages and DCs have not been identiﬁed , but endoge - nous secretion of autocrine / paracrine mediators or the interaction of integrins with the substratum are possibilities . Regardless of the source of the basal activity , it is well docu - mented that a variety of soluble agonists can accentuate the rufﬂing and ﬂailing greatly . They include GPCR ligands , TLR agonists , and growth factors like M - CSF ( 104 , 108 ) . Not surprisingly , these agonists concomitantly increase the phag - ocytic efﬁciency of the cells , an effect that should be more apparent at low target density . In summary , phagocytes are often better prepared to engulf their targets when exposed in advance to deﬁned sol - uble environmental factors . Remarkably , priming factors such as GPCR or TLR ligands operate via multiple , additive mechanisms : they expose ligand - binding sites on the phag - ocytic receptors , enable the receptors to move more freely to promote their clustering , and bring the receptors into © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 201 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton physical contact with the particles by stimulating the cells to extend protrusions that probe the immediate environ - ment . Synergy While priming was described above as exerted by environ - mental factors prior to the phagocytic event , we deﬁne synergism as the supralinear cooperativity of two or more phagocytic receptors or co - receptors occurring at the time of particle engagement . There is abundant evidence docu - menting this phenomenon : parallel ligation of multiple receptor types by the same target particle increases the sensitivity of detection , the phagocytic efﬁciency , and the production of pro - inﬂammatory cytokines ( 109 ) . We envis - age three different modes of synergy : cooperative target binding , alteration of the mobility of one receptor by engagement of another , and convergent signaling pathways . These are brieﬂy described in turn below . Cooperativity in binding : afﬁnity and avidity To engulf and kill pathogens effectively , phagocytes must have the ability to ensnare targets that contact the mem - brane only ﬂeetingly . This is accomplished by tuning opti - mally the afﬁnity and avidity of the receptors . Merely increasing the afﬁnity of the receptors for their ligands is not always a suitable strategy to secure the targets . A case in point is that of IgG - opsonized particles : the soluble mono - meric opsonin ( IgG ) is present in serum at a very high con - centration ( (cid:3) 10 mg / mL ) , and , if the receptor afﬁnity was high , monomeric IgG would occupy virtually all the recep - tor sites , competitively precluding the binding of opsonized phagocytic targets . For this reason , the simultaneous detec - tion of multiple ligands on a single target evolved as the means of selectively and effectively securing particulate targets . The integrated , overall strength of all the ongoing interactions , or avidity , is therefore an important counter - part to the afﬁnity of the association . The avidity of an interaction is normally thought of as proportional to the number of copies of a single receptor type engaged at a time . In the context of phagocytosis , however , myriad different receptors exist and physiological targets expose a wide variety of ligands . This raises the pos - sibility of combined avidity , conferred by simultaneous engagement of multiple , unrelated receptor types . Thus , a pathogen exposed to serum is likely to be recognized con - comitantly by pattern - recognition receptors like Dectin , by immunoglobulin receptors , and also by receptors of comple - ment deposited on its surface , thereby becoming ﬁrmly and rapidly secured by the phagocyte . Synergism between different receptors is not only mani - fested as increased avidity ; afﬁnity changes can also result from interactions between receptors and / or co - receptors . An archetypal example is provided by TIM - 4 , a phosphatidylser - ine receptor that is a major contributor to the uptake of apoptotic bodies by macrophages ( 110 , 111 ) . Because the cytosolic tail of this receptor is dispensable for phagocytosis ( 17 ) , it was proposed that its primary function is not in sig - naling , but to tether phosphatidylserine - coated particles to the surface , so that other receptors with lower afﬁnity can subsequently signal internalization ( 112 ) . Whether TIM - 4 acts solely as a tether or forms a co - receptor complex with integrins is the subject of debate ( 18 ) , but it is clear that this phosphatidylserine receptor cooperates with other phag - ocytic receptors in a synergistic manner . Bona ﬁde co - receptor function , i . e . the physical association of two putative receptor molecules with resulting improve - ment in afﬁnity , has been documented in a few instances . Early studies demonstrated the close interaction between Fc receptors and integrins by co - immunoprecipitation and also by FRET ( 113 ) . A close functional and physical association between CD36 with integrins has also been established ( 68 ) ( Fig . 3A ) ; CD36 also interacts closely with TLRs which , though not considered phagocytic on their own , seem to potentiate the function of CD36 ( 69 , 114 ) . Altered receptor mobility The lateral mobility of phagocytic receptors can be altered not only by priming agents prior to confrontation with the targets but also by other phagocytic receptors at the time of phagocytosis . The outcome can be synergy or antagonism , depending on the nature of the mobility change : immobili - zation of receptors in the thick actin mesh may constrain their mobility and curtail their activation and vice versa . In very few instances has the mobility of one phagocytic receptor been determined while another is engaged . The mobility of integrins increased when Fc c Rs were engaged , suggesting that remodeling of the cytoskeleton occurred at sites remote from the phagocytic cup ( 81 ) . Interestingly , the converse interaction has also been documented : the state of activation of integrins inﬂuences the degree of conﬁne - ment of Fc c R ( 102 ) ( Fig . 3B ) . The latter interaction was described for cells at rest , where integrins were attached to © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 202 Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton the substratum , rather than to a phagocytic target ( 102 ) ; whether this paradigm also applies to integrins binding complement or other phagocytic determinants remains to be determined . It is noteworthy , however , that the effects of adherent integrins were mediated by SFK and Syk and that integrins have been shown to modulate actin dynamics via these kinases in activated neutrophils and platelets ( 115 , 116 ) . We therefore consider it likely that this form of syn - ergy exists also between integrins and Fc c R , and indeed between other receptors , at the time of phagocytosis . Non - linear additivity of signaling Considering the random ﬂuctuations of many biochemical reactions , there is a potential risk of triggering untimely and potentially detrimental responses . Nature has mini - mized the occurrence of such undesirable responses by implementing safety devices , notably coincidence detection of two or more simultaneous inputs , essential for initiation of the signaling event . Because neither input is sufﬁcient to trigger the response when applied in isolation , the net result of the coincident stimulation is supralinear . Examples of this paradigm abound : several protein kinase C isoforms require not only diacylglycerol but also the availability of calcium and anionic lipids to become active ; targeting of proteins to speciﬁc organelles involves multiple determi - nants , such as phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate and ubiqui - tylated proteins in the case of Hrs recruitment to early endosomes , or hydrophobic and polyanionic domains for K - Ras binding to the plasmalemma ; and optimal gene tran - scription frequently requires the simultaneous presence of several transactivators . The principle of coincidence signaling underlies much of the synergy between phagocytic receptors ( Fig . 3C ) . The ability of different receptor types to unleash distinct signal - ing pathways often promotes their convergence in an inte - grator molecule or event that will amplify the output . An important example of such synergistic signaling is the con - comitant engagement of Fc receptors as well as integrins to remodel the actin cytoskeleton ( Fig . 3C ) , an event that occurs whenever targets are opsonized by immune serum . The remainder of this article discusses this point of integra - tion in detail . The actin cytoskeleton of phagocytes Phagocytosis necessitates remodeling of the actin cytoskele - ton to drive controlled , extensive deformation of the plasma membrane . The process is extremely complex but , for didactic purposes , can be envisaged as a series of deﬁned steps . Because the shape and tension of the resting phago - cyte are stabilized by a membrane - associated cortical cyto - skeleton , the ﬁrst step of phagocytosis requires its disruption . This disruption serves two functions : it releases G - actin monomers for incorporation into new ﬁlaments and increases the mobility of non - ligated receptors and phos - oxPS P I T A M P I T A M P P SFK Syk γ−γ α v β 3 CD36 MFG - E8 Apoptotic cell SFK FAK Rac branchedactin polymerization myosin engaged integrin Syk ? Fc receptors ( e . g . Fc γ RIIA ) actin dynamics receptor mobility P I T A M I T A M P P P Rap Talin RapL Syk PI3K Rac V i n c u l i n RIAM PLC DOCK180 p130Cas SFK Syk WAVE complex Vav SFKFAK Grb2 Gab2 C3G Crk ELMO RhoA Arp2 / 3 complex branchedactin polymerization myosin mDia linear , processiveactin polymerization Fc γ RIIA CR3 / Mac - 1 C3bi IgG Opsonized target A B C Fig . 3 . Receptor synergy during phagocytosis . ( A ) The cooperative engagement of apoptotic cells is achieved by CD36 , which binds oxidized PS , and integrins that bind PS - bridging proteins , including MFG - E8 . Signaling by integrins to the actin cytoskeleton at sites of apoptotic corpse engagement involves Rac activation , and completion of internalization requires myosin . Integrins may also recruit ITAM - containing adapters like the common Fc c chain or DAP12 . ( B ) The engagement of integrins increases the mobility of Fc c RIIA and possibly other receptors via largely undetermined mechanisms , though activation of Src - family and Syk kinases has been implicated . ( C ) Signaling by multiple receptors , engaged by the same target particle , can be additive . Engagement of ITAM - containing Fc receptors activates Rap GTPases leading to inside - out activation of integrins . Engaged integrin can further activate Rap as well as Rho - family GTPases . Collectively , this leads to both branched and linear actin polymerization . ITAM , immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 203 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton phatases . The second step is the nucleation of actin ﬁla - ments to initiate F - actin polymerization and extension of pseudopodia . The ﬁnal steps in phagocytosis are the closure of the phagosome and actin depolymerization from the base of the phagocytic cup . Each of these theoretical steps requires the precise temporal and spatial activation and inac - tivation of multiple proteins that govern F - actin dynamics . These mechanisms are discussed below and outlined in Fig . 4 . The resting actin cytoskeleton The polymerization of actin ﬁlaments is only favorable upon formation of an actin trimer or nucleus . Cells use three classes of actin - binding proteins to overcome this rate - limiting step : formins , Arp2 / 3 , and those with tandem WH2 ( WASp - homology 2 ) domains , including Spire , Cordon - bleu , and Leiomodin ( 117 ) . The stimulation of Arp2 / 3 and formins requires Rho - family GTPases , and while these are activated by extracellular factors , a dense healthy cytoskeleton is neverthe - less apparent in ‘resting’ phagocytes . Even in the absence of acute stimulation , however , macrophages and other phago - cytes constantly receive and interpret signals from soluble agonists ( e . g . growth factors and cytokines ) that are continu - ously present and from adhesive ligands , and sense also shear force . The totality of these inputs imparts on the ‘resting’ phagocyte cytoskeleton a balance between cortical F - actin , membrane rufﬂing , and formation of ﬁlopodia and podo - somes ( Fig . 4A ) . How tandem WH2 nucleators contribute to the macrophage actin cytoskeleton is completely unknown , however , recent evidence suggests that this class of nucleators function in concert with formins ( 118 ) . The layer of cortical actin most closely apposed to the membrane does not display the high degree of branching observed in rufﬂes or lamellipodia and is most likely under - pinned by ﬁlaments generated by formins ( 119 , 120 ) . For - mins are a major class of actin nucleators that generate unbranched ﬁlaments ( 121 , 122 ) . They are highly con - served through evolution , particularly in their formin homology 1 and 2 ( FH1 and FH2 ) domains . Mammalian cells express up to 15 different formins ( 120 ) . Formins are activated by Rho GTPases and dimerize to bind with high afﬁnity to barbed ends of existing ﬁlaments , but dimers are also sufﬁcient to catalyze nucleation without a pre - existing ﬁlament . Each half of the FH2 domain dimer can bind two actin subunits within an F - actin polymer , while the C - termi - nal FH1 domains can each bind a proﬁlin - bound actin monomer . The region between the FH2 and FH1 domains is considered to be highly ﬂexible , allowing for FH1 domains to deliver actin monomers to the growing ﬁlament . As new subunits of actin are added to the actin ﬁlament , the formin dimer moves step - wise toward the growing end . Because of this mechanism , formins are considered to be processive actin - nucleation proteins ( 120 ) . An additional consequence of their association with the barbed end is that formins prevent the binding of capping proteins that would otherwise stop the polymerization reaction ( 123 ) . In macro - phages , formins are not only required for the formation of the cortical F - actin layer but are also instrumental in gener - ating podosomes and ﬁlopodia ( 120 , 124 ) . While monocytes in circulation are fairly spherical , mac - rophages and DCs in tissues exhibit rufﬂes prior to phagocy - tosis . These are rich in branched actin and their formation involves Arp2 / 3 . Arp2 / 3 is a protein complex consisting of seven proteins ( Arp2 , Arp3 , and ARPC1 - 5 ) that nucleates branched actin ﬁlaments from the side of an existing mother ﬁlament , using structural mimicry ( 117 ) . Arp2 and Arp3 , when bound to an actin monomer , structurally resemble an actin trimer . The assembly of these proteins is stimulated by the N - terminal VCA ( verprolin - homology , central , acidic ) domain of the WASp - family of nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) , speciﬁcally WASp , N - WASp , WAVE , WASH , and WHAMM . The stimulation process requires two VCA domains : the ﬁrst to bring Arp2 / 3 out of the bulk cyto - plasm and onto a mother ﬁlament , and the second to recruit Fig . 4 . Stages of the cytoskeleton remodeling process during phagocytosis . ( A ) Before macrophages encounter phagocytic targets , actin - based membrane structures exist that include membrane rufﬂes , ﬁlopodia , and podosomes . Rufﬂes and ﬁlopodia serve to survey the environment for phagocytic targets . The nucleators ( red ) , nucleation - promoting factors ( green ) , and GTPases ( purple ) that control F - actin are indicated . ( B ) Upon engagement of target particles , networks of F - actin may be debranched by coronins or GMF c and severed by coﬁlin and gelsolin - family proteins . ( C ) Upon engagement of ITAM - containing Fc c Rs , Nck , Gab2 , and Grb2 bind phosphorylated ITAMs or Syk to recruit N - WASp / WASp . WASp is activated by Cdc42 , PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , and by phosphorylation by Hck . CR3 / Mac - 1 engagement by C3bi activates RhoA and Rap , stimulating mDia - mediated polymerization . Active Rap is sufﬁcient to rescue CR3 - mediated phagocytosis in the absence of RhoA , acting through a number of effectors ( blue ) that stimulate actin polymerization . Vav1 / 3 activation of Rac may also be important in CR3 - mediated phagocytosis . ( D ) F - actin clearance from the base of the nascent phagosome is PI3K dependent and is required for endomembrane delivery to the base of the cup . PtdIns ( 3 – 5 ) P 3 may recruit GAPs to inactivate Rho GTPases . The recruitment of myosins is also PI3K dependent and serves to form a purse - string like , tight apposition to the target and may also control G - actin ﬂow by propelling cytoplasm to the tips of pseudopodia . ITAM , immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation ; GMF c , glial maturation factor c . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 204 Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton Dynamic probing Cortical F - actin disruption F - actin nucleation , polymerization Termination of polymerization , phagosome sealing Lateralmobility of receptors a b c d Fc γ R CR3 / Mac - 1 A B C D mDia Rac RhoA corticalF - actin podosomes WAVE complex WASp Arp2 / 3 complex Arp2 / 3 complex mDia mDia Arp2 / 3 complex PSTPIP RhoA RhoA Cdc42 Arf6 WASp Arp2 / 3 complex gelsolin F - actin severing debranching barbed end G - actin coronin coronin PIP 3 PIP 2 PIP 2 Cdc42 CR3 / Mac - 1 Fc γ R mDia RhoA N - WASp / WASp PIP 2 Nck Grb2 Cdc42 Arp2 / 3 complex Hck pY Gab2 Vav AF6 Rap Rac myosin hydrostaticpressuregradient myosin Rho GAPs ? endomembrane delivery F - actin clearance Arp2 / 3 complex PI3K © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 205 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton an actin monomer to the branch junction ( 125 , 126 ) . Although all WASp - family NPFs use the same mechanism for actin polymerization , it is their site of action that speci - ﬁes their unique cellular function : some act at the mem - brane , while others affect trafﬁc in endosomes , the endoplasmic reticulum or the Golgi complex . The NPFs that are relevant to Arp2 / 3 recruitment and activation at the plasma membrane are primarily WASp , N - WASp , and WAVE . Macrophages express both WASp and N - WASp , the activ - ity of which is stimulated by Cdc42 - GTP ( 127 ) . WASp exists in an autoinhibited state , which is relieved upon asso - ciation of its GTPase - binding domain ( GBD ) with Cdc42 ( 128 , 129 ) . Its subcellular localization is driven by interac - tion between its polybasic region and plasmalemmal PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( 130 , 131 ) , and is inﬂuenced also by a number of receptors that bind SH3 domain - containing adapter proteins ( e . g . Nck , PSTPIP ) that recruit WASp via its proline - rich domains ( 132 ) . In macrophages , WASp is required for the formation of podosomes and ﬁlopodia ( 133 , 134 ) ( Fig . 4A ) . Macrophages also express WAVE1 and WAVE2 ( 108 ) , members of WASp family of NPFs that are constitutively found in a pentameric WAVE regulatory complex . The com - plex is comprised of Sra / Cyﬁp1 , Nap1 / Hem2 / Kette , Abi2 , HSPC300 / Brick1 , and WAVE / SCAR ( 135 ) . WAVE activity is inhibited by the sequestration of its VCA domain within the complex . The sequestered VCA domain is released when WAVE binds active Rac or Arf6 ( 136 , 137 ) , and upon phos - phorylation of the complex by Abl , Cdk5 , or ERK2 ( 138 ) . As in the case of WASp , WAVE is directed to the plasma membrane by phosphoinositides and also by adapters recruited by active receptors ( 137 , 139 – 141 ) . In macro - phages , the activation of WAVE by Rac or Arf6 is required for membrane rufﬂing ( 142 , 180 , 181 ) . Rac and RhoA signaling pathways generally oppose each other ( 143 – 145 ) . In broad strokes , the steady - state actin cytoskeleton may therefore be more branched and dynamic if the activation of Rac activation is greater than that of RhoA , which would prime the macrophages to better cap - ture phagocytic targets . Accordingly , LPS - or M - CSF - stimu - lated macrophages show increased Rac activity at the expense of RhoA , and this is associated with more elaborate and frequent membrane rufﬂing events . In summary , the forces shaping the resting cytoskeleton are numerous and complex . As a result , it is hardly surpris - ing that the structure of the skeleton is remarkably heteroge - neous . When visualized by high - resolution scanning electron microscopy , the macrophage cortical skeleton reveals a patch - quilt of regions with dense cytoskeleton interspersed with others almost devoid of ﬁlaments ( 102 ) . We suspect that the domains containing dense actin net - works are associated to high RhoA activation and that they correlate with zones of low receptor mobility . Whether branched and linear actin networks interact equally with the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane and with potential pickets is an interesting , unresolved question . If Arp2 / 3 - dri - ven branched networks deform the plasma membrane in perpendicular fashion , ﬁlaments may constitute weaker dif - fusion barriers and may even serve to disrupt conﬁnement zones delimited by formin - generated actin ﬁlaments lying parallel to the plane of the membrane . If this were indeed the case , the amount of F - actin would not be a sufﬁcient predictor of receptor mobility and its orientation and depen - dence on Rac , Cdc42 , and RhoA would be paramount . Disruption of cortical actin The F - actin networks that underpin the cytoskeleton of qui - escent macrophages need to be at least partly disassembled to allow the remodeling involved in the extension of pseu - dopodia around the target . Dismantling the resting F - actin networks also ‘opens the fences’ for receptors to diffuse lat - erally and aggregate more freely . There are two mechanisms to achieve F - actin disruption : ( i ) debranching and ( ii ) sever - ing of ﬁlaments ( Fig . 4B ) . After effecting nucleation the Arp2 / 3 complex remains as a scaffold between daughter and mother ﬁlaments . Proteins that interact with Arp2 / 3 to cause its destabilization from the branch junction are termed debranching proteins . The main debranching proteins known to function in phagocytes are the coronins . The coronin family consists of seven mem - bers , though coronin 1 is the only member shown to date to interact with F - actin and inhibit Arp2 / 3 in macrophages ( 146 ) . Coronins can synergize with actin - severing proteins ( described below ) causing the rapid , burst - like disassembly of branched actin networks ( 147 ) . The cooperative mecha - nism is thought to involve severing protein - enhanced ﬁla - ment ﬂexibility , which is propagated at a distance to the coronin - bound branch point ( 148 ) . Severing proteins effec - tively shake F - actin ‘trees’ to remove the coronin - weakened branches . Coronin 1 and 2 can also bind and activate sling - shot phosphatases to dephosphorylate coﬁlin ( discussed below ) , thereby increasing its severing activity ( 148 , 149 ) . Coronin 1 rapidly accumulates at the nascent phagosome during both Fc c R - and CR3 - mediated phagocytosis , suggest - ing its functional involvement ( 146 ) . Moreover , a dominant - negative form of coronin 1 decreases particle binding and © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 206 Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton impairs phagocytosis of bound particles in these cases ( 146 ) . However , whether coronin 1 is required for phagocytosis remains the subject of debate . While elimination of coronin 1 depresses phagocytosis in Dictyostelium ( 150 ) , phagocytosis is virtually unaffected in mammalian macrophages and neutrophils devoid of coronin 1 , suggesting redundancy in actin debranching ( 151 , 152 ) . Other F - actin debranching proteins have not been studied in phagocytosis , though one such protein , GMF c ( glial maturation factor c ) , would be a promising candidate ( 153 ) . Alternatively , F - actin severing may sufﬁce to disrupt the resting membrane skeleton in preparation for phagocytosis . Severing is the second major component of the actin disru - ption process . Severing proteins were originally identiﬁed as agents that acutely transformed the viscous , gel - like state of macrophage cell extracts to ﬂuid solutions ( 154 , 155 ) . This is attributed to the ability of severing proteins to decorate and increase the ﬂexibility of F - actin ﬁlaments , eventually leading to their fracture at a point where decoration is absent ( 156 ) . Filament severing results in the generation of barbed ends , preferred sites for Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation and for release of G - actin . Given their prominent role in ﬁlament recycling and in the creation of nucleation sites , severing proteins are essential for the Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization that changes cell shape ( 156 , 157 ) and can confer motility to bacteria and to vesicles in vivo and in vitro ( 158 , 159 ) . Indeed , at physiological concentrations of G - actin , ﬁlament severing results in a net increase in actin polymerization ( 156 ) . There are two main types of F - actin - severing proteins : the gelsolin family ( 154 ) and the coﬁlin family ( 160 ) . Their activity is controlled by modulating their association with ﬁlaments , or by sequestering them away from ﬁlaments by binding to phosphoinositides . Binding of gelsolin to F - actin is regulated positively by Ca 2 + and negatively by PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( 154 ) . The coﬁlin activity cycle is controlled through phosphorylation by LIM kinase and dephosphorylation by the slingshot family of phosphatases ( 161 ) . Coﬁlin is also negatively regulated by PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding ( 156 ) . Coﬁlin and gelsolin play complex roles in phagocytosis that have been insufﬁciently studied . As a result , our cur - rent understanding of their function is rather muddled . On one hand , gelsolin was found to localize to sites where the membrane makes contact with target particles and claimed to be required for their phagocytosis ( 162 ) . Similarly , the dephosphorylation and activation of coﬁlin were reported to be necessary for phagocytosis ( 163 , 164 ) . However , diametrically opposed conclusions were reached by others . Knockdown of either coﬁlin or gelsolin had no discernible effect on the phagocytosis of bacteria by Drosophila hemo - cytes ( 165 ) . Likewise , ablating coﬁlin in mammalian mac - rophages did not hinder phagocytosis in other studies ( 166 , 167 ) . We surmise that these conﬂicting results reﬂect in part the redundant function of the multiplicity of severing proteins . Indeed , there are eight known members of the gelsolin family : CapG , adseverin , gelsolin , ﬂightless I , advillin , villin , villin - like protein , and supervillin . The coﬁlin family has two members : coﬁlin and ADF ( actin depolymerization factor ) . While the relative contributions of coﬁlin and ADF were recently assessed in primary mac - rophages ( 168 ) , most gelsolin - family members have not been investigated in phagocytes , and functional overlap between gelsolins and coﬁlin has not been determined . In all likelihood , however , the activities of the various F - actin - severing proteins overlap in macrophages , as they do in other mammalian cells . A second explanation for the apparent inconsistencies regarding the role of severing proteins involves the divergent mechanisms of phagocytosis elicited by different receptors . In integrin - mediated phagocytosis , where actin polymerization is largely driven by formins , severing may be unnecessary and , in fact , may be inhibitory . Accordingly , the Rho / ROCK / LIMK pathway is stimulated during integrin - mediated phago - cytosis ( 169 , 170 ) , leading to increased phosphorylation of coﬁlin and , presumably , to a decrease in its activity ( 170 ) . On the other hand , when pseudopod extension is driven by Arp2 / 3 nucleation , as in Fc c R - initiated phagocytosis , F - actin severing is more likely to play a positive role . In summary , we suspect that actin - severing proteins serve distinct and overlap - ping — but nevertheless important — roles in initiating phago - cytosis . Actin polymerization during phagocytosis Of all the steps in the actin remodeling process illustrated in ( Fig . 4 ) , by far the most studied and best understood is the polymerization that drives the formation of protrusions to surround the phagocytic prey . As emphasized throughout this article , phagocytosis can be initiated by many different receptors and , though the gross phenotypic outcome is sim - ilar ( i . e . internalization of the target particle ) , the underly - ing molecular mechanisms can vary widely . This applies also to the actin polymerization step . In fact , the processes triggered by the only two receptors studied in any detail to date , namely Fc c R and CR3 / Mac - 1 , are considerably differ - ent . These are outlined in Fig . 4C and discussed in detail below . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 207 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton Fc c R - mediated phagocytosis The extension of pseudopods following Fc c R engagement is driven by formation of branched actin networks generated by Arp2 / 3 ( Fig . 4C ) . Arp2 / 3 is recruited to the nascent phagocy - tic cup , where its actin - nucleating activity is stimulated by the VCA domain of WASp and N - WASp ( 171 – 173 ) . The sequence is initiated by receptor clustering and the conse - quent increase in tyrosine phosphorylation , which in turn recruits secondary tyrosine kinases ( i . e . Syk ) and also adapter proteins via their SH2 domains . One such adapter , Nck , inter - acts directly with phosphorylated tyrosines of Fc receptors , at least in vitro ( 174 ) . In addition to its SH2 domain , Nck con - tains also three SH3 domains that selectively bind to poly - proline motifs ; importantly , such motifs are present in both WASp and N - WASp . Nck can therefore recruit the NPFs to sites of phagocytosis . In fact , Nck has not one but three SH3 domains , while WASp and N - WASp have multiple poly - pro - line motifs . The presence of repetitive modular domains and multiple target motifs results in the formation of multivalent complexes that cause a localized phase transition , forming gels ( 175 , 176 ) . These gel - like scaffolds may transfer force applied by the actin cytoskeleton to the proteins where they are anchored , propelling the membrane around the target . Grb2 is another adapter that recruits WASp in a similar fashion as Nck . However , Grb2 is recruited to the plasma membrane indirectly , by binding to Gab2 ( Grb2 - associated binder 2 ) or to tyrosine - phosphorylated phospholipase D . Deletion of the Gab2 / Grb2 scaffolding axis ablates Fc - medi - ated phagocytosis ( 177 ) , highlighting the functional impor - tance of this pathway . Finally , WASp may also be recruited to sites with particular membrane curvature via adapter pro - teins that contain F - BAR domains , including FBP17 ( 178 ) or sorting nexin 9 ( 179 ) . This raises the possibility of a posi - tive feedback process whereby curvature imposed by the particle being ingested fosters additional actin nucleation . Once WASp and N - WASp are recruited to sites of Fc receptor clustering , they must also be activated ( i . e . opened to expose their VCA domain ) , to stimulate nucleation by Arp2 / 3 . This is achieved through two signals : binding to Cdc42 - GTP and to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( 131 ) . The phosphoryla - tion of WASp on Y291 by SFKs , notably Hck , also contrib - utes to its activation ( 180 , 181 ) . While a role for Rac activation in Fc - mediated phagocyto - sis has been ﬁrmly established by multiple studies ( 62 , 182 , 183 ) , the effectors involved are ill deﬁned . Remarkably , the WAVE complex , which is typically downstream of Rac , does not appear to be required for Fc c R - mediated phagocytosis ( 108 ) . It would therefore seem surprising that WAVE activa - tors , including Arf6 and the Abl - family kinases , are recruited and essential for FcR - mediated phagocytosis ( 184 , 185 ) . However , these proteins may be acting by alternate path - ways : Abl - family kinases can phosphorylate other substrates , including Syk ( 185 ) , while Arf6 is required for the delivery of recycling endosomes that are important for pseudopod extension during phagocytosis ( 186 ) . A ﬁnal , underappreciated consideration is the source of the actin monomers required for ﬁlament polymerization during phagocytosis . The barbed end of an actin ﬁlament can exist in either of two states : growing by incorporation of ATP - bound G - actin monomers or capped . Whether a ﬁla - ment elongates or is capped is determined by barbed end - interacting proteins . The rate of elongation , in turn , can be limited by the availability of ATP - bound G - actin monomers . Proﬁlin , an abundant actin monomer - binding protein , affects this parameter . It stimulates nucleotide exchange , serving to prime ATP - actin monomers for incorporation ( 158 ) . Proﬁlin also protects ATP - actin from spontaneous , unproductive nucleation . In the context of phagocytosis , we know that proﬁlin can be recruited to the cups through multiple mechanisms . Upon Fc receptor engagement , WASp inducibly binds Ena / VASP proteins ( 187 ) , which associate with proﬁlin . The Ena / VASP - family members ( Mena , VASP and Evl ) can oligomerize to recruit several proﬁlin proteins to the barbed end of a growing actin ﬁlament ( 188 ) . While proﬁlin primes ATP - actin , the Ena / VASP oligomer protects the growing ﬁlaments from capping proteins ( 188 ) . Collec - tively , Ena / VASP and proﬁlin lead to ﬁlament elongation . The role of Ena / VASP - family proteins and their balance with capping proteins in Fc - mediated phagocytosis has not explored , but is an area of potential interest . CR3 - mediated phagocytosis As is the case for other integrins , the clustering of CR3 / Mac - 1 during phagocytosis coincides with the formation of adhesion complexes . Talin , a prominent component of these complexes or adhesomes , orchestrates both the inside - out and outside - in signaling occurring during CR3 / Mac - 1 - medi - ated phagocytosis ( 61 ) . Its recruitment to the integrin is required for the ﬁrm binding and subsequent internalization of C3bi - opsonized targets . Once bound to the cytoplasmic tail of active integrins , talin likely recruits paxillin , vinculin , and a - actinin , all enriched at the nascent phagosome during CR3 - mediated phagocytosis ( 84 ) . Astoundingly little is © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 208 Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton known about how these otherwise well - studied adhesion proteins facilitate phagocytosis . Their role in tension genera - tion and / or sensing during phagocytosis has not been explored , despite its potential importance in engulfment and in the associated transcriptional responses ( 22 ) . In conjunction with recruitment of the adhesome pro - teins , b 2 integrin engagement results in the activation of SFKs and Syk ( 92 , 189 ) ; the latter is recruited by ITAM - con - taining adapters like the Fc c chain that synergize with inte - grins ( 82 , 190 ) . When activated at integrin complexes , SFKs and Syk can phosphorylate and presumably regulate the function of paxillin , Pyk2 , tensin , cortactin , Cbl , SLP - 76 , Vav1 , and p190RhoGAP ( 82 ) . How phosphorylation of these targets culminates in phagocytosis is not clear , and while siRNA knockdown of Syk and expression of domi - nant - negative Syk can impair integrin - mediated phagocytosis ( 191 ) , Syk (cid:4) / (cid:4) macrophages appear to internalize serum - coated zymosan particles normally ( 192 ) . The polymerization of actin in response to integrin engage - ment has traditionally been associated with RhoA ( 193 ) . This pathway is also involved in phagocytosis : clustering of CR3 / Mac1 recruits and stimulates the mDia formins via RhoA ( 183 , 194 ) . It is , however , remarkable that expression of a constitutively active form of Rap1 or the pharmacological acti - vation of the Rap GEF , Epac , can substitute for RhoA in CR3 - mediated phagocytosis ( 195 ) . This suggests that Rap has func - tions other than the inside - out activation of the integrins . Indeed , connections between Rap and the cytoskeleton are numerous ( Fig . 4C ) . Rap - GTP recruits proﬁlin , which is essen - tial for formin - dependent actin polymerization ( 196 ) and for phagocytosis of C3bi - opsonized particles ( 195 ) . Rap also con - trols actin dynamics by regulating the activation of coﬁlin ( 197 ) . Additional Rap effectors include Tiam1 and Vav , which activate other GTPases , particularly Rac ( 62 ) . The role of Rac1 / 2 in CR3 / Mac - 1 phagocytosis is the subject of debate . Early studies using dominant - negative constructs showed this GTPase to be dispensable ( 183 ) . However , subse - quent studies using genetic ablation demonstrated that inte - grin - mediated phagocytosis requires Rac1 / Rac2 and the Vav isoforms that activate them ( 62 ) . Moreover , an active form of Rac was also able to rescue CR3 - mediated phagocytosis when Vav1 / 3 were deleted ( 62 ) . Because Vav - family GEFs can stim - ulate several Rho GTPases , these complementation studies strongly argued that a RhoA - independent mechanism could be sufﬁcient for CR3 - mediated phagocytosis . By way of tenta - tive summary , we conclude that CR3 / Mac1 - initiated phago - cytosis involves and requires multiple small GTPases , including Rap , RhoA , and likely also Rac1 / 2 . Making matters more complex , RhoG was recently implicated in CR3 / Mac - 1 - mediated phagocytosis ( 198 ) , seemingly forming complexes with ELMO / Dock180 to stimulate activation of Rac . Myosin motors are also involved in the CR3 / Mac - 1 response . There are 13 myosins in humans and several of these have been implicated in phagocytosis , including myosins I ( 199 , 200 ) , II ( 169 , 201 ) , and X ( 202 ) . Myosin IIA contracts anti - parallel actin ﬁlaments in an ATP - depen - dent fashion . Its activity is controlled through phosphoryla - tion by Rho kinase ( ROCK ) and myosin light chain kinase ( MLCK ) , both of which become activated during CR3 - medi - ated phagocytosis . The major result of myosin - based con - tractility is the propagation of force through actin networks tethered on integrins and integrin - binding adapters . The contractile forces are somehow necessary for the tight appo - sition of the macrophage membrane around phagocytic tar - gets and , consequently , for their engulfment ( 169 , 201 ) . Myosins could serve two other major functions in phagocy - tosis : recruitment of G - actin to the edge of membrane extensions , and disassembly of actin networks at the base of the phagocytic cup ( see next section ) . As the pseudopodia extend around large , geometrically complex target particles , the volume of cytoplasm trapped within them becomes increasingly small . The availability of readily polymerizable G - actin near the tip of the advancing pseudopod can become a major constraint . To counteract this limitation , contraction of the poroelastic F - actin networks by myosin can exert hydrostatic pressure that could potentially deliver soluble G - actin into the pseudopodial cytosol , fueling actin polymerization ( 203 ) ( Fig . 4D ) . Other myosin isoforms are also likely to partake in phagosome formation . Myosin X , which is recruited by products of PI3K has been suggested to function in pseudopod extension ( 202 ) . The evidence for the vital role of myosin is mostly phar - macological : both blebbistatin ( a selective inhibitor of myo - sin II ) and ML - 7 ( an inhibitor of MLCK ) antagonize integrin - dependent phagocytosis ( 169 ) . Phagocytosis is also inhibited by wortmannin and by other inhibitors of PI3K . This effect is attributable partly to the impairment of myosin X , which requires the products of PI3K for optimal activity ( 202 ) . Myosin X may be required only for the engulfment of large ( ≥ 5 l m ) particles , which in contrast to smaller ones ( ≤ 2 l m ) , are only internalized when PI3K is active . Termination of actin polymerization The maximal extension of pseudopodia around a phagocytic target is accompanied by the clearance of F - actin from the © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 209 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton base of the phagocytic cup ( Fig . 4D ) . In fact , the two events may be functionally coupled , if availability of components of the actin polymerization machinery becomes limiting and key molecules need to be recycled from the base of the cup to the tip of developing pseudopodia . Depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments from the advanced phagocytic cup may also facilitate curving of the membrane around the target and , importantly , the focal exocytosis of endomembranes ( 204 ) . The processes involved in actin removal from the nas - cent phagosome have not been investigated in any detail . One can nevertheless envisage the clearance of F - actin as consisting of ( i ) the termination of actin polymerization and ( ii ) the detachment and depolymerization of existing ﬁlaments . Both processes are controlled by phosphoinosi - tides and interference with inositide metabolism has marked consequences on the removal of F - actin from sites of phagocytosis . Most strikingly , in cells treated with PI3K inhibitors F - actin is formed at the base of the cup , but it fails to depolymerize and , perhaps for that reason , cannot support the continued extension of pseudopods ( 26 ) . PtdIns ( 3 – 5 ) P 3 , the product of PI3K , can in theory arrest actin polymerization by terminating the activity of the Rho - family proteins that are stimulated during phagocytosis ( 205 ) . A number of Rho - family GAPs possess a pleckstrin - homology ( PH ) domain ; though the selectivity of these domains has only been determined for a few of the > 60 Rho - family GAPs , it is most likely that a number of these will be recruited and activated by PtdIns ( 3 – 5 ) P 3 . Consistent with this prediction , inhibition of PI3K was reported to cause persistent activation of Cdc42 and Rac at the phago - cytic cup ( 205 , 206 ) . Inhibition of PI3K depresses phagocytosis even when Rho - family GTPases are constitutively activated ( 205 ) . This implies that the kinase has targets other than the GAPs . These additional targets may be sensitive to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , which decreases as a consequence of PtdIns ( 3 – 5 ) P 3 genera - tion . The decrease is partly due to consumption of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 during the synthesis of PtdIns ( 3 – 5 ) P 3 , but mostly to its hydrolysis by phospholipase C c , which is activated by PtdIns ( 3 – 5 ) P 3 . The disappearance of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 can effect dissociation and depolymerization of cortical F - actin by a number of means . As PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 sequesters coﬁlin and gelsolin and is required for WASp activation , its hydrolysis will cause enhanced F - actin severing and reduced polymeri - zation , respectively . Proteins like ezrin and moesin tether the cortical skeleton to the membrane via PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( 207 ) , so hydrolysis of the inositide will promote detach - ment . Lastly , the localization and activity of myosins also depend on phosphoinositide availability ; inhibition of PI3K will therefore alter their function . Collectively , these mecha - nisms can account for the pronounced effects of PI3K inhib - itors on actin detachment and depolymerization . Conclusions As in other ﬁelds , investigators studying phagocytosis often use reductionist approaches , to better understand the behav - ior of single receptors and their signaling pathways in isola - tion . While aiding in the dissection of the underlying mechanisms , such analytical studies tend to mask the true variety and complexity of biological phenomena . In the case of phagocytosis , it is increasingly apparent that the term encompasses a variety of phenotypically related , yet mecha - nistically very distinct processes . The differentiation and polarization of the phagocyte , its environment , and the nat - ure of the receptor ( s ) engaged combine to determine the unique outcome . The most obvious site of convergence of all these related phenomena is the restructuring of the actin cytoskeleton , a sine qua non event in the engulfment of phago - cytic targets . This accounts for the emphasis of this review on the regulation and consequences of cytoskeletal remodel - ing . We highlighted important aspects that have gained attention recently . One is the meta - stable nature of the ‘rest - ing’ cortical skeleton and the manner in which it restricts receptor mobility and clustering . Going forward , we should bear in mind that the state of differentiation / polarization of the cells , their exposure to priming agents , and the degree of adherence to the substratum will all affect the responsive - ness of the receptors . Matters will be further complicated by the parallel engagement of different receptor types . The detailed nature of the actin changes that are unleashed by stimulation of phagocytic receptors is another area that merits future attention . The topic is daunting because of the bewildering number of participants : actin nucleators , severing proteins , capping proteins , cross - linking proteins , monomer - sequestering proteins , and contractile proteins are all involved . While WASp - family NPFs and Rho - family GTPases have received most of the attention in phagocytosis , actin - binding proteins that control barbed ends ( proﬁlin , ENA / VASP , capping proteins , and severing proteins ) , F - actin debranching proteins , and actin cross - link - ing proteins have been largely ignored , and our understand - ing of the contractile machinery is primitive and inconclusive . These are subjects that are becoming amenable for study with newer molecular and biophysical tools . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 210 Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton Receptor synergy has been underappreciated . In particu - lar , the secondary activation of integrins by other receptors and their impact on phagocytosis deserves consideration . In phagocytes , integrins are abundant , diverse , and have broad ligand selectivity , making them attractive candidates as ancil - lary receptors . Because striking parallels exist between immunoreceptors in lymphoid and myeloid cells , we sus - pect that structures akin to the immunological synapse may form also during the course of phagocytosis , where inte - grins may function to secure the target and to segregate domains on the membrane of the phagocyte . Reviews are often encyclopedic compendia of the informa - tion available in one ﬁeld at the time of writing . As our knowledge increases exponentially , this approach is becoming unmanageable ; instead , shorter reviews tend to stereotype and simplify entire areas , to accommodate our diminishing attention span . In an effort to balance these two extremes , the objective of this review was to expose the complexity of phagocytosis , a sophisticated , tunable , and carefully choreo - graphed sequence of events , while focusing in areas that we felt were uniquely important . We hope that the article will motivate future studies of this fascinating phenomenon . References 1 . Cyster JG . B cell follicles and antigen encounters of the third kind . Nat Immunol 2010 ; 11 : 989 – 996 . 2 . Phan TG , Grigorova I , Okada T , Cyster JG . Subcapsular encounter and complement - dependent transport of immune complexes by lymph node B cells . Nat Immunol 2007 ; 8 : 992 – 1000 . 3 . Carrasco YR , Batista FD . B cells acquire particulate antigen in a macrophage - rich area at the boundary between the follicle and the subcapsular sinus of the lymph node . Immunity 2007 ; 27 : 160 – 171 . 4 . Junt T , et al . Subcapsular sinus macrophages in lymph nodes clear lymph - borne viruses and present them to antiviral B cells . Nature 2007 ; 450 : 110 – 114 . 5 . Szakal AK , Holmes KL , Tew JG . Transport of immune complexes from the subcapsular sinus to lymph node follicles on the surface of nonphagocytic cells , including cells with dendritic morphology . J Immunol 1983 ; 131 : 1714 – 1727 . 6 . Asano K , et al . CD169 - positive macrophages dominate antitumor immunity by crosspresenting dead cell - associated antigens . Immunity 2011 ; 34 : 85 – 95 . 7 . Mazzini E , Massimiliano L , Penna G , Rescigno M . Oral tolerance can be established via gap junction transfer of fed antigens from CX3CR1 ( + ) macrophages to CD103 ( + ) dendritic cells . Immunity 2014 ; 40 : 248 – 261 . 8 . Martinez FO , Gordon S . The M1 and M2 paradigm of macrophage activation : time for reassessment . F1000Prime Rep 2014 ; 6 : 13 . 9 . Mosser DM , Edwards JP . Exploring the full spectrum of macrophage activation . Nat Rev Immunol 2008 ; 8 : 958 – 969 . 10 . McWhorter FY , Wang T , Nguyen P , Chung T , Liu WF . Modulation of macrophage phenotype by cell shape . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013 ; 110 : 17253 – 17258 . 11 . Uderhardt S , et al . 12 / 15 - lipoxygenase orchestrates the clearance of apoptotic cells and maintains immunologic tolerance . Immunity 2012 ; 36 : 834 – 846 . 12 . Jaqaman K , Grinstein S . Regulation from within : the cytoskeleton in transmembrane signaling . Trends Cell Biol 2012 ; 22 : 515 – 526 . 13 . Jaumouille V , Grinstein S . Receptor mobility , the cytoskeleton , and particle binding during phagocytosis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2011 ; 23 : 22 – 29 . 14 . Underhill DM , Ozinsky A . Phagocytosis of microbes : complexity in action . Annu Rev Immunol 2002 ; 20 : 825 – 852 . 15 . Indik Z , Kelly C , Chien P , Levinson AI , Schreiber AD . Human Fc gamma RII , in the absence of other Fc gamma receptors , mediates a phagocytic signal . J Clin Invest 1991 ; 88 : 1766 – 1771 . 16 . Brown GD , Gordon S . Immune recognition . A new receptor for beta - glucans . Nature 2001 ; 413 : 36 – 37 . 17 . Park D , Hochreiter - Hufford A , Ravichandran KS . The phosphatidylserine receptor TIM - 4 does not mediate direct signaling . Curr Biol 2009 ; 19 : 346 – 351 . 18 . Flannagan RS , Canton J , Furuya W , Glogauer M , Grinstein S . The phosphatidylserine receptor TIM4 utilizes integrins as coreceptors to effect phagocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 2014 ; 25 : 1511 – 1522 . 19 . Ichimura T , Asseldonk EJ , Humphreys BD , Gunaratnam L , Dufﬁeld JS , Bonventre JV . Kidney injury molecule - 1 is a phosphatidylserine receptor that confers a phagocytic phenotype on epithelial cells . J Clin Invest 2008 ; 118 : 1657 – 1668 . 20 . Monks J , et al . Epithelial cells as phagocytes : apoptotic epithelial cells are engulfed by mammary alveolar epithelial cells and repress inﬂammatory mediator release . Cell Death Differ 2005 ; 12 : 107 – 114 . 21 . Underhill DM , Goodridge HS . Information processing during phagocytosis . Nat Rev Immunol 2012 ; 12 : 492 – 502 . 22 . Beningo KA , Wang YL . Fc - receptor - mediated phagocytosis is regulated by mechanical properties of the target . J Cell Sci 2002 ; 115 : 849 – 856 . 23 . Champion JA , Mitragotri S . Role of target geometry in phagocytosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 ; 103 : 4930 – 4934 . 24 . Swanson JA . Shaping cups into phagosomes and macropinosomes . Nat Rev Mol Sci Biol 2008 ; 9 : 639 – 649 . 25 . Araki N , Johnson MT , Swanson JA . A role for phosphoinositide 3 - kinase in the completion of macropinocytosis and phagocytosis by macrophages . J Cell Biol 1996 ; 135 : 1249 – 1260 . 26 . Cox D , Tseng CC , Bjekic G , Greenberg S . A requirement for phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase in pseudopod extension . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 1240 – 1247 . 27 . Bruhns P , et al . Speciﬁcity and afﬁnity of human Fcgamma receptors and their polymorphic variants for human IgG subclasses . Blood 2009 ; 113 : 3716 – 3725 . 28 . Anthony RM , Wermeling F , Ravetch JV . Novel roles for the IgG Fc glycan . Ann N Y Acad Sci 2012 ; 1253 : 170 – 180 . 29 . Nimmerjahn F , Ravetch JV . Fc - receptors as regulators of immunity . Adv Immunol 2007 ; 96 : 179 – 204 . 30 . Takai T . Roles of Fc receptors in autoimmunity . Nat Rev Immunol 2002 ; 2 : 580 – 592 . 31 . Flannagan RS , Jaumouille V , Grinstein S . The cell biology of phagocytosis . Annu Rev Pathol 2012 ; 7 : 61 – 98 . 32 . Smith KG , Clatworthy MR . FcgammaRIIB in autoimmunity and infection : evolutionary and therapeutic implications . Nat Rev Immunol 2010 ; 10 : 328 – 343 . 33 . Clynes R , Maizes JS , Guinamard R , Ono M , Takai T , Ravetch JV . Modulation of immune complex - induced inﬂammation in vivo by the coordinate expression of activation and inhibitory Fc receptors . J Exp Med 1999 ; 189 : 179 – 185 . 34 . Li F , Smith P , Ravetch JV . Inhibitory Fcgamma receptor is required for the maintenance of tolerance through distinct mechanisms . J Immunol 2014 ; 192 : 3021 – 3028 . 35 . Anthony RM , Kobayashi T , Wermeling F , Ravetch JV . Intravenous gammaglobulin suppresses inﬂammation through a novel T ( H ) 2 pathway . Nature 2011 ; 475 : 110 – 113 . 36 . Geijtenbeek TB , Gringhuis SI . Signalling through C - type lectin receptors : shaping immune responses . Nat Rev Immunol 2009 ; 9 : 465 – 479 . 37 . Hoving JC , Wilson GJ , Brown GD . Signalling C - Type lectin receptors , microbial recognition and immunity . Cell Microbiol 2014 ; 16 : 185 – 194 . 38 . Ferwerda B , et al . Human dectin - 1 deﬁciency and mucocutaneous fungal infections . N Engl J Med 2009 ; 361 : 1760 – 1767 . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 211 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton 39 . Cunha C , et al . Dectin - 1 Y238X polymorphism associates with susceptibility to invasive aspergillosis in hematopoietic transplantation through impairment of both recipient - and donor - dependent mechanisms of antifungal immunity . Blood 2010 ; 116 : 5394 – 5402 . 40 . Gantner BN , Simmons RM , Underhill DM . Dectin - 1 mediates macrophage recognition of Candida albicans yeast but not ﬁlaments . EMBO J 2005 ; 24 : 1277 – 1286 . 41 . Goodridge HS , et al . Activation of the innate immune receptor Dectin - 1 upon formation of a ‘phagocytic synapse’ . Nature 2011 ; 472 : 471 – 475 . 42 . Gow NA , et al . Immune recognition of Candida albicans beta - glucan by dectin - 1 . J Infect Dis 2007 ; 196 : 1565 – 1571 . 43 . Hardison SE , Brown GD . C - type lectin receptors orchestrate antifungal immunity . Nat Immunol 2012 ; 13 : 817 – 822 . 44 . Grakoui A , et al . The immunological synapse : a molecular machine controlling T cell activation . Science 1999 ; 285 : 221 – 227 . 45 . Hynes RO . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell 2002 ; 110 : 673 – 687 . 46 . Humphries JD , Byron A , Humphries MJ . Integrin ligands at a glance . J Cell Sci 2006 ; 119 : 3901 – 3903 . 47 . Taborda CP , Casadevall A . CR3 ( CD11b / CD18 ) and CR4 ( CD11c / CD18 ) are involved in complement - independent antibody - mediated phagocytosis of Cryptococcus neoformans . Immunity 2002 ; 16 : 791 – 802 . 48 . Le Cabec V , Carreno S , Moisand A , Bordier C , Maridonneau - Parini I . Complement receptor 3 ( CD11b / CD18 ) mediates type I and type II phagocytosis during nonopsonic and opsonic phagocytosis , respectively . J Immunol 2002 ; 169 : 2003 – 2009 . 49 . Savill J , Dransﬁeld I , Hogg N , Haslett C . Vitronectin receptor - mediated phagocytosis of cells undergoing apoptosis . Nature 1990 ; 343 : 170 – 173 . 50 . Mevorach D , Mascarenhas JO , Gershov D , Elkon KB . Complement - dependent clearance of apoptotic cells by human macrophages . J Exp Med 1998 ; 188 : 2313 – 2320 . 51 . Hanayama R , Tanaka M , Miwa K , Shinohara A , Iwamatsu A , Nagata S . Identiﬁcation of a factor that links apoptotic cells to phagocytes . Nature 2002 ; 417 : 182 – 187 . 52 . Hanayama R , Tanaka M , Miwa K , Nagata S . Expression of developmental endothelial locus - 1 in a subset of macrophages for engulfment of apoptotic cells . J Immunol 2004 ; 172 : 3876 – 3882 . 53 . Walport MJ , Davies KA , Botto M . C1q and systemic lupus erythematosus . Immunobiology 1998 ; 199 : 265 – 285 . 54 . International Consortium for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus , et al . Genome - wide association scan in women with systemic lupus erythematosus identiﬁes susceptibility variants in ITGAM , PXK , KIAA1542 and other loci . Nat Genet 2008 ; 40 : 204 – 210 . 55 . Hom G , et al . Association of systemic lupus erythematosus with C8orf13 - BLK and ITGAM - ITGAX . N Engl J Med 2008 ; 358 : 900 – 909 . 56 . Nath SK , et al . A nonsynonymous functional variant in integrin - alpha ( M ) ( encoded by ITGAM ) is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus . Nat Genet 2008 ; 40 : 152 – 154 . 57 . Chen X , Xie C , Nishida N , Li Z , Walz T , Springer TA . Requirement of open headpiece conformation for activation of leukocyte integrin alphaXbeta2 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010 ; 107 : 14727 – 14732 . 58 . Xie C , Zhu J , Chen X , Mi L , Nishida N , Springer TA . Structure of an integrin with an alphaI domain , complement receptor type 4 . EMBO J 2010 ; 29 : 666 – 679 . 59 . Shattil SJ , Kim C , Ginsberg MH . The ﬁnal steps of integrin activation : the end game . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2010 ; 11 : 288 – 300 . 60 . Luo BH , Carman CV , Springer TA . Structural basis of integrin regulation and signaling . Annu Rev Immunol 2007 ; 25 : 619 – 647 . 61 . Dupuy AG , Caron E . Integrin - dependent phagocytosis : spreading from microadhesion to new concepts . J Cell Sci 2008 ; 121 : 1773 – 1783 . 62 . Hall AB , et al . Requirements for Vav guanine nucleotide exchange factors and Rho GTPases in FcgammaR - and complement - mediated phagocytosis . Immunity 2006 ; 24 : 305 – 316 . 63 . Tamada M , Sheetz MP , Sawada Y . Activation of a signaling cascade by cytoskeleton stretch . Dev Cell 2004 ; 7 : 709 – 718 . 64 . Pelling AE , Veraitch FS , Chu CP , Mason C , Horton MA . Mechanical dynamics of single cells during early apoptosis . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 2009 ; 66 : 409 – 422 . 65 . TusonHH , et al . Measuringthestiffnessof bacterialcellsfromgrowthratesinhydrogelsof tunableelasticity . MolMicrobiol2012 ; 84 : 874 – 891 . 66 . Parry BR , Surovtsev IV , Cabeen MT , O’Hern CS , Dufresne ER , Jacobs - Wagner C . The bacterial cytoplasm has glass - like properties and is ﬂuidized by metabolic activity . Cell 2014 ; 156 : 183 – 194 . 67 . Canton J , Neculai D , Grinstein S . Scavenger receptors in homeostasis and immunity . Nat Rev Immunol 2013 ; 13 : 621 – 634 . 68 . Heit B , et al . Multimolecular signaling complexes enable Syk - mediated signaling of CD36 internalization . Dev Cell 2013 ; 24 : 372 – 383 . 69 . Erdman LK , Cosio G , Helmers AJ , Gowda DC , Grinstein S , Kain KC . CD36 and TLR interactions in inﬂammation and phagocytosis : implications for malaria . J Immunol 2009 ; 183 : 6452 – 6459 . 70 . Kusumi A , et al . Dynamic organizing principles of the plasma membrane that regulate signal transduction : commemorating the fortieth anniversary of Singer and Nicolson’s ﬂuid - mosaic model . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2012 ; 28 : 215 – 250 . 71 . Fujiwara T , Ritchie K , Murakoshi H , Jacobson K , Kusumi A . Phospholipids undergo hop diffusion in compartmentalized cell membrane . J Cell Biol 2002 ; 157 : 1071 – 1081 . 72 . Mattila PK , et al . The actin and tetraspanin networks organize receptor nanoclusters to regulate B cell receptor - mediated signaling . Immunity 2013 ; 38 : 461 – 474 . 73 . Treanor B , et al . The membrane skeleton controls diffusion dynamics and signaling through the B cell receptor . Immunity 2010 ; 32 : 187 – 199 . 74 . Lillemeier BF , Mortelmaier MA , Forstner MB , Huppa JB , Groves JT , Davis MM . TCR and Lat are expressed on separate protein islands on T cell membranes and concatenate during activation . Nat Immunol 2010 ; 11 : 90 – 96 . 75 . Jaqaman K , et al . Cytoskeletal control of CD36 diffusion promotes its receptor and signaling function . Cell 2011 ; 146 : 593 – 606 . 76 . Lillemeier BF , Pfeiffer JR , Surviladze Z , Wilson BS , Davis MM . Plasma membrane - associated proteins are clustered into islands attached to the cytoskeleton . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 ; 103 : 18992 – 18997 . 77 . Andrews NL , et al . Actin restricts FcepsilonRI diffusion and facilitates antigen - induced receptor immobilization . Nat Cell Biol 2008 ; 10 : 955 – 963 . 78 . Wilson BS , Pfeiffer JR , Oliver JM . Observing FcepsilonRI signaling from the inside of the mast cell membrane . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 149 : 1131 – 1142 . 79 . Kumar R , et al . Increased sensitivity of antigen - experienced T cells through the enrichment of oligomeric T cell receptor complexes . Immunity 2011 ; 35 : 375 – 387 . 80 . Cambi A , et al . Microdomains of the C - type lectin DC - SIGN are portals for virus entry into dendritic cells . J Cell Biol 2004 ; 164 : 145 – 155 . 81 . Jongstra - Bilen J , Harrison R , Grinstein S . Fcgamma - receptors induce Mac - 1 ( CD11b / CD18 ) mobilization and accumulation in the phagocytic cup for optimal phagocytosis . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 45720 – 45729 . 82 . Lowell CA . Src - family and Syk kinases in activating and inhibitory pathways in innate immune cells : signaling cross talk . Cold Spring Harbor Perspect Biol 2011 ; 3 : pii : a002352 . 83 . Nishida N , Xie C , Shimaoka M , Cheng Y , Walz T , Springer TA . Activation of leukocyte beta2 integrins by conversion from bent to extended conformations . Immunity 2006 ; 25 : 583 – 594 . 84 . Abram CL , Lowell CA . The ins and outs of leukocyte integrin signaling . Annu Rev Immunol 2009 ; 27 : 339 – 362 . 85 . Rees DJ , Ades SE , Singer SJ , Hynes RO . Sequence and domain structure of talin . Nature 1990 ; 347 : 685 – 689 . 86 . Moser M , Legate KR , Zent R , Fassler R . The tail of integrins , talin , and kindlins . Science 2009 ; 324 : 895 – 899 . 87 . Wegener KL , et al . Structural basis of integrin activation by talin . Cell 2007 ; 128 : 171 – 182 . 88 . Calderwood DA , et al . The phosphotyrosine binding - like domain of talin activates integrins . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 21749 – 21758 . 89 . Lim J , Wiedemann A , Tzircotis G , Monkley SJ , Critchley DR , Caron E . An essential role for talin during alpha ( M ) beta ( 2 ) - mediated phagocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 2007 ; 18 : 976 – 985 . 90 . Lim J , Thompson J , May RC , Hotchin NA , Caron E . Regulator of G - protein signalling - 14 ( RGS14 ) regulates the activation of alphaMbeta2 integrin during phagocytosis . PLoS ONE 2013 ; 8 : e69163 . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 212 Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton 91 . Lim J , Dupuy AG , Critchley DR , Caron E . Rap1 controls activation of the alpha ( M ) beta ( 2 ) integrin in a talin - dependent manner . J Cell Biochem 2010 ; 111 : 999 – 1009 . 92 . Han C , Jin J , Xu S , Liu H , Li N , Cao X . Integrin CD11b negatively regulates TLR - triggered inﬂammatory responses by activating Syk and promoting degradation of MyD88 and TRIF via Cbl - b . Nat Immunol 2010 ; 11 : 734 – 742 . 93 . Lefort CT , et al . Distinct roles for talin - 1 and kindlin - 3 in LFA - 1 extension and afﬁnity regulation . Blood 2012 ; 119 : 4275 – 4282 . 94 . Ye F , et al . The mechanism of kindlin - mediated activation of integrin alphaIIbbeta3 . Curr Biol 2013 ; 23 : 2288 – 2295 . 95 . Caron E , Self AJ , Hall A . The GTPase Rap1 controls functional activation of macrophage integrin alphaMbeta2 by LPS and other inﬂammatory mediators . Current Biol 2000 ; 10 : 974 – 978 . 96 . Gloerich M , Bos JL . Regulating Rap small G - proteins in time and space . Trends Cell Biol 2011 ; 21 : 615 – 623 . 97 . Botelho RJ , et al . Localized diacylglycerol - dependent stimulation of Ras and Rap1 during phagocytosis . J Biol Chem 2009 ; 284 : 28522 – 28532 . 98 . Schmidt A , Caron E , Hall A . Lipopolysaccharide - induced activation of beta2 - integrin function in macrophages requires Irak kinase activity , p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase , and the Rap1 GTPase . Mol Cell Biol 2001 ; 21 : 438 – 448 . 99 . Yi L , Chandrasekaran P , Venkatesan S . TLR signaling paralyzes monocyte chemotaxis through synergized effects of p38 MAPK and global Rap - 1 activation . PLoS ONE 2012 ; 7 : e30404 . 100 . Moon EY , Pyo S . Lipopolysaccharide stimulates Epac1 - mediated Rap1 / NF - kappaB pathway in Raw 264 . 7 murine macrophages . Immunol Lett 2007 ; 110 : 121 – 125 . 101 . Flannagan RS , Harrison RE , Yip CM , Jaqaman K , Grinstein S . Dynamic macrophage “probing” is required for the efﬁcient capture of phagocytic targets . J Cell Biol 2010 ; 191 : 1205 – 1218 . 102 . Jaumouille V , Farkash Y , Jaqaman K , Das R , Lowell CA , Grinstein S . Actin cytoskeleton reorganization by syk regulates Fc ( gamma ) receptor responsiveness by increasing its lateral mobility and clustering . Dev Cell 2014 ; 29 : 534 – 546 . 103 . Cairo CW , Mirchev R , Golan DE . Cytoskeletal regulation couples LFA - 1 conformational changes to receptor lateral mobility and clustering . Immunity 2006 ; 25 : 297 – 308 . 104 . Patel PC , Harrison RE . Membrane rufﬂes capture C3bi - opsonized particles in activated macrophages . Mol Biol Cell 2008 ; 19 : 4628 – 4639 . 105 . Cooper PH , Mayer P , Baggiolini M . Stimulation of phagocytosis in bone marrow - derived mouse macrophages by bacterial lipopolysaccharide : correlation with biochemical and functional parameters . J Immunol 1984 ; 133 : 913 – 922 . 106 . Kress H , Stelzer EH , Holzer D , Buss F , Grifﬁths G , Rohrbach A . Filopodia act as phagocytic tentacles and pull with discrete steps and a load - dependent velocity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007 ; 104 : 11633 – 11638 . 107 . Racoosin EL , Swanson JA . M - CSF - induced macropinocytosis increases solute endocytosis but not receptor - mediated endocytosis in mouse macrophages . J Cell Sci 1992 ; 102 : 867 – 880 . 108 . Kheir WA , Gevrey JC , Yamaguchi H , Isaac B , Cox D . A WAVE2 - Abi1 complex mediates CSF - 1 - induced F - actin - rich membrane protrusions and migration in macrophages . J Cell Sci 2005 ; 118 : 5369 – 5379 . 109 . Hajishengallis G , Lambris JD . Microbial manipulation of receptor crosstalk in innate immunity . Nat Rev Immunol 2011 ; 11 : 187 – 200 . 110 . Miyanishi M , Tada K , Koike M , Uchiyama Y , Kitamura T , Nagata S . Identiﬁcation of Tim4 as a phosphatidylserine receptor . Nature 2007 ; 450 : 435 – 439 . 111 . Kobayashi N , et al . TIM - 1 and TIM - 4 glycoproteins bind phosphatidylserine and mediate uptake of apoptotic cells . Immunity 2007 ; 27 : 927 – 940 . 112 . Toda S , Hanayama R , Nagata S . Two - step engulfment of apoptotic cells . Mol Cell Biol 2012 ; 32 : 118 – 125 . 113 . Poo H , Krauss JC , Mayo - Bond L , Todd RF 3rd , Petty HR . Interaction of Fc gamma receptor type IIIB with complement receptor type 3 in ﬁbroblast transfectants : evidence from lateral diffusion and resonance energy transfer studies . J Mol Biol 1995 ; 247 : 597 – 603 . 114 . Stewart CR , et al . CD36 ligands promote sterile inﬂammation through assembly of a Toll - like receptor 4 and 6 heterodimer . Nat Immunol 2010 ; 11 : 155 – 161 . 115 . Mocsai A , Zhou M , Meng F , Tybulewicz VL , Lowell CA . Syk is required for integrin signaling in neutrophils . Immunity 2002 ; 16 : 547 – 558 . 116 . Shattil SJ , Kashiwagi H , Pampori N . Integrin signaling : the platelet paradigm . Blood 1998 ; 91 : 2645 – 2657 . 117 . Campellone KG , Welch MD . A nucleator arms race : cellular control of actin assembly . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2010 ; 11 : 237 – 251 . 118 . Pfender S , Kuznetsov V , Pleiser S , Kerkhoff E , Schuh M . Spire - type actin nucleators cooperate with Formin - 2 to drive asymmetric oocyte division . Curr Biol 2011 ; 21 : 955 – 960 . 119 . Eisenmann KM , Harris ES , Kitchen SM , Holman HA , Higgs HN , Alberts AS . Dia - interacting protein modulates formin - mediated actin assembly at the cell cortex . Curr Biol 2007 ; 17 : 579 – 591 . 120 . Chesarone MA , DuPage AG , Goode BL . Unleashing formins to remodel the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2010 ; 11 : 62 – 74 . 121 . Sagot I , Rodal AA , Moseley J , Goode BL , Pellman D . An actin nucleation mechanism mediated by Bni1 and proﬁlin . Nat Cell Biol 2002 ; 4 : 626 – 631 . 122 . Pruyne D , et al . Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end association . Science 2002 ; 297 : 612 – 615 . 123 . Zigmond SH , et al . Formin leaky cap allows elongation in the presence of tight capping proteins . Curr Biol 2003 ; 13 : 1820 – 1823 . 124 . Mersich AT , Miller MR , Chkourko H , Blystone SD . The formin FRL1 ( FMNL1 ) is an essential component of macrophage podosomes . Cytoskeleton 2010 ; 67 : 573 – 585 . 125 . Padrick SB , Doolittle LK , Brautigam CA , King DS , Rosen MK . Arp2 / 3 complex is bound and activated by two WASP proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 ; 108 : E472 – E479 . 126 . Ti SC , Jurgenson CT , Nolen BJ , Pollard TD . Structural and biochemical characterization of two binding sites for nucleation - promoting factor WASp - VCA on Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 ; 108 : E463 – E471 . 127 . Aspenstrom P , Lindberg U , Hall A . Two GTPases , Cdc42 and Rac , bind directly to a protein implicated in the immunodeﬁciency disorder Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Curr Biol 1996 ; 6 : 70 – 75 . 128 . Rohatgi R , Ho HY , Kirschner MW . Mechanism of N - WASP activation by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 150 : 1299 – 1310 . 129 . Rohatgi R , et al . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell 1999 ; 97 : 221 – 231 . 130 . Higgs HN , Pollard TD . Activation by Cdc42 and PIP ( 2 ) of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) stimulates actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 150 : 1311 – 1320 . 131 . Prehoda KE , Scott JA , Mullins RD , Lim WA . Integration of multiple signals through cooperative regulation of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 2000 ; 290 : 801 – 806 . 132 . Zhang J , Dong B , Siminovitch KA . Contributions of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome family cytoskeletal regulatory adapters to immune regulation . Immunol Rev 2009 ; 232 : 175 – 194 . 133 . Linder S , Nelson D , Weiss M , Aepfelbacher M . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein regulates podosomes in primary human macrophages . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 ; 96 : 9648 – 9653 . 134 . Starnes TW , et al . The F - BAR protein PSTPIP1 controls extracellular matrix degradation and ﬁlopodia formation in macrophages . Blood 2014 ; 123 : 2703 – 2714 . 135 . Eden S , Rohatgi R , Podtelejnikov AV , Mann M , Kirschner MW . Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nucleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature 2002 ; 418 : 790 – 793 . 136 . Koronakis V , et al . WAVE regulatory complex activation by cooperating GTPases Arf and Rac1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 ; 108 : 14449 – 14454 . 137 . Chen Z , et al . Structure and control of the actin regulatory WAVE complex . Nature 2010 ; 468 : 533 – 538 . 138 . Takenawa T , Suetsugu S . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 ; 8 : 37 – 48 . 139 . Chen B , et al . The WAVE regulatory complex links diverse receptors to the actin cytoskeleton . Cell 2014 ; 156 : 195 – 207 . 140 . Chia PH , Chen B , Li P , Rosen MK , Shen K . Local F - actin network links synapse formation and axon branching . Cell 2014 ; 156 : 208 – 220 . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 213 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton 141 . Padrick SB , Rosen MK . Physical mechanisms of signal integration by WASP family proteins . Annu Rev Biochem 2010 ; 79 : 707 – 735 . 142 . Machesky LM , Insall RH . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 1998 ; 8 : 1347 – 1356 . 143 . Ohta Y , Hartwig JH , Stossel TP . FilGAP , a Rho - and ROCK - regulated GAP for Rac binds ﬁlamin A to control actin remodelling . Nat Cell Biol 2006 ; 8 : 803 – 814 . 144 . Machacek M , et al . Coordination of Rho GTPase activities during cell protrusion . Nature 2009 ; 461 : 99 – 103 . 145 . Sander EE , ten Klooster JP , van Delft S , van der Kammen RA , Collard JG . Rac downregulates Rho activity : reciprocal balance between both GTPases determines cellular morphology and migratory behavior . J Cell Biol 1999 ; 147 : 1009 – 1022 . 146 . Yan M , Collins RF , Grinstein S , Trimble WS . Coronin - 1 function is required for phagosome formation . Mol Biol Cell 2005 ; 16 : 3077 – 3087 . 147 . Kueh HY , Charras GT , Mitchison TJ , Brieher WM . Actin disassembly by coﬁlin , coronin , and Aip1 occurs in bursts and is inhibited by barbed - end cappers . J Cell Biol 2008 ; 182 : 341 – 353 . 148 . Cai L , Marshall TW , Uetrecht AC , Schafer DA , Bear JE . Coronin 1B coordinates Arp2 / 3 complex and coﬁlin activities at the leading edge . Cell 2007 ; 128 : 915 – 929 . 149 . Marshall TW , Aloor HL , Bear JE . Coronin 2A regulates a subset of focal - adhesion - turnover events through the coﬁlin pathway . J Cell Science 2009 ; 122 : 3061 – 3069 . 150 . Maniak M , Rauchenberger R , Albrecht R , Murphy J , Gerisch G . Coronin involved in phagocytosis : dynamics of particle - induced relocalization visualized by a green ﬂuorescent protein Tag . Cell 1995 ; 83 : 915 – 924 . 151 . Combaluzier B , Pieters J . Chemotaxis and phagocytosis in neutrophils is independent of coronin 1 . J Immunol 2009 ; 182 : 2745 – 2752 . 152 . Jayachandran R , Gatﬁeld J , Massner J , Albrecht I , Zanolari B , Pieters J . RNA interference in J774 macrophages reveals a role for coronin 1 in mycobacterial trafﬁcking but not in actin - dependent processes . Mol Biol Cell 2008 ; 19 : 1241 – 1251 . 153 . Gandhi M , et al . GMF is a coﬁlin homolog that binds Arp2 / 3 complex to stimulate ﬁlament debranching and inhibit actin nucleation . Curr Biol 2010 ; 20 : 861 – 867 . 154 . Nag S , Larsson M , Robinson RC , Burtnick LD . Gelsolin : the tail of a molecular gymnast . Cytoskeleton 2013 ; 70 : 360 – 384 . 155 . Yin HL , Stossel TP . Control of cytoplasmic actin gel - sol transformation by gelsolin , a calcium - dependent regulatory protein . Nature 1979 ; 281 : 583 – 586 . 156 . Bravo - Cordero JJ , Magalhaes MA , Eddy RJ , Hodgson L , Condeelis J . Functions of coﬁlin in cell locomotion and invasion . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2013 ; 14 : 405 – 415 . 157 . Bakal C , Aach J , Church G , Perrimon N . Quantitative morphological signatures deﬁne local signaling networks regulating cell morphology . Science 2007 ; 316 : 1753 – 1756 . 158 . Bugyi B , Carlier MF . Control of actin ﬁlament treadmilling in cell motility . Annu Rev Biophys 2010 ; 39 : 449 – 470 . 159 . Loisel TP , Boujemaa R , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 1999 ; 401 : 613 – 616 . 160 . Bamburg JR . Proteins of the ADF / coﬁlin family : essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1999 ; 15 : 185 – 230 . 161 . Mizuno K . Signaling mechanisms and functional roles of coﬁlin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation . Cell Signal 2013 ; 25 : 457 – 469 . 162 . Serrander L , et al . Selective inhibition of IgG - mediated phagocytosis in gelsolin - deﬁcient murine neutrophils . J Immunol 2000 ; 165 : 2451 – 2457 . 163 . Bierne H , Gouin E , Roux P , Caroni P , Yin HL , Cossart P . A role for coﬁlin and LIM kinase in Listeria - induced phagocytosis . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 155 : 101 – 112 . 164 . Nagaishi K , Adachi R , Matsui S , Yamaguchi T , Kasahara T , Suzuki K . Herbimycin A inhibits both dephosphorylation and translocation of coﬁlin induced by opsonized zymosan in macrophagelike U937 cells . J Cell Physiol 1999 ; 180 : 345 – 354 . 165 . Stuart LM , et al . A systems biology analysis of the Drosophila phagosome . Nature 2007 ; 445 : 95 – 101 . 166 . Adachi R , Takeuchi K , Suzuki K . Antisense oligonucleotide to coﬁlin enhances respiratory burst and phagocytosis in opsonized zymosan - stimulated mouse macrophage J774 . 1 cells . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 45566 – 45571 . 167 . Serezani CH , et al . PTEN directly activates the actin depolymerization factor coﬁlin - 1 during PGE2 - mediated inhibition of phagocytosis of fungi . Sci Signal 2012 ; 5 : ra12 . 168 . Jonsson F , Gurniak CB , Fleischer B , Kirfel G , Witke W . Immunological responses and actin dynamics in macrophages are controlled by N - coﬁlin but are independent from ADF . PLoS ONE 2012 ; 7 : e36034 . 169 . Olazabal IM , Caron E , May RC , Schilling K , Knecht DA , Machesky LM . Rho - kinase and myosin - II control phagocytic cup formation during CR , but not FcgammaR , phagocytosis . Curr Biol 2002 ; 12 : 1413 – 1418 . 170 . Matsui S , et al . LIM kinase 1 modulates opsonized zymosan - triggered activation of macrophage - like U937 cells . Possible involvement of phosphorylation of coﬁlin and reorganization of actin cytoskeleton . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 544 – 549 . 171 . Park H , Cox D . Cdc42 regulates Fc gamma receptor - mediated phagocytosis through the activation and phosphorylation of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) and neural - WASP . Mol Biol Cell 2009 ; 20 : 4500 – 4508 . 172 . Lorenzi R , Brickell PM , Katz DR , Kinnon C , Thrasher AJ . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is necessary for efﬁcient IgG - mediated phagocytosis . Blood 2000 ; 95 : 2943 – 2946 . 173 . Tsuboi S , Meerloo J . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is a key regulator of the phagocytic cup formation in macrophages . J Biol Chem 2007 ; 282 : 34194 – 34203 . 174 . Dart AE , Donnelly SK , Holden DW , Way M , Caron E . Nck and Cdc42 co - operate to recruit N - WASP to promote FcgammaR - mediated phagocytosis . J Cell Sci 2012 ; 125 : 2825 – 2830 . 175 . Li P , et al . Phase transitions in the assembly of multivalent signalling proteins . Nature 2012 ; 483 : 336 – 340 . 176 . Wachsstock DH , Schwarz WH , Pollard TD . Cross - linker dynamics determine the mechanical properties of actin gels . Biophys J 1994 ; 66 : 801 – 809 . 177 . Gu H , Botelho RJ , Yu M , Grinstein S , Neel BG . Critical role for scaffolding adapter Gab2 in Fc gamma R - mediated phagocytosis . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 161 : 1151 – 1161 . 178 . Tsuboi S , et al . FBP17 mediates a common molecular step in the formation of podosomes and phagocytic cups in macrophages . J Biol Chem 2009 ; 284 : 8548 – 8556 . 179 . Badour K , et al . Interaction of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein with sorting nexin 9 is required for CD28 endocytosis and cosignaling in T cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007 ; 104 : 1593 – 1598 . 180 . Park H , et al . Tyrosine phosphorylation of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) by Hck regulates macrophage function . J Biol Chem 2014 ; 289 : 7897 – 7906 . 181 . Cory GO , Garg R , Cramer R , Ridley AJ . Phosphorylation of tyrosine 291 enhances the ability of WASp to stimulate actin polymerization and ﬁlopodium formation . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 45115 – 45121 . 182 . Cox D , Chang P , Zhang Q , Reddy PG , Bokoch GM , Greenberg S . Requirements for both Rac1 and Cdc42 in membrane rufﬂing and phagocytosis in leukocytes . J Exp Med 1997 ; 186 : 1487 – 1494 . 183 . Caron E , Hall A . Identiﬁcation of two distinct mechanisms of phagocytosis controlled by different Rho GTPases . Science 1998 ; 282 : 1717 – 1721 . 184 . Zhang Q , Cox D , Tseng CC , Donaldson JG , Greenberg S . A requirement for ARF6 in Fcgamma receptor - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 19977 – 19981 . 185 . Greuber EK , Pendergast AM . Abl family kinases regulate FcgammaR - mediated phagocytosis in murine macrophages . J Immunol 2012 ; 189 : 5382 – 5392 . 186 . Niedergang F , Colucci - Guyon E , Dubois T , Raposo G , Chavrier P . ADP ribosylation factor 6 is activated and controls membrane delivery during phagocytosis in macrophages . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 161 : 1143 – 1150 . 187 . Coppolino MG , et al . Evidence for a molecular complex consisting of Fyb / SLAP , SLP - 76 , Nck , VASP and WASP that links the actin cytoskeleton to Fcgamma receptor signalling during phagocytosis . J Cell Sci 2001 ; 114 : 4307 – 4318 . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 214 Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton 188 . Bear JE , Gertler FB . Ena / VASP : towards resolving a pointed controversy at the barbed end . J Cell Sci 2009 ; 122 : 1947 – 1953 . 189 . Reyes - Reyes M , Mora N , Gonzalez G , Rosales C . beta1 and beta2 integrins activate different signalling pathways in monocytes . Biochem J 2002 ; 363 : 273 – 280 . 190 . Mocsai A , Abram CL , Jakus Z , Hu Y , Lanier LL , Lowell CA . Integrin signaling in neutrophils and macrophages uses adaptors containing immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation motifs . Nat Immunol 2006 ; 7 : 1326 – 1333 . 191 . Shi Y , et al . Protein - tyrosine kinase Syk is required for pathogen engulfment in complement - mediated phagocytosis . Blood 2006 ; 107 : 4554 – 4562 . 192 . Kiefer F , et al . The Syk protein tyrosine kinase is essential for Fcgamma receptor signaling in macrophages and neutrophils . Mol Cell Biol 1998 ; 18 : 4209 – 4220 . 193 . Barry ST , Flinn HM , Humphries MJ , Critchley DR , Ridley AJ . Requirement for Rho in integrin signalling . Cell Adhesion Commun 1997 ; 4 : 387 – 398 . 194 . Colucci - Guyon E , Niedergang F , Wallar BJ , Peng J , Alberts AS , Chavrier P . A role for mammalian diaphanous - related formins in complement receptor ( CR3 ) - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . Curr Biol 2005 ; 15 : 2007 – 2012 . 195 . Kim JG , et al . Ras - related GTPases Rap1 and RhoA collectively induce the phagocytosis of serum - opsonized zymosan particles in macrophages . J Biol Chem 2012 ; 287 : 5145 – 5155 . 196 . Romero S , Le Clainche C , Didry D , Egile C , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . Formin is a processive motor that requires proﬁlin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 2004 ; 119 : 419 – 429 . 197 . Freeman SA , Lei V , Dang - Lawson M , Mizuno K , Roskelley CD , Gold MR . Coﬁlin - mediated F - actin severing is regulated by the Rap GTPase and controls the cytoskeletal dynamics that drive lymphocyte spreading and BCR microcluster formation . J Immunol 2011 ; 187 : 5887 – 5900 . 198 . Tzircotis G , Braga VM , Caron E . RhoG is required for both FcgammaR - and CR3 - mediated phagocytosis . J Cell Sci 2011 ; 124 : 2897 – 2902 . 199 . Swanson JA , Johnson MT , Beningo K , Post P , Mooseker M , Araki N . A contractile activity that closes phagosomes in macrophages . J Cell Sci 1999 ; 112 : 307 – 316 . 200 . Dart AE , Tollis S , Bright MD , Frankel G , Endres RG . The motor protein myosin 1G functions in FcgammaR - mediated phagocytosis . J Cell Sci 2012 ; 125 : 6020 – 6029 . 201 . Araki N , Hatae T , Furukawa A , Swanson JA . Phosphoinositide - 3 - kinase - independent contractile activities associated with Fcgamma - receptor - mediated phagocytosis and macropinocytosis in macrophages . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 247 – 257 . 202 . Cox D , et al . Myosin X is a downstream effector of PI ( 3 ) K during phagocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 2002 ; 4 : 469 – 477 . 203 . Keren K , Yam PT , Kinkhabwala A , Mogilner A , Theriot JA . Intracellular ﬂuid ﬂow in rapidly moving cells . Nat Cell Biol 2009 ; 11 : 1219 – 1224 . 204 . Marion S , et al . The NF - kappaB signaling protein Bcl10 regulates actin dynamics by controlling AP1 and OCRL - bearing vesicles . Dev Cell 2012 ; 23 : 954 – 967 . 205 . Beemiller P , et al . A Cdc42 activation cycle coordinated by PI 3 - kinase during Fc receptor - mediated phagocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 2010 ; 21 : 470 – 480 . 206 . Hoppe AD , Swanson JA . Cdc42 , Rac1 , and Rac2 display distinct patterns of activation during phagocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 3509 – 3519 . 207 . Hirao M , et al . Regulation mechanism of ERM ( ezrin / radixin / moesin ) protein / plasma membrane association : possible involvement of phosphatidylinositol turnover and Rho - dependent signaling pathway . J Cell Biol 1996 ; 135 : 37 – 51 . 208 . Anderson CL , Shen L , Eicher DM , Wewers MD , Gill JK . Phagocytosis mediated by three distinct Fc gamma receptor classes on human leukocytes . J Exp Med 1990 ; 171 : 1333 – 1345 . 209 . van Spriel AB , van den Herik - Oudijk IE , van Sorge NM , Vile HA , van Strijp JA , van de Winkel JG . Effective phagocytosis and killing of Candida albicans via targeting FcgammaRI ( CD64 ) or FcalphaRI ( CD89 ) on neutrophils . J Infect Dis 1999 ; 179 : 661 – 669 . 210 . Daeron M , Malbec O , Bonnerot C , Latour S , Segal DM , Fridman WH . Tyrosine - containing activation motif - dependent phagocytosis in mast cells . J Immunol 1994 ; 152 : 783 – 792 . 211 . Ghiran I , Barbashov SF , Klickstein LB , Tas SW , Jensenius JC , Nicholson - Weller A . Complement receptor 1 / CD35 is a receptor for mannan - binding lectin . J Exp Med 2000 ; 192 : 1797 – 1808 . 212 . Ross GD , Reed W , Dalzell JG , Becker SE , Hogg N . Macrophage cytoskeleton association with CR3 and CR4 regulates receptor mobility and phagocytosis of iC3b - opsonized erythrocytes . J Leukoc Biol 1992 ; 51 : 109 – 117 . 213 . Yakubenko VP , Lishko VK , Lam SC , Ugarova TP . A molecular basis for integrin alphaMbeta 2 ligand binding promiscuity . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 48635 – 48642 . 214 . Loike JD , et al . CD11c / CD18 on neutrophils recognizes a domain at the N terminus of the A alpha chain of ﬁbrinogen . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991 ; 88 : 1044 – 1048 . 215 . Diamond MS , Garcia - Aguilar J , Bickford JK , Corbi AL , Springer TA . The I domain is a major recognition site on the leukocyte integrin Mac - 1 ( CD11b / CD18 ) for four distinct adhesion ligands . J Cell Biol 1993 ; 120 : 1031 – 1043 . 216 . Davis GE . Afﬁnity of integrins for damaged extracellular matrix : alpha v beta 3 binds to denatured collagen type I through RGD sites . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1992 ; 182 : 1025 – 1031 . 217 . Brown GD , et al . Dectin - 1 is a major beta - glucan receptor on macrophages . J Exp Med 2002 ; 196 : 407 – 412 . 218 . Schiff DE , et al . Phagocytosis of gram - negative bacteria by a unique CD14 - dependent mechanism . J Leukoc Biol 1997 ; 62 : 786 – 794 . 219 . Ezekowitz RA , Sastry K , Bailly P , Warner A . Molecular characterization of the human macrophage mannose receptor : demonstration of multiple carbohydrate recognition - like domains and phagocytosis of yeasts in Cos - 1 cells . J Exp Med 1990 ; 172 : 1785 – 1794 . 220 . Das S , et al . Brain angiogenesis inhibitor 1 ( BAI1 ) is a pattern recognition receptor that mediates macrophage binding and engulfment of Gram - negative bacteria . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 ; 108 : 2136 – 2141 . 221 . Patel SN , et al . CD36 mediates the phagocytosis of Plasmodium falciparum - infected erythrocytes by rodent macrophages . J Infect Dis 2004 ; 189 : 204 – 213 . 222 . van der Laan LJ , et al . Regulation and functional involvement of macrophage scavenger receptor MARCO in clearance of bacteria in vivo . J Immunol 1999 ; 162 : 939 – 947 . 223 . Peiser L , Gough PJ , Kodama T , Gordon S . Macrophage class A scavenger receptor - mediated phagocytosis of Escherichia coli : role of cell heterogeneity , microbial strain , and culture conditions in vitro . Infect Immun 2000 ; 68 : 1953 – 1963 . 224 . Thomas CA , Li Y , Kodama T , Suzuki H , Silverstein SC , El Khoury J . Protection from lethal gram - positive infection by macrophage scavenger receptor - dependent phagocytosis . J Exp Med 2000 ; 191 : 147 – 156 . 225 . Park D , et al . BAI1 is an engulfment receptor for apoptotic cells upstream of the ELMO / Dock180 / Rac module . Nature 2007 ; 450 : 430 – 434 . 226 . Park SY , et al . Rapid cell corpse clearance by stabilin - 2 , a membrane phosphatidylserine receptor . Cell Death Differ 2008 ; 15 : 192 – 201 . 227 . Choi SC , et al . Cutting edge : mouse CD300f ( CMRF - 35 - like molecule - 1 ) recognizes outer membrane - exposed phosphatidylserine and can promote phagocytosis . J Immunol 2011 ; 187 : 3483 – 3487 . 228 . Nagata K , et al . Identiﬁcation of the product of growth arrest - speciﬁc gene 6 as a common ligand for Axl , Sky , and Mer receptor tyrosine kinases . J Biol Chem 1996 ; 271 : 30022 – 30027 . 229 . Anderson HA , Maylock CA , Williams JA , Paweletz CP , Shu H , Shacter E . Serum - derived protein S binds to phosphatidylserine and stimulates the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells . Nat Immunol 2003 ; 4 : 87 – 91 . 230 . Gardai SJ , et al . Cell - surface calreticulin initiates clearance of viable or apoptotic cells through trans - activation of LRP on the phagocyte . Cell 2005 ; 123 : 321 – 334 . 231 . Albert ML , Kim JI , Birge RB . alphavbeta5 integrin recruits the CrkII - Dock180 - rac1 complex for phagocytosis of apoptotic cells . Nat Cell Biol 2000 ; 2 : 899 – 905 . 232 . Greenberg ME , Sun M , Zhang R , Febbraio M , Silverstein R , Hazen SL . Oxidized phosphatidylserine - CD36 interactions play an essential role in macrophage - dependent phagocytosis of apoptotic cells . J Exp Med 2006 ; 203 : 2613 – 2625 . 233 . Ramirez - Ortiz ZG , et al . The scavenger receptor SCARF1 mediates the clearance of apoptotic cells and prevents autoimmunity . Nat Immunol 2013 ; 14 : 917 – 926 . © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Immunological Reviews 262 / 2014 215 Freeman & Grinstein (cid:1) Phagocytosis : receptors and the cytoskeleton