Inferring geometrical dynamics of cell nucleus translocation Sirine Amiri , 1 , ∗ Yirui Zhang , 2 , ∗ Andonis Gerardos , 2 C´ecile Sykes , 1 , 3 , † and Pierre Ronceray 2 , ‡ 1 Laboratoire de Physique de l’ENS , ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure , PSL University , CNRS , Sorbonne Universit´e , Universit´e de Paris , Paris , France 2 Aix Marseille Univ , CNRS , CINAM , Turing Center for Living Systems , Marseille , France 3 Institut Curie , Paris , France The ability of eukaryotic cells to squeeze through constrictions is limited by the stiffness of their large and rigid nucleus . However , migrating cells are often able to overcome this limitation and pass through constrictions much smaller than their nucleus , a mechanism that is not yet understood . This is what we address here through a data - driven approach using microfluidic devices where cells migrate through controlled narrow spaces of sizes comparable to the ones encountered in physi - ological situations . Stochastic Force Inference is applied to experimental nuclear trajectories and nuclear shape descriptors , resulting in equations that effectively describe this phenomenon of nuclear translocation . By employing a model where the channel geometry is an explicit parameter and by training it over experimental data with different sizes of constrictions , we ensure that the resulting equations are predictive to other geometries . Altogether , the approach developed here paves the way for a mechanistic and quantitative description of dynamical cell complexity during its motility . Introduction The cell nucleus , three - to - four times stiffer than the cytoskeleton and twice as viscous , has traditionally been regarded as a mechanically passive compartment hous - ing genetic information [ 1 ] . It is now established that in physiological conditions , the nucleus can experience large mechanical stresses that impact its shape and internal or - ganisation , affecting , for example , gene transcription [ 2 ] . In particular , when cells migrate through complex envi - ronments , the nucleus happens to experience large de - formations , for instance when passing through tight con - strictions [ 3 – 6 ] . How these large deformations affect nu - cleus functioning and feed back into the behavior of the cell remain open questions . In fact , the overwhelming majority of cell migration studies focus on experiments on flat surfaces that were crucial to decipher the detailed mechanisms of cell motility [ 7 – 9 ] . However , the nucleus is only weakly altered in such experiments , which thus can - not be informative on the role of nuclear mechanics on cell motility , its passive mechanical resistance to defor - mation , and also the mechanosensory pathways through which these deformations feed back and actuate the cell behavior [ 2 , 10 – 13 ] . Addressing this problem through in vivo experimental observations of cell migration in tightly constraining envi - ronments such as the extracellular matrix and epithelial tissues represents a tremendous challenge . Indeed , one would have to disentangle the complexity of the environ - ment from that of the migrating cell . For this reason , here we study an in vitro system of cells migrating in a microfabricated device that imposes three - dimensional mechanical constraints on spontaneously migrating eu - karyotic cells [ 14 , 15 ] . We therefore focus on the influence of the geometry on squeezed cell migration . Specifically , cells migrate in an array of pillars designed to impose constrictions of controlled size , which incur large defor - mations of the nucleus . Remarkably , we find that cells with a nucleus of diameter ∼ 12 µ m in their rest state are able to spontaneously migrate through constrictions as tight as 2 µ m . We refer to this process as nuclear translo - cation , in analogy with polymer translocation where a large macromolecule can pass through tight pores . Us - ing bright - field and multichannel fluorescent imaging , we are able to track the trajectories of individual nuclei go - ing through these constrictions . However , the analysis of the resulting trajectories poses multiple challenges due to their complexity , inherent stochasticity , and the lim - ited amount of data : how does one extract quantitative models and mechanistic insights from such trajectories ? To tackle this challenge , we employ here a data - driven approach to learn dynamical models directly from ex - perimental nucleus trajectories . This contrasts with more traditional model - based approaches that postulate a model form and fit its parameters through the use of aggregate observables such as correlation functions : here we let the model emerge from the data , and the pa - rameters are optimized directly on the entire data set . Such approaches have recently received a lot of atten - tion , in particular due to the development of methods adapted to data - driven inference of deterministic dynam - ical models such as ordinary and partial differential equa - tions [ 16 , 17 ] . These methods are well adapted for large - scale datasets such as tissue dynamics [ 18 , 19 ] . Impor - tantly however , single - cell dynamics are not determin - istic : the inner complexity of these objects , coupled to the reliance to feedback pathways involving small num - bers of signalling molecules , results in apparently erratic dynamics which is better captured by stochastic differen - tial equations ( SDEs ) [ 20 ] . Data - driven approaches have been used to capture the dynamics of freely migrating cells [ 21 – 23 ] , revealing a persistent random walk behav - ior . They have been used to quantify the dynamics of non - constraining confined cell migration [ 24 , 25 ] and , re - a r X i v : 2 3 12 . 12402v1 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 1 9 D ec 2023 2 cently , for constraining cell migration in an elastic envi - ronment [ 26 ] . Newly introduced inference methods for SDEs [ 27 , 28 ] have made it possible to efficiently learn such dynamics and have resulted in insights in cell - cell in - teractions during confined migration that would not have been possible with pre - existing methods [ 24 ] . However , to our knowledge , such methods have not been applied to cell migration with mechanical constraints that lead to large deformations of the nucleus . To this aim , we define and measure quantitative descriptors of the cell shape and state , then use Stochastic Force Inference ( SFI ) [ 27 ] to construct a model that captures the dynamics of these shape descriptors . By including the constriction shape as an explicit input of the model , we are able to extrapo - late the model to other geometries that could be used for further experimental design . Results Confined cell migration experiments We use a CRISPR - modified Mouse Embryonic Fibroblasts ( MEFs ) cell line that expresses nesprin - 2 giant with a green flu - orescent protein ( GFP ) sequence and lamin A / C with a red fluorescent protein ( mCherry ) sequence [ 29 ] . The lamin biopolymer shell that lies right underneath the nu - clear envelope is linked to the cytoskeleton through the LINC complex , which includes nesprins [ 30 – 34 ] . Cells migrate through microfluidic devices that consist of a se - ries of 5 µ m high pillar structures providing three sizes of constrictions ( 5 , 3 and 2 µ m ) and larger channels ( 15 µ m ) ( Fig . 1a , b ) . Such migration devices are obtained by cova - lent assembly of a 3D - imprinted block of polydimethyl - siloxane ( PDMS ) with a glass coverslip [ 15 ] . Cells are placed on one side of the device with culture medium , before the pillars ( See Appendix A1 - 4 ) . They exhibit global motion ( on the x - axis ) towards the other side , empty of cells but filled with culture medium ( Fig . 1a ) . The apparent width of MEF cell nuclei ( on the y - axis ) is 12 ± 2 µ m outside of constrictions ( See Appendix B1 ) . It is , therefore , larger than constriction sizes and smaller than the large channel of 15 µ m . Note that in all condi - tions , nuclei shapes are mostly cylindrical ( on the z - axis ) , touching the bottom and the ceiling of the migration de - vice ( Fig . 1c ) . We confirm previous observations [ 29 ] that during nucleus translocation through a constriction , ne - sprin signal intensity increases at the front of the nucleus while lamin signal does not ( See Appendix B2 ) . Extracting cell nucleus trajectories We observe the movement of cell nuclei in the horizontal ( x , y ) plane when cells migrate between vertical z - oriented pillars ( Fig . 1a , b ) . Nuclei are deformed when they translocate through narrow constrictions [ 14 ] . A constriction is de - fined by two facing big pillars of radius r ( Fig . 1d ) . For each constriction , we define the spatial origin ( x = 0 , y = FIG . 1 . CRISPR engineered MEFs are migrating in a microfluidic device made of constrictions . ( a ) Top view of the pattern used in the microfluidic device . It is composed of PDMS pillars of several widths in order to make three types of constrictions : 5 , 3 and 2 µ m wide and a control channel of 15 µ m . ( b ) Side view of the microfluidic device . Height of the pillars is 5 µ m . ( c ) Side view ( x , z ) of lamin A / C signal in mCherry of an engineered MEF in the middle of a constric - tion . ( d ) Representation of the origin points used for a nu - cleus ( in brown ) trajectory . ( X , Y ) is position of the nucleus ( red star ) . ( e ) Epifluorescence images of an engineered MEF crossing a 3 µ m constriction ( top ) and a 15 µ m large channel ( bottom ) . Left is the transmission signal and right mCherry signal ( for Lamin A / C ) . ( f ) Examples of trajectories of one cell through a 3 µ m constriction ( top ) and one cell through 15 µ m large channel ( bottom ) . Annotated points corresponds to specific positions illustrated in ( d ) . Scale bars : 10 µ m . 0 ) at the center of the constriction . The position of a nu - cleus is defined by its surface barycenter ( X , Y ) detected through the lamin signal ( Fig . 1d , right and Appendix A5 - 6 ) . An image is taken every 10 min . This time inter - val was optimized to limit fluorescence bleaching and cell phototoxicity . For each nucleus trajectory , we define X start as the middle of the small pillar that precedes the specific con - striction ( Fig . 1d ) . The same definition is adapted to the 15 µ m channels with a truncated - disk pillar defining the ”constriction” . The start of a trajectory ( at time t = 0 min ) is defined either by X = X start or by its interpo - lated value using a constant nuclear speed between the 3 two available positions closest to X start . The end of a trajectory is determined by the earliest of i ) the end of the overall acquisition , ii ) the start of a new trajectory in a new constriction , and iii ) half an hour before the cell starts to divide or die . We exclude any trajectory corresponding to cells undergoing adherent cell - cell con - tact for more than an hour to exclusively address here the migration of individual cells . Examples of recorded images of a nucleus translocating through a 3 µ m con - striction and a nucleus migrating through a large 15 µ m channel are given in Fig . 1e . The corresponding trajecto - ries and origin points are displayed in Fig . 1f . We do not observe nuclear rupture during this deformation , contrar - ily to other mechanical studies of cell nuclei [ 13 , 35 , 36 ] . A typical nucleus trajectory X ( t ) through a 3 µ m con - striction has a sigmoid - like shape , with a plateau soon after X start when the nucleus reaches the entrance of the constriction , and a sharp acceleration when it manages to pass through the center of the constriction at X = 0 , followed by an unconstrained motion ( Fig . 1f , top ) . A nucleus trajectory in a large 15 µ m channel displays a smooth movement ( Fig . 1f , bottom ) at almost constant velocity . However a fraction of cells do not translocate before the end of the trajectory recording . They are nev - ertheless included in our data set to avoid any statistical bias in the analysis . Overall , nucleus trajectories show some variability , both in the duration of the plateau and in the velocity of free migration , as can be seen in Fig . 2a . Modeling the stochastic nature of nucleus translo - cation The observed variability between different tra - jectories in the same constriction condition ( either the 3 µ m or the 15 µ m wide constriction ) and the fluctuations of velocity during a single trajectory reflect the internal complexity of the cells . This effective stochasticity is of - ten modeled through a noise term by using stochastic differential equations ( SDEs ) . A SDE describing the cell nucleus motility is typically of the form [ 37 ] : ˙ X ( t ) = Π + f ext ( X ) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) deterministic + (cid:112) 2 D X · η X ( t ) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) stochastic , ( 1 ) which consists of two deterministic terms ( Π and f ext ) reflecting the slow , predictable aspects of the dynamics and a stochastic noise that models the coupling of the ob - served position with fast , unobserved degrees of freedom . More specifically , in the deterministic contribution of nu - cleus dynamics , Π is a driving term , also called polarity of the cell , and captures the asymmetry in the internal organization of the cell that generates the motility [ 38 ] . The other deterministic term , f ext , represents the direct effect of the environment on cell nucleus dynamics . The noise term √ 2 D X · η X has an amplitude characterized by its diffusion coefficient D X , which we assume here to be state independent , and η X the noise , which for sim - plicity we assume to be white and Gaussian , therefore , ⟨ η X ( t ) ⟩ = 0 and ⟨ η X ( t ) η X ( t ′ ) ⟩ = δ ( t − t ′ ) . The polarity Π itself is dynamical , and its dynamics describe the way cells sense their environment and actu - ate their self - propulsion accordingly . The dynamics of Π follows an SDE of the form ˙Π ( X , t ) = f Π ( X , Π ) + (cid:112) 2 D Π · η Π ( t ) , ( 2 ) The drift term f Π ( X , Π ) encodes the internal dynamics of Π as well as the feedback of the nucleus polarity to the external environment . Note that there are thus two ways the environment affects the dynamics : through di - rect forces on X ( term f ext ( X ) in Eq . 1 ) and through indirect feedback ( f Π ( X , Π ) in Eq . 2 ) – i . e . mechanosens - ing . Here again , fast internal processes of the cell are modeled as a Gaussian white noise √ 2 D Π · η Π ( t ) with diffusion coefficient D Π , which determines , for instance , the persistence length of the free motion of the cell [ 23 ] . The class of cell motility models described by Eqs . 1 and 2 is very general and widely used . However , a key challenge to its applicability to experimental data is that the polarity Π is not directly measurable , as its molecu - lar definition remains unknown . To bypass this difficulty , previous studies have relied on the use of underdamped dynamics : briefly , such approaches consist of differen - tiating Eq . ( 1 ) with respect to time , and plugging into Eq . ( 2 ) to eliminate Π , thus resulting in an effectively second - order dynamics for X [ 37 ] . This type of embed - ding approach exploits Taken’s theorem and is popularly used for deterministic dynamical systems [ 39 ] . While this approach has been successful in quantifying , for instance , cell - cell interactions from data [ 24 ] , it has several draw - backs . First , second - order inference is considerably more difficult and demanding in terms of data quality and pre - cision than first - order inference [ 28 ] . Second , one has to neglect the noise on nucleus position in order for this approach to work , which is not always possible . Third , information about the nature of the polarity and its feed - back mechanisms is lost in the process . An alternative approach was proposed recently , consisting of a model - driven treatment of data where the polarity is explicitly included as a hidden variable [ 25 ] , but this requires strong assumptions on the motility mechanisms . Data - driven modeling from geometric quantities We propose here an alternative approach to maintain the overdamped dynamics , which is more physical , and ap - proximate Π with available information . Indeed , we have access to more than just the nuclear center X : using the lamin signal , we can track the precise contour of the nu - cleus and extract a richer set of geometrical quantities . In particular , when the cell engages into the constric - tion , the nucleus starts elongating and protruding toward the narrow part of the constriction , as schematized in Fig . 2b . When exiting the constriction , the protrusion points backwards , and the nucleus progressively recovers is oval shape . From these observations , we define two variables to characterize nucleus deformations . First , to account for 4 the geometrical shape change of the nucleus , we define its protrusion vector P = X c − X , with X c the barycenter of the contour of the nucleus ( see detailed expression in Ap - pendix A7 ) . The quantity P gives a measure of how much and in which direction the nucleus boundary protrudes relative to the center of mass . A positive ( resp . negative ) value of P corresponds to a forward ( resp . backward ) extension of the nucleus relative to the center of mass ( see Fig . 2b ) . Second , we characterize the relative ( x , y ) stretch by defining the aspect ratio of the cell nucleus R ( see detailed expression in Appendix A7 ) . As illustrated in Fig . 2b , a circular disk corresponds to R = 1 , whereas R < 1 ( resp . R > 1 ) corresponds to a horizontal ( resp . vertical ) ellipsoid . The quantities P and R describe two different and complementary aspects of nucleus deformation . As il - lustrated in Fig . 2b , P does not distinguish a dumbbell shape from a sphere , whereas R does ; R cannot distin - guish a front protrusion from a back protrusion , whereas P does . Examples of the time series P and R against X when cells go through a 3 µ m - constriction ( left ) or a 15 µ m - channel ( right ) are shown in Fig . 2c . This shows that the constriction affects significantly P and R com - pared to the 15 µ m large channels . We then make use of these complementary geometrical data to learn a quanti - tative model for nuclear translocation dynamics . Inferring coupled dynamics of position and ge - ometry Our aim is to obtain a data - driven , quanti - tative , autonomous description of nuclear translocation using the position X and geometric descriptors P and R . More precisely , for each recorded nucleus trajectory in constraints 2 , 3 , 5 and 15 µ m , we extract three time se - ries { X t , P t , R t } at acquisition times t = 0 , ∆ t , 2∆ t . . . . These data serve as the input in our inference analysis , from which we aim to extract coupled SDEs capturing the continuous - time dynamics of ( X t , P t , R t ) . We postu - late that including the geometric quantities P t and R t , on top of the nucleus position X t , makes it possible to identify a set of such equations that is both autonomous ( i . e . that does not couple to the dynamics of other , unob - served quantities , in contrast to the approach of Ref . [ 25 ] ) and physically first - order ( i . e . that does not introduce emergent inertia as a polarity model , in contrast to most pre - existing literature [ 23 , 24 , 37 , 40 ] ) . To achieve this , we analyze the time series using a re - cently introduced framework , Stochastic Force Inference ( SFI ) [ 27 ] . SFI allows us to reconstruct first - order SDEs from such time series by employing a data - efficient quasi - maximum - likelihood linear regression algorithm . In prac - tice , it consists of approximating the drift term with es - timators formed by a linear combination of basis func - tions . Here , we start from a relatively large basis that we construct based on symmetries and our physical un - derstanding of the quantities we model , and that include a systematic expansion of the geometrical features of the FIG . 2 . Experimental trajectories of cell nucleus translocation . ( a ) Time series of nucleus position X during translocation . ( b ) Schematic of characteristic nuclei shapes and their corresponding position during the translocation . ( c ) Protrusion vector P and aspect ratio R change along the translocation process . In ( a ) and ( c ) , results from 3 µ m and 15 µ m constraints are shown for comparison . system – i . e . the x - dependent constriction width . We then iteratively reduce this basis to select an appropri - ately minimal model for the dynamical equations we aim to learn . More specifically , our starting model is : ˙ X t = internal driving (cid:122) (cid:125)(cid:124) (cid:123) C X + α X P t + β X ( R t − R − 1 t ) + f X ( X t , r ) + (cid:112) 2 D X · η X ( t ) , ( 3 ) ˙ P t = internal dynamics (cid:122) (cid:125)(cid:124) (cid:123) C P + α P P t + β P ( R t − R − 1 t ) + f P ( X t , r ) + (cid:112) 2 D P · η P ( t ) , ( 4 ) 5 ˙ R t = internal dynamics (cid:122) (cid:125)(cid:124) (cid:123) C R + α R P t + β R ( R t − R − 1 t ) + f R ( X t , r ) + (cid:112) 2 D R · η R ( t ) . ( 5 ) Eq . 3 connects to the general form presented in Eq . 1 by approximating the polarity Π with a linear combination of three terms : C X , a constant drift representing the propensity of cells to migrate in the x direction , physi - cally motivated by the imbalance in cell populations be - tween the two sides of the device ; α X P which is a vector - like term coupling the direction of motion and protru - sion direction ; and β X ( R − R 1 ) by which the nucleus shape modulates the self - propulsion velocity around its rest shape R = 1 . The remainder , f X , captures the ef - fect of the environment , and thus depends on the posi - tion X t – we omit , for simplicity , the possibility that it depends on the geometry . Similarly , the dynamics of P is described by Eq . 4 ( resp . R by Eq . 5 ) with the same decomposition into internal dynamics and external influ - ence , and we use the same basis functions . Note that we use the combination ( R − 1 / R ) to reflect the fact that the aspect ratio R is a ratio of lengths which should remain positive at all times , and has average value of 1 in the absence of external constraints . In a complex or unknown environment , the drifts f X , f P and f R representing the influence of the environment on X , P and R would have to be expanded on a generic basis . Here , however , we take advantage of the fact that the geometry of the channel is known to simplify infer - ence and allow for extrapolation of the model to other geometries . Specifically , we include the radius r of the pillars that form the constriction ( see Fig . 1d ) as an ex - plicit parameter of the inference , and construct our ba - sis functions using the channel width w ( X , r ) as well as the normal to the pillar ˆ n ( X , r ) = ( n x ( X , r ) , n y ( X , r ) ) . ( See Appendix A8 for a schematic of these quantities and their expressions ) . Using w ( X , r ) , n x ( X , r ) and n y ( X , r ) as ingredients , we approximate the environmental drift the nucleus experiences and reacts to , f X ( X , r ) , f P ( X , r ) and f R ( X , r ) in the constraint formed by pillars of ra - dius r . Integrating the pillar radius as a control parame - ter into these functions allows us to infer a single model for the whole experimental data set of different constric - tion sizes , including the reference case where the chan - nel does not have a constriction . It makes the model more straightforward and easier to interpret and allows us to use the data more efficiently . As the influence of the pillars on the cell nucleus is expected to increase with decreasing channel width , we expand this geometrical in - fluence in an inverse power series of the channel width in the basis , up to third - order , i . e . , 1 / w , 1 / w 2 and 1 / w 3 , which we multiply by geometrical quantities 1 , n x and n y that capture distinct features of the constriction . The full expression of our initial model is summarized in Ap - pendix A9 . The SFI algorithm provides estimators for the coeffi - cients of the drift field as a linear combination of these basis functions . The initial model , which consists of the complete set of basis functions ( in total 36 ) , is shown in Appendix A9 . A challenge to the use of stochastic infer - ence techniques on cell migration data is that the time interval between frames ∆ t is typically of the same order as the typical translocation time , and cannot be easily decreased as more frequent imaging would incur photo - toxicity . To overcome this problem , we introduce an im - provement on the SFI algorithm to accommodate large time steps , which uses a trapezoidal integration scheme that results in lower discretization biases than previous methods ( see Appendix A10 for details ) . Model Selection algorithm The learned model con - sisting of the full set of basis functions is constructed through physically motivated systematic expansion , and as such it is not minimal , which potentially leads to overfitting the data and precludes physical interpreta - tion . To overcome this difficulty and obtain a more interpretable model , we improve this model through a sparsity - enforcing algorithm that consists in iteratively deleting the least statistically significant terms until a threshold significance is reached . This inference work - flow , as schematized in Fig . 3 , differs from popular sparse learning algorithms that include a penalization based on the values of the coefficients [ 16 , 41 , 42 ] , which would not be appropriate here due to the fact that coefficients have distinct physical dimensions . More specifically , this workflow consists of three iter - ative steps : infer , bootstrap , and update . The first step infer uses the SFI algorithm to learn coefficients using the current set of basis functions . In the second step bootstrap , we assess the statistical significance of each in - ferred coefficient using the bootstrap method , running the inference again on sets of trajectories sampled with replacement and using the standard deviation of the co - efficients as a confidence interval ( see Appendix A11 for details [ 43 ] ) . The significance of each basis function for our model is quantified by their signal - to - noise ratio – i . e . the ratio between the absolute value of the mean of the coefficient and its standard deviation . If one of these ratios is below a chosen significance threshold of 3 ( corre - sponding to a 3 σ rule ) , we move to the third step update , where we simplify the model by removing the least sig - nificant function from the basis , and iterate the process . The outcome of this process is a final , minimal model where all terms are statistically significant . Resulting model for nuclear translocation dynam - ics Applying this inference workflow to the whole nu - clear translocation data set , we obtain the following model : ˙ X t = C X + α X P t + β X ( R t − R − 1 t ) + a X w 2 ( X t , r ) + b X n y ( X t , r ) w 2 ( X t , r ) + (cid:112) 2 D X · η X ( t ) , ( 6 ) 6 FIG . 3 . Schematic of the inference workflow . To start , write down an initial model – an overdamped Langevin equa - tion of the problem at hand . Propose the basis functions that form the drift part of the equation and fix any known coeffi - cients . Step 1 . Infer , input the experimental data and the candidate model into the SFI algorithm to obtain the most probable value of the unknown coefficients . Step 2 . Eval - uate , using bootstrap to obtain the mean and the standard deviation for each coefficient . We evaluate the significance of each coefficient against the 3 σ rule . If one or more coefficients fails this test , then Step 3 . Update , update the model by removing the noisiest term . Repeat this process until a final model is reached , where any further elimination would dete - riorate the model . ˙ P t = α P P t + β P ( R t − R − 1 t ) + a P 1 w ( X t , r ) + b P 1 w 2 ( X t , r ) + c P n X ( X t , r ) w 2 ( X t , r ) + (cid:112) 2 D P · η P ( t ) , ( 7 ) ˙ R t = C R + α R P t + β R ( R t − R − 1 t ) + a R 1 w ( X t , r ) + (cid:112) 2 D R · η R ( t ) , ( 8 ) with a total of 14 drift terms . The values and standard deviations of the corresponding coefficients , as well as the inferred diffusion constants , are shown in Table I . A representative selection of trajectories X ( t ) from the experiment and simulation is given in Fig . 4a . Averaged trajectories ( P , X ) and ( R , X ) are given for experiments and simulations in Fig . 4b ( N = 1000 simulated trajecto - ries for the averaged quantities ) . The simulation agrees with the experiments on the general shape of the curves P ( X ) and R ( X ) , as well as the starting and ending points of the deformation . Position - binned curves P ( X ) and R ( X ) at different constraints can be differentiated : the deformation and protrusion increase significantly as the constraint becomes smaller . Physically , the fact that C X > 0 indicates an average propensity of cells to migrate towards the nutrient - rich region . Interestingly , we find that α X < 0 and β X > 0 : when entering the constricted region , the cell slows down as the nucleus first protrudes , then accelerates as it elon - gates . The fact that α P < 0 ( resp . β R < 0 ) con - firms that in the absence of external forces these quanti - ties relax back to the equilibrium shape P = 0 ( resp . R = 1 ) . Regarding the x - dependent external forces , f X exhibits a repulsive term a X / w 2 that slows the cell near the entrance of the constriction , and an attractive term b X n y / w 2 that accelerates it near x = 0 , i . e . once it is engaged in the constriction . The protrusion force f P exhibits a term c P n x / w 2 that is odd under reflec - tion symmetry and drives the rapid change of sign of the protrusion P as the nucleus crosses the tightest point of the constriction . Finally , the dynamics of R is captured by a single , elongation - driving term a R / w with a R > 0 ; the relaxation back to the equilibrium value at the con - striction exit is accelerated by the coupling α R P with negative P values . All in all , this model thus recapitu - lates with a few terms the directed migration of the cells through the channel , and the way the nuclei stall when reaching the constriction entrance , then protrude , elon - gate , and finally pop through rapidly . In the final stage , the protrusion reverts and points backward , leading to a rapid relaxation of the aspect ratio and the exit from the constriction . Our inference method also provides us with a physi - cally interpretable estimate of the diffusion coefficients of the nucleus position D X ∼ 5 . 8 × 10 − 2 µ m 2 min − 1 . This value is several orders of magnitude above the equilib - rium expectations from the Stokes - Einstein equation for a purely passive particle in the highly viscous cellular environment , D Stokes − Einstein ∼ 8 × 10 − 7 µ m 2 min − 1 , re - flecting the fact that cellular motion is activity - driven . Note that for simplicity of the analysis , we have assumed constant diffusion coefficients and Gaussian white noise . To investigate further these assumptions , larger amounts Corr . term Coeffs . Value Unit · C X ( 2 . 6 ± 0 . 5 ) × 10 − 1 µ m min − 1 P α X ( − 1 . 7 ± 0 . 2 ) × 10 − 1 min − 1 R − 1 / R β X ( 6 . 7 ± 0 . 7 ) × 10 − 2 µ m min − 1 1 / w 2 a X ( − 4 . 7 ± 1 . 1 ) × 10 1 µ m 3 min − 1 n y / w 2 b X ( 4 . 8 ± 1 . 1 ) × 10 1 µ m 3 min − 1 η X D X ( 5 . 8 ± 0 . 8 ) × 10 − 2 µ m 2 min − 1 P α P ( − 3 . 2 ± 0 . 6 ) × 10 − 2 min − 1 R − 1 / R β P ( 3 . 0 ± 0 . 7 ) × 10 − 3 µ m min − 1 1 / w a P ( 7 . 8 ± 1 . 3 ) × 10 − 2 µ m 2 min − 1 1 / w 2 b P − 1 . 0 ± 0 . 2 µ m 3 min − 1 n x / w 2 c P − 3 . 1 ± 0 . 5 µ m 3 min − 1 η P D P ( 8 . 0 ± 1 . 4 ) × 10 − 4 µ m 2 min − 1 · C R ( − 5 . 7 ± 1 . 2 ) × 10 − 3 min − 1 P α R ( 2 . 2 ± 0 . 3 ) × 10 − 2 µ m − 1 min − 1 R − 1 / R β R ( − 8 . 7 ± 1 . 4 ) × 10 − 3 min − 1 1 / w a R ( 1 . 1 ± 0 . 2 ) × 10 − 1 µ m min − 1 η R D R ( 8 . 6 ± 1 . 8 ) × 10 − 4 min − 1 TABLE I . Inferred coefficients for the minimal model , with corresponding terms in Eqs . 6 - 8 . The confidence intervals correspond to the standard deviation obtained through boot - strapping . 7 FIG . 4 . Simulation results of the reduced model . ( a ) Comparison of four representative time series of cell nuclei po - sition X ( t ) from the experimental data and simulation . ( b ) Experiment and simulation comparison of the averaged tra - jectories of boundary polarity against nuclei position P ( X ) and nuclei aspect ratio against nuclei position R ( X ) . of data with a higher time resolution would be needed . Finally , while the learned model provides good agree - ment in terms of capturing the dynamical geometric change of the nucleus during translocation , with a single parametric model encompassing the multiple constriction widths available , we note that it also presents some lim - itations . Indeed , this model is trained on a population of cells , and neglects any cell - to - cell variability due , e . g . , to different sizes , genetic expression levels and age of the cells . This inherent variability manifests itself in a differ - ent way from the dynamical stochasticity captured here by the diffusion terms . Taking into account such cell - to - cell variability is a major challenge , as the amount of data available for each cell is small : data - efficient methods such as SFI [ 27 ] or Underdamped Langevin Inference [ 28 ] provide a promising avenue towards this , but single - event processes such as nuclear translocation studied here re - main intractable with these approaches . A further diffi - culty comes from the limited frame rate , which leads to trajectories that appear to ”tunnel through” right at the end of the passage through the constriction ( as evidenced by long straight lines connecting data points in Fig 2c ) and lower the resolution of the translocation event . These challenges preclude the quantitative prediction of , e . g . , mean translocation times , using the learned model . Predictivity of the model As our learned model takes the constriction geometry as an explicit parame - ter , we can extrapolate it to predict nuclear translocation dynamics in other geometries . To assess the validity of this approach , we first test it on geometries for which ex - perimental results are available : to this aim , we perform again the inference while masking one of our four con - striction sizes ( 2 , 3 , 5 and 15 µ m ) . We then use the model inferred from the other three constriction widths to make predictions on the fourth geometry , which includes inter - polations ( when masking the 3 and 5 µ m sets ) and ex - trapolations ( when masking 2 and 15 µ m data ) . We then compare in Fig . 5a the prediction on the fourth , masked geometry with the actual experimental results . The good general agreement confirms the validity of this approach , and shows the usefulness of the learned model to predict behavior in geometries not used to train it . Note , how - ever , that the simulation results exhibit smoother geo - metrical deformation than the experiments , in particular past the constriction . This discrepancy could be due to the small number of data points during the short time interval when the nuclei pass through the constraint . Next , we extrapolate the model to other geometries that were not studied experimentally : using the inferred model trained on the full data set , we simulate trajecto - ries and compute the average geometric quantities P ( X ) and R ( X ) in constraints ranging from 1 . 0 µ m to 15 µ m ( Fig . 5b ) . Each curve is obtained by averaging over 1000 simulated trajectories . We observe a continuous increase in the maximum aspect ratio and geometric polarity as the constraint gets smaller . These predictions could be used for future experiment design , as a way to explore parameter space and focus experiments on the regions of interest . Discussion In this article , we have studied the spontaneous migra - tion of individual cells in a microfluidic device that exerts tight three - dimensional constraints mimicking physiolog - ical scenarii where cells are able to migrate in strongly 8 FIG . 5 . Predictivity of the inferred model to other geometries . ( a ) Extrapolation from partial data compared with the experimental data . Comparison of the boundary polarity P against nuclei position X ( first row ) and aspect ratio against X ( second row ) . ( e , f ) Extrapolation over a range of constraints with widths listed in the legend . confined environments . Strikingly , cells can pass through constrictions much smaller than the rest diameter of their nucleus , leading to large deformations of the nucleus dur - ing translocation [ 3 , 14 ] . This controlled experimental setup differs from previous studies of 2D confined cell migration without three - dimensional constraints [ 40 ] , in which the nucleus is not significantly deformed . We seg - ment and track cell nuclei to obtain trajectories that we use to quantify the dynamics of this nuclear transloca - tion process . To this aim , we employ a data - driven ap - proach that captures the stochastic nature of the mo - tion and shape changes of the nucleus during cell motil - ity in strongly constraining environments . In contrast with previous works where only the nucleus position was used [ 24 ] , leading to effectively inertial dynamics , we in - clude shape descriptors in our model that provide a proxy for the unobserved polarity of the cell . The outcome is an optimized set of overdamped equations that quanti - tatively captures the joint dynamics of nuclear position , protrusion and elongation as coupled stochastic differen - tial equations . Importantly , the geometry of the envi - ronment is an explicit parameter of the resulting model , which allows for predictions and extrapolation to other geometries . Nuclear translocation involves a complex set of molecu - lar mechanisms that enables cells to sense their mechan - ical environment and adapt their internal forces . Our study paves the way towards a data - driven understand - ing of this process , where the nucleus is considered as an actor of the dynamical process , rather than a pas - sive tracer lagging behind . In the future , this descrip - tion could be enriched with other cell state descriptors , in particular with the spatial distribution of cytoskele - tal and nuclear components , such as protein complexes involved in the mechanotransduction process . A chal - lenge towards this , however , consists in selecting appro - priate quantitative descriptors to include in the dynam - ical model : for instance , while nesprin – the mechanical linking protein between cytoskeleton and nucleus – is ob - served to accumulate at the front of the nucleus , this is not recapitulated by a polarity defined in terms of the first moment of the protein distribution ( see Appendix B3 ) . Acknowledgments We thank Thierry Dubois and his team ( Breast Can - cer Biology Group , Institut Curie - PSL Research Uni - versity , Paris , France ) , as well as Julie Plastino and Inge Bos ( Active Cell Matter team , LPENS , Paris , France ) , Chase Broedersz ( Vrije Universiteit , Amster - dam , The Netherlands ) , David Br¨uckner ( Institute of Science and Technology Austria ) and Jan Lammerding ( Cornell University , USA ) for their help , support and fruitful discussions . This work was carried out in part 9 at the Nikon Imaging Centre , Institut Curie , member of the French National Research Infrastructure France - BioImaging [ ANR10 - INBS - 04 ] . The project leading to this publication was supported by an institutional Insti - tut Curie grant and received funding from France 2030 , the French Government program managed by the French National Research Agency ( ANR - 16 - CONV - 0001 ) and from Excellence Initiative of Aix - Marseille University - A * MIDEX . Appendix A : Material and Methods A1 . Cell Culture Mouse Embryonic Fibroblasts ( MEF ) were CRISPR - modified to create a new cell line : MEFs SYNE2 - GFP LMNA - mCh as described and vali - dated in [ 29 ] . Cells are cultured at 37 ° C in a humidified incubator with 5 % CO 2 , in DMEM ( Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium - Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) Fetal Bovine Serum ( FBS – Gibco ) . A2 . Migration Devices The epoxy mold ( R123 / R614 - Soloplast ) we used was replicated from a polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) imprinted piece coming from the lab of Jan Lammerding ( Cornell University , USA ) . A mix of PDMS ( using a 10 : 1 ratio polymer : crosslinker ) is vacuumed for 20 minutes to avoid bubbles , then poured into the epoxy mold and let to cure for 4 hours in a 60 ° C oven . Imprinted PDMS pieces are cut using a scalpel and biopsy punches ( 2mm and 5mm in diameter ) . Glass coverslips are soaked overnight in a 0 . 2M solution of HCl and rinsed with H 2 O and ethanol , dried with Kim wipes . To form a migration device , an imprinted PDMS piece and a treated glass coverlip are placed in a plasma cleaner for 1 minute and gently sticked together . This process creates covalent bonds between the PDMS and the glass [ 44 ] . Devices are then directly put on a 100 ° C hot plate for 5 minutes to help the sticking process . A3 . Cell migration experiment Microfluidic de - vices are sterilized and rinsed under a microbiological safety post : first once with ethanol ( ∼ 250 µ L ) then twice with Phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS - Gibco ) and twice with DMEM ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) FBS . Cells are suspended at a concentration of 10 millions per mL in DMEM ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) FBS . They are seeded in the device by adding 5 µ L of the suspended solution in one of the two small ports of the device . After 6 hours , enough cells are in the constricted region of the device and acquisition can start . For that , cell medium is changed to DMEM without phenol red and with HEPES ( 15 mM ) ( Gibco ) , supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Gibco ) , 100 units / mL penicillin , and 100 µ g / mL streptomycin ( Life Technologies ) . A4 . Image Acquisition Timelapse acquisitions are performed on an epifluorescence microscope ( Nikon Ti - E ) equipped with a sCMOS camera ( 2048 ORCA Flash 4 . 0 V2 , Hamamatsu or Prime BSI , Teledyne ) , a perfect focus system , a 60x oil objective ( Nikon ) , and a temperature and gas control chamber ( set on 37 ° C , air at 5 % CO 2 ) . Images are taken every 10 minutes . A5 . Image Analysis Movies are analyzed using Im - age J / Fiji and Python . The projected nucleus surface is detected by using the ”analyze particles” function on a threshold ( median filter to 5 . 0 radius , normalized by 0 . 4 % and autolocal threshold ”Bernsen” 5 ) applied on the mCherry image ( corresponding to a lamin A / C sig - nal ) . The nucleus contour is defined by a band of 1 µ m width created from the detected nucleus projected sur - face ( ”reduce” and ”make band” functions ) . A6 . Definition of the spatial origin The origin of the x axis is set at the center of the constriction pillar ( 2 , 3 , 5 µ m ) or half pillar ( 15 µ m ) . The origin of the y axis is set at the top center of the bottom constriction pillar ( 2 , 3 , 5 µ m ) or the top center of the fitted circle to the bottom half pillar ( 15 µ m ) . A7 . Definition of X , X c , P , R The position of a nu - cleus is defined by its surface barycenter ( X , Y ) , specifi - cally X = (cid:80) ni = 0 x i / n and Y = (cid:80) i y i / n with ( x i , y i ) the coordinates of each pixel i of the nucleus surface and n the number of pixels in the nucleus surface . The x coor - dinate of the center of the nucleus contour X c , is defined as X c = (cid:80) n c i = 0 x c , i / n c , with x c , i the x coordinates of each pixel of the nucleus contour and n c the number of pixels in the nucleus contour . The nucleus protrusion vector is defined as P = X c − X . The aspect ratio of the nucleus is defined by R = R x / R y where R x = (cid:112)(cid:80) ni = 0 ( x i − X ) 2 / n and R y = (cid:112)(cid:80) ni = 0 ( y i − Y ) 2 / n . A8 . Complementary expressions for basis func - tions The direct and indirect effects of the environ - ment , f ext ( X , r ) , f P ( X , r ) and f R ( X , r ) are approxi - mated by combining the width function of the channel w ( X , r ) with the normal vector calculated from the shape of the pillar which is a circle of radius r . The normal vec - tor ˆ n ( X , r ) = ( n x ( X , r ) , n y ( X , r ) ) of a circle of radius r is given by n x ( x , r ) = x r , − x ∗ < x < x ∗ , ( 9 ) n x ( x , r ) = 0 , otherwise ( 10 ) n y ( x , r ) = √ r 2 − x 2 r , − x ∗ < x < x ∗ , ( 11 ) n y ( x , r ) = √ r 2 − x ∗ 2 r otherwise . ( 12 ) where x ∗ = (cid:112) r 2 − r 2 s with r s the small pillar radius . These quantities are schematized in Fig . 6 . The channel 10 width w ( x ) is given by w ( x , r ) = H + 2 r s − 2 (cid:112) r 2 − x 2 − x ∗ < x < x ∗ , ( 13 ) w ( x , r ) = H otherwise , ( 14 ) where H = 15 is the channel height ( note that we ne - glect the texture of the small pillars here , as they do not constrict the nucleus ) . FIG . 6 . Schematics of the geometric quantities de - scribing the pillar shape used to construct force esti - mators . Note that , for one series the centers of the pillars are aligned on x . A9 . Full expression of the initial model The full model consisting of all basis functions , constructed by systematic expansion of the model over physically rele - vant variables , consists in linear combinations of the fol - lowing basis functions : { 1 , P , ( R − R − 1 ) , 1 / w ( X , r ) , n x ( X , r ) / w ( X , r ) , n y ( X , r ) / w ( X , r ) , 1 / w 2 ( X , r ) , n x ( X , r ) / w 2 ( X , r ) , n y ( X , r ) / w 2 ( X , r ) , 1 / w 3 ( X , r ) , n x ( X , r ) / w 3 ( X , r ) , n y ( X , r ) / w 3 ( X , r ) } ( 15 ) and has 39 parameters ( 3 × 12 for the drift , 3 for the diffusion ) . The model inference and reduction framework described in Fig 3 retains only 14 significant terms . A10 . Improvement of the SFI algorithm for large time intervals ∆ t To learn the dynamics of our system , characterized in this paragraph by the vector x t ≡ ( X t , P t , R t ) , it is essential to estimate its discrete time derivative using ∆ x t = x t + ∆ t − x t . A challenge on applying SFI on cellular dynamics data is that the time interval ∆ t between frames is large compared ( 10 min - utes ) and cannot be easily reduced due to phototoxicity : with the previously introduced algorithm [ 27 ] , this incurs O ( ∆ t ) biases on the estimators . To adapt the method to this challenge , we propose a modification , which results in much smaller O ( ∆ t 2 ) biases . Specifically , we focus in the derivation on approximate time differences ∆ x t rather than the infinitesimal time difference d x t . Writing the dynamics in a generic form d x d t = f ( x t ) + √ 2 D η t , we have for discrete time incre - ments : ∆ x t ∆ t = 1 ∆ t (cid:90) t + ∆ t t d x t ′ dt dt ′ ( 16 ) = 1 ∆ t (cid:90) t + ∆ t t (cid:104) f ( x t ′ ) + √ 2 D η t ′ (cid:105) d t ′ ( 17 ) SFI consists in approximating the unknown deterministic drift field f ( x ) by a linear combination of basis functions f ( x ) = (cid:80) α F α b α ( x ) where F α are the coefficients to infer and b α ( x ) are the basis functions . Thus , we can project the above equation on one of the basis functions b γ ( x t ) and derive its average in the Itˆo convention : (cid:28) ∆ x t ∆ t b γ ( x t ) (cid:29) = (cid:88) α F α (cid:42) b γ ( x t ) 1 ∆ t (cid:90) t + ∆ t t b α ( x t ′ ) dt ′ (cid:43) ( 18 ) where ⟨·⟩ represents the expectation over many realisa - tions of the noise η t , conditioned on the initial value x t . Since we only measure x at discrete times t , t + ∆ t , . . . , we need to approximate (cid:82) t + ∆ t t b α ( x t ′ ) dt ′ ≈ ∆ t 2 ( b α ( x t ) + b α ( x t + ∆ t ) ) . Importantly , this trapezoidal integration rule is a more accurate approximation than the Riemann sum approximation b α ( x t ) ∆ t used in Ref . [ 27 ] . By now averaging Eq . 18 over all data points { x t i } i = 1 , N and inverting the trapezoidal approximation for the ma - trix (cid:80) N − 1 i = 1 (cid:16) 1∆ t (cid:82) t + ∆ t t b α ( x t ′ ) dt ′ (cid:17) b γ ( x t i ) , we derive a corrected estimator of F α for large ∆ t : ˆ F α = (cid:88) γ (cid:32) N − 1 (cid:88) i = 1 1 2 ( b α ( x t i ) + b α ( x t i + ∆ t ) ) b γ ( x t i ) (cid:33) − 1 N − 1 (cid:88) i = 1 ∆ x t i ∆ t b γ ( x t i ) . ( 19 ) The use of the trapezoidal method for discrete differences thus results in a lower - order discretization bias compared to the original SFI method , and enables accurate infer - ence with the data set considered in this article . A11 . Bootstrap methods for coefficient error es - timation We estimate the mean and standard devi - ation of each coefficient and the diffusion constant us - ing the bootstrap method . More specifically , we sample with replacements the set of small 5 - consecutive - points trajectories to generate an ensemble of trajectories [ 43 ] . For each sample , the drift coefficients are estimated with the above - mentioned modified SFI algorithm , while the diffusion coefficients are estimated using the method in - troduced by Vestergaard et al . [ 27 , 45 ] . We compute the average and standard deviation of coefficients over 20 bootstrapped data sets obtained from the initial set 11 of trajectories , and use the resulting standard deviations as indicators of the confidence interval for our assessment of the statistical significance of these coefficients . Appendix B : Complementary results B1 . Size of MEFs nuclei The apparent size of MEFs nuclei in the microfluidic device is calculated at X = − 20 µ m , before they are deformed by the constrictions . In fact , we allow a confidence interval of 5 µ m . We fit an ellipse to the detected nucleus and measure its major and minor axis ( Fig . 7 ) . FIG . 7 . MEFs nuclei size is measured through minor and major axis of a fitted ellipse . Width ( minor axis of the fitted ellipse ) and length ( major axis ) of MEFs nuclei measured inside the microfluidic device when X = − 20 ± 5 µ m , regardless of the constriction size . White cross represents the average value of the distribution . N = 75 B2 . Timelapse of MEFs going through a 2 µ m con - striction In agreement with previous results [ 29 ] , we observe that when cells migrate through 2 µ m constric - tions ( Fig . 8 , Trans ) , nesprin accumulates at the front of the nucleus ( Fig . 8 , Syne 2 – green arrows ) whereas lamin do not ( Fig . 8 , Lmna ) . FIG . 8 . MEF cell going through a 2 µ m wide constric - tion . Top : Transmission signal . Middle : GFP signal corre - sponding to the expression of Syne2 - GFP gene for nesprin 2G proteins . Arrows point at hyperfluorescence of nesprin at the front of the nucleus during translocation . Bottom : mCherry signal corresponding to the expression Lmna - mCh gene for lamin A / C proteins . Scale bar : 10 µ m . B3 . Nesprin distribution polarity vector For each constriction size ( 2 , 3 and 5 µ m ) and for the 15 µ m large channel , when the nucleus is in the middle of the constriction , we measure the intensity along a curvilin - ear abscissa ( s ) around the nucleus ( of perimeter L ) at X = 0 µ m ( Fig . 9a ) . At s / L = 0 . 5 , which corresponds to the front of the nucleus , we confirm the increase of the nesprin signal intensity for the three constriction sizes ( 2 , 3 and 5 µ m ) that does not happen in the 15 µ m large channel . This accumulation of nesprin at the front of the nucleus appears to be more dramatic as the constriction gets smaller . In order to account for the nesprin distribution in a quantitative unidimensional way , we construct a nesprin polarity vector . First , we define X n as the barycenter of the nucleus contour weighted by nesprin intensity . Ex - plicitly , X n = (cid:80) n c i = 0 x c , i I c , i (cid:80) n c i = 0 I c , i ( 20 ) with ( I c , i ) the corresponding intensity values of each pix - els ( x c , i ) of the nucleus contour . Second , we define a ne - sprin polarity vector N p as N p = X n − X c . It is calculated for cells migrating through small constrictions ( 2 , 3 and 5 µ m ) and large channels ( 15 µ m ) along nucleus position X ( Fig . 9 . b ) . In fact , N p is noisy , almost constant over nucleus position and close to zero . In addition , there is no significant difference between the nesprin polarity of cells migrating through small constrictions and of cells migrating through large channels , when experimentally nesprins do not accumulate at the front of the nucleus in the 15 µ m case . This means that the barycenter of the contour weighted by the nesprin intensity X n and the barycenter of the contour X c are close in value . There - fore , the application of our method to dynamical changes in protein distribution will need further investigation , in particular to account for nesprin accumulation at the nu - cleus front . ∗ Equal contribution . † cecile . sykes @ phys . ens . fr ‡ pierre . ronceray @ univ - amu . fr [ 1 ] Farshid Guilak , John R . Tedrow , and Rainer Burgkart . Viscoelastic Properties of the Cell Nucleus . Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications , 269 ( 3 ) : 781 – 786 , 2000 . [ 2 ] Caroline Uhler and G . V . Shivashankar . Regulation of genome organization and gene expression by nu - clear mechanotransduction . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 18 ( 12 ) : 717 – 727 , 2017 . [ 3 ] Patricia M . Davidson , Celine Denais , Maya C . Bakshi , and Jan Lammerding . Nuclear Deformability Consti - tutes a Rate - Limiting Step During Cell Migration in 3 - D Environments . Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering , 7 ( 3 ) : 293 – 306 , 2014 . 12 FIG . 9 . Nesprins accumulate at the front of their nu - clei but the defined polarity vector does not show this tendency . a . Nesprin 2G intensity signals measured along the curvilinear abscissa s when the nucleus ( of perimeter L ) is in the middle of the constriction ( resp . large channel ) : X = ( 0 ± 5 ) µ m Intensities are normalised by the contrast and divided by the average on the contour . From left to right number of cells shown is : 7 , 11 , 23 and 32 . Error bars corre - spond to standard deviation . b . Calculated nesprin polarity vector ( N p ) according to nucleus position ( X ) for different constrictions sizes ( 2 , 3 and 5 µ m ) as well as large channels ( 15 µ m ) . Each line represents a single cell . Dots are experi - mental data points . From left to right number of cells shown is : 14 , 36 , 15 and 20 . [ 4 ] Katarina Wolf , Mariska Te Lindert , Marina Krause , Stephanie Alexander , Joost Te Riet , Amanda L . Willis , Robert M . Hoffman , Carl G . Figdor , Stephen J . Weiss , and Peter Friedl . Physical limits of cell migration : Con - trol by ECM space and nuclear deformation and tuning by proteolysis and traction force . Journal of Cell Biology , 201 ( 7 ) : 1069 – 1084 , 2013 . [ 5 ] Alison E . Patteson , Amir Vahabikashi , Katarzyna Pogoda , Stephen A . Adam , Kalpana Mandal , Mark Kittisopikul , Suganya Sivagurunathan , Anne Goldman , Robert D . Goldman , and Paul A . Janmey . Vimentin protects cells against nuclear rupture and DNA damage during migration . Journal of Cell Biology , 218 ( 12 ) : 4079 – 4092 , 2019 . [ 6 ] Ian D . Estabrook , Hawa Racine Thiam , Matthieu Piel , and Rhoda J . Hawkins . Calculation of the force field required for nucleus deformation during cell migration through constrictions . PLOS Computational Biology , 17 ( 5 ) : e1008592 , 2021 . [ 7 ] Alexander B . Verkhovsky , Tatyana M . Svitkina , and Gary G . Borisy . Self - polarization and directional motility of cytoplasm . Current Biology , 9 ( 1 ) : 11 – S1 , 1999 . [ 8 ] Paolo Maiuri , Jean - Fran¸cois Rupprecht , Stefan Wieser , Verena Ruprecht , Olivier B´enichou , Nicolas Carpi , Math - ieu Coppey , Simon De Beco , Nir Gov , Carl - Philipp Heisenberg , Carolina Lage Crespo , Franziska Lauten - schlaeger , Ma¨el Le Berre , Ana - Maria Lennon - Dumenil , Matthew Raab , Hawa - Racine Thiam , Matthieu Piel , Michael Sixt , and Rapha¨el Voituriez . Actin Flows Me - diate a Universal Coupling between Cell Speed and Cell Persistence . Cell , 161 ( 2 ) : 374 – 386 , 2015 . [ 9 ] Kinneret Keren , Zachary Pincus , Greg M . Allen , Erin L . Barnhart , Gerard Marriott , Alex Mogilner , and Julie A . Theriot . Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature , 453 ( 7194 ) : 475 – 480 , 2008 . [ 10 ] Diana E . Jaalouk and Jan Lammerding . Mechanotrans - duction gone awry . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 10 ( 1 ) : 63 – 73 , 2009 . [ 11 ] Melanie Maurer and Jan Lammerding . The Driving Force : Nuclear Mechanotransduction in Cellular Func - tion , Fate , and Disease . Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . , 21 ( 1 ) : 443 – 468 , 2019 . [ 12 ] Valeria Venturini , Fabio Pezzano , Frederic Catal ` a Cas - tro , Hanna - Maria H¨akkinen , Senda Jim´enez - Delgado , Mariona Colomer - Rosell , Monica Marro , Queralt Tolosa - Ramon , Sonia Paz - L´opez , Miguel A . Valverde , Julian Weghuber , Pablo Loza - Alvarez , Michael Krieg , Stefan Wieser , and Verena Ruprecht . The nucleus measures shape changes for cellular proprioception to control dy - namic cell behavior . Science , 370 ( 6514 ) : eaba2644 , 2020 . [ 13 ] A . J . Lomakin , C . J . Cattin , D . Cuvelier , Z . Alraies , M . Molina , G . P . F . Nader , N . Srivastava , P . J . S´aez , J . M . Garcia - Arcos , I . Y . Zhitnyak , A . Bhargava , M . K . Driscoll , E . S . Welf , R . Fiolka , R . J . Petrie , N . S . De Silva , J . M . Gonz´alez - Granado , N . Manel , A . M . Lennon - Dum´enil , D . J . M¨uller , and M . Piel . The nucleus acts as a ruler tailoring cell responses to spatial constraints . Science , 370 ( 6514 ) : eaba2894 , 2020 . [ 14 ] Patricia M . Davidson , Josiah Sliz , Philipp Isermann , Ce - line Denais , and Jan Lammerding . Design of a microflu - idic device to quantify dynamic intra - nuclear deformation during cell migration through confining environments . Integr . Biol . , 7 ( 12 ) : 1534 – 1546 , 2015 . [ 15 ] Jeremy Keys , Aaron Windsor , and Jan Lammerding . As - sembly and Use of a Microfluidic Device to Study Cell Migration in Confined Environments . In Gregg G . Gun - dersen and Howard J . Worman , editors , The LINC Com - plex , volume 1840 , pages 101 – 118 . Springer New York , New York , NY , 2018 . [ 16 ] Steven L . Brunton , Joshua L . Proctor , and J . Nathan Kutz . Discovering governing equations from data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems . PNAS , 113 ( 15 ) : 3932 – 3937 , 2016 . [ 17 ] Kathleen Champion , Bethany Lusch , J . Nathan Kutz , and Steven L . Brunton . Data - driven discovery of coor - dinates and governing equations . Proceedings of the Na - tional Academy of Sciences , 116 ( 45 ) : 22445 – 22451 , 2019 . [ 18 ] Nicolas Romeo , Alasdair Hastewell , Alexander Mietke , and J¨orn Dunkel . Learning developmental mode dynam - ics from single - cell trajectories . eLife , 10 : e68679 , 2021 . [ 19 ] Matthew S . Schmitt , Jonathan Colen , Stefano Sala , John Devany , Shailaja Seetharaman , Margaret L . Gardel , Patrick W . Oakes , and Vincenzo Vitelli . Zyxin is all you need : machine learning adherent cell mechanics , 2023 . [ 20 ] Peter E . Kloeden and Eckhard Platen . Numerical solu - tion of stochastic differential equations . Number 23 in Applications of mathematics . Springer , Berlin , corr . 3 . print edition , 2010 . [ 21 ] David Selmeczi , Stephan Mosler , Peter H . Hagedorn , Niels B . Larsen , and Henrik Flyvbjerg . Cell Motility as Persistent Random Motion : Theories from Experiments . Biophysical Journal , 89 ( 2 ) : 912 – 931 , 2005 . [ 22 ] D . Selmeczi , L . Li , L . I . I . Pedersen , S . F . Nrrelykke , P . H . Hagedorn , S . Mosler , N . B . Larsen , E . C . Cox , and H . Flyvbjerg . Cell motility as random motion : A review : Cell motility as random motion . Eur . Phys . J . Spec . Top . , 157 ( 1 ) : 1 – 15 , 2008 . [ 23 ] Liang Li , Edward C . Cox , and Henrik Flyvbjerg . ’Dicty 13 dynamics’ : Dictyostelium motility as persistent random motion . Phys Biol , 8 ( 4 ) : 046006 , 2011 . [ 24 ] David B . Br¨uckner , Nicolas Arlt , Alexandra Fink , Pierre Ronceray , Joachim O . R¨adler , and Chase P . Broedersz . Learning the dynamics of cell – cell interactions in con - fined cell migration . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 118 ( 7 ) : e2016602118 , 2021 . [ 25 ] David B . Br¨uckner , Matthew Schmitt , Alexandra Fink , Georg Ladurner , Johannes Flommersfeld , Nicolas Arlt , Edouard Hannezo , Joachim O . R¨adler , and Chase P . Broedersz . Geometry Adaptation of Protrusion and Po - larity Dynamics in Confined Cell Migration . Phys . Rev . X , 12 ( 3 ) : 031041 , 2022 . [ 26 ] Stefan St¨oberl , Johannes Flommersfeld , Maximilian M . Kreft , Martin Benoit , Chase P . Broedersz , and Joachim O . R¨adler . Nuclear deformation and dynamics of migrating cells in 3D confinement reveal adaptation of pulling and pushing forces , 2023 . [ 27 ] Anna Frishman and Pierre Ronceray . Learning Force Fields from Stochastic Trajectories . Phys . Rev . X , 10 ( 2 ) : 021009 , 2020 . [ 28 ] David B . Br¨uckner , Pierre Ronceray , and Chase P . Broedersz . Inferring the Dynamics of Underdamped Stochastic Systems . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 125 ( 5 ) : 058103 , 2020 . [ 29 ] Patricia M Davidson , Aude Battistella , Th´eophile D´ejardin , Timo Betz , Julie Plastino , Nicolas Borghi , Bruno Cadot , and C´ecile Sykes . Nesprin - 2 accumulates at the front of the nucleus during confined cell migration . EMBO Reports , 21 ( 7 ) , 2020 . [ 30 ] Amir Vahabikashi , Stephen A . Adam , Ohad Medalia , and Robert D . Goldman . Nuclear lamins : Structure and function in mechanobiology . APL Bioengineering , 6 ( 1 ) : 011503 , 2022 . [ 31 ] Yosef Gruenbaum and Roland Foisner . Lamins : Nu - clear Intermediate Filament Proteins with Fundamental Functions in Nuclear Mechanics and Genome Regulation . Annu . Rev . Biochem . , 84 ( 1 ) : 131 – 164 , 2015 . [ 32 ] Erin C Tapley and Daniel A Starr . Connecting the nu - cleus to the cytoskeleton by SUN – KASH bridges across the nuclear envelope . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 25 ( 1 ) : 57 – 62 , 2013 . [ 33 ] Melissa Crisp , Qian Liu , Kyle Roux , J . B . Rattner , Catherine Shanahan , Brian Burke , Phillip D . Stahl , and Didier Hodzic . Coupling of the nucleus and cytoplasm : Role of the LINC complex . The Journal of Cell Biology , 172 ( 1 ) : 41 – 53 , 2006 . [ 34 ] Jason A Mellad , Derek T Warren , and Catherine M Shanahan . Nesprins LINC the nucleus and cytoskeleton . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 23 ( 1 ) : 47 – 54 , 2011 . [ 35 ] Celine M . Denais , Rachel M . Gilbert , Philipp Isermann , Alexandra L . McGregor , Mariska Te Lindert , Bettina Weigelin , Patricia M . Davidson , Peter Friedl , Katarina Wolf , and Jan Lammerding . Nuclear envelope rup - ture and repair during cancer cell migration . Science , 352 ( 6283 ) : 353 – 358 , 2016 . [ 36 ] Charlotte R . Pfeifer , Michael P . Tobin , Sangkyun Cho , Manasvita Vashisth , Lawrence J . Dooling , Lizeth Lopez Vazquez , Emma G . Ricci - De Lucca , Keiann T . Simon , and Dennis E . Discher . Gaussian curvature dilutes the nuclear lamina , favoring nuclear rupture , especially at high strain rate . Nucleus , 13 ( 1 ) : 130 – 144 , 2022 . [ 37 ] David B . Br¨uckner and Chase P . Broedersz . Learning dynamical models of single and collective cell migration : a review , 2023 . [ 38 ] David G Drubin and W . James Nelson . Origins of Cell Polarity . Cell , 84 ( 3 ) : 335 – 344 , 1996 . [ 39 ] James P . Crutchfield and B . S . McNamara . Equations of motion from a data series . Complex systems , 1 : 417 – 452 , 1987 . [ 40 ] David B . Br¨uckner , Alexandra Fink , Christoph Schreiber , Peter J . F . R¨ottgermann , Joachim O . R¨adler , and Chase P . Broedersz . Stochastic nonlinear dynamics of confined cell migration in two - state systems . Nature Physics , 15 ( 6 ) : 595 , 2019 . [ 41 ] Lorenzo Boninsegna , Feliks N¨uske , and Cecilia Clementi . Sparse learning of stochastic dynamical equations . J . Chem . Phys . , 148 ( 24 ) : 241723 , 2018 . [ 42 ] J . L . Callaham , J . - C . Loiseau , G . Rigas , and S . L . Brunton . Nonlinear stochastic modelling with Langevin regression . Proceedings of the Royal Soci - ety A : Mathematical , Physical and Engineering Sciences , 477 ( 2250 ) : 20210092 , 2021 . [ 43 ] Bradley Efron Tibshirani , R . J . An Introduction to the Bootstrap . Chapman and Hall / CRC , New York , 1994 . [ 44 ] Alexandra Bor´ok , Krist´of Laboda , and Attila Bony´ar . PDMS Bonding Technologies for Microfluidic Applica - tions : A Review . Biosensors , 11 ( 8 ) : 292 , 2021 . [ 45 ] Christian L . Vestergaard , Paul C . Blainey , and Hen - rik Flyvbjerg . Optimal estimation of diffusion coeffi - cients from single - particle trajectories . Phys . Rev . E , 89 ( 2 ) : 022726 , 2014 .