ORIGINAL PAPER Idea - conﬁguration - evaluation ( ICE ) : development and demonstration of a new prescriptive model of the conceptual engineering design process based on parameter analysis and C – K theory Gil Weisbrod 1 • Ehud Kroll 2 Received : 6 November 2016 / Revised : 30 June 2017 / Accepted : 1 July 2017 / Published online : 11 July 2017 (cid:2) Springer - Verlag London Ltd . 2017 Abstract This paper introduces a new prescriptive model of conceptual engineering design . The model is based on the method called parameter analysis ( PA ) and the rela - tively new descriptive model called C – K theory . PA was developed based on observations of designers in action , while C – K theory has a strong foundation in logic theory . The new model combines the beneﬁts of C – K theory and PA to overcome the lack of a strong theoretical foundation in PA and the insufﬁcient prescriptive power of C – K the - ory . The paper describes in detail the process of developing the new model , which was similar to product development . It started with conceptualization in order to deﬁne a set of key factors and principles , i . e . , the conceptual foundation or the ‘‘ideology’’ of the new prescriptive model . Next , those principles were integrated into a structured system - atic procedure to form the new prescriptive model . The conceptual design of a realistic design task is used to demonstrate the application of the new model . The sig - niﬁcance of the current work is the contribution to the theory and practice of engineering design , eventually leading to improved design processes and better designed products . Reporting on the experimental testing of the new model will follow in the future . Keywords Conceptual design (cid:2) Design process model (cid:2) Parameter analysis (cid:2) C – K theory 1 Introduction 1 . 1 Motivation The importance of the conceptual design stage within the process of engineering design of a new product is well known . This stage is considered the most important in terms of its effect on the success of the ﬁnal product . At the end of the conceptual design stage , approximately 70 % of the product cost and performance are determined , while only about 10 % of the development cost has been expended ( Ullman 2010 ) . In a competitive world , companies , and organizations that engage in research and development of products and technologies must continuously improve their design process . A better understanding of the conceptual design stage , achieved through research , will lead to prod - ucts with better quality and value and shorter time to market . There are two principal questions about the engineering design process ( Roozenburg and Eekels 1995 ) : ‘‘What is the essential structure of designing ? ’’ and ‘‘How should the design process be approached to make it effective and efﬁ - cient ? ’’ In regard to these two questions , there are two main kinds of engineering design process models : descriptive and prescriptive . Descriptive models are designed to answer the ﬁrst question . They aim to understand and explain how designers actually work , i . e . , what processes , strategies , and methods they use . Prescriptive models aim to answer the second question via development and validation of system - atic procedures that are based on descriptive models . Considerable research effort in design theory has been devoted to furthering our understanding of design & Ehud Kroll kroll @ braude . ac . il Gil Weisbrod weisbrod @ 012 . net . il 1 Faculty of Aerospace Engineering , Technion - Israel Institute of Technology , Haifa 32000 , Israel 2 Department of Mechanical Engineering , ORT Braude College , Karmiel 2161002 , Israel 123 Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 017 - 0263 - 6 processes and offering a theory , model , or method for the design process . Unfortunately , most of those theories and frameworks are not widely used in industry . Moreover , since the intention behind most descriptive models is that they should eventually be used as a prescription for design , i . e . , becoming a design method , it is sometimes unclear whether a model is descriptive or prescriptive ( Blessing and Chakrabarti 2009 ) . Most existing prescriptive models for conceptual design in both academia and industry are based on German research into ‘‘Systematic Design’’ from the 1970s , with several British and American adaptations . This prescriptive model offers a systematic procedure for conceptual design , known as functional decomposition and morphology ( Pahl et al . 2007 ) . However , in recent years , this conceptual design process model has been criticized , mainly regarding its inability to capture the dynamics of the design process and as a result , hindering creativity and innovation ( Chakrabarti and Bligh 2001 ; Hatchuel and Weil 2003 ; Kroll 2013 ) . For cases requiring innovation , the parameter analysis ( PA ) method has been proposed ( Kroll et al . 2001 ) . How - ever , ‘‘prescriptive models are premature until they can be based on validated theory’’ ( Finger and Dixon 1989 ) and indeed the main drawback of PA is that the method lacks a strong theoretical foundation , so it is difﬁcult to establish its ‘‘correctness’’ and its relation to other design methods . In addition , the method’s deﬁnitions and basic notions sometimes lack in clarity and precision . Therefore , our objective was to generate a new prescriptive model for the conceptual engineering design stage , based on the theo - retical foundation of C – K theory and the empirically derived procedure from PA . The proposed model is intended to overcome the aforementioned drawbacks of PA and the insufﬁcient prescriptive power of C – K . Despite the uniqueness of C – K theory in describing creative and innovative design processes , it does not guide the designer as to what to do next at any given moment . Therefore , a primary objective of this study is linking theory to practice , a need emphasized by Andreasen et al . ( 2014 ) . The goal of the current research was therefore to produce a practically oriented , easy - to - apply , and effective model that ( 1 ) pre - sents a clear and concise step - by - step procedure ; ( 2 ) is conducive to teaching and practicing design ; and ( 3 ) cap - tures the dynamics of the design process , thus facilitating creativity and innovation , as well as high - quality and viable conceptual design , with respect to design require - ments and other aspects . 1 . 2 Parameter analysis ( PA ) : a brief overview PA ( Kroll et al . 2001 ) was developed at MIT in the 1970s . The method focuses on the conceptual design process and consists of a descriptive model ( based on observations of the design process ) according to which the conceptual design process is performed by back - and - forth movement between two spaces : conceptual - level issues in the concept space , and description of hardware ( diagrams , sketches , or other representations of physical objects ) in the conﬁgu - ration space . Movement from one point to another in the conﬁguration space represents a change in the physical description of the evolving design , but requires conceptual reasoning , which is performed in the concept space . The concept space deals with ‘‘parameters , ’’ which in this context are functions , ideas , and other conceptual - level issues that provide the basis for anything that happens in the conﬁguration space . Moving from the concept space to conﬁguration space involves a realization of the idea in a particular hardware representation . Subsequently , speciﬁc hardware serves to stimulate a new conceptual thought , which results in moving back from the conﬁguration to concept space by abstraction . PA implements the descriptive theoretical model by a prescriptive model that has three distinct steps . The ﬁrst step , parameter identiﬁcation ( PI ) , represents the genera - tion of a new design parameter , i . e . , a new or improved concept / idea concerning the most dominant issues at any given moment during the design process . The second step , creative synthesis ( CS ) , represents the creation of a phys - ical conﬁguration based on the issue recognized within the previous PI step . The third step , evaluation ( E ) , triggers the move from the physical realization in the conﬁguration space back to parameters in the concept space . The three steps are applied time and again , constantly reevaluating the information associated with the evolving artifact . At each cycle of this process , the identiﬁed parameters are different , as are the changing conﬁgurations and the results of the evaluations . 1 . 3 C – K theory : a brief overview C – K theory was proposed by Hatchuel and Weil ( 2002 , 2003 , 2009 ) and Le Masson et al . ( 2010 ) and has gained considerable interest in the design community . The theory is a general descriptive model with a strong logical foundation , considered to capture fundamental properties of the design reasoning process , resulting in powerful expressive capabilities . The theory models design as an interplay between two spaces , the space of concepts ( C - space ) and the space of knowledge ( K - space ) . Four oper - ators are used to describe movement between and within the spaces : C ? K , K ? C , C ? C , and K ? K . K - space contains all established or true propositions , which is all the knowledge available to the designer at any given moment . C - space contains concepts , which are undecidable propositions ( neither true nor false ) relative to K ( K - rela - tivity ) , representing objects whose existence is not 204 Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 123 guaranteed in K . A concept has the structure C ( P 1 , P 2 , … ) , where P i is a property or attribute . K - relativity of the concepts is a key notion : decisions regarding the status or goodness of a concept depend on the knowledge that the designer has at a given moment , but this knowledge changes during the design process . Consequently , the same concept can be judged or rated differently upon revisiting it . Design processes aim to transform undecidable propo - sitions into true ones by jointly expanding spaces C and K through the action of the four operators . This expansion continues until a concept becomes an object that is well deﬁned by a true proposition in K . Expansion of C - space yields a tree structure , while that of K produces a more richly networked pattern . It should be noted that the only operation on concepts allowed by C – K theory is adding or subtracting attributes , and this means that the concept tree is not necessarily chronological , and that it deﬁnitely does not represent a decomposition of an initial concept , but rather an expansion of the concept space . 1 . 4 Other design models Extensive reviews of descriptive and prescriptive models can be found in Finger and Dixon ( 1989 ) , Cross ( 2000 , 2004 ) , Blessing and Chakrabarti ( 2009 ) , and others . According to Blessing and Chakrabarti , there seem to be many more descriptive studies , attempting to deepen our understanding of existing design processes , than prescrip - tive investigations that propose speciﬁc methods and steps to accomplish a good design process . However , the dis - tinction between descriptive and prescriptive models may sometimes be vague and depends on their purpose : if the intention is to understand design - related phenomena , then the model will be descriptive ; if the intention is for the model to be used in practice , then it will be prescriptive . A basic and general model proposed by Jones ( 1963 ) deﬁnes the design process as comprising three stages : analysis , synthesis , and evaluation . Cross’ model ( 2000 ) from 1984 is based on the essential activities that the designer performs , and proposes a four - stage model of the design process : exploration ( needs analysis ) , generation ( conceptual design ) , evaluation ( checking or evaluating design proposals and deciding on a ﬁnal version for man - ufacture ) , and communication ( preparing documents for product manufacture ) . French’s model ( Cross 2000 ) from 1985 is similar to Cross’ model and is based on the fol - lowing activities : analysis of the problem , conceptual design , embodiment of schemes , and detailing . The FBS model ( Gero and Kannengiesser 2004 ) comprises three classes of variables describing different aspects of a design object : F - function , B - behavior , and S - structure . The model identiﬁes several processes within design , such as transforming functional requirements into expected behaviors , transforming expected behaviors into solution structures , deriving actual behaviors from structures , comparing derived with expected behaviors , and respond - ing to unsatisfactory behaviors by reformulating the design space . This model appears to enable an iterative and non - linear process , which is intended to capture the dynamics of the design process . Another type of model considers mathematical formu - lations of design : general design theory ( GDT ) ( Yoshikawa 1981 ) , axiomatic design ( AD ) ( Suh 1990 ) , coupled design process ( CDP ) ( Bracha and Reich 2003 ) , and infused design ( ID ) ( Shai and Reich 2004 ) . According to Bracha and Reich ( 2003 ) , mathematical models can improve our understanding of the limits of formalizing design and its automation and could produce practical guidelines for implementing design procedures or systems . Among the more prescriptive models , the functional decomposition and morphology method of Pahl and Beitz from the 1970s is considered to be the cornerstone for work on the engineering design process , and their book ( Pahl et al . 2007 ) is the basis for many engineering design classes and practices . The model , which prescribes a sequence of major stages for the design process , includes abstraction of the important problems , functional analysis by decompos - ing the main function into ﬁner and ﬁner independent sub - functions , creation of solution principles or ‘‘sub - concepts’’ for each sub - function , and ﬁnally , assembling the sub - concepts combinatorially to form multiple overall design concepts . Other well - known models include the ‘‘waterfall model’’ from software engineering ( Pressman 2001 ) , the V - model from system engineering ( Forsberg and Mooz 1991 ) , Pugh’s method ( 1991 ) —commonly used for concept selection although originally intended to be a complete design method , Brainstorming ( Osborn 1963 ) , which is used as a method for collective creativity , and TRIZ ( Altshuller 1984 ) , which is based on identifying design contradictions ( technical and physical ) and eliminating rather than accepting them . Two recent papers ( Chen et al . 2015a , b ) present a new model of conceptual design named need - function - principle - system ( NFPS ) . The model elabo - rates the conceptual design process in ﬁve stages : clariﬁ - cation , synthesis , embodiment , analysis , and prediction . It explains prescriptively how a need is transformed into functions , then the functions lead to abstract solution principles , and ﬁnally a structure emerges . To summarize , there are many existing models of design , some are more descriptive and some prescriptive . Some models tend to be process - centered , focusing on stages and activities , while others are product - centered , emphasizing the characteristics that the product should have . There are comprehensive models with a wide scope and there are models that focus on speciﬁc parts or aspects Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 205 123 of the design process . Many models include iterative and recursive activities and contain synthesis and evaluation stages . Evaluation sometimes consists of selection among alternatives and sometime analysis of a single entity with the help of some criteria . The design process tends to diverge at the beginning but must converge at the end . The design process is a map of how to get from the need to the ﬁnal product . This process requires basic knowledge in science and engineering , but also uses systematic pro - cedures—prescriptive models—so that the ﬁnal product will be innovative and of high value . 1 . 5 The importance of using a theory and C – K theory in particular The purpose of any theory , including design theory , is to describe , explain , and predict phenomena . The importance of a theory in design research and for the development of prescriptive models is paramount , as long as the theory is considered acceptable . Reich et al . ( 2012 ) write that enhancement of design methods should rely on in - depth analysis and be driven as much as possible by theories . Badke - Schaub and Eris ( 2014 ) refer to design theory as ‘‘a body of knowledge which provides an understanding of the principles , practices and procedures of design . That knowledge leads to hypotheses on how designers should work , and such hypotheses provide the basis for the pre - scriptive part of design methodology . ’’ Cavallucci ( 2014 ) emphasizes the practical use of design theory in providing a scientiﬁcally proven and methodological theoretical foundation for appropriate use and practice . Theory as a precise conceptual framework can provide an explanation as to why different methods perform dif - ferently and propose changes to improve them . The theory can provide new or different perspectives on issues that were previously unclear or that must be implemented in order for the prescriptive model to be successful ( for example , what is the trigger for new ideas , what are the relevant design spaces , what are the design steps or activities , what are the necessary conditions for creativity and innovation , how is a decision made , how should the solution direction be chosen , etc . ) . Another advantage is that strong reliance on acceptable theory can provide sup - port for the correctness and effectiveness of the model . We chose C – K theory as our descriptive reference model since it is considered to be a theory that offers comprehensive formalization of the design process , inde - pendent of any design domain , and describes creativity and innovation within the same framework as the design pro - cesses . The theory appears to capture the dynamics of the design process , and contains the necessary conditions that should be veriﬁed by any prescriptive model that is intended to allow creative and innovative performance ( Reich et al . 2012 ; Kroll et al . 2014 ) . Since its introduction , C – K theory has been used in sev - eral studies in connection with other design methods . Kazakc¸i and Tsoukias ( 2005 ) compare C – K theory to Gero’s situated design ( 1996 ) and suggest adding the designer’s environment as a new space . This extension does not change the basic assumptions of C – K theory but offers a practical organization of space K that helps develop new types of personal design assistants . Braha and Reich’s ( 2003 ) coupled design process is shown to have many similarities to C – K theory , with the latter shedding new light on some of the former’s implicit assumptions . Shai et al . ( 2013 ) analyze their infused design method with the aid of C – K theory , and show the beneﬁts of developing better understanding of both the method and the theory through such a comparative study . Reich et al . ( 2012 ) uses C – K theory to improve the ASIT ( a simpliﬁed version of TRIZ ) creativity method . Hatchuel et al . ( 2011 ) compare C – K theory to four other design the - ories using two criteria : generativeness and robustness . It is shown that the various theories represent an evolutionary development of our understanding of design , and not radical changes . An interesting ﬁnding is presented by Elmquist and Le Masson ( 2009 ) : a failed R & D project for developing an urban microbus is analyzed with C – K theory and the project is shown to make signiﬁcant contributions to the organiza - tion and to the ﬁeld of the design task . The developers of C – K theory also use the theory to develop a method called KCP for collective creative design ( Hatchuel et al . 2009 ) . It has been claimed that KCP contrasts with classical creativity techniques such as brainstorming , and has been successfully implemented in 14 industrial cases . Similarly , Zeiler ( 2012 ) uses C – K theory’s KCP model to enhance the integral design variant of systematic design , which uses combinations of morphological charts generated by individual designers to form a morphological overview representing the whole team . This work includes empirical evidence that the incorporation of aspects of C – K theory indeed increases the number of solutions generated by the designers . In summary , C – K theory is considered to be a general descriptive model with a strong logical foundation , resulting in powerful expressive capabilities . It is used in this research for modifying and enhancing the PA method while providing a theoretical foundation and validation support for the new model . 2 The R & D methodology In order to generate a new prescriptive model , we need to know how to perform research on design processes so that the results will be valid and acceptable . Blessing and Chakrabarti ( 2009 ) write : ‘‘Developing support [ support in 206 Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 123 this context is a design method ] should follow the same best practice recommended for developing products and soft - ware . Many aspects of design methodologies can be applied for support development . ’’ Based on this approach , the R & D methodology was designed as a combination of Jones’ descriptive model ( Jones 1963 ) and guiding principles from the design research methodology ( DRM ) structured frame - work ( Blessing and Chakrabarti 2009 ) indicating four dis - tinct stages for conducting design research : research clariﬁcation ( RC ) , descriptive study - I ( DS - I ) , prescriptive study ( PS ) , and descriptive study - II ( DS - II ) . Figure 1 presents the outline of the R & D methodology with the three stages of analysis , synthesis , and evaluation combined with the DRM stages . It incorporates ongoing evaluation by analyzing a multitude of realistic design problems in an iterative process of testing the model , improving it , testing again , etc . The case study demon - strated in Sect . 4 is one of the examples studied . The ﬁrst step of the analysis stage began with research clariﬁcation ( RC in the DRM ) . This step included a liter - ature survey , continued with an in - depth study of PA and C – K theory , followed by formulation of the research objective , working hypotheses , expectations , and success criteria , and ended by deﬁning the R & D methodology and speciﬁc research tasks ( R . T . ) , as follows : • R . T . # 1—Studying the effect of combining C – K theory and the PA method . • R . T . # 2—Redeﬁning key notions and terminology , and reformulating the existing models . • R . T . # 3—Studying and deﬁning the design exploration strategy . • R . T . # 4—Studying and deﬁning the use and composi - tion of design spaces . • R . T . # 5—Studying and deﬁning the design operators for moving within and between design spaces . • R . T . # 6—Deﬁning the new prescriptive model of con - ceptual engineering design . • R . T . # 7—Testing and evaluating the new prescriptive model ( i . e . , design experiment with external participants ) . The ﬁrst step above is analogous to need analysis in the case of product development . The analysis stage moves forward according to R . T . # 1 , which is an in - depth descriptive study ( DS - I in the DRM ) . The main goal in this step was to improve our understanding of all aspects of C – K theory and its interpretation of PA and vice versa . Pre - liminary outcomes can be found in Kroll et al . ( 2013 ) . Similar to the engineering design process , the synthesis stage of developing the new prescriptive model began with conceptualization in order to develop a set of key factors and principles , i . e . , the conceptual foundation or the ‘‘ideology’’ of the new prescriptive model . This was followed by R . T . # 2 – R . T . # 5 , which are part of the DS - I descriptive study . Having developed the conceptual foundation of the new model , the next step in the synthesis stage was prescriptive in nature , that is , PS in the DRM , according to R . T . # 6 . What was left to do at this stage was to combine all of the key factors and principles into a structured systematic procedure and for - mulate a speciﬁc model for every stage of the design process . Through ongoing evaluation and reﬁnement ( including iterations and re - examination of the conceptual foundation ) of different combinations , a viable and promising prescrip - tive model was realized . Conducting literature survey and comprehensive study of the reference models and improving understanding of existing and desired situations Clarification and formulation of research objective , hypotheses , expectations , success criteria and continuous development Formulation of specific research tasks ( R . T . # 1 – 7 ) Studying the effect of combining C - K Theory and the PA method ( R . T . # 1 ) The Analysis Stage RC Developing the new prescriptive model : o Conceptualization = Setting the conceptual foundation of the new model ( R . T . # 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 ) o Realization = Integrating the conceptual foundation into a structured systematic procedure , i . e . the new prescriptive model ( R . T . # 6 ) Ongoing evaluation The Synthesis Stage D S - I Developing the complete testing and evaluating procedure ( i . e . , experiment ) The Evaluation Stage Testing and evaluating the new model by external participants ( R . T . # 7 ) D S - II P S Fig . 1 The R & D methodology . The arrows show that iterations are commonplace between stages , thus the process is not rigid and linear . The DRM stages are shown on the right and Jones’ stages on the left . The research tasks ( R . T . ) are described in the text Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 207 123 Having deﬁned the new prescriptive model , the next stage is a second descriptive study , DS - II . The new model will be evaluated experimentally by examining the per - formance of external participants in using it , i . e . , R . T . # 7 . Setting the stage for the experimental work is brieﬂy out - lined in Sect . 6 , while full reporting will be the subject of a future article . 3 The idea - conﬁguration - evaluation ( ICE ) model The conceptual foundation of the new model is strongly based on C – K theory and the PA method , but also on general and independent ( of any design domain or method ) notions and aspects that have been recognized and con - sidered to have a strong bearing on the design process . The outcome is a set of key factors and principles that are integrated to form the new model , as explained below . The resulting model is summarized at the end of this section . 3 . 1 Design task statement and requirements The model employs the cognitive strategy of solution - focused reasoning ( Lawson 1979 ; Cross 2004 ; Kruger and Cross 2006 ) . At the beginning of the process , the designer will be guided to spend less time clarifying the design task and requirements , leave the problem somewhat ill - deﬁned , and focus initially on generating alternative solutions . In addition , the model employs the principle of solution – problem co - evolution ( Simon1972 ; Maher2001 ) , wherebythedesigntask and requirements are gradually reﬁned during conceptual design . At the end of the conceptual design stage , and before moving the design process to detail design , the problem as wellasthescopeofthedesigntaskandrequirementsshouldbe ﬁnalized and well understood and deﬁned . Accordingly , two types of design task statement and requirements are recog - nized : initial / ill - deﬁned and ﬁnal / well - deﬁned . The above approach is intended to better capture the dynamics of the design process in accordance with Chris - tiaans and Dorst ( 1992 ) , who found that more successful performance in terms of creativity and quality of the solution is achieved by one who ‘‘ … asks less information , processes it instantly , and gives the impression of con - sciously building up an image of the problem … ’’ . An additional and perhaps less academic argument can be made through the ‘‘business’’ aspect . Misunderstanding the task scope in terms of development risks , technological maturity , relevant engineering disciplines , required devel - opment tests , etc . may lead to ﬁnancial losses . In practice , the desired situation is that the development proposal responding to the client / customer requirements should be produced after the designer has understood the need , requirements and scope of the design task well . This can be achieved in most cases only after generating a conceptual solution that allows examining its applicability to the need and the given requirements . A similar principle of requirements reﬁnement can be found in the CDP model ( Bracha and Reich 2003 ) . 3 . 2 Representing the design artifact : the notion of concept PA and C – K theory differ in their deﬁnition of concept . PA’s concepts are ‘‘parameters , ’’ which are ideas or idea - tional - level issues such as functional descriptions , physical principles , core technologies , and analogies that shed new light on the design task . They constitute a rationale for evolving the design , but they do not include physical descriptions of the artifact . In contrast , C – K theory uses ‘‘concept’’ as a description of the solution , consisting of undecidable ( neither true nor false ) propositions . C – K’s concepts remain in C - space as long as the design is evolving and has not yet been proven true relative to the knowledge in K - space . PA deals with the parameters in its concept space , and with the physical or the hardware descriptions in its conﬁguration space . C – K theory , on the other hand , deals with the evolving object ( PA’s parame - ters and conﬁgurations ) as a single type of entity in its C - space , whose meaning is ‘‘There exists some object X , for which a group of properties P 1 , P 2 , … P n , are true in K’’ ( Hatchuel and Weil 2009 ) . The properties P i are generated in K - space , and are sometimes ideational in nature and sometimes conﬁgurative . From PA , we chose to preserve the distinction between parameters and conﬁgurations . From C – K , we took the notion of a single description of the evolving artifact , the concept . For this purpose , we deﬁne the data structure of a concept as C i ( IA 1 , IA 2 , … , IA m , SA 1 , SA 2 , … , SA n ) , where IA i is an ideational attribute and SA i is a structural attri - bute . The meaning of concept C i is that there exists some object C i , for which the ideational attributes IA 1 , IA 2 , … , IA m can be realized with speciﬁc structural attributes SA 1 , SA 2 , … , SA n . The ideational attributes correspond to PA’s parameters , and structural attributes to PA’s conﬁguration items . In the new model , a concept can evolve in two ways : 1 . By adding new ideational attribute ( s ) ( IA ) and some - times subtracting existing attribute ( s ) , ideational or structural . 2 . By realizing ideational attribute ( s ) with speciﬁc new structural attribute ( s ) ( SA ) , and actually creating a conﬁguration in PA terms . The ideational attributes represent the ideas , justiﬁca - tions , and reasoning behind the solution . They should be expressed in terms of physical principles , core technolo - gies , and other ideational - level terms , without a speciﬁc 208 Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 123 physical or hardware description . They are abstract in nature and created in almost every cycle of the conceptual design process . They can usually be represented by textual descriptions . The structural attributes describe how to realize or implement the ideational attributes as tangible entities , i . e . , representations of hardware . They can have the form of a sketch , CAD model , material properties , prototype , or some other speciﬁc physical or hardware description . Realization of structural attributes is a design activity that usually requires more time , effort , and some - times resources . The structural attributes differ from idea - tional attributes not only in their meaning , but also in their impact on the conceptual solution : they are more temporal during the conceptual design stage , they can change con - tinuously and according to the development of the idea - tional attributes . Structural attributes are needed mainly to enable quantitative evaluation of the evolving solution , so they may be described quite crudely , only enough to facilitate the evaluation . After completing the conceptual design stage , the structural attributes may be reﬁned in much more detail during the embodiment and detail design stages . As an example , consider a design task to monitor the number of air - volume exchanges in a room by measuring the air ﬂow through a duct ( adapted from Kroll et al . 2001 , p . 105 ) . A possible concept can be formulated as : measure the drag force exerted on an object immersed in the ﬂow ( the drag force is proportional to the ﬂow velocity squared , so this can provide a direct measure of the ﬂow rate ) . The drag force can be measured by a strain gage force - mea - suring transducer . This concept can be written as C ( IA 1 , IA 2 ) , meaning that it has two ideational attributes : IA 1 — measure the drag force exerted on an object immersed in the ﬂow , IA 2 —the drag force is measured by a strain gage . The concept is next realized by speciﬁc structural attri - butes : SA 1 —a circular aluminum disk , 2 00 in diameter and 1 / 32 00 thick , SA 2 —the disk is rigidly connected to the top surface of the duct through a ﬂat arm , 1 / 32 00 thick , 1 / 2 00 wide , and 3 00 long , SA 3 —a speciﬁc strain gage ( model no . , type , i . e . , foil , wire or semiconductor , etc . ) . The realized concept C ( IA 1 , IA 2 , SA 1 , SA 2 , SA 3 ) is shown in Fig . 2 . 3 . 3 How should the design process begin : the ﬁrst concept C 0 The ﬁrst concept C 0 is derived from the initial requirements list and refers to the basic functional attributes that the intended product should have . In other words , C 0 is a concise expression of the detailed requirements list , mainly in terms of top level functions . The rationale behind this deﬁnition is that requirements , which primarily deﬁne what the product should do and how well it should do it , are actually an initial expression of concept . The data structure of C 0 is therefore written as C 0 ( F 1 , F 2 , … , F n ) . As an example , let us assume a need that deﬁnes a design task for a stairwell cleaning robot . The basic func - tional attributes of the intended product can be written as : F 1 —soap and water ﬁlling , F 2 —autonomous movement upstairs and downstairs , F 3 —autonomous pick up of dry and loose dirt , F 4 —autonomous washing of surfaces , F 5 — unloading of dirt and dirty water . Consequently , C 0 is written as C 0 ( F 1 , F 2 , F 3 , F 4 , F 5 ) . The above deﬁnition of C 0 is strongly based on C – K theory . Hatchuel and Weil ( 2003 ) write explicitly that ‘‘in our framework the formulation of the requirements is a ﬁrst concept formulation which is expanded by the designer in a second concept that is called the proposal . ’’ According to C – K theory , a concept is an entity with undecidable logical status , neither true nor false , at the moment of its creation . There is no concept per se , but relative to some knowledge . The task of design , or the ‘‘intention’’ in C – K terms , is built into the deﬁnition of a concept . In other words , if a need , which is expressed by a list of requirements ( functions and constraints ) , can be met by an existing product without any changes or modiﬁcations , then there is no conceptual design task and certainly no innovative design process . The design process aims to generate an object that does not exist relative to existing knowledge . Hence , C 0 , which is a concise expression of the detailed requirements list , is actually an initial expression of concept . It should be noted that C 0 is not explicitly provided to the designer and should be generated from the initial engineering requirements . In typical design situations , it is not always easy to decide or recognize at the beginning of Fig . 2 Concept C ( IA 1 , IA 2 ) , realized with speciﬁc structural attributes SA 1 , SA 2 , SA 3 , resulting in concept C ( IA 1 , IA 2 , SA 1 , SA 2 , SA 3 ) Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 209 123 the design process , from the initial design task and requirements , what are the basic functional attributes that the intended product should have . Previous experience and knowledge can be useful , but this is not the main point or a necessary condition . The main point is that in ‘‘real life , ’’ some functions as well as critical design issues can only be discovered in the context of a particular solution . This is consistent with the principle of solution – problem co - evo - lution , so there is deﬁnitely a possibility that during the conceptual design stage , some of the basic functional attributes will be consolidated or changed , or other unex - pected ones emerge ( see evaluation decision 5 below ) . 3 . 4 Design exploration strategy The model employs the design exploration strategy of steepest - ﬁrst ( Kroll et al . 2014 ) concerning the most difﬁ - cult and challenging aspect ( s ) of the design task , combined with an ongoing iterative process of divergent thinking about ideational attributes and convergent thinking regarding structural attributes . 3 . 4 . 1 Steepest - ﬁrst strategy After creating C 0 , the designer should focus ﬁrst on the most difﬁcult and challenging aspect ( s ) of the task , those that make the design task a concept relative to the existing knowledge . The main argument for justifying this approach is based on recognizing the function – form dependence in design ( Gero and Kannengiesser 2004 ) . This means that a structure created to provide some function usually results in new behaviors , themselves requiring structural modiﬁ - cations , and so on . Hence , in order to increase the effec - tiveness and efﬁciency of the design process , it makes more sense to deal ﬁrst with the most difﬁcult and challenging aspects , and assume that the easier ones will be satisﬁed later in a way that complies with the previously solved issues . However , despite following this ‘‘steepest - ﬁrst’’ strategy , the designer should constantly evaluate the evolving solution relative to all the design aspects and the requirements behind them . This ensures that the solution created to provide one function of C 0 will be compatible with the others , and conﬂicting solutions avoided . The steepest - ﬁrst strategy is maintained throughout the concept development process . When weaknesses in a concept are uncovered by an evaluation step ( see Sect . 3 . 6 ) , the more challenging of those should be addressed before proceeding with resolving easier aspects . 3 . 4 . 2 Divergent and convergent thinking Due to the ongoing iterative nature of the design process , and in accordance with the distinction between ideational and structural attributes , the model implements the strategy of ‘‘breadth thinking’’ concerning ideational attributes and ‘‘depth thinking’’ concerning structural attributes . The practical implication of this approach is that the designer is guided—depending on feasibility and necessity—to gen - erate several alternative ideational solutions regarding the most difﬁcult and challenging aspect ( s ) of the design task or the most critical issues of the moment . By cursory evaluation of the alternatives , perhaps by reviewing their pros and cons and using general and qualitative criteria , the designer should then determine which has the better chances of resulting in a successful solution . The most promising ideational alternative will be selected for further reﬁnement and realization with structural attributes . It is the nature of design processes that the usefulness , neces - sity , and variety of alternative ideational solutions decrease as the process unfolds and converges towards a ﬁnal con - ceptual solution . The main arguments for justifying this exploration strategy are as follows : • There may be a legitimate question of why to select among the alternative solutions and not reﬁne them all in depth and make the selection at the end of the process . We believe that evaluation that takes place continuously during the design process , together with the possibility and ﬂexibility of backtracking at any given moment , should be an integral part of the process control and learning that take place during design . This evaluation increases the likelihood of screening and ﬁltering the evolving concepts in the most promising direction . This approach is in contrast with design methods in which the designer makes great efforts to develop a number of alternatives in depth ( e . g . , Ullman 2010 ) , and at the end of the process applies a traditional evaluation method such as Pugh’s ( 1991 ) to choose the best concept . However , convergent thinking concerning structural attributes is not a hard rule . There are certainly cases where the degree of innovation , the development risks and the level of uncertainty are so high , that two ( or more ) alternative ideational solutions are developed in parallel , realized in depth with structural attributes , sometimes up to the stage of prototype production , and the best concept is chosen at the end of the process . • Divergent thinking about ideational attributes and convergent thinking concerning structural attributes seem more effective in terms of time , effort and the potential for innovation . This strategy is in agreement with the Branch and Bound search algorithms ( Hillier and Lieberman 2005 ; Kroll and Weisbrod 2015 ) , which take the best path in order to reduce the number of possible searches . Branch is analogous to diverging 210 Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 123 with a variety of alternative ideational solutions and bound is analogous to converging to the most promis - ing concept of the moment for in - depth reﬁnement and realization with structural attributes . • In practice , designers often think informally and rapidly of several alternatives and select the most promising one for further development . Our model formalizes this way of thinking so that a variety of alternative ideational solutions is generated explicitly . • Fricke ( 1996 ) examined protocol studies of engineering designers and found that both generating only one or very few alternative solutions and generating a large number of different solutions resulted in poor designs . The ﬁrst approach caused ﬁxation on one solution too early , while in the second , too much time was spent organizing and managing the alternatives rather than focusing on their effective evaluation and modiﬁcation . Fricke identiﬁed successful designers to be those conducting a balanced search for alternative solutions . This balanced , effective procedure is implemented in our model as divergent thinking concerning ideational attributes and convergent thinking concerning struc - tural attributes . • Shah and Noe ( 2003 ) claim that an approach that generates more ideas increases the chance of better ideas . Directing the designer to generate a variety of alternative ideational solutions ( divergent thinking regarding ideational attributes ) , is less demanding in terms of time and effort than full development of multiple solutions , and has a good chance of obtaining a good solution , not just any solution , in terms of creativity and innovation . • Protocol studies show that most designers form quite early an underlying core concept and keep pursuing it even when faced with implementation difﬁculties . Rowe ( 1987 ) observed that ‘‘A dominant inﬂuence is exerted by initial design ideas on subsequent problem solving directions … . Even when severe problems are encountered , a considerable effort is made to make the initial idea work , rather than to stand back and adopt a fresh point of departure . ’’ Ullman and Dietterich ( 1987 ) found that ‘‘designers typically pursue only a single design proposal … there were many cases where major problems had been identiﬁed in a proposal and yet the designer preferred to apply patches rather than to reject the proposal outright and develop a better one . ’’ A similar observation was made by Ball et al . ( 1994 ) , who attributed this behavior to ﬁxation on early core concept . A prescriptive model that allows a dynamic and ﬂexible process , and assimilates new insights and knowledge created during the process ( which may sometimes contradict or not match earlier concepts ) , seems to increase the likelihood of avoiding ﬁxation on early concepts . This has been implemented in our model by a combination of divergent thinking con - cerning ideational attributes and convergent thinking concerning structural attributes . 3 . 5 Design spaces Woodbury and Burrow ( 2006 ) claim that design repre - sentations are ‘‘ … invariants of the exploration view and are necessary properties of a useful design space repre - sentation . ’’ Many ‘‘spaces’’ appear in the design theory literature : customer space , function space , physical space , process space , problem space , solution space , structure space , behavior space , search space , idea space , concept space , and more ( Suh 1990 ; Maher 2001 ; Dorst and Cross 2001 ; Bracha and Reich 2003 ; Weber 2005 ; Gero and Kannengiesser 2004 ; Goldschmidt 2014 ; Marques et al . 2014 ) . Design in the PA method is performed by back - and - forth movement between two spaces : the concept and conﬁguration spaces . C – K theory’s design is an ongoing interplay between the concept ( C ) and knowledge ( K ) spaces . In general , it seems that many design models distinguish between two spaces : the space where the need , goals , requirements , and design task are deﬁned—the problem space—and the space where the designer gener - ates or searches for a possible solution—the solution space . This is explicit in Maher’s co - evolution model , and implicit in Suh’s axiomatic design , where the customer and functional spaces are analogous to the problem space and the physical and process spaces are equivalent to the solution space . Similarly , in Gero and Kannengiesser’s FBS model , the function and behavior spaces correspond to the problem space and the structure spaces is analogous to the solution space ; in Bracha and Reich’s coupled design process ( CDP ) , the function space is similar to the problem space and the structure space is equivalent to the solution space . In PA , the movements between the concept space and the conﬁguration space—alternating between realiza - tion and abstraction—occur after the customer needs and requirements have been analyzed and converted to a set of engineering requirements . This makes both the concept and conﬁguration spaces comparable to the solution space . In most models , there is no explicit distinction between the abstract level , that is , the ideational attributes behind the design solution , and the level of hardware representa - tion , i . e . , the structural attributes . PA seems to be the only one which explicitly distinguishes between these two levels through its concept and conﬁguration spaces . C – K theory stands out as a descriptive model that deﬁnes the design spaces in terms of logical status and not in terms of object state or type . This is a signiﬁcant difference concerning Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 211 123 what is a concept and what is the intention to design . The relevant spaces in our model follow C – K theory while integrating PA spaces into them . The new model comprises two design spaces : a concept space and a knowledge space . In the C - space of C – K , we included both PA spaces , such that in our framework the concept space explicitly represents the evolving concept in terms of both ideational and structural attributes . The concept space develops as a tree structure and is used as the ‘‘intention to design’’ ( Hatchuel and Weil 2002 ) , or in other words , it is the ‘‘fuel’’ that drives the design process . Additionally , it is used as a representation , documentation , and reﬂection of the ideational and structural attributes that are generated during the design process ; a sort of ‘‘bookkeeping’’ mechanism of the evolving concept . This makes the concept space in the new model analogous to a solution space . PA does not explicitly represent the knowledge used in design , although knowledge is extensively used and gen - erated by it as in any design process . This means that the design activities , or the reasoning process , take place within the knowledge space , so that the ideational and structural attributes that are generated during the design process come from the knowledge space . The knowledge space can be characterized by two dimensions : the type of knowledge and the mode of knowledge expansion . The type of knowledge refers to knowledge required and used during the design process : general , domain - speciﬁc and procedural knowledge ( adapted from Ullman and Diet - terich 1987 ; Culley 2014 ) . Brieﬂy , general knowledge refers to knowledge represented by existing data ( i . e . , information ) , education , and ongoing experience with dif - ferent design tasks and engineering disciplines ; domain - speciﬁc knowledge refers to knowledge that is required for the speciﬁc design task ; and procedural knowledge refers to knowledge about how to undertake the design process in order to generate a solution , i . e . , the problem - solving methodology . Our model includes three modes of knowl - edge expansion : initial , ongoing and ﬁnal , as follows : • Initial knowledge expansion—a stage of need analysis ( using tools such as House of Quality or others ) involves translating the customer’s need ( the initial knowledge ) into a set of more elaborate , precise , and quantitative engineering descriptions of what the pro - duct should do and how well it should do it . The outcome—the added knowledge—is an initial , some - times ill - deﬁned , design task statement , and engineer - ing requirements list and subsequently , generation of C 0 in the concept space . • Ongoing knowledge expansion—once the designer has set up C 0 , the starting point in the concept space , an iterative design exploration begins . Each cycle is accompanied by searching for new knowledge ( using general , domain - speciﬁc , and procedural knowledge ) , so there is an ongoing process of knowledge expansion , where new knowledge about the evolving concept is added to existing knowledge ( K ? K in C – K terms ) . The trigger for knowledge expansion comes from concept exploration . Subsequently , the added new knowledge is used to expand or include the concept tree by adding or subtracting ideational or structural attribute ( s ) to the evolving concept . This process continues until the designer reaches a satisfactory conceptual solution . • Final knowledge expansion—before the process con - tinues to detail design , the design task , and require - ments should be ﬁnalized and become well understood and deﬁned . The ﬁnal concept , as well as the knowl - edge generated during the ongoing knowledge expan - sion , i . e . , new and sometimes unexpected evaluation criteria and design aspects , is used to reﬁne the scope of the design task and the engineering requirements to a ﬁnal and well - deﬁned state . 3 . 6 Design operators The design operators for moving within and between the design spaces are a combination of synthesis ( of ideational or structural attributes ) and evaluation , with ‘‘oscillations’’ between them . The synthesis activity is deﬁned by two types of operators : ideational synthesis ( IS ) and structural synthesis ( SS ) . The task of the IS operation is to generate new or improved concepts by adding new ideational attri - butes and sometimes subtracting existing attributes ( idea - tional and structural ) . The task of the SS operation is to realize the new ideational attributes with new speciﬁc structural attributes , and move the design process from the ideational level into the structural or conﬁgurational level . While both synthesis operators produce new entities , their application is controlled by evaluation steps . The new model incorporates three types of evaluation operators ( E ) , deﬁned as follows : • E type I—To facilitate the design exploration strategy of steepest - ﬁrst , E type I is an activity in which the designer evaluates all the design aspects and chooses to focus ﬁrst on the most difﬁcult and challenging aspect ( s ) of the task . E type I is applied only to C 0 . • E type II—To expedite the design exploration strategy of convergent thinking regarding structural attributes , E type II is an activity of selection whose purpose is to narrow down optional solution paths . The designer determines which of the alternative ideational solutions has a better chance of resulting in a successful solution and ( at least temporarily ) pursues that path . Having in mind only a 212 Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 123 general description of the ideational solutions , E type II is performed by cursory comparative evaluation , perhaps by reviewing the pros and cons of each alternative using general and qualitative criteria such as ease of achieving low weight , availability of technological capabilities , robustness , simplicity , and cost . • E type III—This is a type of analysis , and can be applied to concepts that already have some structural attributes ( i . e . , conﬁgurations represented as sketches , CAD models , important dimensions , and material properties , etc . ) The main objectives of E type III , and respectively , the added new knowledge that this operator generates , are to ( 1 ) provide quantitative insights about the performance and behavior of the evolving solution ; ( 2 ) reveal weaknesses , new critical design issues and contradictions ( technical and physi - cal ) that cause non - compliance with the requirements or otherwise render the solution unfeasible ; ( 3 ) discover new evaluation criteria that should be applied together with the existing ones , and are part of the reﬁnement process that brings the engineering requirements from being initial and ill - deﬁned to ﬁnal and well - deﬁned ; and ( 4 ) make a decision on how to proceed . Many analysis , modeling and simulation approaches can be used in E type III ; for example , TRIZ ( Altshuller 1984 ) for identiﬁcation of contradictions and the dimensional analysis conceptual modeling ( DACM ) framework ( Coat - ane´a et al . 2016 ) from systems engineering . One of the aspects handled by this evaluation activity is avoiding conﬂicts and checking compatibility among the solutions of the various functions in C 0 . E type III includes making one of the following deci - sions regarding the continuation of the design process : 1 . Decision 1—If the concept’s behavior is as desired and nothing is missing , then stop the process , meaning that the conceptual solution is complete . 2 . Decision 2—If an undesired behavior is detected or something is still missing in the concept , but its value is still considered to be the highest among all the other existing concepts—that is , there is a chance that the undesired behavior can be ﬁxed—then try to improve the current path by adding new ideational attributes and sometimes subtracting existing ideational and structural attributes to / from the latest concept . 3 . Decision 3—If the undesired behavior results from critical issues that seem unsolvable , then stop the current path , subtract existing ideational and structural attributes , and backtrack to an existing but unexplored path , i . e . , to an alternative ideational solutions from previous steps , which had not been selected earlier for in - depth reﬁnement and realization with structural attributes . 4 . Decision 4—If the value of all existing concepts is very low , then stop the current path , subtract existing ideational and structural attributes , and backtrack to an unknown path , i . e . , a totally different or new solution direction that had not been considered earlier . 5 . Decision 5—If the value of all existing concepts is very low , and there is no new solution direction , then the validity of the root concept , C 0 , itself should be re - examined and perhaps modiﬁed to a new , more general root concept , C 0 0 . This is called ‘‘de - partitioning’’ in C – K terms and has been demonstrated in Kroll et al . ( 2014 ) . Decision 1 is the stopping condition for the process , while decision 2 maintains a ‘‘linear’’ path of developing a solution . Decisions 3 , 4 , and 5 represent backtracking possibilities that provide the designer with the ﬂexibility required of a ‘‘real - life’’ dynamic design process . 3 . 7 Summary of the ICE model Figure 3 is a schematic of the new prescriptive model . The design process begins with need analysis so that the cus - tomer’s needs and requirements—the initial knowledge—is expanded to produce the initial and sometimes ill - deﬁned task statement and engineering requirements . Next , the ﬁrst concept C 0 is generated in the concept space and consti - tutes the root node of the concept tree ( C – K’s disjunction ) . The design exploration moves forward by C 0 activating the ongoing knowledge expansion . According to the steepest - ﬁrst strategy , and based on general and domain - speciﬁc knowledge , the E type I evaluation operator is used to decide on the most difﬁcult and challenging aspect ( s ) of the design task , those that make the task a concept relative to the existing knowledge ( C – K’s K - relativity ) . Next , by applying the ideational synthesis ( IS ) operator and in compliance with the design strategy of divergent thinking about ideational attributes , several alternative ideational solutions , i . e . , concepts of how to implement the most difﬁcult and challenging aspect ( s ) of C 0 , are generated . The concepts are expressed by groups of ideational attributes and in effect expand the concept space . The second step of the ongoing knowledge expansion consists of generating structural attributes . To facilitate the design exploration strategy of convergent thinking regarding structural attributes , E type II evaluation is applied to determine which of the potential concepts has a better chance of resulting in a successful solution ( this concept is sometimes referred to as having the highest value among all the concepts ) . The selected concept is next realized by applying the structural synthesis ( SS ) operator , resulting in a new concept whose meaning is that the ideational attributes are now realized with the speciﬁc structural attributes . Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 213 123 The third step of the ongoing knowledge expansion consists of a quantitative performance evaluation . By applying the E type III evaluation operator and using general and domain - speciﬁc knowledge to carry out approximate calculations and assessments , the designer evaluates the behavior of the evolving concept and accordingly makes a decision on how to proceed . If the design is still incomplete , a new cycle of design explo - ration begins according to one of the decisions 2 , 3 , 4 , or 5 . All in all , moving the design process from the ideational level ( ellipses in the concept space of Fig . 3 ) to the structural or conﬁgurational level ( square boxes ) is done by applying an E type II evaluation operator plus structural synthesis ( SS ) . Moving from the structural level back to the ideational one is done by applying an E type III evaluation plus ideational synthesis ( IS ) operators ( in the case of decisions 2 – 5 ) . This iterative process takes place until the designer reaches a satisfactory conceptual solution . Once a con - ceptual solution to the most difﬁcult and challenging aspect ( s ) of C 0 has been ﬁnalized , the designer should deal with the other , easier aspects , by repeating the process and of course maintaining compatibility with previously gen - erated solutions . When a ﬁnal concept has been reached , covering all aspects of C 0 , the design exploration stops ( C – K’s conjunction ) , and a ﬁnal knowledge expansion takes place whereby the design task and requirements are ﬁnal - ized and become well understood and deﬁned . C 0 ' …… Stop the process , the conceptual design is complete ( decision 1 ) Concept - Space ( The outcome ) Knowledge - Space ( The reasoning process ) Ongoing / iterative process of ± IA or SA Selected concept Need Initial / ill - defined o Design task statement o Engineering requirements list Need Analysis C 0 …… C 0 ( F 1 , F 2 , F 3 , … , F n ) The next design cycle C f Final / well - defined o Scope of the design task o Engineering requirements list o The final concept for detail design Most difficult and challenging aspect ( s ) o Weaknesses , critical design issues and contradictions o New evaluation criteria ( if identified ) o Decision on how to proceed Fig . 3 The ICE model . Ellipses denote concepts generated by adding new ideational attribute ( s ) and sometimes subtracting existing attribute ( s ) ( ideational or structural ) . Square boxes denote concepts realized with added speciﬁc structural attribute ( s ) . Bold arrows denote ongoing / iterative processes 214 Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 123 4 Demonstration The following is a real design task that originated in the defense industry . 4 . 1 Problem description Today , most combat ships are equipped with electronic warfare systems and radar counter measures ( RCM ) in order to protect themselves against threats such as radar - guided missiles . The RCM is activated when an attack is either expected or detected . The basic idea is that the ship under attack creates an illusion of a radar image at a certain distance from the ship . The expected outcome is that the missile will be guided towards the decoy . Fig - ure 4 schematically illustrates the deployment of a radar decoy : an airborne vehicle is launched from a ship and ﬁred into a trajectory . It is propelled by a rocket motor or launched by a piece of artillery . At a given point on the trajectory , and initiated by self - timing , the folded radar decoy is ejected from the airborne vehicle and deploys to become operative . Most existing RCM decoys are based on chaff . How - ever , modern radar - guided missiles are capable of ignoring the chaff , so defeating these threats require a different physical principle . An effective solution is based on a corner reﬂector , which returns a signal with similar char - acteristics to the real target . Corner reﬂectors , as shown schematically in Fig . 5 , consist of three mutually perpen - dicular , intersecting ﬂat surfaces that reﬂect the radio waves directly back towards the source . The corner reﬂector surfaces should be made from conductive material . 4 . 2 Conceptual design using the ICE model The focus in this demonstration is on the RCM , therefore the list of requirements relates only to limited aspects of the entire problem . In addition , in the above design task , part of the solution to create a realistic radar image was actually deﬁned by the customer , i . e . , a solution that should be based on the principle of a corner reﬂector , and not chaff or another alternative . However , no particular solution for implementing it was deﬁned . 4 . 2 . 1 The initial knowledge expansion The design process begins with need analysis so that the customer’s need is analyzed . Consequently , the design task statement is formulated as developing an RCM that is based on the principle of a corner reﬂector . The deploy - ment method is required to remain as in the process described in Fig . 4 . Next , a list of initial engineering requirements is generated as follows ( only a partial list is presented ) : 1 . The radar decoy should have eight back - to - back trihedral corner reﬂectors . 2 . The airborne vehicle chamber is required to have a maximum diameter of 130 mm and length of 750 mm ( compatible with standard / existing launchers ) . 3 . The required deployment altitude is about 500 m above sea level . 4 . The required deployment distance from the ship is between d 1 and d 2 m ( actual numbers are conﬁdential ) . 5 . The decoy should stay in the air for at least 60 s . 6 . The maximum deployment time ( to be operative ) should be 2 s . 7 . The maximum payload mass ( the decoy ) is 15 kg . 8 . The length ( L ) of each side of the trihedral corner reﬂector should be at least 1 m . 9 . The decoy surfaces must be perpendicular to each other with a maximum deviation of ± 3 (cid:3) . 10 . Each decoy’s surface , S , is allowed to have a maximum deﬂection of 5 mm . 11 . The corner reﬂector surfaces must be made of a reﬂective material that can be folded into the airborne vehicle chamber . 12 . The required reliability of the solution is such that it will deploy properly after being packed in the folded state for a long time . Next , according to the deﬁnition of the ﬁrst concept , C 0 is generated in the concept space , so that C 0 ( F 1 , F 2 , F 3 , F 4 ) is deﬁned by the following four basic functions : Fig . 4 Schematic description of deploying a radar decoy Fig . 5 A corner reﬂector ( one trihedral shown ) . S surface , L length Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 215 123 F 1 —Launch an airborne vehicle from a ship launcher . F 2 —Fly along a given trajectory . F 3 —Eject a decoy at a given point on the trajectory . F 4 —Create an illusion of a realistic radar image by a corner reﬂector . At this stage , the initial knowledge expansion is com - plete , as shown in Fig . 6 . 4 . 2 . 2 The ongoing knowledge expansion Step # 1—The design exploration moves forward so that C 0 is used to activate the ongoing knowledge expansion . According to the steepest - ﬁrst strategy , and based on general and domain - speciﬁc knowledge , the E type I evaluation operator is applied and F 4 identiﬁed as the most difﬁcult and challenging aspect in relation to the other functions ( F 1 , F 2 , and F 3 ) , for which solutions are basically known and in this particular case do not require innovative design . In fact , F 4 is the design aspect that makes C 0 a concept relative to the existing knowledge due to the challenge of generating a realistic radar image which is based on the corner reﬂector . Next , by applying the idea - tional synthesis ( IS ) operator and according to the design strategy of divergent thinking concerning ideational attri - butes , four alternative ideational solutions—concepts of how to implement F 4 of C 0 —are generated . The concepts are expressed by groups of ideational attributes ( IA i ) , and actually expand the concept space . The reasoning process and the outcome of step # 1 are shown in Fig . 7 . Step # 2—The second step of the ongoing knowledge expansion consists of the ﬁrst generation of structural attributes . Following the design exploration strategy of convergent thinking concerning structural attributes , and by applying the E type II evaluation operator , concept C 1 is selected to be ﬁrst for in - depth reﬁnement and realization with structural attributes . The evaluation at this step is made by reviewing some pros and cons of each potential concept ( C 1 – C 4 ) using general and domain - speciﬁc quali - tative criteria . Having in mind only a crude description of each concept , C 3 seems the most complicated and least reliable solution , while C 1 and C 2 are seen as having the potential to be simpler ( have fewer components ) , less costly , and more reliable , with C 4 being somewhere in between . Hence , concept C 1 is valued higher relative to the other concepts , that is , V ( C 1 ) [ V ( C 2 ) [ V ( C 4 ) [ V ( C 3 ) . Concept C 1 is next realized by applying the structural synthesis ( SS ) operator , using general and domain - speciﬁc knowledge , resulting in concept C 5 whose meaning is that the ideational attributes of concept C 1 are now realized with added speciﬁc structural attributes . The reasoning process and the outcome of step # 2 are shown in Fig . 8 . Step # 3—The third step of the ongoing knowledge expansion comprises the ﬁrst quantitative performance evaluation . By applying the E type III evaluation operator , using general and domain - speciﬁc knowledge , and making approximate calculations and assessments , the behavior of concept C 5 shows that ( 1 ) the total foam weight is about 35 kg , i . e . , non - compliance with requirement # 7 , ( 2 ) the time in the air is about 39 s , i . e . , non - compliance with requirement # 5 , ( 3 ) the compression capability is about 40 % , which means that there is non - compliance with requirements # 2 and 11 , i . e . , folding into small dimensions of / 130 9 750 mm , and ( 4 ) a typical compression set of foams is about 10 % , which means that the structure will not deploy to the fully expanded position after being packed in the folded state for a long time , i . e . , non - com - pliance with requirement # 12 . Based on these ﬁndings , which involve critical issues that seem unsolvable , it is decided ( decision 3 ) to stop the current path ( concept C 1 followed by C 5 ) , subtract existing ideational and structural attributes IA 1 , IA 2 , SA 1 , SA 2 , SA 3 , SA 4 , and backtrack to an existing but unexplored path starting with ideational concepts C 2 , C 3 , and C 4 . The reasoning process and the outcome of step # 3 are shown in Fig . 9 . Step # 4—The fourth step of the ongoing knowledge expansion is the second generation of concepts for which the ideational attributes are realized with added speciﬁc structural attributes . Based on the previous E type II evaluation , which was made in step # 2 , and according to the exploration strategy of convergent thinking concerning structural attributes , concept C 2 is selected for further reﬁnement and realization with structural attributes . By applying the structural synthesis ( SS ) operator , using gen - eral and domain - speciﬁc knowledge such as design of parachutes , concept C 2 is now realized with speciﬁc structural attributes , resulting in concept C 6 as shown in Fig . 10 . Step # 5—The ﬁfth step of the ongoing knowledge expansion constitutes the second quantitative performance evaluation . By applying the E type III evaluation operator , using general and domain - speciﬁc knowledge , and making approximate calculations and assessments together with more precise engineering tools , such as computational ﬂuid dynamics ( CFD ) simulation , the performance behavior of concept C 6 shows that ( 1 ) the total weight is about 15 kg , Concept - Space ( The outcome ) Knowledge - Space ( The reasoning process ) Need Need Analysis C 0 ( F 1 , F 2 , F 3 , F 4 ) C 0 Initial / ill - defined o Design task statement o Engineering requirements list Fig . 6 The initial knowledge expansion and the subsequent gener - ation of C 0 in the concept space 216 Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 123 i . e . , compliance with requirement # 7 , ( 2 ) using the equa - tion of mg = (cid:2) 9 q 9 C d 9 A 9 V 2 ( where the mass , m , is 15 kg , the air density , q , is 1 . 225 kg / m 3 , the drag coef - ﬁcient , C d , of a hemispherical parachute is about 1 . 2 , the effective surface area is A = 3 . 14 m 2 , and the deployment altitude is about 500 m ) , the total time in the air is calcu - lated to be about 63 s , i . e . , compliance with requirement # 5 , ( 3 ) the compression capability is about 80 % , which means that there is compliance with requirements # 2 and 11 , i . e . , it folds into small dimensions of / 130 9 750 mm , ( 4 ) the pure - silver fabric does not suffer deterioration of its radar reﬂection properties after having been folded , stret - ched , or pressed together , i . e . , compliance with require - ment # 12 , ( 5 ) a CFD simulation shows that the incoming ﬂow of air through the horizontal panel into the parachute canopy is insufﬁcient . The result is that the decoy surfaces are not stretched enough and hence there is non - compli - ance with requirements # 9 and 10 . Based on these ﬁndings , which involve one critical issue , it is decided to try to improve concept C 6 , i . e . , decision 2 . By applying the ideational synthesis ( IS ) operator and following the design strategy of divergent thinking concerning ideational attri - butes , two alternative ideational solutions ( concepts ) are generated . The reasoning process and the outcome of step # 5 are shown in Fig . 11 . For brevity , the next steps of the ongoing knowledge expansion are not elaborated in detail here . In short , the next step , step # 6 , is driven by the E type II evaluation plus structural synthesis ( SS ) operators . Concept C 7 is selected ( between C 7 and C 8 ) for in - depth reﬁnement and Step # 1 The input to the knowledge space Concept C 0 The reasoning process ( and respective new knowledge ) Evaluation ( E type I ) → Most difficult and challenging aspect ( s ) → F 4 Ideational Synthesis ( IS ) → C 1 to C 4 , such that : Concept C 1 IA 1 - Shape eight trihedral corner reflectors from flexible foam . IA 2 - The flexible foam will be coated with flexible and conductive material . Concept C 2 IA 3 - Shape eight trihedral corner reflectors from flexible conductive material . IA 4 - The flexible conductive material will be placed inside the inflated canopy of a descending parachute . IA 5 - The decoy will be deployed by the forces generated by the parachute’s opening . Concept C 3 IA 3 ( existing ideational attribute ) - Shape eight trihedral corner reflectors from flexible conductive material . IA 6 - The decoy will be deployed by a collapsible mechanism , similar to the principle of an umbrella . Concept C 4 IA 3 ( existing ideational attribute ) - Shape eight trihedral corner reflectors from flexible conductive material . IA 7 - The decoy surfaces will be deployed by an inflatable structure . IA 8 - The inflating device will include a central pressure vessel with helium gas . The input to the concept space Concepts C 1 , C 2 , C 3 , C 4 ) 4 , F 3 , F 2 , F 1 ( F 0 C Concept - Space ( The outcome ) Knowledge - Space ( The reasoning process ) ) 2 , IA 1 ( IA 1 C ) 5 , IA 4 , IA 3 ( IA 2 C ) 6 , IA 3 ( IA 3 C ) 8 , IA 7 , IA 3 ( IA 4 C 1 C 2 C 3 C 4 C 0 C Most difficult and challenging aspect ( s ) → F 4 Fig . 7 The ongoing knowledge expansion , step # 1 , and the subsequent generation of concepts C 1 , C 2 , C 3 , and C 4 in the concept space Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 217 123 realization with the new structural attributes SA 11 , SA 12 , and SA 13 . The outcome in the concept space , concept C 9 , is shown in Fig . 12 . Concept C 9 is next evaluated by the E type III evaluation operator ( step # 7 ) . The result shows that concept C 9 is not robust in crosswinds ( i . e . , a new critical issue whose meaning is non - compliance with requirements # 9 and 10 ) . Subse - quently , a new evaluation criterion emerges ( resistance to 15 - knot crosswinds ) . The decision made is to backtrack to concept C 4 , the inﬂatable structure ( decision 3 ) , keeping SA 6 ( the reﬂective material ) and continue with the next design cycle . The ongoing knowledge expansion and subsequent generation of new concepts ( i . e . , the evolution of concept C 4 ) in the concept space progress in accordance with the ICE model and the outcome is that concept C 4 eventually becomes a ﬁnal concept C f , which seems a promising con - cept in that it satisﬁes all the requirements . The ﬁnal concept , as well as the partial concept tree , is shown in Fig . 13 . 4 . 2 . 3 The ﬁnal knowledge expansion Arriving at the ﬁnal concept , C f has generated several new and unexpected evaluation criteria and design aspects as a result of the ongoing knowledge expansion . Each of the new design aspects results in new engineering requirements and in fact expands the scope of the design task with sig - niﬁcant ﬁnancial implication in relation to what was understood at the beginning of the design process . For example , the ﬁnal concept involves development of an inﬂating device . This design aspect was impossible to identify at the beginning and has been created in response to the speciﬁc conceptual solution . The inﬂating device itself should generate new engineering requirements , such as weight and dimensions of the pressure vessel , gas vol - ume and mass , burst factor , rate of inﬂation , and more . Hatchuel and Weil ( 2003 ) say about such occurrence : ‘‘Design does not only transform projects into solutions , Step # 2 The input to the knowledge space Concepts C 1 , C 2 , C 3 , C 4 The reasoning process ( and respective new knowledge ) Evaluation ( E type II ) → Selected concept among C 1 , C 2 , C 3 , C 4 → C 1 Structural Synthesis ( SS ) → C 5 , such that : Concept C 5 = C 1 + ( SA 1 , SA 2 , SA 3 , SA 4 ) SA 1 - The foam is made of closed cell polyethylene with an average density of 25 kg / m 3 SA 2 - The outer diameter of the structure is 2 m ( so that L = 1 m ) SA 3 - The thickness of the structure is 15 cm ( for toughness ) SA 4 - The foam is coated with conductive flexible fabric with surface resistivity < X ohm ( actual number is classified ) The input to the concept space Concept C 5 Space - Concept ) The outcome ( Space - Knowledge ( The reasoning process ) C 0 ( F 1 , F 2 , F 3 , F 4 ) ) 2 , IA 1 ( IA 1 C ) 5 , IA 4 , IA 3 ( IA 2 C ) 6 , IA 3 ( IA 3 C ) 8 , IA 7 , IA 3 ( IA 4 C C 1 C 2 C 3 C 4 C 0 Selected concept → C 1 5 C = C 5 = C 1 + ( SA 1 , SA 2 , SA 3 , SA 4 ) Fully expanded position ) 3 SA ( cm 15 ) 2 A S 2m ( ϕ ) 1 SA Selected foam ( Conductive flexible ) 4 SA fabric ( Coated surfaces 1m 1m 1m Fig . 8 The ongoing knowledge expansion , step # 2 , and the subsequent generation of concept C 5 in the concept space 218 Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 123 but also projects into projects , or design problems into design problems . ’’ 5 Discussion The ICE model uses C – K theory and contributions from other models of the design process to introduce major modiﬁcations to the PA method . The model constitutes a prescription for doing conceptual design in a way that is conducive to teaching , learning , and practicing . C – K the - ory’s major contribution to the new model is in providing soundness through the reliance on a well - documented and widely accepted theory . The two spaces from C – K theory , namely the concept space and the knowledge space , are retained in the ICE model to explain its working : C - space contains the evolving solutions , which in turn trigger knowledge expansion in the K - space . The knowledge space is where the design reasoning takes place , and new knowledge allows expansions and inclusions in the C - space , thus facilitating creativity and innovation . While the original distinction made in C – K theory between the spaces based on logical statuses is still valid , the new model gives them a more practical orientation . A unique characteristic of the new model , originating from PA , is the distinction between ideational and struc - tural attributes of a concept , and accordingly , the division of the synthesis activity into ideational synthesis ( IS ) and structural synthesis ( SS ) . This feature is useful and effec - tive for the following reasons : • Similar to the philosophy of brainstorming , which is based on separating the creation stage from the evaluation stage so that ‘‘crazy’’ ideas are welcomed Step # 3 The input to the knowledge space Concept C 5 The reasoning process ( and respective new knowledge ) Evaluation ( E type III ) → (cid:2) Performance behavior of concept C 5 : The total weight is about 35 kg > 15 kg ( Req . # 7 ) Time in the air is about 39 sec < 60 sec ( Req . # 5 ) Compression capability is only about 40 % ( Req . # 2 , 11 ) Does not deploy to fully expanded position after being packed for a long time ( Req . # 12 ) (cid:2) Weakness , critical design issues and contradictions → four issues that seem unsolvable . (cid:2) New evaluation criteria → No . (cid:2) Decision on how to proceed → ( decision 3 ) stop the current path , i . e . , concepts C 1 followed by C 5 , subtract IA 1 , IA 2 , SA 1 , SA 2 , SA 3 , SA 4 and backtrack to an existing but unexplored path , i . e . , ideational concepts C 2 , C 3 , C 4 . The input to the concept space Existing but unexplored path , i . e . , concepts C 2 , C 3 , C 4 Concept - Space ( The outcome ) Knowledge - Space ( The reasoning process ) ) 4 , F 3 , F 2 , F 1 ( F 0 C ) 2 , IA 1 ( IA 1 C ) 5 , IA 4 IA 3 , ( IA 2 C ) 6 , IA 3 ( IA 3 C ) 8 , IA 7 , IA 3 ( IA 4 C 1 C 2 C 3 C 4 C C 0 5 C = ) 4 , SA 3 , SA 2 , SA 1 + ( SA 1 = C 5 C o Weaknesses , critical design issues and contradictions o New evaluation criteria ( if identified ) o Decision on how to proceed Fig . 9 The ongoing knowledge expansion , step # 3 , and subsequently , the subtraction of concepts C 1 and C 5 , and backtracking to existing but unexplored concepts C 2 , C 3 , and C 4 . Red crosses symbolize attributes ( ideational and structural ) and concepts that are subtracted / disqualiﬁed after the E type III evaluation ( color ﬁgure online ) Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 219 123 and built upon , the same result can be achieved by distinguishing between the ideational level and the structural or conﬁgurational level . This allows the designer to ‘‘go wild’’ and generate unusual solution ideas . At worst , he or she will ﬁnd out ( during the design process , not at the end ) that some of the ideational solutions cannot be realized or do not work well . • From the cost - effectiveness viewpoint , developing a candidate solution in more detail , i . e . , representation of Step # 4 The input to the knowledge space Concepts C 2 , C 3 , C 4 The reasoning process ( and respective new knowledge ) Evaluation ( E type II ) → Selected concept among C 2 , C 3 , C 4 → C 2 Structural Synthesis ( SS ) → C 6 , such that : Concept C 6 = C 2 + ( SA 5 , SA 6 , SA 7 , SA 8 , SA 9 , SA 1 0 , SA 11 ) SA 5 - The parachute canopy is shaped as a hemisphere with circular inlet diameter of 2 m . SA 6 - The decoy surface is made of pure - silver metalized nylon fabric , weighing 40 g / m 2 , with 47 holes per square inch and resistivity < X ohm . SA 7 - Two semi - circular panels ( upper ) are attached to the interior of the canopy ( x - z and y - z planes ) . Each surface is about 1 . 57 m 2 . SA 8 - Two panels ( lower ) are shaped as isosceles triangles ( x - z and y - z planes ) . Each surface is about 1 m 2 . SA 9 - The upper and lower panels are integrated through the horizontal circular panel ( x - y plane ) , which is attached to the canopy , i . e . , diameter 2 m . The surface is about 3 . 14 m 2 . SA 10 - The parachute canopy is connected to a 5 - kg weight by 21 strings ( approximately 5 - m long , 2 - mm in diameter ) . The input to the concept space Concept C 6 ϕ 2m 1 1 ) 7 SA Upper panels ( ) 5 SA Parachute canopy ( Pure - silver mesh ) 6 SA ( Weight + strings ( SA 10 ) ) 8 SA Lower panels ( Y X Z ) 9 SA Horizontal panel ( ) 4 , SA 3 , SA 2 , SA 1 + ( SA 1 = C 5 C Concept - Space ( The outcome ) Knowledge - Space ( The reasoning process ) ) 4 , F 3 , F 2 , F 1 ( F 0 C ) 2 , IA 1 ( IA 1 C ) 5 , IA 4 , IA 3 ( IA 2 C ) 6 , IA 3 ( IA 3 C ) 8 , IA 7 , IA 3 ( IA 4 C 1 C 2 C 3 C 4 C C 0 5 C = 6 C C 6 = C 2 + ( SA 5 , SA 6 , SA 7 , SA 8 , SA 9 , SA 10 ) = Selected concept 2 C → Fig . 10 The ongoing knowledge expansion , step # 4 , and the subsequent generation of concept C 6 in the concept space 220 Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 123 Step # 5 The input to the knowledge space Concept C 6 The reasoning process ( and respective new knowledge ) Evaluation ( E type III ) → (cid:2) Performance behavior of concept C 6 : The total weight is about 15 kg ( Req . # 7 ) Time in the air is about 63 sec > 60 sec ( Req . # 5 ) Compression capability is about 80 % ( Req . # 2 , 11 ) The pure - silver fabric does not suffer deterioration of its radar reflection properties after having been folded , stretched , or pressed together ( Req . # 12 ) Decoy surfaces do not stretch enough ( Req . # 9 , 10 ) (cid:2) Weaknesses , critical design issues and contradictions → the incoming air flow through the horizontal panel into the parachute canopy is insufficient . (cid:2) New evaluation criteria → tension in the canopy . (cid:2) Decision on how to proceed → ( decision 2 ) try to improve concept C 6 ( whose value is still high ) . Ideational Synthesis ( IS ) → C 7 , C 8 , such that : Concept C 7 = C 6 + ( IA 9 , IA 10 ) IA 9 - Increase the incoming air flow through the horizontal panel by opening a round hole at the top of the canopy and causing a vent effect . IA 10 - Change the horizontal panel to a square shape , so that space is created between the parachute circumference and the horizontal panel to allow enough air flow . Concept C 8 = C 6 + ( IA 11 , IA 12 ) IA 11 - Mechanically increase the tensile forces generated by the parachute . IA 12 - Add flexible / telescopic rods ( similar to the principle of a folding tent ) to the canopy . The input to the concept space Concepts C 7 , C 8 ) 4 , SA 3 , SA 2 SA , 1 + ( SA 1 = C 5 C Concept - Space ( The outcome ) Knowledge - Space ( The reasoning process ) C 0 ( F 1 , F 2 , F 3 , F 4 ) ) 2 , IA 1 ( IA 1 C ) 5 , IA 4 , IA 3 ( IA 2 C ) 6 , IA 3 ( IA 3 C ) 8 , IA 7 , IA 3 ( IA 4 C 1 C 2 C 3 C 4 C C 0 5 C = 6 C = C 6 = C 2 + ( SA 5 , SA 6 , SA 7 , SA 8 , SA 9 , SA 10 ) C 8 = C 6 + ( IA 11 , IA 12 ) C 7 = C 6 + ( IA 9 , IA 10 ) o Weakness , critical design issues and contradictions o New evaluation criteria ( if identified ) o Decision on how to proceed 8 C 7 C Fig . 11 The ongoing knowledge expansion , step # 5 , and the subsequent generation of concepts C 7 and C 8 in the concept space Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 221 123 the hardware , is a design activity that usually requires more time and effort . Therefore , a design process model , which on the one hand allows generating a variety of ideational solutions and on the other hand directs the designer to focus on one high - value solution for hardware description , is likely to be more efﬁcient in terms of resources and increases the probability of the designer exploring original and innovative solu - tions . A review by Motte ( 2015 ) of the effectiveness of using systematic methodologies vs . intuitive approaches offers interesting , but inconclusive , insights related to this point . • Directing the designer to deﬁne the ideational attributes explicitly has the potential to eliminate unnecessary structural features , which in many cases can have signiﬁcant ﬁnancial implications , as well as a negative impact on product reliability . In the new model , Fig . 12 Concept C 9 = C 7 ? ( SA 11 , SA 12 , SA 13 ) ; adapted from ( Weisbrod 2008 ) C f = C 4 + ( IA s , SA s ) The final concept ) 4 , SA 3 , SA 2 , SA 1 + ( SA 1 = C 5 C Concept - Space ( The outcome ) Knowledge - Space ( The reasoning process ) ) 4 , F 3 , F 2 , F 1 ( F 0 C ) 2 , IA 1 ( IA 1 C ) 5 , IA 4 , IA 3 ( IA 2 C ) 6 , IA 3 ( IA 3 C ) 8 , IA 7 , IA 3 ( IA 4 C 1 C 2 C 3 C 4 C C 0 5 C = 6 C ) 10 , SA 9 , SA 8 , SA 7 , SA 6 , SA 5 + ( SA 2 = C 6 C = Ongoing / iterative process of ± IA or SA ) 12 , IA 11 + ( IA 6 = C 8 C ) 10 , IA 9 + ( IA 6 = C 7 C 8 C 7 C 9 C = ) 13 , SA 12 , SA 11 + ( SA 7 = C 9 C Backtracking # 2 Backtracking # 1 Initial Knowledge Expansion Ongoing Knowledge Expansion by Evaluation & Synthesis Final Knowledge Expansion Fig . 13 The concept tree ( not all stages are detailed ) and the ﬁnal concept C f . Red crosses symbolize concepts and their ideational and structural attributes that were subtracted / disqualiﬁed during the conceptual design process after applying E type III evaluations . Ellipses denote concepts generated by adding new ideational attributes and sometimes subtracting existing ones ( ideational and structural ) . Square boxes denote concepts realized with added speciﬁc structural attributes ( color ﬁgure online ) 222 Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 123 structural features can emerge only as realizations of speciﬁc ideational attributes . Further elaboration of the importance and beneﬁts of separating the reasoning in design into solution ideas and their implementation can be found in Kroll and Koskela ( 2016 ) , who argue that the double mapping , from function to idea and from idea to structure , is a fundamental way of carrying out the function - to - form reasoning in design . The ICE model maintains the tree - like representation of the evolving solutions from C – K’s C - space as a sort of ‘‘bookkeeping’’ mechanism , which is important for the following reasons : • Regarding human memory limitations , Goldschmidt ( 2014 ) deﬁnes an internal representation as being generated in mental visual imagery and an external representation as being created in the physical world . She suggests that the main reasons for producing an external representation are to ‘‘decrease the load on memory and to assist in explorative thinking . ’’ Accord - ing to Goldschmidt , an external representation such as a sketch ‘‘ … helps reduce the cognitive load of trying to retrieve and maintain items from long - and short - term memory . ’’ These deﬁnitions are somewhat similar to our distinction between ideational attributes ( Gold - schmidt’s internal representation ) and structural attri - butes ( the external representation ) , which in our framework are both explicit properties of a concept . • Experience shows that designers often try to promote their solution and therefore glorify the process without pointing out the difﬁculties and dead ends along the way . A detailed account of the thought processes and intermediate concepts generated during conceptual design allows capturing the ‘‘justiﬁcations’’ and not just descriptions of the ﬁnal outcome . This need is known as design rationale capture ( Kroll and Shih - manter 2011 ) . From the organizational viewpoint , documenting thoughts and concepts can be useful in the long run with respect to different design tasks . Since many designs are redesign , a record of the design process , the decisions that were made and the rationale behind rejected and accepted concepts may be impor - tant . Concepts that do not ﬁt a speciﬁc problem can often be a good solution to a different problem . The design operators in the new model were deﬁned by studying PA activities in light of C – K theory . Synthesis and evaluation are the key operators for moving within and between the design spaces . This is consistent with Jones’ ( 1963 ) model and does not constitute innovation . Kroll et al . ( 2013 , 2014 ) have already shown that PA’s activities ( PI , CS , and E , as described in Sect . 1 . 2 ) can be modeled as combinations of C – K’s operators ( C ? K , K ? C , C ? C , and K ? K ; see Sect . 1 . 3 ) . The novelty in the ICE model is that different types of synthesis ( ideational and structural ) and evaluation ( type I , II , and III ) —to be applied continuously and repeatedly during the conceptual design process—have been deﬁned . The two synthesis operators represent the distinction between generating ideational and structural attributes and implement the desirable exploration strategy of divergent thinking con - cerning ideational attributes and convergent thinking con - cerning structural attributes . The evaluation operators also differ in a similar sense : E type I is applied only at the beginning of the process to select the most challenging aspect of the design task , while E type II and type III are applied repeatedly , to ideational and structural solutions respectively , to select the most promising solution path or to analyze the behavior of evolving solutions . Both serve to focus and control the overall progress of the design process in a way that implements the strategy of steepest - ﬁrst while thinking broadly about ideational solutions and narrowly about structural implementations . The ﬁve possible deci - sions that follow the analysis of E type III have for the ﬁrst time been formulated explicitly , including a mechanism of backtracking to avoid ﬁxation , thus contributing to the prescriptive nature of the new model while allowing for creativity and innovation . Overall , the ICE model presents a reﬁnement process in which the design task and engineering requirements are updated from an initial and ill - deﬁned state to a ﬁnal and well - deﬁned one . The process is solution - focused and not problem - focused , as the latter approach is considered to be less suitable for innovative ( Le Masson et al . 2010 ) . Because a good design is a synthesis of a series of good ideas or concepts , not just one good idea , the new model encourages the creation of multiple alternative ideational solutions at each design cycle . And because the design process must eventually converge , evaluation is repeatedly applied so the design process remains focused . The result is a design exploration strategy that we call ‘‘steepest - ﬁrst , ’’ emphasizing the handling of the most difﬁcult and chal - lenging issues before moving on to more mundane aspects . It is believed that this approach is how most practitioners work , as opposed to using the breadth - ﬁrst functional decomposition methods . 6 Conclusion and future work The development of a new prescriptive model for con - ceptual design , called ICE , has been described and the model demonstrated . It is intended for the generation and development of conceptual design solutions starting from rough ideas all the way to viable embodiments . The model should improve the designer’s performance as it captures Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 223 123 the dynamics and rationale of conceptual design . ICE is based on the well - established theoretical foundation of C – K theory and the empirically derived PA method . C – K theory is considered to be a design theory that offers a comprehensive formalization of the design process , inde - pendent of any design domain or type of artifact , and describes creativity and innovation within the same framework as the design process . The correctness and effectiveness of the new prescriptive model are strongly based on this accepted theory . Nevertheless , it should be emphasized that C – K theory does not encompass all the activities in design , so stages such as clarifying and ana - lyzing the task to formulate the design requirements and selecting among alternatives , together with some cognitive reasoning steps , were inspired by other design methodologies . The next stage of this research will be carried out by a second descriptive study , i . e . , DS - II in the DRM , as out - lined in Sect . 2 . The new model will be tested and evalu - ated in a design experiment by examining the performance of external participants when applying it . However , the preliminary testing and evaluation process actually began during the formulation of the new model . It has been car - ried out several times by the research team through ana - lyzing a multitude of realistic case studies in an iterative process of testing the model , improving it , testing again , etc . Since the new prescriptive model is strongly based on an accepted theory , i . e . , C – K theory , the correctness and consistency come from this theory . The main objectives of the future experimental testing and evaluation are to determine whether the new model can be used as a clear and precise step - by - step procedure , whether it is conducive to teaching and practicing conceptual engineering design , and to see whether it indeed contributes to successful design performance . To facilitate the experimental evaluation , two cate - gories of success criteria have been planned : applicability of the process and effectiveness of both the process and its outcome . Metrics for assessing the applicability crite - rion will include the model’s conduciveness to teaching , ease of comprehending its key notions , terminology and underlying factors , ease of use in practice , and the degree to which it is followed correctly . Effectiveness will be assessed by the model’s contribution to generating a solution that meets the requirement , to creativity and innovation in the process , to a dynamic and ﬂexible process , to identifying weaknesses in evolving solutions and screening alternatives towards moving in promising directions , and to capturing the design rationale . A thor - ough description of the planning and execution of the experiment , together with an analysis of the results , will be published separately . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Israel Science Foundation under Grant number 546 / 12 . References Altshuller GS ( 1984 ) Creativity as an exact science : the theory of the solution of inventive problems . Gordon and Breach , Amsterdam Andreasen MM , Howard TJ , Bruun HPL ( 2014 ) Domain theory , its models and concepts . In : Chakrabarti A , Blessing LTM ( eds ) An anthology of theories and models of design : philosophy , approaches and empirical explorations . Springer , London , pp 171 – 192 Badke - Schaub P , Eris O ( 2014 ) A theory of design intuition : does design methodology need to account for processes of the unconscious such as intuition ? In : Chakrabarti A , Blessing LTM ( eds ) An anthology of theories and models of design : philosophy , approaches and empirical explorations . Springer , London , pp 351 – 368 Ball L , Evans J , Dennis I ( 1994 ) Cognitive processes in engineering design : a longitudinal study . Ergonomics 37 ( 11 ) : 1753 – 1786 Blessing LTM , Chakrabarti A ( 2009 ) DRM , a design research methodology . Springer , London Bracha D , Reich Y ( 2003 ) Topological structures for modelling engineering design processes . Res Eng Des 14 ( 4 ) : 185 – 199 Cavallucci D ( 2014 ) Designing the inventive way in the innovation area . In : Chakrabarti A , Blessing LTM ( eds ) An anthology of theories and models of design : philosophy , approaches and empirical explorations . Springer , London , pp 233 – 258 Chakrabarti A , Bligh TP ( 2001 ) A scheme for functional reasoning in conceptual design . Des Stud 22 : 493 – 517 Chen Y , Zhao M , Xie Y , Zhang Z ( 2015a ) A new model of conceptual design based on scientiﬁc ontology and intentionality theory . Part I : the conceptual foundation . Des Stud 37 : 12 – 36 Chen Y , Zhao M , Xie Y , Zhang Z ( 2015b ) A new model of conceptual design based on scientiﬁc ontology and intentionality theory . Part II : the process model . Des Stud 38 : 139 – 160 Christiaans H , Dorst C ( 1992 ) Cognitive models in industrial design engineering : a protocol study . In : Taylor DL , Stauffer DA ( eds ) Design theory and methodology—DTM92 . American Society of Mechanical Engineers , New York Coatane´a E , Roca R , Mokhtarian H , Mokammel F , Ikkala K ( 2016 ) A conceptual modeling and simulation framework for system design . Comput Sci Eng 18 ( 4 ) : 42 – 52 Cross N ( 2000 ) Engineering design methods : strategies for product design , 3rd edn . The Open University , Milton Keynes Cross N ( 2004 ) Expertise in design : an overview . Des Stud 25 ( 5 ) : 427 – 441 Culley SJ ( 2014 ) Revisiting design as an information processing activity . In : Chakrabarti A , Blessing LTM ( eds ) An anthology of theories and models of design : philosophy , approaches and empirical explorations . Springer , London , pp 371 – 394 Dorst K , Cross N ( 2001 ) Creativity in the design process : co - evolution of problem – solution . Des Stud 22 ( 5 ) : 425 – 437 Elmquist M , Le Masson P ( 2009 ) The value of a ‘failed’ R & D project : an emerging evaluation framework for building innova - tive capabilities . R & D Manag 39 ( 2 ) : 136 – 152 Finger S , Dixon JR ( 1989 ) A review of research in mechanical engineering design . Part I Descriptive , prescriptive , and com - puter - based models of design processes . Res Eng Des 1 : 51 – 67 Forsberg K , Mooz H ( 1991 ) The relationship of system engineering to the project cycle . In : Proceedings of the ﬁrst annual symposium of national council on system engineering , October 1991 , pp 57 – 65 224 Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 123 Fricke G ( 1996 ) Successful individual approaches in engineering design . Res Eng Des 8 : 151 – 165 Gero JS ( 1996 ) Creativity , emergence and evolution in design : concepts and framework . Knowl Based Syst 9 ( 7 ) : 435 – 448 Gero JS , Kannengiesser U ( 2004 ) The situated function – behaviour – structure framework . Des Stud 25 : 373 – 391 Goldschmidt G ( 2014 ) Modeling the role of sketching in design idea generation . In : Chakrabarti A , Blessing LTM ( eds ) An anthology of theories and models of design : philosophy , approaches and empirical explorations . Springer , London , pp 431 – 448 Hatchuel A , Weil B ( 2002 ) C – K theory : notions and applications of a uniﬁed design theory . In : Proceedings of Herbert Simon international conference on design sciences , Lyon Hatchuel A , Weil B ( 2003 ) A new approach of innovative design : an introduction to C – K theory . In : Proceedings of 14th international conference on engineering and design ( ICED’03 ) , Stockholm , pp 109 – 124 Hatchuel A , Weil B ( 2009 ) C – K design theory : an advanced formulation . Res Eng Des 19 : 181 – 192 Hatchuel A , Le Masson P , Weil B ( 2009 ) Design theory and collective creativity : a theoretical framework to evaluate KCP process . International conference on engineering and design ( ICED’09 ) , Stanford University Hatchuel A , Le Masson P , Reich Y , Weil B ( 2011 ) A systematic approach of design theories using generativeness and robustness . International conference on engineering and design ( ICED’11 ) , Paper no . DS68 _ 2 - 238 , Copenhagen , 15 – 18 August Hillier FS , Lieberman GJ ( 2005 ) Introduction to operations research , 8th edn . McGraw - Hill , New York Jones JC ( 1963 ) A method of systematic design . In : Conference on design methods . Pergamon Press , Oxford Kazakc¸i AO , Tsoukias A ( 2005 ) Extending the C – K design theory : a theoretical background for personal design assistants . J Eng Des 16 ( 4 ) : 399 – 411 Kroll E ( 2013 ) Design theory and conceptual design : contrasting functional decomposition and morphology with parameter analysis . Res Eng Des 24 : 165 – 183 Kroll E , Koskela L ( 2016 ) Explicating concepts in reasoning from function to form by two - step innovative abductions . Artif Intell Eng Des Anal Manuf 30 : 125 – 137 Kroll E , Shihmanter A ( 2011 ) Capturing the conceptual design process with concept - conﬁguration - evaluation triplets . Interna - tional conference on engineering and design ( ICED’11 ) , Copen - hagen , 15 – 18 August Kroll E , Weisbrod G ( 2015 ) A search and optimization perspective on conceptual design . International conference on engineering and design ( ICED’15 ) , Milan , 27 – 30 July Kroll E , Condoor SS , Jansson DG ( 2001 ) Innovative conceptual design : theory and application of parameter analysis . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge Kroll E , Le Masson P , Weil B ( 2013 ) Modeling parameter analysis design moves with C – K theory . International conference on engineering and design ( ICED’13 ) , Seoul , 19 – 22 August Kroll E , Le Masson P , Weil B ( 2014 ) Steepest - ﬁrst exploration with learning - based path evaluation : uncovering the design strategy of parameter analysis with C – K theory . Res Eng Des 25 : 351 – 373 Kruger C , Cross N ( 2006 ) Solution driven versus problem driven design : strategies and outcomes . Des Stud 27 : 527 – 548 Lawson B ( 1979 ) Cognitive strategies in architectural design . Ergonomics 22 : 59 – 68 Le Masson P , Weil B , Hatchuel A ( 2010 ) Strategic management of innovation and design . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge Maher ML ( 2001 ) A model of co - evolutionary design . Eng Comput 16 : 195 – 208 Marques PDBC , Silva AJPF , Henriques EMP , Magee CL ( 2014 ) A descriptive framework of the design process from a dual cognitive engineering perspective . Int J Des Creat Innov 2 ( 3 ) : 142 – 164 Motte D ( 2015 ) Effectiveness of the systematic engineering design methodology . International conference on engineering and design ( ICED’15 ) , Milan , 27 – 30 July Osborn AF ( 1963 ) Applied imagination : principles and procedures of creative problem - solving , 3rd edn . Charles Scribner’s Sons , New York Pahl G , Beitz W , Feldhusen J , Grote KH ( 2007 ) Engineering design : a systematic approach , 3rd edn . Springer , London Pressman RS ( 2001 ) Software engineering : a practitioner’s approach . McGraw - Hill , New York Pugh S ( 1991 ) Total design : integrated methods for successful product engineering . Addison - Wesley , Wokingham Reich Y , Hatchuel A , Shai O , Subrahmanian E ( 2012 ) A theoretical analysis of creativity methods in engineering design : casting and improving ASIT within C – K theory . J Eng Des 23 ( 2 ) : 137 – 158 Roozenburg NFM , Eekels J ( 1995 ) Product design : fundamentals and methods . Wiley , Chichester Rowe P ( 1987 ) Design thinking . MIT Press , Cambridge Shah J , Noe VH ( 2003 ) Metrics for measuring ideation effectiveness . Des Stud 24 : 111 – 134 Shai O , Reich Y ( 2004 ) Infused design : II practice . Res Eng Des 15 ( 2 ) : 108 – 121 Shai O , Reich Y , Hatchuel A , Subrahmanian E ( 2013 ) Creativity and scientiﬁc discovery with infused design and its analysis with C – K theory . Res Eng Des 24 : 201 – 214 Simon HA ( 1972 ) Theories of bounded rationality . In : McGuire CB , Radner R ( eds ) Decision and organization . North - Holland , Amsterdam , pp 161 – 176 SuhNP ( 1990 ) Principlesofdesign . OxfordUniversityPress , NewYork Ullman DG ( 2010 ) The mechanical design process , 4th edn . McGraw - Hill , New York Ullman DG , Dietterich TG ( 1987 ) Mechanical design methodology : implications on future developments of computer - aided design and knowledge - based systems . Eng Comput 2 : 21 – 29 Weber C ( 2005 ) CPM / PDD—an extended theoretical approach to modelling products and product development processes . In : Bley H , Jansen H , Krause F - L , Shpitalni M ( eds ) Proceedings of the 2nd German – Israeli symposium on advances in methods and systems for development of products and processes , TU Berlin / Fraunhofer - Institut—fu¨r Produktionsanlagen und Konstruktion - stechnik ( IPK ) , 7 – 8 July . Fraunhofer - IRB , Stuttgart , pp 159 – 179 Weisbrod G ( 2008 ) Parachuted radar decoy . US patent no . 7 , 336 , 216 Woodbury RF , Burrow AL ( 2006 ) Whither design space ? Artif Intell Eng Des Anal Manuf 20 : 63 – 82 Yoshikawa H ( 1981 ) General Design Theory and CAD system . In : Sata T , War - man E ( eds ) Man – machine communication in CAD / CAM . In : Proceedings of the IFIP WG5 . 2 - 5 . 3 Working confer - ence 1980 ( Tokyo ) , pp 35 – 37 Zeiler W ( 2012 ) Stimulating creativity in building design education : introducing experts and C – K’s C - projectors . 2nd international conference on design creativity ( ICDC2012 ) , Glasgow , 18 – 20 September Res Eng Design ( 2018 ) 29 : 203 – 225 225 123