Psychological Review 1975 , Vol . 82 , No . 6 , 407 - 428 A Spreading - Activation Theory of Semantic Processing Allan M . Collins Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc . , Cambridge , Massachusetts Elizabeth F . Loftus University of Washington This paper presents a spreading - activation theory of human semantic pro - cessing , which can be applied to a wide range of recent experimental re - sults . The theory is based on Quillian ' s theory of semantic memory search and semantic preparation , or priming . In conjunction with this , several of the miscondeptions concerning Qullian ' s theory are discussed . A number of additional assumptions are proposed for his theory in order to apply it to recent experiments . The present paper shows how the extended theory can account for results of several production experiments by Loftus , Juola and Atkinson ' s multiple - category experiment , Conrad ' s sentence - verification experiments , and several categorization experiments on the effect of semantic relatedness and typicality by Holyoak and Glass , Rips , Shoben , and Smith , and Rosch . The paper also provides a critique of the Smith , Shoben , and Rips model for categorization judgments . Some years ago , Quillian 1 ( 1962 , 1967 ) proposed a spreading - activation theory of human semantic processing that he tried to implement in computer simulations of mem - ory search ( Quillian , 1966 ) and com - prehension ( Quillian , 1969 ) . The theory viewed memory search as activation spread - ing from two or more concept nodes in a semantic network until an intersection was found . The effects of preparation ( or prim - ing ) in semantic memory were also ex - plained in terms of spreading activation from the node of the primed concept . Rather than a theory to explain data , it was a the - ory designed to show how to build human semantic structure and processing into a computer . This research was supported by the National Institute of Education , U . S . Department of Health , Education , and Welfare , Project 1 - 0420 , under Contract OEC - 1 - 71 - 0100 ( 508 ) with Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc . Revision of the paper was sup - ported by a grant from the John Simon Guggen - heim Memorial Foundation to the first author . We would like to thank Stephen Woods , Colin Mac - Leod , Mark L . Miller , and the reviewers for their comments on previous drafts of this paper . Requests for reprints should be sent to Allan M . Collins at Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc . , SO Moulton Street , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02138 . 1 Quillian ' s theory of priming appeared in the unpublished version of the 1967 paper ( i . e . , CIP Paper No . 70 , Carnegie Institute of Technology , Since the theory was proposed , there have been a number of experiments investigating retrieval and priming in semantic memory . In the present paper , we attempt to show how an elaboration of Quillian ' s basic theory can account for many of the results . In the first section , we briefly review the original theory while trying to correct a number of the common misunderstandings concerning it . In the second section , we extend the theory in several respects , and in the third section show how the extended theory deals with some recent experimental findings . In the fourth section we compare the theory to the model of Smith , Shoben , and Rips ( 1974 ) . QUILLIAN ' S THEORY OF SEMANTIC MEMORY The fact that Quillian ' s theory was devel - oped as a program for a digital computer imposed certain constraints on the theory , which Quillian felt were psychologically un - realistic . We will recount the theory as he proposed it , and then elaborate the theory in psychological terms . The theory made a number of assumptions about structure and processing in human semantic memory . A brief discussion of these assumptions follows . People ' s concepts contain indefinitely large amounts of information . Quillian used the example of a machine . If one asks people to tell everything they know about machines , 407 408 ALLAN M . COLLINS AND ELIZABETH F . LOFTUS they will start off giving obvious properties , for example , that machines are man - made and have moving parts . But soon people run out of obvious facts and begin giving facts that are less and less relevant , for ex - ample , that a typewriter is a machine or even that the keys on the IBM electric type - writers select the position of a ball that strikes the ribbon against the paper . The amount of information a person can gen - erate about any concept in this way seems unlimited . In these terms concepts correspond to par - ticular senses of words or phrases . For ex - ample , not only is the noun " machine " a concept , but the verb " to machine " is a con - cept ; the " particular old car I own " is a concept ; the notion of " driving a car " is a concept ; even the notion of " what to do if you see a red light " has to be a concept . Thus , people must have a very large num - ber of concepts , and concepts must have very complicated structures . A concept can be represented as a node in a network , with properties of the concept represented as labeled relational links from the node to other concept nodes . These links are pointers , and usually go in both directions between two concepts . Links can have different criterialities , which are num - bers indicating how essential each link is to the meaning of the concept . The criteriali - ties on any pair of links between two con - cepts can be different ; for example , it might be highly criteria ! for the concept of a type - writer that it is a machine , and not very criterial for the concept of machine that one kind is a typewriter . From each of the nodes linked to a given node , there will be links to other concept nodes and from each of these in turn to still others . In Quil - lian ' s theory , the full meaning of any con - cept is the whole network as entered from the concept node . The links are not simply undifferentiated links , but must be complicated enough to represent any relation between two concepts . In the original theory , Quillian proposed five different kinds of links : ( a ) superordinate ( " isa " ) and subordinate links , ( b ) modifier links , ( c ) disjunctive sets of links , ( d ) con - junctive sets of links , and ( e ) a residual class of links , which allowed the specifica - tion of any relationship where the relation - ship ( usually a verb relationship ) itself was a concept . These different kinds of links could be nested or embedded to any degree of depth , so that the format was designed to be flexible enough to express anything , how - ever vague or specific , that can be expressed in natural language . The search in memory between concepts involves tracing out in parallel ( simulated in the computer by a breadth - first search ) along the links from the node of each con - cept specified by the input words . The words might be part of a sentence or stimuli in an experimental task . The spread of ac - tivation constantly expands , first to all the nodes linked to the first node , then to all the nodes linked to each of these nodes , and so on . At each node reached in this pro - cess , an activation tag is left that specifies the starting node and the immediate prede - cessor . When a tag from another starting node is encountered , an intersection between the two nodes has been found . 2 By follow - ing the tags back to both starting nodes , the path that led to the intersection can be reconstructed . When an intersection has been found , it is necessary to evaluate the path to decide if it satisfies the constraints imposed by syntax and context . The . complicated kinds of de - cision rules that are invoked for comprehen - sion of sentences in this evaluation phase are described in Quillian ( 1969 ) . For cate - gorization tasks these rules are described by Collins and Quillian ( 1972b ) and in the next section of this paper . As an example , in a phrase such as " the fall leaves , " a path found between the concept " to fall " and the 2 There can be intersections with more than two starting nodes , but we have limited our discussion in this paper to the case of two nodes ( as did Quillian , 1966 , initially ) . The basic assumptions in Quillian ' s theory and our elaboration can apply to intersections with more than two starting nodes , but this leads to complications in the evaluation of intersections . Some of these were discussed by Quillian ( 1969 ) in regard to comprehension , but for the experiments considered in this paper , only the case of two starting nodes needs to be con - sidered . THEORY OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING 409 concept " tree leaf " would be rejected as a wrong interpretation , because syntax re - quires a participial form of " fall " to fit that interpretation . If a path found is rejected , other paths are considered in the order in which they are found . Priming ( or preparation ) involves the same tracing process that was described for memory search . When a concept is primed , activation tags are spread by tracing an ex - panding set of links in the network out to some unspecified depth . When another con - cept is subsequently presented , it has to make contact with one of the tags left earlier to find an intersection . One of the non - obvious implications of this view of priming is that links as well as nodes will be primed . This is because Quillian treated links them - selves as concepts ( see above ) . Thus prim - ing a node such as " red " will prime the links involving the relation " color " throughout the network . This provides a very powerful context mechanism . Common Misinterpretations of Quillian ' s Theory There is a rich variety of misinterpreta - tions of Quillian ' s theory , many of them de - riving from Collins ' s ( Collins & Quillian , 1969 , 1970a , 1970b ) simplifications of the theory . The problem arose because Collins and Quillian were investigating specific as - pects of the theory and only described enough of the theory to motivate a particu - lar experiment . In turn experimenters made interpretations of these simplified versions , which did not fit with the theory as de - scribed elsewhere ( Bell & Quillian , 1971 ; Quillian , 1966 , 1969 ) . Perhaps the most prevalent misinterpreta - tion of Quillian ' s theory concerns the idea of cognitive economy ( Anderson & Bower , 1973 ; Conrad , 1972 ) . In this regard , it is important to distinguish the strong theory of cognitive economy , which Conrad takes issue with in her attack on Collins and Quillian ( 1969 ) , and the weak theory of cognitive economy , which Collins and Quillian were testing ( though they did not spell it out clearly enough ) . As Conrad ( 1972 ) states , she rejects the " hypothesis that all proper - ties are stored only once in memory and must be retrieved through a series of infer - ences for all words except those that they most directly define " ( p . 153 ) . This is a statement of the strong theory of cognitive economy , Undoubtedly the Collins and Quillian ( 1969 ) paper gave rise to this no - tion , but the authors cautioned against mak - ing that interpretation of the theory . As they said , " people surely store certain prop - erties at more than one level in the hier - archy " ( p . 242 ) , and they cited the maple leaf as an example of this general rule . The strong theory requires erasing infor - mation whenever it applies at a more gen - eral level . If a person learns a robin can fly and then later that birds fly , the strong theory implies that " flying " must be erased from " robin . " The weak theory of cogni - tive economy merely assumes that every time one learns that X is a bird , one does not at that time store all the properties of birds with X in memory . Thus , an inference will be necessary to decide that X can fly , unless one encounters this fact directly . Hence , Collins and Quillian , in testing the weak theory of cognitive economy , picked in - stances where people were not likely to have encountered the general property with the specific instance ( e . g . , " A wren can fly " ) . The point of the experiment was to test whether it was possible to measure infer - ence time , when the weak theory of cogni - tive economy implies that an inference is likely to be necessary for most subjects . Another assumption sometimes made about Quillian ' s theory is that all links are equal ( Anderson & McGaw , 1973 ; Rips , Shoben , & Smith , 1973 ; Wilkins , Note 1 ) . In Quil - lian ' s original theory , there were criteriality tags on links , as we described earlier . In Collins and Quillian ( 1969 , 1972b ) links were assumed to have differential accessi - bility ( i . e . , strength or travel time ) . The accessibility of a property depends on how often a person thinks about or uses a prop - erty of a concept . Whether criteriality and accessibility are treated as the same or dif - ferent is a complex issue , but network mod - els allow them to be treated either way . Thus for example , even though " lungs , " 410 ALLAN M . COLLINS AND ELIZABETH F . LOFTUS " hands , " and " warts " are all linked directly to the concept " human , " these links need not be in any sense equal . The same is true for the links between " bird " and its exemplars , such as " robin , " " chicken , " or " penguin . " Rips et al . ( 1973 ) suggest that intermediate nodes are necessary for a net - work model to explain the reaction time dif - ferences they find in categorizing different birds . This makes the mistaken assumption that all links are equally criterial or accessi - ble in any network model . It turns out , however , that differences in links are crucial to many different aspects of human seman - tic processing as Carbonell and Collins ( 1973 ) point out in their discussion of im - portance ( or criteriality ) tags . A related implication of the Rips et al . ( 1973 ) paper and also a more recent paper of Smith et al . ( 1974 ) is that feature models can account for data that network models cannot . A feature model posits that a con - cept consists of a set of values on a large number of semantic dimensions ( e . g . , ani - mateness , color , etc . ) . What is strange about this argument is that network models were developed as a method of representing features in a computer . Any process that can be represented in a feature model is representable in a network model ; in par - ticular , the Smith et al . model itself could be implemented in a semantic network ( Hol - lan , 1975 ) . In fact , network models are probably more powerful than feature mod - els , because it is not obvious how to handle inferential processing or embedding in fea - ture models . Smith et al . ( 1974 ) argued in favor of feature models because their data for com - parison of concepts seemed to fit a feature comparison process . What should be em - phasized about Quillian ' s theory is that the parallel search would inevitably lead to just such a feature comparison process , though the process would take place over a period of time as different connections are found . One way that Quillian ' s theory is different from the Smith et al . models is that super - ordinate connections , if they exist , would also be found and evaluated . The distinc - tion between these two theories is so crucial that we will discuss it at length in conjunc - tion with the spreading activation theory ' s explanation of the Rips et al . ( 1973 ) results . Another common misconception of Quil - lian ' s theory shows up in Juola and Atkin - son ' s ( 1971 ) work on categorization judg - ments . In a categorization task , response time is measured for a subject to decide whether or not a particular instance ( e . g . , " car " ) is a member of one or more cate - gories ( e . g . , " flower " or " vehicle " ) . Juola and Atkinson assume that in Quillian ' s the - ory the memory search to make a categoriza - tion judgment proceeds from the instance to the category . In fact , the wording in Collins and Quillian ( 1969 ) mistakenly gives that impression . But Quillian ' s theory ( 1966 , 1969 ) assumes the search proceeds from both the instance and category in par - allel . However , if one or the other is pre - sented first , this gives the search from that node a head start , which is the notion of priming . Juola and Atkinson ' s experiment involves priming in a complicated way , which we will discuss below . Anderson and Bower ( 1973 ) reject a Quillian - like model of a parallel search , while acknowledging that their data are compatible with " a parallel model whose search rate is slower in proportion to the number of paths that must be searched " ( p . 371 ) . Anderson and Bower ' s argument implies wrongly that Quillian has made the independence assumption for his parallel search . An independent parallel search is like a race where the speed of each runner is independent of the other runners . This is a common assumption in psychology , be - cause it makes it possible to assign an upper bound to reaction time ( see Sternberg , 1966 ) . But there is no difficulty for Quil - lian ' s theory if the parallel search rate de - pends on the number of paths searched . Hence , Anderson and Bower ' s data are perfectly compatible with Quillian ' s parallel search . The above discussion , then , shows what Quillian ' s theory is not , or at least some of what it is not . Several other misconcep - tions are discussed in Collins and Quillian ( 1972b ) , in particular the notion that Quil - THEORY OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING 411 Han ' s theory of memory is rigidly hierarchi - cal , which Anderson and Bower ( 1973 , p . 379 ) still believe , and Schaeffer and Wal - lace ' s ( 1970 ) argument that Quillian ' s the - ory predicts it will always take less time to compare concepts that are close together in the semantic network . We will return to some of these same papers below , in order to describe how the extended version of Quillian ' s theory accounts for some of the results these experimenters have used to reject Quillian ' s theory . THE EXTENDED THEORY In order to deal with the specific experi - mental results that have appeared in recent years , several more processing and struc - tural assumptions must be added to the basic Quillian theory . These do not bend the theory , but merely elaborate it in such a way that it can be applied to the kinds of experiments on semantic memory that have been performed recently . The elaboration may itself be wrong , so our mistakes should not be held against Quillian ' s theory . Local Processing Assumptions There are four local processing assump - tions in the extended theory . These four assumptions transform the theory from com - puter terms to quasi - neurological terms , a la Pavlov . But all the assumptions of the origi - nal theory should be preserved despite the transformation , except that activation tags are to be considered as source - specific acti - vation ( i . e . , activation that is traceable to its node of origin ) . 1 . When a concept is processed ( or stim - ulated ) , activation spreads out along the paths of the network in a decreasing gradi - ent . The decrease is inversely proportional to the accessibility or strength of the links in the path . Thus , activation is like a sig - nal from a source that is attenuated as it travels outward . 2 . The longer a concept is continuously processed ( either by reading , hearing , or rehearsing it ) , the longer activation is re - leased from the node of the concept at a fixed rate . Only one concept can be ac - tively processed at a time , which is a limita - tion imposed by the serial nature of the human central process ( Collins & Quillian , 1972b ) . This means that activation can only start out at one node at a time . But it continues in parallel from other nodes that are encountered as it spreads out from the node of origin . 3 . Activation decreases over time and / or intervening activity . This is a noncommittal assumption that activation goes away gradu - ally by some mechanism . Assumptions 2 and 3 impose a limitation on the amount of activation that can be allocated in priming more than one concept , because the more concepts that are primed , the less each will be primed . 4 . With the assumption that activation is a variable quantity , the notion of intersection requires a threshold for firing . The assump - tion is that activation from different sources summates and that when the summation at the point of intersection reaches threshold , the path in the network producing the in - tersection will be evaluated . Global Assumptions About Memory Structure and Processing There are three assumptions in the ex - tended theory concerned with the global structure of memory and its processing . These are generalizations of Loftus ' s ( Note 2 ) arguments that semantic memory is or - ganized primarily into noun categories and that there is a " dictionary " ( or lexical memory ) separate from the conceptual net - work . 5 . The conceptual ( semantic ) network is organized along the lines of semantic simi - larity . The more properties two concepts have in common , the more links there are between the two nodes via these properties and the more closely related are the con - cepts . This means that different vehicles or different colors will all be highly inter - linked through their common properties . This also implies that red things ( e . g . , fire engines , cherries , sunsets , and roses ) are not closely interlinked , despite the one prop - erty they have in common . In these terms semantic relatedness is based on an aggre - 412 ALLAN M . COLLINS AND ELIZABETH F . LOFTUS AMBULANCE / y - F | RE ENGINE FIGURE 1 . A schematic representation of concept relatedness in a stereo - typical fragment of human memory ( where a shorter line represents greater relatedness ) . gate of the interconnections between two concepts . 3 3 Semantic relatedness is a slightly different no - tion from semantic distance , though the two terms are sometimes used interchangeably . Semantic dis - tance is the distance along the shortest path , and semantic relatedness ( or similarity ) is an aggre - gate of all the paths . Two concepts may be close in distance , say by a path through " red , " and still not be closely related because that is the only path . Our use of close to refer to both relation - ships is admittedly confusing . In this paper we shall use close to refer to relatedness or similarity , though in sortie tasks ( Quillian , 1966 ) it is only distance that matters . Figure 1 illustrates this aggregate notion of concept relatedness for a hypothetical human memory . ( It is the kind of diagram that the scaling techniques of Rips et al . , 1973 , would produce . ) In the figure the various vehicles are shown as closely re - lated , because of the numerous individual connections that are assumed to exist be - tween them . Conversely , the concepts asso - ciated with " red " are shown as less related , because of the presumed paucity of inter - connections between them . From the assumption that memory is or - ganized according to semantic similarity , to - THEORY OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING 413 gethcr with earlier assumptions , it follows that if " vehicle " is primed , activation at any type of vehicle will accumulate from many neighboring nodes . That is to say , to the degree that " fire engine " is primed by " ve - hicle , " it will in turn prime " ambulance , " " truck , " " bus , " etc . , and each of these in turn will prime the others . On the other hand , if " red " is primed , the activation that spreads to " fire engine " will not prime " cherries , " " roses , " or " sunsets " to any great extent , because there are so few con - nections between these concepts . Instead , " fire engine " will tend to prime other ve - hicles , and " cherries " to prime other fruits . Hence , the same amount of activation will be diffused among a greater number of con - cepts . 6 . The names of concepts are stored in a lexical network ( or dictionary ) that is or - ganized along lines of phonemic ( and to some degree orthographic ) similarity . The links from each node in the lexical network are the phonemic properties of the name , specified with respect to their position in the word . The properties stored about names are assumed to be the properties that Brown and McNeill ( 1966 ) found people could identify about words on the " tip of their tongue . " Each name node in the lexical network is connected to one or more concept nodes in the semantic network . 7 . Loftus ' s ( Note 2 ) data lead to the fur - ther assumption that a person can control whether he primes the lexical network , the semantic network , or both . For example , a person can control whether to prime ( a . ) words in the lexical network that sound like " bird , " ( b ) concepts in the semantic net - work related to " bird , " or ( c ) words in the lexical network corresponding to the con - cepts in ( b ) . This control over priming can be thought of in terms of summation of diffuse activation for an entire network ( per - haps in a particular part of the brain ) and source - specific activation released from a particular node . Thus , ( a ) would derive from activation of the lexical network to - gether with the word " bird , " ( b ) would de - rive from activation of the semantic network together with the concept " bird , " and ( c ) would derive from activation of both net - works together with the concept " bird . " Assumptions About Semantic Matching Process There are a number of assumptions about the decision process for evaluating whether or not two concepts match semantically . This is a fundamental process that occurs in many aspects of language processing , such as matching referents , assigning cases , and answering questions ( Collins & Quil - lian , 1972b ; Collins , Warnock , Aiello , & Miller , 1975 ) . Categorization tasks , which ask " Is X a Y ? " ( where X and Y are con - cepts ) , directly investigate this process . The decision process described here is a more ex - plicit and somewhat revised version of the process postulated by Collins and Quillian ( 1972b ) , with additions to encompass the results of Holyoak and Glass ( 1975 ) . 8 . In order to decide whether or not a concept matches another concept , enough evidence must be collected to exceed either a positive or a negative criterion . The evi - dence consists of various kinds of intersec - tions that are found during the memory search . Evidence from different paths in memory sum together . Positive and nega - tive evidence act to cancel each other out , as shown by dialogue excerpts in Carbonell and Collins ( 1973 ) . Failure to reach either cri - terion before running out of relevant evi - dence leads to a " don ' t know " response ( Collins et al , , 1975 ) . This process is es - sentially the Bayesian decision model that is common in the reaction time literature ( see , for example , Fitts , 1966 ; Stone , I960 ) . There are a number of different kinds of paths between the two concepts that consti - tute positive or negative evidence . Any of these types of evidence might contribute to a particular decision . The different types are listed in Table 1 and described below in Assumptions 9 - 13 . 9 . If the memory search finds that there is a superordinate ( or a negative superordi - nate ) connection from X to Y , that fact alone can push the decision over the posi - tive ( or negative ) criterion . Superordinate links act like highly criterial property links 414 ALLAN M . COLLINS AND ELIZABETH F . LOFTUS TABLE I TYPES OF PATHS FOUND IN MEMORY THAT CONSTITUTE POSITIVE OR NEGATIVE EVIDENCE Positive evidence Negative evidence Superordinate connection Property comparison , matching property Wittgenstein strategy , matching property Negative superordinate connection Property comparison , distinguishing property Wittgenstein strategy , distinguishing property Mutually exclusive subordinates Counterexamples ( see below ) . For example , it is conclusive positive evidence that a mallard is a bird , if superordinate links are found between " mal - lard " and " duck " and between " duck " and " bird . " Similarly , if a negative superordi - nate link is found between " bat " and " bird , " it is conclusive evidence that a bat is not a bird . 10 . If the memory search finds properties on which X and Y match ( i . e . , common properties ) , this is positive evidence propor - tional , to the criteriality of the property for Y . If the memory search finds properties on which X and Y mismatch ( i . e . , distin - guishing properties ) , this is negative evi - dence proportional to the criteriality of the property for Y . There is an asymmetry in the weighing of positive and negative evi - dence in a property comparison , because a mismatch on just one fairly criterial prop - erty can lead to a negative decision , whereas most of the highly criterial properties must match in order to reach a positive decision ( Collins & Quillian , 1972b ) . It Is important to note that property com - parisons and superordinate connections sum together in reaching either criterion as the memory search finds them . Thus , distin - guishing properties make it harder to reach the positive criterion when there is a super - ordinate connection and therefore slow down the process . As an example of property comparison , suppose there is no superordinate connection in a particular person ' s memory between " mink " and " farm animal " and between " cat " and " farm animal . " Then the deci - sion as to whether minks or cats are farm animals might be based on a comparison of the properties of minks or cats on one hand , and farm animals on the other . The most criterial properties of farm animals are pre - sumably being animate and being kept on farms , but other less criterial properties in - clude being domesticated , being raised for some purpose , or being kept in barns or outside . How a particular person would weigh the various properties of minks and cats to decide whether they are farm ani - mals would vary from person to person ( our intuition is that minks are farm animals and cats are not , even though both have the two most criterial properties of farm animals— what Smith et al . , 1974 , called defining properties ) . This decision strategy is simi - lar to that proposed by Smith et al . , as we will discuss later . 11 . The Wittgenstein strategy is a variant of the property comparison strategy . It is postulated on the basis of Wittgenstein ' s ( 1953 ) observation that to decide whether something is a game ( for example , frisbee ) , a person compares it to similar instances that are known to be games . Our assumption is that if any properties of X are found that match properties of another instance whose superordinate is Y , these constitute posi - tive evidence . Similarly , any distinguishing properties constitute negative evidence . In the Wittgenstein strategy , unlike the prop - erty comparison strategy , matching proper - ties count just as much toward a positive decision as distinguishing properties count toward a negative decision . To illustrate the Wittgenstein strategy , Collins and Quillian ( 1972b ) pointed out that in deciding whether a stagecoach is a vehicle , it might be compared to a car . The many properties that a stagecoach has in common with a car constitute strong posi - tive evidence that a stagecoach is a vehicle . But notice that a stagecoach does not have a motor , which is highly criterial for being a car . Though this is strong evidence that a stagecoach is not a car , it is only weak evidence that it is not a vehicle . This illus - trates how the same evidence is weighed differently in the property comparison strat - egy and the Wittgenstein strategy . The THEORY OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING 415 final decision that a stagecoach is a vehicle might depend both on matching properties between a stagecoach and vehicles in gen - eral ( conveyance , motion , etc . ) and match - ing properties between a stagecoach and par - ticular vehicles like a car ( seats , doors , etc . ) . Thus the property comparison strategy and the Wittgenstein strategy might combine to determine a person ' s response . 12 . The mutually exclusive subordinates strategy was necessary for programming a computer to answer questions ( Collins et al . , 1975 ) . Holyoak and Glass ( 1975 ) argue that this strategy accounts for some of their reaction time data ( they call it a contradic - tion ) . The assumption is that if two con - cepts have a common superordinate with mutually exclusive links into the common superordinate , then this constitutes strong negative evidence , almost comparable to a negative superordinate link . For example , if the question is whether a mallard is an eagle , the fact that a mallard is a duck and ducks and eagles are mutually exclusive kinds of birds is rather conclusive evidence that a mallard is not an eagle . Though Holyoak and Glass ( 1975 ) do not mention it , the mutually exclusive restriction is necessary . For example , the fact that Mike Mansfield is a politician does not ex - clude him from being a lawyer . Although " politician " and " lawyer " are both occupa - tional roles , they are not mutually exclusive and in fact most politicians are lawyers . But lacking specific information to the con - trary , people may make a default assump - tion of mutual exclusivity when two con - cepts have a common superordinate . 13 . Counterexamples also can be used as negative evidence . This strategy derives from Holyoak and Glass ( 1975 ) , who argue that statements of the kind " All birds are canaries " are disconfirmed by finding a counterexample , such as " robin . " If the question is of the form " Ts X a Y ? " and there is a superordinate link from Y to X , then finding a counterexample involves find - ing a Z that also has X as superordinate and is mutually exclusive from Y . This is con - clusive evidence that X is not always a Y . Holyoak and Glass ( 1975 ) discusss coun - terexamples in the context of the universal quantifier " all , " but the same process would occur for a question of the kind " Is a mar - supial a kangaroo ? " In such a case , re - trieving a counterexample ( such as a wall - aby ) can be used to determine that kanga - roos are a subset of marsupials and not equivalent ( e . g . , " automobiles " and " cars " are equivalent concepts ) . Though these five kinds of evidence ( As - sumptions 9 - 13 ) are the only ones we have postulated for the semantic matching pro - cess seen in categorization tasks , there may be other kinds of evidence of this sort . We should stress that there are many other kinds of evidence people use for answering more complicated questions ( Collins et al . , 1975 ) . It is beyond the scope of this paper , however , to consider all the different ways people use evidence to make semantic deci - sions . RECENT EXPERIMENTS In this section , we discuss how the theory deals with some different kinds of recent experiments . The four types of studies to which we apply the theory are ( a ) several production experiments by Loftus ( Freed - man & Loftus , 1971 ; Loftus , 1973a , 1973b , Note 2 ) ; ( b ) Juola and Atkinson ' s ( 1971 ) multiple - category experiment ; ( c ) the Con - rad ( 1972 ) sentence - verification experiment ; and ( d ) several categorization experiments on the effects of semantic relatedness and typicality ( Holyoak & Glass , 1975 ; Rips et al . , 1973 ; Rosch , 1973 ; Smith et al . , 1974 ) . We intend to deal with the major kinds of available findings to which the Quillian the - ory has not yet been applied . Our objective is to show how a spreading - activation theory can handle these results , not to consider all the possible alternative explanations of the experiments . Production Experiments of Loftus There are several Loftus experiments we want to discuss in terms of the spreading - activation theory . The first of these is an experiment by Freedman and Loftus ( 1971 ) , in which subjects had to produce an in - 416 ALLAN M . COLLINS AND ELIZABETH F . LOFTUS stance of a category that began with a given letter or was characterized by a given ad - jective . For example , subjects might be asked to name a fruit that begins with the letter A or a , fruit that is red . On some trials the category was shown first and on some trials second . Hence , this was a prim - ing experiment in that one concept was ac - tivated before the other . Reaction time was measured from the onset of the second stimulus . Our concern is with the finding that sub - jects were faster when the category ( e . g . , " fruit " ) was given first than when either the letter or the adjective was given first . This basic result was later replicated even for cases in which the instance named was a more frequent associate to the adjective than to the category noun ( e . g . , " lemon " is a closer associate of " sour " than of " fruit " ) . The explanation in terms of the theory is as follows : When a noun , such as " fruit , " is presented first , the activation spreads to nodes connected to " fruit , " among which are instances such as " apple , " " pear , " " peach , " " orange , " and " lemon . " But these concepts are all highly interlinked with each other ( though some , such as " orange " and " lemon , " are more closely interlinked than others ) . Thus , the total amount of activa - tion is spread among a relatively small num - ber of closely interlinked concepts ( see As - sumption 5 ) . However , when an adjective or letter is presented first , say " red " or " A , " the activation spreads to a much wider set of concepts , which are not particularly interlinked with each other . Thus , the large variety of different things that are red or that start with the letter A will receive relatively little priming when the adjective or letter are given first . Because priming the noun leads to a greater accumulation of activation on the instances , these are closer to their threshold for firing , so that it takes less stimulation , and hence less time , to trig - ger an intersection when the second stimulus is presented . Freedman and Loftus ( 1971 ) explained their finding in terms of entering the cate - gory when a noun is presented and entering a cluster within the category when the adjec - tive or letter is presented . Thus if the noun is presented first , the subject can enter the category immediately and need only choose the correct cluster when the adjective or letter is presented . But if the adjective or letter is presented first , the subject must wait until the category is presented , because the cluster is specific to that category . ( How - ever , Loftus , Note 2 , has revised this expla - nation for the letter stimulus in her dic - tionary - network model . ) The Freedman and Loftus explanation is not altogether different from the explanation offered here , though our theory is less rigidly hierarchical . The rigid hierarchy gets into trouble with errors such as one we encoun - tered where a subject produced " Ben Frank - lin , " given the stimulus pair " president " and " F , " although he later recognized his mistake . In an activation theory , " Frank - lin " is a very likely intersection starting at " president " and " F , " because he is so closely linked with the concept , " president , " and some of its foremost instances , such as " Washington . " Such a wrong intersection was likely in this case because the correct answer ( prior to Ford ) was " Fillmore , " who is rather inaccessible and unlikely to be found quickly enough to preclude finding " Franklin . " Once such an intersection is found , it is only by evaluating the connec - tion between " president " and " Franklin , " that it can be rejected ( see Assumptions 8 - 13 ) . It is a general problem of category - search models that they cannot deal with such errors . Perhaps the major advantage of the spreading - activation theory over the Freed - man and Loftus ( 1971 ) explanation is in tying their result to a parallel result in a quite different experiment by Loftus ( 1973b ) . In a categorization experiment , Loftus found that the direction of the asso - ciation between the category and the instance determined whether subjects were faster when given the category first or the instance first . In the experiment she used four kinds of category - instance pairs : ( a ) pairs where both the category and instance evoked the other with high frequency ( e . g . , " tree - oak " ) ; ( b ) pairs where the category evoked THEORY OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING 417 the instance with high frequency , but the in - stance evoked the category with low fre - quency ( e . g . , " seafood - shrimp " ) ; ( c ) pairs where the category evoked the instance with low frequency , but the instance evoked the category with high frequency ( e . g . , " insect - butterfly " ) ; and ( d ) pairs where both the category and instance evoked the other with low frequency ( e . g . , " cloth - orlon " ) . When the category was presented before the in - stance , reaction time for Conditions ( a ) and ( b ) was approximately equal and signifi - cantly faster than for Conditions ( c ) and ( d ) . However , when the instance was pre - sented first , reaction time for Conditions ( a ) and ( c ) was approximately equal and significantly faster than for Conditions ( b ) and ( d ) . That is to say , subjects are fast when the category is presented first , if the category evokes the instance with high fre - quency , and subjects are fast when the in - stance is presented first , if the instance evokes the category with high frequency . The spreading - activation theory explains the pattern of reaction times in the following way , assuming that production frequency is a measure of the strength or accessibility of the path from one concept to another . When the first concept ( i . e . , the one presented first ) evokes the second with a relatively high frequency , this means that more activa - tion spreads to the second , and it takes less time to reach the threshold for an intersec - tion . Thus , the amount the first concept primes the second concept determines the reaction time . By comparing this experiment with the Freedman and Loftus ( 1971 ) study , it can be seen that the two results are exactly parallel . Based on our structural assump - tions , " fruit " primes " apple " more than " red " or the letter " A " primes " apple " in the Freedman and Loftus study . Hence , the shorter reaction time occurs when " fruit " or " A " is presented first . Similarly in the Loftus ( 1973b ) study , when the category primes the instance most highly , the shortest reaction times occur when the category is presented first . But when the instance primes the category most highly , the short - est reaction times occur when the instance is presented first . A spreading - activation explanation is quite compelling to account for the Loftus ( 1973b ) results , and the theory offered here encompasses the order effect in both the Loftus study and the ear - lier Freedman and Loftus experiment within a single framework . Recently Loftus ( Note 2 ) has found two different ways in which presenting a letter acts differently from presenting an adjective , in variations of the Freedman and Loftus paradigm . This has led her to the develop - ment of a dictionary - network model , which we will translate into spreading - activation terms . The first difference between pre - senting a letter and an adjective appeared when Grober and Loftus ( 1974 ) compared reaction time in two conditions : one where noun - adjective ( e . g . , " fruit - red " ) and noun - letter ( e . g . , " fruit - A " ) trials were ran - domly intermixed , and one where noun - adjective and noun - letter trials were sepa - rated into blocks . In all cases the noun preceded the adjective or letter . The results of this experiment are shown in Figure 2 . It is clear that when the subject knows a letter is coming , he can prepare for it . But in the mixed condition , the subject appar - ently prepares for either kind of trial the same way he prepares for an adjective trial , since adjective trials take the same amount of time in either case . The theory ' s descrip - tion of semantic processing on the adjective trials is the same as that given earlier for the Freedman and Loftus ( 1971 ) experi - ment , with the amendment that only the se - mantic network and not the lexical network would be diffusely primed before the ad - jective is presented . When an intersection is found in the semantic network , then the subject must retrieve the name from the lexical network . Loftus ( Note 2 ) described what must happen on noun - letter trials in the blocked condition as follows : The first step of the process is entering the cate - gory . The next step is a quasi - parallel simul - taneous search towards the Dictionary . That is to say , the subject traces some number of path - ways leading from category instances to the Dic - tionary representations of those instances . This step can be started during the interval between the 418 ALLAN M . COLLINS AND ELIZABETH F . LOFTUS o 0 ) ( ft 1 . 60 1 . 50 1 . 40 1 . 30 adjective letter mixed blocked Condition FIGURE 2 . Reaction time for noun - adjective and noun - letter stimuli in mixed and blocked condi - tions ( from Loftus , Note 2 ) . presentation of the category name and the restrict - ing letter if the subject knows a letter is coming . ( P . 13 ) This is essentially the spreading - activation explanation , if the dictionary is taken to be a lexical network . Rather than saying that " the subject traces some number of path - ways , " which suggests a conscious tracing process , the present theory would say that activation spreads along some number of pathways , because the subject has activated the lexical network in addition to the se - mantic network ( see Assumption 7 ) . Hence , in the present explanation , the subject ' s con - trol is reduced to diffusely activating whole networks rather than specific pathways ( in addition to the specific nodes activated by the stimuli in the experiment ) . The differ - ence in the results for the noun - letter trials in the two conditions then depends on whether the subject primes both networks ( as in the blocked condition ) or only the semantic network ( as in the mixed condi - tion ) . The reason he only activates the semantic network in the mixed condition may be either because of a principle of least effort ( hence he could speed up his reac - tion time if he tried ) or because there is less activation available to the semantic network if both are primed ( hence he will be slower on noun - adjective trials if he primes both ) . As can be seen in Figure 2 , the subject is much slower on noun - adjective trials than on noun - letter trials in the blocked condi - tion . This is accounted for by the fact that an intersection on a noun - adjective trial occurs in the semantic network and requires the further step of retrieving the correspond - ing name in the lexical network . On the other hand , the intersection on a noun - letter trial occurs at the name in the lexical net - work . Therefore , the name does not then need to be retrieved . The second result that shows up the dif - ference between adjectives and letters was predicted by Loftus from the dictionary - net - work model . In this experiment ( Loftus & Cole , 1974 ) subjects saw three stimuli , or - dered either noun , adjective , letter or noun , letter , adjective . For example , the three stimuli might be " animal , " " small , " and " M , " for which an appropriate response is " mouse . " The prediction was that the sub - ject should be faster when the adjective is presented before the letter , and this was the result found . The reasoning is as follows : When the adjective appears before the let - ter , activation will spread from a small set of instances in the semantic network to the lexical network where the intersection oc - curs , since the letter can be expected just as in the blocked condition . When the letter is presented before the adjective , activation will spread from a small set of instances in the lexical network back to the semantic net - work where an intersection with the adjec - tive will occur . Then the subject must re - turn again to the lexical network to retrieve the name , so there is an extra transit neces - sary in this condition . Loftus has also run a series of experi - ments in which subjects were asked to pro - duce a member of a category and a short time later asked to produce a different member of that category ( Loftus , 1973a ; Loftus , Senders , & Turkletaub , 1974 ; Loftus & Lof - tus , 1974 ) . This was accomplished by show - THEORY OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING 419 ing a category - letter pair ( e . g . , " fruit - P " ) , which asked the subject for an appropriate instance , then , following 0 , 1 , or 2 interven - ing items , showing the same category paired with a different letter ( e . g . , " fruit - A " ) , which asked for a different instance . The general finding is that reaction time for the second instance is shorter than reaction time for the first instance and increases mono - tonically with the number of intervening items . For example , in Loftus ( 1973a ) a subject ' s baseline time to name a fruit be - ginning with the letter " P " was 1 . 52 sec . However , it took him 1 . 22 sec to produce the same response if he had named a different fruit on the previous trial and 1 . 29 sec to produce the response if he had named a dif - ferent fruit two trials back . The spreading - activation theory predicts these results by assuming that when an item is processed , other items are activated to the extent that they are closely related to that item . That is , retrieving one category member produces a spread of activation to other category members , facilitating their later retrieval . The assumption ( Assump - tion 3 ) that activation decreases over time or trials predicts the lag effect . Meyer and Schvaneveldt ( Meyer , 1973 ; Meyer & Schvaneveldt , 1971 ; Schvaneveldt & Meyer , 1973 ; Meyer , Schvaneveldt , & Ruddy , Note 3 ) have also shown that the time to retrieve information from memory is faster if related information has been ac - cessed a short time previously . Their para - digm is somewhat different . Subjects were required to classify letter strings as words or nonwords . The general finding was that the response , time to classify a letter string as a word is faster if the subject has just classified a semantically similar word as op - posed to a semantically dissimilar word . Thus , for example , the time it takes to clas - sify " butter " as a word is faster if " butter " is preceded by " bread " than if it is preceded by " nurse . " Their results have led Meyer and Schvaneveldt to an explanation in terms of spreading activation and illustrate the widely different paradigms that such a the - ory can encompass . Juola and Atkinson ' s Study with Multiple Categories An increase in reaction time with multiple categories has been found by Juola and At - kinson ( 1971 ) in a task where subjects had to decide whether a stimulus word belonged to one of a variable number ( 1 - 4 ) of pre - specified ( target ) categories . They com - pared this task with one where subjects de - cided if the stimulus word was the same as one of a variable number ( 1 - 4 ) of target words . Their experiment was designed to distinguish between two kinds of models , one they attribute to Landauer and Freed - man ( 1968 ) and one they attribute to Col - lins and Quillian ( 1970a ) . In most respects , their results fit the model they derived from Landauer and Freedman , but since the spreading - activation theory provides an al - ternative explanation for their results , we want to compare their two models with our theory . The model Juola and Atkinson ( 1971 ) derived from Landauer and Freedman ( 1968 ) is very similar to what Landauer and Meyer ( 1972 ) call the " category - search model . " It assumes that the subject searches through instances of the categories in mem - ory seeking a match for the stimulus word . Such a model predicts that as the number of categories or words in the memory set increases , reaction time for the category - matching task should increase at a greater slope than reaction time for the word - match - ing task . This is because each additional target category adds more instances that must be searched , whereas each additional target word only adds one , the word itself . This result was essentially what Juola and Atkinson found . The model they ascribed to Collins and Quillian ( 1970a ) assumed that subjects per - form the category - matching task by retriev - ing their stored category for the stimulus word and comparing this to the given cate - gories to see if it matches one of them . This model would predict that the slope for the two tasks should be about the same , and the intercept for the category - matching task should be greater than for the word - match - ing task . Their results clearly reject this 420 ALLAN M . COLLINS AND ELIZABETH F . LOFTUS model . Although attributed to Collins and Quillian , this model is quite different from Quillian ' s theory , because the semantic search in Quillian ' s ( 1966 ) theory is as - sumed to spread in parallel from both cate - gories and instances . When the categories are given first , as in Juola and Atkinson ' s experiment , then activation would spread out from the categories before the instance even appeared . In order to explain our interpretation of Juola and Atkinson ' s results , it is necessary to describe their procedure in more detail . They chose 10 large categories and 12 com - mon instances from each category as stimuli . This makes a total of 120 instances in all . In the word - matching task , they presented from 1 to 4 of the 120 instances as targets on each trial . In the category - matching task , they presented from 1 to 4 of the 10 cate - gories as targets on each trial . In both cases the negative stimuli were chosen from the same set of 120 instances . In the word - matching task , then , the discrimination nec - essary to categorize the stimulus was be - tween one of the target words or a word that had not occurred as a target for a large number of trials ( on the average about 24 trials earlier ) . In the category - matching task , however , the discrimination was be - tween a word in one of the target categories and a word in one of the categories from a recent trial ( on the average about 2 trials earlier ) . The discrimination , there - fore , was rather easy in the word - matching task and quite difficult in the cate - gory - matching task . What we think must be happening in the task is that the discrimination between posi - tive and negative responses is made ( at least partly ) on the basis of activation level . In the category - matching task , as the number of categories increases , the amount of acti - vation allocated to each category decreases ( see Assumptions 2 and 3 ) . Furthermore , activation will be left over from previous trials on the categories corresponding to negative instances , though it will have partly decayed ( Assumption 3 ) . For example , suppose " tree " was a target category on a particular trial and " body part " was not , but " body part " was a target on a previous trial . Then " tree " will have a higher activa - tion level than " body part , " but the differ - ence will not be very large because " body part " was presented so recently . If a posi - tive instance such as " oak " is presented , it will intersect with " tree " ; if a negative in - stance such as " arm " is presented , it will intersect with " body part . " The less activa - tion on " tree , " which depends on how many other targets there are , the harder it is to discriminate that it is in fact a target or that " body part " is not a target . The more difficult the discrimination is , the longer it takes to make , and thus there will be a fairly large effect of the size of the target set on reaction time . In the word - matching task , however , the difference in activation level as the number of targets is varied will not be so critical a factor . This is because the absolute differ - ence between the activation level of targets and nontargets is so much greater in the word - matching task , given Juola and Atkin - son ' s experimental procedure . That is to say , each nontarget was presented as a target so many trials previously ( approximately 24 ) that the activation level for a nontarget would have decayed ( Assumption 3 ) to a very low activation level as compared to any target . Hence , the large absolute difference in activation levels between targets and non - targets makes the differences due to target - set size relatively unimportant . In conclusion , the spreading - activation theory ' s explanation of Juola and Atkinson ' s ( 1971 ) results is that the effect of differ - ences in activation level due to target - set size matter more when the discrimination is difficult and matter less when the discrimi - nation is easier . Furthermore , as Juola and Atkinson point out , there are two aspects of their data ( namely , the fact that the data for positive responses are not linear , and the marked recency effects in the serial position curves ) that fit much better with a parallel model , such as spreading - activation theory , than they do with a serial model , such as the one they derive from Landauer and Freed - man ( 1968 ) . THEORY OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING 421 There are two implications of this view that could be tested fairly easily . One is that reaction time to decide that an instance such as " arm " is a negative instance will depend on the recency with which " body part " was presented as a target category . The more recent its presentation , the longer it will take to say " no . " A more global im - plication is simply that the slope of the curve with respect to target size depends on those factors that affect the difficulty of discrimi - nation , such as the recency with which nega - tive instances occurred as targets ( and prob - ably as nontargets as well ) . This has im - portant implications for the memory - search literature as a whole . Conrad ' s Study Using a true - false reaction time technique for sentences ( e . g . , the task is to decide whether " A salmon can eat " is true or false ) , Conrad ( 1972 ) found results which she interpreted as contradictory to Quillian ' s ( 1966 , 1969 ) theory of semantic processing . In fact , the results of her study are quite close to what Quillian ' s theory would pre - dict given Conrad ' s methodology . In her first experiment , which was like the Collins and Quillian ( 1969 ) study , Con - rad selected 2 - level and 3 - level hierarchies from the common culture ( e . g . , salmon —» fish —» animal ) and properties associated with the objects at different levels . Then she constructed sentences with instances , such as " salmon , " from the lowest level and prop - erties from all three levels . The results Collins and Quillian found were that re - action time increased as the property was farther removed from the instance in the hierarchy . The reason for the increases in reaction time according to spreading - activa - tion theory is that as the instance and prop - erty are farther apart in the hierarchy , it takes activation longer to spread between them and to trigger an intersection ( and perhaps to evaluate the path found as well ) . Unlike Collins and Quillian ( 1969 ) , Con - rad ( 1972 ) broke down the properties in her sentences into three groups on the basis of the frequency ( high , medium , low ) with which people generated each property , given the different objects in the hierarchies . An - other difference from Collins and Quillian ' s study is that she collected data over 5 days by repeating all the sentences each day , The results of her first experiment were generally in the same direction as the in - creases in reaction time that Collins and Quillian found when the property was far - ther removed from the instance in the hier - archy . There was one reversal in her data out of nine comparisons , and this occurred for the high - frequency properties , where it . was not unexpected given the weak theory of cognitive economy ( as we will argue below ) . However , the increases she found were much smaller on the average than those of Collins and Quillian . The weak theory of cognitive economy predicts that people store a prop - erty with whatever instance it is linked to in a sentence , so Conrad ' s repetition of sen - tences over 5 days should lead to the smaller reaction time increases she found . This is because an inference necessary on the first day would be less likely on the second day , and so on . Conrad , in fact , reports a large Level X Day interaction . In general , Conrad found that the higher the frequency of the property , the smaller the increases betwen levels . Given the weak theory of cognitive economy , we would ex - pect that high - frequency properties are more likely to be stored at several levels in the hierarchy , because they are more likely to be encountered in contexts involving specific instances . For example , " leaves " are more likely to be stored as a property with par - ticular types of trees ( such as " maple " and " oak " ) than is " bark , " because leaves are a higher frequency property . Thus , the effect of property frequency found by Conrad is consistent with the weak theory . Conrad ( 1972 ) argued that Collins and Quillian ' s ( 1969 ) results could be explained by a confounding of property level and prop - erty frequency . Her argument was that the sentences Collins and Quillian used may have been based on high - frequency proper - ties for Level 1 sentences ( e . g . , " A salmon is pink " ) , moderate - frequency properties for Level 2 sentences ( e . g . , " A salmon has fins " ) , and low - frequency properties for 422 ALLAN M . COLLINS AND ELIZABETH F . LOFTUS Level 3 sentences ( e . g . , " A salmon can eat " ) . To support her argument , she showed that if one plots her reaction time data in the above way , one obtains approximately the same slope as Collins and Quillian did , whereas if one plots the slope for low - , me - dium - , or high - frequency properties sepa - rately , one obtains much smaller slopes . However , there are two weaknesses in Conrad ' s argument . First , she did not use her frequency data to evaluate systematically the frequency of the properties in Collins and Quillian ' s sentences , so her conjecture about such a confounding had no empirical basis . Collins and Quillian ( 1969 ) did ob - tain subject ratings of importance of the property for the relevant level concept , which should correlate with Conrad ' s fre - quency measure . These ratings averaged 1 . 90 for Level 1 sentences , 1 . 92 for Level 2 sentences , and 2 . 16 for Level 3 sentences ( based on a 5 - point scale , where 1 = very important and 5 = not important ) . These are small differences and certainly do not support the notion that the slope between Level 1 and Level 2 sentences was due to the confounding Conrad hypothesized . The difference between Level 3 sentences and the others may have contributed to the greater slope that Collins and Quillian found , but even that is doubtful . For those sub - jects who had sentences with all 3 levels , the slope was actually larger ( approximately 100 msec rather than 75 msec ) , but this was offset by a group of subjects who were slower overall and saw only Level 1 and 2 sentences . So the latter group acted to cancel out any exaggeration of the slope due to the lower importance of Level 3 properties . Second , the comparison Conrad ( 1972 ) made in plotting her data against Collins and Quillian ' s data compared data based on five responses to the same sentence with data based on one response to a sentence . As indicated above , the weak theory of cogni - tive economy predicts that repetition of a sentence makes an inference less likely and should reduce the slopes in the way Conrad found . A fairer comparison would be be - tween her data on the first day and Collins and Quillian ' s data . But even that compari - son has the problem that she may well have included sentences of the kind , " A maple has leaves , " where the property is a general property of trees , but where most people would store it as a property of maples as well . This suggests that the fairest com - parison is between Collins and Quillian ' s data and her data on the first day for low - frequency properties , where the properties were least likely to be stored at more than one level . But we cannot make this com - parison because she did not break down her data by days . In conclusion , the differences between the two experiments and the fact that the only relevant data do not particu - larly support the conjecture about a con - founding of property level and property fre - quency make Conrad ' s argument rather tenuous . It was Conrad ' s second experiment that appears more damaging to Quillian ' s theory , but here she made a crucial methodological change . She presented the object 1 sec be - fore the property , and this turned the ex - periment into a priming study . In the study she presented properties true of the highest level nodes , together with objects ( e . g . , " sal - mon , " " fish , " or " animal " ) at different lev - els in the hierarchy . Therefore , she pre - dicted from Quillian ' s theory that the lower level objects , such as " salmon , " would take longer to confirm , since it would take activa - tion longer to spread between lower level objects and higher level properties . But by presenting the object 1 sec before the prop - erty and by using only high - level proper - ties , she made it possible for her subjects to prepare during the interval by priming the object ' s superordinates . For example , if a subject saw " salmon , " his best strategy was to retrieve the superordinates , " fish " and " animal , " because the property to ap - pear would be a high - level property , such as " eating . " In these circumstances , there is little reason to expect systematic differ - ences between objects such as " salmon , " " fish , " and " animal . " Thus , this particular experiment had real methodological prob - lems as a test of Quillian ' s theory , and it is weaker evidence against spreading - activation THEORY OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING 423 theory than her first experiment is evidence for the theory . Effects of Typicality and Semantic Related - ness in Categorisation Tasks In recent experiments , Rips et al . ( 1973 ) , Rosch ( 1973 ) , and Smith et al . ( 1974 ) have shown that reaction time in a categorization task corresponds very closely to ratings of how typical the instance is of the category . For example , robins and sparrows are con - sidered typical birds whereas chickens and geese are not . The effect of typicality on reaction time is quite large even when fre - quency of the particular instances in the lan - guage is controlled . Like Smith et al . , we would argue that the typicality effect is one more manifestation of the fact that semantic similarity speeds up positive decisions and slows down negative decisions . Such an effect has been found repeatedly ( Collins & Quillian , 1969 , 1970a , 1972b ; Schaeffer & Wallace , 1969 , 1970 ; Wilkins , 1971 ) . While Landauer and Meyer ( 1972 ) argued that the evidence for similarity effects at that time was either questionable or artifactual , the evidence now seems so overwhelming that any viable theory must account for them . They are very damaging to the cate - gory - search model . There are two reasons why spreading - activation theory predicts that atypical in - stances will take longer to categorize than typical instances . The most important rea - son derives from the way evidence is aggre - gated ( see Assumptions 8 - 13 ) . Because different connections that are found are com - bined as evidence , distinguishing properties can slow down a positive decision based on a superordinate connection or on matching properties . For example , the decision that a chicken is a bird ( i . e . , an atypical in - stance ) might be made on the basis of a superordinate connection from " chicken " to " bird , " which people learn because chickens are frequently referred to as birds . But the fact that people eat chickens , that they are raised on farms , and that they are rather large are all properties that distinguish chickens from most birds . If these distin - guishing properties are found during the memory search , as some are likely to be , they act to slow down the positive decision , because they are negative evidence . Simi - larly , matching properties can slow down a negative decision . For example , the deci - sion that a goose is not a duck might be made on the basis of the difference in their necks ( a distinguishing property ) or simply because they are stored as mutually exclu - sive kinds of birds ( see Assumption 12 ) , but the matching properties that are found ( e . g . , their affinity to ponds , their webbed feet , their large size ) will slow down the decision that they are different . The argu - ment here is similar to that of Smith et al . ( 1974 ) , which we will discuss in comparing the two theories . The second reason for the typicality ef - fects relates to those cases where a super - ordinate connection is found . As we indi - cated earlier , superordinate links differ in accessibility ( or strength ) , and accessibility depends on use . If a person frequently uses the link that a robin is a bird , and less fre - quently uses the link that a chicken is a bird ( assuming approximately equal frequency for chickens and robins ) , then the accessi - bility of " bird " from " robin " will be greater than from " chicken . " Because of this , ac - cessibility will be highly correlated with typicality ratings . All the factors acting to make a chicken or a goose an atypical bird in the real world will also act to make the use of the superordinate link in a person ' s mind from " chicken " or " goose " to " bird " infrequent . It is because they are atypical that the superordinate link is weak , and this will also act to slow down reaction time in making categorization judgments about atypical instances . The way evidence is aggregated in the theory also explains the common finding ( Collins & Quillian , 1970a , 1972b ; Holyoak & Glass , 1975 ; Rips et al . , 1974 ) that people are fast to decide that semantically unrelated concepts are different ( e . g . , that a book is not a dog ) . In comparing such concepts , there are not likely to be any superordinate connections , and almost all property con - nections will involve distinguishing rather than matching properties . Therefore , almost 424 ALLAN M . COLLINS AND ELIZABETH F . LOFTUS all the connections found will constitute neg - ative evidence , and subjects will be quite fast to reach the negative criterion in such cases . This too is similar to the explana - tion in the Smith et al ( 1974 ) model . Recently , Holyoak and Glass ( 1975 ) have isolated two different cases where semantic relatedness or typicality does not produce the usual effect on reaction time for nega - tive judgments . One case arises when the decision depends on what they call a contra - diction and what we have called mutually exclusive subordinates . The other case arises when the decision depends on a counterexample . In the first case , Holyoak and Glass found that people are faster to reject sentences such as " All fruits are vegetables " or " Some chairs are tables " than sentences such as " All fruits are flowers " or " Some chairs are beds . " In these four sentences the two nouns are mutually exclusive subordinates . The difference between the sentences is that " vegetables " and " tables " are generated with high frequency , while " flowers " and " beds " are generated with low frequency , when subjects are given the frame " All fruits are . . . " or " Some chairs are . . . " and asked to produce a false sentence . This difference is in the opposite direction of the usual find - ing that negative judgments are slower when the two concepts are more closely related semantically . The explanation for this re - versal according to the theory ( and to Holy - oak and Glass ) is that people make these decisions not on the basis of distinguishing properties ( though some might be consid - ered ) , but because they are stored as mu - tually exclusive subordinates ( Assumption 12 ) . Generation frequency in this case is a measure of the strength of the connection between the two concepts and therefore of how long it will take to find the contradic - tion between the two mutually exclusive concepts . The second finding of Holyoak and Glass ( 1975 ) involves sentences where people re - ject the sentence by finding a counterexam - ple ( Assumption 13 ) . For example , " All animals are birds , " can be rejected by find - ing another kind of animal , such as a mam - mal . In this case Holyoak and Glass varied the production frequency of the predicate noun ( e . g . , " birds " ) independently of the production frequency of the counterexample ( e . g . , " mammals " ) . Their finding was that reaction time depended not on the produc - tion frequency of the predicate noun ( which is a measure of the semantic relatedness of the concepts in the sentence ) but on the fre - quency of producing a counterexample . Here again where a decision strategy that is not based on distinguishing properties is appropriate , the reaction time data do not depend on the semantic relatedness of the two concepts . The importance of these two findings by Holyoak and Glass ( 1975 ) , in our view , is that they demonstrate that different kinds of evidence can be involved in making cate - gorization judgments . This suggests that approaches such as that of Meyer ( 1970 ) and Smith et a ) . ( 1974 ) , which try to for - mulate a single strategy for making such judgments , will inevitably fail . RELATION OF THE THEORY TO THE MODEL OF SMITH , SHOBEN , AND RIPS Quillian ' s ( 1966 , 1969 ) theory was a fore - runner of a number of global theories of se - mantic processing based on network repre - sentations , in particular those of Anderson and Bower ( 1973 ) , Norman and Rumelhart ( 1975 ) , and Schank ( 1972 ) . These theo - rists have made important advances on the Quillian theory ( especially in the represen - tation of acts and causes ) which in no way contradict the basic thrust of Quillian ' s the - ory . There are some differences between these theories and Quillian ' s , but the basic intent of this paper is to deal with those aspects of semantic processing where the model of Smith et al . ( 1974 ) is the major competitor to Quillian ' s theory . Unlike the various network models , the model of Smith et al . represents concepts as bundles of semantic features . Their model has the virtues of being quite clear and ex - plicit , and it agrees quite well with the re - action time data for categorization judg - ments , except for the Holyoak and Glass ( 1975 ) results . Because it is such an ini - tially compelling model , we want to empha - size how it differs from spreading - activation THEORY OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING 425 theory and point out what we think are its inherent difficulties . In the model of Smith et al . ( 1974 ) , the meaning of a concept is assumed to be rep - resented by semantic features of two kinds : defining features and characteristic features . Defining features are those that an instance must have to be a member of the concept , and the model assumes that features can be more or less defining . Characteristic fea - tures are those that are commonly associated with the concept , but are not necessary for concept membership . For example , " wings " might be a defining feature of " birds " and " flying " a characteristic feature , since all birds have wings but not all fly . In a cat - egorization task , the model assumes that the two concepts are first compared in Stage 1 with respect to all their features , both char - acteristic and defining . If the match is above a positive criterion , the subject answers " yes " ; if it is below a negative criterion , the subject answers " no " ; and if it is in - be - tween , the subject makes a second compar - ison in Stage 2 based on just the defining features . If the instance has all the defining features of the category , the subject says " yes " and otherwise says " no . " If the sub - ject can decide in Stage 1 , his reaction time will be faster than if he decides in Stage 2 . There are several minor differences be - tween the model of Smith et al . ( 1974 ) and the spreading - activation theory that could be minimized by slightly changing their model . The difference in wording between compar - ing features in their model and finding links between properties in our theory is really a nondifference . But the distinction between defining and characteristic features has the inherent difficulty , pointed out through the ages , that there is no feature that is abso - lutely necessary for any category . 4 For ex - ample , if one removes the wings from a bird , it does not stop being a bird . Furthermore , we doubt if people can make consistent de - * There is for living things a biologists ' taxonomy , which categorizes objects using properties that are not always those most apparent to the layman . Thus , there are arbitrary , technical definitions that are different from the layman ' s ill - defined concepts , but this is not true in most domains . There is no technical ' definition of a game , a vehicle , or a country that is generally accepted . cisions as to whether a feature is defining or characteristic , either from time to time or from one person to another . Smith et al . recognized that features are more or less defining ( or criterial ) , but they were forced into making the artificial distinction between defining and characteristic in order to have a two - stage model . Still , the model could be revised to work without the two stages and make essentially the same reaction time predictions . The revision is as follows : If features are compared over time , as in Quillian ' s ( 1966 ) theory , then as the process goes on longer , more features will be compared ( assuming features have different accessibilities ) . The comparison process can have a positive cri - terion and a negative criterion just as before , and features can be weighted by their cri - teriality . If the match at any point in time is above the positive criterion , the subject says " yes " ; if the match falls below the negative criterion , the subject says " no " ; and otherwise he goes on comparing fea - tures . Finally , if he is running out of rel - evant information , he says " I don ' t know . " This is simply the Bayesian decision model described in Assumption 9 of the extended theory , where the evidence consists of matching and mismatching features as in the property comparison of Assumption 11 . Thus , we agree that a decision process similar to the one that Smith et al . ( 1974 ) postulate does occur for some categorization decisions . But there is a fundamental dis - agreement , because they argue that all cat - egorizations judgments are made by compar - ing features of the instance and category , whereas we argue that people use whatever evidence they find , including superordinate links . Because they exclude the use of superordi - nate links , the model of Smith et al . has sev - eral inherent difficulties . The most obvious is the assumption that even when people have superordinate information stored , they do not use it . While most people may not have learned some superordinate relations ( e . g . , that a beaver is a mammal , or a sled is a vehicle ) , there are many they have learned ( e . g . , that a wren is a bird , and a beaver is an animal ) . Why would they not 426 ALLAN M . COLLINS AND ELIZABETH F . LOFTUS use such information if it is stored ? How in fact can they avoid using it ? It is an unlikely model which postulates that people use information that is less relevant to make a decision , instead of information that is more relevant . Another obvious difficulty with the Smith et al . ( 1974 ) model is that people seldom know the defining properties of concepts . For example , consider whether a whale is a mammal , a sponge is an animal , a bat is a bird , or a wren is a sparrow . In the Smith et al . model , these difficult ( and slow ) decisions would be made in Stage 2 on the basis of defining properties . But people gen - erally have no idea what the defining prop - erties of a mammal , ' an animal , a bird , or a sparrow are . Even if they know that one of the most criterial properties for being a mammal is that it bears its young alive , it seems highly unlikely that they know whether whales ( or beavers for that matter ) bear their young alive . Neither of the authors has any idea what properties of a sponge make it an animal , but if asked in an experiment whether a sponge was an an - imal , we would answer " yes , " and we would be comparatively slow about it . The reason we would answer " yes " is simply that we were told at one time that a sponge is an animal . We were also told that a bat is not a bird , and if we had not been told , we fear we might have responded " yes " if asked whether a bat is a bird in a categorization experiment . The decision that a wren is not a sparrow would be made because they are mutually exclusive kinds of birds ( See as - sumption 12 ) . They are both small song - birds , and it is hard to believe that many people know what the defining features of a sparrow are that a wren does not have . The fact that there are cases where people must use superordinate information to make cor - rect categorization judgments makes it un - likely that they do not use such information in other cases where they could make the decision simply by matching features or properties . This is one of the strongesl arguments for a hybrid theory . We would like to close this section by raising the question of why one should adopt such a complicated theory when the Smith et al . ( 1974 ) model is simpler and predicts the reaction time data quite well . We have tried to stress the inherent difficulties that their model has in ignoring superordinate information and in relying on defining prop - erties . Experimental tests can probably be devised that will show up those difficulties . We will suggest one such test , but first we might point out that the results of the Loftus ( 1973b ) categorization experiment described earlier do not fit the Smith et al . model very well . If a person is merely comparing fea - tures between the instance and the category , then it should not matter whether the in - stance or category is presented first . It is the asymmetry in the superordinate connec - tions that predicts the asymmetry Loftus found in reaction time , and it is hard to imagine how one could have an asymmetry of that kind in comparing features of two concepts . One experiment that might show difficul - ties with the Smith et al . ( 1974 ) model is a categorization task . The categories and instances used are based on their multidi - mensional scaling of birds and animals on the one hand , and mammals and animals on the other . As both Collins and Quillian ( Note 4 ) and Rips et al . ( 1973 ) report , subjects are faster at deciding that bird names are in the category " bird " than in the category " animal , " whereas they are slower at deciding that mammal names are in the category " mammal " than in the category " animal . " Collins and Quillian argue that this is the way people learn the superordi - nates : that pigeons are birds and lions are animals . Smith et al . argue that it is based on shared features , and they show by their scaling solution that most birds are closer to " bird " than to " animal , " and most mam - mals are closer to " animal ' ' than to " mam - mal . " Rut there are several bird names that are closer to " animal " than to " bird " ( in particular , " goose , " " chicken , " and " duck " ; " pigeon " is equidistant ) , and there are sev - eral mammal names that are closer to " mam - mal " than " animal " ( in particular , " deer , " " bear , " and " lion " ; " horse " is equidistant ) . We would predict that even for those in - stances the above pattern would hold , whereas a pure feature - matching theory , THEORY OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING 427 such as the Smith et al . model , makes the opposite prediction . So this is a possible test of the two theories . There are un - doubtedly many other tests . Finally , we want to explain why we have been led to such a complicated theory . In trying to write computer programs that an - swer different types of questions , it becomes apparent that any decision procedure that gives correct answers must be flexible enough to deal with many different config - urations of knowledge in memory . This is because people have incomplete knowledge about the world ( see Collins et al . , 1975 ) , and they often do not have stored particular superordinate links or criterial properties . Any realistic data base for a computer sys - tem will have this same kind of incomplete knowledge . Therefore , perhaps our strong - est criticism of the Smith et al . ( 1974 ) model is that it breaks down when people lack knowledge about denning features . While at one level this is a complicated theory , at another level it is a simpler theory than the Smith et al . model . By viewing superordinate links as highly criterial prop - erties , the theory becomes a simple Bayesian model . It is only in specifying the particular configurations of knowledge that constitute positive or negative evidence for the Bayes - ian process that the theory becomes compli - cated . The difference between the two the - ories is that the Smith et al . model allows only one kind of evidence ( matching or mis - matching features ) , whereas the theory pre - sented here allows other kinds of evidence as well . Thus the theory encompasses a revised version of the Smith et al . model as a special case of a more general procedure . CONCLUSION We have extended Quillian ' s spreading - activation theory of semantic processing in order to deal with a number of experiments that have been performed on semantic mem - ory in recent years . The result is a fairly complicated theory with enough generality to apply to results from many different ex - perimental paradigms . The theory can also be considered as a prescription for building human semantic processing in a computer , though at that level many details are omitted about decision strategies for different judg - ments that arise in language processing ( see Carbonell & Collins , 1973 ; Collins et al . , 1975 ; Quillian , 1969 ) . We would argue that the adequacy of a psychological theory should no longer be measured solely by its ability to predict experimental data . It is also important that a theory be sufficiently powerful to produce the behavior that it purports to explain . REFERENCE NOTES 1 . Wilkins , A . J . Categories and the internal lex - icon . Paper presented at the meeting of the Experimental Psychology Society , Oxford , Eng - land , 1972 . 2 . Loftus , E . F . Haiti to catch a sebra in semantic memory . Paper presented at the Minnesota Conference on Cognition , Knowledge , and Adap - tation , Minneapolis , 1973 . 3 . Meyer , D . E . , Schvaneveldt , R . W . , & Ruddy , M . G . Activation of lexical memory . Paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic Society , St . Louis , 1972 . 4 . Collins , A . M . , & Quillian , M . R . Categories and subcategorics in semantic memory . Paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic Society , St . Louis , 1971 . REFERENCES Anderson , J . R . , & Bower , G . H . Human associa - tive memory . Washington , D . C . : V . H . Win - ston , 1973 . Anderson , R . C . , & McGaw , B . On the represen - tation of meanings of general terms . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1973 , 101 , 301 - 306 . Bell , A . , & Quillian , M . R . Capturing concepts in a semantic net . In E . L . Jacks ( Ed . ) , Associa - tive information techniques . New York : Amer - ican Elsevier , 1971 . Brown , R . W . , & McNeill , D . The " tip of the tongue " phenomenon . Journal of Verbal Learn - ing and Verbal Behavior , 1966 , 6 , 325 - 337 . Carbonell , J . R . , & Collins , A . M . Natural seman - tics in artificial intelligence . Proceedings of the Third International Joint Conference on Arti - ficial Intelligence , 1973 , 344 - 351 . Collins , A . M . , & Quillian , M . R . Retrieval time from semantic memory . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1969 , 8 , 240 - 248 . Collins , A . M . , & Quillian , M . R . Does category size affect categorization time ? Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1970 , 9 , 432 - 438 . ( a ) Collins , A . M . , & Quillian , M . R . Facilitating retrieval from semantic memory : The effect of repeating part of an inference . Acta Psycho - logica , 1970 , 33 , 304 - 314 . ( b ) Collins , A . M . , & Quillian , M . R . Experiments on semantic memory and language comprehension . 428 ALLAN M . COLLINS AND ELIZABETH F . LOFTUS In L . W . Gregg ( Ed . ) , Cognition in learning and memory . New York : Wiley , 1972 . ( a ) Collins , A . M . , & Quillian , M . R . How to make a language user . In E . Tulving & W . Donald - son ( Eds . ) , Organisation of memory . New York : Academic Press , 1972 . ( b ) Collins , A . , Warnock , E . H . , Aiello , N . , & Miller , M . L . Reasoning from incomplete knowledge . In D . G . Bobrow & A . Collins ( Eds . ) , Repre - sentation and understanding : Studies in cognitive science . New York : Academic Press , 1975 . Conrad , C . Cognitive economy in semantic mem - ory . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1972 , 92 , 149 - 154 . Fitts , P . M . Cognitive aspects of information pro - cessing : III . Set for speed versus accuracy . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1966 , 71 , 849 - 857 . Freedman , J . L . , & Loftus , E . F . Retrieval of words from long - term memory . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1971 , 10 , 107 - 115 . Grober , E . , & Loftus , E . F . Semantic memory : Searching for attributes versus searching for names . Memory & Cognition , 1974 , 2 , 413 - 416 . Hollan , J . D . Features and semantic memory : Set - theoretic or network model ? Psychological Review , 1975 , 82 , 154 - 155 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Glass , A . L . The role of con - tradictions and counterexamples in the rejection of false sentences . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1975 , 14 , 215 - 239 . Juola , J . F . , & Atkinson , R . C . Memory scanning for words versus categories . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1971 , 10 , 522 - 527 . Landauer , T . K . , & Freedman , J . L . Information retrieval from long - term memory : Category size and recognition time . Journal of Verbal Learn - ing and Verbal Behavior , 1968 , 7 , 291 - 295 . Landauer , T . K . , & Meyer , D . E . Category size and semantic memory retrieval . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1972 , 11 , 539 - 549 . Loftus , E . F . Activation of semantic memory . American Journal of Psychology , 1973 , 86 , 331 - 337 . ( a ) Loftus , E . F . Category dominance , instance dom - inance , and categorization time . Journal of Ex - perimental Psychology , 1973 , 97 , 70 - 74 . ( b ) Loftus , E . F . , & Cole , W . Retrieving attribute and name information from semantic memory . Jour - nal of Experimental Psychology , 1974 , 102 , 1116 - 1122 . Loftus , E . F . , Senders , J . W . , & Turkletaub , S . Retrieval of phonetically similar and dissimilar category members . American Journal of Psy - chology , 1974 , 87 , 57 - 64 . Loftus , G . R . , & Loftus , E . F . The influence of one memory retrieval on a subsequent memory retrieval . Memory & Cognition , 1974 , 2 , 467 - 471 . Meyer , D . E . On the representation and retrieval of stored semantic information . Cognitive Psy - chology , 1970 , 1 , 242 - 300 . Meyer , D . E . Correlated operations in searching stored semantic categories . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology , 1973 , 99 , 124 - 133 . Meyer , D . E . , & Schvaneveldt , R . W . Facilitation in recognizing pairs of words : Evidence of a dependence between retrieval operations . Jour - nal of Experimental Psychology , 1971 , 90 , 227 - 234 . Norman , D . A . , & Rumelhart , D . E . Explorations in cognition . San Francisco : W . H . Freeman , 1975 . Quillian , M . R . A revised design for an under - standing machine . Mechanical Translation , 1962 , 7 , 17 - 29 . Quillian , M . R . Semantic memory . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Carnegie Institute of Tech - nology , 1966 . ( Reprinted in part in M . Minsky [ Ed . ] , Semantic information processing . Cam - bridge , Mass . : M . I . T . Press , 1968 . ) Quillian , M . R . Word concepts : A theory and simulation of some basic semantic capabilities . Behavioral Science , 1967 , 12 , 410 - 430 . Quillian , M . R . The Teachable Language Com - prehender : A simulation program and theory of language . Communications of the ACM , 1969 , 12 , 459 - 476 . Rips , L . J . , Shoben , E . J . , & Smith , E . E . Seman - tic distance and the verification of semantic rela - tions . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1973 , 12 , 1 - 20 . Rosch , E . On the internal structure of perceptual and semantic categories . In T . E . Moore ( Ed . ) , Cognitive development and acquisition of lan - guage . New York : Academic Press , 1973 . Schaeffer , B . , & Wallace , R . Semantic similarity and the comparison of word meanings . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1969 , 82 , 343 - 346 . Schaeffer , B . , & Wallace , R . The comparison of word meanings . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology , 1970 , 86 , 144 - 152 . Schank , R . C . Conceptual dependency : A theory of natural language understanding . Cognitive Psychology , 1972 , 3 , 552 - 631 . Schvaneveldt , R . W . , & Meyer , D . E . Retrieval and comparison processes in semantic memory . In S . Kornblum ( Ed . ) , Attention and perform - ance IV . New York : Academic Press , 1973 . Smith , E . E . , Shoben , E . J . , & Rips , L . J . Com - parison processes in semantic memory . Psycho - logical Review , 1974 , 81 , 214 - 241 . Sternberg , S . High - speed scanning in human memory . Science , 1966 , 153 , 652 - 654 . Stone , M . Models of choice - reaction time . Psy - chometrika , 1960 , 25 , 251 - 260 . Wilkins , A . J . Conjoint frequency , category size , and categorization time . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 1971 , 10 , 382 - 385 . Wittgenstein , L . Philosophical investigations ( G . E . M . Anscombe , trans . ) . Oxford : Blackwell , 1953 . ( Received November 4 , 1974 )