PI3Ks phosphorylate the 3 ′ position of the inositol head group of phosphatidylinositol ( PtdIns ) lipids , allowing these to serve as ligands and functional regulators of a broad range of proteins . Yeasts have a single isoform of PI3K , called Vps34 , which regulates autophagy and the transport of proteins to the lysosome - like vacuole 1 . Higher eukaryotes have multiple PI3K isoforms ( eight in mammals ) , correlating with the vastly expanded repertoire of phosphoinositide - regulated processes in these organisms 2 , 3 , including signal transduction ( Fig . 1 ) . In the late 1990s , the Waterfield team proposed group - ing the PI3Ks in three classes 4 – 7 , the overarching func - tions of which have since been uncovered . In general , class I PI3Ks act in signalling downstream of plasma membrane - bound receptors and small gTPases , whereas class II and class III PI3Ks primarily control membrane trafficking and mostly regulate signalling indirectly . All PI3Ks contain a conserved so - called PI3K core , consisting of a C2 domain , a helical domain and a kinase domain ( Fig . 1a ) . A recurrent theme across all PI3K subfamilies is that , in addition to their catalytic activ - ity , these enzymes also have scaffolding roles , whereby their functions depend on protein – protein interactions but not on their enzymatic activity 8 – 11 . A key scaffold - ing function is to stabilize the proteins that the PI3Ks are associated with . This also explains why PI3K gene knockout or knockdown approaches often result in dampening of expression not only of the PI3Ks them - selves but also of their binding partners . This role as scaffolds confounds the predictive potential of damp - ening PI3K expression levels to model pharmacological intervention with these kinases . Indeed , PI3K inhibitors inactivate PI3K catalytic activity without affecting PI3K protein expression and protein – protein interactions . Therefore , there is a need to carefully differentiate between the catalytic and scaffolding roles of PI3Ks . This Review focuses on the processes that regulate the activity of PI3Ks and the roles of these enzymes in signalling and cell biology . For more translational and clinical aspects of PI3K , we refer the reader to specialized reviews mentioned in the sections below . Class I PI3Ks Class I PI3Ks are heterodimers of a p110 catalytic sub - unit in complex with a regulatory subunit ( Fig . 1a ) . They engage in signalling downstream of tyrosine kinases , g protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) and monomeric small GTPases . In contrast to Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster , which have only a single class I PI3K isoform ( AGE - 1 and Dp110 , respectively ) , mammals have four class I PI3K catalytic subunits . These are p110α , p110β , p110γ and p110δ , encoded by the PIK3CA , PIK3CB , PIK3CG and PIK3CD genes , respectively . Structural insights into class I PI3K activation have been reviewed recently 12 – 14 , as have the roles of class I PI3K isoforms in normal physiology and disease 15 – 22 . Below , we discuss emerging data on isoform - selective regulation of the class I PI3Ks and the finding that class I PI3K pathway components are mutationally activated not only in cancer but also in human overgrowth and in a primary immune deficiency syndrome . We also discuss Phosphatidylinositol A phospholipid with myo - inositol as its head group . The 3 ′ - OH , 4 ′ - OH and 5 ′ - OH groups of the inositol ring can be reversibly phosphorylated , resulting in a total of seven lipid species , collectively referred to as phosphoinositides . Pi3Ks phosphorylate the 3 ′ position of the inositol ring . PI3K isoforms in cell signalling and vesicle trafficking Benoit Bilanges * , York Posor * and Bart Vanhaesebroeck * Abstract | PI3Ks are a family of lipid kinases that phosphorylate intracellular inositol lipids to regulate signalling and intracellular vesicular traffic . Mammals have eight isoforms of PI3K , divided into three classes . The class I PI3Ks generate 3 - phosphoinositide lipids , which directly activate signal transduction pathways . In addition to being frequently genetically activated in cancer , similar mutations in class I PI3Ks have now also been found in a human non - malignant overgrowth syndrome and a primary immune disorder that predisposes to lymphoma . The class II and class III PI3Ks are regulators of membrane traffic along the endocytic route , in endosomal recycling and autophagy , with an often indirect effect on cell signalling . Here , we summarize current knowledge of the different PI3K classes and isoforms , focusing on recently uncovered biological functions and the mechanisms by which these kinases are activated . Deeper insight into the PI3K isoforms will undoubtedly continue to contribute to a better understanding of fundamental cell biological processes and , ultimately , of human disease . UCL Cancer Institute , University College London , London , UK . * e - mail : b . bilanges @ ucl . ac . uk ; y . posor @ ucl . ac . uk ; bart . vanh @ ucl . ac . uk https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 019 - 0129 - z REVIEWS NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlECulAR CEll BIOlOGy volume 20 | SePTemBeR 2019 | 515 C2 Helical Catalytic Catalytic ( pseudokinase ) Class III VPS15 ( PIK3R4 ) Myr HEAT WD40 repeats Regulatory and accessory subunits : UVRAG C2 CC BARA2 ATG14 CC1 BATS CC2 Beclin 1 BH3 CC BARA Catalytic subunit : VPS34 ( PIK3C3 ) C o m p l e x I C o m p l e x II Regulatory subunits : p85 α ( PIK3R1 ) p85 β ( PIK3R2 ) p55 α ( PIK3R1 ) p50 α ( PIK3R1 ) p55 γ ( PIK3R3 ) RBD C2 Helical Catalytic p101 ( PIK3R5 ) p84 ( PIK3R6 ) Regulatory subunits P RBD C2 Helical Catalytic P C2 PX RBD C2 Helical Catalytic C2 PX Class I PtdIns lipid substratespeciﬁcity Domain structure of PI3Ks IA IB SH3 BH nSH2 P P iSH2 cSH2 nSH2 P iSH2 cSH2 Class II ABD RBD C2 Helical Catalytic PI3K core Hot - spot locations of kinase - activating mutations Catalytic subunits : p110 α ( PIK3CA ) p110 β ( PIK3CB ) p110 δ ( PIK3CD ) Catalytic subunit : p110 γ ( PIK3CG ) Catalytic subunits : PI3KC2 α ( PIK3C2A ) PI3KC2 β ( PIK3C2B ) PI3KC2 γ ( PIK3C2G ) E542K E545K H1407R PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 PtdIns4P PtdIns3P PtdIns PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 SHIP1 , SHIP2 INPP4A , INPP4B Plasma membrane a b PtdIns3P PtdIns PtdIns3P Recyclingendosome PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 PtdIns3P PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 Early endosome Late endosome / lysosome Autophagosome I I II II II III III III Fig . 1 | Substrate specificity and domain organization of the PI3K isoforms and their lipid products . a | Lipid substrate specificity of the different isoforms is shown on the left . Secondary products for class I PI3Ks generated through sequential dephosphorylation of phosphatidyl - inositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) by the phosphatases SHIP1 , SHIP2 , INPP4A and INPP4B are also shown . The domain structures of the PI3Ks are shown on the right . For highly homologous proteins , a single overall domain structure is shown . No specific domain structures are present in the class IB regulatory PI3K subunits . Three specific hot - spot mutations in human PIK3CA associated with cancer are shown . The name of the protein and the symbol of the gene encoding the PI3K family subunits ( in parentheses ) are indicated . The class IA regulatory subunits are encoded by three distinct genes : PIK3R1 ( which encodes p85 α , p55 α and p50 α , through differential promoter usage ) , PIK3R2 ( which encodes p85 β ) and PIK3R3 ( which encodes p55 γ ) . VPS34 occurs in two main multiprotein complexes , referred to as complex I and complex II , which are made up of VPS34 , VPS15 , beclin 1 and ATG14 ( complex I ) or VPS34 , VPS15 , beclin 1 and UVRAG ( complex II ) . The genes encoding beclin 1 , ATG14 and UVRAG have not been classified as PIK3R genes and are referred to as accessory subunits rather than regulatory subunits . b | Subcellular distribution of the 3 ′ - phosphoinositides directly generated by PI3Ks . Not shown is phos phatidylinositol 3 , 5 - bisphosphate , which derives from phos pho rylation of phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns3P ) by the PI5K PIKFYVE . The three classes of PI3K produce 3 ′ - phosphoinositide pools in distinct subcellular locations . Whereas PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 is produced only by class I PI3Ks , distinct pools of phos - phatidylinositol 3 , 4 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ) and PtdIns3P are generated by more than one class of PI3K . Roman numerals I , II and III in the colour - shaded circles represent class I , class II and class III PI3Ks , respectively . ABD , p85 adaptor binding site ; BARA , β / α - repeated , autophagy - related domain ; BATS , Barkor / Atg14 ( L ) autophagosome targeting sequence ; BH , BCR homology domain ; BH3 , Bcl - 2 homology 3 domain ; C2 , protein kinase C conserved region 2 ; CC1 , coiled - coil domain 1 ; CC2 , coiled - coil domain 2 ; HEAT , huntingtin , EF3 , α - subunit of PP2A , TOR1 domain ; iSH2 , inter - SH2 domain ; Myr , N - terminal myristoylation of VPS15 ; P , proline - rich region ; PtdIns , phosphatidylino - sitol ; PtdIns4P , phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate ; PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; PX , phox homology ; RBD , RAS - binding domain ; SH2 , Src homology 2 domain ; nSH2 , N - terminal SH2 ; iSH2 , inter - SH2 ; cSH2 , C - terminal SH2 ; WD40 repeat , Trp – Asp ( W – D ) ; www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 516 | SePTemBeR 2019 | volume 20 how class I PI3K phosphoinositide lipid products may act in early endosomes to regulate specific isoforms of the protein kinase AKT ( also known as protein kinase B ) , resulting in AKT isoform - selective phosphorylation of substrates . Interesting emerging data indicate that the clinical efficacy of class I PI3K inhibitors in cancer might be due to non - cytotoxic mechanisms , including through regulation of the responsiveness of cancer cells to hormone therapy and stimulation of the host antitumour immune response . Structure and signalling Class I PI3K subunits and their binding partners . The class I PI3Ks are subdivided into class IA and class IB enzymes on the basis of the differences in regulatory subunits ( Fig . 1a ) . Their catalytic subunits consist of the PI3K catalytic core , extended N - terminally with the so - called RAS - binding domain ( RBD ) ( which can bind the small GTPases RAS , RAC1 and CDC42 ) and , in the case of the class IA PI3Ks , a binding domain for a regulatory subunit ( Fig . 1a ) . The class IA catalytic subunits ( p110α , p110β and p110δ ) occur in complex with a p85 regulatory subunit , which keeps the p85 – p110 heterodimer in an inactive , cytosolic state . Mammals have three genes encoding p85 subunits ( PIK3R1 , PIK3R2 and PIK3R3 ) , which can give rise to five gene products ( p85α , p55α , p50α ( encoded by PIK3R1 ) , p85β ( encoded by PIK3R2 ) and p55γ ( encoded by PIK3R3 ) ) ( Fig . 1a ) . Class IA PI3Ks are recruited to the plasma membrane via binding of the SH2 domains of p85 to tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins , such as receptor tyrosine kin - ases , or other membrane - bound proteins , such as the insulin receptor substrate proteins . This recruitment leads to a deinhibition of the p85 – p110 dimer and association with its lipid substrates in the membrane ( Fig . 2 ) . A study using mass spectrometry approaches and mouse models with endogenously tagged class IA subunits revealed that p85α and p85β bind equivalently to p110α and p110β , whereas p85α preferentially interacts with p110δ 23 . The same study provided evidence for the existence of p110 - free p85 subunits 23 . Autophagy A cellular ‘self - eating’ process that involves breaking down subcellular components ( for example , protein and damaged organelles ) through the lysosomal pathway in response to nutrient depletion or stress . it is characterized by membrane trafficking events that sequester cytoplasmic material in double - membrane structures , called autophagosomes , followed by degradation and recycling of cellular components by the lysosome . PlasmamembraneNutrients RHEB – GTP Translocationto the lysosome • Cell growth • Proliferation • Migration PTEN SHIP1 , SHIP2 TSC1 / 2 GSK3 β FOXOs PRAS40 AS160 p27 eNOS AKT1 AKT2 AKT3 Cancer Immunity PROS APDS Normal physiology Disease Metabolism Angiogenesis Male fertility Platelet function PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 AKT PDK1 mTORC2 PH PH PH ? P T308 S473P AKT activation Early endosomeAKT2 Late endosome / lysosome mTORC1off mTORC1on PI3K Clathrin - mediated endocytosis CDC42RAC1 RAS RAB5 G βγ G βγ Class IA PI3Ks Class IB PI3K GPCR RTK RTK GPCR RTK RAS PI3K α PI3K β PI3K δ RAS PI3K γ Regulatory inputs PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 Fig . 2 | Isoform - selective regulation of class I PI3Ks and AKT family members . Shown are the activating inputs into the distinct class I PI3K isoforms , resulting in the generation of phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) from phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) at the plasma membrane . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 production makes possible the recruitment of cytosolic , inactive AKT to the membrane through its pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain . This leads to phosphorylation and activation of AKT by the PH domain - containing kinase PDK1 and mTOR complex 2 ( mTORC2 ) ( in which the SIN1 component contains a PH domain ) . Active AKT then phosphorylates its substrates , which in most known cases leads to functional inactivation ( illustrated by the blunt - ended line ) . However , activation downstream of AKT phosphorylation is also observed , for example , for endothelial nitric oxide synthase ( eNOS ) . Whereas PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 localizes only to the plasma membrane , phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ) generated from PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 by the action of 5 - phosphatases such as SHIP1 and / or SHIP2 is found both on the plasma membrane and in an early endosomal compartment to where it is being transferred via clathrin - mediated endocytosis 54 . Evidence is emerging 54 – 56 that , in this endosomal location , AKT2 is preferentially activated over AKT1 and AKT3 , with endosomal AKT2 being able to phosphorylate certain substrates ( such as glycogen synthase kinase 3 β ( GSK3 β ) , but not forkhead box protein O ( FOXO ) transcription factors or TSC2 ) to which other isoforms have less access . It is not clear whether such AKT isoform substrate specificity also exists for AKT - mediated signalling at the plasma membrane . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 can also be converted into PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 by the inositol lipid 3 - phosphatase PTEN , which is a key regulator of the cellular levels of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 . APDS , activated PI3K δ syndrome ; GPCR , G protein - coupled receptor ; PRAS40 , proline - rich AKT substrate of 40 kDa ; PROS , PIK3CA - related overgrowth spectrum ; RTK , receptor tyrosine kinase . NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlECulAR CEll BIOlOGy R e v i e w s volume 20 | SePTemBeR 2019 | 517 The sole class IB PI3K is p110γ , which forms a hetero - dimer with a p84 ( also known as p87 ) or p101 regula - tory subunit . Gβγ subunits released by activated GPCRs activate this heterodimer and engage it with the plasma membrane 24 ( Fig . 2 ) . Via their RBDs , all class I catalytic subunits also interact with membrane - bound small GTPases , namely , RAS ( p110α , p110δ and p110γ ) and RAC1 or CDC42 ( p110β ) 25 , 26 . Among the class IA PI3K isoforms , p110β is unique in its capacity to additionally interact with Gβγ subunits 27 and activated RAB5 ( reF . 28 ) — a key early endosome marker ( Fig . 2 ) . Although Gβγ subunits activate the cata - lytic potential of p110β , the role of RAB5 binding in regu - lating p110β activation remains unclear 29 . This multitude of upstream signals makes the regulation of p110β among the most complex of the class I PI3Ks , with several inputs possibly required for full activation ( reviewed in reFs 13 , 29 ) . Below , we use the terminology PI3Kα , PI3Kβ , PI3Kγ and PI3Kδ when referring to the heterodimeric class I PI3K complexes . Phosphoinositides generated by class I PI3Ks . Activated class I PI3Ks phosphorylate phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) at the plasma mem - brane to generate the lipid second messenger phos - phatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ; also known as PIP 3 ) , which is metabolized to phos - phatidylinositol 3 , 4 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ) by 5 - phosphatases such as SHIP1 and / or SHIP2 ( Fig . 2 ) . The inositol lipid 3 - phosphatase PTEN is a key regulator of the cellular levels of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 , converting these lipids into PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and phos - phatidylinositol 4 - phosphate ( PtdIns4P ) , respectively 30 , 31 ( Fig . 2 ) . In addition to their catalytic activity , class I PI3K catalytic subunits have protein scaffolding functions . In this capacity , they function as adaptor proteins in the assembly of protein – protein complexes to regulate a range of biological functions that do not depend on PI3K catalytic activity ( reviewed in reFs 8 , 11 , 32 ) . In this Review , we focus on the kinase - dependent functions of the class I PI3Ks , given that these could possibly be tar - geted by small - molecule pharmacological inhibitors to modulate aberrant PI3K activity ( see below ) . There is emerging evidence that p85 subunits may also have functions independent of the catalytic p110 subunit , especially in cancer , in which they may occur free of p110 or acquire mutations that convert them into neomorphic proteins with new functionalities , such as activation of the JNK and ERK signalling pathways ( reviewed in reFs 33 – 35 ) . 3 - Phosphoinositide protein effectors . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 interact with lipid - binding pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domains in a range of protein effectors to modulate their localization and / or activity . Well - established effectors include protein kinases ( such as AKT and BTK ) , scaffolding proteins ( such as GAB proteins ) and regulators of monomeric GTPases , namely , some gTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) and guanine nucleotide exchange factors . These different effec - tors enable class I PI3Ks to regulate a broad range of biological activities , including nutrient sensing , cell cycle progression and cell migration 15 – 17 , 36 ( Fig . 2 ) . Although many class I PI3K protein effectors bind to both PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 , some selectively bind to PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 and could control PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 - selective signalling pathways 37 , 38 . It will be of interest to determine whether and how class I PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 - driven biology integrates with that of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 produced by the class II PI3Ks ( see below ) . In a typical mammalian cell , it is estimated that around 10 – 30 and possibly even more proteins can directly bind to class I PI3K lipids 39 – 42 . Non - PH - domain - based interactions of proteins with PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and / or PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 have also been described , with an example of specific isoforms of the myosin motor proteins 43 , 44 . This indicates that multiple additional class I PI3K - dependent effector pathways remain to be uncovered . AKT as a key 3 - phosphoinositide protein effector . AKT is activated by PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 - driven or PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 - driven recruitment to the plasma membrane , where it undergoes phosphorylation on the conserved Thr308 ( by PDK1 ) and Ser473 ( by mTOr complex 2 ( mTORC2 ) ) , leading to its activation 45 . The ease with which AKT activation can be monitored as a proxy for class I PI3K activation ( using antibodies against the phosphorylated Ser473 and Thr308 activation sites ) in part explains why a large focus thus far has been on class I PI3K - mediated signalling through this kinase . However , given the poten - tial for the class I PI3K - generated lipids to engage with a broader diversity of effectors , it is not surprising that AKT is not always absolutely required for PI3K - driven output ( reviewed in reF . 46 ) . More than 100 AKT substrates have now been iden - tified 45 , including inhibitors of cell cycle progression ( p21 and p27 ) , GAPs ( TSC2 ( also known as tuberin ) and AS160 ) , apoptosis inducers ( BAD ) , protein kinases ( glycogen synthase kinase 3β ( GSK3β ) ) and a subset of the forkhead box protein O ( FOXO ) transcription factors . The function of many AKT substrates has now been clarified , including that of phosphorylation of TSC2 in providing growth - factor input into mTOr complex 1 ( mTORC1 ) activation ( BOx 1 ) . This contrasts with the involvement of the FOXO transcription factors in PI3K signalling , which is more elusive and most likely more context dependent , owing to modulation by other cell type - specific proteins . FOXO transcription factors reg - ulate a broad range of target genes , with AKT - mediated phosphorylation leading to the exclusion of FOXO transcription factors from the nucleus , thus negatively regulating their transcription factor activity . The role of PI3K – AKT signalling in relieving a possible tumour suppressor role of FOXO transcription factors was a concept to rationalize the observed inverse correlation between PI3K activity and FOXO target gene expression in cancer 47 . However , recent data indicate that FOXO transcription factors are not classic tumour suppres - sors 48 , with the overall importance of FOXO regulation in PI3K biology remaining unclear . Nevertheless , studies of T lymphocytes suggest a clear role for AKT - driven FOXO regulation in the context of cell differentiation and adaptation to nutrients and stress 49 , 50 . Small GTPases gTP - binding proteins that bind to and hydrolyse gTP to gDP and are mostly active in the gTP - bound state . Most activities in cells are regulated to some extent by small gTPases . C2 domain A membrane - binding domain homologous to the C2 domain of protein kinase C with mostly only moderate lipid specificity . some C2 domains associate with membranes in a Ca 2 + - dependent manner . G protein - coupled receptors receptors that contain seven transmembrane helices . They activate heterotrimeric g proteins , which , in turn , regulate the function of various proteins . Early endosomes Membrane - bound intracellular vesicles marked by rAB5 and eeA1 and high levels of phos - phatidylinositol 3 - phosphate . endocytic vesicles fuse with early endosomes and endocytic cargo is sorted for recycling or degradation . early endosomes then mature into late endosomes . AKT A group of ser / Thr - specific protein kinases , also known as protein kinase B , that are activated by Pi3K . Hormone therapy Also known as endocrine therapy , this treatment interferes with hormone signalling in hormone receptor - positive cancers , such as some types of breast or prostate cancer . Insulin receptor substrate proteins Proteins that bind to the intracellular domains of activated receptors for insulin and cytokines . These adaptor proteins then engage with other downstream signalling molecules . Neomorphic proteins Proteins that , as a result of mutation , acquire new functions beyond their normal physiological roles . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 518 | SePTemBeR 2019 | volume 20 Signalling specificity of AKT isoforms . Mammals have three isoforms of AKT — AKT1 , AKT2 and AKT3 — for which no isoform - selective inhibitors are available 45 . AKT1 and AKT2 are both widely expressed , with an enrich ment of AKT2 in insulin - responsive tissues such as the liver , muscle and pancreas , whereas AKT3 shows a more restricted tissue distribution and is mostly expressed in the brain 51 . Although AKT isoforms have similar in vitro substrate specificity , emerging evidence indicates the potential for substrate specificity and isoform - specific biological functions in vivo 45 , 52 , 53 . The molecular basis for this specificity has remained unclear to date but recent studies are starting to provide insight into this . One such study has provided evidence that func - tional AKT isoform specificity might be based on sub - strate accessibility and subcellular distribution , rather than being due to differences in intrinsic catalytic sub - strate specificity 54 . In fibroblasts , AKT2 was activated at both the plasma membrane and early endosomes , whereas AKT1 and AKT3 activity was restricted to the plasma membrane . It was further shown that the short linker region between the PH and catalytic domains of the AKT isoforms determines their 3 - phospho - inositide binding selectivity : AKT1 and AKT3 show strong selectivity for PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , whereas AKT2 is able to bind to both PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 . Pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domains sequences of approximately 100 amino acids that can mediate specific binding to phosphoinositide lipids and are present in many signalling molecules . Only a minority of PH domains actually bind lipids , with the PH representing a conserved structural fold in proteins without necessarily a specific biological function . Box 1 | mTORC1 activation and its regulation by class I PI3Ks The Ser / Thr kinase mToR complex 1 ( mToRC1 ) is a central regulator of cell growth . under nutrient - rich conditions ( growth factors and amino acids ) , mToRC1 potentiates anabolic pathways ( such as protein synthesis and metabolism ) and inhibits catabolic processes ( such as autophagy ) . When nutrients are scarce , mToRC1 becomes inactive , resulting in reduced cell growth and induction of autophagy . Apart from growth factors , many other inputs , including oxygen , energy and inflammation , involving the RAS – eRK , ribosomal S6 kinase or AmP - activated protein kinase pathways , have also been identified as regulators of mTORC1 . Activation of mToRC1 occurs at multiple levels . The first level of activation of mToRC1 occurs on the lysosome , through input from amino acids and growth factors 203 . The amino acid branch causes translocation of mTORC1 from the cytosol to lysosomes , its obligate platform of activation , whereas the growth factor axis activates lysosomally bound mToRC1 ( see the figure , part a ) . The second level is through positioning of the lysosome within the cell 140 . under conditions of starvation , lysosomes cluster perinuclearly . under nutrient - rich conditions , lysosomes become positioned near the plasma membrane , bringing mToRC1 close to input from cell surface receptors ( see the figure , part b ) . Amino acid sensing occurs through cytoplasmic sensors and amino acid transporters , which — through regulation of a Ragulator – v - ATPase complex and the GAToR complex that act as a guanine exchange factor and a GTPase - activating protein for the RAGC – RAGA small GTPase heterodimer , respectively — results in a switch between GDP and GTP loading on RAGs . The lysosome - bound active RAG heterodimer then recruits mTORC1 from the cytoplasm to the lysosomal surface , where its activator , the small GTPase RHeB , resides . once localized to the lysosome , mToRC1 becomes fully activated if growth factors are also present . This occurs downstream of class I PI3K – AKT signalling that induces the removal of a lysosomally bound RHEB inactivator to the cytosol , thereby allowing RHeB to become activated through GTP loading and to stimulate mToRC1 activity . This RHeB inactivator is TSC2 , which serves as a GTPase - activating protein for RHeB . TSC2 is bound to TSC1 , forming the so - called tuberous sclerosis complex ( TSC ) . On growth factor stimulation , AKT phosphorylates TSC2 , inducing the dissociation of the TSC complex from the lysosomal membrane . Class II and class III PI3Ks can also regulate mToRC1 ( see BOx 3 ) . In the figure dashed arrows represent change in mToRC1 positioning ( panel a ) or organelle movement ( panel b ) . Late endosome / lysosome Late endosome / lysosome Nutrients Growth factors Class I PI3Ks AKT P RHEB Nutrient signalling Lysosomal translocation of mTORC1 Growth factor signalling Activation of mTORC1 kinase activity GATOR Microtubule Plasma membrane Perinuclear versus cell periphery a Activation of mTORC1 at the lysosome b Regulation of lysosome positioning Endoplasmicreticulum GDP GTP Ragulator V - ATPase mTORC1off mTORC1on RHEB TSC1 / 2 TSC1 / 2 P P R e t r o g r a d e t r a n s p o r t A n t e r o g r a d e t r a n s p o r t Starvation Amino acid and growth factor stimulation Nucleus Lysosomaltranslocation Kinaseactivation RAGC GDP RAGA GTP NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlECulAR CEll BIOlOGy R e v i e w s volume 20 | SePTemBeR 2019 | 519 Further analysis revealed that both PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 were generated at the plasma membrane , with only PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 being transferred via clathrin - mediated endocytosis to an early endosomal compart - ment , where AKT2 was preferentially activated over the other two isoforms 54 . The notion that AKT2 can be selectively activated by PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 is also observed on inactivation of the PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 4 - phosphatase INPP4B , which results in selective activation of AKT2 but not AKT1 ( reF . 55 ) . Moreover , WDFY2 , a FYVe domain - containing protein found on early endosomes , has been shown to selectively interact with and regulate the signalling of AKT2 but not that of AKT1 ( reF . 56 ) . It was also shown that endosomal AKT2 is able to phosphorylate certain substrates such as GSK3β , but not FOXO transcription factors , TSC2 or ribosomal S6 kinase ( a downstream substrate of mTORC1 ) , leading to selective signalling outputs 54 , 57 . This selective sig - nalling by AKT2 could be particularly important in metabolic tissues where AKT2 is the most abundant AKT isoform 51 , 58 . A recent study 59 provided evidence that PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - generating kinases , class I PI3Ks , PDK1 and AKT can all assemble on the scaffold protein IQ motif - containing GAP1 ( IQGAP1 ) . It is clear that the existence of such higher - order complexes of specific kinases , effectors and their substrates has the potential to compartmentalize and facilitate specific and efficient kinase – substrate signalling pathways . The recruitment of specific AKT isoforms to such IQGAP1 complexes has not yet been investigated . Molecular mechanisms of class I PI3K isoform - specific functions . Gene targeting studies in mice have uncov - ered organismal roles of class I PI3Ks 8 , including key roles in insulin signalling and organismal metabolism ( PI3Kα 60 , 61 but not PI3Kβ 62 , 63 ) , angiogenesis ( PI3Kα ) 64 , spermatogenesis 65 , 66 and PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 produc - tion in platelets 67 ( PI3Kβ ) , and immunity ( PI3Kγ and PI3Kδ 68 , 69 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . Pharmacological interventions using isoform - selective PI3K inhibitors have confirmed many of these biological functions in humans . One element to explain the isoform - specific physio - logical functions of the class I PI3Ks may relate to their relative expression levels in different tissues . p110α and p110β show a broad tissue distribution , whereas p110γ and p110δ are highly expressed in white blood cells , but are also found in some other tissues at lower levels than in leukocytes . This includes expression of p110γ in cardiomyocytes , where it is upregulated under stress conditions , triggering adverse cardiac remodel - ling that contributes to heart failure 70 , 71 . p110δ is also found in neurons 72 , 73 and fibroblast - like cells 74 , 75 , where it functions in axonal regeneration 72 and inflammatory responses 74 , respectively . p110δ can also become highly expressed in some solid tumour types , such as breast 76 , 77 and liver 78 , 79 tumours , with emerging evidence that PI3Kδ could be a therapeutic target in these cancers 77 – 79 . Another parameter in isoform - selective function of PI3Ks is their differential capacity to respond to specific upstream signals ( Fig . 2 ) . For example , only PI3Kα ( and not p110β ) regulates insulin signalling and organismal metabolism 60 – 63 , despite both PI3K isoforms being expressed in metabolic tissues . This may be partially explained by the selective recruitment of PI3Kα over PI3Kβ to tyrosine - phosphorylated insulin receptor sub - strate proteins downstream of activated insulin recep - tors 60 . The mechanism of this selective recruitment of p110 isoforms is unclear , but is reminiscent of the analo - gous higher recruitment of p110α – p85 over p110β – p85 to activated platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) receptors 23 . Insulin may also not provide the many upstream stimuli required for full activation of PI3Kβ ( Fig . 2 ) . However , in PDGF - stimulated mouse embryonic fibroblasts , despite being recruited about fivefold less efficiently to the stimulated PDGF receptors than PI3Kα , PI3Kβ still contributed 40 % of the PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ( reF . 23 ) . This was explained by the fact that p110β may also become activated by RAC1 and CDC42 downstream of GPCRs under the conditions tested 23 . In this context , it is important to note that , although specific class I PI3K isoforms typically show dominant functional roles in normal physiology downstream of specific stimuli , such isoform - selective function is often lost on cell transformation 80 , 81 . This might be due to aberrant expression of PI3K isoforms and / or coincident continuous induction of multiple distinct signalling pathways in cancer cells that engage all PI3K isoforms simultaneously and lead to the loss of isoform - specific PI3K signalling . Class I PI3K pathway in cancer Genetic PI3K pathway activation in cancer . Somatic genetic activation of the class IA PI3K pathway is very common in cancer and occurs through multiple mech - anisms 19 – 21 , including mutational activation of p110 catalytic subunits or inactivation of PTEN . Similar genetic lesions as in cancer have now also been found in several rare human syndromes associated with aberrant growth ( BOx 2 ) . Not all of these syndromes are associ - ated with a predisposition to cancer , indicating that the timing and tissue location of genetic PI3K pathway activation may determine its functional outcome . Activating mutations in the p110 catalytic subunits in cancer are most frequent in PIK3CA , with a much lower frequency of mutation in PIK3CB or PIK3CD ( reviewed in reF . 82 ) . These mutations are found throughout the cod - ing region of the p110 isoforms , but most are in ‘hot - spot regions’ in the helical and kinase domains ( Fig . 1 ) , with the RBD conspicuously free from such mutations . These mutations mimic and enhance dynamic events in the natural activation process of the autoinhibited p85 – p110 heterodimer 83 . Activating PIK3CA mutations are not strictly hetero - zygous in cancer , but can occur homozygously and even in multiple gene copies , or alongside additional oncogenic genetic aberrations within the PI3K path - way 84 , 85 . This has also prompted speculation that the therapeutic response of PIK3CA - associated cancers may vary according to the mutant protein dose and thus the strength of pathway activation 85 . Although this remains to be determined for PIK3CA , a clini - cal study of the efficacy of AKT inhibition recently reported that homozygosity for the activated AKT E17K GTPase - activating proteins ( gAPs ) . Proteins that inactivate small gTP - binding proteins , such as rAs and rHeB family members , by increasing their rate of gTP hydrolysis . Guanine nucleotide exchange factors Proteins that facilitate the exchange of gDP for gTP in the nucleotide - binding pocket of gTP - binding proteins . PDK1 A ser / Thr - specific protein kinase . it is a master kinase that is involved in the activation of many other ser / Thr kinases belonging to the cAMP - dependent , cgMP - dependent protein kinase C ( AgC ) family of protein kinases , which includes AKT , protein kinase C and s6 kinase . it is now clear that the activation of PDK1 is not dependent on phosphoinositides , as its name would imply . mTOR complex 2 ( mTOrC2 ) . A multiprotein complex consisting of mTOr , rapamycin - insensitive companion of mTOr ( rictor ) , mammalian stress - activated protein kinase interacting protein 1 ( msiN1 ) , protein observed with rictor 1 ( Protor 1 ) , mammalian lethal with seC13 protein 8 ( mLsT8 ) and DeP domain - containing mTOr - interacting protein ( DePTOr ) . mTOrC2 is insensitive to short - term treatment with rapamycin . This complex phosphorylates AKT on ser473 in its hydrophobic motif . Forkhead box protein O ( FOxO ) . A transcription factor family characterized by a winged - helix DNA - binding motif and the forkhead domain . The mammalian FOxO family has four members : FOxO1 , FOxO3 , FOxO4 and FOxO6 . They are involved in a wide range of cellular processes , such as metabolism , cell cycle arrest , stress resistance and apoptosis . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 520 | SePTemBeR 2019 | volume 20 variant is associated with a significant improvement in therapeutic response 86 . The timing of genetic PI3K pathway activation may differ dependent on cancer type , occurring early in some people and late in others . Evidence has been pre - sented that activating PIK3CA mutations are an early , clonal event in breast cancer 87 and colon cancer 88 as is heterozygous PTEN loss in squamous lung carcinoma 89 . Non - cytotoxic anticancer effects of PI3K inhibitors . The frequent aberrant activation of the class I PI3K pathway in human cancer has led to intense efforts to develop PI3K pathway inhibitors for oncology . It was generally thought that PI3K inhibition would lead to cell death . However , on class I PI3K pathway inhibition , cells mostly enter a dormant state resembling nutrient depri - vation , without direct induction of cell death signalling pathways by PI3K inhibitors 90 . Transformed cells were also found to be able to survive with very low levels of PI3K activity 81 . Emerging evidence indicates that clinical efficacy of PI3K inhibitors in cancer might derive from non - cytotoxic mechanisms , such as through potentia - tion of hormone therapy , stimulation of a host anticancer immune response or interference with tumour – stroma interactions , as detailed below ( reviewed in reF . 105 ) . PI3Kα inhibitors can enhance oestrogen pathway activity in breast cancer and increase the dependence of breast cancer cells on this hormone , as indicated by increased sensitivity to hormone therapy with oestro - gen receptor inhibitors 91 . Reported mechanisms include Box 2 | Genetic class I PI3K deregulation in human disease syndromes Genetic class I PI3K activation is a hallmark of many cancers . Several other human disorders have been associated with mutations in this pathway but are not always predisposing to cancer . PIK3CA - related overgrowth spectrum PIK3CA - related overgrowth spectrum ( PRoS ) comprises rare , congenital disorders in which activating PIK3CA mutations are acquired postzygotically 199 . The resulting genetic mosaicism is associated with phenotypic heterogeneity , reflecting differences in the timing and location of PIK3CA mutation in each patient . vascular malformations are one of the most common clinical features in PRoS ( reviewed in reF . 204 ) . The mosaic nature of these mutations and the lack of germline transmission suggest that heterozygous , activating PIK3CA alleles are embryonic lethal 199 , as is the case in mouse models 87 , 205 . The spectrum of PIK3CA mutations in PRoS mirrors that of cancer , yet the overgrowth in PRoS is benign and is typically not associated with cancer predisposition . PIK3CA mutations in PRoS are mainly found in tissues derived from mesoderm ( such as fat , muscle , bone and vasculature ) and neuroectoderm ( such as brain ) , possibly reflecting negative selection of mutant cells in the other lineages 199 . Conversely , somatic PIK3CA mutations are relatively rare in the sporadic cancers originating from these tissues , which might indicate only a weak tumour - promoting role of mutated PIK3CA in these tissue contexts . Another remarkable observation is an often low percentage of PIK3CA - mutant cells in the overgrowth tissue , indicative of potential paracrine effects of PIK3CA - mutant cells on non - mutant surrounding cells 199 . Treatment of patients with PRoS with a low dose of a PI3K α - selective small - molecule inhibitor has been found to effectively reduce PRoS - related overgrowth , to be very well tolerated and to not interfere with normal growth of paediatric patients 206 . PRoS may hold important lessons for treatments of PIK3CA - associated cancers . Given the shared genetic defect , the clinical observations in PRoS raise the important question whether a low dose of a PI3K α inhibitor could also normalize aberrant PI3K signalling in cancer 207 . In cancer therapy , PI3K pathway inhibitors are currently used at maximum - tolerated doses , intended to block all cellular PI3K activity , but these drugs are poorly tolerated , and when used at high concentrations , induce immediate adaptive signalling ( called feedback loops 208 ) that provides resistance to PI3K inhibitors . Such feedback loops do not seem to occur on low - dose PI3K inhibition , possibly because the remaining PI3K activity is sufficient to support normal growth factor signalling . PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome PTeN hamartoma tumour syndrome ( PHTS ) is a cancer predisposition syndrome caused by heterozygous PTEN dysfunction in all cells of the body , including germ cells 209 , 210 . Thus , unlike PIK3CA mutations in PRoS , heterozygous PTEN inactivation is compatible with human development , illustrating the distinct biological impact of these genetic defects . PHTS is also associated with macrocephaly and developmental disabilities 209 , 210 . A limited number of case reports have been published on the treatment of patients with PHTS with the mToR inhibitors sirolimus ( reviewed in reF . 211 ) and rapamycin 212 , 213 . These treatments led to a variable clinical impact , with reappearance of symptoms on drug discontinuation . It will be of interest to explore other PI3K pathway inhibitors in this clinical setting . Immunodeficiency syndromes caused by PI3K δ activation Dominant - activating mutations in PIK3CD are the cause of a primary immunodeficiency disease : activated PI3K δ syndrome ( APDS ) 214 or PI3K δ - activating mutation causing senescent T cells , lymphadenopathy and immunodeficiency ( PASlI ) 215 ( reviewed in reFs 216 , 217 ) . PIK3CD mutations in APDS are of a similar nature and are located in the equivalent hot - spot locations as in oncogenically activated PIK3CA . These mutations are inherited from one or both of the parents who are heterozygous carriers of this mutation . A clinical phenocopy of APDS , sometimes called APDS2 , is caused by specific mutations in PIK3R1 , which , for reasons that are unclear , preferentially activate p110 δ and not p110 α or p110 β 216 , 218 , and therefore mainly manifest themselves in the immune system . The recent finding that p85 α preferentially interacts with p110 δ over p110 α and p110 β 23 might help to explain this observation . APDS predisposes to respiratory infections and airway damage , early death from infection - related causes and lymphoma 218 . ongoing trials with PI3K δ inhibitors in APDS have provided promising evidence for immune normalization and patient benefit , with no discernible adverse effects 219 . NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlECulAR CEll BIOlOGy R e v i e w s volume 20 | SePTemBeR 2019 | 521 an increase in oestrogen receptor expression through enhanced FOXO3A - mediated transcription 91 and an epi - genetic mechanism involving the histone methyltrans - ferase KMT2D , which is inhibited by AKT - mediated phosphorylation 92 , 93 . Thus , PI3Kα inhibition enhances KMT2D activity , leading to a more open chromatin state that facilitates oestrogen receptor - dependent transcrip - tion 92 . Another example of modulation of steroid hor - mone signalling has been found in prostate cancer , where PI3K – AKT inhibitors have been shown to sensitize the malignant cells to androgen receptor blockade 94 – 97 . These observations help to explain the current clinical develop - ment focus on PI3Kα and AKT inhibitors , with encour - aging reports from phase II / III trials in breast cancer ( NCT02437318 and NCT03310541 ) 98 and prostate can - cer ( NCT03072238 and NCT03310541 ) , in combination with standard anticancer therapies , such as hormone therapy or paclitaxel therapy , respectively . An exciting recent discovery is that PI3K inhibition can stimulate antitumour immunity , either by provid - ing immunostimulatory activity to tumour - associated macrophages ( by PI3Kγ inhibitors ) 99 , 100 or by preferential inhibition of regulatory T cells ( by PI3Kδ inhibitors , which also dampen immunosuppressive myeloid - derived sup - pressor cells ) 101 – 104 . This is the basis for the ongoing trials of immunotherapy for solid tumours using inhibitors of these leukocytic PI3K isoforms 105 . Finally , there is evidence that interference with the reciprocal tumour – stroma interaction can be key to clinical efficacy of PI3K inhibition in cancer , as illus - trated by inhibitors of PI3Kδ that have been approved for the treatment of specific B cell malignancies . Indeed , the efficacy of these compounds does not depend on the PI3K or PTEN mutational status of the leukaemic cells and is unlikely to derive from direct cytotoxicity . Instead , the main leukaemia - intrinsic impact of PI3Kδ inhibi - tion appears to be a dampened response to intrinsic and extrinsic tumour - supporting signals , including B cell - receptor signalling . PI3Kδ inhibition also nega - tively impacts specialized stromal cells that support the leukaemic cells , such as mesenchymal stromal cells and myeloid - derived nurse - like cells 105 , 106 . This dual action of PI3Kδ inhibitors is expected to weaken the leukaemic cells and render them more vulnerable to combination therapy such as with B cell - depleting antibodies ( for example , anti - CD20 ) or chemotherapy . This is espe - cially the case in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia , where PI3Kδ inhibition often induces lymphocytosis 107 , releas - ing the leukaemic cells from their protective niches in the bone marrow and lymph nodes into the peripheral blood . It is likely that the immunostimulatory activity of PI3Kδ inhibition mentioned above also contributes to its clinical anticancer efficacy in B cell malignancies . Class II PI3Ks The class II PI3Ks remain the most enigmatic PI3K subfamily . Whereas class II PI3Ks are represented by a single isoform in C . elegans and D . melanogaster ( piki - 1 and PI3K68D , respectively ) , vertebrates have three class II PI3K isoforms . PI3KC2α and PI3KC2β are expressed ubiquitously , whereas PI3KC2γ expression is mainly restricted to the liver 57 , 108 . In contrast to the class I PI3Ks , class II PI3Ks do not act as classic signal transducers downstream of cell surface receptors . Instead , they regulate intracellular mem - brane dynamics and membrane traffic and can thereby influence cell signalling indirectly . Only in a few cell type - specific settings has evidence been presented for sig - nalling through agonist - dependent lipid pools generated by class II PI3Ks 57 , 109 – 112 ( Supplementary Table 1 ) . Class II PI3Ks consist of the conserved PI3K catalytic core extended by a largely non - structured N - terminal region and C - terminal phox homology ( Px ) domain and C2 domain , the latter being the origin of the PI3KC2 nomenclature ( Fig . 1 ) . To date , no evidence for the existence of regulatory subunits of these enzymes has been found . The lipid products of the class II PI3Ks have been a contentious issue , but are now accepted to include both PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 and phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns3P ) . As 3 ′ - phosphorylated phosphoinositides are key determinants of membrane identity through - out the endocytic system 113 , it is of little surprise that these PI3Ks have been found to operate mainly in endo - cytosis , on early and recycling endosomes as well as on late endosomes / lysosomes ( Fig . 3 ) . Evidence available to date suggests that the pools of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 produced by dephosphorylation of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 generated by class I PI3Ks ( see earlier ) and PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 produced directly by class II PI3Ks in most cases do not have overlapping functions , illustrating that the function of 3 - phosphoinositide lipids depends on the subcellu - lar location and context in which they are generated . A notable exception to this may be PI3KC2γ - derived endosomal PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 , which can activate AKT2 in hepatocytes 57 . Generic as well as diverse and often cell type - specific functions have now emerged for class II PI3Ks , some of which depend on the scaffolding function but not the catalytic activity of these kinases 114 . Regulation of class II PI3K activity Supporting the view that class II PI3Ks lack regulatory subunits , these enzymes appear to have evolved a dis - tinct mode of regulation that was recently uncovered for PI3KC2α 115 . In solution , the C - terminal PX – C2 module of PI3KC2α folds back onto the kinase domain , thereby inhibiting membrane binding and catalytic activity . Recruitment of PI3KC2α to the plasma membrane through interaction of its N - terminal region with clath - rin 116 , 117 facilitates engagement of the PX – C2 module with the membrane . Cooperative binding to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 by the PX domain 118 and the C2 domain 119 is required to unlock PI3KC2α catalytic activity 115 ( Fig . 3a ) ; of note , the precise temporal sequence of these regulatory events has not been assessed . The critical residues in the loop of the kinase domain that contact the PX domain are conserved in PI3KC2β , indicating that PI3KC2β may also be subject to this mode of autoinhibition . Determining the lipid specificity of the PI3KC2β PX domain could be of key importance to molecular understanding of the highly isoform - specific activities of PI3KC2α and PI3KC2β , with dif - ferent PX domain specificities potentially restricting mTOR complex 1 ( mTOrC1 ) . This complex controls metabolic processes in response to environmental cues , including nutrient and growth factor availability as well as stress . mTOrC1 is a multiprotein complex consisting of mTOr , regulatory - associated protein of mTOr ( raptor ) , mammalian lethal with seC13 protein 8 ( mLsT8 ; also known as g β L ) and the negative regulators proline - rich AKT substrate of 40 kDa ( PrAs40 ) and DeP domain - containing mTOr - interacting protein ( DePTOr ) and is sensitive to rapamycin . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis The internalization of plasma membrane and receptors present therein into small vesicles that is mediated by a protein coat containing clathrin , adaptors and accessory proteins . FYVE domain A phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate - binding domain of approximately 60 – 65 amino acids that is named after the four Cys - rich proteins — FAB1 , YOTB ( also known as ZK632 . 12 ) , VAC1 and eeA1 — in which it has been found . Paclitaxel An anticancer agent that acts by stabilizing microtubules through binding to tubulin . Regulatory T cells A subset of T lymphocytes that are involved in the suppression of immune responses . Nurse - like cells A specialized subset of tumour - associated macrophages that regulate leukaemic cell functions . Phox homology ( PX ) domain A domain mediating lipid and protein interactions that consists of 100 – 130 amino acids and is defined by sequences that are found in two components of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase ( phox ) complex . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 522 | SePTemBeR 2019 | volume 20 activation to distinct subcellular locations . It remains unknown whether , in addition to this mechanism of autoinhibition release , class II PI3K activity is further regulated through post - translational modification or allosteric regulation ( for example , through interaction of small GTPases with the RBD ) . Lipid products of class II PI3Ks The substrate specificity of PI3Ks is largely determined by the activation loop in the kinase domain that con - tacts the inositol head group of the phosphoinositide lipid substrate 120 . In class I PI3Ks , this loop contains two clusters of basic residues that coordinate the ino - sitol 4ʹ - phosphate and 5ʹ - phosphate of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , whereas the class III PI3K VPS34 has neither of these basic clusters . In both cases , this accurately reflects the in vivo substrate specificities of class I and class III PI3Ks , namely , PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and PtdIns , respectively . The class II PI3Ks retain only the 4ʹ - phosphate - binding basic residues in the PI3K activation loop 120 , sug - gesting that they use PtdIns4P to produce PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 . Experimental validation of the in vivo lipid prod - ucts of class II PI3Ks , however , has been challenging . This is at least in part a consequence of the rapid con - version of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 into PtdIns4P or PtdIns3P in many cell types 30 , owing to dephosphorylation by the 4ʹ - phosphatase INPP4A or INPP4B and the 3ʹ - phosphatase PTEN 121 , respectively . Changes in PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 levels are therefore difficult to detect , and fluctuations in PtdIns3P levels may in fact derive from altered PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 synthesis . Indeed , functional and cell biological approaches addressing the question of the class II PI3K lipid products have provided more insight than analysis of total PtdIns lipid levels . These include the use of cell - permeant phosphoinositide derivatives 117 , 122 , 123 , visualization of local subcellular pools of phosphoinositides 57 , 115 , 117 , 123 , 124 and an activa - tion loop mutation that limits PI3KC2α to PtdIns3P synthesis 117 , 124 , 125 . Those studies that unambiguously identified the lipid product revealed that all class II PI3K isoforms produce PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 in cells 57 , 117 , 123 . However , at least PI3KC2α also produces PtdIns3P 124 , 125 , and this appears to depend entirely on the inositol lipid substrate species available to PI3KC2α in different subcellular loca - tions 126 . Indeed , as further detailed later , the lipid prod - uct of PI3KC2α appears to largely depend on the relative local abundance of PtdIns and PtdIns4P : at the plasma membrane , which is enriched in PtdIns4P 127 , 128 but low in PtdIns 129 , PI3KC2α produces PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 , whereas on endosomes , the lack of PtdIns4P may favour the formation of PtdIns3P ( Figs 1b , 3b ) . Scaffolding roles of class II PI3Ks In addition to their catalytic functions , class II PI3Ks can act as protein scaffolds , as highlighted by the role of PI3KC2α in stabilizing the mitotic spindle during metaphase 9 . By simultaneously interacting with both clathrin and the microtubule - associated protein TACC3 , PI3KC2α stabilizes a clathrin – ch - TOG – TACC3 protein complex required to crosslink microtubules within the kinetochore fibres of the mitotic spindle 130 ( Fig . 3b ( 4 ) ) . Loss of PI3KC2α expression leads to a delay in completion of mitosis and reduced proliferation , a role that does not depend on its catalytic activity 9 . This exemplifies the need to differentiate between kinase - dependent and scaffolding functions of class II PI3Ks , especially with respect to their potential as therapeutic targets for inhibitors of kinase activity and the interpretation of data obtained with Pik3c2a - knockout mice . General cell biological functions of class II PI3Ks In addition to a growing number of cell type - specific roles ( discussed later ) , class II PI3Ks also perform generic functions across many cell types ( Fig . 3b ) . The sole D . melanogaster class II PI3K PI3K68D is required for endosomal sorting and recycling , as shown in haemocytes 131 and postsynaptically at neuromuscular junctions 132 , as well as for homeostasis of the endo - lysosomal compartment 133 . This functional spectrum is reflected by the general cell biological roles carried out by the ubiquitously expressed mammalian class II isoforms PI3KC2α and PI3KC2β . During clathrin - mediated endocytosis , a complex interplay of phosphoinositide - metabolizing enzymes spatiotemporally organizes membrane internalization 134 , and PI3KC2α has a part in this process . PI3KC2α associates with clathrin through a clathrin - box motif in its N - terminal region 116 and synthesizes a local pool of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 that is required for the matura - tion of clathrin - coated pits 117 ( Fig . 3b ( 1 ) ) . Formation of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 mediates the recruitment of the curvature - inducing PX – BAr domain protein sorting nexin 9 ( SNX9 ) — and in some cell types also SNX18 — leading to constriction of the membrane invagination at its neck , thereby preparing a template for dynamin - mediated membrane scission and vesicle release 117 , 135 . Through a distinct mechanism , PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 further supports membrane fission by enhancing the capacity of the flat BAR protein FCHSD2 to stimulate branched actin fil - ament formation on the flat membrane surrounding the clathrin - coated pit 136 . A recent study postulated the formation of PtdIns3P by PI3KC2α at clathrin - coated pits , with an unidentified PI3K producing PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ( reF . 137 ) . The reason for this discrepancy remains unclear but may lie in the experimental approach : focusing on functional readouts of clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis 115 , 117 , 135 , 138 versus direct visualization of lipids using chimeric sensor constructs that also bind to clathrin itself 137 . Taken together , the role of PI3KC2α in endocytosis illustrates how phosphoinositides can couple vesicle formation to conversion of membrane identity — in this case , completion of clathrin - mediated endocytosis is coupled to the formation of 3 ′ - phos - phoinositides , which are prevalent in the endosomal compartment 113 . Intriguingly , PI3KC2α is also required for the recy - cling of cargo from endosomal compartments to the plasma membrane , yet produces PtdIns3P and not PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 in this context 124 , 125 ( Fig . 3b ( 2 , 3 ) ) . This func - tion is thought to underlie the defective localization of smoothened , the sonic hedgehog signal transducer , to primary cilia in Pik3c2a − / − embryos 125 . Mechanistically , the role of PI3KC2α in endocytic recycling is poorly understood , yet a recent study indicates that PI3KC2α Late endosomes Membrane - bound compartments late on the endocytic route just before fusion with the lysosome . Late endosomes are marked by rAB7 and other proteins also present on lysosomes , such as lysosome - associated membrane glycoproteins . Kinetochore fibres Bundles of spindle microtubules that attach to the kinetochore , a protein complex at the centromere of each chromosome . Endosomal sorting and recycling A process in which endocytosed cargo proteins are sorted in early endosomes for degradation in lysosomes , recycling to the plasma membrane or retrograde trafficking to the trans - golgi network . Haemocytes The circulating blood cells that form the innate immune system in insects . BAR domain A membrane - curvature - inducing and membrane - curvature - sensing protein domain . Dynamin A large mechanochemical gTPase that assembles into a helical oligomer on highly curved membranes . gTP hydrolysis by dynamin is coupled to conformational changes that catalyse constriction and eventually fission of the underlying tubular membrane . Sonic hedgehog A key morphogen , that is , a secreted signalling molecule that acts along a local concentration gradient , which is crucial during vertebrate embryonic development . Primary cilia solitary elongated protrusions of the plasma membrane supported by a microtubule - based axoneme of nine doublet microtubules anchored at the centriole . Primary cilia serve as sensory structures and specialized signalling platforms that are of particular importance in development . NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlECulAR CEll BIOlOGy R e v i e w s volume 20 | SePTemBeR 2019 | 523 synthesizes an early endosomal PtdIns3P pool that acti - vates a master regulator of endocytic recycling , rAB11 ( reF . 124 ) , leading to budding of nascent RAB11 – GTP - positive recycling vesicles . This is followed by recruit - ment of the 3ʹ - phosphatase MTM1 by RAB11 – GTP , resulting in the removal of PtdIns3P from vesicles bound for recycling 124 and effectively restricting PtdIns3P to the early endosomal compartment , thereby contributing to maintenance of the compartment - specific enrichment of PtdIns lipids . PI3KC2β has poorly understood roles in early stages of the endocytic pathway 139 , but a critical role for this PI3K has been found in the late endosomal / lysosomal compartment , where PI3KC2β dampens the activity of mTORC1 ( Fig . 3b ( 5 ) ; see also BOx 3 ) . This positions PI3KC2β in a functionally opposed context to class I PI3Ks , which activate mTORC1 ( BOx 1 ) , and to VPS34 , which , through the production of PtdIns3P , induces peripheral translocation of lysosomes and thereby enhances mTORC1 activity 140 ( BOx 3 ) . A seemingly unrelated process , cell migration , has also been reported to be regulated by PI3KC2β , yet the molecular mechanism of this function remains obscure 111 , 141 , 142 . Cell type - specific roles of class II PI3K isoforms Whereas the class I PI3Ks activate the same ‘canonical’ signalling pathways in different settings , no general modus operandi of the class II PI3Ks has emerged thus far . Their diverse roles in vesicular traffic translate to mul - tiple biological functions , often occurring in a cell type - specific manner ( summarized in Supplementary Table 1 ; RAB11 A small gTPase required for multiple steps during endocytic recycling , including the formation of vesicles travelling to and from the endocytic recycling compartment . Clathrin PtdIns4Psubstrate a b PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 cofactor Membranerecruitment Release of autoinhibition Inactive PI3KC2 α Fully active PI3KC2 α PI3K core RBD PX C2 In hepatocytes Plasma membrane Clathrin - mediated endocytosis Insulin IR Growth factor deprivation Primarycilium Smoothened Centrioles PI3KC2 α PI3KC2 α PI3KC2 γ PI3KC2 β SNX9 / 18 Early endosome Recyclingendosome APPL1 RAB5 AKT2 Early endosome Pericentriolar recycling endosome RAB11 PI3KC2 α 1 2 3 5 6 MTM1 RAB11 Pit maturation and constriction PtdIns3Pdephosphorylation Prolongedresidenceof IR ? Downstreamsignalling UnstructuredN - terminal tail Mitotic spindle TACC3 c h - T O G PI3KC2 α Clathrin During mitosis Scaffolding , non - catalytic function of PI3KC2 α 4 Actin ﬁlaments APPL1 + to RAB5 + endosometransition ? mTORC1off Late endosome / lysosome 14 - 3 - 3 γ PI3KC2 β Raptor P AMPK P PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 PtdIns3P FCHSD2 Clathrin coat www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 524 | SePTemBeR 2019 | volume 20 for a more detailed overview , see reF . 114 ) . PI3KC2α appears to be of particular importance in endothe - lial cells , where it is required for angiogenic signalling in response to vascular endothelial growth factor 143 , sphingosine 1 - phosphate 144 and transforming growth factor - β 138 . In all of these cases , defective receptor internalization underlies the signalling defect 138 , 143 , 144 . This suggests that these endothelium - specific func - tions of PI3KC2α may in fact be a consequence of its role in endocytosis 116 , 117 and further illustrates how class II PI3Ks can indirectly regulate signalling through modulation of membrane traffic . In hepatocytes , PI3KC2β and PI3KC2γ have opposing roles in the regulation of insulin signalling . Inactivation of PI3KC2β in hepatocytes causes expan - sion of the APPL1 - marked early endosomal com - partment by unknown mechanisms , correlating with increased class I PI3K - dependent AKT signalling on insulin stimulation 139 . Also in other cell systems , enlargement of the APPL1 - marked compartment is known to enhance the duration and output of receptor tyrosine kinase signalling 145 , 146 . By contrast , PI3KC2γ is a RAB5 effector that in response to insulin produces an endosomal PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 pool that sustains prolonged AKT2 activation 57 ( Fig . 3b ( 6 ) ) . Thus , in opposition to PI3KC2β , PI3KC2γ is a positive regulator of AKT - mediated signalling on insulin stimulation . Notably , this activity of PI3KC2γ specifically inhibits GSK3β via AKT2 - mediated phosphorylation , without affect - ing AKT1 - dependent ribosomal S6 kinase or FOXO phospho rylation 57 , supporting the idea of selective AKT signalling discussed above . In addition , PI3KC2β has roles in the activation of T cells 147 , 148 and mast cells 149 , 150 to regulate the Ca 2 + - activated K + channel KCa3 . 1 . In response to immune receptor activation , PI3KC2β promotes KCa3 . 1 open - ing to allow compensatory K + efflux during Ca 2 + sig - nalling . The E3 - ubiquitin ligase TRIM27 negatively regulates PI3KC2β and KCa3 . 1 conductivity in this setting 147 . The physiological significance and potential therapeutic exploitation of these findings , for example , in autoimmunity or allergy , remain to be explored . Organismal roles of class II PI3Ks in mammals Gene - targeted mice have provided insight into the phys - iological functions of the class II PI3Ks ( Supplementary Table 2 ) . Of note , inhibitors with selectivity for class II PI3Ks are not available to date 151 . Homozygous Pik3c2a knockout 125 , 143 or kinase inac - tivation by a point mutation in the ATP - binding site 152 results in lethality around embryonic day 10 . 5 ( E10 . 5 ) to E11 . 5 , with multiple defects probably underlying this phenotype . Pik3c2a − / − embryos show defective develop - mental angiogenesis , with conditional Pik3c2a knock - out in vascular endothelial cells also causing embryonic lethality 143 . However , endothelial - cell - specific deletion results in death only at E16 . 5 – E18 . 5 , implicating fac - tors other than defective angiogenesis in the embryonic lethal phenotype of Pik3c2a − / − mice . Indeed , PI3KC2α has also been found to be required for primary cilium elongation and ciliary sonic hedgehog signalling during development 125 , potentially accounting for the retarded development and growth observed from E8 . 5 onwards . Of note , postnatal functions of PI3KC2α have so far been inferred only from mice with heterozygous or incomplete loss of function ( Supplementary Table 2 ) . Pik3c2a + / − mice display increased vascular perme - ability 143 and impaired platelet function with a delay in thrombus formation 153 , a phenotype that is also seen in heterozygous kinase - dead Pik3c2a D1268A / + mice 154 . Furthermore , heterozygous loss of PI3KC2α activity leads to leptin resistance and mild , late - onset insu - lin resistance and obesity in males 152 . Taken together , PI3KC2α is clearly essential for embryonic development in mice yet its postnatal physiological functions remain poorly understood . Surprisingly , homozygous PI3KC2α deficiency has recently been reported in a small number of individuals presenting with skeletal abnormalities and cataract for - mation , among other symptoms 155 . Whereas this may point to a functional divergence of PI3KC2α in mice and humans , it should be noted that fibroblasts derived from these patients displayed strongly increased expression of APPL1 An effector of the small gTPase rAB5 that operates as a scaffolding protein on endosomes , interacting with numerous signalling molecules , including receptor tyrosine kinases and AKT . Thrombus A blood clot formed in a blood vessel . Fig . 3 | Cell biological functions and activation of class II PI3K isoforms . a | Activation mechanisms of PI3KC2 α . The kinase activity of PI3KC2 α is regulated by its C - terminal phox homology ( PX ) domain and C2 domain . In the cytoplasmic , inactive state , PI3KC2 α is autoinhibited by the PX – C2 module , which folds back onto the PI3K core . This closed conformation is stabilized by intramolecular contacts ( indicated by double - headed red arrows ) between the PX – C2 module and the RAS - binding domain ( RBD ) and a loop in the C lobe of the catalytic domain of the PI3K core . PI3KC2 α is recruited to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis by interaction of its unstructured N - terminal region with the clathrin terminal domain . Release of autoinhibition requires the presence of phospha - tidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) in the plasma membrane , which binds to both the PX domain and the C2 domain to dislodge them from the PI3K core . This stabilizes the membrane - associated open conformation of PI3KC2 α and makes possible unhindered access of phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate ( PtdIns4P ) lipid substrate to the catalytic site . b | The class II PI3K isoforms have distinct and non - redundant functions . ( 1 ) PI3KC2 α is recruited to clathrin - coated pits through association with clathrin and synthesizes a local pool of phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ) that is required for maturation of the pit and constriction of the membrane invagination at its neck . This role is mediated at least in part by PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 - dependent recruitment of the PX – BAR domain proteins sorting nexin 9 ( SNX9 ) and SNX18 . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 also activates F - BAR domain - containing protein FCHSD2 to stimulate branched actin filament formation on the flat membrane surrounding the pit , further promoting constriction . ( 2 ) PI3KC2 α is also required for recycling of endosomal cargo back to the plasma membrane . On early endosomes , PI3KC2 α produces a pool of phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns3P ) required for activation of RAB11 . RAB11 – GTP recruits the 3 ʹ - phosphatase MTM1 , leading to depletion of PtdIns3P , which is required for the formation of vesicles bound for the endocytic recycling compartment and effectively restricts PtdIns3P to the early endosomal compartment . ( 3 ) In the pericentriolar recycling compartment , PI3KC2 α produces a pool of PtdIns3P for RAB11 activation that is required for the transport of cargo towards the primary cilium , such as the sonic hedgehog effector smoothened . ( 4 ) During mitosis , PI3KC2 α interacts with clathrin and transforming acidic coiled - coil - containing protein 3 ( TACC3 ) to stabilize the microtubule - crosslinking complex of ch - TOG , TACC3 and clathrin on kinetochore fibres . This function is entirely independent of the kinase activity of PI3KC2 α . ( 5 ) PI3KC2 β negatively regulates mTOR complex 1 ( mTORC1 ) activation in the absence of growth factor signalling ( see also BOx 3 ) . ( 6 ) In hepatocytes , PI3KC2 β and PI3KC2 γ have opposing roles in insulin signalling . PI3KC2 γ is directly involved in insulin signal transduction by producing an insulin stimulation - dependent endosomal pool of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 that sustains prolonged activation of AKT2 . By contrast , PI3KC2 β negatively regulates insulin receptor ( IR ) signalling . The exact mechanisms for this negative regulation are unknown , but it has been shown that inactivation of PI3KC2 β in hepatocytes correlates with an expansion of the APPL1 - positive endosomal compartment , which can serve as a signalling platform for activated receptors . AMPK , AMP - activated protein kinase ; Raptor , regulatory - associated protein of mTOR . Part a is based on data from reF . 115 . ◀ NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlECulAR CEll BIOlOGy R e v i e w s volume 20 | SePTemBeR 2019 | 525 PI3KC2β . This raises the possibility of a compensatory mechanism not observed in mice 155 . Mice with homozygous null 156 or kinase - dead 139 alleles of the ubiquitously expressed PI3KC2β are viable and reach adulthood without overt phenotypes , and the same is true for mice that are homozygous null for the liver - enriched PI3KC2γ 57 . Systemic loss of function of these two PI3K isoforms causes strikingly different metabolic phenotypes , leading to increased ( PI3KC2β ) 139 or reduced ( PI3KC2γ ) organismal insu - lin sensitivity 57 . PI3KC2β inactivation improves insulin sensitivity and protects against high - fat - diet - induced liver steatosis 139 , correlating with augmented class I PI3K - dependent AKT signalling in metabolic tissues in response to insulin . By contrast , PI3KC2γ in hepato - cytes mediates insulin - dependent AKT2 activation required for GSK3β inhibition . Pik3c2g - knockout mice therefore display reduced glycogen storage in the liver , and , by means of compensation , generate more tri - glycerides and develop insulin resistance with age 57 . These distinct functions of PI3KC2β and PI3KC2γ in the liver illustrate the highly isoform - specific roles of the class II PI3Ks . Another example of unexpected in vivo isoform selectivity of PI3Ks was uncovered in the context of x - linked centronuclear myopathy ( XLCNM ) . XLCNM is caused by loss - of - function mutations in the gene encoding the 3ʹ - phosphatase MTM1 ( reF . 157 ) that lead to impaired clearance of PtdIns3P from recycling endo - somes , resulting in defective exocytosis and intracellu - lar accumulation of integrins 158 , 159 . First shown in flies , muscle - specific depletion of the single class II isoform PI3K68D rescues mtm deficiency 159 . By contrast , inter - fering with Vps34 ( encoded by Pi3K59F ) , which in most cell types synthesizes the bulk of PtdIns3P ( see later ) , even exacerbated the phenotype 159 . These findings were Phospholipase D1 A phosphodiesterase that hydrolyses phosphatidylcholine and other glycerophospholipids to generate phosphatidic acid and the free head group of the substrate lipid . X - linked centronuclear myopathy ( xLCNM ) . Also called myotubular myopathy , a severe paediatric neuromuscular disorder causing muscle weakness . Box 3 | Regulation of mTORC1 by class II and class III PI3Ks Activation of mToR complex 1 ( mToRC1 ) is regulated by class II and class III PI3K isoforms at multiple levels . PI3KC2 β contributes to the suppression of mToRC1 activity under starvation by translocating from the cytosol to late endosomes / lysosomes in response to an absence of growth factors , where it produces a pool of phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ) that promotes association of 14 - 3 - 3 γ protein with these compartments 123 . At the same time , low energy levels cause AmP - activated protein kinase ( AmPK ) - mediated phosphorylation of Raptor ( regulatory - associated protein of mTOR ; which serves as a scaffold for mToRC1 substrates ) on Ser722 and Ser792 ( reF . 220 ) . 14 - 3 - 3 γ proteins recruited to the late endosome / lysosome then bind to these phosphorylated sites on Raptor , causing mToRC1 inhibition 123 ( see the figure , part a ) . Additionally , PI3KC2 β - derived PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 promotes perinuclear clustering of lysosomes 123 , known to contribute to repression of mToRC1 ( reF . 140 ) ( BOx 1 ) . It remains unclear how the absence of growth factor signalling activates PI3KC2 β , and whether lysosomal positioning is a cause or consequence of PI3KC2 β - mediated mToRC1 suppression . The availability of amino acids leads to activation of mToRC1 on the lysosomal surface ( BOx 1 ) . In response to amino acid stimulation , vPS34 synthesizes phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns3P ) on lysosomes and thereby enhances activation of mToRC1 by at least two different mechanisms . The first one is PtdIns3P - driven recruitment of phospholipase D1 ( PLD1 ) via its PtdIns3P - binding phox homology ( PX ) domain to the lysosomal surface 190 , which generates phosphatidic acid in the lysosomal membrane . Generation of phosphatidic acid leads to the dissociation of the inhibitory mTORC1 subunit DEPTOR ( not shown ) , thereby activating mTORC1 ( reF . 221 ) ( see the figure , part b ) . Second , vPS34 - derived PtdIns3P promotes trafficking of lysosomes towards the plasma membrane by providing docking sites on the lysosomes for the PtdIns3P - binding proteins protrudin and FYCo1 ( reFs 222 , 223 ) . Protrudin is an integral protein of the endoplasmic reticulum that associates with the anterograde microtubule motor protein kinesin 1 , whereas FYCo1 serves as an adaptor between cargo and motor proteins . PtdIns3P produced on late endosomes / lysosomes by vPS34 on amino acid starvation leads to the recruitment of both protrudin and FYCo1 , making possible the transfer of kinesin 1 from protrudin to FYCo1 . late endosomes / lysosomes loaded with kinesin 1 then translocate along microtubules to the cell periphery , bringing the lysosomal mToRC1 in close proximity to growth factor and nutrient signalling complexes at the plasma membrane , leading to an increase in mToRC1 activity downstream of class I PI3K activity ( see the figure , parts b , c ; see also BOx 1 ) . It is not clear which vPS34 complexes are involved in this function . The figure is based on data from reF . 223 . Microtubule Plasmamembrane Endoplasmicreticulum Nucleus Late endosome / lysosome Protrudin Kinesin 1 mTORC1off Late endosome / lysosome 14 - 3 - 3 γ PI3KC2 β Raptor FYCO1 PLD1 VPS34 PX Phosphatidicacid PLD1 FYCO1 Protrudin VPS34 VPS34 PX Phosphatidicacid Aminoacids Aminoacids mTORC1on mTORC1on RHEB GTP Growthfactors Class I PI3Ks Anterogradetransport Anterogradetransport Retrogradetransport a Under starvation ( low nutrient levels , growth factor deprivation ) c Amino acids and growth factors present b Amino acids present Protrudin VPS34 mTORC1on FYCO1 P P AMPK PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 PtdIns3P www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 526 | SePTemBeR 2019 | volume 20 recently confirmed in an Mtm1 - knockout mouse model of XLCNM , in which concomitant muscle - specific dele - tion of PI3KC2β but not VPS34 fully restored muscle morphology , PtdIns3P levels and viability 160 . The poten - tial to rescue the phenotype by conditional deletion of PI3KC2β even after disease onset indicates the thera - peutic potential of PI3KC2β inhibition in this human condition . VPS34 class III PI3K VPS34 , the primordial PI3K conserved from yeast to human , is the sole class III PI3K member . Through association with specific protein complexes and by producing PtdIns3P in different subcellular compart - ments , VPS34 regulates autophagy , endosomal sort - ing , phagocytosis and macropinocytosis 161 , 162 ( Fig . 4a ) . As mentioned for the other PI3K isoforms , VPS34 has functions dependent on its catalytic activity as well as a scaffolding function in the assembly of the different VPS34 complexes . In the following sections , we summarize recent developments in the understanding of the structure and regulation of VPS34 , the evidence for the gen - eration of distinct subcellular PtdIns3P pools by this PI3K , its control of protein kinase signalling ( including serum - and glucocorticoid - regulated kinase 3 ( SGK3 ) , liver kinase B1 ( LKB1 ; also known as STK11 ) , AMP - activated protein kinase ( AMPK ) and mTORC1 ) and its organismal roles inferred from Vps34 - targeting studies in mice . VPS34 complexes and their activation mechanisms VPS34 consists of the minimal PI3K catalytic core and forms at least two tetrameric complexes , known as complex I and complex II ( Fig . 1 ) . These share VPS34 , beclin 1 ( Atg6 in yeast ) and the protein kinase - like VPS15 ( also known as PIK3R4 ) , which are associated with either ATG14 ( complex I ) or UVRAG ( complex II ) 163 . Additional regulatory subunits can associate with these complexes , including NRBF2 or AMBRA in complex I and rubicon in complex II 161 . Quantitative immuno - precipitation studies in mouse fibroblasts showed that , in addition to complex I and complex II , other sub - complexes of VPS34 potentially exist , containing nei - ther ATG14 nor UVRAG 164 . The activity , function and stability of these subcomplexes have not been charac - terized , and it is not clear what proportion of the total VPS34 is engaged in these alternative complexes in other cell types . Complex I is activated and recruited to the phagophore initiation sites mainly at the endoplasmic reticulum , to produce a pool of PtdIns3P critical for the forma - tion and elongation of the nascent autophagosome , which encloses and isolates cytoplasmic components , whereas complex II controls endosome maturation and promotes autophagosome – late endosome / lysosome fusion 161 ( Fig . 4a ) . Structural studies on human complex I and yeast complex II revealed a V - shaped architecture with membrane - binding domains located at the tip of each arm 165 – 167 ( reviewed in reFs 12 , 168 ) ( Fig . 4b , c ) . One arm is formed by the VPS34 – VPS15 dimer , whereas the other arm is formed by parallel arrangement of the coiled - coil domains of beclin 1 associated with ATG14 ( in complex I ) or UVRAG ( in complex II ) . The tips of both arms make contact with membranes , with one arm binding via the kinase domain of VPS34 and the other binding via the C - terminal BArA domain of beclin 1 and BATs domain of ATG14 ( or BARA2 domain of UVRAG ) . This archi - tecture allows the complexes to activate VPS34 and to adapt to membrane curvature ( Fig . 4b ) . VPS34 catalytic activity is regulated by the helical and kinase domains of VPS34 ( Fig . 1a ) dynamically adopting a closed or opened conformation . Indeed , in solution when not bound to membranes , the C - terminal helix of VPS34 blocks its ATP - binding site to prevent ATP hydrolysis ( Fig . 4c ) . Association of this helix with the membrane tethers VPS34 to the membrane and exposes the ATP - binding site 166 . The other arm is critical to adjust the complexes to different membrane curvatures . By virtue of the curvature - sensing amphipathic helix in the ATG14 BATS domain , complex I preferentially associates with highly curved membranes such as the expanding autophagic isolation membrane 169 . By contrast , flexibility between the two arms of complex II allows it to open and act on low - curvature membranes , such as the relatively flat endosomal membranes 165 . The ATP - binding pocket in VPS34 is unusually con - stricted 170 . This explains the relative VPS34 specificity of the widely used VPS34 inhibitor 3 - methyladenine , which fits in this small pocket , unlike most class I PI3K inhibitors , which are too bulky 170 . However , 3 - methyl - adenine is not selective for VPS34 , and highly selective VPS34 inhibitors have now been developed 171 – 176 . These have been used to confirm the role of VPS34 in auto - phagy and vesicular trafficking , to identify putative autophagy substrates and autophagy cargo receptors 172 and to demonstrate the involvement of VPS34 in the regulation of signalling 171 , 177 , 178 . Contribution of VPS34 to PtdIns3P pools VPS34 and its binding partners ATG14 , beclin 1 and UVRAG are subject to extensive post - translational modifications ( reviewed in reFs 161 , 168 ) . These include phosphorylation by mTORC1 , AMPK and ULK1 ( in response to nutrient availability and energy deple - tion ) and by growth factors via AKT , cyclin - dependent kinases CDK1 and CDK5 and mTORC1 ( to inhibit autophagy and to allow proliferation ) 161 . VPS34 and members of the VPS34 complexes can also be modu - lated by ubiquitylation , sumoylation and acetylation under certain conditions 161 . The functional relevance of these post - translational modifications remains to be determined , but together with phosphorylation , they offer means to finely control VPS34 activity in response to specific signalling inputs and in accordance with cellular needs . The contribution of VPS34 to basal cellular PtdIns3P differs considerably between cell types . For instance , VPS34 is believed to be responsible for 65 % of basal cellular PtdIns3P in mouse embryonic fibroblasts 10 , 30 – 40 % in megakaryocytes and approximately 10 % in platelets 179 . These observations indicate that VPS34 is Phagocytosis A largely actin - driven form of endocytosis that serves to ingest large particles , such as cellular debris or whole microorganisms . Macropinocytosis An evolutionarily conserved endocytic pathway that allows internalization of extracellular fluid via large endocytic vesicles called macropinosomes . Phagophore Also called isolation membrane , a double - membrane cup - shaped structure that engulfs cytoplasmic material during autophagy . it is the precursor of the autophagosome . BARA domain β - α - repeated , autophagy - specific domain . BATS domain Barkor / ATg14 autophagosome targeting domain , which binds to the autophagosome membrane via the hydrophobic surface of an intrinsic amphipathic α - helix . Amphipathic helix α - Helical sequence in which polar and charged amino acids are oriented to one side and hydrophobic ones are oriented to the other side . The lipophilic side dips into bent membranes displaying packing defects in the outer leaflet , thereby providing a means of sensing membrane curvature . Autophagy cargo receptors receptors or adaptors that can recognize material or cargo destined for autophagic degradation and bind to a component of the forming autophagosomes . NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlECulAR CEll BIOlOGy R e v i e w s volume 20 | SePTemBeR 2019 | 527 not the universal main source of cellular PtdIns3P , as had long been thought . Other enzymes , which directly or indirectly affect PtdIns3P production , including the class II PI3Ks and lipid phosphatases , probably contribute to the maintenance of the basal PtdIns3P pool ( Fig . 1 ) . In addition to regulating basal PtdIns3P production , VPS34 also contributes to dynamic PtdIns3P pools in the context of nutrient sensing , to modulate endo - cytosis and autophagy , in a VPS34 complex - specific manner . For instance , glucose starvation increases the autophagic PtdIns3P pool , whereas overall cel - lular PtdIns3P levels are decreased 180 . In fibroblasts , glucose and amino acid starvation have been shown to specifically stimulate VPS34 complexes I and II , whereas the bulk pool of VPS34 is inhibited 164 , 180 . Likewise , amino acid starvation enhances VPS34 activ - ity in complex I to induce autophagy , whereas VPS34 complexes lacking ATG14 and UVRAG ( putative subcomplexes ) are inhibited 164 , 180 . By contrast , insu - lin stimulation selectively induces complex II activity , thereby promoting endocytic trafficking during growth factor stimulation 164 , 181 . VPS34 also contributes to agonist - stimulated pro - duction of PtdIns3P under conditions other than nutrient sensing . This is the case in platelets , in which VPS34 inhibition barely affects basal PtdIns3P levels but significantly reduces PtdIns3P production induced by C - reactive protein or thrombin 179 . Similarly , VPS34 seems to be the main cause of light - induced PtdIns3P production in retinal rods 182 . These findings highlight the complex regulation of VPS34 , especially in the context of nutrient signalling : nutrient starvation can both inhibit and activate VPS34 kinase activity , in a VPS34 complex - dependent man - ner . A similar paradox was reported in macrophages with loss of rubicon , a regulator of VPS34 , which dis - played increased overall PtdIns3P but a significant decrease in PtdIns3P on LC3 - associated phagocytosis - engaged phagosomes 183 . This suggests that VPS34 activity is fine - tuned in different complexes in response to specific environmental stimuli . Complex I Lipidbilayer Autophagosome ( highly curved membrane ) b c WD40 ATG14 VPS15 VPS34 Beclin 1 Complex II Endosome ( ﬂat membrane ) UVRAG C2 C2 H e l C a t BARABATS BARABARA2 CC2 C2 linker Early endosome Autophagosomematuration Plasma membrane Growth factors and nutrients a PI3K – AKT ULK1 Isolationmembrane Omegasome Phagophore RAB5 EEA1 PXSGK3 Late endosome RAB7 RAB7 Lysosome Complex II Complex I Complex II Complex II Complex II ? RAB5 Complex II Rubicon Phagosome mTORC1 W I P I 2 DFCP1 Nucleus LC3 Endosomalfusion AMPK Activation and endosomalsignalling Lysosome positioning and mTORC1 regulation Maturation Maturation LC3lipidation Autophagosomenucleation Fusion with the lysosome Endoplasmic reticulum Fusion with the lysosome • VPS34 • Beclin 1 • VPS15 • UVRAG • VPS34 • Beclin 1 • VPS15 • ATG14 Complex I Complex I ? Complex II 3 4 1 2 VPS34 inactive VPS34 activated PtdIns3P LC3 - associated phagocytosis - engaged phagosomes Also known as LAPosomes , they are dead - cell - containing phagosomes that recruit the autophagy machinery and ultimately become LC3 - associated phagosomes . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 528 | SePTemBeR 2019 | volume 20 Regulation of protein kinase signalling by VPS34 Like the class II PI3Ks , VPS34 is not a direct signal trans - ducer but , through its function in regulation of endo - somal trafficking , it can indirectly regulate signalling by several protein kinases , as detailed below . SGK3 is a Ser / Thr kinase structurally and function - ally closely related to AKT , including substrate speci - ficity . However , SGK3 contains a PtdIns3P - binding PX domain instead of the PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 - binding and PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 - binding PH domain found in AKT , and is the only known Ser / Thr protein kinase with a PtdIns3P - binding domain . On growth factor stimula - tion ( such as by IGF1 ) , SGK3 is recruited via its PX domain to the endosomal membrane by PtdIns3P gen - erated by two sources : by VPS34 complex II 171 , 177 and by sequential dephosphorylation of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 by the lipid phosphatases SHIP2 and / or INPP4B 184 ( Fig . 1 ) . Growth factor - activated PDK1 and mTORC2 , which have been found on endosomal membranes 185 , 186 , then activate SGK3 kinase activity in an analogous way to AKT activation 171 , 177 . These findings are relevant in the context of class I PI3Ks in cancer . First , many breast tumour cell lines with PIK3CA - activating mutations show low levels of AKT activity and instead rely on SGK3 - mediated signalling 178 , 187 . Second , prolonged treatment of breast cancer lines with class I PI3K or AKT inhibitors upregulates VPS34 - dependent SGK3 signalling as an adaptive resistance response , which makes possible phosphorylation of a subset of AKT substrates , including mTORC1 , independently of class I PI3Ks 178 . Another kinase regulated by VPS34 is the endo - somally localized pool of LKB1 , an activator of AMPK and a positive regulator of cell polarity and epithelial organization 188 . A recent study showed that the polarity function of LKB1 emanates from an early endo somal compartment and is attenuated in late endosomes . This downregulation of its polarizing capacity depends on binding to the endosomally localized WDFY2 and subsequent transit from RAB5 - positive ( early ) to RAB7 - positive ( late ) endosomal compartments along - side endosomal maturation . Inhibition of VPS34 leads to impaired endosomal maturation and mislocaliza - tion of WDFY2 , which increases the pool of LKB1 in early endosomes , thereby altering LKB1 signalling and disrupting epithelial organization 188 . VPS34 also controls the AMPK pathway , a criti - cal sensor of low cellular energy levels . A key impact of systemic VPS34 inactivation is an organismal acti - vation of AMPK signalling . This most likely results from reduced autophagic proteolysis on VPS34 inhibi - tion , leading to reduced availability of key metabolites important for mitochondrial respiration . This leads to a lowering of cellular ATP levels , thereby activating AMPK 174 . VPS34 also has a complex interrelationship with mTORC1 signalling , as described in detail in BOx 3 . Whereas VPS34 does not seem to control the basal activity of mTORC1 ( reF . 189 ) , it has been implicated in the acutely stimulated activation of mTORC1 by amino acids in mammalian cells 190 – 193 . Accordingly , VPS34 on the one hand stimulates autophagy , and on the other hand activates mTORC1 , which downregulates auto - phagy . This seemingly counterintuitive activity may be related to the existence of distinct VPS34 complexes and potentially may represent a part of a feedback loop to switch off autophagy when nutrients become available . Fig . 4 | Cell biological functions and activation of VPS34 . a | VPS34 regulates autophagy , endosomal trafficking and phagocytosis , which all converge at the lysosome for degradation of the vesicular contents . VPS34 functions in two main complexes consisting of VPS34 , VPS15 and beclin 1 with either ATG14 ( complex I ) or UVRAG ( complex II ) . ( 1 ) Complex II is recruited to early endosomes through binding of VPS15 to RAB5 – GTP and generates phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns3P ) to recruit phox homology ( PX ) domain - containing or FYVE domain - containing effectors such as EEA1 that drive endosomal fusion , or serum - and glucocorticoid - regulated kinase 3 ( SGK3 ) , which signals from endosomes . Complex II also controls the maturation of RAB5 - positive early endosomes into RAB7 - positive late endosomes by recruiting effector proteins inhibiting and dissociating RAB5 , thereby initiating the RAB switch . Finally , the complex II subunit UVRAG promotes late endosome / lysosome fusion through its interaction with the homotypic fusion and vacuole protein sorting ( HOPS ) complex — a key regulator of late endosomal trafficking and lysosome biogenesis 224 ( not shown ) . ( 2 ) VPS34 complexes generate PtdIns3P on lysosomes to regulate lysosomal positioning and activation of mTOR complex 1 ( mTORC1 ) , although it is not clear which complexes are involved in these processes 223 ( see also BOx 3 ) . ( 3 ) During phagocytosis , phagosomes acquire traits characteristic of early endosomes and VPS34 complex II is recruited to the nascent phagosome through interaction with RAB5 . Phagosomes then mature into late endosomes and fuse with lysosomes , where the sequestered particle is degraded . This traffic is negatively regulated by rubicon ( which also negatively regulates VPS34 complex II in autophagy ; not shown ) . Rubicon is enriched in RAB5 - positive vesicles ( phagosomes and early endosomes ) and acts to displace UVRAG from the HOPS complex ( not shown ) , thereby impairing RAB7 GTPase activation and altering endosome maturation 225 , 226 . ( 4 ) Complex I is required for PtdIns3P production on autophagosome precursor membranes . Initiation of autophagy is regulated by the class I PI3K – mTORC1 pathway and VPS34 . On nutrient depletion , the autophagy - initiating kinase ULK1 is no longer repressed by mTORC1 and translocates to the endoplasmic reticulum , where it phosphorylates many proteins , including ATG14 and VPS34 , leading to the recruitment and activation of VPS34 complex I to the endoplasmic reticulum . Phosphorylation events mediated by AMP - activated protein kinase ( AMPK ) allow precise control of autophagy induction in concert with cell energy status . Local PtdIns3P production by VPS34 leads to the formation of an isolation membrane emerging from an omega - shaped subdomain membrane from the endoplasmic reticulum ( omegasome ) . This local PtdIns3P pool recruits the proteins WIPI2 and DFCP1 , which are required for the recruitment of the ATG12 – ATG5 – ATG16L1 conjugation system ( not shown ) , which functions as an E3 - like ligase to mediate the lipidation of the protein LC3 , enabling it to associate with the nascent autophagosome . Lipidated LC3 has key roles in autophagic cargo recognition and autophagosome expansion and closure . After maturation , autophagosomes fuse with either late endosomes or lysosomes to form autolysosomes , where the sequestered cytoplasmic materials are digested . Although this maturation – fusion process involves VPS34 complex II , the precise mechanism remains poorly understood . b | VPS34 complex assembly and adaptation to membrane curvature . Both VPS34 complexes adopt a V - shaped conformation 165 – 167 . VPS15 is positioned at the base of the assembly and shapes the complex . The tip of each arm interacts with membranes via membrane binding domains : the C - terminal kinase domain of VPS34 , the BARA ( β / α - repeated , autophagy - related ) domain of beclin 1 and the BATS ( Barkor / Atg14 ( L ) autophagosome targeting sequence ) domain of ATG14 for complex I or the BARA2 domain of UVRAG for complex II . The activity of complexes I and II is regulated by membrane curvature . Complex I prefers highly curved membranes such as omegasomes and autophagosomes owing to the curvature - sensing properties of the ATG14 BATS domain 169 . By contrast , complex II is adapted to recognize relatively flat membranes such as endosomes , which may be mediated by a flexible hinge region located in the joint regions at the junction between beclin 1 CC2 ( coiled - coil domain 2 ) domains and VPS15 – VPS34 kinase domains . c | The C - terminal helical and kinase domains ( referred to as HelCat ) of VPS34 adopt different conformations . In the inactive state , the VPS34 kinase domain is tightly associated with the pseudokinase domain of VPS15 , which probably prevents access of the catalytic domain to the phosphatidylinositol lipid substrate and blocks the ATP - binding site . On membrane binding , the VPS34 kinase domain dissociates from VPS15 and via a long C2 - helical linker dislodges from the rest of the complex to access its lipid substrate , becoming catalytically active . Part b is based on data from reF . 165 . Part c is based on data from reF . 166 . ◀ NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlECulAR CEll BIOlOGy R e v i e w s volume 20 | SePTemBeR 2019 | 529 Organismal roles of VPS34 Several Vps34 - deficient mouse models have been reported , mostly using gene - targeting approaches aimed at ablation of VPS34 expression ( Supplementary Table 2 ) . Because the stability of the VPS34 complexes relies on the presence and protein - scaffolding function of VPS34 , these models have invariably resulted in damp - ened expression of VPS34 - binding partners , potentially exacerbating associated phenotypes . Phenotypic analy - sis of mice with the Vps34 gene ( also known as Pik3c3 ) knocked out is likely to be further confounded by the fact that different studies targeted different exons of the Vps34 gene , resulting in loss of expression of full - length VPS34 or the possible generation of truncated VPS34 proteins . These factors very much complicate the interpretation of the observed phenotypes , which may indeed not depend on VPS34 only , and also fail to discriminate between its catalytic and scaffolding functions 10 , 181 , 194 , 195 . Global Vps34 knockout revealed that this PI3K is critical for embryonic development , with homozygous Vps34 - knockout mice dying at early stages of embryo - genesis — between E6 . 5 and E8 . 5 ( reFs 174 , 196 ) . Notably , autophagy - deficient mice ( mice deficient in ATG3 , ATG5 , ATG7 , ATG12 or ATG16L1 ) characteristically die much later , shortly after birth 197 . This suggests that non - autophagic functions of VPS34 also contribute to embryonic development . Tissue - specific Vps34 knockout results in distinct phenotypes , ranging from mild to severe , mostly leading to lethality ( Supplementary Table 2 ) . Most of these pheno - types have been associated with impaired endocytic trafficking or autophagy , or both . A VPS34 kinase - dead knock - in strategy in mice has been used to assess the organismal importance of VPS34 catalytic activity and to model the impact of pharma - cological intervention by VPS34 kinase inhibitors 174 . Whereas homozygous expression of kinase - dead VPS34 , like Vps34 knockout , led to lethality between E6 . 5 and E8 . 5 , heterozygous kinase - dead Vps34 - knock - in mice were healthy and fertile . Heterozygous kinase - dead Vps34 - knock - in mice also displayed increased insulin sensitivity and partial protection against high - fat - diet - induced liver steatosis 174 . This effect was mimicked by a small - molecule inhibitor of VPS34 , in both preven - tive and therapeutic settings of insulin sensitivity . These observations suggest that a therapeutic window exists for organism - wide dampening of VPS34 kinase activ - ity , with potential exploitation in overcoming insulin resistance and diabetes . In these scenarios , it is possi - ble that partial inactivation of VPS34 causes only very mild defects in autophagy and endosomal trafficking . Indeed , studies using VPS34 inhibitors showed that , to fully block autophagy in cell - based models , more than 90 % of VPS34 activity needs to be inhibited , indicating that very low levels of VPS34 activity are sufficient for autophagy , at least under non - stressed conditions 172 . These VPS34 kinase - dead mouse studies also revealed that organismal activation of the energy - sensing AMPK pathway is a prominent consequence of partial sys - temic VPS34 inactivation . This AMPK activation most likely results from a mild autophagy defect , leading to reduced availability of key amino acid substrates for mito chondrial respiration and an ensuing reduced ATP production . Increased activity of AMPK then causes reduction in hepatic gluco neogenesis and augments glucose uptake in the muscle , leading to the reduction of overall levels of glucose in the blood 174 . Liver - specific Vps15 ( also known as Pik3r4 ) knock - out has also been shown to increase organismal insulin sensitivity , through a mechanism different from that reported for VPS34 kinase inactivation 181 . VPS15 - null hepatocytes show an increase in insulin - mediated AKT signalling , which was attributed to prolonged residence of the insulin receptor in endosomes 181 . This contrasts with genetic or pharmacological inactivation of VPS34 , which does not affect insulin - stimulated AKT 171 , 174 . A possible explanation is that this effect of Vps15 dele - tion is due to the reduced expression of beclin 1 in these cells , as a consequence of the loss of the scaffolding func - tion of VPS15 ( reF . 181 ) . This is in line with observations in breast cancer cells , where loss of beclin 1 expression pro - longs the residence of the epidermal growth factor recep - tor in early endosomes , resulting in sustained epidermal growth factor - stimulated AKT – ERK signalling 198 . Conclusions and perspectives Much progress has been made in understanding the roles and mechanisms of action of the different PI3K isoforms . An emerging theme is that pools of the same lipid derived from different PI3K isoforms are not necessarily func - tionally equivalent . This is illustrated by PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 , which , when produced by PI3KC2β , does not activate AKT 123 , unlike the PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 produced by the class I PI3Ks 30 , 121 and by PI3KC2γ in the liver 57 . Likewise , sev - eral independent and functionally distinct subcellular pools of PtdIns3P exist , with roles in endosomal matu - ration , endocytic recycling and initiation of autophagy . It has also become clear that VPS34 is not always the main producer of cellular PtdIns3P , with contributions from class II and possibly class I PI3Ks , although the latter remains to be firmly established . It will be a tech - nical challenge to determine the contributions of indi - vidual PI3K isoforms to the specific subcellular pools of phosphoinositides . With regard to class IA PI3Ks , it has become clear that timing and tissue context determine the impact of mutational activation , with the presence of PIK3CA mutation not necessarily predisposing to cancer devel - opment 199 ( see BOx 2 ) . Much still has to be learned about how the different class IA PI3K subunits engage with each other and with upstream activators 23 , on the compartmentalization of their downstream effectors , such as AKT and their substrates 54 , and on the ensuing biological functions . Essential cellular and organismal roles of the class II PI3Ks have now been uncovered , with the three class II isoforms apparently carrying out entirely dis - tinct functions . The upstream regulatory inputs that activate these PI3Ks remain largely unknown . With a structural concept for the regulation of PI3KC2α activ - ity now in place 115 , it will be exciting to understand whether this applies to the other class II isoforms and how this integrates with other regulatory inputs , such as www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 530 | SePTemBeR 2019 | volume 20 phosphorylation or other post - translational modifica - tions . Although PI3KC2α is clearly essential for embry - onic development 125 , 143 , we still know very little about its organismal role in postnatal stages . The first clear indi - cation of therapeutic potential in targeting class II PI3Ks , as seen in the context of XLCNM 159 , 160 , has the potential to spur efforts to develop isoform - selective inhibitors for these enigmatic PI3Ks . By regulating vesicular trafficking , VPS34 has an indi - rect effect on cell signalling , which in some instances ( for example , the VPS34 – SGK3 pathway ) could represent a major mechanism to counteract inhibition of the class I PI3K – AKT signalling network in cancer . Structural studies have also provided insight into how VPS34 lipid kinase activity is regulated in complexes I and II . It remains to be determined how the multiple post - translational modifications of the distinct subunits 168 may affect the composition and function of the VPS34 complexes . Highly selective VPS34 inhibitors have hel - ped to define the various cellular functions and uncov - ered new biological roles for VPS34 in cancer 178 , 200 , 201 and metabolic sensitization 174 , 178 . Further studies are required to define the biological roles of the distinct VPS34 com - plexes . Development of complex - specific modulators would certainly help to address this fundamental ques - tion , but also would open opportunities for more refined interference with VPS34 function in disease , such as to selectively dampen autophagy in cancer 202 . Published online 20 May 2019 1 . Herman , P . K . & Emr , S . D . Characterization of VPS34 , a gene required for vacuolar protein sorting and vacuole segregation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 10 , 6742 – 6754 ( 1990 ) . 2 . Balla , T . Phosphoinositides : tiny lipids with giant impact on cell regulation . Physiol . Rev . 93 , 1019 – 1137 ( 2013 ) . 3 . Schink , K . O . , Tan , K . - W . & Stenmark , H . Phosphoinositides in control of membrane dynamics . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 32 , 143 – 171 ( 2016 ) . 4 . Zvelebil , M . J . et al . Structural and functional diversity of phosphoinositide 3 - kinases . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . B 351 , 217 – 223 ( 1996 ) . 5 . MacDougall , L . K . , Domin , J . & Waterfield , M . D . A family of phosphoinositide 3 - kinases in Drosophila identifies a new mediator of signal transduction . Curr . Biol . 5 , 1404 – 1415 ( 1995 ) . 6 . Vanhaesebroeck , B . , Leevers , S . J . , Panayotou , G . & Waterfield , M . D . Phosphoinositide 3 - kinases : a conserved family of signal transducers . Trends Biochem . Sci . 22 , 267 – 272 ( 1997 ) . 7 . Domin , J . & Waterfield , M . D . Using structure to define the function of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase family members . FEBS Lett . 410 , 91 – 95 ( 1997 ) . 8 . Vanhaesebroeck , B . , Ali , K . , Bilancio , A . , Geering , B . & Foukas , L . C . Signalling by PI3K isoforms : insights from gene - targeted mice . Trends Biochem . Sci . 30 , 194 – 204 ( 2005 ) . 9 . Gulluni , F . et al . Mitotic spindle assembly and genomic stability in breast cancer require PI3K - C2 α scaffolding function . Cancer Cell 32 , 444 – 459 ( 2017 ) . This study provides the first evidence for a scaffolding function of a class II PI3K that is independent of its catalytic activity . 10 . Devereaux , K . et al . Regulation of mammalian autophagy by class II and III PI 3 - kinases through PI3P synthesis . PLOS ONE 8 , e76405 ( 2013 ) . 11 . Hirsch , E . , Braccini , L . , Ciraolo , E . , Morello , F . & Perino , A . Twice upon a time : PI3K’s secret double life exposed . Trends Biochem . Sci . 34 , 244 – 248 ( 2009 ) . 12 . Burke , J . E . Structural basis for regulation of phosphoinositide kinases and their involvement in human disease . Mol . Cell 71 , 653 – 673 ( 2018 ) . 13 . Burke , J . E . & Williams , R . L . Synergy in activating class I PI3Ks . Trends Biochem . Sci . 40 , 88 – 100 ( 2015 ) . 14 . Dornan , G . L . & Burke , J . E . Molecular mechanisms of human disease mediated by oncogenic and primary immunodeficiency mutations in class IA phosphoinositide 3 - kinases . Front . Immunol . 9 , 575 ( 2018 ) . 15 . Fruman , D . A . et al . The PI3K pathway in human disease . Cell 170 , 605 – 635 ( 2017 ) . 16 . Vanhaesebroeck , B . , Whitehead , M . A . & Pineiro , R . Molecules in medicine mini - review : isoforms of PI3K in biology and disease . J . Mol . Med . 94 , 5 – 11 ( 2016 ) . 17 . Hawkins , P . T . & Stephens , L . R . PI3K signalling in inflammation . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1851 , 882 – 897 ( 2015 ) . 18 . Stark , A . K . , Sriskantharajah , S . , Hessel , E . M . & Okkenhaug , K . PI3K inhibitors in inflammation , autoimmunity and cancer . Curr . Opin . Pharmacol . 23 , 82 – 91 ( 2015 ) . 19 . Fruman , D . A . & Rommel , C . PI3K and cancer : lessons , challenges and opportunities . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 13 , 140 – 156 ( 2014 ) . 20 . Thorpe , L . M . , Yuzugullu , H . & Zhao , J . J . PI3K in cancer : divergent roles of isoforms , modes of activation and therapeutic targeting . Nat . Rev . Cancer 15 , 7 – 24 ( 2015 ) . 21 . Janku , F . , Yap , T . A . & Meric - Bernstam , F . Targeting the PI3K pathway in cancer : are we making headway ? Nat . Rev . Clin . Oncol . 15 , 273 – 291 ( 2018 ) . 22 . Mayer , I . A . & Arteaga , C . L . The PI3K / AKT pathway as a target for cancer treatment . Annu . Rev . Med . 67 , 11 – 28 ( 2016 ) . 23 . Tsolakos , N . et al . Quantitation of class IA PI3Ks in mice reveals p110 - free - p85s and isoform - selective subunit associations and recruitment to receptors . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 115 , 12176 – 12181 ( 2018 ) . This study provides an in - depth quantitative assessment of the endogenous levels of the class IA PI3K catalytic and regulatory subunits in mouse tissues and cells and their interaction with each other and with receptors under basal and stimulated conditions . 24 . Vadas , O . et al . Molecular determinants of PI3K γ - mediated activation downstream of G - protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 18862 – 18867 ( 2013 ) . 25 . Fritsch , R . & Downward , J . SnapShot : class I PI3K isoform signaling . Cell 154 , 940 – 940 ( 2013 ) . 26 . Fritsch , R . et al . RAS and RHO families of GTPases directly regulate distinct phosphoinositide 3 - kinase isoforms . Cell 153 , 1050 – 1063 ( 2013 ) . 27 . Dbouk , H . A . et al . G protein - coupled receptor - mediated activation of p110 β by G βγ is required for cellular transformation and invasiveness . Sci . Signal . 5 , ra89 ( 2012 ) . 28 . Salamon , R . S . et al . Identification of the Rab5 binding site in p110 β : assays for PI3K β binding to Rab5 . Methods Mol . Biol . 1298 , 271 – 281 ( 2015 ) . 29 . Bresnick , A . R . & Backer , J . M . PI3K β — a versatile transducer for GPCR , RTK and small GTPase signaling . Endocrinology 160 , 536 – 555 ( 2019 ) . 30 . Malek , M . et al . PTEN regulates PI ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 signaling downstream of class I PI3K . Mol . Cell 68 , 566 – 580 ( 2017 ) . This study demonstrates that PTEN is not only a lipid phosphatase for PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 as was previously thought but also uses PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 as a substrate to convert it into PtdIns4P . 31 . Lee , Y . R . , Chen , M . & Pandolfi , P . P . The functions and regulation of the PTEN tumour suppressor : new modes and prospects . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 547 – 562 ( 2018 ) . 32 . Costa , C . & Hirsch , E . in Current Topics in Microbiology and Immunology ( eds Rommel , C . , Vanhaesebroeck , B . & Vogt , P . ) 171 – 181 ( Springer , 2010 ) . 33 . Ito , Y . , Hart , J . R . & Vogt , P . K . Isoform - specific activities of the regulatory subunits of phosphati - dylinositol 3 - kinases — potentially novel therapeutic targets . Expert Opin . Ther . Targets 22 , 869 – 877 ( 2018 ) . 34 . Takiar , V . , Ip , C . K . , Gao , M . , Mills , G . B . & Cheung , L . W . Neomorphic mutations create therapeutic challenges in cancer . Oncogene 36 , 1607 – 1618 ( 2017 ) . 35 . Marshall , J . D . S . , Whitecross , D . E . , Mellor , P . & Anderson , D . H . Impact of p85 α alterations in cancer . Biomolecules 9 , 29 ( 2019 ) . 36 . Vanhaesebroeck , B . , Guillermet - Guibert , J . , Graupera , M . & Bilanges , B . The emerging mechanisms of isoform - specific PI3K signalling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 11 , 329 – 341 ( 2010 ) . 37 . Li , H . & Marshall , A . J . Phosphatidylinositol ( 3 , 4 ) bisphosphate - specific phosphatases and effector proteins : a distinct branch of PI3K signaling . Cell . Signal . 27 , 1789 – 1798 ( 2015 ) . 38 . Hawkins , P . T . & Stephens , L . R . Emerging evidence of signalling roles for PI ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 in class I and II PI3K - regulated pathways . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 44 , 307 – 314 ( 2016 ) . 39 . Isakoff , S . J . et al . Identification and analysis of PH domain - containing targets of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase using a novel in vivo assay in yeast . EMBO J . 17 , 5374 – 5387 ( 1998 ) . 40 . Zhang , P . , Wang , Y . , Sesaki , H . & Iijima , M . Proteomic identification of phosphatidylinositol ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) triphosphate - binding proteins in Dictyostelium discoideum . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 11829 – 11834 ( 2010 ) . 41 . Park , W . S . et al . Comprehensive identification of PIP3 - regulated PH domains from C . elegans to H . sapiens by model prediction and live imaging . Mol . Cell 30 , 381 – 392 ( 2008 ) . 42 . Krugmann , S . et al . Identification of ARAP3 , a novel PI3K effector regulating both Arf and Rho GTPases , by selective capture on phosphoinositide affinity matrices . Mol . Cell 9 , 95 – 108 ( 2002 ) . 43 . Chen , C . L . , Wang , Y . , Sesaki , H . & Iijima , M . Myosin I links PIP3 signaling to remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton in chemotaxis . Sci . Signal . 5 , ra10 ( 2012 ) . 44 . Plantard , L . et al . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 is a regulator of myosin - X localization and filopodia formation . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 3525 – 3534 ( 2010 ) . 45 . Manning , B . D . & Toker , A . AKT / PKB signaling : navigating the network . Cell 169 , 381 – 405 ( 2017 ) . 46 . Lien , E . C . , Dibble , C . C . & Toker , A . PI3K signaling in cancer : beyond AKT . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 45 , 62 – 71 ( 2017 ) . 47 . Dansen , T . B . & Burgering , B . M . Unravelling the tumor - suppressive functions of FOXO proteins . Trends Cell Biol . 18 , 421 – 429 ( 2008 ) . 48 . Hornsveld , M . , Dansen , T . B . , Derksen , P . W . & Burgering , B . M . T . Re - evaluating the role of FOXOs in cancer . Semin . Cancer Biol . 50 , 90 – 100 ( 2018 ) . 49 . Hedrick , S . M . , Hess Michelini , R . , Doedens , A . L . , Goldrath , A . W . & Stone , E . L . FOXO transcription factors throughout T cell biology . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 12 , 649 – 661 ( 2012 ) . 50 . Luo , C . T . & Li , M . O . Foxo transcription factors in T cell biology and tumor immunity . Semin . Cancer Biol . 50 , 13 – 20 ( 2018 ) . 51 . Dummler , B . & Hemmings , B . A . Physiological roles of PKB / Akt isoforms in development and disease . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 35 , 231 – 235 ( 2007 ) . 52 . Toker , A . & Marmiroli , S . Signaling specificity in the Akt pathway in biology and disease . Adv . Biol . Regul . 55 , 28 – 38 ( 2014 ) . 53 . Chin , Y . R . & Toker , A . The actin - bundling protein palladin is an Akt1 - specific substrate that regulates breast cancer cell migration . Mol . Cell 38 , 333 – 344 ( 2010 ) . This is one of the first reports of AKT isoform substrate specificity in cells . NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlECulAR CEll BIOlOGy R e v i e w s volume 20 | SePTemBeR 2019 | 531 54 . Liu , S . L . et al . Quantitative lipid imaging reveals a new signaling function of phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 - bisphophate : isoform - and site - specific activation of Akt . Mol . Cell 71 , 1092 – 1104 ( 2018 ) . This study provides a molecular mechanism , based on AKT - isoform - selective endocytosis , for AKT isoform substrate specificity in cells . 55 . Li Chew , C . et al . In vivo role of INPP4B in tumor and metastasis suppression through regulation of PI3K – AKT signaling at endosomes . Cancer Discov . 5 , 740 – 751 ( 2015 ) . 56 . Walz , H . A . et al . Isoform - specific regulation of Akt signaling by the endosomal protein WDFY2 . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 14101 – 14108 ( 2010 ) . 57 . Braccini , L . et al . PI3K - C2 γ is a Rab5 effector selectively controlling endosomal Akt2 activation downstream of insulin signalling . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7400 – 7400 ( 2015 ) . This is the first description of a role of the liver - specific class II isoform PI3KC2 γ , based on endosomal PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 production . 58 . Cho , H . et al . Insulin resistance and a diabetes mellitus - like syndrome in mice lacking the protein kinase Akt2 ( PKB β ) . Science 292 , 1728 – 1731 ( 2001 ) . 59 . Choi , S . et al . Agonist - stimulated phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate generation by scaffolded phosphoinositide kinases . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 1324 – 1335 ( 2016 ) . 60 . Foukas , L . C . et al . Critical role for the p110 α phosphoinositide - 3 - OH kinase in growth and metabolic regulation . Nature 441 , 366 – 370 ( 2006 ) . 61 . Knight , Z . A . et al . A pharmacological map of the PI3 - K family defines a role for p110 α in insulin signaling . Cell 125 , 733 – 747 ( 2006 ) . 62 . Nylander , S . et al . Human target validation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) β : effects on platelets and insulin sensitivity , using AZD6482 a novel PI3K β inhibitor . J . Thromb . Haemost . 10 , 2127 – 2136 ( 2012 ) . 63 . Mateo , J . et al . A first - time - in - human study of GSK2636771 , a phosphoinositide 3 kinase beta - selective inhibitor , in patients with advanced solid tumors . Clin . Cancer Res . 23 , 5981 – 5992 ( 2017 ) . 64 . Graupera , M . et al . Angiogenesis selectively requires the p110 α isoform of PI3K to control endothelial cell migration . Nature 453 , 662 – 666 ( 2008 ) . 65 . Ciraolo , E . et al . Essential role of the p110 β subunit of phosphoinositide 3 - OH kinase in male fertility . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 704 – 711 ( 2010 ) . 66 . Guillermet - Guibert , J . et al . Novel role for p110 β PI 3 - kinase in male fertility through regulation of androgen receptor activity in Sertoli cells . PLOS Genet . 11 , e1005304 ( 2015 ) . 67 . Gratacap , M . P . et al . Regulation and roles of PI3K β , a major actor in platelet signaling and functions . Adv . Enzyme Regul . 51 , 106 – 116 ( 2011 ) . 68 . So , L . & Fruman , D . A . PI3K signalling in B - and T - lymphocytes : new developments and therapeutic advances . Biochem . J . 442 , 465 – 481 ( 2012 ) . 69 . Ruckle , T . , Schwarz , M . K . & Rommel , C . PI3K γ inhibition : towards an ‘aspirin of the 21st century’ ? Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 5 , 903 – 918 ( 2006 ) . 70 . Perino , A . et al . Integrating cardiac PIP3 and cAMP signaling through a PKA anchoring function of p110 γ . Mol . Cell 42 , 84 – 95 ( 2011 ) . 71 . Damilano , F . et al . Distinct effects of leukocyte and cardiac phosphoinositide 3 - kinase γ activity in pressure overload - induced cardiac failure . Circulation 123 , 391 – 399 ( 2011 ) . 72 . Eickholt , B . J . et al . Control of axonal growth and regeneration of sensory neurons by the p110 δ PI 3 - kinase . PLOS ONE 2 , e869 ( 2007 ) . 73 . Law , A . J . et al . Neuregulin 1 – ErbB4 – PI3K signaling in schizophrenia and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase - p110 δ inhibition as a potential therapeutic strategy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 12165 – 12170 ( 2012 ) . 74 . Bartok , B . , Hammaker , D . & Firestein , G . S . Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase δ regulates migration and invasion of synoviocytes in rheumatoid arthritis . J . Immunol . 192 , 2063 – 2070 ( 2014 ) . 75 . Whitehead , M . A . , Bombardieri , M . , Pitzalis , C . & Vanhaesebroeck , B . Isoform - selective induction of human p110 δ PI3K expression by TNF α : identification of a new and inducible PIK3CD promoter . Biochem . J . 443 , 857 – 867 ( 2012 ) . 76 . Sawyer , C . et al . Regulation of breast cancer cell chemotaxis by the phosphoinositide 3 - kinase p110 δ . Cancer Res . 63 , 1667 – 1675 ( 2003 ) . 77 . Goulielmaki , E . et al . Pharmacological inactivation of the PI3K p110 δ prevents breast tumour progression by targeting cancer cells and macrophages . Cell Death Dis . 9 , 678 ( 2018 ) . 78 . Ko , E . et al . PI3K δ is a new therapeutic target in hepatocellular carcinoma . Hepatology 68 , 2285 – 2300 ( 2018 ) . 79 . Yue , D . & Sun , X . Idelalisib promotes Bim - dependent apoptosis through AKT / FoxO3a in hepatocellular carcinoma . Cell Death Dis . 9 , 935 ( 2018 ) . 80 . Papakonstanti , E . A . et al . Distinct roles of class IA PI3K isoforms in primary and immortalised macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 4124 – 4133 ( 2008 ) . 81 . Foukas , L . C . , Berenjeno , I . M . , Gray , A . , Khwaja , A . & Vanhaesebroeck , B . Activity of any class IA PI3K isoform can sustain cell proliferation and survival . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 11381 – 11386 ( 2010 ) . 82 . Arafeh , R . & Samuels , Y . PIK3CA in cancer : the past 30 years . > Semin . Cancer Biol . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . semcancer . 2019 . 02 . 002 ( 2019 ) . 83 . Burke , J . E . , Perisic , O . , Masson , G . R . , Vadas , O . & Williams , R . L . Oncogenic mutations mimic and enhance dynamic events in the natural activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase p110 α ( PIK3CA ) . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 15259 – 15264 ( 2012 ) . This study provides an in - depth assessment of how cancer - associated mutations in PIK3CA affect the biochemical characteristics of the p110 α – p85 α complex . 84 . Oda , K . , Stokoe , D . , Taketani , Y . & McCormick , F . High frequency of coexistent mutations of PIK3CA and PTEN genes in endometrial carcinoma . Cancer Res . 65 , 10669 – 10673 ( 2005 ) . 85 . Madsen , R . R . et al . Oncogenic PIK3CA promotes cellular stemness in an allele dose - dependent manner . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 116 , 8380 – 8389 ( 2019 ) . This study shows that homozygous but not heterozygous mutation of PIK3CA induces broad biological effects in human induced pluripotent stem cells , and provides evidence that many PIK3CA - mutant tumours either show homozygous mutation in this gene or carry additional activating genetic lesions in the PI3K pathway . 86 . Hyman , D . M . et al . AKT inhibition in solid tumors with AKT1 mutations . J . Clin . Oncol . 35 , 2251 – 2259 ( 2017 ) . 87 . Berenjeno , I . M . et al . Oncogenic PIK3CA induces centrosome amplification and tolerance to genome doubling . Nat . Commun . 8 , 1773 ( 2017 ) . 88 . Gerstung , M . et al . The evolutionary history of 2 , 658 cancers . Preprint at bioRxiv https : / / www . biorxiv . org / content / 10 . 1101 / 161562v3 ( 2019 ) . 89 . Jamal - Hanjani , M . et al . Tracking the evolution of non - small - cell lung cancer . N . Engl . J . Med . 376 , 2109 – 2121 ( 2017 ) . 90 . Morris , J . Z . , Tissenbaum , H . A . & Ruvkun , G . A phosphatidylinositol - 3 - OH kinase family member regulating longevity and diapause in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature 382 , 536 – 539 ( 1996 ) . 91 . Bosch , A . et al . PI3K inhibition results in enhanced estrogen receptor function and dependence in hormone receptor - positive breast cancer . Sci . Transl . Med . 7 , 283ra51 ( 2015 ) . 92 . Toska , E . et al . PI3K pathway regulates ER - dependent transcription in breast cancer through the epigenetic regulator KMT2D . Science 355 , 1324 – 1330 ( 2017 ) . The studies reported in Bosch et al . ( 2015 ) and Toska et al . ( 2017 ) uncover mechanisms of how PIK3CA mutation modulates oestrogen hormone responsiveness in breast cancer cell lines , and together with other studies form the basis of the ongoing phase III trials of PI3K α inhibitors with hormone therapy . 93 . Koren , S . & Bentires - Alj , M . Tackling resistance to PI3K inhibition by targeting the epigenome . Cancer Cell 31 , 616 – 618 ( 2017 ) . 94 . Carver , B . S . et al . Reciprocal feedback regulation of PI3K and androgen receptor signaling in PTEN - deficient prostate cancer . Cancer Cell 19 , 575 – 586 ( 2011 ) . 95 . Zhu , Q . et al . Phosphoinositide 3 - OH kinase p85 α and p110 β are essential for androgen receptor transactivation and tumor progression in prostate cancers . Oncogene 27 , 4569 – 4579 ( 2008 ) . 96 . Jiang , X . , Chen , S . , Asara , J . M . & Balk , S . P . Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase pathway activation in phosphate and tensin homolog ( PTEN ) - deficient prostate cancer cells is independent of receptor tyrosine kinases and mediated by the p110 β and p110 δ catalytic subunits . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 14980 – 14989 ( 2010 ) . 97 . Marques , R . B . et al . High efficacy of combination therapy using PI3K / AKT inhibitors with androgen deprivation in prostate cancer preclinical models . Eur . Urol . 67 , 1177 – 1185 ( 2015 ) . 98 . Rinnerthaler , G . , Gampenrieder , S . P . & Greil , R . ASCO 2018 highlights : metastatic breast cancer . Memo 11 , 276 – 279 ( 2018 ) . 99 . Kaneda , M . M . et al . PI3K γ is a molecular switch that controls immune suppression . Nature 539 , 437 – 442 ( 2016 ) . 100 . De Henau , O . et al . Overcoming resistance to checkpoint blockade therapy by targeting PI3K γ in myeloid cells . Nature 539 , 443 – 447 ( 2016 ) . 101 . Ali , K . et al . Inactivation of PI ( 3 ) K p110 δ breaks regulatory T cell - mediated immune tolerance to cancer . Nature 510 , 407 – 411 ( 2014 ) . The studies reported in Kaneda et al . ( 2016 ) , De Henau et al . ( 2016 ) and Ali et al . ( 2014 ) demonstrate the potential of drugs targeting leukocyte - expressed PI3K γ and PI3K δ in cancer immunotherapy . 102 . Abu - Eid , R . et al . Selective inhibition of regulatory T cells by targeting the PI3K – Akt pathway . Cancer Immunol . Res . 2 , 1080 – 1089 ( 2014 ) . 103 . Ahmad , S . et al . Differential PI3K δ signaling in CD4 + T cell subsets enables selective targeting of T regulatory cells to enhance cancer immunotherapy . Cancer Res . 77 , 1892 – 1904 ( 2017 ) . 104 . Lu , X . et al . Effective combinatorial immunotherapy for castration - resistant prostate cancer . Nature 543 , 728 – 732 ( 2017 ) . 105 . Okkenhaug , K . , Graupera , M . & Vanhaesebroeck , B . Targeting PI3K in cancer : impact on tumor cells , their protective stroma , angiogenesis , and immunotherapy . Cancer Discov . 6 , 1090 – 1105 ( 2016 ) . 106 . Burger , J . A . & Wiestner , A . Targeting B cell receptor signalling in cancer : preclinical and clinical advances . Nat . Rev . Cancer 18 , 148 – 167 ( 2018 ) . 107 . Brown , J . R . The PI3K pathway : clinical inhibition in chronic lymphocytic leukemia . Semin . Oncol . 43 , 260 – 264 ( 2016 ) . 108 . Ho , L . K . , Liu , D . , Rozycka , M . , Brown , R . A . & Fry , M . J . Identification of four novel human phosphoinositide 3 - kinases defines a multi - isoform subfamily . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 235 , 130 – 137 ( 1997 ) . 109 . Falasca , M . et al . The role of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase C2 α in insulin signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 28226 – 28236 ( 2007 ) . 110 . Leibiger , B . et al . Insulin - feedback via PI3K - C2 α activated PKB α / Akt1 is required for glucose - stimulated insulin secretion . FASEB J . 24 , 1824 – 1837 ( 2010 ) . 111 . Maffucci , T . et al . Class II phosphoinositide 3 - kinase defines a novel signaling pathway in cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 169 , 789 – 799 ( 2005 ) . 112 . Bridges , D . et al . Phosphatidylinositol 3 , 5 - bisphosphate plays a role in the activation and subcellular localization of mechanistic target of rapamycin 1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 2955 – 2962 ( 2012 ) . 113 . Marat , A . L . & Haucke , V . Phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphates—at the interface between cell signalling and membrane traffic . EMBO J . 35 , 561 – 579 ( 2016 ) . 114 . Gulluni , F . , De Santis , M . C . , Margaria , J . P . , Martini , M . & Hirsch , E . Class II PI3K functions in cell biology and disease . Trends Cell Biol . 29 , 339 – 359 ( 2019 ) . 115 . Wang , H . et al . Autoregulation of class II alpha PI3K activity by its lipid - binding PX - C2 domain module . Mol . Cell 71 , 343 – 351 ( 2018 ) . This is the first description of a regulatory mechanism for a class II PI3K . 116 . Gaidarov , I . , Smith , M . E . , Domin , J . & Keen , J . H . The class II phosphoinositide 3 - kinase C2 α is activated by clathrin and regulates clathrin - mediated membrane trafficking . Mol . Cell 7 , 443 – 449 ( 2001 ) . 117 . Posor , Y . et al . Spatiotemporal control of endocytosis by phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 - bisphosphate . Nature 499 , 233 – 237 ( 2013 ) . This study provided evidence of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 formation by a class II PI3K and how this regulates clathrin - mediated endocytosis . 118 . Stahelin , R . V . et al . Structural and membrane binding analysis of the Phox homology domain of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase - C2 α . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 39396 – 39406 ( 2006 ) . 119 . Chen , K . E . , Tillu , V . A . , Chandra , M . & Collins , B . M . Molecular basis for membrane recruitment by the PX and C2 domains of class II phosphoinositide 3 - kinase - C2 α . Structure 26 , 1 – 14 ( 2018 ) . 120 . Pirola , L . et al . Activation loop sequences confer substrate specificity to phosphoinositide 3 - kinase α ( PI3K α ) . Functions of lipid kinase - deficient PI3K α in signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 21544 – 21554 ( 2001 ) . 121 . Goulden , B . D . et al . A high - avidity biosensor reveals plasma membrane PI ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 is predominantly a class I PI3K signaling product . J . Cell Biol . 218 , 1066 – 1079 ( 2018 ) . 122 . Laketa , V . et al . Membrane - permeant phosphoinositide derivatives as modulators of growth factor signaling and neurite outgrowth . Chem . Biol . 16 , 1190 – 1196 ( 2009 ) . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 532 | SePTemBeR 2019 | volume 20 123 . Marat , A . L . et al . mTORC1 activity repression by late endosomal phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 - bisphosphate . Science 356 , 968 – 968 ( 2017 ) . This study reveals a new link between class II PI3Ks and mTORC1 regulation . 124 . Campa , C . C . et al . Rab11 activity and PtdIns ( 3 ) P turnover removes recycling cargo from endosomes . Nat . Chem . Biol . 14 , 801 – 810 ( 2018 ) . 125 . Franco , I . et al . PI3K class II α controls spatially restricted endosomal PtdIns3P and Rab11 activation to promote primary cilium function . Dev . Cell 28 , 647 – 658 ( 2014 ) . 126 . Campa , C . C . , Franco , I . & Hirsch , E . PI3K - C2 α : one enzyme for two products coupling vesicle trafficking and signal transduction . FEBS Lett . 589 , 1552 – 1558 ( 2015 ) . 127 . Nakatsu , F . et al . PtdIns4P synthesis by PI4KIII α at the plasma membrane and its impact on plasma membrane identity . J . Cell Biol . 199 , 1003 – 1016 ( 2012 ) . 128 . Hammond , G . R . V . et al . PI4P and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 are essential but independent lipid determinants of membrane identity . Science 727 , 2 – 6 ( 2012 ) . 129 . Saheki , Y . et al . Control of plasma membrane lipid homeostasis by the extended synaptotagmins . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 504 – 515 ( 2016 ) . 130 . Booth , D . G . , Hood , F . E . , Prior , I . A . & Royle , S . J . A . TACC3 / ch - TOG / clathrin complex stabilises kinetochore fibres by inter - microtubule bridging . EMBO J . 30 , 906 – 919 ( 2011 ) . 131 . Jean , S . , Cox , S . , Schmidt , E . J . , Robinson , F . L . & Kiger , A . Sbf / MTMR13 coordinates PI ( 3 ) P and Rab21 regulation in endocytic control of cellular remodeling . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 2723 – 2740 ( 2012 ) . 132 . Hauswirth , A . G . et al . A postsynaptic PI3K - cII dependent signaling controller for presynaptic homeostatic plasticity . eLife 7 , e31535 ( 2018 ) . 133 . Velichkova , M . et al . Drosophila Mtm and class II PI3K coregulate a PI ( 3 ) P pool with cortical and endolysosomal functions . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 407 – 425 ( 2010 ) . 134 . Posor , Y . , Eichhorn - Grünig , M . & Haucke , V . Phosphoinositides in endocytosis . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1851 , 794 – 804 ( 2014 ) . 135 . Schöneberg , J . et al . Lipid - mediated PX - BAR domain recruitment couples local membrane constriction to endocytic vesicle fission . Nat . Commun . 8 , 15873 ( 2017 ) . 136 . Almeida - Souza , L . et al . A flat BAR protein promotes actin polymerization at the base of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 174 , 325 – 337 ( 2018 ) . 137 . He , K . et al . Dynamics of phosphoinositide conversion in clathrin - mediated endocytic traffic . Nature 552 , 410 – 414 ( 2017 ) . 138 . Aki , S . , Yoshioka , K . , Okamoto , Y . , Takuwa , N . & Takuwa , Y . Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase class II α - isoform PI3K - C2 α is required for transforming growth factor β - induced Smad signaling in endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 290 , 6086 – 6105 ( 2015 ) . 139 . Alliouachene , S . et al . Inactivation of the class II PI3K - C2 β potentiates insulin signaling and sensitivity . Cell Rep . 13 , 1881 – 1894 ( 2015 ) . 140 . Korolchuk , V . I . et al . Lysosomal positioning coordinates cellular nutrient responses . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 453 – 460 ( 2011 ) . 141 . Katso , R . M . et al . Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase C2 β regulates cytoskeletal organization and cell migration via Rac - dependent mechanisms . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 3729 – 3744 ( 2006 ) . 142 . Domin , J . et al . The class II phosphoinositide 3 - kinase PI3K - C2 β regulates cell migration by a PtdIns ( 3 ) P dependent mechanism . J . Cell . Physiol . 205 , 452 – 462 ( 2005 ) . 143 . Yoshioka , K . et al . Endothelial PI3K - C2 α , a class II PI3K , has an essential role in angiogenesis and vascular barrier function . Nat . Med . 18 , 1560 – 1569 ( 2012 ) . This study demonstrated that homozygous knockout of Pik3c2a in mice causes embryonic lethality as a consequence of impaired angiogenesis . 144 . Biswas , K . et al . Essential role of class II phosphatidylinositol - 3 - kinase - C2 α in sphingosine 1 - phosphate receptor - 1 - mediated signaling and migration in endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 2325 – 2339 ( 2013 ) . 145 . Kalaidzidis , I . et al . APPL endosomes are not obligatory endocytic intermediates but act as stable cargo - sorting compartments . J . Cell Biol . 211 , 123 – 144 ( 2015 ) . 146 . Zoncu , R . et al . A phosphoinositide switch controls the maturation and signaling properties of APPL endosomes . Cell 136 , 1110 – 1121 ( 2009 ) . 147 . Cai , X . et al . Tripartite motif containing protein 27 negatively regulates CD4 T cells by ubiquitinating and inhibiting the class II PI3K - C2 β . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 20072 – 20077 ( 2011 ) . 148 . Srivastava , S . et al . The class II phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase C2 β is required for the activation of the K + channel KCa3 . 1 and CD4 T cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 3783 – 3791 ( 2009 ) . 149 . Srivastava , S . , Cai , X . , Li , Z . , Sun , Y . & Skolnik , E . Y . Phosphatidylinositol - 3 - kinase C2 and TRIM27 function to positively and negatively regulate IgE receptor activation of mast cells . Mol . Cell . Biol . 32 , 3132 – 3139 ( 2012 ) . 150 . Srivastava , S . , Li , Z . & Skolnik , E . Y . Phosphatidlyinositol - 3 - kinase C2 beta ( PI3KC2 β ) is a potential new target to treat IgE mediated disease . PLOS ONE 12 , e0183474 ( 2017 ) . 151 . Falasca , M . et al . Class II phosphoinositide 3 - kinases as novel drug targets . J . Med . Chem . 60 , 47 – 65 ( 2017 ) . 152 . Alliouachene , S . et al . Inactivation of class II PI3K - C2 α induces leptin resistance , age - dependent insulin resistance and obesity in male mice . Diabetologia 59 , 1503 – 1512 ( 2016 ) . 153 . Mountford , J . K . et al . The class II PI 3 - kinase , PI3KC2 α , links platelet internal membrane structure to shear - dependent adhesive function . Nat . Commun . 6 , 6535 ( 2015 ) . 154 . Valet , C . et al . Essential role of class II PI3K - C2 α in platelet membrane morphology . Blood 126 , 1128 – 1138 ( 2015 ) . 155 . Tiosano , D . Mutations in PIK3C2A cause syndromic short stature , skeletal abnormalities , and cataracts associated with ciliary dysfunction . PLOS Genet . 15 , e1008088 ( 2019 ) . 156 . Harada , K . , Truong , A . B . , Cai , T . & Khavari , P . A . The class II phosphoinositide 3 - kinase C2 β is not essential for epidermal differentiation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 11122 – 11130 ( 2005 ) . 157 . Amoasii , L . , Hnia , K . & Laporte , J . Myotubularin phosphoinositide phosphatases in human diseases . Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 362 , 209 – 233 ( 2012 ) . 158 . Ketel , K . et al . A phosphoinositide conversion mechanism for exit from endosomes . Nature 529 , 408 – 412 ( 2016 ) . 159 . Ribeiro , I . , Yuan , L . , Tanentzapf , G . , Dowling , J . J . & Kiger , A . Phosphoinositide regulation of integrin trafficking required for muscle attachment and maintenance . PLOS Genet . 7 , e1001295 ( 2011 ) . 160 . Sabha , N . et al . PIK3C2B inhibition improves function and prolongs survival in myotubular myopathy animal models . J . Clin . Invest . 126 , 3613 – 3625 ( 2016 ) . 161 . Backer , J . The intricate regulation and complex functions of the class III phosphoinositide 3 - kinase Vps34 . Biochem . J . 473 , 2251 – 2271 ( 2016 ) . 162 . Ktistakis , N . T . & Tooze , S . A . Digesting the expanding mechanisms of autophagy . Trends Cell Biol . 26 , 624 – 635 ( 2016 ) . 163 . Stjepanovic , G . , Baskaran , S . , Lin , M . G . & Hurley , J . H . Unveiling the role of VPS34 kinase domain dynamics in regulation of the autophagic PI3K complex . Mol . Cell . Oncol . 4 , e1367873 ( 2017 ) . 164 . Russell , R . C . et al . ULK1 induces autophagy by phosphorylating beclin - 1 and activating VPS34 lipid kinase . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 741 – 750 ( 2013 ) . 165 . Rostislavleva , K . et al . Structure and flexibility of the endosomal Vps34 complex reveals the basis of its function on membranes . Science 350 , aac7365 ( 2015 ) . This study reports on the crystal structure of the yeast Vps34 complex II and documents how Vps34 complexes adapt to membrane curvature . 166 . Stjepanovic , G . , Baskaran , S . , Lin , M . G . & Hurley , J . H . Vps34 kinase domain dynamics regulate the autophagic PI 3 - kinase complex . Mol . Cell 67 , 528 – 534 ( 2017 ) . This study reports on the series of conformational changes involved in the regulation of VPS34 lipid kinase activity . 167 . Baskaran , S . et al . Architecture and dynamics of the autophagic phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase complex . eLife 3 , e05115 ( 2014 ) . 168 . Ohashi , Y . , Tremel , S . & Williams , R . L . VPS34 complexes from a structural perspective . J . Lipid Res . 60 , 229 – 241 ( 2018 ) . 169 . Fan , W . , Nassiri , A . & Zhong , Q . Autophagosome targeting and membrane curvature sensing by Barkor / Atg14 ( L ) . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 7769 – 7774 ( 2011 ) . This study reveals the requirement of the BATS domain of ATG14 for its localization to the autophagosome in vivo and for membrane association in vitro . 170 . Miller , S . et al . Shaping development of autophagy inhibitors with the structure of the lipid kinase Vps34 . Science 327 , 1638 – 1642 ( 2010 ) . This study was the first to unveil the structure of VPS34 ( from D . melanogaster ) , providing new insights into its catalytic mechanism and the binding of VPS34 inhibitors . 171 . Bago , R . et al . Characterization of VPS34 - IN1 , a selective inhibitor of Vps34 , reveals that the phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate - binding SGK3 protein kinase is a downstream target of class III phosphoinositide 3 - kinase . Biochem . J . 463 , 413 – 427 ( 2014 ) . 172 . Dowdle , W . E . et al . Selective VPS34 inhibitor blocks autophagy and uncovers a role for NCOA4 in ferritin degradation and iron homeostasis in vivo . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 1069 – 1079 ( 2014 ) . 173 . Ronan , B . et al . A highly potent and selective Vps34 inhibitor alters vesicle trafficking and autophagy . Nat . Chem . Biol . 10 , 1013 – 1019 ( 2014 ) . The studies reported in Bago et al . ( 2014 ) , Dowdle et al . ( 2014 ) and Ronan et al . ( 2014 ) were the first to report highly selective VPS34 inhibitors . 174 . Bilanges , B . et al . Vps34 PI 3 - kinase inactivation enhances insulin sensitivity through reprogramming of mitochondrial metabolism . Nat . Commun . 8 , 1804 ( 2017 ) . 175 . Honda , A . et al . Potent , selective , and orally bioavailable inhibitors of VPS34 provide chemical tools to modulate autophagy in vivo . ACS Med . Chem . Lett . 7 , 72 – 76 ( 2016 ) . 176 . Pasquier , B . et al . Discovery of ( 2S ) - 8 - [ ( 3R ) - 3 - methylmorpholin - 4 - yl ] - 1 - ( 3 - methyl - 2 - oxobutyl ) - 2 - ( trifluoromethyl ) - 3 , 4 - dihydro - 2H - pyrimido [ 1 , 2 - a ] pyrimidin - 6 - one : a novel potent and selective inhibitor of Vps34 for the treatment of solid tumors . J . Med . Chem . 58 , 376 – 400 ( 2015 ) . 177 . Malik , N . et al . Mechanism of activation of SGK3 by growth factors via the class 1 and class 3 PI3Ks . Biochem . J . 475 , 117 – 135 ( 2018 ) . 178 . Bago , R . et al . The hVps34 – SGK3 pathway alleviates sustained PI3K / Akt inhibition by stimulating mTORC1 and tumour growth . EMBO J . 35 , 1902 – 1922 ( 2016 ) . 179 . Valet , C . et al . A dual role for the class III PI3K , Vps34 , in platelet production and thrombus growth . Blood 130 , 2032 – 2042 ( 2017 ) . 180 . Kim , J . et al . Differential regulation of distinct Vps34 complexes by AMPK in nutrient stress and autophagy . Cell 152 , 290 – 303 ( 2013 ) . 181 . Nemazanyy , I . et al . Class III PI3K regulates organismal glucose homeostasis by providing negative feedback on hepatic insulin signalling . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8283 ( 2015 ) . 182 . He , F . et al . Phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate is light - regulated and essential for survival in retinal rods . Sci . Rep . 6 , 26978 ( 2016 ) . 183 . Martinez , J . et al . Molecular characterization of LC3 - associated phagocytosis reveals distinct roles for Rubicon , NOX2 and autophagy proteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 893 – 906 ( 2015 ) . 184 . Gasser , J . A . et al . SGK3 mediates INPP4B - dependent PI3K signaling in breast cancer . Mol . Cell 56 , 595 – 607 ( 2014 ) . 185 . Ebner , M . , Sinkovics , B . , Szczygiel , M . , Ribeiro , D . W . & Yudushkin , I . Localization of mTORC2 activity inside cells . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 343 – 353 ( 2017 ) . 186 . Tessier , M . & Woodgett , J . R . Role of the Phox homology domain and phosphorylation in activation of serum and glucocorticoid - regulated kinase - 3 . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 23978 – 23989 ( 2006 ) . 187 . Vasudevan , K . M . et al . AKT - independent signaling downstream of oncogenic PIK3CA mutations in human cancer . Cancer Cell 16 , 21 – 32 ( 2009 ) . 188 . O’Farrell , F . et al . Class III phosphatidylinositol - 3 - OH kinase controls epithelial integrity through endosomal LKB1 regulation . Nat . Cell Biol . 19 , 1412 – 1423 ( 2017 ) . 189 . Juhasz , G . et al . The class III PI ( 3 ) K Vps34 promotes autophagy and endocytosis but not TOR signaling in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 655 – 666 ( 2008 ) . 190 . Yoon , M . S . , Du , G . , Backer , J . M . , Frohman , M . A . & Chen , J . Class III PI - 3 - kinase activates phospholipase D in an amino acid - sensing mTORC1 pathway . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 435 – 447 ( 2011 ) . 191 . Nobukuni , T . et al . Amino acids mediate mTOR / raptor signaling through activation of class 3 phosphatidylinositol 3OH - kinase . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 14238 – 14243 ( 2005 ) . 192 . Gulati , P . et al . Amino acids activate mTOR complex 1 via Ca 2 + / CaM signaling to hVps34 . Cell Metab . 7 , 456 – 465 ( 2008 ) . 193 . Byfield , M . P . , Murray , J . T . & Backer , J . M . hVps34 is a nutrient - regulated lipid kinase required for activation of p70 S6 kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 33076 – 33082 ( 2005 ) . The studies reported in Nobukuni et al . ( 2005 ) and Byfield et al . ( 2005 ) were the first to report a link between VPS34 and mTORC1 . NATuRe RevIeWS | MOlECulAR CEll BIOlOGy R e v i e w s volume 20 | SePTemBeR 2019 | 533 194 . Jaber , N . et al . Class III PI3K Vps34 plays an essential role in autophagy and in heart and liver function . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 2003 – 2008 ( 2012 ) . 195 . Willinger , T . & Flavell , R . A . Canonical autophagy dependent on the class III phosphoinositide - 3 kinase Vps34 is required for naive T cell homeostasis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 8670 – 8675 ( 2012 ) . 196 . Zhou , X . , Takatoh , J . & Wang , F . The mammalian class 3 PI3K ( PIK3C3 ) is required for early embryogenesis and cell proliferation . PLOS ONE 6 , e16358 ( 2011 ) . 197 . Kuma , A . , Komatsu , M . & Mizushima , N . Autophagy - monitoring and autophagy - deficient mice . Autophagy 13 , 1619 – 1628 ( 2017 ) . 198 . Rohatgi , R . A . et al . Beclin 1 regulates growth factor receptor signaling in breast cancer . Oncogene 34 , 5352 – 5362 ( 2015 ) . 199 . Madsen , R . R . , Vanhaesebroeck , B . & Semple , R . K . Cancer - associated PIK3CA mutations in overgrowth disorders . Trends Mol . Med . 24 , 856 – 870 ( 2018 ) . 200 . Dyczynski , M . et al . Targeting autophagy by small molecule inhibitors of vacuolar protein sorting 34 ( Vps34 ) improves the sensitivity of breast cancer cells to sunitinib . Cancer Lett . 435 , 32 – 43 ( 2018 ) . 201 . Liu , X . et al . Simultaneous inhibition of Vps34 kinase would enhance PI3K δ inhibitor cytotoxicity in the B cell malignancies . Oncotarget 7 , 53515 – 53525 ( 2016 ) . 202 . Levy , J . M . M . , Towers , C . G . & Thorburn , A . Targeting autophagy in cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 17 , 528 – 542 ( 2017 ) . 203 . Saxton , R . A . & Sabatini , D . M . mTOR signaling in growth , metabolism , and disease . Cell 169 , 361 – 371 ( 2017 ) . 204 . Castillo , S . D . , Baselga , E . & Graupera , M . PIK3CA mutations in vascular malformations . Curr . Opin . Hematol . 26 , 170 – 178 ( 2019 ) . 205 . Hare , L . M . et al . Heterozygous expression of the oncogenic Pik3ca H1047R mutation during murine development results in fatal embryonic and extraembryonic defects . Dev . Biol . 404 , 14 – 26 ( 2015 ) . 206 . Venot , Q . et al . Targeted therapy in patients with PIK3CA - related overgrowth syndrome . Nature 558 , 540 – 546 ( 2018 ) . This clinical study shows that treatment with a low dose of a PI3K α - selective inhibitor is well tolerated in human patients with PIK3CA - related overgrowth spectrum , reduces aberrant tissue overgrowth and leads to clinical benefit . 207 . Semple , R . K . & Vanhaesebroeck , B . Lessons for cancer drug treatment from tackling a non - cancerous overgrowth syndrome . Nature 558 , 523 – 525 ( 2018 ) . 208 . Rozengurt , E . , Soares , H . P . & Sinnet - Smith , J . Suppression of feedback loops mediated by PI3K / mTOR induces multiple overactivation of compensatory pathways : an unintended consequence leading to drug resistance . Mol . Cancer Ther . 13 , 2477 – 2488 ( 2014 ) . 209 . Hollander , M . C . , Blumenthal , G . M . & Dennis , P . A . PTEN loss in the continuum of common cancers , rare syndromes and mouse models . Nat . Rev . Cancer 11 , 289 – 301 ( 2011 ) . 210 . Yehia , L . & Eng , C . One gene , many endocrine and metabolic syndromes : PTEN - opathies and precision medicine . Endocr . Relat . Cancer 25 , T121 – T140 ( 2018 ) . 211 . Keppler - Noreuil , K . M . , Parker , V . E . , Darling , T . N . & Martinez - Agosto , J . A . Somatic overgrowth disorders of the PI3K / AKT / mTOR pathway and therapeutic strategies . Am . J . Med . Genet . C 172 , 402 – 421 ( 2016 ) . 212 . Zak , M . , Ledbetter , M . & Maertens , P . Infantile Lhermitte – Duclos disease treated successfully with rapamycin . J . Child Neurol . 32 , 322 – 326 ( 2017 ) . 213 . Marsh , D . J . et al . Rapamycin treatment for a child with germline PTEN mutation . Nat . Clin . Pract . Oncol . 5 , 357 – 361 ( 2008 ) . 214 . Angulo , I . et al . Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase delta gene mutation predisposes to respiratory infection and airway damage . Science 342 , 866 – 871 ( 2013 ) . 215 . Lucas , C . L . et al . Dominant - activating germline mutations in the gene encoding the PI ( 3 ) K catalytic subunit p110delta result in T cell senescence and human immunodeficiency . Nat . Immunol . 15 , 88 – 97 ( 2014 ) . 216 . Lucas , C . L . , Chandra , A . , Nejentsev , S . , Condliffe , A . M . & Okkenhaug , K . PI3Kdelta and primary immunodeficiencies . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 16 , 702 – 714 ( 2016 ) . 217 . Michalovich , D . & Nejentsev , S . Activated PI3 kinase delta syndrome : from genetics to therapy . Front . Immunol . 9 , 369 ( 2018 ) . 218 . Coulter , T . I . et al . Clinical spectrum and features of activated phosphoinositide 3 - kinase delta syndrome : a large patient cohort study . J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 139 , 597 – 606 ( 2017 ) . 219 . Rao , V . K . et al . Effective “activated PI3Kdelta syndrome” - targeted therapy with the PI3Kdelta inhibitor leniolisib . Blood 130 , 2307 – 2316 ( 2017 ) . 220 . Gwinn , D . M . et al . AMPK phosphorylation of raptor mediates a metabolic checkpoint . Mol . Cell 30 , 214 – 226 ( 2008 ) . 221 . Yoon , M . S . et al . Rapid mitogenic regulation of the mTORC1 inhibitor , DEPTOR , by phosphatidic acid . Mol . Cell 58 , 549 – 556 ( 2015 ) . 222 . Raiborg , C . et al . Repeated ER – endosome contacts promote endosome translocation and neurite outgrowth . Nature 520 , 234 – 238 ( 2015 ) . 223 . Hong , Z . et al . PtdIns3P controls mTORC1 signaling through lysosomal positioning . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 4217 – 4233 ( 2017 ) . 224 . Liang , C . et al . Beclin1 - binding UVRAG targets the class C Vps complex to coordinate autophagosome maturation and endocytic trafficking . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 776 – 787 ( 2008 ) . 225 . Sun , Q . , Westphal , W . , Wong , K . N . , Tan , I . & Zhong , Q . Rubicon controls endosome maturation as a Rab7 effector . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 19338 – 19343 ( 2010 ) . 226 . Sun , Q . et al . The RUN domain of rubicon is important for hVps34 binding , lipid kinase inhibition , and autophagy suppression . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 185 – 191 ( 2011 ) . Acknowledgements Work in the laboratory of B . V . is supported by PTEN Research , Cancer Research UK ( C23338 / A25722 ) , the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council ( BB / I007806 / 1 , BB / M013278 / 1 and BB / R017972 / 1 ) and the UK NIHR University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre . Y . P . has been supported by a long - term EMBO fellowship ( ALTF 1227 - 2014 ) and an EU Marie Skłodowska - Curie fellowship ( 656778 ) . The authors thank R . Madsen , M . Graupera and K . Okkenhaug for excellent feedback on the manuscript . Author contributions B . B . , Y . P . and B . V . contributed equally to writing the article and to the review and editing of the manuscript before submission . Competing interests B . V . is a consultant for Karus Therapeutics ( Oxford , UK ) , iOnctura ( Geneva , Switzerland ) and Venthera ( Palo Alto , CA , USA ) and has received speaker fees from Gilead . The other authors declare no conflict of interest . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Reviewer information Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology thanks V . Haucke , and other anonymous reviewer ( s ) , for their contribution to the peer review of this work . Supplementary information Supplementary information is available for this paper at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 019 - 0129 - z . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 534 | SePTemBeR 2019 | volume 20