Towards an Ontology - based Scientific Knowledge Infrastructure for Information Systems Research Poster paper Constantin Houy , Sven Kaiser , Peter Fettke , Peter Loos Institute for Information Systems ( IWi ) at the DFKI and Saarland University Saarbrücken , Germany Email : { constantin . houy , sven . kaiser , peter . fettke , peter . loos } @ iwi . dfki . de Abstract — Every scientific discipline aims at accumulating and developing scientific knowledge in order to develop its theoretical foundations . Scientific knowledge is typically shared and communicated by means of articles published in journals , conference proceedings or books printed on paper or in electronic form . As researchers are typically not interested in articles but their specific content such as concepts , theories or facts , the full potential of electronic knowledge availability has not fully been tapped . Against this background , Hars developed a conceptual model of a general scientific knowledge infrastructure supporting a more adequate electronic provision of knowledge which is typically requested by scholars . In this contribution , the development of a scientific knowledge infra - structure which has been extended to specific needs of Infor - mation Systems research using OWL - DL is presented . Keywords — Scientific Knowledge Infrastructure , Ontology , OWL , Information Systems Research , Theory Development I . I NTRODUCTION The creation , accumulation and evaluation of scientific knowledge is one of the most important objectives of every research discipline and an important indicator for a disci - pline’s maturity and stability , hence , also for the field of Information Systems ( IS ) research . IS research focuses on investigating and designing information systems in order to create and develop reliable scientific knowledge about them [ 1 ] . To communicate scientific knowledge , scholars typically present their results in paper - based or meanwhile in electro - nically available research outlets such as journal articles , conference proceedings or books . However , the infrastruc - ture for scientific communication is changing and research results are increasingly presented in online knowledge infra - structures such as digital libraries , online encyclopedias or collaborative knowledge sharing environments . In his contri - bution “Designing Scientific Knowledge Infrastructures : The Contribution of Epistemology” [ 2 ] and his habilitation thesis [ 3 ] , Hars investigated and developed an appropriate structure for representing scientific knowledge and making it electro - nically accessible in order to tap the full potential of infor - mation technology and the Internet in this context . This goal has also been discussed in the context of e - Science [ 4 ] or Science 2 . 0 [ 5 ] . Hars’ goal is motivated by the fact that even in most online infrastructures , scientific knowledge is still organised around articles which have a title , abstract , key - words , a main body of the text and references [ 2 ] . However , researchers are typically requesting the content presented in articles such as concepts , statements , empirical results , facts or results from testing hypotheses . In order to identify key elements which should be represented in an electronically available scientific knowledge infrastructure ( SKI ) , in [ 2 ] different conceptualizations of scientific knowledge provided by central epistemological works are investigated . Based on this , a conceptual model of scientific knowledge is offered which , however , remains rather generic . For concrete usage , this model has to be further adapted and apropriately imple - mented . This has already been done , e . g . in the context of environmental modeling using an OWL - DL ontology as the general utility of ontologies in this context has been clearly acknowledged [ 6 ] . Moreover , ontology - based knowledge in - frastructures exist for other fields of research , like medicine . However , to our best knowledge , no SKI instantiation con - sidering the specific requirements of IS research based on an OWL ontology has been presented so far . II . T OWARDS A N O NTOLOGY - B ASED S CIENTIFIC K NOWLEDGE I NFRASTRUCTURE FOR IS RESEARCH In general , it is the goal of this research to provide an extensible SKI for the documentation of scientific know - ledge in IS research , especially for the identification and visualization of patterns in empirical data , related to a better understanding and prediction of IS phenomena and as well as to a better design of IS . Moreover , the specific advantages of ontologies such as reasoning , consistency checking , know - ledge mapping and consolidation etc . were of special interest for this research . Therefore , an adaption of Hars’ general SKI regarding the specific requirements of design - oriented IS research has been developed and implemented using OWL - DL . The adaption of the SKI has been driven towards the common understanding of the “Nature of Theory in Information Systems” formulated by Gregor in MISQ [ 7 ] comprising “common types” of theory for the specification and explanation of law - like relationships between well - de - fined constructs , related predictions as well as theory for design and action . Such so called design theories support the design of IS artefacts by formulating and representing pre - scriptive or normative statements ( means - end - relationships ) which are empirically grounded , e . g . technological rules or technical norms . The generic framework was extended by several specific features of IS research such as typical empi - rical research methods in IS research according to [ 8 ] or the level of evidence of a certain statement according to [ 9 ] . Our extended SKI framework is visualized in figure 1 . Classes extending of the underlying framework by Hars have been highlighted in grey . Fig . 1 . Adapted Scientific Knowledge Infrastucture for IS research based on Hars’ framework [ 2 ] In order to investigate the feasibility and usefulness of the adapted framework and its implementation in OWL - DL for the transparent documentation of patterns in empirical data , design - relevant empirical knowledge concerning the relation - ships between conceptual model understandability and differ - ent model characteristics , e . g . model complexity or modeling language , from more than 40 empirical contributions [ 10 ] has been manually documented . The contained data can signifi - cantly support the identification of as - yet - unknown relation - ships for theory development using reasoning or visualization functionalities . Figure 2 visualizes an exemplary search for and analysis of data elements using OntoGraf in Protégé . Fig . 2 . Exemplary data search using OntoGraf III . C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK The development of an ontology - based SKI for IS research turned out to be an interesting approach which is conjectured to significantly support IS theory development . So far , we have used the developed infrastructure for manual documentation of empirical knowledge , which is a time - consuming endeavor . In the future , the usage of Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) techniques supporting ( semi - ) automated identification and maintenance of data elements in the ontology are planned . REFERENCES [ 1 ] A . R . Hevner , S . T . March , J . Park , and S . Ram , " Design Science in In - formation Systems Research , " MIS Quarterly , vol . 28 , pp . 75 - 105 , 2004 . [ 2 ] A . Hars , " Designing Scientific Knowledge Infrastructures : The Contribution of Epistemology , " Information Systems Frontiers , vol . 3 , pp . 63 - 73 , Mar 2001 . [ 3 ] A . Hars , From Publishing to Knowledge Networks . Reinventing Online Knowledge Infrastructures . Berlin : Springer , 2003 . [ 4 ] T . Hey and A . E . Trefethen , " Cyberinfrastructure for e - Science , " Science vol . 308 , pp . 817 - 821 , 2005 . [ 5 ] B . Shneiderman , " Science 2 . 0 , " Science , vol . 319 , pp . 1349 - 1350 , 2008 . [ 6 ] B . Brodaric and M . Gahegan , " Ontology Use for Semantic e - Science , " Semantic Web , vol . 1 , pp . 149 - 153 , 2010 . [ 7 ] S . Gregor , " The Nature of Theory in Information Systems , " MIS Quarterly , vol . 30 , pp . 611 - 642 , 2006 . [ 8 ] W . J . Orlikowski and J . J . Baroudi , " Studying Information Technology in Organizations : Research Approaches and Assumptions , " Information Systems Research , vol . 2 , pp . 1 - 28 , 1991 . [ 9 ] P . Fettke , C . Houy , and P . Loos , " On the Relevance of Design Knowledge for Design - Oriented Business and Information Systems Engineering , " BISE , vol . 2 , pp . 347 - 358 , 2010 . [ 10 ] C . Houy , P . Fettke , and P . Loos , " Understanding understandability of conceptual models : What are we actually talking about ? , " in : Conceptual Modeling – ER 2012 , LNCS 7532 , P . Atzeni , D . Cheung , and S . Ram , Eds . , Berlin : Springer , 2012 , pp . 64 - 77 .