Developmental Cell 11 , 629 – 640 , November , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Inc . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2006 . 09 . 002 Myosin - 1c Couples Assembling Actin to Membranes to Drive Compensatory Endocytosis Anna M . Sokac , 1 , 2 , 4 Cataldo Schietroma , 3 Cameron B . Gundersen , 3 and William M . Bement 1 , 2 , * 1 Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology and 2 Department of Zoology University of Wisconsin - Madison Madison , Wisconsin 53706 3 Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology David Geffen UCLA School of Medicine University of California , Los Angeles Los Angeles , California 90095 Summary Compensatory endocytosis follows regulated exocy - tosis in cells ranging from eggs to neurons , but the means by which it is accomplished are unclear . In Xenopus eggs , compensatory endocytosis is driven by dynamic coats of assembling actin that surround and compress exocytosing cortical granules ( CGs ) . We have identiﬁed Xenopus laevi s myosin - 1c ( Xl Myo1c ) as a myosin that is upregulated by poly - adenylation during meiotic maturation , the develop - mental interval that prepares eggs for fertilization and regulated CG exocytosis . Upon calcium - induced exocytosis , Xl Myo1c is recruited to exocytosing CG membranes where actin coats then assemble . When Xl Myo1c function is disrupted , actin coats assemble , but dynamic actin ﬁlaments are uncoupled from the exocytosing CG membranes such that coats do not compress , and compensatory endocytosis fails . Re - markably , there is also an increase in polymerized ac - tin at membranes throughout the cell . We conclude that Xl Myo1c couples polymerizing actin to mem - branes and so mediates force production during com - pensatory endocytosis . Introduction Dynamic interactions between the actin cytoskeleton and cellular membranes are required for essential pro - cesses including endo - and exocytosis , cell locomotion , cell division , and vesicle motility . Force production is inherent to these processes , and intense effort has been expended to identify the means by which the actin cytoskeleton exerts force on membrane compartments . Two general mechanisms have been described : force exerted on membranes by actin assembly , exempliﬁed by actin polymerization at the plasma membrane ( PM ) of the leading edge of crawling cells ( Welch and Mullins , 2002 ) , and force exerted via myosin - based translocation of actin - associated membranes , exempliﬁed by myosin - 2 - powered PM ingression during cytokinesis ( Yumura and Uyeda , 2003 ) . The unconventional myosins ( classes 1 and 3 – 18 ) have attracted considerable attention as potential motors for actin - dependent force production on membranes because these motors typically bind mem - branes in vitro and associate with membrane compart - ments in vivo ( Sokac and Bement , 2000 ) . Furthermore , disrupting the function of speciﬁc unconventional myo - sins can alter the distribution or motility of their asso - ciated membrane compartments ( e . g . , Doberstein et al . , 1993 ) . Myosins - 1 are the most abundant and diverse class of unconventional myosins . In vertebrates , they are repre - sented by four distinct subclasses ( Coluccio , 1997 ) and have been implicated in endocytosis ( Soldati , 2003 ) and exocytosis ( Bose et al . , 2002 ) . But how myosins - 1 con - tribute to these processes in vertebrates is unknown . While the textbook model of unconventional myosins as membrane transport motors predicts that they carry endosomes and secretory compartments along actin ﬁl - aments ( F - actin ) , recent work in budding yeast suggests that myosins - 1 can participate in endocytosis both by promoting actin assembly and by transport of F - actin ( Sun et al . , 2006 ) . To understand the roles played by myosins - 1 in verte - brate cells , we have analyzed their expression and func - tion during activation of Xenopus laevis eggs . Egg activation in Xenopus and other vertebrate and inverte - brate species is triggered at fertilization by an increase in intracellular free calcium ( [ Ca 2 + ] i ) and entails a series of rapid , essential events that depend on F - actin / mem - brane interactions . These include cortical contraction , required for pronuclear fusion ( Elinson , 1977 ) , cortical granule ( CG ) exocytosis , required for the slow block to polyspermy ( Wolf , 1974 ) , assembly of dynamic actin coats around exocytosing CGs , required for compensa - tory endocytosis ( Sokac et al . , 2003 ) , and assembly of actin comets ( Taunton et al . , 2000 ) . The Xenopus system is ideal for analysis of myosin function during egg activa - tion in that the events of fertilization can be mimicked by artiﬁcial elevation of [ Ca 2 + ] i , exogenous constructs can be expressed by microinjection of mRNA , and four - dimensional ( 4D ) imaging permits detailed analysis of cytoskeletal dynamics with exceptional clarity ( Sokac et al . , 2003 ) . Using an expression screen , we identify Xenopus Myosin - 1c ( Xl Myo1c ; formerly known as myosin - 1 b or myr 2 ) as a myosin speciﬁcally upregulated by polyadenylation during meiotic maturation , the devel - opmental interval that prepares oocytes for fertilization . We show that Xl Myo1c is rapidly recruited to exocytos - ing CGs and that disruption of Xl Myo1c function perturbs several events of egg activation , including compensatory endocytosis . Surprisingly , the primary phenotype underlying these egg activation defects is misdirected actin assembly whereby dynamic actin is uncoupled from the appropriate membrane compart - ments . Thus , rather than acting as a transporter , Xl Myo1c instead links polymerizing actin to mem - branes such that actin assembly exerts force on the membranes . * Correspondence : wmbement @ wisc . edu 4 Present address : Department of Molecular Biology , Princeton Uni - versity , Washington Road , Princeton , NJ 08544 . Results Identiﬁcation and Expression of Xenopus Myosins Xenopus oogenesis proceeds through six deﬁned growth stages , followed by progesterone - triggered mei - otic maturation to convert the stage 6 oocyte into the fertilizable egg , followed by calcium - dependent egg ac - tivation at fertilization . Oogenesis occurs over the course of months , meiotic maturation takes 3 – 12 hr , and activation commences within seconds of sperm - induced calcium elevation . To identify myosins that might participate in Xenopus egg activation , we screened by degenerate polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) ( Bement et al . , 1994 ) and ampliﬁed small frag - ments of 12 different myosins , representing seven myo - sin classes ( see Experimental Procedures ) . Six myosins ( Myosin - 1c , 1e , 2a , 3 , 9b , and 10 ) were selected for am - pliﬁcation of larger fragments by using exact - match primers paired to downstream degenerate primers . The fragments thus obtained , as well as g - actin , were used to probe poly ( A ) + RNA blots of stage 1 – 6 oocytes as well as meiotically mature eggs . Most myosins and g - actin showed high expression in early oogenesis ( stages 1 – 3 ) , decreasing expression up to stage 6 , and a sharp decline during meiotic maturation ( Figure 1A ) . This decrease presumably reﬂects the de - adenylation of most mRNAs during meiotic maturation ( Liu and Smith , 1994 ) . The sole exception to this pattern was Xenopus Myosin - 1c ( Xl Myo1c ) : while the general de - crease during oogenesis was observed , poly ( A ) + levels increased during meiotic maturation such that eggs have more Xl Myo1c poly ( A ) + RNA than stage 6 oocytes ( Figure 1A ) . Xl Myo1c Is Upregulated by Polyadenlyation during Meiotic Maturation The upregulation of Xl Myo1c poly ( A ) + RNA during meiotic maturation could result from selective polyade - nylation , an exciting possibility in that such regulation is normally restricted to mRNAs encoding proteins re - quired for meiotic maturation and early development ( Sheets et al . , 1994 ; Robbie et al . , 1995 ) . To test this di - rectly , both total RNA and poly ( A ) + RNA were isolated from stage 6 oocytes and meiotically mature eggs and then probed for Xl Myo1c , g - actin , or Xl Myo2a . There was no apparent change in the levels of total RNA be - tween stage 6 oocytes and meiotically mature eggs for Xl Myo2a , Xl Myo1c , or g - actin ( Figure 1B ) . In contrast , both Xl Myo2a and g - actin poly ( A ) + RNA levels de - creased upon meiotic maturation , while Xl Myo1c Figure 1 . Xl Myo1c Is Speciﬁcally Upregu - lated by Polyadenylation during Meiotic Maturation ( A ) Poly ( A ) + northern blots of six myosins and g - actin from the six stages of oogenesis ( 1 – 6 ; ‘‘Oogenesis’’ ) and the egg following meiotic maturation ( E ; ‘‘MM’’ ) . Levels of Xl Myo1c Poly ( A ) + RNA increase during meiotic matu - ration , while levels forallof the othermyosins and g - actin sharply decrease during the same interval ( compare 6 to E ) . Equal amounts of RNA were loaded in each lane . ( B ) Poly ( A ) + and total RNA before ( 6 ) and after ( E ) meiotic maturation for Xl Myo1c , Xl Myo2a , and g - actin . Total RNA levels do not change for any message , while poly ( A ) + levels drop sharply for Xl Myo2a and g - actin . In contrast , poly ( A ) + levels increase for Xl Myo1c . Thirty oocyte equivalents of RNA were loaded for each lane . ( C ) Immunoblot comparison of protein levels before ( 6 ) and after ( E ) meiotic maturation for Xl Myo1c , Xl Myo2a , and g - actin . Xl Myo1c levels increase during meiotic maturation , while those of Xl Myo2a and g - actin do not . ( D ) The complete coding sequence for Xl Myo1c . The ATP - binding region ( dark underline ) and actin - binding region ( dashed underline ) are indicated , as are the three IQ motifs ( dark underline , gray text ) . ( E ) Schematic diagram of Xl Myo1c . ( F ) Alternative 3 0 UTRs for Xl Myo1c . Both 3 0 UTRs include nuclear polyadenylation sig - nals ( PolyA ) but only Xl Myo1c ( A ) has the cy - toplasmic polyadenylation element ( CPE ) necessary to direct polyadenylation during meiotic maturation . Developmental Cell 630 poly ( A ) + RNA levels increased , conﬁrming that the latter is selectively polyadenylated . Immunoblotting showed that Xl Myo1c protein levels concomitantly increased during meiotic maturation , but Xl Myo2a and g - actin levels did not ( Figure 1C ) . The complete Xl Myo1c coding sequence was ob - tained by rapid ampliﬁcation of cDNA ends ( RACE ) ( Figure 1D ) . Its deduced primary structure predicts all of the expected features of a myosin - 1c : an N - terminal ‘‘head’’ with the actin and ATP - binding motor domain ( Reizes et al . , 1994 ) , a ‘‘neck’’ comprised of three IQ mo - tifs that bind calmodulin ( Zhu et al . , 1998 ; Tang et al . , 2002 ) , and a highly basic ( pI = 10 . 4 ) C - terminal ‘‘tail’’ that directs membrane interaction ( Tang et al . , 2002 ) ( Figures 1D and 1E ) . In addition , two alternative 3 0 untranslated regions ( UTRs ) were identiﬁed , one of which contains a cytoplasmic polyadenylation element ( Figure 1F ) that could account for the polyadenylation of Xl Myo1c during meiotic maturation ( Gray and Wick - ens , 1998 ) . Xl Myo1c Localizes to the PM and to Exocytosing CGs upon Egg Activation To characterize the subcellular distribution of Xl Myo1c , an eGFP - Xl Myo1c fusion was generated and expressed in oocytes and eggs . In both oocytes and eggs , confocal analysis of ﬁxed samples showed that eGFP - Xl Myo1c localizes to the PM , coincident with cortical F - actin ( Figure 2A ) . After calcium ionophore - induced activation , eGFP - Xl Myo1c moved to some CGs , as revealed by eGFP - Xl Myo1c on spherical compartments of w 1 – 3 m m diameter immediately beneath the PM ( Figures 2A and 2B ) . These CGs were also encased by coats of F - actin , which only form around exocytosing CGs ( Sokac et al . , 2003 ) . Z views of prick - activated eggs indi - cated that Xl Myo1c was recruited to exocytosing CGs before actin coats formed ( Figure 2B ) . That is , pricking induces a wave of [ Ca 2 + ] i increase and , therefore , a wave of CG exocytosis that emanates from the prick site . In regions far from the prick site , where exocytosis had just began upon ﬁxation , CGs with Xl Myo1c , but not actin , were observed . However , in regions close to the prick site , where the exocytosis stimulus had been pres - ent longer , CGs were surrounded by both Xl Myo1c and actin . In intermediate areas , Xl Myo1c surrounded CGs , while actin coats tended to only partially encase these compartments ( Figure 2B ) . To conﬁrm the localization results obtained from ﬁxed samples expressing exogenous Xl Myo1c , two addi - tional approaches were employed . First , the distribution of endogenous Xl Myo1c was assessed in activated eggs with an anti - mammalian myosin - 1c antibody ( Wagner et al . , 1992 ) . Consistent with the above results , endogenous Xl Myo1c localized to both the PM and exo - cytosing CGs ( Figure 2C ) . Second , oocytes were frac - tionated to generate a cortical pellet comprised of the PM and CGs and a supernatant comprised of the cyto - plasm and other membrane compartments ( Gundersen et al . , 2002 ) . Immunoblotting showed that both exoge - nous and endogenous Xl Myo1c associated with the cor - tical fraction , along with markers for the PM and CGs ( Figure 2D ) . EGFP - Xl Myo1c distribution was next analyzed in living cells activated by photolysis of caged inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphoshpate ( IP 3 ) . Brieﬂy , eggs expressing eGFP - Xl Myo1c were subjected to IP 3 uncaging in the presence of extracellular Texas red dextran ( TR - dextran ) , which reveals CG exocytosis by ﬁlling the compartments created upon CG - PM fusion ( Sokac et al . , 2003 ) . Time - lapse confocal imaging in a single optical plane revealed that eGFP - Xl Myo1c is rapidly re - cruited to exocytosing CGs ( within 0 . 15 s 6 0 . 17 s of dextran ; mean 6 SEM ) ( Figures 2E and 2F ; see Movie S1 ) , whereas actin is recruited later ( Sokac et al . , 2003 ; see also below ) . Exocytosing CGs surrounded by eGFP - Xl Myo1c shrank over time , as observed in both en face views ( Figure 2E ) and z views ( Figure 2F ) . To di - rectly conﬁrm that Xl Myo1c is recruited to CGs before actin , localization of both eGFP - Xl Myo1c and ﬂuores - cent actin were monitored simultaneously . Consistent with the above ﬁndings , Xl Myo1c was invariably re - cruited before actin ( Figure 2G ) . We conclude that in resting eggs Xl Myo1c localizes to the PM , and upon egg activation Xl Myo1c is rapidly recruited to exocytos - ing CGs before actin coats assemble . Contributions of Xl Myo1c Domains to Localization Unconventional myosins are directed to their sites of lo - calization via their tails ( Sokac and Bement , 2000 ) . Thus , isolated tail fragments have been widely used as domi - nant negatives for a variety of unconventional myosins including myosin - 1c ( Bose et al . , 2002 ) . We therefore generated a series of constructs encoding eGFP fused to either the head and IQ domains ( HIQ ) , the IQ domains alone ( IQ ) , the IQ domains and the tail ( IQT ) , or the tail alone ( T ) and assayed their distribution in oocytes , eggs , and activated eggs ( Figure 3A ) . In oocytes and eggs , eGFP - HIQ and eGFP - IQ were cytoplasmic , while eGFP - IQT and eGFP - T localized to the PM ( data not shown ) . Following activation , eGFP - HIQ remained cyto - plasmic , while eGFP - IQT and eGFP - T rapidly redistrib - uted to some CGs , similar to full - length Xl Myo1c ( Figure 3B ) . Interestingly , eGFP - IQ was also recruited to CG compartments after activation , although the high cytoplasmic signal made this recruitment harder to dis - cern than that of eGFP - IQT or eGFP - T ( Figure 3B ) . Thus , the tail is sufﬁcient to direct the localization of Xl Myo1c , but the IQ domains also target to exocytosing CGs . Disruption of Xl Myo1c Perturbs Cortical Contraction , CG Exocytosis , Actin Coat Compression , and Results in Unrestrained Actin Assembly Based on the above results , the IQT construct was em - ployed to disrupt Xl Myo1c function . Coexpression of IQT with GFP - HIQT displaced the latter from the PM in a concentration - dependent manner ( Figures 4A and 4B ) , as expected if this construct competes with full - length Xl Myo1c for membrane binding sites . To assess the effects of IQT on the events of egg activation , oocytes were allowed to express IQT overnight , while undergoing progesterone - induced meiotic maturation . IQT had no apparent effect on meiotic maturation rela - tive to either uninjected or HIQT - injected controls ( Fig - ures 4C and 4D ) , suggesting that IQT did not grossly per - turb the cortical F - actin cytoskeleton , which is required for proper meiotic maturation ( Gard et al . , 1995 ) . IQT did result in speciﬁc changes in cortical F - actin , however , in that oocytes expressing IQT consistently had longer Myosin - 1c in Exocytosis and Endocytosis 631 microvilli than either uninjected or HIQT - injected con - trols ( Figure 4E ) . IQT expression induced two phenotypes that were not evident until eggs were artiﬁcially activated with calcium ionophore . First , cortical contraction was strongly suppressed ( Figures 4F and 4G ) . This effect was con - centration dependent and could be rescued by coex - pression of HIQT , demonstrating its speciﬁcity . Second , fertilization envelope elevation , a marker for CG exocy - tosis , was slower in eggs expressing IQT ( Figure 4H ) . Figure 2 . Xl Myo1c Is Recruited to Exocytosing CGs upon Egg Activation ( A ) Single plane imagesof eGFP - Xl Myo1c ( green ) and F - actin ( red ) in oocytes , eggs , and activated eggs . Surface views show Xl Myo1c atthe PM overlying F - actin microvilli . Upon egg activation , views just below the PM show Xl Myo1c is recruited to exocytosing CGs , along with actin . ( B ) Z sections of a prick - activated egg . In regions far from the prick site , Xl Myo1c completely surrounds CGs that do not yet have actin coats . At intermediate distances from the prick site , exocytosing CGs are partially enclosed by actin coats ( arrowheads ) . Near the prick site , exocytosing CGs are completely enclosed by actin coats . ( C ) Z sections of endogenous Xl Myo1c ( red ; 1C ) and F - actin ( green ; FA ) in activated eggs . Xl Myo1c localizes to the PM and exocytosing CGs . ( D ) Immunoblot analysis of cortical ( pel ) and cytoplasmic ( sup ) fractions from Xenopus oocytes . Cortical fractions are enriched in cell - surface proteins and CG lectins , while most of the actin is cytoplasmic . Both endogenous and exogenous Xl Myo1c are enriched in the cortical fraction . ( E ) Time - lapseimagesfromasingleplanejustbeneaththePM , showingeGFP - Xl Myo1c ( green ) beforeandaftereggactivationbyIP 3 uncagingin the presence of extracellular TR - dextran ( red ) to reveal exocytosing CGs . Within 3 s of uncaging , CGs exocytose ( arrowhead ) , become sur - rounded by eGFP - Xl Myo1c , and are then compressed . See Movie S1 . ( F ) Z section , time - lapse images of eGFP - Xl Myo1c recruitment to exocytosing CGs that are then compressed . ( G ) Single plane time - lapse imagesshowing eGFP - Xl Myo1c ( green ) andactin ( red ) beforeand afteractivationby IP 3 uncaging . eGFP - Xl Myo1cis recruited before actin . Time is in min : sec ; bars are 5 m m . Developmental Cell 632 Again , this phenotype was both concentration depen - dent and rescued by HIQT coexpression . To then examine the effects of IQT on CG exocytosis as well as constitutive exocytosis , a biochemical ap - proach was taken ( Gundersen et al . , 2002 ) . Two - day ex - pression of IQT completely suppressed CG exocytosis in oocytes and eggs challenged with phorbol 12 - myris - tate 13 - acetate ( PMA ) and eggs challenged with iono - phore ( Figure 4I ) . Complete suppression of exocytosis following 2 day expression of IQT was not rescuable by HIQT coexpression , possibly because of the in - creased efﬁciency of IQT translation relative to the larger HIQT ( data not shown ) . Nevertheless , this phenotype was speciﬁc , in that 2 day expression of IQT had no ef - fect on constitutive exocytosis of either the PM Na + - K + ATPase or syntaxin - 1a ( Figure 4J ) . Since constitutive exocytosis in Xenopus oocytes is actin dependent ( e . g . , Colman et al . , 1981 ) , these results again demon - strate that IQT expression is neither simply toxic nor causing wholesale disruption of the actin cytoskeleton . In fact , we found that IQT expression actually pro - moted actin assembly . That is , treatment of Xenopus eggs with PMA results in small endosome propulsion via actin ‘‘comets , ’’ structures comprised of rapidly po - lymerizing actin ( Taunton et al . , 2000 ) . IQT increased the number of comets that formed in response to PMA treat - ment by more than 10 - fold relative to uninjected and HIQT - injected controls , while coexpression of HIQT with IQT sharply reduced comet number ( Figures 5A and 5B ) . Further , biochemical analysis conﬁrmed that IQT expression elevated the level of actin associated with the cortical fraction , and this elevation was reduced by coexpression of HIQT ( Figure 5C ) . To provide independent support for the effects of IQT on actin assembly , cortical contraction , and CG exocy - tosis , antisense morpholinos were employed ( Heasman et al . , 2000 ) . A morpholino complementary to the 5 0 UTR of Xl Myo1c resulted in a 59 % reduction in Xl Myo1c pro - tein relative to a ﬁve base mismatch control morpholino ( Figure 6A ) . As with IQT expression , the Xl Myo1c mor - pholino suppressed cortical contraction ( Figure 6B ) , in - creased the number of actin comets observed following PMA treatment ( Figure 6C ) , and suppressed CG exocy - tosis ( Figure 6D ) . The microvilli and comet phenotypes , as well as the increased cortical actin levels , suggest that actin as - sembly goes unrestrained when Xl Myo1c is disrupted . This ectopic actin may perturb some events of egg acti - vation , and if so , then inhibiting actin assembly should rescue the Xl Myo1c phenotypes . Obviously , this ap - proach cannot be used for comet formation , cortical contraction , or actin coat assembly since these are all critically dependent on F - actin . However , it can be used to test CG exocytosis , which is actin independent in Xenopus oocytes and eggs ( Sokac et al . , 2003 ) . In - deed , the effects of IQT on CG exocytosis were rescued by preincubating cells with cytochalasin D ( Figure 6E ) . Thus , unrestrained actin assembly is likely a primary cause of the egg - activation defects observed following Xl Myo1c disruption . Xl Myo1c Expression Uncouples Actin Coats from Exocytosing CG Membranes The consequences of Xl Myo1c disruption were next an - alyzed in more detail by time - lapse confocal microscopy of eggs injected with Alexa488 - globular - actin ( G - actin ) and either IQT or , as a control , HIQT . To ensure that exo - cytosis was not completely inhibited , IQT and HIQT were expressed overnight only . Following IP 3 uncaging , CGs rapidly exocytosed in HIQT - expressing cells , and be - came surrounded by actin coats that then compressed ( Figure 7A ; see Movie S2 ) . IQT - expressing cells also un - derwent CG exocytosis following IP 3 uncaging . How - ever , consistent with the fertilization envelope elevation Figure 3 . Neck and Tail Constructs of Xl Myo1c Are Recruited to Exocytosing CGs ( A ) Schematic diagram of eGFP - tagged Xl Myo1c constructs . ( B ) Time - lapse images , from a single plane just below the PM , showing eGFP - HIQ , eGFP - IQT , eGFP - T , and eGFP - IQ before and after egg activation by IP 3 uncaging . While eGFP - HIQ remains cytoplasmic following activation , eGFP - IQT , eGFP - T , and eGFP - IQ are recruited to exocytosing CGs ( arrow - heads ) . Time is in min : sec ; bar is 5 m m . Myosin - 1c in Exocytosis and Endocytosis 633 results , exocytosis was slower than in HIQT - expressing cells , based on both the increased time elapsed be - tween uncaging and appearance of TR - dextran ( Figure 7A ; see Movie S3 ) and the reduced speed with which dextran signal reached its peak in exocytosing CGs ( HIQT 2 . 2 6 0 . 15 s , IQT 4 . 2 6 0 . 39 s ; mean 6 SEM ; p < 0 . 05 ) . Actin coats assembled around exocy - tosing CGs in IQT - expressing cells and appeared at Figure 5 . Xl Myo1c Disruption by Dominant - Negative IQT Expression Leads to Unre - strained Actin Assembly ( A ) Singleplanetime - lapseimagesofoocytes injected with either HIQT or IQT and Alexa488 - G - actin and then treated with PMA . F - actin comets ( arrowheads ) are nu - merous in the IQT but not the HIQT - express - ing oocytes . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of the average number of comets appearing in PMA - treated oocytes . IQTsigniﬁcantlyincreases cometnumberrel - ative to controls , while coexpression of IQT withHIQTsharplyreducesthiseffect . Results are mean 6 SEM ; n = 3 independent experi - ments . Asterisk indicates p < 0 . 05 . ( C ) Immunoblot of actin in cortical ( P ) and cytoplasmic ( S ) fractions shows that IQT increases levels of actin associated with the cortical fraction . This effect is rescued by co - expression of IQT with HIQT . Bars are 10 m m . Figure 4 . Xl Myo1c Disruption by Dominant - Negative IQT Expression Perturbs Actin / Membrane Events of Egg Activation ( A ) Single plane images of eGFP - HIQT signal at the PM showing ﬂuorescence decreases with increasing amounts of IQT coexpres - sion . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of decreasing eGFP - HIQT signal at the PM with coexpression of IQT . Results are mean 6 SEM ; n = 3 independent experiments . Asterisks indicate p < 0 . 05 . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of oocytes that mature to eggs following progesterone treatment . Ex - pression of IQT has no effect on meiotic mat - uration relative to controls . ( D ) Images of propidium - iodide - stained mei - otic spindle chromosomes show that IQT ex - pression does not impair spindle rotation during meiotic maturation in that chromo - somes are found in classic rosette patterns , parallel to the PM . ( E ) ZsectionsofPMshowingF - actininmicro - villi . IQT expression results in microvilli that are longer than in control cells . ( F ) Images showing that IQT suppresses cor - tical contraction in eggs . Calcium ionophore ( + Iono . ) triggers movement of pigment to animal pole in uninjected ( No inj . ) and HIQT - injected cells but not in IQT - injected cells . Coexpression of HIQT rescues the effects of IQT . ( G ) Quantiﬁcation of cortical contraction in eggs . The effects of IQT are dose dependent and are rescued by coexpression of HIQT . Results are mean 6 SEM ; n = 3 independent experiments . Asterisks indicate p < 0 . 05 . ( H ) Quantiﬁcation of oocytes with fertilization envelopes 2 min after calcium ionophore treatment . IQT expression slows exocytosis in a dose - dependent manner , and this slowing is rescued by coexpression of HIQT . Results are mean 6 SEM , n = 3 independent experiments . Asterisks indicate p < 0 . 05 . ( I ) Coomassie - stained gels showing 2 day expression of IQT completely suppresses CG exocytosis in oocytes treated with PMA or eggs treated with PMA or calcium ionophore . Each lane represents CG lectin released from a single oocyte in uninjected ( No inj . ) and IQT - injected ( IQT ) cells . ( J ) Immunoblots of cortical ( P ) and cytoplasmic ( S ) fractions showing IQT does not inhibit constitutive exocytosis of Na + - K + ATPase or syntaxin - 1 . While IQT had no effect on exocytosis of these proteins at the PM relative to uninjected controls , progesterone treatment sharply suppressed their exocytosis . Developmental Cell 634 least as robust as those in HIQT - expressing cells ( Figure 7A ) . However , coats in IQT - expressing cells failed to compress over time and eventually dissipated . Furthermore , compression of exocytosing CGs was se - verely compromised ( 89 . 9 % 6 2 . 8 % in HIQT cells com - pressed to at least half their initial diameter within 1 min versus 13 . 9 % 6 5 . 6 % in IQT cells ; p < 0 . 05 ) . Conse - quently , many exocytosing CGs were not retrieved in IQT - expressing cells ( Figure 7A ; see Movie S3 ) . Cells were then analyzed by 4D imaging , which has the advantage of allowing visualization of dynamic pro - cesses that occur in the z dimension such as actin coat assembly and compression ( Sokac et al . , 2003 ) . Apical views showed that in HIQT - expressing cells the dilated fusion pores of exocytosing CGs were rapidly covered over with actin ( data not shown , but see Sokac et al . , 2003 ) , whereas in IQT - expressing cells , the fusion pores remained open ( Figure 7B ; see Movie S4 ) . Similarly , basal views showed that actin coats in HIQT - expressing cells spread over the entire cytoplasmic surface of exo - cytosing CGs ( Figure 7C ; see Movie S6 ) , while in IQT - ex - pressing cells , most coats failed to fully enclose the exo - cytosing CGs ( Figures 7B and 7C ; see Movie S5 ) . Rather , the coats started to form and extend into the cytoplasm but remained separated from exocytosing CGs and did not track closely along their surface ( Figure 7C ; see Movie S7 ) . Tilt views of the underside of the PM showed actin ﬁngers extending from the PM into the cytoplasm nearexocytosingCGsinIQT - expressingcells ( Figure7D ; seeMovieS8 ) . Suchﬁngersgrewandshrankbutfailedto completely enclose the CGs . The partially enclosed CGs were often squeezed to one side but were not com - pressed , even after many minutes ( Figure 7D ) . Z views further supported the notion that Xl Myo1c tethers assembling actin coats to exocytosing CGs . In HIQT - expressing cells , the coats extended rapidly down either side of exocytosing CGs , enclosed them , and compressed upward and inward ( Figure 7E ; see Movie S9 ) . In contrast , in IQT - expressing cells , actin coats began to enclose exocytosing CGs and then shrank back , leaving the exocytosed CGs stranded beneath the PM ( Figure 7E ; see Movie S10 ) . Z views of dextran alone provided a potential explana - tion for the slowed exocytosis in IQT - expressing cells . Speciﬁcally , the necks of fusion pores in IQT - expressing cells were much narrower than in controls ( Figure 7F ) . These results suggest that IQT expression might some - how limit dilation of fusion pores following CG - PM fu - sion , perhaps due to unrestrained actin assembly at the pore region either prior to or coincident with CG exocytosis . Discussion The most remarkable ﬁndings of this study are that a de - velopmentally regulated myosin , Xl Myo1c , participates in egg activation by coupling dynamic actin to mem - branes and that when the function of this myosin is disrupted , unrestrained actin assembly results . Egg ac - tivation entails the rapid onset of several processes dependent on precisely coordinated actin - membrane interactions ( see Introduction ) . The consequences of Xl Myo1c disruption , thus , are numerous and severe : suppressed cortical contraction , superﬂuous actin comet formation , perturbed CG exocytosis , and im - paired compression and retrieval of those CGs that do exocytose . Of the above phenotypes , dissection of the last was themostinformative . Thatis , Xl Myo1cnormallylocalizes to exocytosing CGs . Following disruption of Xl Myo1c Figure 6 . Xl Myo1c Disruption by a Morpholino Perturbs Actin / Membrane Events of Egg Activation ( A ) Immunoblot showing a Xl Myo1c morpholino ( Xl Myo1c Morpho ) prevents the increase in Xl Myo1c protein during meiotic maturation , but the mismatch control morpholino ( Control Morpho ) does not . Tubulin was probed as a loading control . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of cortical contraction in eggs with Xl Myo1c morpholino or control morpholino . The Xl Myo1c morpholino suppresses cortical contraction . Results are mean 6 SEM ; n = 3 independent experiments . Asterisk indicates p < 0 . 05 . ( C ) Quantiﬁcationofactin cometsinoocyteswith Xl Myo1cmorpholino orcontrolmorpholino . Xl Myo1cmorpholino causesasigniﬁcantincrease in actin comets in oocytes . Results are mean 6 SEM ; n = 3 independent experiments . Asterisk indicates p < 0 . 05 . ( D ) Coomassie - stained gel showing the Xl Myo1c morpholino sharply reduces CG exocytosis in eggs . ( E ) Coomassie - stained gel showing that cytochalasin D ( CytoD ) rescues CG exocytosis in IQT - expressing cells ( IQT ) . Myosin - 1c in Exocytosis and Endocytosis 635 Figure 7 . Xl Myo1c Couples Dynamic Actin to Exocytosing CG Membranes ( A ) Time - lapse images from a single plane just below the PM of Alexa488 - G - actin ( green ) in eggs expressing either HIQT or IQT . Eggs were ac - tivatedbyIP 3 uncaginginthepresenceofextracellularTR - dextran ( red ) torevealexocytosingCGs . InHIQTeggs , actincoatsrapidlyencloseand compress exocytosingCGs ( arrowheads ) . SeeMovie S2 . In IQTeggs , CG exocytosis isslower , asjudged by delayinthe appearanceofdextran . Also , actin coats assemble around exocytosing CGs but fail to compress and eventually dissipate ( arrowheads ) . See Movie S3 . ( B ) Low magniﬁcation , 4Dtime - lapseimagesofeggsexpressing IQT . Uncaging triggers exocytosis ; however , CGsare not coveredover by actin coats on either the exoplasmic surface ( Apical ) or the cytoplasmic surface ( Basal ) . See Movies S4 ( Apical ) and S5 ( Basal ) . ( C ) High magniﬁcation , 4D time - lapse images of eggs expressing either HIQT or IQT . In HIQT eggs , basal views show that the actin coat tracks closely over the cytoplasmic surface of the exocytosing CG , eventually enclosing it . See Movie S6 . In IQT eggs , basal views show that the actin coat forms ( arrowhead ) but is separated from the cytoplasmic surface of the CG ( arrows ) . The coat eventually regresses . See Movie S7 . ( D ) High magniﬁcation , 4D time - lapse images of an egg expressing IQT . This tilted z view shows perturbed actin - coat assembly in the form of actinﬁngers ( arrowheads ) thatpartiallytrackalongtheCGbutthenextendintothecytoplasm . Theﬁngersgrow andshrinkovertime , buttheCG Developmental Cell 636 function , actin coats still assemble but fail to remain at - tached to the CG membrane . Thus , Xl Myo1c serves to tightly link the actin coat to the CG membrane , and this linkage is essential for CG compression and retrieval . How , exactly , might this work ? While it is possible that Xl Myo1c functions by myosin - based contraction in the classicbipolarﬁlamentsense , itispredictedtobemono - meric and to lack a second actin - binding site outside the motor domain and so is not well suited to this role . Further , the F - actin that comprises the coats is highly dynamic and nucleated by the Cdc42 - WASP - Arp2 / 3 pathway ( Sokac et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , it is presumably com - prised of branched networks with the plus ends of the ﬁl - aments facing the membrane . We therefore suggest that Xl Myo1c works by linking dynamic actin to the mem - brane of CGs and so transduces the force provided by polymerizing ﬁlaments to compress the membrane . Recent work on mammalian myosins - 1c supports the idea that this motor could play such a role . First , to efﬁ - ciently couple actin assembly to membrane compres - sion , Xl Myo1c would need to be ﬁrmly anchored to the CG membrane ; otherwise , its interaction with actively polymerizing actin might rip the myosin from the mem - brane surface . Consistent with this , the tail domain of mouse myosin - 1c binds tightly and speciﬁcally to PIP 2 - containing membranes ( Hokanson and Ostap , 2006 ) . Exocytosing CGs contain PIP 2 ( Sokac and Be - ment , 2006 ) , thus , the means for tight linkage between CG membranes and actin coats by Xl Myo1c is available in this system . Second , the ideal myosin transducer would entrain force production by the polymerizing actin ﬁlament to its own ATPase cycle . Consistent with this , release of ADP by rat myosin - 1c is thought to be strain - dependent ( Batters et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , myosins linked to an actively growing ﬁlament on CGs would preferentially move through the ATPase cycle as the ﬁl - ament pushed on the membrane and then rebind ﬁla - ments near the membrane , in a rachet - like manner . Con - versely , myosins linked to a nongrowing ﬁlament would preferentially hang on to the ﬁlament , ensuring some constant tethering between the membrane and assem - bling actin . Third , the optimal orientation for a motor that directs actin assembly - dependent force production on membrane compartments is parallel to the surface of the membrane compartment . Consistent with this , myo - sin - 1c releases calmodulin from IQ domains upon cal - cium increase ( Zhu et al . , 1998 ) , exposing other potential membrane - binding sites ( Swanljung - Collins and Collins , 1992 ; Barylko et al . , 2005 ; but see also Hokanson and Ostap , 2006 ) . Thus , it is thought that under conditions of elevated calcium , the motor domain is oriented paral - lel to the membrane ( Barylko et al . , 2005 ) . How can the above model account for the ﬁnding that Xl Myo1c disruption results in increased actin assembly , as revealed by biochemical fractionation and increased numbers of actin comets ? At least two , nonexclusive hypotheses suggest themselves . First , and most simply , by maintaining the plus ends of actin ﬁlaments in close contact with the membrane , Xl Myo1c might normally limit intercalation of actin monomer between the actin ﬁlament plus end and the membrane . Indeed , that im - mediate proximity to the membrane acts as a physical restraint on actin - ﬁlament growth is a basic assumption of a variety of models of actin - based cell locomotion ( Mogilner and Oster , 1996 ; Alberts and Odell , 2004 ) . Consequently , it is reasonable to imagine that increased distance between the ﬁlament plus ends and the mem - brane would permit greater access of monomer to the plus ends and , thus , faster assembly . Second , Xl Myo1c might normally antagonize factors that bind to growing ﬁlaments and promote further ﬁlament nucleation or growth , such as the Arp2 / 3 complex or other myosins - 1 that interact with CARMIL , a protein that binds to and inhibits capping protein ( Yang et al . , 2005 ) . Whether myosins - 1 in other contexts can restrain ac - tin assembly in vivo remains to be seen , but previous work is consistent with this possibility . Speciﬁcally , dis - ruption of myosins - 1 in Dictyostelium results in forma - tion of ectopic pseudopodia ( e . g . , Titus et al . , 1993 ) . Similarly , acute disruption of mammalian myosin - 1c in growth cones results in a rapid outgrowth of lamellapo - dia ( Diefenbach et al . , 2002 ) . Interestingly , the disruption of Xl Myo1c also impairs cortical contraction . The suppression of cortical con - traction is unlikely to reﬂect a role for Xl Myo1c in power - ing this event , both for the reasons presented above for coat compression and because cortical contraction in eggs is myosin - 2 dependent ( Christensen et al . , 1984 ) . We instead suspect that the cortical contraction deﬁcit either reﬂects improper anchorage of cortical F - actin to the PM or the inability of myosin - 2 to efﬁciently utilize the ectopic F - actin resulting from Xl Myo1c disruption . The effects of Xl Myo1c disruption on CG exocytosis are particularly fascinating given the previous report that expression of mammalian myosin - 1c IQT in adipo - cytes suppresses exocytosis of the GLUT4 glucose transporter by an unknown mechanism ( Bose et al . , 2002 ) . We can envision several possible explanations for inhibition of CG exocytosis . The ﬁrst is that excess actin resulting from IQT expression provides a physical block to exocytosis , as observed in other systems ( e . g . , Muallem et al . , 1995 ) and supported by our ﬁnding that cytochalasin treatment rescues the exocytosis de - fect . The second potential explanation is that IQT itself acts as a physical barrier to CG - PM fusion . However , constitutive exocytosis is unaffected by IQT expression at levels sufﬁcient to completely suppress CG exocyto - sis , arguing against simple physical inhibition . A third possibility is that Xl Myo1c abets exocytosis by limiting actin assembly at the fusion pores and thus promoting their dilation . This idea is consistent with the observa - tion that expression of IQT slows incorporation of is never completely surrounded by an actin coat . Compression of the incomplete coat causes the CGto squirtout througha region with no coat . ( ‘‘Out’’ and ‘‘In’’ indicate the outside and the inside of the cell , respectively . ) See Movie S8 . ( E ) High magniﬁcation , 4D time - lapse images of eggs expressing either HIQT or IQT . Z views show in HIQT eggs , actin coats extend downward from the PM ( arrowheads ) , enclose the exocytosing CG , and compress upward . See Movie S9 . In IQT eggs , while coatsstart toassemble down - ward from the PM ( arrowheads ) , they subsequently regress upwards . See Movie S10 . ( F ) ZviewsfromeggsexpressingeitherHIQTorIQT . OnlytheTR - dextranisshown . InHIQTeggs , exocytosingCGshavebroadneckswherethey fuse to the PM ( arrowhead ) . In IQT eggs , the necks are narrow . Time is in min : sec ; bars are 5 m m . Myosin - 1c in Exocytosis and Endocytosis 637 dextran into exocytosing CGs and produces constricted fusion pore necks in these compartments . It is also con - sistent with the results of the cytochalasin rescue exper - iments . Of course , the above mechanisms are not mutu - ally exclusive , andit is possible that each may contribute to the deﬁcit in CG exocytosis . Finally , in addition to demonstrating a key role for Xl Myo1c in egg activation , this study also provides a striking conﬁrmation of the proposal that F - actin coats are responsible for retrieval of exocytosing CG mem - branes ( Sokac et al . , 2003 ) . This point could not be di - rectly tested before because inhibition of coat assembly by latrunculin treatment also results in immediate col - lapse of exocytosing CGs into the PM ( Sokac et al . , 2003 ) . In contrast , disruption of Xl Myo1c does not result in collapse but does prevent coat compression . Conse - quently , theCG membranes arenotretrievedandremain trapped beneath the PM . Because F - actin coats form in other eggs as well as in secretory cell types ( reviewed in Sokac and Bement , 2006 ) , it may be that myosin - 1 simi - larly contributes to compartment retrieval following reg - ulated exocytosis in a number of different systems . Experimental Procedures Degenerate PCR Screen Degenerate primers ATP3 ( 5 0 - GGIGARWSIGGIGCIGGNAARAC - 3 0 ) and EAF - A ( 5 0 - GTYTTIGCRTTICCRAAIGCYTC - 3 0 ) , corresponding to amino acids GESGAGKT and EAFGNAKT , respectively , were used to amplify 12 different myosins from Xenopus ovary cDNA . Based on the closest vertebrate homolog identiﬁed by BLAST searching , these myosin fragments represent Xl Myo1b ( 100 % , Xt Myo1b ) , Xl Myo1c ( 92 % , Rc Myo1c ) , Xl Myo1d ( 100 % , Hs Myo1D ) , Xl Myo1e ( 89 % , Hs Myo1E ) , Xl Myo1f ( 100 % , Hs Myo1F ) , Xl Myo2a ( 92 % , Hs Myo2A ) , Xl Myo3 ( 67 % , Gg Myo3 ) , Xl Myo6 ( 100 % , Xt Myo6 ) , Xl Myo9a ( 100 % , Hs Myo9A ) , Xl Myo9b ( 89 % , Hs Myo9B ) , Xl Myo10 ( 70 % , Tn Myo10 ) , and Xl Myo18 ( 72 % , Tn Myo18 ) wherethepercentageindicatespercent amino acid identity , and initials indicate the following organisms : Xt , Xenopustropicalis ; Rc , Ranacatesbeiana ; Hs , Homosapiens ; Gg , Gal - lus gallus ; Tn , Tetraodon nigroviridis . Larger myosin fragments were thenampliﬁedwithupstream - speciﬁcprimersforMyo1c ( 5 0 - CAGGTG GAGACCGTGAAA - 3 0 ) , Myo1e ( 5 0 - GGAGGTGGCCCTAAAGTG - 3 0 ) , Myo2a ( 5 0 - GCAACATCACACAAGTCT - 3 0 ) , Myo9b ( 5 0 - TTGGGTGCTG GACCTGTA - 3 0 ) , andMyo10 ( 5 0 - GAAAGCACCAAACTGCTG - 3 0 ) , corre - sponding to amino acids QVETVK , GGGPKV , ATSHKS , ESTKLL , and LGAGPV , respectively , that werepairedwith downstreamdegenerate primers LDIY ( 5 0 - TCRAAICCRWADATRTCIAR - 3 0 ) or FEQF ( 5 0 - ARTT DATRCARAAYTGYTCRAA - 3 0 ) , corresponding to amino acids LDIY / FGFE and FEQFCIN , respectively . 5 0 / 3 0 RACE and Morpholinos For 5 0 RACE , cDNA was made from egg poly ( A ) + RNA with a Xl Myo1c - speciﬁc primer ( 5 0 - GAGATAGTTTAGAATGTGACC - 3 0 ) , corresponding to amino acids GHILNYL . For subsequent PCR , anested Xl Myo1cprimer ( 5 0 - GGATTGGACTGAAGAAGGCG - 3 0 ) , cor - responding to amino acids RLLQSN , was paired with a generic oligo - dT anchor primer ( Roche Applied Biosciences , Indianapolis , IN ) . For 3 0 RACE , two speciﬁc primers were designed against the Xl Myo1c 5 0 UTR ( 5 0 - CTGAGGAGTTGAGTGCTGTGAAGC - 3 0 and 5 0 - GTTGAGTGCTGTGAAGCTGAACAGG - 3 0 ) and used in sequential rounds of PCR . The morpholino ( GeneTools ; 5 0 - TTTTCCATGGT GACCCGGATCCCGA - 3 0 ) was designed against the Xl Myo1c 5 0 UTR ; the control morpholino ( 5 0 - TTTACCATGGTCACGCGGTTCG CGA - 3 0 ) incorporated a ﬁve base pair mismatch . RNA Isolation and Northern Blotting Total RNA was extracted from staged oocytes and further fraction - ated to yield stage - speciﬁc poly ( A ) + RNA with the MicroPoly ( A ) Pure mRNA Isolation Kit ( Ambion , Austin , TX ) . For developmental North - erns , poly ( A ) + RNA was quantiﬁed by spectrophotometry and equal quantities loaded per oogenic stage . For total versus poly ( A ) + RNA / stage 6oocyte versus egg analysis , 30oocyte / egg equivalents were loaded per lane . RNAs were blotted and processed according to Northern Max Blotting Kit ( Ambion ) speciﬁcations . Antisense RNA probes were transcribed in vitro , puriﬁed over G - 50 spin columns , and labeled and detected with the Bright - Star Psoralen - Biotin Nonisotopic Labeling and Detection Kit ( Ambion ) . Protein Extraction and Immunoblotting Forstage6oocyteversusegganalysisofendogenousmyosinorac - tin , 90 stage 6 oocytes or eggs were homogenized in 240 m l PHEME Buffer ( 60 mM K - PIPES , 25 mM HEPES , 10 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgCl 2 [ pH7 . 0 ] withKOH , 1 % TritonX - 100 , 5mMMgATP , 5 m g / mlleupeptin , 10 m g / ml aprotinin , 1 mM PefaBloc SC , 10 m g / ml chymostatin , 10 m g / ml pepstatin ) with a mechanical homogenizer . Homogenates were spun at 14 , 000 3 g , and the cytoplasmic layer collected and combined with sample buffer and then separated by SDS - PAGE . Forcorticalfractionations , singleoocytesweredisruptedinSolution A ( 250 mM sucrose , 10 mM HEPES , 1 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgCl 2 [ pH 7 . 4 ] supplemented immediately before use with 1 mM PMSF , 1 m g / ml pepstatin A , 1 m g / ml leupeptin ) by six to seven gentle pas - sages through the oriﬁce of a yellow pipet tip . Sample was spun at 720 3 g for 3 min . Low - speed supernatant was collected and com - bined with sample buffer . Low - speed pellet was re - extracted in Solution B ( 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 M NaCl , 50 mM Tris , 1 mM EDTA [ pH 7 . 4 ] ) by trituration through a yellow pipet tip . Sample was spun at 16 , 000 3 g for 1 min . Supernatant was collected , combined with sample buffer , and subjected to SDS - PAGE . Forimmunoblotsprimaryantibodiesanti - Myosin - 1c ( M2 ) ( Wagner et al . , 1992 ) , anti - Myosin - 2 ( Biomedical Technologies , Stoughton , MA ) , and anti - actin ( Amersham Biosciences ) were used at a dilution of 1 : 500 . Secondary antibodies anti - mouse IgG - HRP conjugate and anti - rabbit IgG - HRP conjugate ( Promega , Madison , WI ) were used at a dilution of 1 : 5000 . Chemiluminescent detection proceeded ac - cording to standard ECL protocols . Secretion Assays Foranalysisofconstitutivesecretion , oocyteswereinjectedwith10 – 50 ng of capped RNAs encoding GFP - rat syntaxin 1A ( construct supplied by Dr . T . Coppola ; Lausanne ) or a 1 - b 1 subunits ( 4 : 1 ratio ) rat Na + - K + ATPase ( construct supplied by Dr . J . D . Horisberger ; Lau - sanne ) and incubated at 18 (cid:2) C for 48 hr . Cells were fractionated as above , and the fractions immunoblotted . Cortical granule secretion from single oocytes was monitored as previously described ( Gun - dersen et al . , 2002 ) following 30 min treatment with 1 m M PMA or 10 m M ionomycin at 20 (cid:2) C – 22 (cid:2) C . Capped RNA Synthesis For expression of untagged or N - terminally eGFP - tagged Xl Myo1c constructs , myosin sequences were cloned into pCS 2 + or custom vector pCS 2 + eGFP , respectively . Transcription of capped RNA pro - ceeded according tothe SP6 or T7 mMessage mMachine HighYield Capped RNA Transcription Kit ( Ambion ) protocol with 1 m g of tem - plate . RNA was extracted with an equal volume of phenol : chloro - form ( 50 : 50 ) . For rescue experiments , cells were injected with 80 ng HIQT and 40 ng IQT . Cell Fixation and Staining Egg activation was induced and proceeded for 2 min in 10 m M iono - mycin ( Calbiochem ) in 1 / 10 3 OR2 . The eGFP - Xl Myo1c - expressing oocytes , eggs , and activated eggs were ﬁxed for 4 hr in 3 . 7 % para - formaldehyde , 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde , and 0 . 4 units / ml Alexa568 - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) in Myo1c Fix Buffer ( 10 mM HEPES , 10 mM EGTA , 100 mM KCl , 3 mM MgCl 2 , 150 mM sucrose [ pH 7 . 6 ] ) . Cells were bisected prior to staining with 1 unit / ml Alexa568 - phalloidin for 12 – 14 hr . For immunoﬂuorescence localization of Xl myo1c , activated eggs were ﬁxed for 30 min in the presence of Alexa568 phalloidin , washed for 1 hr , bisected , and processed for immunoﬂuorescence with a monoclonal anti - myosin - 1c antibody ( Wagner et al . , 1992 ) . Microscopy and Image Analysis Oocytes and eggs were prepared , injected , cultured , and mounted aspreviouslydescribed ( Sokacetal . , 2003 ) . Imagingwasperformed Developmental Cell 638 with a Zeiss Axiovert 100 M microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Inc . , Thorn - wood , NY ) withBio - Rad 1024 3 1024Lasersharp Confocal Software ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , Hercules , CA ) with a numerical aperture 1 . 4 , 63 3 objectivelens . Forquantiﬁcationofﬂuorescenceintensities , the NIHObject - Imagev2 . 06softwarewasused . Zseriesandtime - lapse , single optical plane movies and 4D renderings were generated with Volocity v10 software ( Improvision , Lexington , MA ) . All other image processing was done with Adobe Photoshop 7 . 0 ( Adobe Systems ) . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include ten movies and corresponding movie descriptions and are available at http : / / www . developmentalcell . com / cgi / content / full / 11 / 5 / 629 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health via grants to W . M . B . ( GM052932 - 06 ) and C . B . G . ( MH59938 ) . Many thanks to Mark Wagner ( Indiana University ) for providing the myosin - 1c antibody . Received : March 9 , 2004 Revised : July 31 , 2006 Accepted : September 5 , 2006 Published : November 6 , 2006 References Alberts , J . B . , and Odell , G . M . ( 2004 ) . In silico reconstitution of Liste - ria propulsion exhibits nano - saltation . PLoS Biol . 2 , 2054 – 2066 . Barylko , B . , Jung , G . , and Albanesi , J . P . ( 2005 ) . Structure , function , and regulation of myosin - 1c . Acta Biochim . Pol . 52 , 373 – 380 . Batters , C . , Arthur , C . P . , Lin , A . , Porter , J . , Geeves , M . A . , Milligan , R . A . , Molloy , J . E . , and Coluccio , L . M . ( 2004 ) . Myo1c is designed fortheadaptationresponseintheinnerear . EMBOJ . 23 , 1433 – 1440 . Bement , W . M . , Hasson , T . , Wirth , J . A . , Cheney , R . E . , and Mooseker , M . S . ( 1994 ) . Identiﬁcation and overlapping expression of multiple unconventional myosin genes in vertebrate cell types . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 6549 – 6553 . Bose , A . , Guilherme , A . , Robida , S . I . , Nicoloro , S . M . , Zhou , Q . L . , Jiang , Z . Y . , Pomerleau , D . P . , andCzech , M . P . ( 2002 ) . Glucose trans - porter recycling in response to insulin is facilitated by myosin Myo1c . Nature 420 , 821 – 824 . Christensen , K . , Sauterer , R . , and Merriam , R . W . ( 1984 ) . Role of sol - uble myosin in cortical contractions of Xenopus eggs . Nature 310 , 150 – 151 . Colman , A . , Morser , J . , Lane , C . , Besley , J . , Wylie , C . , and Valle , G . ( 1981 ) . Fateofsecretoryproteinstrappedinoocytesof Xenopuslae - vis by disruption of the cytoskeleton or by imbalanced subunit syn - thesis . J . Cell Biol . 91 , 770 – 780 . Coluccio , L . M . ( 1997 ) . Myosin I . Am . J . Physiol . 273 , C347 – C359 . Diefenbach , T . J . , Latham , V . M . , Yimlamai , D . , Liu , C . A . , Herman , I . M . , andJay , D . G . ( 2002 ) . Myosin1candmyosinIIBserveopposingroles in lamellipodial dynamics of the neuronal growth cone . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 1207 – 1217 . Doberstein , S . K . , Baines , I . C . , Wiegand , G . , Korn , E . D . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1993 ) . Inhibition of contractile vacuole function in vivo by anti - bodies against myosin - I . Nature 365 , 841 – 843 . Elinson , R . P . ( 1977 ) . Fertilization of immature frog eggs : cleavage and development following subsequent activation . J . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 37 , 187 – 201 . Gard , D . L . , Cha , B . J . , and Roeder , A . D . ( 1995 ) . F - actin is required for spindle anchoring and rotation in Xenopus oocytes : a re - examina - tion of the effects of cytochalasin B on oocyte maturation . Zygote 3 , 17 – 26 . Gray , N . K . , andWickens , M . ( 1998 ) . Control oftranslationinitiationin animals . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 , 399 – 458 . Gundersen , C . B . , Kohan , S . A . , Chen , Q . , Iagnemma , J . , and Umbach , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Activation of protein kinase Ceta triggers cor - tical granule exocytosis in Xenopus oocytes . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 1313 – 1320 . Heasman , J . , Kofron , M . , andWylie , C . ( 2000 ) . Beta - cateninsignaling activity dissected in the early Xenopus embryo : a novel antisense approach . Dev . Biol . 222 , 124 – 134 . Hokanson , D . E . , and Ostap , E . M . ( 2006 ) . Myo1c binds tightly and speciﬁcally to phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 3118 – 3123 . Liu , C . , and Smith , L . D . ( 1994 ) . Differential accumulation of mRNA and interspersed RNA during Xenopus oogenesis and embryogene - sis . Zygote 2 , 307 – 316 . Mogilner , A . , and Oster , G . ( 1996 ) . Cell motility driven by actin poly - merization . Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 – 3045 . Muallem , S . , Kwiatkowska , K . , Xu , X . , and Yin , H . L . ( 1995 ) . Actin ﬁl - ament disassembly is a sufﬁcient ﬁnal trigger for exocytosis in non - excitable cells . J . Cell Biol . 128 , 589 – 598 . Reizes , O . , Barylko , B . , Li , C . , Sudhof , T . C . , andAlbanesi , J . P . ( 1994 ) . Domain structure of a mammalian myosin I beta . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 6349 – 6353 . Robbie , E . P . , Peterson , M . , Amaya , E . , and Musci , T . J . ( 1995 ) . Tem - poral regulation of the Xenopus FGF receptor in development : a translation inhibitory element in the 3 0 untranslated region . Devel - opment 121 , 1775 – 1785 . Sheets , M . D . , Fox , C . A . , Hunt , T . , VandeWoude , G . , andWickens , M . ( 1994 ) . The 3 0 - untranslated regions of c - mos and cyclin mRNAs stimulate translation by regulating cytoplasmic polyadenylation . Genes Dev . 8 , 926 – 938 . Sokac , A . M . , and Bement , W . M . ( 2000 ) . Regulation and expression of metazoan unconventional myosins . Int . Rev . Cytol . 200 , 197 – 304 . Sokac , A . M . , and Bement , W . M . ( 2006 ) . Kiss - and - coatandcompart - ment mixing : coupling exocytosis to signal generation and local ac - tin assembly . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 , 1495 – 1502 . Sokac , A . M . , Co , C . , Taunton , J . , and Bement , W . ( 2003 ) . Cdc42 - dependent actin polymerization during compensatory endocytosis in Xenopus eggs . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 727 – 732 . Soldati , T . ( 2003 ) . Unconventional myosins , actin dynamics and en - docytosis : a menage a trois ? Trafﬁc 4 , 358 – 366 . Sun , Y . , Martin , A . C . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2006 ) . Endocytic internaliza - tion in budding yeast requires coordinated actin nucleation and Myosin motor activity . Dev . Cell 11 , 33 – 46 . Swanljung - Collins , H . , and Collins , J . H . ( 1992 ) . Phosphorylation of brush border myosin I by protein kinase C is regulated by Ca ( 2 + ) - stimulated binding of myosin I to phosphatidylserine concerted with calmodulin dissociation . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 3445 – 3454 . Tang , N . , Lin , T . , and Ostap , E . M . ( 2002 ) . Dynamics of Myo1c ( myo - sin - Ibeta ) lipid binding and dissociation . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 42763 – 42768 . Taunton , J . , Rowning , B . A . , Coughlin , M . L . , Wu , M . , Moon , R . T . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Larabell , C . A . ( 2000 ) . Actin - dependent propul - sion of endosomes and lysosomes by recruitment of N - WASP . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 519 – 530 . Titus , M . A . , Wessels , D . , Spudich , J . A . , and Soll , D . ( 1993 ) . The unconventional myosin encoded by the myoA gene plays a role in Dictyostelium motility . Mol . Biol . Cell 4 , 233 – 246 . Wagner , M . C . , Barylko , B . , andAlbanesi , J . P . ( 1992 ) . Tissuedistribu - tion and subcellular localization of mammalian myosin I . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 163 – 170 . Welch , M . D . , andMullins , R . D . ( 2002 ) . Cellular control of actin nucle - ation . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 247 – 288 . Wolf , D . P . ( 1974 ) . The cortical granule reaction in living eggs of the toad , Xenopus laevis . Dev . Biol . 36 , 62 – 71 . Yang , C . , Pring , M . , Wear , M . A . , Huang , M . , Cooper , J . A . , Svitkina , T . M . , and Zigmond , S . H . ( 2005 ) . Mammalian CARMIL inhibits actin ﬁlament capping by capping protein . Dev . Cell 9 , 209 – 221 . Yumura , S . , and Uyeda , T . Q . ( 2003 ) . Myosins and cell dynamics in cellular slime molds . Int . Rev . Cytol . 224 , 173 – 225 . Myosin - 1c in Exocytosis and Endocytosis 639 Zhu , T . , Beckingham , K . , and Ikebe , M . ( 1998 ) . High afﬁnity Ca 2 + binding sites of calmodulin are critical for the regulation of myosin Ibeta motor function . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20481 – 20486 . Accession Numbers ThemyosinsequencesobtainedinthisstudyhavebeenenteredintoGenBankwiththefollowingaccessionnumbers : Xl Myo1b , EF026166 ; Xl Myo1c , EF026164 ; Xl Myo1d , EF026167 ; Xl Myo1e , EF026163 ; Xl Myo1f , EF026168 ; Xl Myo2a , EF026169 ; Xl Myo3 , EF026170 ; Xl Myo6 , EF026171 ; Xl Myo9a , EF026172 ; Xl Myo9b , EF026173 ; Xl Myo10 , EF026174 ; Xl Myo18 , EF026165 . Developmental Cell 640