R E V I E W A cost – benefit analysis of the physical mechanisms of membrane curvature Jeanne C . Stachowiak , Frances M . Brodsky and Elizabeth A . Miller Many cellular membrane - bound structures exhibit distinct curvature that is driven by the physical properties of their lipid and protein constituents . Here we review how cells manipulate and control this curvature in the context of dynamic events such as vesicle - mediated membrane traffic . Lipids and cargo proteins each contribute energy barriers that must be overcome during vesicle formation . In contrast , protein coats and their associated accessory proteins drive membrane bending using a variety of interdependent physical mechanisms . We survey the energy costs and drivers involved in membrane curvature , and draw a contrast between the stochastic contributions of molecular crowding and the deterministic assembly of protein coats . These basic principles also apply to other cellular examples of membrane bending events , including important disease - related problems such as viral egress . Cellular membranes , which partition eukaryotic cells into distinct compartments , possess an intrinsic simplicity that belies their com - plex gymnastics during normal cellular function . The majority of cellular membranes are planar lipid bilayers . These are influenced by intrinsic and extrinsic forces to generate the curved structures that are associated with diverse cellular architectures ( Fig . 1 ) . Curved mem - branes can be relatively stable structures — such as those surrounding nuclear pores — or can be transient , such as transport vesicles that are continually produced and consumed during membrane and protein traffic . In each case , these structures form from the action of proteins that use distinct mechanisms to exert forces that sculpt the requisite membrane architecture 1 – 3 . Considerable insight into the mechanisms of membrane curvature has been gained from minimally reconstituted systems , largely based on shape changes exerted on synthetic liposomes by individual protein components . These systems have established that , in many instances , physical properties associated with a single protein are sufficient to induce curvature . In recent years , experimental sys - tems have focused on two principles : membrane insertion and pro - tein scaffolding . However , more recent theoretical and experimental analyses have suggested that molecular crowding is also an important driver of curvature , in a manner that can either augment the action of protein scaffolds , or oppose it . Finally , scaffold rigidity has also been suggested to be a key factor contributing to membrane bending . Examples of each of these types of curvature drivers can be found at different sites within the cell ( Fig . 1 ) , where different bending require - ments are likely to be specified by the lipid and protein composition of the underlying membrane . The current challenge is to understand how the cooperative energy contributions of multiple active components drive bending of complex membranes composed of diverse lipids and proteins . Cellular membrane bending also occurs in the context of organized tissue or in the face of turgor pressure , factors that introduce additional energy barriers , neces - sitating additional force . Here we review the multiple physical mecha - nisms that influence membrane bending and perform an accounting of their relative energy contributions to cellular membrane deforma - tion . We focus primarily on vesicle trafficking pathways , although the same fundamental principles can also help us understand curvature in other cellular contexts . We first consider the physical properties of lipids and cargo , and the barriers they pose to membrane bending . We then discuss the drivers of membrane curvature and the different physical mechanisms that they employ . Together these considerations define an integrated set of parameters that operate during intracellular and plasma membrane bending . The energy cost - benefit analysis that we describe here becomes particularly important in considering membrane curvature under pathological conditions , for example where pathogens induce uptake by cells , or when viruses bud from the plasma membrane , liberating themselves for additional rounds of infection . The energy costs of bending a membrane Most cellular phospholipids have a cylindrical shape and therefore self - assemble into planar bilayers . According to the simplified two - dimen - sional description of membrane mechanics by Canham 4 and Helfrich 5 , deforming bilayers into curved shapes encounters two energy barriers : resistance to membrane bending and resistance to membrane stretching . Jeanne C . Stachowiak is in the Department of Biomedical Engineering , Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology , University of Texas at Austin , Austin , Texas 78712 , USA . Frances M . Brodsky is in the Departments of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences , Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Microbiology and Immunology , The G . W . Hooper Foundation , University of California , San Francisco , California 94143 , USA . Elizabeth A . Miller is in the Department of Biological Sciences , Columbia University , New York , New York 10027 , USA . e - mail : em2282 @ columbia . edu NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 1019 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved R E V I E W As discussed below , bending rigidity generally poses the larger barrier to membrane curvature , except in cases where membrane tension is signifi - cantly raised by turgor pressure 6 , osmotic shock , or action of the cytoskel - eton 7 . Many biological membranes , such as the plasma membranes of red blood cells 8 , are thought to have significant spontaneous curvature , a preferred curvature 5 that typically arises from a difference in lipid compo - sition between the two leaflets of the membrane 9 . Spontaneous curvature is likely to have a significant influence on the curvature of cellular structures , though this contribution remains difficult to quantify , as it arises from highly localized , often transient , differences in membrane composition . Cargo proteins An under - appreciated player in the membrane - bending problem is the protein fraction embedded within the bilayer . Far from being inert vesicle passengers , cargo proteins represent major constituents of vesicles 10 that probably contribute a significant energy barrier to membrane bending . As cargo concentration increases and membrane curvature progresses , the surface area available to each protein decreases on the concave lumenal membrane surface . This process increases steric repulsion among cargo molecules that can be expected to oppose membrane curvature ( Fig . 2a ) . Such effects are amplified when cargo proteins display asymmetry across the bilayer such that lumenal domains are significantly larger than their corresponding cytoplasmic domains . An extreme example of this topol - ogy is the family of lipid - anchored proteins , glycosylphosphorylinosi - tol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins . These abundant and diverse cell surface proteins expose their entire molecular mass on the lumenal surface of transport vesicles 11 . Concentration of these proteins at budding sites may create significant lateral pressure within the membrane that could induce local negative ( away from the membrane ) curvature ( Fig . 2b ) . The idea that unbalanced steric pressure among membrane - bound molecules can drive membranes to bend derives in part from the bilayer couple model of Sheetz and Singer 12 . These authors recognized that tight coupling between the two leaflets of a lipid bilayer engenders curvature , whereby expanding or compressing one side of the membrane would cause the other side to experience the opposite effect ( i . e . compression or expansion ) . The increased abundance of molecules and the increased Clathrin - coated vesicles COPII vesicles Caveolae Caveolin ER tubules Reticulons Mitochondrial cristae ATP synthase Secretory granules Cargo aggregation Viral budding ESCRTs Cargo oligomerization Nuclear pores Cilia COPI vesicles Multivesicular bodies ESCRTs Retromer Septins Nups Figure 1 Cellular sites of membrane curvature . The membranes of eukaryotic cells often display curvature ; some are dynamic ( for example , transport vesicles , endosomal tubules and viral buds ) and others more static ( for example , nuclear pores , cilia , endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) tubules and mitochondrial cristae ) . Each of these examples of membrane curvature is created by physical effects that derive from both lipid and protein sources . Self - assembling proteins can scaffold membranes ( clathrin , COPI , COPII , nucleoporins , caveolins , reticulons , retromer , ESCRTs and septins ) . Asymmetric lipid and protein insertion can drive curvature by the bilayer couple model and molecular crowding effects ( secretory granule cargoes , reticulons , caveolins , viral matrix proteins and mitochondrial ATP synthase ) . COPI structure reproduced with permission from ref . 46 , © 2004 AAAS . COPII structure reproduced from ref . 45 , clathrin structure from ref . 83 and retromer model from ref . 84 . Septin model reproduced with permission from ref . 85 , © 2009 Elsevier . ESCRT structure reproduced with permission from ref . 86 , © 2013 Wiley . 1020 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved R E V I E W rate of collisions within or adjacent to one leaflet of the membrane causes the area of the leaflet to increase relative to the opposite leaflet , leading to membrane curvature away from the source of increased steric pressure ( Fig . 2b ) . The phenomenon of curvature driven by steric pressure has been demonstrated for synthetic membranes with a high concentration of poly - mer molecules attached to their outer surfaces 13 . More recently , it has been demonstrated that steric pressure between densely crowded , membrane - bound proteins can drive dramatic changes in membrane shape , forming narrow membrane tubules , even from stiff , solid - phase membranes 14 . In the first physiological example of this phenomenon , steric pressure between GPI - anchored proteins and other cargo molecules in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum seems to oppose the curvature enforced by the COPII vesicle coat machinery , driving a requirement for increased coat rigidity 15 . Similar costs are likely to apply to bona fide transmembrane cargo proteins , especially those with relatively small cytoplasmic domains such as many surface receptors and Golgi glycosylation enzymes 16 . Overcoming the barriers to membrane bending Cells have evolved multiple solutions to the problem of overcoming the energy barriers associated with curving membranes ( Fig . 1 ) . Early obser - vations of clathrin - coated vesicles 17 and subsequent characterization of clathrin’s self - assembling properties 18 gave rise to the long - standing premise that formation of spherical vesicles is driven by coat protein scaffolds that are capable of imposing their inherent curvature on mem - brane surfaces ( Fig . 1 ) . In addition to the scaffolding effects of polymeric coat structures , further mechanisms that contribute to membrane bend - ing have now been characterized . These include differential lipid and protein insertion into the bilayer , steric pressure among proteins bound to membrane surfaces , oligomerization of membrane - embedded and membrane - associated proteins , and actin polymerization . We consider each of these mechanisms in turn , starting with the membrane itself and working our way out towards the cytoplasm . Lipid asymmetry Although the majority of membrane lipids are cylindrical in shape , lipids with large hydrocarbon tails ( or small head groups ) can take on a coni - cal shape , and lipids with small tails ( or large head groups ) can adopt an inverse conical shape . The unequal distribution of such irregularly shaped lipids between the two leaflets of the membrane could impose a distinct curvature on the bilayer . Indeed , asymmetric lipids such as phosphatidylethanolamine and gangliosides 19 and ceramides 20 display curvature preferences . The asymmetric distribution of these lipids has been invoked to explain observations of curvature during autophago - some formation 21 . In the context of vesicle formation , local recruitment of lipases and other lipid - modifying enzymes , including flippases , may contribute to the curvature associated with vesicle formation 22 . Direct measurement of this effect in a cellular context has not been achieved , making the impact of lipid asymmetry difficult to quantify . Nonetheless , flippases are clearly implicated in post - Golgi trafficking events 23 and local release of sphingomyelinase can induce endocytosis 24 , suggesting such mechanisms are physiologically relevant in cells . Protein asymmetry Asymmetric membrane insertion of proteins should also be capable of driving membrane bending , according to the bilayer couple model 25 . Indeed , a number of cytosolic proteins that are central to membrane traffic , such as epsin 1 , Arf1 and Sar1 , insert short amphipathic helices into one leaflet of the membrane when recruited . These proteins can tubulate synthetic liposomes when applied at relatively high concen - trations 26 – 29 . However , whether it is physiologically possible to create a high enough local density of insertions to generate a significant driving force for membrane bending remains under debate 30 , 31 . Specifically , the physical dimensions of the proteins that contain insertable helices set a limit on the number of helices that can be actually be inserted at the membrane surface . As discussed below , even when all membrane - bound proteins insert helices , the membrane area occupied by helices cannot fill the disparity in area between the two leaflets of highly curved mem - branes . This analysis is based on the prediction 30 that insertions must cover at least 10 % of the membrane surface area to drive formation of the smallest vesicles found in cells . This situation is intractable except for cases in which proteins that contain multiple helix insertions cover the entire membrane surface 30 . Therefore , hydrophobic insertion prob - ably makes a relatively small contribution to the energy budget of mem - brane curvature in most settings . This is consistent with the formation of COPII - coated curved membranes in the absence of helix insertions 27 and curvature induced by clathrin in the presence of a truncated form of epsin that lacks the N - terminal amphipathic helix 32 . Cytosol Lumen Cytosol Lumen d Cytosol Lumen Cargo adaptors Cytosol Lumen Increased steric pressure Reduced steric pressure a b c Figure 2 Steric effects during membrane curvature . ( a ) As curvature progresses and a vesicle bud forms , the decrease in surface area on the lumenal face restricts mobility of lumenal protein mass , increasing the local steric pressure to resist bending . Simultaneously , the cytoplasmic surface area increases , reducing steric pressure and necessitating increased force at this face to maintain bending . ( b ) Complete asymmetry of lumenally oriented proteins during budding could create negative spontaneous curvature by entropic means , thus opposing the action of the coat . ( c ) Conversely to b , if lumenally oriented proteins oligomerize , their affinity for each other and the membrane could drive bending in the appropriate direction . ( d ) Recruitment of cargo adaptors to nascent budding sites could create local curvature by entropic means and thereby reverse cargo resistance . The combined mass of cargo plus adaptor proteins creates steric pressure . NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 1021 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved R E V I E W An alternative effect that may account for the observed tubulation following recruitment of helix - containing proteins is steric pressure between densely crowded membrane - bound molecules . As described above with respect to asymmetric cargo proteins , this effect can itself drive membrane bending when the concentration of molecules is higher on one face of the membrane than the other . In this case , the crowding effect is achieved by local membrane association of coat assembly pro - teins , creating curvature and contributing to vesicle formation . Indeed , membrane - bound clathrin assembly proteins , including epsin 1 and AP180 , have recently been demonstrated to drive bending of model membrane vesicles by creating steric pressure , accounted for by the reduced frequency of protein – protein collisions ( i . e . increased entropy ) when the membrane bends away from its more densely crowded sur - face 31 ( Fig . 2d ) . Instead of driving bulk curvature , coat initiation by amphipathic - helix - containing proteins might generate initial local curvature and then couple this to coat propagation through recruit - ment of additional helix - containing ( and other ) proteins , leading to steric pressure effects of the coat as a whole . Indeed , the amphipathic helix of Sar1 lowers the bending energy of the underlying lipid bilayer 33 , suggesting that it makes the membrane more susceptible to remodelling by downstream coat components 25 . Another function for amphipathic helices is detection rather than induction of curvature . This is almost certainly the case for the ALPS - domain of ARF GAP ( GTPase - activating protein ) , which detects lipid - packing defects in the curved bilayers of COPI vesicles , inserting specifically into membranes that are under curvature stress 34 and thus restricting its GTPase stimulation activity to curved membranes . An extension of this protein asymmetry and molecular crowd - ing model may also be relevant to cargo - driven vesiculation events . Experiments with membrane - bound polymers revealed that self - avoid - ing polymers create an expansive pressure that drives the membrane to bend away from them 13 , 35 ( Fig . 2b ) , a finding supported by a sim - ple thermodynamic model 36 . Likewise , self - attracting polymers can be expected to create a compressive pressure that drives the membrane to bend toward them 37 ( Fig . 2c ) . Thus , vesiculation of the correct topology ( that is towards the cytoplasm ) might be induced by lumenally distrib - uted proteins if they have affinity for each other . For example , apical sorting of GPI - anchored proteins relies on their oligomerization 38 , rais - ing the prospect that such sorting employs a cargo - driven budding event ( Fig . 2c ) . This phenomenon might also explain the biogenesis of secre - tory granules that have long been thought to employ a concentration - driven segregation mechanism of egress from the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) 39 ( Fig . 1 ) , although the molecular details of the budding event are not yet fully defined . Viral budding may also employ such a mechanism whereby self - association of matrix proteins — driven in some cases by nucleic acid packaging — would couple with plasma membrane recruit - ment to drive outward budding of the enveloped virus 40 ( Fig . 1 ) . Cargo - driven molecular crowding effects could also be relevant to intracellular trafficking pathways for which cargo adaptors are known but no outer coat scaffold has been described . So far , no known coat pro - teins mediate transport between the yeast TGN and plasma membrane , although some specialized cargo adaptors ( such as exomer ) regulate selected transport steps 41 . Whether exomer recruits a more canonical coat scaffold remains to be seen . In a cargo - driven budding model , cargo concentration alone would create local shape changes in the membrane by virtue of molecular crowding ( Fig . 2b ) . For this model to work , a heterogeneous population of cargo proteins would require an asymmet - ric distribution in the membrane , with the bulk of their masses facing the cytoplasm . Alternatively , lumenally oriented cargoes would need to undergo significant intermolecular interactions that would in turn reverse the spontaneous curvature of the underlying bilayer 37 ( Fig . 2c ) . Yet another alternative would invoke the molecular crowding effects of the cargoes plus their cargo adaptors , such that the accumulated mass on the cytoplasmic face of the bilayer creates sufficient lateral pressure to bend the membrane in the desired direction ( Fig . 2d ) . Such a scenario might be accelerated by curvature - sensing properties of the cargo adap - tors such that a positive feedback loop is created : local recruitment and concentration initiates curvature that is in turn sensed by additional adaptors that bring in more cargo molecules , perpetuating the local cur - vature 25 . Indeed , such positive feedback may participate in the canonical coat systems where curvature may be induced initially by steric pressure among cargo adaptors , detected and propagated by accessory proteins with amphipathic helices and concave membrane - binding surfaces , and further propagated and stabilized by cargo concentration and polymeri - zation of a protein coat or the cargo adaptors themselves . Self - assembly of membrane - embedded proteins Caveolins and reticulons are membrane - embedded proteins that undergo oligomerization to generate curvature 42 , 43 ( Fig . 1 ) . They both have transmembrane domains that form wedge - shaped insertions with capacity to contribute to membrane curvature . Self - assembly of caveolins and reticulons then further drives membrane remodelling to create plasma membrane invaginations and tubulate the endoplasmic reticulum , respectively . By combining a wedge - shaped hydrophobic structure with oligomerization , these proteins can induce significant local curvature without occupying a large amount of the membrane surface . Thus , they are effective curvature generators that are compat - ible with recruitment of effectors for receptor signalling and other functions 44 . Self - assembling soluble coat scaffolds Moving outwards from the membrane surface , membrane - binding adaptor proteins frequently recruit coat scaffolds to the membrane sur - face . Perhaps the best - characterized examples of protein assembly driv - ing membrane curvature are two of the canonical coats , clathrin and COPII . Both coats contain elements that polymerize into polyhedral structures independent of membranes 45 . As noted , the favourable ener - getics of clathrin or COPII assembly alone can induce vesicle formation without membrane - inserted motifs 32 , 27 . However , the structure formed by the COPII outer coat scaffold does not employ the significant inter - twining that occurs during clathrin triskelion assembly , relying instead on less extensive interactions among coat protomers . Thus , the energy derived from assembly of COPII interfaces is likely to be less than that derived from clathrin assembly . In the case of the COPI coat , self - assembly into a cage - like structure has not been observed , and electron microscopy of liposome - derived COPI vesicles reveals both gaps in coat packing and alternative packing interactions on vesicles of different size 46 , suggesting a more labile scaf - fold . Adaptor recruitment alone could also contribute to membrane bending ( Fig . 2d ) , especially if additional organization promotes steric pressure . The plastic COPI coat could contribute to membrane bend - ing through this mechanism , as well as by forming a rigid scaffold . 1022 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved R E V I E W Sorting events mediated by the AP3 adaptor complex , which can occur without clathrin , may rely on Vps41 as a self - assembling element 47 , but whether this assembly provides a bona fide scaffold or promotes adaptor aggregation remains to be established . In the case of the two COP coats , membrane recruitment is mediated by small GTPases with amphip - athic helices . As discussed above , it is not completely clear whether these contribute to bending by inserting in the cytoplasmic leaflet 27 , 48 or serv - ing as lipid interactors that alter membrane rigidity 33 , or both . Clathrin assembly at the TGN and endosome employs ARF1 ( ref . 49 ) and ARF6 ( ref . 50 ) , respectively . The use of these accessory proteins may reflect different bending challenges at the different cellular locations . Although no experimentally determined numbers exist for the free energy generated by clathrin or COP scaffold assembly at membranes , it is clear that the individual interactions of scaffold components are of sufficiently low affinity to be reversible 51 . Experimental evidence that clathrin assembly can directly vesiculate membranes 32 is consistent with higher estimates of clathrin – clathrin interactions 7 , 52 rather than lower estimates 53 . Further , cellular clathrin depolymerization ( uncoat - ing ) clearly requires ATP hydrolysis by heat - shock protein 70 ( HSP70 ) stimulated by the DNAJ homologue auxilin ( known in yeast as Swa2 ) , in a process that requires direct interaction with the coat protein 49 . COPI and COPII coat disassembly , on the other hand , is modulated by their anchoring small GTPases , and they apparently disassemble spontane - ously following GTP hydrolysis 34 , 54 . One remaining question is whether the energy invested in vesicle formation is sufficient to force curvature of membranes such that the closed vesicle released from the donor mem - brane remains under curvature stress . We speculate that such accumu - lated tension might ‘prime’ a vesicle for fusion such that the stored energy will promote membrane fusion events when the vesicle docks with the target membrane . In this model , the energy invested in forming a highly curved vesicle could help to pay the energy cost of membrane fusion , providing a role for curvature drivers in both vesicle biogenesis and consumption . A final important physical parameter associated with coat scaffolds is the need for rigidity , which presumably translates into stronger bending forces and is seemingly required to enforce curvature on certain cargo - containing membranes . For example , structural modelling suggests that the outer COPII coat protein , Sec13 , acts to rigidify the coat to enforce curvature on wild - type membranes . In yeast , Sec13 becomes dispensable when traffic of GPI - anchored cargoes is diminished , linking coat rigid - ity to a specific cargo burden 15 . In support of this model , knockdown of mammalian SEC13 has minimal impact on bulk protein secretion but impedes endoplasmic reticulum export of collagen 55 , which might contribute a significant barrier to curvature because of its polymeric state 56 . Similarly , the clathrin light chain subunit , which confers rigidity on the proximal leg of the triskelion , is dispensable for receptor - mediated endocytosis of transferrin and the epidermal growth factor receptor 57 . However , some G - protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) require the pres - ence of clathrin light chains for their uptake 58 . Although this was sug - gested to be an effect on clathrin uncoating , it might also reflect a need for greater rigidity of coats that must internalize GPCRs plus their associ - ated arrestin and signalling subunit baggage . Actin polymerization Beyond membrane cargo and membrane - associated adaptors and coats , the actin cytoskeleton frequently plays an indispensable role in membrane curvature . In some cellular circumstances , membrane deformation by the mechanisms described is not sufficient to induce vesicle budding . In these cases , actin polymerization is coordinated with membrane - bending proteins to generate the force required for budding . Actin can play three roles in budding ; one role is to help the vesicle pinching process by polymerization at the neck of a budding vesicle , pushing the vesicle away from the membrane and / or providing constricting force . For clathrin - coated vesicles forming in yeast , actin is constitutively needed at the neck of a budding coated vesicle to over - come turgor pressure on the membrane 6 . Indeed , the effect of turgor , combined with the small size of yeast endocytic vesicles , may form such a strong barrier to curvature that membrane bending isn’t detected until actin polymerization occurs 59 . Similarly , in mammalian cell membranes under tension , either induced by the presence of microvilli on apical membranes or by artificially generated tension , actin polymerization is required for budding 7 . These clathrin - associated actin pathways involve the connection between the clathrin light chain subunits and HIP ( hun - tingtin interacting protein ) family proteins 49 . Interestingly , electron microscopy analysis of mammalian cells 60 shows actin at the neck of most endocytic clathrin - coated vesicles , indicating that most plasma membrane budding uses actin . In this particular feature , mammalian endocytic clathrin - coated vesicles resemble yeast endocytic clathrin - coated vesicles 61 , though the former has variable requirements for actin , whereas the latter has absolute requirements . Despite these findings on the important role of actin in membrane bending and endocytosis , it has also been shown that depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton does not significantly inhibit clathrin - mediated endocytosis in multiple mammalian cell types 62 . However , these latter experiments involved cells in culture , so actin could be more critical for endocytosis in the context of mammalian tissue . Another mechanism by which actin contributes to endocytosis relies on its ability to extend membrane protrusions by polymerization and induce localized phagocytosis . When clathrin coats are flat and cargo is too large to be surrounded by a scaffold , actin operates to cause endo - cytosis . This is observed during uptake of clathrin plaques 63 , uptake of bacteria where clathrin serves as an actin - assembly nucleator 64 , and with viral particles that are too large to fit in conventional clathrin - coated pits 65 . Uptake of virus by endocytosis in caveolae works by a similar prin - cipal and requires actin 66 . A third role for actin , which is less established , may be to contribute to vesicle biogenesis from membrane tubules 67 . Yeast TGN - derived vesicles travel on actin cables to polarized sites of growth and thus may also employ actin in their biogenesis . Directed endosomal recycling in mammalian cells also involves actin - organizing proteins , particularly during cell migration , which could play a role in generating recycling vesicles 68 . Once these drivers have acted to generate nascent vesicle buds , addi - tional membrane remodelling occurs during vesicle release . Pinching at the neck of a vesicle is a special case of extreme membrane bending to promote fusion , and involves complex curvature that seems to require specialized protein machines 69 . In metazoan cells , force for this process is exerted by self - assembly of dynamin into collars , which can also recruit actin 70 . Additional influence can come from BAR - domain - containing proteins that oligomerize to scaffold membrane curvature . In the case of dynamins 71 and BAR - domain proteins 72 , membrane insertion events might make an important contribution by virtue of the high surface density of these oligomeric proteins . NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 1023 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved R E V I E W Compiling the forces that drive and oppose membrane curvature The various mechanisms by which lipids , membrane - bound proteins , self - assembling scaffolds and actin contribute to membrane bending during vesicle formation are the subject of ongoing discussion . In the cell , these mechanisms are deployed in a complementary and cooperative fashion . Here we provide an accounting of the energetics involved in membrane bending , using the assembly of clathrin - coated vesicles as a model . Our estimates are based on previously published calculations of the contri - butions of the components we have described ( see Box 1 ) . In doing so , we aim to approximate the relative contribution of each component to vesicle formation and to investigate whether our current understanding of the physical forces underlying membrane bending is sufficient to explain vesicle formation . This approach does not incorporate the entire spectrum of physical effects , especially those driven by accessory proteins and lipid asymmetry , largely because these effects have not yet been precisely quan - tified . Further , since the number of independently published quantitative estimates of the individual bending effects is still quite small , we expect these estimates to be revised repeatedly over the next few years . In particu - lar , the contribution of actin to vesicle formation is based on a single , very recent estimate 7 . Nonetheless , we consider that this quantitative approach provides a valuable illustration of the problem of the cost - driver balance of forming highly curved vesicles from cellular membranes . Returning first to the Canham and Helfrich models of membrane bend - ing 4 , 5 , we can calculate the energy cost of bending a piece of initially flat membrane into a spherical vesicle by understanding the bending rigidity . This force , expressed in units of energy , ranges from 10 k B T for highly fluid membranes composed entirely of lipids with unsaturated tails 73 to approxi - mately 50 k B T for fluid membranes containing 50 % cholesterol 74 , similar in composition to the plasma membrane of mammalian cells 75 ( where k B is Boltzmann’s constant and T is temperature ) ( Fig . 3a and Box 1 ) . The energy barrier to membrane stretching is the product of membrane ten - sion and membrane surface area . Membrane tension arises from thermal fluctuations within the membrane 74 , osmotic imbalances across the mem - brane and application of forces to the membrane by the cytoskeleton in cellular structures such as villi 7 , and by a cell wall . Physiological values of membrane tension are in the range of 0 . 2 – 1×10 – 3 k B T nm −2 ( ref . 76 ) . For a typical vesicle of 100 nm diameter , the energy cost per mem - brane area of overcoming membrane tension is therefore 10 – 100 times smaller than the energy cost per membrane area of membrane bending ( 8 – 40×10 – 3 k B T nm −2 ) , such that membrane bending is usually cited as the most significant lipid - associated barrier to deforming membranes . The energy costs of cargo crowding are more difficult to model , as they are dependent on the specific protein composition of the underlying mem - brane , with asymmetrically distributed and lumenally oriented proteins 25 50 100 75 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 B end i ng r i g i d i t y 50 % c ho l e s t e r o l ( 50 k B T ) B end i ng r i g i d i t y N o c ho l e s t e r o l ( 10 k B T ) M e m b r ane t en s i on Vesicle diameter ( nm ) d E ne r g y pe r m e m b r ane a r ea ( k B T n m - 2 ) 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 25 50 100 75 0 . 4 AP c r o w d i ng A c t i n po l y m e r i z a t i on C l a t h r i n po l y m e r i z a t i on H y d r op ho b i c i n s e r t i o n Vesicle diameter ( nm ) E ne r g y pe r m e m b r ane a r ea ( k B T n m - 2 ) 25 50 100 75 0 . 0 0 . 4 0 . 8 S y mm e t r i c A sy mm e t r i c E ne r g y pe r m e m b r ane a r ea ( k B T n m - 2 ) Vesicle diameter ( nm ) 0 . 2 0 . 6 1 . 0 a b c 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 25 50 100 75 C o s t s D r i v e r s E ne r g y pe r m e m b r ane a r ea ( k B T n m - 2 ) Vesicle diameter ( nm ) Figure 3 Energetics of coated vesicle formation . Compiling quantitative data and models from the recent literature , we estimate the energy budget responsible for formation of coated vesicles of variable size . ( a ) Energy costs of membrane bending , including bending rigidity and tension 74 . ( b ) Energy costs of cargo confinement in the vesicle lumen 15 , 31 , considering either asymmetrically ( orange ) or symmetrically ( blue ) distributed cargoes . ( c ) Energy contributions by drivers of membrane bending including actin polymerization 7 , clathrin coat assembly 52 , confinement of accessory proteins ( AP ) beneath coats 31 , and hydrophobic insertions 30 . The colours of each icon correspond to their energy contributions shown in the plot . ( d ) Comparison of energy costs with drivers during coated vesicle formation . Drivers ( actin , clathrin coats and APs ) are blue , and cargo - and membrane - derived costs are red . See Box 1 for further description of these energy estimates . 1024 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved R E V I E W having a larger effect than those that are symmetrically proportioned . However , a recently published model has estimated the energy costs of the entropic effects of membrane - attached proteins as a function of the size and density of proteins bound to membrane surfaces 31 . Applying these results to two hypothetical vesicle budding scenarios that contain either asymmetrically or symmetrically distributed cargo proteins ( Fig . 3b ) All energy costs and drivers were estimated in terms of energy per membrane area ( units of k B T nm −2 ) as a function of coated vesicle diameter ranging from 25 - 100 nm . Energetic costs of forming coated vesicles Membrane bending . Using the classic Canham , Helfrich , and Evans theory 4 , 5 , the energy cost per membrane area of creating a curved sphere was estimated as G bending = ( 8πκ ) / ( 4π r 2 ) , where κ is the bending rigidity of the membrane and r is the vesicle radius . Calculations were performed for soft fluid membranes for which κ ~ 10 k B T and for membranes containing 50 % cholesterol ( typical value for mammalian plasma membrane ) , for which κ ~ 50 k B T ( ref . 74 ) . Membrane tension . The finite tension of biological membranes opposes changes in shape . The membrane tension , which has units of energy per area , is approximately the energy required per membrane area to form a spherical vesicle from an initially flat membrane surface . A typical value of 0 . 02 k B T nm −2 was estimated based on micropipette aspiration measurements of membrane tension before significant straining 74 . Cargo crowding . When an initially flat region of the membrane becomes curved , the lumenal domains of cargo molecules have less space to diffuse on the membrane surface , owing to the concave curvature of the vesicle inner surface . The reduced entropy of cargo molecules leads to an increased pressure on the membrane surface that can be expressed as an energy cost per membrane area . Conversely , cargo molecules that have a domain on the coat side of the membrane will experience a reduction in steric congestion as the membrane bends , an energy con - tribution that encourages membrane curvature . The difference between these terms is the approximate energy cost of cargo crowding . The net energy cost per membrane area of crowding was calculated by assuming a cargo molecule with either a single lumenal domain of 5 nm diameter ( asymmetric case ) , or independently diffusing domains of 5 nm diameter on both sides of the membrane ( symmetric case ) , where lumenal domains cover 50 % of the initially flat membrane surface area 16 . Surface pressures on both membrane surfaces were estimated using a nonlinear equation of state for hard discs in two dimensions as proposed by Carnahan and Starling 87 , 88 , used recently to estimate the surface pressure owing to protein crowding on membrane surfaces 31 , 89 . Energetic drivers for forming coated vesicles Hydrophobic insertion . Clathrin assembly proteins , such as epsin 1 , insert amphipathic helices when they bind to the membrane surface 26 . The energy contribution of helix insertion was taken from Campelo et al . 30 assuming that a maximum of 2 % of the membrane surface area is covered by insertions . Under this condition , Campelo et al . predict a membrane radius of curvature of about 130 nm . Using G bending = ( 8πκ ) / ( 4π r 2 ) to calculate the bending energy and assuming a bending rigidity of 50 k B T , we arrive at a value of 0 . 006 k B T nm −2 for insertions . The 2 % insertion area is the maximum expected if each adaptor protein provides an insertion of approximately 2 nm 2 , and there are approximately three adaptor proteins per clathrin triskelia ( such as AP2 , AP180 , epsin 1 etc ) . Accessory protein crowding . When an initially flat portion of the membrane surfaces curves to form a clathrin - coated vesicle , accessory proteins beneath the clathrin lattice are able to explore a larger region of the membrane surface , owing to the positive curvature of the outer vesicle surface . This increased entropy decreases the membrane surface pressure , which can be described as a reduction in free energy per membrane area . Assuming that 75 % of the membrane surface is occupied by accessory proteins 90 and that an average accessory protein has a diameter of 5 – 10 nm , the energy contribution of accessory protein crowding was estimated using the same approach used to estimate the cost of cargo crowding . Clathrin polymerization . Coarse - grained molecular simulations used a reasonable estimate that 25 k B T is released per clathrin triskelia when a clathrin lattice assembles 52 . Dividing this value by the membrane surface area occupied per triskelia of a lattice ( ~ 300 nm 2 ; ref . 83 ) , the energy contribution of clathrin assembly per membrane area was estimated at approximately 0 . 08 k B T nm −2 . Actin polymerization . A dense collar of actin filaments surrounds clathrin - coated vesicles , contributing to vesicle formation 60 . Recent studies have suggested that polymerization of these filaments helps clathrin - coated vesicles to form 7 , 59 . The energy contribution of actin polymerization to vesicle budding must vary with the density and geometric arrangement of filaments , parameters that are still being defined and are likely to differ from one physiological situation to another . Here we include an energy contribution of 0 . 13 k B T nm −2 , based on the recent report that osmotic swelling of mammalian cells creates a requirement for actin to efficiently complete clathrin - mediated endocytosis 7 . In this report , the work , W , required to form a vesicle against membrane tension , σ , was estimated as W = π r 2 σ . Roughly estimating the elevated membrane tension to be approximately half the lytic limit ( ~ 0 . 5 k B T nm −2 ; ref . 74 ) , and dividing the work , W , by the vesicle surface area ( 4πr 2 ) , we estimate the contribution of actin required to overcome high membrane tension as approximately 0 . 13 k B T nm −2 . BOX 1 Calculations and assumptions of approximate energy analysis for formation of coated vesicles in Fig . 3 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 1025 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved R E V I E W suggests that both orientations contribute a significant barrier , espe - cially as the diameter of the vesicle decreases . It is initially surprising that symmetric cargo proteins oppose curvature nearly as strongly as highly asymmetric ones . This behaviour is a consequence of the highly nonlinear increase in steric pressure with protein density . Owing to this nonlinearity , crowding effects are much stronger on the inner leaflet of a small vesicle than on the outer leaflet . Therefore , crowding on the outer leaflet by sym - metric cargos only slightly reduces the barrier to membrane bending . Turning to the drivers of curvature and compiling recent estimates from the literature ( Fig . 3c ) , we find that the effect of hydrophobic inser - tions is relatively small , even where one insertion was included for each adaptor protein with a generous stoichiometry of three adaptor proteins per clathrin triskelia ( see Box 1 for detailed analysis ) . Since insertions contribute to membrane bending on a per area basis , their energy contri - bution per membrane area remains constant across vesicles of different sizes . Crowding effects of the cargo - bound adaptor complexes con - tribute significantly , with a larger impact as vesicle diameter decreases . Clathrin and actin polymerization are both significant contributors that make a fixed contribution per membrane area . These estimates rep - resent data from diverse experiments that are likely to be refined and revised by future work . Therefore , their interpretation at this stage must remain largely qualitative . Nonetheless , from combining these findings , it seems that the energy costs ( bending rigidity and tension 4 , 5 , 73 , 74 , and cargo crowding 15 , 31 ) of producing vesicles of moderate size ( ~ 50 nm diameter ) is offset by the energy drivers when all drivers are present ( coat polymerization 52 , accessory protein crowding 31 , amphipathic inser - tion 26 , 30 and cytoskeletal forces 60 , 77 ) , whereas producing smaller vesicles and vesicle production in the absence of one or more drivers cannot be fully accounted for ( Fig . 3d ) . Synaptic vesicles represent an extreme example of a highly curved vesicle , measuring just 40 nm in diameter . Formation of these vesicles is independent of actin 78 and thus would seem to be energetically unfavourable in our analysis ( Fig . 3d ) . However , detailed structural and proteomic analysis of synaptic vesicles reveals that a large number of the embedded protein cargoes are cytoplasmically oriented and thus may contribute positively to membrane bending rather than acting as a barrier . In this example , the energy cost of membrane bending would be overestimated and cargo itself could be considered as a driver . Indeed , the detailed molecular map of synaptic vesicles 10 serves as a benchmark that characterization of other vesicle systems might aspire to in order to fully appreciate the underlying costs and drivers of an individual budding event . Our analysis demonstrates that different prop - erties of cellular membranes engender distinct requirements in terms of the energetics of coat scaffold assembly , the role of actin and the need for additional accessory factors such as BAR - domain proteins and dynamin that can provide additional curvature and / or force . Ultimately , cellular membrane curvature involves the coordination of multiple complementary and cooperative mechanisms . Such coordina - tion has been elegantly demonstrated for clathrin - coated pit formation by single - molecule imaging . Cooperative interactions between cargo - bound adaptors recruited scaffold - forming coat molecules that in turn attracted other membrane benders 79 . Intracellular pathogens provide further exam - ples of diverse solutions to the membrane bending problem . The outer coat of trypanosomes is formed by GPI - anchored proteins that might create bending challenges through leaflet asymmetry and cargo crowding . Notably , these organisms alter the packing of their surface proteins by gly - cosylation that could reduce crowding or rigidity 80 . In another pathogenic example , clathrin is implicated in organizing retroviral glycoproteins dur - ing viral budding , which might induce crowding that enforces external budding 81 . This may be comparable to the crowding effects of Herpes virus capsid proteins , which may have a positive influence on budding 82 . In conclusion , the simple principles of membrane bending that we have discussed here can be orchestrated in a variety of combinations to mediate membrane budding in biological membranes both for normal cellular function and during pathogenesis . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS J . C . S . acknowledges funding from the University of Texas Austin Cockrell School of Engineering and the Texas 4000 Cancer Seed Grant Program . F . M . B . and E . A . M . acknowledge support from the National Institute of General Medical Science of the National Institutes of Health under award numbers R01GM038093 ( F . M . B . ) , R01GM078186 ( E . A . M . ) and R01GM085089 ( E . A . M . ) . We thank M . C . S . Lee ( Columbia University ) , E . Schmid ( University of California , Berkeley ) , C . Hayden ( Sandia National Laboratories ) and E . Lafer ( University of Texas Health Science Center ) for thoughtful discussions and comments on the manuscript . COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors declare no competing financial interests . 1 . McMahon , H . T . & Gallop , J . L . Membrane curvature and mechanisms of dynamic cell membrane remodelling . Nature 438 , 590 – 596 ( 2005 ) . 2 . Bigay , J . & Antonny , B . Curvature , lipid packing , and electrostatics of membrane organelles : defining cellular territories in determining specificity . Dev . Cell 23 , 886 – 895 ( 2012 ) . 3 . Zimmerberg , J . & Kozlov , M . M . How proteins produce cellular membrane curvature . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 9 – 19 ( 2006 ) . 4 . Canham , P . B . The minimum energy of bending as a possible explanation of the biconcave shape of the human red blood cell . J . Theoret . Biol . 26 , 61 – 81 ( 1970 ) . 5 . Helfrich , W . Elastic properties of lipid bilayers : theory and possible experiments . Biochem . Biophys . Biol . Virol . 28 , 693 – 703 ( 1973 ) . 6 . Aghamohammadzadeh , S . & Ayscough , K . R . Differential requirements for actin during yeast and mammalian endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1039 – 1042 ( 2009 ) . 7 . Boulant , S . , Kural , C . , Zeeh , J . C . , Ubelmann , F . & Kirchhausen , T . Actin dynamics counteract membrane tension during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 1124 – 1131 ( 2011 ) . 8 . Svetina , S . & Zeks , B . Membrane bending energy and shape determination of phospholipid vesicles and red blood cells . Eur . Biophys . J . 17 , 101 – 111 ( 1989 ) . 9 . Fuller , N . & Rand , R . P . The influence of lysolipids on the spontaneous curvature and bending elasticity of phospholipid membranes . Biophys . J . 81 , 243 – 254 ( 2001 ) . 10 . Takamori , S . et al . Molecular anatomy of a trafficking organelle . Cell 127 , 831 – 846 ( 2006 ) . 11 . Fujita , M . & Kinoshita , T . GPI - anchor remodeling : potential functions of GPI - anchors in intracellular trafficking and membrane dynamics . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1821 , 1050 – 1058 ( 2012 ) . 12 . Sheetz , M . P . & Singer , S . J . Biological membranes as bilayer couples . A molecular mechanism of drug - erythrocyte interactions . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 71 , 4457 – 4461 ( 1974 ) . 13 . Decher , G . et al . Interaction of amphiphilic polymers with model membranes . Angew . Makromol . Chem . 166 , 71 – 80 ( 1989 ) . 14 . Stachowiak , J . C . , Hayden , C . C . & Sasaki , D . Y . Steric confinement of proteins on lipid membranes can drive curvature and tubulation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 7781 – 7786 ( 2010 ) . 15 . Copic , A . , Latham , C . F . , Horlbeck , M . A . , D’Arcangelo , J . G . & Miller , E . A . ER cargo properties specify a requirement for COPII coat rigidity mediated by Sec13p . Science 335 , 1359 – 1362 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Sharpe , H . J . , Stevens , T . J . & Munro , S . A comprehensive comparison of transmembrane domains reveals organelle - specific properties . Cell 142 , 158 – 169 ( 2010 ) . 17 . Roth , T . F . & Porter , K . R . Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito Aedes aegypti L . J . Cell Biol . 20 , 313 – 332 ( 1964 ) . 18 . Pearse , B . M . & Crowther , R . A . Structure and assembly of coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biophys . Chem . 16 , 49 – 68 ( 1987 ) . 19 . Thomas , P . D . & Poznansky , M . J . Curvature and composition - dependent lipid asymmetry in phosphatidylcholine vesicles containing phosphatidylethanolamine and gangliosides . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 978 , 85 – 90 ( 1989 ) . 20 . Goni , F . M . & Alonso , A . Biophysics of sphingolipids , I . Membrane properties of sphingosine , ceramides and other simple sphingolipids . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1758 , 1902 – 1921 ( 2006 ) . 21 . Hailey , D . W . et al . Mitochondria supply membranes for autophagosome biogenesis during starvation . Cell 141 , 656 – 667 ( 2010 ) . 22 . Yang , J . S . et al . A role for phosphatidic acid in COPI vesicle fission yields insights into Golgi maintenance . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 1146 – 1153 ( 2008 ) . 23 . Gall , W . E . et al . Drs2p - dependent formation of exocytic clathrin - coated vesicles in vivo . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1623 – 1627 ( 2002 ) . 24 . Zha , X . et al . Sphingomyelinase treatment induces ATP - independent endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 39 – 47 ( 1998 ) . 1026 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved R E V I E W 25 . Leibler , S . Curvature instability in membranes . J . Phys . 47 , 507 – 516 ( 1986 ) . 26 . Ford , M . G . et al . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature 419 , 361 – 366 ( 2002 ) . 27 . Lee , M . C . S . et al . Sar1p N - terminal helix initiates membrane curvature and completes the fission of a COPII vesicle . Cell 122 , 605 – 617 ( 2005 ) . 28 . Lundmark , R . , Doherty , G . J . , Vallis , Y . , Peter , B . J . & McMahon , H . T . Arf family GTP loading is activated by , and generates , positive membrane curvature . Biochem . J . 414 , 189 – 194 ( 2008 ) . 29 . Krauss , M . et al . Arf1 - GTP - induced tubule formation suggests a function of Arf family proteins in curvature acquisition at sites of vesicle budding . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 27717 – 27723 ( 2008 ) . 30 . Campelo , F . , McMahon , H . T . & Kozlov , M . M . The hydrophobic insertion mechanism of membrane curvature generation by proteins . Biophys . J . 95 , 2325 – 2339 ( 2008 ) . 31 . Stachowiak , J . C . et al . Membrane bending by protein - protein crowding . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 944 – 949 ( 2012 ) . 32 . Dannhauser , P . N . & Ungewickell , E . J . Reconstitution of clathrin - coated bud and vesicle formation with minimal components . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 634 – 639 ( 2012 ) . 33 . Settles , E . I . , Loftus , A . F . , McKeown , A . N . & Parthasarathy , R . The vesicle trafficking protein Sar1 lowers lipid membrane rigidity . Biophys . J . 99 , 1539 – 1545 ( 2010 ) . 34 . Bigay , J . , Gounon , P . , Robineau , S . & Antonny , B . Lipid packing sensed by ArfGAP1 couples COPI coat disassembly to membrane bilayer curvature . Nature 426 , 563 – 566 ( 2003 ) . 35 . Tsafrir , I . , Caspi , Y . , Guedeau - Boudeville , M . A . , Arzi , T . & Stavans , J . Budding and tubulation in highly oblate vesicles by anchored amphiphilic molecules . Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 , 138102 ( 2003 ) . 36 . Lipowsky , R . Bending of membranes by anchored polymers . Europhys . Lett . 30 , 197 – 202 ( 1995 ) . 37 . Kim , Y . W . & Sung , W . Y . Membrane curvature induced by polymer adsorption . Phys . Rev . E 63 , 041910 ( 2001 ) . 38 . Imjeti , N . S . et al . N - Glycosylation instead of cholesterol mediates oligomerization and apical sorting of GPI - APs in FRT cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 4621 – 4634 ( 2011 ) . 39 . Tooze , S . A . , Martens , G . J . & Huttner , W . B . Secretory granule biogenesis : rafting to the SNARE . Trend s Cell Biol . 11 , 116 – 122 ( 2001 ) . 40 . Vennema , H . et al . Nucleocapsid - independent assembly of coronavirus - like particles by co - expression of viral envelope protein genes . EMBO J . 15 , 2020 – 2028 ( 1996 ) . 41 . Wang , C . W . , Hamamoto , S . , Orci , L . & Schekman , R . Exomer : A coat complex for transport of select membrane proteins from the trans - Golgi network to the plasma membrane in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 973 – 983 ( 2006 ) . 42 . Shibata , Y . et al . The reticulon and DP1 / Yop1p proteins form immobile oligomers in the tubular endoplasmic reticulum . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 18892 – 18904 ( 2008 ) . 43 . Walser , P . J . et al . Constitutive formation of caveolae in a bacterium . Cell 150 , 752 – 763 ( 2012 ) . 44 . Hu , J . et al . Membrane proteins of the endoplasmic reticulum induce high - curvature tubules . Science 319 , 1247 – 1250 ( 2008 ) . 45 . Stagg , S . M . et al . Structure of the Sec13 / 31 COPII coat cage . Nature 439 , 234 – 238 ( 2006 ) . 46 . Faini , M . et al . The structures of COPI - coated vesicles reveal alternate coatomer conformations and interactions . Science 336 , 1451 – 1454 ( 2012 ) . 47 . Darsow , T . , Katzmann , D . J . , Cowles , C . R . & Emr , S . D . Vps41p function in the alkaline phosphatase pathway requires homo - oligomerization and interaction with AP - 3 through two distinct domains . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 37 – 51 ( 2001 ) . 48 . Bielli , A . et al . Regulation of Sar1 NH2 terminus by GTP binding and hydrolysis promotes membrane deformation to control COPII vesicle fission . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 919 – 924 ( 2005 ) . 49 . Brodsky , F . M . Diversity of clathrin function : new tricks for an old protein . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 28 , 309 – 336 ( 2012 ) . 50 . Luo , Y . , Zhan , Y . & Keen , J . H . Arf6 regulation of gyrating - clathrin . Traffic 14 , 97 – 106 ( 2012 ) . 51 . Wakeham , D . E . , Chen , C . Y . , Greene , B . , Hwang , P . K . & Brodsky , F . M . Clathrin self - assembly involves coordinated weak interactions favorable for cellular regulation . EMBO J . 22 , 4980 – 4990 ( 2003 ) . 52 . Den Otter , W . K . & Briels , W . J . The generation of curved clathrin coats from flat plaques . Traffic 12 , 1407 – 1416 ( 2011 ) . 53 . Nossal , R . Energetics of clathrin basket assembly . Traffic 2 , 138 – 147 ( 2001 ) . 54 . Antonny , B . , Madden , D . , Hamamoto , S . , Orci , L . & Schekman , R . Dynamics of the COPII coat with GTP and stable analogues . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 531 – 537 ( 2001 ) . 55 . Townley , A . K . et al . Efficient coupling of Sec23 – Sec24 to Sec13 – Sec31 drives COPII - dependent collagen secretion and is essential for normal craniofacial development . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 3025 – 3034 ( 2008 ) . 56 . Malhotra , V . & Erlmann , P . Protein export at the ER : loading big collagens into COPII carriers . EMBO J . 30 , 3475 – 3480 ( 2011 ) . 57 . Huang , F . & Sorkin , A . Growth factor receptor binding protein 2 - mediated recruitment of the RING domain of Cbl to the epidermal growth factor receptor is essential and sufficient to support receptor endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 1268 – 1281 ( 2005 ) . 58 . Ferreira , F . et al . Endocytosis of G protein - coupled receptors is regulated by clathrin light chain phosphorylation . Curr . Biol . 22 , 1361 – 1370 ( 2012 ) . 59 . Kukulski , W . , Schorb , M . , Kaksonen , M . & Briggs , J . A . G . Plasma membrane reshaping during endocytosis is revealed by time - resolved electron tomography . Cell 150 , 508 – 520 ( 2012 ) . 60 . Collins , A . , Warrington , A . , Taylor , K . A . & Svitkina , T . Structural organization of the actin cytoskeleton at sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 21 , 1167 – 1175 ( 2011 ) . 61 . Idrissi , F . Z . , Blasco , A . , Espinal , A . & Geli , M . I . Ultrastructural dynamics of proteins involved in endocytic budding . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , E2587 – 2594 ( 2012 ) . 62 . Fujimoto , L . M . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Traffic 1 , 161 – 171 ( 2000 ) . 63 . Saffarian , S . , Cocucci , E . & Kirchhausen , T . Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000191 ( 2009 ) . 64 . Bonazzi , M . et al . Clathrin phosphorylation is required for actin recruitment at sites of bacterial adhesion and internalization . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 525 – 536 ( 2011 ) . 65 . Cureton , D . K . , Massol , R . H . , Whelan , S . P . & Kirchhausen , T . The length of vesicular stomatitis virus particles dictates a need for actin assembly during clathrin - dependent endocytosis . PLoS Pathog . 6 , e1001127 ( 2010 ) . 66 . Hansen , C . G . & Nichols , B . J . Exploring the caves : cavins , caveolins and caveolae . Trends Cell Biol . 20 , 177 – 186 ( 2010 ) . 67 . Karpova , T . S . et al . Role of actin and Myo2p in polarized secretion and growth of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 1727 – 1737 ( 2000 ) . 68 . Zech , T . , Calaminus , S . D . & Machesky , L . M . Actin on trafficking : Could actin guide directed receptor transport ? Cell Adh . Migr . 6 , 476 – 481 ( 2012 ) . 69 . Campelo , F . & Malhotra , V . Membrane fission : the biogenesis of transport carriers . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 81 , 407 – 427 ( 2012 ) . 70 . Ferguson , S . M . & De Camilli , P . Dynamin , a membrane - remodelling GTPase . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 75 – 88 ( 2012 ) . 71 . Schmid , S . L . & Frolov , V . A . Dynamin : functional design of a membrane fission catalyst . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 27 , 79 – 105 ( 2011 ) . 72 . Boucrot , E . et al . Membrane fission is promoted by insertion of amphipathic helices and is restricted by crescent BAR domains . Cell 149 , 124 – 136 ( 2012 ) . 73 . Rawicz , W . , Olbrich , K . C . , McIntosh , T . , Needham , D . & Evans , E . Effect of chain length and unsaturation on elasticity of lipid bilayers . Biophys . J . 79 , 328 – 339 ( 2000 ) . 74 . Evans , E . & Rawicz , W . Entropy - driven tension and bending elasticity in condensed - fluid membranes . Phys . Rev . Lett . 64 , 2094 – 2097 ( 1990 ) . 75 . Van Meer , G . , Voelker , D . R . & Feigenson , G . W . Membrane lipids : where they are and how they behave . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 112 – 124 ( 2008 ) . 76 . Hochmuth , F . M . , Shao , J . Y . , Dai , J . & Sheetz , M . P . Deformation and flow of membrane into tethers extracted from neuronal growth cones . Biophys . J . 70 , 358 – 369 ( 1996 ) . 77 . Liu , J . , Kaksonen , M . , Drubin , D . G . & Oster , G . Endocytic vesicle scission by lipid phase boundary forces . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 10277 – 10282 ( 2006 ) . 78 . Sankaranarayanan , S . , Atluri , P . P . & Ryan , T . A . Actin has a molecular scaffolding , not propulsive , role in presynaptic function . Nat . Neurosci . 6 , 127 – 135 ( 2003 ) . 79 . Cocucci , E . , Aguet , F . , Boulant , S . & Kirchhausen , T . The first five seconds in the life of a clathrin - coated pit . Cell 150 , 495 – 507 ( 2012 ) . 80 . Mehlert , A . , Wormald , M . R . & Ferguson , M . A . Modeling of the N - glycosylated transferrin receptor suggests how transferrin binding can occur within the surface coat of Trypanosoma brucei . PLoS Pathog . 8 , e1002618 ( 2012 ) . 81 . Zhang , F . , Zang , T . , Wilson , S . J . , Johnson , M . C . & Bieniasz , P . D . Clathrin facilitates the morphogenesis of retrovirus particles . PLoS Pathog . 7 , e1002119 ( 2011 ) . 82 . Johnson , D . C . & Baines , J . D . Herpesviruses remodel host membranes for virus egress . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 9 , 382 – 394 ( 2011 ) . 83 . Fotin , A . et al . Molecular model for a complete clathrin lattice from electron cryomicroscopy . Nature 432 , 573 – 579 ( 2004 ) . 84 . Hierro , A . et al . Functional architecture of the retromer cargo - recognition complex . Nature 449 , 1063 – 1067 ( 2007 ) . 85 . Tanaka - Takiguchi , Y . , Kinoshita , M . & Takiguchi , K . Septin - mediated uniform bracing of phospholipid membranes . Curr . Biol . 19 , 140 – 145 ( 2009 ) . 86 . Effantin , G . et al . ESCRT - III CHMP2A and CHMP3 form variable helical polymers in vitro and act synergistically during HIV - 1 budding . Cell . Microbiol . 15 , 213 – 226 ( 2013 ) . 87 . Carnahan , N . F . & Starling , K . E . Equation of state for nonattracting rigid spheres . J . Chem . Phys . 51 , 635 ( 1969 ) . 88 . Song , Y . H . , Mason , E . A . & Stratt , R . M . Why does the Carnahan - Starling equation work so well . J . Phys Chem 93 , 6916 – 6919 ( 1989 ) . 89 . Scheve , C . S . , Gonzales , P . A . , Momin , N . & Stachowiak , J . C . Steric pressure between membrane - bound proteins opposes lipid phase separation . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 135 , 1185 – 1188 ( 2013 ) . 90 . Blondeau , F . et al . Tandem MS analysis of brain clathrin - coated vesicles reveals their critical involvement in synaptic vesicle recycling . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 3833 – 3838 ( 2004 ) . NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2013 1027 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved