royalsocietypublishing . org / journal / rsif Research Cite this article : Cavanagh H , Kempe D , Mazalo JK , Biro M , Endres RG . 2022 T cell morphodynamics reveal periodic shape oscillations in three - dimensional migration . J . R . Soc . Interface 19 : 20220081 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rsif . 2022 . 0081 Received : 28 January 2022 Accepted : 7 April 2022 Subject Category : Life Sciences – Physics interface Subject Areas : computational biology , biophysics , systems biology Keywords : T cells , morphodynamics , lattice light - sheet microscope , physics of behaviour , shape analysis Author for correspondence : Robert G . Endres e - mail : r . endres @ imperial . ac . uk Electronic supplementary material is available online at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 6084 / m9 . figshare . c . 5953609 . T cell morphodynamics reveal periodic shape oscillations in three - dimensional migration Henry Cavanagh 1 , Daryan Kempe 2 , Jessica K . Mazalo 2 , Maté Biro 2 and Robert G . Endres 1 1 Imperial College London , Centre for Integrative Systems Biology and Bioinformatics , London SW7 2BU , UK 2 EMBL Australia , Single Molecule Science Node , School of Medical Sciences , The University of New South Wales , Sydney , NSW 2052 , Australia MB , 0000 - 0001 - 5852 - 3726 ; RGE , 0000 - 0003 - 1379 - 659X T cells use sophisticated shape dynamics ( morphodynamics ) to migrate towards and neutralize infected and cancerous cells . However , there is limited quantitative understanding of the migration process in three - dimensional extracellular matrices ( ECMs ) and across timescales . Here , we leveraged recent advances in lattice light - sheet microscopy to quantitatively explore the three - dimensional morphodynamics of migrating T cells at high spatio - temporal resolution . We first developed a new shape descriptor based on spherical harmonics , incorporating key polarization information of the uropod . We found that the shape space of T cells is low - dimensional . At the behavioural level , run - and - stop migration modes emerge at approxi - mately 150 s , and we mapped the morphodynamic composition of each mode using multiscale wavelet analysis , finding ‘ stereotyped ’ motifs . Focus - ing on the run mode , we found morphodynamics oscillating periodically ( every approx . 100 s ) that can be broken down into a biphasic process : front - widening with retraction of the uropod , followed by a rearward sur - face motion and forward extension , where intercalation with the ECM in both of these steps likely facilitates forward motion . Further application of these methods may enable the comparison of T cell migration across differ - ent conditions ( e . g . differentiation , activation , tissues and drug treatments ) and improve the precision of immunotherapeutic development . 1 . Introduction Shape changes ( morphodynamics ) are one of the principal mechanisms through which individual cells interact with their environment [ 1 , 2 ] . These dynamics arise from the interplay between a multitude of molecules and complex signal - ling pathways that often organize with emergent simplicity to carry out critical cellular functions , including division and migration . T cells , specialized cells of the adaptive immune system , are highly dependent on global morphodynamics to squeeze through gaps in the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , in contrast to the ECM - degrading strategies other cells use ( e . g . tumour cells ) . Despite plasticity for adjusting the mode of migration to environmental conditions , the migration of T cells is often characterized as amoeboid : fast ( up to 25 μ m min − 1 [ 3 ] ) , with low adhesion and polarized morphologies arising due to the segregation of different cytoskeletal networks to specific subcellular compartments [ 4 ] . In this mode of locomotion , dynamic F - actin forms pseudopods at the leading edge and an actomyosin - rich uropod at the rear generates contractile forces [ 5 ] ( see figure 1 a for a schematic ) . However , this canonical migration mechanism is not fixed and T cells adapt their motility to their immediate environment . T cells are thought to toggle between exploration and exploitation states , balancing surface receptor cues for interacting with antigen - presenting or target cells ( stop ) with chemokine - driven or purely exploratory searches ( run ) © 2022 The Author ( s ) Published by the Royal Society . All rights reserved . [ 6 ] . The specific morphodynamics and force - generating mechanisms behind these states are not well understood , in part due to their large variety and adaptability in different environments [ 7 ] . Proposed methods for propulsion include leading edge extension and intercalation with the ECM ( using either low - adhesion integrin connections or surface texture for friction ) , followed by contraction of the uropod for small pore sizes [ 7 , 8 ] . In addition to creating friction for moving forward , the rearward flow of actin waves from the leading edge may connect with the ECM like a paddle [ 9 , 10 ] . However , the extent to which these methods are used in complex three - dimensional ECM environments , and their precise organization , are far from well - characterized . Accurate characterization is important as dysregulation of T cell migration processes can be highly deleterious . T cells differentiate into different effector states . For instance , antigen - specific CD4 + ‘ helper ’ T cells amplify the immune response , while CD8 + ‘ cytotoxic ’ T cells seek out and neutralize infected or cancerous cells [ 11 ] . Inadequate migration leaves infected and cancerous cells free to proliferate , while over - stimulation pseudopods nucleus actomyosinfibres e x t r a - ce ll u l a r m a t r i x ( E C M ) ( a ) ( c ) ( d ) ( b ) uropod D 1 D 2 I max = 1 2 3 15 f q x ( q , f ) y ( q , f ) z ( q , f ) surface parameterization sphericalharmonic decomposition shape descriptor incorporate invariances ( e ) 12 9 6 4 x y z uropod centroid frameA D 0 frame A frame B frame B D 0 D 0 D 1 D 2 D 3 D 4 0 s 15 s 30 s 50 s 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 m I Re ( Y lm ( q , f ) ) 0 . 4 – 0 . 4 cross - linked actin polymers ( f ) . . . 2 0 2 0 Figure 1 . T cell shape can be quantified by spherical harmonic descriptors in three dimensions . ( a ) Schematic of a T cell employing an amoeboid migration strategy to navigate through the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) in three dimensions . Actin polymerization at the front results in the formation of pseudopods , and a complex of actomyosin at the rear forms the uropod , important for stability and generating contractile forces . ( b ) Complex spherical harmonic functions , Y ml ð u , f Þ where l is the function degree ( related to frequency ) and m is the order ( rotations at each degree ; real parts shown for m ≥ 0 ) , form a basis on the surface of a sphere . ( c ) Cartesian coordinates of the cell surface , { x , y , z } , are mapped to the surface of a sphere , as parameterized by polar coordinates { θ , ϕ } . The three resulting functions { x ( θ , ϕ ) , y ( θ , ϕ ) , z ( θ , ϕ ) } are decomposed in terms of the spherical harmonic functions and transformed to be translation , scale and rotation invariant . This yields the final shape representation , D l , based on the harmonics at each energy level , l , with the exclusion of l = 0 giving the translation invariance . ( d ) Truncation of the representation at different degrees of l leads to different levels of smoothing , with l = 1 describing the ellipsoid part of the shape . ( e ) An additional descriptor , D 0 , for accounting for cell orientation , with the landmark - like smooth uropod at the rear and dynamic protrusions at the leading edge . Without this additional variable , the two cells shown have very similar descriptors . The standard deviation of D 0 across all datasets is 0 . 31 , and the standard deviations of the remaining D l are all lower . ( f ) For cases where the uropod vanishes , the landmark - like rear can still be identified by its smoothness and stationarity , compared with the dynamic leading edge , as shown in the example . For simplicity , we refer to this region at the rear as the uropod for all frames . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 19 : 20220081 2 cancauseinflammation - baseddiseaseslikeasthmaandarthritis [ 12 ] . While there are exciting immunotherapeutic avenues manipulating the migration process , these have so far disap - pointed [ 13 ] . With quantitative representations of T cell morphodynamics , their statistics can be interpreted with high precision and compared across conditions for potentially improved immunotherapeutic development , and mechanistic models can be developed [ 14 – 16 ] . One of the main challenges for analysing morphody - namics is that cells do not have obvious landmarks ( e . g . legs , eyes , wings of animals ) , and so the important degrees of freedom must be inferred from the data itself . Where there is important landmark - like information ( e . g . polariz - ation that can manifest as subtle morphological features ) , this is typically diffuse rather than precisely locatable , which further complicates quantification . Current methods therefore do not explicitly include this information . Two - dimensional cell morphologies are often quantified using Fourier descriptors . This method decomposes the cell outline coordinates as functions of rotation around the centroid in terms of Fourier coefficients , which then represent the mor - phology . This approach has revealed that amoeboid migrating cells in two dimensions , including epithelial kera - tocytes and Dictyostelium amoebae [ 14 , 15 ] , explore only a small subspace of the shapes that might be thought possible from qualitative inspection ( i . e . low - dimensionality of mor - phology ) . Furthermore , the morphodynamics within this space are composed primarily of frequently used , or ‘ stereo - typed ’ , motifs ( i . e . low - dimensionality of morphodynamics ) . Imaging of three - dimensional cell dynamics at sufficiently high spatio - temporal resolution has only recently become available through lattice light - sheet microscopy ( LLSM ) [ 17 ] . Whether T cells navigating complex three - dimensional ECM environments similarly have low - dimensional mor - phology and morphodynamics remains to be understood . Such questions in three - dimensional necessitate automated analysis even more than in two dimensions , both because such datasets are inherently harder to visualize and interpret , and because three - dimensional environments typically induce a richer variety of morphodynamics [ 18 ] . Spherical harmonic descriptors ( SPHARM ) , a three - dimensional ana - logue of Fourier descriptors , are a promising method for quantifying three - dimensional cell shape and connecting with motion [ 19 ] . However , the representations are typically too uninterpretable for exploring morphodynamics with high precision , and their use so far is primarily limited to classification or the detection of established shape changes [ 20 , 21 ] . It therefore remains an open question how best to quantify three - dimensional cell shapes without clear landmarks and interpret high spatio - temporal dynamics . Here , we sought to combine LLSM [ 17 ] with quantitative image analysis to explore the three - dimensional morpho - dynamics of cytotoxic T cells migrating in the absence of chemoattractant cues through three - dimensional collagen matrices [ 22 ] . We first created a new compact shape descriptor , based on SPHARM , but better connected to key polarization information than current approaches . We found that T cells explore a low - dimensional morphological space , and that run - and - stop migration emerges at long timescales . We explored the morphodynamic compositions of these two modes using multiscalewaveletanalysis , previouslyusedtoexplorethestruc - ture of fruit fly behaviour [ 23 , 24 ] , uncovering a global set of largely discrete stereotyped motifs . Focusing ultimately on the run mode , due to its key role in active translocation and polar - ized morphologies that are well - suited for analysis with our descriptor , we found that periodically oscillating morpho - dynamics ( every approx . 100 s ) sustain forward motion . These can be understood as a biphasic process integrating previously hypothesized propulsion mechanisms [ 9 , 10 ] , namely : front - widening and retraction of the uropod ( rear moves forward ) and rearward surface motion with forward extension ( front moves forward ) . 2 . Results 2 . 1 . T cell shape is low - dimensional We imaged primary mouse effector CD8 + cytotoxic T cells in three - dimensional collagen matrices without chemical cues , with a lattice light - sheet microscope ( LLSM ) [ 17 ] at spatial resolutions of 0 . 145 , 0 . 145 , 0 . 4 μ m and temporal resolution of approximately 2 − 5 s ( see § 4 for details on the imaging and pre - processing and electronic supplementary material , figure S1 for a representative snapshot and three - dimensional trajectories ) . Spherical harmonics ( figure 1 b ) can be used to quantify three - dimensional cell shapes , as shown in figure 1 c [ 20 , 21 , 25 , 26 ] . The spherical harmonic functions , Y ml ð u , f Þ , form a basis over the sphere , where l is the function degree ( related to frequency ) and m is the order ( rotations at each degree ) . The full approach is detailed in § 4 and summarized here . The Cartesian coordinates describing the cell surface are each mapped to a sphere , so as polar coordinates { θ , ϕ } move over the sphere surfaces , the cell surface is traced out in object space . Analogous to a Fourier decomposition , the functions describing the cell surface can be decomposed into a set of sphericalharmoniccoefficients , c ml , i with i ∈ { x , y , z } . The l = 0coef - ficients describe the centroid location , the l = 1 coefficients describe the ellipsoid part of the shapes , and so on , with increas - ing levels of detail . Truncation of the representation at a certain l max therefore leads to a representation of a smoothed version of the original morphology , where higher - frequency features are filtered out ( figure 1 d ) . Translation invariance is achieved by omitting the l = 0 coefficient , scale invariance is achieved by dividing all coefficients by V − ( 1 / 3 ) where V is the volume [ 27 ] , and rotational invariance is achieved by transforming to a new representation , { D l } l > 0 , with D l ¼ X i [ ð x , y , z Þ X l m ¼ 0 c ml , i c m (cid:2) l , i , ð 2 : 1 Þ analogous to how rotational invariance can be achieved by extracting the power spectrum from Fourier descriptors of two - dimensional cell shapes [ 15 ] . There are two key problems with the descriptor in its current form , and we made two modifications to remedy these . First , the coefficients are not linearly related to the spatial extent of different features . We therefore took the square root of each element , i . e . f D l g ! f D 1 = 2 l g , which yields a descriptor more representative than the power spectrum [ 28 ] . Without this operation , almost all variance is contained in the first ( ellipsoid ) coefficient . Second , we added an element to the shape representation to capture key polarization information lost in a purely global shape representation . At the cell rear is the uropod , a smooth round appendage that stabilizes the cell and generates contractile forces , and at the leading edge emerge dynamic , higher - frequency protrusions . The cells in r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 19 : 20220081 3 frames A and B in figure 1 e have very similar descriptors under a regular spherical harmonic representation , reflecting the similarity of their ellipsoid components , but this misses the polarization conveyed in subtler features . We therefore added an extra descriptor , linearly related to the distance between the uropod and centroid , D 0 ( see § 4 for the full expression ) . The standard deviation of D 0 across all datasets is 0 . 31 , and the standard deviations of the remaining D l are all lower , showing that frames A and B in figure 1 e are approximately two standard deviations apart along the D 0 dimension . While most cells have a well - defined uropod that can be readily identified ( e . g . frames A and B in figure 1 e ) , some can exhibit more spherical shapes , as shown in figure 1 f . However , even for these cells , there is still an ident - ifiable smooth rear opposite a dynamic leading edge , and temporal information can reveal where the uropod transi - ently forms . For simplicity , we refer to this region at the rear as the uropod for all frames . The ultimate representation of T cell shape is therefore f D l g l max ¼ 15 l ¼ 0 , with D 0 as described above and D l for l > 0 the square root of the expression in equation ( 2 . 1 ) . We used principal component analysis ( PCA ) to identify a set of uncorrelated linear features , or principal components ( PCs ) , from the initial high - dimensional shape representation , { D l } . Despite the lack of obvious constraints from manual inspection , figure 2 a shows that only three PCs are required to capture approximately 96 % of the variance in the data ( 74 % , 12 % and 9 . 8 % for PCs 1 , 2 and 3 , respectively ) . The rotational invariance means that the PCA coordinates are not invertible to unique shapes . To better isolate what fea - tures each PC describes , we therefore split the PCA space into 7 equal - length bins along each axis and plotted the T cell within each bin with the lowest value for the other PCs , shown in figure 2 b for l max = 3 reconstructions and elec - tronic supplementary material , figure S2 a for full cells ( and electronic supplementary material , figure S2 b shows the PC values of these plotted cells ) . Figure 2 c shows what D l tran - sitions these PCs correspond to , with the minimum , mean and maximum inverted for each PC ( with the other PCs set to zero ) , and electronic supplementary material , figure S2 c shows the vector composition of each PC . An increasing PC 1 represents elongation and front - widening , a decreasing ( a ) ( b ) PC 3 PC 2 PC 1 increasing with increasing PC decreasing with increasing PC D l PC 3 minimum maximum mean PC 2 PC 1 D l D l D 0 D 1 D 2 PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 PC 4 PC 5 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 explained variance ( % ) increasing PC 3 increasing PC 2 increasing PC 1 increasing PC 1 increasing PC 2 increasing PC 3 ( c ) ( d ) 4 04 04 0 0 2 4 0 2 4 0 2 4 u r o p o d c e n t r o i d Figure 2 . T cell shape is low - dimensional as quantified with three principal components . ( a ) Principal components ( PCs ) 1 , 2 and 3 capture 74 % , 12 % and 9 . 8 % ( total of 96 % ) of the variance in D l , respectively . ( b ) Shape changes associated with each PC ( l max = 3 reconstructions ) , found by splitting the PCA space into seven equal - length bins along each axis and plotting the T cell within each bin with the lowest value for the other PCs . An increasing PC 1 represents elongation and front - widening , a decreasing PC 2 represents contraction with front - widening , and an increasing PC3 represents elongation ( forward or sideways ) with the centroid moving towards the uropod . ( c ) Correspondence between the principal components ( PCs ) and D l is found by inverting the minimum , mean and maximum of each PC , with the other two PCs set to zero . Red and blue indicate decreasing and increasing descriptors , respectively , as the PCs are increased . D 0 represents the closeness between the uropod and centroid , D 1 the ellipsoidal aspects , and higher descriptors represent higher - frequency shape features . ( d ) Cell reconstructions with l max = 3 at their positions in PCA space . Darkness of colour indicates increasing PC 2 . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 19 : 20220081 4 PC 2 represents contraction with front - widening , and an increasing PC3 represents elongation ( forward or sideways ) with the centroid moving towards the uropod . Figure 2 d shows a sample of cells ( with l max = 3 ) at their locations in the PC space . Electronic supplementary material , figure S2 d shows that along the main axis of variation ( PC 1 ) , dimensionality is relatively constant , and electronic sup - plementary material , figure S2 e shows only modest differences in the spherical harmonic spectra of the low and high PC 1 populations . Uncertainty in the uropod label , a diffuse region rather than a precisely locatable point , can be quantified and propa - gated to downstream variables of interest ( electronic supplementary material , figure S3 and § 4 ) . Uropod uncer - tainty was found using the curvature around the labelled point ( electronic supplementary material , figure S3 a , b ) , and then PC uncertainties were calculated by re - computing D 0 using each point on the cell rear within this uncertainty ( elec - tronic supplementary material , figure S3 c ) . The mean per cent uncertainty in D 0 is 1 . 5 % , which is lower than the uropod uncertainty since cell rears are typically perpendicular to the axis defined by the centroid and uropod . The percentage uncertainties of the PCs ( relative to their standard deviations ) are 4 . 4 % , 0 . 3 % and 9 . 2 % for PCs 1 – 3 , respectively . 2 . 2 . Run - and - stop migration emerges over long timescale To connect morphodynamics with migration strategies , vari - ables describing cell motion are required . There are two landmark - like features of the cell that move through the ECM , the uropod and the centroid , and we calculated velocity vectors for both , invariant to cell scale ( i . e . units of s − 1 ; see § 4 ) . To ensure that uropod velocities have adequate signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) , where noise arises from uropod labelling uncer - tainty , we found for each dataset the mean time taken for the uropod to move a significant distance , τ sig , and then com - puted velocities using running means over position with a time window of τ sig ( see § 4 and electronic supplementary material , figure S3 d for details ) . We then calculated speeds , which are one dimension and rotationally invariant , unlike velocities . The uropod and centroid speeds alone cannot separ - ate distinct behaviours at small timescales , like translation and rotation ( electronic supplementary material , figure S4 a ) , and so we searched for a biologically meaningful reference frame . We found that long - timescale migration is typically along the axis defined by the uropod and centroid ( the UC axis ) , rather than the ellipsoid major axis ( electronic supplementary material , figure S4 b ) . The speeds of the uropod and centroid along this axis then better differentiate distinct motifs ( electronic sup - plementary material , figure S4 c ) and electronic supplementary material , figure S4 d shows that these describe largely irrevers - ible motion . The former has lower variance and fewer reversals ( electronic supplementary material , figure S4 d ) , and figure 1 f and electronic supplementary material , video S9 show dynamics that we observed in some datasets , where the cell appears to test routes with multiple extensions and retractions but a relatively static uropod , before committing with the uropod . We therefore selected uropod speed along the UC axis as the variable for cell motion ( figure 3 a ) , and henceforth refer to it simply as speed . Two migration modes separate out at long timescales , as shown in plots of cumulative speed ( figure 3 b ) : repeated phases of high speed , making significant progress forward , e . g . cell A ; and lower speeds , yielding little progress , despite significant uropod motion in some cases , e . g . cell B ( figure 3 c ) . Figure 3 d shows that , while at small times the dynamics can be indistinguishable ( both modes have phases of near - zero speed ) , run - and - stop bimodality emerges at approxi - mately 150 s . This bimodality is consistent with conclusions from lower - resolution experiments , where long - timescale tra - jectories of single cells have been modelled with Lévy - type random walks ( characteristic of switching between stop and run modes ) [ 29 ] . Interestingly , another study suggested more complex statistics , with cells divided into sub - populations described by distinct random walk models [ 30 ] . PCs 1 and 2 have a stronger correlation with run - and - stop mode than speed , indicating that shape is specialized more for migration mode than instantaneous speed , with cells in the run mode longer and thinner than those in the stop mode ( electronic sup - plementary material , figure S5 a ) . We next explored the morphodynamics behind these migration modes . 2 . 3 . Stereotyped morphodynamics underlie migration modes We analysed longer duration datasets for each of the run and stop modes to investigate how they differ ( electronic sup - plementary material , videos S1 – 4 and 5 – 8 for the run and stop modes , respectively ) . We first computed the autocorrela - tion functions ( ACF ) of the shape ( PCs 1 – 3 ) and speed dynamics ( using high SNR timeseries ; see § 4 for details ) . The ACF is the correlation of a timeseries with a lagged version of itself , as a function of the lag , which can reveal the presence of latent variables preserving information across time . We found an autocorrelation decay time , τ ACF , by fitting an expo - nential decay model to the peaks of the oscillating ACFs ( electronic supplementary material , figure S5 b ) , and these decay times are indicative of the timescales over which pro - cesses are likely guided more by internal cytoskeletal machinery than stochastic external cues . For the stop mode , PC 3 is more autocorrelated than the other variables ( mean τ ACF ∼ 250 s compared with approx . 150 s of the other vari - ables ; electronic supplementary material , figure S5 b ) . PC 3 dynamics are suggestive of sensing : forward extension with a tentative rearward centroid , and reaching sideways . See elec - tronic supplementary material , videos S5 – 9 , with the three included in the PC 3 ACF analysis coloured by PC 3 . For the run mode , the main differences are a decrease in the PC 3 auto - correlation ( to approx . 150 s ) and an increase in the speed and PC 2 ( contraction with front - widening ) autocorrelations ( to approx . 225 s ) . The power spectra in electronic supplementary material , figure S5 c show that the run mode has larger oscil - lations in speed and PC 2 , particularly for 0 . 005 – 0 . 01 Hz . The run mode is therefore associated with faster oscillations in speed and PC 2 that typically remain autocorrelated for longer than those of the stop mode . These ACFs give a global perspective on morphodynamics , and the presence of long timescales suggests that the morphodynamics are , as with the morphologies , low - dimensional . We therefore next zoomed in on the PC timeseries to interpret the organization of local morphodynamics , or ‘ behaviours ’ , that underlies this low - dimensionality . The continuous wavelet transform is a method for finding local morphodynamics ( behaviours ) from a timeseries of mor - phologies , and has been used to map stereotyped behaviour in r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 19 : 20220081 5 fruit flies [ 23 , 24 ] . See § 4 for the full pipeline and electronic sup - plementary material , figure S6 a for a schematic . Wavelets are used to transform the timeseries into a spectrogram with mul - tiscale dynamic information . Dimensionality reduction with t - SNE [ 31 ] can then be performed to map the spectrogram to an interpretable two - dimensional morphodynamic space , where different locations represent different local morphody - namics ( figure 4 a ) , and electronic supplementary material , figure S6 b shows the dimensionality reduction is robust across different hyperparameters . Stereotyped motifs are those that are frequently performed , and so correspond to peaks in the probability density function ( PDF ) of spectrogram embeddings in this space . We used wavelets with a maximum width of influence of 150 s , the approximate timescale of organization found from the autocorrelation analysis . We found that behaviours are organized into more of a discrete set rather than a continuum ( figure 4 a ) , forming ‘ islands ’ between which cells jump , and we could therefore categorize and interpret these individually . Figure 4 b shows key examples , with frames evenly spaced over a 150 s interval cell A ( a ) ( c ) ( d ) ( b ) time ( s ) 0 0 . 07 uropod – centroid ( UC ) axis time time ( s ) stop run cell A cell B uropod centroid cell B ( µms – 1 ) T d max D uropod j S speed cell A cell B d max speed ( s – 1 ) speedrunning mean ( s – 1 ) , t win = 100 s speedrunning mean ( s – 1 ) t win = 200 s bimodalityemerges 1 . 5 1 . 0 0 . 5 0 0 200 400 600 800 100 0 . 02 0 0 . 010 0 . 005 0 0 . 010 0 . 005 0 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 Figure 3 . Run - and - stop migration emerges over long timescales . ( a ) Speed is defined as the uropod speed along the uropod – centroid ( UC ) axis , | | ( Δ uropod / Δ t ) | | cos ϕ , with smoothed uropod and centroid locations , and a further operation for invariance to cell scale ( see § 4 ) . ( b ) Cumulative speed plots show that some cells have repeated phases of high speed ( e . g . cell A ) , while others have much lower speeds ( e . g . cell B ) . Lines are coloured by the maximum distance travelled divided by total dataset duration . ( c ) These speed differences are significant despite substantial uropod motion in some cases . Meshes are shown every approximately 104 s and 103 s for Cells A and B , respectively . ( d ) Histograms of speed with different running mean windows ( t win ) . At small timescales , differences in speed between cells can be indistinguishable because most exhibit phases of low speed , highlighted for cells A and B . However , bimodality into two modes ( run - and - stop ) emerges at around 150 s . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 19 : 20220081 6 ( with the remainder and further examples in electronic supplementary material , figure S7 ) , and electronic sup - plementary material , figure S8 shows the PC dynamics of three examples from each motif . Figure 4 c shows how these are used differently in the run and stop modes . Red and blue indicate that the speed running mean is above 0 . 005 s − 1 ( run mode ) and below 0 . 0025 s − 1 ( stop mode ) , respectively ( selected from the bimodal distribution in figure 3 d ) , and grey indicates it is in between these values ( e . g . transitions ) . In the stop mode , stereotyped motifs include static shape or minor reaching with centroid towards the rear ( 4 ) ; forward lengthening with centroid towards the front ( 5 ) ; and edging centroid forward ( 9 ) ( figure 4 b ) . In the run mode , stereotyped motifs include front - widening then streamlining and extend - ing ( 8 ) ; and retracting and front - widening then extending ( 2 ) . A probability matrix for transitions between the stereo - typed motifs is shown in figure 4 d , with rows and columns corresponding to the start and end motifs , respectively . We assigned points to the closest stereotyped motif and counted transitions only once the cell moves to a different motif ( i . e . diagonal entries are zero ) . Frequent transitions include from 3 to 7 ( retract to reach to one side ) and from 8 to 1 ( front - widen then streamline and extend to front - widening ) . We next looked in detail at the run mode , of particular interest as this is when cells use global morphodynamics for active translocation through the ECM , and because it is in all cases defined by polarized morphologies , for which our descriptor was designed . First , we repeated the wavelet analysis with the longer duration datasets of the run mode , finding more of a continuum than the global uropod centroid run 1 2 3 4 5 6 ' 8 9 10 11 2 3 4 5 8 9 11 static shape / minor reaching with centroid towards rear retract and front - widen ( then extend ) forward - lengthen with centroid towards front retract and widen front - widen then streamline and extend edge centroid forward streamline ( minor ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 from to probability – 1 stop neither ( e . g . transitions ) ( c ) ( d ) ( a ) ( b ) 0 Figure 4 . Morphodynamics are organized in stereotyped motifs . ( a ) Eleven stereotyped motifs are local peaks in a probability density function ( PDF ) over the spectrogram embeddings in morphodynamic space , where different locations represent different local morphodynamics . These form more of a discrete set than continuum , and some examples of the local PC series are shown ( red , blue and green lines for PCs 1 – 3 , respectively ) . ( b ) Example stereotyped motifs , with frames evenly spaced across 150 s . ( c ) Utilization of motifs in the stop and run modes . Red and blue indicate that the speed running mean is above 0 . 005 s − 1 ( run mode ) and below 0 . 0025 s − 1 ( stop mode ) , respectively ( selected from the bimodal distribution in figure 3 d ) , and grey indicates it is in between these values ( e . g . transitions ) . ( d ) Transition probability matrices reveal how cells move around the morphodynamic space , counting transitions only once the cell moves to a different motif . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 19 : 20220081 7 morphodynamic space , but for which stereotyped motifs can still be categorized ( electronic supplementary material , figure S9 a , b , with PC timeseries of three examples from each motif in electronic supplementary material , figure S10 ) . Electronic supplementary material , figure S9 c , d shows the speeds and transition probability matrix . Apart from a turning motif , all fall into two categories : compression , and a rearward sur - face motion with extension forward ( rearward with respect to the cell frame of reference , and relatively static in the labora - tory frame ) . The precise motifs are then variants on these base behaviours , e . g . whether there is also widening . These under - lying morphodynamics , omitting the distracting variations , are most characteristic of PC 2 dynamics , and this connection between PC 2 dynamics and migration is certainly consistent with the increased autocorrelation timescales and power of PC 2 relative to the stop mode ( electronic supplementary material , figure S5 b , c ) . To test this theory , we calculated the entropy of each PC ’ s morphodynamics . We did this by repeating the wavelet analy - sis for each PC on its own and calculating the Markov chain entropy for transitions on a grid over the resulting morpho - dynamic space ( see § 4 and electronic supplementary material , figure S9 e ) . We used grids since these dynamics formed continuums rather than discrete , categorizable mor - phodynamic spaces . We found an entropy minimum for PC 2 ( figure 5 a ) , confirming that PC 2 dynamics are the most stereotyped . Figure 5 b shows how all four cells follow the same circular oscillations of varying radius in the space of PC 2 morphodynamics . Electronic supplementary material , videos S1 – 4 are labelled as cells 1 – 4 . Outer and inner rings e n t r opy ( b it s ) cell 3 cell 4 cell 1 cell 2 PC 2 morphodynamics 75 s 75 s 20 s 50 s 80 s 110 s 0 s 25 s 50 s 75 s 100 s 125 s 150 s 175 s 200 s 225 s rearward surface motion lab - frame marker contract and front - widen rearward surface motion speed 0 s p ee d ( s – 1 ) 0 . 003 – 0 . 2 PC 2 0 . 28 pseudopodpushesthrough front - widens as rear is retracted uropodmoves centroidmoves ) PC 2 0 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 7 – 0 . 2 cell 1 ( a ) ( c ) ( d ) ( b ) combined PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 1 . 5 1 . 4 1 . 3 1 . 2 1 . 1 1 . 0 0 . 9 0 . 8 0 . 7 0 . 6 Figure 5 . Periodic oscillations in PC 2 underlie the run mode . ( a ) Entropy of the run mode marginal dynamics for each PC ( 5 repeats for each ) shows a minimum for PC 2 , and therefore that these dynamics are the most stereotyped , consistent with the autocorrelation results of electronic supplementary material , figure S5 b . Markov chain entropies were calculated for transitions on grids over morphodynamic spaces for each PC , found by repeating the wavelet analysis with each PC on its own . ( b ) Dynamics in the PC 2 morphodynamic space for the run mode , where different locations represent different local PC 2 morphodynamics ( and decreasing PC 2 represents contraction and front - widening ) . Tracking the trajectories of the longer duration datasets reveals periodic oscillations of varying ampli - tude . Local PC 2 dynamics in 150 s windows are shown inset at key points in the morphodynamic space , showing that outer rings represent higher - amplitude oscillations , with a region for particularly large PC 2 decreases , bottom right . The top left corner represents rearward surface motion and the bottom right corner represents contraction and front - widening . Regions in between represent transitions between these motifs . Maximum uropod speeds correspond to contraction and front - widening . ( c ) These results are suggestive of the following cyclic morphodynamic propulsion mechanism : the leading edge widens , likely intercalating with the ECM and contracting the uropod ; the leading edge then extends forward , as the previously widened leading edge regions undergo a rearward motion that may connect with the ECM like a paddle . This cycle repeats every approx . 100 s . ( d ) An example showing these oscillations in cell 1 , coloured by PC 2 . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 19 : 20220081 8 represent high - and low - amplitude oscillations , respectively , and there is a region for particularly large decreases in PC 2 ( but not for large increases ) . These results , in conjunction with electronic supplementary material , videos S1 – 4 , coloured by PC 2 , suggest the following morphodynamic propulsion mechanism ( sketched in figure 5 b , c ) : the leading edge widens , likely intercalating with the ECM to contract the uropod ( PC 2 decreases ) ; the leading edge then extends for - ward , as the previously widened leading edge regions undergo a rearward flow that may connect with the ECM like a paddle , ultimately streamlining ( PC 2 increases ) . This cycle is repeated every approx . 100 s , and explains the oscil - lations in ( uropod ) speed observed in figure 3 d . Figure 5 d shows an example section of electronic supplementary material , video S1 , coloured by PC 2 . These results suggest that T cells use a highly periodic internal machinery to gener - ate a sustained migration effort , alternating between two previously proposed propulsion mechanisms to move the uropod then leading edge forward [ 7 , 9 , 10 ] . A plausible mechanistic basis for the rearward morphodynamic flow is ret - rograde cortical actin flow , a process that has been implicated in amoeboid migration in a number of cells , including T cells [ 9 , 10 ] . However , further investigations of internal actin dynamics are needed to explore this connection . 3 . Discussion T cells are a key part of the adaptive immune system , migrating through the ECM to neutralize infected and cancer - ous cells . However , their morphodynamics have not yet been completely quantitatively mapped in three dimensions . Here , we used LLSM to acquire datasets of primary mouse cytotoxic T cells migrating through a collagen matrix with high spatio - temporal resolution . Using a novel shape descrip - tor that incorporates key polarization information with a uropod label , we found that shape was low - dimensional . Run - and - stop migration emerges at long timescales ( approx . 150 s ) , and global morphodynamics are stereotyped , forming a discrete set rather than continuum . Stop mode morphodynamics primarily involve oscillations in centroid movement towards the uropod , with extension forwards or sideways ( PC 3 dynamics ) , and these remain autocorrelated for long timescales ( decay time , τ ACF ∼ 250 s ) . The run mode ( i . e . active translocation ) arises from periodic oscillations in PC 2 , with a period of approximately 100 s and τ ACF ∼ 225 s : the leading edge widens , likely using intercalation with the ECM to contract the uropod ( PC 2 decreases ) ; the leading edge then extends forward , as the previously widened leading edge regions undergo a rearward motion that may connect with the ECM like a paddle , ultimately streamlining ( PC 2 increases ) . These results indicate that periodicity in the cellular machinery helps to sustain forward motion during active translocation . Uropod tracking proved vital for differentiating key mor - phological and morphodynamic states . Uropod uncertainties were then required to ensure that analysis was at sufficient SNR , because the uropod is a diffuse region rather than a pre - cisely locatable point . In analogy to the role of the Hessian matrix in parameter fitting , we found this could be achieved relatively simply by quantifying uropod uncertainty through the curvature of the cell rear , then propagating this to down - stream variables of interest . The inclusion of landmark - like but diffuse features will likely become more important as methods for tracking intracellular structures at high spatio - temporal resolution continue to improve , meaning spatial regions can be associated with specific internal organization and activity [ 32 ] . In a small number of cases ( e . g . electronic supplementary material , video S7 ) , thin fluid - like protrusions extend out of the uropod , which cause dynamics in D 0 that are unlikely to be important for migration . To reduce these effects , in future work , we will explore labelling uropods based on smoothed reconstructions ( with e . g . l max = 15 ) . We found uropod definition reduced for some cells in a long - lived stop mode ( and therefore had high uncer - tainties for some PCs , meaning they were omitted from analyses ) . This may be indicative of loss of polarization , so for these modes alternative shape descriptors may be more appropriate . Internal retrograde actin flow has been a hallmark of cell migration models for decades , since Abercrombie first observed centripetal flow of particles on fibroblast surfaces [ 5 , 10 ] . However , Abercrombie also proposed a second pro - pulsion mechanism , where rearward flows of surface deformation might push the cell forward like a paddle . Such morphodynamic flows ( or ‘ waves ’ ) have recently been observed in two - dimensional migrating Dictyostelium cells [ 33 ] , and in T cells embedded in microfluidic channels where they can enable migration without any adhesion [ 9 ] . To our knowledge , however , they have not been character - ized in three - dimensional ECM environments . Through inhibition at obstacles and activation on the opposite side , flows may also aid turning as has been described in neutro - phils [ 34 ] , and the lateral protrusions likely serve as an anchor in confined geometries [ 35 , 36 ] . Analysis of actomyo - sin dynamics , as well as tracking of the ECM fibres ( perhaps with a contact map over the cell surfaces ) , would help test the connection between the rearward surface motion and internal actin dynamics , and the specific nature of how these interact with the ECM for anchoring and pro - pulsion . The analysis would also reveal the extent to which decreasing PC 2 ( contraction with front - widening ) is driven by contact with fibres , although the periodic PC 2 dynamics across all run mode cells suggests this may predominantly be internally regulated . Exciting areas for future work include the extension of the analysis to the timescale of hours , where the statistics and morphodynamics of switching between run and stop modes could be interpreted at the single - cell level , and the hierarchical organization of the stereotyped motifs could be mapped . There are technical challenges , however : individual cells would have to be followed and migration distances would exceed the scales of current LLSM fields of view . Data - set sizes might also become problematic , given that a 20 min video corresponds to 1 TB of data ( with one colour ) . Further - more , non - stationary issues such as ageing , differentiation and activation may come into effect [ 37 ] . It would also be interesting to build statistical models of T cell morpho - dynamics [ 16 ] , which may then enable the development of mechanistic models [ 38 ] , connecting morphodynamics to both extracellular and intracellular processes . Ultimately , we hope quantitative morphodynamic ana - lyses of T cells navigating the complex ECM environment will aid comparison of migration across different conditions ( e . g . tissues , drugs and cell mutants ) . In particular , the preva - lence and switching between human - labelled modes of r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 19 : 20220081 9 migration such as chimneying , mesenchymal , amoeboid ( blebbing ) , finger - like and rear - squeezing could be put on firm objective grounds [ 38 , 39 ] . These advanced morpho - dynamic analyses will in turn help the development of mechanistic models , with a view to enhanced understanding of , and more effective , immunotherapeutics . 4 . Methods 4 . 1 . Lattice light - sheet microscopy imaging and pre - processing 4 . 1 . 1 . Lattice light - sheet microscopy LLSM experiments were either performed on a custom - built system described in [ 40 ] , or on a Zeiss Lattice Light Sheet 7 microscope ( Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) . OT1 - Lifeact - GFP T cells [ 41 ] labelled with CellTracker Deep Red dye were excited at 642 nm , OT1 - mT / mG at 561 nm and plain OT1 - Lifeact - GFP T cells at 488 nm . For all experiments performed on the home - built system , Point Spread Functions ( PSFs ) were measured using 200 nm Tetraspeck beads . The acquired datasets were des - kewed and deconvolved using LLSpy , a Python interface for processing of LLSM data . Deconvolution was performed using a Richardson – Lucy algorithm using the PSFs generated for each excitation wavelength . Datasets acquired on the Zeiss system were deskewed using the Zeiss Zen ( blue edition ) soft - ware . All data were acquired at 37°C and 5 % humidified CO 2 . The voxel size was 0 . 1 × 01 × 0 . 2 μ m 3 for the home - built system and 0 . 145 × 0 . 145 × 0 . 4 μ m 3 for the Zeiss system . The temporal resolution was 2 . 5 s per frame for the OT1 - mT / mG datasets , 5 . 6 s per frame for the OT1 - Lifeact - GFP - CellTracker Deep Red datasets ( both imaged on the home - built system ) and 4 . 17 s per frame for the plain OT1 - Lifeact - GFP datasets imaged on the Zeiss system . We collected 29 datasets with 2850 frames altogether and a mean and standard deviation across datasets of 98 and 78 , respectively . 4 . 1 . 2 . Image segmentation Before further processing , membrane Tomato signal was denoised using a deep - learning approach based on Content - Aware Image Reconstruction ( CARE ) [ 42 ] . CellTracker Deep Red and membrane Tomato signal were bleach - corrected using Fiji [ 43 ] . Cell surfaces were segmented using Imaris 8 . 4 . 1 ( Bit - plane , Zurich , Switzerland ) . To minimize the occurrence of holes in the surfaces , depending on the signal to noise , ratio smoothing factors between 0 . 35 μ m and 0 . 8 μ m were applied . Cell surface triangulations were exported using custom M ATLAB code and again analysed for surface holes . If required , surface holes were eliminated by custom M ATLAB code based on closing operations . 4 . 1 . 3 . Sample preparation Primary murine OT1 - Lifeact - GFP and OT1 - mT / mG cytotoxic T cells were isolated and cultured as previously described [ 41 ] . All imaging was done with T cells cultured over 6 or 7 days . For imaging on the home - built system , OT1 - Lifeact - GFP T cells were labelled with 100 nM CellTracker Deep Red dye ( Thermo - Fisher Scientific , Waltham , MA , USA ) . Keeping all components on ice , collagen matrix solution was prepared by adding 10 μ l of 10 × PBS , 1 . 15 μ l 1N NaOH and 39 μ l T cell medium ( TCM ) , consisting of phenol - free RPMI 1640 , 10 % foetal calf serum , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , 10 mM HEPES , 100 U ml penicillin , 100 μ g ml streptomycin , 2 mM L - glutamine and 50 μ M β 2 - mer - captoethanol ( all from Gibco , ThermoFisher Scientific ) , to 50 μ l liquid - phase rat - tail collagen I ( approx . 3 mg / ml ; Corning , New York , NY , USA ) . Coverslip and imaging dish glass surfaces were treated with 2 % ( 3 - aminopropyl ) triethoxysilane in ethanol and 6 % glutaraldehyde to facilitate firm attachment of collagen gels . For imaging on the home - built LLSM , 6 μ l of collagen mix were placed onto surface - treated round 5 mm coverslips ( Warner Instruments , Hamden , CT , USA ) and polymerized at 37°C for 15 min . After polymerization , 10 5 T cells in phenol - free TCM were seeded on top of the gel and allowed to infiltrate over 3 h before imaging . For imaging on the Zeiss LLS system , 10 5 T cells were added to TCM during collagen matrix mix prep - aration . Seventy millilitres of collagen mix were added to well of 35 mm imaging dishes ( Mattek , Ashland , USA ) and polymerized at 37°C for 30 min . After polymerization , 1 ml of pre - warmed phenol - free TCM was added to the dish and cells were allowed to recover for 1 h before imaging . 4 . 2 . Quantifying three - dimensional cell morphology Cell morphologies were quantified using SPHARM . First , the cell surface , described with three Cartesian coordinates , { x , y , z } , is mapped to the unit sphere , described with polar coordinates { θ , ϕ } , such that the three Cartesian coordinates are functions of the polar coordinates : { x ( θ , ϕ ) , y ( θ , ϕ ) , z ( θ , ϕ ) } . { x ( θ , ϕ ) , y ( θ , ϕ ) , z ( θ , ϕ ) } are then be decomposed in terms of the spherical harmo - nics , Y ml ð u , f Þ , and only m ≥ 0 functions are required [ 44 ] . For x for example , x ð u , f Þ ¼ X 1 l ¼ 0 X l m ¼ 0 c ml , x Y ml ð u , f Þ , ð 4 : 1 Þ and the ( in general complex ) coefficients , c ml , i with i ∈ { x , y , z } , rep - resent the morphology . We used the S PHARM - PDM software package [ 44 ] to find the coefficients for the T cells with l max = 15 and cell meshes converted to voxel grids with a spatial resol - ution of 0 . 5 μ m for computational speed . The additional variable for capturing polarization information was D 0 . This was the dis - tance between the uropod and centroid multiplied by 32 , with the numerator reflecting the fact that the harmonics are summed over three spatial coordinates and the denominator accounting for the fact that the coefficients have a spatial extent double their magnitude . The uropod was manually selected ( aiming for its centre ) in alternating frames and linearly interpolated . PCA is a dimensionality reduction method that finds a set of uncorrelated linear features ( the PCs ) , which are the eigenvectors of the data covariance matrix ( which for D l has dimensions 16 × 16 ) [ 45 ] . Electronic supplementary material , figure S2 c shows the vector composition of each PC . As explored through the main text , PC 1 is largely associated with transitions between run and stop mode morphologies , PC 2 is largely associated with morphological transitions in the run mode , and PC 3 is lar - gely associated with morphological transitions in the stop mode . For implementing PCA , we used the Scikit - learn Python package . 4 . 3 . Uncertainty quantification The uncertainty in the uropod label depends on the curvature of the cell rear , which we quantified using the mean curvature aver - aged across the 15 closest mesh vertices to the labelled point ( with a sub - sampled mesh for computational speed ) . We then defined the positional uncertainty as the cord length associated with a 20° rotational perturbation . To convert this to PC uncer - tainties , we found the set of possible D 0 values using mesh vertices within this uncertainty ( i . e . within one cord length of the uropod label ) , calculated the standard deviation , and con - verted to PC uncertainties by multiplying by the cosine of the angle between the D 0 and PC vectors in { D l } space . This process was repeated for every 10 frames in each dataset to get a single characteristic uncertainty for each PC ( the mean ) for each dataset . r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 19 : 20220081 10 τ sig was calculated as the mean time taken for the uropod to move twice the cord length . Some cells have uropods that are near - stationary , and therefore have a τ sig comparable with the full dataset duration . To account for such cases , we used a maxi - mum τ sig of 100 s , in order that these could be plotted for comparison with dynamic cells , but we excluded them from quantitative analysis . 4 . 4 . Finding a motion variable for small timescales We calculated uropod and centroid velocities by finding the displacements between consecutive positions ( smoothed with running means over τ sig for both , for consistency ) and dividing by the time step and cube root of cell volume ( for invariance to cell scale ) . The ellipsoid major axis was calculated as the eigenvector with the largest eigenvalue of A T A , where A is a matrix of the l = 1 spherical harmonic coefficients [ 25 ] : ﬃﬃﬃ 3 p = ð 3 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 p p Þð c (cid:3) 1 1 (cid:3) c 11 , i ð c (cid:3) 1 1 (cid:3) c 11 Þ , ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p c 01 Þ . For comparing the uropod - centroid ( UC ) and ellipsoid axes , we used running means for uropod and centroid with a time window of 100 s for long - time - scale behaviour . We compared cells where the uropod speed was above 0 . 0025 s − 1 , i . e . moving more than a quarter cell length in 100 s , and the distance between the uropod and centroid velocity vectors was within half the uropod speed , i . e . they were aligned . 4 . 5 . Time - series autocorrelation functions and power spectra ACF and power spectra were computed for longer duration data - sets for each of the run and stop mode . We removed timeseries with low SNR : PC timeseries where the ratio of the signal stan - dard deviation to the PC uncertainty was below 2 . 5 and speed timeseries where t sig was of a similar scale to the full dataset dur - ation . There was one removal for each of PC 1 , 3 and speed , across different cells . We calculated the autocorrelation on de - trended timeseries , in order to only capture statistically signifi - cant correlations , removing trends with frequencies lower than 0 . 0025 Hz ( corresponding to a period of approximately half the total dataset duration ) with a Butterworth high - pass filter [ 46 ] . We then found a decay time , τ ACF , by fitting an exponential decay model , y ¼ e (cid:3)ð x = t ACF Þ , to the peaks of the ACF ( rather than the full ACF , which is more appropriate for non - oscillatory patterns ) . 4 . 6 . Continuous wavelet transform The continuous wavelet transform was used to find local mor - phodynamics ( or ‘ behaviours ’ ) from the PC timeseries . A wavelet that decays to zero on either side of a central peak is con - volved with the timeseries , which produces a new timeseries where each element now represents local morphodynamics . Repeating this process with dilated versions of the wavelet and stacking the resulting set of timeseries yields a spectrogram with multiscale dynamic information , where high - frequency components are analysed close in time , but lower frequency information bleeds in from afar . This spectrogram is then mapped to an interpretable two - dimensional space using t - SNE ( t - distributed stochastic neighbour embedding ) [ 31 ] , and a PDF can be computed with kernel density estimation [ 47 ] . t - SNE is a nonlinear dimensionality reduction method that uses machine learning . Two similarity metrics between data - points are defined for each of the two representations , the initial ( high - dimensional ) representation and the target ( lower - dimensional ) representation . The difference between the distributions of these similarities across all data pairs is mini - mized . For implementing t - SNE , we used the Scikit - learn Python package with default parameters : perplexity ( analogous to the number of neighbours in other algorithms ) of 30 , learning rate of 200 and 1000 iterations . We identified stereotyped motifs ( PDF peaks ) using adaptive binarization , a method that thresholds pixels in an image with a threshold value that depends on the local statistics : the mean over a surrounding square of pixels with an added bias ( we used square dimensions of 7 and a bias of 20 , found with a grid search ) . We used adaptive rather than pure binarization so that regions with high - density peaks and high PDF between then ( ‘ superhighways ’ representing common transitions ) could be separated , while lower peaks in absolute terms could also be captured . We used two simple wavelets , the ‘ Mexican hat ’ wavelet and Gaussian first derivative wavelet , with the combi - nation of the two required to capture symmetric and antisymmetric features . For organisms where the morphody - namics of interest are organized in repeating bouts , e . g . high - frequency wing - beating of fruit flies , complex wavelets that enable the removal of phase information can be useful . However , over the timescales analysed here , T cell morphodynamics are slower - changing , and phase information is important . We used six equally spaced frequencies for each wavelet from double the Nyquist limit up to the ( wavelet - specific ) frequency with width of influence corresponding to 150 s , the approximate time - scale of organization found from the autocorrelation analysis . The width of influence was found by convolving each wavelet with a square pulse to find where edge effects begin . When repeating this method for only the four run mode datasets , we used for the adaptive binarization parameters square dimensions of 15 and a bias of 50 , again found with a grid search . 4 . 7 . Comparing marginal morphodynamics of the run mode The marginal morphodynamics form continuums , and so tran - sition matrices over stereotyped PDF peaks cannot be defined . Instead , we defined transition matrices over points on a grid . We then quantified the entropy for the transition dynamics of each PC ( and compared with that of their combined dynamics ) . The entropy is (cid:3) P p i p ij log 2 p ij , where π i is the equilibrium dis - tribution and p ij is the probability that the next motif to be visited after i will be j . For plotting the PC 2 dynamics of the four cells , we perturbed the wavelets slightly to further improve the interpretability . This was done by searching locally across options for the maximum wavelet width ( keeping 150 s as an upper bound ) and finding combinations with reduced entropy . Reduced entropy was associated with reducing the Gaussian wavelet maximum width to 100 s , but with the same Mexican hat wavelets as before . Data accessibility . The cell surface segmentation data that support the findings of this study are available from the Dryad Digital Reposi - tory : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5061 / dryad . tdz08kq1r [ 48 ] . The code used is available at https : / / github . com / hcbiophys / tcells _ paper _ code . Authors ’ contributions . H . C . : conceptualization , data curation , formal analysis , investigation , methodology , software , validation , visualiza - tion , writing — original draft , writing — review and editing . D . K . : data curation , methodology , resources , software , validation , visual - ization , writing — review and editing . J . K . M . : data curation , resources . M . B . : conceptualization , data curation , project adminis - tration , resources , software , supervision , validation , writing — review and editing . R . G . E . : conceptualization , formal analysis , fund - ing acquisition , investigation , methodology , project administration , supervision , writing — original draft , writing — review and editing . All authors gave final approval for publication and agreed to be held accountable for the work performed therein . Conflict of interest declaration . We declare we have no competing interests . Funding . This work was funded by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council ( grant no . BB / M011178 / 1 ) to R . G . E . and r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 19 : 20220081 11 the Australian Research Council ( Discovery Project grant no . DP180102458 ) to M . B . Acknowledgements . The authors thank ND Geoghegan , KL Rogers , N Tubau and LW Whitehead ( WEHI , Melbourne , Australia ) for technical assistance with LLS microscopy and image denoising . M . B . acknowledges Bitplane AG for an Imaris Developer licence , and H . C . and R . G . E . thank Suhail Islam for invaluable computational support . References 1 . Yin Z , Sailem H , Sero J , Ardy R , Wong ST , Bakal C . 2014 How cells explore shape space : a quantitative statistical perspective of cellular morphogenesis . Bioessays 36 , 1195 – 1203 . ( doi : 10 . 1002 / bies . 201400011 ) 2 . Bodor DL , Pönisch W , Endres RG , Paluch EK . 2020 Of cell shapes and motion : the physical basis of animal cell migration . Dev . Cell 52 , 550 – 562 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2020 . 02 . 013 ) 3 . Friedl P , Noble P , Shields E , Zänker K . 1994 Locomotor phenotypes of unstimulated CD45RA high and CD45RO high CD4 + and CD8 + lymphocytes in three - dimensional collagen lattices . Immunology 82 , 617 . 4 . Weninger W , Biro M , Jain R . 2014 Leukocyte migration in the interstitial space of non - lymphoid organs . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 14 , 232 – 246 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nri3641 ) 5 . Dupré L , Houmadi R , Tang C , Rey - Barroso J . 2015 T lymphocyte migration : an action movie starring the actin and associated actors . Front . Immunol . 6 , 586 . ( doi : 10 . 3389 / fimmu . 2015 . 00586 ) 6 . Krummel MF , Bartumeus F , Gérard A . 2016 T cell migration , search strategies and mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 16 , 193 – 201 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nri . 2015 . 16 ) 7 . Fowell DJ , Kim M . 2021 The spatio - temporal control of effector T cell migration . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 21 , 1 – 15 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / s41577 - 021 - 00507 - 0 ) 8 . Soriano SF , Hons M , Schumann K , Kumar V , Dennier TJ , Lyck R , Sixt M , Stein JV . 2011 In vivo analysis of uropod function during physiological T cell trafficking . J . Immunol . 187 , 2356 – 2364 . ( doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1100935 ) 9 . Reversat A et al . 2020 Cellular locomotion using environmental topography . Nature 582 , 582 – 585 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 020 - 2283 - z ) 10 . Abercrombie M , Heaysman JE , Pegrum SM . 1970 The locomotion of fibroblasts in culture : III . Movements of particles on the dorsal surface of the leading lamella . Exp . Cell Res . 62 , 389 – 398 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4827 ( 70 ) 90570 - 7 ) 11 . Galeano Niño JL et al . 2020 Cytotoxic T cells swarm by homotypic chemokine signalling . Elife 9 , e56554 . ( doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 56554 ) 12 . Xia M , Sui Z . 2009 Recent developments in CCR2 antagonists . Expert Opin . Ther . Pat . 19 , 295 – 303 . ( doi : 10 . 1517 / 13543770902755129 ) 13 . Rafiq S , Hackett CS , Brentjens RJ . 2020 Engineering strategies to overcome the current roadblocks in CAR T cell therapy . Nat . Rev . Clin . Oncol . 17 , 147 – 167 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / s41571 - 019 - 0297 - y ) 14 . Keren K , Pincus Z , Allen GM , Barnhart EL , Marriott G , Mogilner A , Theriot JA . 2008 Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature 453 , 475 – 480 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nature06952 ) 15 . Tweedy L , Meier B , Stephan J , Heinrich D , Endres RG . 2013 Distinct cell shapes determine accurate chemotaxis . Sci . Rep . 3 , 1 – 7 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / srep02606 ) 16 . Tweedy L , Witzel P , Heinrich D , Insall RH , Endres RG . 2019 Screening by changes in stereotypical behavior during cell motility . Sci . Rep . 9 , 1 – 12 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 45305 - w ) 17 . Chen BC et al . 2014 Lattice light - sheet microscopy : imaging molecules to embryos at high spatiotemporal resolution . Science 346 , 1257998 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1257998 ) 18 . Driscoll MK , Danuser G . 2015 Quantifying modes of 3D cell migration . Trends Cell Biol . 25 , 749 – 759 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2015 . 09 . 010 ) 19 . Heryanto YD , Cheng CY , Uchida Y , Mimura K , Ishii M , Yamada R . 2021 Integrated analysis of cell shape and movement in moving frame . Biol . Open 10 , bio058512 . ( doi : 10 . 1242 / bio . 058512 ) 20 . Ducroz C , Olivo - Marin JC , Dufour A . 2012 Characterization of cell shape and deformation in 3D using spherical harmonics . In 9th IEEE Int . Symp . on Biomedical Imaging ( ISBI ) , Barcelona , Spain , 2 – 5 May 2012 , pp . 848 – 851 . IEEE . ( doi : 10 . 1109 / ISBI . 2012 . 6235681 ) 21 . Medyukhina A , Blickensdorf M , Cseresnyés Z , Ruef N , Stein JV , Figge MT . 2020 Dynamic spherical harmonics approach for shape classification of migrating cells . Sci . Rep . 10 , 1 – 12 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 62997 - 7 ) 22 . Galeano Niño JL , Kwan RY , Weninger W , Biro M . 2016 Antigen - specific T cells fully conserve antitumour function following cryopreservation . Immunol . Cell Biol . 94 , 411 – 418 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / icb . 2015 . 105 ) 23 . Berman GJ , Choi DM , Bialek W , Shaevitz JW . 2014 Mapping the stereotyped behaviour of freely moving fruit flies . J . R . Soc . Interface 11 , 20140672 . ( doi : 10 . 1098 / rsif . 2014 . 0672 ) 24 . Berman GJ , Bialek W , Shaevitz JW . 2016 Predictability and hierarchy in Drosophila behavior . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 113 , 11 943 – 11 948 . ( doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1607601113 ) 25 . Brechbühler C , Gerig G , Kübler O . 1995 Parametrization of closed surfaces for 3 - D shape description . Comput . Vis . Image Underst . 61 , 154 – 170 . ( doi : 10 . 1006 / cviu . 1995 . 1013 ) 26 . Kazhdan M , Funkhouser T , Rusinkiewicz S . 2003 Rotation invariant spherical harmonic representation of 3D shape descriptors . In Eurographics symposium on geometry processing , vol . 6 ( eds L Kobbelt , P Schroeder , H Hoppe ) , pp . 156 – 164 . Goslar , Germany : The Eurographics Association . ( doi : 10 . 2312 / SGP / SGP03 / 156 - 165 ) 27 . Zhao B , Wei D , Wang J . 2017 Application of spherical harmonics analysis on LBS particles and LBS fragments . EPJ Web Conf . 140 , 05002 doi : 10 . 1051 / epjconf / 201714005002 ) 28 . Shen L , Farid H , McPeek MA . 2009 Modeling three - dimensional morphological structures using spherical harmonics . Evol . : Int . J . Org . Evol . 63 , 1003 – 1016 . ( doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1558 - 5646 . 2008 . 00557 . x ) 29 . Harris TH et al . 2012 Generalized Lévy walks and the role of chemokines in migration of effector CD8 + T cells . Nature 486 , 545 – 548 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nature11098 ) 30 . Banigan EJ , Harris TH , Christian DA , Hunter CA , Liu AJ . 2015 Heterogeneous CD8 + T cell migration in the lymph node in the absence of inflammation revealed by quantitative migration analysis . PLoS Comput . Biol . 11 , e1004058 . ( doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1004058 ) 31 . Van der Maaten L , Hinton G . 2008 Visualizing data using t - SNE . J . Mach . Learn . Res 9 , 2579 – 2605 . 32 . McKayed KK , Simpson JC . 2013 Actin in action : imaging approaches to study cytoskeleton structure and function . Cells 2 , 715 – 731 . ( doi : 10 . 3390 / cells2040715 ) 33 . Driscoll MK et al . 2012 Cell shape dynamics : from waves to migration . PLoS Comput . Biol . 8 , e1002392 . ( doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1002392 ) 34 . Weiner OD , Marganski WA , Wu LF , Altschuler SJ , Kirschner MW . 2007 An actin - based wave generator organizes cell motility . PLoS Biol . 5 , e221 . ( doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050221 ) 35 . Tozluo ğ lu M , Tournier AL , Jenkins RP , Hooper S , Bates PA , Sahai E . 2013 Matrix geometry determines optimal cancer cell migration strategy and modulates response to interventions . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 751 – 762 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2775 ) 36 . Mandeville JT , Lawson MA , Maxfield FR . 1997 Dynamic imaging of neutrophil migration in three dimensions : mechanical interactions between cells and matrix . J . Leukoc . Biol . 61 , 188 – 200 . ( doi : 10 . 1002 / jlb . 61 . 2 . 188 ) 37 . Metzner C , Mark C , Steinwachs J , Lautscham L , Stadler F , Fabry B . 2015 Superstatistical analysis and modelling of heterogeneous random walks . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7516 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms8516 ) 38 . Zhu J , Mogilner A . 2016 Comparison of cell migration mechanical strategies in three - dimensional matrices : a computational study . Interface Focus 6 , 20160040 . ( doi : 10 . 1098 / rsfs . 2016 . 0040 ) 39 . Yamada KM , Sixt M . 2019 Mechanisms of 3D cell migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 20 , 738 – 752 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 019 - 0172 - 9 ) 40 . Geoghegan ND et al . 2021 4D analysis of malaria parasite invasion offers insights into erythrocyte membrane remodeling and parasitophorous vacuole r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 19 : 20220081 12 formation . Nat . Commun . 12 , 1 – 16 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 23626 - 7 ) 41 . Galeano Niño JL et al . 2020 The lifeact - EGFP mouse is a translationally controlled fluorescent reporter of T cell activation . J . Cell Sci . 133 , jcs238014 . ( doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 238014 ) 42 . Weigert M et al . 2018 Content - aware image restoration : pushing the limits of fluorescence microscopy . Nat . Methods 15 , 1090 – 1097 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / s41592 - 018 - 0216 - 7 ) 43 . Schindelin J et al . 2012 Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 676 – 682 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2019 ) 44 . StynerM , OguzI , XuS , BrechbühlerC , PantazisD , LevittJJ , Shenton ME , Gerig G . 2006 Framework for the statistical shape analysis of brain structures using SPHARM - PDM . Insight J . 1071 , 242 . ( doi : 10 . 10 . 54294 / owxzi ) 45 . Wold S , Esbensen K , Geladi P . 1987 Principal component analysis . Chemom . Intell . Lab . Syst . 2 , 37 – 52 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / 0169 - 7439 ( 87 ) 80084 - 9 ) 46 . Butterworth S . 1930 On the theory of filter amplifiers . Wirel . Eng . 7 , 536 – 541 . 47 . Davis RA , Lii KS , Politis DN . 2011 Remarks on some nonparametric estimates of a density function . In Selected worksof Murray Rosenblatt ( edsR Davis , KSLii , D Politis ) , pp . 95 – 100 . Berlin , Germany : Springer . 48 . Cavanagh H , Kempe D , Mazalo JK , Biro M , Endres RG . 2022 Data from : T cell morphodynamics reveal periodic shape oscillations in three - dimensional migration . DryadDigitalRepository . ( doi : 10 . 5061 / dryad . tdz08kq1r ) r o y a l s o c i e t y pub l i s h i ng . o r g / j o u r n a l / r s i f J . R . S o c . I n t e r f a c e 19 : 20220081 13