Volume 29 February 1 , 2018 247 Stu2 acts as a microtubule destabilizer in metaphase budding yeast spindles ABSTRACT The microtubule - associated protein Stu2 ( XMAP215 ) has the remarkable ability to act either as a polymerase or as a destabilizer of the microtubule plus end . In budding yeast , it is required for the dynamicity of spindle microtubules and also for kinetochore force generation . To understand how Stu2 contributes to these distinct activities , we analyzed the contributions of its functional domains to its localization and function . We find that Stu2 co - localizes with kinetochores using its TOG domains , which bind GTP - tubulin , a coiled - coil ho - modimerization domain , and a domain that interacts with plus - end interacting proteins . Stu2 localization is also promoted by phosphorylation at a putative CDK1 phosphorylation site located within its microtubule - binding basic patch . Surprisingly , however , we find that kineto - chore force generation is uncorrelated with the amount of kinetochore - colocalized Stu2 . These and other data imply that Stu2 colocalizes with kinetochores by recognizing growing microtubule plus ends within yeast kinetochores . We propose that Stu2 destabilizes these plus ends to indirectly contribute to the “catch - bond” activity of the kinetochores . INTRODUCTION Accurate segregation of chromosomes during cell division requires a stable attachment of sister kinetochores on each chromosome to microtubules emanating from opposite spindle poles . These kineto - chore - microtubule attachments are termed “end - on” because the kinetochore binds to the tip of the microtubule plus end ( McIntosh et al . , 2013 ) . End - on kinetochore – microtubule attachments tightly couple chromosome movement to the growth and shrinkage of the microtubule plus ends . Such plus end – coupled movements of the chromosome and its bipolar attachment to the spindle result in its accurate segregation in anaphase . The establishment and maintenance of end - on attachment re - quires the concerted action of several microtubule - binding kineto - chore proteins , microtubule - associated proteins ( MAPs ) , and mo - tors . Individual contributions of these proteins are well understood in the case of the relatively simple kinetochore found in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( Malvezzi and Westermann , 2014 ) . In budding yeast , the kinetochore initially interacts laterally with a microtubule lattice . The plus end – interacting protein ( + TIP ) Stu2 / XMAP215 plays crucial but indirect roles in this process ( Gandhi et al . , 2011 ; Vasileva et al . , 2017 ) . These lateral interactions are transformed into end - on attachment to the plus end by the microtu - bule - binding activities of the Ndc80 complex , a highly conserved kinetochore component , and the yeast - specific Dam1 complex ( Tanaka , 2010 ) . In metaphase , an assembly of ∼ 8 Ndc80 molecules and ∼ 16 – 20 Dam1 complex molecules , which likely form an oligo - meric ring , couples kinetochore movement with depolymerization at the plus end ( Lampert et al . , 2010 , 2013 ; Tien et al . , 2010 ; Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . Recent in vitro studies reveal that Stu2 is also essential for kinetochore force generation and for the “catch bond” behavior of yeast kinetochore particles , in which end - on at - tachment of the kinetochore to a depolymerizing microtubule tip becomes stronger in response to higher tension ( Miller et al . , 2016 ) . The involvement of Stu2 in force generation is surprising , be - cause it is primarily known as a regulator of microtubule polymeriza - tion dynamics . It polymerizes microtubule plus ends by acting as a tethered delivery system of tubulin dimers ( Al - Bassam et al . , 2006 ; Monitoring Editor Thomas Surrey The Francis Crick Institute Received : Aug 4 , 2017 Revised : Nov 15 , 2017 Accepted : Nov 21 , 2017 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E17 - 08 - 0494 ) on November 29 , 2017 . † Present address : Department of Kinesiology , Michigan State University , East Lansing , MI 48824 . * Address correspondence to : Ajit P . Joglekar ( ajitj @ umich . edu ) . © 2018 Humphrey et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is available to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Un - ported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : CDK1 , cyclin - dependent kinase 1 ; FRAP , fluorescence recov - ery after photobleaching ; GFP , green fluorescent protein ; HU , hydroxy urea ; MAP , microtubule - associated protein ; ORF , open reading frame ; + TIP , Plus Tip - Inter - acting Protein ; TOG , tumor overexpressed gene ; UTR , untranslated region ; YPD , yeast extract , peptone , dextrose . Lauren Humphrey a , Isabella Felzer - Kim a , † , and Ajit P . Joglekar a , b , * a Cell and Developmental Biology , University of Michigan Medical School , and b Department of Biophysics , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI 48019 MBoC | BRIEF REPORT 248 | L . Humphrey et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell the ability of Stu2 to recognize and bind to GTP - tubulin is essential . Its localization is further enhanced by mitosis - specific phosphoryla - tion at a conserved CDK1 site in the basic patch of Stu2 . We also find that Stu2 is dispensable after yeast kinetochores establish bipo - lar attachments . Using these observations , we propose that Stu2 - mediated plus - end destabilization counteracts the tension - depen - dent rescue of the plus end by the Ndc80 - Dam1 assembly . This in turn ensures that the Ndc80 - Dam1 assembly consistently interacts with the depolymerizing plus end to withstand tension and gives rise to the “catch - bond” behavior . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION As a regulator of microtubule dynamics , Stu2 performs several dis - tinct functions during mitosis . It promotes microtubule polymeriza - tion to facilitate the capture of unattached kinetochores . It is re - quired for the “catch - bond” activity of bioriented yeast kinetochores ( Tanaka et al . , 2007 ; Miller et al . , 2016 ; Vasileva et al . , 2017 ) . It also promotes microtubule turnover during metaphase ( Kosco et al . , 2001 ; van Breugel et al . , 2003 ; Wolyniak et al . , 2006 ) . Finally , Stu2 is implicated in driving spindle elongation in anaphase B ( Severin et al . , 2001 ) . Therefore , to understand how Stu2 contributes specifi - cally to the catch - bond activity of yeast kinetochores under tension , Brouhard et al . , 2008 ; Ayaz et al . , 2012 ) . Equally surprising is the ob - servation that Stu2 destabilizes microtubules in mitotic yeast cells ( Kosco et al . , 2001 ; van Breugel et al . , 2003 ) . However , the mecha - nisms by which Stu2 contributes to kinetochore force generation or to the dynamicity of spindle microtubules remain unknown . For either function , Stu2 must localize in the kinetochore near the plus end of the microtubule . Indeed , the centroid of fluorophore - labeled Stu2 molecules coincides with the expected position of microtubule plus ends within bioriented kinetochores ( which themselves appear as two puncta , each containing 16 kinetochores in metaphase ; see Figure 1A ; McIntosh et al . , 2013 ; Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . Importantly , this Stu2 localization is dynamic : Stu2 molecules turn over completely at a rate that is twice as high as the rate of tubulin turnover ( Maddox et al . , 2000 ; Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . Thus , Stu2 is in a position to contribute to kinetochore movement either directly , by generating force , or indirectly , by acting on the plus end , or via both activities . To elucidate how Stu2 contributes to kinetochore motility , we systematically analyzed the contributions of individual functional do - mains in Stu2 to its colocalization with bioriented kinetochores in budding yeast . Surprisingly , we found that Stu2 localization arises out of distinct contributions from disparate biochemical activities rather than a specific protein – protein interaction . Of these activities , FIGURE 1 : Functional domains of Stu2 . ( A ) Cartoon of the intranuclear spindle in budding yeast . Micrographs on the right reveal the colocalization of bioriented kinetochore clusters ( visualized by Nuf2 - GFP ) and Stu2 in metaphase - arrested cells . Spindle poles visualized by Spc97 - mCherry . Note that individual yeast kinetochores cannot be resolved due to the large number of kinetochores ( 16 sister kinetochore pairs ) and the small size of the spindle ( ∼ 1 . 7 μm on average , scale bar ∼ 0 . 5 μm ) . ( B ) Left : organization of the functional domains in Stu2 and their known biochemical activities . Amino acid positions are indicated by the numbers above . Right : list of mutant alleles of Stu2 studied and the designations used . Lethal mutations are highlighted by red letters ; deleterious mutations are highlighted by orange letters . ( C ) Tetrad analysis of heterozygous diploid yeast strains carrying a wild - type and a mutant allele of STU2 ( each column of four yeast colonies is produced by the four spores of a meiotic event ) . ( D ) Top : colocalization of Stu2 - GFP and Stu2 - mCherry in a heterozygous diploid yeast strain . Scatterplot : comparison of normalized fluorescence signals from metaphase kinetochore clusters in the indicated strains . Note that Stu2 is ∼ 1 . 5 - fold more abundant than the Ndc80 complex . In the heterozygous diploid strain expressing Stu2 - GFP and Stu2 - mCherry , the amount of each allele is ∼ 1 . 2 - fold higher than that of the Ndc80 complex ( n = 208 , 222 from two repeats and 308 from three repeats , respectively ) scale bar ∼ 0 . 5 μm . ( E ) Normalization scheme used to compare wild - type ( Stu2 - mCherry ) and mutant ( stu2 Δ in this case ) protein . Notice that Stu2 - mCherry compensates for the loss of localization due to the mutation . ( n = 78 from four repeats and n = 75 from three repeats . ) Volume 29 February 1 , 2018 Stu2’s role in metaphase kinetochores | 249 detect any defects in the timing of the metaphase - to - anaphase tran - sition ( Supplemental Figure S2C ) . To assess the impact of the selected Stu2 mutations on its meta - phase localization , we first verified that wild - type Stu2 - GFP and wild - type Stu2 - mCherry colocalize in similar quantities in heterozy - gous diploid strains . In these and subsequent experiments , we im - aged cells from mid – log phase cultures and analyzed only those cells wherein two distinct clusters of bioriented kinetochores were visible . We refer to the kinetochores in these clusters as metaphase kinetochores . The GFP and mCherry fluorescence signals from a cluster of bioriented kinetochores cannot be directly compared , because the fluorescence depends not only on protein counts but also on the brightness of the two fluorophores and the excitation intensity used for each . Therefore , to normalize and compare the two signals , we used the respective signals of Ndc80 - GFP and Spc25 - mCherry expressed in a haploid strain . GFP and mCherry fluorescence signals from a kinetochore cluster in this strain corre - sponds to the same number of molecules , because the composition of the Ndc80 complex dictates a 1 : 1 of GFP to mCherry stoichiom - etry . Normalization of Stu2 - GFP and Stu2 - mCherry fluorescence signals with Ndc80 - GFP and Spc25 - mCherry , respectively , con - firmed that the two Stu2 alleles colocalize with kinetochores in equal quantities ( Figure 1D ) . We used the Stu2 - GFP and Stu2 - mCherry intensities in this wild - type diploid strain to normalize the respective signals measured in other heterozygous diploid strains , so that the ability of the wild - type and mutant Stu2 proteins to localize to meta - phase kinetochores can be quantified ( Figure 1E ) . In metaphase cells , Stu2 dynamically localizes in the close vicinity of the plus ends of kinetochore microtubules ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . The TOG domains of Stu2 recognize GTP - tubulin at the plus ends of polymerizing microtubules in vitro ( van Breugel et al . , 2003 ; Ayaz et al . , 2012 ; Maurer et al . , 2014 ) . Therefore , we first tested the hypothesis that the TOG domains colocalize Stu2 with metaphase kinetochore clusters . When we introduced progressively severe mu - tations in the TOG domains to impair their ability to bind to GTP - tubulin , the localization of the mutant Stu2 diminished progressively ( Figure 2A ) . Interestingly , the loss of the mutant protein was com - pensated for by a corresponding increase in the wild - type Stu2 - mCherry . Abrogation of the GTP - tubulin - binding activity of both TOG domains significantly reduced Stu2 localization and also led to lethality in haploid strains ( Figure 1B ; Supplemental Figure S2A ) . The strong correlation between the ability of the TOG domains to recognize and bind specifically to GTP - tubulin and Stu2 localization reveals that the TOG domains play a crucial role in colocalizing Stu2 with kinetochores in metaphase . The TOG domains are unlikely to interface directly with kinetochore subunits , given that they detect the shape and curvature of the GTP - tubulin dimer ( Ayaz et al . , 2012 ) . We next studied the contribution of the basic patch in Stu2 to its localization . Electrostatic interactions between the basic patch and tubulin E - hooks should distribute Stu2 evenly along the entire lattice of spindle microtubules . However , Stu2 is mostly concentrated near the plus ends of kinetochore - bound microtubules ( Figure 1A ) . To reconcile the Stu2 distribution predicted by the activity of the basic patch with the observed localization , we hypothesized that the net positive charge of the basic patch may be neutralized by mitosis - specific phosphorylation at a putative CDK1 phosphorylation site located within the basic patch ( Aoki et al . , 2006 ) . To test this hypoth - esis , we examined the localization of stu2 - S603A , a Stu2 allele that cannot be phosphorylated at the CDK1 phosphorylation site ( Figure 2B ) . Unlike wild - type Stu2 , stu2 - 603A localized uniformly over the entire spindle . Examination of stu2 - S603A along cytoplasmic micro - tubules indicated that the spindle localization was due to the that is , bioriented kinetochores , we first sought to determine how Stu2 interacts with the kinetochore under this condition . Early studies of Stu2 describe it as a microtubule - associated protein ( He et al . , 2001 ; Kosco et al . , 2001 ) . However , we have pre - viously shown that Stu2 colocalizes to a large degree with biori - ented kinetochores . In metaphase - arrested cells , Stu2 localization is distinct from the localization of the plus - tip interacting proteins ( + TIPs ) Bim1 / EB1 , which is distributed along the entire length of the spindle , and Bik1 / CLIP - 170 , which is skewed toward the spin - dle poles ( Supplemental Figure S1A ; Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . Although we arrested cells in metaphase using conditional repres - sion of CDC20 in these experiments , this treatment does not detectably alter either the amount of tubulin polymer or its distri - bution in the mitotic spindle ( Supplemental Figure S1B ) . In fact , the spatial distribution of Stu2 molecules over the length of the metaphase spindle is identical to the distribution of the Dam1 complex ( Supplemental Figure S1C ) . It is likely that a fraction of the Stu2 molecules are microtubule - associated , given that Stu2 interacts with Bim1 and Bik1 and kinesin motors ( Wolyniak et al . , 2006 ; Gandhi et al . , 2011 ; Vasileva et al . , 2017 ) . However , because of the ∼ 250 - nm average length of the kinetochore - attached micro - tubules , optical microscopy cannot individually resolve the kineto - chore - localized and microtubule - associated populations of Stu2 molecules . To elucidate the molecular basis of Stu2 interaction with meta - phase kinetochores , we determined the individual contributions of its five functional domains to achieving its metaphase localization ( Figure 1B , left ; Al - Bassam et al . , 2006 ) . In its N - terminal half , Stu2 contains two TOG domains , TOG1 and TOG2 , which bind to GTP - tubulin present either in solution or in the form of the GTP cap on a polymerizing microtubule plus end ( Ayaz et al . , 2012 ) . The TOG do - mains are followed by an unstructured domain containing many ba - sic residues . This “basic patch” interacts electrostatically with the acidic tails , or “E - hooks , ” of tubulin . The basic patch leads into an extended coiled - coil domain that mediates Stu2 homodimerization . Finally , the C - terminal domain of Stu2 interacts with Bim1 and Bik1 ( Wolyniak et al . , 2006 ) . To dissect the contributions of these do - mains to Stu2 localization in metaphase , we used gene replacement to introduce Stu2 mutations that abrogate the activity of individual domains ( Figure 1B , right ; Materials and Methods ) . A subset of the mutations in Stu2 either severely reduced or abolished the viability of haploid yeast strains ( photographs in Figure 1C ; Supplemental Figure S2A ; also highlighted in the table in Figure 1B ) . Therefore , to study the localization phenotypes of such lethal mutations , we adopted an alternative strategy ( Figure 1D ) . We examined the colocalization of mutant and wild - type alleles of Stu2 in heterozygous diploid strains , wherein the wild - type STU2 is tagged at its C - terminus with mCherry and the mutant allele is tagged similarly with GFP . These heterozygous diploid strains are viable . Furthermore , gene replacement ensured that the expression of the mutant protein was similar to that of the wild - type protein ( Supplemental Figure S3A ) . Therefore , this strategy enabled the quantification and comparison of the abilities of the mutant and wild - type Stu2 to localize to the spindle in the same cell . One drawback of this strategy is that the mutant protein can di - merize with wild - type Stu2 , which will partially mask the effects of the mutation . Therefore , the observed phenotypes of the mutation are expected to be less severe than the true phenotypes . Consistent with this expectation , the heterozygous strains did not exhibit de - tectable defects in microtubule attachment as judged by their ability to grow on media containing low doses of the microtubule - destabi - lizing drug benomyl ( Supplemental Figure S2B ) . We also did not 250 | L . Humphrey et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell in the dimerization domain . To test this possibility , we replaced the dimerization domain with an artificial coiled - coil dimerization domain in the form of the much shorter Leucine Zipper ( GCN4 ) . It should be noted that this engineered Stu2 protein is unlikely to heterodimerize with wild - type Stu2 . Strikingly , artificially ho - modimerized stu2 - GCN4 regained its kinetochore localization , although its abundance was ∼ 50 % lower than that of wild - type Stu2 ( Figure 2B ) . The mutant allele also restored the viability of haploid yeast strains ( Supplemental Figure S3E ) . Moreover , de - spite the ∼ 50 % reduction in kinetochore - colocalized stu2 - GCN4 , kinetochore force generation remained unaffected ( Supplemental Figure S3G ) . Finally , we investigated the role of the + TIP - interaction ( + TIPI ) domain of Stu2 by replacing it with GFP ( stu2 - Δ + TIPI ; Figure 2C ) . In heterozygous diploid cells stu2 - Δ + TIPI localized within kinetochore clusters , but its abundance was significantly reduced . Despite this reduction , haploid yeast strains carrying stu2 - Δ + TIPI were viable ( Figure 2D ) . Therefore , we quantified the colocalization of stu2 - Δ + TIPI with Ndc80 - mCherry in a haploid strain . Consistent with the results from heterozygous diploid cells , stu2 - Δ + TIPI colocalized with Ndc80 , although at significantly reduced levels ( Supplemental Figure S3 , D , right , and G , left ) . The mutation also did not detect - ably affect the separation between bioriented sister kinetochores , suggesting that kinetochore force generation was unaffected ( Supplemental Figure S3G , right ) . The systematic analysis of each functional domain in Stu2 offers a key insight into the mechanism of Stu2 localization . It reveals that binding of the mutant protein along the entire microtubule lattice ( Figure 2B , white arrowheads ; also see additional examples and quantitative analysis of protein distribution provided in Supplemen - tal Figure S3 , B and C ) . The dispersed distribution also decreased the level of kinetochore - colocalized stu2 - S603A ( Supplemental Figure S3C ) . Localization of the nonphosphorylatable Stu2 is consis - tent with the expected activity of the basic patch . Conversely , neu - tralization of the basic patch via phosphorylation will significantly reduce its binding to the microtubule lattice and thereby enable other Stu2 domains to concentrate the protein near the plus end . The dimerization domain in Stu2 is not expected to be important for microtubule binding . Therefore , we studied the phenotype of a previously designed allele of Stu2 , stu2 - Δ dd , wherein this domain is deleted ( Al - Bassam et al . , 2006 ) . Strikingly , stu2 - Δ dd was unable to localize to the spindle in heterozygous diploid cells ( Figure 2B ) . The cellular level of stu2 - Δ dd was ∼ 50 % lower than expected , but this decrease does not fully explain the drastic loss in its localization ( Supplemental Figure S3A ) . The delocalization of stu2 - Δ dd is sur - prising because it retains all of its microtubule - binding activities ( Al - Bassam et al . , 2006 ) . Interestingly , stu2 - Δ TOG1 , wherein the first TOG domain is deleted , fully retained its metaphase localization even though this allele contains the same number of TOG domains as stu2 - Δ dd ( Figure 2A ; Supplemental Figure S3D ) . Therefore , we conclude that the stereotypical metaphase localization of Stu2 re - quires a minimum of two dimerized TOG domains . The observed loss of Stu2 localization could also be due to the removal of an unanticipated kinetochore - interacting motif located FIGURE 2 : The contribution of functional domains in Stu2 to its metaphase localization . ( A ) Effects of mutations in the GTP - binding TOG domains . Left : representative micrographs of heterozygous diploid yeast strains expressing mCherry - tagged wild - type Stu2 and GFP - tagged mutant Stu2 ( mutations indicated at the top of each micrograph panel ) . Right : normalized intensity scatterplots for the mutations displayed . Horizontal lines display mean ± SD . ( n = 78 , 162 , 68 , 54 , 101 from two or three experiments . ) Scale bar ∼ 1 μm . ( B ) Contributions of the basic patch and the dimerization domain ( n = 78 , 99 , 86 , 272 , respectively , from > 2 experiments ) . Scale bar ∼ 1 μm . ( Asterisks in A and B indicate statistical significance obtained from a nonparametric Mann – Whitney test . ) ( C ) Effects of the deletion of the + TIP interaction domain of Stu2 ( n = 196 , 134 for wild type and stu2 - Δ + TIPI , respectively , from two experiments ) . Scale bar ∼ 1 μm . ( D ) Benomyl sensitivity of haploid strains carrying the indicated mutations in Stu2 . mad2 Δ , which cannot survive on benomyl - containing media , was used as the negative control ( representative photograph shown , plating performed twice ) . Volume 29 February 1 , 2018 Stu2’s role in metaphase kinetochores | 251 colocalizes with kinetochores in a significantly lower amount , it enables robust growth of yeast cells on benomyl - containing me - dia . In contrast , stu2 - Δ TOG1 colocalizes with kinetochore clusters as well as wild - type Stu2 , but it does not support the growth of yeast cells under the same conditions ( Figure 2 , A and D ) . This striking observation suggests that the deletion of the + TIP inter - acting domain may impact Stu2 functions unrelated to Stu2 activ - ity in metaphase kinetochores . Because all five functional domains of Stu2 contribute to its char - acteristic colocalization with metaphase kinetochores , we could not design a separation of function mutation that selectively abrogates kinetochore interaction . Therefore , we had to resort to the condi - tional delocalization strategy based on the “Anchor Away” tech - nique in order to elucidate Stu2 function before and after kineto - chore biorientation ( Materials and Methods ; Haruki et al . , 2008 ) . We tagged Stu2 with Frb - GFP and Tub4 , a spindle pole body compo - nent chosen because of its high copy number , with Fkbp12 ( Figure 3A ) . When metaphase - arrested cells were treated with rapamycin , Stu2 - Frb - GFP strongly dimerized with Tub4 - Fkbp12 . This resulted in ∼ 70 % depletion of Stu2 from the kinetochore clusters , leaving only ∼ 2 Stu2 dimers on average per kinetochore ( Supplemental Figure S4E ) . The delocalized protein was stably anchored at the spindle pole bodies as evidenced by the lack of detectable FRAP ( Supplemental Figure S4B ) . Surprisingly , the significant Stu2 deple - tion had no detectable effect on the bioriented sister kinetochores ( Figure 3C ) . The length of the metaphase spindle also remained unaffected ( Figure 3D ) . These observations demonstrate that even after significant reduction in Stu2 colocalized with kinetochores , the steady - state distribution of kinetochores in metaphase and the balance of opposing forces that maintains a constant spindle length remain unaffected . In agreement with previous observations ( Severin et al . , 2001 ) , the depletion of free Stu2 from the spindle also reduced the rate of spindle elongation during anaphase B ( Supplemental Figure S4C ) . We next used the “Anchor Away” strategy to assess specifically the functional significance of the dynamic Stu2 localization , without perturbing the position with respect to kinetochores . For this , we dimerized Stu2 with the C - terminus of Spc24 , which is located at the centromeric end of the Ndc80 complex ( Figure 3 , E and F ) . We first observed the effect of suppressed Stu2 turnover on the formation of bipolar spindles . We anchored Stu2 to the C - terminus of Spc24 in G1 - arrested cells , released them into the cell cycle , and then experi - mentally prevented the cells from entering anaphase . As expected , a majority of untreated cells achieved kinetochore biorientation in 30 – 60 min ( Figure 3G ) . In contrast , rapamycin - treated cells experi - enced significant delays in forming metaphase spindles , even though Stu2 was statically localized in the close vicinity of its normal , dynamic localization ( Figure 3G , bar graph ; it should be noted that short - term rapamycin treatment does not have any detectable ef - fects on cell cycle progression ; Supplemental Figure S4F ) . The ob - served effects could arise from a combination of two causes . First , Stu2 plays a key role in the establishment of lateral kinetochore - microtubule interaction and its conversion into end - on attachment ( Gandhi et al . , 2011 ; Vasileva et al . , 2017 ) . Moreover , Stu2 - mediated microtubule turnover may also be essential for kinetochore biorien - tation ( Bakhoum et al . , 2009 ) . We also cannot rule out the possibility that defects in Stu2 conformation relative to the plus end induced by rapamycin - induced dimerization of Stu2 - Frb with Spc24 - 2xFkbp12 , or inadvertent impairment of Ndc80 function due to the dimerization , contribute to the observed phenotype . We also assessed Stu2 function in anaphase progression . In this experiment , we suppressed Stu2 turnover in metaphase - arrested all Stu2 domains contribute to its colocalization with bioriented ki - netochores . Thus , Stu2 localization emerges out of complex interac - tions rather than a specific protein – protein interaction between Stu2 and a kinetochore subunit . The necessity of homodimerized TOG domains for Stu2 localization is striking , because neither the TOG domains nor the homodimerization domain harbor kinetochore - in - teraction motifs . Therefore , the ability of Stu2 to bind GTP - tubulin specifically appears to be crucial for colocalizing Stu2 with meta - phase kinetochores . This observation implies that Stu2 binds tran - siently to GTP - tubulin in polymerizing plus ends embedded in the kinetochore . Consistent with this notion , Stu2 turns over at a rate that is twice as high as the rate of tubulin turnover in metaphase ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . The absence of a specific protein – pro - tein interaction in mediating Stu2 localization and its rapid turnover are both markedly different from the properties of the Dam1 com - plex , another MAP and the bona fide force generator of the yeast kinetochore . Dam1 is stably associated with the yeast kinetochore in metaphase and its localization is mediated by a specific protein – protein interaction ( Joglekar et al . , 2006 ; Lampert et al . , 2013 ; Kim et al . , 2017 ) . It is possible that there are two colocalized , but distinct , Stu2 populations : one that transiently binds GTP - tubulin in growing microtubule plus end and the other stably bound to the kineto - chore . However , the presence of a stable Stu2 population is unlikely because the kinetochore - colocalized Stu2 turns over completely , as revealed by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) ex - periments ( the convergence of the curves displaying fluorescence recovery in the bleached cluster and the loss of fluorescence in the unbleached cluster in Supplemental Figure S4A indicate that fluo - rescence recovery is only limited by the availability of unbleached fluorophores ; also see Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . The mitosis - specific phosphorylation in the basic patch of Stu2 offers a key insight into Stu2 function . The microtubule - binding ac - tivity of the basic patch of XMAP215 is required for its polymerase activity ( Widlund et al . , 2011 ) . If the basic patch is similarly required for Stu2 polymerase activity , then its negation via phosphorylation will also impair the polymerase activity by neutralizing its ability to bind to the microtubule lattice . To test this idea , we observed the growth of haploid yeast strains carrying nonlethal mutations in Stu2 on media containing benomyl ( Figure 2D ) . We reasoned that muta - tions that decrease Stu2 polymerase activity would be unsuitable for survival under conditions where microtubules are abnormally un - stable ( e . g . , in media containing a low dose of benomyl ) . Consistent with this reasoning , deletion of the first TOG domain in Stu2 ( stu2 - Δ TOG1 ) , which reduces the polymerase activity , adversely affected colony growth on benomyl - containing media ( Figure 2D ) . Con - versely , Stu2 mutations that enhance its polymerase activity should counteract the effects of benomyl and enable more robust colony growth . Indeed , a haploid strain expressing stu2 - S603A grew mark - edly better than wild - type cells on the benomyl - containing media . This observation is consistent with the notion that the basic patch contributes to Stu2 polymerase activity by enhancing its tethering near the plus end ( Ayaz et al . , 2014 ) . Our observation , when consid - ered together with the requirement of Stu2 for dynamic microtu - bules ( Kosco et al . , 2001 ; Wolyniak et al . , 2006 ) and the finding that Stu2 is a microtubule plus - end destabilizer ( van Breugel et al . , 2003 ) , suggests that mitosis - specific phosphorylation within the basic patch transforms Stu2 from a plus - end polymerase into a destabilizer . Interestingly , strains carrying stu2 - Δ + TIPI grew more robustly on benomyl - containing media than all other strains , even though the stu2 - Δ + TIPI mutation resulted in significantly slower growth on normal media ( Figure 2D ) . Thus , even though stu2 - Δ + TIPI 252 | L . Humphrey et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell FIGURE 3 : Effects of conditional mislocalization and conditional suppression of the turnover of Stu2 . ( A ) Cartoon schematic for the expected effect of rapamycin treatment on Stu2 - Frb - GFP localization with Tub4 - FKBP . ( B ) Fluorescence micrographs show Stu2 - Frb - GFP and kinetochore ( Spc24 - mCherry ) localization in metaphase - arrested cells before and after the addition of rapamycin to culture media , thus anchoring Stu2 to Tub4 - FKBP . Number in the top left corner indicates the time after rapamycin addition . Scale bar ∼ 1 μm . ( C ) Normalized intensity distribution along the spindle axis for the indicated fluorescently labeled proteins . Line scans from a strain expressing Spc24 - GFP ( kinetochore protein ) and Spc97 - mCherry ( spindle pole body protein ) are overlaid for reference . 0 min : Stu2 / Spc24 n = 84 three repeats , 60 min : Stu2 / Spc24 n = 89 three repeats . Both : Spc97 control n = 56 one repeat , Spc24 control n = 12 one repeat . ( D ) The effect of Stu2 mislocalization on the spindle length in metaphase - arrested cells . ( For each column , left to right : n = 45 , 64 , 42 , 58 , 93 , 88 , respectively ; horizontal lines display mean ± std . dev . ) ( E ) Cartoon depicts the scheme used to suppress Stu2 turnover , while maintaining its metaphase localization . ( F ) Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching quantifies the effect of rapamycin on Stu2 turnover ( DMSO n = 10 , rapamycin n = 11 cells , mean Volume 29 February 1 , 2018 Stu2’s role in metaphase kinetochores | 253 2013 ) . The opposition to depolymerization offered by the Dam1 ring also induces ten - sion - dependent rescue of the plus end : High tension makes the switch from depoly - merization to polymerization more likely ( Franck et al . , 2007 ; Akiyoshi et al . , 2010 ; Miller et al . , 2016 ) . Importantly , after such a tension - dependent rescue , the Ndc80 - Dam1 assembly must maintain its attach - ment with a growing plus end even as the tension pulling the kinetochore toward the plus end persists ( Figure 4B ) . However , with the plus end now polymerizing , the Ndc80 - Dam1 assembly can only offer frictional re - sistance of less than 1 pN ( Akiyoshi et al . , 2010 ; Miller et al . , 2016 ) . The likely outcome of this force imbalance is the detachment of the Ndc80 - Dam1 assembly from the plus end with a probability of detachment that is proportional to the magnitude of the ap - plied tension ( Figure 4C ) ( Miller et al . , 2016 ) . If Stu2 is present in this experiment , it will destabilize the growing plus end and enable the Ndc80 - Dam1 assembly to reengage the now depolymerizing plus end and gen - erate minus end – directed force opposing the applied tension ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . Thus , Stu2 will play an indirect role in realizing the “catch - bond” activity of yeast kinetochore particles . This model explains why both Stu2 and Dam1 are essential for force generation , even though the Dam1 ring alone can suffice for generating the same magnitude of force ( Volkov et al . , 2013 ; Umbreit et al . , 2014 ) . Although our model reconciles the in vivo Stu2 activity with in vi - tro data , further investigations are necessary to test it in vivo for two reasons . First , the model predicts that depletion of Stu2 should result in tension - dependent detachment of the kinetochore . However , we did not observe this in our Stu2 delocalization experiments ( Figure 3 ) . Similar observations were also made by a previous study , which found that sister kinetochore separation in metaphase yeast cells is unaffected even when microtubule turnover is suppressed by low doses of benomyl without affecting Stu2 directly ( Pearson et al . , 2003 ) . The lack of kinetochore detachment suggests that centro - meric tension rarely exceeds 4 – 5 pN , a tension range that kineto - chore – microtubule attachments can withstand for tens of minutes ( Akiyoshi et al . , 2010 ) . Second , it also remains to be seen whether the load - bearing characteristics of the yeast kinetochore derived from observations of its in vitro interaction with mammalian microtubules are the same as its load - bearing characteristics in vivo ( Akiyoshi et al . , 2010 ; Miller et al . , 2016 ) . Recent studies show that the parameters characterizing dynamic instability for yeast and vertebrate tubulin are cells and then released the cells into anaphase ( Figure 3H ) . As ex - pected , majority of the untreated cells completed anaphase by ∼ 30 min . In contrast , rapamycin - treated cells were significantly delayed . Again , there are two possible mechanisms by which Stu2 contrib - utes to anaphase progress . Stu2 may facilitate microtubule - depoly - merization coupled movement and in anaphase it may act as a microtubule polymerase on the interpolar microtubules to enable spindle elongation ( Severin et al . , 2001 ; Miller et al . , 2016 ) . These observations further indicate that Stu2 is not directly involved in kinetochore force generation . To reconcile the microtubule destabilizing activity of Stu2 ob - served in vivo with its essential role in force generation inferred from in vitro force clamp experiments , we propose the following model ( Figure 4 ) . Extensive in vitro studies reveal that the assembly of Ndc80 and Dam1 ring complex generates a minus end – directed movement coupled to microtubule depolymerization ( Figure 4A ; Asbury et al . , 2006 ; Powers et al . , 2009 ; Lampert et al . , 2010 ; Tien et al . , 2010 ) . When interacting with a depolymerizing microtubule tip , the Dam1 ring harnesses the energy released by the outward curling of depolymerizing tubulin protofilaments to withstand a large plus end – directed force ( Grishchuk et al . , 2008 ; Volkov et al . , ± SEM . ) Scale bar ∼ 1 μm . ( G , H ) Effects of suppressed Stu2 turnover on kinetochore biorientation ( G ) and on anaphase onset ( H ) . The experimental scheme is noted at top left in each panel . Representative micrographs at selected time points shown at bottom left . Cells at each time point were scored using the following morphological criteria . Prophase cells : cells with only a single kinetochore cluster ( visualized by the kinetochore - anchored Stu2 - Frb - GFP ) . Metaphase cells : mitotic yeast cells with two clearly separated kinetochore clusters . Anaphase cells : large budded cells with kinetochore clusters separated by > 4 μm . Bar graphs in each panel display the quantification obtained by combining scoring results from three independent experiments . ( In G left to right : n = 68 , 128 , 439 , 246 , 54 , 159 , 252 , 358 , respectively . In H left to right : n = 620 , 537 , 263 , 180 , 592 , 464 , 582 , 392 , 200 , respectively . ) Scale bar ∼ 1 . 5 μm . FIGURE 4 : Proposed role of Stu2 in the catch - bond activity of yeast kinetochores . ( A ) When attached to a depolymerizing microtubule tip , the kinetochore uses the Ndc80 - Dam1 assembly to generate depolymerization - coupled movement even against high opposing forces , or tension . The Dam1 ring also produces tension - dependent rescue . ( B ) When the microtubule tip is polymerizing , however , the Ndc80 - Dam1 assembly can only offer a weak , frictional resistance to tension . Under this condition , the plus - end destabilizing activity of Stu2 ensures that the Ndc80 - Dam1 assembly is able to reengage the depolymerizing microtubule tip and oppose high tension . This tension - dependent behavior leads to the catch - bond property of yeast kinetochore particles . ( C ) If Stu2 is depleted , the imposed tension will drag the kinetochore off the plus end . 254 | L . Humphrey et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell planes ) was acquired immediately before and after photobleach - ing , and then every 15 s for a total of 3 min . Maximum intensity projection of the Z - stack was used for fluorescence quantitation . The fluorescence of the photobleached kinetochore cluster ( in a 6 × 6 pixel region around the brightest pixel ) pre - and postbleach was measured , as was that of the region for each time point after photobleaching . Background fluorescence was subtracted from that of the region and a recovery graph was made using the fractional intensity at each time point relative to the pre - bleach signal . The methods used for image analysis have been described previously ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . Quantitative analysis of the spatial distribution of Stu2 and its mutant alleles This analysis was conducted following the method developed pre - viously ( Sprague et al . , 2003 ) . Briefly , a maximum - intensity projec - tion image was generated from a stack of 10 Z planes separated by 200 nm for each cell . Next , the spindle axis defined by maximum - intensity pixels in the two spindle pole body spots was rotated so that it coincides with the horizontal axis . The cumulative intensity sum of a five - pixel - wide column centered on the spindle axis was calculated along the entire spindle axis and then normalized by the total fluorescence in the entire spindle . Finally , the normalized in - tensities were resampled to obtain 16 data points separated by 100 nm each ( approximately equal to the pixel width of 107 nm ) along the spindle axis . Western blots Yeast cells were grown at 30°C to mid – log phase in YPD . 3 OD 600 cells were pelleted and lysed into Laemmli sample buffer ( Bio - Rad 161 - 0737 ) by repeated vortexing with glass beads ( Research Prod - ucts International Corps # 9831 ) and heating intermittently at 100°C . Total cell lysates were separated by electrophoresis on 10 % SDS polyacrylamide gels and then transferred to nitrocellulose mem - branes . The blots were probed with mouse monoclonal antibodies against GFP ( Clontech Living Colors A . v . monoclonal antibody [ JL - 8 ] ; 1 : 5000 ) and mCherry ( abcam Anti - mCherry antibody [ 1C51 ] ab125096 ; 1 : 2000 ) , followed by peroxidase - conjugated anti - mouse immunoglobulin G ( 1 : 15 , 000 ; Sigma , A - 4416 ) . Blots were exposed to ECL reagent ( Millipore Immobilon Western chemiluminescent HRP substrate , WBKLS0100 ) , imaged with UVP ChemiDocIt Gel Imager using Vision Works LS Software or with the Azure Biosystem c600 . significantly different and that MAPs can have distinctly different in - teractions with the two tubulins ( Podolski et al . , 2014 ; Driver et al . , 2017 ) . These differences are likely to affect transitions of the kineto - chore - attached plus end between polymerization and depolymeriza - tion and the coupling of kinetochore movement through these transitions . Quantitative in vitro and in vivo measurements of the biophysical properties of yeast kinetochores are essential to fully understand their catch - bond activity and the role that Stu2 plays in realizing this activity . MATERIALS AND METHODS Strain construction Yeast strains were transformed with PCR amplified GFP - fusion cas - settes as described previously ( Longtine et al . , 1998 ) . Gene replace - ment was achieved via homology - directed integration of a linear DNA fragment consisting of STU2 promoter ( 1014 base pairs up - stream of START ) , the STU2 ORF fused with GFP ORF followed by the G418 resistance gene , and ending in the STU2 3 ′ UTR ( 283 base pairs downstream from STOP ) in a yeast strain hemizygous for STU2 . This fragment was cloned into the pRS305 vector using Sac II and Apa I sites . Yeast culture and imaging conditions Cells were grown in yeast nitrogen base and dextrose ( synthetic me - dia ) medium or grown in yeast extract , peptone , and dextrose ( YPD ) medium at 32°C and imaged at room temperature . Before imaging , cells were washed once with synthetic media and then immobilized on coverslips coated with concanavalin A . To synchronize cells in G1 , α - factor was added at 2 μg / ml for 90 min and supplemented again for an additional 30 min . To image cell cycle progression , the α - factor was washed out , and cells were transferred to YPD media . To image metaphase - arrested cells , cells were first grown in synthetic media lacking methionine for 1 h and then transferred to media containing 2 . 75 mM methionine ( Fisher Scientific BP388 - 100 ) for 2 . 5 h . To image the release from the metaphase arrest , these cells were then washed into methionine - free media . In experiments involving the “Anchor Away” technique , rapamycin ( Fisher Scientific NC9362949 ) was added to a final concentration 1 μg / ml in the imaging culture . Dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) ( Fisher Scientific BP231 - 100 ; 1 μg / ml imaging culture ) was used as the vehicle control . To observe timing of the metaphase - anaphase transition , cells were synchronized in S phase by treating with 100 mM hydroxyurea ( HU ; Sigma - Aldrich H8627 ) for 2 . 5 h . HU was washed out before imaging . Image acquisition and analysis We used a Nikon Ti - E inverted microscope with a 1 . 4 NA , 100 × oil immersion objective . The 1 . 5 × tube lens was also used when neces - sary . Images were acquired on an Andor EMCCD camera ( iXon 3 ) using MetaMorph acquisition software . A Lumencor LED light en - gine was used for fluorophore excitation . For each experiment , a 10 - plane Z - stack was acquired with a separation of 200 nm be - tween adjacent planes for a field of cells . The total fluorescence from each cluster of proteins tagged with either GFP or mCherry was measured using ImageJ or a custom MatLab program as previ - ously described ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . To measure fluores - cence recovery after photobleaching , a solid - state 473 nm laser ( MBL - FN - 473 - 50mW , Dragon Laser ) was coupled to the micro - scope light path using the photoactivation port on the microscope body . The laser beam was focused on the sample by the objective through an ET - GFP filter cube . A selected kinetochore cluster was manually aligned in the laser focus and exposed to the laser light for 100 ms . A 5 - plane Z - stack ( 300 nm separation between adjacent ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by R01 - GM105948 from the National Insti - tutes of Health to A . P . J . We thank Anthony Hyman , Luke Rice , and Tim Huffaker for sharing plasmids . We also thank Matt Miller and Sue Biggins for helpful discussions . REFERENCES Akiyoshi B , Sarangapani KK , Powers AF , Nelson CR , Reichow SL , Arellano - Santoyo H , Gonen T , Ranish JA , Asbury CL , Biggins S ( 2010 ) . Tension directly stabilizes reconstituted kinetochore - microtubule attachments . Nature 468 , 576 – 579 . Al - Bassam J , van Breugel M , Harrison SC , Hyman A ( 2006 ) . Stu2p binds tubulin and undergoes an open - to - closed conformational change . J Cell Biol 172 , 1009 – 1022 . Aoki K , Nakaseko Y , Kinoshita K , Goshima G , Yanagida M ( 2006 ) . CDC2 phosphorylation of the fission yeast dis1 ensures accurate chromosome segregation . Curr Biol 16 , 1627 – 1635 . Aravamudhan P , Felzer - Kim I , Gurunathan K , Joglekar AP ( 2014 ) . Assem - bling the protein architecture of the budding yeast kinetochore – microtu - bule attachment using FRET . Curr Biol 24 , 1437 – 1446 . Volume 29 February 1 , 2018 Stu2’s role in metaphase kinetochores | 255 Malvezzi F , Westermann S ( 2014 ) . “Uno , nessuno e centomila” : the different faces of the budding yeast kinetochore . Chromosoma 123 , 447 – 457 . Maurer SP , Cade NI , Bohner G , Gustafsson N , Boutant E , Surrey T ( 2014 ) . EB1 accelerates two conformational transitions important for microtu - bule maturation and dynamics . Curr Biol 24 , 372 – 384 . McIntosh JR , O’Toole E , Zhudenkov K , Morphew M , Schwartz C , Ataul - lakhanov FI , Grishchuk EL ( 2013 ) . Conserved and divergent features of kinetochores and spindle microtubule ends from five species . J Cell Biol 200 , 459 – 474 . Miller MP , Asbury CL , Biggins S ( 2016 ) . A TOG protein confers tension sen - sitivity to kinetochore – microtubule attachments . Cell 165 , 1428 – 1439 . Pearson CG , Maddox PS , Zarzar TR , Salmon ED , Bloom K ( 2003 ) . Yeast kinetochores do not stabilize Stu2p - dependent spindle microtubule dynamics . Mol Biol Cell 14 , 4181 – 4195 . Podolski M , Mahamdeh M , Howard J ( 2014 ) . Stu2 , the budding yeast XMAP215 / Dis1 homolog , promotes assembly of yeast microtubules by increasing growth rate and decreasing catastrophe frequency . J Biol Chem 289 , 28087 – 28093 . Powers AF , Franck AD , Gestaut DR , Cooper J , Gracyzk B , Wei RR , Wordeman L , Davis TN , Asbury CL ( 2009 ) . The Ndc80 kinetochore complex forms load - bearing attachments to dynamic microtubule tips via biased diffu - sion . Cell 136 , 865 – 875 . Severin F , Habermann B , Huffaker T , Hyman T ( 2001 ) . Stu2 promotes mitotic spindle elongation in anaphase . J Cell Biol 153 , 435 – 442 . Sprague BL , Pearson CG , Maddox PS , Bloom KS , Salmon ED , Odde DJ ( 2003 ) . Mechanisms of microtubule - based kinetochore positioning in the yeast metaphase spindle . Biophys J 84 , 3529 – 3546 . Tanaka K , Kitamura E , Kitamura Y , Tanaka TU ( 2007 ) . Molecular mechanisms of microtubule - dependent kinetochore transport toward spindle poles . J Cell Biol 178 , 269 – 281 . Tanaka TU ( 2010 ) . Kinetochore – microtubule interactions : steps towards bi - orientation . EMBO J 29 , 4070 – 4082 . Tien JF , Umbreit NT , Gestaut DR , Franck AD , Cooper J , Wordeman L , Gonen T , Asbury CL , Davis TN ( 2010 ) . Cooperation of the Dam1 and Ndc80 kinetochore complexes enhances microtubule coupling and is regulated by aurora B . J Cell Biol 189 , 713 – 723 . Umbreit NT , Miller MP , Tien JF , Ortola JC , Gui L , Lee KK , Biggins S , Asbury CL , Davis TN ( 2014 ) . Kinetochores require oligomerization of Dam1 complex to maintain microtubule attachments against tension and promote biorientation . Nat Commun 5 , 4951 . van Breugel M , Drechsel D , Hyman A ( 2003 ) . Stu2p , the budding yeast member of the conserved Dis1 / XMAP215 family of microtubule - associ - ated proteins is a plus end - binding microtubule destabilizer . J Cell Biol 161 , 359 – 369 . Vasileva V , Gierlinski M , Yue Z , O’Reilly N , Kitamura E , Tanaka TU ( 2017 ) . Molecular mechanisms facilitating the initial kinetochore encounter with spindle microtubules . J Cell Biol , doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201608122 . Volkov VA , Zaytsev AV , Gudimchuk N , Grissom PM , Gintsburg AL , Ataullakhanov FI , McIntosh JR , Grishchuk EL ( 2013 ) . Long tethers pro - vide high - force coupling of the Dam1 ring to shortening microtubules . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 , 7708 – 7713 . Widlund PO , Stear JH , Pozniakovsky A , Zanic M , Reber S , Brouhard GJ , Hyman AA , Howard J ( 2011 ) . XMAP215 polymerase activity is built by combining multiple tubulin - binding TOG domains and a basic lattice - binding region . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 , 2741 – 2746 . Wolyniak MJ , Blake - Hodek K , Kosco K , Hwang E , You L , Huffaker TC ( 2006 ) . The regulation of microtubule dynamics in Saccharomyces cerevi - siae by three interacting plus - end tracking proteins . Mol Biol Cell 17 , 2789 – 2798 . Asbury CL , Gestaut DR , Powers AF , Franck AD , Davis TN ( 2006 ) . The Dam1 kinetochore complex harnesses microtubule dynamics to produce force and movement . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 , 9873 – 9878 . Ayaz P , Munyoki S , Geyer EA , Piedra FA , Vu ES , Bromberg R , Otwinowski Z , Grishin NV , Brautigam CA , Rice LM ( 2014 ) . A tethered delivery mecha - nism explains the catalytic action of a microtubule polymerase . Elife 3 , e03069 . Ayaz P , Ye X , Huddleston P , Brautigam CA , Rice LM ( 2012 ) . A TOG : alphabeta - tubulin complex structure reveals conformation - based mechanisms for a microtubule polymerase . Science 337 , 857 – 860 . Bakhoum SF , Genovese G , Compton DA ( 2009 ) . Deviant kinetochore microtubule dynamics underlie chromosomal instability . Curr Biol 19 , 1937 – 1942 . Brouhard GJ , Stear JH , Noetzel TL , Al - Bassam J , Kinoshita K , Harrison SC , Howard J , Hyman AA ( 2008 ) . XMAP215 is a processive microtubule polymerase . Cell 132 , 79 – 88 . Driver JW , Geyer EA , Bailey ME , Rice LM , Asbury CL ( 2017 ) . Direct mea - surement of conformational strain energy in protofilaments curling outward from disassembling microtubule tips . Elife 6 , e28433 . Franck AD , Powers AF , Gestaut DR , Gonen T , Davis TN , Asbury CL ( 2007 ) . Tension applied through the Dam1 complex promotes microtubule elongation providing a direct mechanism for length control in mitosis . Nat Cell Biol 9 , 832 – 837 . Gandhi SR , Gierlin´ski M , Mino A , Tanaka K , Kitamura E , Clayton L , Tanaka TU ( 2011 ) . Kinetochore - dependent microtubule rescue ensures their ef - ficient and sustained interactions in early mitosis . Dev Cell 21 , 920 – 933 . Grishchuk EL , Efremov AK , Volkov VA , Spiridonov IS , Gudimchuk N , Wester - mann S , Drubin D , Barnes G , McIntosh JR , Ataullakhanov FI ( 2008 ) . The Dam1 ring binds microtubules strongly enough to be a processive as well as energy - efficient coupler for chromosome motion . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 , 15423 – 15428 . Haruki H , Nishikawa J , Laemmli UK ( 2008 ) . The anchor - away technique : rapid , conditional establishment of yeast mutant phenotypes . Mol Cell 31 , 925 – 932 . He X , Rines DR , Espelin CW , Sorger PK ( 2001 ) . Molecular analysis of kineto - chore – microtubule attachment in budding yeast . Cell 106 , 195 – 206 . Joglekar AP , Bouck DC , Molk JN , Bloom KS , Salmon ED ( 2006 ) . Molecular architecture of a kinetochore – microtubule attachment site . Nat Cell Biol 8 , 581 – 585 . Kim JO , Zelter A , Umbreit NT , Bollozos A , Riffle M , Johnson R , MacCoss MJ , Asbury CL , Davis TN ( 2017 ) . The Ndc80 complex bridges two Dam1 complex rings . Elife 6 , e21069 . Kosco KA , Pearson CG , Maddox PS , Wang PJ , Adams IR , Salmon ED , Bloom K , Huffaker TC ( 2001 ) . Control of microtubule dynamics by Stu2p is essential for spindle orientation and metaphase chromosome align - ment in yeast . Mol Biol Cell 12 , 2870 – 2880 . Lampert F , Hornung P , Westermann S ( 2010 ) . The Dam1 complex confers microtubule plus end - tracking activity to the Ndc80 kinetochore com - plex . J Cell Biol 189 , 641 – 649 . Lampert F , Mieck C , Alushin GM , Nogales E , Westermann S ( 2013 ) . Molecular requirements for the formation of a kinetochore – microtubule interface by Dam1 and Ndc80 complexes . J Cell Biol 200 , 21 – 30 . Longtine MS , McKenzie A 3rd , Demarini DJ , Shah NG , Wach A , Brachat A , Philippsen P , Pringle JR ( 1998 ) . Additional modules for versatile and economical PCR - based gene deletion and modification in Saccharomy - ces cerevisiae . Yeast 14 , 953 – 961 . Maddox PS , Bloom KS , Salmon ED ( 2000 ) . The polarity and dynamics of microtubule assembly in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Nat Cell Biol 2 , 36 – 41 .