1 Evolutionary diversification reveals distinct somatic versus germline cytoskeletal functions of the Arp2 branched actin nucleator protein Kaitlin A . Stromberg 1 , Tristan Spain 1 , Sarah A . Tomlin 2 , 3 , Kristen Dominique Amarillo 1 , Courtney M . Schroeder 1 * 1 Department of Pharmacology , UT Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX 2 Division of Basic Sciences & 3 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center , Seattle , WA Running Title : Testis Diversification of Arp2 / 3 Keywords : cytoskeleton , actin , Arp2 , evolution , fertility , sperm development * Correspondence should be addressed to : Courtney M . Schroeder , UT Southwestern Medical Center , ND9 . 214 6001 Forest Park Rd , Dallas , TX 75390 , CourtneyM . Schroeder @ utsouthwestern . edu 2 Summary Branched actin networks are critical in many cellular processes , including cell motility and division . Arp2 , a protein within the 7 - membered Arp2 / 3 complex , is responsible for generating branched actin . Given its essential roles , Arp2 evolves under stringent sequence conservation throughout eukaryotic evolution . We unexpectedly discovered recurrent evolutionary diversification of Arp2 in Drosophila , yielding independently arising paralogs Arp2D in obscura species and Arp2D2 in montium species . Both paralogs are unusually testis - enriched in expression relative to Arp2 . We investigated whether their sequence divergence from canonical Arp2 led to functional specialization by replacing Arp2 in D . melanogaster with either Arp2D or Arp2D2 . Despite their divergence , we surprisingly found both complement Arp2’s essential function in the soma , suggesting they have preserved the ability to polymerize branched actin even in a non - native species . However , we found that Arp2D - expressing males are subfertile and display many defects throughout sperm development . We pinpointed two highly diverged structural regions in Arp2D that contribute to these defects : subdomain 2 and the C - terminus . We expected that germline function would be rescued by replacing Arp2D’s long and charged C - terminus with Arp2’s short C - terminus , yet surprisingly , the essential somatic function of Arp2D was lost . Therefore , while Arp2D’s structural divergence is incompatible with D . melanogaster sperm development , its unique C - terminus has evolved a critical role in actin polymerization . Our findings suggest canonical Arp2’s function differs between somatic versus germline contexts , and Arp2 paralogs have recurrently evolved and specialized for actin branching in the testis . Introduction The Arp2 / 3 complex is a highly conserved protein complex that nucleates branched actin networks and is found in almost all eukaryotes . The complex comprises seven proteins , consisting of two actin - related proteins , Arp2 and Arp3 , and five other subunits , ArpC1 - 5 . The complex docks onto a mother actin filament and promotes the nucleation of a daughter filament at a 70° angle from the mother filament 1 . Arp2 / 3 - generated branched actin networks are often found at the surface of cell membranes and are vital for many cellular processes , such as cell motility and endocytosis 2 - 4 . These actin networks are mechanosensitive and respond to environmental cues by undergoing actin reorganization , implicating Arp2 / 3 in events such as cellular signaling and energetics 5 . This complex also plays roles in genomic stability 6 and cell division , particularly in proper chromosome segregation , spindle organization , and mitotic progression 6 . Finally , Arp2 / 3 also resides in the nucleus , where it aids in DNA damage repair 7 , 8 . In addition to its many somatic roles , Arp2 / 3 has specialized roles in the germline . In Drosophila , Arp2 / 3 is required for generating actin structures found in ovaries 9 and testes 10 . Drosophila 3 ovaries have actin structures known as ring canals , which are critical for successful oogenesis and allow cytoplasmic flow to the oocyte 9 . The Arp2 / 3 complex localizes to ring canals and is necessary for their expansion in late oogenesis 9 . Drosophila sperm development also depends on Arp2 / 3 11 , 12 . Drosophila sperm develop together within cysts sharing a cytoplasm ; mature sperm must be separated following their elongation and tail development 10 . To accomplish this individualization process , an actin cone forms around each sperm within the cyst , and all cones move synchronously along the tail from the basal to the apical end of the testis 10 , 11 . The Arp2 / 3 complex localizes to the front of the cones , and branched actin polymerization aids in motility 12 . Recent studies have begun to reveal the structure and regulation of the Arp2 / 3 complex in mechanistic detail . Like actin , Arp2 and 3 contain four subdomains with an ATP - binding fold 13 . Upon docking onto the mother actin filament , Arp2 / 3 undergoes a conformational change from inactive to active , in which Arp2 and Arp3 are no longer splayed but are aligned together , like actin monomers in a filament 14 - 16 . This re - arrangement of Arps 2 and 3 allow them to become the first two subunits of the daughter actin filament 15 , 17 . Arp2 / 3 cannot nucleate actin filaments on their own 18 ; instead , nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) activate Arp2 / 3 downstream of many signaling pathways 16 . Numerous regulatory factors terminate polymerization and disassemble filaments , replenishing the monomeric actin pool for future nucleation events 19 . Filament nucleation , polymerization , termination , and disassembly are regulated by a myriad of proteins to fine - tune the timing and structural stability of branched actin networks 19 , thus contributing to the diversity of Arp2 / 3’s functional roles . Eukaryotic genomes show genetic and functional diversification of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Humans encode two isoforms of Arp3 ( Arp3 and Arp3B ) , ArpC1 ( ArpC1A and ArpC1B ) , and ArpC5 ( ArpC5 and ArpC5L ) 20 , 21 . Arp2 / 3 complexes containing ArpC1B and ArpC5L differ in their rates of actin polymerization from those containing ArpC1A and ArpC5 22 . Although Arp3B functions similarly to canonical Arp3 in actin polymerization , it diverges from Arp3 in the rate of actin network disassembly 21 . Like humans , Drosophila also exhibits diversification of the Arp2 / 3 complex . D . melanogaster encodes two isoforms of Arpc3 ( Arpc3a and Arpc3b ) . Arpc3a is expressed in all tissues , whereas Arpc3b appears to be expressed only in the ovary and localizes to intercellular bridges known as actin rings 9 . Furthermore , an Arp2 paralog , known as Arp2D , emerged in one clade of Drosophila species . Arp2D is highly expressed in the male germline and localizes to branched actin networks in the front of actin cones 23 . Arp2 / 3’s key regulators also show diversification , allowing for differential regulation of Arp2 / 3 between cell 4 types . Defects in the Arp2 / 3 regulatory system are implicated in disease 19 , 22 . Therefore , despite Arp2 / 3’s stringent conservation , multiple members of the Arp2 / 3 complex and its regulators have undergone recurrent gene duplication and diversification across phyla , suggesting that evolution is selecting for different ‘flavors’ of Arp2 / 3 for specialized roles . Here , we have discovered that recurrent diversification of Arp2 in Drosophila has led to functional specialization in the male germline . In addition to Arp2D found in the Drosophila obscura clade 23 , we found a second , independently arising gene duplication of Arp2 in the montium clade , named Arp2D2 . Both Arp2D and Arp2D2 are exclusively expressed in the male germline of their respective species . Despite their striking sequence divergence , we found that Arp2D and Arp2D2 can polymerize actin in somatic tissues in the non - native species D . melanogaster and complement canonical Arp2’s essential function in the soma . However , the more divergent Arp2D paralog cannot complement Arp2 function in sperm development , resulting in many testis defects . Arp2D diverges most from canonical Arp2 at the C - terminus and a loop found in subdomain 2 . We found that both regions contribute to defects in germline function , yet the unique C - terminus of Arp2D is essential for its somatic function . These data reveal that evolution has shaped the Arp2 structure for specialized roles in spermatogenesis . Results Recurrent invention of testis - expressed Arp2 paralogs in Drosophila species The seven - member Arp2 / 3 complex is present and evolves under stringent sequence constraints in most eukaryotes . However , the subunit Arp2 has undergone unexpected diversification via gene duplication . We previously discovered that an Arp2 paralog , Arp2D , arose via retroduplication in the obscura clade and has been retained for over 14 million years 23 . By examining additional sequenced Drosophila genomes , we found that D . kikkawai 24 and D . serrata 25 , species of the montium clade , also encoded an Arp2 gene duplication found on chromosome 2 ( Figure 1A ) . We named the newly discovered duplicate ‘ Arp2D2 . ’ We queried the Arp2D2 locus by PCR in 18 additional montium species , whose genomes were unsequenced . Together with recently published montium genomes 26 , we concluded that Arp2D2 is present in a shared syntenic location in 27 montium species with no exceptions ( Figure 1B , Figure S1A , Data S1 - 3 ) . Based on this , we conclude that Arp2D2 arose in the common ancestor of the montium group at least 15 million years ago 27 ( Figure S1A ) . Our phylogenetic analysis based on a nucleotide alignment shows that Arp2D2 sequences form a monophyletic clade that 5 is a well - supported sister clade to the montium Arp2 orthologs ( 100 % bootstrap support ) , further confirming Arp2D2 duplicated from canonical Arp2 in the common ancestor of the montium group ( Figure 1B ) . Arp2D orthologs form a separate clade with its closest outgroup being obscura Arp2 sequences , supporting independent origins of the Arp2 paralogs ( Figure 1B ) . Arp2 encodes six introns ( Figure 1A ) , yet 26 of the 27 Arp2D2 sequences have none ( the D . diplacantha Arp2D2 subsequently acquired one intron ( Figure S1B , Data S2 ) ) . Therefore , our phylogenomic analyses reveal that Arp2D2 and Arp2D both arose via independent retroduplication events in which Arp2’s spliced mRNA was reverse transcribed and inserted into the genome 23 ( Figure 1A - B ) . Subsequent to their origin , both Arp2D and Arp2D2 have been retained throughout the obscura and montium clades , respectively , suggesting that they must confer a functional advantage to their native species . Although independently derived from canonical Arp2 , Arp2D and Arp2D2 may have converged on similar sequence features associated with their testis - specific roles . However , we observed no conserved residue changes common to all Arp2D and Arp2D2 orthologs but distinct from canonical Arp2 , suggesting the two duplicates had divergent evolutionary paths ( Figure S1C ) . Moreover , when we viewed the conserved residue changes on the surface of the Arp2 structure ( where protein interactions occur ) , we did not find residue changes concentrating in one structural region , indicating no ’hot spot’ of diversification for Arp2D or Arp2D2 ( Figure S1C ) . Arp2D exhibits testis - enriched expression , unlike the ubiquitously expressed canonical Arp2 23 . We investigated whether Arp2D2 also exhibits sex - biased expression . We compared the expression of Arp2D2 mRNA between males and females in the montium species D . barbarae , D . bicornuta , D . watanabei , and D . auraria by RT - PCR analyses . We detected Arp2D2 only in males ( Figure 1C , Figure S1D - E , Data S1 ) . To determine if expression is localized to the testis , we extracted RNA from dissected D . auraria testes , separating them from the head and remaining male carcass . We detected Arp2D2 mRNA solely in the testis ( Figure 1D , Figure S1F - G , Data S1 ) . Thus , two independent gene duplications of Arp2 exhibit testis - enriched expression , suggesting recurrent Arp2 diversification may have specifically acquired roles in sperm development . Divergent Arp2 duplicates localize to actin in D . melanogaster Our previous study revealed that Arp2D , under the control of its endogenous promoter , localizes to actin in the testis of its native species , D . pseudoobscura 23 . However , it was unclear whether 6 it could also do so in heterologous species like D . melanogaster . To investigate this possibility , we studied whether divergent D . pseudoobscura Arp2D ( from the obscura group ) or D . auraria Arp2D2 ( from the montium group ) could localize to actin in D . melanogaster . We generated D . melanogaster fly lines that express the paralogs tagged with superfolder GFP ( sfGFP ) at their C - termini ( Figure 2A ) , where canonical Arp2 can be tagged without a noticeable impact on function 28 . We expected the paralogs to be expressed in both germ cells and somatic cells because they are under the control of the endogenous Arp2 promoter ( Figure 2A ) . Indeed , we found that Arp2D , Arp2D2 , and canonical Arp2 from D . pseudoobscura were highly expressed and localized to actin cones in the testis , even in the presence of endogenous D . melanogaster Arp2 ( Figure 2C ) . Actin cones are unique testis - specific actin structures that are specialized for Drosophila sperm development 10 . In flies , germ cells remain interconnected throughout development until they are fully mature , and actin cones facilitate the separation of mature sperm 10 ( Figure 2B ) . Like canonical Arp2 , which localizes to the front half of the cone to help produce the cone’s typical fan shape , we observed Arp2D and Arp2D2 also localizing to the cone’s front half ( Figure 2C ) . Based on their localization , we conclude that Arp2D and Arp2D2 fold and localize to actin , suggesting they incorporate into the D . melanogaster Arp2 / 3 complex despite their sequence divergence . Divergent Arp2 duplicates rescue actin polymerization in vivo Mutations or knockdowns of Arp2 / 3 complex components lead to lethality 3 , 9 . We next tested if the Arp2D and Arp2D2 paralogs could rescue the loss of D . melanogaster Arp2 . For this , we first generated an Arp2 - KO fly line by deleting the entire gene and replacing it with an eye - expressed DsRed cassette using CRISPR / Cas9 technology ( Figure 3A ) . Upstream to DsRed in the KO locus , we introduced an attP site , which we subsequently used for targeted transgenesis ( Figure 3A ) . As expected , our Arp2 - KOs exhibited homozygous lethality . Because Arp2 is on the X chromosome , only heterozygous Arp2 - KO females survived , whereas hemizygous Arp2 - KO males did not . We next inserted D . pseudoobscura Arp2D , D . auraria Arp2D2 , or canonical D . melanogaster Arp2 ( as a positive control ) in the Arp2 - KO locus to test for rescue . We used intronless D . melanogaster Arp2 because Arp2D and Arp2D2 lack introns , and we wanted to prevent splicing differences from leading to any phenotypes . All transgenes were introduced using the same attP site ; they all possess the same upstream and downstream ~ 1kb regions of D . melanogaster canonical Arp2 , which included the 5’ - and 3’ UTRs ( Figure 3A ) . Because Arp2D is only 70 % 7 identical to canonical Arp2 , we expected Arp2D would fail to rescue lethality , whereas Arp2D2 , being 96 % identical , was likely to rescue . We were surprised to find that we were able to obtain homozygous females and hemizygous males expressing Arp2D or Arp2D2 , suggesting both rescued the Arp2 - KO lethality phenotype . However , whether the transgene fully rescued lethality or exhibited a fitness cost remained unclear . To address this question , we crossed females and males that encode for one copy of the transgene and quantified the progeny genotypes ( Figure 3B ) . This scenario should lead to 50 % of females having two copies of the transgene and 50 % of males with one copy if there is no fitness cost . Indeed , we found that crossing both Arp2D - and Arp2D2 - expressing flies led to at least 50 % of the progeny being homozygous ( female ) or hemizygous ( male ) for the transgenes ( p < 0 . 05 , Figure 3B ) . The slight increase over the expected 50 % suggests that the X - chromosome balancer ( FM7 ) has a small fitness cost compared to the transgenes . We conclude that when canonical Arp2 is replaced with either Arp2D or Arp2D2 , no loss of fitness is detected under laboratory conditions ( Figure 3B ) . We further tested whether a fitness cost would become apparent under environmental stress . We conducted the same cross with the most divergent duplicate ( Arp2D ) under heat stress at 29°C and found complete rescue , suggesting no fitness cost in viability even under these conditions ( Figure S2A ) . We also did not notice any lifetime defects , abnormalities in morphology , or unusual behavior at room temperature or under heat stress . We conclude that the diverged Arp2D and Arp2D2 duplicates can functionally replace Arp2 for all assayed somatic roles . Arp2D - expressing males are subfertile Having established that Arp2D and Arp2D2 possess all the canonical Arp2 functions , we next tested if they could fully complement Arp2 functions in the male germline by comparing fertility of the ‘gene - replacement’ males . For this , we crossed hemizygous males with wildtype ( Oregon R ) females and , after one week of mating , compared adult progeny count to males encoding intron - less canonical Arp2 in the KO locus ( Figure 3C ) . We observed that Arp2D - expressing flies yielded fewer progeny than canonical Arp2 ( albeit this difference was not significant ) , whereas Arp2D2 - expressing flies had progeny counts comparable to canonical Arp2 ( Figure 3C ) . Since males generally produce many sperm , one week of mating at room temperature may not readily reveal decreases in sperm count . Heat stress often exacerbates existing fertility defects , which become more detectable . We conducted the same male fertility assay as before , except at 29°C . We found that Arp2D - expressing males exhibited a significant decrease in adult progeny ( p = 0 . 02 , Figure 3D ) , indicating they are subfertile . We then directly assessed sperm 8 production by measuring the size of the seminal vesicle , where mature sperm are stored 29 . The area of the seminal vesicle scales with the number of stored mature sperm 29 . We found that the average area of seminal vesicles from Arp2D - expressing males was significantly smaller than those from canonical Arp2 - expressing males , whether they mated or not ( p = 0 . 009 , Figure 3E ; p = 0 . 003 , Figure S2B ) . Therefore , Arp2D - expressing males produce less sperm and exhibit a fertility cost . We investigated whether the decrease in germline function was due to a lack of Arp2D expression in the testis and found that Arp2D and Arp2D2 are both expressed in the testis at comparable levels ( Figure S2C ) . Given Arp2D mRNA expression and the localization of Arp2D - GFP to testis actin ( Figure 2C ) , we conclude that expression levels cannot account for the observed male subfertility . We conclude that Arp2D may be able to perform somatic roles in D . melanogaster , yet it lacks compatibility with D . melanogaster sperm development . We also tested the fertility of Arp2D - expressing females . We crossed homozygous females to wildtype males and found a significant reduction in adult progeny ( p < 0 . 001 , Figure S3A ) . We next investigated whether this is due to a lack of expression of Arp2D in ovaries . We imaged ovaries from wildtype D . melanogaster flies expressing GFP - tagged Arp2D and detected no Arp2D protein expression ( Figure S3B ) . In contrast , we found that D . pseudoobscura canonical Arp2 does localize to actin - rich areas like the cortex ( Figure S3B ) , suggesting that lack of Arp2D expression in the ovary is likely not due to a species difference in transcriptional or translational regulation . D . auraria Arp2D2 - GFP was also expressed and localized to actin ( Figure S3B ) . To further rule out the possibility that species - specific codon usage may lead to a lack of Arp2D expression in the ovary , we codon optimized Arp2D for D . melanogaster and inserted it in the Arp2 - KO locus as done previously ( Figure 3A ) . Because codon bias can also impact transcription 30 , we assessed mRNA expression and found that Arp2D mRNA remained the same as non - codon optimized Arp2D ( Figure S3C ) , and female fertility remained extremely low ( p < 0 . 001 , Figure S3D ) , suggesting subfertility is not due to species - specific codon usage . Given that Arp2D - GFP is expressed and localizes to actin in the testis , we conclude that reduced male fertility is due to Arp2D protein function , whereas failure to even express Arp2D protein in the ovary prevented us from further assessing its female germline function . Because Arp2D is natively expressed in the testis , we focused on investigating Arp2D protein function in the male germline . 9 Arp2D - expressing males exhibit testis defects We next investigated whether the testis exhibits any cytological defects that may lead to reduced sperm production . Sperm development can be tracked spatially in the fly testis ( Figure 4A ) . Germline stem cells are at the apical end , where they differentiate and progress through mitosis , meiosis , and sperm maturation . After sperm elongation , sperm are separated by a process known as individualization , which is powered by actin cones . Fly testes appear morphologically as tubes coiled at the basal end , where individualizing sperm are found ( Figure 4A ) . We were surprised that Arp2D - expressing testes exhibited a striking morphological defect in testis morphology ( Figure 4B ) . The apical end of all Arp2D - expressing testes appeared swollen relative to the rest of the testis ( p < 0 . 001 , Figure 4B ) . Because Arp2D was not codon - optimized for D . melanogaster , we considered this cytological defect might result from transcriptional and translational differences . However , codon - optimized Arp2D - expressing males exhibited the same abnormal morphology ( Figure S4A ) . Alternatively , we hypothesized that this defect could be due to an artifact of Arp2D overexpression . Thus , we dissected the testes of male flies expressing two copies of wildtype Arp2 and GFP - tagged Arp2D or D . pseudoobscura Arp2 ( four copies total ) . All exhibited wildtype morphology , suggesting the morphological defect is not due to overexpression of Arp2D , nor does Arp2D cause a dominant - negative effect ( Figure S4B ) . The enlarged apical end of Arp2D - expressing testes is reminiscent of phenotypes previously observed in mutants in sperm individualization , which lead to an accumulation of debris and disorganized cysts with scattered actin cones 31 - 35 . Therefore , we investigated Arp2D - expressing testes for defects in individualization . We fixed and probed testes for DNA and actin to visualize actin cones in near - mature sperm . Actin cones in Arp2D - expressing males exhibited the normal fan shape that indicates the presence of the branched actin network near the cone’s front half 12 ( Figure 4C ) . However , we found that cones often moved asynchronously in Arp2D - expressing males , unlike canonical Arp2 - expressing cones ( p < 0 . 0001 , Figure 4D - E ) or wildtype males 12 . Cones were also frequently misoriented . Cones normally move away from the basal end with the branched front facing the apical end , yet we often found the branched front of cones incorrectly facing the basal end ( p = 0 . 05 , Figure 4F - G ) . We next assessed the last step of individualization : formation of the waste bag . Once actin cones reach the apical end , the excess cytoplasm and actin cones are degraded 10 . We quantified the number of waste bags ( identified by actin cone degradation ) and found that the number of waste bags per testis was significantly increased ( p = 0 . 005 , Figure 4H ) . The increase in waste bags and the abnormal apical end was 10 not due to a lack of caspase activity ( Figure S4C ) , which is required for proper individualization 33 , 36 , 37 . We also found that the average number of cysts with motile cones per testis was slightly reduced , though not significantly ( Figure 4I ) . Overall , defects were found throughout individualization , indicating Arp2D fails to carry out sperm individualization optimally in D . melanogaster . Arp2D’s divergent subdomain 2 loop contributes to testis defects We next asked which structural divergence found in Arp2D leads to this testis phenotype . We compared the sequences of Arp2D orthologs to canonical Arp2 and Arp2D2 orthologs and found the most pronounced divergence in two segments : subdomain 2 and the C - terminus ( Figure S5A ) . Canonical Arp2 has a highly conserved alternately spliced exon in subdomain 2 ( Figure S5A ) . Arp2D2 orthologs’ subdomain 2 appeared similar in length and sequence to the longer canonical Arp2 splice variant , whereas Arp2D orthologs do not encode the alternate exon and notably diverge in sequence ( Figure S5A ) . Most Arp2D2 orthologs have C - termini similar to canonical Arp2’s , yet Arp2D orthologs have significantly longer and diverged C - termini ranging from 10 to 21 additional highly charged amino acids , composed mainly of Lys ( 5 - 6 residues ) and Asp / Glu ( 1 - 4 residues ) ( Figure S5A ) . Given canonical Arp2 ’s stringent conservation across eukaryotes , the sequence divergence of Arp2D suggests these regions may result in functional divergence . We first tested if Arp2D’s divergent subdomain 2 loop contributes to the testis defects . We generated a chimera that replaces the Arp2D loop with the loop from D . auraria Arp2D2 ( Figure 5A , Fig . S5B ) , which does not exhibit reduced fertility or an abnormal testis morphology . The chimera’s expression was comparable to that of Arp2D at the mRNA level ( Figure S6G ) , and hemizygous males were viable like Arp2D - expressing flies . We found that testes were strikingly normal in morphology ( Figure 5B ) . While 100 % of Arp2D - expressing testes were bulbous , only 30 % of the chimera’s testes exhibited a bulbous apical end ( p < 0 . 001 , Figure 5C ) . However , the phenotypic rescue was incomplete , as cones remained asynchronous ( Figure 5D , Figure S6A - E ) . We conclude that the subdomain 2 loop contributes to Arp2D’s deficient germline function , yet it is not the only structural divergence leading to the observed defects . 11 Arp2D’s C - terminus is required for its activity in somatic tissue but reduces optimal function in the testis We next tested if Arp2D’s unique C - terminus also affects sperm development . We shortened D . pseudoobscura Arp2D’s C - terminus by removing 11 amino acids , including the lysines conserved among most obscura species , and replaced it with Arp2’s C - terminus , which is only 3 residues long ( Figure 6A , Figure S5C ) . We inserted the chimeric transgene ( ‘Arp2D - 2CT’ ) into the Arp2 - KO locus to test its impact on testis function ( Figure 6A ) . Similar to previous designs , this transgene encoded canonical Arp2’s 5’UTR and 3’UTR ( Figure 3A ) . Although we removed divergence in Arp2D’s C - terminus , Arp2D - 2CT surprisingly failed to rescue Arp2 - KO lethality ( p < 0 . 0001 , Figure 6B ) . We verified that the construct was expressed and comparable to full - length Arp2D expression in heterozygotes ( Figure S6F ) . Therefore , Arp2D’s evolutionarily unique C - terminus is critical for its activity . We next tested the impact of Arp2D’s C - terminus on canonical Arp2 . We modified the Arp2 - KO flies by inserting canonical Arp2 with Arp2D’s C - terminus ( Figure 6A , Figure S5D ) . The transgene was expressed ( Figure S6G ) , and the Arp2 - KO lethality phenotype was fully rescued ( Figure 6C ) . However , we found a significant increase in testes with an enlarged apical end ( p = 0 . 01 , Figure 6D ) and actin cones that moved asynchronously ( p = 0 . 01 , Figure 6E ) . The number of waste bags per testis , number of motile cones , and orientation of cones were comparable to that of canonical Arp2 ( Figure S6A , D - E ) . Therefore , despite the importance of the unique C - terminus for Arp2D function , this domain negatively impacts D . melanogaster sperm development . Discussion Arp2 arose early in eukaryotic evolution and is under stringent sequence conservation for its many roles throughout all tissue types 19 , 38 . Our studies reveal recurrent Arp2 gene duplication and subsequent sequence diversification in Drosophila . The paralogs’ exclusive expression in the testis suggests a selective pressure to have a testis - specific Arp2 . Their diversification may have retained Arp2 function , sub - functionalized , or led to an entirely new function that does not involve generating branched actin . We found that they can functionally replace Arp2 and lead to viable flies , even in a non - native species . However , Arp2D’s considerable divergence in sequence and specialization for male germline roles in the obscura clade appears to have led to incompatibility with D . melanogaster sperm development . This study reveals how the Arp2 structure can be altered and sub - functionalize Arp2 . 12 Gene duplications often relieve tension between conflicting roles of the parental gene 39 - 42 . We find that Arp2 may have conflicting roles between its ‘housekeeping’ functions in somatic tissue and those in sperm development , and the optimal Arp2 sequence for somatic roles may result in a fitness cost in the germline . This tension can be relieved with a germline - specific Arp2 paralog . Surprisingly , evolution has selected for a testis - specific Arp2 paralog twice , suggesting a recurrent need for an Arp2 that is specialized for male germline roles . Arp2D2 and Arp2D’s sequence and functional differences suggest they have evolved uniquely for Arp2’s spermatogenic roles specific to their respective species . Although we found no fertility cost in Arp2D2 - expressing D . melanogaster flies , Arp2D2 may have a subtle deviation from canonical Arp2’s function . Alternatively , Arp2D2 may function exactly like Arp2 , and the montium species require a higher copy number in the testis . Intriguingly , Arp2 appears to be the only member of the Arp2 / 3 complex that has repeatedly duplicated . We see one additional instance of Arp2 / 3 diversification in Drosophila ; D . melanogaster encodes a gene duplicate of Arpc3 exclusively expressed in the ovary and localizes to actin structures found only in the female germline 9 . The diversification of multiple Drosophila Arp2 / 3 subunits indicates that each member of the complex may differentially tune actin polymerization for specific germline roles , and Arp2 uniquely plays a central function in testis specialization . Despite being only 70 % identical to canonical Arp2 , Arp2D surprisingly does not lead to a fitness cost in D . melanogaster viability , yet subtle defects in somatic tissues may exist and remain undetected . We focused our analysis on the striking testis phenotypes due to Arp2D’s male - specific expression in the obscura species 23 . Although Arp2D appears to generate branched actin networks in the D . melanogaster testis ( Figure 4C ) , Arp2D fails to perform like canonical Arp2 . The kinetics of complex assembly or Arp2D - catalyzed actin polymerization may be changed . Alternatively , the Arp2D / 3 complex may lead to branched actin networks that are unstable or hyper - stable . There is precedence for diversification of Arp2 / 3 complexes leading to an impact on polymerization rate ( gene duplicates of ArpC1 and ArpC5 20 ) or network stability ( gene duplicate of human Arp3 21 ) . These differences may not be attributed directly to the complex but may result from the loss or gain of interactions with regulators 19 . A testis - specific factor in the obscura species may be required for Arp2D to function normally in D . melanogaster testes . 13 We show that Arp2D’s structural divergence from canonical Arp2 in subdomain 2 contributes to the observed testis defects in D . melanogaster . Canonical Arp2’s subdomain 2 loop has limited structural information , partly due to its flexibility and lack of electron density in high - resolution structures 14 , 16 . However , we have a few clues about the functional impact of subdomain 2 . In canonical Arps 2 and 3 , it faces towards the mother actin filament 15 , 16 , 43 . One study showed Arp3’s subdomain 2 loop facilitates interaction with actin , and by removing it , the rate of actin polymerization increases , suggesting it is kinetically important 43 . Because our study shows Arp2D’s subdomain 2 is incompatible with D . melanogaster sperm development , this structural region carries functional importance and may enable critical interactions with actin that impact kinetics like Arp3’s loop . Interestingly , canonical Arp2’s subdomain 2 undergoes alternative splicing , resulting in two splice variants differing only by five amino acids 44 , 45 ( Figure S5A ) . Although nothing is known about the distinct functions of Arp2’s splice isoforms , we speculate that modulation of Arp2’s subdomain 2 can tune actin polymerization for different contexts , and perhaps Arp2D has evolved a divergent loop that specializes polymerization kinetics specifically for sperm development in obscura species . We also find that Arp2D’s C - terminus is incompatible with D . melanogaster sperm development . Because canonical Arp2 can be C - terminally tagged without perturbing activity 28 or localization ( Figure 2C ) , the functional impact of Arp2D’s C - terminus on Arp2 likely depends on sequence and not length . Unlike subdomain 2 , much less is known about the role of canonical Arp2’s C - terminus in actin polymerization and how altering its sequence may impact function . However , a major clue comes again from Arp3 studies . Arp3’s C - terminal tail serves an autoinhibitory role by binding the hydrophobic groove between subdomains 1 and 3 , keeping the Arp2 / 3 complex in an inactive conformation until ATP 46 or a nucleation - promoting factor ( WASP ) 47 binds . Analogously , it would seem Arp2D’s C - terminus may be inhibitory , yet this domain is highly charged and unlikely to bind the hydrophobic groove of Arp2 . Instead , Arp2D’s C - terminus may alter charge - charge interactions with regulators critical for actin polymerization in D . melanogaster individualization . Despite its negative impact on sperm development , Arp2D’s unique C - terminus is surprisingly required for Arp2D’s somatic function . Because the C - terminus is predicted to be unstructured , removing it is unlikely to make the protein less stable and , therefore , must be required for Arp2D protein function . The N - terminal domain composing the majority of Arp2D appears structurally like canonical Arp2 based on homology predictions ; thus , we expected this domain would be 14 sufficient to interact with actin and the rest of the Arp2 / 3 complex for actin polymerization . However , because the unique C - terminus is required for somatic function , we infer that Arp2D’s C - terminus has co - evolved with the ‘Arp2 - like’ N - terminal domain and is now integral for full - length protein activity , yet incompatible with the evolutionarily older canonical Arp2 sequence for testis function . The C - terminus may directly stimulate Arp2D for nucleation activity or have acquired a regulator binding site . Interestingly , Arp2D orthologs’ C - termini vary in length and overall charge ( Figure S5A ) . We speculate that each ortholog’s C - terminus has co - evolved with its respective ‘Arp2 - like’ domain , which has led to species - specialized germline function . Because the obscura species retain canonical Arp2 , Arp2D had the opportunity to evolutionarily explore new sequences and roles in sperm development without compromising viability , as canonical Arp2 preserved somatic function . The question remains why Arp2 has recurrently specialized exclusively for testis function . Sperm development is under intense selective pressure from sperm competition and sexual selection 48 , 49 . Consequently , biological innovation frequently occurs in the testis , leading to significant species variation in sperm developmental processes that likely have unique cytoskeletal requirements . For example , actin cones , found only in the Drosophila male germline , arose for the syncytial nature of insect germ cell development 10 , and their construction and motility may require a specialized Arp2 / 3 - generated branched actin network . Our findings show that by studying how Arp2 diversification impacts testis actin , we can gain insight into how Arp2 adapts structurally and functionally for the germline . Materials and Methods : Culturing flies and sequencing the Arp2D2 locus : Arp2D2 was identified by using a tBLASTn search with canonical D . melanogaster Arp2 , and mRNA encoding an ‘Arp2 - like’ gene was found in D . serrata ( Accession XM _ 020944101 . 1 ) and D . kikkawai ( Accession XM _ 017179971 . 1 ) . The coding sequence was then mapped to the D . kikkawai 24 and D . serrata 25 genomes ( contig 7911 and MTTC01000122 . 1 , respectively ) to identify the loci and found they were syntenic and differed in canonical Arp2’s locus . For sequencing the shared syntenic locus of montium species , genomic DNA was obtained from 10 - 15 whole flies as done previously 23 . D . melanogaster and D . kikkawai genomes were aligned , and primers were designed to target conservation in the intergenic regions flanking the D . kikkawai Arp2D2 locus . Primers were then used for targeted sequencing of the Arp2D2 locus in 15 unsequenced montium species . Some montium species had genomic DNA purified for a past study 50 and were kindly offered for the study . Cultured species for which genomic DNA was not already available were homogenized and DNA was extracted as done previously 50 . PCRs were conducted following a touchdown protocol 51 with Phusion , following the manufacturer’s instructions ( NEB ) . PCRs were directly sequenced , or first TOPO cloned ( Invitrogen ) followed by sequencing . Primers were iteratively designed using sequences from successful PCRs to obtain Arp2D2 loci sequences that were more diverged in the intergenic regions . All flies were cultured on yeast - cornmeal - molasses - malt extract medium at room temperature . Cultured species and primer sequences are listed in Data S1 , and Arp2D2 sequences obtained by PCR are provided in Data S2 . Identification of Arp2 and Arp2D2 in sequenced montium genomes D . melanogaster Arp2 and D . kikkawai Arp2D2 protein sequences were used in a tBLASTn search to obtain orthologs in sequenced montium species 26 . The search set was BioProject ID 554346 ( a whole genome shotgun contigs database ) 26 . Hits that had E values of 0 were obtained and syntenic orthologs of D . kikkawai Arp2D2 were identified by conservation of upstream and downstream genetic regions including neighbors Hmu and CG3339 . To obtain syntenic Arp2 orthologs , upstream and downstream regions including genetic neighbors Pp2B - 14D and CG9903 were identified . Arp2D2 coding sequences were then extracted based on alignments with D . kikkawai Arp2D2 , and Arp2 coding sequences were obtained by aligning with D . kikkawai Arp2 or Arp2 from a more closely related montium species . All analyses were done using the Geneious software package 52 . Accession numbers of scaffolds encoding Arp2D2 or Arp2 in BioProject 554346 26 are provided in Data S1 . Phylogenetics and structural analysis : Nucleotide sequences were aligned using translation alignment in the Geneious software 52 . A maximum - likelihood tree ( Data S3 ) was generated with PhyML ( HKY85 substitution model ) , and 100 bootstrap replicates were performed for statistical support in Geneious 52 . Protein sequence alignments were conducted using MUSCLE 53 in Geneious 52 . For structural analyses , a homology model of D . pseudoobscura Arp2 was obtained using SWISS - MODEL 54 , which used PDB 4JD2 55 as a template , and structures were viewed using Chimera 56 . 16 Generation of fly transgenics : Generation of GFP - tagged Arp2 and paralogs To visualize Arp2 variants , D . pseudoobscura Arp2 ( intronless , short splice variant ) , D . pseudoobscura Arp2D , and D . auraria Arp2D2 were C - terminally tagged with superfolder GFP and cloned into a vector encoding attB . Each construct was cloned with either the promoter for D . melanogaster Arp2 or for D . melanogaster Arp53D ( a gene highly expressed in the testis ) . Constructs were midi - prepped ( Takara Bio ) , and for site - directed transgenesis , constructs were co - injected with PhiC31 into a fly line encoding attP on the third chromosome ( stock 9744 from Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center ) by Rainbow Transgenic Flies , Inc . Generation of Arp2 Knockout Arp2 was knocked out using CRISPR / Cas9 and replaced with DsRed to track the knockout allele . The guide RNAs were chosen based on a low probability of off - targets ( http : / / flyrnai . org / crispr2 / ) and targeted in the intergenic regions upstream and downstream of the coding regions to completely remove the gene . The guide RNAs ( GTAGCTGCTACTAGCAGACT and TCGTTACTCCCCAGAGTTGA ) were cloned into pCFD4 ( Addgene plasmid 49411 ) 57 and the 1kb regions upstream and downstream of the cut sites were cloned into vector pHD - attP - DsRed ( Addgene plasmid 51019 ) 58 . Plasmids were midi - prepped ( Takara Bio ) , and BestGene , Inc . injected them into a nanos - Cas9 expressing fly line ( 51324 from Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center ) . G0 adults were crossed to w1118 flies to identify transformants ( DsRed - fluorescent eyes ) and cross out Cas9 . Transformants’ X - chromosome was balanced with FM7 . We sequence verified CRISPR / Cas9 cut sites and presence of DsRed . The KO allele was only found in heterozygous females , as expected for the Arp2 - KO phenotype , and no homozygous or DsRed - positive males were identified . Generation of transgenic lines with Arp2 - KO flies The genes encoding D . pseudoobscura Arp2D and D . auraria Arp2D2 were obtained by PCR from the species’ genomic DNA . Canonical Arp2 was obtained by PCR from D . melanogaster cDNA , and the short splice variant was used for this study . Codon - optimized Arp2D was synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies , Inc . All mutants ( Arp2D subdomain 2 swap , Arp2D - 2CT , and Arp2 - 2DCT ) were generated using Q5 site - directed mutagenesis ( NEB ) . All genes were cloned into a vector encoding an attB site and superfolder GFP under the control of an eye - specific promoter ( 3XP3 ) . Flanking all genes were approximately the 1kb upstream and downstream regions of canonical D . melanogaster Arp2 . Constructs were midi - prepped and 17 injected into the attP - encoding Arp2 KOs by Rainbow Transgenic Flies , Inc . We crossed G0 adults to Arp2 - KO stocks , selected flies with GFP - and DsRed - positive eyes , and balanced the X - chromosome with FM7 . To sequence verify all transgenics , genomic DNA from flies was obtained by grinding two flies in 10 mM Tris - HCl pH8 , 1 mM EDTA , 25 mM NaCl , and 200 µg / mL Proteinase K . The lysate was incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes then at 95°C for 3 minutes to deactivate Proteinase K . The lysate was briefly centrifuged , and the supernatant was used for PCR - amplification of the modified loci . A touchdown protocol 51 was conducted with Phusion ( NEB ) , and PCR products were used for Sanger sequencing . Sequences for all constructs used to generate transgenic fly lines are provided in Data S4 . RT - PCR : To detect expression in the germline , abdomens were separated from the body and further dissected in PBS to extract testes or ovaries . Tissues or whole flies ( 5 - 10 total ) were homogenized with TRIzol ( Invitrogen ) then briefly centrifuged to separate the supernatant . The supernatant was chloroform - extracted , resulting in a soluble phase that was then isopropanol - extracted . The RNA that precipitated was briefly centrifuged , and the resulting pellet was washed with 70 % ethanol and resuspended in RNAse - free water . Samples were treated with DNase I ( Zymo Research ) , followed by purification and concentration ( RNA Cleanup & Concentrator kit , Zymo Research ) . The samples were used to generate cDNA using SuperScript III First - Strand Synthesis , following the manufacturer’s instructions ( Invitrogen ) . The cDNA was then used to conduct RT - PCRs with Phusion ( NEB ) . Primers are provided in Data S1 . Imaging : Ovary live imaging Virgin females were fed yeast paste ( Sigma Aldrich ) for two days prior to ovary dissections . Ovaries were dissected in PBS then incubated with Hoechst 33342 ( Invitrogen ) for 10 minutes at room temperature and washed once with PBS . Images were then collected on Nikon CSU - W1 with SoRa ( UTSW Live Imaging Core ) . 18 Testis imaging For brightfield imaging of testes , similarly aged males were collected and dissected in PBS . They were then placed on slides for live imaging . Images were collected on a Nikon Ts2 epi - fluorescent microscope with a 10x objective . For confocal imaging , virgin male flies were dissected at 0 - 3 days old . For live imaging of GFP - tagged proteins at cones , testes were dissected in PBS and then transferred to a slide and torn to separate cysts . Cysts were then incubated with 10 µM SiR - Actin 59 ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) and Hoechst 33342 ( Invitrogen ) for 5 - 10 min before imaging . For fixed whole mount testes and seminal vesicles , germline tissue was dissected in PBS and then transferred to an eppendorf tube for fixation using 4 % PFA ( 25 min at room temperature ) . Samples were then washed twice for 15 min each with PBS including 0 . 1 % Triton . To probe for actin and DNA , testes were stained with 2 µM SiR - Actin 59 ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) for 2 - 3 hours at room temperature and incubated with Hoechst 33342 ( Invitrogen ) for 10 min at room temperature . Stained testes were then placed on a slide , non - germline tissue was further removed , and a coverslip was placed following addition of ProLong Diamond Antifade Mountant ( Thermo Fisher ) . To probe for activated caspase 3 , whole mount testis imaging was conducted similarly , though testes were stained with anti - cleaved caspase 3 ( Asp 175 , Cell Signaling ) as done previously 36 and probed with anti - rabbit secondary antibody ( Alexa Fluor 488 , Invitrogen ) . All testis imaging was done using an inverted Ti2 Nikon AX - R confocal microscope and NIS - Elements ( Nikon ) . Quantification of male germline defects Z - stacks were acquired of whole mount testes that were stained for actin and DNA . Stacks were then visualized with NIS - Elements ( Nikon ) to quantify testis defects , including motile cones , asynchronous cones , misoriented cones , and waste bags . Cones that were no longer localized to sperm nuclei were classified as ‘motile . ’ Motile cones were quantified as asynchronous if a cyst had more than two cones that were trailing behind most cones . Waste bags were identified by degrading , amorphous actin cones . Misoriented cones were identified by the front of actin cones facing the basal end instead of the apical end . When counts of cysts or waste bags were compared , the statistical significance was evaluated with a t - test . When the percentage of asynchronous cones and testes with abnormal morphology were compared , statistical significance was assessed using a chi - squared test , using values for Arp2 - expressing flies as the expectation . Seminal vesicle size was measured using the line tool in Image J 60 , and a t - test was used to evaluate statistical significance . 19 Fly crosses : Oregon - R flies were used for wildtype flies . For all crosses , female virgins that were 1 - 5 days old and male virgins that were 1 - 3 days old were used . Virgins were maintained at room temperature until crosses were set up . All crosses were set up with females in excess of males at a ratio of 5 : 2 . Pairs were mated for approximately one week with vials being flipped every 3 days . For heat stress , the mating pairs were maintained at 29°C , and all crosses were carried out with consistent light / dark cycles . Adult progeny were quantified for no more than 16 days relative to when crosses were setup or 13 days ( crosses at 29°C ) to avoid counting progeny from the next generation . Parental flies that died during the mating week were tallied and did not differ significantly among genotypes . All fertility assays were done at least three times , and statistical significance was evaluated with a t - test . For assays testing for rescue of Arp2 - KO lethality , at least 5 replicates were done ( noted in legends ) , and genotypes were scored per vial . Averages with variance are displayed . To assess statistical significance , the genotypes were summed across replicates and the observed ratio of genotypes was compared to the expected Mendelian proportion with a chi - squared test . A p - value less than 0 . 05 resulted if observed ratios deviated significantly from the Mendelian expectation . Acknowledgments : We thank Michael Buszczak , Lisa Kursel , and Harmit Malik for their comments on the manuscript and helpful discussions . We also thank Lisa for genomic DNA of the montium species . We thank Dean Smith , Elizabeth Chen , and John Abrams for experimental suggestions , the CC3 - antibody ( Abrams lab ) , and a homogenizer ( Smith lab ) . Many Drosophila species were obtained from the National Drosophila Species Stock Center ( Cornell University ) , and transgenic flies were generated by Rainbow Transgenic Flies , Inc . We thank the Sanger Sequencing Cores at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center and UT Southwestern , as well as UT Southwestern’s Quantitative Light Microscopy Core , a Shared Resource of the Harold C . Simmons Cancer Center , supported in part by an NCI Cancer Center Support Grant , 1P30 CA142543 - 01 . This work was initiated using an NIGMS K99 Pathway to Independence Award GM137038 ( CS ) and funds to Harmit Malik from NIGMS grant R01GM074108 and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . Work is currently funded by a recruitment award from the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas ( CS ) , the UT Southwestern Endowed Scholars Program ( CS ) , a UT Southwestern STARs Fund ( CS ) , and an NIGMS R00 ( GM137038 , CS ) . 20 Competing Interests The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest . Figure Legends Figure 1 : Arp2D2 is a male germline - enriched Arp2 paralog found in the montium group species of Drosophila . A ) The syntenic loci of canonical Arp2 in representative Drosophila species spanning 50 million years of evolution . Arp2D is found in the obscura clade and was described previously 23 . Arp2D2 was discovered in montium group species . B ) Phylogenetic tree derived from Arp2 , Arp2D , and Arp2D2 coding sequence with 100X resampling . Species with blue asterisks have genomes that have been fully sequenced 26 . The ranges of protein sequence identity among the orthologs are given , and nodes with > 80 % bootstrap support are shown . Stars indicate independent evolutionary origins ; Arp2D2 in the montium clade shares a common ancestor with montium Arp2 ; Arp2D in the obscura clade shares a common ancestor with obscura Arp2 . C ) RT - PCRs comparing mRNA expression of Arp2D2 between females and males in four montium species . Rp49 was used to confirm similar quantities of cDNA among the samples . D ) RT - PCRs comparing mRNA expression of Arp2D2 in D . auraria whole females ( WF ) , whole males ( WM ) , heads ( H ) , carcasses ( C ) or testes ( T ) . Arp2 was used as a control for presence of cDNA among the samples . Figure 2 : Divergent Arp2 paralogs localize to actin in D . melanogaster . A ) A schematic showing how wildtype D . melanogaster flies were genetically modified . Canonical Arp2 ( D . pseudoobscura ) , Arp2D ( D . pseudoobscura ) or Arp2D2 ( D . auraria ) were C - terminally tagged with superfolder GFP and inserted on the third chromosome , whereas canonical Arp2 is on the X - chromosome . All transgenes are under the control of the endogenous Arp2 promoter . B ) Schematic depicting individualization of mature sperm with actin cones . Each sperm has one cone , and all cones move synchronously from the sperm head to the end of the sperm tail , moving excess cytoplasm in the ‘cystic bulge . ’ Cones contain parallel actin filaments in the rear and Arp2 / 3 - generated branched actin networks in the front half . C ) Live imaging of individualizing sperm from lines in ( A ) . Manual separation of cysts for improved staining and imaging led to scattered cones . Native GFP fluorescence of the tagged proteins was imaged with actin . The merge of actin ( magenta ) and Arp2 ( green ) is white . Scale bars are 10 µm . 21 Figure 3 : Arp2 paralogs rescue Arp2 somatic functions , yet Arp2D - expressing males are subfertile . A ) Schematic of CRISPR strategy used to generate Arp2 knockouts ( KOs ) . Cut sites were in the intergenic regions upstream and downstream of canonical Arp2 . DsRed , under the control of an eye - specific promoter , was inserted to track the KO allele . An attP site is upstream of DsRed and was leveraged for site - directed transgenesis . Canonical D . melanogaster Arp2 , D . pseudoobscura Arp2D , or D . auraria Arp2D2 were inserted at the attP site , and superfolder GFP was used as an eye marker to track the transgene . All transgenes were intronless and tagless . B ) Left , schematic of crossing scheme used to test for rescue of Arp2 - KO lethality . Heterozygous females ( transgene balanced with FM7 ) were crossed to hemizygous males . Eye color indicates presence of the transgene , with heterozygous females having dimmer GFP - positive eyes . Right , percent of the progeny population without FM7 ( homozygous females and hemizygous males ) is shown for canonical Arp2 , Arp2D , and Arp2D2 . Each cross had 6 - 8 replicates . Genotype fractions were compared to Mendelian expectation using a chi - squared test . Homozygotes were higher than expected , suggesting a slight fitness cost from the balancer . C ) A male fertility assay was conducted by crossing males ( generated in A ) to wildtype females ( Oregon R ) . Arp2D - expressing males exhibited a reduction , though not significant ) at room - temperature . D ) A male fertility assay as done in ( C ) except under heat stress ( 29°C ) . Arp2D - expressing males produced significantly less progeny than canonical Arp2 - or Arp2D2 - expressing males . E ) Left , seminal vesicles from Arp2 - and Arp2D - expressing males from ( A ) imaged with a DNA probe ( 20 µm scale bar ) . Right , area was measured and compared , revealing significantly smaller seminal vesicles from Arp2D - expressing males ( non - virgin ) . Figure 4 : Arp2D - expressing males exhibit defects in sperm individualization . A ) Schematic showing the stages of sperm development , including mitosis , meiosis , elongation , and individualization progressing from the apical end to the basal end . Nuclei are depicted in blue . B ) Left , light microscopy image of testes from Arp2 - and Arp2D - expressing flies . Arrowheads indicate apical end . Right , Arp2D - expressing flies exhibit an enlarged apical end , which was quantified as percent abnormal ( Arp2 : n = 19 ; Arp2D : n = 12 ) . C ) Images of a single actin cone containing canonical Arp2 or Arp2D . Cones are fan - like , indicating the presence of branched actin ( depicted in cartoon ) . D ) Images of dissected testes fixed and stained for actin . Testes expressing canonical Arp2 moved synchronously while cones in Arp2D - expressing flies 22 frequently moved asynchronously . E ) Quantification of cysts containing asynchronous cones ( Arp2 : n = 21 , Arp2D : n = 14 testes ) . Arp2D - expressing flies exhibited significantly more asynchronous cones . F ) Image of the apical end of Arp2D - expressing testes stained with actin . Motile cones are expected to face the apical end ( the destination ) , yet some are misoriented and face the basal end . Arrow indicates direction cone front is facing . G ) Quantification of cysts with cone fronts facing the basal end . None were seen in Arp2 - expressing flies , whereas a significant number were seen in Arp2D - expressing flies . H ) Quantification of the number of waste bags per testis . Arp2D - expressing testes exhibited more waste bags , which were identified by degraded actin cones . I ) Quantification of cysts with motile cones , which are no longer localized to mature sperm nuclei . The number of cysts with motile cones per testis was reduced but insignificant for Arp2D - expressing flies . Figure 5 : Arp2D’s divergent subdomain 2 loop contributes to testis defects . A ) Schematic showing subdomain 2 swap . D . melanogaster Arp2 - KO flies were genetically modified as in Figure 3A except Arp2D ( D . pseudoobscura ) encoded subdomain 2 from Arp2D2 ( D . auraria ) . B ) Brightfield images of one - day old virgins expressing Arp2D or ‘subdom2 swap’ in ( A ) . Arp2D’s apical end is an abnormal bulbous shape while the chimera exhibited normal morphology at the apical end . Arrowheads indicate apical ends , and scale bars are 100 µm . C ) Quantification of the percent of testes with an abnormal ( bulbous ) apical end ( Subdomain 2 swap : n = 28 ; Arp2 and Arp2D data from Figure 4B ) . D ) Quantification of the percent of cysts containing asynchronous cones . ( Arp2D2 : n = 12 ; data for Arp2 and Arp2D is the same as in Figure 4E . Despite a normal apical end , the chimera still exhibits asynchronous cones . Figure 6 : The unique C - terminus is required for Arp2D function but leads to testis defects in D . melanogaster . A ) Schematic showing the generation of two chimeras . The extended C - terminus of Arp2D was replaced with Arp2’s short C - terminus to produce the ‘Arp2D - 2CT’ chimera . The extended C - terminus of Arp2D was engineered on to canonical Arp2 to form the ‘Arp2 - 2DCT’ chimera . The transgenes were inserted into the Arp2 - KO locus as done in Figure 3A . B ) Schematic of the cross used to test for rescue of Arp2 - KO lethality with chimeric Arp2D : Arp2D - 2CT . Heterozygous Arp2D - 2CT - expressing females were crossed to males with the balancer FM7 ( 5 replicate crosses ) . Green eye color indicates presence of the transgene , with heterozygous females having dim GFP - positive eyes . Percent of the male progeny that was hemizygous for Arp2D - 2CT is shown . No viable hemizygous males were produced ( 5 replicate crosses ) . C ) 23 Schematic of the cross used to test for rescue of Arp2 - KO lethality with chimeric Arp2 : Arp2 - 2DCT . Heterozygous Arp2 - 2DCT - expressing females were crossed to hemizygous males ( 6 replicate crosses ) . Quantification shows approximately 50 % of the cross’s progeny expressed only Arp2 - 2DCT with no FM7 present , indicating a complete rescue of Arp2 - KO lethality . Genotype fractions in B and C were compared to Mendelian expectation using a chi - squared test . D ) Percent of abnormal testes ( bulbous apical end ) is shown for Arp2 - and Arp2 - 2DCT - expressing flies ( Arp2 - 2DCT : n = 31 ; data for Arp2 from Figure 4B ) . E ) Percent of cysts containing asynchronous cones is shown for Arp2 - and Arp2 - 2DCT - expressing flies ( Arp2 - 2DCT : n = 24 ; data for Arp2 from Figure 4E ) . Supplementary Figures Figure S1 : Evolutionary analyses and controls for RT - PCRs in Figure 1 . A ) A Drosophila species tree including 18 montium species . The Arp2D2 syntenic locus was PCR amplified and sequenced . Presence and absence of Arp2D2 in each species is indicated with black and white boxes , respectively . B ) An alignment of D . auraria and D . diplacantha Arp2D2 is shown , and the single intron and splice sites are annotated in D . diplacantha Arp2D2 . C ) Space filling representation of a D . pseudoobscura Arp2 homology model displaying residues that are uniquely conserved in either Arp2D or Arp2D2 . Conserved Arp2D residues are shown in teal and Arp2D2 conserved residues are blue . No conserved residue changes were shared between Arp2D and Arp2D2 . D ) The full gel in Figure 1C’s top image , showing RT - PCRs of Arp2D2 . E ) The bottom image of Figure 1C showing RT - PCRs of Arp2D2 . Template in the left side of the gel was cDNA synthesis conducted without reverse transcriptase ( RT ) , and lack of signal indicates no genomic DNA contamination . Template on the right side of the gel was cDNA synthesis done with RT . Signal for rp49 is comparable among samples . F ) The full gel for the top image in Figure 1D . The left side of the gel corresponds to the top image ( plus RT ) , and the right side includes RT - PCRs with the same samples except rp49 expression is shown . The minus RT lanes indicate no genomic DNA contamination . G ) The full gel for the bottom image in Figure 1D . Figure S2 : Tests for fitness cost and expression of Arp2D - encoding flies . A ) The same cross with Arp2D - expressing flies in Figure 3B was conducted at 29°C to test for rescue under heat stress ( 7 replicate crosses ) . Percent of the progeny population that had no FM7 ( Arp2D - expressing homozygous females and hemizygous males ) is shown and was not significantly different from the expected percent based on Mendelian inheritance ( 50 % ) , 24 indicating a full rescue . B ) Quantification of seminal vesicle area from similarly aged Arp2D - expressing virgin males ( 3 d old ) consistently exhibited significantly smaller seminal vesicles . C ) RT - PCRs assessing expression of canonical Arp2 , Arp2D , and Arp2D2 in the fly lines depicted in Figure 3A . Male flies were dissected , separating carcass ( ‘C’ ) and testis ( ‘T’ ) . rp49 is shown to compare overall cDNA levels of the samples . The bottom gel image indicates cDNA samples generated without reverse transcriptase . No genomic DNA contamination was detected . Figure S3 : D . pseudoobscura Arp2D protein is not expressed in D . melanogaster ovaries unlike testes . A ) Schematic for a female fertility assay . Arp2 - , Arp2D - , or Arp2D2 - expressing females were crossed to Oregon R ( wildtype ) males . Total adult progeny is shown , indicating Arp2D - expressing females were significantly subfertile . B ) Live imaging of ovaries from D . melanogaster females expressing GFP - tagged canonical Arp2 ( D . pseudoobscura ) , Arp2D ( D . pseudoobscura ) , or Arp2D2 ( D . auraria ) ( see Figure 2A for design of transgenic lines ) . Native GFP fluorescence of the tagged proteins was imaged with actin and DNA probes . White boxes indicate the location of the enlarged image , and arrows indicate the cell cortex . Scale bars are 25 µm . C ) RT - PCRs assessing expression of canonical Arp2 , Arp2D , and codon - optimized Arp2D ( see Figure 3A for design of transgenic lines ) . Females were dissected , separating carcass ( ‘C’ ) and ovaries ( ‘O’ ) . rp49 is shown to compare overall cDNA levels of the samples . The bottom gel image indicates cDNA samples generated without RT . No genomic DNA contamination was detected . RNA expression of Arp2D and codon optimized Arp2D were both detected at comparable levels . D ) Schematic for a female fertility assay . Arp2 - and codon optimized Arp2D - expressing females were crossed to Oregon R ( wildtype ) males . Total adult progeny is shown , indicating codon - optimized Arp2D still leads to female subfertility . Figure S4 : The testis morphology defect does not appear to be due to codon usage , overexpression , or lack of caspase activity . A ) Brightfield images of testes from Arp2 - KO flies expressing D . pseudoobscura Arp2D or codon - optimized Arp2D . Both genotypes exhibited enlarged testis apical ends , indicated with arrows . B ) Brightfield images of testes from D . melanogaster flies that were modified to express sfGFP - tagged D . pseudoobscura Arp2 or Arp2D under the canonical Arp2 promoter or a promoter of a gene highly expressed in the testis ( Arp53D ) . Despite two copies of the transgene and two copies of endogenous Arp2 , testes appeared wildtype in morphology at the apical end ( indicated by arrows ) , suggesting overexpression does not lead to a bulbous end . C ) 25 Immunofluorescent images of testes from Arp2 - KO flies expressing canonical Arp2 or D . pseudoobscura Arp2D . DNA , actin , and cleaved caspase 3 ( Asp 175 ) , which indicates caspase activation , were imaged . As expected for normal sperm development , Arp2D - expressing testes exhibited caspase activity during individualization , similar to flies expressing canonical Arp2 . All scale bars are 100 µm . Figure S5 : Sequence modification of Arp2D and canonical Arp2 . A ) Protein alignment of subdomain 2 and the C - terminus of Arp2 , Arp2D2 and Arp2D . Both splice variants of Arp2 are shown . Significant regions of divergence are highlighted ( teal for Arp2D and blue for Arp2D2 ) . Numbers above the alignment are with respect to the canonical Arp2 protein sequence . B ) A protein alignment of Arp2D2 , Arp2D and the Arp2D chimera are shown . The chimera is Arp2D with D . auraria ’s subdomain 2 ( ‘Arp2D subdom 2 swap’ ) . C ) The protein sequences of Arp2D , Arp2D - 2CT , and canonical Arp2 are aligned . The C - terminus of Arp2D was replaced with Arp2’s short C - terminus , which is predicted to be disordered . D ) Canonical Arp2 , Arp2D , the chimera Arp2 - 2DCT are aligned , showing the C - terminus of Arp2D was added to canonical Arp2 . Figure S6 : Transgene expression and quantification of testis cytology for Figures 4 - 6 . A - E ) Quantification of individualization defects . Arp2 - KO flies expressing untagged canonical Arp2 , Arp2D , Arp2D with modified subdomain 2 ( ‘subdomain2 swap’ ) , and canonical Arp2 with Arp2D’s C - terminus ( ‘Arp2 - 2DCT’ ) were imaged and the following features were quantified : the number of waste bags per testis ( A ) , the percent of cysts with asynchronous cones ( B ) , the percent of testes with abnormal apical ends ( C ) , the number of cysts with motile cones ( no longer at sperm nuclei ) per testis ( D ) , and the number of misoriented cones ( directed toward the basal end ) per testis ( E ) . Results with statistical significance are displayed in Figures 4 - 6 . F ) RT - PCRs assessing expression of Arp2D versus Arp2D - 2CT in heterozygous whole female flies . Expression of rp49 shows relative cDNA levels between samples , and ‘ - RT’ samples ( no reverse transcriptase ) indicate absence of genomic DNA . G ) RT - PCRs assessing expression of canonical Arp2 , Arp2D subdomain 2 swap , and Arp2 - 2DCT in Arp2 - KOs ( left side of top image ) . Whole females ( homozygous ) and males ( hemizygous ) were analyzed separately . Genomic DNA was absent ( ‘ - RT’ , right side of top image ) and cDNA levels were comparable among samples ( rp49 control , bottom image ) . 26 Supplemental Information : Data S1 : Species and Primers Cultured species are listed , and scaffolds and accession numbers are provided for Arp2 and Arp2D2 sequences obtained from BioProject ID 554346 26 . All primers used for targeted sequencing of Arp2D2 loci and RT - PCRs are also provided . Data S2 : Sequences Arp2D2 sequences obtained from montium species with unsequenced genomes are provided in addition to Arp2 and Arp2D2 coding sequences from BioProject ID 554346 26 and annotated genomes 24 , 61 . Data S3 : Tree The tree for Figure 1B is provided as a newick file with bootstrap support . Data S4 : Constructs All construct sequences used for generating fly transgenics are provided . References 1 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of filaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 , 6181 - 6186 . 10 . 1073 / pnas . 95 . 11 . 6181 . 2 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 - 465 . 3 . Suraneni , P . , Rubinstein , B . , Unruh , J . R . , Durnin , M . , Hanein , D . , and Li , R . ( 2012 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex is required for lamellipodia extension and directional fibroblast cell migration . J Cell Biol 197 , 239 - 251 . 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201112113 . 4 . Zhou , K . , Sumigray , K . D . , and Lechler , T . ( 2015 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex has essential roles in vesicle trafficking and transcytosis in the mammalian small intestine . Mol Biol Cell 26 , 1995 - 2004 . 10 . 1091 / mbc . E14 - 10 - 1481 . 5 . Papalazarou , V . , and Machesky , L . M . ( 2021 ) . The cell pushes back : The Arp2 / 3 complex is a key orchestrator of cellular responses to environmental forces . Curr Opin Cell Biol 68 , 37 - 44 . 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2020 . 08 . 012 . 6 . Haarer , E . L . , Theodore , C . J . , Guo , S . , Frier , R . B . , and Campellone , K . G . ( 2023 ) . Genomic instability caused by Arp2 / 3 complex inactivation results in micronucleus biogenesis and cellular senescence . PLOS Genet . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1010045 . 7 . Caridi , C . P . , D ' Agostino , C . , Ryu , T . , Zapotoczny , G . , Delabaere , L . , Li , X . , Khodaverdian , V . Y . , Amaral , N . , Lin , E . , Rau , A . R . , and Chiolo , I . ( 2018 ) . Nuclear F - actin and myosins drive relocalization of heterochromatic breaks . Nature 559 , 54 - 60 . 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 018 - 0242 - 8 . 27 8 . Schrank , B . R . , Aparicio , T . , Li , Y . , Chang , W . , Chait , B . T . , Gundersen , G . G . , Gottesman , M . E . , and Gautier , J . ( 2018 ) . Nuclear ARP2 / 3 drives DNA break clustering for homology - directed repair . Nature 559 , 61 - 66 . 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 018 - 0237 - 5 . 9 . Hudson , A . M . , and Cooley , L . ( 2002 ) . A subset of dynamic actin rearrangements in Drosophila requires the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 156 , 677 - 687 . 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200109065 . 10 . Fabian , L . , and Brill , J . A . ( 2012 ) . Drosophila spermiogenesis : Big things come from little packages . Spermatogenesis 2 , 197 - 212 . 10 . 4161 / spmg . 21798 . 11 . Noguchi , T . , and Miller , K . G . ( 2003 ) . A role for actin dynamics in individualization during spermatogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster . Development 130 , 1805 - 1816 . 12 . Noguchi , T . , Lenartowska , M . , Rogat , A . D . , Frank , D . J . , and Miller , K . G . ( 2008 ) . Proper cellular reorganization during Drosophila spermatid individualization depends on actin structures composed of two domains , bundles and meshwork , that are differentially regulated and have different functions . Mol Biol Cell 19 , 2363 - 2372 . 10 . 1091 / mbc . E07 - 08 - 0840 . 13 . Robinson , R . C . , Turbedsky , K . , Kaiser , D . A . , Marchand , J . B . , Higgs , H . N . , Choe , S . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Crystal structure of Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 294 , 1679 - 1684 . 10 . 1126 / science . 1066333 . 14 . Zimmet , A . , Van Eeuwen , T . , Boczkowska , M . , Rebowski , G . , Murakami , K . , and Dominguez , R . ( 2020 ) . Cryo - EM structure of NPF - bound human Arp2 / 3 complex and activation mechanism . Sci Adv 6 . 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aaz7651 . 15 . Rouiller , I . , Xu , X . P . , Amann , K . J . , Egile , C . , Nickell , S . , Nicastro , D . , Li , R . , Pollard , T . D . , Volkmann , N . , and Hanein , D . ( 2008 ) . The structural basis of actin filament branching by the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 180 , 887 - 895 . 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200709092 . 16 . Shaaban , M . , Chowdhury , S . , and Nolen , B . J . ( 2020 ) . Cryo - EM reveals the transition of Arp2 / 3 complex from inactive to nucleation - competent state . Nat Struct Mol Biol 27 , 1009 - 1016 . 10 . 1038 / s41594 - 020 - 0481 - x . 17 . Pfaendtner , J . , Volkmann , N . , Hanein , D . , Dalhaimer , P . , Pollard , T . D . , and Voth , G . A . ( 2012 ) . Key structural features of the actin filament Arp2 / 3 complex branch junction revealed by molecular simulation . J Mol Biol 416 , 148 - 161 . 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2011 . 12 . 025 . 18 . Machesky , L . M . , Mullins , R . D . , Higgs , H . N . , Kaiser , D . A . , Blanchoin , L . , May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 , 3739 - 3744 . 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 7 . 3739 . 19 . Gautreau , A . M . , Fregoso , F . E . , Simanov , G . , and Dominguez , R . ( 2022 ) . Nucleation , stabilization , and disassembly of branched actin networks . Trends Cell Biol 32 , 421 - 432 . 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2021 . 10 . 006 . 20 . Abella , J . V . , Galloni , C . , Pernier , J . , Barry , D . J . , Kjaer , S . , Carlier , M . F . , and Way , M . ( 2016 ) . Isoform diversity in the Arp2 / 3 complex determines actin filament dynamics . Nat Cell Biol 18 , 76 - 86 . 10 . 1038 / ncb3286 . 21 . Galloni , C . , Carra , D . , Abella , J . V . G . , Kjaer , S . , Singaravelu , P . , Barry , D . J . , Kogata , N . , Guerin , C . , Blanchoin , L . , and Way , M . ( 2021 ) . MICAL2 enhances branched actin network disassembly by oxidizing Arp3B - containing Arp2 / 3 complexes . J Cell Biol 220 . 10 . 1083 / jcb . 202102043 . 22 . Molinie , N . , and Gautreau , A . ( 2018 ) . The Arp2 / 3 Regulatory System and Its Deregulation in Cancer . Physiol Rev 98 , 215 - 238 . 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00006 . 2017 . 23 . Schroeder , C . M . , Valenzuela , J . , Hocky , G . M . , and Malik , H . S . ( 2020 ) . A burst of genetic innovation in actin - related proteins ( Arps ) for testis - specific function in a Drosophila lineage . Mol Biol Evol 37 , 757 – 772 . 10 . 1093 / molbev / msz262 . 24 . Chen , Z . X . , Sturgill , D . , Qu , J . , Jiang , H . , Park , S . , Boley , N . , Suzuki , A . M . , Fletcher , A . R . , Plachetzki , D . C . , FitzGerald , P . C . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Comparative validation of the D . 28 melanogaster modENCODE transcriptome annotation . Genome Res 24 , 1209 - 1223 . 10 . 1101 / gr . 159384 . 113 . 25 . Allen , S . L . , Delaney , E . K . , Kopp , A . , and Chenoweth , S . F . ( 2017 ) . Single - Molecule Sequencing of the Drosophila serrata Genome . G3 ( Bethesda ) 7 , 781 - 788 . 10 . 1534 / g3 . 116 . 037598 . 26 . Bronski , M . J . , Martinez , C . C . , Weld , H . A . , and Eisen , M . B . ( 2020 ) . Whole Genome Sequences of 23 Species from the Drosophila montium Species Group ( Diptera : Drosophilidae ) : A Resource for Testing Evolutionary Hypotheses . G3 ( Bethesda ) 10 , 1443 - 1455 . 10 . 1534 / g3 . 119 . 400959 . 27 . Russo , C . A . M . M . , Beatriz ; Frazão , Annelise ; Voloch , Carolina M . ( 2013 ) . Phylogenetic analysis and a time tree for a large drosophilid data set ( Diptera : Drosophilidae ) . Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 169 , 765 - 775 . 28 . Egile , C . , Rouiller , I . , Xu , X . P . , Volkmann , N . , Li , R . , and Hanein , D . ( 2005 ) . Mechanism of filament nucleation and branch stability revealed by the structure of the Arp2 / 3 complex at actin branch junctions . PLoS Biol 3 , e383 . 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0030383 . 29 . Lefevre , G . , Jr . , and Jonsson , U . B . ( 1962 ) . Sperm transfer , storage , displacement , and utilization in Drosophila melanogaster . Genetics 47 , 1719 - 1736 . 10 . 1093 / genetics / 47 . 12 . 1719 . 30 . Zhou , Z . , Dang , Y . , Zhou , M . , Yuan , H . , and Liu , Y . ( 2018 ) . Codon usage biases co - evolve with transcription termination machinery to suppress premature cleavage and polyadenylation . Elife 7 . 10 . 7554 / eLife . 33569 . 31 . Steinhauer , J . ( 2015 ) . Separating from the pack : Molecular mechanisms of Drosophila spermatid individualization . Spermatogenesis 5 , e1041345 . 10 . 1080 / 21565562 . 2015 . 1041345 . 32 . Rogowski , K . , Juge , F . , van Dijk , J . , Wloga , D . , Strub , J . M . , Levilliers , N . , Thomas , D . , Bre , M . H . , Van Dorsselaer , A . , Gaertig , J . , and Janke , C . ( 2009 ) . Evolutionary divergence of enzymatic mechanisms for posttranslational polyglycylation . Cell 137 , 1076 - 1087 . 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 05 . 020 . 33 . Arama , E . , Agapite , J . , and Steller , H . ( 2003 ) . Caspase activity and a specific cytochrome C are required for sperm differentiation in Drosophila . Dev Cell 4 , 687 - 697 . 10 . 1016 / s1534 - 5807 ( 03 ) 00120 - 5 . 34 . Robida , M . , Sridharan , V . , Morgan , S . , Rao , T . , and Singh , R . ( 2010 ) . Drosophila polypyrimidine tract - binding protein is necessary for spermatid individualization . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 , 12570 - 12575 . 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1007935107 . 35 . Xu , S . , Hafer , N . , Agunwamba , B . , and Schedl , P . ( 2012 ) . The CPEB protein Orb2 has multiple functions during spermatogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster . PLoS Genet 8 , e1003079 . 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1003079 . 36 . D ' Brot , A . , Chen , P . , Vaishnav , M . , Yuan , S . , Akey , C . W . , and Abrams , J . M . ( 2013 ) . Tango7 directs cellular remodeling by the Drosophila apoptosome . Genes Dev 27 , 1650 - 1655 . 10 . 1101 / gad . 219287 . 113 . 37 . Huh , J . R . , Vernooy , S . Y . , Yu , H . , Yan , N . , Shi , Y . , Guo , M . , and Hay , B . A . ( 2004 ) . Multiple apoptotic caspase cascades are required in nonapoptotic roles for Drosophila spermatid individualization . PLoS Biol 2 , E15 . 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020015 . 38 . Goodson , H . V . , and Hawse , W . F . ( 2002 ) . Molecular evolution of the actin family . J Cell Sci 115 , 2619 - 2622 . 39 . Hughes , A . L . ( 1994 ) . The evolution of functionally novel proteins after gene duplication . Proc Biol Sci 256 , 119 - 124 . 10 . 1098 / rspb . 1994 . 0058 . 40 . Hittinger , C . T . , and Carroll , S . B . ( 2007 ) . Gene duplication and the adaptive evolution of a classic genetic switch . Nature 449 , 677 - 681 . 10 . 1038 / nature06151 . 29 41 . Des Marais , D . L . , and Rausher , M . D . ( 2008 ) . Escape from adaptive conflict after duplication in an anthocyanin pathway gene . Nature 454 , 762 - 765 . 10 . 1038 / nature07092 . 42 . Gallach , M . , and Betran , E . ( 2011 ) . Intralocus sexual conflict resolved through gene duplication . Trends Ecol Evol 26 , 222 - 228 . 10 . 1016 / j . tree . 2011 . 02 . 004 . 43 . Liu , S . L . , May , J . R . , Helgeson , L . A . , and Nolen , B . J . ( 2013 ) . Insertions within the actin core of actin - related protein 3 ( Arp3 ) modulate branching nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex . J Biol Chem 288 , 487 - 497 . 10 . 1074 / jbc . M112 . 406744 . 44 . Gramates , L . S . , Marygold , S . J . , Santos , G . D . , Urbano , J . M . , Antonazzo , G . , Matthews , B . B . , Rey , A . J . , Tabone , C . J . , Crosby , M . A . , Emmert , D . B . , et al . ( 2017 ) . FlyBase at 25 : looking to the future . Nucleic Acids Res 45 , D663 - D671 . 10 . 1093 / nar / gkw1016 . 45 . Celniker , S . E . , Dillon , L . A . , Gerstein , M . B . , Gunsalus , K . C . , Henikoff , S . , Karpen , G . H . , Kellis , M . , Lai , E . C . , Lieb , J . D . , MacAlpine , D . M . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Unlocking the secrets of the genome . Nature 459 , 927 - 930 . 10 . 1038 / 459927a . 46 . Rodnick - Smith , M . , Liu , S . L . , Balzer , C . J . , Luan , Q . , and Nolen , B . J . ( 2016 ) . Identification of an ATP - controlled allosteric switch that controls actin filament nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat Commun 7 , 12226 . 10 . 1038 / ncomms12226 . 47 . Rodnick - Smith , M . , Luan , Q . , Liu , S . L . , and Nolen , B . J . ( 2016 ) . Role and structural mechanism of WASP - triggered conformational changes in branched actin filament nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 , E3834 - 3843 . 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1517798113 . 48 . Kleene , K . C . ( 2005 ) . Sexual selection , genetic conflict , selfish genes , and the atypical patterns of gene expression in spermatogenic cells . Dev Biol 277 , 16 - 26 . 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2004 . 09 . 031 . 49 . Simmons , L . W . , and Fitzpatrick , J . L . ( 2012 ) . Sperm wars and the evolution of male fertility . Reproduction 144 , 519 - 534 . 10 . 1530 / REP - 12 - 0285 . 50 . Kursel , L . E . , and Malik , H . S . ( 2017 ) . Recurrent Gene Duplication Leads to Diverse Repertoires of Centromeric Histones in Drosophila Species . Mol Biol Evol 34 , 1445 - 1462 . 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx091 . 51 . Korbie , D . J . , and Mattick , J . S . ( 2008 ) . Touchdown PCR for increased specificity and sensitivity in PCR amplification . Nat Protoc 3 , 1452 - 1456 . 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2008 . 133 . 52 . Kearse , M . , Moir , R . , Wilson , A . , Stones - Havas , S . , Cheung , M . , Sturrock , S . , Buxton , S . , Cooper , A . , Markowitz , S . , Duran , C . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Geneious Basic : an integrated and extendable desktop software platform for the organization and analysis of sequence data . Bioinformatics 28 , 1647 - 1649 . 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / bts199 . 53 . Edgar , R . C . ( 2004 ) . MUSCLE : multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high throughput . Nucleic Acids Res 32 , 1792 - 1797 . 10 . 1093 / nar / gkh340 . 54 . Waterhouse , A . , Bertoni , M . , Bienert , S . , Studer , G . , Tauriello , G . , Gumienny , R . , Heer , F . T . , de Beer , T . A . P . , Rempfer , C . , Bordoli , L . , et al . ( 2018 ) . SWISS - MODEL : homology modelling of protein structures and complexes . Nucleic Acids Res 46 , W296 - W303 . 10 . 1093 / nar / gky427 . 55 . Luan , Q . , and Nolen , B . J . ( 2013 ) . Structural basis for regulation of Arp2 / 3 complex by GMF . Nat Struct Mol Biol 20 , 1062 - 1068 . 10 . 1038 / nsmb . 2628 . 56 . Pettersen , E . F . , Goddard , T . D . , Huang , C . C . , Couch , G . S . , Greenblatt , D . M . , Meng , E . C . , and Ferrin , T . E . ( 2004 ) . UCSF Chimera - - a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis . J Comput Chem 25 , 1605 - 1612 . 10 . 1002 / jcc . 20084 . 57 . Port , F . , Chen , H . M . , Lee , T . , and Bullock , S . L . ( 2014 ) . Optimized CRISPR / Cas tools for efficient germline and somatic genome engineering in Drosophila . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 , E2967 - 2976 . 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1405500111 . 58 . Gratz , S . J . , Ukken , F . P . , Rubinstein , C . D . , Thiede , G . , Donohue , L . K . , Cummings , A . M . , and O ' Connor - Giles , K . M . ( 2014 ) . Highly specific and efficient CRISPR / Cas9 - catalyzed 30 homology - directed repair in Drosophila . Genetics 196 , 961 - 971 . 10 . 1534 / genetics . 113 . 160713 . 59 . Lukinavicius , G . , Reymond , L . , D ' Este , E . , Masharina , A . , Gottfert , F . , Ta , H . , Guther , A . , Fournier , M . , Rizzo , S . , Waldmann , H . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Fluorogenic probes for live - cell imaging of the cytoskeleton . Nat Methods 11 , 731 - 733 . 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2972 . 60 . Schneider , C . A . , Rasband , W . S . , and Eliceiri , K . W . ( 2012 ) . NIH Image to ImageJ : 25 years of image analysis . Nat Methods 9 , 671 - 675 . 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2089 . 61 . Drosophila 12 Genomes , C . ( 2007 ) . Evolution of genes and genomes on the Drosophila phylogeny . Nature 450 , 203 - 218 . 10 . 1038 / nature06341 . 91 100 100 100 92 82 97 96 90 92 99 99 99 99 91 82 98 93 97 94 99 98 100 100 100100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 Arp2 Drosophila Arp2 diversification Arp2D Arp2D2 D . pseudoobscura D . willistoni D . melanogaster D . kikkawai D . ananassae Arp2D Arp2 Pp2B - 14D CG9903 CG4338 MESR3 Hmu CG3339 Arp2D2 A r p2 D 2 A r p2 A C Figure 1 : Arp2D2 is a male germline - enriched Arp2 paralog found in the montium group species of Drosophila H C T WF kbp WM D . virilis D . mojavensis D . grimshawi D . ananassae D . kanapiae D . burlai D . jambulina D . jambulina * * * D . lacteicornis D . lacteicornis * * * D . asahinai D . asahinai * * * D . rufa D . rufa D . auraria D . auraria D . triauraria D . bakoue D . nikananu D . c . f . bakoue * * * D . seguyi D . serrata D . bunnanda * * * D . barbarae D . willistoni D . bicornuta D . diplacanthaD . vulcana D . burlai D . punjabiensis D . punjabiensis D . watanabei D . leontia D . leontia * * * D . bocki D . mayri D . mayri D . birchii D . birchiiD . truncata * * * D . seguyi D . pseudoobscura D . persimilis D . kikkawai D . bocki D . kikkawai D . pectinifera * * * D . tani * * * D . yakuba D . erecta D . sechellia D . melanogaster Arp2 ( 100 % ) melanogastergroup montium group obscura group 0 . 07 bp substitution Arp2D2 ( 84 - 99 % ) Arp2D ( 71 - 95 % ) Arp2 Arp2 B D D . barbarae D . bicornutaD . watanabei D . auraria r p49 400300 400 500 300 200 A r p2 D 2 1 . 2 1 . 4 . 3 bp D . mirandaD . azteca D . persimilis D . bifasciataD . imaii D . affinisD . algonquin D . guanche D . obscuraD . ambigua D . tsukubaensis D . pseudoobscura F i gu r e 2 : D i ve r g e n t A r p 2 p a r a l og s l o ca li z e t o ac t i n i n D . m e l a nog as t e r . Endogenous Arp2 promoter XChr 3rdChr sfGFP Arp2 duplicate WT Arp2 A B C GFP D . p s e A r p2 D . p s e A r p2 D D . au r A r p2 D 2 Actin Merge D . melanogaster CysticBulge Nuclei ActinCones Tail parallelactin branchedactin 0 20 , 000 40 , 000 60 , 000 80 , 000 100 , 000 A r ea ( µ m 2 ) A r p2 A r p2 D A r p2 D 2 0 20 40 60 80 100 % popu l a t i on w i t hou t F M 7 0 . 03 0 . 008 < 0 . 001 F i gu r e 3 : A r p 2 p a r a l og s r esc u e A r p 2 s o m a t i c f un c t i on s , ye t A r p 2 D - ex p r ess i ng m a l es a r e s ub f e r t il e . Arp2 CG9903 Pp2B - 14D CG9903 Pp2B - 14D A eye - speciﬁc promoter Arp2 promoter Arp2 duplicate sfGFP a tt P cut site cut site CRISPR / Cas9 & knock - in n . s . n . s . n . s . B 0 . 02 0 . 009 Male fertility assay C E D D . melanogaster DsRed CG9903 Pp2B - 14D DsRed Arp2 duplicate sfGFP A r p2 A r p2 D A r p2 D 2 0 50 100 150 P r ogen y C oun t R T X ♁ ♂ X ♁ ♂ Arp2 duplicate 50 % Genotypes FM7 Arp2 duplicate Y Y WT Arp2Arp2 FM7 Arp2 Y Y If 100 % rescue , expected progeny : 50 % expected Arp2 FM7 A r p2 A r p2 D A r p2 A r p2 D A r p2 D 2 0 200 400 600 800 P r ogen y C oun t 29 ° C Male fertility assay under heat stress Seminal Vesicle Size Arp2 Arp2D DNA 20 µ m Arp2 duplicate X ♁ ♂ Y WT Arp2 duplicate A r p2 A r p2 D 0 50 100 % abno r m a l m o r pho l og y A r p2 A r p2 D 0 20 40 60 80 100 % a sy n c h r onou s c one s A r p2 A r p2 D 0 2 4 6 8 # w a s t e bag s pe r t e s t i s A Spermatogenesis : Mitosis Meiosis Elongation Individualization Cyst Apicalend Basalend D C F E G H I Arp2 0 . 005 < 0 . 0001 < 0 . 0001 Arp2D Arp2 A r p2 Arp2D A r p2 D B F i gu r e 4 : A r p 2 D - ex p r ess i ng m a l es ex h i b i t d e f ec t s i n s p e r m i nd i v i du a li z a t i on A r p2 A r p2 D 0 5 10 15 # cys t s w i t h m o t il e c one s pe r t e s t i s A r p2 A r p2 D 0 1 2 3 4 5 # cys t s w i t h m i s o r i en t ed c one s pe r t e s t i s 0 . 067 0 . 05 asy n c h r onou s c on es Actin Arp2D m i s p l ace d c on es a p i ca l e nd Actin 1 0 µ m 5 µ m 50 µ m 100 µ m F i gu r e 5 : A r p 2 D ' s d i ve r g e n t s ubdo m a i n 2 l oop c on t r i bu t es t o t es t i s d e f ec t s 0 50 100 % abno r m a l m o r pho l og y A r p2 A r p2 D S ubdo m 2 s w ap 0 . 03 < 0 . 001 < 0 . 001 < 0 . 001 A r p2 A r p2 D S ubdo m 2 s w ap 0 20 40 60 80 100 % a sy n c h r onou s c one s A B D C Arp2D with subdomain 2 swap Arp2D W T C h i m e r a ' S ubdo m 2 s w ap ' A r p2 D 2 s ubdo m a i n 2 sfGFP Arp2 promoter D . mel Arp2 locus eye - speciﬁc promoter Chimera Arp2D Arp2D Arp2D - 2CT 0 20 40 60 80 100 F i gu r e 6 : Th e un i qu e C - t e r m i nu s i s r e qu i r e d f o r A r p 2 D f un c t i on bu t l ea d s t o t es t i s d e f ec t s i n D . m e l a nog as t e r B C E X ♁ ♂ ♂ X ♁ Arp2 - 2DCT 0 20 40 60 80 100 % popu l a t i on w i t hou t F M 7 A r p2 A r p2 - 2 D C T 0 50 100 % a b no r m a l m o r pho l og y A r p2 A r p2 - 2 D C T 0 20 40 60 80 100 % a sy n c h r o n ou s c one s D 0 . 01 0 . 01 A W T C h i m e r a A r p 2 D - 2 C T A r p 2 - 2 DC T Arp2 promoter Chimera sfGFP Arp2 Arp2 Arp2D Arp2D D . mel Arp2 locus eye - speciﬁc promoter FM7 FM7 Arp2D - 2CT Arp2 - 2DCT FM7 Arp2 - 2DCT Y Y 50 % expected 50 % expected n . s . p < 0 . 0001 H e m i zy gou s m a l e p r ogen y ( % m a l e popu l a t i on ) Figure S1 : Evolutionary analyses and controls for RT - PCRs in Figure 1 1C rp49 , minus RT 1C rp49 , plus RT A B D F G E D . barbarae D . bicornuta D . watanabei D . auraria D . barbarae D . bicornuta D . watanabei D . auraria 1C Arp2D2 , plus RT 1D Arp2 , plus RT D . barbarae D . bicornuta D . watanabei D . auraria H C T WF WM 1D Arp2D2 , plus RT H C T WF WM plus RT minus RT H C T H C T 1D , rp49 500300 100 500 300 100 500 300 100 bp bp bp 1200 1000 500 bp 6 million years ( my ) = Present = Absent splice sites 15 my D . auraria A r p2 D 2 D . diplacantha Arp2DArp2D2 180° Fixed residue changes : C Arp2D 0 20 40 60 80 100 % popu l a t i on w i t hou t F M 7 a t 29 º C F i gu r e S 2 : T es t s f o r fi t n ess c o s t a nd ex p r ess i on o f A r p 2 D - e n c od i ng fl i es Arp2 n . s . T r an s gene r p49 C T T T C C Arp2D Arp2D2 A B C 400 200 400 bp bp T r an s gene , - R T 400 200 bp 200 Arp2 Arp2D 0 20 , 000 40 , 000 60 , 000 80 , 000 s e m i na l v e s i c l e s i z e ( µ m 2 ) 0 . 003 50 % expected A F i gu r e S 3 : D . p se udoob sc u r a A r p 2 D p r o t e i n i s no t ex p r esse d i n D . m e l a nog as t e r o va r i es un li ke t es t es . Arp2 T r an s gene P r ogen y C oun t r p49 C O C O C O C O Arp2D Codonopt . 2D A r p2 C odon op t . A r p2 D 400 bp 200 B C D D . p s e A r p2 D . p s e A r p2 D D . au r A r p2 D 2 DNA GFP Merge Enlarged 400 bp 200 400 bp 200 A r p 2 A r p 2 D A r p 2 D 2 0 50 100 150 n . s . < 0 . 001 fertility assay X ♁ ♁ ♁ ♂ WT Arp2 duplicateArp2duplicate 0 50 100 150 200 P r o g e n y C oun t fertility assay X ♁ ♂ WT Arp2D codon opt . Arp2D codon opt . < 0 . 001 D . pse Arp2 - sfGFP ( canonical Arp2 promoter ) D . pse Arp2 - sfGFP ( testis promoter ) D . pse Arp2 D - sfGFP ( testis promoter ) Arp2 D ( canonical Arp2 promoter ) in Arp2 KO Arp2 D codon opt . ( canonical Arp2 promoter ) in Arp2 KO 2 c op i e s o f t r an s gene + 2 c op i e s o f W T D . m e l A r p2 F i gu r e S 4 : Th e t es t i s m o r pho l og y d e f ec t do es no t a pp ea r t o b e du e t o c odon u sa g e , o ve r ex p r ess i on , o r l ack o f cas p ase ac t i v i t y . 100µm A B C DNA Cleaved Caspase 3 Actin Merge C a n on i c a l A r p2 D . p s e A r p2 D 100 µ m Arp2D2 Subdomain 2 loop C - terminus Arp2D Arp2D subdom 2 swap Arp2D Arp2D - 2CT Canonical Arp2 C - terminus Arp2D Arp2 - 2DCT Canonical Arp2 F i gu r e S 5 : S e qu e n ce m od i ﬁ ca t i on o f A r p 2 D a nd ca non i ca l A r p 2 B C D A Subdomain 2 C - terminus ( subdomain 1 ) D . kanapiae D . burlai D . nikananu D . seguyi D . kikkawai D . serrata D . bicornuta D . diplacantha D . vulcana D . punjabiensis D . watanabei D . bocki D . birchii D . mayri D . barbarae D . kikkawai D . kikkawai D . auraria D . triauraria D . rufa D . pseudoobscura D . persimilis D . miranda D . azteca D . afﬁnis D . algonquin D . guanche D . tsukubaensis D . bifasciata D . imaii D . ambigua D . obscura Arp2D2 Arp2D 44 54 61 386 396 406 410 Arp2 F i gu r e S 6 : T r a n s g e n e ex p r ess i on a nd qu a n t i fi ca t i on o f t es t i s cy t o l og y f o r F i gu r es 4 - 6 A r p2 A r p2 D s ubdo m 2 s w ap A r p2 - 2 D C T 0 20 40 60 80 100 % a sy n c h r onou s c one s A r p2 A r p2 D s ubdo m 2 s w ap A r p2 - 2 D C T 0 1 2 3 4 5 # m i s o r i en t ed c one s pe r t e s t i s A r p2 A r p2 D s ubdo m 2 s w ap A r p2 - 2 D C T 0 5 10 15 # cys t s w i t h m o t il e c one s pe r t e s t i s A r p2 A r p2 D s ubdo m 2 s w ap A r p2 - 2 D C T 0 2 4 6 8 # w a s t e bag s pe r t e s t i s A r p2 A r p2 D s ubdo m 2 s w ap A r p2 - 2 D C T 0 50 100 % abno r m a l m o r pho l og y F G A B C D E 400300200 A r p2 D + RT - RT t r an s g ene r p49 Arp2 Arp2D - 2CT Arp2D - 2CT Arp2 r p49 400 500 300 300bp 200 Arp2 + RT subdom2swap Arp2 - 2DCT Arp2 - RT subdom2swap Arp2 - 2DCT 300 100 0 . 005 < 0 . 0001 0 . 05 < 0 . 001 < 0 . 0010 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 03 < 0 . 001 < 0 . 0001