Ties that Truly Bind : Non - competition Agreements , Executive Compensation and Firm Investment Mark J . Garmaise UCLA Anderson Abstract We study the eﬀects of non - competition agreements by analyzing time - series and cross - sectional variation in the enforceability of these contracts across U . S . states . We ﬁnd that tougher non - competition enforcement promotes executive stability . Increased enforceability also results in re - duced executive compensation and shifts its form towards greater use of salary . We further show that stricter enforcement reduces research and development spending and capital expenditures per employee . These results are consistent with a model in which enforceable non - competition con - tracts encourage ﬁrms to invest in their managers’ human capital . On the other hand , our ﬁndings suggest that these contracts also discourage managers from investing in their own human capital and that this second eﬀect is empirically dominant . Correspondence to : Mark Garmaise , UCLA Anderson , 110 Westwood Plaza , Los Angeles , CA , 90095 . E - mail : mark . garmaise @ anderson . ucla . edu . I have beneﬁtted from the comments of Antonio Bernardo , Kjell Nyborg , Efraim Benmelech and seminar participants at Harvard Law School , the NBER , UIUC and Wharton . I thank Eric Neis for excellent research assistance . 1 Introduction For most ﬁrms , the human capital of their employees is a core asset , but it is one over which they can - not exercise full ownership . Non - competition agreements ( also known as covenants not to compete ) are contracts that restrict workers from joining ( or forming ) a rival company , and they represent one of the most important mechanisms binding employees to a ﬁrm . In this paper we make use of time - series and cross - sectional variation in non - competition enforceability across the states of the U . S . to analyze the eﬀects of these agreements . We ﬁnd that increased enforceability does , in fact , reduce executive mobility . Increased enforceability also results in lower executive compensation and shifts its form towards a heavier reliance on salary . We further show that tougher non - competition enforcement reduces research and development ( R & D ) spending and capital expenditures per em - ployee . We demonstrate that these ﬁndings are consistent with an incomplete - contracting model that has the following three features : enforceable non - competition contracts encourage ﬁrms to invest in their managers’ human capital , the contracts discourage managers from investing in their own human capital and managers’ investments have a greater eﬀect than those of the ﬁrm . Our empirical and theoretical results show that non - competition regulations help to determine optimal ﬁrm choices on a wide set of issues including executive pay , the stability of the managerial team and ﬁrm investment strategy . The inalienability of human capital ( Hart and Moore , 1994 , Diamond and Rajan , 2000 ) is universally accepted in developed economies as a basic personal right . This right , however , restricts the ability of a manager to make certain commitments to a ﬁrm ; it may be regarded , essentially , as a form of legally - mandated contractual incompleteness . The extent of non - competition enforceability in a jurisdiction determines the scope of this incompleteness . We present a theoretical framework that applies insights from the incomplete contracting literature ( e . g . Grossman and Hart , 1986 , Hart and Moore , 1990 ) to study the eﬀects of varying non - competition enforcement . We then test the implications generated by the theory . Although the theory of incomplete contracts is well - developed , there have been relatively few tests of its predictions ; our work contributes to the empirical literature on incomplete contracting ( Baker and Hubbard , 2003 , 2004 , and Feenstra and Hanson , 2005 ) . We consider two contrasting theoretical models . In the ﬁrst model ( Model A ) , we study the ef - fects of non - competition enforceability on a ﬁrm that is deciding whether to make a non - contractible partially ﬁrm - speciﬁc investment in the human capital of its manager . We show that increased en - forceability encourages the ﬁrm to invest , which makes it more likely that the manager will remain 1 with the ﬁrm . The ﬁrm’s investment raises the manager’s human capital , and we demonstrate that this implies that the optimal contract will grant the manager a higher expected compensation in a high - enforcement jurisdiction . The optimal contract will also have a greater performance - linked ( and smaller ﬁxed ) component if enforceability is high . We also show that a ﬁrm in the high - enforcement jurisdiction is more likely to choose a form of production that is skill - intensive ( such as R & D ) because the managers in that jurisdiction have greater human capital . Model A is similar to that of Posner , Triantis and Triantis ( 2004 ) , though our results on executive compensation and on the optimal form of production are not the focus of their analysis . We also analyze a second model ( Model B ) in which , in addition to the ﬁrm investment just described , managers also have the option to make a non - contractible investment in their own general human capital . We ﬁnd that an increase in enforceability makes it less likely that managers will make their investment but , as in Model A , makes it more likely that ﬁrms will invest . Model B shares with Model A the implication that a manager in a high - enforcement - jurisdiction ﬁrm beneﬁts less from transferring to a new ﬁrm and hence is more likely to remain with his current employer . If , however , the manager’s investment in his own human capital has a greater eﬀect than the ﬁrm’s , then Model B yields several predictions that diﬀer from those of Model A . In Model B the manager’s human capital will be greater in the low - enforcement jurisdiction , and thus the optimal contract will grant a higher expected compensation with a smaller tilt towards salary in that jurisdiction . Model B also suggests that it is the ﬁrm in the low - enforcement jurisdiction that is more likely to undertake skill - intensive production because managers in that area will have more human capital . We make use of data on state regulations and the Execucomp database of executive com - pensation to test the predictions of Models A and B by analyzing the eﬀects of non - competition enforceability . We begin by showing that non - competition are quite commonly utilized ; we ﬁnd that 70 . 2 % of ﬁrms use them with their top executives . We then perform two types of tests . Our time - series tests consider changes in non - competition enforceability law that took place in Texas , Florida and Louisiana . These tests employ ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects to analyze the impact of the legal shifts , controlling for all ﬁrm - speciﬁc variables . Our cross - sectional tests analyze diﬀerences in en - forceability across all states . We argue that non - competition law is particularly important to ﬁrms with substantial within - state competition , since covenants not to compete typically have limited geographic scope and are easiest to enforce in the same legal jurisdiction . We then use the in - teraction between enforceability and the extent of in - state competition as a measure of the power and relevance of non - competition law for a given ﬁrm . We include state ﬁxed eﬀects in our cross - 2 sectional tests to control for diﬀerences between states unrelated to non - competition enforceability , and we also control for industry eﬀects . 1 Our ﬁrst ﬁnding is that enforceability strongly reduces executive mobility , particularly decreas - ing the likelihood that a ﬁrm will experience a within - industry managerial transfer ( either in or out ) . In a related result , we show that executives in high - enforcement jurisdictions have longer job tenures . Thus , covenants not to compete do serve to attach human capital assets to companies in the way predicted by both Models A and B . Our analysis of executive compensation shows that it is both lower and more salary - based in high enforcement jurisdictions . These results hold both in time - series speciﬁcations with ﬁxed eﬀects at the executive level , and in the cross - sectional regressions . The ﬁndings support Model B and suggest that the role of non - competition agreements in discouraging managerial investment may be substantial . In addition , these results indicate that the regulatory environment can have an important eﬀect on compensation levels and complement the recent empirical literature on optimal executive contracts ( Gibbons and Murphy 1992a , Kole , 1997 , Hermalin and Wallace , 2001 , Gillan , Hartzell and Parrino , 2005 ) . Both Models A and B predict that managers from high - enforcement jurisdictions will beneﬁt less from transferring to a new ﬁrm . In support of this prediction , we ﬁnd that managers in ﬁrms in high - enforcement areas receive relatively smaller compensation increases when they transfer ﬁrms . These managers also tend to assume lower - ranked positions in their new ﬁrms , relative to managers who transfer from low - enforcement areas . Our work draws a link between managerial incentives and compensation and ﬁrm investment strategy ( Gibbons and Murphy , 1992b , Oyer , 1998 ) . Models A and B make contrasting predictions about the eﬀects of non - enforceability on the likelihood that ﬁrms will engage in skill - intensive production . We use R & D investment as a ﬁrst proxy for skill - intensive production . Controlling for ﬁxed eﬀects at either the ﬁrm ( time - series analysis ) or industry and state ( cross - sectional analysis ) levels , we ﬁnd that non - competition enforceability reduces R & D spending , which is consistent with Model B . When a ﬁrm determines its R & D investment policy , the negative incentive eﬀects of non - competition agreements on managerial investments in their own human capital outweigh the positive incentive eﬀects on ﬁrm investment in managerial human capital . Our ﬁndings indicate that low - enforcement jurisdictions have a comparative advantage in funding R & D . We also make use of the capital - intensity of production as a second proxy for skill - intensive projects . We show 1 In previous empirical work on non - competition enforceability , Stuart and Sorenson ( 2002 ) link non - competition law to local business founding rates and Kaplan and Stromberg ( 2003 ) ﬁnd that venture capitalists frequently require entrepreneurs to sign non - competition agreements . 3 that ﬁrms in low - enforcement states engage in production that is relatively capital - intensive . This result is consistent with Model B as well . Our empirical ﬁndings on executive mobility and post - transfer compensation are consistent with the idea ( developed in Models A and B ) that enforceable non - competition agreements encourage ﬁrms to make investments in their managers’ human capital . Our results on the level and form of executive compensation and on R & D investment and capital - intensity of production , however , support the argument ( analyzed in Model B ) that enforceable covenants not to compete discourage managers from investing in their own human capital and that managerial investments have a greater impact than those of ﬁrms . Overall , the evidence is that non - competition agreements do bind human capital to ﬁrms , but in doing so they change the quality of that capital . We ﬁnd no evidence that the enforceability regime aﬀects either ﬁrm market to book ratios or proﬁtability . There are two natural explanations for these results . The ﬁrst is that the negative managerial incentive eﬀects of requiring enforceable covenants not to compete may roughly balance the beneﬁts . ( This is consistent with the less than 100 % adoption of non - competition contracts that is observed in high - enforcement jurisdictions . ) The second is that enforceable non - competition con - tracts may yield beneﬁts to individual ﬁrms but may also generate oﬀsetting negative externalities by restricting labor mobility . The remainder of the paper is organized as follows . Section 2 describes the theoretical frame - work . Section 3 details the data , and we outline the empirical strategy in Section 4 . The results are analyzed in Section 5 , and we conclude in Section 6 . 2 Model Non - competition agreements are contracts signed by employees and ﬁrms that prohibit employees from joining ( or forming ) a competing ﬁrm . The agreements usually specify a time period and geographic location within which the employee agrees not to compete with his current employer . Employees from senior managers to salespeople may be required to sign a covenant not to compete , and an agreement accepted at the time of hiring will typically continue to hold throughout the employment relationship and will extend beyond the end of the relationship for a contractually speciﬁed period . As we discuss in Section 4 , the enforceability of non - competition agreements varies substantially across the states of the U . S . In high - enforceability jurisdictions courts are willing to implement agreements of long duration and wide geographical scope , even if employees entered into such contracts with no reciprocal compensation other than employment . In low - enforceability jurisdictions it can be very diﬃcult to enforce any non - competition agreement at all . 4 The property rights literature ( e . g . , Grossman and Hart , 1986 , Hart and Moore , 1990 , 1994 ) examines the eﬀects of incomplete contracts on the willingness of economic actors to make invest - ments . In this section , we apply the insights of that literature to study the speciﬁc case of one legally mandated form of contractual incompleteness : the refusal of certain jurisdictions to enforce non - competition contracts . We explore the impact of non - competition enforceability on executive mobility , the form and level of executive compensation and the type of production in which ﬁrms choose to engage . We present two models . In Model A , we analyze the eﬀects of the enforceability of non - competition contracts on the decision of a ﬁrm whether to make an investment in the human capital of its employee . This model is similar to that of Posner , Triantis and Triantis ( 2004 ) , though we develop results on the level and type of executive compensation and on the mode of production that they do not consider . In Model B , we also allow the manager to make an investment in his own human capital . We provide tests of the implications of these two models in Section 5 . 2 . 1 General Model Framework We model a labor production game with two companies and a manager . The manager is matched to a company in a labor market , as described below . A matched company - manager pair can then together produce output . 2 . 1 . 1 Non - competition Contracts In the model , a non - competition contract binds a manager not to leave a company for its competitor , without the company’s permission . We will consider two equilibria : one in which the companies are located in a jurisdiction in which non - competition contracts are enforced by the courts , and a second in which the companies are located in a jurisdiction in which they are not . 2 . 1 . 2 Labor Market In period zero , the manager is randomly assigned to a company . For convenience , we will refer to the company to which the worker is initially assigned as the ﬁrm , and we will refer to the other company as the competitor . The ﬁrm may oﬀer the manager a non - competition contract , along with a signing bonus , which the manager is free to accept or reject . In period one , public information arrives about the quality q of the match between the worker and the ﬁrm . The quality ˆ q of the manager match to the competitor is also revealed in period one . After the public information is reported , the manager may receive an oﬀer to join the competitor . In period two , the manager makes a ﬁnal decision about which company to join ( perhaps in exchange for a signing bonus ) , the company oﬀers him a production contract , production occurs and ﬁnal 5 payoﬀs are made . We assume that q and ˆ q are non - negative and identically distributed , and they may be either correlated or uncorrelated . 2 . 1 . 3 Production The period two proﬁt generated by a company - manager pair depends on the quality q (cid:48) of the company - manager match and the eﬀort e exerted in period two by the manager . We assume that if a manager has a match of quality q (cid:48) and exerts eﬀort e then he will generate proﬁt x , where x is a normal random variable with mean q (cid:48) e and standard deviation σ . The proﬁt x is observable , but eﬀort e is not . Exerting eﬀort is costly to the manager : we assume the manager must bear a cost of e 2 when he exerts eﬀort e . A company without a manager will produce nothing . 2 . 1 . 4 Production Contracts and Preferences After a manager has joined a company in period two , the company may oﬀer him a production contract that links compensation to output . For simplicity , and to generate clear empirical implica - tions , we consider linear contracts of the form ax + b . We assume that companies are risk - neutral , while managers are risk - averse with negative exponential utility U ( w ) = − exp ( − ρw ) . 2 . 1 . 5 Bargaining In period two , the ﬁrm and its competitor both require the services of a single manager , so the manager may bargain over any surplus that will be created by his production . A manager who has not signed an enforceable non - competition contract will negotiate with the company that most values his services . We assume that in this two - party bargaining , the manager will receive a fraction θ m ∈ ( 0 , 1 ) of the surplus , with the remaining going to the company . For the manager who has signed an enforceable non - competition contract , there are two possible scenarios . In the ﬁrst , he is valued most by the ﬁrm with which he signed the contract , in which case the ﬁrm will not release him , since the competitor would not be willing to fully reimburse the ﬁrm for its loss of the manager . In the second , the competitor values him more , and the surplus from his transfer must be shared amongst the manager , the ﬁrm and the competitor . We assume that in this three - party negotiation , the manager receives (cid:178) m ∈ ( 0 , 1 ) of the surplus , the ﬁrm receives (cid:178) f ∈ ( 0 , 1 ) and the competitor receives the remainder . We assume that both the manager and either company receive more of the surplus in the two - party bargaining than in the three - party bargaining : θ m ≥ (cid:178) m and ( 1 − θ m ) ≥ max { (cid:178) f , 1 − (cid:178) m − (cid:178) f } . 6 2 . 1 . 6 Optimal Linear Production Contracts In time period two , after a ﬁnal manager - company match has been arranged , the company oﬀers the manager a production contract of the form ax + b to motivate him to exert eﬀort . A higher incentive component a will induce the manager to provide more eﬀort , but it also raises the risk of the manager’s compensation . The manager will only accept the production contract if it oﬀers him a non - negative certainty equivalent ( for he can always choose not to work for any company at all ) , so the company may also have to provide a salary component b to convince the manager to participate in production . For a manager and company with a ﬁnal period two match quality q (cid:48) , we denote by V F ( q (cid:48) ) the expected payoﬀ of the company , and we deﬁne EC ( q (cid:48) ) to be the total expected compensation of the manager . The optimal contract maximizes V F subject to the manager’s optimal choice of eﬀort and subject to the manager’s agreeing to participate in the company . When the company oﬀers the production contract , the quality of the manager - company match is known , and the contract will be made contingent on this quality , as the following lemma shows . Lemma 1 . In the optimal linear production contract , the incentive component a ∗ ( q (cid:48) ) is in - creasing is increasing in the manager - company match quality q (cid:48) . The ratio of the optimal salary to the total expected compensation b ∗ ( q (cid:48) ) EC ( q (cid:48) ) is decreasing in q (cid:48) . The expected period two manager compensation EC ( q (cid:48) ) and the expected period two payoﬀ to the company V F ( q (cid:48) ) are increasing in q (cid:48) . The eﬀort of higher quality managers is more valuable , so the company oﬀers these managers a greater incentive component in their compensation in order to induce eﬀort . Higher quality managers require less salary , since their better performance raises the incentive - linked portion of their compensation . The company overall does better when the manager - company match is of high quality , since a better match quality leads to greater production for any contract . Expected manager compensation is higher for high quality managers because these managers optimally exert more eﬀort ( and take more risk , given the greater incentive component of their pay ) and must be compensated for doing so . 2 . 1 . 7 Firm and Manager Payoﬀs We deﬁne π F ( q , ˆ q ) to be the expected second - period payoﬀ of a ﬁrm without a non - competition agreement that learns in period one that its manager has a match with it of quality q and a match with its competitor of quality ˆ q . The expected second - period payoﬀ of the manager is set equal to π M ( q , ˆ q ) . We use the notation π nccF and π nccM for a ﬁrm and a manager , respectively , that have signed a non - competition contract . The bargaining and labor - company matching assumptions given 7 earlier yield π F ( q , ˆ q ) = ( 1 − θ m ) max { V F ( q ) − V F ( ˆ q ) , 0 } π M ( q , ˆ q ) = ( 1 − θ m ) min { V F ( q ) , V F ( ˆ q ) } + θ m max { V F ( q ) , V F ( ˆ q ) } π nccF ( q , ˆ q ) = V F ( q ) + (cid:178) f max { V F ( ˆ q ) − V F ( q ) , 0 } π nccM ( q , ˆ q ) = (cid:178) m max { V F ( ˆ q ) − V F ( q ) , 0 } . 2 . 2 Model A : Firm Investment in Manager Human Capital Firm investments in manager human capital , which may take the form of training , permitting the manager ( at some cost to the ﬁrm ) to engage in human - capital - improving projects or the revelation of trade secrets , are highly vulnerable to the departure of the manager . This model describes the role of enforceable non - competition contracts in facilitating these investments and thereby building manager human capital . 2 . 2 . 1 Firm Investment We assume that at time period zero , after the ﬁrm and manager have agreed on whether a non - competition agreement will be signed , the ﬁrm may make an investment in the human capital of its manager ( Becker , 1993 ) . ( This option is not available to the competitor . ) This investment has cost I to the ﬁrm and raises the quality of the ﬁrm - manager match . Speciﬁcally , we presume that the investment raises the ﬁrm - manager match quality from q to q + λ for some λ > 0 . The investment is partly ﬁrm - speciﬁc , but may also increase the manager’s general human capital : we assume that it raises the quality of the manager’s match with the competitor by δλ , for δ ∈ [ 0 , 1 ) . The investment is assumed to be non - veriﬁable by the courts . 2 . 2 . 2 Information Structure At time zero , neither the manager , the ﬁrm nor the competitor knows the quality of the manager - company matches . Match quality is publicly revealed in period one , for both the ﬁrm and its competitor . 8 2 . 2 . 3 Equilibrium Investment We now consider the attractiveness of the investment to ﬁrms in the non - competition enforcement and non - enforcement jurisdictions . A ﬁrm without an enforceable agreement will receive no beneﬁt from its investment if the manager turns out to have a substantially higher quality match with the ﬁrm’s competitor . In this case , the manager will simply abandon the ﬁrm . If the manager and ﬁrm have an agreement , however , the ﬁrm will not agree to release the manager to be employed by its competitor , unless the ﬁrm is compensated for its investment . Moreover , if the manager has a higher match with the ﬁrm’s competitor and the investment is not entirely ﬁrm - speciﬁc , then , in the three - party negotiations between the manager , the ﬁrm and its competitor , the ﬁrm may also be able to extract some of the enhanced value to the competitor generated by its investment . These intuitions are formalized in Lemma 2 . Lemma 2 also shows that the net beneﬁt of the investment to a ﬁrm and manager who have signed an enforceable non - competition agreement is greater than the beneﬁt to a ﬁrm that has not signed such a agreement . This is relevant , because a ﬁrm’s oﬀer of a non - competition contract to a manager must compensate the manager for all the eﬀects of the contract . Lemma 2 . The increase in expected ﬁrm payoﬀ from making the investment is greater for ﬁrms with an enforceable non - competition agreement than for those without such an agreement . Moreover , the joint beneﬁt to the ﬁrm and manager who have signed an enforceable agreement is greater than that for a ﬁrm without an agreement . If the required investment I is very high then ﬁrms will not make the investment , irrespective of the non - competition contract regime , while if the required investment is very low the opposite will be true . We consider the more interesting case of an intermediate level of required investment . Assumption A : The cost of the investment is greater than the expected beneﬁt to the ﬁrm for ﬁrms without an enforceable non - competition agreement . The cost of the investment is less than the expected beneﬁt to both the ﬁrm and to the ﬁrm and manager jointly in ﬁrms with enforceable non - competition agreements . Assumption A implies that non - competition enforceability is required for investment by the ﬁrm . Result 1A . In the equilibrium in the enforcement jurisdiction , the ﬁrm oﬀers a signing bonus in exchange for a non - competition agreement with the manager . The manager accepts this agreement , and the ﬁrm makes the investment in managerial human capital . In the equilibrium in the non - enforcement jurisdiction , the ﬁrm does not make the investment . 9 2 . 3 Model B : Manager Investment in Human Capital A manager who has signed a non - competition agreement that limits his future ability to negotiate a favorable compensation scheme will be less willing to make investments in his own human capital . As a result , ﬁrms that require non - competition contracts may discourage human capital investments by their managers and thereby end up with low quality employees . Firms may be willing to accept this cost if ﬁrm investments in human capital ( which are only made in the presence of non - competition covenants ) are relatively more eﬃcient than manager investments . This model explores this trade - oﬀ . 2 . 3 . 1 Manager and Firm Investment At time zero , after the ﬁrm and manager have determined whether a non - competition contract will be signed , the manager may make an investment in his own human capital . This investment has cost J to the manager and raises the quality of the manager by γ : the investment is in general human capital and improves the manager’s quality in the same way for both the ﬁrm and its competitor . The investment is assumed to be non - veriﬁable . If the manager declines to invest in his own human capital , the ﬁrm may make an investment , which we assume is the same as the investment described in Model A . For simplicity , we presume that either the manager or the ﬁrm may invest ( but not both ) , and the manager is granted the ﬁrst option to invest . We will assume that manager investment has a greater eﬀect on manager human capital : γ > λ . ( Otherwise , this model yields results very similar to those of Model A . ) 2 . 3 . 2 Equilibrium Investment In this model , non - competition contracts discourage manager investment , since these agreements transfer much of the beneﬁt of the investment to the ﬁrm . Lemma 3 . The increase in expected manager payoﬀ from making the investment is greater for a manager without an enforceable non - competition agreement than for one with such an agreement . As before , we consider the case in which investment is moderately attractive . Assumption B : The cost of investment is greater than the expected beneﬁt to the manager for managers with an enforceable non - competition agreement , and the cost of the investment is less than the expected beneﬁt to the manager for managers without enforceable non - competition agreements . We also assume that the net beneﬁt of an investment made by the ﬁrm is greater than the net beneﬁt of an investment made by the manager . In other words , managerial investments have a large eﬀect , but they are also very costly and are hence relatively less eﬃcient than ﬁrm investments . 10 If this assumption does not hold , then all ﬁrms will forgo non - competition agreements and simply allow managers to make their own investments . We focus on the case in which investments made by the ﬁrm are relatively attractive . Assumption C : The net beneﬁt to the ﬁrm and the manager of an investment made by the ﬁrm is greater than the net beneﬁt to the ﬁrm and the manager of an investment made by the manager . These assumptions yield an equilibrium in which the manager invests in the non - enforcement jurisdiction and the ﬁrm invests in the enforcement jurisdiction . Result 1B . In equilibrium in the enforcement jurisdiction , the ﬁrm oﬀers a signing bonus in exchange for a non - competition agreement with a manager . The ﬁrm makes an investment and the manager does not . In equilibrium in the non - enforcement jurisdiction , the manager makes an investment and the ﬁrm does not . 2 . 4 Empirical Implications We now consider the implications of the two models described above . For all the results below we assume that the necessary conditions for Results 1A and 1B hold . Result 2 . In both Model A and Model B the ﬁrm in the high enforcement jurisdiction is less likely to experience a manager transfer . In both models , the ﬁrm in the high enforcement jurisdiction is more likely to make an in - vestment that makes the manager more valuable within the ﬁrm . Consequently , the result of the bargaining between the ﬁrm , the manager and the competitor will more often result in the man - ager remaining with the ﬁrm . In Model B , the manager in the ﬁrm in the non - enforcement regime invests in his general human capital , but this has no eﬀect on his relative value to the ﬁrm and to its competitor . We note here that since non - competition agreements can only restrict manager movements to competitors , Result 2 in particular predicts fewer within - industry transfers for the ﬁrm in the high enforcement jurisdiction . We now turn to the question of expected compensation . Result 3 . In Model A , the manager in the enforcement jurisdiction has higher expected com - pensation than the manager in the non - enforcement jurisdiction . In Model B , the manager in the non - enforcement jurisdiction has higher expected compensation . The intuition for Result 3 is that in both Models A and B the ﬁrm invests in the manager’s human capital only in the enforcement jurisdiction . In Model B , the managers invests in his own 11 human capital only in the ﬁrm in the non - enforcement jurisdiction , and the manager’s investment is presumed to have a greater eﬀect than the ﬁrm’s . As a result , the manager in the enforcement jurisdiction has greater human capital in Model A and less human capital in Model B , relative to the manager in the non - enforcement jurisdiction . Lemma 1 shows that the manager in the enforcement jurisdiction will receive higher expected compensation in Model A and lower expected compensation in Model B . Lemma 1 also shows that the manager in the enforcement jurisdiction will have a compensation contract tilted away from salary in Model A and tilted towards salary in Model B . This intuition is formalized in Result 4 . Result 4 . In Model A , the optimal production contract oﬀers an expected ratio of salary to total compensation that is higher for the manager in the non - enforcement jurisdiction than for the manager in the enforcement jurisdiction . In Model B , the optimal production contract oﬀers an expected ratio of salary to total compensation that is higher for the manager in the enforcement jurisdiction . In both models , the ﬁrm - speciﬁc investments made by ﬁrms in the enforcement jurisdiction decrease the relative beneﬁts to managers from transferring to the competitor . Consequently , even though managers from the enforcement jurisdiction may sometimes transfer , their gains from doing so will be relatively small . Formalizing this argument requires the following assumption . Assumption D : We presume that q = α + β 1 and ˆ q = α + β 2 , where β j , j ∈ { 1 , 2 } are independent of α and identically distributed . We also assume that α , β 1 and β 2 have log - concave and non - negative continuously diﬀerentiable density functions . The truncated normal , uniform , exponential and a number of other densities are log - concave ( Bagnoli and Bergstrom , 2005 ) . Result 5 . Under Assumption D , in both Models A and B , the average increase in match quality for managers who transfer companies is higher for managers in the non - enforcement jurisdiction For our last empirical implication , we consider a modiﬁcation to the basic model framework presented above . In particular , in the second period we allow ﬁrms to select a skill - intensive mode of production that , for a manager - company match of quality q (cid:48) , generates proﬁts with mean s ( q (cid:48) ) e rather than q (cid:48) e as in the basic model . We presume that skill - intensive production is beneﬁcial for high quality managers , but harmful for low quality managers : there is a q 1 such that s ( q (cid:48) ) ≥ q (cid:48) for q (cid:48) ≥ q 1 and s ( q (cid:48) ) ≤ q (cid:48) for q (cid:48) ≤ q 1 . We denote the ﬁrm proﬁt from the use of skill intensive production by W F ( q (cid:48) ) . The ﬁrm’s overall proﬁt is then given by max { V F ( q (cid:48) ) , W F ( q (cid:48) ) } . The previous analysis can be replicated , modifying the assumptions by replacing V F ( q (cid:48) ) with max { V F ( q (cid:48) ) , W F ( q (cid:48) ) } . Result 6 describes the optimal use of skill - intensive production . 12 Result 6 . In Model A , the company in the enforcement jurisdiction is more likely to choose skill - intensive production . In Model B , the company in the non - enforcement jurisdiction is more likely to choose skill - intensive production . Skill - intensive production will be chosen by companies with high quality managers . In Model A , these companies are in the enforcement jurisdiction , and in Model B the opposite is true . 3 Data To test the predictions detailed in Section 2 , we require data on executive jobs transfers , executive compensation , ﬁrm research and development spending and ﬁrm capital investment . Our data source for details on executives is Standard and Poor’s Execucomp database . Execucomp includes compensation data on the ﬁve most highly paid executives for 2 , 610 large publicly traded U . S . ﬁrms . ( Execucomp also follows executives who were amongst the top ﬁve and later fell below , so some ﬁrms have reported data for more than ﬁve executives in a given year . ) Data are available for 1992 - 2004 . Executive - speciﬁc identiﬁers allow us to track managers who move from one ﬁrm to another . We supplement the Execucomp data with ﬁrm - level data from Compustat on research and development investment and capital expenditures . We proxy for ﬁrm age by considering the ﬁrm’s ﬁrst appearance in Compustat . We use the location of ﬁrms’ headquarters in implementing our empirical strategy ( as discussed below in Section 4 ) , but Execucomp and Compustat report only the current and not the historical headquarters location . We match the Execucomp data set to the Compact Disclosure database to determine historical headquarters locations . One hundred and thirty ( 5 . 0 % ) of the ﬁrms shifted locations during the sample period . Data on state unemployment rates and per capita personal income are provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis . Our last data source is 10kwizard . com , which provides SEC ﬁlings for the sample companies . Summary statistics on these data are reported in Table 1 . 4 Empirical Strategy The central empirical challenge is to generate a measure of the enforceability of non - competition agreements across the states of the U . S . To this end , we construct an index of non - competition enforcement . 2 2 Our study applies the insight of the law and ﬁnance literature ( La Porta , Lopez - de - Silanes , Shleifer and Vishny 1997 , 1998 , 1999 , 2000 , Beck , Demirguc - Kunt and Levine , 2003 ) that legal institutions can have a strong eﬀect on the structure and workings of the ﬁrm . In our setting , however , regulations vary at the state level within a given country . Recent studies exploiting cross - state analysis include Bebchuk and Cohen ( 2003 ) and Wald and Long ( 2006 ) . 13 4 . 1 Non - competition Enforcement Index Malsberger ( 2004 ) is the central resource describing non - competition law in the ﬁfty U . S . states and the District of Columbia . We consider twelve questions analyzed by Malsberger for each jurisdiction and assign one point to each jurisdiction for each question if the jurisdiction’s enforcement of that dimension of non - competition law exceeds a given threshold . Possible totals therefore range from zero to twelve , and we scale the totals by dividing by twelve to generate a score from zero to one . A complete list of questions , thresholds and state totals is given in the Appendix . Summary statistics on the scores are reported in Table 1 . We provide here a broad overview of the basic issues in non - competition law and provide some examples illustrating diﬀerences amongst the laws of varying states . The ﬁrst question is whether non - competition agreements are generally enforceable in any re - spect . The focus of our study is on the eﬀects of non - competition agreements signed by executives who are employed by large ﬁrms , so we ignore laws that apply to non - competition arrangements concluded in the context of the sale of a business . ( Those are permitted to some degree in every jurisdiction . ) Almost all states allow some form of covenant not to compete between employers and employees , though California and North Dakota do not . For this question , all jurisdictions save these two are awarded a score of one . Even though most states allow some form of non - competition agreement , there is great variation in the types of contracts permitted . For example , the nature of what a ﬁrm can claim as a legitimate protectable interest depends on the jurisdiction . In some states ( e . g . , New Hampshire ) , a ﬁrm can restrict an employee from future independent dealings with customers with whom he had direct contact , but cannot prevent him from seeking business from other customers once he leaves the ﬁrm . In other states ( e . g . Georgia ) , a non - competition agreement can ban an employee from trading with any current clients of the ﬁrm , even if the employee has no contact with the client . States also have diﬀerent requirements for the compensation that an employee must receive in order for the non - competition contract to be valid . In some states ( e . g . Wisconsin ) , at - will employment is suﬃcient consideration . In other states ( e . g . Texas ) some ancillary compensation must be granted to the employee at the time the agreement is made . The geographical and time restrictions that are considered reasonable can be quite diﬀerent in diﬀerent jurisdictions . In some states ( e . g . Missouri ) , an agreement will be enforced in a region even if the ﬁrm has no current business in that area . In other states ( e . g . Virginia ) the non - competition agreement must usually be restricted to the ﬁrm’s current markets . Some states ( e . g . Pennsylvania ) will routinely enforce 3 year covenants , while others ( e . g . Florida ) presume that covenants more 14 than 2 years in length contracted upon outside a sale - of - business context are unreasonable . State laws also vary in determining whether employees are released from their contracts if they are ﬁred . In our empirical work we consider the eﬀects of both changes in the regulations of given states over time and cross - sectional diﬀerences in state laws . We note here that the enforcement of non - competition agreements is governed by employment law , not corporate law , so the relevant jurisdiction is typically the one in which the employee works ( Malsberger , 2004 and Pentelovitch , 2003 ) . Our study analyzes top executives at large ﬁrms , who will typically work at headquarters , so it is the headquarters location , not the state of incorporation , that we consider . 3 4 . 2 Time - Series Changes in State Laws While laws governing the enforcement of non - competition agreements are largely static , three states experienced signiﬁcant shifts in the treatment of covenants not to compete during our sample period of 1992 - 2004 . 4 . 2 . 1 Texas In June 1994 in Light v . Centel Cellular Co . the Texas Supreme Court developed a new set of requirements that were needed for enforceability of non - competition agreements . The ruling , in this important case that redeﬁned the legal standards in the state , stated that a covenant not to compete must be “ancillary to or part of an otherwise enforceable agreement” between the employer and the employee . In other words , the employer must oﬀer the employee some speciﬁc consideration in exchange for the non - competition agreement , and continued at - will employment does not constitute acceptable consideration . Moreover , it must be that the covenant not to compete is designed to enforce the promises made by the employee as part of the agreement . This latter condition was a new requirement added by the court ( Malsberger , 2004 ) , and it serves to make it substantially more diﬃcult to enforce non - competition agreements in Texas . 4 The non - competition enforcement index score for Texas is ﬁve before 1994 and three after the decision . The court also ruled that its interpretation of the law applied both retroactively to all agreements previously signed in Texas and prospectively to any future agreements . 3 As discussed below in Section 4 . 3 there was some ambiguity during the sample period about which state’s law governed cases in which an employee left a ﬁrm with a headquarters in one state and moved to a competitor with a headquarters in a diﬀerent state . This adds noise to our estimation ( though no systematic bias ) , but the state of incorporation , in any case , is rarely of signiﬁcant importance . 4 Bundren ( 2005 ) , Schueler and Solomon ( 2001 ) and Fowler ( 2002 ) detail the signiﬁcant eﬀects of the Light v . Centel decision on Texas non - competition law . 15 4 . 2 . 2 Louisiana The Louisiana Supreme Court radically changed the enforcement of non - competition agreements in the state with its June 2001 ruling in SWAT 24 Shreveport Bossier , Inc . v . Bond . The court ruled that Louisiana’s statues on covenants not to compete only permitted contracts that restricted employees from setting up their own businesses in competition with a previous employer ; employees could not be prohibited from joining a competing ﬁrm in which they held no equity interest . From the perspective of a manager of a large corporation , the SWAT ruling made non - competition agreements signiﬁcantly less enforceable in Louisiana ; the relevant labor market opportunities for such a manager would typically lie with other large competitors . The ruling applied to all previous covenants not to compete . In 2003 , the state legislature altered the law to permit non - competition agreements barring employees from joining other ﬁrms in which they have no ownership interest . 5 The non - competition enforcement index score for Louisiana is zero during the period 2002 - 2003 and four otherwise . 4 . 2 . 3 Florida The change in law in Florida , by contrast with the above two cases , arose from the actions of the state legislature , not a court . In late May , 1996 the state legislature repealed the previous law governing covenants not to compete and replaced it with a new law . In addition to adding clarity to the rules governing non - competition agreements , the new law strengthened employers’ positions in three signiﬁcant ways . First , the 1996 statue prohibits courts from considering the individual hardship that the non - competition agreement will cause the former employee . This represents a dramatic change from the previous law that balanced the interests of the employer and the former employee ( Malsberger , 2004 ) . Second , the 1996 law requires courts to modify geographic or time restrictions that are overbroad , rather than simply declaring the covenant unenforceable . Prior law allowed for such modiﬁcations , but did not require them . This change made it easier for employers to write highly restrictive covenants without fear of their being overturned in court . Third , under the new law there is a presumption of injury to the ﬁrm when a non - competition agreement is violated . This enhances the ﬁrm’s powers to get an injunction preventing its former employee from working for another company ( Gallo and Adler , undated ) . The non - competition enforcement index score for Florida is seven before the 1996 law and nine afterwards . The new law was speciﬁcally stated to apply only to contracts signed after July , 1996 - previous contracts are governed by the law in eﬀect at the time they were signed . The purely prospective change in Florida law diﬀers 5 Terrell ( 2004 ) discusses the history of Louisiana non - competition law . 16 from the prospective and retroactive changes in the law in Texas and Louisiana . When considering the impact of these various legal changes on executive compensation , we will take into account in our analysis below the fact that the Texas and Louisiana rulings abrogated some past agreements , while the Florida change in statue law served only to expand the scope for future agreements , and had no eﬀect on previous contracts . We make use of these changes in the legal environment to generate a variable we label Increased Enforceability . We assume that the legal changes detailed above aﬀected compensation and ﬁrm investment starting in the year following their occurrence . The variable therefore takes the value of one for ﬁrms in Florida in 1997 - 2004 , takes the value of negative one for ﬁrms in Texas in 1995 - 2004 and for ﬁrms Louisiana in 2002 - 2003 and is set equal to zero otherwise . To avoid any possible selection eﬀects , we only consider the eﬀects of the legal shifts on the large majority ( 95 % ) of ﬁrms that did not change the state of their headquarters locations throughout the entire sample period . We use a simple three - level ( { − 1 , 0 , + 1 } ) measure of the changes for the results reported in the paper , but a measure based on diﬀerences in the non - enforcement index scores yields similar ﬁndings . The changes described above can be regarded as exogenous shocks to the legal environment from the perspective of any given ﬁrm . All the changes had substantial eﬀects on the enforceability of non - competition agreements . Since these legal changes aﬀected ﬁrms in diﬀerent states at diﬀerent times , we are able to incorporate ﬁrm ( or executive ) ﬁxed eﬀects into our analysis . In our analysis of the level of R & D spending , for example , we consider the eﬀect of the change in the legal environment on the R & D investment of a given ﬁrm . Firms in the states that did not experience any legal shifts serve as controls for any times series variation in compensation levels that occurs national - wide . Our econometric model considers the eﬀect of Increased Enforceability on the following ﬁrm characteristics : executive transfers into and out of the ﬁrm , executive job tenures , level and com - position of executive compensation , ﬁrm research and development spending , ﬁrm investment and ﬁrm performance . The equation estimated is firm characteristic i = F ( Increased Enforceability , controls i ) + (cid:178) i , ( 1 ) where controls i is a vector of controls for ﬁrm i including a ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀect and (cid:178) i is an error term . We most often estimate linear models , though we also consider Poisson and logit models . Given the small number of ﬁrm headquarters moves discussed in Section 3 , state ﬁxed eﬀects are essentially subsumed by the ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects and are therefore omitted . We calculate robust standard errors clustered at the state - year level . 17 In some tests we analyze the characteristics of a given executive ( such as growth in compensa - tion ) and estimate executive characteristic j = F ( Increased Enforceability , controls j ) + (cid:178) j , ( 2 ) where controls j is a vector of controls for executive j including an executive ﬁxed eﬀect and (cid:178) j is an error term . Under this speciﬁcation we calculate robust standard errors clustered at the ﬁrm level . 4 . 3 Cross - sectional Variation in State Laws To supplement the time - series evidence , we also consider cross - sectional variation in legal envi - ronments across states . One approach would be to simply use the non - enforcement index scores without any state ﬁxed eﬀects , but that analysis would presume that the diﬀerences in , for example , compensation levels between ﬁrms in diﬀerent states are entirely driven by non - competition law . That is clearly not true ; states vary in numerous ways , not all of which can be speciﬁed , so state ﬁxed eﬀects are required . Just using the non - enforcement index scores along with state ﬁxed eﬀects would essentially replicate the time - series approach described above . Instead , we argue that the level of the non - enforcement index will have a diﬀerent eﬀect on ﬁrms that face diﬀerent competitive environments . We focus on the extent of in - state competition , since it is in - state competition that is most aﬀected by a covenant not to compete . This is true for two reasons : 1 . As discussed above , enforceable non - competition agreements typically have a restricted geo - graphical scope , and this scope is often a state or a part of a state , for example , a county , a city or a 10 or 50 mile radius around the place of business ( Malsberger , 2004 ) . 2 . During the sample period it was considerably more diﬃcult to enforce a non - competition agreement across state boundaries than within a state . Managers from states with tough non - competition enforceability on several occasions accepted oﬀers from California ﬁrms and asked California courts to void their non - competition agreements . California courts typically agreed , arguing that the contracts were not enforceable in California . 6 6 The governing case is Application Group v . Hunter Group ( 1996 ) in which the Maryland - based employee of a Maryland ﬁrm who had signed a non - competition agreement moved to California to work for a California - based competitor . A California court voided the non - competition agreement based on California law . This case also showed that courts would not be bound by a choice - of - law provision in the contract asserting under which state law the non - competition agreement was to be enforced . Keener v . Covergys ( 2003 ) and Advanced Bionics v . Medtronic ( 2003 ) conﬁrmed that state courts have a very limited ability to enforce non - competition agreements when employees move to other states . Cheskin and Lerner ( 2003 ) detail the diﬃculties previous employers face in enforcing non - competition covenants across state lines . It is clear that it is easiest and least costly to enforce non - competition agreements when the executive remains in - state . 18 We thus propose the interaction between the non - competition enforcement index and the level of in - state competition as a measure of eﬀect of enforceability . For ﬁrms with considerable in - state competition , an increase in the non - competition index will substantially reduce the probability that an executive will leave the ﬁrm and join a competitor . For ﬁrms with little in - state competition , an increase in enforceability will have little impact , for the two reasons given above . We also incorporate state ﬁxed eﬀects in the analysis to control for state - wide variables other than non - compete enforceability . We are thus comparing the relative eﬀects of non - competition enforcement We cannot use ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects in this speciﬁcation because most states ( and hence most ﬁrms ) experience no time - series variation in the non - competition index . Thus , relative to the time - series variable , the cross - sectional measure sacriﬁces the precision of ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects , but makes use of variation in non - compete enforceability across more ﬁrms and more states . The econometric model we use to estimate the cross - sectional eﬀects of diﬀerences in state laws is firm characteristic k = F ( ( Enforcement score ) ∗ ( in − state competition ) , controls k ) + (cid:178) k , ( 3 ) where ( in - state competition ) is the fraction of total industry sales ( excluding those of the ﬁrm itself ) generated by in - state competitors , 7 controls k is a vector of controls for ﬁrm k including ( in - state competition ) and state and industry ﬁxed eﬀects and (cid:178) k is an error term . We calculate robust standard errors clustered at the ﬁrm level . The level of the non - enforcement index is almost perfectly collinear with the state ﬁxed eﬀects and is therefore not included in ( 3 ) . ( It is not completely collinear only because of the time - series variation that we analyze in the method described in Section 4 . 2 . ) We interpret the coeﬃcient on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) as a measure of the eﬀects of non - competition enforceability since it reﬂects the impact of enforceability on the ﬁrms within a given state for which it should matter most . 4 . 3 . 1 Is the Level of Non - Competition Enforceability Exogenous ? It is clear that a ﬁrm can choose the location of its corporate headquarters . Our study of the eﬀects of cross - sectional variation in non - competition enforcement is therefore subject to the following objection : perhaps ﬁrms that plan to have a corporate policy requiring non - competition contracts locate in jurisdictions that will enforce these contracts . Any results we may ﬁnd linking non - competition enforceability to , for example , executive mobility may thus be driven simply by sorting in the types of ﬁrms that choose to locate in diﬀerent areas . 7 Our results are robust to using a measure of competition based on the number of competitors . 19 We do not view this objection as particularly forceful for two reasons . First , the business location literature has emphasized the eﬀects of natural resources ( Ellison and Glaeser , 1999 ) , unionization levels , state taxes ( Bartik , 1985 ) , founder’s home location , energy costs ( Carlton , 1983 ) and environmental regulation on the siting decisions of ﬁrms . The local non - competition enforcement regime has not been proposed as a ﬁrst - order determinant of ﬁrm location , nor do we think it a likely candidate . Moreover , the time - series results in Section 5 show that non - competition enforceability has no eﬀect on value or performance for aﬀected ﬁrms , so it seems unlikely that it is driving ﬁrm location decisions . We also ﬁnd no evidence that the time - series changes in enforceability that we observe led to any change in the rate of in - or out - migration of ﬁrms to the relevant states . Second , the sorting argument presumes that diﬀerences in non - competition law do have an eﬀect , or else there would be no reason for ﬁrms to sort into states based on varying enforceability . That is , the sorting argument can suggest at most that any eﬀects we ﬁnd are a combination of treatment eﬀects from diﬀerences in the laws and sorting eﬀects . Our speciﬁcation , however , is designed to negate sorting eﬀects . Suppose , for example , that ﬁrms that have no interest in non - competition contracts locate in California ( a low - enforcement state ) , while ﬁrms that do want non - competition agreements locate in Massachusetts ( a high - enforcement state ) . We make use of state ﬁxed eﬀects in all our cross - sectional regressions that completely net out such eﬀects . The type of sorting for which we cannot control is sorting that takes place across the enforceabil - ity and within - state competition measures simultaneously . If there are ﬁrms that are particularly averse to executive mobility , they may locate in states that have both high enforceability and little in - state competition , since these features should reduce managerial transfers . Result 2 predicts that high enforceability reduces executive transfers . Our interaction variable can essentially be thought of as ( Enforcement − mean ( Enforcement ) ) ∗ ( in − state competition − mean ( in − state competition ) ) . Stability - seeking ﬁrms locating in high enforcement , low in - state competition states will generate negative values for this interaction but will presumably have low executive mobility . This would bias the results away from a ﬁnding consistent with Result 2 ( since our empirical strategy regards a positive value for the interaction as indicative of high enforceability eﬀects ) , and similar arguments apply to the other predictions . In other words , any sorting eﬀects are likely to be quite small , and , in any case , will disfavor ﬁnding evidence in support of the predictions of the theoretical framework . 20 The time - series tests oﬀer clear exogenous shocks to individual ﬁrms , but the cross - sectional tests provide additional evidence using variation across all states . 5 Results 5 . 1 Do ﬁrms use non - competition agreements for top executives ? To answer this question , we selected a random sample of 500 Execucomp ﬁrms and conducted searches in 10kwizard . com of the 10 - K , 10 - Q and other SEC ﬁlings of these ﬁrms . For 351 of the ﬁrms ( 70 . 2 % ) , we found evidence of non - competition agreements between the ﬁrm and its top executives . In many cases ﬁrms supplied explicit employment agreements detailing the terms of these non - competition covenants . In other cases , the ﬁrms simply speciﬁed that certain top oﬃcers had signed non - competes . Firms need not , of course , disclose this information , so 70 . 2 % should be regarded as a lower bound for the fraction of ﬁrms that employ these covenants . This ﬁnding is consistent with previous research on the frequency of non - competition provisions in contracts with entrepreneurs ( Kaplan and Stromberg , 2003 ) , CEOs ( Gillan , Hartzell and Parrino , 2005 ) and technology sector workers ( Jauhiainen , Heilmann and Hurmelinna , 2003 ) . A logistic regression of whether a ﬁrm has disclosed the use of non - competition agreements on the level of the enforceability index in the ﬁrm’s state yields a coeﬃcient estimate of 1 . 313 with a t - stat of 3 . 14 ( robust standard errors , clustered at the state level ) . A one - standard deviation increase in the enforceability index from its mean raises the probability of disclosed use of non - competition agreements from 0 . 705 to 0 . 754 . While this evidence is essentially descriptive , lacking the state and industry ( or ﬁrm ) controls we will use in our formal analysis , it suggests that non - competition agreements are widely used and that their use increases with state enforceability . The choice by ﬁrms to use an agreement , however , is endogenous and the relevance of an agreement will vary with the level of enforceability . For example , we ﬁnd that 58 % of the California ﬁrms in our sample report using non - competition agreements , despite the extremely limited legal scope of those agreements . ( Kaplan and Stromberg , 2003 ﬁnd a similar fraction in their sample of California entrepreneurs . ) The more important question is the extent to which non - competition covenants are enforceable . Consequently , having established the common use of non - competition agreements , our analysis now turns to the central issue of the eﬀects of plausibly exogenous variation in enforceability on employment patterns , executive compensation and project selection . 21 5 . 2 Are non - competition agreements eﬀective ? We apply our empirical strategy to test the predictions listed in Section 2 . Result 2 shows that in both Models A and B the frequency of executive job transfers ( especially within - industry ) is decreasing in the level of non - competition enforceability faced by the ﬁrm . 8 To test this prediction , we ﬁrst analyze the set of job transfers . Execucomp provides information on the top executives , and unique executive identiﬁers allow us to establish that executives have left one ﬁrm and joined an - other . Using 10kwizard . com searches , we also track all the executives who have left the Execucomp database for other public ﬁrms . We exclude all transfers that result from mergers and spin - oﬀs . We also exclude transfers between subsidiaries of the same parent . In total , we ﬁnd 1 , 883 transfers between independent ﬁrms over the sample period . 9 We deﬁne a transfer to be within - industry if it is between two ﬁrms that have primary businesses in the same 4 - digit industry NAICS code . For ﬁrms outside Compustat without NAICS codes , we match industries at the 4 - digit SIC code level . We observe 637 within - industry transfers . For each ﬁrm we calculate the total number of transfers both into and out of the ﬁrm . The ﬁrst column of Table 2 reports results for the regression of the number of within - industry transfers on Increased Enforceability , ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects , year ﬁxed eﬀects and a set of controls . The controls include for each ﬁrm - year the ﬁrm’s one - and three - year total returns , the log of ﬁrm equity book and market values , the log of ﬁrm sales and the log of ﬁrm assets . We also include as additional controls the log of the state unemployment rate and the log of the state personal per capita income in the year . This regression explores the eﬀects of time - series changes in state laws ( speciﬁcation ( 1 ) ) . The estimation is via Poisson ﬁxed - eﬀects regression , as it is for all the regressions reported in this table . The coeﬃcients are expressed as intensities , relative to a base level ( equivalent to no eﬀect ) of one . Reported t - statistics compare coeﬃcients to one . We ﬁnd that increased enforceability of non - competition agreements signiﬁcantly ( t = - 4 . 01 ) reduces within - industry transfers , as suggested by Result 2 . ( Robust t - statistics corrected for clustering at the state - year level are reported . ) A shift to a tougher enforcement regime reduces the arrival intensity of within - industry transfers by 48 . 5 % . A change in state law to greater enforceability leads to a reduction in within - industry transfers that is both economically and statistically signiﬁcant . 10 8 In the theoretical framework , in the enforcement jurisdiction the ﬁrm experiences fewer out - transfers and its competitor experiences fewer in - transfers . Overall , there are fewer transfers . Implicitly the model assumes that the ﬁrm and its competitor are governed by the same law , but this need not be true in reality . The discussion in Section 4 . 3 , however , shows that the laws of both the previous and new employer are relevant in non - compete cases . That suggests that an increase in enforceability will reduce both out - transfers and in - transfers for a ﬁrm . 9 Due to the nature of the data , we observe fewer transfers in 1992 - 1993 , but this is accounted for by our year ﬁxed eﬀects . 10 The coeﬃcients ( with t - statistics in parenthesis ) for the increased enforceability in individual states are as follows : 22 We next consider the impact of cross - sectional variation in the non - competition enforcement index ( speciﬁcation ( 3 ) ) . The second column of Table 2 reports results for the regression of the number of within - industry transfers on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) , ( In - state competition ) , state , industry and year ﬁxed eﬀects , and the previous set of ﬁrm controls , along with log of ﬁrm age . ( Log ( Firm Age ) and ( In - state competition ) were omitted in the previous regression due to the presence of ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects - these variables exhibit very little time - series variation for a given ﬁrm , especially in the presence of year ﬁxed eﬀects . ) Firms that produce more than 90 % of their industry’s sales ( 1 . 9 % of the sample ) are excluded from this regression ( and the analogous regres - sions throughout the paper ) because they face so little within - industry competition that variation in the ( in - state competition ) measure will not reﬂect substantive diﬀerences in the same - industry employment opportunities of their executives . We ﬁnd that the coeﬃcient on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) is negative and signiﬁcant ( t = - 2 . 82 ) , providing further support for Result 2 . ( Robust t - statistics corrected for clustering at the ﬁrm level are reported . ) Tough enforcement of non - competition agreements serves to particularly reduce within - industry transfers for ﬁrms with substantial in - state competition , as hypothesized . A one - standard deviation increase in the inter - action between the enforcement index and the level of in - state competition reduces the intensity of the arrival of within - industry transfers by 24 . 2 % . The third and fourth columns display results from regressing all transfers ( within and between industries ) on Increased Enforceability and Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) , respectively . The eﬀects are economically smaller than for the within - industry regressions ( a shift to increased en - forcement reduces the arrival intensity of all transfers by 34 . 4 % , and a one - standard - deviation increase in the interaction between the enforcement index and the level of in - state competition reduces the rate of transfers by 10 . 0 % of the mean ) , but remain statistically signiﬁcant ( t = - 2 . 45 and t = - 1 . 69 , respectively ) . As shown in the ﬁfth and sixth columns of Table 2 , however , Increased Enforceability and Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) have statistically insigniﬁcant eﬀects on the level of between - industry eﬀects . While the group of companies within a ﬁrm’s industry likely does not perfectly correspond to the ﬁrm’s set of competitors that can excluded as potential employers by a non - competition agreement , our empirical ﬁndings show that the industry matching performs quite well in describing the scope of covenants not to compete . The results displayed in Table 2 establish that our measures of Increased Enforceability and Enforcement capture diﬀerences in the legal environment that have an important eﬀect on within - Texas 0 . 62 ( - 3 . 09 ) , Florida 0 . 33 ( - 2 . 89 ) and Louisiana 0 . 71 ( - 0 . 40 ) . The joint hypothesis that these coeﬃcients are zero may be rejected at the 1 % level . 23 industry executive mobility . Moreover , the results also suggest that our variables are not simply correlated with some endogenous measure of executives’ general propensity to move since we show that Increased Enforceability and Enforcement reduce within - industry , but not between - industry , moves . Result 2 suggests that executives should have longer job tenures in tough enforcement jurisdic - tions . Execucomp provides data on the start and departure dates for a subset of managers . We use this data to generate a record of completed job tenure lengths for these executives . For each ﬁrm - year we then calculate the average completed job tenure across all executives for whom data is available . ( This measure is highly correlated within ﬁrms , which we account for through clustering of the standard errors at the ﬁrm level . ) In the ﬁrst column of Table 3 we display the results from regressing job tenure length on Increased Enforceability , ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects and the previous set of controls . In support of Prediction 2 , the coeﬃcient on Increased Enforceability is signiﬁcant ( t = 3 . 14 ) . A switch to a higher enforceability regime increases completed job tenure lengths by 1 . 15 years , which is 9 . 0 % of the mean . In the second column , we report the results from regressing job tenures on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) and the usual controls . The coeﬃcient is positive and signiﬁcant ( t = 2 . 16 ) . A one - standard deviation increase in Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) increases job tenures by 10 . 6 % of the mean . We also analyze the eﬀect of non - competition agreement enforceability on the rate of departures from the ﬁrm . We consider than an executive has departed a ﬁrm if Execucomp records his leaving date , or if the executive appears as an employee of a diﬀerent ﬁrm . In the third column of Table 3 we report results from regressing the number of departures in each ﬁrm - year on Increased Enforceability , ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects and the standard controls . The coeﬃcient is statistically signiﬁcant , and we ﬁnd that a shift to a higher enforcement regime reduces the rate of departures by 29 % of the mean . In the fourth column we show results from regressing the number of departures on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) and the usual controls . The coeﬃcient is statistically insigniﬁcant . We note here that the Increased Enforceability variable measures a change , while the Enforcement variable is a level . The departure measure is a change , and the job tenure variable is a level . We would thus expect that Increased Enforceability would directly change the rate of departures , but that it would change job tenure lengths only over time . This may explain the much larger economic impact of Increased Enforceability on the departure rate relative to job tenure length . The Enforcement variable , by contrast , should be expected to have an eﬀect on observed job tenures ( since both are levels ) , but its eﬀect on the rate of departures might be more diﬃcult to discern . This may explain the signiﬁcance of Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) in the job tenure regression and its 24 insigniﬁcance in the departures regression . Overall the results are supportive of Result 2 . Non - competition arrangements clearly reduce executive mobility and increase stability . 5 . 3 Executive compensation We now turn to the issue of executive compensation . Result 3 shows that Models A and B provide competing hypotheses about the eﬀect of non - competition agreement enforcement on the level of compensation . We ﬁrst consider the impact of a shift in legal enforcement . As discussed in Section 4 . 2 , the change in Florida’s laws diﬀered from the changes in Texas and Louisiana . In Florida , the law change in 1996 in favor of tougher enforcement was purely prospective and had no eﬀect on pre - existing contracts . In Models A and B , managers who work for the ﬁrm in enforcement jurisdiction accept signing bonuses in period zero , while managers who are employed in the non - enforcement jurisdiction receive their compensation at a later period . This suggests that Florida executives may have negotiated higher compensation in 1997 ( the year after the law change ) in exchange for signing new , more restrictive covenants not to compete . In future years these covenants may have limited growth in compensation . By contrast , the abrogating of all historical contracts that occurred in Texas and Louisiana would be expected to raise salaries immediately . We thus deﬁne a new variable Increased Enforceability’ that is equal to Increased Enforceability , except that it is equal to zero for Florida ﬁrms in 1997 and takes the value of one for Florida ﬁrms from 1998 - 2004 . The Increased Enforceability’ variable measures a change , so we study its eﬀect on the change in compensation . We deﬁne compensation to be the sum of the following Execucomp data items : Salary , Bonus , Other Annual , Total Value of Restricted Stock Granted , Total Value of Stock Options Granted ( using Black - Scholes ) , Long - Term Incentive Payouts , and All Other Total . We analyze compensation at the individual executive level , and we truncate the growth in compensation at - 90 % and + 900 % . ( This eliminates 1 . 5 % of the data . ) In the ﬁrst column of Table 4 we report results from regressing compensation growth on Increased Enforceability’ , executive ﬁxed eﬀects and the previous set of ﬁrm controls ( speciﬁcation ( 2 ) ) . We ﬁnd a negative and signiﬁcant ( t = - 2 . 42 ) coeﬃcient on Increased Enforceability’ ( robust t - statistics corrected for clustering at the level of the ﬁrm are reported ) . For a given executive , a shift to a tougher enforcement regime reduces compensation growth by 12 . 8 % , which is 39 . 1 % of the mean growth rate . This economically signiﬁcant decrease in the growth rate of compensation , using individual executive ﬁxed eﬀects , is strong evidence in support of Model B , indicating that increased enforcement of non - competition agreements reduces compensation growth . The individual ﬁxed eﬀect controls indicate that this ﬁnding is evidence in favor of the direct eﬀect of non - competition enforceability on a given executive ; there is no 25 selection eﬀect at work in this regression . Regressing log growth rates on Increased Enforceability’ yields similar ( unreported ) results in the untruncated sample . We also consider the eﬀect of the level of Enforcement on the level of compensation . Since the Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) variable does not vary within a ﬁrm , we are unable to make use of ﬁrm ( or executive ) ﬁxed eﬀects . We regress the log of average compensation across the top ﬁve executives for each ﬁrm - year on the level variable Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) , ( In - state competition ) , state , industry and year ﬁxed eﬀects and the usual ﬁrm controls . As displayed in the second column of Table 4 , we ﬁnd that Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) signiﬁcantly ( t = - 3 . 64 ) reduces compensation ( robust t - statistics corrected for clustering at the level of the ﬁrm are reported ) . A one - standard deviation increase in Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) reduces the log of compensation by 1 . 2 % of the mean . ( By comparison , a one - standard deviation increase in three - year total return increases the log of compensation by 0 . 7 % of the mean . ) This result provides further cross - sectional support for Model B in addition to the previous time - series evidence : top executive compensation is lower in high - enforcement jurisdictions . We have shown that compensation is lower in high - enforcement jurisdictions , and we now con - sider whether the form of compensation diﬀers with non - competition enforceability . Result 4 shows that Model A predicts that salary should constitute a smaller proportion of overall compensation in areas in which covenants not to compete are more strictly enforced , while Model B predicts the opposite . To test the time - series implication of these predictions , we regress via OLS the diﬀerence between salary growth and overall compensation growth on Increased Enforceability’ , executive ﬁxed eﬀects and the standard set of ﬁrm controls . As exhibited in the ﬁrst column of Table 5 , we ﬁnd a positive and signiﬁcant ( t = 2 . 01 ) coeﬃcient on Increased Enforceability’ : a shift to greater enforcement of non - competition agreements leads to greater growth in salary relative to other forms of compensation . This ﬁxed eﬀect ﬁnding provides evidence for Model B . To test the cross - sectional implications of the predictions arising from Result 4 , we regress the log of the ratio of salary to over - all compensation on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) , ( In - state competition ) and the standard controls . Column two of Table 5 shows that we ﬁnd a positive and signiﬁcant ( t = 3 . 99 ) coeﬃcient on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) . The time - series and cross - sectional results provide consistent evidence in favor of Model B . To further study the question of compensation composition , we consider whether ﬁrms provide any options to their executives . For each executive - year , we regress an indicator variable for whether the executive receive any option compensation on Increased Enforceability’ , executive ﬁxed eﬀects and the standard controls . Since the dependent variable is binary , the estimation is via ﬁxed eﬀects 26 ( conditional ) logit . As displayed in column three of Table 5 , we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant eﬀect of Increased Enforceability’ on options - granting . We also regress the number of top ﬁve executives receiving options on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) , ( In - state competition ) and the previous controls . In column four of Table 5 we report that the coeﬃcient on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) is insigniﬁcant . Thus , although the total value of non - salary compensation ( as a proportion of total compensation ) is increasing in non - competition enforceability , we do not ﬁnd evidence that enforceability aﬀects whether or not ﬁrms use any options at all . In unreported results , we also ﬁnd no evidence that the use of restricted stock in executive compensation varies with non - competition enforcement . The use of reload options in executive compensation received particular attention during our sample period ( Dybvig and Loewenstein , 2003 ) . An executive who pays the exercise price for these options by selling currently held shares receives both shares and new reload options with a higher strike price but the same maturity as the original option . Dybvig and Loewenstein ( 2003 ) show that , relative to standard options , reload options are more valuable and have higher deltas , but the two options types are otherwise somewhat similar . Reload options are designed to ensure that an executive’s exposure to the stock price is not diminished by his selling previously owned shares in order to pay the exercise price on his options . 11 As Result 4 makes clear , Model B suggests that compensating managers in a manner directly tied to stock price performance should be more important in low - enforcement jurisdictions , so we might expect a greater use of reload options in such areas . Model A predicts the opposite . We regress a binary variable for whether an executive received any reload options in a given year on Increased Enforceability’ , executive ﬁxed eﬀects and the usual controls . The estimation is by ﬁxed eﬀects logit . As exhibited in column ﬁve of Table 5 , the coeﬃcient on Increased Enforceability’ is negative and signiﬁcant ( t = - 3 . 78 ) . This is evidence for a direct eﬀect of enforceability on a given executive . We also regress the number of top ﬁve executives who received any reload options in a given ﬁrm - year on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) , ( In - state competition ) and the standard controls . The coeﬃcient on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) is negative and signiﬁcant ( t = - 2 . 41 ) . Both ﬁndings are consistent with the idea explored in Model B that maintaining a manager’s exposure to his ﬁrm’s stock price through the use of reload options is less important in high - enforcement jurisdictions . 12 11 Executives commonly liquidate most of the shares they receive upon exercising options ( Ofek and Yermack , 2000 ) . Chen ( 2004 ) studies the role of options in encouraging executive retention . 12 Dybvig and Loewenstein’s ( 2003 ) result that reload options are worth more than standard options , combined with our ﬁnding that reload options are used more frequently in low - enforcement jurisdictions strengthens our previous result on compensation composition . We showed that non - salary compensation is larger in low - enforcement jurisdic - 27 5 . 4 Post - transfer Compensation Result 5 states that both Models A and B predict that amongst the set of managers who transfer , managers from the non - enforcement jurisdiction will enjoy greater increases in match quality , due to the largely ﬁrm - speciﬁc human capital of managers in the enforcement region . To test this prediction , we ﬁrst make use of compensation as a proxy for ﬁrm - manager match quality . We consider all transfers within the Execucomp database ( compensation information is not available for managers who transfer out of Execucomp ) . The time - series implication of Models A and B is that managers will accumulate relatively more ﬁrm - speciﬁc human capital after an increase in non - competition enforceability . Testing the time - series implication of Result 5 therefore requires comparing managers who leave their ﬁrms before the regulatory shift with those who join their ﬁrms after the regulatory shift and then depart for a new ﬁrm . There are , however , fewer than ﬁfteen managers in the second group . Consequently , we are only able to test the cross sectional implication of Result 5 that managers that depart ﬁrms in high - enforcement jurisdictions will receive relatively low compensation increases at their new companies . There are 912 transferring executives with compensation data available at both their previous and new ﬁrms . For each executive we regress the log of the compensation he receives at his new ﬁrm on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) , ( In - state competition ) , the log of the compensation he received at his previous ﬁrm , his compensation rank at his previous ﬁrm ( all those below the top ﬁve are assigned the sixth rank ) , state and industry dummies for both the previous and new ﬁrms and the full set of ﬁrm controls . As shown in the ﬁrst column of Table 6 , the coeﬃcient on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) is negative and signiﬁcant ( t = - 3 . 64 ) . Relative to their previ - ous compensation , executives who transfer from high enforcement jurisdictions receive relatively lower pay increases . This ﬁnding supports Result 5 . It is also interesting to note that the costs ( e . g . renegotiation costs ) of moving to a new company may plausibly be higher for executives who have signed non - competition agreements , so they might be expected to switch ﬁrms only for very large compensation inducements . Despite this point , executives transferring from high enforcement jurisdictions receive smaller compensation increases upon transferring . That suggests that renego - tiation costs are not especially large . ( We set these costs equal to zero in the theoretical framework , although the results are not sensitive to this assumption . ) It may be argued that executives transferring from high enforcement jurisdictions are only tions , using the Execucomp valuation measure that does not distinguish between reload and non - reload options . If reload options were valued properly , we would presumably ﬁnd an even stronger result linking low - enforcement to high non - salary compensation . 28 able to do so when they are ﬁred , and that their lower post - transfer compensation reﬂects their involuntary termination from their previous ﬁrm . Against this point , we ﬁrst note that in only nine states is a ﬁring considered a justiﬁcation for releasing an employee from a non - competition covenant . Second , in the second column of Table 6 , we report results from repeating the regression in the ﬁrst column for the subset of managers who are hired as CEOs at their new ﬁrms . These managers are presumably much less likely to have been ﬁred from their previous jobs . The coeﬃcient on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) is signiﬁcant for this set of managers as well . As a last test , we consider the compensation rank of a manager as a second proxy for the quality of the manager - ﬁrm match . We regress the compensation rank on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) , ( In - state competition ) , his compensation rank at his previous ﬁrm and the previously described set of controls . 13 We report in the third column of Table 6 that the coeﬃcient on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) is positive and signiﬁcant ( t = 3 . 41 ) . Managers from ﬁrms in high - enforcement areas move to higher ( i . e . , worse ) ranked positions in their new ﬁrms . This is further evidence in support of Result 5 . 5 . 5 Research and development spending and ﬁrm investment As described in Result 6 , Model A predicts that an increase in non - competition enforceability will lead to more skill - intensive production , while Model B predicts the opposite . To test these predic - tions , we consider two proxies for skill - intensive production : research and development spending and the capital - intensity of production . Research and development ( R & D ) is clearly an investment that especially beneﬁts from the presence of highly - skilled managers . Model A suggests that the managers in the high - enforcement ﬁrm have higher human capital and are thus better suited to making R & D investments . ( It is also the case that in Model A the ﬁrms in high - enforcement ju - risdictions may be more willing to invest in R & D because non - competition agreements can protect the ﬁrms from the loss of their investments that would ensue if key managers depart . ) Model B , by contrast , indicates that managers in low - enforcement jurisdictions will be more likely to make the investments in their own human capital that make success in R & D more likely . As a result , ﬁrms in low - enforcement jurisdictions should be more likely to invest in R & D rather than other projects . To test these competing hypotheses , we regress the log of one plus research and development spending ( research and development spending is zero for many ﬁrms ) on Increased Enforceability , ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects and the standard ﬁrm controls from previous regressions . As reported in the ﬁrst column of Table 7 , we ﬁnd a negative and signiﬁcant ( t = - 2 . 81 ) coeﬃcient on Increased Enforce - 13 We estimate the regression by OLS , despite the discrete nature of the dependent variable , because there are four sets of state and industry ﬁxed eﬀects . These can be incorporated into the OLS regression without loss of consistency . 29 ability . A shift to tighter enforcement of non - competition agreements reduces the log of one plus research and development investment for a given ﬁrm by 4 . 8 % of the mean . We test the cross - sectional implications of Result 6 by regressing the log of one plus re - search and development spending ( research and development spending is zero for many ﬁrms ) on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) , ( In - state competition ) , state and industry ﬁxed eﬀects and the usual set of ﬁrm controls . We show in the second column of Table 7 that the coeﬃcient on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) is negative and signiﬁcant ( t = - 2 . 17 ) . A one - standard - deviation increase in Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) reduces the log of one plus research and development spending by 3 . 8 % of the mean . The time - series and cross - sectional results both provide support for Model B . While high enforceability of non - competition agreements may protect R & D investments , the empirically dominant eﬀect is that non - compete agreements discourage employees from making investments in their own human capital . This places ﬁrms that require covenants not to compete at a comparative disadvantage in engaging in research and development , so they pursue less of it . This result provides a new perspective on Saxenian’s ( 1996 ) discussion of the diﬀerences between the computer industries in California and Massachusetts . Saxenian describes the greater commu - nication amongst Silicon Valley ﬁrms relative to those along Massachusetts’s Route 128 and argues that this information - sharing advantage led to the success of the California ﬁrms . Gilson ( 1999 ) and Rajan and Zingales ( 2001 ) argue that diﬀerences in non - compete enforcement between the Califor - nia and Massachusetts can explain organizational and cultural diﬀerences between ﬁrms in the two states . Our empirical analysis indicates that ﬁrms in low non - competition enforcement jurisdictions are best suited to make investments in research and development . This suggests that the success of Silicon Valley may in part be linked to California’s public policy of not enforcing covenants not to compete . Our empirical ﬁndings , however , are not driven simply by a state - to - state comparison ; there are , after all , many diﬀerences between states that are unrelated to non - competition law . In - stead we analyze both time - series variation in the laws of given states and cross - sectional variation in non - competition enforceability interacted with in - state competition , while controlling for state ﬁxed eﬀects . We also consider the capital intensity of production as a second proxy for skill - intensive pro - duction . 14 To test the predictions generated by Result 6 , we regress the log of one plus the ratio of capital expenditures to the number of employees on Increased Enforceability , ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects and the usual controls . The results , displayed in the third column of Table 7 , show that increased 14 That physical capital is more complementary to skilled than to unskilled human capital is well established in the literature ( see , for example , Goldin and Katz , 1998 ) . 30 non - competition enforceability signiﬁcantly ( t = - 4 . 33 ) reduces capex per employee . A shift to a regime of greater enforceability leads to a decrease in the log of capex per employee by 5 . 7 % of the mean . We test the cross - sectional implications of Result 6 by regressing the log of one plus the ratio of capital expenditures to the number of employees on Enforcement * ( In - state competi - tion ) , ( In - state competition ) , state and industry ﬁxed eﬀects and the standard set of ﬁrm controls . As shown in the fourth column of Table 7 , the coeﬃcient on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) is negative and signiﬁcant ( t = - 3 . 18 ) . A one - standard - deviation increase in Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) reduces the log of the capex per employee by 3 . 9 % of the mean . The time - series and cross - sectional evidence both provide strong support for Model B . Firms in high non - compete enforcement jurisdictions have substantially lower physical capital to labor ratios . 5 . 6 Firm performance and value We now consider the net impact of non - competition on ﬁrm performance . In both Models A and B , the ﬁrm in the enforcement jurisdiction may choose not to require a non - competition contract , so the ﬁrm value should be at least weakly higher for ﬁrms in high - enforceability jurisdictions . To explore the impact of non - competition enforcement on ﬁrm value , we regress the log of the ratio of the ﬁrm’s equity market value to its equity book value on Increased Enforceability , ﬁrm and year ﬁxed eﬀects , the log of the book value of debt , the log of sales , the log of assets , the log of the state unemployment rate and the log of the state personal income . The results , exhibited in the ﬁrst column of Table 8 , show that the coeﬃcient on Increased Enforceability is insigniﬁcant . To study cross - sectional eﬀects , we regress the log of the market to book ratio on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) , ( In - state competition ) , state , industry and year ﬁxed eﬀects , the log of the ﬁrm age and the previous set of ﬁrm controls . As shown in the second column of Table 8 , the coeﬃcient on Enforcement * ( In - state competition ) is insigniﬁcant . We repeat these regressions , replacing the dependent variable with the return on equity ( results reported in columns three and four of Table 8 ) and the return on assets ( results not reported ) and ﬁnd insigniﬁcant results throughout . The clear conclusion from this evidence is that non - competition enforcement has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on ﬁrm value or proﬁtability . There are two natural explanations for this result . The ﬁrst is that requiring an enforceable non - competition agreement may yield small ( or no ) net beneﬁts to a ﬁrm . This might arise , for example , if the ﬁrm payoﬀ from encouraging managers to invest in their own human capital is substantial . The second explanation is that non - competition agreements may yield sizable beneﬁts to ﬁrms but might also create substantial negative externalities . The free ﬂow of managers and 31 intellectual capital across ﬁrms may generate positive gains for all the ﬁrms in an industry , and particularly for those in the same state . Thus , the positive spillovers from low - enforceability may roughly balance out the disadvantages at the individual ﬁrm level . This argument is particularly plausible given that we have shown that low - enforceability encourages R & D , an investment to which positive externalities are commonly attributed ( e . g . Hall , 2002 ) . 5 . 7 Firm Investment versus Managerial Investment We found support for the importance of both ﬁrm investment in ﬁrm - speciﬁc human capital and managerial investment in general human capital . The reduced mobility and lower post - transfer com - pensation of executives in high - enforcement jurisdictions are both evidence that non - competition enforceability encourages ﬁrm investment , as proposed by both Models A and B . Models A and B diﬀer , however , in their predictions relating enforceability to managerial human capital and hence to executive compensation and ﬁrm investment . The ﬁndings that managers in low - enforcement areas have higher compensation and receive less of their compensation in the form of salary , and that ﬁrms in low - enforcement areas invest more in R & D and capital - intensive production all sup - port Model B . The weight of the evidence , therefore , is that ﬁrm investments are important , but that managerial investments in their own human capital have greater empirical relevance . 6 Conclusion Our study of the time - series and cross - sectional variation in non - competition enforceability across the U . S . states demonstrates the importance of these legal regulations for executive mobility , exec - utive compensation and ﬁrm investment . We show that increased enforceability leads to fewer exec - utive within - industry transfers , lower and more salary - based compensation , reduced post - transfer compensation , lower R & D spending and reduced capital expenditures per employee . These ﬁnd - ings are consistent with a model that has the following three features : non - competition agreements encourage ﬁrm investments in managerial human capital , the agreements discourage managerial investments in their own human capital and managerial investments have a greater impact than ﬁrm investments . A new stream of literature on the theory of the ﬁrm has emphasized the important role and somewhat unstable character of human capital assets . Our results show that non - competition agreements can serve as an eﬀective means for securing employee resources within the boundary of the ﬁrm . Our ﬁndings also indicate , however , that the human capital of the ﬁrm’s managers is changed by the presence of covenants not to compete . Overall , we ﬁnd that the enforceability of 32 non - competition agreements has no net eﬀect on ﬁrm value . This suggests two directions for analysis . First , it would be useful to distinguish between the direct eﬀects on ﬁrm value of non - competition enforceability and the spillover eﬀects arising from the restrictions on the free ﬂow of labor ( and hence ideas ) across ﬁrms . These may diﬀer across industries . Second , non - competition enforceability may aﬀect the attractiveness of mergers between ﬁrms . Acquirers often list non - competition contracts amongst the assets they are purchasing . The value and meaning of these contracts is clearly dependent on the extent to which covenants not to compete are enforceable and assignable to purchasers . In an economy in which human capital is growing in prominence , determining the socially - optimal level of non - competition enforceability is likely to become increasing important . 33 Appendix Proof of Lemma 1 . The certainty equivalent to the manager of a contract oﬀering him ax + b , given match quality q and eﬀort e is aqe − ρa 2 σ 2 2 + b − e 2 . Presented with this contract , the manager will thus exert eﬀort e ∗ ( a , b , q ) = aq 2 . The expected value to the company of oﬀering the contract is ( 1 − a ) qe ∗ ( a , b ∗ ( q ) , q ) − b ∗ ( q ) . Since salary b has no eﬀect on the optimal eﬀort choice , the company will choose b ∗ to set the manager’s certainty equivalent equal to zero : b ∗ ( q ) = a 2 2 (cid:179) ρσ 2 − q 2 2 (cid:180) . This yields V F ( q , a ) = ( 1 − a ) aq 2 2 − a 2 2 (cid:181) ρσ 2 − q 2 2 (cid:182) . Maximizing V F provides the optimal incentive component a ∗ ( q ) = q 2 2 q 2 2 + ρσ 2 , which is increasing in q . The manager’s expected compensation is given by EC ( q ) = a ∗ ( q ) qe ∗ ( a ∗ ( q ) , b ∗ ( q ) , q ) + b ∗ ( q ) = a ∗ ( q ) 2 2 (cid:181) ρσ 2 + q 2 2 (cid:182) , so the ratio of salary to expected compensation is b ∗ ( q ) EC ( q ) = (cid:179) ρσ 2 − q 2 2 (cid:180) (cid:179) ρσ 2 + q 2 2 (cid:180) , which is decreasing in q . Since a ∗ ( q ) is increasing in q , so is EC ( q ) . Last , we have V F ( q ) = q 4 4 q 2 + 8 ρσ 2 , which is increasing in q . Lemma 2 . E [ π F ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) ) − π F ( q , ˆ q ) ] < E [ π nccF ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) − π nccF ( q , ˆ q ) ] and E [ π F ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) − π F ( q , ˆ q ) ] < E [ π nccF ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) + π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) − π nccM ( q , ˆ q ) − π nccF ( q , ˆ q ) ] . Proof of Lemma 2 . We begin by proving the ﬁrst clause of the lemma . We let q and ˆ q be given . It is suﬃcient to show that 34 ( 1 − θ m ) ( max { V F ( q + λ ) − V F ( ˆ q + δλ ) , 0 } − max { V F ( q ) − V F ( ˆ q ) , 0 } ) ≤ ( 4 ) V F ( q + λ ) + (cid:178) f max { V F ( ˆ q + δλ ) − V F ( q + λ ) , 0 } − V F ( q ) − (cid:178) f max { V F ( ˆ q ) − V F ( q ) , 0 } , ( 5 ) and that this inequality is strict with positive probability . If q ≥ ˆ q ( which occurs with positive probability ) then the expression in ( 5 ) is equal to V F ( q + λ ) − V F ( q ) , while the expression in ( 4 ) is equal to ( 1 − θ m ) ( V F ( q + λ ) − V F ( ˆ q + δλ ) − V F ( q ) + V F ( ˆ q ) ) . In this case , the inequality is strict , because V F is strictly increasing . If q < ˆ q and q + λ ≥ ˆ q + δλ then the expression in ( 4 ) is equal to ( 1 − θ m ) ( V F ( q + λ ) − V F ( ˆ q + δλ ) ) , while the expression in ( 5 ) is greater than ( V F ( q + λ ) − V F ( ˆ q + δλ ) ) . If q < ˆ q and q + λ ≤ ˆ q + δλ , the expression in ( 4 ) is equal to zero , while the expression in ( 5 ) is non - negative . To prove the second clause of the lemma , repeat this argument with ( (cid:178) f + (cid:178) m ) replacing (cid:178) f . Assumption A : I > E [ π F ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) − π F ( q , ˆ q ) ] , I < E [ π nccF ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) − π nccF ( q , ˆ q ) ] and I < E [ π nccF ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) + π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) − π nccM ( q , ˆ q ) − π nccF ( q , ˆ q ) ] . Proof of Result 1A . Assumption A show that a ﬁrm will make an investment if and only if it has an enforceable non - competition agreement with its manager . The following argument shows that the ﬁrm in the high enforcement jurisdiction will oﬀer a signing bonus in exchange for a non - competition agreement and that this oﬀer will be accepted . The signing bonus s ∗ will be set equal to s ∗ = E [ π M ( q , ˆ q ) − π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) ] to make the manager indiﬀerent between agreeing and not agreeing to accept the non - competition contract . We have E [ π nccF ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) + π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) ] > I + E [ π nccM ( q , ˆ q ) + π nccF ( q , ˆ q ) ] ≥ I + E [ π M ( q , ˆ q ) + π F ( q , ˆ q ) ] = I + s ∗ + E [ π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) + π F ( q , ˆ q ) ] , where the ﬁrst inequality follows from Assumption A , the second from the fact that (cid:178) m + (cid:178) f ≥ θ m and the equality from the deﬁnition of s ∗ . This shows that E [ π nccF ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) ] − I − s ∗ > E [ π F ( q , ˆ q ) ] . Proof of Lemma 3 . Formally , we will show that E [ π M ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π M ( q , ˆ q ) ] > E [ π nccM ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π nccM ( q , ˆ q ) ] ( 6 ) and 35 E [ π M ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π M ( q , ˆ q ) ] > E [ π nccM ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) ] . ( 7 ) Assumption A guarantees that the ﬁrm will not make an investment in the absence of a non - competition agreement , so showing the above two inequalities is suﬃcient to prove the lemma . Inequality ( 6 ) follows directly from θ m ≥ (cid:178) m . To show ( 7 ) , we consider several cases . If q ≥ ˆ q then π M ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π M ( q , ˆ q ) > 0 = π nccM ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) . If q < ˆ q and q + γ > ˆ q , then π M ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π M ( q , ˆ q ) ≥ θ m ( V F ( ˆ q + γ ) − V F ( ˆ q ) ) ≥ (cid:178) m ( V F ( ˆ q + γ ) − V F ( q + γ ) ) = π nccM ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) . If q < ˆ q and q + γ < ˆ q , then if π nccM ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) ≤ 0 , the lemma is proved . Otherwise , π M ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π M ( q , ˆ q ) ≥ θ m ( V F ( ˆ q + γ ) − V F ( ˆ q ) ) ≥ (cid:178) m ( V F ( ˆ q + γ ) − V F ( q + γ ) − V F ( ˆ q + δλ ) + V F ( q + λ ) ) = π nccM ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) , where the second inequality follows from γ ≥ λ . Assumption B : J > max { E [ π nccM ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) ] , E [ π nccM ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π nccM ( q , ˆ q ) ] } J < E [ π M ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π M ( q , ˆ q ) ] ) , Assumption C : E [ π nccF ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) + π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) ] − I > E [ π nccF ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) + π nccM ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) ] − J Proof of Result 1B . We consider the following candidate equilibrium . In exchange for a non - competition agreement , the ﬁrm in the enforcement jurisdiction oﬀers the signing bonus 36 s ∗∗ = E [ π M ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) ] − J , which a manager accepts . Assumption B shows that the manager who accepts the non - competition agreement will not make an investment , and Assumption A shows that his ﬁrm will . Assumption A shows that the ﬁrm in the non - enforcement jurisdiction will not make an investment , and Assumption B shows that the manager who works for this ﬁrm will make an investment . To show that the ﬁrm in the enforcement regime will oﬀer the signing bonus s ∗∗ , consider that E [ π nccF ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) ] − I − s ∗∗ > E [ π nccF ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) + π nccM ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) ] − J − s ∗∗ ≥ E [ π F ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) + π M ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) − π nccM ( q + λ , ˆ q + δλ ) ] − J − s ∗∗ = E [ π F ( q + γ , ˆ q + γ ) ] , where the ﬁrst inequality follows from Assumption C , the second from the fact that (cid:178) m + (cid:178) f ≥ θ m and the equality from the deﬁnition of s ∗ . Proof of Result 2 . In Model A only the ﬁrm in the enforcement jurisdiction makes a ﬁrm speciﬁc investment . We denote the underlying probability measure by P . The probability that the manager transfers from the non - enforcement ﬁrm is P ( ˆ q > q ) . The probability that the manager transfers from the enforcement ﬁrm is P ( ˆ q + δλ > q + λ ) ≤ P ( ˆ q > q ) . In Model B , the ﬁrm makes the investment in the enforcement regime and the manager makes the investment in the non - enforcement regime . In the enforcement regime , the probability of transfer is P ( ˆ q + δλ > q + λ ) . In the non - enforcement regime , the probability of transfer is P ( ˆ q + γ > q + γ ) ≥ P ( ˆ q + δλ > q + λ ) . Proof of Result 3 . We use the notation y ≥ FOSD z to denote that y dominates z in the sense of ﬁrst - order stochastic dominance ( FOSD ) . In Model A , the quality of the manager in the enforcement jurisdiction is max { q + λ , ˆ q + δλ } and the quality of the manager in the non - enforcement jurisdiction is max { q , ˆ q } . It is clear that for all k ≥ 0 , k ≤ max { q , ˆ q } ⇒ k ≤ max { q + λ , ˆ q + δλ } , so max { q + λ , ˆ q + δλ } ≥ FOSD max { q + λ , ˆ q + δλ } . ( 8 ) Lemma 1 shows that expected compensation is increasing in quality , which completes the proof of the ﬁrst statement of Result 3 . 37 In Model B , the quality of the manager in the non - enforcement jurisdiction is given by max { q + γ , ˆ q + γ } . The quality of the manager in the enforcement jurisdiction is given by max { q + λ , ˆ q + δλ } . The fact that γ > λ shows that max { q + γ , ˆ q + γ } ≥ FOSD max { q + λ , ˆ q + δλ } . ( 9 ) The second statement of Result 3 follows from Lemma 1 . We note here that in both models the ﬁrm in the enforcement jurisdiction sets the period zero signing bonus awarded to its manager equal to the expected period two signing bonus realized by the manager in the non - enforcement jurisdiction , since the production contract is designed to grant the manager zero expected utility . Given Assumption D , Results 3 , 4 and 6 are also true conditional on the manager remaining with the ﬁrm . The proof is available upon request . Proof of Result 4 . Lemma 1 shows that the ratio of salary to total compensation is decreasing in managerial quality . The result follows from ( 8 ) and ( 9 ) . Proof of Result 5 . We require a preliminary lemma to prove this result . For any random variable y , we denote its density by f y and its cumulative distribution function by F y . We use the notation y = D z to denote that y and z are equal in distribution , and we denote the distribution of y conditional on an event A by ( y | A ) . Lemma 4 . If the random variable c has a log - concave density function , then for all a > 0 , ( c + a ) dominates c in the sense of the monotone likelihood ratio property ( MLRP ) , which we denote by ( c + a ) ≥ MLRP c . Proof of Lemma 4 . The log - concavity of f c implies that for any y , dlogf c ( y − a ) dy ≥ dlogf c ( y ) dy which implies that f (cid:48) c ( y − a ) f c ( y − a ) ≥ f (cid:48) c ( y ) f c ( y ) . This last inequality implies that f c ( y − a ) f c ( y ) is increasing in y . We deﬁne z = β 2 − β 1 . In Model A , the increase in match quality for managers who transfer from the enforcement ﬁrm is given by ( ˆ q + δλ − q − λ | ˆ q + δλ ≥ q + λ ) = D ( z − ( 1 − δ ) λ | z − ( 1 − δ ) λ ≥ 0 ) . ( 10 ) The increase in match quality for managers who transfer from the non - enforcement ﬁrm is ( ˆ q − q | ˆ q ≥ q ) = D ( z | z ≥ 0 ) . Assumption D and Miravete ( 2001 ) Corollary 2 shows that z has a log - concave density function . Lemma 4 shows that z ≥ MLRP z − ( 1 − δ ) λ and hence ( z | z ≥ 0 ) ≥ MLRP ( z − ( 1 − δ ) λ | z − ( 1 − δ ) λ ≥ 0 ) . In Model B , the increase in match quality for managers who transfer from the enforcement ﬁrm is given by ( 10 ) . The increase in match quality for managers who transfer from the non - enforcement 38 ﬁrm is ( ˆ q + γ − q − γ | ˆ q + γ ≥ q + γ ) = D ( z | z ≥ 0 ) . The result follows from the argument given in the case of Model A . Proof of Result 6 . It is clear that skill - intensive production will be employed if and only if q (cid:48) ≥ q 1 . The result follows from ( 8 ) and ( 9 ) . Questions and Thresholds The following twelve questions from Malsberger ( 2004 ) are used to evaluate the level of non - competition agreement enforceability in each state . Each state is granted one point for each question concerning which its laws lie above the threshold . Question 1 . Is there a state statue of general application that governs the enforceability of covenants not to compete ? Threshold 1 . States that enforce non - competition agreements outside a sale - of - business con - text receive a score of one . Question 2 . What is an employer’s protectable interest and how is it deﬁned ? Threshold 2 . States in which the employer can prevent the employee from future independent dealings with all the ﬁrm’s customers , not merely with the customers with whom the employee had direct contact , receive a score of one . Question 3 . What must the plaintiﬀ be able to show to prove the existence of an enforceable covenant not to compete ? Threshold 3 . Laws that place greater weight on the interests of the ﬁrm relative to those of the former employee are above the threshold . For example , a law that requires that the contract be reasonably protective of the ﬁrm’s business interests and only meet the condition of not being unreasonably injurious to the employee’s interests would receive a score of one . Question 4 . Does the signing of a covenant not to compete at the inception of the employment relationship provide suﬃcient consideration to support the covenant ? Threshold 4 . States for which the answer to Question 4 is clearly ”Yes” are above the thresh - old . Question 5 . Will a change in the terms and conditions of employment provide suﬃcient consideration to support a covenant not to compete entered into after the employment relationship has begun ? Threshold 5 . States for which the answer to Question 5 is clearly ”Yes” are above the thresh - old . 39 Question 6 . Will continued employment provide suﬃcient consideration to support a covenant not to compete entered into after the employment relationship has begun ? Threshold 6 . States for which the answer to Question 6 is clearly ”Yes” are above the thresh - old . Question 7 . What factors will the court consider in determining whether time and geographic restrictions in the covenant are reasonable ? Threshold 7 . Jurisdictions in which courts are instructed not to consider economic or other hardships faced by the employee are above the threshold . Question 8 . Who has the burden of proving the reasonableness or unreasonableness of the covenant not to compete ? Threshold 8 . States in which the burden of proof is clearly placed on the employee are above the threshold . Question 9 . What type of time or geographic restrictions has the court found to be reasonable ? Unreasonable ? Threshold 9 . Jurisdictions in which three - year statewide restrictions have been upheld receive a score of one . Question 10 . If the restrictions in the covenant not to compete are unenforceable because they are overbroad , are the courts permitted to modify the covenant to make the restrictions more narrow and to make the covenants enforceable ? Threshold 10 . States for which the answer to Question 10 is clearly ”Yes” are above the threshold . Question 11 . If the employer terminates the employment relationship , is the covenant en - forceable ? Threshold 11 . States for which the answer to Question 11 is clearly ”Yes” are above the threshold . Question 12 . What damages may an employer recover and from whom for breach of a covenant not to compete ? Threshold 12 . If , in addition to lost proﬁts , there is a potential for punitive damages against the former employee , the state receives a score of one . States that explicitly exclude consideration of the reasonableness of the contract from the calculation of damages are also above the threshold . 40 References Aggarwal , R . , and A . Samwick , “Performance Incentives within Firms : The Eﬀect of Managerial Responsibility , ” Journal of Finance 58 ( 2003 ) , 1613 - 1649 . Bagnoli , M . , and T . Bergstrom , “Log - concave probability and its applications , ” Economic Theory 26 ( 2005 ) , 445 - 469 . Baker , G . , and T . Hubbard , “Make versus Buy in Trucking : Asset Ownership , Job Design , and Information , American Economic Review 93 ( 2003 ) , 551572 . Baker , G . , and T . Hubbard , “Contractibility and Asset Ownership : On - Board Computers and Governance in U . S . Trucking , Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 ( 2004 ) , 14431479 . Bartik , T . , Business Location Decisions in the United States : Estimates of the Eﬀects of Union - ization , Taxes , and Other Characteristics of States , Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 3 ( 1985 ) , 1422 . Bebchuk , L . , and A . Cohen , “Firms’ Decisions Where to Incorporate , ” Journal of Law and Eco - nomics 46 ( 2003 ) , 383 - 425 . Beck , T . , A . Demirguc - Kunt and R . Levine , “Law , endowments , and ﬁnance , ” Journal of Financial Economics 70 ( 2003 ) , 137 - 181 . Becker , G . , Human Capital , 3rd edition , University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL ( 1993 ) . Bundren , R . , “To Give or Not to Give : Enforceability of Covenants Not to Compete in Texas , ” Baylor Law Review 57 ( 2005 ) . Carlton , D . , The Location and Employment Decisions of New Firms : An Econometric Model with Discrete and Continuous Exogenous Variables , Review of Economics and Statistics 65 ( 1993 ) , 44049 . Carr , D . , ed . , “Assignment of Covenants Not to Compete : What Happens When ‘Mom and Pop’ Sell Out ? , ” Working Paper , American Bar Association ( 1999 ) . Chen , M . , “Executive Option Repricing , Incentives , and Retention , ” Journal of Finance 59 ( 2004 ) , 1167 - 1199 . Cheskin , M . , and B . Lerner , “When Distance is No Object , ” National Law Journal November 24 , 2003 . Diamond , D . , and R . Rajan , “A Theory of Bank Capital , ” Journal of Finance 55 ( 2000 ) , 2431 - 2465 . Dybvig P . , and M . Loewenstein , “Employee Reload Options : Pricing , Hedging , and Optimal Exer - cise , ” Review of Financial Studies , 16 ( 2003 ) , 145 - 171 . Ellison , G . , and E . Glaeser , “The Geographic Concentration of Industry : Does Natural Advantage Explain Agglomeration ? , ” American Economic Review 89 ( 1999 ) , 311 - 316 . Feenstra , R . , and G . Hanson , “Owner and Control in Outsourcing to China : Estimating the Property - Rights Theory of the Firm , ” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 ( 2005 ) , 729 - 761 . Fowler , W . , “Drafting Eﬀective Noncompetition Covenants : The Incredible Darkness of Light v . Centel Cellular , ” Dallas Bar Association ( 2002 ) . 41 Galle , William P . , and Cliﬀord M . Koen , “Reducing Post - Termination Disputes : A National Survey of Contract Clauses Used in Employment Contracts , ” Journal of Individual Employment Rights 9 ( 2000 - 2001 ) , 227 - 241 . Gallo , T . , and J . Adler , “Non - compete agreements in Alabama , Florida , South Carolina and Ten - nessee , ” Robins , Kaplan , Miller & Ciresi L . L . P . ( undated ) . Gibbons , R . , and K . Murphy , “Optimal incentive contracts in the presence of career concerns : Theory and evidence , ” Journal of Political Economy 100 ( 1992b ) , 468 - 506 . Gibbons , R . , and K . Murphy , “Does executive compensation aﬀect investment ? ” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 5 ( 1992a ) , 99 - 109 . Gillan , S . , J . Hartzell and R . Parrino , “Explicit vs . Implicit Contracts : Evidence from CEO Employment Agreements , ” Working Paper , University of Texas ( 2005 ) . Gilson , R . , “The legal infrastructure of high technology industrial districts : Silicon Valley , Route 128 , and covenants not to compete , New York University Law Review 74 ( 1999 ) , 575 - 629 . Goldin , C . , and L . Katz , “The Origins of Technology - Skill Complementarity , ” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 ( 1998 ) , 693 - 732 . Grossman S . , and O . Hart , “The Costs and Beneﬁts of Ownership : A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration , ” Journal of Political Economy 94 ( 1986 ) , 691 - 719 . Hall , B . , “The Financing of Research and Development , ” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 18 ( 2002 ) , 35 - 51 . Hart , O . , and J . Moore , “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm , ” Journal of Political Economy 98 ( 1990 ) , 1119 - 1158 . Hart , O . , and J . Moore , “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human capital , ” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 ( 1994 ) , 841 - 79 . Hermalin , B . , and N . Wallace , “Firm performance and executive compensation in the savings and loan industry , ” Journal of Financial Economics 61 ( 2001 ) , 139170 . Huson , M . , R . Parrino and L . Starks , “Internal Monitoring Mechanisms and CEO Turnover : A Long - Term Perspective , ” Journal of Finance 56 ( 2001 ) , 2265 - 2297 . Jauhiainen , T . , P . Heilmann and P . Hurmelinna , “Risks Related to Recruitment A Survey Among SMEs in ICT sector in Finland , ” Working Paper , Lappeenranta University of Technology ( 2003 ) . Kaplan , S . , and P . Stromberg , “Financial contracting : Theory meets the real world : An empirical analysis of venture capital contracts , ” Review of Economic Studies 70 ( 2003 ) , 281 - 315 . Kole , S . , “The Complexity of Compensation Contracts , ” Journal of Financial Economics 43 ( 1997 ) , 79 - 104 . Kumar K . , R . Rajan and L . Zingales , “What Determines Firm Size ? ” NBER Working Paper ( 2001 ) . La Porta , R . , F . Lopez - de - Silanes , A . Shleifer and R . Vishny , “Legal Determinants of External Finance , ” Journal of Finance , 52 ( 1997 ) , 1131 - 1150 . La Porta , R . , F . Lopez - de - Silanes , A . Shleifer and R . Vishny , “Law and Finance , ” Journal of 42 Political Economy 106 ( 1998 ) , 1113 - 1155 . La Porta , R . , F . Lopez - de - Silanes , A . Shleifer and R . Vishny , “Corporate Ownership around the World , ” Journal of Finance 54 ( 1999 ) , 471 - 517 . La Porta , R . , F . Lopez - de - Silanes , A . Shleifer and R . Vishny , “Investor Protection and Corporate Governance , ” Journal of Financial Economics 58 ( 2000 ) , 3 - 27 . Malsberger , B . , Covenants Not to Compete : A State - by - State Survey , BNA Books : Washington , D . C . ( 2004 ) . Miravete , E . J . , “On Preservation of Increasing Hazard Rate Under Convolution , CARESS Working Paper 01 - 05 , University of Pennsylvania ( 2001 ) . Ofek , E . , and D . Yermack , “Taking Stock : Equity - Based Compensation and the Evolution of Managerial Ownership , ” Journal of Finance 55 ( 2000 ) , 1367 - 1384 . Oyer , P . , “Fiscal Year Ends And Nonlinear Incentive Contracts : The Eﬀect On Business Seasonal - ity , ” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 ( 1998 ) , 149 - 185 . Pentelovitch , W . , “Enforcing Noncompetition Agreements Across State Lines : The California and Texas Problems , ” Maslon Edelman Borman & Brand , LLP ( 2003 ) . Posner E . , A . Triantis and G . Triantis , “Investing in Human Capital : The Eﬃciency of Covenants Not to Compete , ” Working Paper ( 2004 ) . Rajan , R . , and L . Zingales , “The Firm as a Dedicated Hierarchy : A Theory of the Origins and Growth of Firms , ” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 ( 2001 ) , 805 - 851 . Saxenian , A . , Regional Advantage , Harvard University Press : Cambridge , MA ( 1996 ) . Schueler , S . , and C . Solomon , “Protecting Intellectual Capital : What Texas Employers Need To Know , ” South Texas College of Law ( 2001 ) . Stuart , T . , and O . Sorenson , “Liquidity Events , Noncompete Covenants and the Geographic Dis - tribution of Entrepreneurial Activity , ” Working Paper , UCLA Anderson School . Wald , J . , and M . Long , “The Eﬀect of State Laws on Capital Structure , ” Journal of Financial Economics , forthcoming ( 2006 ) . 43 Non - competition Enforceability Index State Score State Score Alabama 5 Missouri 7 Alaska 3 Montana 2 Arizona 3 Nebraska 4 Arkansas 5 Nevada 5 California 0 New Hampshire 2 Colorado 2 New Jersey 4 Connecticut 3 New Mexico 2 Delaware 6 New York 3 District of Columbia 7 North Carolina 4 Florida 1992 - 1996 7 North Dakota 0 Florida 1997 - 2004 9 Ohio 5 Georgia 5 Oklahoma 1 Hawaii 3 Oregon 6 Idaho 6 Pennsylvania 6 Illinois 5 Rhode Island 3 Indiana 5 South Carolina 5 Iowa 6 South Dakota 5 Kansas 6 Tennessee 7 Kentucky 6 Texas 1992 - 1994 5 Louisiana 1992 - 2001 , 2004 4 Texas 1995 - 2004 3 Louisiana 2002 - 2003 0 Utah 6 Maine 4 Vermont 5 Maryland 5 Virginia 3 Massachusetts 6 Washington 5 Michigan 5 West Virginia 2 Minnesota 5 Wisconsin 3 Mississippi 4 Wyoming 4 44 Table 1 : Summary Statistics Variable Mean Median Standard Deviation Increased Enforceability 0 . 07 0 0 . 25 Enforceability 0 . 32 0 . 33 0 . 18 In - state Competition 0 . 10 0 . 01 0 . 18 1 year total return 123 . 74 12 . 72 8 , 884 . 51 3 year total return 13 . 04 11 . 29 33 . 63 Firm Age 21 . 23 16 . 00 15 . 53 Book Value 1 , 538 . 43 369 . 21 4 , 650 . 71 Sales 3 , 312 . 71 760 . 75 9 , 850 . 77 State Unemployment Rate 5 . 56 5 . 40 1 . 50 State Personal Income per Capita 27 , 371 . 04 26 , 862 . 00 5 , 327 . 60 Within - industry transfers 0 . 03 0 0 . 18 All transfers 0 . 08 0 0 . 32 Executive Job Tenure 14 . 69 9 . 00 12 . 82 Compensation Level 2 , 173 , 953 . 72 932 , 828 . 00 6 , 606 , 673 . 16 Compensation Growth 0 . 33 0 . 10 1 . 01 Salary / Compensation 0 . 38 0 . 34 0 . 2344 Options Granted ? 0 . 73 1 . 00 0 . 45 Reload Options Granted ? 0 . 02 0 0 . 13 Research and Development Spending 123 . 40 14 . 68 502 . 22 Capex per Employee 325 , 226 . 73 13 , 131 . 31 5 , 176 , 368 . 54 Book Value , Market Value , Sales , Assets and Research and Development Spending are expressed in millions of dollars . Compensation growth is truncated at - 90 % and + 900 % . 45 Table 2 : Executive Mobility Dependent Within - ind . Within - ind . All All Between - ind . Between - ind . Variable transfers transfers transfers transfers transfers transfers # Obs . 20 , 965 20 , 474 20 , 965 20 , 474 20 , 965 20 , 474 Increased Enforceability 0 . 5105 * * 0 . 6562 * * 0 . 7674 ( - 4 . 01 ) ( - 2 . 45 ) ( - 1 . 03 ) Enforce * ( In - state Comp . ) 0 . 0123 * * 0 . 1888 * 1 . 3342 ( - 2 . 82 ) ( - 1 . 69 ) ( 0 . 20 ) In - state Competition 7 . 7964 * * 2 . 4823 * * 1 . 172 ( 4 . 01 ) ( 2 . 80 ) ( 0 . 32 ) 1 year total return 1 . 0000 1 . 0000 1 . 0000 1 . 0000 0 . 9995173 0 . 9991 ( - 0 . 14 ) ( 1 . 12 ) ( - 0 . 45 ) ( - 0 . 05 ) ( - 0 . 86 ) ( - 1 . 27 ) 3 year total return 0 . 9973 0 . 9928 * * 0 . 99653 * * 0 . 9929 * * 0 . 996321 * 0 . 9937 * * ( - 1 . 47 ) ( - 3 . 59 ) ( - 2 . 34 ) ( - 7 . 30 ) ( - 1 . 75 ) ( - 3 . 38 ) Log ( Firm Age ) 1 . 1946 * * 1 . 2609 * * 1 . 3033 * * ( 2 . 54 ) ( 5 . 87 ) ( 4 . 58 ) Log ( Book Value ) 0 . 9774 1 . 0752 1 . 0198 1 . 0123 1 . 0225 0 . 9701 ( - 0 . 18 ) ( 0 . 66 ) ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 24 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( - 0 . 47 ) Log ( Market Value ) 0 . 9952 0 . 9932 0 . 9219 0 . 9433 0 . 9056187 0 . 9219 ( - 0 . 05 ) ( - 0 . 10 ) ( - 1 . 29 ) ( - 1 . 55 ) ( - 1 . 35 ) ( - 1 . 54 ) Log ( Sales ) 1 . 2497 * 1 . 2975 * * 1 . 0627 1 . 2233 * * 0 . 929854 1 . 1748 * * ( 1 . 75 ) ( 3 . 07 ) ( 0 . 71 ) ( 4 . 19 ) ( - 0 . 59 ) ( 2 . 04 ) Log ( Assets ) 1 . 0451 0 . 9684 1 . 1941 1 . 1236 * 1 . 310974 * 1 . 2347 * * ( 0 . 23 ) ( - 0 . 29 ) ( 1 . 63 ) ( 1 . 92 ) ( 1 . 91 ) ( 2 . 34 ) Log ( State Unemployment ) 0 . 8093 0 . 8510 0 . 9774 1 . 0639 1 . 080183 1 . 1564 ( - 0 . 50 ) ( - 0 . 39 ) ( - 0 . 10 ) ( 0 . 25 ) ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 44 ) Log ( State Personal Income ) 18 . 9327 * 155 . 6014 * * 7 . 9192 * * 4 . 7673 3 . 726545 0 . 547 ( 1 . 70 ) ( 1 . 97 ) ( 2 . 02 ) ( 1 . 07 ) ( 0 . 99 ) ( - 0 . 31 ) Estimation Method Poisson Poisson Poisson Poisson Poisson Poisson Firm Fixed Eﬀects ? Yes No Yes No Yes No State Fixed Eﬀects ? No Yes No Yes No Yes Industry Fixed Eﬀects ? No Yes No Yes No Yes Clustering State - Year Firm State - Year Firm State - Year Firm R 2 0 . 19 0 . 04 0 . 22 0 . 09 0 . 22 0 . 09 The regressions are estimated via Poisson ﬁxed eﬀects as described , with t - statistics ( comparing coeﬃcients to one ) reported in parentheses using robust “sandwich” standard errors . * , * * Indicates signiﬁcance at the 10 % and 5 % levels , respectively . 46 Table 3 : Executive Tenure Dependent Variable Tenure Tenure Departures Departures # Obs . 5 , 765 5 , 628 20 , 965 20 , 474 Increased Enforceability 1 . 1518 * * - 0 . 0804 * * ( 3 . 14 ) ( - 2 . 26 ) Enforce * ( In - state Comp . ) 28 . 8326 * * - 0 . 3899 ( 2 . 16 ) ( - 1 . 43 ) In - state Competition - 5 . 7817 0 . 1720 * ( - 1 . 39 ) ( 1 . 80 ) 1 year total return 0 . 0000 0 . 0000 0 . 0000 0 . 0000 ( 0 . 80 ) ( 0 . 07 ) ( - 0 . 68 ) ( 0 . 36 ) 3 year total return - 0 . 0258 * * - 0 . 0220 * * - 0 . 0012 * * - 0 . 0017 * * ( - 5 . 55 ) ( - 3 . 59 ) ( - 5 . 17 ) ( - 4 . 66 ) Log ( Firm Age ) 3 . 8960 * * 0 . 0151 * ( 6 . 57 ) ( 1 . 70 ) Log ( Book Value ) 1 . 5278 * * 1 . 7951 * * - 0 . 0015 - 0 . 0090 ( 4 . 97 ) ( 3 . 08 ) ( - 0 . 08 ) ( - 0 . 69 ) Log ( Market Value ) 1 . 3284 * * 1 . 4268 * * - 0 . 0535 * * - 0 . 0489 * * ( 5 . 17 ) ( 3 . 39 ) ( - 4 . 03 ) ( - 4 . 10 ) Log ( Sales ) 0 . 3079 0 . 0289 - 0 . 0247 0 . 0095 ( 1 . 14 ) ( 0 . 05 ) ( - 1 . 41 ) ( 0 . 90 ) Log ( Assets ) - 0 . 0110 - 1 . 0732 0 . 0581 * * 0 . 0759 * * ( - 0 . 03 ) ( - 1 . 31 ) ( 2 . 55 ) ( 5 . 51 ) Log ( State Unemployment ) 0 . 6330 1 . 1743 - 0 . 1256 * * - 0 . 0916 * ( 1 . 04 ) ( 0 . 59 ) ( - 2 . 83 ) ( - 1 . 87 ) Log ( State Personal Income ) - 3 . 8089 * * 11 . 2703 0 . 5187 * * 0 . 4501 ( - 2 . 69 ) ( 1 . 01 ) ( 2 . 92 ) ( 1 . 61 ) Estimation Method OLS OLS OLS OLS Firm Fixed Eﬀects ? Yes No Yes No State Fixed Eﬀects ? No Yes No Yes Industry Fixed Eﬀects ? No Yes No Yes Clustering State - Year Firm State - Year Firm R 2 0 . 52 0 . 56 0 . 24 0 . 09 The regressions are estimated via ordinary least squares ( OLS ) as described , with t - statistics reported in parentheses using robust “sandwich” standard errors . * , * * Indicates signiﬁcance at the 10 % and 5 % levels , respectively . 47 Table 4 : Executive Compensation Dependent Compensation Log of Compensation Variable growth level # Obs . 74 , 068 16 , 337 Increased Enforceability’ - 0 . 1282 * * ( - 2 . 42 ) Enforce * ( In - state Comp . ) - 1 . 3745 * * ( - 3 . 64 ) In - state Competition 0 . 3954 * * ( 2 . 90 ) 1 year total return 0 . 0000 0 . 0000 * * ( 1 . 52 ) ( 2 . 17 ) 3 year total return 0 . 0030 * * 0 . 0018 * * ( 6 . 37 ) ( 7 . 62 ) Log ( Firm Age ) - 0 . 0488 * * ( - 3 . 24 ) Log ( Book Value ) - 0 . 0482 - 0 . 0636 * * ( - 1 . 54 ) ( - 3 . 68 ) Log ( Market Value ) 0 . 1283 * * 0 . 2265 * * ( 5 . 13 ) ( 15 . 28 ) Log ( Sales ) 0 . 0298 0 . 0426 * * ( 0 . 96 ) ( 2 . 14 ) Log ( Assets ) - 0 . 0629 0 . 2434 * * ( - 1 . 22 ) ( 9 . 35 ) Log ( State Unemployment ) 0 . 1287 * - 0 . 0172 ( 1 . 89 ) ( - 0 . 31 ) Log ( State Personal Income ) - 0 . 0983 0 . 3254 ( - 0 . 33 ) ( 0 . 99 ) Unit of Observation Exec Firm Estimation Method OLS OLS Exec / Firm Fixed Eﬀects ? Exec No State Fixed Eﬀects ? No Yes Industry Fixed Eﬀects ? No Yes Clustering Firm Firm R 2 0 . 28 0 . 68 The regressions are estimated via ordinary least squares ( OLS ) as described , with t - statistics reported in parentheses using robust “sandwich” standard errors . * , * * Indicates signiﬁcance at the 10 % and 5 % levels , respectively . 48 Table 5 : Form of Executive Compensation Dependent Salary growth Log of Options Options Reload Reload Variable - Comp . growth Salary Compensation granted ? granted ? options ? options ? # Obs . 73 , 899 16 , 337 74 , 997 16 , 337 74 , 997 16 , 337 Increased Enforceability’ 0 . 1087 * * 0 . 1531 - 2 . 1948 * * ( 2 . 01 ) ( 1 . 34 ) ( - 3 . 78 ) Enforce * ( In - state Comp . ) 1 . 4298 * * - 1 . 4920 - 0 . 7784 * * ( 3 . 99 ) ( - 1 . 36 ) ( - 2 . 41 ) In - state Competition - 0 . 4670 * * 0 . 6005 * 0 . 1831 * ( - 3 . 64 ) ( 1 . 70 ) ( 1 . 92 ) 1 year total return 0 . 0000 0 . 0000 * * 0 . 0000 0 . 0000 - 0 . 0008 0 . 0000 ( - 1 . 51 ) ( - 2 . 43 ) ( 1 . 08 ) ( 0 . 70 ) ( - 0 . 61 ) ( - 1 . 28 ) 3 year total return - 0 . 0032 * * - 0 . 0021 * * 0 . 0003 - 0 . 0012 * 0 . 0122 * * - 0 . 0001 ( - 6 . 76 ) ( - 8 . 34 ) ( 0 . 41 ) ( - 1 . 88 ) ( 3 . 05 ) ( - 0 . 50 ) Log ( Firm Age ) 0 . 0928 * * - 0 . 0483 0 . 0018 ( 6 . 61 ) ( - 1 . 21 ) ( 0 . 10 ) Log ( Book Value ) 0 . 0449 0 . 0713 * * 0 . 3349 * * - 0 . 0372 0 . 0226 - 0 . 0014 ( 1 . 40 ) ( 4 . 03 ) ( 6 . 04 ) ( - 0 . 78 ) ( 0 . 10 ) ( - 0 . 08 ) Log ( Market Value ) - 0 . 0964 * * - 0 . 2139 * * 0 . 1977 * * 0 . 1836 * * 1 . 1227 * * 0 . 0442 * * ( - 3 . 81 ) ( - 14 . 22 ) ( 4 . 64 ) ( 4 . 93 ) ( 4 . 91 ) ( 3 . 43 ) Log ( Sales ) - 0 . 0125 0 . 0575 * * 0 . 2278 * * 0 . 0242 0 . 1358 - 0 . 0099 ( - 0 . 39 ) ( 3 . 16 ) ( 3 . 49 ) ( 0 . 55 ) ( 0 . 39 ) ( - 0 . 63 ) Log ( Assets ) 0 . 0750 - 0 . 1518 * * - 0 . 2679 * * 0 . 0352 - 0 . 4136 0 . 0117 ( 1 . 42 ) ( - 5 . 32 ) ( - 3 . 11 ) ( 0 . 62 ) ( - 1 . 01 ) ( 0 . 49 ) Log ( State Unemployment ) - 0 . 0845 0 . 0529 0 . 4402 * * 0 . 3172 * 0 . 9119 - 0 . 0382 ( - 1 . 22 ) ( 0 . 98 ) ( 2 . 48 ) ( 1 . 70 ) ( 1 . 46 ) ( - 0 . 69 ) Log ( State Personal Income ) - 0 . 0004 - 0 . 2426 - 2 . 1383 * * - 0 . 9975 0 . 3784 - 0 . 2351 ( 0 . 00 ) ( - 0 . 76 ) ( - 2 . 80 ) ( - 0 . 90 ) ( 0 . 13 ) ( - 0 . 70 ) Unit of Observation Exec Firm Exec Firm Exec Firm Estimation Method OLS OLS Logit OLS Logit OLS Exec / Firm Fixed Eﬀects ? Exec No Exec No Exec No State Fixed Eﬀects ? No Yes No Yes No Yes Industry Fixed Eﬀects ? No Yes No Yes No Yes Clustering Firm Firm No Firm No Firm R 2 0 . 28 0 . 49 0 . 16 0 . 18 0 . 23 0 . 15 The regressions are estimated via ordinary least squares ( OLS ) or ﬁxed eﬀect ( conditional ) logistic regression ( Logit ) , as described , with OLS t - statistics reported in parentheses using robust “sandwich” standard errors . Reported R 2 for Logit speciﬁcations is McFadden’s pseudo R 2 . * , * * Indicates signiﬁcance at the 10 % and 5 % levels , respectively . 49 Table 6 : Post - transfer Compensation Dependent Log ( compensation ) Log ( compensation ) Rank Variable at new ﬁrm at new ﬁrm at new ﬁrm # Obs . 912 226 770 Enforce * ( In - state Comp . ) - 5 . 4246 * * - 23 . 1126 * * 10 . 2763 * * ( - 3 . 64 ) ( - 2 . 72 ) ( 3 . 41 ) In - state Competition 1 . 6212 * * 3 . 5369 - 2 . 4636 * * ( 3 . 04 ) ( 1 . 26 ) ( - 2 . 47 ) Log ( compensation ) at previous ﬁrm 0 . 4433 * * 0 . 8267 * * - 0 . 3122 * * ( 7 . 03 ) ( 2 . 69 ) ( - 2 . 89 ) Previous rank 0 . 0096 0 . 2181 * * 0 . 0291 ( 0 . 27 ) ( 2 . 61 ) ( 0 . 56 ) 1 year total return 0 . 0020 * 0 . 0038 * * - 0 . 0002 ( 1 . 95 ) ( 2 . 10 ) ( - 0 . 11 ) 3 year total return - 0 . 0044 - 0 . 0204 * * 0 . 0027 ( - 1 . 36 ) ( - 3 . 79 ) ( 0 . 80 ) Log ( Firm Age ) - 0 . 0601 0 . 1425 - 0 . 0935 ( - 0 . 82 ) ( 0 . 39 ) ( - 0 . 71 ) Log ( Sales ) 0 . 1953 * * 0 . 0322 - 0 . 1683 ( 2 . 50 ) ( 0 . 13 ) ( - 1 . 22 ) Log ( Book Value ) - 0 . 0174 0 . 8468 - 0 . 1065 ( - 0 . 22 ) ( 1 . 45 ) ( - 0 . 69 ) Log ( Market Value ) 0 . 1936 * * 0 . 2479 - 0 . 4274 * * ( 2 . 44 ) ( 0 . 77 ) ( - 3 . 10 ) Log ( Assets ) - 0 . 1667 * - 0 . 9175 0 . 5397 * * ( - 1 . 81 ) ( - 1 . 50 ) ( 2 . 85 ) Log ( State Unemployment ) - 0 . 1516 1 . 6047 - 0 . 3987 ( - 0 . 29 ) ( 1 . 39 ) ( - 0 . 80 ) Log ( State Personal Income ) - 0 . 6366 0 . 1914 1 . 9311 * * ( - 0 . 73 ) ( 0 . 09 ) ( 2 . 40 ) Estimation Method OLS OLS OLS Sample All CEOs at All at old ﬁrm State Fixed Eﬀects ? Yes Yes Yes Industry Fixed Eﬀects ? Yes Yes Yes R 2 0 . 55 0 . 97 0 . 51 The regressions are estimated via ordinary least squares ( OLS ) as described , with t - statistics reported in parentheses using robust “sandwich” standard errors . * , * * Indicates signiﬁcance at the 10 % and 5 % levels , respectively . 50 Table 7 : Research and Development and Capital Expenditures Dependent Log of R & D Log of R & D Log of Capex Log of Capex Variable Spending Spending per Employee per Employee # Obs . 10 , 608 10 , 351 18 , 939 18 , 456 Increased Enforceability - 0 . 1369 * * - 0 . 1383 * * ( - 2 . 81 ) ( - 4 . 33 ) Enforce * ( In - state Comp . ) - 1 . 8772 * * - 1 . 4907 * * ( - 2 . 17 ) ( - 3 . 18 ) In - state Competition 0 . 4495 0 . 4584 * * ( 1 . 58 ) ( 2 . 74 ) 1 year total return 0 . 0000 0 . 0000 * * 0 . 0000 * 0 . 0000 ( - 1 . 14 ) ( - 2 . 24 ) ( - 1 . 66 ) ( - 1 . 58 ) 3 year total return - 0 . 0016 * * - 0 . 0036 * * 0 . 0014 * * 0 . 0006 * * ( - 5 . 72 ) ( - 5 . 78 ) ( 7 . 52 ) ( 2 . 48 ) Log ( Firm Age ) 0 . 0865 * * - 0 . 1341 * * ( 2 . 49 ) ( - 6 . 67 ) Log ( Book Value ) - 0 . 0380 * * - 0 . 0356 0 . 0764 * * 0 . 0863 * * ( - 2 . 76 ) ( - 1 . 04 ) ( 5 . 34 ) ( 3 . 62 ) Log ( Market Value ) 0 . 0790 * * 0 . 2269 * * 0 . 0958 * * 0 . 1871 * * ( 5 . 62 ) ( 7 . 38 ) ( 7 . 38 ) ( 11 . 76 ) Log ( Sales ) 0 . 0748 * * - 0 . 0567 - 0 . 0377 - 0 . 1700 * * ( 3 . 68 ) ( - 1 . 45 ) ( - 1 . 26 ) ( - 5 . 54 ) Log ( Assets ) 0 . 4390 * * 0 . 6122 * * 0 . 0463 * * 0 . 0114 ( 16 . 69 ) ( 10 . 79 ) ( 1 . 97 ) ( 0 . 29 ) Log ( State Unemployment ) - 0 . 1830 * * - 0 . 0222 - 0 . 0411 - 0 . 0405 ( - 4 . 02 ) ( - 0 . 23 ) ( - 0 . 86 ) ( - 0 . 61 ) Log ( State Personal Income ) - 0 . 0220 0 . 2684 0 . 2903 * 0 . 6910 * ( - 0 . 12 ) ( 0 . 43 ) ( 1 . 67 ) ( 1 . 80 ) Estimation Method OLS OLS OLS OLS Firm Fixed Eﬀects ? Yes No Yes No State Fixed Eﬀects ? No Yes No Yes Industry Fixed Eﬀects ? No Yes No Yes Clustering State - Year Firm State - Year Firm R 2 0 . 98 0 . 88 0 . 87 0 . 71 The regressions are estimated via ordinary least squares ( OLS ) or ﬁxed eﬀect ( conditional ) logistic regression ( Logit ) , as described , with OLS t - statistics reported in parentheses using robust “sandwich” standard errors . Reported R 2 for Logit speciﬁcations is McFadden’s pseudo R 2 . * , * * Indicates signiﬁcance at the 10 % and 5 % levels , respectively . 51 Table 8 : Firm Performance Dependent Log of Market Log of Market Return on Return on Variable to Book Ratio to Book Ratio Equity Equity # Obs . 20 , 875 20 , 384 17 , 746 17 , 313 Increased Enforceability - 0 . 0417 - 4 . 2798 ( - 1 . 01 ) ( - 0 . 57 ) Enforce * ( In - state Comp . ) - 0 . 0771 2 . 6021 ( - 0 . 18 ) ( 0 . 04 ) In - state Competition 0 . 1282 - 62 . 3172 ( 0 . 89 ) ( - 1 . 32 ) Log ( Firm Age ) - 0 . 0919 * * - 288 . 9220 ( - 5 . 34 ) ( - 1 . 34 ) Log ( Debt ) 0 . 0001 - 0 . 0322 * * 260 . 1298 13 . 7342 ( 0 . 02 ) ( - 4 . 47 ) ( 1 . 20 ) ( 1 . 46 ) Log ( Sales ) 0 . 2686 * * 0 . 1847 * * - 289 . 8920 2 . 9834 ( 7 . 52 ) ( 8 . 24 ) ( - 1 . 28 ) ( 0 . 26 ) Log ( Assets ) - 0 . 3381 * * - 0 . 0843 * * - 18 . 0083 159 . 1344 ( - 9 . 47 ) ( - 3 . 50 ) ( - 1 . 03 ) ( 1 . 21 ) Log ( State Unemployment ) - 0 . 1334 * * - 0 . 1462 * * 24 . 6577 ( - 2 . 01 ) ( - 2 . 19 ) ( 0 . 55 ) Log ( State Personal Income ) 0 . 4343 * 0 . 8900 * * ( 1 . 69 ) ( 2 . 31 ) Estimation Method OLS OLS OLS OLS Firm Fixed Eﬀects ? Yes No Yes No State Fixed Eﬀects ? No Yes No Yes Industry Fixed Eﬀects ? No Yes No Yes Clustering State - Year Firm State - Year Firm R 2 0 . 64 0 . 31 0 . 52 0 . 06 The regressions are estimated via ordinary least squares ( OLS ) as described , with t - statistics reported in parentheses using robust “sandwich” standard errors . * , * * Indicates signiﬁcance at the 10 % and 5 % levels , respectively . 52