LETTERS Performance variability enables adaptive plasticity of ‘crystallized’ adult birdsong Evren C . Tumer 1 & Michael S . Brainard 1 , 2 Significant trial - by - trial variation persists even in the most prac - ticed skills . One prevalent view is that such variation is simply ‘noise’ that the nervous system is unable to control or that remains below threshold for behavioural relevance 1 – 3 . An alternative hypo - thesis is that such variation enables trial - and - error learning , in which the motor system generates variation and differentially retains behaviours that give rise to better outcomes . Here we test the latter possibility for adult bengalese finch song . Adult bird - song is a complex , learned motor skill that is produced in a highly stereotyped fashion from one rendition to the next 4 , 5 . Never - theless , there is subtle trial - by - trial variation even in stable , ‘crys - tallized’ adult song 6 – 8 . We used a computerized system to monitor small natural variations in the pitch of targeted song elements and deliver real - time auditory disruption to a subset of those varia - tions . Birds rapidly shifted the pitch of their vocalizations in an adaptive fashion to avoid disruption . These vocal changes were precisely restricted to the targeted features of song . Hence , birds were able to learn effectively by associating small variations in their vocal behaviour with differential outcomes . Such a process could help to maintain stable , learned song despite changes to the vocal control system arising from ageing or injury . More generally , our results suggest that residual variability in well learned skills is not entirely noise but rather reflects meaningful motor explora - tion that can support continuous learning and optimization of performance . Birdsong , like speech , is a learned motor skill that requires excep - tionally precise and rapid control of vocal musculature ; for both song and speech , modulation in acoustic structure occurs on a timescale of milliseconds 4 , 9 . This fine level of vocal control is learned in a process that depends crucially on auditory feedback . In many songbird spe - cies the learned song ‘crystallizes’ into a stable form after reaching adulthood 4 . However , disruption of feedback can cause a gradual deterioration in song , suggesting the continued importance of feed - back for monitoring and maintaining performance 10 – 14 . Prior modelling indicates that song learning could proceed through trial and error , in which variable songs are produced ( ‘motor exploration’ ) followed by selective reinforcement of better versus worse variants 15 – 18 . Consistent with the possibility that song variation reflects motor exploration , experimental data indicate that a com - ponent of variability in both juvenile and adult song is centrally controlled 7 , 8 , 19 – 22 . Despite these observations , it remains unknown whether birds can modify their songs by a trial - and - error process in which they associate variations in vocal behaviour with better versus worse outcomes . We directly tested this possibility in adult bengalese finches by using a computerized system to continuously monitor song and provide online disruptive feedback for a targeted range of vocaliza - tions . A normal song consists of a stereotyped sequence of discrete ‘syllables’ ( Fig . 1a ) . We focused our experiments on the pitch , or fundamental frequency , of individual syllables , because fundamental frequency is learned , precisely controlled and readily quantifiable 5 , 7 , 8 . The coefficient of variation of fundamental frequency for syllables in our study was 1 . 5 % ( median ; range 1 . 2 – 2 % ) . This only slightly exceeds the variation present across renditions of notes by trained vocalists and is much less than the variation across repeated pho - nemes for normal speech 23 , 24 . Moreover , this variation is of the same order as frequency discrimination thresholds for birds and humans 25 . Hence , variation in adult bengalese finch song is quite subtle , com - mensurate with that of other well - practiced skills . An experiment to assess whether this variability can be used by the nervous system is illustrated in Fig . 1 . We targeted fundamental frequency of syllable ‘a’ ( Fig . 1a ) for modification . Initially , fun - damental frequency was tightly controlled with only , 1 % variation ( Fig . 1c ; fundamental frequency 5 2 , 281 6 27 Hz ) . We used short bursts of white noise as a negative reinforcer for a subset of syllable variants , as white noise disrupts normal feedback and causes a gra - dual , non - specific deterioration of song when chronically used to disrupt feedback ( see Methods ) . Here , rather than indiscriminately disrupting feedback , we delivered white noise in a manner contingent on acoustic features of the targeted syllable . Higher pitched rendi - tions received a short latency burst of white noise ( ‘hit’ ) , whereas lower pitched versions received normal feedback ( ‘escape’ ) ( Fig . 1b ) . Unlike natural feedback , which potentially provides fine - grained information about amplitude , pitch and other features of song , our experimentally controlled feedback provided a binary signal for each rendition of the target syllable , either ‘bad’ ( white noise burst ) or ‘good’ ( escape ) , without further detail about the aspects of song that triggered feedback . We then asked whether birds could detect the externally imposed contingency that led to disruption of feedback and alter their songs to escape it . This form of behaviourally contingent reinforcement drove rapid , adaptive changes to targeted features of adult song . For the experi - ment of Fig . 1 , the fundamental frequency of the targeted syllable decreased significantly over the first three days of reinforcement ( Fig . 1d ; fundamental frequency reduced by 1 . 8 times the standard deviation of the baseline distribution ; P , 0 . 0001 ) . Correspondingly , the hit rate dropped from 91 % ( baseline ) to 17 % . By establishing the appropriate contingency , the same reinforcement scheme could direct either increases or decreases in pitch ( Fig . 1e ) . When white noise was differentially delivered at higher frequencies , the fun - damental frequency always shifted lower ; when white noise bursts were delivered at lower frequencies , the fundamental frequency shifted higher ( Fig . 1f ) . Hence , the applied contingency determined the direction of behavioural change ( P , 0 . 01 ; sign - test for 7 of 7 cases shifting in the direction of the applied contingency ) . In all cases , changes in fundamental frequency led to a large reduction in hit rate , 1 Keck Center for Integrative Neuroscience , Sloan - Swartz Center for Theoretical Neurobiology , Department of Physiology , University of California , San Francisco , California 94143 - 0444 , USA . 2 Department of Psychiatry , University of California , San Francisco , California 94143 , USA . Vol 450 | 20 / 27 December 2007 | doi : 10 . 1038 / nature06390 1240 Nature ©2007 PublishingGroup with the median decreasing from 91 % to 21 % by the third day . These data provide the first evidence that auditory reinforcement signals can direct specific , adaptive changes to adult song . As a corollary , they demonstrate that birds were able to effectively associate small natural variations in vocal production with differential outcomes . Changes elicited by differential reinforcement occurred rapidly . A detailed examination of one experiment reveals that fundamental frequency approached the asymptotic range within one day ( Fig . 2a ) . Similarly , for six of seven birds , significant adaptive changes to fundamental frequency occurred within 7 h ( Fig . 2b , ‘morning’ ) and for all birds significant changes occurred within the first day ( Fig . 2b , ‘evening’ ) . The median number of syllables sung within the first half - day and full day were 605 and 1 , 179 , respectively . By day 3 , fundamental frequency stabilized at nearly asymptotic values ( Fig . 2b ) . The induced changes in fundamental frequency recovered rapidly . After at least 3 days of reinforcement , contingent white noise bursts were terminated . In every case , the fundamental frequency reverted towards its original range ( Fig . 2c ) . Hence , the nervous system retains a representation of the initial song and both the capacity and impetus to return song towards its original structure in the absence of extern - ally imposed drive . c Fundamental frequency ( kHz ) Fundamental frequency ( z - score ) P r o b a b ili t y 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 2 . 2 2 . 3 2 . 2 2 . 3 Baseline Day 3 Escape Hit P r o b a b ili t y d Escape Hit a 100 ms 5 k H z a b c d e e Mean + 1 σ – 1 σ P r o b a b ili t y – 5 – 2 . 5 0 2 . 5 5 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 Fundamental frequency ( kHz ) Fundamental frequency ( z - score ) 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 – 5 – 2 . 5 0 2 . 5 5 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 P r o b a b ili t y e Baseline Day 3 Downwardescape Upwardescape Downwardescape Upwardescape f 250 ms * Hit b Escape * 5 k H z Trigger time Figure 1 | Differential reinforcement can adaptively alter features of adult song . a , Syllables ( a , b , c , d , e , e ) are normally produced with little variation . Three songs are shown for which the fundamental frequency of ‘a’ spanned 2 standard deviations of the baseline distribution ( Supplementary Recording 1 contains corresponding audio files ) . b , White noise bursts ( ‘hits’ ) were targeted at higher pitched versions of ‘a’ . c , Baseline fundamental frequency distribution for ‘a’ , showing overall mean ( triangle ) and mean for escapes ( line ) . d , Fundamental frequency distribution after 3 days white noise . e , f , Baseline ( e ) and day 3 ( f ) distributions for seven experiments in which white noisedirected either downward ( red ) orupward ( blue ) shiftsin fundamental frequency . Fundamentalfrequencyis expressed in units of the standard deviation of the baseline distribution ( z - score , see Methods ) . - 2 - 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 2 . 2 2 . 3 2 . 4 Time since feedback on ( days ) White noise on a c White noise on B a s e li n e M o r n i n g E v e n i n g D a y 3 Day 1 feedbackon { L a s t d a y A d a p t i v e s h i f t i n m ea n f un d a m e n t a l f r e q u e n c y ( z - s c o r e ) A d a p t i v e s h i f t i n m ea n f un d a m e n t a l f r e q u e n c y ( z - s c o r e ) 0 1 2 3 – 1 L a s t d a y f e e db ac k o n D a y 3 f e e db ac k o ff Whitenoise off 0 1 2 3 – 1 b F un d a m e n t a l f r e q u e n c y ( k H z ) Figure 2 | Adaptive shifts in fundamental frequency occur rapidly and recover . a , Fundamental frequency of targeted syllables for one adult bird ( age 334 days ) . Fundamental frequency progressively increased during the first day . b , Upward ( blue ) and downward ( red ) shifts in fundamental frequency . Filled symbols indicate significance ( P , 0 . 05 ) . After 3 days , fundamental frequency changed little , indicating that shifts had reached near asymptotic values . c , Fundamental frequency for last day with white noise feedback on ( ‘Last day , feedback on’ ) and third day following termination of feedback ( ‘Day 3 , feedback off’ ) . NATURE | Vol 450 | 20 / 27 December 2007 LETTERS 1241 Nature ©2007 PublishingGroup In principle , birds could escape white noise equally well by altering the fundamental frequency of only the targeted syllable or of larger segments of song . Nevertheless , we consistently found that changes to fundamental frequency were restricted exclusively to targeted syllables ( Fig . 3a , b , red symbols ) . Other syllables , even when they occurred within a few tens of milliseconds , did not change ( Fig . 3a , b , blue symbols ) . Furthermore , the changes were specific to fun - damental frequency and did not affect other features such as dura - tion , volume and spectral entropy ( Fig . 3c ) . Hence , even though the experimentally imposed contingency between performance and feed - back was not revealed to the bird in any direct sense , the nervous system was able to detect and respond precisely to that contingency . This specificity indicates an impressive capacity of the nervous system to modify discrete features of song independently . This is appropriate for vocal learning , where birds match their song to rapidly varying features of an acoustic model . If modification of one song feature generalized to cause modification of others , learning might still proceed , but such interference would probably slow its progress 26 . In theory , reinforcement signals can drive learning even at long latencies to the actions that precipitate them 15 . For complex motor skills , however , the nervous system might detect the contingency more effectively at shorter delays . We tested the importance of delay by varying the time between measurement of fundamental frequency c Fundamentalfrequency Duration Volume Entropy – 1 0 1 2 3 M e a n s h i f t i n f ea t u r e ( z - s c o r e ) Target Control b M ea n s h i f t i n f un d a m e n t a l f r e q u e n c y ( z - s c o r e ) Mean time from target syllable ( ms ) a Target Mean time from target syllable ( ms ) – 400 – 300 – 200 – 100 0 100 200 300 400 0 2 4 6 8 10 – 4 – 2 0 2 4 F r e q u e n c y ( k H z ) – 400 – 300 – 200 – 100 0 100 200 300 400 Figure 3 | Changesarerestrictedtotargetedfeaturesofsong . a , Spectrogram illustrating analysed features for target ( red bar ) and control ( blue bars ) syllables of an individual experiment . b , Mean changes in fundamental frequency for target ( red ) and control ( blue ) syllables . Squares represent two experiments for song illustrated in a . Data from 3 additional birds ( circles , triangles , diamonds ) are shown without corresponding spectrograms . Filled and open symbols indicate experiments with upward and downward shifts in fundamental frequency , respectively . c , Spectral characteristics other than fundamentalfrequencywerenotalteredforeithertarget ( red ) orcontrol ( blue ) syllables . Bars indicate mean 6 standard deviation . 5 k H z 100 ms + 100 ms delay Targetsyllable Short delay Targetsyllable a b Detect time Trigger time d Shortdelay + 100 ms delay – 1 0 1 2 3 A d a p t i v e s h i f t i n m e a n f un d a m e n t a l f r e q u e n c y ( z - s c o r e ) B a s e li n e D a y 3 D a y 5 B a s e li n e D a y 3 D a y 5 D a y 8 D a y 12 Shortdelay + 100 ms delay 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 H i t r a t e B a s e li n e D a y 3 D a y 5 B a s e li n e D a y 3 D a y 5 D a y 8 D a y 12 0 3 7 15 21 25 2 . 2 2 . 3 2 . 4 Time ( days ) F un d a m e n t a l f r e q u e n c y ( k H z ) c Feedback off Feedback on Short delay + 100 ms delay Short delay Downwardescape Downwardescape Upwardescape 28 Figure 4 | Delayed feedback prevents adaptive pitch shifts . a , b , Spectrograms illustrating short delay ( a ) and 1 100ms delay ( b ) feedback for one bird . c , Fundamental frequency ( mean 6 standard deviation ) for this bird . Initially , short delay feedback directed a downward shift in fundamental frequency . After recovery , the same contingency with delayed feedback was ineffective . Subsequently , an upward shift was driven usinganewshortdelaycontingency . Shadingindicatesbaseline 6 1standard deviation . d , Summary of shifts in fundamental frequency and hit rate . Symbols indicate 4 birds subjected to both short delay and 1 100ms delay reinforcement . Shifts were prevented when feedback was delayed . LETTERS NATURE | Vol 450 | 20 / 27 December 2007 1242 Nature ©2007 PublishingGroup and delivery of feedback . White noise typically was delivered within 16 – 30 ms . In this case , white noise overlapped with the targeted syllable ( Fig . 4a , ‘short delay’ ) . For some experiments , white noise was delayed by an extra 100 ms . In this case , white noise started after completion of the targeted syllable ( Fig . 4b , ‘ 1 100 ms delay’ ) . Syllables targeted at short delay rapidly shifted and reached asymp - totic values after roughly 3 – 4 days . In contrast , the same syllables , when targeted with delayed feedback , exhibited no directed change to fundamental frequency even over longer periods ( Fig . 4c , d ) . Hence , even small delays profoundly attenuated adaptive responses . Likewise , in the 1 100 ms condition , there were no systematic changes to syllables following the targeted syllable , for which white noise was delivered in a non - contingent manner ( see Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . Hence , rapid changes to fundamental frequency required both that white noise was contingent on the structure of a syllable and that it occur at short delay . These data suggest that the vocal control system may take advantage of normally predictable timing between premotor activity and resultant sensory consequences ; normally , activity of premotor neurons influences song and resultant feedback at latencies , 70 ms ( ref . 27 ) . Therefore , the nervous system may not readily detect reinforcement contingencies when feedback is delayed beyond this range . Although such timing con - straints are not necessary for reinforcement learning , they potentially enable more efficient learning and may be a general feature of sensorimotor systems where there is predictable delay between action and consequence 28 . Our results indicate that small natural variations present in adult song can enable adaptive modification of targeted features . These changes exceed the frequency discrimination threshold for birds 25 . Moreover , the reversion of fundamental frequency after termination of feedback ( Fig . 2c ) indicates the nervous system is sensitive to the discrepancy from the original song . Nevertheless , our reinforcement scheme constrained shifts in fundamental frequency to be similar in magnitude to the initial range of variation ( see Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . This raises the question of whether changes in adult song are restricted to subtle fine - tuning , or whether more dramatic remodel - ling is possible . We tested this by progressively altering the reinforce - ment contingency so that continued escape from white noise would require progressively larger shifts in fundamental frequency ( Fig . 5 ) . We were able to incrementally drive large changes in fundamental frequency , such that syllables eventually were produced in a range completely non - overlapping with the baseline range ( Supplementary Movie 1 demonstrates the salience of these changes ) . This finding implies that following each incremental shift in fundamental fre - quency a new range of behaviourally relevant variation was estab - lished that enabled differential reinforcement of more extreme vocalizations . The range of variation remained relatively constant over time ( for example , see Figs 1 , 4 , 5 ) . Hence , as learning pro - gresses , current performance is continuously surrounded by a ‘halo’ of variation that enables continuous adaptive modification . In summary , our results demonstrate that binary feedback signals can drive rapid plasticity of normally stable adult song . In contrast to previous studies in which disruption of feedback led to a deteriora - tion of song 10 – 14 , we show that differentially delivered feedback can direct precise , adaptive changes to adult song . Thechangesareprecise in that they are restricted to targeted features . They are adaptive in that birds alter those features systematically to escape disrupted feed - back . These data provide empirical support for models suggesting that song might normally be shaped by reinforcement signals 16 – 18 . More generally , they indicate that the trial - and - error process of rein - forcement learning can efficiently guide adaptive modification of highly complex and tightly controlled motor skills . The adaptive plasticity reported here also demonstrates that birds can accurately associate small variations in fundamental frequency with resultant consequences . In principle , variation could be mon - itored by sensory feedback ( auditory or proprioceptive ) . Alter - natively , if variation is centrally generated , it could be monitored internally by an efference copy of premotor activity 17 . Consistent with this possibility , studies in both birds and mammals indicate that some movement variability derives from central neural activity rather than the periphery 7 , 8 , 29 , 30 , suggesting that variability may be actively generated for motor exploration . Regardless of mechanism , our data indicate that natural variations present in crystallized adult song are not simply noise but rather can be exploited for trial - and - error c d – 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 2 . 3 2 . 4 2 . 5 2 . 6 Time since feedback onset ( days ) F un d a m e n t a l f r e q u e n c y ( k H z ) 2 . 3 2 . 4 2 . 5 2 . 6 2 . 7 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 Fundamental frequency ( kHz ) P r o b a b ili t y White noise a b 100 ms 2 . 5 k H z Baseline Day 13 Day 13 – 15 – 10 – 5 0 5 10 15 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 P r o b a b ili t y Fundamental frequency ( z - score ) Baseline Last day – 15 – 10 – 5 0 5 10 15 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 P r o b a b ili t y Fundamental frequency ( z - score ) Figure 5 | Incremental adjustment of threshold drives large pitch changes . a , Changes to fundamental frequency for one experiment . Points indicate mean ( 6 standard deviation ) on each day . Shading indicates threshold for escapes . b , Fundamentalfrequencydistributionsforbaseline ( black ) andday 13 ( blue ) . Spectrograms show the average syllable for corresponding days . c , d , Baseline ( c ) and final ( d ) fundamental frequency distributions for three experiments with thresholds incrementally adjusted upward ( blue ) or downward ( red ) . Over 11 – 14 days , mean fundamental frequency ( triangles ) shiftedby7 . 0 – 10 . 5standarddeviationsofthebaselinedistribution ( 226 – 376 Hz ) . For comparison , vertical shaded regions show the range of mean changes driven with a fixed reinforcement contingency . NATURE | Vol 450 | 20 / 27 December 2007 LETTERS 1243 Nature ©2007 PublishingGroup learning . We suggest that in other systems as well , subtle variation in performance may reflect continued experimentation to optimize behaviour , rather than noise that the nervous system is unable to control , or that is below threshold for behavioural relevance . METHODS SUMMARY Subjects . Eleven adult ( age 112 – 346 days ) male bengalese finches ( Lonchura striata var . domestica ) were used . All procedures were approved by the University of California , San Francisco Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee . Song recording and behaviourally contingent reinforcement . Birds were housed individually in sound isolation chambers throughout the experiments . Custom LabView software ( National Instruments ) was used for song recording and online detection of target syllables . We tuned spectral templates to differ - entially detect and trigger reinforcement of higher or lower pitched syllables , thereby establishing a clear direction in which pitch would need to be shifted to reduce disruptive feedback . Hit rate and syllable structure calculations . Hit rate was defined as the per - centage of times the target syllable matched the established criterion for white noise playback out of the total number of target syllables sung . Fundamental frequency was calculated from the frequency bins surrounding the harmonic peaksinthepowerspectrumofthetargetsyllable . Volumeofindividualsyllables was normalized by mean volume of the entire song . Duration and spectral entropy ( from 0 . 5 – 10kHz ) were calculated as previously described 27 . Signi - ficance was determined using two - tailed t - tests . During baselineperiods , hit rate was calculated in the absence of white noise playback . During the period of contingentreinforcement , werandomlyselectedasubsetofsongsas‘catch’trials for which whitenoise playbacks were suppressed ( 10 – 20 % ) . The valuesreported for hit rate , fundamental frequency and other syllable parameters were derived from these catch trials . Full Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at www . nature . com / nature . Received 24 August ; accepted 16 October 2007 . 1 . Beers , R . J . V . , Baraduc , P . & Wolpert , D . M . Role of uncertainty in sensorimotor control . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B 357 , 1137 – 1145 ( 2002 ) . 2 . Todorov , E . Optimality principles in sensorimotor control . Nature Neurosci . 7 , 907 – 915 ( 2004 ) . 3 . Harris , C . M . & Wolpert , D . M . Signal - dependent noise determines motor planning . Nature 394 , 780 – 784 ( 1998 ) . 4 . Konishi , M . Birdsong : From behavior to neuron . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 8 , 125 – 170 ( 1985 ) . 5 . Deregnaucourt , S . et al . How sleep affects the developmental learning of bird song . Nature 433 , 710 – 716 ( 2005 ) . 6 . Sossinka , R . & Bohner , J . Song types in the zebra finch Poephila guttata castanotis . Z . Tierpsychol . 53 , 123 – 132 ( 1980 ) . 7 . Kao , M . H . , Doupe , A . J . & Brainard , M . S . Contributions ofan avianbasal ganglia - forebrain circuit to real - time modulation of song . Nature 433 , 638 – 643 ( 2005 ) . 8 . Kao , M . H . & Brainard , M . S . Lesions of an avian basal ganglia circuit prevent context - dependent changes to song variability . J . Neurophysiol . 96 , 1441 – 1455 ( 2006 ) . 9 . Doupe , A . J . & Kuhl , P . K . Birdsong and human speech : common themes and mechanisms . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 22 , 567 – 631 ( 1999 ) . 10 . Nordeen , K . W . & Nordeen , E . J . Auditory feedback is necessary for the maintenance of stereotyped song in adult zebra finches . Behav . Neural Biol . 57 , 58 – 66 ( 1992 ) . 11 . Okanoya , K . & Yamaguchi , A . Adult Bengalese finches ( Lonchura striata var . domestica ) require real - time auditory feedback to produce normal song syntax . J . Neurobiol . 33 , 343 – 356 ( 1997 ) . 12 . Woolley , S . M . & Rubel , E . W . Bengalesefinches LonchuraStriatadomestica depend upon auditory feedback for the maintenance of adult song . J . Neurosci . 17 , 6380 – 6390 ( 1997 ) . 13 . Leonardo , A . & Konishi , M . Decrystallization of adult birdsong by perturbation of auditory feedback . Nature 399 , 466 – 470 ( 1999 ) . 14 . Zevin , J . D . , Seidenberg , M . S . & Bottjer , S . W . Limits on reacquisition of song in adult zebra finches exposed to white noise . J . Neurosci . 24 , 5849 – 5862 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Sutton , R . S . & Barto , A . G . Reinforcement Learning : An Introduction ( MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts , 1998 ) . 16 . Doya , K . & Sejnowski , T . in The New Cognitive Neurosciences ( ed . Gazzaniga , M . ) 469 – 482 ( MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts , 2000 ) . 17 . Troyer , T . & Doupe , A . J . An associational model of birdsong sensorimotor learning . I . Efference copy and the learning of song syllables . J . Neurophys . 84 , 1204 – 1223 ( 2000 ) . 18 . Fiete , I . R . , Fee , M . S . & Seung , H . S . Model of birdsong learning based on gradient estimation by dynamic perturbation of neural conductances . J . Neurophys . 98 , 2038 – 2057 ( 2007 ) . 19 . Olveczky , B . P . , Andalman , A . S . & Fee , M . S . Vocalexperimentationinthejuvenile songbird requires a basal ganglia circuit . PLoS Biol . 3 , e153 ( 2005 ) . 20 . Hessler , N . A . & Doupe , A . J . Social context modulates singing - related neural activity in the songbird forebrain . Nature Neurosci . 2 , 209 – 211 ( 1999 ) . 21 . Bottjer , S . W . , Miesner , E . A . & Arnold , A . P . Forebrain lesions disrupt development but not maintenance of song in passerine birds . Science 224 , 901 – 903 ( 1984 ) . 22 . Scharff , C . & Nottebohm , F . A comparative study of the behavioral deficits following lesions of various parts of the zebra finch song system : implications for vocal learning . J . Neurosci . 11 , 2896 – 2913 ( 1991 ) . 23 . Amir , O . , Amir , N . & Kishon - Rabin , L . Theeffectofsuperiorauditoryskillsonvocal accuracy . J . Acoust . Soc . Am . 113 , 1102 – 1108 ( 2003 ) . 24 . Sundberg , J . , Prame , E . & Iwarsson , J . in Vocal Fold Physiology , Controlling Complexity and Chaos ( eds Davis , P . & Fletcher , N . ) 291 – 306 ( Singular Publishing Group , San Diego , 1996 ) . 25 . Dent , M . L . , Dooling , R . J . & Pierce , A . S . Frequency discrimination in budgerigars ( Melopsittacus undulatus ) : Effects of tone duration and tonal context . J . Acoust . Soc . Am . 107 , 2657 – 2664 ( 2000 ) . 26 . Fiete , I . R . , Hahnloser , R . H . , Fee , M . S . & Seung , H . S . Temporal sparseness of the premotor drive is important for rapid learning in a neural network model of birdsong . J . Neurophysiol . 92 , 2274 – 2282 ( 2004 ) . 27 . Sakata , J . T . & Brainard , M . S . Real - time contributions of auditory feedback to avian vocal motor control . J . Neurosci . 26 , 9619 – 9628 ( 2006 ) . 28 . Held , R . , Efstathiou , A . & Greene , M . Adaptation to displaced and delayed visual feedback from the hand . J . Exp . Psychol . 72 , 887 – 891 ( 1966 ) . 29 . Churchland , M . M . , Afshar , A . & Shenoy , K . V . A central source of movement variability . Neuron 52 , 1085 – 1096 ( 2006 ) . 30 . Churchland , M . M . , Santhanam , G . & Shenoy , K . V . Preparatory activity in premotor and motor cortex reflects the speed of the upcoming reach . J . Neurophysiol . 96 , 3130 – 3146 ( 2006 ) . Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www . nature . com / nature . Acknowledgements We thank A . Doupe , L . Frank , T . Warren , M . Wohlgemuth , S . Sober , J . Sakata , C . Hampton and J . Wong for comments . This work was supported by an NIDCD NRSA postdoctoral fellowship and the Sloan - Swartz Foundation ( E . C . T . ) and by an NIDCD R01 award , an NIMH Conte Center for Neuroscience Research award and a McKnight Foundation Scholars Award ( M . S . B ) . Author Contributions E . C . T . performed the experiments and analysis ; E . C . T . and M . S . B . designed the experiments and wrote the manuscript . Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at www . nature . com / reprints . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to evren @ phy . ucsf . edu . LETTERS NATURE | Vol 450 | 20 / 27 December 2007 1244 Nature ©2007 PublishingGroup METHODS Song recording and behaviourally contingent reinforcement . Birds were housed individually in sound isolation chambers ( Acoustic Systems ) with a 14 / 10 h light / dark cycle throughout the experiments . Custom LabView software ( National Instruments ) was used for song recording and online detection of target syllables . Before initiation of contingent reinforcement , songs were recorded for several days to measure baseline statistics on fundamental fre - quency of targeted syllables and develop spectral templates to detect syllables in real - time and trigger playback of white noise contingent on syllable spectral structure . For 2 birds a diurnal trend in pitch was apparent during baseline , reminiscent of that in juvenile zebra finches 5 ( for example , Fig . 2a ) , but did not correlate with observed plasticity . Templates were constructed from the power spectrum of short segments ( 8ms ) of the target syllable . By varying the exemplar syllables from which templates were constructed , we tuned templates to differentially detect and trigger reinforcement of higher or lower pitched syllables . During the baseline period ( with no white noise playback ) , we mon - itoredthedistributionoffundamentalfrequencyfor‘hits’and‘escapes’todeter - mine empirically the actual feedback contingency that was applied in each experiment . For most experiments , ‘escapes’ were present only at the upper ( or lower ) end of the natural range of variation for fundamental frequency , establishing a clear direction in which pitch would need to be shifted to reduce disruptive feedback . For these experiments , an adaptive response was defined as a shift in mean pitch towards the end of the baseline distribution that contained escapes . SeeSupplementaryInformationforadditionaldetailsonthetimingand specificity of contingent reinforcement . For two experiments , escapes were pre - sent at both the upper and lower ends of the baseline distribution . In both of these cases , birds shifted the pitch of the targeted syllables upwards and reduced the hit rate . However , in these cases , the direction of adaptive response ( increase versus decrease in pitch ) was not clearly defined by the initial feedback contin - gency , and therefore these experiments are not included in analyses document - ing that changes to targeted features of song can be specifically directed by predetermined feedback contingencies ( for example , Fig . 1 ) . White noise bursts were used to differentially reinforce variations within the normal range of vocalizations . The duration of white noise bursts was long enough to overlap with the remainder of the targeted syllable ( 80 – 200ms ) . We chose white noise bursts as our stimulus for differential reinforcement for two reasons . First , the superposition of white noise on normal feedback disrupts the sound that the bird experiences , and previous experiments have shown that chronic ( non - contingent ) disruption of feedback in this fashion results in a gradual and non - specific deterioration of song 14 , 31 , 32 . Second , perturbation of feedback with similar stimuli for both birds and humans can cause acute dis - ruptions of ongoing vocalizations 27 . We confirmed for each of our experiments thatwhitenoiseburstswerebehaviourallysalientinthattheycausedasignificantincreaseintheprobabilityofsongstoppagesduringthefirstdayofexposure . These acute effects typically habituated over the course of extended exposure . Nevertheless , they suggest that white noise stimuli superimposed on song are readily detected by the nervous system . Our finding that birds consistently alter their songs to avoid white noise bursts indicates that this form of feedback disruption indeed acts as an effective negative reinforcer . Hit rate and fundamental frequency calculation . Hit rate was defined as the percentageoftimesthetargetsyllablematchedtheestablishedcriterionforwhitenoiseplaybackoutofthetotalnumberoftargetsyllablesthebirdsang . During baseline periods , hit rate was calculated in the absence of white noise playback . During the period of contingent reinforcement , we additionally suppressed white noise playbacks for a randomly selected subset of songs ( 10 – 20 % ) . These catch trials allowed us to monitor the progression of changes to pitch ( and hit rate ) for songs that were produced with entirely normal feedback , avoiding any potential complications due to online contributions of feedback tosongstructure . Thevaluesreportedforfundamentalfrequencyandhitrateare derived from these catch trials . Online evaluation of fundamental frequency for purposes of contingent rein - forcement relied on short ( 8ms ) segments of targeted syllables and a rapid template - matching algorithm ( see above ) in order to minimize the latency between production of song features that met criterion and the delivery of white noise . For analysis of spectral characteristics of targeted syllables , longer seg - ments ( 16 – 64ms ) of thesyllablewaveformwere used . Each segmentwas Fourier transformed and the fundamental frequency was calculated from the average of the five frequency bins neighbouring the peak weighted by the corresponding spectral power in each bin . Volume of individual syllables was normalized by mean volume of the entire song . Duration and spectral entropy ( from 0 . 5 – 10kHz ) were calculated as previously described 27 . To summarize effects across syllables , weexpressedchangesinmeasuredfeaturesas z - scores , computedasthe difference between the means of the experimentally shifted and baseline distri - butions , divided by the standard deviation of the baseline distribution . Significance was determined using two - tailed t - tests . 31 . Leonardo , A . Experimental test of the birdsong error - correction model . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 16935 – 16940 ( 2004 ) . 32 . Kozhevnikov , A . & Fee , M . S . Singing - relatedactivityofidentifiedHVCneuronsin the zebra finch . J . Neurophysiol . 97 , 4271 – 4283 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature06390 Nature ©2007 PublishingGroup