The mucosal surfaces of the mammalian skin , airways , reproductive tract and intestine are in direct contact with the external environment and therefore are suscep - tible to colonization and invasion by viruses , bacteria , fungi and parasites . To combat these potentially lethal pathogens , mammals have evolved elaborate mucosa - associated lymphoid tissues that are rich in cells of the innate and adaptive immune system . However , mucosal surfaces are continuously exposed to innocuous envi - ronmental antigens and ‘commensal’ microorganisms that live in a symbiotic or mutually beneficial relation - ship with their mammalian hosts . In the face of constant immunological stimulation , the requirement for a homeostatic balance between tolerance and immunity represents a unique regulatory challenge for the mucosal immune system . This challenge is arguably most acute in the intestinal tract , the largest mucosal surface of the human body . The intestinal surface covers an area of approximately 100 m 2 and is lined by a single layer of columnar intestinal epithelial cells ( IECs ) that forms a barrier between the intesti - nal lumen and host connective tissue . In addition to the constant exposure to dietary and environmental antigens , the adult human intestine is home to an esti - mated 10 14 commensal bacteria 1 . In fact , communities of bacteria in the intestine form one of the most densely populated microbial habitats known in biology 2 . In the face of this massive antigenic challenge , immune cells distributed throughout the gut - associated lymphoid tissues ( GALTs ) , although they frequently exhibit hallmarks of recent activation , must remain immunologically hypore - sponsive to commensal bacteria while retaining their capacity to respond to a pathogenic challenge . The necessity to regulate immune responses to commensal bacteria is exemplified by evidence that dysregulation of the balance between tolerance and immunity can contribute to the pathogenesis of numer - ous inflammatory conditions , including food allergies , inflammatory bowel disease ( IBD ) and intestinal can - cer 3 – 5 . Paradoxically , experimental manipulation of the commensal bacteria in multiple species has revealed an essential role for microbial communities in the normal physiological functions of the intestine and in the devel - opment of the GALTs . Therefore , under steady - state conditions , the mammalian immune system recognizes commensal bacteria and elicits basal or tonic signals in the absence of full activation of the innate and adaptive immune responses 6 . Defining the molecular and cellular mechanisms that regulate immunological hyporesponsiveness is an area of intense research . Recent studies in which various functional capacities of IECs have been targeted , either by the generation of bone - marrow chimaeras or by cell - lineage - specific deletion , have demonstrated that IECs , which were once considered a simple physical barrier to the external environment , are integral to both the dis - crimination of pathogenic and commensal bacteria and the subsequent regulation of immune responses in the intestinal microenvironment . The anatomical features of the intestinal immune system and functions of dendritic Department of Pathobiology , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Philadelphia 19104‑4539 , USA . e‑mail : dartis @ vet . upenn . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nri2316 Published online 12 May 2008 Gut - associated lymphoid tissues ( GALTs ) . Lymphoid structures and aggregates associated with the intestinal mucosa , specifically the tonsils , Peyer’s patches , lymphoid follicles , appendix or coecal patch and mesenteric lymph nodes . They are enriched in conventional and unconventional lymphocytes and specialized dendritic - cell and macrophage subsets . Immunological hyporesponsiveness A diminished degree of responsiveness to antigen or other stimulation . It is an active process , not simply a passive lack of response . Epithelial - cell recognition of commensal bacteria and maintenance of immune homeostasis in the gut David Artis Abstract | Mucosal surfaces such as the intestinal tract are continuously exposed to both potential pathogens and beneficial commensal microorganisms . This creates a requirement for a homeostatic balance between tolerance and immunity that represents a unique regulatory challenge to the mucosal immune system . Recent findings suggest that intestinal epithelial cells , although once considered a simple physical barrier , are a crucial cell lineage for maintaining intestinal immune homeostasis . This Review discusses recent findings that identify a cardinal role for epithelial cells in sampling the intestinal microenvironment , discriminating pathogenic and commensal microorganisms and influencing the function of antigen - presenting cells and lymphocytes . nATuRE REvIEws | immunology voLumE 8 | junE 2008 | 411 REVIEWS f o c u s o n m u c o s a l i m m u n o lo g y © 200 8 Nature Publishing Group Nature Reviews | Immunology Lymphoidfollicle Peyer’s patch Glycocalyx Antimicrobialpeptide Epithelial cell Commensal and pathogenic microorganisms a b d c f g e M cell SED Perifolliculararea DC Lamina propria Microvillarextension Tight junctions Specialized intercellular junctions that seal the apical epithelium . They are formed by several proteins including occludin and claudin , in which two plasma membranes form a sealing gasket around a cell ( also known as zonula occludens ) . Tight junctions prevent fluid moving through the intercellular gaps and prevent lateral diffusion of membrane proteins between the apical and basolateral membranes . Brush border The microvilli - covered surface found on the apical surface of epithelial cells that is coated in a rich glycocalyx of mucus and other glycoproteins . The microvilli contain many of the digestive enzymes and transporter systems that are involved in the metabolism and uptake of dietary materials , and provides a large surface area for absorption . Early anatomists noted that this structure appeared very much like the bristles of a paintbrush , hence the name brush borders . cells ( DCs ) and regulatory T cells in the intestine have been discussed elsewhere recently 7 – 10 , therefore the cen - tral themes discussed in this Review are current concepts of how microorganisms are sampled in the intestine , how IECs discriminate between commensal and pathogenic bacteria , and how epithelial - cell - derived factors , through effects on antigen - presenting cells and lymphocytes , regulate intestinal immune homeostasis . The intestinal epithelial - cell barrier The intestinal epithelium exhibits numerous physical adaptations to separate the host connective tissue from the external environment . Intercellular tight junctions that prevent paracellular traffic are coupled with actin - rich microvillar extensions that create a brush border on the apical surface of the epithelium that impedes microbial attachment and invasion ( FIG . 1 ) 11 . This physical barrier is reinforced by numerous biochemical adaptations such as a glycocalyx formed by the secretion and apical attach - ment of a heavily glycosylated mucin - rich layer by goblet cells . Together , these form a viscous and relatively imper - meable sheet on the apical surface of the epithelium 12 , 13 ( reviewed in REF . 14 ) . IECs also secrete a broad range of antimicrobial peptides , including defensins , cathelicidins and calprotectins . most molecules in this diverse group of peptides are rich in hydrophobic and basic residues that confer broad - spectrum antimicrobial properties through the formation of pores in the bacterial cell wall 15 – 18 . These adaptations are consistent with the view that IECs , in addition to promoting digestion and absorption of nutri - ents , perform essential barrier functions that obstruct the entry of commensal and pathogenic bacteria into the underlying lamina propria ( FIG . 1 ) . Adaptations of the GALT for microbial sampling in the intestine . The basal influence of commensal bacteria on intestinal homeostasis , coupled with rapid recog - nition of pathogens , suggests that the contents of the intestinal lumen are constantly sampled . The physical constraints that the epithelial - cell barrier imparts on sampling the luminal space are overcome by special - ized lymphoid structures , including the Peyer’s patches in the small intestine , and isolated lymphoid follicles that are embedded in the lamina propria throughout the length of the intestinal tract ( FIG . 1 ) . These induc - tive sites of the GALT contribute to maintaining the balance of immunity and tolerance at the mucosal surface . The follicle - associated epithelium that overlies Peyer’s patches and lymphoid follicles contains special - ized m ( microfold ) cells that can sample antigens and microorganisms and deliver them by transcytosis to the subepithelial dome , an area that is populated by profes - sional antigen - presenting cells , including a number of DC subsets 7 , 10 , 19 , 20 . In addition to these structures , specialized intestinal DCs located in the lamina propria of the small intestine express tight - junction proteins and can extend their dendrites between epithelial - cell tight junctions to directly sample the luminal microenvironment ( FIG . 1 ) . Rescigno et al . showed that myeloid DCs in the intes - tine can extend their dendrites into the intestinal lumen and directly acquire luminal bacteria 21 , a process that is dependent on CX 3 C - chemokine receptor 1 ( CX 3 CR1 ) 22 , 23 and is influenced by the composition of the commensal bacteria 24 . Accordingly Cx3cr1 – / – mice exhibit defective luminal sampling by DCs and impaired resistance to Salmonella typhimurium infection , implicating a cru - cial role for luminal sampling in the development of protective immune responses in the gut 22 . DCs are known to efficiently acquire antigens from the intestinal lumen 25 – 29 and express a wide range of pattern - recognition receptors ( PRRs ) , including Toll - like receptors ( TLRs ) that recognize microbial compo - nents 30 , 31 . IECs also express TLRs as well as intracellular nucleotide - binding oligomerization domain ( noD ) - like receptors ( nLRs ) 32 , 33 . In general , ligation of TLRs and nLRs results in the activation of innate immune responses , inducing the expression of pro - inflammatory cytokines , chemokines and antimicrobial peptides 30 , 31 , 34 . The expression of PRRs by IECs coupled with their proximity to commensal and pathogenic bacteria suggest that IECs , beyond their function as a physical barrier , could influence the initiation and regulation of antimicrobial immune responses . The collective capac - ity of IECs and specialized DC subsets to directly sample the luminal space and recognize bacteria through PRRs provokes the fundamental question as to why these cells do not elicit innate and adaptive immune responses to commensal bacteria . Figure 1 | The intestinal epithelial - cell barrier . Simple columnar epithelial cells exhibit physical and biochemical adaptations to maintain barrier integrity including actin - rich microvillar extensions ( a ) , epithelial - cell tight junctions ( b ) , apically attached and secreted mucins that form a glycocalyx ( c ) and the production of various antimicrobial peptides ( d ) . Specialized intestinal epithelial cells known as M ( microfold ) cells overlie Peyer’s patches and lymphoid follicles to facilitate luminal sampling . M cells exhibit reduced mucin secretion and have modified apical and basolateral surfaces ( e ) to promote uptake and transport of luminal contents to professional antigen - presenting cells that inhabit the subepithelial dome ( SED ) of the Peyer’s patches and lymphoid follicles ( f ) . Specialized dendritic cell ( DC ) subsets can also extend dendrites between the tight junctions of intestinal epithelial cells to sample luminal contents ( g ) . R E V i E W s 412 | junE 2008 | voLumE 8 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol R E V i E W s © 200 8 Nature Publishing Group Goblet cell A differentiated epithelial cell that secretes mucus . Lamina propria Connective tissue that is found directly under the mucosal epithelial - cell surface of the gastrointestinal tract . It is traversed by blood and lymphoid vessels , physically supports epithelial cells through the basal membrane and is enriched in innate and adaptive immune cells . Peyer’s patches Groups of lymphoid nodules identified by Peyer in 1677 that are present in the small intestine ( usually the ileum ) . They occur massed together on the intestinal wall , opposite the line of attachment of the mesentery . Peyer’s patches consist of a subepithelial dome area , B - cell follicles and interfollicular T - cell areas . Pattern - recognition receptor ( PRR ) . A receptor that recognizes unique structures that are present at the surface of microorganisms . Signalling through PRRs leads to the production of pro - inflammatory cytokines and chemokines and to the expression of co - stimulatory molecules by antigen - presenting cells . The expression of co - stimulatory molecules , together with the presentation of antigenic peptides , by antigen - presenting cells couples innate immune recognition of pathogens with the activation of adaptive immune responses . Angiogenesis The development of new blood vessels from existing blood vessels . Commensal bacteria Acquisition and composition of commensal communities . All metazoan organisms have evolved a strategic alli - ance with commensal microorganisms . An estimated 10 14 microorganisms composed of members of all three domains of life — the eukarya , archaea and bacteria — inhabit the intestinal lumen . Commensal bacteria are acquired shortly after birth and are reported to reach a density of 10 12 per ml of luminal contents in the adult human large intestine 35 ( BOX 1 ) . Therefore , the numbers of commensal bacteria are 10 times greater than the combined number of somatic and stem cells in the human body 36 – 38 . In addition , the collective genetic material of commensal communities , termed the micro - biome and which encompasses at least 500 – 1000 species , is thought to encode as much as 100 times the number of genes in the human genome 1 , 39 , 40 . The relationship between mammalian hosts and commensal bacteria is the product of millions of years of co - evolution and is a fundamentally symbiotic one . The mammalian intestine provides a hospitable micro - environment for bacteria , stable in temperature and rich in nutrients , and bacteria - derived signals are essential for normal intestinal physiology . For example , acquisition of commensal bacteria promotes angiogenesis , development of the intestinal epithelium and protection against tis - sue injury 36 , 41 . Commensal bacteria also facilitate diges - tion , absorption and storage of nutrients , such as plant material , that would otherwise be inaccessible to their mammalian hosts 1 , 41 – 46 . In addition , colonization of the intestine by beneficial bacterial communities , through occupation of this environmental niche , competition for nutrients and secretion of antimicrobial peptides , prob - ably provides a degree of protection for the host against rapid colonization by pathogenic microorganisms 38 , 47 , 48 . Development and function of the immune system . The beneficial properties endowed by commensal bacteria on host physiology underlie the requirement for immune hyporesponsiveness to these microbial communities . Paradoxically , some degree of innate immune recognition of commensal bacteria is essential for normal develop - ment and function of the mucosal and peripheral immune system 6 . For example , mice reared under gnotobiotic or germ - free conditions exhibit numerous immunological defects . In the intestinal microenvironment of germ - free mice , the Peyer’s patches are poorly formed and the com - position of CD4 + T cells and IgA - producing B cells in the lamina propria is altered compared with conventionally housed animals 6 , 49 – 52 . In addition , unconventional popula - tions of T cells , including those that express the canonical v α 7 . 2 – j α 33 or v α 19 – j α 33 T - cell receptor ( TCR ) rear - rangement are preferentially located in the gut lamina propria of humans and mice , respectively , and are absent in germ - free mice , suggesting that acquisition of com - mensal bacteria promotes the differentiation , recruitment and / or selective maintenance of these mucosa - associated invariant T cells 53 . In the periphery , the development of the defined follicular T - and B - cell areas of the spleen and peripheral lymph nodes is also impaired in germ - free mice ( reviewed in REF . 52 ) . The introduction of a single bacterial product isolated from Bacteroides fragilis — one of the dominant commensal bacterial species in mice — corrected the defects in the peripheral lymphoid compartment of germ - free mice 54 , which demonstrates that signals from commensal bacteria have an essential role in the development of the peripheral and mucosal immune system . These observations indicate that molecu - lar mechanisms must exist to facilitate the recognition of commensal bacteria and allow for a basal level of immune activation in order to programme gene - expression pat - terns that are required for the normal development and function of immune cells . Commensal bacteria and disease . In addition to regu - lating the development of the intestinal and systemic immune system , recent studies suggest that altera - tions in the acquisition or composition of commensal bacteria may trigger or influence the course of various metabolic and inflammatory disease states . For example , Box 1 | Acquisition and composition of commensal communities Immediately after birth , mammals begin to acquire commensal microorganisms from their surroundings . The intestine is transformed from a sterile environment to a diverse microbial ecosystem that is densely populated by members of all three domains of life — eukarya , archaea and bacteria . Commensal bacteria are the dominant and best - studied type of microorganism present . The density of bacteria is relatively low in the stomach and proximal small intestine ( approximately 10 3 – 10 5 organisms per ml of luminal contents ) but rises to approximately 10 9 – 10 12 per ml of luminal contents in the distal small intestine and colon . The greatest diversity of bacteria is in the colon , where anaerobic species , including Bacteroides spp . , Eubacterium spp . , Bifidobacterium spp . , Fusobacterium spp . and Peptostreptococcus spp . predominate , whereas aerobic bacterial species including Escherichia coli , Lactobacillus spp . and Enterobacter spp . are less abundant 1 , 40 , 155 , 156 . Analysis of the temporal and spatial kinetics of the acquisition of commensal bacteria , the factors that regulate this , and the degree of variation within and between individuals is only beginning to be understood . For example , longitudinal analysis of the diversity of commensal bacteria in newborns suggests that there is no deterministic or stereotyped pattern of acquisition . Instead , commensal bacteria appear to be acquired as a result of opportunistic colonization by particular species as a result of random environmental encounters 156 . Therefore , although there appears to be a remarkable degree of inter - individual variation , the composition of the microbiota within adults appears to be relatively stable over time 40 , 155 , 156 . Environmental and genetic factors have a major influence of the composition of commensal bacterial communities , whereas the influence of factors including mode of infant delivery and neonatal diet remain controversial 157 – 162 . The consequences of alterations in the acquisition and / or composition of commensal bacterial communities on mammalian development , normal physiology and susceptibility to disease are an active area of investigation . R E V i E W s nATuRE REvIEws | immunology voLumE 8 | junE 2008 | 413 f o c u s o n m u c o s a l i m m u n o lo g y © 200 8 Nature Publishing Group Adipose tissue A type of connective tissue that is specialized for the storage of neutral lipids . Activation - induced cytidine deaminase ( AID ) . An RNA - editing enzyme that is necessary for somatic hypermutation and class - switch recombination . the relative proportion of commensals of the order Bacteroidales is reduced in obese individuals and in inbred mouse strains that are genetically predisposed to obesity 1 , 55 , 56 . The commensal bacteria isolated from obese mice were more effective at releasing calories from food , and these bacteria transmitted this trait to germ - free mice , resulting in greater deposition of adipose tissue . Alterations in the composition of intestinal commen - sal communities may also influence susceptibility to , or progression of , immune - mediated diseases . For example , chronic inflammation is linked to alterations in commen - sal bacteria in patient groups and murine models of airway inflammation , arthritis , IBD and necrotizing enterocoli - tis 43 , 57 – 64 . whether alterations in microbial communities that exist during these disease states are the cause or consequence of inflammation remains unclear . nevertheless , these correlations highlight the complexity of host – commensal interactions in both health and disease . The remarkable cross - regulation that operates between the intestinal commensals and the host immune system is highlighted by a recent study showing that the immune status of the host can influence the composition of commensal communities . Dysregulation of nuclear factor - κ B ( nF - κ B ) - dependent expression of antimicro - bial peptides in the intestinal epithelium of Drosophila melanogaster resulted in the outgrowth of one ‘patho - genic’ commensal community , which led to the death of the host 65 . The ability of host immune responses to influence the structure of commensal communities is conserved across species . For example , mice that are deficient in IgA or activation - induced cytidine deaminase ( AID ) , and that therefore lack hypermutated IgA , exhibit aberrant expansion of defined commensal species 66 , 67 . Garret et al . also identified an unexpected role for T - bet — a member of the T - box transcription factor family that regulates the development and function of cells of the immune system — in influencing the composition of commensal populations 64 . In mice lacking an adap - tive immune system , deletion of T - bet created a colonic microenvironment that appeared to promote the out - growth of ‘colitogenic’ bacteria and the development of severe intestinal inflammation that shared characteristics with ulcerative colitis in humans . Importantly , following transfer to immunosufficient hosts , this population of bacteria could drive intestinal inflammation 64 . Taken together , these studies suggest that the mamma - lian immune system exerts a significant environmental pressure on commensal bacteria . Immune pressure could act either directly on defined taxonomic groups of bacteria or indirectly by influencing the selection and maintenance of dominant commensal species through the creation of favourable microenvironments for spe - cific microbial communities . As a consequence , selective immune pressure can result in the outgrowth of poten - tially pathogenic commensal species with detrimental consequences for the host . Microbial recognition by IECs : a declared truce The fundamental influence of commensal bacteria on the development and function of the immune system , coupled with evidence that alterations in the acquisition or composition of the microbial community can influ - ence disease susceptibility , supports a model in which components of the mammalian innate immune system are constantly sampling the dynamic composition of commensal communities . As discussed above , host IECs and DCs express a comprehensive array of PRRs and are in direct contact with luminal bacteria 27 – 29 , 68 . However , delineating the molecular mechanisms that orchestrate the recognition of commensal bacteria while preventing the generation of innate and adaptive immune responses against them remains an area of intense research . A traditional explanation for the differential immune recognition of pathogenic versus commensal bacteria is that only pathogenic bacteria that have evolved mecha - nisms to invade the epithelial - cell barrier and survive within host tissues would be recognized by cells of the innate immune system located in the Peyer’s patches , lymphoid follicles or lamina propria . For example , pathogenic bacteria such as Listeria monocytogenes , S . typhimurium or Shigella spp . maintain genes organized within so - called ‘pathogenicity islands’ that encode viru - lence factors that allow pathogen adherence , invasion and subsequent subjugation of the host cell machinery thereby enabling efficient entry and dissemination in the host 69 – 73 . By contrast , commensal bacteria , which lack virulence or pathogenicity genes , would not survive in host cells or disseminate throughout tissues and there - fore fail to elicit innate and adaptive immune responses . However , it is clear that IECs  in addition to providing a physical and biochemical barrier to invading patho - gens  express a wide range of PRRs that can recognize bacterial factors , such as lipopolysaccharide ( LPs ) , lipo - proteins , flagellin and unmethylated CpG - containing DnA 30 , 31 , 34 ( FIG . 2 ) . Therefore , even in the absence of pathogenicity - island genes , IECs have the capacity to recognize and respond to commensal bacteria . Recent in vivo studies using IEC - specific deletion of genes or the generation of bone - marrow chimeric mice in which the non - haematopoietic - cell compartment , which includes epithelial cells , are specifically targeted , suggest a crucial role for IECs in innate immune rec - ognition of commensal bacteria and in the regulation of the intestinal immune system . For example , IECs deficient in sIGIRR ( single - immunoglobulin - domain - containing interleukin - 1 receptor ( IL - 1R ) - related protein ) , which is a negative regulator of TLR and IL - 1R signalling 74 , exhibited elevated expression of pro - inflammatory genes , and Sigirr – / – mice were more susceptible to commensal - dependent intestinal inflam - mation dependent on bacteria . moreover , IEC - specific expression of a Sigirr transgene in sIGIRR - deficient mice reduced susceptibility to intestinal inflammation 75 – 77 , indicating that the intrinsic expression of sIGIRR by IECs regulates the communication between commensal bacteria and the mammalian immune system . In addition , deletion of TLR4 , noD1 or myeloid differentiation primary - response gene 88 ( myD88 ) in non - haematopoietic cells resulted in impaired immu - nity to bacterial infections , implicating IEC - mediated recognition of bacteria as a key component in the devel - opment of protective immunity in the gastrointestinal R E V i E W s 414 | junE 2008 | voLumE 8 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol R E V i E W s © 200 8 Nature Publishing Group Nature Reviews | Immunology p65 p50 p65 Pro - inflammatory cytokines and chemokines Nucleus TLR5 TLR5 TLR3 TLR7 , TLR8 , TLR9 IKK γ IKK α IKK β NALPs Endosome Intestinal epithelial cell RIP2 TRIF MyD88 I κ B NOD1 , NOD2 p50 Commensal and pathogenic microorganisms NF - κ B Polymorphisms Single - nucleotide differences in the sequence of genes that represent allelic variants . These differences might lead to altered structure and / or altered expression of gene products , ultimately leading to pathology . microenvironment 78 – 80 . IEC - specific deletion of compo - nents of the IKK ( inhibitor of nF - κ B ( I κ B ) kinase ) com - plex , an upstream kinase required for nF - κ B activation 81 , also resulted in enhanced expression of pro - inflammatory cytokines and susceptibility to intestinal inflammation in multiple disease models 82 – 86 , suggesting that recognition of commensal bacteria influences gene expression in IECs and susceptibility to intestinal inflammation . supporting these findings in mice , polymorphisms in the human NOD2 gene are associated with reduced expression of anti - microbial peptides and severe intestinal inflammation in patients with Crohn’s disease 87 – 90 . Distribution of PRRs on IECs . several mechanisms have been proposed to explain IEC - mediated discrimination between commensal and pathogenic bacteria , includ - ing the selective distribution of TLRs and nLRs , and the active modulation of IEC function by commensal bacteria . Regulated expression and location of TLRs and nLRs in IECs has been proposed to allow innate immune recognition of commensal bacteria and tonic signalling in IECs but restrain innate immune responses . For example , under steady - state conditions , IECs are reported to express little or no TLR2 , TLR4 and CD14 , minimizing the rec - ognition of bacterial LPs 91 – 93 . In addition , the subcellular localization of other TLRs and nLRs in IECs may facili - tate the discrimination of commensal versus pathogenic bacteria . For example , TLR5 , which recognizes bacterial flagellin , has been reported to be expressed exclusively on the basolateral surfaces of IECs 94 , and TLR3 , TLR7 , TLR8 and TLR9 are expressed in intracellular endosomal organelles 31 . In addition , nLRs are found in the cytoplasm of IECs , similar to their localization in other cell types ( FIG . 2 ) 18 , 33 . These intracellular PRRs would not encounter luminal commensal bacteria or those attached to the api - cal surface of IECs but would only recognize pathogenic bacteria that actively invade the epithelial - cell barrier . However , as outlined above , recognition of commensal bacteria probably by both IECs 41 , 82 – 86 and haematopoietic cells 95 , 96 does occur and is essential for normal intestinal homeostasis . In IECs , recognition of commensal bac - teria must occur without initiating a cascade of innate immune responses , which suggests that the regulated expression and basolateral distribution of PRRs cannot be the only mechanism that controls the discrimination of commensal and pathogenic bacteria . Commensal bacteria modulate IEC function . Commensal bacteria can actively modulate signalling in mammalian IECs , providing another mechanism through which they are recognized by IECs in the absence of innate immune responses . For example , although pathogenic bacteria induce TLR - and nLR - mediated nF - κ B activation , in vitro studies have demonstrated that commensal bacteria such as Lactobacillus spp . , Bacteroides spp . and Escherichia coli ( as well as attenuated strains of bacteria that are normally pathogenic , such as Salmonella spp . ) can actively inhibit this pathway . In resting cells , nF - κ B is sequestered in the cytoplasm by I κ B , which masks the nuclear localization sequences of nF - κ B . Following receptor stimulation , clas - sical nF - κ B activation results from the phosphorylation of I κ B , which targets it for ubiquitylation and subsequent proteasomal degradation 97 . Commensal bacteria can inhibit the degradation of I κ B following phosphorylation by disrupting the host - cell machinery that controls the processes of ubiquitylation and degradation 98 – 100 ( FIG . 3 ) . In addition , members of the genus Bacteroides can also inhibit the nF - κ B pathway by hijacking the per - oxisome - proliferation - activated receptor - γ ( PPAR γ ) pathway . PPAR γ is a member of the nuclear hormone receptor family that can inhibit the transcriptional activ - ity of nF - κ B by associating with RelA , a transcription - ally active subunit of nF - κ B , and promoting the export of the complex from the host nucleus to the cytoplasm . Figure 2 | microbial recognition by intestinal epithelial cells . Pattern - recognition receptors , including Toll - like receptors ( TLRs ) and nucleotide - binding oligomerization domain ( NOD ) - like receptors ( NLRs ) , are expressed by most intestinal epithelial cells . TLRs recognize conserved microbial - associated molecular motifs including bacterial - derived lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) , lipoproteins , flagellin and unmethylated CpG - containing DNA . TLR ligation results in the recruitment of adaptor proteins such as MyD88 ( myeloid differentiation primary - response gene 88 ) , and TRIF ( TIR - domain - containing adaptor protein inducing interferon - β ) and subsequent activation of several signalling modules including the nuclear factor - κ B ( NF - κ B ) and mitogen - activated protein ( MAP ) kinase pathways . NLRs , including NOD1 and NOD2 , recognize bacterial - derived peptidoglycan , a main component of the bacterial cell wall , and activate NF - κ B and MAP kinases through the recruitment of receptor - interacting protein 2 ( RIP2 ) . Activation of PRRs promotes a cascade of signalling events that result in expression of pro - inflammatory cytokines and chemokines . Basolateral and intracellular localization of most PRRs in or on intestinal epithelial cells is proposed as one mechanism to limit the recognition of commensal bacteria and initiation of innate immune responses . I κ B , inhibitor of NF - κ B ; IKK , I κ B kinase ; NALPs , NACHT - , LRR - and pyrin - domain - containing proteins . R E V i E W s nATuRE REvIEws | immunology voLumE 8 | junE 2008 | 415 f o c u s o n m u c o s a l i m m u n o lo g y © 200 8 Nature Publishing Group p65 p50 p65 Pro - inflammatory cytokines and chemokines Nucleus TLR5 TLR5 TLR3 TLR7 , TLR8 , TLR9 IKK γ IKK α IKK β NALPs Endosome Intestinal epithelial cell RIP2 TRIF MyD88 I κ B NOD1 , NOD2 p50 PPAR γ Nature Reviews | Immunology Commensal and pathogenic microorganisms NF - κ B Yersinia spp . Bacteroidesthetaiotaomicron Salmonella spp . Ubiquitylation The attachment of the small protein ubiquitin to lysine residues that are present in other proteins . This tags these proteins for rapid cellular degradation the proteasome . Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron induces PPAR γ expression and promotes PPAR γ - dependent cytoplasmic shuttling of nF - κ B 101 ( FIG . 3 ) . It is important to note that most of these analyses were carried out using in vitro systems and future in vivo studies will be required to determine the functional significance of commensal - dependent regulation of IEC - intrinsic innate signalling pathways in the maintenance of homeostasis . As mentioned above , commensal bacteria contribute to mammalian metabolism by digesting complex poly - saccharides that would otherwise be inaccessible to mam - mals . In addition to contributing to nutrient extraction , commensal - derived metabolites can also impair innate immune responses and so aid in the maintenance of the commensal – host relationship . For example , digestion of starch by commensal bacteria creates short - chain fatty acids such as butyrate that can inhibit the expression of pro - inflammatory cytokines that are induced by com - mensal bacteria and augment the production of regula - tory cytokines , such as IL - 10 ( REF . 102 ) . Collectively , these studies identify multiple adapta - tions that have evolved in both host IECs and commensal bacteria to facilitate the recognition of bacteria and basal activation of IECs while simultaneously limiting innate immune responses . This homeostatic balance in the epithelial - cell response is essential to preserve the symbi - otic relationship between mammals and their commensal communities . Indeed , it is tempting to speculate that the dominant evolutionary pressure to evolve and retain PRRs in the mammalian genome was their role in the establish - ment of mutualism between mammals and their com - mensals , whereas the capacity of PRRs to promote innate immunity to pathogens is a secondary function that is only required in the presence of bacterial - derived virulence fac - tors that promote systemic dissemination of pathogens . Epithelial - cell regulation of immune - cell function The consequences of altering the composition of the com - mensal bacterial communities or disrupting coordinate recognition and signalling in IECs for the development of intestinal inflammation provide a clear demonstration of the role that IECs have in the recognition of com - mensal bacteria and in the maintenance of intestinal immune homeostasis . In particular , disruption of IEC - intrinsic pathways required for innate recognition of commensals results in dysregulated innate and adaptive immune responses in mouse models of oral tolerance , IBD and immunity to infection 84 – 86 , 103 . However , subsets of DCs are capable of directly sampling the luminal micro - environment and there is evidence that in the steady state or during intestinal inflammation , bacteria - laden DCs can migrate to the mesenteric lymph nodes that drain the intestine 22 , 104 . But , why do these DC populations not recognize commensal bacteria as foreign and initiate a cascade of signalling events , resulting in the production of pro - inflammatory cytokines and adaptive immune responses ? It is now clear that IECs , in addition to pro - viding a physical barrier and first line of innate defence against pathogenic and commensal bacteria , can influence the function of antigen - presenting cells and lymphocytes in the intestinal microenvironment . Epithelial regulation of DC and macrophage function . several DC populations have been reported in mouse Peyer’s patches and mesenteric lymph nodes 10 , 20 , 27 , 105 – 109 . In addition , a subset of myeloid DCs that are distinguished by their expression of CX 3 CR1 are resident in the lamina propria of the jejunum and proximal ileum of the small intestine and have the capacity to extend their dendrites between the tight junctions of IECs to take up luminal bacteria 24 , 25 , 110 – 112 . In vitro studies have implicated IECs , through their secretion of cytokines , in the tissue - specific conditioning of DCs by limiting the pro - inflammatory cytokine production by these cells and maintaining intes - tinal immune homeostasis . supporting these findings , Figure 3 | Commensal bacteria regulate intestinal epithelial - cell gene expression . In resting cells , nuclear factor - κ B ( NF - κ B ) is sequestered in the cytoplasm by inhibitor of NF - κ B ( I κ B ) , which masks nuclear localization sequences . Following stimulation through Toll - like receptors ( TLRs ) or nucleotide - binding oligomerization domain ( NOD ) - like receptors ( NLRs ) , classical NF - κ B activation is the result of I κ B kinase ( IKK ) - mediated phosphorylation of I κ B , which targets the inhibitor for ubiquitylation and subsequent proteasomal degradation . Commensal and attenuated pathogenic bacteria have been shown to inhibit innate signalling pathways in intestinal epithelial cells . For example , Yersinia spp . inhibit the NF - κ B pathway at the levels of I κ B phosphorylation , whereas attenuated Salmonella spp . block the polyubiquitylation and degradation of I κ B that is required for efficient nuclear translocation of NF - κ B . By contrast , Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron can also inhibit the NF - κ B pathway by hijacking the peroxisome - proliferation - activated receptor - γ ( PPAR γ ) pathway . MyD88 , myeloid differentiation primary - response gene 88 ; NALP , NACHT - , LRR - and pyrin - domain - containing protein ; RIP2 , receptor - interacting protein 2 ; TRIF , TIR - domain - containing adaptor protein inducing interferon - β . R E V i E W s 416 | junE 2008 | voLumE 8 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol R E V i E W s © 200 8 Nature Publishing Group Nature Reviews | Immunology B - cell follicle Epithelial cell Commensal bacteria Perifolliculararea SED M cell InterfollicularT - cell area TLR5 DC Macrophage cell Immature DC RegulatoryT cell BAFFAPRILSLPI TSLPTGF β IL - 10 PGE 2 Metabolites Limited expression of pro - inflammatory cytokines T R 1 cell T H 2 cell T H 3 cell Peyer’s patch Lamina propria in vivo deletion of nF - κ B signalling specifically in IECs resulted in the dysregulated expression of DC - derived pro - inflammatory cytokines and the development of spontaneous and infection - induced intestinal inflamma - tion 85 , 86 , providing the first in vivo evidence of a crucial role for IECs in the conditioning of intestinal DC responses . How do IECs regulate DC function ? one mechanism is through the secretion of immunoregulatory molecules including thymic stromal lymphopoietin ( TsLP ) , trans - forming growth factor - β ( TGF β ) and prostaglandin E 2 ( FIG . 4 ) . TsLP is expressed by the epithelium of the Hassall’s corpuscles of the thymus , where it activates myeloid DCs in the thymic medulla and these are in turn proposed to promote the positive selection of regulatory T cells 113 . subsequent analysis revealed that epithelial cells expressed high levels of Tslp mRnA at most mucosal surfaces includ - ing the skin , airways and intestine . Tslp mRnA is con - stitutively expressed by IECs , although its expression by mucosal epithelial cells can be upregulated in response to a range of stimuli , including infection , inflammation and tissue injury 85 , 111 , 114 – 117 , in an nF - κ B - dependent manner 118 . A role for IEC - derived TsLP in extrathymic regulatory T - cell development was supported by the identification of mucosal - derived plasmacytoid DCs that can promote the differentiation of T cells with regulatory capacity 119 . Another subset of intestinal DCs has recently been shown to preferentially promote regulatory T - cell develop - ment . CD103 + DCs isolated from the GALT were shown to express retinal dehydrogenase , an enzyme respon - sible for the metabolism of vitamin A . The vitamin A metabolite retinoic acid has been shown to be crucial for promoting the peripheral conversion of regulatory T cells by these DCs 120 , 121 . whether IEC - derived factors such as TsLP influence vitamin A metabolism in DCs is unclear at present . However , a more prominent func - tion for TsLP – TsLPR ( TsLP receptor ) interactions at mucosal sites appears to be in influencing the expression of pro - inflammatory cytokines and subsequent T helper ( T H ) - cell differentiation . In in vitro studies , Rescigno and colleagues demonstrated that IEC - derived TsLP could limit the expression of IL - 12 by DCs and limit their capacity to promote T H 1 - cell differentiation . moreover , IEC - mediated - conditioning promoted IL - 10 production by activated DCs and enhanced their capacity to promote regulatory and T H 2 - type cytokine responses 111 , 122 . Deletion of TsLPR in mice resulted in constitutive overexpres - sion of IL - 12p40 by intestinal DCs and in the inability of the host to generate protective T H 2 - type cytokine responses following exposure to the nematode parasite Trichuris muris 85 . Consistent with these in vivo findings , overexpression of TsLP by keratinocytes of the skin or by airway epithelial cells results in T H 2 - type cytokine - mediated pathologies at multiple mucosal surfaces 123 – 128 . IECs and stromal cells also produce abundant amounts of TGF β in the intestine 129 , 130 , another potent immunoregulatory cytokine that can inhibit nF - κ B - dependent gene expression 131 and limit the expression of pro - inflammatory cytokines by macrophages 132 and DCs 133 ( FIG . 4 ) . In addition to the expression of immuno - regulatory cytokines , IECs express a range of metabolic enzymes and intermediates , including indoleamine 2 , 3 - dioxygenase ( IDo ) and cyclooxygenase - 2 and its arachidonic - acid metabolite prostaglandin E 2 , which can regulate multiple innate and adaptive immune - cell functions 134 , 135 . metabolic by - products derived from com - mensal bacteria can also influence the expression of heat - shock proteins in IECs 136 that can have broad effects on IEC survival and on the expression of pro - inflammatory cytokines 137 – 140 . Although the possibility that IECs can directly regulate the functions of other innate cells such as granulocytes or natural killer ( nK ) cells remains to be examined , IEC - derived factors such as TsLP can also influence mast - cell activation 114 , demonstrating that the ability of IECs to govern the function of innate immune cells is not limited to macrophages and DCs . Epithelial - cell regulation of intestinal lymphocyte func - tion . The majority of lymphocytes in the GALT exhibit hallmarks of recent activation yet remain hyporesponsive to commensal bacteria , suggesting the immunoregulatory effects of IECs and other tissue - specific signals act on effector cells . In addition to effects on macrophages Figure 4 | intestinal epithelial cells regulate immune - cell function . Basal recognition of commensal bacteria by intestinal epithelial cells ( IECs ) may influence the secretion of cytokines , including thymic stromal lymphopoietin ( TSLP ) , transforming growth factor - β ( TGF β ) and interleukin - 10 ( IL - 10 ) , that can directly influence the expression of pro - inflammatory cytokines by dendritic cell ( DC ) and macrophage populations that resident in the lamina propria and Peyer’s patches . Signals derived from commensal bacteria may influence tissue - specific ‘licensing’ of accessory - cell functions resulting in the expansion and / or survival of T cells with regulatory capacities , including regulatory T cells , T regulatory type 1 ( T R 1 ) cells , T helper 2 ( T H 2 ) cells and T H 3 cells . In addition to TSLP , TGF β and IL - 10 , other IEC - derived factors , including APRIL ( a proliferation - inducing ligand ) , B - cell - activating factor ( BAFF ) , secretory leukocyte peptidase inhibitor ( SLPI ) , prostaglandin E 2 ( PGE 2 ) and other metabolites have the capacity to directly regulate the functions of both antigen - presenting cells and lymphocytes in the intestinal microenvironment . TLR5 , Toll - like receptor 5 ; SED , subepithelial dome . R E V i E W s nATuRE REvIEws | immunology voLumE 8 | junE 2008 | 417 f o c u s o n m u c o s a l i m m u n o lo g y © 200 8 Nature Publishing Group and DCs , there is increasing evidence that IEC - derived signals can positively and negatively regulate T - and B - cell functions in the intestine . Deletion of IKK β exclusively in IECs resulted in dysregulated infection - induced T - and B - cell responses in the GALT 85 , although whether these effects were direct or indirect is unclear at present . A role for activated IECs in directly regulating B - cell responses was shown through their secretion of B - cell - activating factor ( BAFF ) and a proliferation - inducing ligand ( APRIL ) 141 , 142 that favoured T - cell - independent IgA responses 143 , 144 ( FIG . 4 ) . Production of TsLP and IL - 10 by IECs can also promote B - cell responses 141 , 142 , 145 , a compre - hensive discussion of which is covered in this issue 146 . In addition , IECs are in direct contact with intraepithe - lial lymphocytes and express all the molecular machinery required for antigen processing and presentation , includ - ing proteolytically active cathepsins , the invariant chain and mHC class II molecules 147 . In vitro studies showed that rodent IECs , although less potent than professional antigen - presenting cells , can process and present antigen through the mHC class II pathway 148 – 152 . supporting a role in promoting T - cell responses , IECs isolated from patients with IBD express mHC class II molecules and can localize exogenous antigens to the late endosome on their basolateral surfaces 153 . However , the lack of co - stimulatory molecule expression by IECs 154 suggests IECs cannot prime naive T cells . memory T cells exhibit less stringent requirements for co - stimulation , and there - fore the influence of IEC - intrinsic antigen processing and presentation on the maintenance and / or functions of memory T cells may be more significant , although this hypothesis has yet to be investigated . Alternatively , antigen presentation by IECs in the absence of co - stimu - lation may promote local and systemic T - cell tolerance . Delivery of inhibitory or tolerogenic signals directly to T cells is consistent with the negatively regulatory influ - ence of IECs on B - cell responses . For example , following activation IECs secrete the antimicrobial peptide secretory leukocyte peptidase inhibitor ( sLPI ) that inhibits nF - κ B activation and can limit BAFF - induced immunoglobulin class switching in B cells 141 . Taken together , these studies highlight that IEC - medi - ated recognition of commensals results in remarkable changes in IEC - intrinsic gene expression associated with metabolic and immunological functions . Furthermore , IEC - derived regulatory signals control innate and adap - tive immune - cell function in the intestinal microenvi - ronment . Deciphering how commensal bacteria are recognized by IECs and whether IECs exhibit unique mechanisms to translate signals derived from commensal bacteria to regulate the functions of antigen - presenting cells and lymphocytes offers exciting future challenges and therapeutic prospects . Future perspectives Although still in it infancy , the experimental studies outlined in this Review , coupled with correlations in patient groups , collectively highlight the complexity of the relationship between commensal bacteria and the mammalian immune system . The emerging rec - ognition of the relationship between commensal com - munities , the host immune system and susceptibility to inflammatory diseases emphasizes the need for a better understanding of the pathways that initiate and maintain host – bacterial symbiosis . The identification of a cardinal role of IECs as central mediators in these interactions will focus future efforts on delineating the molecular and cellular mechanisms through which IECs recognize commensals and how they coordinate intestinal immune homeostasis in health and disease . 1 . Ley , R . E . , Peterson , D . A . & Gordon , J . I . Ecological and evolutionary forces shaping microbial diversity in the human intestine . Cell 124 , 837 – 848 ( 2006 ) . 2 . Gill , S . R . , et al . Metagenomic analysis of the human distal gut microbiome . Science 312 , 1355 – 1359 ( 2006 ) . 3 . Bouma , G . & Strober , W . The immunological and genetic basis of inflammatory bowel disease . Nature Rev . Immunol . 3 , 521 – 533 ( 2003 ) . 4 . Macdonald , T . T . & Monteleone , G . Immunity , inflammation , and allergy in the gut . Science 307 , 1920 – 1955 ( 2005 ) . 5 . Karin , M . , Lawrence , T . & Nizet , V . Innate immunity gone awry : linking microbial infections to chronic inflammation and cancer . Cell 124 , 823 – 835 ( 2006 ) . 6 . Macpherson , A . J . & Harris , N . L . Interactions between commensal intestinal bacteria and the immune system . Nature Rev . Immunol . 4 , 478 – 485 ( 2004 ) . 7 . Mowat , A . M . Anatomical basis of tolerance and immunity to intestinal antigens . Nature Rev . Immunol . 3 , 331 – 341 ( 2003 ) . 8 . Izcue , A . , Coombes , J . L . & Powrie , F . Regulatory T cells suppress systemic and mucosal immune activation to control intestinal inflammation . Immunol . Rev . 212 , 256 – 271 ( 2006 ) . 9 . Coombes , J . L . & Maloy , K . J . Control of intestinal homeostasis by regulatory T cells and dendritic cells . Semin . Immunol . 19 , 116 – 126 ( 2007 ) . 10 . Coombes , J . L . & Powrie , F . Dendritic cells in intestinal immune regulation . Nature Rev . Immunol . 8 , 435 – 446 ( 2008 ) . 11 . Shen , L . & Turner , J . R . Role of epithelial cells in initiation and propagation of intestinal inflammation . Eliminating the static : tight junction dynamics exposed . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 290 , G577 – G582 ( 2006 ) . 12 . Frey , A . , et al . Role of the glycocalyx in regulating access of microparticles to apical plasma membranes of intestinal epithelial cells : implications for microbial attachment and oral vaccine targeting . J . Exp . Med . 184 , 1045 – 1059 ( 1996 ) . 13 . McAuley , J . L . , et al . MUC1 cell surface mucin is a critical element of the mucosal barrier to infection . J . Clin . Invest . 117 , 2313 – 2324 ( 2007 ) . 14 . Sansonetti , P . J . War and peace at mucosal surfaces . Nature Rev . Immunol . 4 , 953 – 964 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Salzman , N . H . , Ghosh , D . , Huttner , K . , Paterson , Y . & Bevins , C . L . Protection against enteric salmonellosis in transgenic mice expressing a human intestinal defensin . Nature 422 , 522 – 526 ( 2003 ) . This paper demonstrates a critical in vivo role of paneth - cell - derived defensins in intestinal host defence . 16 . Ganz , T . Defensins : antimicrobial peptides of innate immunity . Nature Rev . Immunol . 3 , 710 – 720 ( 2003 ) . 17 . Agerberth , B . & Gudmundsson , G . H . Host antimicrobial defence peptides in human disease . Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 306 , 67 – 90 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Uehara , A . , Fujimoto , Y . , Fukase , K . & Takada , H . Various human epithelial cells express functional Toll - like receptors , NOD1 and NOD2 to produce anti - microbial peptides , but not proinflammatory cytokines . Mol . Immunol . 44 , 3100 – 3111 ( 2007 ) . 19 . Neutra , M . R . M cells in antigen sampling in mucosal tissues . Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 236 , 17 – 32 ( 1999 ) . 20 . Iwasaki , A . Mucosal dendritic cells . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 25 , 381 – 418 ( 2007 ) . 21 . Rescigno , M . , et al . Dendritic cells express tight junction proteins and penetrate gut epithelial monolayers to sample bacteria . Nature Immunol . 2 , 361 – 367 ( 2001 ) . 22 . Niess , J . H . , et al . CX 3 CR1 - mediated dendritic cell access to the intestinal lumen and bacterial clearance . Science 307 , 254 – 258 ( 2005 ) . Reference 22 shows that a subset of lamina propria DCs express the chemokine receptor CX 3 CR1 allowing formation of transepithelial dendrites that enable the cells to directly sample luminal antigens . 23 . Niess , J . H . & Reinecker , H . C . Lamina propria dendritic cells in the physiology and pathology of the gastrointestinal tract . Curr . Opin . Gastroenterol . 21 , 687 – 691 ( 2005 ) . 24 . Chieppa , M . , Rescigno , M . , Huang , A . Y . & Germain , R . N . Dynamic imaging of dendritic cell extension into the small bowel lumen in response to epithelial cell TLR engagement . J . Exp . Med . 203 , 2841 – 2852 ( 2006 ) . 25 . Chirdo , F . G . , Millington , O . R . , Beacock - Sharp , H . & Mowat , A . M . Immunomodulatory dendritic cells in intestinal lamina propria . Eur . J . Immunol . 35 , 1831 – 1840 ( 2005 ) . 26 . Blanas , E . , Davey , G . M . , Carbone , F . R . & Heath , W . R . A bone marrow - derived APC in the gut - associated lymphoid tissue captures oral antigens and presents them to both CD4 + and CD8 + T cells . J . Immunol . 164 , 2890 – 2896 ( 2000 ) . 27 . MacPherson , G . , et al . Uptake of antigens from the intestine by dendritic cells . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 1029 , 75 – 82 ( 2004 ) . 28 . Milling , S . W . , Cousins , L . & MacPherson , G . G . How do DCs interact with intestinal antigens ? Trends Immunol . 26 , 349 – 352 ( 2005 ) . 29 . Liu , L . M . & MacPherson , G . G . Antigen acquisition by dendritic cells : intestinal dendritic cells acquire antigen administered orally and can prime naive T cells in vivo . J . Exp . Med . 177 , 1299 – 307 ( 1993 ) . R E V i E W s 418 | junE 2008 | voLumE 8 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol R E V i E W s © 200 8 Nature Publishing Group 30 . Qureshi , S . T . & Medzhitov , R . Toll - like receptors and their role in experimental models of microbial infection . Genes Immun . 4 , 87 – 94 ( 2003 ) . 31 . Medzhitov , R . Recognition of microorganisms and activation of the immune response . Nature 449 , 819 – 826 ( 2007 ) . 32 . Girardin , S . E . , et al . Nod1 detects a unique muropeptide from Gram - negative bacterial peptidoglycan . Science 300 , 1584 – 1587 ( 2003 ) . 33 . Philpott , D . J . & Girardin , S . E . The role of Toll - like receptors and Nod proteins in bacterial infection . Mol . Immunol . 41 , 1099 – 1108 ( 2004 ) . 34 . Fritz , J . H . , Ferrero , R . L . , Philpott , D . J . & Girardin , S . E . Nod - like proteins in immunity , inflammation and disease . Nature Immunol . 7 , 1250 – 1257 ( 2006 ) . 35 . Savage , D . C . Microbial ecology of the gastrointestinal tract . Annu . Rev . Microbiol . 31 , 107 – 133 ( 1977 ) . 36 . Hooper , L . V . , et al . Molecular analysis of commensal host - microbial relationships in the intestine . Science 291 , 881 – 884 ( 2001 ) . 37 . Hooper , L . V . & Gordon , J . I . Commensal host - bacterial relationships in the gut . Science 292 , 1115 – 1118 ( 2001 ) . 38 . Backhed , F . , Ley , R . E . , Sonnenburg , J . L . , Peterson , D . A . & Gordon , J . I . Host - bacterial mutualism in the human intestine . Science 307 , 1915 – 1920 ( 2005 ) . 39 . Whitman , W . B . , Coleman , D . C . & Wiebe , W . J . Prokaryotes : the unseen majority . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6578 – 6583 ( 1998 ) . 40 . Eckburg , P . B . , et al . Diversity of the human intestinal microbial flora . Science 308 , 1635 – 1638 ( 2005 ) . 41 . Rakoff - Nahoum , S . , Paglino , J . , Eslami - Varzaneh , F . , Edberg , S . & Medzhitov , R . Recognition of commensal microflora by Toll - like receptors is required for intestinal homeostasis . Cell 118 , 229 – 241 ( 2004 ) . Medzhitov and colleagues demonstrate that commensal bacteria are recognized by TLRs under normal steady - state conditions . This interaction has a crucial role in the maintenance of epithelial - cell homeostasis and protection from injury in the intestine . 42 . Stappenbeck , T . S . , Hooper , L . V . & Gordon , J . I . Developmental regulation of intestinal angiogenesis by indigenous microbes via Paneth cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 15451 – 15455 ( 2002 ) . 43 . Guarner , F . & Malagelada , J . R . Gut flora in health and disease . Lancet 361 , 512 – 519 ( 2003 ) . 44 . Xu , J . & Gordon , J . I . Inaugural Article : Honor thy symbionts . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 10452 – 10459 ( 2003 ) . 45 . Backhed , F . , et al . The gut microbiota as an environmental factor that regulates fat storage . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 15718 – 15723 ( 2004 ) . 46 . MacDonald , T . T . & Gordon , J . N . Bacterial regulation of intestinal immune responses . Gastroenterol . Clin . North Am . 34 , 401 – 412 ( 2005 ) . 47 . Hooper , L . V . , Stappenbeck , T . S . , Hong , C . V . & Gordon , J . I . Angiogenins : a new class of microbicidal proteins involved in innate immunity . Nature Immunol . 4 , 269 – 273 ( 2003 ) . 48 . Sonnenburg , J . L . , Angenent , L . T . & Gordon , J . I . Getting a grip on things : how do communities of bacterial symbionts become established in our intestine ? Nature Immunol . 5 , 569 – 573 ( 2004 ) . 49 . Gordon , H . A . Morphological and physiological characterization of germfree life . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 78 , 208 – 220 ( 1959 ) . 50 . Umesaki , Y . , Setoyama , H . , Matsumoto , S . & Okada , Y . Expansion of αβ T - cell receptor - bearing intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes after microbial colonization in germ - free mice and its independence from thymus . Immunology 79 , 32 – 37 ( 1993 ) . 51 . Helgeland , L . , Vaage , J . T . , Rolstad , B . , Midtvedt , T . & Brandtzaeg , P . Microbial colonization influences composition and T - cell receptor V β repertoire of intraepithelial lymphocytes in rat intestine . Immunology 89 , 494 – 501 ( 1996 ) . 52 . Smith , K . , McCoy , K . D . & Macpherson , A . J . Use of axenic animals in studying the adaptation of mammals to their commensal intestinal microbiota . Semin . Immunol . 19 , 59 – 69 ( 2007 ) . 53 . Treiner , E . , et al . Selection of evolutionarily conserved mucosal - associated invariant T cells by MR1 . Nature 422 , 164 – 169 ( 2003 ) . 54 . Mazmanian , S . K . , Liu , C . H . , Tzianabos , A . O . & Kasper , D . L . An immunomodulatory molecule of symbiotic bacteria directs maturation of the host immune system . Cell 122 , 107 – 118 ( 2005 ) . This paper shows that during colonization of animals with the commensal B . fragilis , a bacterial polysaccharide is presented by DCs and directs the maturation of the developing immune system . 55 . Ley , R . E . , et al . Obesity alters gut microbial ecology . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 11070 – 11075 ( 2005 ) . Gordon and colleagues demonstrate that genetically obese mice exhibit significant alterations in the composition of their commensal flora and suggest that intentional manipulation of community structure may be useful for regulating metabolism in obese individuals . 56 . Ley , R . E . , Turnbaugh , P . J . , Klein , S . & Gordon , J . I . Microbial ecology : human gut microbes associated with obesity . Nature 444 , 1022 – 1023 ( 2006 ) . 57 . Kalliomaki , M . , et al . Distinct patterns of neonatal gut microflora in infants in whom atopy was and was not developing . J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 107 , 129 – 134 ( 2001 ) . 58 . Noverr , M . C . & Huffnagle , G . B . Does the microbiota regulate immune responses outside the gut ? Trends Microbiol . 12 , 562 – 568 ( 2004 ) . 59 . Tlaskalova - Hogenova , H . , et al . Commensal bacteria ( normal microflora ) , mucosal immunity and chronic inflammatory and autoimmune diseases . Immunol . Lett . 93 , 97 – 108 ( 2004 ) . 60 . de la Cochetiere , M . F . , et al . Early intestinal bacterial colonization and necrotizing enterocolitis in premature infants : the putative role of Clostridium . Pediatr . Res . 56 , 366 – 370 ( 2004 ) . 61 . Ott , S . J . , et al . Reduction in diversity of the colonic mucosa associated bacterial microflora in patients with active inflammatory bowel disease . Gut 53 , 685 – 693 ( 2004 ) . 62 . Noverr , M . C . & Huffnagle , G . B . The ‘microflora hypothesis’ of allergic diseases . Clin . Exp . Allergy 35 , 1511 – 1520 ( 2005 ) . 63 . De Hertogh , G . , et al . Validation of 16S rDNA sequencing in microdissected bowel biopsies from Crohn’s disease patients to assess bacterial flora diversity . J . Pathol . 209 , 532 – 539 ( 2006 ) . 64 . Garrett , W . S . , et al . Communicable ulcerative colitis induced by T - bet deficiency in the innate immune system . Cell 131 , 33 – 45 ( 2007 ) . 65 . Ryu , J . H . , et al . Innate immune homeostasis by the homeobox gene caudal and commensal - gut mutualism in Drosophila . Science 319 , 777 – 782 ( 2008 ) . 66 . Fagarasan , S . , et al . Critical roles of activation - induced cytidine deaminase in the homeostasis of gut flora . Science 298 , 1424 – 1427 ( 2002 ) . Honjo and collegues show that deficiency in AID results in a significant expansion of anaerobic flora in the small intestine , implicating a role for intestinal B - cell somatic hypermutation in regulating the commensal flora . 67 . Suzuki , K . , et al . Aberrant expansion of segmented filamentous bacteria in IgA - deficient gut . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 1981 – 1986 ( 2004 ) . 68 . Neal , M . D . , et al . Enterocyte TLR4 mediates phagocytosis and translocation of bacteria across the intestinal barrier . J . Immunol . 176 , 3070 – 3079 ( 2006 ) . 69 . Altier , C . Genetic and environmental control of Salmonella invasion . J . Microbiol . 43 , 85 – 92 ( 2005 ) . 70 . Guiney , D . G . The role of host cell death in Salmonella infections . Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 289 , 131 – 150 ( 2005 ) . 71 . Brown , N . F . , et al . Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 is expressed prior to penetrating the intestine . PLoS Pathog . 1 , e32 ( 2005 ) . 72 . Gal - Mor , O . & Finlay , B . B . Pathogenicity islands : a molecular toolbox for bacterial virulence . Cell . Microbiol . 8 , 1707 – 1719 ( 2006 ) . 73 . Bhavsar , A . P . , Guttman , J . A . & Finlay , B . B . Manipulation of host - cell pathways by bacterial pathogens . Nature 449 , 827 – 834 ( 2007 ) . 74 . Wald , D . , et al . SIGIRR , a negative regulator of Toll - like receptor - interleukin 1 receptor signaling . Nature Immunol . 4 , 920 – 927 ( 2003 ) . 75 . Garlanda , C . , et al . Intestinal inflammation in mice deficient in Tir8 , an inhibitory member of the IL - 1 receptor family . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 3522 – 3526 ( 2004 ) . 76 . Garlanda , C . , et al . Increased susceptibility to colitis - associated cancer of mice lacking TIR8 , an inhibitory member of the interleukin - 1 receptor family . Cancer Res . 67 , 6017 – 6021 ( 2007 ) . 77 . Xiao , H . , et al . The Toll - interleukin - 1 receptor member SIGIRR regulates colonic epithelial homeostasis , inflammation , and tumorigenesis . Immunity 26 , 461 – 475 ( 2007 ) . 78 . Schilling , J . D . , Martin , S . M . , Hung . , C . S . , Lorenz , R . G . & Hultgren , S . J . Toll - like receptor 4 on stromal and hematopoietic cells mediates innate resistance to uropathogenic Escherichia coli . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 4203 – 4208 ( 2003 ) . 79 . Brandl , K . , Plitas , G . , Schnabl , B . , DeMatteo , R . P . & Pamer , E . G . , MyD88 - mediated signals induce the bactericidal lectin RegIII γ and protect mice against intestinal Listeria monocytogenes infection . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 1891 – 1900 ( 2007 ) . 80 . Lebeis , S . L . , Bommarius , B . , Parkos , C . A . , Sherman , M . A . & Kalman , D . TLR signaling mediated by MyD88 is required for a protective innate immune response by neutrophils to Citrobacter rodentium . J . Immunol . 179 , 566 – 577 ( 2007 ) . 81 . Hacker , H . & Karin , M . Regulation and function of IKK and IKK - related kinases . Sci . STKE 2006 , re13 ( 2006 ) . 82 . Chen , L . W . , et al . The two faces of IKK and NF - κ B inhibition : prevention of systemic inflammation but increased local injury following intestinal ischemia - reperfusion . Nature Med . 9 , 575 – 581 ( 2003 ) . 83 . Egan , L . J . , et al . I κ B - kinase β - dependent NF - κ B activation provides radioprotection to the intestinal epithelium . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 2452 – 2457 ( 2004 ) . 84 . Greten , F . R . , et al . IKK β links inflammation and tumorigenesis in a mouse model of colitis - associated cancer . Cell 118 , 285 – 296 ( 2004 ) . 85 . Zaph , C . , et al . Epithelial - cell - intrinsic IKK - β expression regulates intestinal immune homeostasis . Nature 446 , 552 – 556 ( 2007 ) . 86 . Nenci , A . , et al . Epithelial NEMO links innate immunity to chronic intestinal inflammation . Nature 446 , 557 – 561 ( 2007 ) . References 85 and 86 demonstrate an essential role for intestinal epithelial - cell - intrinsic NF - κ B activity in regulating intestinal DC responses and susceptibility to spontaneous or infection - induced intestinal inflammation . 87 . Ogura , Y . , et al . A frameshift mutation in NOD2 associated with susceptibility to Crohn’s disease . Nature 411 , 603 – 606 ( 2001 ) . 88 . Hugot , J . P . , et al . Association of NOD2 leucine - rich repeat variants with susceptibility to Crohn’s disease . Nature 411 , 599 – 603 ( 2001 ) . 89 . Maeda , S . , et al . Nod2 mutation in Crohn’s disease potentiates NF - κ B activity and IL - 1 β processing . Science 307 , 734 – 738 ( 2005 ) . 90 . Abreu , M . T . , Fukata , M . & Arditi , M . TLR signaling in the gut in health and disease . J . Immunol . 174 , 4453 – 4460 ( 2005 ) . 91 . Abreu , M . T . , et al . Decreased expression of Toll - like receptor - 4 and MD - 2 correlates with intestinal epithelial cell protection against dysregulated proinflammatory gene expression in response to bacterial lipopolysaccharide . J . Immunol . 167 , 1609 – 1166 ( 2001 ) . 92 . Melmed , G . , et al . Human intestinal epithelial cells are broadly unresponsive to Toll - like receptor 2 - dependent bacterial ligands : implications for host - microbial interactions in the gut . J . Immunol . 170 , 1406 – 1415 ( 2003 ) . 93 . Lotz , M . , et al . Postnatal acquisition of endotoxin tolerance in intestinal epithelial cells . J . Exp . Med . 203 , 973 – 984 ( 2006 ) . 94 . Gewirtz , A . T . , Navas , T . A . , Lyons , S . , Godowski , P . J . & Madara , J . L . Cutting edge : bacterial flagellin activates basolaterally expressed TLR5 to induce epithelial proinflammatory gene expression . J . Immunol . 167 , 1882 – 1885 ( 2001 ) . 95 . Pull , S . L . , Doherty , J . M . , Mills , J . C . , Gordon , J . I . & Stappenbeck , T . S . Activated macrophages are an adaptive element of the colonic epithelial progenitor niche necessary for regenerative responses to injury . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 99 – 104 ( 2005 ) . 96 . Rakoff - Nahoum , S . , Hao , L . & Medzhitov , R . Role of Toll - like receptors in spontaneous commensal - dependent colitis . Immunity 25 , 319 – 329 ( 2006 ) . 97 . Karin , M . & Ben - Neriah , Y . Phosphorylation meets ubiquitination : the control of NF - κ B activity . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 18 , 621 – 663 ( 2000 ) . 98 . Neish , A . S . , et al . Prokaryotic regulation of epithelial responses by inhibition of I κ B - α ubiquitination . Science 289 , 1560 – 1563 ( 2000 ) . Madara and colleagues demonstrate that prokaryotic determinants from non - virulent bacteria can inhibit polyubiquitylation and subsequent degradation of I κ B α that could contribute to immune hyporesponsiveness in the gut . 99 . Tien , M . T . , et al . Anti - inflammatory effect of Lactobacillus casei on Shigella - infected human intestinal epithelial cells . J . Immunol . 176 , 1228 – 1237 ( 2006 ) . 100 . Collier - Hyams , L . S . , Sloane , V . , Batten , B . C . & Neish , A . S . Cutting edge : bacterial modulation of epithelial signaling via changes in neddylation of cullin - 1 . J . Immunol . 175 , 4194 – 4198 ( 2005 ) . 101 . Kelly , D . , et al . Commensal anaerobic gut bacteria attenuate inflammation by regulating nuclear - cytoplasmic shuttling of PPAR - γ and RelA . Nature Immunol . 5 , 104 – 112 ( 2004 ) . R E V i E W s nATuRE REvIEws | immunology voLumE 8 | junE 2008 | 419 f o c u s o n m u c o s a l i m m u n o lo g y © 200 8 Nature Publishing Group 102 . Saemann , M . D . , et al . Anti - inflammatory effects of sodium butyrate on human monocytes : potent inhibition of IL - 12 and up - regulation of IL - 10 production . FASEB J . 14 , 2380 – 2382 ( 2000 ) . 103 . Bashir , M . E . , Louie , S . , Shi , H . N . & Nagler - Anderson , C . Toll - like receptor 4 signaling by intestinal microbes influences susceptibility to food allergy . J . Immunol . 172 , 6978 – 6987 ( 2004 ) . 104 . Macpherson , A . J . & Uhr , T . Induction of protective IgA by intestinal dendritic cells carrying commensal bacteria . Science 303 , 1662 – 1665 ( 2004 ) . Macpherson and Uhr show that intestinal DCs carry live commensal bacteria to the mesenteric lymph nodes where they selectively induce IgA production . 105 . Iwasaki , A . & Kelsall , B . L . Unique functions of CD11b + , CD8 α + , and double - negative Peyer’s patch dendritic cells . J . Immunol . 166 , 4884 – 4890 ( 2001 ) . 106 . Kelsall , B . L . & Leon , F . Involvement of intestinal dendritic cells in oral tolerance , immunity to pathogens , and inflammatory bowel disease . Immunol . Rev . 206 , 132 – 148 ( 2005 ) . 107 . Macpherson , A . J . , Geuking , M . B . & McCoy , K . D . Immune responses that adapt the intestinal mucosa to commensal intestinal bacteria . Immunology 115 , 153 – 162 ( 2005 ) . 108 . Sato , A . & Iwasaki , A . Peyer’s patch dendritic cells as regulators of mucosal adaptive immunity . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 62 , 1333 – 1338 ( 2005 ) . 109 . Colonna , M . , Pulendran , B . & Iwasaki , A . Dendritic cells at the host - pathogen interface . Nature Immunol . 7 , 117 – 120 ( 2006 ) . 110 . Rimoldi , M . , Chieppa , M . , Vulcano , M . , Allavena , P . & Rescigno , M . Intestinal epithelial cells control dendritic cell function . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 1029 , 66 – 74 ( 2004 ) . 111 . Rimoldi , M . , et al . Intestinal immune homeostasis is regulated by the crosstalk between epithelial cells and dendritic cells . Nature Immunol . 6 , 507 – 514 ( 2005 ) . Rescigno and colleagues show that human IECs can induce non - inflammatory DCs in vitro that preferentially promoted T H 2 - type cytokine production in T cells and that this pathway is dysregulated in patients with Crohn’s disease . 112 . Vallon - Eberhard , A . , Landsman , L . , Yogev , N . , Verrier , B . & Jung , S . Transepithelial pathogen uptake into the small intestinal lamina propria . J . Immunol . 176 , 2465 – 2469 ( 2006 ) . 113 . Watanabe , N . , et al . Human thymic stromal lymphopoietin promotes dendritic cell - mediated CD4 + T cell homeostatic expansion . Nature Immunol . 5 , 426 – 434 ( 2004 ) . 114 . Allakhverdi , Z . , et al . Thymic stromal lymphopoietin is released by human epithelial cells in response to microbes , trauma , or inflammation and potently activates mast cells . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 253 – 258 ( 2007 ) . 115 . Kato , A . , Favoreto , S . Jr , Avila , P . C . & Schleimer , R . P . TLR3 - and Th2 cytokine - dependent production of thymic stromal lymphopoietin in human airway epithelial cells . J . Immunol . 179 , 1080 – 1087 ( 2007 ) . 116 . Bogiatzi , S . I . , et al . Cutting Edge : Proinflammatory and Th2 cytokines synergize to induce thymic stromal lymphopoietin production by human skin keratinocytes . J . Immunol . 178 , 3373 – 3377 ( 2007 ) . 117 . Li , M . , et al . Topical vitamin D3 and low - calcemic analogs induce thymic stromal lymphopoietin in mouse keratinocytes and trigger an atopic dermatitis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 11736 – 11741 ( 2006 ) . 118 . Lee , H . C . & Ziegler , S . F . Inducible expression of the proallergic cytokine thymic stromal lymphopoietin in airway epithelial cells is controlled by NF κ B . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 914 – 919 ( 2007 ) . 119 . Bilsborough , J . , George , T . C . , Norment , A . & Viney , J . L . Mucosal CD8 α + DC , with a plasmacytoid phenotype , induce differentiation and support function of T cells with regulatory properties . Immunology 108 , 481 – 492 ( 2003 ) . 120 . Coombes , J . L . , et al . A functionally specialized population of mucosal CD103 + DCs induces Foxp3 + regulatory T cells via a TGF - β and retinoic acid - dependent mechanism . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 1757 – 1764 ( 2007 ) . 121 . Sun , C . M . , et al . Small intestine lamina propria dendritic cells promote de novo generation of Foxp3 T reg cells via retinoic acid . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 1775 – 1785 ( 2007 ) . Work from the Belkaid and Powrie laboratories ( references 120 and 121 ) shows that a subset of CD103 + intestinal DCs can promote peripheral conversion of regulatory T cells via a TGF β and retinoic - acid - dependent mechanism . 122 . Rimoldi , M . , et al . Monocyte - derived dendritic cells activated by bacteria or by bacteria - stimulated epithelial cells are functionally different . Blood 106 , 2818 – 2826 ( 2005 ) . 123 . Soumelis , V . , et al . Human epithelial cells trigger dendritic cell mediated allergic inflammation by producing TSLP . Nature Immunol . 3 , 673 – 680 ( 2002 ) . 124 . Yoo , J . , et al . Spontaneous atopic dermatitis in mice expressing an inducible thymic stromal lymphopoietin transgene specifically in the skin . J . Exp . Med . 202 , 541 – 549 ( 2005 ) . 125 . Zhou , B . , et al . Thymic stromal lymphopoietin as a key initiator of allergic airway inflammation in mice . Nature Immunol . 6 , 1047 – 1053 ( 2005 ) . 126 . Al - Shami , A . , Spolski , R . , Kelly , J . , Keane - Myers , A . & Leonard , W . J . A role for TSLP in the development of inflammation in an asthma model . J . Exp . Med . 202 , 829 – 839 ( 2005 ) . 127 . Ziegler , S . F . & Liu , Y . J . Thymic stromal lymphopoietin in normal and pathogenic T cell development and function . Nature Immunol . 7 , 709 – 714 ( 2006 ) . 128 . Liu , Y . J . , et al . TSLP : An epithelial cell cytokine that regulates T cell differentiation by conditioning dendritic cell maturation . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 25 , 193 – 219 ( 2006 ) . 129 . Dignass , A . U . & Podolsky , D . K . Cytokine modulation of intestinal epithelial cell restitution : central role of transforming growth factor β . Gastroenterology 105 , 1323 – 1332 ( 1993 ) . 130 . Brown , S . L . , et al . Myd88 - dependent positioning of Ptgs2 - expressing stromal cells maintains colonic epithelial proliferation during injury . J . Clin . Invest . 117 , 258 – 269 ( 2007 ) . 131 . Kalinski , P . , Vieira , P . L . , Schuitemaker , J . H . , de Jong , E . C . & Kapsenberg , M . L . Prostaglandin E 2 is a selective inducer of interleukin - 12 p40 ( IL - 12p40 ) production and an inhibitor of bioactive IL - 12p70 heterodimer . Blood 97 , 3466 – 3469 ( 2001 ) . 132 . Smythies , L . E . , et al . Human intestinal macrophages display profound inflammatory anergy despite avid phagocytic and bacteriocidal activity . J . Clin . Invest . 115 , 66 – 75 ( 2005 ) . 133 . Fujita , S . , et al . Regulatory dendritic cells act as regulators of acute lethal systemic inflammatory response . Blood 107 , 3656 – 3664 ( 2006 ) . 134 . Newberry , R . D . , McDonough , J . S . , Stenson , W . F . & Lorenz , R . G . Spontaneous and continuous cyclooxygenase - 2 - dependent prostaglandin E 2 production by stromal cells in the murine small intestine lamina propria : directing the tone of the intestinal immune response . J . Immunol . 166 , 4465 – 4472 ( 2001 ) . 135 . Harris , S . G . , Padilla , J . , Koumas , L . , Ray , D . & Phipps , R . P . Prostaglandins as modulators of immunity . Trends Immunol . 23 , 144 – 150 ( 2002 ) . 136 . Arvans , D . L . , et al . Luminal bacterial flora determines physiological expression of intestinal epithelial cytoprotective heat shock proteins 25 and 72 . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest Liver Physiol . 288 , G696 – G704 ( 2005 ) . 137 . Luo , X . , et al . Release of heat shock protein 70 and the effects of extracellular heat shock protein 70 on the production of IL - 10 in fibroblast - like synoviocytes . Cell Stress Chaperones 8 April 2008 ( PMID : 18392950 ) . 138 . Osterloh , A . , Veit , A . , Gessner , A . , Fleischer , B . & Breloer , M . Hsp60 - mediated T cell stimulation is independent of TLR4 and IL - 12 . Int . Immunol . 20 , 433 – 443 ( 2008 ) . 139 . Laudanski , K . , De , A . & Miller - Graziano , C . Exogenous heat shock protein 27 uniquely blocks differentiation of monocytes to dendritic cells . Eur . J . Immunol . 37 , 2812 – 2824 ( 2007 ) . 140 . Dai , J . , Liu , B . , Cua , D . J . & Li , Z . Essential roles of IL - 12 and dendritic cells but not IL - 23 and macrophages in lupus - like diseases initiated by cell surface HSP gp96 . Eur . J . Immunol . 37 , 706 – 715 ( 2007 ) . 141 . Xu , W . , et al . Epithelial cells trigger frontline immunoglobulin class switching through a pathway regulated by the inhibitor SLPI . Nature Immunol . 8 , 294 – 303 ( 2007 ) . 142 . He , B . , et al . Intestinal bacteria trigger T cell - independent immunoglobulin A 2 class switching by inducing epithelial - cell secretion of the cytokine APRIL . Immunity 26 , 812 – 826 ( 2007 ) . 143 . Rojas , R . & Apodaca , G . Immunoglobulin transport across polarized epithelial cells . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 944 – 955 ( 2002 ) . 144 . Woof , J . M . & Mestecky , J . Mucosal immunoglobulins . Immunol . Rev . 206 , 64 – 82 ( 2005 ) . 145 . Astrakhan , A . , et al . Local increase in thymic stromal lymphopoietin induces systemic alterations in B cell development . Nature Immunol . 8 , 522 – 531 ( 2007 ) . 146 . Cerutti , A . The regulation of IgA class switching . Nature Rev . Immunol . 8 , 421 – 434 ( 2008 ) . 147 . Hershberg , R . M . & Mayer , L . F . Antigen processing and presentation by intestinal epithelial cells — polarity and complexity . Immunol . Today 21 , 123 – 128 ( 2000 ) . 148 . Bland , P . W . & Warren , L . G . Antigen presentation by epithelial cells of the rat small intestine . I . Kinetics , antigen specificity and blocking by anti - Ia antisera . Immunology 58 , 1 – 7 ( 1986 ) . 149 . Bland , P . W . Antigen presentation by gut epithelial cells : secretion by rat enterocytes of a factor with IL - 1 - like activity . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 216A , 219 – 225 ( 1987 ) . 150 . Kaiserlian , D . , Vidal , K . & Revillard , J . P . Murine enterocytes can present soluble antigen to specific class II - restricted CD4 + T cells . Eur . J . Immunol . 19 , 1513 – 1516 ( 1989 ) . 151 . Bland , P . W . & Whiting , C . V . Induction of MHC class II gene products in rat intestinal epithelium during graft - versus - host disease and effects on the immune function of the epithelium . Immunology 75 , 366 – 371 ( 1992 ) . 152 . Telega , G . W . , Baumgart , D . C . & Carding , S . R . Uptake and presentation of antigen to T cells by primary colonic epithelial cells in normal and diseased states . Gastroenterology 119 , 1548 – 1559 ( 2000 ) . 153 . Buning , J . , et al . Antigen targeting to MHC class II - enriched late endosomes in colonic epithelial cells : trafficking of luminal antigens studied in vivo in Crohn’s colitis patients . FASEB J . 20 , 359 – 361 ( 2006 ) . 154 . Sanderson , I . R . , Ouellette , A . J . , Carter , E . A . , Walker , W . A . & Harmatz , P . R . Differential regulation of B7 mRNA in enterocytes and lymphoid cells . Immunology 79 , 434 – 438 ( 1993 ) . 155 . Zoetendal , E . G . , Akkermans , A . D . & De Vos , W . M . Temperature gradient gel electrophoresis analysis of 16S rRNA from human fecal samples reveals stable and host - specific communities of active bacteria . Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 64 , 3854 – 3859 ( 1998 ) . 156 . Palmer , C . , Bik , E . M . , Digiulio , D . B . , Relman , D . A . & Brown , P . O . Development of the human infant intestinal microbiota . PLoS Biol . 5 , e177 ( 2007 ) . Palmer et al . analyze commensal bacteria in babies over the first year of life and demonstrate that environmental exposures have a major influence on distinctive and dynamic characteristics of the microbial community in individuals . 157 . Harmsen , H . J . , et al . Analysis of intestinal flora development in breast - fed and formula - fed infants by using molecular identification and detection methods . J . Pediatr . Gastroenterol . Nutr . 30 , 61 – 67 ( 2000 ) . 158 . Favier , C . F . , Vaughan , E . E . , De Vos , W . M . & Akkermans , A . D . Molecular monitoring of succession of bacterial communities in human neonates . Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 68 , 219 – 226 ( 2002 ) . 159 . Fanaro , S . , Chierici , R . , Guerrini , P . & Vigi , V . Intestinal microflora in early infancy : composition and development . Acta Paediatr . 91 , S48 – S55 ( 2003 ) . 160 . Hallstrom , M . , Eerola , E . , Vuento , R . , Janas , M . & Tammela , O . Effects of mode of delivery and necrotising enterocolitis on the intestinal microflora in preterm infants . Eur . J . Clin . Microbiol . Infect . Dis . 23 , 463 – 470 ( 2004 ) . 161 . Penders , J . , et al . Quantification of Bifidobacterium spp . , Escherichia coli and Clostridium difficile in faecal samples of breast - fed and formula - fed infants by real - time PCR . FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 243 , 141 – 147 ( 2005 ) . 162 . Penders , J . , et al . Factors influencing the composition of the intestinal microbiota in early infancy . Pediatrics 118 , 511 – 521 ( 2006 ) . Acknowledgements Thanks to all current members of the Artis laboratory for useful discussions and contributions to this manuscript . Work in the laboratory is supported by the US National Institutes of Health ( AI61570 , AI74878 , F31 - GM82187 , F32 - AI72943 , T32 - AI007532 - 08 , T32 - CA09140 - 30 ) , University of Pennsylvania Center for Infectious Diseases and University Research Fund , The Irvington Institute Fellowship Program of the Cancer Research Institute and The Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America’s William and Shelby Modell Family Foundation Research Award . Apologies to colleagues whose work and pub - lications could not be referenced due to space constraints . DATABASES Entrez gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene AID | CX 3 CR1 | NOD1 | NOD2 | PPAR γ | SIGIRR | TGF β | TLR4 | TLR5 | TSLP FURTHER INFORMATION David artis’s homepage : http : / / www . med . upenn . edu / micro / faculty / artis . html All links Are ACTive in The online pdf R E V i E W s 420 | junE 2008 | voLumE 8 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol R E V i E W s © 200 8 Nature Publishing Group