Inactivation of ether lipid biosynthesis causes male infertility , defects in eye development and optic nerve hypoplasia in mice Claus Rodemer 1 , Thanh - Phuong Thai 2 , Britta Brugger 1 , Thomas Kaercher 3 , Hauke Werner 4 , Klaus - Armin Nave 5 , Felix Wieland 1 , Karin Gorgas 6 and Wilhelm W . Just 1 , * 1 Universita¨t Heidelberg , Biochemie - Zentrum Heidelberg ( BZH ) , 69120 Heidelberg , Germany , 2 Universita¨tsklinik , Abteilung fu¨r Innere Medizin , 69120 Heidelberg , Germany , 3 Klinikum Ludwigshafen , 67063 Ludwigshafen , Germany , 4 Yale University , School of Medicine , Department of Cell Biology , New Haven , CT , USA , 5 Max - Planck - Institut fu¨r Experimentelle Medizin , Abteilung Neurogenetik , 37075 Go¨ttingen , Germany and 6 Institut fu¨r Anatomie und Zellbiologie der Universita¨t , 69120 Heidelberg , Germany Received March 20 , 2003 ; Revised and Accepted May 28 , 2003 Although known for almost 80 years , the physiological role of plasmalogens ( PLs ) , the major mammalian ether lipids ( ELs ) , is still enigmatic . Humans that lack ELs suffer from rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata ( RCDP ) , a peroxisomal disorder usually resulting in death in early childhood . In order to learn more about the functions of ELs , we generated a mouse model for RCDP by a targeted disruption of the dihydroxyacetone - phosphate acyltransferase gene . The mutant mice revealed multiple abnormalities , such as male infertility , defects in eye development , cataract and optic nerve hypoplasia , some of which were also observed in RCDP . Mass spectroscopic analysis demonstrated the presence of highly unsaturated fatty acids including docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) in brain PLs and the occurrence of PLs in lipid raft microdomains ( LRMs ) isolated from brain myelin . In mutants , PLs were completely absent and the concentration of brain DHA was reduced . The marker proteins ﬂotillin - 1 and F3 / contactin were found in brain LRMs in reduced concentrations . In addition , the gap junctional protein connexin 43 , known to be recruited to LRMs and essential for lens development and spermatogenesis , was down - regulated in embryonic ﬁbroblasts of the EL - deﬁcient mice . Free cholesterol , an important constituent of LRMs , was found in these ﬁbroblasts to be accumulated in a perinuclear compartment . These data suggest that the EL - deﬁcient mice allow the identiﬁcation of new phenotypes not related so far to EL - deﬁciency ( male sterility , defects in myelination and optic nerve hypoplasia ) and indicate that PLs are required for the correct assembly and function of LRMs . INTRODUCTION Plasmalogens ( PLs ) are by far the most abundant ether lipids ( ELs ) . Their concentration may vary between 5 % , for example , in liver and 70 % of total phosphatidylethanolamine ( PE ) in human brain white matter ( 1 ) . Although it has been speculated that PLs participate in diverse physiological processes , such as modulation of membrane ﬂuidity , facilitation of membrane fusion , synthesis of eicosanoids , mediation of signal transduc - tion processes and protection against oxidative stress , the in vivo function of PLs remains to be elucidated ( reviewed in 1 ) . However , other EL species than PLs exist that possess important physiological functions , among these are alkenylacyl - glycerophosphocholines ( PC - PLs ) ( 2 ) , platelet activating factor ( PAF ) , an alkylacetyl - glycerophosphocholine ( 3 ) , the glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchor of distinct mem - brane proteins ( 4 , 5 ) as well as seminolipid , a sulfogalactosyl - alkylacylglycerol ( SGalAAG ) and its precursor galactosyl - alkylacylglycerol ( GalAAG ) ( 6 , 7 ) . Two enzymes , dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase ( DAPAT ) and alkyl dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase ( ADAPS ) , are involved in the synthesis of ELs forming the ether bond ( 8 ) . The cellular level of ELs is affected by both peroxisome assembly disorders and single peroxisomal enzyme deﬁciencies , e . g . Zellweger syndrome and rhizomelic chon - drodysplasia punctata ( RCDP ) type 1 – 3 ( 9 ) . In Zellweger * To whom correspondence should be addressed at : Biochemie - Zentrum der Universita¨t , Im Neuenheimer Feld 328 , D - 69120 Heidelberg , Germany . Tel : þ 49 6221544151 ; Fax : þ 49 6221544366 ; Email : wilhelm . just @ urz . uni - heidelberg . de Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 1881 – 1895 DOI : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddg191 Human Molecular Genetics , Vol . 12 , No . 15 # Oxford University Press 2003 ; all rights reserved D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 syndrome ( ZS ) the genetic defect is attributed to mutations of various PEX genes , such as for example PEX5 coding for the peroxisomal targeting signal 1 ( PTS 1 ) receptor , PEX5p ( 10 ) . As a consequence peroxisomal proteins imported via the PTS 1 pathway are mislocalized to the cytoplasm where they are proteolytically degraded ( 11 ) . Most peroxisomal matrix proteins including DAPAT carry a PTS 1 . Accordingly , ZS is distinguished by multiple peroxisomal deﬁciencies and model systems , such as human skin ﬁbroblasts ( SFs ) from Zellweger patients or the targeted disruption of PEX5 or PEX2 in mice ( 12 – 14 ) do not allow unequivocal assignment of the observed phenotypes to their basic molecular defects . In RCDP type 1 the PTS 2 receptor , PEX7p , is mutationally inactivated ( 15 ) . Only a small subset of peroxisomal proteins , including ADAPS , peroxisomal 3 - ketoacyl - CoA thiolase , phytanic acid oxidase and mevalonate kinase , are imported via the PTS 2 pathway . Loss of the PTS 2 receptor generates a phenotype that appears to be primarily determined by the deﬁciency of ELs . RCDP type 2 and type 3 are characterized by the isolated deﬁciencies of DAPAT and ADAPS , respec - tively , and result in a phenotype indistinguishable from that of RCDP type 1 . The major clinical manifestations of the different types of RCDP are microcephaly , psychomotor retardation , short humerus and femur , calciﬁc stippling and cataract ( 9 ) . Most RCDP patients die in early childhood ( 16 – 20 ) . Both human and animal PL - deﬁcient cell lines reveal that ELs are not essential for the viability of single cells ; for example mutant human SF cell lines grow well in culture for many generations . Most likely , this class of lipids is essential for cellular functions that govern development and organization of complex multi - cellular systems . In order to gain insight into the in vivo functions of ELs , particularly PLs , we disrupted the DAPAT gene in mice . DAPAT is the key enzyme in EL biosynthesis that localizes to the luminal aspect of the peroxisomal membrane where it interacts with ADAPS ( 12 , 21 ) . The DAPAT gene in human and mouse are similar in structure , including 16 exons , and the encoded proteins are about 80 % identical ( 12 ) . Here we show that the targeted disruption of the DAPAT gene causes a complex developmental phenotype in mice . Homozygous mutants are viable but infertile ( males ) and subfertile ( females ) and display phenotypic abnormalities similar to those of RCDP including developmental defects of the central nervous system ( CNS ) , eyes , testis and others organs . In addition , evidence is provided that PLs are important constituents of lipid raft microdomains ( LRMs ) and that PL deﬁciency might result in their impaired functioning . RESULTS Generation of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice Exons 5 – 7 of the mouse DAPAT gene were disrupted in R1 - ES cells by homologous recombination using a DAPAT / pgk - Neo 1 cassette ( Fig . 1A ) . DNA transfer into ES cells was performed by electroporation and recombinant cell clones were identiﬁed by G418 and gancyclovir 1 selection ( Fig . 1B ) . Chimeric animals were generated by the implantation of C57Bl / 6 blastocysts that had been injected with about six cells . Chimeras were mated with C57Bl / 6 wild - type ( wt ) mice and DAPAT þ / (cid:1) heterozygous animals were obtained from 20 chimeras . These mice were backcrossed to C57Bl / 6 mice to generate DAPAT þ / þ , DAPAT þ / (cid:1) and DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) offsprings . Whereas the frequency of DAPAT þ / (cid:1) newborns was in the range of expected Mendelian inheritance , that of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice was consistently lower ( about 15 % ) suggesting prenatal death of some embryos . DAPAT þ / þ and DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice were identiﬁed by tail DNA analysis 2 – 3 days after birth and used to generate primary SF cultures ( Fig . 1C ) . As expected , DAPAT protein was absent in these mutant cells ( Fig . 1D ) . Whereas ADAPS activity was normal in cells of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice , there was no measurable DAPAT activity in brain , heart and SFs ( Table 1 ) . Homozygous mutants were viable , but displayed a marked variability in lifespan . About 40 % died within the ﬁrst 4 – 6 weeks of age , whereas others have now reached the age of 18 months . In nearly all cases , long - lived animals were females . RCDP in humans is frequently accompanied by dwarﬁsm that also occurred in DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice . Mutants were about 30 – 40 % underweight during the ﬁrst 2 weeks after birth ( Fig . 2A ) and this underweight was even more pronounced after 4 weeks ( Fig . 2B ) , although controls and DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mutants had the same food intake . Although not as conspicuous as in RCDP , shortening of proximal limbs was also observed in the mutants ( results not shown ) . Brain phospholipids and LRMs Brain tissue from wt and mutant animals was used for lipid extraction and analysis by nano - ESI - MS / MS . The major ethanolamine PL ( PE - PL ) species found in controls contained the alkenyl / acyl residues 34 : 2 , 36 : 5 , 38 : 5 , 38 : 6 and 40 : 7 ( Fig . 3A ) . All these PL species were undetectable in DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice . The most abundant PE species in brain of wt animals was PE 40 : 6 , whereas in the DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mutants it was PE 38 : 4 . Thus , the loss of PL 40 : 7 , which is the most abundant PL species in controls , resulted in a decrease of PE 40 : 6 and an increase in PE 38 : 4 ( Fig . 3B ) . There were no such compensatory changes observed in the spectra recording PC and sphingomyelin ( SM ; Fig . 3C and E ) . Since PLs have been reported to contain with high frequency docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) at the sn - 2 position , we analyzed the brain phospholipid extracts for DHA . The most abundant DHA - containing species in wt tissue was PE 40 : 6 and about half the amount of DHA of PE 40 : 6 was found in PL 40 : 7 ( Fig . 3D ) . In spite of the absence of PL 40 : 7 from mutant brain , there were no indications for a compensatory integration of DHA into other phospholipid species . A recent ESI - MS analysis demonstrated that LRMs isolated from KB cells , human epidermal carcinoma cells that do not express caveolin - 1 , were signiﬁcantly enriched in PLs , particularly in that species containing arachidonic acid ( AA ) ( 22 ) . Since PLs are highly abundant in brain myelin , we isolated LRMs from brain myelin of controls and DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mutants in order to investigate their PE and PL content ( Fig . 3F ) . In control LRM preparations , PE - PLs were the dominating species , mainly composed of PE - PL 36 : 2 and PE - PL 38 : 2 . This pattern was strikingly changed in LRMs of 1882 Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 the mutants in which , due to the complete absence of PLs , PE 38 : 4 , PE 40 : 6 , PE 36 : 1 and PE 34 : 1 were the major species . These changes in the phospholipid pattern of LRMs prompted us to investigate the segregation into total brain LRMs of two proteins , ﬂotillin - 1 and F3 / contactin , known markers of cerebral LRMs ( 23 ) . Whereas ﬂotillin - 1 is a transmembrane protein that was originally described as a caveolae - associated protein ( 24 ) , F3 / contactin is a neural GPI - anchored protein of the Ig superfamily implicated in the development of the neural circuitry ( 25 , 26 ) . Although starting from the same amount of control and mutant brain tissue and loading the same amount of LRM protein to the gradients , the concentrations of ﬂotillin - 1 and F3 / contactin , determined by western blotting , were reduced by 30 % in LRMs of the mutant brain ( Fig . 4A and B ) . Furthermore , we investigated the expression of connexin ( Cx ) 43 and the distribution of free cholesterol in embryonic ﬁbroblasts of controls and DAPAT - deﬁcient mutant mice . Cx43 is a transmembrane protein known to be targeted to LRMs and to be involved in the formation of intercellular gap junctions , the regulation of cell growth and the maintenance of tissue homeostasis ( 27 ) . Cx43 - containing gap junctions have been shown to play important roles in spermatogenesis ( 28 ) and maintenance of lens transparency ( 29 ) . Analyses by both western blotting ( Fig . 4C ) and immunoﬂuorescence labeling ( Fig . 4D and E ) demonstrated the reduced expression of Cx43 in the DAPAT - deﬁcient ﬁbroblasts . Free cholesterol , one of the major lipids accumula - ting in LRMs and visualized by ﬁlipin staining , was found to be concentrated in a perinuclear compartment indicating severe impairment of intracellular cholesterol distribution ( Fig . 4F and G ) . Male DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice are infertile Mating male and female homozygous mutants with appropriate wt partners suggested that male DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice were infertile . Wt and mutant newborns did not show major differences in the histological characteristics of their testes , although apoptotic cells did occur more frequently in the seminiferous epithelium of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice . In adult mutants , testes were atrophic and the epididymis devoid of spermatozoa . Semithin cross - sections of testis revealed a 40 % decrease in the average diameter of seminiferous tubules ( STs ) exhibiting reduction and disorgani - zation of the multilayered seminiferous epithelium as well as Table 1 . DAPATactivities in brain , heart and skin ﬁbroblasts of wt and DAPAT - deﬁcient ( ko ) mice DAPAT activity ( nmolh (cid:2) 1 mg (cid:2) 1 ) wt ko Brain 0 . 25 nd Heart 0 . 21 nd Fibroblasts 0 . 26 nd nd , not detectable . Figure 1 . Construction , screening and expression of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) transgene as well as immunologic detection of DAPAT - protein . Schematic representation of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) transgene construct ( A ) , screening of ES clones ( B ) and PCR mouse tail DNA analysis ( C ) using primers for exon 5 and the neo - gene . ( D ) DAPAT - protein as detected by western blotting in Harderian glands of wt animals was completely absent in ko mice . Peroxisomes isolated from the Harderian gland of rabbits ( hPox ) were used as positive controls . Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 1883 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 partial arrest and apoptosis of pachytene spermatocytes ( Fig . 5A – C ) . Multinucleated giant cells were present at different apoptotic stages and contained up to 30 nuclei depending on the meiotic progress and localization within the disorganized epithelium ( Fig . 5D and E ) . Together with the complete absence of mature spermatozoa and elongated spermatids these observations suggest that the spermatogenic arrest occurred between pachytene primary spermatocytes and the stage of round spermatids . Corresponding to the impaired spermatogenesis , an age - dependent thickening of the lamina propria was observed in the mutants . Proliferation of myoid cells correlated with an increase in thickness of the basement membranes of STs , myoid cells and lymphatic capillaries ( Fig . 5F – H ) . In contrast to controls , the intertubular space of the mutant testis was occupied by proliferating Leydig cell clusters of all develop - mental stages ( Fig . 5A and B ) . When bred to wt males , only one of seven homozygous females became pregnant . However , the two siblings died at birth . Mutant ovaries were smaller in size but displayed intact folliculogenesis showing primary , secondary and tertiary follicles . Development of the oocyte , zona pellucida , granulosa and theca interna ( Fig . 6A ) , as well as formation of corpus rubrum ( Fig . 6B ) and corpora lutea , appeared normal conﬁrming that ovulation occurs in the absence of ELs . Secondary and tertiary follicles as well as corpora lutea and glassy membranes were reduced in number , indicating female subfertility . Ocular anomalies Ophthalmologic examination of nine DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice elicited distinct developmental eye defects resulting in microphthalmia with an about 20 % reduction in eye diameter , dysgenesis of the anterior eye chamber and bilateral central dense cataract ( Fig . 7A ) . At both the anterior and equatorial poles , the lens epithelium appeared strikingly disorganized . Anterior lenti - conus adhering to the corneal endothelium was the most conspicuous anomaly observed ( Fig . 7B ) . Towards the lens equator impaired epithelial cell differentiation and ﬁber formation resulted in a multilayered cell sheath mainly composed of undifferentiated precursor cells lacking parallel orientation ( Fig . 7C and E ) . The epithelial layers migrated up to the posterior pole covering the posterior suture . They were frequently disrupted by large vacuoles ( Fig . 7C and D ) . Compared with controls , the thickness of the lens capsule at the anterior and posterior poles was increased in mutants 2 - and 3 - fold , respectively . In addition , disarrangement of lens core ﬁbers containing crystalline aggregates favored cataractogene - sis . Most animals showed anterior and posterior synechias , i . e . iris attachments to both the corneal endothelium and the anterior lens surface ( Fig . 7A ) caused by persistent vascular remnants of the pupillary membrane . Pigment cells and pigment - loaded macrophages were also frequently found at the surface of the anterior lenticonus ( Fig . 7B ) and in the trabecular meshwork of the irido - corneal angle , similarly as described for the iris pigment dispersion syndrome ( 30 ) . Retinal architecture of mutant mice revealed minor altera - tions that were predominantly conﬁned to the pigment epithelium demonstrating vacuolation , hypo - and hyperplasia , hypo - and hyperpigmentation as well as accumulation of photoreceptor degradation products . The basement membrane ( Bruch’s membrane ) was increased in thickness by about 40 % ( data not shown ) . Moreover , several observations indicated optic nerve hypoplasia in mutants : ( i ) a nearly 20 % reduction in diameter of the optic nerve head proportional to microphthal - mia ( Fig . 8A and B ) ; ( ii ) a nearly 40 % increase in the length of the non - myelinated portion of the optic nerve ( Fig . 8A and B ) ; ( iii ) the frequent appearance of abnormally dilated retinal ganglion cell axons ( exceeding 20 m m in diameter ) predomi - nantly situated at the nerve periphery ( Fig . 8D , arrow ) ; and ( iv ) a nearly 50 % decrease in diameter of the myelinated portion of the optic nerve . This reduction was mainly due to a 55 % reduction in the numerical density of large axonal proﬁles ( exceeding a diameter of 1 . 5 m m ) , as veriﬁed by morphometric analysis ( Fig . 8E and F ) . A striking feature of the adult mutant eye was a persistent hyaloid artery ( Bergmeister’s papilla ) that exceeded a length of 400 m m , corresponding to a 4 - fold increase in length compared with controls ( Fig . 8C ; evaluated by serial sectioning ) . Figure 2 . Growth retardation of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice . ( A ) Size comparison of wt ( right ) and ko mouse ( left ) 5 weeks after birth . ( B ) Weight gain of wt and ko mice during the ﬁrst 4 weeks after birth . For each time point the weight of three animals was determined . 1884 Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 Although the persisting hyaloid artery remained connected by ﬁbrils and hyalocytes to the posterior lens capsule , no remnants of the tunica vasculosa lentis were visible , suggesting a defective remodeling of the primary to the secondary vitreous body . DISCUSSION Mammalian ELs PLs are by far the most abundant ELs in mammalian tissues . However , as mentioned at the beginning , other EL species , such as PC - PLs , PAF , the GPI - anchor of numerous membrane proteins and SGalAAG ( seminolipid ) do occur , raising the question as to the individual contribution of each of these molecules to the overall DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) phenotype . Although most tissues contain PE - PLs as the major PL species , some tissues , such as cardiac tissue , are particularly rich in PC - PLs . In the human heart , for example , about 40 % of total PC is PC - PL ( 2 ) . The reason for that is not clear , however it has been demonstrated that PE - PLs but not PC - PLs have a high tendency at or below 30 (cid:3) C to adopt a non - bilayer structure known to facilitate membrane fusion events ( 22 ) . Thus , subtle differences in the structure of PLs might have important inﬂuences on the physical properties of membranes . PAF , a potent bioactive EL , is considered to constitutively regulate physiological processes , such as neural development , hippocampal long - term potentiation , blood pressure , reproduc - tion as well as anaphylaxis and endotoxic shock ( for review see 3 ) . Studies in mice lacking a functional PAF receptor have unexpectedly shown that PAF plays a dominant role only in eliciting anaphylaxis . Moreover , PAF receptor - deﬁcient mice were fertile , develop normally and were as sensitive to endotoxins as wt animals ( 31 ) . Thus , PAF deﬁciency might not signiﬁcantly contribute to the DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) phenotype . Figure 3 . Nano - ESI - MS / MS analysis of mouse brain lipid extracts . Total brain from wt and DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) animals was extracted and the dried extracts were dissolved in 5m M ammonium acetate in methanol ( see Materials and Methods ) . ( A ) Detection of PE and PE - PL , ( B ) of PE and ( C ) of PC . ( D ) Speciﬁc scanning for DHA in phosphoglycerolipids and ( E ) detection of SM molecular species and ( F ) PE - PL in lipid raft microdomains isolated from brain myelin . Lack of PLs does not change the peak intensity of other DHA containing PE species ( D ) . Note the relative increase in PE 38 : 4 over PE 40 : 6 in the tissue of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice ( A , B and F ) . Total number of carbon atoms and double bonds in alkenyl / acyl chains are displayed . Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 1885 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 An additional major characteristic of PLs is their high content of polyunsaturated fatty acids , such as DHA and AA that both occur in high concentrations in brain and retina . As seen by mass spectroscopical analysis , relatively large amounts of brain DHA were incorporated into PLs and were missing in the DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) tissue ( Fig . 3D ) . Correspondingly , the level of both PLs and DHA was drastically reduced in brain tissue of patients with peroxisomal disorders ( 32 ) , conﬁrming that DHA Figure 4 . AnalysisofbrainLRMsandembryonicﬁbroblastsofcontrol ( wt ) andDAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) ( ko ) mice . ( A , B ) LRMswereisolatedfromtotalbrainbydensitygradient ﬂotation . For the preparations 100mg wet weight of brain were homogenized and identical amounts of protein ( 1 . 54mg ) loaded onto the gradients . Fractions were analyzedforﬂotillin - 1andF3 / contactinbywesternblottingandECLdetection . Proteinconcentrationsweredeterminedbydensitometryandexpressedaspercentages . Cx43 expression was analyzed in embryonic ﬁbroblasts by western blotting ( C ) and immunoﬂuorescence ( D , E ) . Fibroblast homogenates ( 50 m g of protein / lane ) were separated by SDS – PAGE and Cx43 and b - actin were visualized by immunoblotting . b - actin was used as a marker for the protein load . ( D , E ) Immunoﬂuorescence detection of Cx43 was carried out using mouse anti - Cx43 peptide and FITC - labeled goat anti - mouse antibodies . ( F , G ) Filipin staining of embryonic ﬁbroblasts for the visualization of free cholesterol . Note the abnormal perinuclear accumulation of free cholesterol in EL - deﬁcient ﬁbroblasts . Bar : 20 m m . 1886 Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 deﬁciency is a predominant defect in the CNS of these patients . Release of AA might be mediated by a PL - selective phospholipase A2 and released AA and AA - derived eicosa - noids might participate in intra - and extracellular signaling processes ( 33 ) . In contrast to AA , the role of DHA is less well understood . However , the beneﬁts of long - chain polyunsatu - rated fatty acids , currently under discussion , at least in part , may be attributed to their incorporation into PLs ( 34 ) . Numerous mammalian proteins , e . g . human placental alka - line phosphatase , human erythrocyte acetylcholinesterase , Figure 5 . Semithin sections of wt ( A , C , F ) and DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) ( B , D , E , G , H ) testes . Whereas in wt mice ( A , C ) the multilayered epithelium of STs contains the entire complement of spermatogenic cells , in mutant STs ( B , D , E ) epithelial disorganization is accompanied by variable apoptotic stages visible in the population of primary spermatocytes . Most notably , elongated spermatids and mature spermatozoa are completely absent and multinucleated giant cells become dominating . Spermatogonia ( SG ) and vacuolated Sertoli cells ( S ) are the predominant cells types constituting the disorganized seminiferous epithelium ( B , E ) . In controls ( F ) , the lamina propria is composed of a continuous layer of ﬂat elongated myoid cells separated by a rather thin basal lamina from both STs and the endothelium of lymphatic capillary . In DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice ( G , H ) , the lamina propria progressively increases age - dependently in thickness . Proliferation of myoid cells correlates with thickening of basement membranes ( arrows ) . ( A – G ) Three - month - old mice and ( H ) 10 - month - old mouse . Methylene blue – Azur II stain . Bars : 100 m m ( A , B ) and 20 m m ( C – H ) . Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 1887 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 aminopeptidase , folate receptor and neural F3 / contactin , are anchored to membranes via a GPI structure . GPI - anchoring has been attributed to processes , such as endocytic sorting , transmembrane signaling and clathrin - independent endocytosis ( reviewed in 4 , 5 ) . Since the lipid anchor in many mammalian GPI - anchored proteins is 1 - alkyl - 2 - acylglycerol , its synthesis should be dependent on the peroxisomal pathway of EL biosynthesis . Studies on human placental alkaline phosphatase suggested an alternative pathway of ether bond formation ( 35 ) , although substantial evidence for its existence is lacking . A major proposed function of PLs is their protective activity against reactive oxygen species . This view was mainly derived from experiments demonstrating UV - induced photosensitized killing of PL - deﬁcient CHO and murine macrophage - like cells following incorporation of pyrenedodecanoic acid into mem - brane lipids ( 36 ) . Exposure of these cells to long wavelength UV light was supposed to generate reactive oxygen species ( singlet oxygen ) and / or radicals . Although there is evidence that PL deﬁciency in cultured cells increases their sensitivity against lipid peroxyl radicals , the underlying chemical mechanism for the stabilization of PL radicals is unclear . Stabilization of these radicals , however , is essential that PLs act as radical scavengers . Studies in human SFs of control and PL - deﬁcient patients as well as in vivo studies in these patients failed to show any evidence for PLs to play a major role in protection against oxidative stress ( 37 , 38 ) . The DAPAT - deﬁcient mouse might be a valuable model system to clarify the existing discrepancies . PLs are constituents of LRMs GPI anchoring not only serves the ﬁrm membrane attachment of proteins , but is also a means to sort and concentrate the anchored proteins into specialized membrane areas called LRMs . For most of these proteins sorting into LRMs has been demonstrated to be essential for functioning . LRMs are membrane micro - domains particularly enriched in cholesterol and glycosphingo - lipids and , as in the case of caveolae , contain caveolin - 1 as an essential structural component ( reviewed in 39 ) . Membranes may also contain LRMs not associated with caveolin - 1 . They are isolated by low - temperature detergent extraction and gradient ﬂotation and the proteins that segregate into these LRMs are of considerable functional heterogeneity including signaling mole - cules and receptors ( 40 – 45 ) , junction and adhesion molecules ( 28 , 46 , 47 ) and enzymes ( 4 ) . As shown in the present paper , detergent - resistant mem - branes isolated from brain myelin contain PE - PLs . It is interesting to note that in lipid extracts of both total brain and LRMs prepared from brain myelin of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice , PE 38 : 4 is the dominating species ( Fig . 3A , B and F ) . Thus , lack of PLs might be compensated for by an increase in PE 38 : 4 . Moreover , studies using human epidermal carcinoma cells that either express or do not express caveolin - 1 have shown that LRMs isolated by a non - detergent method compared with the plasma membrane fractions were enriched in cholesterol , sphingomyelin and AA - containing PE - PLs ( 22 ) . Further evidence for the important role of PLs in assembly and function of LRMs was provided by a comparative analysis of the recruitment of ﬂotillin - 1 and F3 / contactin to brain LRMs of control and EL - deﬁcient mice . Flotillin - 1 is an integral membrane protein abundantly expressed in brain and fre - quently used as a biochemical marker of neural LRMs ( 23 ) . F3 / contactin is a neural GPI - anchored cell adhesion molecule known to interact with paranodin , a neural transmembrane protein , and to guide it to LRMs at the cell surface , a process important for the correct formation of the nodes of Ranvier ( 25 , 48 ) . The concentration of both ﬂotillin - 1 and F3 / contactin was signiﬁcantly reduced in LRMs of the EL - deﬁcient mice suggesting that the lack of ELs affects the composition and possibly also the function of LRMs ( Fig . 4A and B ) . Along this line are the results demonstrating the reduced expression of Cx43 in DAPAT - deﬁcient ﬁbroblasts ( Fig . 4C and E ) and the impaired cellular distribution of cholesterol ( Fig . 4F and G ) , a major lipid constituent of LRMs . Several connexin family members including Cx43 have been shown to be targeted to LRMs and to interact with caveolin - 1 . Caveolin - 1 acts as a scaffolding protein to cluster lipids , particularly cholesterol , and signaling molecules within LRMs ( 49 ) . Although the mechanism by which EL þ deﬁciency affects the expression Figure 6 . Semithin sections of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) ovary . ( A ) DAPAT - / - mutants ( 6 months old ) show normal folliculogenesis but an increased number of atretic follicles ( arrow marks the apoptotic oocyte ) . Secondary follicles exhibit intact theca , granulosa and zona pellucida . Formation of corpus rubrum in the mutant ovary ( B , 10 months old ) corresponds to that in controls . Bars : 50 m m ( A ) and 100 m m ( B ) . 1888 Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 level of Cx43 is unknown , various factors have been described that inﬂuence Cx43 expression . Among these are some protooncogenes , such as Src , Ras and Neu that alter regulation of gap junctions and Cx43 ( 50 – 52 ) . Activated c - Src , for example , stimulates Cx43 phosphorylation reducing gap junctional communication and the level of Cx43 ( 50 ) . Similarly PDGF , a strong inhibitor of intercellular commu - nication via gap junctions , causes rapid junctional interruption and the concomitant phosphorylation of Cx43 involving protein kinase C and the mitogen - activated protein kinase ( 53 ) . Figure 7 . Thick microslicer section and semithin sections of the eye . Thick microslicer section of mutant eye bulb showing the entire lens ( A ) reveals microphthal - mia , anterior lenticonus , lens attachment to the corneal endothelium , irregular pupil , posterior synechia , iris pigment dispersion on the lens surface ( see arrows in B ) , lens deformation and cataract . At the lenticonus ( B ) , lens capsule is remarkably increased in thickness and lens epithelial cells form a highly disorganized stellate cellular meshwork ( see also arrow in C ) . In contrast to controls ( E ) , at lens equator mutant lens ( C ) shows severe defects in epithelial cell organization , ﬁber differentiation and maturation . Focal disruptions are paralleled by formation of large vacuoles . Lens epithelial cells continue to migrate along the thickened capsule to the posterior pole ( D ) , resulting in lens ﬁber swelling and vacuole formation at the posterior suture . Bars : 200 m m ( A ) , 50 m m ( B , C , E ) and 30 m m ( D ) . Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 1889 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 Phosphorylation of Cx43 is believed to be causally linked with the disruption of gap junctional communication ( 54 ) . Interestingly with respect to the observed phenotypes in the DAPAT - deﬁcient mouse , Cx43 plays a dominant role in both lens development ( 29 ) and spermatogenesis ( 28 ) ( see below ) . Our observation that EL - deﬁcient ﬁbroblasts showed impaired intracellular cholesterol distribution was consistent with previous results in human SFs of patients with RCDP type 2 and type 3 also demonstrating cholesterol accumulations in an endosomal / lysosomal compartment and the impaired formation of caveolae and clathrin - coated pits ( 12 ) . Impaired cholesterol transport was recently also observed in PL - depleted CHO cells ( 55 ) . In these cells transport of cholesterol from an endosomal compartment or the plasma membrane to the endoplasmic reticulum was defective . These results strongly suggest that PLs are important constituents of Figure 8 . Semithin sections of the posterior eye bulb . Compared with controls ( A ) , regression of the hyaloid artery is incomplete in the mutant eye ( C ) . The optic nerve head is covered by an elongated ﬁbro - vascular , funnel - shaped structure ( Bergmeister’s papilla ) extending with numerous ﬁne strands to the posterior pole of the lens ( C ) . Posterior to the scleral canal , the unmyelinated segment of the optic nerve is reduced in diameter and enhanced in length in mutants ( B ) compared with controls ( A ) . In addition , the diameter of the myelinated portion of the optic nerve is more than proportionally decreased ( arrows in A and B mark the ﬁrst myelinated axons ) . Remarkable axon swelling is observed in the transition zone ( D , arrow ) suggesting axon degeneration and optic nerve atrophy . Cross - sections through the myelinated segment show a distinct decrease in the number of large axon proﬁles in mutants ( F ) compared with controls ( E ) . Bars : 100 m m ( A – C ) , 30 m m ( D ) and 20 m m ( E , F ) . 1890 Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 LRMs and that the lack of PLs affects both the sequestration of proteins into LRMs and the maintainance of intracellular cholesterol homeostasis . The latter aspect was further supported by observations demonstrating that both chondro - dysplasia punctata and cataract , major clinical phenotypes of RCDP , were also manifested in human disorders with defects in late cholesterol biosynthesis , such as Conradi – Hu¨nermann – Happel syndrome and Smith – Lemmli – Opitz syndrome ( 56 ) . EL deﬁciency causes spermatogenic arrest The detailed histological analysis of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) testis revealed the presence of normal spermatogonia and early primary spermatocytes . Late primary spermatocytes exhibited severe degeneration including the frequent appearance of multinucleated giant cells suggesting arrest of spermatogenesis between the stages of pachytene primary spermatocytes and round spermatids ( Fig . 5 ) . DAPAT deﬁciency is not the only lipid deﬁciency eliciting this phenotype . In addition , three other targeted deletions of lipid synthesizing enzymes were described , all resulting in an early arrest of spermatogenesis and the complete absence of spermatozoa . In mammalian testes and spermatozoa , SGalAAG ( seminolipid ) is the principle glycolipid comprising (cid:4) 3 % of total lipids and more than 90 % of total boar spermatozoa ( reviewed in 6 , 7 ) . In the early phase of spermatocyte development synthesis of SGalAAG rapidly increases and the level is maintained in subsequent germ cell stages . SGalAAG in humans , although not detected in testes of infants of prepubertal age , is highest at 40 years and decreases drastically above 70 years . Synthesis of the SGalAAG precursor GalAAG is catalyzed by UDP - galactose : ceramide galactosyltransferase ( CGT ) and SGalAAG is synthesized by cerebroside sulfotransferase ( CST ) . Both the CGT (cid:1) / (cid:1) ( 57 – 59 ) and the CST (cid:1) / (cid:1) ( 60 ) mouse revealed a phenotype in testis rather similar to that seen in the DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mutant . The CGT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mouse , besides GalAAG , was also unable to synthesize galactosylceramide ( GalCer ) , the major myelin galactolipid , galactosylsphingosine ( psychosine ) and galacto - syldiacylglycerol ( GalDAG ) , whereas the CST (cid:1) / (cid:1) mouse failed to synthesize both galactosylceramide - 3 - sulfate ( SGalCer ) and SGalAAG . The fact that SGalAAG is the predominant sulfolipid in testis ( 6 , 7 ) suggested that the defects in spermatogenesis of the CST (cid:1) / (cid:1) mouse were related to the lack of the EL SGalAAG rather than the sphingolipid SGalCer . This in turn indicates that the spermatogenic arrest in the DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mutant is at least in part due to the lack of GalAAG and particularly SGalAAG . The GM2 / GD2 synthase deﬁcient ( GM2 / GD2 (cid:1) / (cid:1) ) mouse is lacking the enzyme b 1 , 4 - N - acetylgalactosaminyltransferase , a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of complex gangliosides ( belonging to the sialo - ganglio series ) . These mice were unable to synthesize GM2 , GD2 and their more complex derivatives ( 61 ) . Considering that the targeted deletion of GM2 / GD2 synthase and Cx43 led to a phenotype in testis close to that seen in the DAPAT - deﬁcient mouse , lack of seminolipid and / or its precursor GalAAG might not be the only cause of defective spermatogenesis in the DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mutants . Although affecting a different branch of glycolipids , the complex sialoganglio - sides , the phenotype of GM2 / GD2 (cid:1) / (cid:1) and DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice is strikingly similar . Provided that a functional relationship exists between complex gangliosides and ELs , they might converge on a common cellular platform which we hypothesize might be the glycosphingolipid - and cholesterol - enriched LRMs . Furthermore , gap junctional communication also plays a dominant role in spermatogenesis . Cx43 is expressed in several cell types in testis including Sertoli cells , Leydig cells and spermatogonia / spermatocytes and its targeted deletion caused a ‘Sertoli cell - only’ phenotype similarly to that seen in the DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mutants ( 28 ) . PLs and ocular anomalies Ocular manifestations in DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice included micro - phthalmia , cataract , anterior lenticonus , persistent hyaloid artery and alterations in retinal pigment epithelium ( Figs 7 and 8 ) . Various gap junctional proteins including Cx43 , Cx46 and Cx50 are expressed in the eye . Individual mutations in these proteins were found in lenses of cataract patients and the targeted deletion of Cx46 and Cx50 has been shown to result in impaired lens homeostasis favoring cataract ( 62 ) . Moreover , it was proposed that in the lens Cx43 phosphorylation led to its destabilization and proteasome - dependent degradation ( 29 ) . Direct interaction has also been demonstrated between Cx43 and the tight - junction - associated protein zonula occludens - 1 ( ZO - 1 ) , v - and c - Src and b - catenin ( 63 – 65 ) , suggesting that Cx43 is part of a complex that includes both signaling and scaffolding molecules . Anterior lenticonus , as we observed it in the DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mutants , is rarely described in the literature but is a hallmark in the Alport syndrome , a familial nephritis . In the X - linked form , mutations were found in COL ( IV ) a 5 . Within the lens capsule and Bruch’s membrane , COL ( IV ) a 5 , forms a collagen network and , by the expression of abnormal COL ( IV ) a 5 , it becomes destabilized , leading to structural alterations and thickening of the basement membrane ( 66 , 67 ) . Analogous to the lens , thickening of the basement membrane was also observed in STs of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) testis ( Fig . 5F – H ) . In this tissue , tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) a activation of Sertoli cells induced expression and secretion of COL ( IV ) , metalloprotease - 9 and tissue inhibitor of metalloprotease - 1 regulating tight junction dynamics behind the blood – testis barrier ( 68 ) . Interestingly , TNF a receptor was localized to both LRMs and the trans Golgi complex and loss of the ability to become targeted to LRMs following mutagenesis was paralleled by functional deactiva - tion ( 41 ) . Since most of the proteins discussed are topologically related to LRMs , the functions of these proteins may be dependent on the presence of PLs and be impaired by their lack in the DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) tissue . Thus , it is tempting to speculate that a major function of PLs might be to act as an essential constituent of LRMs . ELs and optic nerve hypoplasia The major alterations seen in the optic nerve of the DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mutants were the reduced diameter of the nerve head , the appearance of dilated retinal ganglion cell axons as well as the increased length of the non - myelinated and the decreased diameter of the myelinated portion of the nerve ( Fig . 8A and B ) . These structural alterations are indicative of optic nerve hypoplasia and distinct deﬁcits in myelination . In particular , the Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 1891 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 increase in length of the non - myelinated portion of the nerve suggests that the complex processes involved in axon – oligodendrocyte interaction at the paranode rather than within the compact myelin are affected by EL deﬁciency . This view is favored by the reduced amount of F3 / contactin recovered from cerebral LRMs of the mutants , most likely reﬂecting the reduced amount of LRMs isolated . A recent model for the function of F3 / contactin at the paranode proposed the intracellular interaction of neuronal F3 / contactin with para - nodin ( contactin - associated protein ) to be necessary for translocating the complex to the paranodal axolemma . Deﬁciency of ELs , therefore , might affect translocation to the axolemma and / or sorting of the complex to axolemmal LRMs . Proliferation and survival of oligodendrocytes is regulated by PDGF - A ( 69 ) . The corresponding receptor switches from mitogen to survival function by sequestering into GM1 containing LRMs that provide a favorable signaling environ - ment ( 70 ) . Intriguingly , the PDGF - A (cid:1) / (cid:1) mouse exhibits severe defects in oligodendrogenesis and also spermatogenesis ( 71 ) . The greatest loss of both myelin and PDGF - A receptor progenitors was observed in the optic nerve , cerebellar white matter and thoracic spinal cord ( 72 ) . Alterations in cerebral structures were also seen in the peroxisome - deﬁcient PEX2 (cid:1) / (cid:1) Zellweger mouse ( 14 ) . The phenotypes described were altered cerebellar foliate patterning , loss of Purkinje cells and neuronal migration defects . Possibly due to the multiple defects generated by the PEX2 deletion , phenotypes different to that of DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice were observed . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cloning and disruption of the murine DAPAT gene The full - length mouse DAPAT cDNA was used to screen PAC clones with the total genomic mmDNA . Positive clones were sequenced to get the full genomic DAPAT sequence ( 12 ) . The targeting vector designed to eliminate the DNA sequence between the introns 4 and 7 of the DAPAT gene was generated by cloning PCR products into the CWKO vector as 5 0 - and 3 0 - ﬂanking regions of the pgk - Neo 1 cassette ( 73 ) . For the 5 0 - region the primers VA6s ( 5 0 - ctcggatccACGGTGACAGAA - AACATCTGGGCAGTACCC - 3 0 ) and VA6as ( 5 0 - gagggtaccG - GCAAGGCAACATGACAACACTGTCAGAGG - 3 0 ) , covering parts of intron 4 , were used . The resulting 1 . 2 kb product was cloned into the Bam HI and Kpn I sites of the vector . For the 3 0 - region the primers HA2s ( 5 0 - ctcgtcgacGATTTCCTTTGA - GTATAGAGAATACCCTGG - 3 0 ) and HA2as ( 5 0 - cacgtcgac CTTCCAACTCTAGACCTCTACGTGGTCAGG - 3 0 ) , covering intron 7 and exons 8 – 10 , were used . The 5 kb product was cloned into the Sal I site of the targeting construct . A 100 m g sample of the vector was linearized with AscI and introduced into 6 . 5 (cid:6) 106 R1 - ES cells by electroporation . Transfected cells were double selected by neomycin ( 250 m g / ml ) and ganciclovir ( 0 . 2 m m ) and resistant clones obtained 7 – 9 days after transfec - tion as described ( 74 ) . Targeted clones were identiﬁed by nested PCR using the primers VA11s ( CTGGCTTTCC - TCCCCATGGCTTGTTCAGCC ) and neo1as ( GCCTCTCC - ACCCAAGCGGCCGGAGAACCTGCGTGC ) . Homologous recombination was identiﬁed in four out of 300 clones , and one of the four clones was used for injection into blastocysts of C57BL / 6 mice . Chimeric mice were mated with C57BL / 6 mice and offsprings tested for germline transmission by PCR . Homozygous DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice were obtained by mating F 1 heterozygous animals and F 2 offsprings genotyped by PCR . PCR analysis Nested PCR of ES cells and genomic tail DNA of hetero - zygous , wt and ko animals was carried out using the primers VA16 ( CAATCAGTGAGGGCGGGACCTGGAGCAGGA ) , Neo10as ( GCTGACAGCCG GAACACGGCGGCATCAGAG ) , ex7 - 1s ( CGATACCTACTTTGTCCCAATTAGC ) and HA5as ( GCTGGTCTCAAACAGCTACGTAGCTGA ) . About 0 . 1 m g DNA , 20pmol of each primer in reaction buffer and Taq / Pwo polymerase ( Thermohybaid , Heidelberg , Germany ) were used in a total volume of 50 m l . After 3 min denaturation at 95 (cid:3) C , PCR was performed using 35 cycles at 94 (cid:3) C for 30s and 68 (cid:3) C for 4 min followed by a ﬁnal extension at 68 (cid:3) C for 2 min , resulting in a 2 kb product for the recombinant and a 3 kb product for the wt gene . For the primers Ex7 and HA5 elongation time was shortened to 1 min at 72 (cid:3) C resulting in a 650 bp product for the wt gene and a 860 bp product for the recombinant DAPAT gene . PCR products were analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis . Biochemical assays DAPAT activity was assayed as described ( 12 , 75 ) . Brain and heart of wt and knockout ( ko ) mice were directly solubilized in solu - chaps ( Sigma , Munich ) . For measuring DAPAT activity in ﬁbroblasts , a 15 cm conﬂuent dish was washed with PBS and the cells scraped off using 0 . 25 M sucrose , containing 10 m M glycylglycine pH 7 . 4 . After pelleting , the cells were solubilized in solu - chaps and subjected to sonication ( 12 , 75 ) . Protein content of solubilized material was determined by the Bradford assay ( Biorad , Munich ) . Myelin and detergent - resistant lipid microdomains from total brain and myelin and were prepared as described ( 25 , 76 ) . Lipid extraction from brain tissue was performed according to the method of Bligh and Dyer ( 77 ) . After solvent evaporation , samples were resuspended in methanol and further processed for mass spectrometry as described ( 78 ) . ESI - MS / MS analysis was performed on a Micromass QII triple - stage quadrupol tandem mass spectrometer equipped with a nano - ESI source ( Z spray ; Micromass ) . Argon was used as collision gas at a nominal pressure of 2 – 3 (cid:6) 10 (cid:1) 3 mbar . Usually the cone voltage was set to 30 eV . Resolution of Q1 and Q3 was set to achieve isotope resolution . For detecting distinct phospholipid species the following MS parameters were used : PC and SM—positive precursor ion scanning mode , selection of phosphocholine ion ( m / z 184 ) , 32 eV collision energy ; SM—negative precursor ion mode , selection for dimethyl phosphoethanolamine anion ( m / z 168 ) , 35 eV collision energy and 100 eV cone voltage ; PE— neutral loss scanning in positive mode , selection for neutral phosphoethanolamine ( m / z 141 ) , 30 eV collision energy ; PE and PE - PL—negative precursor ion scanning mode , selection for the dilyso - PE – H 2 O fragment ( m / z 196 ) , 50 eV collision energy ; docosahexaenoyl - containing phosphoglycerolipids—negative precursor ion mode , selection for docosahexaenoate anion ( m / z 327 ) , 50 eV collision energy . 1892 Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 Histological analysis Mice were anesthetized by phenobarbital and subsequently perfused via either the left ventricle or the abdominal aorta . The ﬁxative used for perfusion contained 1 . 5 % paraformaldehyde , 1 . 5 % glutaraldehyde , 2 . 5 % polyvinylpyrrolidone dissolved in either PBS or 0 . 1 M cacodylate pH 7 . 4 . Organs were removed and 80 – 1200 m m thick sections prepared by using a Dosaka - microslicer . Cytochemical staining , postﬁxation with 1 – 2 % osmium tetroxide , and embedding in Epon or Araldite of the tissue samples was carried out as described ( 79 ) . Serial semithin sections ( 0 . 5 – 1 m m ) were stained with a modiﬁed Richardson solution ( methylene blue – Azur II ) . Morphometric analysis The numerical density of axon proﬁles in the myelinated portion of the optic nerve was determined using semithin sections . All axon proﬁles exceeding a diameter of 1 . 5 m m were counted on three cross - sections of each of two animals . Cell culture and immunoﬂuorescence DAPAT þ / þ and DAPAT (cid:1) / (cid:1) embryonic ﬁbroblasts were isolated from E13 . 5 embryos by removing head and limbs and incubation of the remaining carcasses for 10 min in 0 . 5 % trypsin at 37 (cid:3) C . Cells were grown in DMEM with 10 % FCS in a humiﬁed CO 2 incubator at 37 (cid:3) C and used at passage numbers P4 – 5 . For immunoﬂuorescence , cells were plated on coverslips . Brieﬂy subconﬂuent cells were washed twice with PBS , ﬁxed with 3 % paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 1 % Triton X - 100 . Cells were incubated for 30 min at 37 (cid:3) C with antibodies against Cx43 ( Dianova , Hamburg ) in PBS – 1 % BSA . After washing the FITC - coupled secondary antibodies ( Sigma , Munich ) were applied . Cells were washed again and mounted using moviol / paraphenylendiamine . Staining was visualized in a Zeiss - LSM laser scanning microscope ( Zeiss , Goettingen ) . For cholesterol staining embryonal ﬁbroblasts were grown on coverslips and incubated 30 min with 25 m g / ml ﬁlipin ( Sigma , Munich ) in PBS at room temperature . After washing , the cells were ﬁxed with 3 % paraformaldehyde and mounted using moviol . Micrographs were taken with a Zeiss Axiovert Microscope using a DAPI ﬁlter . Immunoblotting was carried out as previously described ( 75 ) . Brieﬂy , an aliquot of the LRM fraction following acetone precipitation was solubilized in sample buffer and subjected to SDS – PAGE . Proteins were transblotted onto PVDF mem - branes . After blocking with 5 % non - fat dry milk in PBS / 0 . 05 % Tween20 the blots were processed with anti - ﬂotillin - 1 ( 76 ) and anti - F3 / contactin ( 25 ) antiserum . Horseradish peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibodies ( Dianova , Hamburg ) were used to visualize the proteins by chemiluminescence . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank Dr C . H . Westphal ( MIT , Boston , MA ) and Dr A . Nagy ( Mount Sinai Hospital , Toronto ) for the generous gift of the CWKO - vector and the mouse ES cell clone , respectively , and Dr J . Ortiz - Lechner for reading the manuscript . The technical assistance of Ingrid Kuhn - Krause , Ursula Wald and Jutta Worsch is acknowledged . REFERENCES 1 . Nagan , N . and Zoeller , R . A . ( 2001 ) Plasmalogens : biosynthesis and functions . Prog . Lipid Res . , 40 , 199 – 229 . 2 . Diagne , A . , Fauvel , J . , Record , M . , Chap , H . and Douste - Blazy , L . ( 1984 ) Studies on ether phospholipids . II . Comparative composition of various tissues from human , rat and guinea pig . Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 793 , 221 – 231 . 3 . Montrucchio , G . , Alloatti , G . and Camussi , G . ( 2000 ) Role of platelet - activating factor in cardiovascular pathophysiology . Physiol . Rev . , 80 , 1669 – 1699 . 4 . Hooper , N . M . ( 1997 ) Glycosyl – phosphatidylinositol anchored membrane enzymes . Clin . Chim . Acta , 266 , 3 – 12 . 5 . Chatterjee , S . and Mayor , S . ( 2001 ) The GPI - anchor and protein sorting . Cell Mol . Life Sci . , 58 , 1969 – 1987 . 6 . Vos , J . P . , Lopes - Cardozo , M . and Gadella , B . M . ( 1994 ) Metabolic and functional aspects of sulfogalactolipids . Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 1211 , 125 – 149 . 7 . Ishizuka , I . ( 1997 ) Chemistry and functional distribution of sulfoglycolipids . Prog . Lipid Res . , 36 , 245 – 319 . 8 . Hajra , A . K . ( 1995 ) Glycerolipid biosynthesis in peroxisomes ( microbodies ) . Prog . Lipid Res . , 34 , 343 – 364 . 9 . Moser , H . W . ( 2000 ) Molecular genetics of peroxisomal disorders . Front . Biosci . , 5 , D298 – 306 . 10 . Subramani , S . , Koller , A . and Snyder , W . B . ( 2000 ) Import of peroxisomal matrix and membrane proteins . A . Rev . Biochem . , 69 , 399 – 418 . 11 . Heikoop , J . C . , van Roermund , C . W . , Just , W . W . , Ofman , R . , Schutgens , R . B . , Heymans , H . S . , Wanders , R . J . and Tager , J . M . ( 1990 ) Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata . Deﬁciency of 3 - oxoacyl - coenzyme A thiolase in peroxisomes and impaired processing of the enzyme . J . Clin . Invest . , 86 , 126 – 130 . 12 . Thai , T . P . , Rodemer , C . , Jauch , A . , Hunziker , A . , Moser , A . , Gorgas , K . and Just , W . W . ( 2001 ) Impaired membrane trafﬁc in defective ether lipid biosynthesis . Hum . Mol . Genet . , 10 , 127 – 136 . 13 . Baes , M . , Gressens , P . , Baumgart , E . , Carmeliet , P . , Casteels , M . , Fransen , M . , Evrard , P . , Fahimi , D . , Declercq , P . E . , Collen , D . et al . ( 1997 ) A mouse model for Zellweger syndrome . Nat . Genet . , 17 , 49 – 57 . 14 . Faust , P . L . , Su , H . M . , Moser , A . and Moser , H . W . ( 2001 ) The peroxisome deﬁcient PEX2 Zellweger mouse : pathologic and biochemical correlates of lipid dysfunction . J . Mol . Neurosci . , 16 , 289 – 297 ; discussion 317 – 321 . 15 . Kunau , W . H . ( 2001 ) Peroxisomes : the extended shuttle to the peroxisome matrix . Curr . Biol . , 11 , R659 – 662 . 16 . Clayton , P . T . , Eckhardt , S . , Wilson , J . , Hall , C . M . , Yousuf , Y . , Wanders , R . J . and Schutgens , R . B . ( 1994 ) Isolated dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase deﬁciency presenting with developmental delay . J . Inherit . Metab . Disord . , 17 , 533 – 540 . 17 . Hebestreit , H . , Wanders , R . J . , Schutgens , R . B . , Espeel , M . , Kerckaert , I . , Roels , F . , Schmausser , B . , Schrod , L . and Marx , A . ( 1996 ) Isolated dihydroxyacetonephosphate - acyl - transferase deﬁciency in rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata : clinical presentation , metabolic and histological ﬁndings . Eur . J . Pediatr . , 155 , 1035 – 1039 . 18 . Elias , E . R . , Mobassaleh , M . , Hajra , A . K . and Moser , A . B . ( 1998 ) Developmental delay and growth failure caused by a peroxisomal disorder , dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase ( DHAP - AT ) deﬁciency . Am . J . Med . Genet . , 80 , 223 – 226 . 19 . Powers , J . M . , Kenjarski , T . P . , Moser , A . B . and Moser , H . W . ( 1999 ) Cerebellar atrophy in chronic rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata : a potential role for phytanic acid and calcium in the death of its Purkinje cells . Acta Neuropathol . ( Berl . ) , 98 , 129 – 134 . 20 . Wanders , R . J . ( 1999 ) Peroxisomal disorders : clinical , biochemical , and molecular aspects . Neurochem . Res . , 24 , 565 – 580 . 21 . de Vet , E . C , Ijlst , L . , Oostheim , W . , Dekker , C . , Moser , H . W . , van Den Bosch , H . and Wanders , R . J . ( 1999 ) Ether lipid biosynthesis : alkyl - dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase protein deﬁciency leads to reduced dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase activities . J . Lipid Res . , 40 , 1998 – 2003 . Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 1893 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 22 . Pike , L . J . , Han , X . , Chung , K . N . and Gross , R . W . ( 2002 ) Lipid rafts are enriched in arachidonic acid and plasmenylethanolamine and their composition is independent of caveolin - 1 expression : a quantitative electrospray ionization / mass spectrometric analysis . Biochemistry , 41 , 2075 – 2088 . 23 . Kokubo , H . , Lemere , C . A . and Yamaguchi , H . ( 2000 ) Localization of ﬂotillins in human brain and their accumulation with the progression of Alzheimer’s disease pathology . Neurosci . Lett . , 290 , 93 – 96 . 24 . Bickel , P . E . , Scherer , P . E . , Schnitzer , J . E . , Oh , P . , Lisanti , M . P . and Lodish , H . F . ( 1997 ) Flotillin and epidermal surface antigen deﬁne a new family of caveolae - associated integral membrane proteins . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 13793 – 13802 . 25 . Kramer , E . M . , Klein , C . , Koch , T . , Boytinck , M . and Trotter , J . ( 1999 ) Compartmentation of Fyn kinase with glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored molecules in oligodendrocytes facilitates kinase activation during myelination . J . Biol . Chem . , 274 , 29042 – 29049 . 26 . Boyle , M . E . , Berglund , E . O . , Murai , K . K . , Weber , L . , Peles , E . and Ranscht , B . ( 2001 ) Contactin orchestrates assembly of the septate - like junctions at the paranode in myelinated peripheral nerve . Neuron , 30 , 385 – 397 . 27 . Goodenough , D . A . , Goliger , J . A . and Paul , D . L . ( 1996 ) Connexins , connexons , and intercellular communication . A . Rev . Biochem . , 65 , 475 – 502 . 28 . Roscoe , W . A . , Barr , K . J . , Mhawi , A . A . , Pomerantz , D . K . and Kidder , G . M . ( 2001 ) Failure of spermatogenesis in mice lacking connexin43 . Biol . Reprod . , 65 , 829 – 838 . 29 . Girao , H . and Pereira , P . ( 2003 ) Phosphorylation of connexin 43 acts as a stimuli for proteasome - dependent degradation of the protein in lens epithelial cells . Mol . Vis . , 9 , 24 – 30 . 30 . Chang , B . , Smith , R . S . , Hawes , N . L . , Anderson , M . G . , Zabaleta , A . , Savinova , O . , Roderick , T . H . , Heckenlively , J . R . , Davisson , M . T . and John , S . W . ( 1999 ) Interacting loci cause severe iris atrophy and glaucoma in DBA / 2J mice . Nat . Genet . , 21 , 405 – 409 . 31 . Ishii , S . and Shimizu , T . ( 2000 ) Platelet - activating factor ( PAF ) receptor and genetically engineered PAF receptor mutant mice . Prog . Lipid Res . , 39 , 41 – 82 . 32 . Martinez , M . and Mougan , I . ( 1999 ) Fatty acid composition of brain glycerophospholipids in peroxisomal disorders . Lipids , 34 , 733 – 740 . 33 . Ford , D . A . and Gross , R . W . ( 1989 ) Plasmenylethanolamine is the major storage depot for arachidonic acid in rabbit vascular smooth muscle and is rapidly hydrolyzed after angiotensin II stimulation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 86 , 3479 – 3483 . 34 . Nordoy , A . , Marchioli , R . , Arnesen , H . and Videbaek , J . ( 2001 ) n - 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and cardiovascular diseases . Lipids , 36 ( suppl . ) , S127 – 129 . 35 . Singh , N . , Zoeller , R . A . , Tykocinski , M . L . , Lazarow , P . B . and Tartakoff , A . M . ( 1994 ) Addition of lipid substituents of mammalian protein glycosylphosphoinositol anchors . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 14 , 21 – 31 . 36 . Zoeller , R . A . , Morand , O . H . and Raetz , C . R . ( 1988 ) A possible role for plasmalogens in protecting animal cells against photosensitized killing . J . Biol . Chem . , 263 , 11590 – 11596 . 37 . Jansen , G . A . and Wanders , R . J . ( 1997 ) Plasmalogens and oxidative stress : evidence against a major role of plasmalogens in protection against the superoxide anion radical . J . Inherit . Metab . Disord . , 20 , 85 – 94 . 38 . Wanders , R . J . , Jansen , G . A . , van Roermund , C . W . , Denis , S . , Schutgens , R . B . and Jakobs , B . S . ( 1996 ) Metabolic Aspects of Peroxisomal Disorders . New York Academy of Science , New York . 39 . Brown , D . A . and London , E . ( 1998 ) Structure and origin of ordered lipid domains in biological membranes . J . Membr . Biol . , 164 , 103 – 114 . 40 . Ko , Y . G . , Lee , J . S . , Kang , Y . S . , Ahn , J . H . and Seo , J . S . ( 1999 ) TNF - alpha - mediated apoptosis is initiated in caveolae - like domains . J . Immunol . , 162 , 7217 – 7223 . 41 . Cottin , V . , Doan , J . E . and Riches , D . W . ( 2002 ) Restricted localization of the TNF receptor CD120a to lipid rafts : a novel role for the death domain . J . Immunol . , 168 , 4095 – 4102 . 42 . Razani , B . , Zhang , X . L . , Bitzer , M . , von Gersdorff , G . , Bottinger , E . P . and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2001 ) Caveolin - 1 regulates transforming growth factor ( TGF ) - beta / SMAD signaling through an interaction with the TGF - beta type I receptor . J . Biol . Chem . , 276 , 6727 – 6738 . 43 . Mineo , C . , Gill , G . N . and Anderson , R . G . ( 1999 ) Regulated migration of epidermal growth factor receptor from caveolae . J . Biol . Chem . , 274 , 30636 – 30643 . 44 . Davy , A . , Feuerstein , C . and Robbins , S . M . ( 2000 ) Signaling within a caveolae - like membrane microdomain in human neuroblastoma cells in response to ﬁbroblast growth factor . J . Neurochem . , 74 , 676 – 683 . 45 . Citores , L . , Wesche , J . , Kolpakova , E . and Olsnes , S . ( 1999 ) Uptake and intracellular transport of acidic ﬁbroblast growth factor : evidence for free and cytoskeleton - anchored ﬁbroblast growth factor receptors . Mol . Biol . Cell , 10 , 3835 – 3848 . 46 . Nusrat , A . , Parkos , C . A . , Verkade , P . , Foley , C . S . , Liang , T . W . , Innis - Whitehouse , W . , Eastburn , K . K . and Madara , J . L . ( 2000 ) Tight junctions are membrane microdomains . J . Cell Sci . , 113 ( Pt 10 ) , 1771 – 1781 . 47 . Lee , N . P . , Mruk , D . , Lee , W . M . and Cheng , C . Y . ( 2003 ) Is the cadherin / catenin complex a functional unit of cell - cell actin - based adherens junctions in the rat testis ? Biol . Reprod . , 68 , 489 – 508 . 48 . Faivre - Sarrailh , C . , Gauthier , F . , Denisenko - Nehrbass , N . , Le Bivic , A . , Rougon , G . and Girault , J . A . ( 2000 ) The glycosylphosphatidyl inositol - anchored adhesion molecule F3 / contactin is required for surface transport of paranodin / contactin - associated protein ( caspr ) . J . Cell Biol . , 149 , 491 – 502 . 49 . Schubert , A . L . , Schubert , W . , Spray , D . C . and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2002 ) Connexin family members target to lipid raft domains and interact with caveolin - 1 . Biochemistry , 41 , 5754 – 5764 . 50 . Zhou , L . , Kasperek , E . M . and Nicholson , B . J . ( 1999 ) Dissection of the molecular basis of pp60 ( v - src ) induced gating of connexin 43 gap junction channels . J . Cell Biol . , 144 , 1033 – 1045 . 51 . Carystinos , G . D . , Kandouz , M . , Alaoui - Jamali , M . A . and Batist , G . ( 2003 ) Unexpected induction of the human connexin 43 promoter by the ras signaling pathway is mediated by a novel putative promoter sequence . Mol . Pharmac . , 63 , 821 – 831 . 52 . Jou , Y . S . , Layhe , B . , Matesic , D . F . , Chang , C . C . , de Feijter , A . W . , Lockwood , L . , Welsch , C . W . , Klaunig , J . E . and Trosko , J . E . ( 1995 ) Inhibition of gap junctional intercellular communication and malignant transformation of rat liver epithelial cells by neu oncogene . Carcinogenesis , 16 , 311 – 317 . 53 . Hossain , M . Z . , Jagdale , A . B . , Ao , P . , Kazlauskas , A . and Boynton , A . L . ( 1999 ) Disruption of gap junctional communication by the platelet - derived growth factor is mediated via multiple signaling pathways . J . Biol . Chem . , 274 , 10489 – 10496 . 54 . Lau , A . F . , Kurata , W . E . , Kanemitsu , M . Y . , Loo , L . W . , Warn - Cramer , B . J . , Eckhart , W . and Lampe , P . D . ( 1996 ) Regulation of connexin43 function by activated tyrosine protein kinases . J . Bioenerg . Biomembr . , 28 , 359 – 368 . 55 . Munn , N . J . , Arnio , E . , Liu , D . , Zoeller , R . A . and Liscum , L . ( 2003 ) Deﬁciency in ethanolamine plasmalogen leads to altered cholesterol transport . J . Lipid Res . , 44 , 182 – 192 . 56 . Nwokoro , N . A . , Wassif , C . A . and Porter , F . D . ( 2001 ) Genetic disorders of cholesterol biosynthesis in mice and humans . Mol . Genet . Metab . , 74 , 105 – 119 . 57 . Bosio , A . , Binczek , E . and Stoffel , W . ( 1996 ) Functional breakdown of the lipid bilayer of the myelin membrane in central and peripheral nervous system by disrupted galactocerebroside synthesis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 93 , 13280 – 13285 . 58 . Coetzee , T . , Fujita , N . , Dupree , J . , Shi , R . , Blight , A . , Suzuki , K . and Popko , B . ( 1996 ) Myelination in the absence of galactocerebroside and sulfatide : normal structure with abnormal function and regional instability . Cell , 86 , 209 – 219 . 59 . Fujimoto , H . , Tadano - Aritomi , K . , Tokumasu , A . , Ito , K . , Hikita , T . , Suzuki , K . and Ishizuka , I . ( 2000 ) Requirement of seminolipid in spermatogenesis revealed by UDP - galactose : ceramide galactosyltrans - ferase - deﬁcient mice . J . Biol . Chem . , 275 , 22623 – 22626 . 60 . Honke , K . , Hirahara , Y . , Dupree , J . , Suzuki , K . , Popko , B . , Fukushima , K . , Fukushima , J . , Nagasawa , T . , Yoshida , N . , Wada , Y . et al . ( 2002 ) Paranodal junction formation and spermatogenesis require sulfoglycolipids . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 99 , 4227 – 4232 . 61 . Takamiya , K . , Yamamoto , A . , Furukawa , K . , Zhao , J . , Fukumoto , S . , Yamashiro , S . , Okada , M . , Haraguchi , M . , Shin , M . , Kishikawa , M . et al . ( 1998 ) Complex gangliosides are essential in spermatogenesis of mice : possible roles in the transport of testosterone . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 95 , 12147 – 12152 . 62 . White , T . W . ( 2002 ) Unique and redundant connexin contributions to lens development . Science , 295 , 319 – 320 . 63 . Giepmans , B . N . and Moolenaar , W . H . ( 1998 ) The gap junction protein connexin43 interacts with the second PDZ domain of the zona occludens - 1 protein . Curr . Biol . , 8 , 931 – 934 . 1894 Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019 64 . Giepmans , B . N . , Hengeveld , T . , Postma , F . R . and Moolenaar , W . H . ( 2001 ) Interaction of c - Src with gap junction protein connexin - 43 . Role in the regulation of cell – cell communication . J . Biol . Chem . , 276 , 8544 – 8549 . 65 . Ai , Z . , Fischer , A . , Spray , D . C . , Brown , A . M . and Fishman , G . I . ( 2000 ) Wnt - 1 regulation of connexin43 in cardiac myocytes . J . Clin . Invest . , 105 , 161 – 171 . 66 . Colville , D . J . and Savige , J . ( 1997 ) Alport syndrome . A review of the ocular manifestations . Ophthal . Genet . , 18 , 161 – 173 . 67 . Chen , L . , Miyamura , N . , Ninomiya , Y . and Handa , J . T . ( 2003 ) Distribution of the collagen IV isoforms in human Bruch’s membrane . Br . J . Ophthal . , 87 , 212 – 215 . 68 . Siu , M . K . , Lee , W . M . and Cheng , C . Y . ( 2003 ) The interplay of collagen IV , tumor necrosis factor - alpha , gelatinase B ( matrix metalloprotease - 9 ) , and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteases - 1 in the basal lamina regulates Sertoli cell - tight junction dynamics in the rat testis . Endocrinology , 144 , 371 – 387 . 69 . Noble , M . , Murray , K . , Stroobant , P . , Waterﬁeld , M . D . and Riddle , P . ( 1988 ) Platelet - derived growth factor promotes division and motility and inhibits premature differentiation of the oligodendrocyte / type - 2 astrocyte progenitor cell . Nature , 333 , 560 – 562 . 70 . Baron , W . , Decker , L . , Colognato , H . and Ffrench - Constant , C . ( 2003 ) Regulation of integrin growth factor interactions in oligodendrocytes by lipid raft microdomains . Curr . Biol . , 13 , 151 – 155 . 71 . Mariani , S . , Basciani , S . , Arizzi , M . , Spera , G . and Gnessi , L . ( 2002 ) PDGF and the testis . Trends Endocrinol . Metab . , 13 , 11 – 17 . 72 . Fruttiger , M . , Karlsson , L . , Hall , A . C . , Abramsson , A . , Calver , A . R . , Bostrom , H . , Willetts , K . , Bertold , C . H . , Heath , J . K . , Betsholtz , C . et al . ( 1999 ) Defective oligodendrocyte development and severe hypomyelination in PDGF - A knockout mice . Development , 126 , 457 – 467 . 73 . Westphal , C . H . and Leder , P . ( 1997 ) Transposon - generated ‘knock - out’ and ‘knock - in’ gene - targeting constructs for use in mice . Curr . Biol . , 7 , 530 – 533 . 74 . Forss - Petter , S . , Werner , H . , Berger , J . , Lassmann , H . , Molzer , B . , Schwab , M . H . , Bernheimer , H . , Zimmermann , F . and Nave , K . A . ( 1997 ) Targeted inactivation of the X - linked adrenoleukodystrophy gene in mice . J . Neurosci . Res . , 50 , 829 – 843 . 75 . Thai , T . P . , Heid , H . , Rackwitz , H . R . , Hunziker , A . , Gorgas , K . and Just , W . W . ( 1997 ) Ether lipid biosynthesis : isolation and molecular characterization of human dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase . FEBS Lett . , 420 , 205 – 211 . 76 . Gkantiragas , I . , Brugger , B . , Stuven , E . , Kaloyanova , D . , Li , X . Y . , Lohr , K . , Lottspeich , F . , Wieland , F . T . andHelms , J . B . ( 2001 ) Sphingomyelin - enriched microdomains at the Golgi complex . Mol . Biol . Cell , 12 , 1819 – 1833 . 77 . Bligh , E . G . and Dyer , W . J . ( 1959 ) A rapid method of total lipid extraction and puriﬁcation . Can . J . Biochem . Physiol . , 37 , 911 – 917 . 78 . Brugger , B . , Erben , G . , Sandhoff , R . , Wieland , F . T . and Lehmann , W . D . ( 1997 ) Quantitative analysis of biological membrane lipids at the low picomole level by nano - electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 94 , 2339 – 2244 . 79 . Gorgas , K . ( 1984 ) Peroxisomes in sebaceous glands . V . Complex peroxisomes in the mouse preputial gland : serial sectioning and three - dimensional reconstruction studies . Anat . Embryol . ( Berl . ) , 169 , 261 – 270 . Human Molecular Genetics , 2003 , Vol . 12 , No . 15 1895 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / h m g / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 12 / 15 / 1881 / 2527243 b y gue s t on 11 M a r c h 2019