Challenges in Visual Data Analysis ∗ Daniel A . Keim , Florian Mansmann , J¨orn Schneidewind , and Hartmut Ziegler University of Konstanz , Germany { keim , mansmann , schneide , ziegler } @ inf . uni - konstanz . de Abstract In today’s applications data is produced at unprece - dented rates . While the capacity to collect and store new data rapidly grows , the ability to analyze these data vol - umes increases at much lower rates . This gap leads to new challenges in the analysis process , since analysts , decision makers , engineers , or emergency response teams depend on information hidden in the data . The emerging ﬁeld of vi - sual analytics focuses on handling these massive , heteroge - nous , and dynamic volumes of information through integra - tion of human judgement by means of visual representations and interaction techniques in the analysis process . Further - more , it is the combination of related research areas includ - ing visualization , data mining , and statistics that turns vi - sual analytics into a promising ﬁeld of research . This paper aims at providing an overview of visual analytics , its scope and concepts , and details the most important technical re - search challenges in the ﬁeld . 1 . Introduction The information overload is a well - known phenomenon of the information age , since due to the progress in com - puter power and storage capacity over the last decades , data is produced at an incredible rate . Meanwhile , our ability to collect and store these data is increasing at a faster rate than our ability to analyze it . However , the analysis of these massive , typically messy and inconsistent , volumes of data is crucial in many application domains . For decision mak - ers , analysts or emergency response teams it is an essential task to rapidly extract relevant information from the ﬂood of data . Today , a selected number of software tools is em - ployed to help analysts to organize their information , gen - erate overviews and explore the information space in order to extract potentially useful information . Most of these data analysis systems still rely on interaction metaphors devel - oped more than a decade ago and it is questionable whether ∗ Part of this work has been presented at Dagstuhl Seminar 05231 “Sci - entiﬁc Visualization : Challenges for the Future” [ 3 ] they are able to meet the demands of the ever - increasing mass of information . In fact , huge investments in time and money are often lost , because we still lack the possibili - ties to properly interact with the databases . Visual ana - lytics aims at bridging this gap by employing more intel - ligent means in the analysis process . The basic idea of vi - sual analytics is to visually represent information , allow - ing the human to directly interact with it , to gain insight , to draw conclusions , and to ultimately make better decisions . The visual representation of the information reduces com - plex cognitive work needed to perform certain tasks . People may use visual analytics tools and techniques to synthesize information and derive insight from massive , dynamic , and often conﬂicting data by providing timely , defensible , and understandable assessments . [ 10 ] The goal of visual analytics research is to turn the information overload into an opportunity . Decision - makers should be enabled to examine this massive , multi - dimensional , multi - source , time - varying information stream to make effective decisions in time - critical situa - tions . For informed decisions , it is indispensable to include humans in the data analysis process to combine ﬂexibility , creativity , and background knowledge with the enormous storage capacity and the computational power of today’s computers . The speciﬁc advantage of visual analytics is that decision makers may focus their full cognitive and percep - tual capabilities on the analytical process , while allowing them to apply advanced computational capabilities to aug - ment the discovery process . This paper gives an overview on visual analytics , and discusses the most important re - search challenges in this ﬁeld . Technical research chal - lenges are detailed to show how visual analytics can help to turn information overload as generated by today’s appli - cations into useful information . The rest of the paper is organized as follows : section 2 deﬁnes visual analytics and discusses its scope . The techni - cal challenges are described in Section 3 . Finally , section 4 presents the visual analytics mantra as a solution . 2 . Scope of Visual Analytics In general , visual analytics can be described as “the sci - ence of analytical reasoning facilitated by interactive vi - sual interfaces” [ 10 ] . To be more precise , visual analyt - ics is an iterative process that involves information gath - ering , data preprocessing , knowledge representation , inter - action and decision making . The ultimate goal is to gain insight in the problem at hand which is described by vast amounts of scientiﬁc , forensic or business data from hetero - geneous sources . To reach this goal , visual analytics com - bines strengths of machines with those of humans . On the one hand , methods from knowledge discovery in databases ( KDD ) , statistics and mathematics are the driving force on the automatic analysis side , while on the other hand human capabilities to perceive , relate and conclude turn visual an - alytics into a very promising ﬁeld of research . Historically , visual analytics has evolved out of the ﬁelds of information and scientiﬁc visualization . According to Colin Ware , the term visualization is meanwhile understood as “a graphical representation of data or concepts” [ 14 ] , while the term was formerly applied to form a mental im - age . Nowadays fast computers and sophisticated output de - vices create meaningful visualizations and allow us not only to mentally visualize data and concepts , but also to see and explore an exact representation of the data under considera - tion on a computer screen . However , the transformation of data into meaningful visualizations is not a trivial task that will automatically improve through steadily growing com - putational resources . Very often , there are many different ways to represent the data and it is unclear which represen - tation is the best one . State - of - the - art concepts of represen - tation , perception , interaction and decision - making need to be applied and extended to be suitable for visual data anal - ysis . The ﬁelds of information and scientiﬁc visualization deal with visual representations of data . The main difference among the two is that scientiﬁc visualization examines po - tentially huge amounts of scientiﬁc data obtained from sen - sors , simulations or laboratory tests . Typical scientiﬁc visu - alization applications are ﬂow visualization , volume render - ing , and slicing techniques for medical illustrations . In most cases , some aspects of the data can be directly mapped onto geographic coordinates or into virtual 3D environments . We deﬁne information visualization more generally as the communication of abstract data relevant in terms of action through the use of interactive visual interfaces . There are three major goals of visualization , namely a ) presentation , b ) conﬁrmatory analysis , and c ) exploratory analysis . For presentation purposes , the facts to be presented are ﬁxed a priori , and the choice of the appropriate presentation tech - nique depends largely on the user . The aim is to efﬁciently and effectively communicate the results of an analysis . For Presentation , production , and dissemination Statistical Analytics Scientific Analytics Knowledge Discovery Data Management & Knowledge Representation Cognitive and Perceptual Science Interaction Geospatial Analytics Scope of Visual Analytics Information Analytics Figure 1 . The Scope of Visual Analytics conﬁrmatory analysis , one or more hypotheses about the data serve as a starting point . The process can be described as a goal - oriented examination of these hypotheses . As a result , visualization either conﬁrms these hypotheses or re - jects them . Exploratory data analysis as the process of searching and analyzing databases to ﬁnd implicit but po - tentially useful information , is a difﬁcult task . At the be - ginning , the analyst has no hypothesis about the data . Ac - cording to John Tuckey , tools as well as understanding are needed [ 12 ] for the interactive and usually undirected search for structures and trends . Visual analytics is more than only visualization . It can rather be seen as an integral approach combining visual - ization , human factors and data analysis . Figure 1 illus - trates the detailed scope of visual analytics . Concerning the ﬁeld of visualization , visual analytics integrates methodol - ogy from information analytics , geospatial analytics , and scientiﬁc analytics . Especially human factors ( e . g . , inter - action , cognition , perception , collaboration , presentation , and dissemination ) play a key role in the communication between human and computer , as well as in the decision - making process . In this context , production is deﬁned as the creation of materials that summarize the results of an analyt - ical effort , presentation as the packaging of those materials in a way that helps the audience understand the analytical results in context using terms that are meaningful to them , and dissemination as the process of sharing that information with the intended audience [ 11 ] . In matters of data analysis , visual analytics furthermore proﬁts from methodologies de - veloped in the ﬁelds of data management & knowledge rep - resentation , knowledge discovery and statistical analytics . Note that visual analytics , is not likely to become a sepa - rate ﬁeld of study [ 15 ] , but its inﬂuence will spread over the research areas it comprises . According to Jarke J . van Wijk , “visualization is not ’good’ by deﬁnition , developers of new methods have to make clear why the information sought cannot be extracted automatically” [ 13 ] . From this statement , we immediately see the need for the visual analytics approach using auto - matic methods from statistics , mathematics and knowledge discovery in databases ( KDD ) wherever they are applicable . Visualization is used as a means to efﬁciently communicate and explore the information space when automatic meth - ods fail . In this context , human background knowledge , intuition and decision - making either cannot be automated or serve as input for the future development of automated processes . Overlooking a large information space is a typical visual analytics problem . In many cases , the information at hand is conﬂicting and needs to be integrated from heterogeneous data sources . Moreover , the system lacks knowledge that is still hidden in the expert’s mind . By applying analytical rea - soning , hypotheses about the data can be either afﬁrmed or discarded and eventually lead to a better understanding of the data , thus supporting the analyst in his task to gain in - sight . Contrary to this , a well - deﬁned problem where the optimum or a good estimation can be calculated by non - interactive analytical means would rather not be described as a visual analytics problem . In such a scenario , the non - interactive analysis should be clearly preferred due to ef - ﬁciency reasons . Likewise , visualization problems not in - volving methods for automatic data analysis do not fall into the category of visual analytics problems . The ﬁelds of visualization and visual analytics both build upon methods from scientiﬁc analytics , geospatial analytics and information analytics . They both proﬁt from knowledge out of the ﬁeld of interaction as well as cognitive and per - ceptual science . They do differentiate in so far as visual an - alytics furthermore integrates methodology from the ﬁelds of statistical analytics , knowledge discovery , data manage - ment & knowledge representation and presentation , produc - tion & dissemination . 3 . Technical Challenges With information technology becoming a standard in most areas in the past years , from medicine to science , from education to business , from astronomy to networking ( In - ternet ) , more and more digital information is generated and collected . Today , we continuously face rapidly increasing amounts of data : New sensors , faster recording methods and decreasing prices for storage capacities in the previous years allow storing huge amounts of data that have not been imaginable a decade ago . Applications like ﬂow simula - tions , molecular dynamics , nuclear science , computer to - mography or astronomy generate amounts of data that can easily reach terabytes ; the Large Hadron Collider ( LHC ) at CERN for example generates a volume of 1 petabyte of Figure 2 . Visual Analysis of Financial Data : The Growth Matrix data per year . Parallel to the growth of datasets , the compu - tational power of the computer systems for processing these amounts of data also evolved : Faster processors , more main memory , faster networks , parallel and distributed comput - ing and larger storage capacities increase the data through - put every year . Having no possibility of adequately explor - ing the large amounts of data which have been collected be - cause of their potential usefulness , the data becomes useless and the databases become data “dumps” [ 2 ] . Often , the huge amount of data ( terabytes ) to be visual - ized exceeds the limited amount of pixels of a display by several orders of magnitude . Filtering , aggregation , com - pression , principle component analysis or other data reduc - tion techniques are then needed to reduce the amount of data as only a small portion of it can be displayed . Visual scal - ability is deﬁned as the capability of visualization tools to effectively display large data sets in terms of either the num - ber or the dimension of individual data elements [ 1 ] . We thus not only have to compare the absolute data growth and hardware performance in order to cope with a problem , but also the software and the algorithms to bring this data onto the screen in an appropriate way . Scalability in general is a key challenge of visual analytics as it determines the ability to process large datasets by means of computational over - head as well as appropriate rendering techniques . In the last decade , information visualization has developed numerous techniques to visualize datasets , but only some of them are scalable to the huge data sets used in visual analytics . As the amount of data is continuously growing and the amount of pixels on the display remains rather constant , the rate of compression to visualize the dataset on the display is con - tinuously increasing , therefore more and more details are lost . It is the task of visual analytics to create a higher - level view onto the dataset to gain insight , while maximizing the amount of details at the same time . An example of a highly scalable visual analytics tech - nique in the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial data analysis is the Growth Matrix [ 4 ] . It visualizes all possible time intervals of a fund over a time span of 14 years ( about 11 . 000 intervals ) , and simultaneously compares the performance of each interval with 14 . 000 funds that are in the database in just one im - age ( see Fig . 2 ) . To generate one image , 154 million values have to be calculated . Using a large display wall , it is possi - ble to compare several hundreds of these Growth Matrices . Dynamic processes , arising in business , network or telecommunications generate tremendous streams of time related or real time data . Examples are sensor logs , web statistics , network trafﬁc logs or atmospheric and meteoro - logical applications . The analysis of such data streams is an important challenge , since it plays an essential role in many areas of science and technology . As the sheer amount of data does often not allow to record all data at full de - tail , effective compression and feature extraction methods are needed to manage the data . Furthermore it is vital to provide analysis techniques and metaphors that are capable of analyzing real time data streams , and to present the re - sults in a meaningful and intuitive way . This enables quick identiﬁcation of important information and timely reaction on critical process states or alarming incidents . Real - world applications often access information from a number of heterogeneous information sources and thus re - quire synthesis of heterogeneous types of data in order to perform an effective analysis . These heterogeneous data sources may include collections of vector data , strings and text documents , graphs or sets of objects . A typical appli - cation domain is computational biology , where the human genome for example , is , among others , accompanied by real - valued gene expression data , functional annotation of genes , genotyping information , a graph of interacting pro - teins , equations describing the dynamics of a system , local - ization of proteins in a cell , and natural language text in the form of papers describing experiments , partial models , and numerous other data sources . The problem of integrating these data sources touches many fundamental problems in decision theory , information theory , statistics , and machine learning evidently posing a challenge for visual analytics , too . The focus on scalable and robust methods for fusing complex and heterogeneous data sources is thus key to a more effective analysis process . Interpretability or the ability to recognize and under - stand the data is one of the biggest challenges in visual an - alytics . Generating a visually correct output from raw data and drawing the right conclusions largely depends on the quality of the used data and methods . A lot of possible qual - ity problems ( e . g . , data capture errors , noise , outliers , low precision , missing values , coverage errors , double counts ) can already be contained in the raw data . Furthermore , pre - processing of data in order to use it for visual analysis bears many potential quality problems ( i . e . , data migration and parsing , data cleaning , data reduction , data enrichment , up - / down - sampling , rounding and weighting , aggregation and combining ) . Data can inherently be incomplete or simply out of date . The challenges are on the one hand to deter - mine and to minimize these errors on the pre - processing side , and a ﬂexible yet stable design of the visual analyt - ics application to cope with data quality problems on the other hand . From a technical point of view such an applica - tion can be either designed to be insensitive to data qual - ity issues through employment of data cleaning methods or to explicitly visualize errors and uncertainty in the ap - plication to make the analyst aware of the problem . Many domains ranging from terrorism informatics to natural sci - ences and business intelligence applications would poten - tially beneﬁt from methods to enhance data quality . Home - land Security applications in general have to deal with a lot of missing values and uncertainty . As an example , imagine a screening program in the context of Homeland Security at an airport . The system should identify potential terrorists , but also try to minimize false positives in order to avoid incorrectly targeting innocent travelers . A falsely inserted data record should not inﬂuence the principle way in which the system observes and analyzes other persons . Moreover , updated data of a potential terrorist might not be available in the database for many weeks , but the visual monitoring and analysis of patterns should still work even though the records in the database are widely incomplete . The ﬁeld of problem solving , decision science , and hu - man information discourse constitutes a further visual an - alytics challenge . Many psychological studies about the process of problem solving have been conducted . In a usual test setup the subjects have to solve a well - deﬁned problem where the optimal solution is known to the re - searchers . However , real - world problems are manifold . In many cases these problems are intransparent , consist of con - ﬂicting goals , and are complex in terms of large numbers of items , interrelations , and decisions involved . In addi - tion to these aspects , information exhibits its own dynam - ics by changing over time and has thus a strong impact on the optimal solution . To date , decision making is aided by so - called Decision Support Systems that try to repre - sent expert knowledge through rules in order to reduce the risk of human errors when too much interrelated informa - tion is involved . Decision making in groups makes the hu - man decision - making process even more complicated . Con - cerning human information discourse , it is estimated that human subjects can reliably distinguish between approxi - mately seven categories in the process of absolute judge - ment [ 6 ] . This number has therefore direct consequences on the design of effective user interfaces . To assess further limitations of human capabilities for more complex tasks is challenging as subjects react differently to screen designs depending on their personality and their cultural , educa - tional , and professional background . Summing up , the pro - cess of decision support for problem solving requires under - standing of technology on the one hand , but also compre - hension of typical human capabilities such as logic , reason - ing , and common sense on the other hand . Intuitive displays and interaction devices should be constructed to steer anal - ysis and to communicate analytical results through mean - ingful visualizations and clear representations . Another challenge in the context of visual analytics is to provide semantics for future analysis tasks and decision - centered visualization . Semantic meta data extracted from heterogeneous sources may capture associations and com - plex relationships . Therefore , providing techniques to anal - yse and detect this information is crucial to visual analyt - ics applications . Ontology - driven techniques and systems have already started to enable new semantic applications in a wide span of areas such as bioinformatics , ﬁnancial ser - vices , web services , business intelligence , and national se - curity . However , further research is necessary to increase capabilities for creating and maintaining large domain on - tologies and automatic extraction of semantic meta data , since the integration process between different ontologies to link various datasets is hardly automated yet . In order to perform a more powerful way of analysis of heteroge - neous data sources , more advanced methods for the extrac - tion of semantics from heterogenous data is a key require - ment . Thereby , research challenges arise from the size of ontologies , content diversity , heterogeneity as well as from computation of complex queries and link analysis over on - tology instances and meta data . New techniques are neces - sary to resolve semantic heterogeneities in order to discover complex relationships . User acceptability is a further challenge ; many novel vi - sualization techniques have been presented , yet their wide - spread deployment has not taken place , primarily due to the users’ refusal to change their working routines . Therefore , the advantages of visual analytics tools need to be commu - nicated to the audience of future users to overcome usage barriers , and to eventually tap the full potential of the visual analytics approach . One example is the IBM Remail project [ 8 ] , which tries to enhance human capabilities to cope with email overload . Concepts like “Thread Arcs” , “Correspon - dents Map” , and “Message Map” support the user to efﬁ - ciently analyse his personal email communication . MIT’s project Oxygen [ 7 ] even goes one step further , by address - ing the challenges of new systems to be pervasive , embed - ded , nomadic , adaptable , powerful , intentional and eternal . Another challenge for Visual Analytics is the integration of the visualization techniques into other applications and systems . Visual Analytics tools and techniques should not stand alone , but should integrate seamlessly into the appli - cations of diverse domains , and allow interaction with other already existing systems . Although many visual analytics tools are very speciﬁc ( like in astronomy or nuclear sci - ence ) and therefore rather unique , in many domains ( like business applications or network security ) integration into existing systems would make sense . This requires inter - active capabilities and input / output software interfaces for communication with other applications . Real - time visual monitoring and analysis requires a connection to databases and frequent updates , and can also be used for automated analysis . In addition to that , Visual Analytics applications can be integrated or connected to new innovative interaction and visualization devices for improved performance . Evaluation as a systematic determination of merit , worth , and signiﬁcance of a system is crucial to its suc - cess . When evaluating a system , different aspects can be considered such as functional testing , performance bench - marks , measurement of the effectiveness of the display , eco - nomic success , user studies , assessment of its impact on decision - making to name just a few . Not all of these aspects are orthogonal , they rather commonly represent a compar - isons with previous systems to assess the novel system’s ad - equacy . In this context , objective rules of thumbs to facil - itate design decisions would be a great contribution to the community . 4 Solutions Visual analytics combining strengths from information analytics , geospatial analytics , scientiﬁc analytics , statis - tical analytics , knowledge discovery , data management & knowledge representation , presentation , production and dis - semination , cognition , perception and interaction . It is a goal - oriented process to gain insight into homogeneous , contradictory and incomplete data through the combina - tion of automatic analysis methods with human background knowledge and intuition . The example shown in Figure 3 helps to illustrate the ra - tio behind visual analytics . The ﬁgure shows an analysis of stock market data using the CircleView [ 5 ] approach , visu - alizing stock prices of 240 stocks from the S & P 500 over 6 months , starting from January 2004 ( outside of the circle ) to June 2004 ( center of the circle ) . Instead of just visualizing the data , it is analysed by applying a relevance function in the ﬁrst step . Since from an analysts point of view it may be more interesting to analyse actual stock prizes rather than historic ones , the basic idea is to show actual stock prizes at full detail and to present historic values as aggregated high level views . That is , the relevance value of each data point is determined by its time stamp and the data is presented at dif - ferent levels of details ( i . e . , day , week , month ) . This helps to reduce the amount of data and to provide overviews even on large data sets . In the next step the stocks are clustered to identify groups of stock that have a similar performance over time . If the analyst then identiﬁes stocks of interest or relevant groups of stocks , he can now select relevant subsets of the data and perform a detailed analysis using drill down Figure 3 . CircleView technique operations on items with lower resolution or select inter - esting parts of the data and investigate them in more detail using chart techniques . Unlike described in the information seeking mantra ( “overview ﬁrst , zoom / ﬁlter , details on demand” ) [ 9 ] , the visual analytics process comprises the application of auto - matic analysis methods before and after the interactive vi - sual representation is used . This is primarily due to the fact that current and especially future data sets are complex on the one hand and too large to be visualized straightforward on the other hand . Therefore , we present the visual analyt - ics mantra : “Analyse First - Show the Important - Zoom , Filter and Analyse Further - Details on Demand” The visual analytics mantra could be exemplarily applied in the context of data analysis for network security . Visual - izing the sheer amount of data is unfeasible and rarely re - veals deep insight . Therefore , it is ﬁrst analysed ( i . e . , com - pute changes , intrusion detection analysis , etc . ) and then displayed . Afterwards , the analyst chooses a small suspi - cious subset of the recorded intrusion incidents by applying ﬁlters and zoom operations . Finally , this subset is used for a more careful analysis . During this interactive analysis pro - cess insight is gained . Acknowledgements This work has been funded by the German Research So - ciety ( DFG ) under the grant GK - 1042 , Explorative Analysis and Visualization of Large Information Spaces , Konstanz . References [ 1 ] S . G . Eick . Visual scalability . Journal of Computational & Graphical Statistics , March 2002 . [ 2 ] D . A . Keim . Information visualization and visual data min - ing . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics ( TVCG ) , 8 ( 1 ) : 1 – 8 , January – March 2002 . [ 3 ] D . A . Keim . Visual Exploration of Large Geo - Spatial Data Sets . In T . Ertl , E . Gr¨oller , K . Joy , and G . Nielson , edi - tors , Dagstuhl Seminar 05231 : Scientiﬁc Visualization , June 2005 . [ 4 ] D . A . Keim , T . Nietzschmann , N . Schelwies , J . Schnei - dewind , T . Schreck , and H . Ziegler . A spectral visualization system for analyzing ﬁnancial time series data . In EuroVis 2006 : Eurographics / IEEE - VGTC Symposium on Visualiza - tion , Lisbon , Portugal , 8 - 10 May , 2006 . [ 5 ] D . A . Keim , J . Schneidewind , and M . Sips . Circleview - a new approach for visualizing time related multidimensional data sets . In ACM Advanced Visual Interfaces ( AVI ) . Associ - ation for Computing Machinery ( ACM ) , ACM Press , 2004 . [ 6 ] G . A . Miller . The magical number seven , plus or minus two : Some limits on our capacity for processing information . The Psychological Review , 63 : 81 – 97 , 1956 . [ 7 ] MIT Project Oxygen . http : / / oxygen . lcs . mit . edu / . [ 8 ] S . L . Rohall , D . Gruen , P . Moody , M . Wattenberg , M . Stern , B . Kerr , B . Stachel , K . Dave , R . Armes , and E . Wilcox . Re - mail : a reinvented email prototype . In Extended abstracts of the 2004 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems , CHI 2004 , Vienna , Austria , April 24 - 29 , 2004 , pages 791 – 792 , 2004 . [ 9 ] B . Shneiderman . The eyes have it : A task by data type tax - onomy for information visualizations . In IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages , pages 336 – 343 , 1996 . [ 10 ] J . Thomas and K . Cook . Illuminating the Path : Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics . IEEE - Press , 2005 . [ 11 ] J . J . Thomas and K . A . Cook . A Visual Analytics Agenda . IEEE Transactions on Computer Graphics and Applica - tions , 26 ( 1 ) : 12 – 19 , January / February 2006 . [ 12 ] J . W . Tuckey . Exploratory Data Analysis . Addison - Wesley , Reading MA , 1977 . [ 13 ] J . J . van Wijk . The value of visualization . In IEEE Visual - ization , 2005 . [ 14 ] C . Ware . Information Visualization - Perception for Design . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , 1st edition , 2000 . [ 15 ] P . C . Wong and J . Thomas . Visual analytics - guest editors’ introduction . IEEE Transactions on Computer Graphics and Applications , September / October 2004 .