Kinetics of the Formation and Dissociation of Actin Filament Branches Mediated by Arp2 / 3 Complex Rachel E . Mahaffy * and Thomas D . Pollard * y * Department of Molecular , Cellular , and Developmental Biology ; and y Departments of Cell Biology , and Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry , Yale University , New Haven , Connecticut 06520 - 8103 ABSTRACT The actin ﬁlament network at the leading edge of motile cells relies on localized branching by Arp2 / 3 complex from ‘‘mother’’ ﬁlaments growing near the plasma membrane . The nucleotide bound to the mother ﬁlaments ( ATP , ADP and phosphate , or ADP ) may inﬂuence the branch dynamics . To determine the effect of the nucleotide bound to the subunits of the mother ﬁlament on the formation and stability of branches , we compared the time courses of actin polymerization in bulk samples measured using the ﬂuorescence of pyrene actin with observations of single ﬁlaments by total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy . Although the branch nucleation rate in bulk samples was nearly the same regardless of the nucleotide on the mother ﬁlaments , we observed fewer branches by microscopy on ADP - bound ﬁlaments than on ADP - P i - bound ﬁlaments . Observation of branches in the microscope depends on their binding to the slide . Since the probability that a branch binds to the slide is directly related to its lifetime , we used counts of branches to infer their rates of dissociation from mother ﬁlaments . We conclude that the nucleotide on the mother ﬁlament does not affect the initial branching event but that branches are an order of magnitude more stable on the sides of new ATP - or ADP - P i ﬁlaments than on ADP - actin ﬁlaments . INTRODUCTION At the leading edge of motile cells , a host of molecules participates in the continuous assembly and disassembly of a cytoskeleton capable of producing protrusive forces . Actin ﬁlaments form the scaffold on which all of the other mole - cules act . By attaching to the sides of these ﬁlaments , Arp2 / 3 complex contributes to the formation of a dense network of short branched ﬁlaments ( 1 – 3 ) . Within one to two microm - eters of the leading edge , the network is remodeled into long , unbranched ﬁlaments ( 4 ) capable of providing the traction to sustain the forces necessary for global cell motility ( 5 ) . Timing is important in the assembly and disassembly of these ﬁlaments to maintain distinct ﬁlament networks within the dynamic cytoskeleton . Actin ﬁlaments contain their own internal timer with the subunits hydrolyzing bound ATP within seconds followed by the release of the g - phosphate within minutes . Proteins utilizing the ﬁlament’s nucleotide - bound state could aid in timing the disassembly or rearrange - ment of the network . For example , ADF / coﬁlin increases the rate of phosphate dissociation from ADP - P i ﬁlaments and then binds with higher afﬁnity , promotes dissociation of branches , and severs ADP - actin ﬁlaments ( 6 , 7 ) . ATP hydrolysis and phosphate dissociation might also inﬂuence the ability of ﬁlaments to bind Arp2 / 3 complex and support the formation of branches , but the published evi - dence on this matter is inconsistent . Experiments on branch formation in bulk samples using the ﬂuorescence of pyrene actin to measure ﬁlament nucleation implicated the nucle - otide bound to the Arp2 / 3 complex and not nucleotide bound to the mother ﬁlament ( 8 , 9 ) . Microscopic observations of ﬁlaments stabilized with rhodamine - phalloidin or ﬁlaments on glass slides showed more branches on newly polymerized segments of ﬁlaments than older ﬁlaments ( 7 , 10 , 11 ) , but these studies lacked quantitative information on whether ATP hydrolysis or phosphate release inﬂuence observed branching . One study concluded that only the tip of the barbed end is available for branching ( 12 ) , which seems un - likely given microscopic observations of branching from the sides of ﬁlaments ( 10 , 13 ) . Here we take a new approach to investigate how the nucleotide bound to mother ﬁlaments inﬂuences their ability to support branching . We compared the number of branches observed by total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy with the number of ﬁlament ends formed in bulk samples where polymerization was mea - sured by the ﬂuorescence of pyrene - labeled actin . Branches formed at similar rates in bulk samples whether they contained aging actin ﬁlaments or exclusively ADP - P i - bound actin ﬁlaments . On the other hand , we observed fewer branches microscopically on older ﬁlaments with bound ADP than on new ATP - actin ﬁlaments or ADP - actin ﬁlaments saturated with phosphate . The number of branches observed on ﬁlaments assembled from ATP - actin declined with time , with two exponential rates on highly adhesive surfaces and one exponential rate on less adhesive surfaces . We conclude from our experiments on branching in bulk samples that the nucleotide bound to the mother ﬁlament does not inﬂuence branch formation , but our microscopic observations show that ATP hydrolysis and g - phosphate dissociation increase the rate of branch dissociation ; 10 - fold as mother ﬁlaments age . Submitted January 6 , 2006 , and accepted for publication July 28 , 2006 . Address reprint requests to Thomas D . Pollard , Tel . : 203 - 432 - 3565 ; Fax : 203 - 432 - 6161 ; E - mail : thomas . pollard @ yale . edu . (cid:2) 2006 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 06 / 11 / 3519 / 10 $ 2 . 00 doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 080937 Biophysical Journal Volume 91 November 2006 3519 – 3528 3519 MATERIALS AND METHODS Proteins Actin was prepared from an acetone powder of rabbit skeletal muscle ( 14 ) , gel ﬁltered on a column of Sephacryl S300 , stored in buffer G ( 2 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) ) at 4 (cid:3) C , and used within 3 weeks of preparation . Actin was dialyzed for 24 h versus buffer G and centrifuged at 100 , 000 3 g for 2 h immediately before use . Mg - ADP actin monomers were prepared by treating Mg - ATP actin with soluble hexokinase and glucose ( 15 ) and used within 4 h . Arp2 / 3 complex was prepared from bovine thymus using a modiﬁcation of a previously described protocol ( 16 ) . Two frozen bovine thymuses were broken into small chunks and blended in 100 ml homogenization buffer ( 10 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 1 mM DTT , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 50 mM KCl , 2 mM EGTA , 5 % glycerol , 4 Complete EDTA - free protease inhibitor tablets ( Roche Diag - nostics , Mannheim , Germany ) / L , and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride ) . The homogenate was centrifuged at 2600 rpm for 30 min . Lipids were removed from the surface . The supernatant and pellet were further centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 15 min . The supernatant was ﬁltered through cheesecloth and centrifuged at 100 , 000 3 g for 1 h . The supernatant was passed over a fast - ﬂow Q - Sepharose ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech , Uppsala , Sweden ) column in Q - buffer ( 10 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 1 mM DTT , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 50 mM KCl , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 1 mM EGTA , 2 % glycerol ) with two protease inhibitor tablets without EDTA / L . The ﬂow - through was subject to precipitation with a 35 % followed by a 55 % saturated ammonium sulfate solution . The pellet from the second step was dialyzed into Q - buffer without KCl overnight . The protein was further puriﬁed on a fast - ﬂow Q - Sepharose column in Q - buffer ( 10 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 1 mM DTT , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 15 mM KCl , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 1 mM EGTA , 2 % glycerol ) after some dilution to ensure that the initial conductivity of the solution matched a 15 mM KCl solution . A linear gradient of salt between 15 mM and 300 mM KCl was used to elute the proteins . Fractions with actin - nucleating activity were further puriﬁed by binding to human GST ( glutathione S - transferase C - terminal fragment ) - WASp ( Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ) - VCA ( verprolin homology - connecting - acidic motifs ) on a glutathione - Sepharose column and eluted with Q - buffer containing 300 mM KCl . A ﬁnal step of puriﬁcation over a Source S column ( 10 mM 1 , 4 - piperazinediethanesulfonic acid ( PIPES ) , pH 6 . 8 , 25 – 150 mM KCl , 0 . 2 mM EGTA , 0 . 2 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM DTT ) yielded pure Arp2 / 3 complex . The complex was dialyzed into ATP polymerization buffer ( 50 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA , 10 mM imidazole , pH 7 . 0 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 1 mM DTT , 5 % glycerol ) and frozen as small aliquots in liquid nitrogen . Aliquots were thawed for each ex - periment . GST - WASp - VCAwasexpressedin E s cherichiacoli BL21cellsandpuri - ﬁed by afﬁnity chromatography on glutathione - Sepharose and ion exchange chromatography on Source Q - Sepharose and stored at (cid:2) 80 (cid:3) C . Protein concentrations were determined by absorbance using the following extinc - tion coefﬁcients : actin ( e 290 ¼ 25 , 974 M (cid:2) 1 cm (cid:2) 1 ) , Arp2 / 3 complex ( e 290 ¼ 139 , 000 M (cid:2) 1 cm (cid:2) 1 ) , GST - WASp - VCA ( e 280 ¼ 46 , 200 M (cid:2) 1 cm (cid:2) 1 ) . Protein labeling We labeled actin on lysine with Alexa Fluor 488 succinimidyl ester ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) in a protocol similar to Kellogg et al . ( 17 ) . Actin ﬁlaments were dialyzed against labeling buffer ( 50 mM PIPES , pH 6 . 8 , 50 mM KCl , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP ) for 4 h to remove DTT and to adjust the pH . We incubated actin ﬁlaments in labeling buffer with a 20 - fold molar excess of dye overnight at 4 (cid:3) C . Filaments were pelleted at 100 , 000 3 g for 2 h , resuspended in buffer G , and dialyzed for 48 h versus buffer G ( 1L , 3 changes ) . The actin monomers werecentrifugedat 100 , 000 3 g for 2 h to remove remaining oligomers . The top 70 % of the supernatant was gel ﬁltered on a column of Sephacryl S - 300 equilibrated with buffer G . The ﬁnal label concentration was calculated using e 495 ¼ 71 , 000 M (cid:2) 1 cm (cid:2) 1 ( Molecular Probes product information , MP10168 ) . The ﬁnal protein con - centration was determined assuming a 0 . 11 fractional contribution to the A290 signal from the label . The ratio of label per molecule was , 0 . 8 in all preparations . The rate of elongation was on average 10 . 7 6 2 . 0 subunits / ( m M 3 s ) with 15 % or 30 % of the actin monomers labeled on lysine residues with Alexa Fluor 488 . This value matches the elongation rate of unlabeled actin ( 18 ) , so that labeling actin with Alexa 488 at these concentrations does not affect actin ﬁlament elongation as much as labeling actin on cysteine 374 with rhodamine ( 10 ) or Oregon green ( 19 ) . Total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy Glass ﬂow cells were prepared from cleaned glass slides and 24 3 40 mm No . 2 glass coverslips using stretched Paraﬁlm as spacers to create a chamber 20 – 50 - m m deep and 5 - mm wide ( 20 ) . In most cases , chambers were prepared in a high humidity environment on a grounded metal plate to minimize static . Chambers were ﬂushed ﬁrst with 20 – 200 nM N - ethylmaleimide ( NEM ) - inactivated skeletal muscle myosin ( 21 ) in high salt buffer ( 500 mM KCl , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM imidazole ) for 30 s at 22 (cid:3) C . Chambers were then ﬂushed sequentially with high salt buffer and KMEI buffer ( 50 mM KCl , 1mM EGTA , 1 mM MgCl 2 ; 10 mM imidazole , PH 7 . 0 ) . Bovine serum albumin in KMEI buffer was used to block the slides for 2 min , and imaging buffer was introduced into the chamber . The imaging buffer contained 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM imidazole , 100 mM DTT , 20 m g / ml catalase , 100 m g / ml glucose oxidase , 3 mg / ml glucose , and 0 . 5 % methylcellulose ( 2000 cps at 2 % ) ( 10 , 19 ) with one of three salt solutions , each with the same conductivity at room temperature : i ) , 50 mM KCl ; ii ) , 25 mM potassium phosphate , pH 7 . 0 ( 15 . 37 mM H 2 KPO 4 and 9 . 63 mM HK 2 PO 4 ) with 19 . 9 mM KCl ; or iii ) , 25 mM potassium sulfate with 3 . 5 mM KCl . The potassium sulfate introduces a similar bivalent anion to control for the presence of the phosphate ion in solution . In agreement with previous results , sulfate did not affect mea - surable polymerization parameters ( 22 ) . For TIRF microscopy we used an Olympus ( Tokyo , Japan ) IX70 inverted microscope with the excitation beam entering through a prism from the top of the slide ( 10 , 19 ) . The excitation wavelength was 490 nm . Filaments were visible with 10 % or more of the subunits labeled with Alexa Fluor . Generally 30 % labeled actin was used in experiments . Initial ‘‘seed’’ ﬁlaments are grown for several minutes on the slide before ﬂowing in a mixture of Arp2 / 3 complex , GST - WASp - VCA , and actin monomer . Images were taken every 5 – 10 s with a Hamamatsu ( Hamamatsu City , Japan ) CCD camera ORCA - ER charge - coupled device camera . Humidiﬁers kept the ambient relative humidity above 35 % . Measurement of adhesion of ﬁlaments to slides The adhesion of ﬁlaments to slides varied between experiments and in - ﬂuenced observed branch densities . We determined the adhesiveness of each slide independently using the motion of ﬁlaments on the slide . First , we corrected the images for global stage drift by subtracting the center of mass positions ( x cm , y cm ) of all the measured ﬁlaments at a given time from the raw coordinates of the ﬁlament segments . We measured the changes in corrected position of each segment of each actin ﬁlament ( X ij ( t k 1 1 ) , Y ij ( t k 1 1 ) ) relative to the previous time position ( t k ) . Here k is the ordinal number of the image , i is the ordinal number of the ﬁlament , and j is the ordinal number of the segment . Reaction 1 deﬁnes the seed mobility , and the total number of ﬁlaments ( n f ) was constant through the movie . Each ﬁlament contained a number of equal length segments ( m s ) that depended on the length of the ﬁlament ( L i ) at the time ( t k ) . A total of p t time points are separated by time D t . Higher mobility implies fewer attachment points . Mother ﬁlament age determination The use of full ﬁlament histories to determine age was necessary for quantitative results because ﬁlament growth could be interrupted by slide affects , breakage , or annealing . We recorded a full time - lapse series of the 3520 Mahaffy and Pollard Biophysical Journal 91 ( 9 ) 3519 – 3528 growth of at least 20 ﬁlaments for each experiment and traced their growth through time . Each complete experiment included two series of images : one series documented the growth of the seed ﬁlaments , and the other series provided information after the addition of the Arp2 / 3 complex and activators . Each image in the series contained an absolute time stamp used to determine time differences . We measured ﬁlaments grown from an original mother ﬁlament as well as ﬁlaments nucleated later , but not ﬁlaments that dropped into the plane of focus fully formed with no history . Our measurement technique used a combination of a custom automated line detection given a starting point and manual correction as necessary . Each measured ﬁlament in an image was reduced to a series of ( x , y ) coordinates of ﬁve - pixel ( ; 530 nm ) ﬁlament segments with smaller end segments for a total of m segments that varied with ﬁlament length . The total ﬁlament length , L , at the time of each image is the sum of the lengths of all the segments . Fig . 1 A illustrates how we determined the time that each branch began and the age of that segment of the mother ﬁlament at that point in time . When deﬁning the time that each branch began , we ﬁrst looked late in the time - lapse sequence when the branch was over 1 - m m long and clearly visible growing from the mother ﬁlament , as it is in Fig . 1 , frame 28 . We then tracked the branch backward through time until the ﬁrst indication of the branch was detectable as a bright spot . Knowing that branches grow at six subunits ( 16 nm ) per second , we assumed that the branch started in the previous frame , 10 s before the frame with the bright spot . We used the subscript k to denote an image number in the time - lapse series of images taken of the slide surface . In the time between t k (cid:2) 1 and t k each ﬁlament grew from length L k (cid:2) 1 to length L k . Thus , the segment of ﬁlament between L k (cid:2) 1 and L k was newly created at time ( t k 1 t k (cid:2) 1 ) / 2 . The age of this segment at any later time was found by subtracting creation time from the current image time . For example , the age of the ‘‘mother ﬁlament’’ at the branch point , L b , that occurred at time t 26 was age ¼ t 26 (cid:2) t 6 where t 6 was the time the length segment at L b was ﬁrst created . A linear interpolation was used for points falling between the discrete segment positions or points on the seeds that were formed before the ﬁrst slice of the seed movie . We divided the number of branches that originated on segments of a given age by the length of segments of that age to obtain the branch count per unit length for each age . Uncertainties The following sources contribute to uncertainties in these experiments : length measurement error , global variations in concentrations , and differ - ences in adhesive effects of the substrate . To ascertain the magnitude of the uncertainties in the experiments , we repeated experiments with a single set of conditions on the same day . We traced and tallied branches on 20 ﬁla - ments in each experiment . Some scatter existed between experiments , but the trends in observed branch frequency with age were consistent ( Fig . 1 B ) . To correct for variations in concentrations we divided the observed branch frequencies on ﬁlaments of different ages by the total frequency of observed FIGURE 1 Actin branch formation by Arp2 / 3 complex observed by ﬂuorescence microscopy on aging mother ﬁlaments . Comparison of ﬁve separate experiments demonstrates the variability in the observations . ( A ) Time series of ﬂuorescence micrographs of a branching actin ﬁlament . The images in this series were taken 10 s apart . Conditions : 0 . 6 m M Alexa 488 - ATP - actin monomers , 200 nM WASp - VCA , 5 nM Arp2 / 3 complex in TIRF buffer without phosphate . The mother ﬁlament is traced in yellow with a length marker at the barbed end . A branch point is labeled with a green arrow in the frame in which it becomes visible and in the frame immediately before it appears . The length to the branch point from the pointed end is labeled ( L b ) . The segment of the mother ﬁlament that serves as the substrate for the branch labeled in frame t 26 ( the number refers to the frame number ) was ﬁrst created in the frame labeled t 6 ( L b ¼ L 6 ) . The difference of these two times yields the age of the mother ﬁlament at the time of branching , age ¼ t 26 (cid:2) t 6 . ( B ) The observed branch density per minute ( branches per micrometer of ﬁlament in 60 s ) on segments of ﬁlaments with ages ranging from 0 to 1100 s . The symbols representdata from ﬁve similarlypreparedslides . ( Inset ) These ﬁve data sets were normalized by dividing individual branch densities per minute in a given age segment by the total branch density per minute over all ages and times to correct for variations in protein concentrations . ( C ) Average branch densities per minute observed as a function of the age of the mother ﬁlament segment for the ﬁve experiments in B . The error bars are ; 30 % mean 6 1 SD . ( Inset ) Normalized mean branch densities per minute have lower standard deviations of 15 % . Actin Branch Formation by Arp2 / 3 Complex 3521 Biophysical Journal 91 ( 9 ) 3519 – 3528 branches on all ﬁlaments in the ﬁeld ( inset , Fig . 1 B ) . We used this type of normalization to compare the observed branch frequencies along the ﬁlaments looking for age dependence but not to draw quantitative com - parisons between different experiments . Without this normalization standard deviations between experiments were 30 % of the mean branch frequency ( Fig . 1 C ) . With this normalization the standard deviations were 15 % of the mean ( Fig . 1 C , inset ) . We used these percentage errors to display all data unless otherwise stated . RESULTS Branch formation in bulk samples We used the time course of polymerization of bulk samples with pyrenyl - labeled actin to measure new end formation by ATP actin monomers with Arp2 / 3 complex , GST - WASp - VCA , and actin ﬁlament seeds . We calculated the concen - tration of growing barbed ends from the instantaneous polymerization rate , the elongation rate constant , and the concentration of ATP - actin at every point in the experiment . This method measures the concentration of all growing barbed ends whether the ﬁlament is a branch or free in solu - tion . We grew actin ﬁlament seeds by polymerizing ATP - actin monomers for 1 h in the presence or absence of phosphate . In the absence of phosphate most of the subunits in these seeds had bound ADP , whereas in the presence of phosphate the seeds were primarily ADP - P i bound . We performed the nu - cleation experiments with buffers that allowed for free aging ( no phosphate ) or that maintained the homogeneous nucle - otide ( with phosphate ) . In reactions of ATP - actin monomers and actin ﬁlament seeds the polymerization rate increased with time , slightly less so with saturating concentrations of phosphate than controls with sulfate ( Fig . 2 A ) . From the time courses of polymerization , we derived the concentration of ends over time ( Fig . 2 B ) . The concentration of ends increased with the concentration of Arp2 / 3 complex and was consistently higher in sulfate than in phosphate . The slopes in Fig . 2 B yield end creation rates , shown in Fig . 2 C for 10 nM Arp2 / 3 complex . The end creation rate increased during the ﬁrst third of the polymerization reaction because the concentra - tion of polymerized actin increased over time , providing more substrate for branching . The end creation rates were the same in sulfate and in phosphate until 30 % of the actin was polymerized , after which the rate was faster in sulfate . At the point where half of the actin was polymerized , the end creation rate was directly proportional to the concentration of Arp2 / 3 complex ( Fig . 2 D ) and higher in sulfate than phosphate . The results were similar using a lower concen - tration of ATP - actin monomers ( Fig . 2 E ) . The end creation rates fell late in all of these reactions ( Fig . 2 , C , E , and F ) owing to the depletion of actin monomers . Arp2 / 3 complex requires ﬁlaments to nucleate efﬁciently , indicating that branch formation is the primary mechanism for creating ﬁlament ends in these experiments . The initial end creation rates show that ATP - actin monomers and Arp2 / 3 complex formed branches at the same rate on mother ﬁlaments satu - rated with ADP - P i and on a mixture of ADP and ageing ATP actin ﬁlaments . Branch formation observed by microscopy We used TIRF microscopy to visualize individual branches on the sides of mother ﬁlaments on glass slides coated with NEM - myosin . This method records those branches that grow parallel to the microscope slide within the evanescent ﬁeld . Branches that grew long enough on the surface coated with NEM - myosin to be distinguished from the mother ﬁlament showed no tendency to detach from the mother ﬁlament or move out of the evanescent ﬁeld . This implies that ﬁlaments recorded here were stabilized on the slide surface . In no case was a fully formed ﬁlament seen to couple to the side of a mother ﬁlament to form a branch . The key variable in these experiments was the nucleotide state of the mother ﬁlament at the time a branch became visible . Mother ﬁlaments were grown from actin monomers with bound ATP , ADP , or ADP - P i . The ADP and ADP - P i mother ﬁlaments were stable over time in their respective buffers . The ATP mother ﬁlaments aged as they hydrolyzed the bound ATP and dissociated the g - phosphate . To docu - ment the age of each segment of each mother ﬁlament , we took time - lapse images of ﬁlaments growing for up to 10 min with only actin monomers in polymerization buffer . After adding Arp2 / 3 complex , fresh actin monomers , and GST - WASp - VCA to activate Arp2 / 3 complex , we acquired more images for a further 5 – 10 min . We used the recorded history of each ﬁlament to extrapolate back the age of each segment at the time that each branch began . We tested four combinations of actin monomers and ﬁlaments to determine how the nucleotide bound to mono - mers and ﬁlaments inﬂuenced the observation of branches by TIRF microscopy . For quantitative analysis of the experi - mental conditions , we combined several experiments and averaged the branch frequencies per micrometer . Using a total of 2 cm actin ﬁlament and ; 1000 branching events , we determined the average branch frequency per micrometer as a function of age ( Fig . 3 E ) . The error bars in Fig . 3 E represent the standard deviation of the mean and are largest on the oldest ﬁlament where the sample size is small . We observed no branches on ADP - bound mother ﬁlaments after the introduction of Arp2 / 3 complex , ADP actin monomers , and activators in ADP buffer ( Fig . 3 B ) . The absence of a hydrolyzable nucleotide bound to Arp2 / 3 complex may play a role in this result ( 7 , 8 , 15 , 22 ) . We observed branches at a low frequency on ADP - bound mother ﬁlaments when we poly - merized ATP - actin monomers with Arp2 / 3 complex and an activator in ATP buffer ( Fig . 3 C ) . The number of branches observed with ATP - actin mon - omers , Arp2 / 3 complex , and an activator in ATP buffer depended on the age of each segment of mother ﬁlament polymerized from ATP - actin ( Figs . 1 , B and C , and 3 E ) . 3522 Mahaffy and Pollard Biophysical Journal 91 ( 9 ) 3519 – 3528 After averaging branch frequencies from all of our slide conditions , we observed 2 – 3 times more branches on young segments of ﬁlaments ( , 4 min old ) than on old segments of ﬁlaments ( . 8 min old ) ( Fig . 3 , E and F ) . The observed frequency of new branches on old segments of ﬁlaments plateaued after 10 min at a minimum value similar to the frequency of branches on ADP - bound mother ﬁlaments without phosphate . Under these conditions , the frequency of observed branches decayed with the age of each mother ﬁlament segment with a half time of ; 6 . 3 min ( Fig . 3 E , solid circles ) . When 25 mM phosphate was present with ATP - actin monomers , Arp2 / 3 complex , and an activator in ATP buffer , branches appeared at the same frequency on all parts of mother ﬁlaments regardless of their age ( Fig . 3 , D and E , shaded diamonds ) . This phosphate concentration largely saturates the g - phosphate site of ADP - actin ﬁlaments , forming ADP - P i - bound ﬁlaments ( 22 ) . Within error , we ob - served branches on the phosphate - bound mother ﬁlaments at the same frequency as on segments of mother ﬁlaments grown from ATP - actin in the absence of phosphate that were , 4 min old . Given the standard deviations in Fig . 3 F , we can conclude with 99 % certainty that the average number of branches observed on young ﬁlaments and ADP - P i - bound ﬁlaments is statistically larger than the average number of branches on old ﬁlaments and ADP - bound ﬁlaments . These direct observations by ﬂuorescence microscopy differed in two ways from our measurements on bulk sam - ples with the same concentrations of proteins . For this compar - ison we calculated the branch density per micrometer - minute FIGURE 2 Calculation of nucleation rates from the time course of polymerization of bulk samples of actin mono - mers , Arp2 / 3 complex , WASp - VCA , and actin ﬁlament seeds . The polymer concentration was measured from the ﬂuorescence of pyrene - actin . ( A – D ) Conditions : 2 m M Mg - ATP - actin , 200 nM GST - WASp - VCA , 0 – 20 nM active Arp2 / 3 complex , 5 nM actin ﬁlament seeds ( 30 min old , formed from ATP actin monomers in the same buffer used for the nucleation reaction ) in polymerization buffer with ( open symbols ) 25 mM sulfate or ( solid symbols ) 25 mM phosphate . ( A ) Time courses of polymerization in phos - phate or sulfate buffer with variable concentrations of active Arp2 / 3 complex : ( circles ) 0 nM ; ( squares ) 2 nM ; ( diamonds ) 5 nM ; ( triangles ) 10 nM ; and ( inverted triangles ) 20 nM . This stock solution of Arp2 / 3 complex was 25 % active based on the concentration of ends produced with 5 nM of complex . ( B ) Calculated concen - tration of barbed ends created by Arp2 / 3 complex over time in the samples in A . Ends provided by the seeds were subtracted . ( C ) End creation rate with 2 . 5 nM active Arp2 / 3 complex depending on the fraction of the total actin polymerized . ( D ) Dependence of the end creation rate on the concentration of active Arp2 / 3 complex with 25 mM sulfate ( open circles ) or phosphate ( solid circles ) . These rates were calculated at the point where 50 % of the actin monomers were polymerized . ( E and F ) Rates of barbed end formation under the conditions used in TIRF exper - iments ( Figs . 1 , 3 , and 4 ) . Conditions : 0 . 6 m M actin monomer , 5 nM Arp2 / 3 complex ( 55 % active ) , 200 nM GST - WASp - VCA , seeds grown from ATP - bound mono - mers for 10 min . Symbols : open diamonds 25 mM sulfate ; ﬁlled diamonds 25 mM phosphate buffer . ( E ) End creation rate as a function of time for conditions matching the TIRF experiments formed in 25 mM sulfate ( open diamonds ) or phosphate ( solid diamonds ) . ( F ) Rate of ends formed per micrometer of mother ﬁlament as a function of time after initiating polymerization in 25 mM phosphate or 25 mM sulfate . Actin Branch Formation by Arp2 / 3 Complex 3523 Biophysical Journal 91 ( 9 ) 3519 – 3528 of polymerized actin in bulk samples from the end creation rate , assuming that that all new ﬁlaments were created as branches in the presence of Arp2 / 3 complex and an activator ( Fig . 1 F ) . First , the number of branches observed by mi - croscopy depended on the nucleotide bound to the mother ﬁlament but not in bulk samples . Second , we calculated the rate of barbed end formation in bulk samples by averaging the data over the ﬁrst 3 min and obtained 0 . 5 ends / ( m m 3 min ) . This value was more than ﬁvefold higher than observed by microscopy , even on ATP - actin ﬁlaments that were , 3 - min old or on ADP - P i ﬁlaments . Inﬂuence of the slide surface on the observation of branches The adhesiveness of the slide inﬂuenced the number of branches observed but not the main points in previous sec - tions . The ability to observe branches depends on ﬁrst stabilizing the branch . In our experiments , the factor that allows us to stabilize the branches is the slide surface itself , and the ability of the surface to hold new branches can vary according to the number of ﬁlament adhesionpointsavailable . To demonstrate this effect of the surface , we normalized the observations from over 40 experiments , each with 10 and 20 ﬁlaments , by dividing the observed branch density per minute for a given age by the total branch density per minute over all the ﬁlaments in the experiment . This normalization eliminated effects of differing protein concentrations while allowing a comparison of the age dependence of the branching on slides with differing adhesion strengths . We used the lateral motion of ﬁlaments on the slide ( ‘‘mobility’’ ) to gauge adhesion . This mobility was inversely related to the density of nonspeciﬁc adhesions to the glass ( that varied between stocks of slides ) and of speciﬁc tethers by NEM - myosin ( that varied with the total amount of myosin used to coat the slide ) . We grouped the experimental data according to the motilities and averaged over 4 – 7 experiments . The normalized number of branches observed decayed with the age of the mother ﬁlament assembled from ATP - actin in sulfate buffer ( Fig . 4 , A – C , E , G , and I ) but was independent of the age of the mother ﬁlament in the presence of 25 mM phosphate ( Fig . 4 , D , F , H , and J ) . The decay in the number of branches observed on the age of ATP - mother ﬁlaments was better ﬁt by a double exponential than a single exponential when the ﬁlaments adhered strongly to the sub - strate ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) . However , with fewer attachment points , the fast exponential was not apparent , leaving only a single exponential with a decay constant of between 8 and FIGURE 3 Effect of nucleotide on the branch density observed by ﬂuorescence microscopy . Conditions : 0 . 6 m M actin monomer , 5 nM Arp2 / 3 complex ( 55 % active ) , 200 nM GST - VCA in TIRF buffer with 25 mM sulfate or phosphate . ( A – D ) Time series of ﬂuorescence micrographs at60 - sintervalsindifferentbufferconditions . ( A ) ATP - actin monomers in ATP / sulfate buffer with mother ﬁlaments polymerized from ATP - actin monomers starting 10 min before the ﬁrst frame . ATP branches grew from aging mother ﬁlaments . ( B ) ADP - actin monomers in ADP / sulfate buffer with mother ﬁlaments polymerized from ADP - actin monomers starting 15 min before the ﬁrst frame . No ADP branches grew from ADP - actin mother ﬁlaments . ( C ) ATP - actinmonomersinATP / sulfatebufferwithmotherﬁlaments polymerized from ADP - actin monomers starting 15 min beforetheﬁrstframe . ATPbranchesgrewfromADPmother ﬁlaments . ( D ) ATP - actin monomers in ATP / phosphate buffer with mother ﬁlaments polymerized from ATP - actin monomers in phosphate starting 10 min before the ﬁrst frame . ATP branches grew from ADP - P i mother ﬁlaments . ( E ) Average observed branch frequency per micron as a function of the age of the mother ﬁlament . Mean 6 1 SD . ( Solid circles ) Branching by ATP - actin monomers in ATP / sulfate buffer from aging mother ﬁlaments polymerized fromATP - actinmonomers . ( Shadedsymbols ) Branchingby ATP - actinmonomersinATP / phosphatebufferfrommother ﬁlaments polymerized from ATP - actin monomers in phos - phate buffer . ( F ) Summary of the average branch densities per minute observed under various conditions : ATP - actin monomers on aging ATP - actin ﬁlaments , 4 min old or . 8 min old ; ATP - actin monomers on ADP - ﬁlaments ; ATP - actin monomers on ADP - P i ﬁlaments ; and ADP - actin on ADP ﬁlaments . Averaging was performed over 14 – 18 experiments containing a total of 2 cm of actin and 1000 events for each condition . Scale bars are 5 m m . 3524 Mahaffy and Pollard Biophysical Journal 91 ( 9 ) 3519 – 3528 12 min ( Fig . 4 , C , E , and G ) . Although the slow exponential was expected from the results in Figs . 1 and 3 , the decay of , 1 min is new and indicative of a previously undetected age dependence of the branch stability . We also observed the fast exponential on less adhesive slides , provided that we used a high concentration of actin monomers to increase the rate of elongation ( Fig . 4 I ) . The ability to capture the fast decay at high adhesion or fast polymerization indicates that highly unstable branches can only be captured when adhesion density is strong or branch growth is fast enough to span more disperse adhesion points . DISCUSSION By comparing actin ﬁlament branching rates observed in bulk samples with those found by TIRF microscopy , we learned that the nucleotide bound to mother ﬁlaments gov - erns the stability of branches but not the rate that Arp2 / 3 complex forms branches . Branches dissociate more rapidly from ADP - actin mother ﬁlaments than from ADP - P i mother ﬁlaments . Dissociation of branches has no effect on the time course of polymerization of bulk samples , explaining why the nucleotide state of mother ﬁlaments does not inﬂuence their ability to promote branching in bulk samples . However , the rate of dissociation strongly affects the probability that a branch will be captured by the slide in real time microscopic assays or by phalloidin in others assays ( 7 , 11 , 23 ) . The dis - cussion reviews the reactions and the interpretation of the two types of assays , followed by our calculations of branch dissociation rates . Reactions observed in bulk samples using ﬂuorimeter assays Fluorimeter assays of bulk samples and microscopy of single ﬁlaments measure different aspects of the branching reac - tions . Because spontaneous nucleation was very slow under FIGURE 4 Normalized branch density per minute observed microscop - ically as a function of the age of the mother ﬁlament with different nucleotide composition and surface adhesiveness . Dividing the individual branch density per minute at each age segment by the total branch density per minute for each experiment provided the normalization . Adhesiveness is inversely related to the mobility of the ﬁlaments on the surface , noted in m m / min above each graph . General conditions : 0 . 6 m M Mg - ATP actin , 5 nM total Arp2 / 3 complex ( 50 % active ) , and 200 nM GST - VCA . ( A – C , E , G , and I ) 25 mM sulfate buffer . ( A and B ) Highly adhesive low mobility ( 0 . 38 – 0 . 41 m m / min ) substrates in sulfate buffer . The decline in the observed branch density per minute with age of the mother ﬁlament ﬁts a double exponential ( B , t 1 / 2 ¼ 1 min , t 1 / 2 ¼ 12 min , R ¼ 0 . 95 ) much better than a single exponential ( A , t 1 / 2 ¼ 8 . 8 min , R ¼ 0 . 91 ) . ( C , E , and G ) . When the adhesiveness of the substrate was lower , the observed branch density per minute declined with the age of the mother ﬁlament as a single exponential noted oneachgraph . ( I ) With a higherrate of ﬁlamentelongationusing 1 m M actin monomer , the decline in branch densities per minute ﬁts two exponentials ( t 1 / 2 ¼ 1 min , t 1 / 2 ¼ 14 min , R ¼ 0 . 94 ) even on a slide of moderate adhesiveness . ( D , F , H , and J ) 25 mM phosphate buffer ionically balanced with KCl . Observed branch density per minute was independent of the age of the mother ﬁlament on all substrates with both concentrations of actin monomers . Actin Branch Formation by Arp2 / 3 Complex 3525 Biophysical Journal 91 ( 9 ) 3519 – 3528 the conditions used here and because nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex requires binding to a preexisting ﬁlament , most of the new ﬁlament ends created in bulk samples were formed as branches . In a simpliﬁed branching model , a VCA acti - vator molecule brings together an actin monomer ( G - actin ) and an Arp2 / 3 complex on the side of an existing ﬁlament to produce a branch : VCA 1 G (cid:2) actin 1 Arp2 = 3 complex 1 Filament 4 Branch 1 Filament : ( 1 ) In reaction 1 , ﬁlaments act catalytically to form branches . Each ﬁlament and each branch has a free barbed end capable of elongation . New barbed ends , whether on a free ﬁlament or on an attached branch , are indistinguishable in bulk assays . A branch can dissociate to form an independent ﬁlament with the same barbed end , releasing VCA and Arp2 / 3 com - plex to recycle : Branch 1 Filament 4 2 Filaments 1 VCA 1 Arp2 = 3 complex : ( 2 ) The reaction described by reaction 2 has little or no effect on the number of ends measured in bulk polymerization assays , assuming that the polymerization reaction proceeds quickly enough that the newly released Arp2 / 3 complex and VCA do not have time to start a new branch . Late in the poly - merization reaction , the ﬂuorimeter assay detected slightly fewer ends in phosphate than in the sulfate control . One pos - sible explanation for this observation is that Arp2 / 3 complex dissociates more slowly from phosphate - bound mother ﬁla - ments , slowing the recycling of Arp2 / 3 complex . This work and previous experiments with phalloidin ( 7 , 11 , 23 ) show that branches dissociate in seconds to minutes . On the other hand , the reverse of reaction 2 , the assembly of a branch from two free ﬁlaments , is extremely slow and was not observed with the low concentration of 5 nM Arp2 / 3 complex used in this study . Branch products measured microscopically Microscopic assays detect only branches associated with their mother ﬁlament . Since we never observe branches dissoci - ating , all of the observed branches must be stabilized by interactions with myosin or other adhesion points on the slide . In this reaction , a branch ( Br ) interacts with a stabilizing inﬂuence ( st ) on the slide to form a stabilized branch ( stBr ) : Br 1 st % stBr : ( 3 ) The probability that a branch is stabilized before it dissociates ( and is lost to observation ) depends on the length of the branch ( and therefore its rate of elongation ) and the adhesiveness of the slide . Given a uniform elongation rate and uniformly distributed adhesion sites , the probability that a branch is captured is inversely related to the rate that it dissociates . Branches that grow vertically out of the evanescent ﬁeld or dissociate before binding to the slide are lost to direct observation but are recorded in bulk assays . That is , bulk assays measure Br 1 ﬁlament , whereas microscopic assays measure only stBr . Therefore we can use measurements of branches formed in bulk samples and microscopic counts of stabilized branches to infer rates of branch dissociation from mother ﬁlaments . Comparison of branching from ADP - and ADP - P i mother ﬁlaments In bulk samples Arp2 / 3 complex and VCA formed new ﬁlament ends , presumed to be branches under the conditions employed , at about the same rate on mother ﬁlaments that age freely with or without saturating phosphate , whereas saturating phosphate increased the number of branches observed by TIRF microscopy on ADP ﬁlaments indepen - dent of their age . The larger number of branches that we observed by microscopy on ﬁlaments saturated with phos - phate was previously missed in a study that used only 2 mM phosphate ( 11 ) , which did not fully saturate the ﬁlaments ( 22 ) . However , even with saturating phosphate the number of branches observed per micrometer of ﬁlament was less than in bulk samples . Our interpretation of this difference is that many ﬁlaments dissociate from the mother ﬁlaments before being stabilized for microscopic observation and branches dissociate faster from ADP ﬁlaments than ADP - P i ﬁlaments . Saturating concentrations of phosphate may associate with the nucleotide in the Arp2 / 3 complex itself and affect the stability of branches . Within error , the number of branches observed microscopically on new ﬁlaments is the same as the branch density on ﬁlaments in saturating phosphate buffer . Since the branch density observed microscopically is pro - portional to the branch stability , any effect of phosphate - bound Arp2 / 3 complex on branch stability is subtle . Branching on aging ATP - actin ﬁlaments The gap between the number of branches formed in bulk samples and the number observed microscopically widens as ATP - actin mother ﬁlaments age . We observed the maximum of branches on segments of ﬁlaments assembled from ATP - actin , 1 - min old , provided that the surface was highly ad - hesive ( Fig . 4 B ) or we used 1 m M actin monomers ( Fig . 4 I ) so that the branches grew about twice as fast as in our stan - dard conditions . Since the bulk assays show that all segments of ﬁlaments are equally supportive of branch formation , our interpretation is that branches start dissociating immediately after their formation , not that the ends favor branching as proposed previously ( 12 ) . The difference in the lifetime of these transient branches that occurs between new ﬁlament and ﬁlament over 1 - min old may have been lost to obser - vation in earlier experiments ( 7 , 11 ) due to slow binding of rhodamine - phalloidin to actin ﬁlaments . 3526 Mahaffy and Pollard Biophysical Journal 91 ( 9 ) 3519 – 3528 ATP hydrolysis and phosphate dissociation from mother ﬁlaments , daughter ﬁlaments , or Arp2 / 3 complex may contribute to this fast loss of stability during the ﬁrst minute after polymerization of ATP - actin . On these young ﬁla - ments , more than 80 % of the subunits have bound ADP - P i , so the branches lose stability before phosphate dissociates from all of the subunits in the mother ﬁlaments . Perhaps phosphate dissociation from just one of the three mother ﬁlament subunits that bind each Arp2 / 3 complex ( 24 ) de - stabilizes branches . After the ﬁrst minute , the stability of the branches declines further with a half time on the order of 8 min as mother ﬁlaments age . Three lines of evidence suggest that this decline in the number of branches observed as a function of age is related to ATP hydrolysis and phosphate release . First , the decline in branches has about the same half time as g - phosphate dissociation ( 6 , 25 ) . Second , a concentration of phosphate that saturates the g - phosphate site on ADP - actin ﬁlaments prevents the decay in branch density observed by microscopy on ﬁlaments freshly polymerized from ATP - actin ( Fig . 4 ) . Third , phalloidin , which inhibits g - phosphate dissociation ( 26 ) , and the phosphate analog BeF 3 also stabilize branches ( 11 ) . Branch dissociation rates We calculated the relative rates of branch dissociation from mother ﬁlaments with different nucleotide states and put lower limits on the rate constants . We assumed that branches dissociate unless captured by the slide and that slides capture branches randomly at a rate proportional to the length of the branch ( and therefore directly proportional to the elongation rate ) and to the density of adhesion points . We assumed that branch dissociation is a competing ﬁrst order reaction and subtracted the dissociation rate from the stabilization rate to get the net capture rate . Of these quantities , only the branch dissociation rate was variable on a single slide . Using the two decay constants in observed branches from Fig . 4 B , we calculated that the rate constant for branch dis - sociation from ADP - bound mother ﬁlaments ( k D ) is almost 10 times higher than the rate constant for branch dissocia - tion from new ATP - actin ﬁlaments ( k n ¼ 0 . 1 k D ) . Addi - tionally , the rate constant for branch dissociation from mixed ADP / ADP - P i ﬁlament ( k pi ) was approximately half that of pure ADP ﬁlament ( k pi ¼ 0 . 5 k D ) . We could distinguish branches from mother ﬁlaments easily after they had reached a length of 1 m m , which took 60 s with 0 . 6 m M actin in our experiments . Branches that we saw did not dis - sociate and were well adhered to the substrate , so k n ; 0 . 02 s (cid:2) 1 was the lower limit for the branch dissociation rates from the newest segments of ATP - actin mother ﬁlaments . Using the relative rates of capture from the different segments of aging ﬁlaments , we calculated that k D ; 0 . 2 s (cid:2) 1 and k pi ; 0 . 04 s (cid:2) 1 . Implications for cells In motile cells highly branched actin networks are conﬁned to the ﬁrst 1 – 2 m m of the leading edge . The branched network exists for a short time , on the order of a few seconds , before remodeling into longer unbranched ﬁlaments , disas - sembling , and recycling ( 1 , 4 ) . The time course of debranch - ing observed in this work may contribute to the remodeling . Especially intriguing is the observation of transient branches that dissociate from ﬁlaments with . 80 % of the subunits in the ADP - P i state . With the aid of accessory proteins such as coﬁlin to accelerate phosphate release , branches could easily be limited to the ﬁrst micrometer of a leading edge and exist for mere seconds . REFERENCES 1 . Pollard , T . D . , and G . G . Borisy . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell . 112 : 453 – 465 . 2 . Machesky , L . M . 1997 . Cell motility : complex dynamics at the leading edge . Curr . Biol . 7 : R164 – R167 . 3 . Mullins , R . D . , and M . D . Welch . 2002 . Cellular control of actin nucle - ation . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 : 247 – 288 . 4 . Svitkina , T . M . , and G . G . Borisy . 1999 . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and tread - milling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 1009 – 1026 . 5 . Flanagan , L . A . , J . Chou , H . Falet , R . Neujahr , J . H . Hartwig , and T . P . Stossel . 2001 . Filamin A , the Arp2 / 3 complex , and the morphology and function of cortical actin ﬁlaments in human melanoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 155 : 511 – 517 . 6 . Blanchoin , L . , and T . D . Pollard . 1999 . Mechanism of interaction of Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / coﬁlin ) with actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 15538 – 15546 . 7 . Blanchoin , L . , T . D . Pollard , and R . D . Mullins . 2000 . Interaction of ADF / coﬁlin , Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein and proﬁlin in remod - eling of branched actin ﬁlament networks . Curr . Biol . 10 : 1273 – 1282 . 8 . Le Clainche , C . , D . Pantaloni , and M . - F . Carlier . 2003 . ATP hydrolysis on actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex causes debranching of dendritic actin arrays . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 6337 – 6342 . 9 . Dayel , M . J . , R . D . Holleran , and D . M . Mullins . 2001 . Arp2 / 3 complex requires hydrolyzable ATP for nucleation of new actin ﬁlaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 14871 – 14876 . 10 . Amann , K . J . , and T . D . Pollard . 2001 . Direct real - time observation of actin ﬁlament branching mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex using total internal reﬂection microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 15009 – 15013 . 11 . Ichetovkin , I . , W . Grant , and J . Condeelis . 2002 . Coﬁlin produces newly polymerized actin ﬁlaments that are preferred for dendritic nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 : 79 – 84 . 12 . Pantaloni , D . , R . Boujemaa , D . Didry , P . Gounon , and M . - F . Carlier . 2000 . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches ﬁlament barbed ends : functional antagonism with capping proteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 385 – 391 . 13 . Fujiwara , I . , S . Suetsugu , S . Uemura , T . Takenawa , and S . Ishiwata . 2002 . Visualization and force measurement of branching by Arp2 / 3 complex and N - WASP in actin ﬁlament . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 293 : 1550 – 1555 . 14 . Spudich , J . A . , and S . Watt . 1971 . The regulation of rabbit skeletal muscle contraction . Biochemical studies of the interaction of the tropomyosin - troponin complex with actin and the proteolytic fragments of myosin . J . Biol . Chem . 246 : 4866 – 4871 . 15 . Pollard , T . D . 1984 . Polymerization of ADP - actin . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 769 – 777 . Actin Branch Formation by Arp2 / 3 Complex 3527 Biophysical Journal 91 ( 9 ) 3519 – 3528 16 . Higgs , H . N . , L . Blanchoin , and T . D . Pollard . 1999 . Inﬂuence of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) C terminus and Arp2 / 3 complex on actin polymerization . Biochemistry . 38 : 15212 – 15222 . 17 . Kellogg , D . , T . Mitchison , and B . M . Alberts . 1988 . Behavior of microtubules and actin ﬁlaments in living Drosophila embryos . Development . 103 : 675 – 685 . 18 . Pollard , T . D . , P . C . - H . Tseng , D . L . Rimm , D . P . Bichell , R . C . Williams , and J . Sinard . 1986 . Characterization of alpha - actinin from Acanthamoeba . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 6 : 649 – 661 . 19 . Kuhn , J . R . , and T . Pollard . 2005 . Real - time measurements of actin ﬁlament polymerization by total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence micro - scopy . Biophys . J . 88 : 1387 – 1407 . 20 . Kron , S . J . , and J . A . Spudich . 1986 . Fluorescent actin ﬁlaments move on myosin ﬁxed to a glass surface . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 83 : 6272 – 6276 . 21 . Pemrick , S . , and A . Weber . 1998 . Mechanism of inhibition of relaxation by N - ethylmaleimide treatment of myosin . Biochemistry . 15 : 5193 – 5198 . 22 . Carlier , M . - F . , and D . Pantaloni . 1988 . Binding of phosphate to F - ADP - actin and role of F - ADP - Pi - actin in ATP - actin polymerization . J . Biol . Chem . 263 : 817 – 825 . 23 . Blanchoin , L . , K . J . Amann , H . N . Higgs , J . B . Marchand , D . A . Kaiser , and T . D . Pollard . 2000 . Direct observation of dendritic actin ﬁlament networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASp / Scar proteins . Nature . 404 : 1007 – 1011 . 24 . Volkmann , N . , K . J . Amann , S . Stoilova - McPhie , C . Egile , D . C . Winter , L . Hazelwood , J . E . Heuser , R . Li , T . D . Pollard , and D . Hanein . 2001 . Structure of Arp2 / 3 complex in its activated state and in actin ﬁlament branch junctions . Science . 293 : 2456 – 2459 . 25 . Melki , R . , S . Fievez , and M . - F . Carlier . 1996 . Continuous monitoring of P i release following nucleotide hydrolysis in actin or tubulin assembly using 2 - amino - 6 - mecapto - 7 - methylpurine ribonucleoside and purine - nucleoside phosphorylase as an enzyme - linked assay . Biochem - istry . 35 : 12038 – 12045 . 26 . Dancker , P . , and L . Hess . 1990 . Phalloidin reduces the release of inorganic phosphate during actin polymerization . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1035 : 197 – 200 . 3528 Mahaffy and Pollard Biophysical Journal 91 ( 9 ) 3519 – 3528