Multiply - constrained semantic search in the Remote Associates Test Kevin A . Smith ⇑ , David E . Huber , Edward Vul Department of Psychology , University of California , San Diego , 9500 Gilman Drive , La Jolla , CA 92093 - 0109 , United States a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 30 May 2012 Revised 10 January 2013 Accepted 7 March 2013 Keywords : Multiply - constrained problems Semantic retrieval Semantic search Problem solving Remote Associates Test a b s t r a c t Many important problems require consideration of multiple constraints , such as choosing a job based on salary , location , and responsibilities . We used the Remote Associates Test to study how people solve such multiply - constrained problems by asking participants to make guesses as they came to mind . We evaluated how people generated these guesses by using Latent Semantic Analysis to measure the similarity between the guesses , cues , and answers . We found that people use two systematic strategies to solve multiply - con - strained problems : ( a ) people produce guesses primarily on the basis of just one of the three cues at a time ; and ( b ) people adopt a local search strategy—they make new guesses based in part on their previous guesses . These results inform how people combine con - straints to search through and retrieve semantic information from memory . (cid:2) 2013 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction 1 . 1 . Multiply - constrained problems Imagine you are planning a vacation with three ﬁnicky friends . Sam wants to relax on a beach . Pat lost her pass - port and must stay in the United States . Alex , an amateur volcanologist , wants to visit volcanoes . What destination would satisfy everyone ? People ﬁgure out that Hawaii is good choice , and regularly solve similar problems with rel - ative ease . They combine disparate constraints to plan the best route home based on road , weather , and trafﬁc condi - tions ; or to prioritize work based on demands of bosses , available resources , and dependencies from other projects . These problems are all ‘multiply - constrained’ : many alter - natives satisfy one constraint in isolation , but the small number of acceptable solutions can only be found via all constraints . Multiply - constrained problems have two key features : ﬁrst , each of the constraints deﬁnes qualitatively different and mutually uninformative objectives , and second , there is no common currency by which to make a principled tradeoff between criteria . The ﬁrst feature differentiates multiply - constrained problems from probabilistic cue combination ( Ernst & Banks , 2002 ; Ernst & Bulthoff , 2004 ; Hillis , Watt , Landy , & Banks , 2004 ) . In probabilistic cue combination each datum provides uncertain informa - tion about the same latent variable and combining the data increases certainty ; for example , obtaining a more accurate estimate of the height of a ridge by combining tactile and stereoscopic percepts ( Ernst & Banks , 2002 ) . In contrast , the constraints in multiply - constrained prob - lems provide different types of information : in the prior example , a location’s distance to the beach has no bearing on its proximity to a volcano . The second criteria captures the fact that there is no information within the problem about how to weight the constraints : one cannot judge whether a location closer to the beach but further from a volcano is preferable to one with the opposite tradeoff . Thus it is possible to have multiple acceptable answers depending on how individuals decide to weight the constraints . 0010 - 0277 / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2013 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2013 . 03 . 001 ⇑ Corresponding author . Address : Department of Psychology , Univer - sity of California , San Diego , 9500 Gilman Drive , La Jolla , CA 92093 - 0109 , United States . Tel . : + 1 858 534 4468 . E - mail address : k2smith @ ucsd . edu ( K . A . Smith ) . Cognition 128 ( 2013 ) 64 – 75 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Cognition journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / COGNIT Although people often solve these problems effortlessly , this apparent ease hides the computational difﬁculty of the task . The space of possible answers to such a problem is usually enormous ( e . g . , all possible vacation spots on Earth ) , and an exhaustive search of all possible answers is impractical . Instead , people direct their search to prom - ising alternatives ; but how ? Many theories of multiply - constrained problem solving propose a two - stage process : ﬁrst people search for a potential answer , then they test this candidate against all of the constraints to rate its acceptability . If the answer is considered acceptable , peo - ple will use it as a solution ; otherwise , they will search for and test another potential answer . This search - test pro - cess has been proposed as a mechanism for many cognitive tasks such as hypothesis generation ( Thomas , Dougherty , Sprenger , & Harbison , 2008 ) , analogy ( Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1995 ) , or solving word problems ( Gupta , Jang , Med - nick , & Huber , 2012 ) . In this paper we focus on the search process – how do people come up with candidate answers . Although this test process is required to identify when the search process outputs a solution , the search process can be studied sep - arately under the assumption that , in general , people are able to recognize a good answer when it is provided ( i . e . , the test process does not vary greatly across different prob - lems ) . We studied the search process by obtaining a se - quence of guesses as people attempted to solve a multiply - constrained problem . Prior studies have typically not studied this process as it unfolds ; instead they have ﬁt models based on a single ( ﬁnal ) answer for each problem . We hope to gain further traction on the issue by examining the search process in an ‘online’ fashion , under the assumption that a sequence of guesses is a subset of pro - posals from the true underlying search process . We partitioned the space of human search strategies in multiply - constrained problems along two dimensions . First , how do people use the constraints to limit the pool of candidate answers ? Second , how do people search through these potential answers ? Here we address these questions in a novel Remote Associates Test ( RAT ; Med - nick , 1962 ) paradigm by collecting sequences of responses and quantitatively evaluating the search strategies people use to explore candidate answers . 1 . 2 . Search in the Remote Associates Test ( RAT ) The goal in RAT problems is to ﬁnd one word that is associated with three cues ( e . g . , cues : ‘moon’ ‘dew’ ‘comb’ ; answer : ‘honey’ ) . This task illustrates key features of mul - tiply - constrained problems : each cue indicates a different aspect of the target word ( ‘honeymoon’ relies on a different meaning of ‘honey’ than ‘honeycomb’ ) , and there is no principled way to trade off association to each of the three cues . Moreover , RAT problems provide a controlled envi - ronment for studying how people solve multiply - con - strained problems : all constraints are of the same type ( word - word relationships ) , and unlike many naturalistic multiply - constrained problems , RAT problems are de - signed to have a unique best solution . Not only is the Remote Associates Test a controlled mul - tiply - constrained problem , but it is also correlated with real - world problem solving ability and creativity ( Mednick , 1962 ) , so elucidating human search strategies in the RAT can inform what drives these individual differences . More - over , RAT performance is used to measure manipulations related to creativity , such as incubation ( Vul & Pashler , 2007 ) , affect ( Isen , Daubman , & Nowicki , 1987 ) , sleep ( Cai , Mednick , Harrison , Kanady , & Mednick , 2009 ) , and performance assessment ( Harkins , 2006 ) . Although these manipulations affect RAT solution rates , the mechanisms they impact remain unknown , so characterizing search strategies in the RAT might inform how these interventions improve creativity and problem - solving . We next review previous attempts to specify the search process employed while taking the RAT ; however , we note that these studies only considered a single ﬁnal answer , rather than collecting intermediate responses during the search process . Spreading activation accounts ( Collins & Loftus , 1975 ) of the RAT proposed that the cues activate their close associates and thus jointly activate the answer , making it more likely to be produced ( Bolte , Goschke , & Kuhl , 2003 ; Topolinski & Strack , 2008 ) . However , these ac - counts did not specify the weighting scheme for the cues , the quantitative deﬁnition of ‘close associate’ , or the pro - cess for choosing amongst equally activated words . Gupta et al . ( 2012 ) provided evidence that the search process is affected by the frequency of candidate answers , although their model assumed an equal weighting of the cues rather than testing whether this was the case . Supporting the claim that the cues are not equally weighted , Harkins ( 2006 ) found that if the answer to a RAT problem comes to mind easily when prompted by just one of the three cue words , that problem is easier to solve . However , it is possible that these easily answered RAT problems were different in other ways—for instance , the answer to these problems may have been more strongly associated with the other cues as well . Although these studies yield prom - ising clues about how people search for an answer in the RAT , they do not fully specify the weighting scheme for the cues , and , more importantly , do not investigate dy - namic changes in the weighting scheme as the search pro - cess unfolds . In this study , we investigated how the cues act as con - straints on the words produced by the search process . The number of words related to at least one of the cues is a truly vast set of words , and an unordered exhaustive search of this set would take considerable time . Instead , we suggest that the search process samples words probabi - listically , such that the constraints impact the probability that a given word is considered as a potential answer . Thus we want to know how the cues combine to impact this probability : is it the case that cues act multiplicatively , meaning that candidate answers are likely to be consid - ered only if they are related to all three of the cues , or do the cues act additively , such that a word need only be strongly related to a single cue to be considered ? To ex - plore these questions within a probabilistic sampling framework , we considered a range of stochastic search algorithms that people could be using ( Russell & Norvig , 2003 ) . Global search algorithms explore the search space with no sequential dependencies , such that each word is randomly and independently selected from the same set K . A . Smith et al . / Cognition 128 ( 2013 ) 64 – 75 65 of possibilities . In contrast , local search algorithms explore the space via a sequentially dependent chain , where each word is selected from the neighborhood of the previously considered word . Using tasks as varied as free recall ( Howard & Kahana , 2002 ) , production of category members ( Gruenewald & Lockhead , 1980 ) , solving anagrams ( Hills , Todd , & Gold - stone , 2010 ) , and naming personal social relations ( Hills & Pachur , 2012 ) , prior research ﬁnds close similarity rela - tionships between responses that are adjacent within the sequence of responses . But these tasks all require retrieval based on a single constraint ( e . g . , naming animals ) for which close associates of a response will also tend to sat - isfy the constraints of the problem ; close associates of ‘dog’ might include ‘cat’ and ‘wolf’ , which also satisfy the single constraint of naming animals . However , in the mul - tiply - constrained vacation example , locations similar to beach resorts may satisfy the ‘beach’ requirement , but will not necessarily satisfy the ‘volcano’ constraint . Thus , it is not clear whether local search is an effective search strat - egy for multiply - constrained problems . As such , it is important to test whether the ﬁnding of local search for singly - constrained problems generalizes to multiply - con - strained problems . There are different search strategies that can give rise to local search behavior ( i . e . , sequential dependencies ) and , beyond determining if local search is used in multiply - con - strained problems , we seek to differentiate between these alternatives . The simplest form of local search involves the use of each response as an additional constraint that affects the choice of the next response , resulting in a relatively smooth progression . However , some studies have found evidence of a different kind of local dependency based on ‘clustering’ : the tendency in free association for people to rapidly and sequentially name instances of a subcategory from the task ( e . g . , naming a series of farm animals as a subcategory of all animals ) before discretely switching to another subcategory after a pause ( Bousﬁeld , 1953 ; Graes - ser & Mandler , 1978 ) . This has led some to suggest that lo - cal dependence between responses is due to a two - stage process , in which people select a subcategory and then list items that are part of that group ( Gruenewald & Lockhead , 1980 ) . We therefore investigated whether there was evi - dence of direct dependence or clustering as people search for an answer to RAT problems . Using classic RAT tasks that only collect a single re - sponse , it is difﬁcult to distinguish between global search and local search strategies , or to investigate the process by which local search might arise . To gain data capable of differentiating between search algorithms , we used a new experimental method that elicits sequences of re - sponse from participants and analyzed these responses with a technique for measuring the semantic relationships between responses . We asked participants to respond with each word they considered as it came to mind while searching for a RAT solution , and we measured the seman - tic similarity between each of these responses and the cues , answer , and other responses using Latent Semantic Analysis ( LSA ; Landauer & Dumais , 1997 ) . In doing so , we do not assume that these responses faithfully represent every single candidate answer considered by our partici - pants . However , if these responses reﬂect a subset of the candidate answers , and if these responses are ordered in the same manner as the full set of candidate answers , then our analyses can be used to address these questions . 2 . Methods 2 . 1 . Participants and design Seventy - one native English speaking undergraduate students at the University of California San Diego partici - pated for course credit . Each participant was given 25 RAT problems in a randomized order . For each problem they saw three cues ( e . g . , ‘moon’ , ‘dew’ , and ‘comb’ ) , and attempted to ﬁnd a word related to all three ( e . g . , ‘honey’ ) . At the start of the experiment , participants saw one solved RAT problem and were then given three easy practice problems . Participants had 2 min to solve each problem , and were instructed to enter every word they considered while searching for an answer , regardless of whether that word was correct . If they were sure they had produced the right answer , they were instructed to press F5 . After pressing F5 , the problem ceased and a point was given if the last en - tered word was correct . If it was not , a penalty period en - sued before moving onto the next problem . The ﬁrst two times this occurred , the penalty period was 10 s ; thereafter it was the remaining time of the problem . If participants never pressed F5 , the problem ceased after 2 min and par - ticipants received a point if the correct answer was entered as any one of their responses . Participants were informed of their score every ﬁve trials . During each problem , the three cue words were pre - sented in a randomly determined order and a timer dis - played the remaining time . Participants entered responses in a space below the cues and pressed the ‘‘En - ter’’ key or the F5 key when done typing . While typing , the backspace key was enabled . 2 . 2 . Materials We selected RAT problems from three sources ( Bowden & Jung - Beeman , 2003 ; Bowers , Regher , & Balthazard , 1990 ; Mednick , 1962 ) with the constraint that all of the cues and answers were unique ( see Supplementary Table S1 for a list of these RAT problems ) . Three additional ( easy ) RAT problems were used as practice trials to familiarize partic - ipants with the task . 2 . 3 . Metrics of word similarity Word - word similarities were calculated via a Latent Semantic Analysis ( LSA ) of the TASA corpus . 1 LSA summa - rizes the relationship between words in a corpus by placing them in a multi - dimensional space ( 300 dimensions in our analysis ) such that similar words are close to each other ; 1 This corpus was developed by Touchtone Applied Science Associates ( Zeno , Ivens , Millard , & Duvvuri , 1995 ) , and consists of a collection of texts appropriate for students between third grade and the ﬁrst year of college . 66 K . A . Smith et al . / Cognition 128 ( 2013 ) 64 – 75 thus word - word similarity is deﬁned as the distance be - tween words in the LSA space ( Landauer , 2007 ) . As is typical for LSA , distance was measured as the cosine angle between each pair of words ( Martin & Berry , 2007 ) . Although this metric of similarity is only a crude approximation of human semantics , LSA based on the TASA corpus approximates word - sorting and relatedness judgments ( Landauer , Foltz , & Laham , 1998 ) , judgments of sentence cohesion ( McNa - mara , Cai , & Louwerse , 2007 ) , and memory intrusions in free - recall tasks ( Steyvers , Shiffrin , & Nelson , 2005 ) , to name some examples . To check whether the reported results gen - eralize to other semantic spaces , we performed all of the same analyses using the Word Association Space ( WAS ; Steyvers et al . , 2005 ) , reaching nearly identical conclusions . For details of the LSA space see Supplementary Materials A and for the WAS results see Supplementary Materials B . 2 . 4 . Data pre - processing Fifteen participants were excluded from all analyses be - cause they produced fewer than three responses per RAT problem on average , which may indicate that they were performing the task in a different manner . 2 For each response to a particular RAT problem , we cal - culated the similarity between that response and : ( a ) each cue , ( b ) the answer , and ( c ) all prior responses from the same problem . 500 ( 4 . 6 % ) of the 10 , 862 responses were not found in the TASA corpus and were excluded from all analyses ( these were typically misspellings ) . LSA calculates the similarity between a word and itself as 1 , which is well outside the normal range of word - word similarities . Thus , additional steps were taken to eliminate identity relations from the analyses . First , the answer words were not analyzed , as this would skew tests for a relationship between responses and answers . In 34 in - stances , a response was given that was identical to one of the cue words , and these responses were dropped from the analyses . In 147 instances , participants repeated the same word twice in a row . We treated these as if the par - ticipants had entered that word only once . In 532 in - stances , participants entered the same word at different non - adjacent places within the same problem . When these word pairs were compared to each other , they were ex - cluded from analyses ; otherwise they were retained . Elim - ination of repeats was a conservative assumption – words tended to be repeated nearby in the sequence of responses , so including identical word - word pairs would have in - creased the chance of ﬁnding local dependencies within the response chain . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Performance on RAT problems On average , participants solved 42 % of problems within the 2 - min period . Although the word - word similarity val - ues did not differ greatly across participants , there were large accuracy differences across both problems and sub - jects , consistent with the RAT literature . The number of participants solving each problem varied from 5 ( 9 % ) to 48 ( 86 % ) participants ( see Supplementary Table S1 for solution rates by problem ) . Similarly , participants varied in their RAT proﬁciency , solving between 4 ( 16 % ) and 17 ( 68 % ) problems . 3 . 2 . How do people constrain potential answers ? Prior research has shown that if people give a single re - sponse to RAT problems , that response tends to be related to all three cue words ( Gupta et al . , 2012 ) . But these ﬁnal answers reﬂect the end result of the search / test processes ; even if participants primarily search using one cue at a time , they may not give a ﬁnal answer until the search pro - cess produces a word that happens to be similar to all three cues . Here we focus exclusively on the search process rather than the ﬁnal answer – do they combine the cues to constrain potential answers to words related to all three , or do they pick a single cue at a time to use as a constraint ? If potential answers are constrained by all three cues simultaneously , then all of the candidate answers consid - ered prior to a ﬁnal answer should also be related to all three cues . However , if participants consider candidate an - swers mainly based on a single cue , then intermediate re - sponses prior to a ﬁnal response should ‘bunch’ around that cue in semantic space ( we call this the primary cue ) . By bunching , we are not implying that response distribu - tion will have multiple modes ( one around each cue ) , but only that responses will tend to be more related to one of the three cues than would be expected if all cues were weighted equally . If responses bunch in this manner , then responses with the same primary cue ( within - cue word pairs ) should be more similar to each other than responses with different primary cues ( across - cue word pairs ) . We tested for this ‘bunching’ by assigning each re - sponse a primary cue , deﬁned to be the cue most similar to the response . We then sorted all adjacent response pairs into within - cue pairs and across - cue pairs . We found that the similarity between the within - cue pairs was higher than across - cue pairs ( 0 . 250 vs . 0 . 142 , t ( 5572 ) = 27 . 7 , p < 0 . 001 ) . This demonstrates that subjects’ responses tended to bunch around particular cues , suggesting that participants based their responses largely on a single cue . This test may suffer from selection bias , because words that tend to be closest to the same cue will also tend to be similar to each other . However , the effect remains even when we controlled for this confound by using permuta - tion tests ( see Appendix A for details ) . This result does not preclude all three cues from con - straining the search for potential answers ; instead it indi - cates that one cue is used primarily , but not necessarily exclusively . As reported in Supplementary Materials C , we ran a statistical test demonstrating that responses are more similar to the other two cues than chance when con - trolling for similarity to the primary cue . However , this sta - tistical test can only be interpreted as providing evidence that participants jointly use all 3 cues under the assump - tion that our analyses have accurately identiﬁed the pri - mary cue for each response . If instead the primary cue is 2 We ran all tests with these subjects as well and found no qualitative difference in any of the reported results K . A . Smith et al . / Cognition 128 ( 2013 ) 64 – 75 67 misidentiﬁed for some responses ( e . g . , the participant used cue1 and sampled a word that was by chance more similar to cue2 , resulting in our misidentiﬁcation of cue2 as the primary cue ) this analysis will falsely appear to indicate an inﬂuence of more than one cue . Therefore , we cannot make strong claims based on this test . In lieu of a speciﬁc statistical test , we graphically quan - tiﬁed the extent to which responses where similar to each of the cues in Fig . 1 by projecting subjects’ responses in LSA semantic space onto the plane deﬁned by the three cues , normalized such that the cues form a standard 2 - D simplex . 3 On this simplex , responses equally related to all three cues will appear in the middle , whereas responses more related to one of the three cues will be shifted towards the vertex representing that cue . We ﬁnd that responses tend to lie in the middle of all three cues ( the upper - left , ‘real observed’ plot ) ; however , so do unrelated responses from other problems ( the ‘real background’ plot ) 4 , indicating that the preference for the middle is simply a feature of our semantic space . Thus , we must compare how the real re - sponses differ from the background distribution : how much more likely are we to ﬁnd a response in a spot on the sim - plex compared to all other words ( the ‘real difference’ plot ) . We ﬁnd that compared to the background distribution , re - sponses are much more likely to arise near one of the three cues . We also ‘shufﬂed’ responses by assigning each to a dif - ferent RAT problem , calculating where they would be posi - tioned relative to those cues . When we do , the proximity of the responses to the cues disappears . The fact that re - sponses show these relationships to the cues in semantic space suggests that people primarily use a single cue to con - strain the search for potential answers . Based on these data and analyses , we cannot rule out whether the other two cues have any effect , although if they do , that effect is very small . 3 . 3 . Does search exhibit sequential dependence ? The above analyses demonstrated how the cues were used to constrain the set of potential answers , but did not investigate the impact of prior responses . Here we ask whether the search process has sequential dependen - cies between responses , which indicates a local search , or whether each response is independent of the other re - sponses , which indicates a global search . Many semantic search tasks use a single semantic constraint , and for these problems use of prior responses may be an effective search strategy ( i . e . , because prior responses were generated from the original constraint , they may be as similar to valid an - swers as the original constraint ) . Indeed , for these single constraint tasks , there is evidence that people use a local search rather than a global search . However , in a multi - ply - constrained problem such as the RAT , the three cues are completely unrelated to each other . Thus , a prior re - sponse generated from a single cue does not necessary bring the semantic search any closer to the goal of ﬁnding a word that is related to all three cues . Therefore , it is of interest to test for sequential dependencies in the chain of responses to these RAT problems . To test whether search is local or global , we investi - gated whether response pairs from a single problem that are closer together are more similar to one another than pairs from that same problem that are further apart in the response chain . Supporting the local search algorithm , there was a signiﬁcantly negative linear relationship between the number of intervening responses and average response - response similarity ( See Fig . 2 ; F ( 1 , 53 , 701 ) = 482 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Fig . 1 . Projectionof responses onto the simplexdeﬁned by the three cues in semantic space . Thetop row represents actual responses , while the bottom row represents a single random shufﬂing of responses such that each response is paired with non - related cues . The left column ( ‘observed’ ) is a heatmap of the log - frequency of ﬁnding a response in a given area on that plane . The middle column ( ‘background’ ) is the matched log - frequency of ﬁnding any word on the same plane . The right column ( ‘difference’ ) is the log - ratio of the observed and background frequencies . 3 Because projection requires Euclidean distance metrics rather than cosine - distance measures of similarity , this depiction is an approximation of the clustering analysis . 4 Background words were chosen such that they were responses given to other RAT problems but never as responses to the cues they were paired with . We selected 9361 words in this manner to match the number of real responses analyzed . 68 K . A . Smith et al . / Cognition 128 ( 2013 ) 64 – 75 If prior responses are inﬂuencing the search process , we might also expect that close associates of the prior re - sponse would be produced more quickly . More speciﬁcally , if there is a variable degree of semantic drift in the search process between each response , either due to a diffusion process that has run for a variable duration , or due to a var - iable number of latent samples of candidate answers be - tween each overt response , then subsequent responses that are close associates ( i . e . , less semantic drift ) should correspond with shorter response times . Conﬁrming this prediction , there was a linear relationship between simi - larity and response time for responses that were adjacent in the sequence ( F ( 1 , 8071 ) = 108 , p < 0 . 001 ) . 5 3 . 4 . How does sequential dependence arise ? The sequential dependence we ﬁnd between adjacent responses could arise from two distinct mechanisms . We have suggested that it reﬂects a direct dependence on prior responses or mental states ( e . g . , direct use of a prior re - sponse in the sampling process ) . On the other hand , appar - ent sequential dependence could arise through a cluster search process – people may search through separate ‘clus - ters’ of words in memory and produce responses from that group , moving to another cluster when the remaining words in the local cluster are few and far between ( Gru - enewald & Lockhead , 1980 ; Hills , Jones , & Todd , 2012 ) . In this case , responses from within a given cluster will be more similar to one another than chance , while responses across clusters would not . Because adjacent responses are more likely to be from the same cluster , they are also likely to be more similar to each other as compared to non - adja - cent responses . And since the above results suggest that people primarily use a single cue for each response , this clustering hypothesis amounts to longer than chance runs of responses that use the same primary cue ( in effect treat - ing this run of responses from a primary cue as a cluster ; see Fig . 3 ) . We can test whether our deﬁnition of clusters using the primary cues is informative of the search process . Adjacent within - cluster responses are more similar to one another than adjacent across - cluster responses ( 0 . 2471 vs . 0 . 1389 ; t ( 5761 ) = 28 . 7 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Furthermore the adja - cent responses from within the same cluster as the prior response are generated more quickly than adjacent re - sponses from different clusters ( 8 . 5s vs . 9 . 4s ; t ( 7394 ) = 4 . 14 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Thus if people are using a cluster search strategy , deﬁning each cluster as a string of re - sponses related to one of the three cues is informative of the response relationships . A simple test of whether people select from cue ‘clus - ters’ is to check whether participants continued to use the same primary cue for multiple responses in a row , which would suggest that they had picked one primary cue and produced a number of words from it . However , the chance level of repetition is not 1 - in - 3 ; some cues are assigned as primary cues more often than others . After correcting for the base rate of cue use assuming indepen - dent transitions , the chance probability of staying with the same primary cue would be 40 . 6 % . Of the 8342 re - sponse pairs tested , 3573 had the same primary cue ( 42 . 8 % ) , which is statistically greater than chance ( Binomial Test ( Exact ) , p < 0 . 001 ) , but is a small numerical difference . Qualitatively , these results appear to favor the cluster hypothesis . However , they are not diagnostic of this pro - cess : even with direct inﬂuence , some response pairs will Fig . 2 . Average similarity between response pairs from the same trial as a function of number of intervening responses ( ±1 s . e . m . ) . Responses that were farther apart were more dissimilar than nearby responses , suggesting sequential dependence . 5 Because we do not make claims about the linearity of this relationship , we also tested for a relationship between rank similarity and rank response time , and still found a signiﬁcant effect ( F ( 1 , 8071 ) = 185 , p < 0 . 001 ) . K . A . Smith et al . / Cognition 128 ( 2013 ) 64 – 75 69 by chance be less similar , and these responses will have longer inter - item response times and will be more likely to be assigned to different clusters . Furthermore , a slight increase in the rate of continued use of the same primary cue is also consistent with direct inﬂuence from prior re - sponses . More speciﬁcally , direct relationships will natu - rally produce some longer runs with the same primary cue : because a pair of subsequent responses are similar to each other through direct inﬂuence , they will be more likely than chance to be most similar to the same cue . If the sequential dependencies we observed arose from a cluster search process , then there would be two addi - tional characteristics of the response chain . First , there should be ‘breaks’ when people switch cues , such that re - sponses on either side of the switch should show only chance levels of similarity ( e . g . , retrieving items based only on global criteria during a cluster switch , as in the dynamic model of Hills , Jones , and Todd ( 2012 ) ) . Second , there should be no dependence of responses within cue clusters , such that adjacent words within a cluster should be no more similar than non - adjacent responses . 6 If people make a clean switch between clusters , then we should be able to observe ‘breaks’ in their response chain with a cluster switch , where the ﬁrst response of a new cluster is not inﬂuenced by the preceding response . There - fore if we examine response pairs with different primary cues ( thus coming from different clusters ) , there should be no effect of adjacency on the relationship between those responses . This test showed that of the response pairs with different primary cues , adjacent responses were more sim - ilar than non - adjacent responses ( 0 . 1389 vs . 0 . 1133 ; t ( 5977 ) = 13 . 05 , p < 0 . 001 ) , indicating that adjacent re - sponses are related even across cluster breaks . Sampling from clusters would also predict no intra - cluster dependencies . Thus in a contiguous chain of re - sponses that have the same primary cue , adjacent re - sponses should be no more similar to one another than non - adjacent responses . However , the data suggest that adjacent responses are more similar even when the re - sponses arise from the same primary cue ( 0 . 2471 vs . 0 . 2136 ; t ( 6705 ) = 7 . 64 , p < 0 . 001 ) , suggesting that the sequential dependence does not arise from clustering alone . These results suggest that the sequential dependence between responses is at least in part driven by direct asso - ciation between responses ; although adjacent responses are more likely to share a primary cue , the fact that sequential dependence was still found within and across clusters suggests that this dependence cannot be due to reliance on cluster search alone . 3 . 5 . The direction of local search In computer science , local search algorithms often use gradients , or the information about the success of prior guesses , to systematically move towards the answer ( e . g . , gradient descent ) . Here we test whether something similar happens in the semantic search process for RAT problems . If people preferentially move towards the answer , their re - sponses should become more similar to the answer over time on trials in which they ﬁnd the correct answer . How - ever , sequential dependencies could give the appearance that this occurs due to an artifact of path selection . Con - sider that local search is a kind of random walk in semantic space . There will be natural variation in the path taken by the random walk , and some paths will randomly arrive at the answer while others will not . By selecting only those moon dew comb hair brush teeth cheese blue dye … comb moon comb comb comb moon … moon dew comb hair brush teeth cheese blue dye … ( 1 ) Direct influence of prior responses ( 2 ) Cluster dependence of responses Responses always depend on one another Sequential responses related through cluster membership… … but no relation across clusters comb moon comb comb comb moon … Fig . 3 . Illustration of sequential dependence through direct inﬂuence ( 1 ) or cluster - level dependence ( 2 ) . If responses are related through direct inﬂuence , then adjacent responses should always be more related than would be expected by chance . If responses are related by virtue of their cluster , then there will be a mixture of related adjacent responses within a cluster and unrelated responses across cluster boundaries , but averaging across both groups will show that adjacent responses are more related than chance . 6 This is not a prediction of the Hills et al . model which assumes local search within ( but not across ) clusters , but follows logically from the assumption that local search is driven solely by the clustered nature of semantic retrieval . 70 K . A . Smith et al . / Cognition 128 ( 2013 ) 64 – 75 paths that randomly arrive at the answer , it will appear , on average , as if the path taken by the participant was one that was headed speciﬁcally towards that answer . Notably , this same logic applies to an analysis of incorrect trials if the similarity metric is applied in relation to the ﬁnal ( incorrect ) response rather than the correct answer . Thus , the key to determining whether the search process hones in on the answer is a comparison of the path towards the answer for correct trials versus the path towards the ﬁnal response for trials that were ended due to time constraints ( see Fig . 4 ) . 7 As seen in the ﬁgure , the sequences for both trial types became progressively more similar to the ﬁnal response . To test whether responses approached the answer more quickly than incorrect responses , we tagged each response by its location relative to the ﬁnal response in the response chain ( e . g . , the penultimate response would be tagged as ‘ - 1’ , the response before that as ‘ - 2’ , etc . ) . We then measured the average similarity of responses to the ﬁnal response for correct trials ( which ended on the answer ) and incorrect trials . We could then measure the rate of approach as the slope of the line that ﬁts the similarity to the ﬁnal response as a function of responses prior to the end , where greater slopes represent faster approach . For the subset of re - sponses that ended on the answer there was a positive slope ( F ( 1 , 1265 ) = 7 . 32 , p = 0 . 0069 ) over the ﬁnal 10 re - sponses , suggesting that responses do become closer to the answer over time . However , this did not differ from the rate of approach to the ﬁnal response in incorrect trials ( F ( 1 , 5859 ) = 0 . 077 , p = 0 . 38 ) , which suggests that this ap - proach is due to random walk selection effects rather than participants honing in on the answer . 8 4 . Discussion To solve RAT problems , and multiply - constrained prob - lems in general , people ﬁrst search through a set of poten - tial answers and then test those answers against each constraint for suitability . In this experiment , we investi - gated the search process , and found that people solve RAT problems by selecting a set of promising answers con - strained primarily by one of the three cues at a time . In Incorrect Final Response 1 2 3 4 5 6 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Correct Final Response ( Answer ) InitialResponse 7 ( 1 ) Illustration of response approach ( 2 ) Similarity to final response by path Fig . 4 . ( 1 ) Illustration of how sequential dependencies correspond to a random walk in semantic space such that responses immediately prior to the ﬁnal response , regardless of whether the ﬁnal response is correct or incorrect , are likely to be more similar to the ﬁnal response than responses occurring earlier in the sequence . ( 2 ) Average similarity between responses and the ﬁnal response in the chain ( the answer in ‘correct’ trials ) as a function of the number of responses prior to the ﬁnal response . Although responses become more similar to the ﬁnalresponse with fewer intervening responses , there is nodifference in the slope of this function when comparing ‘correct’ and ‘incorrect’ trials , suggesting that the approach is due to sequential dependence between responses , rather than a directed movement towards the answer . Lines represent best ﬁtting linear trendline for each trial type , and bars represent standard error . 7 We excluded trials in which participants incorrectly marked their ﬁnal response as the answer , leaving only trials terminated due to time constraints . Thus , the similarity between these two paths does not reﬂect a honing in on a speciﬁc word believed ( incorrectly ) to be the answer . 8 Responses in correct chains did in general have greater similarity to the ﬁnal response than responses in incorrect chains ( F ( 1 , 5859 ) = 34 . 9 , p < 0 . 001 ) . This is likely because the ﬁnal response in correct chains were answers , which were on average more related to randomly selected words than incorrect responses were ( 0 . 1371 vs . 0 . 1066 ; t ( 20651 ) = 20 . 9 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Furthermore , this effect disappears when using WAS metrics , in which answers are not more related to random words than responses . Thus this difference is a factor of answers being special words in the LSA space rather than reﬂecting a facet of the search process . K . A . Smith et al . / Cognition 128 ( 2013 ) 64 – 75 71 addition to using just one cue at a time , there were sequen - tial dependencies in sequence of considered candidate an - swers , suggesting that prior guesses directly affect subsequent guesses ( i . e . , local rather than global search ) . Finally , we did not ﬁnd evidence that this search process speciﬁcally hones in on the correct answer . 4 . 1 . Combining constraints for memory search One of the key features of multiply - constrained prob - lems is that the set of potential answers is enormous be - fore the constraints are imposed , so an exhaustive search of this space is impossible . Nevertheless , people quickly limit the search space to promising answers . This study shows that people ﬁnd these promising answers by focus - ing primarily on one constraint at a time . This ﬁnding at ﬁrst seems to be at odds with prior mod - els of episodic and semantic memory . Many of these mod - els assume that multiple distinct cues interact to probe memory ( Gillund & Shiffrin , 1984 ; Murdock , 1997 ; Ratcliff & McKoon , 1988 ) . This joint cue representation is required to explain episodic memory phenomena such as recogni - tion for multiple - item probes – e . g . , if ‘door’ , ‘radio’ and ‘wall’ are studied together , then recognition of ‘door’ is bet - ter if ‘radio’ and ‘wall’ are presented as additional retrieval cues than if ‘door’ is presented by itself ( Clark & Shiffrin , 1987 ) . But on the RAT , people retrieve potential answers primarily on the basis of a single cue , suggesting that memory cannot be probed using an arbitrary combination of cues . However , in these episodic memory paradigms , not only was memory cued with a joint cue , but the mem - ories that were being retrieved were joint memories ( i . e . , the participant studied the three words jointly and then was cued with those same three words ) . In contrast , the set of cues in the RAT does not exist as a joint memory ( e . g . , it is unlikely that participants previously saw the words ‘moon’ , ‘comb’ , ‘dew’ , and ‘honey’ together ) . Thus , it is not clear if these episodic memory results truly indi - cate an ability to use a joint cue on the ﬂy - instead , it may be that prior study of the joint set of items allows the participant to learn the speciﬁc combination as new single conjoined representation . Similar to the ﬁndings in episodic memory experiments , there has been prior research attempting to characterize how people combine cues to access semantic memory that came to different conclusions than this study . For instance , Rubin and Wallace ( 1989 ) found that when given both meaning and rhyme cues ( e . g . ‘a mythical being’ and ‘rhymes with ost’ ) people would often come up with a re - sponse ( ‘ghost’ ) that would rarely or never be produced in response to one of the cues individually . This ﬁnding is used as evidence that memory works super - additively : the combination of the cues retrieves ‘ghost’ more often than an additive mixture of the cues . However , this and similar studies ( e . g . Massaro , Weldon , & Kitzis , 1991 ) rely on a single , ﬁnal response . Since the ﬁnal response is the product of both a search and a test process , one possibility is that the search process proposes words by considering cues additively , while the test process accepts these pro - posals based on a multiplicative combination of cues . This account would offer a resolution to the tension between our ﬁnding that interim responses are related mainly to one cue alone and these ﬁndings that ﬁnal answers are based on super - additive combinations of the two cues . Any interim words that are considered , but are not related to both cues , would be rejected by the test process and not produced in these tasks . For instance , the rhyme cue may cause ‘most’ to come to mind in both the single and dual - cue tasks ; this will be an acceptable answer for just the rhyme cue ( and so would be recorded ) , while it will be rejected in the dual - cue task ( and so would not be cap - tured ) . On the other hand , these tasks also differ from our RAT task in another important way : they require combin - ing only two cues . People may therefore have attentional or memory limits that allow a conjunctive search based on two cues , but become overtaxed when three or more cues are presented . Further research is required to deter - mine whether there is a qualitative difference between two - cue and three - cue memory search . Our results raise the question of what causes the focus on a single cue . On the one hand , this could be a limitation of memory . However , it is not difﬁcult to keep the three cue words in working memory , so this capacity constraint should not be the cause . But it is possible that there are additional attention or processing constraints that limit memory from retrieving based on more than one cue at a time . Conversely , this could be a strategy people use to ﬁnd answers efﬁciently ; perhaps searching based on individual cues arrives at an answer more quickly than searching based on a combination . Further research is required to disentangle these possibilities . 4 . 2 . Exploration of potential answers We found sequential dependencies between responses within a problem : responses tended to be semantically similar to the previous response , consistent with a local search process . Other studies have found sequential dependencies in tasks requiring semantic retrieval and production with a single constraint ( Gruenewald & Lock - head , 1980 ; Hills et al . , 2012 ; Howard & Kahana , 2002 ; Tro - yer , Moscovitch , & Winocur , 1997 ) , and our results expand this ﬁnding by demonstrating that these dependencies ex - ist even in tasks with multiple constraints . We also found evidence that this dependence arises di - rectly from relationships between responses . Prior studies have used categorical clustering as evidence of sequential dependencies ( Bousﬁeld , 1953 ; Troyer , Moscovitch , Wino - cur , Alexander , & Stuss , 1998 ) , and some have hypothe - sized that the sequential dependencies directly result from a clustering search strategy ( Hills et al . , 2012 ; Pollio & Gerrow , 1968 ) . However , we found evidence of sequen - tial dependences both within and across clusters , which suggests that there is a direct inﬂuence of prior responses rather than sole reliance on cluster - level search . This direct association of adjacent responses can arise from two distinct types of processes . First , this could be the result of sampling from an evolving search process . Un - der this account , search is a drift through semantic mem - ory , and responses are intermittent samples from this process . This may be a facet of a general search process , as hypothesized by Hills , Todd , and Goldstone ( 2008 ) . Sec - 72 K . A . Smith et al . / Cognition 128 ( 2013 ) 64 – 75 ond , this could be driven by a priming process without a speciﬁc functional signiﬁcance ; in this case , responding with a word will make that word more salient in semantic memory and therefore cause related words to be retrieved with greater ease . Both explanations are consistent with the response chains we observed in this study ; different experiments will be required to determine which explana - tion underlies these sequential dependencies . Regardless of the mechanism underlying these sequen - tial dependencies , it is difﬁcult to say whether that mech - anism is a natural component of the search process or whether that mechanism only arises when participants are asked to overtly report their intermediate guesses . It is possible that the act of overtly producing a response changes the nature of the search process , serving to prime subsequent responses in a manner that would not occur if prior guesses were not overly reported . This is a limitation shared by all behavioral studies of semantic search , though made more explicit here because RAT problems require only a single correct response ( as opposed to naming all animals that come to mind , for instance ) . But without a tool that would allow us to continuously measure the words under consideration without asking for a response , we must assume that the act of responding does not have a large impact on the search process . Local search algorithms are the most common method for stochastic optimization in engineering applications ( Spall , 2003 ) , which might suggest that this dependence arises from a rational search process such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo ( Grifﬁths , Vul , & Sanborn , 2012 ) . And indeed , in many other tasks that require searching through seman - tic knowledge , responses that are related to prior re - sponses are more likely to be viable candidates ; e . g . , when producing animal names , words associated with ‘cat’ are more likely to be animals as well . It is therefore possible that local search produces a more efﬁcient explo - ration of the space of possible answers ; however , on this RAT task we do not ﬁnd evidence that local search causes faster convergence to the answer than would be expected to any other response in the chain . This then begs the question – if people are searching through their semantic memory using a process similar to a random walk , how does anyone solve a RAT problem when there are so many words to consider and so few re - sponses given ? If subjects had only considered the words that they provided as responses , the probability of stum - bling on the answer would be vanishingly small using this model . Instead , we believe that the responses that people provide are a small subset of all potential words consid - ered ; responses are the words that happened to be acti - vated enough that subjects noticed and recorded them , but do not describe the full underlying path of semantic search . The full process is able to sample signiﬁcantly more words , thus increasing the odds of stumbling on the cor - rect answer . 4 . 3 . Explicit versus implicit search The current task was designed to investigate the pro - cess people use to search for answers in the RAT by inves - tigating intermediate responses elicited from participants . Our procedure assumes that people have conscious access to this search process such that their intermediate guesses reﬂect the current status of the search . Suggesting that the search process underlying RAT performance may be impli - cit rather than explicit , prior studies have found that peo - ple can identify whether a combination of three cues in the RAT does or does not have valid solution within a second and a half of ﬁrst viewing the cues even though they are unable to explicitly produce a solution within this time period ( Bolte & Goschke , 2005 ; Topolinski & Strack , 2009 ) . Similarly , Kounios and Beeman ( 2009 ) have found differences between deliberate and insight solutions to RAT problems . The current procedure can thus only ad - dress the conscious deliberate search for answers ; it does not specify the nature of rapid implicit processes . It is pos - sible that the explicit search process addressed in the cur - rent study is wholly unrelated to the implicit process that produces the correct answer on RAT problems . However , we have reason to believe that these interme - diate wrong answer guesses are indicative of the processes that support RAT performance . For instance , Gupta et al . ( 2012 ) used a version of the RAT in which participants were asked to give a single best guess within a short time period even if they knew that guess to be false . An analysis of these incorrect best guesses found that people who did better on the RAT were people who tended to give low fre - quency incorrect guesses . This supports the claim that overtly produced incorrect guesses relate to the processes of ﬁnding the correct solution to RAT problems . 4 . 4 . Conclusion From causal reasoning to analogy , to day - to - day tasks such as prioritizing work , many of the problems people face in naturalistic settings require ﬁnding the best answer or course of action from a huge set of potential answers , limited by only a handful of constraints . Finding an accept - able solution to these problems requires querying ones background knowledge in a quick and efﬁcient fashion . In this research we have begun to explore this process , ﬁnding that people search through their semantic knowl - edge primarily using one constraint at a time , and that di - rect sequential dependence occurs between search items . Of course , many questions still remain : is the focus on a single constraint a limitation of memory , or a strategy for solving these RAT problems in particular ? Is direct sequen - tial dependence due to semantic priming or a local search strategy ? And how do people decide whether a potential answer is considered acceptable ? Investigating how people solve multiply - constrained problems will provide further insight into how semantic memory is structured , and how people combine and use cues from their environment to retrieve the most task - relevant information . In general , understanding multiply - constrained search is necessary to explain how people are able to solve everyday problems so effortlessly . Acknowledgments Edward Vul and Kevin Smith were supported by IARPA via DOI contract D10PC20023 . The views and conclusions K . A . Smith et al . / Cognition 128 ( 2013 ) 64 – 75 73 contained herein are those of the authors and do not repre - sent the ofﬁcial policies or endorsements of IARPA , DOI , or the U . S . Government . David Huber was supported by Na - tional Science Foundation Grant BCS - 0843773 . Appendix A . Addressing confounds in the test of cue usage When we assign primary cues to each response ( see Section 3 . 2 ) , we cannot know which cue was used to con - strain each response , so we estimated this primary cue by identifying the cue most similar to that response . We then found that adjacent responses sharing the same primary cue ( within - cue pairs ) were more similar than responses with different primary cues ( across - cue pairs ) . However , this assignment of primary cues to responses will favor greater similarity for within - cue word pairs due to chance factors ; some adjacent pairs will be more similar than others by chance , and it is more likely that similar word pairs will be assigned the same primary cue . While we could not get rid of this structural bias , we could build it into our null hypothesis distribution , thus asking whether within - cue similarity is greater than would be ex - pected by chance given the baseline similarity arising from cue assignment . We achieved this via across - problem ran - domization : to construct a null hypothesis distribution , the same across - and within - cue similarity measures were cal - culated except that the assignment of primary cues was based on the cues from another randomly selected prob - lem ( ‘shufﬂed cues’ ) . Under this random assignment of cues to responses , the increase in similarity for within - cue response pairs as compared to across - cue response pairs was due solely to chance assignment of the shufﬂed primary cue . In addition , because the same words appeared in both the analysis of the effect and the null hypothesis , the speciﬁc semantic and lexical properties of the cues were controlled . Thus if the increase in similarity from within - cue to across - cue responses is greater when using the real cues as compared to the shufﬂed cues , then we have evidence for bunching of the responses around the real cues ( see Fig . A1 ) . For this analysis , there were four classiﬁcations of word pairs , representing combinations of across - or within - cue as determined by real or shufﬂed cues . Of key interest were word pairs that were within - cue pairs for the real cues , and across - cue pairs for the shufﬂed cues ( A - type response pairs in Figure A1 ) versus ones that were across - real - cues , but within - shufﬂed - cues ( B - type responses ) . Both of these word pair types have a within - and an across - cue determi - nation , so the same degree of similarity is imposed accord - ing to chance factors . However , if responses bunch around the cues , A - type pairs should be more similar since they are within the boundaries established by the real cues . A comparison of these similarity ratings showed that A - type response pairs were more similar than B - type response pairs ( average similarities = 0 . 209 vs . 0 . 160 ; t ( 2502 ) = 9 . 04 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Because this analysis controls for the con - found of primary cue assignment inherent in the original analysis , we can be conﬁdent that the results of this test are due to a feature of how people use the cues to produce responses and not due to the method by which we per - formed the test . Appendix B . Supplementary material Supplementary data associated with this article can be found , in the online version , at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2013 . 03 . 001 . Fig . A1 . Illustration of semantic space demonstrating test of response bunching . Responses were assigned to ‘real’ primary cues , with divisions delineated by the solid black lines , and ‘shufﬂed’ primary cues , delineated by the dashed grey lines . If responses bunch around the cues ( 1 ) , then adjacent responses that cross the ‘shufﬂed’ lines but not ‘real’ lines ( A ) should be on average more similar than response pairs that cross ‘real’ but not ‘shufﬂed’ lines ( B ) . If responses are generated based on an equal conjunction of the cues ( 2 ) , then there should be no difference in adjacent responses . 74 K . A . Smith et al . / Cognition 128 ( 2013 ) 64 – 75 References Bolte , A . , & Goschke , T . ( 2005 ) . On the speed of intuition : Intuitive judgments of semantic coherence under different response deadlines . Memory & Cognition , 33 ( 7 ) , 1248 – 1255 . Bolte , A . , Goschke , T . , & Kuhl , J . ( 2003 ) . Effects of positive and negative mood on implicit judgments of semantic coherence . Psychological Science , 14 ( 5 ) , 416 – 421 . Bousﬁeld , W . A . ( 1953 ) . The occurrence of clustering in the recall of randomly arranged associates . Journal of General Psychology , 49 , 229 – 240 . Bowden , E . M . , & Jung - Beeman , M . ( 2003 ) . Normative data for 144 compound remote associate problems . Behavior Research Methods , 35 ( 4 ) , 634 – 639 . Bowers , K . S . , Regher , G . , & Balthazard , C . ( 1990 ) . Intuition in the context of discovery . Cognitive Psychology , 22 , 72 – 110 . Cai , D . J . , Mednick , S . A . , Harrison , E . M . , Kanady , J . C . , & Mednick , S . C . ( 2009 ) . REM , not incubation , improves creativity by priming associative networks . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106 ( 25 ) , 10130 – 10134 . Clark , S . E . , & Shiffrin , R . ( 1987 ) . Recognition of multiple - item probes . Memory & Cognition , 15 ( 5 ) , 367 – 378 . Collins , A . M . , & Loftus , E . F . ( 1975 ) . A spreading - activation theory of semantic priming . Psychological Review , 82 ( 6 ) , 407 – 428 . Ernst , M . O . , & Banks , M . S . ( 2002 ) . Humans integrate visual and haptic information in a statistically optimal fashion . Nature , 415 , 429 – 433 . Ernst , M . O . , & Bulthoff , H . H . ( 2004 ) . Merging the senses into a robust percept . Trends in Cognitive Science , 8 ( 4 ) , 162 – 169 . Forbus , K . D . , Gentner , D . , & Law , K . ( 1995 ) . MAC / FAC : A model of similarity - based retrieval . Cognitive Science , 19 , 141 – 205 . Gillund , G . , & Shiffrin , R . ( 1984 ) . A retrieval model for both recognition and recall . Psychological Review , 91 ( 1 ) , 1 – 67 . Graesser , A . I . , & Mandler , G . ( 1978 ) . Limited processing capacity constrains the storage of unrelated sets of words and the retrieval from natural categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 4 ( 1 ) , 86 – 100 . Grifﬁths , T . L . , Vul , E . , & Sanborn , A . N . ( 2012 ) . Bridging levels of analysis for probabilistic models of cognition . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 21 ( 4 ) , 263 – 268 . Gruenewald , P . J . , & Lockhead , G . R . ( 1980 ) . The free recall of category examples . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 6 ( 3 ) , 225 – 240 . Gupta , N . , Jang , Y . , Mednick , S . C . , & Huber , D . E . ( 2012 ) . The road not taken : Creative solutions require avoidance of high frequency responses . Psychological Science , 23 ( 3 ) , 288 – 294 . Harkins , S . G . ( 2006 ) . Mere effort as the mediator of the evaluation – performance relationship . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 91 ( 3 ) , 436 – 455 . Hillis , J . M . , Watt , S . J . , Landy , M . S . , & Banks , M . S . ( 2004 ) . Slant from texture and disparity cues : Optimalcue combination . Journal of Vision , 4 , 967 – 992 . Hills , T . T . , Jones , M . N . , & Todd , P . M . ( 2012 ) . Optimal foraging in semantic memory . Psychological Review , 119 ( 2 ) , 431 – 440 . Hills , T . T . , & Pachur , T . ( 2012 ) . Dynamic search and working memory in social recall . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 38 ( 1 ) , 218 – 228 . Hills , T . T . , Todd , P . M . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2008 ) . Search in external and internal spaces : Evidence for generalized cognitive search processes . Psychological Science , 19 ( 8 ) , 802 – 808 . Hills , T . T . , Todd , P . M . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2010 ) . The central executive as a search process : Priming exploration and exploitation across domains . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 139 ( 4 ) , 590 – 609 . Howard , M . W . , & Kahana , M . J . ( 2002 ) . When does semantic similarity help episodic retrieval ? Journal of Memory and Language , 46 ( 1 ) , 85 – 98 . Isen , A . M . , Daubman , K . A . , & Nowicki , G . P . ( 1987 ) . Positive affect facilitates creative problem solving . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 ( 6 ) , 1122 – 1131 . Kounios , J . , & Beeman , M . ( 2009 ) . The aha ! moment : The cognitive neuroscience of insight . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 18 ( 4 ) , 210 – 216 . Landauer , T . K . , & Dumais , S . T . ( 1997 ) . A solution to Plato’s problem : The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of acquisition , induction , and representation of knowledge . Psychological Review , 104 ( 2 ) , 211 – 240 . Landauer , T . K . , Foltz , P . W . , & Laham , D . ( 1998 ) . An introduction to latent semantic analysis . Discourse Processes , 25 ( 2 & 3 ) , 259 – 294 . Landauer , T . K . ( 2007 ) . LSA as a theory of meaning . In T . K . Landauer , D . S . McNamara , S . Dennis , & W . Kintsch ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis ( pp . 3 – 34 ) . Mahwah , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Martin , D . I . , & Berry , M . W . ( 2007 ) . Mathematical foundations behind latent semantic analysis . In T . K . Landauer , D . S . McNamara , S . Dennis , & W . Kintsch ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis ( pp . 35 – 56 ) . Mahwah , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Massaro , D . W . , Weldon , M . S . , & Kitzis , S . N . ( 1991 ) . Integration of orthographic and semantic information in memory retrieval . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 17 ( 2 ) , 277 – 287 . McNamara , D . S . , Cai , Z . , & Louwerse , M . M . ( 2007 ) . Optimizing LSA measures of cohesion . In T . K . Landauer , D . S . McNamara , S . Dennis , & W . Kintsch ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis ( pp . 379 – 400 ) . Mahwah , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Mednick , S . ( 1962 ) . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological Review , 69 ( 3 ) , 220 – 232 . Murdock , B . B . ( 1997 ) . Context and mediators in a theory of distributed associative memory ( TODAM2 ) . Psychological Review , 104 ( 4 ) , 839 – 862 . Pollio , H . R . , & Gerrow , J . R . ( 1968 ) . The role of rules in recall . The American Journal of Psychology , 81 ( 3 ) , 303 – 313 . Ratcliff , R . , & McKoon , G . ( 1988 ) . A retrieval theory of priming in memory . Psychological Review , 95 ( 3 ) , 385 – 408 . Rubin , D . C . , & Wallace , W . T . ( 1989 ) . Rhyme and reason : Analyses of dual retrieval cues . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 ( 4 ) , 698 – 709 . Russell , S . , & Norvig , P . ( 2003 ) . Informed Search and Exploration , Artiﬁcial Intelligence : A Modern Approach . Upper Saddle River , New Jersey : Pearson Education , Inc . . Spall , J . C . ( 2003 ) . Introduction to Stochastic Search and Optimization . New York : Wiley . Steyvers , M . , Shiffrin , R . , & Nelson , D . ( 2005 ) . Word association spaces for predicting semantic similarity effects in episodic memory . In A . Healy ( Ed . ) , Experimental Cognitive Psychology and Its Applications ( pp . 237 – 249 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Thomas , R . P . , Dougherty , M . R . , Sprenger , A . M . , & Harbison , J . I . ( 2008 ) . Diagnostic hypothesis generation and human judgment . Psychological Review , 115 ( 1 ) , 155 – 185 . Topolinski , S . , & Strack , F . ( 2008 ) . Where there’s a will – there’s no intuition . The unintentional basis of semantic coherence judgments . Journal of Memory and Language , 58 , 1032 – 1048 . Topolinski , S . , & Strack , F . ( 2009 ) . Scanning the ‘‘fringe’’ of consciousness : What is felt and what is not felt in intuitions about semantic coherence . Consciousness and Cognition , 18 , 608 – 618 . Troyer , A . K . , Moscovitch , M . , & Winocur , G . ( 1997 ) . Clustering and switching as two components of verbal ﬂuency : Evidence from younger and older healthy adults . Neuropsychology , 11 ( 1 ) , 138 – 146 . Troyer , A . K . , Moscovitch , M . , Winocur , G . , Alexander , M . P . , & Stuss , D . ( 1998 ) . Clustering and switching on verbal ﬂuency : The effects of focal frontal - and temporal - lobe lesions . Neuropsychologia , 36 ( 6 ) , 499 – 504 . Vul , E . , & Pashler , H . ( 2007 ) . Incubation beneﬁts only after people have been misdirected . Memory & Cognition , 35 ( 4 ) , 701 – 710 . Zeno , S . M . , Ivens , S . H . , Millard , R . T . , & Duvvuri , R . ( 1995 ) . The Educator’s word frequency guide . Touchstone Applied Science Associates . K . A . Smith et al . / Cognition 128 ( 2013 ) 64 – 75 75