Regulated Internalization of Caveolae Robert G . Parton , Brigitte Joggerst , and Kai Simons European Molecular Biology Laboratory , D69012 Heidelberg , Germany Abstract . Caveolae are specialized invaginations of the plasma membrane which have been proposed to play a role in diverse cellular processes such as en - docytosis and signal transduction . We have developed an assay to determine the fraction of internal versus plasma membrane caveolae . The GPI - anchored pro - tein , alkaline phosphatase , was clustered in caveolae after antibody - induced crosslinking at low temperature and then , after various treatments , the relative amount of alkaline phosphatase on the cell surface was determined . Using this assay we were able to show a time - and temperature - dependent decrease in cell - surface alkaline phosphatase activity which was depen - dent on antibody - induced clustering . The decrease in cell surface alkaline phosphatase activity was greatly accelerated by the phosphatase inhibitor , okadaic acid , but not by a protein kinase C activator . Internalization of clustered alkaline phosphatase in the presence or absence of okadaic acid was blocked by cytochalasin D and by the kinase inhibitor staurosporine . Electron microscopy confirmed that okadaic acid induced removal of caveolae from the cell surface . In the pres - ence of hypertonic medium this was followed by the redistribution of groups of caveolae to the center of the cell close to the microtubule - organizing center . This process was reversible , blocked by cytochalasin D , and the centralization of the caveolar clusters was shown to be dependent on an intact microtubule net - work . Although the exact mechanism of internalization remains unknown , the results show that caveolae are dynamic structures which can be internalized into the cell . This process may be regulated by kinase activity and require an intact actin network . C AVEOLAE or plasmallemmal vesicles are a charac - teristic feature of the plasma membrane of many mammalian cell types ( for review see Severs , 1988 ) . Morphologically , caveolae are 50 - 60 - nm invaginations of the plasma membrane with a characteristic flask shape . Un - like clathrin - coated pits , caveolae have no clearly defined coat by transmission electron microscopy of conventionally prepared specimens . However , under certain conditions a characteristic spiral coat is visible on the cytoplasmic side of the caveolae ( Peters et al . , 1985 ) consisting in part of the integral membrane protein VIP21 / caveolin ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ; Dupree et al . , 1993 ; Kurzchalia et al . , 1994 ) . A num - ber of molecules have now been localized to caveolae includ - ing a plasma membrane Ca - ATPase and an IPrreceptor - like protein ( Fujimoto , 1993 ; Fujimoto et al . , 1993 ) . Other molecules have been shown to associate with caveolae under certain conditions . For example , GPI - anchored proteins ( Mayor et al . , 1994 ) , VIP - 36 ( Fiedler et al . , 1994 ) , and the / 3 - adrenergic receptor ( Raposo et al . , 1989 ; Dupree et al . , 1993 ) are concentrated in caveolae after cell surface labeling with antibodies . Other molecules postulated to be associated with caveolae include tyrosine kinases and kinase substrates Address all correspondence to Dr . R . G . Parton , EMBL , Meyerhofstr . 1 , 1369012 Heidelberg , Germany . Fax : 49 6221 - 387 . 306 . which are enriched in VIP21 / caveolin - contalning detergent - insoluble complexes ( Sargiacomo et al . , 1993 ) . However , it is not yet clear to what extent these molecules are associated with caveolae in vivo ; for example , VIP - 36 and many GPI - anchored proteins are associated with these detergent - insoluble complexes but do not appear to be significantly en - riched in caveolae under physiological conditions ( Fiedler et al . , 1994 ; Mayor et al . , 1994 ) . Caveolae may also have a dis - tinct lipid composition . The ganglioside GM1 has been shown to be enriched in caveolae ( Parton , 1994 ) and choles - terol is essential for their structure and function ( Rothberg et al . , 1990a , 1992 ; Chang et al . , 1992 ) . A number of different functions have been proposed for caveolae including signal transduction ( Lisanti et al . , 1994a ) , potocytosis ( Anderson , 1993 ) , calcium regulation or signaling ( Fujimoto , 1993 ; Fujimoto et al . , 1993 ) , and non - clathrin - dependent endocytosis and transcytosis ( Mon - tesano et al . , 1982 ; Milici et al . , 1987 ; Tran et al . , 1987 ) . Early studies suggested a role for caveolae or plasmalemmal vesicles in endothelial cells in transport across the mono - layer ( Ghitescu et al . , 1986 ; Milici et al . , 1987 ; Simionescu and Simionescu , 1991 ) . However , other studies concluded that in endothelial cells most , if not all , caveolae were con - netted to the cell surface and were not free vesicles ( Bund - gaard , 1983 ; Bundgaard et al . , 1983 ) . Studies of cultured cells showed that uncoated invaginations were able to inter - © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 94 / 12 / 1199 / 17 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Ceil Biology , Volume 127 , Number 5 , December 1994 1199 - 1215 1199 nalize toxin - gold conjugates ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Tran et al . , 1987 ) . These invaginations were subsequently shown to be caveolae as defined by VIP21 / caveolin labeling ( Parton , 1994 ) . However , others have argued against any role for cav - eolae in endocytosis ( Van Deurs et al . , 1993 ) . The role of caveolae in potocytosis ( Anderson et al . , 1992 ; Anderson , 1993 ) has also been questioned by the finding that GPI - anchored proteins are present in similar concentrations in clathrin - coated pits and caveolae ( Mayor et al . , 1994 ) . We have therefore developed an assay to examine whether caveo - lae remain attached to the cell surface and to examine condi - tions which might stimulate their internalization . Here we show that a small fraction of plasma membrane caveolae do lose their connection to the cell surface and that this is regu - lated by kinase activity . Materials and Methods Cells , Antibodies , and Other Reagents A431 cells and MDCK cells were cultured as previously described ( Dupree et al . , 1993 ) . A431 cells were plated 18 - 24 h before each experiment and were used at 60 - 80 % confluency . MDCK cells were grown on glass cover - slips for 2 - 3 d until confluent . Affinity - purified antibodies to a peptide cor - responding to the NH2 - terminus of VIP21 / caveolin ( anti - VIP21N / caveolin ) were characterized previously ( Dupree et al . , 1993 ) . Cholera toxin - binding subunit ( CT - B ) t and CT - B conjugated to horseradish peroxidase ( CT - B - HRP ) were purchased from Sigma Chem . Co . ( St . Louis , MO ) . CT - B adsorbed to 10 or 14 nm gold ( CT - B - gold ) was prepared exactly as de - scribed previously ( Parton , 1994 ) . Antiserum to cholera toxin was a kind gift from Dr . D . R . Critchley ( Department of Biochemistry , University of Leicester , England ) . Cytochalasin D ( CytD ) , nocodazole , phorbol 12 - myristate 13 - acetate ( PMA ) , p - nitrophenyl phosphate , and stanrosporine were purchased from Sigma and okadaic acid ( OA ) and genistein from Gibco ( Paisley , Scotland ) . Monoclonal antibodies to human placental alka - line phosphatase were purchased from Dako ( Glostrup , Denmark ) and Zymed ( San Francisco , CA ) . Surface Labeling of Cells for Morphological Experiments Labeling with Antibodies to Alkaline Phosphatase . A431 cells were washed in DMEM / 25 mM Hepes and then incubated sequentially with mouse monoclonal antibodies to human placental alkaline phosphatase ( Dako or Zymed ) , rabbit anti - mouse IgG , and protein A - gold , all at 4°C . Alternatively the cells were fixed with 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde in 100 mM cac - odylate buffer , pH 7 . 35 , washed with glycine - containing buffer , and in - cubated as above . Prefixation labeling was also performed using a rabbit anti - human placental alkaline phosphatase ( Dako ) followed directly by pro - tein A - gold . Labeling with Cholera Toxin - conjugates . A431 cells were washed in DMEM / 25mM Hepes ( normal medium ) or in the above medium with all components at a final concentration of 1 . 6× ( hypertonic medium ) . Cells were incubated in the same medium containing 0 . 2 % BSA for 1 h before each experiment . The cells were then incubated with CT - B , CT - B - HRP ( 10 # g / mi ) , or CT - B - gold , in the same medium at 8°C to optimize labeling of caveolae ( Parton , 1994 ) . The cells were then warmed in the appropriate medium in the presence of 1 # M OA for 1 h at 37°C . In some experiments 10 mg / mi horseradish peroxidase ( HRP , type II ; Sigma ) was added during the 37°C incubation . To distinguish internal from surface caveolae , cells were incubated with CT - B - gold at 4°C , washed , incubated at 37 " C under the appropriate condi - tions and then reincubated at 4°C with 20 # g / ml CT - B - HRP . At this concen - tration the entire surface was heavily labeled with HRP reaction product . 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : AP , alkaline phosphatase ; CT - B , chol - era toxin - binding subunit ; CT - B - gold , CT - B adsorbed to 10 or 14 run gold ; CT - B - HRP , CT - B conjugated to HRP ; CytD , eytochalasin D ; Tf - HRP , transferrin - HRP ; OA , okadaic acid ; PMA , phorbol 12 - myristate 13 - acetate . The cells were then embedded in Epon and cut perpendicular to the culture substratum . Treatment with Cytoskeleton - disrupting Drugs . For disruption of the cytoskeleton , cells were pretreated with cyt D ( 5 # g / ml ) for 15 min or with nocodazole ( 1 . 5 # g / ml ) for 1 h at 37°C . For immunofiuorescence the cells were then incubated with the same drugs plus I gM OA for 1 h . For electron microscopy they were incubated with CT - B - HRP at 8°C , washed , and fur - ther incubated at 37°C with 1 # M OA all in the presence of either of the twv cytoskeleton - disrupting drugs . Electron Microscopy Cells were fixed with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 50 mM cacodylate buffer for Epon embedding or 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 250 mM Hepes for frozen sec - tioning . They were then processed for frozen sectioning or for Epon sections as previously described ( Parton et al . , 1992 ) . In some experiments thawed frozen sections were stained after immunogold labeling with a mixture of ammonium molybdate and methylcellulose ( Griffiths , 1993 ) : Cells embedded in a thin layer of Epon were reorientated for sectioning perpendicular to the culture substratum by sandwiching two pieces of Epen together , with the cells innermost and a layer of glue between . Quantitation of Morphological Experiments . To determine the fraction of the caveolar marker , CT - B - gold , in internal structures ( CT - B - HRP nega - tive ) versus surface caveolae ( CT - B - HRP positive ) thin sections were ana - lyzed . Caveolae were recognized by their characteristic size and shape ( 60 - rim diameter , spherical , e . g . , see Fig . 3 C ) . Other labeled elements consisted of tubular profiles ( e . g . , see Fig . 3 B ) and multivesicular struc - tures ( see Fig . 3 D ) . For the sake of the quantitation these structures were grouped together as " endosomes " ( Table I ) . Over 500 gold particles were scored for each condition . To determine the percentage of the total caveolae which were clustered or isolated , semi - thick sections of CT - B - HRP - labeled cells were cut per - pendicular to the substratum . Random fields were photographed at a pri - mary magnification of 12 . 5kx . Approximately 20 micrographs were exam - ined for each condition . Each caveola , defined as a 60 - 70 - nm spherical profile labeled with CT - B - HRP , was then classified as " clustered " or " iso - lated " ( see Fig . 6 ) . Immunofluorescence Microscopy Cells were fixed in methanol at - 20°C . Cells were labeled , mounted and viewed as described previously ( Chavrier et al . , 1990 ) . Biochemical Measurement of Alkaline Phosphatase Distribution A431 cells were washed with DMEM / Hepes at 4°C and then reincubated in the same medium with or without sequential incubations with mouse monoclonal antibodies to alkaline phosphatase ( Dako ) and a rabbit anti - mouse IgG antibody ( Cappel , Durham , NC ) to induce clustering of alkaline phosphatase ( AP ) in caveolae . The cells were then warmed to 37°C for vari - ous times under different conditions . The alkaline phosphatase distribution was then determined as described by Kobayashi and Robinson ( 1991 ) . Briefly , cells in multiweil plates were treated as described above , fixed in 1 % glutaraldehyde in PBS for 15 rain on ice , washed in assay buffer lacking substrate , and then the alkaline phosphatase activity in the presence of 1 % Triton X - 100 ( total AP ) or without detergent ( surface AP ) was determined . In contrast to the surface AP activity , none of the tested reagents consis - tently changed the total level of AP . However , in some experiments involv - ing long incubations with OA a slight decrease in total AP activity was ob - served as a result of cell loss . The times and concentrations for the tw ~ tment of cells with various drugs was as described for the morphological experiments . In addition , the follow - ing treatments were used ; cells were treated for 1 h at 37°C with PMA ( 2 # M ) ; stanrosporine ( 2 # M ) and genistein ( 4 # M ) were both present for 10 rain before OA treatment ( at 8°C ) as well as during the OA treatment . All the above were kept as 1000x stocks in DMSO at - 20°C . Incubation of cells with DMSO alone at the same concentration had no effect on the distribution of AP under any experimental condition . Measurement of Transferrin - HRP Uptake . Incubation of cells with transferrin - HRP ( Tf - HRP ) ( Biotrend , Cologne , Germany ) was as described previously for iodinated transferrin ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ) . In brief , cells were washed , incubated 1 h at 37°C in serum - free medium and then treated for various times at 37°C with 1 # M OA . A 5 - rain pulse of 25 # g / ml Tf - HRP was added at various times after OA treatment . The cells were then acid - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1200 washed , scraped from the culture dish , permeabilized using 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in 10 mM Hepes for 30 min at room temperature and after centrifuga - tion the HRP activity in the lysate was measured . To check for possible loss of cells during OA treatment the protein concentration in the lysate was as - sayed by the method of Bradford ( 1976 ) . All biochemical experiments were performed with triplicates for each condition with the variation shown by the error bars ( SE ) . The results shown are from representative experiments with similar results in at least three separate experiments . Results Antibody - induced Clustering of Alkaline Phosphatase in Caveolae ofA431 Cells Alkaline phosphatase is a well - characterized GPI - anchored protein which has been shown to be present within caveolae after cell surface labeling ( Ying et al . , 1992 ) . Conditions were optimized for antibody - induced clustering of AP in cav - eolae of A431 cells using electron microscopy . Cells labeled at 4°C with primary antibody followed by a second antibody and protein A - gold showed clusters of gold particles within caveolae ( Fig . 1 A ) . Little labeling was found over the re - mainder of the plasma membrane . Quantitation showed that 61 + 12 % of the labeling was found in caveolae under these conditions . Less than 0 . 3 % of the labeling was found within clathrin coated pits . Similar results were obtained using a rabbit anti - AP antibody followed directly by protein A - gold with 56 % of the surface gold within caveolae . In contrast , cells labeled after fixation showed labeling over the entire surface with no preferential labeling of caveolae ( Fig . 1 B ) consistent with results with other GPI - anchored proteins ( Mayor et al . , 1994 ) . Alkaline Phosphatase Activity as a Marker of Surface vs lntraceUular Caveolae AP activity can be assayed using p - nitrophenyl phosphate as substrate at pH 9 . 5 . Total and surface AP are determined in the presence or absence of detergent , respectively ( Ko - bayashi and Robinson , 1991 ) , the difference between the two representing the intracellular pool of AP . As the sub - strate is a small molecule its accessibility to the AP is a good indication of whether the enzyme is actually on the surface or within the cell . This is an important consideration as groups of caveolae may be attached to the plasma membrane by long thin tubules ( see Fig . 3 ) . We first optimized the con - ditions for AP detection in A431 cells . Surface AP was shown to represent 74 + 9 % ( mean of eight separate experi - ments ) of the total cellular AP . Some variation in the level of surface AP was found between experiments but within each experiment variation within the triplicate was ~ 5 % . Antibody addition , to induce crosslinking and clustering of AP in caveolae , did not change the total AP activity . We examined whether incubating cells at 37°C , with or without antibody addition , caused a shift in the distribution of AP activity . In the absence of antibodies no change in the relative level of surface AP activity occurred ( Fig . 2 A ) . However , after crosslinking a small but significant decrease Figure 1 . Surface labeling of alkaline phosphatase in A431 cells . Ceils were incubated with antibodies to AP followed by second antibodies and 5 or 10 nm protein A - gold either before ( A ) or after ( B ) glutaraldehyde fixation . Cells labeled at 4°C before fixation show labeling within caveolae at the cell surface ( arrowheads ) . In contrast , cells labeled after a mild glutaraldehyde fixation show labeling over the entire surface with little concentration within caveolae ( arrowhead ) . pm , plasma membrane . Bars , 100 nm . Patton et al . Internalization of Caveolae 1201 C 80 , 60 - % AP activity associated with cell surface 40 20 + Ah / + OA 15 30 4 ' 5 Time 37°C 60 D 100 - 80 % Maximal Tf - HRP uptake 60 40 20 0 0 15 30 45 60 Time 37°C ( + OA ) in surface AP activity occurred which was significant after 30 min at 37°C . We assume that this difference is due to the clustering of the alkaline phosphatase within caveolae after antibody binding . No change in the relative distribution of AP was observed if the cells were kept at 40C after antibody addition . We also tested whether the redistribution of AP was dependent on cytoskeletal elements . While nocodazole had no effect , CytD blocked the decrease in surface AP which occurred on warming the cells and caused a small but consistent increase in surface AP ( Fig . 2 A ) . Okadaic Acid Stimulates , and Staurosporine Inhibits , the Internalization of Cross - linked AP We tested a number of agents which may affect the function of caveolae . First , we examined the effect of hyperphos - phorylation on AP distribution by using the general phos - phatase inhibitor okadaic acid ( OA , Cohen et al . , 1990 ) . OA caused a striking decrease in surface AP ( Fig . 2 B ) . The maximal effect was seen after around 30 rain at 37 " C when only 20 % of the AP activity remained on the surface ( Fig . 2 C ) . To determine the specificity of the OA effect , we treated cells with OA in the absence of antibody binding when the AP labeling should be distributed over the entire surface and not concentrated in caveolae ( Fig . 1 ) . No sig - nificant decrease in surface AP was observed at any time ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) . This shows that the effect of OA was not due to a general stimulation of plasma membrane internali - zation and is consistent with the low density of GPI - anchored proteins detected in caveolae in the absence of an antibody cross - linking step ( see above , and Mayor et al . , 1994 ) . Con - sistent with the expected role of kinases in the OA effect , stanrosporine , a general kinase inhibitor , completely blocked the effects of OA ( Fig . 2 B ) . Interestingly , staurosporine also blocked the decrease in surface AP activity observed in the absence of OA and even caused a small but consistent in - crease in surface AP activity ( Fig . 2 A ) . Staurosporine treat - ment did not affect the clustering of AP in caveolae ( results not shown ) . These results strongly suggest that the internali - zation of clustered AP is dependent on the relative activity of kinases and phosphatases . Genistein , which shows higher specificity for tyrosine kinases , had only a partial effect on the OA - induced redistribution ( Fig . 2 B ) . We also examined Figure 2 . Biochemical detection of surface and intracellular alka - line phosphatase A - C . A431 cells were treated with or without anti - bodies to AP followed by a second antibody . They were then fixed immediately or treated with the agents indicated ( as described in Materials and Methods ) before fixation . CytD was used at two different concentrations , ( a ) 10 / ~ g / ml and ( b ) 1 / zg / ml . Surface and total AP were assayed and the results were expressed in terms of the percentage of total AP which is on the cell surface . Results are expressed as the mean with the standard error indicated ( A , B , and D ) . C shows time courses for the redistribution of surface AP after treatment with OA without an antibody - incubation step ( - Ab / + OA ) , after antibody binding only ( + Ab ) , and after antibody binding and OA treatment in hypertonic ( + Ab / + OA 1 . 6x ) or normal ( + Ab / + OA ) medium . ( D ) Ceils were treated with OA for various times and then incubated with a 5 - min pulse of Tf - HRP . After removing surface Tf - HRP the cell - associated HRP activity was determined and expressed as the fraction of the maximal Tf - HRP uptake ( in the absence of OA ) . gen , genistein ; Noc , nocodazole ; STP , stauro - sporine . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1202 the effect of the protein kinase C activator , PMA , on the AP distribution . PMA has previously been shown to prevent potocytosis and decrease the number of surface caveolae ( Smart et al . , 1993 ) . Consistent with previous results with A431 cells ( Sandvig and van Deurs , 1990 ) , PMA increased fluid - phase marker uptake ( results not shown ) but after a 1 - h incubation there was no significant change in the level of sur - face AP ( Fig . 2 B ) . Next we examined the effect of cytoskel - eton - disrupting agents on the OA - induced redistribution of AP . While nocodazole had no effect , CytD blocked the OA effect in a concentration - dependent manner ; in the presence of 1 / zg / ml CytD okadaic acid caused only a 50 % decrease in surface AP activity whereas 10 / zg / ml CytD completely blocked the effects of OA ( Fig . 2 B ) . Finally , we investigated the effect of OA on the clathrin - coated pit uptake pathway . A 5 - min pulse of Tf - HRP was ad - ministered at various times after OA treatment . The cell - associated HRP activity was then measured after removal of the surface Tf - HRP . As shown in Fig . 2 D the coated pit path - way is rapidly inhibited under these conditions . After 5 min the activity is already reduced by 50 % and after 15 min by 80 % consistent with previous studies of the effects of OA on the endocytic pathway ( Lucocq et al . , 1991 ; Lucocq , 1992 ) . This argues against any involvement of the coated pit inter - nalization pathway in the redistribution of AP under these conditions . Electron Microscopic Analysis of the Effects of OA on Caveolae We employed electron microscopy to further investigate the caveolae dynamics . As an independent marker , we used cho - lera toxin - binding subunit adsorbed to gold ( CT - B - gold ) , a single step labeling reagent which is highly specific for cave - olae ( Parton , 1994 ) . After washing , the cells were kept at 4°C or warmed for various times to 37°C . After this incuba - tion the cell surface was labeled at 4°C with cholera toxin - binding subunit conjugated to HRP ( CT - B - HRP ) . CT - B - HRP labels the entire cell surface but is concentrated within caveolae ( see e . g . , Figs . 3 A and 6 A ) . This allowed us to as - certain whether gold - labeled structures were still attached to the surface ( CT - B - gold and CT - B - HRP positive ) or were now internal ( CT - B - gold positive , CT - B - HRP negative ) . In cells treated with CT - B - gold and then labeled with CT - B - HRP without a warming step , all the gold was accessible to the second marker despite the double labeled structures occasionally appearing deep within the cell ( Fig . 3 A ) . 62 % of the gold was found within caveolae ( Table I ) and only 1 . 8 % within clathrin coated pits . After a warming step a small fraction of the cholera toxin - gold became internalized and gold particles were observed in CT - B - HRP - negative tubules , endosomes and caveolae - like structures ( Fig . 3 , B - D ) . We then examined the effect of OA on the surface caveolae . Labeling of internal caveolae - like profiles , multivesicular endosomes , and putative endosomal tubules were all in - creased upon OA treatment ( Fig . 3 E , Table I ) . Consistent with the decrease in gold within surface caveolae , the mean number of surface caveolar profiles per cell was decreased ninefold after a 15 - min incubation in the presence of OA . Serial section analysis ( results not shown ) and thick section electron microscopy after CT - B - HRP and HRP internaliza - tion suggested that the majority of the caveolae , if not all , were present in large clusters or attached to tubular elements rather than being present as free - budded caveolae ( see e . g . , Fig . 3 F ) . Quantitation showed that the fraction of internal gold increased from 35 % after a 15 - min incubation in the ab - sence of OA to 86 % after incubation for the same time but in the presence of 1 / ~ M OA ( Table I ) . The fraction of gold within internal eaveolar profiles and putative endosomal ele - ments were both increased upon OA treatment ( Table I ; see Materials and Methods for details ) . As OA treatment inhibits the clathrin coated pit pathway , this suggests that caveolar do - mains can fuse with endosomes . Examination of the pattern of CT - B - HRP or HRP labeling in semi - thick sections after OA treatment for 15 - min showed labeling of a heterogeneous population of tubulovesicular elements including multivesic - ular endosomes and caveolar - like profiles ( see e . g . , Fig . 3 F ) . Consistent with the biochemical results , CytD blocked the OA - induced internalization of CT - B - gold without affect - ing the caveolar morphology or the clustering of the gold within caveolae ( results not shown , also see Fig . 9 I ) . Okadaic Acid Treatment in Hypertonic Medium Causes Redistribution of VIP21 / Caveolin We investigated whether OA has any effect on the distribu - tion of VIP21 / caveolin using a specific antibody against the NH2 - terminus of the protein ( here referred to as VIP21N / caveolin ) which only recognizes the caveolar form of the protein ( Dupree et al . , 1993 ) . Immunofluorescence experiments showed that VIP21N / caveolin labeling gener - ally appeared more diffuse after OA treatment but in some cells patches of intracellular labeling were apparent ( Figs . 4 B and 9 C ) . We attempted to optimise this effect and fortui - tously found that treatment of cells with OA in the presence of hypertonic ( 1 . 6 × concentrated ) medium exaggerated this effect of OA . OA treatment under these conditions caused a dramatic effect on VIP21N / caveolin distribution ; in all cells the labeling redistributed from the cell surface to intracellu - lar patches between 30 and 60 min at 37°C ( Figs . 4 C and 9 E ) . The hypertonic medium alone had no effect on cell morphology or viability even after 24 h . The effect of OA in the hypertonic medium , as determined biocbemieally by the effect on surface AP , was similar to , but less dramatic , than the effect of OA in the normal medium ( Fig . 2 C ) . The redis - tribution of VIP21 / caveolin under these conditions as judged by immunofluorescence was also blocked by staurosporine ( results not shown ) . We then used immunoelectron micros - copy to find out where the VIP21 / caveolin was localized within the cell . After treatment of the cells with OA for 1 h at 37°C , heavy labeling for VIP21N / eaveolin was apparent on large clusters of vesicular profile s close to the nucleus ( Fig . 5 ) and occasionally the centrioles ( e . g . , Fig . 5 A ) . The labeled structures often resembled the interconnected groups of caveolae seen occasionally in control cells ( Fig . 5 D , com - pare with e . g . , Fig . 3 A ) . This suggested that these structures are clusters of caveolae which have redistributed from the pe - riphery of the cell . This was confirmed using CT - B - HRP which was bound to the cell surface at 8°C before OA treat - ment . After treatment of cells with OA for 1 h at 37°C , semi - thick section electron microscopy demonstrated the presence of extremely large clusters of caveolae ( Fig . 6 ) close to the nucleus and usually near to the dorsal pole of the cell ( Fig . 6 B ) . In the absence of OA , CT - B - HRP showed only weak Parton ¢t al . Internalization of Caveolae 1203 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1204 Table L Quantitative Analysis of CT - B - Gold Distribution After OA Treatment Condition % gold on % gold % gold in 37 " C surface within cell surface caveolae % gold in internal caveolar profiles % gold in endosomal profiles * 0 100 0 62 0 0 15 min 65 35 49 7 28 60 min 47 53 39 6 50 15 rain + OA 14 86 7 43 43 * Includes internal tubular profiles and multivesicular endosomes . See Materials and Methods for details . labeling of Golgi elements and occasionally endosomes ( results not shown ) . The percentage of caveolae present as clusters rather than single caveolae dramatically increased from 22 ( under control conditions ) to 80 % ( after treatment with OA for 1 h ) . Rarely were caveolae found at the periph - ery of the cell . Tubular profiles , apparently derived from the plasma membrane , occasionally appeared to be connected to the clusters of vesicles ( Fig . 6 B ) . The labeled structures were shown to be VIP2 l / caveolin positive ( Fig . 7 B ) and dis - tinct from the typical Golgi clusters described previously ( Fig . 7 C ; Lucocq et al . , 1989 , 1991 ) . CT - B - gold particles were observed in the 60 - nm buds and not in the associated tubules ( Fig . 7 A ) . HRP included in the medium as a fluid - phase marker during the OA treatment labeled the CT - B - gold - positive structures and the associated tubules ( Fig . 7 , A and C ) . As the cells were washed for 1 h at 4°C before fixation the results suggest that most of the gold - labeled HRP - containing structures were no longer connected to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 7 , A and C ) consistent with the bio - chemical results . In contrast to the cells treated with OA in normal medium , the caveolar clusters formed in the hyper - tonic medium were the major structures labeled with HRP . Transferrin - HRP bound to the cell surface before , or during , OA treatment did not appear in CT - B - gold labeled caveolae after a 1 - h treatment with OA ( results not shown ) . The effect of OA in the hypertonic medium was reversible . At an intermediate time after washing out the OA ( 3 h ) some ceils had already flattened and both surface and intracellular labeling for VIP21 / caveolin was apparent ( Fig . 4 C ) . The in - tracellular labeling was present in large patches within the cytosol . At this time large clusters of CT - B - HRP labeled caveolae were evident in the perinuclear area of the cell ( Fig . 8 ) . These clusters could also be labeled by adding a pulse of HRP at the time of OA treatment and then incubating the cells a further 3 h in the absence of OA and HRP ( Fig . 8 C ) . Later the intracellular clusters disappeared and VIP21 / cav - colin labeling was only found at the cell surface ( results not shown ) . Interaction of Caveolar Clusters with the Cytoskeleton Since the internalization of caveolar AP was completely blocked by treatment of the cells with CytD , we examined whether the OA - induced redistribution of caveolar clusters to the center of the cell in hypertonic medium was also affected by CytD . Cells were treated for 15 min with 5 gg / ml CytD and subsequently treated with OA , also in the presence of CytD . For this analysis we used MDCK cells grown on coverslips which remained flat during OA - treatment , facili - tating light microscopic analysis . As in A431 cells , VIP21 / caveolin labeling was redistributed from the lateral border of the cell to the perinuclear area after OA treatment in hyper - tonic medium whereas in normal medium the labeling be - came more diffuse ( Fig . 9 , A - F ) . The change in distribution upon OA treatment in hypertonic medium was completely blocked by treatment of CytD ( Fig . 9 , G - l ) as confirmed by electron microscopy of A431 cells ( Fig . 9 I ) . Under these conditions only 24 % of the caveolae were present as clus - tered structures as in untreated cells . Although nocodazole had no effect on the internalization of caveolae , we examined whether the movement of the cav - eolar clusters to the cell center was affected by microtu - bule depolymerization . By indirect immunofluorescence , VIP21N / caveolin labeling was shown to be concentrated around the microtubule - organizing center of many OA - treated MDCK cells ( Fig . 10 ) . MDCK cells in hypertonic medium were treated with nocodazole and then with OA , again in the presence of nocodazole . Under these condi - Figure 3 . Effect of OA on surface caveolae . A - E show examples of the morphological assay used to assess surface connectivity of CT - B - gold - labeled structures . Cells were incubated with CT - B - gold at 4°C and then incubated for various times at 37°C in the presence ( E and F ) or absence of OA ( B - D ) . The cells were then returned to 4°C and incubated with CT - B - HRP to label the cell surface . ( . 4 ) Cells were incubated with CT - B - gold followed by CT - B - HRP without a warming step between . This semi - thick section ( , 0200 nm ) shows a group of caveolae which are attached to the cell surface ( an arrowhead marks a connecting structure ) . All the gold is within CT - B - HRP positive caveolae evident as 60 - 70 - nm invaginations ( double arrowheads ) . ( B - D ) Cells were surface - labeled with CT - B - gold and then incubated for 15 rain at 37°C before labeling the cell surface at 4°C . ( B ) Note the CT - B - HRP - Iabeled clathrin - coated pits ( arrowheads ) which must be connected to the cell surface out of the plane of section . The double arrowheads mark a surface - connected caveola containing both CT - B - HRP and CT - B - gold . Two gold particles are evident within an internal tubnlar / cisternal structure ( arrow ) which is CT - B - HRP nega - tive . C and D show examples of internal structures labeled with CT - B - gold only . C and the inset show examples of possible caveolae while in D two gold - containing tubular profiles are connected to a multivesicular endosome . ( E ) Cells were labeled as above but were incubated for 15 min in the presence of OA . Gold particles are evident within CT - B - HRP negative vesicular and tubular profiles as shown at higher magnification in the inset . Note the 60 - 70 nm buds / vesicular profiles ( small arrowheads ) . A surface clathrin - coated pit is indicated ( large arrowhead ) . F shows a semi - thick section of a cell incubated as above but with CT - B - HRP surface labeling before OA treatment . Note the clusters of caveolae - like structures ( arrowheads ) which are often associated with tubular elements . Bars : ( A - E ) 100 nm , ( F ) 200 nm . Parton et al . Internalization of Caveolae 1205 Figure 4 . Localization of VlP21N / caveolin in okadaic acid - treated A431 cells . A431 cells were treated with 1 tzM okadaic acid for 1 h in normal medium ( B ) , or in hypertonic medium ( C ) . A shows control cells . D shows cells treated as in C and then incubated in OA - free hypertonic medium for 3 h before fixation . All cells were then labeled for VIP ' 21N / caveolin . Untreated ceils ( A ) show characteristic lateral staining of the plasma membrane . After treatment with OA ( B ) , the cells round up and diffuse labeling is evident . Some cells show patches of labeling ( see inset ) . In contrast , after OA treatment in hypertonic medium , essentially all the labeling is concentrated in discrete areas close to the nucleus . After removal of OA ( D ) and reincubation in OA - free hypertonic medium the cells flatten . Some VIP21N / caveolin is evident at the cell periphery ( arrows ) , but in most cells patches of perinuclear staining are still apparent . Bars , 10 # m . tions all microtubules were depolymerized as judged by in - direct immunofluorescence using an anti - tubulin antibody ( results not shown ) . VIP21 / caveolin was found to be distrib - uted throughout the nocodazole / OA - treated cells in rela - tively large structures , often peripherally , and was not con - centrated in the perinuclear area ( Fig . 9 , J and K ) . These results were confirmed by electron microscopy using A431 cells ( Fig . 9 L ) . Quantitation demonstrated that under these conditions 69 % of the caveolae were clustered , similar to cells treated in the hypertonic medium with OA alone . Discussion In the present study we have shown that okadaic acid , a specific inhibitor of phosphatases 1 and 2a , caused a dra - matic removal of caveolae from the cell surface . To examine this process further we developed a biochemical assay for caveolar internalization . Using this assay we have been able to show that the OA - induced removal of a GPI - anchored pro - tein from the cell surface was blocked by a general kinase inhibitor and by CytD , and was dependent on the clustering Figure 5 . Immunoelectron microscopic localization of VIP21N / caveolin in A431 cells treated with OA in hypertonic medium . A431 cells were treated with OA for 1 h in hypertonic medium and then fixed and processed for frozen sectioning . Sections were indicated by anti - VIP2 IN / caveolin antibodies followed by protein A - gold . Heavy labeling of tubulovesicular elements close to the nucleus ( n ) and centrioles ( c ) is apparent ( , 4 ) . A common observation is the presence of intermediate filaments ( i ) close to the labeled elements ( also see Figs . 4 , B and C and 5 C ) . The labeled structures are shown at higher magnification in B - D . Note that the labeling is associated with the 60 - rim buds ( arrows ) and not the associated tubules ( C , arrowheads ) . D shows a labeled section which was stained with ammonium molybdate to more clearly delineate the structure of the labeled elements . The labeled structures resemble caveolar rosettes ( also see structure indicated by arrows in A ) . Bars , 100 am . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1206 Patton et al . Internalization of Caveolae 1207 Figure 6 . Distribution and morphology of CT - B - labeled structures in control and OA - treated A431 ceils . A431 cells were labeled with CT - B - HRP and then fixed ( A ) or warmed in the presence of OA in hypertonic medium ( B - D ) . After Epon embedding semi - thick ( 200 rim ) sections were prepared . A shows a low magnification view of a cell which was surface - labeled with CT - B - HRP at 8°C . Caveotae Figure 7 . Morphology of CT - B - labeled structures in OA - treated A431 cells . 431 cells were labeled with CT - B - gold ( A and C ) or unlabeled CT - B ( B ) at 8°C and then washed and warmed in the presence of OA as described in the legend to Fig . 4 . A and C show semi - thick Epon sections . The cells were surface - labeled with CT - B - gold and then warmed in the presence of OA and HRP for 1 h . Numerous tubular structures containing HRP are evident but only the buds at the ends of the tubules contain CT - B - gold ( arrows ) . B shows the perinuclear area of a cell which was labeled with CT - B and then warmed in the presence of OA for 1 h before processing for frozen sections . Ultrathin sections were then labeled with antibodies to VIP21N / caveolin followed by 10 nm gold ( / arge arrows ) and anti - cholera toxin followed by 6 nm gold ( small arrowheads ) . The two markers colocalize in structures close to the nucleus ( n ) . C shows a cell labeled with CT - B - gold and HRP as described above . Two discrete clusters of small vesicles ( indicated by open arrowheads ) with the characteristics of Golgi clusters are not labeled by the HRP or CT - B - gold . n , nucleus . Bars , 200 rim . ( arrows ) are distributed over the entire cell surface . The inset shows a characteristic cluster of caveolae ( arrowheads ) in comparison to single caveolae ( arrows ) . ( B ) After OA treatment CT - B - HRP - Iabeled structures are observed in groups ( one group indicated by an arrow - head is shown at higher magnification in the inset ) at the dorsal pole of the cell . Note that few caveolae are seen on the remainder of the plasma membrane . Each group comprises tubules with attached buds of 50 - 70 - rim diameter as shown at higher magnification in the inset and in C and D . Note the rosette - like structures ( arrowheads indicate some of the buds ) , n , nucleus ; i , intermediate filaments ; s , culture substratum . Bars ; ( A and B ) 1 / zm ; ( C and D , insets ) 200 nm . Figure 8 . Morphology of caveolae after OA wash - out . ( A and B ) A431 cells were labeled with CT - B - HRP and then washed and warmed in the presence of OA as described in the legend to Fig . 4 . The cells were then washed and reincubated for a further 3 h in the absence of OA , also in hypertonic medium . After Epon embedding semi - thick ( 200 nm ) sections were prepared . A shows a low magnification view of a typical cell . A cluster of CT - B - HRP - Iabeled structures is located close to the nucleus ( n ) . As shown at higher magnification in B the labeled structure has the morphology of a caveolar cluster . ( C ) A431 cells were incubated with HRP and OA for 1 h and then washed and reincubated in HRP - and OA - free medium . A caveolar cluster close to the nucleus is labeled with HRP . Bars , 1 ~ tm . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1210 Figure 9 . Effect of cytoskele - ton disrupting agents on the OA - induced redistribution of caveolae . MDCK cells were treated with OA only ( C - F ) , with OA and CytD ( G and H , or with OA and nocodazole ( J and K ) . All incubations with OA were for 1 h and were ei - ther in normal medium ( C and D ) or in hypertonic medium ( E - L ) , as described in Mate - rials and Methods . The cells were then fixed and VIP21N / caveolin was detected by indi - rect immunotluorescence ( A , C , E , G , and J ) . B , D , F , , H , and K show the corresponding phase contrast images . Con - trol cells ( A and B ) show the characteristic staining of the lateral plasma membrane area . After OA treatment in normal medium , labeling is evident in small dots ( C and D ) . In con - trast , after OA treatment in hypertonic medium ( E and F ) labeling is observed in large patches in the perinuclear area of each cell ( small triangles in E indicate two nuclei ) . Note that the cells do not round up significantly under these con - ditions . Cells treated with both CytD and OA in hypertonlc medium show no redistribu - tion of VIP - labeling ( G and H ) . In cells treated with no - codazole and OA ( J and K ) , labeling is not clustered in the perinuclear area as in cells treated with OA alone ( com - pare with C and E ) . Labeling is present in the cell periph - ery , in some eases lying close to the lateral plasma mem - brane ( arrows ) , but the label - ing pattern is clearly different from control untreated cells ( compare with A ) . I and L show regions in the periphery of A431 cells which were labeled with CT - B - HRP and then treated with OA and CytD ( I ) or OA and nocodazole ( L ) . Note that CytD completely blocks the redistribution of caveolae which remain at the cell periphery ( I , arrows ) , whereas dusters still form in the presence of nocodazole ( L ) . Bars ; ( A - H , J and K ) 10 / ~ m ; ( I and L ) 0 . 5 # m . of the GPI - anchored protein into caveolae prior to OA treat - ment . Filipin , which disrupts the structure of caveolae and prevents clustering of GPI - anchored proteins ( Rothberg et al . , 1990a , 1992 ; Chang et al . , 1992 ) , also blocked the de - crease in surface AP in the presence or absence of OA , with - out significantly affecting transferrin uptake ( Parton R . G . , and B . Joggerst , results not shown ) . These results , as well as the decrease in internalization via clathrin coated pits after OA treatment , strongly suggest that the effect of OA is spe - cific for caveolae rather than generally causing plasma mem - brane internalization . In the absence of OA a caveolar marker was also internalized , although at a slower rate , and this process was also blocked by a kinase inhibitor . This sug - gests that OA may simply be exaggerating a normally occur - ring but low frequency process and that the internalization of caveolae may be regulated by phosphorylation and de - phosphorylation . OA treatment in hypertonic medium al - lowed the visualization of a possible intermediate in the re - distribution process when clusters of caveolae accumulated in the center of the cell . Previous work has described an internalization pathway for toxin - gold conjugates via small uncoated invaginations Patton et al . Internalization of Caveolae 1211 Figure 10 . Microtubule organization in OA - treated MDCK cells . A431 cells were treated with OA in hypertonic medium for 1 h at 37 " C , fixed and then VIP21N / caveolin and tubulin were detected by indirect immunofluorescence . A shows the distribution of VIP - 21N / caveolin and B shows the microtubule organization . The dou - ble exposure ( C ) shows that the VIP21N / caveolin staining ( red ) co - localizes with the microtubule - organizing centers ( microtubules in green ) . Bar , 10 ~ m . ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Tran et al . , 1987 ; Parton et al . , 1988 ; Carpentier et al . , 1989 ) . These structures were subse - quently shown to be caveolae as defined by VIP21N / caveolin labelling ( Parton , 1994 ) . Morphological studies by Orci and coworkers delineated the internalization pathway which in - volved the budding of caveolae to generate non - coated vesi - cles and their fusion with tubulovesicular elements in the cell periphery ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Tran et al . , 1987 ) . GPI - anchored proteins have also been shown to internalize into endosomes ( Hjelle et al . , 1991 ; Birn et al . , 1993 ; Turek et al . , 1993 ) . For example , a ligand bound to a GPI - anchored form of CD4 was localized to caveolae and was internalized at a relatively slow rate ( initial rate of 0 . 7 % per min ) into en - dosomes ( Keller et al . , 1992 ) . However , the capability of caveolae to be internalized has been questioned ( Bundgaard , 1983 ; Anderson , 1993 ; Van Deurs et al . , 1993 ) based on the finding that the GPI - anchored folate receptor and VIP21 / caveolin could not be observed within endosomal ele - ments ( Rothberg et al . , 1990b , 1992 ) and from serial section analysis of caveolae in endothelial cells where the vast majority of caveolae , if not all , were shown to be connected to the cell surface ( Bundgaard et al . , 1983 ) . Nevertheless , these studies cannot rule out a small number of asnychronous budding events which would be difficult to detect if the generated vesicles rapidly fuse with another membrane , for example , with the early endosome . Assuming that all the AP internalized in the present study in the absence of OA is through caveolae and that each budded caveola would have a lifetime of 1 min , we might expect approximately one inter - nal caveola profile to be observed per 20 A431 cell profiles . The lifetime of a budded caveola could actually be much shorter than this . It should be noted that Tran et al . ( 1987 ) used an incubation temperature of 22°C which may have slowed down this process allowing the visualization of the in - termediates . The present study is certainly consistent with the view that caveolae are capable of detachment from the cell surface at least under certain experimental conditions . The use of an enzymatic assay allowed us to differentiate between internal and surface caveolae and to rapidly test other reagents to determine their effect on the removal of caveolae . Interestingly , staurosporine , and CytD which in - hibited the OA - induced internalization of caveolae , also prevented the small decrease in surface AP activity which occurred in the absence of OA . The slow rate of AP uptake under these conditions is in the same range as that observed for CT - gold and for GPI - anchored CD4 ( Tran et al . , 1987 ; Keller et al . , 1992 ) . Further work will be required to ascer - tain whether the low rate of surface AP decrease observed in the present study actually corresponds to caveolar bud - ding rather than another membrane uptake process with similar characteristics . We occasionally observed internal caveolar profiles labeled with CT - B - gold but many such profiles in serial sections were attached to groups of caveo - lae , narrow tubules , or multivesicular endosomal structures . We do not know whether the tubular elements are parts of the plasma membrane which are internalized together with the caveolae or endosomal structures to which the caveolae rapidly fuse . However , consistent with previous studies it ap - pears that markers present in caveolae are transferred to en - dosomes as labeling of the latter was increased upon OA treatment . In this respect it is interesting to note that deter - gent - insoluble complexes enriched in caveolar components were recently shown to contain rab5 ( Lisanti et al . , 1994b ) postulated to be involved in coated vesicle - early endosome fusion ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ) . At present we have no evidence that caveolae play a role in the internalization of GPI - anchored proteins under physiological conditions . Consis - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1212 tent with the results of Mayor et ah ( 1994 ) AP was only en - riched in caveolae after antibody - induced crosslinking . In the absence of antibody binding , OA treatment caused a de - crease in surface - attached caveolae as judged morphologi - cally without significantly affecting the fraction of AP on the cell surface consistent with the view that under these condi - tions AP is not concentrated within caveolae . Our results suggest that the actin cytoskeleton may play a role in the internalization of caveolae . An interaction of the actin cytoskeleton with caveolae has been suggested from morphological studies ( Willingham et al . , 1981 ; Izumi et al . , 1988 ) . In addition , recent studies using detergents to enrich for possible caveolar components showed the presence of ac - tin , gelsolin , and annexin II in these fractions ( Lisanti et al . , 1994b ) . It should now be possible to examine the possible role of these and other actin binding proteins in the redistri - bution of caveolae induced by OA . The dependence of the internalization process on actin filaments suggests a possible similarity to the pathway of endocytosis in yeast . Actin and fimbrin have both been shown to be involved in the initial in - ternalization steps of the alpha factor receptor ( Kubler and Riezman , 1993 ) . In addition , morphological studies showed that actin and actin - binding proteins are clustered around finger - like invaginations of the yeast plasma membrane ( Mulholland et al . , 1994 ) . Cortical actin patches were ob - served to be associated with the cell surface via these invagi - nations . Other internalization pathways which are dependent on actin have been described in mammalian cells . Uptake from the apical surface of epithelial cells was reduced by CytD but this appeared to reflect inhibition of internalization through clathrin - coated pits ( Gottlieb et al . , 1993 ) . Uptake via a non - clathrin - dependent pathway in Vero cells was also shown to be blocked by CytD ( Sandvig and van Deurs , 1990 ) . The dramatic effects of OA on the surface caveolae as de - tected biochemically suggested that we might be able to de - tect some redistribution of the caveolar marker VIP21 / caveo - lin . Although initial immunofluorescence studies did not show a great effect of OA on the pattern of VIP21 / caveolin labeling , to our surprise we noticed a dramatic change in the VIP21 / caveolin distribution if cells were treated with OA in the presence of a hypertonic medium . The labeling com - pletely redistributed from the periphery to the perinuclear area of the cell . This process was reversible ( in the same medium ) and did not affect cell viability . Agents shown to block the internalization of AP measured biochemically ( e . g . , CytD and staurosporine ) also blocked the redistribu - tion of VIP21 / caveolin in the hypertonic medium . A striking feature of the OA treatment was the formation of clusters of caveolae at early times after OA treatment . Formation of these clusters was blocked by CytD . The caveolar clusters consist of discrete 60 - nm buds attached to either a central vacuole or to long tubules . The clusters are not an artifact of OA treatment as they are also observed ifi untreated A431 cells ( see Parton , 1994 , and Fig . 6 this study ) . Complex ar - rangements of caveolae , termed rosettes , have been exten - sively described in adipocytes where they were postulated to play a role in the uptake of lipid precursors or in insulin ac - tion ( Williamson , 1964 ; Jarrett and Smith , 1975 ; Novikoff et al . , 1980 ) . Surface caveolar markers appeared within these VIP21 / caveolin - positive clusters and accumulated in the center of the cell in a microtubule - dependent step . Why should hypertonic medium cause this specific effect when combined with OA treatment ? Our preliminary results sug - gest that the amount of CT - B - gold reaching endosomes is lower after OA treatment in the hypertonic medium than in normal medium . Hypertonic medium might therefore dis - rupt the interaction of caveolae with endosomes , prevent VIP21 / caveolin recycling back to the cell periphery , and cause caveolar markers to be trapped in the caveolar clusters . Although no endosomal or Golgi markers were detected in the caveolar clusters formed in the hypertonic medium it is possible that caveolae interact with domains of these or - ganelles and that their centralization is a secondary effect of this interaction . It should be noted that cholera toxin has been detected in endosomes ( Tran et al . , 1987 ) and in Golgi elements ( Joseph et al . , 1978 , 1979 ) under physiological conditions . Whatever the cause , this specific interaction with microtubules must reflect some physiological process . In ad - dition , this procedure provides a useful tool to accumulate large numbers of caveolae in the cell and so facilitate im - munolabeling studies . While our results suggest a role for phosphorylation in regulating caveolae dynamics , the nature of the kinases and their targets are unknown . Previous work showed that OA in - duced a mitotic - like state in cultured cells ( Lucocq et al . , 1991 ) . Interestingly , we have observed VIP21 / caveolin label - ing associated with caveolae - like profiles close to the spindle poles of mitotic A431 and MDCK cells ( Parton , R . G . , and B . Joggerst , results not shown ) . The level of phosphorylation of many different cellular proteins and the activity of several cellular kinases will be increased during OA treatment ( Co - hen et al . , 1990 ) . These kinases will also be inhibited by the general kinase inhibitor staurosporine . Our results suggest that the observed effects are not mediated by protein kinase C . VIP21 / caveolin , one of the major caveolar proteins , was first identified as a substrate for tyrosine phosphorylation by v - src ( Glenney , 1989 ; Glenney and Zokas , 1989 ) and has shown to be phosphorylated in vitro on both serine / threonine and tyrosine ( Sargiacomo et al . , 1993 ) . However , prelimi - nary experiments suggest that OA treatment does not sig - nificantly increase the phosphorylation of VIP21 / caveolin in MDCK cells ( Fra , A . , P . Dupree , K . Simons , R . G . Parton , results not shown ) . We are now trying to identify other cav - eolar components which could be hyperphosphorylated dur - ing OA treatment . In conclusion , we have shown that internalization of cav - eolae may be a regulated process . Increased phosphorylation due to phosphatase inhibition induces removal of caveolae from the surface whereas decreased kinase activity inhibits the internalization process . Although OA caused an almost complete removal of caveolae from the surface , we envisage that physiological stimuli may cause budding of small groups or individual caveolae . This may be modulated by the state of the actin cytoskeleton which is also subject to regulation . What might be the physiological role of caveolar internaliza - tion ? One possibility is that this represents a highly regulat - able endocytic mechanism for membrane - bound proteins . Their small volume ( approximately one fifth that of a clathrin - coated vesicle ) would mean that fluid uptake by cav - eolae may be minimal . Alternatively , this pathway might allow the accessibility of signaling molecules present in caveolae to be modulated . One striking feature of caveolae is their high concentration of calcium - regulating molecules Parton et al . Internalization of Caveolae 1213 ( Fujimoto , 1993 ; Fujimoto et al . , 1993 ) . Closure of caveo - lae , induced by phosphorylation , might be combined with opening of calcium channels in response to an intracellular messenger . A discrete amount of calcium ( contained within the uniformly - sized budded caveola ) would then enter the cell . Due to the enrichment of gangliosides in caveolae , the lipid - bound sialic acids could locally concentrate calcium at these sites ( Maggio , 1994 ) . Whatever the role of the caveolae internalization described here , these assays should allow detailed study of caveolar dynamics and the role of phos - phorylation in this process . In addition , the possibility to re - move caveolae from the surface and to cluster them in dis - crete areas of the cell should facilitate the study of caveolar functions and allow localization of further caveolar compo - nents . We are grateful to Sigrun Brendel for excellent technical assistance . We would also like to thank Paul Dupree , Anna Fra , and David Critchley for providing antibodies ; Sanjay Pimplikar for sharing reagents ; and Paul Dupree , Anna Fra , Gareth Grifliths , Jean Gruenberg , Sanjay Pimplikar , Sigrid Reinsch , and Marino Zerial for many helpful discussions . Received for publication 21 March 1994 and in revised form 1 September 1994 . References Anderson , R . G . W . 1993 . Potocytosis of small molecules and ions by caveolae . Trends Cell Biol . 3 : 69 - 72 . Anderson , R . G . W . , B . A . Kamen , K . G . Rothberg , and S . W . Lacey . 1992 . Potocytosis : sequestration and transport of small molecules by eaveolae . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 255 : 410 - 411 . Birn , H . , J . Selhub , and E . I . Christensen . 1993 . Internalization and intracellu - lar transport of folate - binding protein in rat kidney proximal tubule . Am . J . Physiol . 264 : 302 - 310 . Bradford , M . M . 1976 . A rapid sensitive method for the quantitation of micro - gram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein - dye binding . Anal . Biochem . 72 : 248 - 254 . Bucci , C . , R . G . Patton , I . Mather , H . Stunnenberg , K . Simons , B . Hoflack , and M . Zerial . 1992 . The small GTPase rab5 functions as a regulatory factor in the early endocytic pathway . Cell . 70 : 715 - 728 . Bundgaard , M . 1983 . Vesicular transport in capillary endothelium : does it oc - cur ? Fed . Proc . 42 : 2425 - 2430 . Bundgaard , M . , P . Hagman , and C . Crone . 1983 . The three - dimensional orga - nization of plasmalemmal vesicular profiles in the endothelium of rat heart capillaries . Microvasc . Res . 25 : 358 - 368 . Carpentier , J . - L . , F . Sawano , D . Geiger , P . Gorden , A . Perrelet , and L . Orci . 1989 . Potassium depletion and hypertonic medium reduce " non - coated " and clathrin - - coated pit formation , as well as endocytosis through these two gates . J . Cell Physiol . 138 : 519 - 526 . Chang , W . - J . , K . G . Rothberg , A . Kamen , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1992 . Lowering of the cholesterol content of MA104 cells inhibits receptor - mediated transport of folate . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 63 - 69 . Chavrier , P . , R . G . Parton , H . P . Hauri , K . Simons , and M . Zerial . 1990 . Lo - calization of low molecular weight GTP binding proteins to exocytic and en - docytic compartments . Cell . 62 : 317 - 329 . Cohen , P . , C . F . B . Holmes , and Y . Tsukitani . 1990 . Okadaic acid ; a new probe for the study of cellular regulation . Trends Biochem . Sci . 15 : 98 - 102 . Dupree , P . , R . G . Patton , G . Raposo , T . V . Kurzchalia , and K . Simons . 1993 . Caveolae and sorting in the trans - Golgi - network of epithelial cells . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 12 : 1597 - 1605 . Fiedler , K . , R . G . Partun , R . Kellner , T . Etzold , and K . Simons . 1994 . VIP - 36 , a novel component of glycolipid rafts and exocytic carrier vesicles in epithe - lial cells . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 13 : 1729 - 1740 . Fujimoto , T . 1993 . Calcium pump of the plasma membrane is localized in eav - eolae . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 1147 - 1157 . Fujimoto , T . , S . Nakade , A . Miyawaki , K . Mikoshiba , and K . Ogawa . 1993 . Localization of inositol 1 , 4 , 5 , - triphosphate receptor - like protein in plas - malemmal caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 119 : i507 - 1513 . Ghitescu , L . , A . Fixman , M . Simionescu , and N . Simionescu . 1986 . Specific binding sites for albumin restricted to plasmalemmal vesicles of continuous capillary endothelium : receptor - mediated transcytosis . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 1304 - 131 ! . Glenney , . I . R . 1989 . Tyrosine phosphorylation of a 22 - kDa protein is cor - related with phosphorylation by Roos sarcoma virus . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 20163 - 20166 . Glenney , J . R . , and L . Zokas . 1989 . Novel tyrosine kinase substrate from Rous sarcoma virus - transformed cells are present in the membrane skeleton . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 2401 - 2408 . Gottlieb , T . A . , I . E . Ivanov , M . Adesnik , and D . D . Sabatini . 1993 . Actin micrnfilaments play a critical role in endocytosis at the apical but not the basolateral surface of polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 695 - 710 . Grifliths , G . 1993 . Fine Structure Immunocytochemistry . Springer - Verlag , Berlin - Heidelberg . 181 - 183 . Hjelle , J . T . , E . I . Christensen , F . A . Carone , and J . Selhub . 1991 . Cell frac - tionation and electron microscope studies of kidney folate - binding protein . Am . J . Physiol . 260 : 338 - 346 . Izumi , T . , Y . Shibata , and T . Yamamoto . 1988 . Striped structures on the cyto - plasmic surface membranes of the endothelial vesicles of the rat aorta re - vealed by quick - freeze , deep - etching replicas ~ Anat . Rec . 220 : 225 - 232 . Jarrett , L . , and R . M . Smith . 1975 . Ultrastructural localization of insulin recep - tors on adipocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 72 : 3256 - 3530 . Joseph , K . C . , S . U . Kim , A . Stieber , and N . K . Gonatas . 1978 . Endocytosis of cholera toxin into neuronal GERL . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 75 : 2815 - 2819 . Joseph , K . C . , A . Stieber , and N . K . Gonatas . 1979 . Endocytosis of cholera toxin in GERL - Iike structures of routine meuroblastoma cells pretreated with GM1 ganglioside . J . Cell Biol . 81 : 543 - 554 . Keller , G . A . , M . W . Siegel , and I . W . Caras . 1992 . Endocytosis ofglycophos - pholipid - anchored and transmembrane forms of CD4 by different endocytic pathways . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 11 : 863 - 874 . Kobayashi , T . , and J . M . Robinson . 1991 . A novel intracellular compartment with unusual secretory properties in human neutrophils . J . Cell Biol . 113 : 743 - 756 . Kubler , E . , and H . Riezman . 1993 . Actin and fimbrin are required for the initial internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 12 : 2855 - 2862 . Kurzchalia , T . V . , P . Dupree , and S . Monier . 1994 . VIP21 - Caveolin , a protein of the trans - Golgi network and eaveolae . FEBS ( Fed . Fur . Biochem . Soc . ) Lett . 346 : 88 - 91 . Lisanti , M . P . , P . E . Scherer , Z . - L . Tang , and M . Sargiacomo . 1994a . Caveo - lae , eaveolin and caveolin - rich membrane domains : a signalling hypothesis . Trends Cell Biol . 4 : 231 - 235 . Lisanti , M . P . , P . E . Scherer , J . Vidugiriene , Z . - L . Tang , A . Hermanowski - Vosatka , Ya - Huei Tu , R . F . Cook , and M . Sargiacomo . 1994b . Character - ization of caveolin - rich membrane domains isolated from an endothelial - rich source : implications for human disease . J . Cell Biol . 126 : 111 - 126 . Lucocq , J . 1992 . Minticking mitotic Golgi assembly using okadaic acid . J . Cell Sci . 103 : 875 - 880 . Lucocq , J . M . , E . G . Berger , and G . Warren . 1989 . Mitotic Golgi fragments in HeLa cells and their role in the reassembly pathway . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 463 - 474 . Lucocq , J . , G . Warren , and J . Pryde . 1991 . Okadaic acid induces Golgi appara - tus fragmentation and arrest of intracellular transport . J . Cell Sci . 100 : 753 - 759 . Maggio , B . 1994 . The surface behaviour of glycosphingolipids in biomem - branes : a new frontier of molecular ecology . Prog . Biophys . Mol . Biol . 62 : 55 - 117 . Mayor , S . , K . Rothberg , and F . Maxfield . 1994 . Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae triggered by crosslinking . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 264 : 1948 - 1951 . Milici , A . J . , N . W . Watrnus , H . Stukenbrok , and G . E . Palade . 1987 . Trans - cytosis of albumin in capillary endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 2603 - 2612 . Montesano , R . , J . Roth , A . Robert , and L . Orci . 1982 . Non - coatcd membrane invaginations are involved in binding and internalization of cholera and teta - nus toxins . Nature ( Lond . ) . 296 : 651 - 653 . Muiholland , J . , D . Prenss , A . Moon , A . Wong , D . Drubin , and D . Botstein . 1994 . Ultrastructure of the yeast actin cytoskeleton and its association with the yeast cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 381 - 389 . Novikoff , A . B . , P . M . Novikoff , O . M . Rosen , and C . S . Rubin . 1980 . Or - ganelle relationships in cultured 3T3 - LI preadipocytes . J . Cell Biol . 87 : 180 - 196 . Parton , R . G . 1994 . Ultrastructural localization of gangliosides ; GM1 is con - centrated in eaveolae . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 42 : 155 - 166 . Parton , R . G . , C . D . Ockleford , and D . R . Critchley . 1988 . Tetanus toxin bind - ing to mouse spinal cord cells : an evaluation of the role of gangliosides in toxin internalization . Brain Res . 475 : 118 - 127 . Parton , R . G . , P . Schrotz , C . Bucci , and J . Greunberg . 1992 . Plasticity of early endosomes . J . Cell Sci . 103 : 335 - 348 . Peters , K . R . , W . W . Carley , and G . E . Palade . 1985 . Endothelial plasmalem - mal vesicles have a characteristic striped bipolar surface structure . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 2233 - 2238 . Raposo , G . , I . Dunia , C . Delavier - Klutchko , S . Kaveri , A . D . Strosberg , and E . L . Benedetti . 1989 . Internalization of / 3 - adrenergic receptor in A431 cells involves non - coated vesicles . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 50 : 340 - 352 . Rothberg , K . , Y . Ying , B . A . Kamen , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1990a . Choles - ternl controls the clustering of the glycophospholipid - anchored membrane receptor for 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 2931 - 2938 . Rothberg , K . , Y . Ying , J . F . Kolhouse , B . A . Kamen , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1990b . The glycophospholipid - linked folate receptor internalizes folate The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1214 without entering the clathrin - coated pit endocytic pathway . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 637 - 649 . Rothberg , K . , J . E . Heuser , W . C . Donzell , Y . - S . Ying , J . R . Glenney , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1992 . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae mem - brane coats . Cell . 68 : 673 - 682 . Sandvig , K . , and B . van Deurs . 1990 . Selective modulation of the endocytic uptake of ricin and fluid phase markers without alteration in transferrin en - docytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 6382 - 6388 . Sargiacomo , M . , M . Sudol , Z . Tang , and M . P . Lisanti . 1993 . Signal transduc - ing molecules and GPI - linked proteins form a caveolin - rich insoluble com - plex in MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 122 : 789 - 80 % Severs , N . J . 1988 . Caveolae : static inpocketings of the plasma membrane , dy - namic vesicles or plain artifact ? J . Cell Sci . 90 : 341 - 348 . Simionescu , M . , and N . Simionescu . 1991 . Endothelial transport of macro - molecules : Transcytosis and endocytosis . Cell Biol . Rev . 25 : 1 - 80 . Smart , E . J . , D . Foster , Y . - S . Ying , B . A . Kamen , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1993 . Protein kinase C activators inhibit receptor - mediated potocytosis by preventing internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 124 : 307 - 313 . Tran , D . , J . - L . Carpentier , F . Sawano , P . Gorden , and L . Orci . 1987 . Ligands internal . ized through coated or non - coated invaginations follow a common in - tracellular pathway . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 7957 - 7961 . Turek , J . J . , C . P . Leamon , and P . S . Low . 1993 . Endocytosis of folate - protein conjugates : ultrastructural localization in KB cells . J . Cell Sci . 106 : 423 - - 430 . Van Deurs , B . , P . K . Holm , K . Sandvig , and S . H . Hansen . 1993 . Are caveolae involved in endocytosis ? Trends Cell Biol . 3 : 249 - 251 . Williamson , J . R . 1964 . Adipose tissue . Morphological changes associated with mobilization . J . Cell Biol . 20 : 57 - 74 . Willingham , M . C . , S . S . Yamada , P . J . A . Davies , A . V . Rutherford , M . G . Gallo , and I . Pastan . 1981 . Intracellular localization of actin in cultured fibroblasts by electron microscopic immunocytochemistry . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 29 : 17 - 37 . Ying , Y . - S . , R . G . W . Anderson , and K . G . Rothberg . 1992 . Each caveola con - tains multiple glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol anchored membrane proteins . CoM Spring Harbor Symp . Quant . Biol . 57 : 593 - 604 . Patton et al . Internalization of Caveolae 1215