Modification with glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) is an irreversible glycolipid modification of the protein C(cid:2)terminus ( Fig . 1 ) that is initiated in endoplas(cid:2) mic reticulum by substitution of C(cid:2)terminal signal pep(cid:2) tide – the signal of GPI(cid:2)modification – with the pro(cid:2) form of GPI(cid:2)anchor , and it is followed by modification of the lipid part of the GPI(cid:2)anchor in Golgi [ 1 ] . In the UNIPROT database ( www . uniprot . org ) , there are 124 GPI(cid:2)APs in the human genome , while this number is reduced to 83 after combining homologous proteins . According to the same database , the main function of all GPI(cid:2)APs appears on a surface of a cell , which suggests that the GPI(cid:2)anchor is a signal of localization on the outer surface of the plasma membrane ( PM ) . Based on GPI(cid:2)AP activities , it is possible to distinguish their major types : enzymes , navigation cues and navigation receptors , adhesion molecules , growth factors receptors and core(cid:2) ceptors , and receptors participating in formation of immune complexes . For functioning of some GPI(cid:2)APs , namely enzymes and navigation cues , a GPI(cid:2)AP serves mainly as a signal of PM localization . For the GPI(cid:2)APs that were shown to activate intracellular signaling , exis(cid:2) tence of some transmembrane adapter that mediates its signal transduction is usually assumed . Still , there are numerous indications that GPI(cid:2)APs have their own receptor function . The most prominent example is that oligomerization of different GPI(cid:2)APs with antibodies induces the same type of cell response : activation of src(cid:2) family kinases ( SFK ) and phospholipase C γ ( PLC γ ) , phosphoinositide turnover , and elevation of intracellular calcium [ 2(cid:2)5 ] . Another example is potentiation of T(cid:2)cell activation by oligomerization of different GPI(cid:2)APs with antibodies or their crosslinking with other receptors and ISSN 0006(cid:2)2979 , Biochemistry ( Moscow ) , 2016 , Vol . 81 , No . 6 , pp . 636(cid:2)650 . © Pleiades Publishing , Ltd . , 2016 . Published in Russian in Biokhimiya , 2016 , Vol . 81 , No . 6 , pp . 844(cid:2)859 . Biochemistry ( Moscow ) . Papers in Press . Published on May 1 , 2016 as Manuscript BM15(cid:2)363 . REVIEW(cid:2)HYPOTHESIS 636 Abbreviations : DRM , detergent resistant membrane ; EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; G α i2 , α i2 subunit of het(cid:2) erotrimeric G(cid:2)protein ; GEEC , GPI(cid:2)APs enriched early endo(cid:2) somal compartments ; GPCR , G(cid:2)protein coupled receptor ; GPI , glycosylphosphatidylinositol ; GPI(cid:2)AP , glycosylphos(cid:2) phatidylinositol(cid:2)anchored proteins ; LDL , low density lipopro(cid:2) teins ; NgR , Nogo66 receptor ; PI ( x ) P , phosphatidyl(cid:2) inositol ( x ) phosphate ; PLC , phospholipase C ; PM , plasma membrane ; PS , phosphatidylserine ; RTK , receptor tyrosine kinase ; SFK , src(cid:2)family kinases ; uPAR , urokinase receptor . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . Glycosylphosphatidylinositol(cid:2)Anchored Proteins as Regulators of Cortical Cytoskeleton G . V . Sharonov 1 , 2 * , M . N . Balatskaya 1 , and V . A . Tkachuk 1 1 Lomonosov Moscow State University , Faculty of Medicine , 119992 Moscow , Russia ; fax : + 7 ( 495 ) 932(cid:2)9904 ; E(cid:2)mail : sharonov @ gmail . com 2 Shemyakin – Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry , Structural Biology Department , 117997 Moscow , Russia Received November 4 , 2015 Revision received April 3 , 2016 Abstract —Glycosylphosphatidylinositol(cid:2)anchored proteins ( GPI(cid:2)AP ) are important players in reception and signal trans(cid:2) duction , cell adhesion , guidance , formation of immune synapses , and endocytosis . At that , a particular GPI(cid:2)AP can have different activities depending on a ligand . It is known that GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer creates a lipid raft in its base on plasma mem(cid:2) brane , which serves as a signaling platform for binding and activation of src(cid:2)family kinases . Yet , this does not explain dif(cid:2) ferent activities of GPI(cid:2)APs . Meanwhile , it has been shown that short(cid:2)lived actomyosin complexes are bound to GPI(cid:2)APs through lipid rafts . Here , we hypothesize that cell cortical cytoskeleton is the main target of GPI(cid:2)AP signaling . Our hypoth(cid:2) esis is based on the fact that the GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2)induced lipid raft bound to actin filaments and anionic lipids of this raft is known to interact with and activate various actin(cid:2)nucleating factors , such as formins and N(cid:2)WASP . It is also known that these and other actin(cid:2)regulating proteins are activated by src(cid:2)family kinases directly or through their effectors , such as cortactin and abl(cid:2)kinases . Regulation of cytoskeleton by GPI(cid:2)APs may have impact on morphogenesis , cell guidance , and endocytosis , as well as on signaling of other receptors . To evaluate our hypothesis , we have comprehensively considered physiological activities of two GPI(cid:2)APs – urokinase receptor and T(cid:2)cadherin . DOI : 10 . 1134 / S0006297916060110 Key words : glycosylphosphatidylinositol , cytoskeleton , actin , lipid rafts , uPAR , T(cid:2)cadherin GPI(cid:2)ANCHORED PROTEINS AS REGULATORS OF CORTICAL CYTOSKELETON 637 BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 activation inhibition by blocking of oligomerization [ 6 ] . However , it is unclear how oligomerization with antibod(cid:2) ies is related to the activation of GPI(cid:2)APs with physiolog(cid:2) ical ligands . Upon activation by physiological ligands , GPI(cid:2)APs have a broad spectrum of activities ; moreover , one recep(cid:2) tor can induce different and even opposite types of cell responses ( Table 1 ) . Thus , in studies led by V . A . Tkachuk , it has been shown that binding of low(cid:2)density lipoproteins ( LDLs ) with T(cid:2)cadherin on smooth muscle cells potentiates adrenergic receptors and vessel contrac(cid:2) tion , i . e . exacerbating stress outcomes [ 7(cid:2)9 ] . At the same time , B . Ranscht’s group has shown that a high molecu(cid:2) lar weight form of adiponectin ( a fat tissue hormone that has multiple beneficial physiological effects that is most prominent for the high molecular weight form ) also acts through T(cid:2)cadherin , but contrary to LDLs , it protects heart muscle from damage in a model of myocardial infarction [ 10 ] . Moreover , T(cid:2)cadherin may act as a cell guidance receptor that prevents nerve and vessel growth on T(cid:2)cadherin(cid:2)expressing tissues [ 11 , 12 ] . The T(cid:2)cad(cid:2) herin example reflects the activity spectrum inherent for GPI(cid:2)APs , namely signaling potentiation and effects on cell cytoskeleton in such processes as cell migration , cell – cell contacts , tissue boundary formation , and cell guidance . This list should be complemented by the abili(cid:2) ty of GPI(cid:2)APs to promote endocytosis , as for CD14(cid:2) dependent pathogen endocytosis and folic acid endocyto(cid:2) sis by its receptor ( Table 1 ) . All GPI(cid:2)APs have a marked affinity to nonionic detergent(cid:2)resistant fractions of PM ( DRM ) that are com(cid:2) monly intermixed with liquid ordered domains of PM , also referred to as lipid rafts . For association with a lipid raft , a GPI(cid:2)AP should contain two saturated or monoun(cid:2) saturated lipid moieties of 16 or more carbon atoms [ 13 , 14 ] . In mammalian cells , GPI(cid:2)APs usually contain two saturated substituent stearic acid residues ( C18 : 0 ) or , less often , a monounsaturated oleic ( C18 : 1 ) or saturated palmitic acid ( C16 : 0 ) residue instead of one of the former in the sn(cid:2)1 position of the glycerol base [ 1 ] . Lipid rafts differ from the rest of membrane by increased concentra(cid:2) tion of saturated charged lipids and cholesterol , increased by 1 nm ( or ∼ 15 % ) thickness , ordered hydrophobic phase , and slowed by a factor of 2 to 3 lateral diffusion of lipids [ 15(cid:2)17 ] . The major saturated lipids of the outer PM leaflet are glycosphingolipids ( gangliosides , sphin(cid:2) gomyelin , ceramides ) , and their concentration in lipid rafts is approximately 1 . 5(cid:2)fold higher than in the rest of the membrane ( Fig . 2 ) [ 15 ] . For cholesterol , this factor is 2 . From the inner side of the PM , the lipid raft is enriched in phosphatidylserine ( PS ) by a factor of 2(cid:2)3 , as well as in other anionic lipids – phosphatidylinositols that are spe(cid:2) cific to certain types of lipid rafts [ 16 , 18 , 19 ] . In biologi(cid:2) cal membranes of living cells , lipid rafts have significant(cid:2) ly shorter lifetime and smaller size than in model mem(cid:2) branes [ 20(cid:2)22 ] , which indicates that in living cells they are actively regulated by constituent proteins and bound cytoskeleton . According to this view , the works of K . Suzuki’s and A . Kusumi’s groups have shown that GPI(cid:2) AP oligomer induces formation of lipid raft in its base that binds the α i2 subunit of G(cid:2)protein ( G α i2 ) and SFK Lyn and activates the latter . However , this does not explain the differences in activities of GPI(cid:2)APs ligands and the absence of such activation in the rest of liquid ordered membrane that , for example , occupies 76 % of the PM area in T(cid:2)cells [ 23 ] . In this work , we suggest a working hypothesis that the activity of GPI(cid:2)APs is dependent on their ability to organize cortical cytoskeleton that , in turn , is dependent on the oligomer properties of the GPI(cid:2)AP . The first indi(cid:2) cations of the interaction of GPI(cid:2)APs with cytoskeleton Fig . 1 . Structure of a mammalian GPI(cid:2)AP . From the protein to lipid part , GPI(cid:2)AP consists of ethanolamine , phosphate , three mannose moieties that can be modified with additional sugar chains ( R ) , glucosamine , inositol , and phospholipid . The most abundant alkyl substituents are stearic acid residues C18 : 0 and , less often , in the sn(cid:2)1 position are monounsaturated oleic acid ( C18 : 1 as depicted ) or saturated palmitic acid ( C16 : 0 ) residues . ( Mannose ) 3 638 SHARONOV et al . BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 were obtained in the late 1990s [ 24(cid:2)26 ] . A group of Indian scientists lead by S . Mayor [ 14 , 27(cid:2)30 ] studied this inter(cid:2) action most extensively . In their works , it was shown that GPI(cid:2)AP oligomerization dynamics on PM is dependent on actin polymerization and myosin activity , and that the same dynamics is inherent to a transmembrane protein directly linked to actin . They also revealed that in the case of GPI(cid:2)APs this link is mediated by lipid rafts and PS [ 14 ] . Based on the existence of the link between GPI(cid:2)AP and cytoskeleton , we hypothesize that GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer(cid:2) ization should have an effect on the structure and dynam(cid:2) ics of cortical cytoskeleton . As we suppose , a GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2) induced lipid raft affects orientation , polymerization , and branching of actin filaments . This effect is mediated by actin(cid:2)binding and actin(cid:2)regulating proteins , most of which also bind to lipid rafts and are activated by SFK or through their direct effectors . Hence , we expect that the properties of a newly formed structure depend on the size , shape , and lifetime of a GPI(cid:2)AP oligomeric complex . Induced cytoskeleton may serve as an active scaffold for assembly of signaling complexes and directly affect the cell shape . Further , we will consider data that underlie our hypothesis , propose a mechanism of GPI(cid:2)AP effect on cytoskeleton , and use it to explain physiological activ(cid:2) ities of some GPI(cid:2)APs . ACTIVATION OF INTRACELLULAR SIGNALING BY A GPI(cid:2)AP OLIGOMER A valuable contribution to understanding GPI(cid:2)AP signaling was made by the works of Japan scientists lead GPI(cid:2)AP Т(cid:2)cadherin uPAR CD59 CD14 Folic acid receptors NgR References [ 7(cid:2)9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 , 12 , 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 24 , 31 , 35(cid:2)38 ] [ 31 , 35 , 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 39 , 42 ] [ 5 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 , 45 ] [ 46 ] Table 1 . GPI(cid:2)APs discussed in this paper . Ligands of GPI(cid:2)APs are given with their physiological activities exerted through the GPI(cid:2)AP Physiological activity potentiation of adrenergic receptors ( GPCR ) protection of heart muscle in an infarction model axon and endothelial cell repulsion potentiation and transactivation of insulin receptor ( RTK ) increase in endothelial permeability glucose(cid:2)dependent insulin secretion cell taxis towards urokinase source proteolysis of extracellular matrix on leading edge of cell stimulation of chemotactic receptor FPRL1 ( GPCR ) transactivation of EGFR ( RTK ) adhesion , migration , protrusions formation inhibition of MAC formation ; protection of the cell from MAC attack phago(cid:2) / endocytosis of pathogens and their fragments folic acid endocytosis axon repulsion , growth suppression , transactivation of EGFR ( RTK ) Ligand ( molecular weight , kDa ) low(cid:2)density lipoprotein ( 3000 ) high molecular weight adiponectin ( 450 ) T(cid:2)cadherin ( 105(cid:2)130 ) T(cid:2)cadherin expressing microparticles ( > 1000 ) ? ? urokinase ( 50 ) vitronectin ( fibrillar ) membrane attack complex of complement ( MAC ) from C5b , C6 , C7 , and C8 proteins ( > 1000 ) lipopolysaccharide ( > 1000 ) folic acid ( 0 . 45 ) myelin(cid:2)associated inhibitors ( > 50 ) GPI(cid:2)ANCHORED PROTEINS AS REGULATORS OF CORTICAL CYTOSKELETON 639 BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 by K . Suzuki and A . Kusumi , where dynamics of a single GPI(cid:2)AP was analyzed with nanometer spatial and mil(cid:2) lisecond temporal resolution on PM of living cells togeth(cid:2) er with its relation to the movement and activation of intracellular effectors . It was shown that in the absence of stimuli , GPI(cid:2)APs diffuse freely on PM and form transient short(cid:2)lived ( ∼ 0 . 15 s ) dimers and ( less often ) trimers that are stabilized by intermolecular interaction of ectodomains and by lipid rafts [ 5 ] . We should note that dimerization dependence of lipid rafts does not exclude participation of cytoplasmic molecules and cytoskeleton in stabilization of this raft . GPI(cid:2)AP dimers retain high mobility and do not induce any intracellular signaling . Oligomerization of CD59 by a nanoparticle with specific antibodies activates SFK Lyn , leads to formation of inositol triphosphate by PLC γ and increase of intracel(cid:2) lular calcium concentration [ 3 , 4 ] . It has been revealed that oligomeric GPI(cid:2)APs do not diffuse on PM freely , but appear immobilized ( immobilization periods of ∼ 0 . 5 s ) for ∼ 30 % of the time . Alteration of a relative immobiliza(cid:2) tion period by cholesterol depletion or repletion induces a proportional change of intracellular signaling intensity , indicating that it is induced by an immobilized oligomer . It appears that CD59 immobilization requires activity of Lyn and the α i2 subunit of G(cid:2)protein ( G α i2 ) , but does not require PLC γ . Overlay of a GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer trace by traces of each of these molecules showed that immobi(cid:2) lization is preceded by a short period ( ∼ 0 . 13 s ) of colocal(cid:2) ization of G α i2 with CD59 oligomer ( both still moving ) , which is followed by G α i2 dissociation and immobiliza(cid:2) tion of the complex . The traces of Lyn and CD59 oligomer coincide frequently for periods of ~ 0 . 2 s , but these periods do not correlate with immobilization . In contrast , PLC γ appears to be colocalized with the CD59 cluster only during the periods of immobilization . It has been also ascertained that Lyn activation does not require cytoskeleton integrity , but PLC γ does . On the basis of these data , a model has been suggested where a lipid raft that is created / stabilized by CD59 oligomer promotes a colocalization within the raft of G α i2 and Lyn , their interaction , and activation of Lyn that leads to immobi(cid:2) lization . In turn , immobilized Lyn complex activates a further signaling cascade , particularly immobilization and activation of PLC γ . As follows from the works of Suzuki et al . , lipid rafts mediate interaction of GPI(cid:2)APs with intracellular signal(cid:2) ing molecules , but this interaction is relatively weak and allows holding in place Lyn and G α i2 only for 0 . 2 and 0 . 13 s , respectively . Lyn retention in a lipid raft is mediat(cid:2) ed by the N(cid:2)terminal fragment that contains two modifi(cid:2) cations , by saturated fatty acids , palmitoleic and myrist(cid:2) oleic , and three cationic lysines in the vicinity to this anchor , as well as by protein – protein interactions with some other components of the raft [ 3 ] . An analogous N(cid:2) terminal motif with two lipid modifications but less prominent cationic part is present in G α i2 , this explain(cid:2) ing its appearance in the lipid raft . It is remarkable that G α i2 does not diffuse over the PM as Lyn does , but con(cid:2) tacts it for short periods ( < 0 . 1 s ) , and points of contact are distributed on PM nonrandomly : they are placed near the GPI(cid:2)AP cluster or even coincide with it . This indicates the directionality of G α i2 motion in the cytoplasm towards the GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer , and it is tempting to spec(cid:2) ulate that this directionality is mediated by cytoskeleton ( Fig . 3 , a and b ) . Besides the immobilization of GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer and directed motion of G α i2 , it has also shown that PLC γ activation requires intact cytoskeleton [ 4 ] . It should be noted that the requirement of cytoskele(cid:2) ton or other protein scaffold emerges from consideration of physicochemical properties of lipid rafts . So , the reten(cid:2) tion of various lipids including PS in lipid rafts lasts only for 10(cid:2)20 ms [ 47 , 48 ] , that is , one order of magnitude lower than the retention time of intracellular effectors . This shows that lipid order and slowed diffusion in the Fig . 2 . Schematic drawing of a GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2)containing lipid raft . The raft region is marked in gray . The raft is enriched with cholesterol , glycosphingolipids outside of the cell , and anionic lipids inside the cell , and it has increased thickness compared to the rest of the membrane . From the cytoplasmic side , the lipid raft interacts with proteins having a lipid raft(cid:2)binding motif . Usually , this motif consists of lipid modifications with palmitoyl or myristoyl alkyl chains and / or polycationic amino acid sequence . Lipid raft localization motif 640 SHARONOV et al . BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 lipid raft are not the major factors of protein retention within it . Therefore , this means that the lipid raft can cat(cid:2) alyze just an initial phase of complex formation , after which it does not require the lipid raft ( but still may require PM anchorage ) . This is illustrated by data on PLC γ activation that , in contrast to Lyn and G α i2 , does not contain lipid modifications and hence should have weaker interaction with lipid rafts . Nevertheless , its retention in CD59(cid:2)associated lipid raft is longer(cid:2)lived and amounts to 0 . 3 s , which is longer than that for Lyn and G α i2 . Such prolonged colocalization with lipid raft is necessary for induction of Ca 2 + response and requires intact cytoskeleton . GPI(cid:2)APs INTERACTION WITH CYTOSKELETON Effects of GPI(cid:2)APs on cytoskeleton with require(cid:2) ments of G(cid:2)proteins and SKF were shown in the 1990s [ 24 , 25 ] . At that time , it was assumed that there was some transmembrane adaptor that mediates this link , like inte(cid:2) grins for urokinase receptor ( uPAR ) , for example [ 49 , 50 ] . However , later it was shown that the effect of uPAR on cell morphology and motility could be transduced independently of integrins and other possible coreceptors [ 42 ] . Existence of a link between GPI(cid:2)AP and cytoskele(cid:2) ton mediated by a lipid raft was supposed by Indian sci(cid:2) entists lead by S . Mayor , who analyzed oligomerization dynamics of GPI(cid:2)AP on PM . In was found that folic acid receptor forms oligomers of from two to four molecules that do not follow thermodynamic rules and are energet(cid:2) ically unfavorable [ 27 , 28 ] . It has been shown that : ( i ) oligomer dissociation rate is independent of the tempera(cid:2) ture ( above 28°C ) ; ( ii ) and oligomer / monomer ratio is independent of GPI(cid:2)AP expression level ; and ( iii ) fre(cid:2) quencies of homo(cid:2) and heterooligomer formation are equal . Similar results were obtained for other GPI(cid:2)APs : CD55 and model fluorescent GPI(cid:2)APs . It turned out that GPI(cid:2)AP dynamics and oligomerization are critically dependent on actin polymerization and myosin activity , and that is clear evidence for their association with actin cytoskeleton . Later , it was shown that this association is a b c d e f Fig . 3 . Hypothetical model of signaling activation and cytoskeleton rearrangement by GPI(cid:2)APs . a ) Metastable complex of actin filaments and myosin that is linked with GPI(cid:2)AP through a lipid raft . The G α (cid:2)subunit of G(cid:2)protein is also bound with actin filaments . Some GPI(cid:2)APs and SFKs are localized in short(cid:2)lived rafts that are not connected to cytoskeleton . b ) Oligomerization of GPI(cid:2)AP by multivalent ligand promotes coalescence of rafts and increase of their lifetime . Filament motion towards the center of the complex stimulates interaction of G(cid:2)protein with SFK , which activates SFK . c ) GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2)stabilized lipid raft and activated SFK activate actin(cid:2)regulating proteins such as cortactin , formins , WASP , and others ( Table 2 ) . This induces actin network growth and polymerization in the region of the GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer . d ) GPI(cid:2)AP oligomers that are in the vicinity of caveolae induce caveolae budding or flattening due to polymerization or contraction of caveolae(cid:2)associat(cid:2) ed cytoskeleton , respectively . e , f ) Massive cytoskeleton rearrangement in the region of large and stable GPI(cid:2)AP oligomeric complex that induces changes in PM shape . Depending on a ligand , particularly on its shape , cell invagination ( GEEC ) or protrusions ( membrane ruffles or thin spikes ) are formed . GPI(cid:2)ANCHORED PROTEINS AS REGULATORS OF CORTICAL CYTOSKELETON 641 BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 mediated by lipid rafts and PS [ 14 ] with the involvement of the actin(cid:2)nucleating factor formin [ 30 ] . While searching for possible cytoskeleton structures with dynamics corresponding to GPI(cid:2)AP oligomeriza(cid:2) tion , Mayor and coworkers suggested their link to short dynamic filaments [ 29 ] . Existence of such filaments has been shown by several groups using cryoelectron tomo(cid:2) graphy , which allows analysis of thick specimens ( whole cells or slices up to 1 μm ) with spatial resolution in all dimensions ( down to 5 nm ) and retention of native struc(cid:2) ture [ 51 , 52 ] . Despite a limited number of these works related to technical difficulties of the method , all of them clearly show high density of actin filament in the cortical region of eukaryotic cells with the most filaments being 200(cid:2) to 500(cid:2)nm long [ 53(cid:2)56 ] . Decrease of the filament length hinders its identification by cryoelectron tomogra(cid:2) phy , which may lead to overestimation of the filament mean length [ 57 ] . In the works of Mayor’s group , the mean filament length was evaluated by analysis of diffu(cid:2) sion of fluorescent actin(cid:2)binding domain of ezrin and was estimated to be ~ 250 nm [ 29 ] . Computational modeling by Mayor’s group showed that in the system of short actin filaments ( ∼ 200 nm ) and myosin , metastable and dynamic aster(cid:2)like structures are formed , wherein filaments continuously move towards the center of the aster [ 29 ] ( Fig . 3 , a and b ) . It the model , they took into account basic actin dynamics : continuous polymerization / depolymerization , association / dissocia(cid:2) tion with PM , crosslinking , and movement by myosin motors . It appeared that the dynamics and the tempera(cid:2) ture dependency of GPI(cid:2)AP oligomerization correspond well to the dynamics of formation of asters with lifetime of ~ 0 . 1 s and decay determined by “active noise” , which accumulates due to stochasticity of myosin binding and direction of related forces . Mayor et al . considered GPI(cid:2)APs as passive mole(cid:2) cules that are bound to a cytoskeleton , but not affecting filament dynamics . Nevertheless , it is obvious that as far as the link between GPI(cid:2)APs and cytoskeleton exists , the impact on GPI(cid:2)AP will be transduced to the cytoskele(cid:2) ton . Indeed , Suzuki and Sheetz measured mechanical resistance during movement of GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer over PM with an optical tweezer [ 58 ] . While doing so , they observed static barriers that were reproduced during repetitive passages , as well as dynamic barriers that were always different during each repetitive passage . The static barriers correspond to stable cytoskeleton filaments , while dynamic ones are likely to be represented by metastable structures of dynamic cortical cytoskeleton . MECHANISM OF GPI(cid:2)AP EFFECT ON CORTICAL ACTIN CYTOSKELETON : A HYPOTHESIS It has been shown that many GPI(cid:2)APs ( ephrins(cid:2)A , semaphorins , contactins , Thy(cid:2)1 , netrins(cid:2)G , repulsive guidance molecule , T(cid:2)cadherin , uPAR , and others [ 31 ] ) have important functions in morphogenesis , especially in neural tissue development . Morphogenesis is closely related to cytoskeleton remodeling , and as mentioned earlier , GPI(cid:2)AP oligomerization induces SFK(cid:2) and G(cid:2) protein(cid:2)mediated accumulation of cortical actin [ 24 , 25 ] . Based on the data of K . Suzuki et al . and S . Mayor’s team , we supposed that there are two major components of the effect of GPI(cid:2)APs on cortical actin cytoskeleton ( Fig . 3 ) . First , a GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2)induced lipid raft is enriched in anionic lipids , which interact with a number of actin(cid:2)nucleating and actin(cid:2)binding proteins ( Table 2 ) , leading to their local concentration together with actin filaments in the region of GPI(cid:2)AP oligomerization , their activation , and growth of an actin network at this place . We should note that cytoskeleton reorganization is possible even without polymerization , but by means of local concentration and / or alignment of dynamic filaments , which can result in directional flow , contraction , or severing of filaments ( due to action of myosins ) [ 59 , 60 ] . We assume that this mechanism can be realized in some cases of cortical con(cid:2) traction , which is common for axon growth cone repul(cid:2) sion and for tissue border formation during development [ 61 , 62 ] . Cortical contraction also may affect properties of other signaling systems , in particular through the impact on caveolae ( see below ) . Second , oligomerization of GPI(cid:2)APs activates SFKs , and their major targets are key regulators of actin cytoskeleton ( Table 2 ) : cortactin , catenins , abl(cid:2)kinases , focal adhesion kinase , vinculin , talin , and others [ 63 , 64 ] . Activation of these proteins results in conversion of dynamic actin filaments to a stable branched and / or bun(cid:2) dled actin network . This is mediated by Arp2 / 3 nucleat(cid:2) ing complex , bundling and polymerization promoter formins , and adapters between actin and PM ( Fig . 3 and Table 2 ) . Such actin network rearrangement results in change of the cell shape , motility , and endocytosis , as well as in regulation of signaling [ 65 , 66 ] . GPI(cid:2)APs IN REGULATION OF CAVEOLAE A common feature of almost all GPI(cid:2)APs is their abundance in caveolin(cid:2)containing DRM fractions of PM and endosomal compartments [ 73 , 74 ] . Caveolae are Ω (cid:2) shaped invaginations of PM , 60(cid:2)80 nm in diameter , scaf(cid:2) folded by oligomeric complex of ∼ 140(cid:2)150 caveolins and ∼ 12 cavins [ 75 ] . On the basis on caveolae lipid composi(cid:2) tion and their requirement for cholesterol , they are com(cid:2) monly considered as a subset of lipid rafts [ 76 ] . Many receptors and intracellular effectors interact with caveo(cid:2) lae and caveolin(cid:2)1 , but more often , this leads to inhibi(cid:2) tion of their activity , as in the case of SFKs , MAP(cid:2)kinas(cid:2) es , endothelial NO(cid:2)synthase , and some GPCRs ( G(cid:2)pro(cid:2) tein coupled receptors ) and RTKs ( receptor tyrosine kinases ) [ 77 ] . Accordingly , caveolae can be considered as 642 SHARONOV et al . BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 a scaffold that serves for assembly of receptor / signaling complex but holds this complex inactive until an appro(cid:2) priate stimulus is received . It is now assumed that the ability of caveolae to respond rapidly to mechanical stimulus and PM damage underlies most of their biological activities [ 78(cid:2)80 ] . Thus , PM tension induces caveolae coalescence and flattening , while compression induces their formation and budding [ 78 , 79 ] . Cell attack by pore(cid:2)forming toxins or PM mechanical damage induces intense caveolae budding that is believed to internalize a damaged part of the PM [ 78 , 80 ] . It is quite natural that linkage of caveolae to mechanical membrane properties is mediated by actin cytoskeleton [ 79 ] . Several ways of their interaction have been revealed : through dynamin family proteins , that are responsible for membrane fission during budding , through myosin Myo1c , and through mechanosensitive actin(cid:2)bound protein filamin(cid:2)A [ 80 ] . It was also shown that actin polymerization supports uniform distribution of caveolae on PM , and their budding requires activation of formin mDia1 by Abl(cid:2)kinase [ 81 ] . In contrast , hyper(cid:2) activation of mDia1 induces caveolae flattening accom(cid:2) panied by formation of stress fibrils and cell stretching . Fluorescence microscopy analysis has confirmed association of GPI(cid:2)APs with caveolae [ 82 , 83 ] . Ultrastructural analysis by electron microscopy has revealed that very few GPI(cid:2)APs can be found inside cave(cid:2) olae cavity , while their majority is located on PM in the Protein Formins N(cid:2)WASP WAVE Myosins I Ezrin , radixin , moesin Spectrins Vinculin Cortactin Catenins Abl(cid:2)kinases References [ 30 , 67 , 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 69 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 72 ] [ 63 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] Table 2 . Some possible mediators of GPI(cid:2)APs and cytoskeleton Impact on actin cytoskeleton promote actin polymerization , bundled actin formation , mediate actin(cid:2)dependent GPI(cid:2)AP oligomerization promote actin polymerization , bundles for(cid:2) mation promote actin polymerization and branch(cid:2) ing through Arp2 / 3 activation promote actin polymerization , unbranched actin network formation link and move filaments along PM link actin filaments to PM link actin filaments with PM and stabilize their di(cid:2) and trimers link filaments to PM and activate actin(cid:2) nucleating factors Ena / VASP and Arp2 / 3 activate Arp2 / 3 , actin polymerization and branching weaken of cadherin cell − cell contacts activate formins , N(cid:2)WASP , WAVE , cortactin Relation to GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2)induced lipid raft and / or signaling interaction with anionic lipids through the N(cid:2) terminal fragment interacts with curved anionic membranes through BAR(cid:2)domain(cid:2)containing proteins interacts with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and Cdc42 interacts with PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 interact with anionic lipids interact with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , activated by phospho(cid:2) rylation ( including SFKs ) interact with PS , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 interacts with PS , PI , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , activated by phosphorylation ( including SFKs ) and by mechanical force one of the main targets of many SFKs mediators of SFK(cid:2)induced cell transformation SFKs are major intermediators between recep(cid:2) tors ( RTKs and GPCRs ) and Abl(cid:2)kinases and following cytoskeleton rearrangement Nucleating factors , promoters of polymerization Adapters between filaments and PM SKF targets GPI(cid:2)ANCHORED PROTEINS AS REGULATORS OF CORTICAL CYTOSKELETON 643 BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 vicinity of caveolae attachment to PM [ 82 , 84 ] ( Fig . 3d ) . Moreover , these regions , as well as other regions of GPI(cid:2) APs clustering without caveolae , have increased electron(cid:2) ic density , indicating possibly cytoskeleton condensation there [ 84 ] . After oligomerization with antibodies , GPI(cid:2) APs are translocated to caveolae , but it does not change the number of caveolae [ 82 ] . Inhibition of GPI(cid:2)AP biosynthesis increases caveolae number [ 85 ] , indicating that biogenesis of caveolae does not depend on GPI(cid:2)APs , yet pointing out the activation of some compensatory mechanisms in order to compensate ( partial ) dysfunction of caveolae in the absence of GPI(cid:2)APs . Since SFKs are among the major activators of Abl(cid:2) kinases [ 64 ] , we suppose that GPI(cid:2)APs regulate dynamics of caveolae through activation of SFKs , Abl(cid:2)kinases , and actin polymerization in the region of caveolae attachment of PM ( Fig . 3d ) . It is also possible to assume that effects of GPI(cid:2)APs on caveolae are mediated by cortical cytoskeleton contraction induced by alignment of dynamic filaments . As mentioned above , caveolae play an important role in regulating activity of various receptor(cid:2) signaling complexes , thus an impact on caveolae is cer(cid:2) tainly reflected on signaling of these complexes . GPI(cid:2)APs ENDOCYTOSIS Despite the close relation of GPI(cid:2)APs with caveolae , their endocytosis via caveolae is still debated [ 78 , 86 ] . At the same time , GPI(cid:2)APs have a marked ability to inter(cid:2) nalize extracellular fluid phase and large oligomeric com(cid:2) plexes by clathrin(cid:2)dependent and clathrin(cid:2) and dynamin(cid:2) independent mechanisms [ 73 ] . Clathrin(cid:2)dependent internalization of GPI(cid:2)APs occurs after their interaction with classical endocytosis regulators such as LDL(cid:2)recep(cid:2) tor like protein ( LRP1 ) and lipopolysaccharide binding protein ( LBP ) [ 86 ] . In the absence of such lateral associ(cid:2) ations , GPI(cid:2)APs are internalized by specific clathrin(cid:2) and dynamin(cid:2)independent mechanisms with formation of so(cid:2) called GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2)enriched early endosomal compartments ( GEECs ) . Unlike other types of endocytosis , GEECs do not have specialized coat proteins and therefore have large variation in shape and size and frequently stay attached to PM as tubular structures [ 87 , 88 ] . In the absence of specialized structural proteins , the main driv(cid:2) ing force of GEECs formation is polymerization and con(cid:2) traction of cortical cytoskeleton [ 89 ] ( Fig . 3e ) . Compensation of membrane area during stretching and regulation of activity of surface proteins are thought to be the main functions of GEECs [ 87 ] . GPI(cid:2)AP oligomerization induces formation of GEECs . This process has been studied at a single mole(cid:2) cule level [ 90 ] . GEECs are originated in the region of dense actin patches with size less than 1 μm , indicating the crucial role of actin cytoskeleton not only in matura(cid:2) tion , but also in initiation of GEECs . GEEC formation is strictly dependent on cholesterol , pointing out the impor(cid:2) tance of lipid rafts in their biogenesis . Then , the small GTPase Cdc42 that belongs to the Rho GTPase family binds in the place of GEEC initiation . Cdc42 , in turn , activates WASP , which induces actin polymerization and branching . Cdc42 associates with PM in its active GTP(cid:2) bound form , and the duration of this association has a crucial effect on further cytoskeleton structure . It has been found that Cdc42 activity is stopped by ADP(cid:2)ribo(cid:2) sylation factor ARF1 , while inactivation of ARF1 , as well as the use of constitutively active Cdc42 , induces the for(cid:2) mation of cortical spike(cid:2)like structures instead of invagi(cid:2) nations [ 91 ] ( Fig . 3f ) . Switching from invagination to spikes occurs when Cdc42 residence time in the complex is increased from 2 to 4 s . ANALOGY OF GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2)INDUCED CYTOSKELETON WITH IMMUNE SYNAPSE T(cid:2)cell activation is accompanied by formation of immune synapse – a region of tight contact between the T(cid:2)cell and antigen(cid:2)presenting cell wherein many recep(cid:2) tors and signaling molecules are concentrated [ 92 , 93 ] . The cytoskeleton structure in an immune synapse is sim(cid:2) ilar to the aster(cid:2)like structure underlying GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer , proposed by Mayor’s group , but it is 10 times larger . It consists of radially allocated filaments where polymerization of barbed ends pointing outward causes retrograde filament flow towards the center of the synapse . This similarity suggests an analogy between immune synapse formation and GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2)induced response . As in the case of GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer , T(cid:2)cell sig(cid:2) naling is initiated by SFK ( Lck ) [ 93 ] , and this activation is critically dependent on actin cytoskeleton and myosin(cid:2) II activity [ 92 , 93 ] . There are several models of actin cytoskeleton interplay with T(cid:2)cell signaling that are also plausible for GPI(cid:2)AP signaling . According to these mod(cid:2) els , the cytoskeleton serves for : ( i ) concentrating of T(cid:2)cell receptor and intracellular signaling molecule in the synapse ; ( ii ) stabilization of lipid raft in the synapse region , which promotes activation of Lck and exclusion of phosphatases ; ( iii ) T(cid:2)cell receptor activation by mechanical tension [ 93 ] . Although structural data on mechanosensitivity of T(cid:2)cell receptors are still lacking , mechanical action of cytoskeleton is considered as one of the crucial steps in T(cid:2)cell activation . Mechanical tension in the complex of T(cid:2)cell receptor with an antigen ( in the complex with the main histocompatibility complex ) pro(cid:2) vides high specificity and sensitivity of T(cid:2)cell activation down to activation by a single antigen molecule [ 94 ] . Mechanisms of cytoskeleton rearrangement and ten(cid:2) sion generation in the region of the immune synapse are still elusive . Integrins , particularly LFA(cid:2)1 , play an impor(cid:2) tant role in adhesion initiation , but integrins need mechanical tension for activation [ 95 ] . Upon formation 644 SHARONOV et al . BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 of an immune synapse , actin filaments polymerize out(cid:2) wards , causing retrograde actin filament flow towards the center of the synapse [ 96 ] . It is thought that this retro(cid:2) grade flow is responsible for the observed motion of inte(cid:2) grins and T(cid:2)cell receptor towards the center of the synapse , but their movement is several(cid:2)fold slower than the retrograde flow . To explain this discrepancy , existence of a frictional but not rigid link between these molecules and cytoskeletons has been suggested , although molecu(cid:2) lar details of this link are not known [ 93 ] . As we suppose , GPI(cid:2)APs are able to align filaments and induce their polymerization . In addition , it can be expected that their lipid(cid:2)mediated link to cytoskeleton has frictional proper(cid:2) ty , so GPI(cid:2)APs may have an important function in for(cid:2) mation of immune synapse cytoskeleton . Frequent appearance of GPI(cid:2)APs in immune synapses [ 97 ] favors this assumption . Oligomerization of various GPI(cid:2)APs by antibodies potentiates T(cid:2)cell activation substantially and can even activate it without additional stimuli in some cases [ 6 ] . DESCRIPTION OF PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES OF uPAR AND T(cid:2)CADHERIN ACCORDING TO THE SUGGESTED MODEL uPAR . One of the GPI(cid:2)APs that regulate lymphocyte adhesion and migration is uPAR [ 35 ] . uPAR expression is rather limited in all tissues except leukocytes , but it increases significantly during tissue remodeling , particu(cid:2) larly in wound healing , vessels and nerve growth , as well as in cancer [ 36 ] . uPAR ligands are the urokinase and extracellular matrix components vitronectin and fibulin V [ 31 , 37 , 38 ] . A close relation between uPAR and integrins has been established , but their direct interaction is still under debate [ 98 ] . uPAR was among the first GPI(cid:2)APs that were shown to affect cytoskeleton [ 25 , 99 ] . In those experiments , uPAR activation by urokinase or its kinase(cid:2) deficient analog induced directed cell migration towards increasing urokinase concentration . This process was accompanied by redistribution of uPAR , SFKs , and inte(cid:2) grins to the leading edge and condensation of cytoskele(cid:2) ton in this region , indicating directed transport of these molecules . As in the case of immune synapse ( see above ) , it is assumed that the integrins are responsible for uPAR(cid:2) induced chemotaxis through interacting with uPAR [ 100 ] . Further , the mechanism of cytoskeleton rearrange(cid:2) ment triggering at an integrin adhesion site resembles GPI(cid:2)AP signaling : activation of SFK by G α (cid:2)subunit of G(cid:2)protein and further activation of SFK substrates [ 101 ] . Thus , uPAR may serve for triggering cytoskeletal rearrangement at adhesion contact . This assumption is supported by data on inhibition of uPAR(cid:2)induced chemotaxis by pertussis toxin that inhibits G(cid:2)proteins [ 25 ] and consequently the initial stage of GPI(cid:2)AP signal(cid:2) ing as well . Morphological analysis of cell structures that are formed with the aid of uPAR and integrin complex pro(cid:2) vides more evidence that in this complex uRAR is responsible for cytoskeleton activation , while integrin – for connection to extracellular matrix . In adhesion con(cid:2) tacts , filament ends are attached to extracellular matrix through integrins . uPAR activation can induce formation of filaments that have no points of attachment to extra(cid:2) cellular matrix . In the work of Degrise et al . , in the first 5 min after uPAR stimulation , marked accumulation of actin in cell periphery was observed , and after 30 min it was transformed into ring(cid:2)like filaments [ 25 ] . At the cell – matrix contact , the effect of uPAR depends on matrix composition . On vitronectin , which is a ligand for uPAR , cells are spread as wide as possible irrespectively of integrins , and uPAR is fully colocalized with vitronectin [ 102 ] . This indicates that uPAR may act as an adhesion molecule . On fibronectin and collagen that bind to inte(cid:2) grins but not to uPAR , cells are significantly less spread than on vitronectin , and they form filopodia . Analysis of distribution of uPAR and integrins in filopodia shows that near its base uPAR and integrins are colocalized and filopodia stay straight , but at remote sites integrin disap(cid:2) pears and filopodia form disperse bundle and terminate . These data support our hypothesis that cytoskeleton rearrangement is initiated not by integrins , but by uPAR . The fundamental difference of such activation stimulus is that it is present over the whole length of filopodia , not only on its end , as in the case of integrins , and at that the underlying filaments retain the ability to slide along the membrane and extracellular matrix . Besides its role in chemotaxis , uPAR is able to induce release of intracellular vesicle contents , in partic(cid:2) ular neutrophil degranulation , and to transactivate epi(cid:2) dermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) [ 61 , 103 ] . Neutrophil degranulation has been shown to be the result of PLC γ (cid:2)mediated increase of intracellular calcium con(cid:2) centration [ 103 ] . That is in agreement with the common perception of exocytosis as Ca 2 + (cid:2)dependent vesicle fusion with PM mediated by SNARE(cid:2)family proteins [ 104 ] . However , it now becomes more evident that cytoskeleton activity is needed for exocytosis , particularly for a vesicle to approach the PM [ 105 ] . In turn , calcium activates myosin light chain kinase , which activates myosin and induces its motion [ 106 ] . In this regard , it is reasonable to ask whether calcium is necessary for GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2)induced cytoskeletal rearrangement and what is the source of this calcium ? PLC γ activation that occurs due to GPI(cid:2)AP oligomerization is known to stimulate phosphatidylinosi(cid:2) tol production and calcium release from endoplasmic reticulum . This calcium probably serves as positive feed(cid:2) back for enhancement of cortical contraction , yet calci(cid:2) um signaling may participate in earlier GPI(cid:2)AP signaling stages before activation of PLC γ . So , transactivation of EGFR has been shown for several GPI(cid:2)APs besides uPAR ( Table 1 ) , particularly for receptor of myelin GPI(cid:2)ANCHORED PROTEINS AS REGULATORS OF CORTICAL CYTOSKELETON 645 BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 inhibitor Nogo(cid:2)66 ( NgR ) [ 46 ] . In the case of NgR , trans(cid:2) activation did not depend on PLCs , SFKs , and G(cid:2)pro(cid:2) teins , but it was blocked almost completely by chelation of cytoplasmic calcium [ 46 ] . Calcium simulates calmod(cid:2) ulin binding to EGFR , which stabilizes its active confor(cid:2) mation , but this occurs after stimulation with EGF . What the activating stimulus is during transactivation of EGFR by GPI(cid:2)APs is still unknown . One can speculate that cor(cid:2) tical tension induced by filament alignment with GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer activates EGFR through caveolae flattening or by direct mechanical tension . The hypothesis of receptor activation by mechanical tension was proposed earlier , particularly for RTKs [ 107 ] . T(cid:2)cadherin . T(cid:2)cadherin belongs to the cadherin fam(cid:2) ily of cell – cell adhesion molecules , but unlike other members of this family , it is devoid of the cytoplasmic part of a GPI(cid:2)AP , and that is why it has obtained the prefix “T” ( from “truncated” ) [ 108 ] . T(cid:2)cadherin is expressed mainly in cardiovascular and nerve tissues [ 31 , 109 ] . T(cid:2) cadherin was discovered as a guidance cue that restricts motor neurons from T(cid:2)cadherin expressing tissue regions [ 11 ] . Ligands for most of cadherins , including T(cid:2)cad(cid:2) herin , are cadherins themselves , and their interaction occurs in trans (cid:2)conformation , i . e . while interacting cad(cid:2) herins are located on neighboring cells [ 109 ] . Accordingly , it was shown that axon repulsion from T(cid:2) cadherin expressing tissues is mediated by T(cid:2)cadherin as a receptor on the axon [ 110 ] . As noted above , cell guid(cid:2) ance and repulsion is inherent for many GPI(cid:2)APs . Repulsion is driven by contraction of cell cortex as a con(cid:2) sequence of cell guidance receptor activation [ 31 , 61 , 62 ] . As far as in both contacting cells T(cid:2)cadherin has high lat(cid:2) eral diffusion , their interaction results in T(cid:2)cadherin accumulation in the contact region . According to our hypothesis , this promotes alignment of cortical filaments , which induces contraction and consequent repulsion . In studies of V . A . Tkachuk’s group , it was shown that T(cid:2)cadherin mediates effects of LDLs on activity of adrenergic receptors [ 7 , 111 , 112 ] . The dissociation con(cid:2) stant of LDL with T(cid:2)cadherin was estimated as 45 μg / ml [ 9 ] . It is known that the dissociation constant is the ratio of rate constants of reverse ( unbinding ) and forward ( binding ) reactions , while the forward reaction constant is determined by diffusion and usually lies in the range of 10 6 (cid:2)10 8 M – 1 ·s – 1 . This allows one to estimate the unbind(cid:2) ing rate constant , which comprises ~ 0 . 5 s – 1 , i . e . the T(cid:2) cadherin / LDL complex lifetime is ~ 2 s . This factor prob(cid:2) ably determines the outcome of T(cid:2)cadherin oligomeriza(cid:2) tion with LDL since it limits the size and the lifetime of underling cytoskeleton structure to be induced according to our hypothesis . This time is longer than the immobi(cid:2) lization time required to activate PLC γ by GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer ( ~ 0 . 5 s ) [ 4 ] . Indeed , it was shown that LDL induces calcium response either alone or in the presence of other agonists [ 8 , 113 ] , and this requires G(cid:2)protein activity [ 9 ] . It is also possible that potentiation of adren(cid:2) ergic receptors by LDL / T(cid:2)cadherin oligomer does not require cytoskeleton . In this case , the lipid raft in the base of this oligomer may favor G(cid:2)protein and GPCR complex formation , as it does for G(cid:2)protein and SFK complex ( Fig . 4 ) . In 2004 , one more ligand of T(cid:2)cadherin was discov(cid:2) ered – a high molecular weight form of adiponectin [ 114 ] . T(cid:2)cadherin and adiponectin knockout mice have similar increase of infarct size during ischemia – reperfu(cid:2) sion injury [ 10 ] . Adiponectin is bound to T(cid:2)cadherin on PM of cardiomyocytes , while adiponectin knockout results in disappearance of T(cid:2)cadherin . It should be noted that T(cid:2)cadherin is the most abundant GPI(cid:2)AP on cardiac sarcolemma [ 115 ] . According to our hypothesis , substan(cid:2) tial stability and large size of adiponectin / T(cid:2)cadherin oligomer should result in formation of condensed cytoskeletal structures underneath this oligomer . Indeed , stimulation of cardiomyocytes with adiponectin activates Rho GTPases , deactivates cofilin , a protein that severs actin filaments , and induces actin polymerization and formation of membrane ruffles [ 116 , 117 ] . Membrane ruffles are used as a membrane container ; they are flat(cid:2) tened during tension and compensate increase in cell sur(cid:2) face density , preventing membrane rupture [ 87 ] . Actin polymerization and formation of membrane ruffles by T(cid:2) cadherin / adiponectin complex may protect cardiomy(cid:2) ocyte from mechanical damage . The data now available allow one to say confidently that GPI(cid:2)APs are competent receptors that fulfil impor(cid:2) tant physiological functions of signal reception and trans(cid:2) duction . Since GPI(cid:2)APs are devoid of intracellular domain , they transmit signals by affecting properties of the membrane . Spatial reorganization of GPI(cid:2)APs on a cell surface can affect lipid bilayer properties , which in turn trigger intracellular signaling . With the aid of long and saturated lipid moieties , GPI(cid:2)APs are able to create and stabilize a liquid ordered phase – a lipid raft that serves as a platform for binding of many effectors includ(cid:2) ing G(cid:2)proteins and SFK , whose interaction results in activation of SFK . By analogy , it can be supposed that a GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2)induced lipid raft promotes association of G(cid:2) protein with GPCR , thus potentiating GPCR activity as in the case of adrenergic receptors potentiation by T(cid:2)cad(cid:2) herin ( Fig . 4 ) . At the same time , many types of GPI(cid:2)AP activities , such as regulation of adhesion , cell polarity , migration , and endocytosis , point on formation of more stable molecular complexes that can be stabilized by a lipid raft . A lipid raft is a highly dynamic structure with high lateral diffusion of lipids – the mean retention time of saturated lipids is 10(cid:2)20 ms . However , the GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2) induced lipid raft is able to retain signaling proteins for more than 100 ms . This indicates that the lipid raft cat(cid:2) alyzes just the initial stage of complex formation . Prolonged stabilization may be achieved with the aid of 646 SHARONOV et al . BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 cytoskeleton , as in the case of the GPI(cid:2)AP and PLC γ complex . We suppose that assembly of this cytoskeleton scaffold is initiated by GPI(cid:2)AP oligomerization that con(cid:2) solidates cytoskeleton machinery within the lipid raft . Short actin filaments ( through actin(cid:2)binding proteins ) and actin(cid:2)regulating proteins such as cortactin , formins , and WASP interact with lipid rafts and are activated by SFK directly or through its effectors ( Fig . 4 ) . This struc(cid:2) ture is dependent on GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer stability due to the necessity of membrane binding for activity of these proteins . It can also be expected that the structure of induced cytoskeleton depends on the size and the shape of GPI(cid:2)AP oligomer , for example , through an effect of membrane curvature that defines the choice between cell protrusions or invaginations . It is well known that cytoskeleton plays an important role in activity of many receptors by regulating their traffic , membrane distribu(cid:2) tion , and interactions between each other and with scaf(cid:2) fold proteins , by exerting mechanical tension , as well as by affecting caveolae and membrane lipid composition . This work was financially supported by the Russian Science Foundation ( project No . 14(cid:2)24(cid:2)00086 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Kinoshita , T . ( 2014 ) Biosynthesis and deficiencies of glyco(cid:2) sylphosphatidylinositol , Proc . Jpn . Acad . Ser . B , 90 , 130(cid:2)143 . 2 . Stefanova , I . , Horejsi , V . , Ansotegui , I . J . , Knapp , W . , and Stockinger , H . ( 1991 ) GPI(cid:2)anchored cell(cid:2)surface mole(cid:2) cules complexed to protein tyrosine kinases , Science , 254 , 1016(cid:2)1019 . Fig . 4 . Schematic representation of suggested mechanist of uPAR and T(cid:2)cadherin effect on membrane properties and activity of transmem(cid:2) brane receptors . Urokinase ( uPA ) and LDLs induce oligomerization of uPAR and T(cid:2)cadherin , respectively . Oligomeric receptor induces lipid raft formation ( gray membrane region ) that binds proteins from the cytoplasmic leaflet based on a raft(cid:2)localization motif ( see annotations from Fig . 2 ) . These proteins include G(cid:2)proteins ( G ) , src(cid:2)family kinases ( src ) , and actin(cid:2)binding proteins ( ABP ) . T(cid:2)cadherin(cid:2)induced lipid raft may potentiate GPCRs by facilitating its interaction with G(cid:2)proteins . ABP links short dynamic actin filaments with the lipid raft , which creates a scaffold for signaling complex . This scaffold is required for activation of phospholipase C ( PLC ) and probably other receptors , par(cid:2) ticularly receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) . Other possible functions of GPI(cid:2)AP(cid:2)induced cytoskeleton are concentrating of receptors and sig(cid:2) naling molecules , their activation by mechanical tension , change of membrane shape , and assembly / disassembly of caveolae . GPI(cid:2)ANCHORED PROTEINS AS REGULATORS OF CORTICAL CYTOSKELETON 647 BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 3 . Suzuki , K . G . N . , Fujiwara , T . K . , Sanematsu , F . , Iino , R . , Edidin , M . , and Kusumi , A . ( 2007 ) GPI(cid:2)anchored recep(cid:2) tor clusters transiently recruit Lyn and G alpha for tempo(cid:2) rary cluster immobilization and Lyn activation : single(cid:2)mol(cid:2) ecule tracking study 1 , J . Cell Biol . , 177 , 717(cid:2)730 . 4 . Suzuki , K . G . N . , Fujiwara , T . K . , Edidin , M . , and Kusumi , A . ( 2007 ) Dynamic recruitment of phospholipase C gamma at transiently immobilized GPI(cid:2)anchored recep(cid:2) tor clusters induces IP3(cid:2)Ca 2 + signaling : single(cid:2)molecule tracking study 2 , J . Cell Biol . , 177 , 731(cid:2)742 . 5 . Suzuki , K . G . N . , Kasai , R . S . , Hirosawa , K . M . , Nemoto , Y . L . , Ishibashi , M . , Miwa , Y . , Fujiwara , T . K . , and Kusumi , A . ( 2012 ) Transient GPI(cid:2)anchored protein homodimers are units for raft organization and function , Nat . Chem . Biol . , 8 , 774(cid:2)783 . 6 . Loertscher , R . , and Lavery , P . ( 2002 ) The role of glycosyl phosphatidyl inositol ( GPI ) (cid:2)anchored cell surface proteins in T(cid:2)cell activation , Transpl . Immunol . , 9 , 93(cid:2)96 . 7 . Tkachuk , V . A . , Bochkov , V . N . , Philippova , M . P . , Stambolsky , D . V . , Kuzmenko , E . S . , Sidorova , M . V . , Molokoedov , A . S . , Spirov , V . G . , and Resink , T . J . ( 1998 ) Identification of an atypical lipoprotein(cid:2)binding protein from human aortic smooth muscle as T(cid:2)cadherin , FEBS Lett . , 421 , 208(cid:2)212 . 8 . Bochkov , V . N . , Tkachuk , V . A . , Hahn , A . W . , Bernhardt , J . , Buhler , F . R . , and Resink , T . J . ( 1993 ) Concerted effects of lipoproteins and angiotensin II on signal transduction processes in vascular smooth muscle cells , Arterioscler . Thromb . , 13 , 1261(cid:2)1269 . 9 . Bochkov , V . N . , Tkachuk , V . A . , Kuzmenko , Y . S . , Borisova , Y . L . , Buhler , F . R . , and Resink , T . J . ( 1994 ) Characteristics of low and high(cid:2)density lipoprotein binding and lipoprotein(cid:2)induced signaling in quiescent human vas(cid:2) cular smooth muscle cells , Mol . Pharmacol . , 45 , 262(cid:2)270 . 10 . Denzel , M . S . , Scimia , M . (cid:2)C . , Zumstein , P . M . , Walsh , K . , Ruiz(cid:2)Lozano , P . , and Ranscht , B . ( 2010 ) T(cid:2)cadherin is critical for adiponectin(cid:2)mediated cardioprotection in mice , J . Clin . Invest . , 120 , 4342(cid:2)4352 . 11 . Fredette , B . J . , and Ranscht , B . ( 1994 ) T(cid:2)cadherin expres(cid:2) sion delineates specific regions of the developing motor axon(cid:2) hindlimb projection pathway , J . Neurosci . , 14 , 7331(cid:2)7346 . 12 . Rubina , K . , Kalinina , N . , Potekhina , A . , Efimenko , A . , Semina , E . , Poliakov , A . , Wilkinson , D . G . , Parfyonova , Y . , and Tkachuk , V . ( 2007 ) T(cid:2)cadherin suppresses angiogene(cid:2) sis in vivo by inhibiting migration of endothelial cells , Angiogenesis , 10 , 183(cid:2)195 . 13 . Benting , J . , Rietveld , A . , Ansorge , I . , and Simons , K . ( 1999 ) Acyl and alkyl chain length of GPI(cid:2)anchors is criti(cid:2) cal for raft association in vitro , FEBS Lett . , 462 , 47(cid:2)50 . 14 . Raghupathy , R . , Anilkumar , A . A . , Polley , A . , Singh , P . P . , Yadav , M . , Johnson , C . , Suryawanshi , S . , Saikam , V . , Sawant , S . D . , Panda , A . , Guo , Z . , Vishwakarma , R . A . , Rao , M . , and Mayor , S . ( 2015 ) Transbilayer lipid interac(cid:2) tions mediate nanoclustering of lipid(cid:2)anchored proteins , Cell , 161 , 581(cid:2)594 . 15 . Pike , L . J . ( 2009 ) The challenge of lipid rafts , J . Lipid Res . , 50 , S323(cid:2)328 . 16 . Binder , W . H . , Barragan , V . , and Menger , F . M . ( 2003 ) . Domains and rafts in lipid membranes , Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . , 42 , 5802(cid:2)5827 . 17 . Hancock , J . F . ( 2006 ) Lipid rafts : contentious only from simplistic standpoints , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 7 , 456(cid:2)462 . 18 . Viola , A . , and Gupta , N . ( 2007 ) Tether and trap : regulation of membrane(cid:2)raft dynamics by actin(cid:2)binding proteins , Nat . Rev . Immunol . , 7 , 889(cid:2)896 . 19 . Zhou , Y . , and Hancock , J . F . ( 2015 ) Ras nanoclusters : ver(cid:2) satile lipid(cid:2)based signaling platforms , Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 1853 , 841(cid:2)849 . 20 . Simons , K . , and Sampaio , J . L . ( 2011 ) Membrane organi(cid:2) zation and lipid rafts , Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . , 3 , a004697 . 21 . Saha , S . , Lee , I . (cid:2)H . , Polley , A . , Groves , J . T . , Rao , M . , and Mayor , S . ( 2015 ) Diffusion of GPI(cid:2)anchored proteins is influenced by the activity of dynamic cortical actin , Mol . Biol . Cell , 25 , 4033(cid:2)4045 . 22 . Lee , I . (cid:2)H . , Saha , S . , Polley , A . , Huang , H . , Mayor , S . , Rao , M . , and Groves , J . T . ( 2015 ) Live cell plasma membranes do not exhibit a miscibility phase transition over a wide range of temperatures , J . Phys . Chem . B , 119 , 4450(cid:2)4459 . 23 . Owen , D . M . , Williamson , D . J . , Magenau , A . , and Gaus , K . ( 2012 ) Sub(cid:2)resolution lipid domains exist in the plasma membrane and regulate protein diffusion and distribution , Nat . Commun . , 3 , 1256 . 24 . Harder , T . , and Simons , K . ( 1999 ) Clusters of glycolipid and glycosylphosphatidylinositol(cid:2)anchored proteins in lymphoid cells : accumulation of actin regulated by local tyrosine phosphorylation , Eur . J . Immunol . , 29 , 556(cid:2)562 . 25 . Degryse , B . , Resnati , M . , Rabbani , S . A . , Villa , A . , Fazioli , F . , and Blasi , F . ( 1999 ) Src(cid:2)dependence and pertussis(cid:2)toxin sensitivity of urokinase receptor(cid:2)dependent chemotaxis and cytoskeleton reorganization in rat smooth muscle cells , Blood , 94 , 649(cid:2)662 . 26 . Varma , R . , and Mayor , S . ( 1998 ) GPI(cid:2)anchored proteins are organized in submicron domains at the cell surface , Nature , 394 , 798(cid:2)801 . 27 . Sharma , P . , Varma , R . , Sarasij , R . C . , Ira , Gousset , K . , Krishnamoorthy , G . , Rao , M . , and Mayor , S . ( 2004 ) Nanoscale organization of multiple GPI(cid:2)anchored proteins in living cell membranes , Cell , 116 , 577(cid:2)589 . 28 . Goswami , D . , Gowrishankar , K . , Bilgrami , S . , Ghosh , S . , Raghupathy , R . , Chadda , R . , Vishwakarma , R . , Rao , M . , and Mayor , S . ( 2008 ) Nanoclusters of GPI(cid:2)anchored pro(cid:2) teins are formed by cortical actin(cid:2)driven activity , Cell , 135 , 1085(cid:2)1097 . 29 . Gowrishankar , K . , Ghosh , S . , Saha , S . C . R . , Mayor , S . , and Rao , M . ( 2012 ) Active remodeling of cortical actin reg(cid:2) ulates spatiotemporal organization of cell surface mole(cid:2) cules , Cell , 149 , 1353(cid:2)1367 . 30 . Saha , S . , Lee , I . (cid:2)H . , Polley , A . , Groves , J . T . , Rao , M . , and Mayor , S . ( 2015 ) Diffusion of GPI(cid:2)anchored proteins is influenced by the activity of dynamic cortical actin , Mol . Biol . Cell , 26 , 4033(cid:2)4045 . 31 . Rubina , K . A . , and Tkachuk , V . A . ( 2015 ) Guidance recep(cid:2) tors in the nervous and cardiovascular systems , Biochemistry ( Moscow ) , 80 , 1235(cid:2)1253 . 32 . Philippova , M . , Joshi , M . B . , Pfaff , D . , Kyriakakis , E . , Maslova , K . , Erne , P . , and Resink , T . J . ( 2012 ) T(cid:2)cadherin attenuates insulin(cid:2)dependent signaling , eNOS activation , and angiogenesis in vascular endothelial cells , Cardiovasc . Res . , 93 , 498(cid:2)507 . 33 . Semina , E . V . , Rubina , K . A . , Sysoeva , V . Y . , Rutkevich , P . N . , Kashirina , N . M . , and Tkachuk , V . A . ( 2013 ) Novel mechanism regulating endothelial permeability via T(cid:2)cad(cid:2) herin(cid:2)dependent VE(cid:2)cadherin phosphorylation and 648 SHARONOV et al . BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 clathrin(cid:2)mediated endocytosis , Mol . Cell . Biochem . , 387 , 39(cid:2)53 . 34 . Tyrberg , B . , Miles , P . , Azizian , K . T . , Denzel , M . S . , Nieves , M . L . , Monosov , E . Z . , Levine , F . , and Ranscht , B . ( 2011 ) T(cid:2)cadherin ( Cdh13 ) in association with pancreatic β (cid:2)cell granules contributes to second phase insulin secre(cid:2) tion , Islets , 3 , 327(cid:2)337 . 35 . Blasi , F . , and Tjwa , M . ( 2002 ) uPAR : a versatile signaling orchestrator , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 3 , 932(cid:2)943 . 36 . Smith , H . W . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2010 ) Regulation of cell signaling by uPAR , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 11 , 23(cid:2)36 . 37 . Stepanova , V . V . , and Tkachuk , V . A . ( 2002 ) Urokinase as a multidomain protein and polyfunctional cell regulator , Biochemistry ( Moscow ) , 67 , 109(cid:2)118 . 38 . Kapustin , A . , Stepanova , V . , Aniol , N . , Cines , D . B . , Poliakov , A . , Yarovoi , S . , Lebedeva , T . , Wait , R . , Ryzhakov , G . , Parfyonova , Y . , Gursky , Y . , Yanagisawa , H . , Minashkin , M . , Beabealashvilli , R . , Vorotnikov , A . , Bobik , A . , and Tkachuk , V . ( 2012 ) Fibulin(cid:2)5 binds urokinase(cid:2)type plas(cid:2) minogen activator and mediates urokinase(cid:2)stimulated β 1(cid:2) integrin(cid:2)dependent cell migration , Biochem . J . , 443 , 491(cid:2)503 . 39 . Blasi , F . , and Sidenius , N . ( 2010 ) The urokinase receptor : focused cell surface proteolysis , cell adhesion and signal(cid:2) ing , FEBS Lett . , 584 , 1923(cid:2)1930 . 40 . Resnati , M . , Pallavicini , I . , Wang , J . M . , Oppenheim , J . , Serhan , C . N . , Romano , M . , and Blasi , F . ( 2002 ) The fib(cid:2) rinolytic receptor for urokinase activates the G protein(cid:2) coupled chemotactic receptor FPRL1 / LXA4R , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 99 , 1359(cid:2)1364 . 41 . Liu , D . , Aguirre Ghiso , J . , Estrada , Y . , and Ossowski , L . ( 2002 ) EGFR is a transducer of the urokinase receptor ini(cid:2) tiated signal that is required for in vivo growth of a human carcinoma , Cancer Cell , 1 , 445(cid:2)457 . 42 . Madsen , C . D . , Ferraris , G . M . S . , Andolfo , A . , Cunningham , O . , and Sidenius , N . ( 2007 ) uPAR(cid:2)induced cell adhesion and migration : vitronectin provides the key , J . Cell Biol . , 177 , 927(cid:2)939 . 43 . Zanoni , I . , Ostuni , R . , Marek , L . R . , Barresi , S . , Barbalat , R . , Barton , G . M . , Granucci , F . , and Kagan , J . C . ( 2011 ) CD14 controls the LPS(cid:2)induced endocytosis of Toll(cid:2)like receptor 4 , Cell , 147 , 868(cid:2)880 . 44 . Sabharanjak , S . , and Mayor , S . ( 2004 ) Folate receptor endocytosis and trafficking , Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . , 56 , 1099(cid:2)1109 . 45 . Bhagatji , P . , Leventis , R . , Comeau , J . , Refaei , M . , and Silvius , J . R . ( 2009 ) Steric and not structure(cid:2)specific fac(cid:2) tors dictate the endocytic mechanism of glycosylphos(cid:2) phatidylinositol(cid:2)anchored proteins , J . Cell Biol . , 186 , 615(cid:2) 628 . 46 Koprivica , V . , Cho , K . (cid:2)S . , Park , J . B . , Yiu , G . , Atwal , J . , Gore , B . , Kim , J . A . , Lin , E . , Tessier(cid:2)Lavigne , M . , Chen , D . F . , and He , Z . ( 2005 ) EGFR activation mediates inhibi(cid:2) tion of axon regeneration by myelin and chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans , Science , 310 , 106(cid:2)110 . 47 . Eggeling , C . , Ringemann , C . , Medda , R . , Schwarzmann , G . , Sandhoff , K . , Polyakova , S . , Belov , V . N . , Hein , B . , Von Middendorff , C . , Schonle , A . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2009 ) Direct observation of the nanoscale dynamics of membrane lipids in a living cell , Nature , 457 , 1159(cid:2)1162 . 48 . Kay , J . G . , Koivusalo , M . , Ma , X . , Wohland , T . , and Grinstein , S . ( 2012 ) Phosphatidylserine dynamics in cellu(cid:2) lar membranes , Mol . Biol . Cell , 23 , 2198(cid:2)2212 . 49 . Wei , Y . , Lukashev , M . , Simon , D . I . , Bodary , S . C . , Rosenberg , S . , Doyle , M . V . , and Chapman , H . A . ( 1996 ) Regulation of integrin function by the urokinase receptor , Science , 273 , 1551(cid:2)1555 . 50 . Busso , N . , Masur , S . K . , Lazega , D . , Waxman , S . , and Ossowski , L . ( 1994 ) Induction of cell migration by pro(cid:2) urokinase binding to its receptor : possible mechanism for signal transduction in human epithelial cells , J . Cell Biol . , 126 , 259(cid:2)270 . 51 . Ben(cid:2)Harush , K . , Maimon , T . , Patla , I . , Villa , E . , and Medalia , O . ( 2010 ) Visualizing cellular processes at the molecular level by cryo(cid:2)electron tomography , J . Cell Sci . , 123 , 7(cid:2)12 . 52 . Lucic , V . , Rigort , A . , and Baumeister , W . ( 2013 ) Cryo(cid:2)elec(cid:2) tron tomography : the challenge of doing structural biology in situ , J . Cell Biol . , 202 , 407(cid:2)419 . 53 . Urban , E . , Jacob , S . , Nemethova , M . , Resch , G . P . , and Small , J . V . ( 2010 ) Electron tomography reveals unbranched networks of actin filaments in lamellipodia , Nat . Cell Biol . , 12 , 429(cid:2)435 . 54 . Medalia , O . , Weber , I . , Frangakis , A . S . , and Nicastro , D . ( 2002 ) Macromolecular architecture in eukaryotic cells visualized by cryoelectron tomography , Science , 298 , 1209(cid:2) 1213 . 55 . Medalia , O . , Beck , M . , Ecke , M . , Weber , I . , and Neujahr , R . ( 2007 ) Organization of actin networks in intact filopo(cid:2) dia , Curr . Biol . , 17 , 79(cid:2)84 . 56 . Maurer , U . E . , Sodeik , B . , and Grunewald , K . ( 2008 ) Native 3D intermediates of membrane fusion in herpes simplex virus 1 entry , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 105 , 10559(cid:2)10564 . 57 . Kudryashev , M . , Lepper , S . , Baumeister , W . , Cyrklaff , M . , and Frischknecht , F . ( 2010 ) Geometric constrains for detecting short actin filaments by cryogenic electron tomography , PMC Biophys . , 3 , 6 . 58 . Suzuki , K . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2001 ) Binding of cross(cid:2) linked glycosylphosphatidylinositol(cid:2)anchored proteins to discrete actin(cid:2)associated sites and cholesterol(cid:2)dependent domains , Biophys . J . , 81 , 2181(cid:2)2189 . 59 . Sanchez , T . , Chen , D . T . N . , DeCamp , S . J . , Heymann , M . , and Dogic , Z . ( 2012 ) Spontaneous motion in hierar(cid:2) chically assembled active matter , Nature , 491 , 431(cid:2)434 . 60 . Reymann , A . (cid:2)C . , Boujemaa(cid:2)Paterski , R . , Martiel , J . (cid:2)L . , Guerin , C . , Cao , W . , Chin , H . F . , La Cruz , De , E . M . , Thery , M . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2012 ) Actin network archi(cid:2) tecture can determine myosin motor activity , Science , 336 , 1310(cid:2)1314 . 61 . Dent , E . W . , Gupton , S . L . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2011 ) The growth cone cytoskeleton in axon outgrowth and guidance , Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . , 3 , a001800 . 62 . Fagotto , F . , Rohani , N . , Touret , A . (cid:2)S . , and Li , R . ( 2014 ) A molecular base for cell sorting at embryonic boundaries : contact inhibition of cadherin adhesion by ephrin / Eph(cid:2) dependent contractility , Dev . Cell , 27 , 1(cid:2)16 . 63 . Reynolds , A . B . , Kanner , S . B . , Bouton , A . H . , Schaller , M . D . , Weed , S . A . , Flynn , D . C . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2014 ) SRChing for the substrates of Src , Oncogene , 33 , 4537(cid:2) 4547 . 64 . Greuber , E . K . , Smith(cid:2)Pearson , P . , Wang , J . , and Pendergast , A . M . ( 2013 ) Role of ABL family kinases in cancer : from leukemia to solid tumors , Nat . Rev . Cancer , 13 , 559(cid:2)571 . GPI(cid:2)ANCHORED PROTEINS AS REGULATORS OF CORTICAL CYTOSKELETON 649 BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 65 . Girao , H . , Geli , M . (cid:2)I . , and Idrissi , F . (cid:2)Z . ( 2008 ) Actin in the endocytic pathway : from yeast to mammals , FEBS Lett . , 582 , 2112(cid:2)2119 . 66 . Herve , J . (cid:2)C . ( 2014 ) Reciprocal influences between cell cytoskeleton and membrane channels , receptors and trans(cid:2) porters , Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 1838 , 511(cid:2)513 . 67 . Gorelik , R . , Yang , C . , Kameswaran , V . , Dominguez , R . , and Svitkina , T . ( 2011 ) Mechanisms of plasma membrane targeting of formin mDia2 through its amino terminal domains , Mol . Biol . Cell , 22 , 189(cid:2)201 . 68 . Blanchoin , L . , Boujemaa(cid:2)Paterski , R . , Sykes , C . , and Plastino , J . ( 2014 ) Actin dynamics , architecture , and mechanics in cell motility , Physiol . Rev . , 94 , 235(cid:2)263 . 69 . Takenawa , T . , and Suetsugu , S . ( 2007 ) The WASP(cid:2)WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 8 , 37(cid:2)48 . 70 . McConnell , R . E . , and Tyska , M . J . ( 2010 ) Leveraging the membrane – cytoskeleton interface with myosin(cid:2)1 , Trends Cell Biol . , 20 , 418(cid:2)426 . 71 . Clucas , J . , and Valderrama , F . ( 2015 ) ERM proteins in can(cid:2) cer progression , J . Cell Sci . , 128 , 1253(cid:2)1253 . 72 . Saarikangas , J . , Zhao , H . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2010 ) Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton – plasma membrane interplay by phosphoinositides , Physiol . Rev . , 90 , 259(cid:2)289 . 73 . Mayor , S . , and Riezman , H . ( 2004 ) Sorting GPI(cid:2)anchored proteins , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 5 , 110(cid:2)120 . 74 . Sprenger , R . R . , Fontijn , R . D . , Van Marle , J . , Pannekoek , H . , and Horrevoets , A . J . G . ( 2006 ) Spatial segregation of transport and signaling functions between human endothe(cid:2) lial caveolae and lipid raft proteomes , Biochem . J . , 400 , 401(cid:2)410 . 75 . Locker , J . K . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2013 ) Integrated electron microscopy : super(cid:2)duper resolution , PLoS Biol . , 11 , e1001639 76 . Tsui(cid:2)Pierchala , B . A . , Encinas , M . , Milbrandt , J . , and Johnson , E . M . ( 2002 ) Lipid rafts in neuronal signaling and function , Trends Neurosci . , 25 , 412(cid:2)417 . 77 . Patel , H . H . , Murray , F . , and Insel , P . A . ( 2008 ) Caveolae as organizers of pharmacologically relevant signal transduction molecules , Annu . Rev . Pharmacol . Toxicol . , 48 , 359(cid:2)391 . 78 . Cheng , J . P . X . , and Nichols , B . J . ( 2015 ) Caveolae : one function or many ? Trends Cell . Biol . , 26 , 1(cid:2)13 . 79 . Echarri , A . , and Del Pozo , M . A . ( 2015 ) Caveolae – mechanosensitive membrane invaginations linked to actin filaments , J . Cell Sci . , 128 , 2747(cid:2)2758 . 80 . Andrews , N . W . , Almeida , P . E . , and Corrotte , M . ( 2014 ) Damage control : cellular mechanisms of plasma membrane repair , Trends Cell Biol . , 24 , 1(cid:2)9 . 81 . Echarri , A . , Muriel , O . , Pavon , D . M . , Azegrouz , H . , Escolar , F . , Terron , M . C . , Sanchez(cid:2)Cabo , F . , Martinez , F . , Montoya , M . C . , Llorca , O . , and Del Pozo , M . A . ( 2012 ) Caveolar domain organization and trafficking is regulated by Abl kinases and mDia1 , J . Cell Sci . , 125 , 3097(cid:2)3113 . 82 . Mayor , S . , Rothberg , K . G . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1994 ) Sequestration of GPI(cid:2)anchored proteins in caveolae trig(cid:2) gered by cross(cid:2)linking , Science , 264 , 1948(cid:2)1951 . 83 . Stahl , A . , and Mueller , B . M . ( 1995 ) The urokinase(cid:2)type plasminogen activator receptor , a GPI(cid:2)linked protein , is localized in caveolae , J . Cell Biol . , 129 , 335(cid:2)344 . 84 . Ying , Y . S . , and Anderson , R . ( 1992 ) Each caveola contains multiple glycosylphosphatidylinositol(cid:2)anchored membrane proteins , Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . , 57 , 593(cid:2)604 . 85 . Abrami , L . , Fivaz , M . , Kobayashi , T . , Kinoshita , T . , Parton , R . G . , and Van der Goot , F . G . ( 2001 ) Cross(cid:2)talk between caveolae and glycosylphosphatidylinositol(cid:2)rich domains , J . Biol . Chem . , 276 , 30729(cid:2)30736 . 86 . Doherty , G . J . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2009 ) Mechanisms of endocytosis , Annu . Rev . Biochem . , 78 , 857(cid:2)902 . 87 . Gauthier , N . C . , Masters , T . A . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2012 ) Mechanical feedback between membrane tension and dynamics , Trends Cell Biol . , 22 , 527(cid:2)535 . 88 . Kirkham , M . , Fujita , A . , Chadda , R . , Nixon , S . J . , Kurzchalia , T . V . , Sharma , D . K . , Pagano , R . E . , Hancock , J . F . , Mayor , S . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2005 ) Ultrastructural identification of uncoated caveolin(cid:2)inde(cid:2) pendent early endocytic vehicles , J . Cell Biol . , 168 , 465(cid:2) 476 . 89 . Johannes , L . , Parton , R . G . , Bassereau , P . , and Mayor , S . ( 2015 ) Building endocytic pits without clathrin , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 16 , 1(cid:2)11 . 90 . Chadda , R . , Howes , M . T . , Plowman , S . J . , Hancock , J . F . , Parton , R . G . , and Mayor , S . ( 2007 ) Cholesterol(cid:2)sensi(cid:2) tive Cdc42 activation regulates actin polymerization for endocytosis via the GEEC pathway , Traffic , 8 , 702(cid:2)717 . 91 . Kumari , S . , and Mayor , S . ( 2008 ) ARF1 is directly involved in dynamin(cid:2)independent endocytosis , Nat . Cell Biol . , 10 , 30(cid:2)41 . 92 . Dustin , M . L . , and Groves , J . T . ( 2012 ) Receptor signaling clusters in the immune synapse , Annu . Rev . Biophys . , 41 , 543(cid:2)556 . 93 . Yu , Y . , Smoligovets , A . A . , and Groves , J . T . ( 2013 ) Modulation of T(cid:2)cell signaling by the actin cytoskeleton , J . Cell Sci . , 126 , 1049(cid:2)1058 . 94 . Liu , B . , Chen , W . , Evavold , B . D . , and Zhu , C . ( 2014 ) Accumulation of dynamic catch bonds between TCR and agonist peptide(cid:2)MHC triggers T(cid:2)cell signaling , Cell , 157 , 357(cid:2)368 . 95 . Bakker , G . J . , Eich , C . , Torreno(cid:2)Pina , J . A . , Diez(cid:2)Ahedo , R . , Perez(cid:2)Samper , G . , Van Zanten , T . S . , Figdor , C . G . , Cambi , A . , and Garcia(cid:2)Parajo , M . F . ( 2012 ) Lateral mobility of individual integrin nanoclusters orchestrates the onset for leukocyte adhesion , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 109 , 4869(cid:2)4874 . 96 . Kaizuka , Y . , Douglass , A . D . , Varma , R . , Dustin , M . L . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2007 ) Mechanisms for segregating T(cid:2)cell receptor and adhesion molecules during immunological synapse formation in Jurkat T(cid:2)cells , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 104 , 20296(cid:2)20301 . 97 . Ilangumaran , S . , He , H . T . , and Hoessli , D . C . ( 2000 ) Microdomains in lymphocyte signaling : beyond GPI(cid:2) anchored proteins , Immunol . Today , 21 , 2(cid:2)7 . 98 . Blasi , F . , and Sidenius , N . ( 2009 ) Efferocytosis : another function of uPAR , Blood , 114 , 752(cid:2)753 . 99 . Blasi , F . ( 1988 ) A surface receptor for urokinase plasmino(cid:2) gen activator : a link between the cytoskeleton and the extracellular matrix , Protoplasma , 145 , 95(cid:2)98 . 100 . Ossowski , L . , and Aguirre(cid:2)Ghiso , J . A . ( 2000 ) Urokinase receptor and integrin partnership : coordination of signal(cid:2) ing for cell adhesion , migration and growth , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 12 , 613(cid:2)620 . 101 . Shen , B . , Delaney , M . K . , and Du , X . ( 2012 ) Inside(cid:2)out , outside(cid:2)in , and inside(cid:2)outside(cid:2)in : G protein signaling in integrin(cid:2)mediated cell adhesion , spreading , and retrac(cid:2) tion , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 24 , 600(cid:2)606 . 650 SHARONOV et al . BIOCHEMISTRY ( Moscow ) Vol . 81 No . 6 2016 102 . Zhu , S . , Gladson , C . L . , White , K . E . , Ding , Q . , Stewart , J . , Jin , T . H . , Chapman , H . A . , and Olman , M . A . ( 2009 ) Urokinase receptor mediates lung fibroblast attachment and migration toward provisional matrix proteins through interaction with multiple integrins , Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell . Mol . Physiol . , 297 , L97(cid:2)L108 . 103 . Sitrin , R . G . , Pan , P . M . , Harper , H . A . , Todd , R . F . , Harsh , D . M . , and Blackwood , R . A . ( 2000 ) Clustering of urokinase receptors ( uPAR ; CD87 ) induces proinflamma(cid:2) tory signaling in human polymorphonuclear neutrophils , J . Immunol . , 165 , 3341(cid:2)3349 . 104 . Chen , Y . A . , and Scheller , R . H . ( 2001 ) SNARE(cid:2)mediated membrane fusion , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 2 , 98(cid:2)106 . 105 . Porat(cid:2)Shliom , N . , Milberg , O . , Masedunskas , A . , and Weigert , R . ( 2012 ) Multiple roles for the actin cytoskeleton during reg(cid:2) ulated exocytosis , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . , 70 , 2099(cid:2)2121 . 106 . Somlyo , A . P . , and Somlyo , A . V . ( 2003 ) Ca 2 + sensitivity of smooth muscle and nonmuscle myosin II : modulated by G proteins , kinases , and myosin phosphatase , Physiol . Rev . , 83 , 1325(cid:2)1358 . 107 . Salaita , K . , and Groves , J . T . ( 2010 ) Roles of the cytoskele(cid:2) ton in regulating EphA2 signals , Commun . Integr . Biol . , 3 , 454(cid:2)457 . 108 . Ivanov , D . B . , Philippova , M . P . , and Tkachuk , V . A . ( 2001 ) Structure and functions of classical cadherins , Biochemistry ( Moscow ) , 66 , 1174(cid:2)1186 . 109 . Rubina , K . A . , Kalinina , N . I . , Parfenova , E . V . , and Tkachuk , V . A . ( 2007 ) T(cid:2)cadherin as a receptor involved in the regulation of angiogenesis and the remodeling of blood vessels , Biol . Membr . ( Moscow ) , 24 , 62(cid:2)69 . 110 . Fredette , B . J . , Miller , J . , and Ranscht , B . ( 1996 ) Inhibition of motor axon growth by T(cid:2)cadherin substrata , Development , 122 , 3163(cid:2)3171 . 111 . Kuzmenko , Y . S . , Stambolsky , D . , Kern , F . , Bochkov , V . N . , Tkachuk , V . A . , and Resink , T . J . ( 1998 ) Characteristics of smooth muscle cell lipoprotein binding proteins ( p105 / p130 ) as T(cid:2)cadherin and regulation by pos(cid:2) itive and negative growth regulators , Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . , 246 , 489(cid:2)494 . 112 . Bochkov , V . N . , Voino(cid:2)Yasenetskaya , T . A . , and Tkachuk , V . A . ( 1991 ) Epinephrine potentiates activation of human platelets by low(cid:2)density lipoproteins , Biochim . Biophys . Acta , 1097 , 123(cid:2)127 . 113 . Rubina , K . , Talovskaya , E . , Cherenkov , V . , Ivanov , D . , Stambolsky , D . , Storozhevykh , T . , Pinelis , V . , Shevelev , A . , Parfyonova , Y . , Resink , T . , Erne , P . , and Tkachuk , V . ( 2005 ) LDL induces intracellular signaling and cell migra(cid:2) tion via atypical LDL(cid:2)binding protein T(cid:2)cadherin , Mol . Cell . Biochem . , 273 , 33(cid:2)41 . 114 . Hug , C . , Wang , J . , Ahmad , N . S . , and Bogan , J . S . ( 2004 ) T(cid:2)cadherin is a receptor for hexameric and high(cid:2)molecu(cid:2) lar(cid:2)weight forms of Acrp30 / adiponectin , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 101 , 10308(cid:2)10313 . 115 . Doyle , D . D . , Goings , G . E . , Upshaw(cid:2)Earley , J . , and Page , E . ( 1998 ) T(cid:2)cadherin is a major glycophosphoinosi(cid:2) tol(cid:2)anchored protein associated with noncaveolar deter(cid:2) gent(cid:2)insoluble domains of the cardiac sarcolemma , J . Biol . Chem . , 273 , 6937(cid:2)6943 . 116 . Vu , V . , Bui , P . , Eguchi , M . , Xu , A . , and Sweeney , G . ( 2013 ) Globular adiponectin induces LKB1 / AMPK(cid:2) dependent glucose uptake via actin cytoskeleton remodel(cid:2) ing , J . Mol . Endocrinol . , 51 , 155(cid:2)165 . 117 . Palanivel , R . , Ganguly , R . , Turdi , S . , Xu , A . , and Sweeney , G . ( 2014 ) Adiponectin stimulates Rho(cid:2)mediated actin cytoskeleton remodeling and glucose uptake via APPL1 in primary cardiomyocytes , Metabolism , 63 , 1363(cid:2)1373 .