Filamentous fungi are of profound ecological , agricul - tural , medical and biotechnological importance 1 . A key to the extraordinary success of these non - motile , heterotrophic organisms has been the evolution of highly polarized and predominantly tip - growing tubu - lar hyphae , which determine the unique lifestyles and modes of morphogenesis of filamentous fungi 2 . Several lines of evidence suggest that the ancestral form of fungi that gave rise to the budding and fission yeasts was filamentous 3 . In common with morphogenesis in other types of walled cells , morphogenesis in fungi is governed by wall construction 4 . Hyphae grow by continual tip extension , which requires the localized delivery and fusion of secre - tory vesicles that supply the apical plasma membrane with membrane and the enzymes required for the syn - thesis of new cell wall , while turgor provides the pri - mary driving force behind cell expansion 4 – 6 . Therefore , targeted secretion underpins hyphal form and function , and the fungal cell achieves proper morphogenesis through the reorganization , polarization and alignment of cytoskeletal tracks , along which secretory vesicles are translocated 7 – 9 . Both actin and microtubules are crucial to the growth of hyphae and have different but complemen - tary roles in their polarized extension 10 , 11 . Hyphal tips treated with anti - actin drugs immediately arrest apical extension and start to swell 12 – 15 , suggesting that exo - cytosis still occurs but is no longer localized to the hyphal apex . Actin - mediated endocytosis also contributes to normal polar growth 15 – 17 . In addition to the function of actin in exocytosis and endocytosis , pharmacological and genetic studies have revealed an essential role for actin in cytokinesis and organelle transport in fungi 13 – 15 , 18 – 24 ( FIG . 1 ) . Actin is an abundant , highly conserved protein pol - ymer found in all eukaryotes . The 43 kDa monomeric form , globular actin ( G - actin ) , is a single polypeptide chain consisting of two major domains that form a deep cleft which participates in ATP binding 25 . G - actin can assemble into filaments ( FIG . 1a ) ; two parallel filaments form a double helix , known as a microfilament ( fila - mentous actin ( F - actin ) ) , with a diameter of 7 nm and the loop of the helix repeating every 37 nm . The pro - cess of self - assembly gives rise to microfilaments with structural polarity , which is a crucial attribute for their cellular function . Assembly is dynamic , with individual filaments continually growing and shrinking , and is regulated by ATP hydrolysis and an extensive range of actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) . ABPs catalyse the gamut of regulatory events , including severing , capping , nucle - ating and crosslinking of F - actin . The rapid assembly and disassembly of F - actin into higher - order structures with differing functional roles , coupled to nucleotide hydrolysis , provides the cell with an energy - efficient means of cellular organization . The unicellular yeasts Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe are well - established mod - els for the study of actin in eukaryotic cells 26 , 27 . Indeed , much of our knowledge about actin , its assembly , its temporal and spatial regulation and its interaction with ABPs comes from work with these model organisms . However , several aspects of the lifestyle of filamentous * Fungal Cell Biology Group , Institute of Cell Biology , Rutherford Building , University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh EH9 3JH , UK . ‡ Department of Microbiology , Center for Scientific Research and Higher Education of Ensenada ( CICESE ) , Ensenada , Baja California 22860 , Mexico . Correspondence to N . D . R . e‑mail : Nick . Read @ ed . ac . uk doi : 10 . 1038 / nrmicro2666 Published online 2 November 2011 Microtubules Tubular cytoskeletal polymers composed of tubulin dimers . They provide tracks for intracellular transport based on motor proteins ( kinesin or dynein ) and form the spindle apparatus that allows chromosome segregation during nuclear division . Actin organization and dynamics in filamentous fungi Adokiye Berepiki * , Alexander Lichius * ‡ and Nick D . Read * Abstract | Growth and morphogenesis of filamentous fungi is underpinned by dynamic reorganization and polarization of the actin cytoskeleton . Actin has crucial roles in exocytosis , endocytosis , organelle movement and cytokinesis in fungi , and these processes are coupled to the production of distinct higher - order structures ( actin patches , cables and rings ) that generate forces or serve as tracks for intracellular transport . New approaches for imaging actin in living cells are revealing important similarities and differences in actin architecture and organization within the fungal kingdom , and have yielded key insights into cell polarity , tip growth and long - distance intracellular transport . In this Review , we discuss the contribution that recent live - cell imaging and mutational studies have made to our understanding of the dynamics and regulation of actin in filamentous fungi . R E V I E W S 876 | DECEMBER 2011 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology Actin cables ( polarized transport ) Actin patches ( endocytosis ) Actin ring ( cytokinesis ) – + a b G - actin Capping protein Proﬁlin – actin Proﬁlin Coﬁlin – actin Coﬁlin F - actin Filasomes Vesicles coated in filamentous actin . Phalloidin A toxin that binds specifically to the interface between filamentous actin ( F‑actin ) subunits . Phalloidin conjugated to fluorescent dyes has been widely used for imaging F‑actin in eukaryotic cells such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae but has not proved useful for staining F‑actin in many filamentous fungi . fungi , such as the capacity to simultaneously maintain different foci of growth , rapid apical extension and the production of a range of cell types , suggest that there are likely to be important differences in actin organiza - tion and dynamics , as well as in the associated regula - tory mechanisms , between unicellular and multicellular fungi 28 . Indeed , a large - scale screen for proteins involved in hyphal morphogenesis in Neurospora crassa uncov - ered multiple regulators of actin dynamics and several novel proteins that lacked known homologues 29 . The growing range of experimentally and genetically trac - table , fully sequenced model filamentous fungi , such as N . crassa , Aspergillus nidulans , Ashbya gossypii , Candida albicans and Ustilago maydis , has expedited several recent investigations into the actin cytoskeleton that have revealed novel aspects of F - actin dynamics 15 , 16 , 30 , 31 . In this Review , we describe key functions of the three higher - order F - actin structures — patches , cables and rings ( FIG . 1b ) — in model filamentous fungi and discuss recent live - cell imaging studies ( BOX 1 ) that have yielded important insights into F - actin dynamics in this group of organisms . Imaging the actin cytoskeleton A pioneering electron microscopy ( EM ) study using freeze substitution provided one of the first insights into actin organization in fungi 32 . This study revealed a relative abundance of actin in hyphal tips and at septa , and an accumulation of microfilaments in the Spitzenkörper ( Spk ) , a multicomponent apical struc - ture that contains a vesicle cluster involved in secretion ( BOX 2 ) . It was suggested that the presence of F - actin within the Spk could mediate fusion between secretory vesicles and specific sites on the plasma membrane and , somewhat presciently , that “a possible role for actin filaments in secretion may be common to a wide variety of eukaryotic cell types” ( REF . 32 ) . This study also found that there was an aggregation of peripheral patches or plaques , termed filasomes , on or close to the plasma membrane 32 – 34 . Several years later , two semi - nal investigations used fluorescently labelled phalloidin and actin - specific antibodies to reveal the presence of three higher - order F - actin structures in S . cerevi‑ siae : patches , cables and rings 35 , 36 . A close association between growing buds and actin patches and cables was described , suggesting that both structures par - ticipate in polarized growth . The presence of patches , cables and rings in the fission yeast S . pombe was con - firmed shortly after 37 . Immunofluorescence micros - copy also confirmed the presence of actin patches ( or plaques ) and actin rings in hyphae of A . nidulans , N . crassa and C . albicans 13 , 38 – 40 . The filasomes reported in the freeze substitution EM study 32 and the actin patches in filamentous fungi are probably the same entities . Recent studies with living filamentous fungi have unequivocally demonstrated the presence of actin cables 15 , 30 , 31 , so the previous failure of some studies to detect cables 22 , 32 – 34 , 40 was probably due to the use of unsuitable probes and / or poor preservation of labile F - actin structures during chemical fixation . We now know that these three higher - order F - actin structures have distinct cellular roles , mechanisms of assembly , localization patterns and dynamics . Actin patches Actin patches are accumulations of F - actin in complex with > 60 other proteins , and they mediate endocytosis in fungal cells 41 – 44 . Actin patches are initially assembled at the plasma membrane ( FIG . 2 ) . Following membrane invagination and scission to form endocytic vesicles , actin and the other patch components that coat these vesicles are gradually lost as the vesicles are transported away from the plasma membrane , and the uncoated ves - icles eventually fuse with endosomal compartments 45 . Endocytosis in growing regions of fungal cells is thought to provide a compensatory mechanism for exocytosis and aid the recycling of receptors and other membrane proteins 46 – 48 . A pioneering study 49 , using pairwise com - binations of six patch proteins labelled with either GFP or red fluorescent protein ( RFP ) , demonstrated that Figure 1 | Properties of actin and higher - order actin structures in filamentous fungi . a | Filamentous actin ( F - actin ) is an asymmetrical polymer . Within an actin filament , the plus end ( also known as the barbed end ) of a globular actin ( G - actin ) subunit binds to the minus end ( also known as the pointed end ) of the neighbouring G - actin subunit . Two filaments form a helical microfilament . The plus end of a microfilament is the fast - growing end with net addition of subunits , whereas the minus end is the slow - growing end with net loss of subunits . Three important actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) that regulate microfilament dynamics are cofilin ( which disassembles F - actin ) , profilin ( which sequesters G - actin ) and capping protein ( which caps the plus end of filaments , inhibiting their disassembly ) . b | F‑actin forms three higher - order structures with different functional roles . Actin cables ( extended lines ) are important in polarized transport , actin patches ( dots ) mediate endocytosis and actin rings are contractile structures that guide septum formation during cytokinesis . Scale bars represent 2 m m . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | DECEMBER 2011 | 877 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology 0 min 9 min Time Clathrin A structural protein that forms a cage‑like , polyhedral molecular arrangement ( a triskelion ) composed of three heavy chains and three light chains . Clathrin shapes and coats vesicles during their formation . Wiscott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) . Founding member of a family of activators of the actin‑related protein 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex that participate in signal transduction to the actin cytoskeleton . Myosin A superfamily of motor proteins that bind to microfilaments and couple ATP hydrolysis to force generation . Class I myosins are monomeric and are involved in endocytosis . Class II myosins are dimeric and can form filaments , which is important for their conserved role in cytokinesis . Class V myosins are dimeric processive motors that translocate cargoes along actin cables . Fimbrin A conserved actin‑crosslinking protein that contains a conserved 100 amino acid calponin homology domain found in many actin‑binding proteins . FM4‑64 A vital , membrane‑selective , amphiphilic styryl dye commonly used to study endocytosis , vesicle trafficking , and organelle organization and movement in living fungal cells . Lucifer yellow A vital fluorescent dye used as a marker for fluid‑phase endocytosis . Formins Large protein dimers that nucleate the formation of filamentous actin by the processive addition of globular actin to the barbed ends of actin microfilaments . patch composition changes over time in a defined , pre - dictable manner in S . cerevisiae and that the alteration of protein composition correlates with different patterns of patch behaviour . The composition of actin patches and details of their assembly have been the subjects of several excellent reviews 44 , 47 , 50 . Briefly , in S . cerevisiae the accumulation of clathrin and endocytic adaptor proteins ( such as Ede1 , Pan1 ( also known as Eps15 ) , Sla1 and Sla2 ) at the plasma membrane triggers the recruitment of the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex 49 , 51 . This complex uses structural mimicry to nucleate actin in patches 27 . Activation of Arp2 / 3 by the Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family member Las17 ( also known as Bee1 ) 52 , 53 and the myosin protein myosin I 54 , 55 stimulates actin assembly within patches to generate an F - actin network crosslinked by fimbrin 51 , 56 . Further actin assembly with incorporation of amphiphysin , and myo - sin I motor activity have been proposed to provide the force for plasma membrane invagination and scission of endocytic vesicles 18 , 44 , 54 , 55 , 57 , 58 . Interestingly , actin is essen - tial in S . cerevisiae for clathrin - dependent endocytosis , whereas in mammalian cells it merely facilitates endo - cytosis 44 . Recent work has demonstrated that efficient actin polymerization is required during endocytosis to overcome the internal turgor of fungal cells and drive membrane invagination 57 . Furthermore , it has been sug - gested that in S . cerevisiae , large , immobile , plasma mem - brane - associated protein assemblies called eisosomes are the sites of endocytosis , and initial results indicated that actin patch proteins colocalized with eisosome proteins 59 . However , more recent studies have shown that eisosome proteins fail to colocalize with actin patches in S . cerevi‑ siae , A . gossypii and C . albicans and that eisosomes do not mark sites of endocytosis 60 – 62 . The precise function of eisosomes remains elusive , although it has been suggested that they protect protein complexes from endocytosis 60 , and the eisosome protein Pil1 seems to be important for tip growth in A . gossypii but not in A . nidulans 62 , 63 . The components of actin patches in filamentous fungi are probably similar to those in S . cerevisiae , and the details of patch assembly in these organisms are also probably similar , on the basis of the high degree of ABP conservation between S . cerevisiae , N . crassa and A . nidulans 50 , 64 . Initial studies have confirmed some similarities but have also revealed interesting differences . Surprisingly , although Arp2 / 3 is essential in other fungi 65 – 67 , C . albicans cells lacking both Arp2 and Arp3 are viable and able to endocytose fluorescent dyes ( FM4‑64 and Lucifer yellow ) , albeit at a reduced rate 68 . Distinct actin patches are not observed in C . albi‑ cans arp2 – / – arp3 – / – cells , whereas localization of cables and rings , which are nucleated by formins ( see below ) , is unaffected . Instead of patches , large filamentous aggregates have been described in C . albicans arp2 – / – arp3 – / – mutants ; similar observations have been made in S . cerevisiae strains that carry temperature - sensitive arp2 or arp3 alleles and also in LAS17 - null mutants of S . cerevisiae 52 , 69 . It has been proposed that there is an Arp2 / 3 - independent endocytic pathway that requires actin polymerization but uses a different nucleator , possibly a Ysc84 homologue or orthologue 68 , 70 . Actin patch dynamics . Actin patches display a predict - able pattern of behaviour : they appear , mature , undergo a short period of undirected movement and are subse - quently translocated away from the membrane along actin cables 30 , 45 , 71 . Interestingly , two different patterns of patch behaviour have been observed in filamentous Box 1 | Live - cell imaging of filamentous actin Imaging filamentous actin ( F‑actin ) in living cells has proved to be challenging . Live‑cell imaging of actin has been attempted by the microinjection of fluorescently labelled phalloidin or actin , or by expression of GFP – actin 73 , 138 , 142 , 143 . However , phalloidin is toxic to cells 144 , and microinjection allows only transient monitoring of actin dynamics . Moreover , GFP – actin is unable to function as the sole source of cellular actin , is not incorporated into actin cables and perturbs actin dynamics 73 , 138 , 145 . More recent approaches have relied on fusions of fluorescent proteins to actin‑binding proteins ( ABPs ) , such as Abp140 ( REF . 123 ) , or to actin‑binding domains . These recent approaches are preferable to the earlier methods , as they generally result in less perturbation of F‑actin dynamics in vivo , but they may reveal only a subpopulation of F‑actin , and the fusion protein may compete with unlabelled endogenous ABPs . In an attempt to generate a suitable probe for F‑actin , Abp140 from S . cerevisiae was truncated to yield a 17 amino acid peptide called Lifeact that gave the same staining pattern as the full‑length Abp140 when fused to GFP 145 . The Lifeact peptide has proved to be a convenient , non‑toxic F‑actin probe and has been used to image F‑actin in diverse organisms such as mice , plants and filamentous fungi 30 , 31 , 146 – 148 ( see the figure , which shows actin cable dynamics in a Neurospora crassa germ tube , as revealed by Lifeact – GFP ; scale bar represents 2 μ m ) . However , there are some caveats with the use of Lifeact . Its low binding affinity for F‑actin means that Lifeact cannot be used to measure F‑actin dynamics with some microscopy techniques , such as fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) , which requires the covalent attachment of a fluorophore to the protein of interest for accurate measurements of diffusion rates 145 . In addition , Lifeact has been shown to affect growth when expressed at high levels 148 , so care should be taken to ensure that Lifeact‑expressing cells are healthy and behave normally . R E V I E W S 878 | DECEMBER 2011 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology Actin Spitzenkörper Merge Tropomyosin An actin‑binding protein that binds to and stabilises filamentous actin , promoting actin cable formation . fungi : slow , nonlinear movement and rapid , linear move - ment 17 , 30 . The measured velocities and lifetimes of slow , nonlinear patches in N . crassa ( 0 . 26 μm s – 1 and 14 s , respectively ) 30 and A . nidulans ( 0 . 19 μm s – 1 and 24 s ) 17 are similar to values obtained for endocytic patches of S . pombe ( 0 . 31 μm s – 1 and 19 s ) 71 , 72 and S . cerevisiae ( 0 . 1 – 0 . 5 μm s – 1 and 10 – 20 s ) 27 , 73 – 75 . Thus slow , nonlinear patches probably represent endocytic vesicles decorated with F - actin 15 – 17 , 27 , 30 , 45 , 72 , 75 . Random , undirected move - ment of patches at the plasma membrane is driven by actin polymerization 49 . In S . cerevisiae , subsequent patch transport along actin cables matches the rate of actin elongation , implying that polymerization is the motive force in this species 45 , 71 , whereas in N . crassa and A . nidulans , patches can undergo rapid , linear salta - tory ( ‘stop – start’ ) translocations along underlying actin cables , suggesting the involvement of myosin motors in these fungi 17 , 30 . In N . crassa and A . nidulans , linear patch movement proceeds at 1 . 2 μm s – 1 and 0 . 56 – 0 . 59 μm s – 1 , respectively , with some patches moving towards regions of active growth and others moving away from these regions 17 , 30 . Interestingly , although translocation along an individual cable is unidirectional , patches move in both directions within a hypha , suggesting that cables are nucleated from both basal and apical regions 30 . Whether or not these patches fuse with endosomes remains to be determined . However , given the rapid motility of endosomes within fungal hyphae 76 , 77 , it is conceivable that endocytic vesicles require transport to these organelles . Alternatively , fast patch transport could represent nonspecific interactions with the underlying network formed by actin cables and myosin V . Mutational studies of actin patches . Several putative components of the endocytic machinery have been analysed in filamentous fungi . Actin - binding protein 1 ( Abp1 ) has a role in promoting the disassembly of endo - cytic structures in S . cerevisiae 49 , 51 . In A . nidulans , dele - tion of the gene encoding the Abp1 homologue has no obvious effect on growth or endocytosis , in keeping with its partially redundant role in S . cerevisiae 16 . Mutants of A . nidulans lacking the fimbrin FimA display abnormal hyphal growth , have polarity defects during germination and are severely impaired in endocytosis 17 . The promi - nent polarity defects of these fimA mutants suggest that endocytosis is required to concentrate polarity markers , thus ensuring the maintenance of a stable growth axis and suppressing multipolarization in hyphal cells 17 . In A . gossypii , fimbrin supports fast , polarized hyphal - tip growth and endocytosis 78 . SlaB is the A . nidulans homologue of S . cerevisiae Sla2 , which regulates actin dynamics in patches 49 . Deletion of slaB is lethal in A . nidulans 16 , and conditional SlaB - deficient mutants of Aspergillus oryzae and A . nidulans show defects in endocytosis 79 , 80 . Amphiphysin is thought to contribute to endocytosis by inducing membrane cur - vature 81 , 82 . The C . albicans amphiphysin homologues Rvs161 ( reduced viability upon starvation protein 161 ) and Rvs167 are important for endocytosis , although not essential 83 . In C . albicans and A . gossypii , the homologue of S . cerevisiae Las17 , Wal1 , supports hyphal growth and is necessary for proper actin patch organization , suggest - ing that it has a similar role to Las17 in Arp2 / 3 - mediated endocytosis 84 , 85 . Class I myosins activate the S . cerevisiae Arp2 / 3 complex and are thought to participate in membrane invagination and scission during endocytosis 54 , 55 . In C . albicans , the class I myosin Myo5 localizes to actin patches 86 . Myo5 - deficient C . albicans mutants can still undergo hyphal growth even though patches are depo - larized , suggesting that patches are not necessary for polarized growth per se . By contrast , the class I myo - sin MyoA is essential for inducing polarized growth in A . nidulans 87 , 88 . It has been suggested that the role of MyoA is mainly structural , as A . nidulans mutants devoid of motor motility can still support hyphal growth 87 , 88 . Interestingly , mutation of myoA can render endocytosis constitutively active in A . nidulans 89 . Actin cables Actin cables are bundles of formin - nucleated F - actin crosslinked by tropomyosin and fimbrin 27 , 90 , 91 ( FIG . 3 ) . In fungi , actin cables serve as tracks for the transport of various cargoes , including secretory vesicles , actin patches , peroxisomes , Golgi equivalents , mitochondria , Box 2 | The Spitzenkörper The Spitzenkörper ( Spk ) , literally meaning ‘apical body’ , was first identified in growing hyphae of filamentous fungi in the 1950s ; using phase contrast microscopy , it was seen as a dynamic , phase‑dark accumulation of material at the apex of hyphal tips 149 . The Spk is a complex , multicomponent structure dominated by vesicles and in close proximity to the apical plasma membrane of a mature hypha 150 ( see the figure , which shows the colocalization of actin and the Spk in a mature hypha of Neurospora crassa ; scale bar represents 2 μ m ) . New Spk structures arise at sites of branch initiation , and the position of the Spk within the hyphal tip predicts the subsequent direction of hyphal tip growth 149 , 151 . This evidence supports the idea that the Spk acts as a vesicle supply centre for targeted secretion of new plasma membrane and cell wall‑synthesizing enzymes involved in cell surface expansion 152 . The Spk has a unique role in spatially and temporally organizing the polarity machinery , by moving within the apical dome and controlling the directionality and speed of polarized tip extension 153 . The mechanism of Spk motility remains unknown but might involve concerted action of the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton in order to maintain the integrity of the Spk at the growing tip 154 . In N . crassa , the microtubules transiently extend into the Spk 155 , whereas actin localizes to the core of the Spk and also forms a collar of endocytic patches associated with the plasma membrane 30 . The different distribution of microtubules and filamentous actin ( F‑actin ) at hyphal tips has led to the proposition that the Spk acts as a ‘relay station’ from long‑distance vesicle transport along microtubules to short‑distance F‑actin‑mediated vesicle delivery to the apical plasma membrane at the hyphal tip 10 . In addition , the fidelity of polarized tip growth is thought to be increased through micro‑ tubule‑mediated deposition of polarity factors at the apical plasma membrane 156 , as has been shown for the Schizosaccharomyces pombe formin For3 , which is delivered by microtubules to cell tips , where it assembles actin cables 157 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | DECEMBER 2011 | 879 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology – + Actin cable Loading and translocation Clathrin recruitment 1 2 3 4 5 Actin network assembly Force generation and invagination Scission Clathrin Endocytic adaptor proteins Myosin I Myosin V Amphiphysin Actin network ( Arp2 / 3 complex , WASP family members , ﬁmbrin ) Golgi equivalents Single Golgi cisternae that are produced by most filamentous fungi instead of the stacks of cisternae found in animal and plant cells . These organelles process and package macromolecules that are destined for secretion . vacuoles and mRNA 9 , 14 , 17 , 23 , 24 , 30 , 92 , 93 . In both C . albicans and A . nidulans , the polarization and morphology of Golgi equivalents depends on actin 14 , 23 , 94 , suggesting that these organelles move along actin cables , as has been demonstrated in S . cerevisiae 93 . Indeed , C . albi‑ cans cells lacking the formin Bni1 , which mediates linear cable assembly ( see below ) , form unpolarized and disorganized Golgi equivalents 23 . However , direct visualization of Golgi equivalent transport along actin cables has not been demonstrated , and it is possible that F - actin serves an organizing function in Golgi equiva - lents in addition to , or instead of , functioning as tracks for Golgi transport . Targeted transport of cargoes is achieved via myo - sin V - dependent translocation along an actin cable or via attachment to a growing actin polymer 92 . Organelle transport in S . cerevisiae is almost entirely dependent on actin , whereas in filamentous fungi both actin and microtubules contribute to organelle trafficking . Even within filamentous species , differences exist . For exam - ple , transport of mitochondria occurs via microtubules in N . crassa , whereas it is actin dependent in A . nidu‑ lans 24 , 95 . The roles of F - actin and microtubules can also change at different developmental stages : in N . crassa , cell fusion mediated by conidial anastomosis tubes ( CATs ) requires actin but not microtubules , whereas the nor - mal growth of germ tubes and vegetative hyphae requires both actin and microtubules 19 , 66 . Given that the key morphogenic role of actin cables is to serve as tracks for the transport of secretory vesi - cles , where and when these cables are assembled in the cell is of considerable importance . The Rho - family small GTPases regulate the spatial organization of the actin cytoskeleton in fungi 96 . Loss - of - function studies of all six Rho GTPases identified in Aspergillus niger have revealed how individual Rho GTPases contribute dif - ferently to growth and morphogenesis 97 . Notable in the context of this Review , however , is the apparent func - tional separation between small Rho GTPases involved in septation and those involved in tip growth in filamen - tous fungi . Rho4 , for example , has an exclusive function in actin ring organization during septation and is dis - pensable for polarized tip growth 98 , 99 . By contrast , Cdc42 and Rac1 are required for breaking cell symmetry and the maintenance of polarity but are dispensable for sep - tum formation 100 , 101 . Cdc42 and Rac1 are both crucial for proper hyphal morphogenesis in a range of filamentous fungi 97 , 100 , 102 , 103 , which probably stems from their ability to modulate polarisome localization and activity 96 , as has been shown for S . cerevisiae Cdc42 ( REFS 83 , 89 , 104 ) . The polarisome is a multiprotein complex that forms at the sites of active growth and controls the assembly of actin cables 105 . Formin Bni1 homologues are fundamental com - ponents of this complex because they catalyse de novo F - actin assembly ( FIG . 3 ) . Formins . Formins are conserved nucleators of actin filaments and are characterized by a formin homol - ogy 1 ( FH1 ) domain , which contains binding sites for profilin – actin complexes , and an FH2 domain , which controls actin nucleation and cable assembly 90 , 91 , 104 , 106 – 110 . An interaction between FH1 and profilin is required for actin recruitment to FH1 ( REFS 107 , 111 , 112 ) . Profilin – actin complexes arrive at the FH2 domain via FH1 and are delivered to the growing barbed end . The FH2 domain mediates actin filament assembly by processive binding to the barbed end of a filament , thereby pre - venting access of capping proteins while allowing elon - gation 91 , 107 , 109 , 110 , 112 . Three other domains are typical in formins : a diaphanous - related formin inhibitory domain ( DID ) ; a diaphanous - related formin autoregulatory domain ( DAD ) and a RHO - binding domain ( RBD ) 106 . Autoinhibitory interactions between DID and DAD on the same protein , as documented for some formins , are Figure 2 | Model of actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex - mediated actin nucleation and actin patch transport in filamentous fungi . Clathrin accumulation at the plasma membrane triggers the recruitment of endocytic adaptor proteins ( step 1 ) . Actin‑related protein 2 / 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex recruitment and activation by Wiscott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family members and myosin I catalyses the formation of a filamentous - actin network crosslinked by fimbrin , leading to slow actin - dependent cortical movements ( step 2 ) . Further actin assembly , together with amphiphysin and myosin I activity , promotes invagination and scission of the endocytic vesicle ( steps 3 and 4 ) . Patch components left behind at the cell cortex include endocytic adaptor proteins and myosin I . The mature patch is detached from the plasma membrane and loaded onto actin cables by an unknown mechanism ( step 5 ) . Patches can undergo rapid saltatory translocation along actin cables . The role of class V myosins in this mode of transport remains to be confirmed . Note that patches move in both directions within a hypha . As class V myosins exclusively move towards the barbed ( plus ) ends of microfilaments , this suggests that actin cables are polarized or assembled from different sites and in opposite orientations . R E V I E W S 880 | DECEMBER 2011 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology Nucleation Autoinhibition Formin domain organization Formin a b Regulatory domains FH1 FH2 – + Elongation MesA Proﬁlin – actin Actin cable Time Direction of vesicle transport Direction of cable extension Myosin V Boi1 / 2 Rho GTPase Secretory vesicle Fimbrin Tropomyosin Conidial anastomosis tubes Specialized cell protrusions or short hyphae that emerge from asexual fungal spores ( conidia ) and mediate cell fusion during colony initiation . relieved by RHO GTPase binding to the RBD , although additional factors may be required for mouse and human formins 106 . Interestingly , A . nidulans and N . crassa pos - sess only a single formin , whereas S . cerevisiae , S . pombe , A . gossypii and C . albicans possess multiple formins that catalyse actin assembly from distinct cellular locations . For example , in A . gossypii , Bni1 localizes to hyphal tips but not to septa , Bnr1 localizes to septa but not to hyphal tips and Bnr2 nucleates actin cables from the spindle pole body ( the fungal equivalent of the meta - zoan centrosome ) , which is located on the nucleus 113 , 114 . The assembly of actin cables by Bnr2 from the spindle pole body during sporulation is thought to contribute to the morphogenesis of the long ( 30 μm ) needle - shaped spores of A . gossypii 113 . In A . nidulans and N . crassa , the formin gene ( sepA and bni‑1 , respectively ) is essential for cell viabil - ity 115 – 117 . The conditional SepA - deficient mutant of A . nidulans is aseptate , exhibits an aberrant growth pattern and has abnormally wide hyphae 115 , 116 . In A . nidulans , SepA is concentrated at hyphal tips and localizes as a crescent at the extreme apex and as a dot , which colocalizes with the fluorescent dye FM4 - 64 in the Spk , posterior to the crescent 116 . SepA localization in A . nidulans is dynamic , as SepA – GFP forms a spot and a crescent that track the direction of growth , and this localization is also dependent on actin 116 . SepA also localizes to the septum , where it catalyses actin ring formation 116 , as does BNI - 1 of N . crassa 117 . By contrast , the formin Bni1 of A . gossypii seems to be specifically involved in tip growth 114 . The C . albicans BNI1 - null mutant is viable but shows major morphological defects and forms swollen abnormal hyphae 118 , 119 . Bni1 is essential for cell viability in A . gossypii ; the BNI1 - null mutant is unable to form hyphae and produces spores that expand to large deformed cells 114 . In all of the mutational studies on Bni1 and SepA homologues , actin cables are absent , confirming that formins medi - ate cable assembly in filamentous fungi 114 – 116 , 118 , 119 . Swollen conidia and hyphae are a common feature of formin mutants , demonstrating that in the absence of actin cables growth is no longer confined to a dis - tinct region , and highlighting the strict requirement for actin cables in targeted secretion 114 – 116 , 118 , 119 . Figure 3 | Actin cable assembly and dynamics . a | Fungal formins are regulated by autoinhibitory interactions between a catalytic region ( composed of formin homology 1 ( FH1 ) and FH2 domains ) and regulatory domains on the same protein . The inactive state is relieved by the binding of activated Rho GTPases , allowing profilin – actin complexes to access the FH1 and FH2 domains . Additional regulators , such as MesA and Boi1 / 2 , contribute to formin activation and localization in filamentous fungi . Profilin – actin complexes bind to the FH1 domain and are delivered onto the FH2 domain , which catalyses actin nucleation in a processive manner , forming the polymer chain . Assembled microfilaments are bundled into cables by fimbrin and tropomyosin and serve as tracks for the myosin V‑dependent transport of secretory vesicles . Cable extension and vesicle transport proceed in opposite directions . b | In Neurospora crassa , dense arrays of actin cables undergo retrograde movement from the tip of germ tubes during growth . Formin - mediated cable formation has been proposed to drive retrograde movement of actin cable arrays . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | DECEMBER 2011 | 881 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Paxillin An adaptor protein that participates in signal transduction and actin reorganization in mammalian cells . Epistatic Pertaining to a gene : masking the phenotypic effect of another gene . Exocyst A multiprotein complex involved in determining where vesicles dock and fuse with the plasma membrane . As well as the conserved functions of Rho GTPases and the polarisome in controlling cable assembly , several additional regulators have been identified in filamentous species . For example , small GTPases from the Ras family have an important role in actin organization in A . nidu‑ lans . The Ras activator GapA is recruited to the incipient site of germ tube emergence , and deletion of gapA results in a disorganized cortical actin cytoskeleton 120 . Lack of GapA does not affect microtubule organization , indicat - ing a specific role for Ras GTPases in F - actin organi - zation at the cell cortex . Interestingly , MesA , a protein containing several predicted transmembrane domains , localizes to hyphal tips in A . nidulans and participates in the recruitment and stabilization of SepA at hyphal tips but not at septation sites 121 . Septation is completely unaffected in MesA - deficient A . nidulans mutants , which fail to form actin cables and show an altered lipid - domain staining pattern . In S . cerevisiae and S . pombe , deletion of the gene encoding the MesA homologue ( YOR129C ( also known as AFI1 ) and SPBC776 . 06c , respectively ) causes negligible morphological defects , and SPBC776 . 06c fails to complement the A . nidulans MesA - deficient mutant 121 , 122 . Cumulatively , these data suggest that MesA has evolved specific roles in hyphal morphogenesis . Boi1 / 2 is another conserved protein that is found in both unicellular ( as two homo logues , Boi1 and Boi2 , in S . cerevisiae ) and filamentous fungi and has specific roles in hyphal morphogenesis . In A . gossypii , Boi1 / 2 regulates actin cable formation , thereby ensuring maxi - mal hyphal extension rates and preventing non - polar growth at hyphal tips 12 . Boi1 / 2 localizes to tips and septa , although its localization to septa is not important for permanent polar growth . The Rho GTPase Rho3 , previ - ously implicated in maintaining hyphal growth , inter - acts with both Boi1 / 2 and the formin Bni1 in A . gossypii , and GTP - bound Rho3 binds to the RBD of Bni1 , sug - gesting that Boi1 / 2 and Rho3 cooperate to modulate Bni1 - mediated actin cable assembly 12 . Actin cable dynamics . Actin cables were first visual - ized in living S . cerevisiae cells using an Abp140 – GFP fusion 123 . It was shown that assembly of actin cables occurs in the bud , with cables polarized along the mother – bud axis , and that during de novo assembly and elongation cables undergo retrograde flow into the mother cell , in complete agreement with current models of formin - mediated F - actin assembly 106 . Recent studies in N . crassa have revealed subtle but important differ - ences in cable organization in S . cerevisiae and filamen - tous fungi 30 . Long actin cables ( 5 – 10 μm ) are commonly observed in N . crassa germlings , and occasionally cables that cover the entire length of a 25 μm germ tube can be detected . Long actin cables such as these seem well suited to their proposed roles in the transport of vesi - cles and organelles . Actin cables in N . crassa also display transient cable – cable interactions and regularly undergo bending , buckling and kinking 30 . Cables and patches are exquisitely sensitive to inhibitors of actin polymeriza - tion , implying that there is a rapid turnover of filaments in these structures 30 , 123 . In N . crassa , a dense meshwork of actin cables , termed an actin array , marks the site of outgrowth of germ tubes , CATs and hyphal branches 30 . During germ tube emer - gence and elongation , actin arrays undergo recurrent retrograde movement from the tip , probably driven by BNI - 1 - mediated F - actin assembly ( FIG . 3 ; BOX 1 ) . It is likely that secretory vesicle transport to the tip can still proceed because the velocity of myosin V - mediated transport is great enough to counter retrograde cable flow ; in S . cerevisiae , myosin V movement along actin cables is approximately ten times faster than the rate of retrograde cable extension 27 , 123 . A direct role for class V myosins in secretion has not yet been demonstrated in filamentous fungi , but they have been shown to be crucial for hyphal growth in C . albicans and U . maydis 124 , 125 . In C . albicans , the class V myosin Myo2 is not essential but is required for correct polarization of the actin cytoskeleton , for germ tube formation and for vegetative hyphal growth 125 . Similarly , in U . maydis , the class V myosin Myo5 is not essential but is needed for normal cell separation , mating , hyphal growth and pathogenicity 124 . These data imply that myosin V - dependent secretion supports hyphal growth but is not needed for secretion per se . Interestingly , the dense actin arrays present in grow - ing germ tubes are not found in mature hyphae ; rather , actin cables mark the site of branch outgrowth and are found at the cell cortex , but arrays are not present in tips . Instead , a spot of F - actin just behind the apex is present , colocalizing with the Spk , and a collar of actin patches is associated with the plasma membrane several micro metres posterior to this spot 30 , 31 . This observa - tion confirms an emerging theme of hyphal growth : the rearrangement of the tip growth apparatus to support rapid extension ( FIG . 4 ) . Filamentous fungi show a rapid acceleration in apical extension during the transition from germ tube to mature vegetative hypha . The rate of apical extension in mature hyphae can be up to 20 - fold greater than that during initial germ tube emergence 126 . In A . gossypii , the transition from slow - growing to fast - growing hyphae is regulated by the paxillin homologue Pxl1 and the p21 - activated kinase Cla4 ( REFS 127 , 128 ) . The gene CLA4 is epistatic to PXL1 , and A . gossypii cells lacking either of these components do not undergo hyphal maturation 128 . Endocytosis and exocytosis occur at the apex of a germ tube , whereas in mature vegetative hyphae exo - cytosis remains confined to the apex but endocytosis occurs in a circular band or collar several micro metres behind the tip apex 15 , 16 , 30 , 126 . Taken together , these findings support the view that subapical compensa - tory endocytosis underlies hyphal growth 46 – 48 and that endocytosis and exocytosis become spatially segregated to achieve the rapid growth rates exhibited by mature vegetative hyphae . Additional developmental changes to the tip growth apparatus include the transition from a crescent - like localization to a spheroid localization for exocyst and polarisome markers in A . gossypii 126 , and the formation of the Spk — enriched in F - actin , formin and the polarisome component SPA - 2 or SpaA , respectively — in N . crassa and A . nidulans 30 , 31 , 116 , 129 , 130 . Interestingly , in the dimorphic pathogen C . albicans , the Spk is present R E V I E W S 882 | DECEMBER 2011 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology b a Mature hyphal tip Endocytic zone Endocytic zone Germ tube tip Polarisome and exocyst Actin patch Actin cable Exocytic zone Spk with a core formed by formin and F - actin Exocytic zone Anillin A Drosophila melanogaster scaffold protein that interacts with and organizes structural components of the contractile actin ring . Other eukaryotes encode anillin‑related proteins with similar functions . Actinin An actin‑binding protein that crosslinks filamentous actin and associates with the plasma membrane . in hyphae but not in yeast cells , and the exocyst and polarisome display different patterns of localization and distinct dynamics at hyphal tips 131 . An actin spot that is located in the hyphal tip has been described in living cells of A . nidulans and N . crassa , and shown to localize to the core of the Spk 15 , 30 , 31 , confirm - ing the ultrastructural observations that were made with freeze - substituted cells more than 30 years ago 32 . The enrichment of F - actin and formin as a spot suggests that the Spk acts as an actin - organizing centre and can be considered as a fourth type of higher - order F - actin structure . Interestingly , ABPs involved in actin patch formation , such as Arp2 / 3 , fimbrin and Abp1 , do not localize to the Spk 15 – 17 , 31 . It is likely that actin filaments or cables are assembled by formin at the Spk and / or the apical plasma membrane and allow vesicles to reach the cell tip via myosin V - dependent transport . Cortical actin cables seem to converge on the Spk ; however , recent studies have failed to clearly visualize actin microfila - ments or cables bridging the gap between the Spk and the apical membrane in living hyphae 15 , 30 , 31 . It is probable that the strong fluorescence signal from the Spk hinders the detection of actin microfilaments and cables in this region . Conversely , actin microfilaments or cables may simply not be present in the gap between the Spk and the plasma membrane , and vesicles may concentrate in the Spk but then diffuse and preferentially dock at the apex . Which scenario occurs remains to be determined . Actin rings The contractile actomyosin ring ( CAR ) is a key constitu - ent of the cytokinetic machinery in fungi . Consisting of actin , myosin II and other associated proteins , the CAR forms a force - generating ring linked to the plasma mem - brane 132 . Myosin II - mediated sliding of actin filaments leads to contraction of the ring , guiding membrane invagination and cell wall synthesis . The utilization of a contractile ring is an ancient mechanism present in fungi , animals and protists 132 . Although the central contractile mechanism is conserved between yeasts and filamentous fungi , there are differences in the regulation of the placement and assembly of the CAR 133 . In various fungi , anillin - like proteins provide the spatial cues for ring placement 133 . In N . crassa , the anillin - like protein bud site selection protein 4 ( BUD - 4 ) functions upstream of the Rho GTPase RHO - 4 and its effec - tors 98 , 99 , 117 ( FIG . 5 ) . BUD - 4 localizes as dots at the plasma membrane at incipient sites of septum formation , forms a ring during septation and is required for correct RHO - 4 placement 117 . Although the localization of BUD - 4 dots at the plasma membrane is independent of RHO - 4 , BUD - 4 dots do not coalesce into a ring in the absence of RHO - 4 ( REF . 117 ) . RHO - 4 and its activator , BUD - 3 , are proposed to localize and activate the formin BNI - 1 , thereby regulat - ing CAR placement and assembly . A similar Rho4 – Bud3 module regulates formin recruitment before CAR forma - tion in A . nidulans 134 . In addition , an actinin - like protein , AcnA , localizes to septation sites and has been shown to contribute to cytokinesis in A . nidulans 135 . The sites of BNI - 1 - mediated cable assembly in N . crassa , as shown by cable localization before ring formation , are dispersed within the hyphae and gradu - ally coalesce into an actin ring 30 , 31 . The most convinc - ing hypothesis to explain cable condensation into rings is the search , capture , pull and release ( SCPR ) model developed from studies in S . pombe 136 – 138 . In this organ - ism , the anillin - like protein Mid1 ( also known as Dmf1 ) localizes as nodes in a broad band on the plasma mem - brane before septum formation 137 – 139 . Mid1 and asso - ciated proteins recruit the formin Cdc12 , which then assembles actin filaments or cables from these nodes 140 . Contraction of the nodes into a ring is thought to be Figure 4 | Rearrangement of the tip growth apparatus . a | The actin cytoskeleton in germ tubes . Dense arrays of actin cables are present at the apex and are thought to serve as tracks for myosin V‑dependent secretory vesicle transport to the tip . The polarisome and the exocyst localize to a crescent at the apex of the germ tube . Actin patches are found at regions of exocytosis in germ tubes , suggesting that exocytosis and endocytosis are spatially coupled at this stage . Actin patches are also translocated to and from the tip along actin cables . b | In rapidly growing mature vegetative hyphae , the Spitzenkörper ( Spk ) contains a variety of components , such as secretory vesicles , the polarisome proteins Spa2 and Bni1 ( SpaA and SepA in Aspergillus nidulans ; SPA - 2 and BNI - 1 in Neurospora crassa ) and a core of filamentous actin ( F - actin ) . Actin cables are no longer found as dense arrays but instead are mostly associated with the cell cortex and can be observed emanating from the Spk . Endocytosis , as shown by actin patch localization , becomes confined to a subapical collar several micrometres behind the tip apex . The polarisome and exocyst maintain their crescent shape but are now also present as a diffuse sphere between the apex and the Spk . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | DECEMBER 2011 | 883 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology RHO - 4 Site selection RHO - 4 recruitment Cable assembly and condensation CAR contraction Septation Actin cables CAR ( actin , myosin II , tropomyosin ) Septum BUD - 3 , BUD - 4 BNI - 1 BUD - 3 , BUD - 4 , RHO - 4 Myosin II 1 2 3 5 4 mediated by myosin II - dependent capture and tension - ing of actin filaments that emanate from neighbouring nodes : Myo2 in a node captures filaments emerging from a neighbouring node , thereby linking the nodes , and ‘walks’ towards the barbed end , pulling nodes together 136 , 137 . Random breaks in the connecting fila - ments allow for numerous rounds of experimentation and correction , and computer simulations based on known physiological parameters closely mimic micro - scopic observations 137 . However , this hypothesis is con - tested , and S . pombe mid1 - null mutants do not form detectable nodes but are still able to form CARs , which suggests that other ring assembly mechanisms exist in this organism 141 . Concluding remarks Despite recent advances , several important aspects of actin organization and dynamics remain poorly under - stood in filamentous fungi . The functional roles of patch transport within hyphae need to be defined . In N . crassa and A . nidulans , actin patches undergo rapid linear trans - port ; however , the purpose of this transport , the motors involved and the fate of the F - actin - coated endocytic ves - icles have not been determined . Also , the more general role of myosin motors in organizing actin in filamentous fungi has received relatively little attention . The finding that the tip growth apparatus is highly structured and changes over time is most interesting . Rearrangements in the tip growth apparatus are often observed during changes in growth rate or developmental state , but a causal , mechanistic relationship has not been established . Finally , how the site of CAR assembly is determined in filamentous fungi and the precise mechanism of CAR formation require further study . The precise roles of F - actin in the Spk also need to be determined . The concentration of F - actin within the core of the Spk probably represents a fourth type of higher - order F - actin structure in filamentous fungi . F - actin is thought to be important for the short - range targeting of secretory vesicles from the Spk to the plasma membrane . However , it may have additional roles , such as maintaining the structural integrity of the Spk and / or regulating Spk movement within the hyphal tip . A more complete inventory of the proteins that regulate actin organization and dynamics in filamen - tous fungi , and the elucidation of the roles of these pro - teins , is crucial . Given the importance of actin in fungal growth , the identification of novel ABPs in filamentous fungi could lead to the development of new antifungal drugs . Genetic screens , the generation of conditional mutants and proteomic methods such as mass spectrom - etry will help to identify new ABPs and determine their cellular function . But given the dynamic properties of actin assembly and the link between function and the higher - order structures formed by F - actin , any mean - ingful explanation of the cellular functions of actin in fungi must account for the spatial organization of F - actin and ABPs , and the timing of regulatory events . Live - cell imaging using fluorescent - protein labelling has been and will continue to be pivotal in achieving this end and advancing our knowledge of actin organization and dynamics in filamentous fungi . Figure 5 | Model of contractile actomyosin ring assembly in Neurospora crassa . The site of contractile actomyosin ring ( CAR ) formation in Neurospora crassa is determined by the anillin‑like protein bud site selection protein 4 ( BUD‑4 ) , which assembles as dots at the inner perimeter of the cell cortex in a RHO‑4‑independent manner ( step 1 ) . Localization of the Rho GTPase RHO‑4 depends on BUD‑4 . RHO‑4 , activated by BUD‑3 , is thought to localize and activate the formin BNI‑1 ( steps 2 and 3 ) . Formin‑mediated filamentous‑actin ( F‑actin ) assembly leads to a meshwork of actin cables between formin nodes . The search , capture , pull and release ( SCPR ) model proposes that myosin II‑dependent contraction leads to the condensation of the cable meshwork into a ring . The CAR is formed , consisting of actin , myosin II and tropomyosin , with BUD‑3 , BUD‑4 and RHO‑4 localizing to the inner perimeter of the ring ( step 4 ) . The CAR contracts and guides membrane invagination and cell wall synthesis , resulting in septum formation ( step 5 ) ; the CAR eventually dissipates . In N . crassa , the septum is not completed and a septal pore is formed that retains BUD‑3 , BUD‑4 and RHO‑4 , which suggests additional roles for this complex . R E V I E W S 884 | DECEMBER 2011 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 1 . May , G . S . & Adams , T . H . The importance of fungi to man . Genome Res . 7 , 1041 – 1044 ( 1997 ) . 2 . Read , N . D . in Fungi and the Environment ( eds Gadd , G . M . , Watkinson , S . C . & Dyer , P . S . ) 38 – 57 ( Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge , UK , 2006 ) . 3 . Liu , Y . J . & Hall , B . D . Body plan evolution of ascomycetes , as inferred from an RNA polymerase II phylogeny . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 4507 – 4512 ( 2004 ) . 4 . Bartnicki‑Garcia , S . in Molecular Biology of Fungal Development ( ed . Osiewaqcz , H . D . ) 29 – 58 ( Marcel Dekker , New York , 2002 ) . 5 . Bartnicki‑Garcia , S . , Bracker , C . E . , Gierz , G . , Lopez‑ Franco , R . & Lu , H . Mapping the growth of fungal hyphae : orthogonal cell wall expansion during tip growth and the role of turgor . Biophys . J . 79 , 2382 – 2390 ( 2000 ) . 6 . Lew , R . R . How does a hypha grow ? The biophysics of pressurized growth in fungi . Nature Rev . Microbiol . 9 , 509 – 518 ( 2011 ) . 7 . Pruyne , D . W . , Schott , D . H . & Bretscher , A . Tropomyosin‑containing actin cables direct the Myo2p‑ dependent polarized delivery of secretory vesicles in budding yeast . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1931 – 1945 ( 1998 ) . 8 . Schott , D . H . , Collins , R . N . & Bretscher , A . Secretory vesicle transport velocity in living cells depends on the myosin‑V lever arm length . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 35 – 39 ( 2002 ) . 9 . Motegi , F . , Arai , R . & Mabuchi , I . Identification of two type V myosins in fission yeast , one of which functions in polarized cell growth and moves rapidly in the cell . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 1367 – 1380 ( 2001 ) . 10 . Harris , S . D . et al . Polarisome meets Spitzenkörper : microscopy , genetics , and genomics converge . Eukaryot . Cell 4 , 225 – 229 ( 2005 ) . 11 . Lichius , A . , Berepiki , A . & Read , N . D . Form follows function – the versatile fungal cytoskeleton . Fungal Biol . 115 , 518 – 540 ( 2011 ) . 12 . Knechtle , P . , Wendland , J . & Philippsen , P . The SH3 / PH domain protein AgBoi1 / 2 collaborates with the Rho‑type GTPase AgRho3 to prevent nonpolar growth at hyphal tips of Ashbya gossypii . Eukaryot . Cell 5 , 1635 – 1647 ( 2006 ) . 13 . Torralba , S . , Raudaskoski , M . , Pedregosa , A . M . & Laborda , F . Effect of cytochalasin A on apical growth , actin cytoskeleton organization and enzyme secretion in Aspergillus nidulans . Microbiology 144 , 45 – 53 ( 1998 ) . 14 . Pantazopoulou , A . & Penalva , M . A . Organization and dynamics of the Aspergillus nidulans Golgi during apical extension and mitosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 4335 – 4347 ( 2009 ) . 15 . Taheri‑Talesh , N . et al . The tip growth apparatus of Aspergillus nidulans . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 1439 – 1449 ( 2008 ) . Live - cell analysis of hyphal - tip organization using a combination of markers for actin , endocytosis and exocytosis . 16 . Araujo‑Bazan , L . , Penalva , M . A . & Espeso , E . A . Preferential localization of the endocytic internalization machinery to hyphal tips underlies polarization of the actin cytoskeleton in Aspergillus nidulans . Mol . Microbiol . 67 , 891 – 905 ( 2008 ) . The demonstration that endocytic components are polarized and form a subapical ring at hyphal tips . 17 . Upadhyay , S . & Shaw , B . D . The role of actin , fimbrin and endocytosis in growth of hyphae in Aspergillus nidulans . Mol . Microbiol . 68 , 690 – 705 ( 2008 ) . An article that highlights the importance of endocytosis for correct polar growth and describes a subapical ring of endocytic components at hyphal tips . 18 . Ayscough , K . R . et al . High rates of actin filament turnover in budding yeast and roles for actin in establishment and maintenance of cell polarity revealed using the actin inhibitor latrunculin A . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 399 – 416 ( 1997 ) . 19 . Barja , F . , Chappuis , M . L . & Turian , G . Differential effects of anticytoskeletal compounds on the localization and chemical patterns of actin in germinating conidia of Neurospora crassa . FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 107 , 261 – 266 ( 1993 ) . 20 . Harris , S . D . , Morrell , J . L . & Hamer , J . E . Identification and characterization of Aspergillus nidulans mutants defective in cytokinesis . Genetics 136 , 517 – 532 ( 1994 ) . 21 . Novick , P . & Botstein , D . Phenotypic analysis of temperature‑sensitive yeast actin mutants . Cell 40 , 405 – 416 ( 1985 ) . 22 . Virag , A . & Griffiths , A . J . A mutation in the Neurospora crassa actin gene results in multiple defects in tip growth and branching . Fungal Genet . Biol . 41 , 213 – 225 ( 2004 ) . 23 . Rida , P . C . G . , Nishikawa , A . , Won , G . Y . & Dean , N . Yeast‑to‑hyphal transition triggers formin‑dependent Golgi localization to the growing tip in Candida albicans . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 4364 – 4378 ( 2006 ) . 24 . Suelmann , R . & Fischer , R . Mitochondrial movement and morphology depend on an intact actin cytoskeleton in Aspergillus nidulans . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 45 , 42 – 50 ( 2000 ) . 25 . Dominguez , R . & Holmes , K . C . Actin structure and function . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 40 , 169 – 186 ( 2011 ) . 26 . Kovar , D . R . , Sirotkin , V . & Lord , M . Three’s company : the fission yeast actin cytoskeleton . Trends Cell Biol . 21 , 177 – 187 ( 2011 ) . 27 . Moseley , J . B . & Goode , B . L . The yeast actin cytoskeleton : from cellular function to biochemical mechanism . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 70 , 605 – 645 ( 2006 ) . 28 . Harris , S . D . & Momany , M . Polarity in filamentous fungi : moving beyond the yeast paradigm . Fungal Genet . Biol . 41 , 391 – 400 ( 2004 ) . 29 . Seiler , S . & Plamann , M . The genetic basis of cellular morphogenesis in the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 4352 – 4364 ( 2003 ) . 30 . Berepiki , A . , Lichius , A . , Shoji , J . Y . , Tilsner , J . & Read , N . D . F‑actin dynamics in Neurospora crassa . Eukaryot . Cell 9 , 547 – 557 ( 2010 ) . The first study to use the Lifeact probe to provide detailed live - cell imaging of F - actin localization and dynamics in germlings and vegetative hyphae of N . crassa . 31 . Delgado‑Alvarez , D . L . et al . Visualization of F‑actin localization and dynamics with live cell markers in Neurospora crassa . Fungal Genet . Biol . 47 , 573 – 586 ( 2010 ) . An in - depth description of the localization of F - actin and various ABPs in hyphae of N . crassa . 32 . Howard , R . J . Ultrastructural analysis of hyphal tip cell growth in fungi : Spitzenkörper , cytoskeleton and endomembranes after freeze‑substitution . J . Cell Sci . 48 , 89 – 103 ( 1981 ) . A classic paper providing the first description of the ultrastructural localization of actin in hyphal tips . 33 . Bourett , T . M . & Howard , R . J . Ultrastructural immunolocalization of actin in a fungus . Protoplasma 163 , 199 – 202 ( 1991 ) . 34 . Roberson , R . W . The actin cytoskeleton in hyphal cells of Sclerotium rolfsii . Mycologia 84 , 41 – 51 ( 1992 ) . 35 . Adams , A . E . & Pringle , J . R . Relationship of actin and tubulin distribution to bud growth in wild‑type and morphogenetic‑mutant Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 934 – 945 ( 1984 ) . 36 . Kilmartin , J . V . & Adams , A . E . Structural rearrangements of tubulin and actin during the cell cycle of the yeast Saccharomyces . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 922 – 933 ( 1984 ) . 37 . Marks , J . , Hagan , I . M . & Hyams , J . S . Growth polarity and cytokinesis in fission yeast : the role of the cytoskeleton . J . Cell Sci . 5 , 229 – 241 ( 1986 ) . 38 . Yokoyama , K . , Kaji , H . , Nishimura , K . & Miyaji , M . The role of microfilaments and microtubules in apical growth and dimorphism of Candida albicans . J . Gen . Microbiol . 136 , 1067 – 1075 ( 1990 ) . 39 . Garrill , A . & Suei , S . An F‑actin‑depleted zone is present at the hyphal tip of invasive hyphae of Neurospora crassa . Protoplasma 232 , 165 – 172 ( 2008 ) . 40 . Barja , F . , Thi , B . N . & Turian , G . Localization of actin and characterization of its isoforms in the hyphae of Neurospora crassa . FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 61 , 19 – 24 ( 1991 ) . 41 . Kubler , E . & Riezman , H . Actin and fimbrin are required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J . 12 , 2855 – 2862 ( 1993 ) . 42 . Mulholland , J . et al . Ultrastructure of the yeast actin cytoskeleton and its association with the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 381 – 391 ( 1994 ) . 43 . Munn , A . L . , Stevenson , B . J . , Geli , M . I . & Riezman , H . End5 , End6 , and End7 : mutations that cause actin delocalization and block the internalization step of endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1721 – 1742 ( 1995 ) . 44 . Robertson , A . S . , Smythe , E . & Ayscough , K . R . Functions of actin in endocytosis . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 66 , 2049 – 2065 ( 2009 ) . 45 . Huckaba , T . M . , Gay , A . C . , Pantalena , L . F . , Yang , H . C . & Pon , L . A . Live cell imaging of the assembly , disassembly , and actin cable‑dependent movement of endosomes and actin patches in the budding yeast , Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 519 – 530 ( 2004 ) . 46 . Altschuler , S . J . , Marco , E . , Wedlich‑Soldner , R . , Li , R . & Wu , L . F . Endocytosis optimizes the dynamic localization of membrane proteins that regulate cortical polarity . Cell 129 , 411 – 422 ( 2007 ) . 47 . Penalva , M . A . Endocytosis in filamentous fungi : Cinderella gets her reward . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 13 , 684 – 692 ( 2010 ) . 48 . Steinberg , G . On the move : endosomes in fungal growth and pathogenicity . Nature Rev . Microbiol . 5 , 309 – 316 ( 2007 ) . 49 . Kaksonen , M . , Sun , Y . & Drubin , D . G . A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell 115 , 475 – 487 ( 2003 ) . A landmark investigation showing that different types of patch behaviour are determined by the varying protein composition of actin patches . 50 . Sanchez‑Ferrero , J . C . & Peñalva , M . A . in The Aspergilli : Genomics , Medical Applications , Biotechnology , and Research Methods ( eds Osmani , S . & Goldman , G . ) 177 – 195 ( CRC Press , Boca Raton , 2007 ) . 51 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . & Drubin , D . G . A modular design for the clathrin‑ and actin‑mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 , 305 – 320 ( 2005 ) . 52 . Li , R . Bee1 , a yeast protein with homology to Wiscott‑ Aldrich syndrome protein , is critical for the assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 649 – 658 ( 1997 ) . 53 . Madania , A . et al . The Saccharomyces cerevisiae homologue of human Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein Las17p interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 3521 – 3538 ( 1999 ) . 54 . Jonsdottir , G . A . & Li , R . Dynamics of yeast myosin I : evidence for a possible role in scission of endocytic vesicles . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1604 – 1609 ( 2004 ) . 55 . Sun , Y . D . , Martin , A . C . & Drubin , D . G . Endocytic internalization in budding yeast requires coordinated actin nucleation and myosin motor activity . Dev . Cell 11 , 33 – 46 ( 2006 ) . 56 . Ayscough , K . R . et al . Interactions between the yeast SM22 homologue Scp1 and actin demonstrate the importance of actin bundling in endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 15037 – 15046 ( 2008 ) . 57 . Aghamohammadzadeh , S . & Ayscough , K . R . Differential requirements for actin during yeast and mammalian endocytosis . Nature Cell Biol . 11 , 1039 – 1042 ( 2009 ) . 58 . Ayscough , K . R . Endocytosis and the development of cell polarity in yeast require a dynamic F‑actin cytoskeleton . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1587 – 1590 ( 2000 ) . 59 . Walther , T . C . et al . Eisosomes mark static sites of endocytosis . Nature 439 , 998 – 1003 ( 2006 ) . 60 . Grossman , G . et al . Plasma membrane microdomains regulate turnover of transport proteins in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 1075 – 1088 ( 2008 ) . 61 . Reijnst , P . , Walther , A . & Wendland , J . Dual‑colour fluorescence microscopy using yEmCherry‑ / GFP‑ tagging of eisosome components Pil1 and Lsp1 in Candida albicans . Yeast 28 , 331 – 338 ( 2011 ) . 62 . Seger , S . , Rischatsch , R . & Philippsen , P . Formation and stability of eisosomes in the filamentous fungus Ashbya gossypii . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 1629 – 1634 ( 2011 ) . 63 . Vangelatos , I . et al . Eisosome organization in the filamentous ascomycete Aspergillus nidulans . Eukaryot . Cell 9 , 1441 – 1454 ( 2010 ) . 64 . Borkovich , K . A . et al . Lessons from the genome sequence of Neurospora crassa : tracing the path from genomic blueprint to multicellular organism . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 68 , 1 – 108 ( 2004 ) . 65 . Lees‑Miller , J . P . , Henry , G . & Helfman , D . M . Identification of Act2 , an essential gene in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe that encodes a protein related to actin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 89 , 80 – 83 ( 1992 ) . 66 . Roca , M . G . , Kuo , H . C . , Lichius , A . , Freitag , M . & Read , N . D . Nuclear dynamics , mitosis , and the cytoskeleton during the early stages of colony initiation in Neurospora crassa . Eukaryot . Cell 9 , 1171 – 1183 ( 2010 ) . 67 . Schwob , E . & Martin , R . P . New yeast actin‑like gene required late in the cell cycle . Nature 355 , 179 – 182 ( 1992 ) . 68 . Whiteway , M . et al . Forward genetics in Candida albicans that reveals the Arp2 / 3 complex is required for hyphal formation , but not endocytosis . Mol . Microbiol . 75 , 1182 – 1198 ( 2010 ) . 69 . Martin , A . C . et al . Effects of Arp2 and Arp3 nucleotide‑binding pocket mutations on Arp2 / 3 complex function . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 315 – 328 ( 2005 ) . 70 . Robertson , A . S . et al . The WASP homologue Las17 activates the novel actin‑regulatory activity of Ysc84 to promote endocytosis in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 1618 – 1628 ( 2009 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | DECEMBER 2011 | 885 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 71 . Pelham , R . J . Jr & Chang , F . Role of actin polymerization and actin cables in actin‑patch movement in Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 235 – 244 ( 2001 ) . 72 . Sirotkin , V . , Berro , J . , Macmillan , K . , Zhao , L . & Pollard , T . D . Quantitative analysis of the mechanism of endocytic actin patch assembly and disassembly in fission yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 2894 – 2904 ( 2010 ) . 73 . Doyle , T . & Botstein , D . Movement of yeast cortical actin cytoskeleton visualized in vivo . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 3886 – 3891 ( 1996 ) . 74 . Smith , M . G . , Swamy , S . R . & Pon , L . A . The life cycle of actin patches in mating yeast . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1505 – 1513 ( 2001 ) . 75 . Waddle , J . A . , Karpova , T . S . , Waterston , R . H . & Cooper , J . A . Movement of cortical actin patches in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 861 – 870 ( 1996 ) . 76 . Abenza , J . F . , Pantazopoulou , A . , Rodriguez , J . M . , Galindo , A . & Penalva , M . A . Long‑distance movement of Aspergillus nidulans early endosomes on microtubule tracks . Traffic 10 , 57 – 75 ( 2009 ) . 77 . Wedlich‑Soldner , R . , Bolker , M . , Kahmann , R . & Steinberg , G . A putative endosomal t‑SNARE links exo‑ and endocytosis in the phytopathogenic fungus Ustilago maydis . EMBO J . 19 , 1974 – 1986 ( 2000 ) . 78 . Jorde , S . , Walther , A . & Wendland , J . The Ashbya gossypii fimbrin SAC6 is required for fast polarized hyphal tip growth and endocytosis . Microbiol . Res . 166 , 137 – 145 ( 2011 ) . 79 . Higuchi , Y . , Shoji , J . Y . , Arioka , M . & Kitamoto , K . Endocytosis is crucial for cell polarity and apical membrane recycling in the filamentous fungus Aspergillus oryzae . Eukaryot . Cell 8 , 37 – 46 ( 2009 ) . 80 . Hervas‑Aguilar , A . & Penalva , M . A . Endocytic machinery protein SlaB is dispensable for polarity establishment but necessary for polarity maintenance in hyphal tip cells of Aspergillus nidulans . Eukaryot . Cell 9 , 1504 – 1518 ( 2010 ) . 81 . Balguerie , A . , Sivadon , P . , Bonneu , M . & Aigle , M . Rvs167p , the budding yeast homolog of amphiphysin , colocalizes with actin patches . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 2529 – 2537 ( 1999 ) . 82 . Peter , B . J . et al . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 , 495 – 499 ( 2004 ) . 83 . Konopka , J . B . , Douglas , L . M . & Martin , S . W . BAR domain proteins Rvs161 and Rvs167 contribute to Candida albicans endocytosis , morphogenesis , and virulence . Infec . Immun . 77 , 4150 – 4160 ( 2009 ) . 84 . Walther , A . & Wendland , J . Polarized hyphal growth in Candida albicans requires the Wiskott‑Aldrich syndrome protein homolog Wal1p . Eukaryot . Cell 3 , 471 – 482 ( 2004 ) . 85 . Walther , A . & Wendland , J . Apical localization of actin patches and vacuolar dynamics in Ashbya gossypii depend on the WASP homolog Wal1p . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 4947 – 4958 ( 2004 ) . 86 . Oberholzer , U . , Marcil , A . , Leberer , E . , Thomas , D . Y . & Whiteway , M . Myosin I is required for hypha formation in Candida albicans . Eukaryot . Cell 1 , 213 – 228 ( 2002 ) . 87 . Osherov , N . , Yamashita , R . A . , Chung , Y . S . & May , G . S . Structural requirements for in vivo myosin I function in Aspergillus nidulans . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 27017 – 27025 ( 1998 ) . 88 . Yamashita , R . A . , Osherov , N . & May , G . S . Localization of wild type and mutant class I myosin proteins in Aspergillus nidulans using GFP‑fusion proteins . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 45 , 163 – 172 ( 2000 ) . 89 . Yamashita , R . A . & May , G . S . Constitutive activation of endocytosis by mutation of myoA , the myosin I gene of Aspergillus nidulans . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 14644 – 14648 ( 1998 ) . 90 . Evangelista , M . , Pruyne , D . , Amberg , D . C . , Boone , C . & Bretscher , A . Formins direct Arp2 / 3‑independent actin filament assembly to polarize cell growth in yeast . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 260 – 269 ( 2002 ) . 91 . Pruyne , D . et al . Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed‑end association . Science 297 , 612 – 615 ( 2002 ) . 92 . Fehrenbacher , K . L . , Boldogh , I . R . & Pon , L . A . Taking the A‑train : actin‑based force generators and organelle targeting . Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 472 – 477 ( 2003 ) . 93 . Rossanese , O . W . et al . A role for actin , Cdc1p , and Myo2p in the inheritance of late Golgi elements in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 47 – 62 ( 2001 ) . 94 . Hubbard , M . A . & Kaminskyj , S . G . Rapid tip‑directed movement of Golgi equivalents in growing Aspergillus nidulans hyphae suggests a mechanism for delivery of growth‑related materials . Microbiology 154 , 1544 – 1553 ( 2008 ) . 95 . Fuchs , F . , Prokisch , H . , Neupert , W . & Westermann , B . Interaction of mitochondria with microtubules in the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 1931 – 1937 ( 2002 ) . 96 . Harris , S . D . Cdc42 / Rho GTPases in fungi : variations on a common theme . Mol . Microbiol . 79 , 1123 – 1127 ( 2011 ) . 97 . Kwon , M . J . et al . Functional characterization of Rho GTPases in Aspergillus niger uncovers conserved and diverged roles of Rho proteins within filamentous fungi . Mol . Microbiol . 79 , 1151 – 1167 ( 2011 ) . 98 . Rasmussen , C . G . & Glass , N . L . A Rho‑type GTPase , rho‑4 , is required for septation in Neurospora crassa . Eukaryot . Cell 4 , 1913 – 1925 ( 2005 ) . 99 . Rasmussen , C . G . & Glass , N . L . Localization of RHO‑4 indicates differential regulation of conidial versus vegetative septation in the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa . Eukaryot . Cell 6 , 1097 – 1107 ( 2007 ) . 100 . Mahlert , M . , Leveleki , L . , Hlubek , A . , Sandrock , B . & Bolker , M . Rac1 and Cdc42 regulate hyphal growth and cytokinesis in the dimorphic fungus Ustilago maydis . Mol . Microbiol . 59 , 567 – 578 ( 2006 ) . 101 . Rolke , Y . & Tudzynski , P . The small GTPase Rac and the p21‑activated kinase Cla4 in Claviceps purpurea : interaction and impact on polarity , development and pathogenicity . Mol . Microbiol . 68 , 405 – 423 ( 2008 ) . 102 . Boyce , K . J . , Hynes , M . J . & Andrianopoulos , A . Control of morphogenesis and actin localization by the Penicillium marneffei RAC homolog . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1249 – 1260 ( 2003 ) . 103 . Virag , A . , Lee , M . P . , Si , H . & Harris , S . D . Regulation of hyphal morphogenesis by cdc42 and rac1 homologues in Aspergillus nidulans . Mol . Microbiol . 66 , 1579 – 1596 ( 2007 ) . 104 . Evangelista , M . et al . Bni1p , a yeast formin linking Cdc42p and the actin cytoskeleton during polarized morphogenesis . Science 276 , 118 – 122 ( 1997 ) . 105 . Pruyne , D . & Bretscher , A . Polarization of cell growth in yeast . I . Establishment and maintenance of polarity states . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 365 – 375 ( 2000 ) . 106 . Chesarone , M . A . , DuPage , A . G . & Goode , B . L . Unleashing formins to remodel the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 62 – 74 ( 2010 ) . 107 . Kovar , D . R . , Kuhn , J . R . , Tichy , A . L . & Pollard , T . D . The fission yeast cytokinesis formin Cdc12p is a barbed end actin filament capping protein gated by profilin . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 875 – 887 ( 2003 ) . 108 . Sagot , I . , Klee , S . K . & Pellman , D . Yeast formins regulate cell polarity by controlling the assembly of actin cables . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 42 – 50 ( 2002 ) . 109 . Zigmond , S . H . et al . Formin leaky cap allows elongation in the presence of tight capping proteins . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1820 – 1823 ( 2003 ) . 110 . Moseley , J . B . et al . A conserved mechanism for Bni1‑and mDia1‑induced actin assembly and dual regulation of Bni1 by Bud6 and profilin . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 896 – 907 ( 2004 ) . 111 . Chang , F . , Drubin , D . & Nurse , P . Cdc12p , a protein required for cytokinesis in fission yeast , is a component of the cell division ring and interacts with profilin . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 169 – 182 ( 1997 ) . 112 . Kovar , D . R . , Wu , J . Q . & Pollard , T . D . Profilin‑mediated competition between capping protein and formin Cdc12p during cytokinesis in fission yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 2313 – 2324 ( 2005 ) . 113 . Kemper , M . et al . A Bnr‑like formin links actin to the spindle pole body during sporulation in the filamentous fungus Ashbya gossypii . Mol . Microbiol . 80 , 1276 – 1295 ( 2011 ) . This study demonstrates that Bnr2 has an important role in sporulation and that during sporulation it assembles actin cables from the nuclear spindle pole body . 114 . Schmitz , H . P . , Kaufmann , A . , Kohli , M . , Laissue , P . P . & Philippsen , P . From function to shape : a novel role of a formin in morphogenesis of the fungus Ashbya gossypii . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 130 – 145 ( 2006 ) . 115 . Harris , S . D . , Hamer , L . , Sharpless , K . E . & Hamer , J . E . The Aspergillus nidulans sepA gene encodes an FH1 / 2 protein involved in cytokinesis and the maintenance of cellular polarity . EMBO J . 16 , 3474 – 3483 ( 1997 ) . 116 . Sharpless , K . E . & Harris , S . D . Functional characterization and localization of the Aspergillus nidulans formin SEPA . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 469 – 479 ( 2002 ) . 117 . Justa‑Schuch , D . , Heilig , Y . , Richthammer , C . & Seiler , S . Septum formation is regulated by the RHO4‑specific exchange factors BUD3 and RGF3 and by the landmark protein BUD4 in Neurospora crassa . Mol . Microbiol . 76 , 220 – 235 ( 2010 ) . A detailed study analysing the role of RHO - 4 and BUD - 4 during cytokinesis in N . crassa , and establishing the contribution of the activators BUD - 3 and RGF - 3 to this process . 118 . Li , C . R . et al . The formin family protein CaBni1p has a role in cell polarity control during both yeast and hyphal growth in Candida albicans . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2637 – 2648 ( 2005 ) . 119 . Martin , R . , Walther , A . & Wendland , H . Ras1‑induced hyphal development in Candida albicans requires the formin Bni1 . Eukaryot . Cell 4 , 1712 – 1724 ( 2005 ) . 120 . Harispe , L . , Portela , C . , Scazzocchio , C . , Penalva , M . A . & Gorfinkiel , L . Ras GTPase‑activating protein regulation of actin cytoskeleton and hyphal polarity in Aspergillus nidulans . Eukaryot . Cell 7 , 141 – 153 ( 2008 ) . 121 . Pearson , C . L . , Xu , K . M . , Sharpless , K . E . & Harris , S . D . MesA , a novel fungal protein required for the stabilization of polarity axes in Aspergillus nidulans . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3658 – 3672 ( 2004 ) . 122 . Ren , B . et al . Genome‑wide location and function of DNA binding proteins . Science 290 , 2306 – 2309 ( 2000 ) . 123 . Yang , H . C . & Pon , L . A . Actin cable dynamics in budding yeast . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 751 – 756 ( 2002 ) . A seminal live - cell - imaging paper providing the first details of actin cable dynamics in S . cerevisiae . 124 . Weber , I . , Gruber , C . & Steinberg , G . A class‑V myosin required for mating , hyphal growth , and pathogenicity in the dimorphic plant pathogen Ustilago maydis . Plant Cell 15 , 2826 – 2842 ( 2003 ) . 125 . Woo , M . , Lee , K . & Song , K . MYO2 is not essential for viability , but is required for polarized growth and dimorphic switches in Candida albicans . FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 218 , 195 – 202 ( 2003 ) . 126 . Köhli , M . , Galati , V . , Boudier , K . , Roberson , R . W . & Philippsen , P . Growth‑speed‑correlated localization of exocyst and polarisome components in growth zones of Ashbya gossypii hyphal tips . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 3878 – 3889 ( 2008 ) . A comprehensive quantitative study showing that localization of the polarisome and exocyst is correlated with growth rate . 127 . Ayad‑Durieux , Y . , Knechtle , P . , Goff , S . , Dietrich , F . & Philippsen , P . A PAK‑like protein kinase is required for maturation of young hyphae and septation in the filamentous ascomycete Ashbya gossypii . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 4563 – 4575 ( 2000 ) . 128 . Knechtle , P . , Kaufmann , A . , Cavicchioli , D . & Philippsen , P . The Paxillin‑like protein AgPxl1 is required for apical branching and maximal hyphal growth in Ashbya gossypii . Fungal Genet . Biol . 45 , 829 – 838 ( 2008 ) . 129 . Araujo‑Palomares , C . L . , Riquelme , M . & Castro‑Longoria , E . The polarisome component SPA‑2 localizes at the apex of Neurospora crassa and partially colocalizes with the Spitzenkörper . Fungal Genet . Biol . 46 , 551 – 563 ( 2009 ) . 130 . Virag , A . & Harris , S . D . Functional characterization of Aspergillus nidulans homologues of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Spa2 and Bud6 . Eukaryot . Cell 5 , 881 – 895 ( 2006 ) . 131 . Jones , L . A . & Sudbery , P . E . Spitzenkörper , exocyst , and polarisome components in Candida albicans hyphae show different patterns of localization and have distinct dynamic properties . Eukaryot . Cell 9 , 1455 – 1465 ( 2010 ) . 132 . Pollard , T . D . Mechanics of cytokinesis in eukaryotes . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 50 – 56 ( 2010 ) . 133 . Seiler , S . & Justa‑Schuch , D . Conserved components , but distinct mechanisms for the placement and assembly of the cell division machinery in unicellular and filamentous ascomycetes . Mol . Microbiol . 78 , 1058 – 1076 ( 2010 ) . 134 . Si , H . , Justa‑Schuch , D . , Seiler , S . & Harris , S . D . Regulation of septum formation by the Bud3 – Rho4 GTPase module in Aspergillus nidulans . Genetics 185 , 165 – 176 ( 2010 ) . 135 . Wang , J . et al . The important role of actinin‑like protein ( AcnA ) in cytokinesis and apical dominance of hyphal cells in Aspergillus nidulans . Microbiology 155 , 2714 – 2725 ( 2009 ) . 136 . Lord , M . , Laves , E . & Pollard , T . D . Cytokinesis depends on the motor domains of myosin‑II in fission yeast but not in budding yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 5346 – 5355 ( 2005 ) . R E V I E W S 886 | DECEMBER 2011 | VOLUME 9 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 137 . Vavylonis , D . , Wu , J . Q . , Hao , S . , O’Shaughnessy , B . & Pollard , T . D . Assembly mechanism of the contractile ring for cytokinesis by fission yeast . Science 319 , 97 – 100 ( 2008 ) . 138 . Wu , J . Q . & Pollard , T . D . Counting cytokinesis proteins globally and locally in fission yeast . Science 310 , 310 – 314 ( 2005 ) . 139 . Pollard , T . D . et al . Assembly of the cytokinetic contractile ring from a broad band of nodes in fission yeast . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 391 – 402 ( 2006 ) . 140 . Wu , J . Q . , Coffman , V . C . , Nile , A . H . , Lee , I . J . & Liu , H . Y . Roles of formin nodes and myosin motor activity in Mid1p‑dependent contractile‑ring assembly during fission yeast cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 5195 – 5210 ( 2009 ) . 141 . Oliferenko , S . & Mishra , M . Cytokinesis : catch and drag . Curr . Biol . 18 , R247 – R250 ( 2008 ) . 142 . Kreis , T . E . , Winterhalter , K . H . & Birchmeier , W . In vivo distribution and turnover of fluorescently labeled actin microinjected into human fibroblasts . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 76 , 3814 – 3818 ( 1979 ) . 143 . Wehland , J . & Weber , K . Actin rearrangement in living cells revealed by microinjection of a fluorescent phalloidin derivative . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 24 , 176 – 183 ( 1981 ) . 144 . Cooper , J . A . Effects of cytochalasin and phalloidin on actin . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1473 – 1478 ( 1987 ) . 145 . Riedl , J . et al . Lifeact : a versatile marker to visualize F‑actin . Nature Methods 5 , 605 – 607 ( 2008 ) . An outstanding report showing that F - actin can be visualized in a range of cell types using a 17 amino acid peptide ( Lifeact ) without any deleterious effects . 146 . Riedl , J . et al . Lifeact mice for studying F‑actin dynamics . Nature Methods 7 , 168 – 169 ( 2010 ) . 147 . Ueda , T . et al . Application of Lifeact reveals F‑actin dynamics in Arabidopsis thaliana and the liverwort , Marchantia polymorpha . Plant Cell Physiol . 50 , 1041 – 1048 ( 2009 ) . 148 . Vidali , L . , Rounds , C . M . , Hepler , P . K . & Bezanilla , M . Lifeact‑mEGFP reveals a dynamic apical F‑actin network in tip growing plant cells . PLoS ONE 4 , e5744 ( 2009 ) . 149 . Girbardt , M . Der Spitzenkörper von Polysticus versicolor . Planta 50 , 47 – 59 ( 1957 ) . 150 . Verdin , J . , Bartnicki‑Garcia , S . & Riquelme , M . Functional stratification of the Spitzenkörper of Neurospora crassa . Mol . Microbiol . 74 , 1044 – 1053 ( 2009 ) . 151 . Bracker , C . E . , Murphy , D . J . & Lopez‑Franco , R . in Functional Imaging of Optical Manipulation of Living Cells . Proceedings of SPIE . , Vol . 2983 ( eds Farkas , D . L . & Tromberg , B . J . ) 67 – 80 ( International Society of Optical Engineering , Bellingham , Washington , 1997 ) . 152 . Bartnicki‑Garcia , S . , Hergert , F . & Gierz , G . Computer simulation of fungal morphogenesis and the mathematical basis for hyphal ( tip ) growth . Protoplasma 153 , 46 – 57 ( 1989 ) . 153 . Riquelme , M . , Reynaga‑Pena , C . G . , Gierz , G . & Bartnicki‑Garcia , S . What determines growth direction in fungal hyphae ? Fungal Genet . Biol . 24 , 101 – 109 ( 1998 ) . 154 . Steinberg , G . Hyphal growth : a tale of motors , lipids , and the Spitzenkörper . Eukaryot . Cell 6 , 351 – 360 ( 2007 ) . 155 . Freitag , M . , Hickey , P . C . , Raju , N . B . , Selker , E . U . & Read , N . D . GFP as a tool to analyze the organization , dynamics and function of nuclei and microtubules in Neurospora crassa . Fungal Genet . Biol . 41 , 897 – 910 ( 2004 ) . 156 . Takeshita , N . , Higashitsuji , Y . , Konzack , S . & Fischer , R . Apical sterol‑rich membranes are essential for localizing cell end markers that determine growth directionality in the filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 339 – 351 ( 2008 ) . 157 . Martin , S . G . , McDonald , W . H . , Yates , J . R . & Chang , F . Tea4p links microtubule plus ends with the formin for3p in the establishment of cell polarity . Dev . Cell 8 , 479 – 491 ( 2005 ) . Acknowledgements This work was supported by funding from the UK Biotechnological and Biological Sciences Research Council ( BBSRC ) ( grant BB / E010741 / 1 ) to N . D . R . , a Ph . D . Studentship from The University of Edinburgh to A . L . and a BBSRC Studentship to A . B . The authors also thank the Mexican National Council for Science and Technology ( CONACyT ) for a postdoctoral fellowship to A . L . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . FURTHER INFORMATION Nick D . Read’s homepage : http : / / fungalcell . org ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 9 | DECEMBER 2011 | 887 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved