[ 1 ] Proximity and distance in knowledge relations : From micro to structural considerations based on Territorial Knowledge Dynamics ( TKDs ) Joan Crespo * , Jérôme Vicente * † * LEREPS , University of Toulouse , Manufacture des Tabacs , allée de Brienne , 31000 Toulouse – France . † Toulouse Business School , Boulevard Lascrosse , 31000 Toulouse Abstract the striking variety of the knowledge processes that are described in EURODITE TKDs need to be classified according to the identification of a limited set of regional patterns that typify their features . Among these key parameters , the papers focuses on the balance and the trade - off between proximity and distant relations , with for our concern , a particular attention on knowledge relations . We propose in this contribution to investigate this entry through an original way consisting in combining together micro - motives for knowledge relations and structural properties of resulting knowledge networks , always paying attention to the balance between proximity and distance . From the extraction of information available in EURODITE case studies and the presentation of the methodology , we explore the micro - foundations of proximity and distance in knowledge relations according to the knowledge trade - off and the complex knowledge value chain that typify the modern knowledge process . From these micro - considerations , we infer a structural analysis of TKDs that furnishes significant patterns of their structuring . From these patterns , section 6 investigates policy implications , showing that surgical interventions on some particular missing links fit better with regional trajectories to the knowledge economy than the common view of “connecting people” policies . Key - words : Territorial Knowledge Dynamics , EURODITE , knowledge trade - off , knowledge value chain , structural analysis , regional policy . JEL classification : R . 12 , R . 58 . 1 . Introduction : Getting into Territorial Knowledge Dynamics ( TKDs ) for targeted regional policies The compilation of EURODITE case studies furnishes an extended view on the key parameters of the Territorial Knowledge Dynamics ( TKDs ) at work in each of the selected cases . Most of all , the striking variety of the knowledge processes that are described in these empirical studies need to be classified according to the identification of a limited set of regional patterns that typify their features and from which policy implications can be deduced . Among these key parameters , one retains our attention here , which is a traditional entry in economic geography : the balance and the trade - off between proximity and distant relations , with for our concern , a particular attention on knowledge relations . We propose in this contribution to investigate this entry through an original way consisting in combining together micro - motives for knowledge relations and structural properties of resulting knowledge networks , always paying attention to the balance between proximity and distance . Such an investigation should be suited for disentangling the high level of variety observed in the regional knowledge pathways , as well as it would be fitted to propose policy implications that go beyond the one best way of “connecting people” in cluster policies . The contribution is organized as follows . In section 2 , we discuss the theoretical background of this study , arguing that the trade - off between proximity and distance in knowledge relations has [ 2 ] to be analyzed in a coupling of micro - motives and structural features of regional systems , in order to bring out the critical parameters of TKDs . Section 3 presents the empirical material from EURODITE and the methodology , stressing on the way by which all these critical parameters are captured . Section 4 explores the micro - foundations of proximity and distance in knowledge relations according to the knowledge trade - off and the complex knowledge value chain that typify the modern knowledge process . Section 5 focuses on the structural level of analysis , bringing the micro - considerations into a knowledge network analysis that furnishes significant patterns of the structuring of TKDs . From these patterns , section 6 investigates policy implications , showing that surgical interventions on some particular missing links fit better with regional trajectories to the knowledge economy than the common view of “connecting people” policies . 2 . Theoretical background : Micro motives for proximity and distance in knowledge relations and structural properties of TKDs Physical distance is not the only criteria that influences organizations in their relational choice . In economic geography , the micro - motives for building proximity and distant relations has always been supported by others related criteria , such as transportation costs , access to markets and strategic interactions in the “new economic geography” ( Combes , Mayer , Thisse , 2008 ) , or organisational and institutional criteria in the “proximity - based approach of regional innovation systems” ( Rallet , Torre , 2005 ; Carrincazeaux , Lung , Vicente , 2008 ) . Here , considering knowledge processes being at the heart of analysis , proximity and distance will be related at the strict micro - level to the widely admitted knowledge trade - off between knowledge appropriability and accessibility ( Antonelli , 2006 ) . The way organizations manage this trade - off influences greatly their relational strategies and their preferences for proximity or distance in these relations . The multi - scalar properties of TKDs ( Crevoisier , Jeannerat , 2009 ) at the structural and meso - economic level can be understood considering the resulting network properties that rise from the aggregation of these relational strategies , for instance in terms of regional cohesiveness or opening . 2 . 1 . Knowledge trade - off and micro - motives for proximity and distance in knowledge relations The knowledge trade - off ( Antonelli , 2006 ) between appropriability and accessibility is one of the most important decision parameters on relations building , since it plays an essential role on the incentives for organizations to innovate ( Arrow , 1962 ) . Indeed , on one hand , organizations have to develop a high level of knowledge appropriation in order to extract a rent from their research investments and their knowledge outputs , and thus have to prevent as much as possible that knowledge spill towards neighbours , in particular when these later have a high absorptive capability and compete in close markets . On the other hand , organizations produce knowledge outputs through a more or less complex combination of knowledge inputs , so that they have to develop and maintain an appropriate level of external knowledge accessibility . So , in order to access missing pieces of knowledge , organizations need to build cooperative relations and connect to knowledge networks besides the traditional arm length relations on competitive markets ( Uzzi , 1997 ) . The knowledge trade - off is thus central in the decision process of organizations to locate units and build relations . Organizations use proximity and distance for that purpose under the admitted constraint that , ceteris paribus , the risks and opportunities of knowledge spilling over connected or unconnected neighbours are stronger with geographical proximity ( Audretsch , Feldman , 1996 ; Boschma , 2005 ) . But the way different organizations manage the same trade - off , and use proximity and distance , will differ according to a set of parameters related to the nature of the organizations , as well as the nature of the relational context in their social and cognitive aspects . On the one hand , the organizational ecology of knowledge processes has a high level of heterogeneity , so different types of organizations ( universities , start - ups , spin - offs , big firms , [ 3 ] agencies , associations , … ) react differently to the knowledge trade - off ( Owen - Smith and Powell , 2004 ; Alemida and Kogut , 1997 ; Dasgupta and David , 1994 ) . Moreover , organizations are also heterogeneous in their competences ( Nelson and Winter , 1982 ) . So , the consequence of the knowledge trade - off on the choice of proximate and distant knowledge relations will depend on the cognitive distance between their knowledge bases ( Breschi and Lissoni , 2001 ; Boschma , 2005 ) and their respective absorptive capacities ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ) , which influence the risk of unintended knowledge spillovers or potential misunderstandings ( Nooteboom , 2000 ) . On the other hand , the terms of the knowledge trade - off change with the context of interaction . Firstly , knowledge relations can be distinguished according to the phases of the knowledge value chain . The perception of risks and opportunities are not the same in exploration , examination or exploitation phases ( Cooke , 2006 ; Asheim et al . 2007 ) . Moreover , the strategic behaviour with respect knowledge relations of organizations changes with the market conditions that evolves through different market and technological phases . Either if we talk about of ears of ferment and incremental change ( Anderson and Tushman , 1990 ; Abernathy and Utterback , 1978 ) or early , growing and mass markets ( Rogers , 1962 ; Moore , 1991 , Audretsch and Feldman , 1996 ; Suire and Vicente , 2011 ) , the conclusion is the same : there is a change in the competitive conditions that needs a change in the behaviour of organizations . Finally , since knowledge relations are socially embedded ( Granovetter , 1985 ) , the perceptions of risks and opportunities that define the knowledge trade - off are affected by the degree of social proximity , based on trust , existing between the organizations ( Boschma , 2005 ) . Nature of the organizations ( the organizational ecology ) , the mutual competences ( the cognitive distance or the knowledge gap ) , nature of the knowledge relation ( the phases of the knowledge value chain and the market phase ) and the nature of the social relation ( social embeddedness ) are parameters of micro - decisions that interplay and imply a wide range of situations for proximate and distant relations . If geographical proximity and cooperation are most often presented as a critical point for the innovation - based regional policy , one has to take into consideration the ambivalent effects of geographical proximity on innovation and consider the knowledge trade - off and the related criteria as critical parameters . Understanding TKDs need to invest micro - motives for building knowledge relations and thus to capture all these criteria . 2 . 2 . Understanding TKDs from the structural properties of knowledge networks Considering these micro - motives , the multi - scalar hypothesis of TKDs can now find micro - foundations . Indeed , the resulting network structures one can observe from the aggregation of the relational strategies of organizations will exhibit structural properties that bring interesting information on the kind of knowledge dynamics at work in regions . Regional network analysis based on social network methodologies ( Borgatti , Everett , Freeman , 2002 ) are nowadays developed . They are suited for going beyond the study of places as regard the co - location process of organizations and their individual characteristics , by adding considerations on their relations and the resulting architecture of knowledge flows ( Boschma , Ter Wal , 2007 ; Vicente , Balland , Brossard , 2010 ) . Understanding TKDs as some particular architectures of knowledge flows between organizations , and investigating their multi - scalar properties , can be done by capturing the structural properties of knowledge networks . First of all , at the structural level , considering the relations and their motives identified at the micro - level , the aggregation of these relations can offer a first view of the degree of closure and openness of the structure of knowledge relations and highlight the way by which the local knowledge dynamics is embedded or not in a wider one . Secondly , the closure and openness on the regional innovation systems can be analysed according to the cognitive attributes of knowledge relations based on the phases of the knowledge value chain , in order to disentangle the recurrent question of proximity and distance along the diffusion process of innovations . Finally , the density and the connectivity of the relational structures can be suited for the understanding on the combinatorial knowledge process , as well as the structural influence some organizations can play in these structures . The organizational ecology and the variety of knowledge bases observed at the micro - level can be [ 4 ] turned into a structural analysis in order to focus on the identification of redundant or missing links , whatever they are local or not , that weaken the aggregate efficiency of the regional systems . If the relational density of regional systems of innovation are most often presented as a critical point for innovation - based regional policy , on has to go beyond this general idea by typifying the TKDs according to their particular structural forms and the links between these later and the nature of the local knowledge process at work , in particular concerning its embeddedness into the global knowledge value chain . Moreover , by identifying the architecture of knowledge flows that permits the combinatorial knowledge process to occur along the knowledge value chain , a knowledge network approach based on the analysis of structural properties is suited for the understanding of why some territories succeed in turning local research outputs and new ideas into tradable innovations , and some others not . 3 . Empirical material and methodology This section focuses now on the rich empirical material that crosses over the contributions of this special issue , with a very particular attention on the way information can be extracted for the specific purpose of this contribution above - discussed . Following Crevoisier and Jeannerat ( 2009 ; this issue ) , recall that TKDs as an empirical tool was defined as a “bounded system” in which “concrete knowledge transformations” can be captured at the interplay of “regions , sectors and firms dynamics” . All the case studies that constitute our empirical material have delineated particular systems around the identification of a place ( a region ) and a particular knowledge dynamics , each one attempting to identify a particular composite knowledge domain . Each case study is based on a set of common questions , even if methodologies for capturing information differ sometimes significantly , due to the heterogeneous disciplines and knowledge backgrounds of scholars involved in the program . Nevertheless , as displayed in the following table ( Table 1 ) , through an attentive lecture of each TKDs case study , a tractable set of information can be drawn by firstly removing some cases in which an insufficient level of information can be extracted according the critical parameters we have mentioned in the theoretical backgrounds . Secondly , by aggregating all the information the remaining case studies display on these critical parameters . In the following table , lines represent the selected cases , while columns represent the critical parameters at the micro and structural levels . 17 cases among the 23 initial cases have been selected , and the boxes represent the quality of data we can extract on each parameters , from [ 0 ] signifying no information , to [ + + + ] signifying high quality information on the parameter . From this appreciative lecture we can extract several relevant items for the study of the proximity / distance articulation in the TKDs . On the one hand , since this articulation depends on the way each organization deals with the knowledge trade - off , we identify a set of micro - motives factors . On the other hand , since the aggregation of the individual behaviour results in a complex structure , we identify emerging meso - structural features for the knowledge dynamics in each territory . However , due to the fact that the structural properties result from the individual aggregation they will not be independent : each of the micro - motive factors has its meso - structure counterpart . [ 5 ] Available Information in Case Studies Micro - parameters Structural - parameters Geographical Length Relation Contents Social Embeddedness Knowledge Bases Organizational ecology Outward - Inward Structure Leading Organizations Knowledge Value Chain Nature of the Knowledge Process Appreciation on Missing Links Laser Photonics ( Aquitaine ) + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + Pharma - Food ( Aquitaine ) + + + + 0 + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + Film ( Munich ) + + + + + + + + + + + 0 0 + Biotechnology ( Munich ) + + + + 0 0 + + + + 0 + 0 ICT ( Bratislava ) + + + + + + + + + + 0 + + + + + + GNSS ( Toulouse ) + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + Watchmaking ( Switzerland ) + + + + + + + + + 0 + + + + 0 Automotive Electronics ( Sout - East Saxony ) + + + + + + + + + + + + 0 Automotive ( Baden - Wuttenmberg ) + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + Car - Safety ( Västra - Götland ) + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + Nanotechnology ( Veneto ) + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + Food - Industry ( Bornholm ) + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + Serious Games ( West Midlands ) + 0 + + + + + + + + + + + + + + Biotechnology ( Wageningen ) + + + + 0 + + + + + + + + 0 + + + + Moving Media ( Skane ) + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + 0 Tourism ( North Jutland ) + + + + + 0 + + + + + + + + + + + + Automotive ( West Midlands ) + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + Table 1 : extracted information from EURODITE case studies TKDs are composed by more or less interacting heterogeneous organizations with different valuation of the knowledge trade - off . From the reports we extracted the information about the nature of the organizations involved in the TKD , distinguishing between three big categories , i . e . the organization ecology ( public research organizations and other institutions , spin - offs / start - ups and incumbents and big companies ) . We also obtained the leading position they may play to structure the whole TKD . Then , we expand the focus from the organization , to its relations . For each case study we collected the relevant information on the geographical length of actors’ knowledge relations . The aggregation of this information results on more or less outwards / inward network structures . The knowledge trade - off underlying the actors’ geography of relations is also dependent on their position in the knowledge sphere , their market position and the social embeddedness of the relations . In that respect , on the one hand , we collected information on the knowledge bases of the organizations . On the other hand we look for information about the content of the relations and their embeddedness in the social sphere . The aggregation of the individual knowledge exchanges with respect to their bases defines the nature of the knowledge process as cumulative or combinatorial , and the collecting of this information is suited to investigate the structural properties of connectivity . Additionally , since knowledge relations generate added value , they constitute a fundamental parameter in the competitive market strategy of firms for innovation and differentiation . To capture this we collect the information about the differentiation strategies adopted by the organizations either individually or collectively to construct a territorial differentiation and position it in the global knowledge dynamics . [ 6 ] Finally , with a structural aim we collected , in an appreciative manner , information on the evaluation of performance of each TKD . This basically refers to the missing organizations , missing links or limiting conditions identified by scholars on each case study . This appreciative valuation of the viability and performance of the local knowledge dynamics , when it will be confronted to the whole of designed structural properties of TKDs , will be suited to draw targeted policy implications . 4 . Micro considerations on proximity and distance in TKDs : Knowledge trade - off , combinatorial knowledge process and the organizational ecology this section focuses on the micro - motivations that drive the decisions of individual organizations when choosing the geographical length of their knowledge relations . The a priori advantages of cognitive external relations to access new pieces of knowledge are counterbalanced by the fact that they are not costless and riskless . On the one hand , the costs of searching , storming and monitoring implied in the construction and maintenance of a relation impose a limit on the number of relations . On the other hand , the risk of unintended knowledge spillovers , that grounds the cognitive trade - off , limits the range of selective partners . These limitations and advantages of external knowledge impose the need of being selective and strategic in the search for cognitive partners . Organizations manage these decisions depending on the nature of the involved partners and their competences , the nature of the knowledge relation and the nature of the social relation . All these parameters modify the benefits , costs and risks of knowledge relations and consequently influence their geographical proximity and distance . Organizations are heterogeneous . Besides the widely admitted differences in competences ( Nelson and Winter , 1982 ) , they differ also in the nature of the goals accepted as legitimate , the norms of behaviour face to knowledge disclosure and the features of the reward system ( Dasgupta and David , 1994 ; Owen - Smith and Powell , 2004 ) . These differences modify their perception about the benefit of accessibility and the risk of under - appropriability affecting the knowledge management of the trade - off . In this sense , Public Research Organizations ( PROs ) are less concerned by the risk of under - appropriability . In fact , besides research and formation , the diffusion of knowledge , i . e . increasing accessibility , has become their “third mission” , and their legitimacy and reputation depends on their ability to diffuse and promote knowledge . Consequence of this disclosure attitude Jaffe et al . ( 1993 ) found that new knowledge flew out of universities much more readily than it does from commercial organizations . But not all commercial organizations are alike . Incumbents and big firms are conditioned by their proximity to the market . In their research for competitiveness to ensure their market position and survival , the appropriability of knowledge becomes a key issue . The strategic value of knowledge as a source of differentiation through innovation imposes the need of preventing knowledge spillovers at some particular steps of the knowledge value chain . Consequently , incumbents and big firms use the absorption of small innovative firms and the accumulation of patents as a source of market competitiveness to reinforce their success . Contrary , start - ups and spin - offs , although of commercial nature , are more open than big firms to knowledge disclosure . Due to their origin and their commitment with intensive R & D activities , start - ups and spin - offs are usually in the halfway between the world of science and the world of industry . On the base of their large knowledge bases and open disclosure attitude they often act as bridges between cognitive distant organizations . Their small size reduces its organizational inertia and enhances their engagement in exploration and integration processes to find new spaces and opportunities ignored by lager firms more centred in market exploitation ( Almeida and Kogut , 1997 ) . Their patenting activity , rather than appropriability , seeks to signal partnership in order to overcome size constraints to reach the market . [ 7 ] In addition to their different objectives and norms of behaviour , organizations differ in their competences too ( Nelson and Winter , 1982 ) . Since knowledge relations are tied to gain access to missing pieces of knowledge the concerned organizations will have heterogeneous cognitive bases . The terms of the knowledge trade - off will depend on the knowledge gap between the organization , its geographical neighbours and its potential partners ( Noteboom , 2000 ) , as well as in the ability of the organizations to recognize the value of new external information , assimilate it and apply it , i . e . their absorptive capacity ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ) . If the risks of unintended knowledge spillovers grow with geographical proximity , they grow also with the proximity between knowledge backgrounds of organizations . So , when a knowledge relation between organizations with close cognitive bases is settled , this relation will fit better with geographical distance and temporary proximity ( Torre , 2008 ) . Contrary , when the knowledge bases of the organizations involved in a knowledge process are distant , the risks of misunderstandings increase ( Noteboom , 2000 ) , so geographical proximity is fitted to bridge the gap between the partners’ knowledge bases . In these cases the lower costs of collaboration and the higher efficiency of face - to - face contacts ( Storper and Venables , 2004 ) increase the chance of success . Similar effect has the strength of the absorptive capacities . The higher the absorptive capacities of partners are , the more difficult to control the flows of knowledge , and so the higher the risk of unintended spillovers . Increasing geographical distance lets take control over these flows and reduce the risks ( Audretsch and Feldman , 1996 ) . However , interactions do not happen in a vacuum space . The context of interaction influences the terms of the trade - off too . So , in setting proximate and distant relations actors do not only consider the nodes - features , but also the nature of the relation in itself and the surrounding circumstances . In this respect , a first relevant element to take into account , by its strategic implications for proximate or distant relations , is the phase of knowledge value chain in which the relation is inscribed . Based on Cooke ( 2005 ) and Asheim et al . ( 2007 ) three phases on the knowledge value chain are distinguished : i ) knowledge exploration , where fundamental research about technological feasibility is done , ii ) knowledge examination , where applied research for product development , standardisation and integration is done , and iii ) knowledge exploitation , consisting on knowledge activities of commercialization , diffusion and search of scale economies . As we shift from exploration to exploitation the market proximity increases . This raises the risks of unintended spillovers because , on the one hand , along the knowledge value chain the knowledge codification increases ( Antonelli , 2006 ) . On the other hand , the cognitive distance among the actors are reduced ( Menzel and Fornahl , 2010 ) . Both circumstances enhance knowledge transfers but make more difficult their control , i . e . grow the risk of unintended spillovers . Moreover , the growing proximity to the market along the knowledge value chain contributes to modify the attitude towards knowledge disclosure too . The high uncertainty in upstream phases ( Klepper , 1997 ) about the product or technology itself , about the potential uses and markets , and consequently about potential rents is progressively reduced as we go close to the market . This shift feeds the increase on appropriability concerns over the accessibility ones . Either the higher risk of unintended spillovers or the growing concerns on appropriability push towards long distance knowledge relations as we come to exploitation phases . However , this does not imply that exploration is local and exploitation is global . There are several counterbalancing forces that nuance this schema . On the one hand , the limits of the local availability of the required knowledge and the insertion of the relation in a larger technological domain play down the role of local knowledge relations in upstream phases . On the other hand , the need of local cooperative strategies among co - located direct competitors , and the need of frequent meeting for design and consultancy interactions nuance the role distant interactions in downstream phases . The above schema univocally linking geographical length of relations with knowledge phases is blurred up when we add some sociology considerations to our previous economic framework . Since organizations are composed by people , knowledge relations are socially embedded ( Granovetter , 1985 ) . Consequently , organizations in their construction of a relational set to [ 8 ] exchange knowledge will be influenced by the strength of the social relations of their members , i . e . the social proximity ( Boschma , 2005 ) . The existence of these social links ( kinship , friendship , experience or even reputation ) generates , in a dynamic process through time ( Dettman and Brenner , 2010 ) , different levels of trust that contributes to reduce the risk of opportunistic behaviours . Strong social proximity generates a lower risk of under - appropriation of rents . Organizations can focus on the other side of the trade - off : accessibility . Moreover , accessibility , to a certain threshold ( Uzzi , 1996 ) , is also favoured by strength of social links undergoing knowledge relations because the exchange of tacit knowledge is facilitated ( Maskell and Malmberg , 1999 ) , and the costs of searching , monitoring and coordination associated to relational construction and maintenance are reduced . There is nothing intrinsically geographical in social relations . Even if geographical proximity favours the strength of the social ties because enhances frequent meetings and trust construction ( Kraut et al . 1988 ) , they are not necessarily localized ( Boschma , 2005 ) because geographical proximity is only needed at the forming stage of trust ( Dettman and Brenner , 2010 ) and thereafter maintained with temporal meetings ( Torre , 2008 ) . Finally , competitive conditions and industrial organization change through time since markets and technologies are not static but evolve through several stages . Consequently , the market phase will influence the micro - considerations of actors when tying their proximate or distant knowledge relations . From the era of ferment to the era of incremental change ( Anderson , Tushman , 1990 ; Abernathy , Utterback , 1978 ) the uncertainty is reduced , the competition shifts from a “competition for the market” to a “competition in the market” . Process innovations take the lead over product ones . The remaining product innovations are focused on building complementary applications and reaching compatibility in order to increase the installed base . The second approach focuses on demand conditions . Based on the psychographic profile of adopters an Adoption Product Life Cycle of sigmoid form is designed ( Rogers , 2002 ; Moore 1991 ) , the early and mass markets can be distinguished . While in early markets what matters are the technological properties of the innovation , in mass markets concerns , productivity improvements , complementarity and compatibility are more important . This evolution of markets tends to change the terms of the knowledge trade - off . In early markets the high market uncertainty and the need to impose their variety over rival ones by increasing the installed base , constructing complementarity and quick problem solving give priority to accessibility . However , in mass markets , since it is “where the dollars are” ( p . 41 , Moore , 1991 ) , appropriability concerns rise . This move is reinforced by the shift towards price competition , the reduction of uncertainty and the search for new niche differentiated markets . 5 . Structural considerations on TKDs : understanding multi - scalar localized knowledge processes from structural properties of knowledge networks Proximity and distance in knowledge relations can be appreciated at the micro - level as well as the structural level , highlighting thereby the variety of the forms of collective organization of TKDs . Defined as peculiar ecologies of interacting organizations , the structural properties of TKDs result from the complex aggregation of the relational strategies of the organizations that are located in the considered area , but also considering their relations with others that are located in other places . Indeed , by discriminating proximate and distant knowledge relations , TKDs can be analyzed as particular knowledge networks that are embedded , or not , in a wider geographical structure of knowledge interactions ( Owen - Smith , Powell , 2004 ; Vicente , Balland , Brossard , 2010 ) . Combining some basic foundations of structural analysis of knowledge networks and the empirical materials abstracted in table 1 , the following results are based in a 3 - steps structural analysis . Firstly , from the information available in case studies , the multi - scalar features of TKD are defined according to the respective densities of proximate and distant knowledge relations [ 9 ] in order to have a first overview of the openness or closure of each TKD as wall as their degree of embeddedness in the considered knowledge domain . Secondly , coupling the first result to the knowledge value chain of the knowledge process and the knowledge bases of the organizations that are involved in TKDs , one can rely the openness and closure of TKDs to the peculiar stages of the knowledge dynamics . Finally , going beyond density by investigating the connectivity of networks and the influence some organizations plays for connecting disconnected organizations , TKDs can be typified according to the way they succeed or not in turning cumulative knowledge processes into combinatorial ones . 5 . 1 . Multi - scalar TKDs , structure and geography Literature acknowledges that locally clustered relations favours innovation in such a way that clusters are often been viewed as a panacea of regional development in the knowledge society ( Martin , Sunley , 2003 ) . This standard thinking has to be taken with caution if we keep in mind that organizations have to deal with knowledge accessibility and knowledge appropriation , i . e between a share of risks and a share of opportunities , and that geographical proximity influences strongly the way with which organizations manage this trade - off . Moreover , if we consider that building knowledge relations engenders economic costs , such as monitoring costs for instance , all relations are not possible , whether they are at proximity or at distance . So between a fully connected structure and a highly non - connected structure , intermediate configurations can support a high level of knowledge circulation so that density of knowledge interactions is at least all the more important than connectivity of the structure . Figure 1 – Multi - scalar TKDs , structural and geographical proporties The combination of proximity and distance in knowledge relations as a mark up of the multi - scalar feature of TKDs can thus be appreciated focusing on the different type of structures that can be drawn considered a fixed amount of knowledge relations . Figure 1 summarizes this idea by displaying 3 kinds of structures composed by 14 nodes ( organizations ) and 10 ties ( knowledge relations ) . At the left of the table , the “random” network represents a relational structure in which proximity and distant knowledge relations are randomly distributed . In this structure , knowledge comes in and comes out the place easily but a lack of local cohesiveness or cliquishness impedes the knowledge combination process to occur . Empirical works have previously illustrated this structure that has been typified by Markusen ( 1996 ) as Satellite Platforms . The centre of the table displays the opposite case of structure based this time of a pure local cohesive structure , i . e all the knowledge relations are absorbed by the local organizations . This structure exhibits a strong cohesiveness that supports a high level of knowledge circulation in The “closed” network - Excess of local density and cohesiveness - Redundancies in knowledge flows - Closure from outward knowledge flows The “random” network - lack of local cohesiveness - Weak local density and disconnected local structure The “cluster / pipelines” network - Geographical gatekeeper - Access to outward knowledge flows - Efficient local structure [ 10 ] the area and many opportunities of knowledge combinations . Nevertheless , redundant ties are observable and this strong relational density is obtained at the expense of the knowledge diffusion and accessibility outside the region . This type of structure is typical of many marshallian districts ( Markusen , 1996 ) within which the local cliquishness resulting from a high density of local relations , trust and social embeddedness , gives a high level of flexibility to the knowledge production system . But the aggregate performance of these structures can be weakened by the absence of structural bridges and geographical gatekeepers ( Burt , 1992 , Rychen , Zimmermann , 2008 ) , when innovations and new knowledge have to be turned into dominant designs and mass - markets products . Following these two extreme cases of “random” and “closed” network , the aggregate performance of each structure can be increased by adding missing relations . For the former , adding local relations could increase the cohesiveness of the local structure , while for the latter , adding distant relations could reinforce the ability of its collective organization to diffuse and access to outward knowledge . Nevertheless , recall that forming a tie engenders costs so that the increase of aggregate performance is not finally clear . The figure at the right of the table displays a network in which the local cohesiveness is maintained and knowledge can flow through all the organizations without adding and removing ties . Indeed , by removing 4 local ties and replacing them by 4 distant relations , the “cluster / pipelines” network is obtained . Now , on one hand , the split in local knowledge relations observed in the “random” network is repaired and the excess of redundancies in local knowledge flows in the “closed” network is reduced . On the other hand , the number of distant knowledge relations is lightly reduced compared to the “random” network , but these relations are insured by the so - called “geographical gatekeepers” ( Gould , Fernandez , 1989 ; Rychen , Zimmermann , 2008 ) , i . e the local organization that connect disconnected insiders and outsiders and through which the knowledge is coming in and coming out , due their betweenness centrality in the local network . Such a structure is thus particularly appropriate for an efficient flowing of knowledge with a minimal level of relations and a minimal level of relational costs . It features the knowledge structures that combine proximity and distance in the innovation process and permits to the regional system to be embedded in wider networks and knowledge spaces . Figure 2 This variety of knowledge structures that typifies TKDs can be captu and a targeted extraction of information . Figure 2 relates to this work . Here we consider only the structural dimensions as a first step , keeping the relations between structural properties and cognitive ones for the next step . Among the whole of case studies , one in particular appears as a pure case of dispersed knowledge network , while some others can de considered as border cases . The TKD of Bratislava focused on the ICT sector is typical of a highly dispersed network suppor weak level of local cohesiveness but a high level of dispersed relations mainly supported by the corporate structure of organizations . Following Rehak ( 2009 ) , MNEs in the ICT sector is mainly distributed via hiera MNEs thus cooperate with the corporate headquarters , or other branches predominantly in the metropolitan regions ( Prague , London , The Hague , San Francisco , etc . ) ” relations exists but are mainly supported by market relations , such as consultancy activities and local labor market opportunities . The TKD of Swiss watch industry displays also structural features of a dispersed knowledge network , but with to some extent different organization logics . Indeed , Following Jeannerat , Kebir and Crevoisier ( 2009 ) , if local interactions are based on a very long and cumulative experience of cooperation in the technical segment of watchmaking , the current dynamics is also highly structured by distant in a combinatorial process between watch industry and world motorsport or fashion and design , even if local intermediaries as KIBS are required for the integration of knowledge . The TKDs of biotech in Mu [ 11 ] Figure 2 – openness and closure of TKDs This variety of knowledge structures that typifies TKDs can be captured by an attentive lecture and a targeted extraction of information . Figure 2 relates to this work . Here we consider only the structural dimensions as a first step , keeping the relations between structural properties and Among the whole of case studies , one in particular appears as a pure case of dispersed knowledge network , while some others can de considered as border cases . The TKD of Bratislava focused on the ICT sector is typical of a highly dispersed network suppor weak level of local cohesiveness but a high level of dispersed relations mainly supported by the corporate structure of organizations . Following Rehak ( 2009 ) , “knowledge in the dynamics within MNEs in the ICT sector is mainly distributed via hierarchical inter - firm linkages . Local branches of MNEs thus cooperate with the corporate headquarters , or other branches predominantly in the metropolitan regions ( Prague , London , The Hague , San Francisco , etc . ) ” ( p . 23 ) . Local knowledge re mainly supported by market relations , such as consultancy activities and local labor market opportunities . The TKD of Swiss watch industry displays also structural features of a dispersed knowledge network , but with to some extent different organization logics . Indeed , Following Jeannerat , Kebir and Crevoisier ( 2009 ) , if local interactions are based on a very long and cumulative experience of cooperation in the technical segment of watchmaking , the current dynamics is also highly structured by distant knowledge interactions in a combinatorial process between watch industry and world - wide luxury industry , such as motorsport or fashion and design , even if local intermediaries as KIBS are required for the integration of knowledge . The TKDs of biotech in Munich also displays features of a dispersed red by an attentive lecture and a targeted extraction of information . Figure 2 relates to this work . Here we consider only the structural dimensions as a first step , keeping the relations between structural properties and Among the whole of case studies , one in particular appears as a pure case of dispersed knowledge network , while some others can de considered as border cases . The TKD of Bratislava focused on the ICT sector is typical of a highly dispersed network supported by a weak level of local cohesiveness but a high level of dispersed relations mainly supported by the “knowledge in the dynamics within firm linkages . Local branches of MNEs thus cooperate with the corporate headquarters , or other branches predominantly in the ( p . 23 ) . Local knowledge re mainly supported by market relations , such as consultancy activities and local labor market opportunities . The TKD of Swiss watch industry displays also structural features of a dispersed knowledge network , but with to some extent different organizational logics . Indeed , Following Jeannerat , Kebir and Crevoisier ( 2009 ) , if local interactions are based on a very long and cumulative experience of cooperation in the technical segment of knowledge interactions wide luxury industry , such as motorsport or fashion and design , even if local intermediaries as KIBS are required for the nich also displays features of a dispersed [ 12 ] network . Kaiser , Liecke and Kripp ( 2009 ) stress several times in their report how Munich biotech cluster is far from the literature on biotech clusters , since their qualitative as well as quantitative analysis show that along the knowledge value chain the distant relations , highly based on licensing agreements , are predominantly happening on a global level : “By mapping the firms relations , we examined and found out that by far more collaborations on the international than on the national of cluster - level were forged” ( p . 7 ) . Nevertheless , the Munich biotech cluster cannot be sorted as a pure dispersed and random network , since , even if most of the young firms build early global relations , this pattern does not hide the fact that these firms have been created through university local spinoffs , which thus can be appreciated as a form of local knowledge flows . Some of the other TKDS clearly display at the strict structural level the typical properties of embedded knowledge networks . Among them , three can be briefly recalled as representative examples of the structure and the geographical extent of the knowledge flows in knowledge domains . In these three case studies , a quantitative measure of proximate and distant knowledge relations has been attempted and thus gives interesting indications of the forms of the embedded structures of knowledge interactions . In the photonic and laser TKD in Aquitaine , as well as in the case of Vastra Götland for car safety and Midi - Pyrenees for GNSS ( Global Navigation Satellite Systems ) , the structure of knowledge interactions mixes a high level of local cohesiveness with some well - identified strategic and important distant knowledge interactions . These embedded knowledge dynamics are supported by close structures of interactions , nevertheless they differ according to the purpose - and the key organizations – of the embedding process . In the case of photonics and laser , the highly cohesive structure of knowledge interactions is typified by an ecosystem of SMEs , spin offs and local research teams , while distant knowledge interactions are supported by the belonging of these later to a global scientific network of public research organizations dedicated to this knowledge domain . According to Carrincazeaux and Gaschet ( 2009 ) , proximate relations in this TKD are more the result of a social embeddedness of interactions than the traditional result of the tacit dimension of knowledge . And distant relations refer more to the organizational dimension of the French academic research than the consequence of the mobility of codified knowledge . In the case of the GNSS knowledge dynamics in Midi - Pyrenees , Vicente and Balland ( 2009 ) observed the same cohesive structure of knowledge interactions between SMEs , spin - offs and two main big companies , concluding on the existence of a local GNSS cluster . But in this case , the way by which this cluster is embedded in the whole of the European GNSS technological field goes through the particular gatekeeper role of the local big companies , that are also connected to other big companies in Europe for the purpose of technological integration and standardization in satellite systems . Anders Larsson ( 2009 ) in the case of active safety systems in Värga also observed this local cohesiveness between science , SMEs and Swedish automotive companies , and described the process of embeddedness of the local structure in the world - wide automotive industry , using the corporate structure in which local companies are involved . All the embedded TKDs mix this high level of cohesiveness with a minimal and strategic amount of branching with organizations outside the region , in order to absorb knowledge from outside , or diffuse and value knowledge outside , or cooperate with “outsiders” in order to define dominant design . Finally , other TKDs display the features of closed knowledge networks , according to different logics and purposes . For instance , the TKD of film in Munich is described by Kaiser , Liecke and Kripp ( 2009 ) as a very “inward looking” relational structure between the players of the feature films value chain , and the industrial organization between production , special effects , funding and distribution is highly concentrated in the cluster . According to them , “all other hypothesis pointing to the importance of distant learning and extra - regional relationships can not be supported” ( p . 37 ) . Tourism TKD in North Jutland and Food TKD in Bornholm display the main features , with a dense and cohesive structure of local relations in the knowledge value chain , even if a few set of outward knowledge relations are developed , for marketing mainly . 5 . 2 . Proximity and distance along the knowledge value chain Using now the information on the organizational ecology , the knowledge nature of the knowledge process extracted from all the case studies , we try now to combine the densities of proximate and distant knowledge relations and the main phase of the knowledge value chain in which the ecosystem previous one and consists in bracketing the observed heterogeneity of TKDs according to the set of critical parameters and micro previous sections . Figure 3 – TKDs and the nature of knowledge processes In figure 3 , the science - pushed TKDs supported by analytic and synthetic knowledge that are favored by a dense system of local knowledge relations , even if for most of these TKDs , this dominant phase can be also supported by global networks and pipelines in the scientific sphere . In most of cases , the knowledge process is highly combinatorial so that proximity knowledge relations increase the mutual understanding between cognitively distant organizations . This combinatorial process give r general to knowledge outputs that are in a very early phase of tradability , and concerns local experimentation , prototype or beta technologies or paradigms and are far from the mass market . is typical of a science - pushed TKD ( Carrincazeaux , Gaschet , 2009 ) , since knowledge relations are mainly concentrated in exploration and examination phases , and a wide range of players are public research organizations and rese on analytical capabilities and knowledge relations are dedicated both on the photonics [ 13 ] Proximity and distance along the knowledge value chain Using now the information on the organizational ecology , the knowledge value chain and the nature of the knowledge process extracted from all the case studies , we try now to combine the densities of proximate and distant knowledge relations and the main phase of the knowledge value chain in which the ecosystems of organizations is involved . The purpose is the same as the previous one and consists in bracketing the observed heterogeneity of TKDs according to the set and micro - motives for building knowledge relations discusses in the TKDs and the nature of knowledge processes pushed TKDs are featured by a dominant phase of exploration mainly supported by analytic and synthetic knowledge that are favored by a dense system of local knowledge relations , even if for most of these TKDs , this dominant phase can be also supported rks and pipelines in the scientific sphere . In most of cases , the knowledge process is highly combinatorial so that proximity knowledge relations increase the mutual understanding between cognitively distant organizations . This combinatorial process give r general to knowledge outputs that are in a very early phase of tradability , and concerns local experimentation , prototype or beta - test . Science - pushed TKDs focus generally on disruptive technologies or paradigms and are far from the mass market . The case of photonic in Bordeaux pushed TKD ( Carrincazeaux , Gaschet , 2009 ) , since knowledge relations are mainly concentrated in exploration and examination phases , and a wide range of players are public research organizations and research spin - offs . The knowledge dynamics is mainly focused on analytical capabilities and knowledge relations are dedicated both on the photonics value chain and the nature of the knowledge process extracted from all the case studies , we try now to combine the densities of proximate and distant knowledge relations and the main phase of the knowledge ons is involved . The purpose is the same as the previous one and consists in bracketing the observed heterogeneity of TKDs according to the set motives for building knowledge relations discusses in the are featured by a dominant phase of exploration mainly supported by analytic and synthetic knowledge that are favored by a dense system of local knowledge relations , even if for most of these TKDs , this dominant phase can be also supported rks and pipelines in the scientific sphere . In most of cases , the knowledge process is highly combinatorial so that proximity knowledge relations increase the mutual understanding between cognitively distant organizations . This combinatorial process give rise in general to knowledge outputs that are in a very early phase of tradability , and concerns local pushed TKDs focus generally on disruptive case of photonic in Bordeaux pushed TKD ( Carrincazeaux , Gaschet , 2009 ) , since knowledge relations are mainly concentrated in exploration and examination phases , and a wide range of players are offs . The knowledge dynamics is mainly focused on analytical capabilities and knowledge relations are dedicated both on the photonics [ 14 ] fundamentals and convergence with other scientific fields such as optic and medical sciences . If purely scientific relations into the photonic field are partly embedded in a geographically large community or research , scientific relations dedicated to convergence between photonics and other scientific fields are highly concentrated in the region and mainly supported by formal as well as social networks - based relations between public research organizations . Examination phase is mainly supported by local spin - offs , coming more from research than industry , and big companies are not really involved in the knowledge process . The TKDs is in the very upstream phase of early market and experimentation and beta - test prevail on tradable applications . The case of GNSS ( Navigation satellite systems ) un Toulouse is close to the previous one ( Vicente , Balland , 2009 ) . The knowledge process in GNSS is supported by local knowledge relations in the exploration phase , while examination and integration phases are supported both by local relations when the purpose is to integer navigation solutions in existing technological systems such transport , telecommunications or security ; and global relations when the purpose is to insure interoperability and compatibility between the main European players of the Satellite industry . Navigation systems are between early and mass market so that big companies are involved in the TKDs and the exploitation phase on the worldwide market has started in parallel to the reinforcement of the cohesive system of knowledge relations in the exploration phase . In engineering - pushed TKDs , examination process and knowledge integration between existing technologies and knowledge prevail . Exploitation are reachable for these TKDs and local knowledge relations in the examination and engineering processes coexist with global ones for knowledge tradability . Engineering - pushed TKDs concerns generally mass markets that evolve more through incremental innovations than through disruptive ones . The two cases of automotive TKDs of Lower East Saxony ( Blöcker , Jürgens , 2009 ) and Baden Wurttemberg ( Strambach , Stockkhorst , Sandmüller , 2009 ) are typical of engineering - pushed TKDs . Integration between automotive and electronic devices and software are supported by a cohesive local structure of knowledge relations between players of these separated technological fields . SMEs of the later find new markets opportunities for their products while automotive companies integrate new technologies in their products that can be diffused along their corporate structure in worldwide markets . In particular in the case of automotive electronics in Lower East Saxony , geographical proximity matters for the knowledge transfer from aeronautic electronics to automotive embedded systems , while the international corporate structure of VW as well as the “Automotive Electronics Alliance” supported by the German Federal Government contribute through corporate integration and cooperative agreements to the worldwide exploitation of German quality and innovation standards in the automotive industry . Market - pushed TKDs are concerned by mature technologies and knowledge based on well and large established standards . Organizations in these TKDs are generally embedded in larger networks and the combinatorial process does not occur or at least is integrated within the corporate structure of multi - plants organizations . These TKDs are featured by a dominant exploitation phase and market relations prevail . The ICT case of Bratislava fits with the type TKDs ( Rehak , 2009 ) . Most of the companies located in the area are plants of worldwide software companies and are dedicated to the exploitation of their knowledge in the European market . Research and exploitation are mainly realized within the corporate structure . Relations with local universities and schools are mainly dedicated to training and labor market . In the leisure and symbol - pushed TKDs , exploitation phases prevail as in the market - pushed TKDs but with a high concentration of local relations due to the specific resources that are exploited . The symbolic dimensions of the knowledge outputs are built and preserved by local , social and economic arrangements and partnerships . Combinatorial processes , when they occur , concern exploitation phases , marketing and quality . The Bornholm TKDs on regional food corresponds to this kind of TKDs ( Manniche , Larsen , Petersen , 2009 ) . Even if the knowledge dynamics is market - pushed , the niche strategy leads to a very cohesive structure of local relations between complementary organizations ( food , tourism , restaurant , art , marketing and media ) . Knowledge [ 15 ] relations are mainly dedicated to symbolic knowledge and combine very local knowledge relations in integration phase of the capabilities of each sectors with relations in the Danish perimeter in the phase of exploitation . A close pattern is observed in the feature films TKD of Munich ( Kaiser , Liecke and Kripp , 2009 ) , in which the niche market strategy of the main organization implies a region - based relational system in the exploitation phase . This local cohesiveness is a source of market but also cultural differentiations , since “the TKD displays an exploitation of market niches within the domestic sphere of feature films where Hollywood productions generate a much lower stress of competition” ( p . 21 ) . 5 . 3 . Structural properties of TKDs and the viability of combinatorial knowledge processes : in search for connectivity TKDs are featured by a relational structure and an institutional demography so that the relational structure of each TKDs is composed by organizations that differ according to their peculiar knowledge and structural profiles . As shown in the micro - motives for forming knowledge relations , big companies , SMEs or public research organizations , but also regulation agencies , KIBS , … develop different knowledge and relational strategies , do not face the same constraints in the knowledge trade - off , and are not involved in a same way along the knowledge value chain . The viability of the TKDs does not depend only on the density of proximity and distant knowledge relations , but also on the role of peculiar relations ( sometimes few ) that support both the combinatorial knowledge process and the links between the phases of the knowledge value chain . As a consequence , some particular organizations will play a critical role in the connectivity of the knowledge network . The lecture of reports shows that combinatorial knowledge processes are sometimes potential and sometimes effective . The most surprising is that the effectiveness of the combinatorial process does not depend necessarily of the density of local knowledge relations , but on the particular role of a limited number of organizations and relations that connect or not disconnected groups of organizations . Connectivity , i . e the ability of the relational structure to render reachable for an agent any other agents in the structure , is thus at least as critical as the density . Most of all , as suggested is figure 4 , network connectivity does not necessarily decrease with density . Figure 4 – Knowledge networks density and connectivity If we remind that forming a relation favors knowledge accessibility as the same time as it increases the risks of knowledge under appropriation , a fully connected regional network , as displayed in the left box of the figure , could weaken the aggregate performance , except if we The fully connected network n ( n - 1 ) / 2 = 21 undirected ties . Knowledge flows through many pathways . Density as well as connectivity are high but with a high level of relational costs and relational redondancies . The “efficient” network 7 undirected ties Each organization is reachable through a knowledge pathway with a minimal amount of “relational costs” . One node is more influent than the others since it connects disconnected organizations The disconnected network 9 undirected ties . Intermediate level of relational density but weak level of connectivity since all the nodes are not reachable by the others consider that the benefits of knowledge accessibility is greater than the risks of unintended knowledge spillovers for all the organizations number of partners that mix a sufficient level of knowledge accessibility that minimize these costs . Most of time , as discussed in the section on micro knowledge relations , the selection process of partners is based on past relations , the assessment of the satisfaction these relations previously brought and the resulting that reduce these costs . Finally , following Burt’s researches on network aggregate efficiency ( Burt , 1992 ) , a fully connected network is far to be an efficient structure since it implies an excess of redundancies of knowledge flows . bilateral relations between organizations , knowledge does not flow only through direct ties between them , but through different pathways since multilateral cohesive structures of relations emerge and knowledge waters the structure through different channels ( Owen 2004 ) . Thus , network density has to be fixed at an intermediate level of connections for which each organization can reach another one at random through a not to hig as displayed in the right box of the figure . exhibit a high level of strategic influence for the organizations that form these relations , when removing them implies a split in the whole of the networ combinatorial knowledge process . the “efficient network” display a better level of connectivity for a lower density than the “disconnected network” . Thus , if densit connectivity also plays a critical role , in particular for combin some “missing links” can have a higher importance than others in the territorial knowledge dynamics Using this critical parameter of connectivity in TKDs , the appreciative valuation of the viability and performance of TKDs extracted from the reports ( when information is available ( see table 1 ) ) , we focus on the analysis of the role some organizations play in con disconnected organizations , in order to favor the combinatorial knowledge process as well as the diffusion and promotion of knowledge along the phases of the knowledge value chain . In doing that , the identification or the lack of few but c particular gatekeepers and interfaces ( Rychen , Zimmermann , 2008 ) , will help us to have a better understanding of why some TKDs succeed while some others exhibit more difficulties to insure their viability . Figure 5 – Knowledge gatekeepers and interfaces in TKDs An attentive lecture of WP5 reports shows clearly that these gatekeepers and knowledge interfaces can be ranked according to three categories organizations that bridge cumulative knowledge dynamics and turn them into combinatorial ones along the knowledge value chain federative research organizations , play generally a connecting role for TKDs involved in science [ 16 ] owledge accessibility is greater than the risks of unintended knowledge spillovers for all the organizations of the network . Organizations have to select a number of partners that mix a sufficient level of knowledge accessibility that minimize these as discussed in the section on micro - motives for proximate and distant the selection process of partners is based on past relations , the assessment of the satisfaction these relations previously brought and the resulting trust between partners that reduce these costs . Finally , following Burt’s researches on network aggregate efficiency ( Burt , 1992 ) , a fully connected network is far to be an efficient structure since it implies an excess of redundancies of knowledge flows . Indeed , in a structural approach that aggregates bilateral relations between organizations , knowledge does not flow only through direct ties between them , but through different pathways since multilateral cohesive structures of relations dge waters the structure through different channels ( Owen - Smith , Powell , 2004 ) . Thus , network density has to be fixed at an intermediate level of connections for which each organization can reach another one at random through a not to high number of pathwa as displayed in the right box of the figure . In this type of structures , particular relations can exhibit a high level of strategic influence for the organizations that form these relations , when removing them implies a split in the whole of the network , and thus a failure in the combinatorial knowledge process . Indeed , if we move from the right to the centre of the figure , the “efficient network” display a better level of connectivity for a lower density than the “disconnected network” . Thus , if density in knowledge relations matters for innovation , connectivity also plays a critical role , in particular for combinatorial knowledge processes , and some “missing links” can have a higher importance than others in the territorial knowledge is critical parameter of connectivity in TKDs , the appreciative valuation of the viability and performance of TKDs extracted from the reports ( when information is available ( see table the analysis of the role some organizations play in connecting ( or not ) in order to favor the combinatorial knowledge process as well as the diffusion and promotion of knowledge along the phases of the knowledge value chain . In doing that , the identification or the lack of few but critical organizations , performing as particular gatekeepers and interfaces ( Rychen , Zimmermann , 2008 ) , will help us to have a better understanding of why some TKDs succeed while some others exhibit more difficulties to insure Knowledge gatekeepers and interfaces in TKDs An attentive lecture of WP5 reports shows clearly that these gatekeepers and knowledge interfaces can be ranked according to three categories ( see figure 5 ) , each ones involving umulative knowledge dynamics and turn them into combinatorial along the knowledge value chain . Firstly , public research organizations , and most of time derative research organizations , play generally a connecting role for TKDs involved in science owledge accessibility is greater than the risks of unintended rganizations have to select a number of partners that mix a sufficient level of knowledge accessibility that minimize these motives for proximate and distant the selection process of partners is based on past relations , the assessment trust between partners that reduce these costs . Finally , following Burt’s researches on network aggregate efficiency ( Burt , 1992 ) , a fully connected network is far to be an efficient structure since it implies an Indeed , in a structural approach that aggregates bilateral relations between organizations , knowledge does not flow only through direct ties between them , but through different pathways since multilateral cohesive structures of relations Smith , Powell , 2004 ) . Thus , network density has to be fixed at an intermediate level of connections for which h number of pathways , In this type of structures , particular relations can exhibit a high level of strategic influence for the organizations that form these relations , when k , and thus a failure in the Indeed , if we move from the right to the centre of the figure , the “efficient network” display a better level of connectivity for a lower density than the y in knowledge relations matters for innovation , atorial knowledge processes , and some “missing links” can have a higher importance than others in the territorial knowledge is critical parameter of connectivity in TKDs , the appreciative valuation of the viability and performance of TKDs extracted from the reports ( when information is available ( see table necting ( or not ) in order to favor the combinatorial knowledge process as well as the diffusion and promotion of knowledge along the phases of the knowledge value chain . In ritical organizations , performing as particular gatekeepers and interfaces ( Rychen , Zimmermann , 2008 ) , will help us to have a better understanding of why some TKDs succeed while some others exhibit more difficulties to insure An attentive lecture of WP5 reports shows clearly that these gatekeepers and knowledge , each ones involving umulative knowledge dynamics and turn them into combinatorial , and most of time derative research organizations , play generally a connecting role for TKDs involved in science - pushed knowledge dynamics and early markets organizations” than firms ( Owen knowledge promotion and valuation , dynamics and engender new phases of combinatorial knowledge exploration . Secondly , Knowledge Intensive Business Services ( KIBS ) play a similar role , in particular for TKDs which are involved in engineering phases interface of technologies and markets , due to the composite nature of their knowledge and their ability to provide solutions for knowledge integration in regional innovation systems ( Strambach , 2008 ) . Thirdly , standardization or normalization agencies , of organizations in TKDs , play also a salient a combinatorial knowledge processes . reduce uncertainty on new market development ( David , 1987 ; Swann , 2000 ) . The more organizations , and companies in particular , face norms and standards , the more they invest in these emerging markets and develop relations to combine their knowledge with the kno coming from other domains around new consumers standards . So the interface role of standardization agencies , at proximity or distance , is crucial in the knowledge dynamic turn a very early market into a mass Figure 6 highlights these connectivity considerations horizontal axis displays the sequences of the knowledge value chain of the previous figure , while the vertical axis represents the existence or not of the gatekeepers and interfaces that connec ( or not ) disconnected organizations , groups of organizations and pools of knowledge . Figure 6 – TKDs knowledge network connectivity and combinatorial knowledge processes [ 17 ] shed knowledge dynamics and early markets . Public research organizations organizations” than firms ( Owen - Smith , Powell , 2004 ) , and thus , due to their model of knowledge promotion and valuation , play a critical role in connecting disconnected k dynamics and engender new phases of combinatorial knowledge exploration . Secondly , Knowledge Intensive Business Services ( KIBS ) play a similar role , in particular for TKDs which are involved in engineering phases and for which KIBS can play a betweenness role at the interface of technologies and markets , due to the composite nature of their knowledge and their ability to provide solutions for knowledge integration in regional innovation systems standardization or normalization agencies , an often neglected type s , play also a salient and critical role in the development of combinatorial knowledge processes . As a matter of fact , standardization and normalization market development ( David , 1987 ; Swann , 2000 ) . The more organizations , and companies in particular , face norms and standards , the more they invest in these emerging markets and develop relations to combine their knowledge with the kno coming from other domains around new consumers standards . So the interface role of standardization agencies , at proximity or distance , is crucial in the knowledge dynamic into a mass - market . connectivity considerations for the selected case studies horizontal axis displays the sequences of the knowledge value chain of the previous figure , while the vertical axis represents the existence or not of the gatekeepers and interfaces that connec ( or not ) disconnected organizations , groups of organizations and pools of knowledge . TKDs knowledge network connectivity and combinatorial knowledge processes . Public research organizations are “leakier Smith , Powell , 2004 ) , and thus , due to their model of play a critical role in connecting disconnected knowledge dynamics and engender new phases of combinatorial knowledge exploration . Secondly , Knowledge Intensive Business Services ( KIBS ) play a similar role , in particular for TKDs which eenness role at the interface of technologies and markets , due to the composite nature of their knowledge and their ability to provide solutions for knowledge integration in regional innovation systems an often neglected type critical role in the development of regional As a matter of fact , standardization and normalization market development ( David , 1987 ; Swann , 2000 ) . The more organizations , and companies in particular , face norms and standards , the more they invest in these emerging markets and develop relations to combine their knowledge with the knowledge coming from other domains around new consumers standards . So the interface role of standardization agencies , at proximity or distance , is crucial in the knowledge dynamics that for the selected case studies . The horizontal axis displays the sequences of the knowledge value chain of the previous figure , while the vertical axis represents the existence or not of the gatekeepers and interfaces that connect ( or not ) disconnected organizations , groups of organizations and pools of knowledge . TKDs knowledge network connectivity and combinatorial knowledge processes [ 18 ] In science - pushed TKDs , combinatorial knowledge processes seem to succeed when public research organizations posit themselves as the main knowledge interfaces . In the photonic case of Aquitaine , public research organizations connect their world - wide scientific networks with the local milieu of spinoffs , leading external knowledge to be turned into knowledge inputs for the cohesive structure of local relations . According to Carrincazeaux and Gaschet ( 2009 ) , public research organizations “water” the local structure , so that “the more combinatorial knowledge interactions that are involved in the diversification of photonic applications ( virtual reality , metrology , energy , medical applications ) are also associated with a high degree of territorialisation of the relations . A first reason seems to be the facilitation , by an effect of proximity , of knowledge interactions between firms and local laboratories having heterogeneous competences” ( p . 40 ) . A close pattern is observed by Balland and Vicente ( 2009 ) in the Navigation Satellite Systems technological field in Midi - Pyrénées . The combinatorial process has been favoured by the creation of a federative research institute – TESA – that gathers researchers from satellite and telecommunication knowledge domains . “TESA want to be the missing link between research and development of services and applications for users . TESA thus appear as a “leaky” interface , diffusing knowledge between the different cognitive segments” ( p . 26 ) . The authors quantitatively show that removing this research institute disconnects more the local network of knowledge interactions than removing other organizations . In engineering TKDs , this connecting role is insured by KIBS . The case of Automotive in Baden Wurttemberg is illustrative of the role some strategic intermediaries play in the combinatorial knowledge integration . In this particular case , KIBS are identified as the necessary interface of the modular system in which cognitive barriers exist and need to be overcome . According to Strambach , Stockhorst and Sandmüller ( 2009 ) , “KIBS seem to contribute crucially to the creation of composite knowledge since they are able to build up missing technological , organizational or cognitive proximity . It could be also observed that existing proximity barriers hinder the knowledge transfer across sectoral boundaries ; in these cases firm intern and extern KIBS are characterised by their knowledge products which contribute to overcoming these existing proximity barriers” ( p . 26 ) . The same trend is observed by Blöker and Jürgens ( 2009 ) in the automotive case of Saxony , in which the very cohesive structure of start - ups working on embedded - systems for automotive industry find technological bridges with aeronautics through the coordination role of KIBS in the region , which “form not only the link between various sectors but also constitute an important knowledge resource since they are often specialised in introducing non - automotive knowledge from regional and from global networks into the existing TKD” ( p . 20 ) . Standardization and normalisation agencies facilitate also the flowing of knowledge for the combinatorial knowledge processes in some TKDs . They reduce uncertainty on market opportunities and , by fixing norms in relation with organizations , they facilitate the building of relations between organizations that decide to combine cumulative knowledge processes with more composite ones . For instance , in the TKD of GNSS in Midi - Pyrénées , the role of the CNES ( French spatial agency ) in Toulouse , and more generally the one of the ESA ( European Spatial Agency ) , had permitted to define new standards in navigation systems . According to Balland and Vicente ( 2009 ) , “the geographical gatekeeper role of CNES marks up its willingness to impose standards in the technological field by insuring the knowledge accessibility and flow in the whole of the Midi - Pyrenean network” ( p . 30 ) . Relations between satellite companies and the whole of other organizations belonging to other sectors and interested in developing applications have been created due to the decrease of uncertainty on technological interoperability and compatibility . The same trend is observed in the automotive industry , in the case of lower Saxony , since the standardization agency Autostar is connected as intermediaries between the organizations involved in the combinatorial knowledge process between OEMs and automotive software providers . The role of this agency is crucial due the necessary European interoperability between automotive embedded systems . According to Blöker and Jürgens ( 2009 ) , “Cooperation in this field takes place through the AUTOSTAR ( AUTomotive Open System ARchictecture ) network , jointly developed by automobile manufacturers , suppliers and tool [ 19 ] developers , by means of which participants hope to eliminate problems through uniform standards by the end of 2009” ( p . 31 ) . The role of some particular organizations seems thus crucial for connecting disconnected organizations or groups of organizations , and connectivity of the regional and relational structure seems more important than the overall density of knowledge interactions in TKDs . Focusing on these particular organizations and their links gives some illustrations on how the combinatorial knowledge processes occur in territories , and how the resulting types of relational structures participates to the ability of some places to reach a high level of creativity along the knowledge value chain . As a consequence , some particular , and sometimes few , missing links , can be the reason of why some knowledge dynamics in particular places can fail . One of the striking examples of such missing links in the combinatorial knowledge process relates to the case of Pharma - food in Aquitaine . Involved in the new paradigm of functional and nutritional food , the region displays a high potential of food and pharma firms but with a weak level of cooperation between the two sectors . The report clearly shows that the main reason of this disconnected process relates to the strong uncertainty that remains on norms , rules , standards that will concern these emerging markets in the future . Carrincazeaux and Gaschet ( 2009 ) note that “If cooperation between agrifood and pharmaceutical domains remain weak at the local level , one can expect that EU legislation will act as an important incentive” ( p . 10 ) . In spite of a high level of production of analytic knowledge in the field from local public research organizations , this uncertainty on market perspectives impedes the combinatorial knowledge process to grow in the engineering and examination phase . An Increase of knowledge transfers between public research organizations and firms , and an expected clarification on the European standards of functional and nutritional food , should allow the very explorative and isolated local knowledge dynamics to be turned into a central place in this growing market . The case of nanotechnologies in the Veneto region provides another illustration of how missing links hamper the development of combinatorial knowledge processes . The persistence on cumulative knowledge dynamics has brought local SMEs to mature industries with strong competitive pressure . The report explains that their upgrade through the re - qualification with technological innovations was difficult because of the historical weak collaborations between the industrial sectors and the university research system . Such separation is grounded on their cognitive and cultural distances : “ the difficulties encountered were connected to the distance between two different epistemic communities : one , that of researchers , focused on the specific dimension of the experimentation and on its specific language ; the second that of SMEs representatives , characterized by the strong attention towards products and processes and quite distant , in cognitive and cultural terms ” ( p . 14 , Finotto , 2009 ) . In order to close this gap two sets of interactions have been developed : Firstly , community interactions among professionals on SMEs and researchers on R & D regional institutions . Secondly , interactions among organizations themselves . In that sense the match - making role of Veneto Nanotech to diffuse information about potential applications and scientific advancements has been crucial . Similarly , the plant - biotechnology TKD in Wageningen shows how combinatorial knowledge processes , involving research organizations in plant biotechnology and industrial firms in related sectors such as plant breeding or food industry , fail to emerge because of the problems of WUR to assume its brokerage role of local cognitive coordinator . “ The impact of WUR ( Wageningen University and Research Centre ) on economic activity in the area of green , plant - related biotechnology in the Wegeningen region seems limited ( p . 8 ) [ … ] In the Wageningen region there are few business start - ups in the field of plant biotechnology , few hybrid technologies and few if any relocations . A connection between plant biotechnology and the large food industry network ( Food Valley ) has hardly developed . Absent are firms in the region that grew as a result of WUR’s plant biotechnology research , or that diversified into plant biotechnology ( p . 35 ) ” ( Vissers , Dankbaar , 2009 ) . In spite of the strength of research capacities of WUR , its cognitive lock - in by [ 20 ] its labour division and its focus in genetic modification with low public acceptance , have increased the distances between scientific and industrial world objectives . 6 . Policy perspectives from TKDs : From the “connecting people one best way” to the “missing links” targeted and surgical interventions Using the empirical material of EURODITE TKDs , proximity and distance in knowledge relations have been studied at the micro - level for the understanding of the motives for building knowledge relations , as well as at the structural level , for the understanding of the structural organization of knowledge processes along the knowledge value chain , the knowledge domains and the geographical space . Different patterns of TKDs appear and display a degree of diversity of regional dynamics , with some different levels of perceived performances . This diversity invites to go beyond an univocal way of thinking about knowledge - based regional policies . Indeed , if policies focus usually on the increase of the density of local knowledge interactions as a source of regional performance , a strict application of this basic principle can be under efficient , while some more surgical and precise interventions focused on some particular missing links can favor the regional dynamics as a whole . For instance , looking at the first typology related to the pure structural properties of TKDs , regional policies have to take into account the variety of TKDs . Indeed , if for dispersed and random networks , policies need to focus on the enforcement of the local cohesiveness of the relations in the region , the focus changes radically in the closed networks and requires to favor the connections between the regional ecosystem and the global market and technological environment . In a same way , the traditional cluster policy can fail if it is applied in a undifferentiated way . Indeed , cluster policies generally produce strong incentives for forming local knowledge relations . This policy remains efficient for dispersed and random networks , because it favors knowledge encountering and the production of new innovations . But in the case of closed networks , the risk of this policy is to be under efficient since it favors local knowledge relations that preexist to the policy and thus create a risk of opportunism and knowledge relations redundancies . At the opposite in this particular case of closed network , policies need to focus on incentives that lead organizations to build structural bridges between the local structure and the global environment in order to go from the niche markets to mass markets . Looking now at the second typology , focusing on the links between the knowledge value chain and the geographical extent of knowledge relations , we can see that policy implications differ according to positions of TKDs . For instance , Science - pushed TKDs do not face the same constraints of development or incentives than the leisure and symbol - pushed ones so that policies need to take into account the positioning of TKDs in the figure . For science - pushed TKDs , the main purpose of policy has to focus on the incentives and means to turn new innovations into tradable applications , products and services . For market - pushed TKDs , at the opposite , the long term viability of the attractiveness of the place needs to be supported by a higher level of research and analytic knowledge , in order that the cost opportunity of the place rests also on the building of local capabilities of exploration , in order that plants anchor their activities in the long term . Finally , focusing on particular missing links rather than a general watering of public funds for coordination is suited for “repairing” the lack of connectivity some TKDs exhibit . This lack of connectivity impedes the combinatorial knowledge process to occur , or the new ideas and fresh knowledge to be turned into tradable and mass markets products . The above discussion and typology on the level of connectivity in TKDs reveal that sometimes few links are missing for the knowledge dynamics to succeed in connecting separated organizations and insuring the convergence between knowledge processes along the knowledge value chain . This discussion [ 21 ] shows clearly that incentives and policies need to be more surgical than general , because TKDs , when they present failures in the combinatorial process , do not present the same failures at the same level of their growth stages . The synthesis realized in the paper gives a possible interpretation of these failures and points out the ways for policies . For instance , when a early market and an associated TKDs is identified , policies should focus on the way to establish standard settings ( think about the GSM European policy at the beginning of the mobile phone industry ) in order that the emerging technological field can be turned into a mass - market . In parallel , when the exploration in this emerging field displays failures in the coordination process of knowledge combination between private organizations , incentives for creating and supporting public research organizations that promote knowledge as a local commodity for private organizations of the place should be favored . Moreover , for incremental innovations supported by new combinations of knowledge , policies should have to support KIBS since these organizations are generally suited interfaces between cognitively distant players and reinforce their mutual understanding . 7 . Concluding remarks The contribution started by the ambivalence of the effects of proximity and distant knowledge relations on innovation . For highlighting this ambivalence , we proposed to focus on the micro - motives of knowledge relations and their critical parameters , and link these micro - motives to the resulting regional structures that emerge when these relations are aggregated . Results show that organizations form proximity and / or distant knowledge relations according to some particular parameters : the way with which organization manage their own knowledge trade - off and the phases of the knowledge value chain . According to these micro - motives , TKDs exhibit particular structural properties and are involved differently in the phases of the knowledge value chain . Concerning the density of relational structures in TKDs , and following the growing idea that the more organizations are connected between them the more the region is efficient , we moderate this argument showing that an intermediate level of density fits better with regional performance since fully connected structures engender an excess of relational costs and redundancies in knowledge flows . Combinatorial knowledge processes will thus require to maintain a sufficient level of regional cohesiveness supported by central nodes that connect disconnected organizations and insure a sufficient level of connectivity between the inward and outward organizations through a reduced but strategic number of geographical gatekeepers . Reachability is thus more important than high density . And cluster / pipelines structures display interesting properties for regions that maximize knowledge accessibility and diffusion by minimizing relational costs and the risks of unintended knowledge spillovers . Such results could have interesting consequences on policies , and regional policies in particular . Indeed , the “connecting people” idea needs to be re - evaluated since the density of knowledge relations in regional innovations systems is not the panacea of the regional performance in knowledge society , and can be , in a extreme case , under efficient . Thinking about regional performance in knowledge society requires first to have a diagnostic for each region that highlights their structural properties and their organizational ecology at a time t . Some regions can be fragile on their organizational ecology and thus have difficulties to be involved in all the phases of the knowledge value chain , even if the relational density is still high . Some others can suffer from local missing links and from a lack of cohesiveness that weakens the local combinatorial knowledge process , so that the intervention might focus on particular organizations . Some others can suffer from a lack of outward connectivity so that the intervention might focus on the reinforcement of geographical gatekeepers… From these diagnostics , different situations should occur , each of them necessitating a particular “surgical” intervention instead of general interventions based on relational incentives . [ 22 ] 8 . References Abernathy , W . J . & Utterback , J . M . , 1978 . Patterns of industrial innovation . Technology Review , 80 ( 7 ) : 40 - 47 . Almeida , P . & Kogut , B . , 1997 . The exploration of technological diversity and geographic localization in Innovation : start - up firms in the semiconductor industry . Small Business Economics , 9 ( 1 ) : 21 - 31 . Anderson , P . & Tushman , M . L . , 1990 . Technological discontinuities and dominant designs : a cyclical model of technological change . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 ( 4 ) : 604 - 633 . Antonelli , C . , 2006 . The governance of localized knowledge . An information economics approach to the economics of knowledge . Industry and Innovation , 13 ( 3 ) : 227 - 261 . Arrow , K . J . , 1962 . Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention . NBER Chapters : 609 - 626 . Asheim , B . T . , Boschma , R . A . & Cooke , P . , 2007 . Constructing regional advantage : platform policies based on related variety and differentiated knowledge bases . Papers in Evolutionary Economic Gepgraphy , 07 . 09 . Audretsch , D . B . & Feldman , M . P . , 1996a . Innovative clusters and the industry life cycle . Review of Industrial Organization , 11 ( 2 ) : 253 - 273 . Audretsch , D . B . & Feldman , M . P . , 1996b . R & D spillovers and the geography of innovation and production . The American Economic Review , 86 ( 3 ) : 630 - 640 . Blöcker , A . & Jürgens , U . , 2009 . Automotive TKD in South East Lower Saxony , EURODITE report . Bogartti , S . , Everett , M . & Freeman , L . , 2002 . UCINET for Windows : software for social network analysis . Harvard : Analytic Technologies . Boschma , R . A . , 2005 . Proximity and innovation : a critical assessment . Regional Studies , 39 ( 1 ) : 61 - 74 . Boschma , R . A . & Wal , A . L . T . , 2007 . Knowledge networks and innovative performance in an industrial district : the case of a footwear district in the South of Italy . Industry & Innovation , 14 ( 2 ) : 177 - 199 . Breschi , S . & Lissoni , F . , 2001 . Knowledge spillovers and local innovation systems : a critical survey . Industrial and Corporate Change , 10 ( 4 ) : 975 - 1005 . Burt , R . S . , 1992 . Structural holes : the social structure of competition , Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press . Carrincazeaux , C . , Lung , Y . & Vicente , J . , 2008 . The scientific trajectory of the French School of Proximity : Interaction - and Institution - based approaches to Regional Innovation Systems . European Planning Studies , 16 ( 5 ) : 617 - 628 . Carrincazeaux , C . , Gaschet , F . & Becue , M . , 2009 . Pharma food and laser photonics TKD in Aquitaine , EURODITE report . Cohen , W . M . & Levinthal , D . A . , 1990 . Absorptive capacity : a new perspective on learning and innovation . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 ( 1 ) : 128 - 152 . Combes , P . , Mayer , T . & Thisse , J . C . , 2008 . Economic geography , Princeton University Press . Cooke , P . , 2005 . Rational drug design , the knowledge value chain and bioscience megacentres . Cambridge Journal of Economics , 29 ( 3 ) : 325 - 341 . Crespo , J . , 2011 . How emergence conditions of technological clusters affect their viability ? Theoretical perspectives on cluster lifecycles . European Planning Studies , Forthcoming . [ 23 ] Crevoisier , O . & Jeannerat , H . , 2009 . Territorial knowledge dynamics : from the proximity paradigm to multi - location milieus . European Planning Studies , 17 ( 8 ) : 1223 - 1241 . Dahlström , M . et al . , 2009 . Harnessing complementary resources - knowledge dynamics in New Media in Skane , EURODITE report . Dasgupta , P . & David , P . A . , 1994 . Toward a new economics of science . Research Policy , 23 ( 5 ) : 487 - 521 . Dettmann , A . & Brenner , T . , 2010 . Proximity is a social process : a conceptual modification . En DRUID - DIME Academy Winter 2010 PhD Conference . Aalborg , Denmark . Finotto , V . , 2009 . Nanotechnology for the upgrading of mature industries in the Veneto region , EURODITE report . Frenken , K . , Oort , F . V . & Verburg , T . , 2007 . Related variety , unrelated variety and regional economic growth . Regional Studies , 41 ( 5 ) : 685 - 697 . Gould , R . V . & Fernandez , R . M . , 1989 . Structures of mediation : a formal approach to brokerage in transaction networks . Sociological Methodology , 19 : 89 - 126 . Granovetter , M . S . , 1985 . Economic action and social structure : the problem of embeddedness . American Journal of Sociology , 91 ( 3 ) : 481 - 510 . Halkier , H . & Schmidt , P . B . , 2009 . Territorial knowledge dynamics in tourism in North Jutland , EURODITE report . Jaffe , A . B . , Trajtenberg , M . & Henderson , R . M . , 1993 . Geographic localization of knowledge spillovers as evidenced by patent citations . The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 108 ( 3 ) : 577 - 598 . Jeannerat , H . , Kebir , L . & Crevoisier , O . , 2009 . The growing need of symbolic knowledge in the Swiss watch industry , EURODITE report . Kaiser , R . , Liecke , M . & Kripp , M . , 2009a . Biotechnology TKD in Bavaria region , EURODITE report . Kaiser , R . , Liecke , M . & Kripp , M . , 2009b . Film TKD in Bavaria region , EURODITE report . Klepper , S . , 1997 . Industry Life Cycles . Industrial and Corporate Change , 6 ( 1 ) : 145 – 182 . Kraut , R . , Egido , C . & Galegher , J . , 1988 . Patterns of contact and communication in scientific research collaboration . En Proceedings of the 1988 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work : 1 - 12 . Larsson , A . , 2009 . The automotive industry TKD in Västra Götland , EURODITE report . MacNeill , S , James , L . , Collinge , C . , Staines , A . , 2009a . Automotive TKD in West Midlands , EURODITE report . MacNeill , S , James , L . , Collinge , C . , Staines , A . , 2009b . Serious games TKD in West Midlands , EURODITE report . Manniche , J . , Topsø Larsen , K . , Petersen , T . 2009 . Food industry renovation TKD in Bornholm , EURODITE report . Markusen , A . , 1996 . Sticky places in slippery space : a typology of industrial districts . Economic Geography , 72 ( 3 ) : 293 - 313 . Martin , R . & Sunley , P . , 2003 . Deconstructing clusters : chaotic concept or policy panacea ? Journal of Economic Geography , 3 ( 1 ) : 5 - 35 . Maskell , P . & Malmberg , A . , 1999 . Localised learning and industrial competitiveness . Cambridge Journal of Economics , 23 ( 2 ) : 167 - 185 . [ 24 ] Menzel , M . P . & Fornahl , D . , 2010 . Cluster life cycles - dimensions and rationales of cluster evolution . Industrial and Corporate Change , 19 ( 1 ) : 205 - 238 . Moore , G . , 1991 . Crossing the chasm 3º ed . , New York : Harper Business Essentials . Nelson , R . R . & Winter , S . G . , 1982 . An evolutionary theory of economic change , Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press . Nooteboom , B . , 2000 . Learning by interaction : absorptive capacity , cognitive distance and governance . Journal of Management and Governance , 4 ( 1 ) : 69 - 92 . Owen - Smith , J . & Powell , W . W . , 2004 . Knowledge networks as channels and conduits : the effects of spillovers in the Boston biotechnology community . Organization Science , 15 ( 1 ) , págs . 5 - 21 . Rehak , S . , 2009 . Knowledge dynamics in the ICT / KIBS sector in Bratislava region . Development of the information security , EURODITE report . Rogers , E . M . , 2002 . Diffusion of innovations Fifth Edition . , New York : Free Trade . Rychen , F . & Zimmermann , J . , 2008 . Clusters in the global knowledge - based economy : knowledge gatekeepers and temporary proximity . Regional Studies , 42 ( 6 ) : 767 - 776 . Storper , M . & Venables , A . J . , 2004 . Buzz : face - to - face contact and the urban economy . Journal of Economic Geography , 4 ( 4 ) : 351 - 370 . Strambach , S . , Stockhorst , J . & Sandmüller , M . , 2009 . TKD in automotive industry of Baden - Württemberg - The contribution of engineering services and visual computing services , EURODITE report . Suire , R . & Vicente , J . , 2009 . Why do some places succeed when others decline : a social interaction model of clusters viability , Journal of Economic Geography , 9 ( 3 ) : 381 - 404 . Torre , A . , 2008 . On the role played by temporary geographical proximity in knowledge transmission . Regional Studies , 42 ( 6 ) : 869 - 889 . Torre , A . & Rallet , A . , 2005 . Proximity and Localization . Regional Studies , 39 ( 1 ) : 47 - 59 . Uzzi , B . , 1997 . Social structure and competition in interfirm networks : the paradox of embeddedness . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 ( 1 ) : 35 - 67 . Uzzi , B . , 1996 . The sources and consequences of embeddedness for the economic performance of organizations : the network effect . American Sociological Review , 61 ( 4 ) : 674 - 698 . Vicente , J . & Balland , P . , 2009 . The structural properties of the Midi - Pyrenean knowledge dynamics in the GNSS technological field , EURODITE report . Vicente , J . , Balland , P . A . , Brossard , O . , 2010 . Getting into networks and clusters : Evidence from the Midi - Pyrenean GNSS collaboration network , Regional Studies , Forthcoming Visser , G . & Dankbaar , B . , 2009 . Plan biotechnology research and practice in Netherlands , EURODITE report .