Current Biology 16 , 1018 – 1025 , May 23 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2006 . 03 . 092 Report Transcriptional Pulsing of a Developmental Gene Jonathan R . Chubb , 1 , 2 , * Tatjana Trcek , 1 Shailesh M . Shenoy , 1 and Robert H . Singer 1 1 Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology Albert Einstein College of Medicine The Bronx , New York 10461 2 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dundee DD1 5EH United Kingdom Summary It has not been possible to view the transcriptional activity of a single gene within a living eukaryotic cell . It is therefore unclear how long and how frequently a gene is actively transcribed , how this is modulated during differentiation , and how transcriptional events are dynamically coordinated in cell populations . By means of an in vivo RNA detection technique [ 1 – 3 ] , we have directly visualized transcription of an endo - genous developmental gene . We found discrete ‘‘pulses’’ of gene activity that turn on and off at irregu - lar intervals . Surprisingly , the length and height of these pulses were consistent throughout develop - ment . However , there was strong developmental varia - tion in the proportion of cells recruited to the express - ing pool . Cells were more likely to reexpress than to initiate new expression , indicating that we directly ob - serve a transcriptional memory . In addition , we used a clustering algorithm to reveal synchronous transcrip - tion initiation in neighboring cells . This study repre - sents the ﬁrst direct visualization of transcriptional pulsing in eukaryotes . Discontinuity of transcription may allow greater ﬂexibility in the gene - expression decisions of a cell . Results and Discussion Conventional methods for monitoring transcription uti - lize microarrays or Northern analysis of RNA on large populations of disrupted cells . These methods , although useful , provide a population average and yield little in - sight into the speciﬁc transcriptional responses of indi - vidual cells in their tissue context . Important information about gene activity is lost in this averaged sample . Quantitative studies measuring ﬂuctuations in ﬂuores - cent protein expression suggest that gene expression might involve intermittent pulsing [ 4 – 8 ] . A rigorous sin - gle - cell RNA counting study revealed that discontinuous transcription can occur in prokaryotes [ 9 ] . However , these transcriptional events have not been directly visu - alized in eukaryotes . Therefore , it is unclear how long and how frequent transcriptional events are and how they vary during development . In addition , how are tran - scriptional decisions coordinated in cell populations ? Is transcription initiation synchronous , sequential , or asynchronous ? What is the balance of reinitiation and de novo expression ? We would gain considerable in - sight into the dynamic nature of transcription if we could view a native gene turning on and turning off in its natural cellular context , subject to all its native cues . To gain insight into these events in single cells , we used ﬂuorescence microscopy to describe transcrip - tional activity at a single genomic locus . The system uti - lizes the high - afﬁnity interaction between a genomic stem loop and the coat protein of the MS2 RNA bacterio - phage [ 1 – 3 ] . Integration of a cassette of MS2 stem loops is targeted into a single endogenous gene . Upon tran - scription , the MS2 stem loops are read into nascent RNA and detected at the site of transcription with GFP fused to the phage MS2 coat protein ( Figure 1A ) . We used the social amoeba Dictyostelium because of the ease of targeted recombination and the well - described morphological changes as it differentiates . We studied the expression of the discoidin Ia gene , dscA , which is abundantly expressed [ 10 ] , facilitating detection of tran - scriptional events , and is reliably induced as cells begin differentiation [ 11 – 13 ] . Twenty - four MS2 stem loops were integrated at the 5 0 end of the dscA gene , 6 base pairs downstream of the ATG start codon ( Figures 1B and 1C ) . We used the AX3 strain , as the chromosomal region containing the discoi - din I genes is duplicated [ 14 ] . Although dscA is dispen - sible for growth and development in Dictyostelium [ 15 ] and there are three almost identical discoidin I genes clusteredinthegenome , theextracopiesmitigateissues of a mutant background . In agreement with this , the growth and development of the MS2 - tagged cells are in - distinguishable from AX3 . Critically , expression of the 1 . 5 kb MS2 RNA shows the same induction during early development and at high culture densities as discoidin I in wild - type cells ( Figure 1D ) . Sites of transcription are visualized as a ﬂuorescent nuclear spot in dscA - MS2 cells stably expressing MS2 - GFP ( Figure 1E ) , due to the high intensity of the multiple nascent chains at the gene locus . Spots are not ob - served if MS2 - GFP is expressed in wild - type cells lack - ing the MS2 repeats . Background ﬂuorescence inhibited effective visualization of low or single copy RNA mole - cules in the cytoplasm . We estimated the number of transcripts at the gene by using FISH with single ﬂuores - cent 50 - mer probes [ 16 ] ( see Figure S1 in the Supple - mental Data available with this article online ) . By com - paring the intensities of these spots with a dilution series of the probe , we estimate a maximum transcript load of 11 nascent RNA molecules , corresponding to 1 polymerase every 120 bp , in agreement with other analyses [ 16 ] . When living dscA - MS2 cells were imaged by ﬂuores - cence microscopy , we were able to visualize the time course of gene activation ( Figure 1F ; see also Movie S1 ) . * Correspondence : j . chubb @ dundee . ac . uk In the ﬁrst three frames , the central cell has no detect - able transcriptional event . In the fourth frame , a spot be - comes visible , which grows in intensity over the next minute . As the observed transcriptional events occur overperiods of minutes rather than seconds , we devised an imaging protocol to capture the full range of events . Fields of cells were blind - captured in 3D stacks ( 0 . 25 m m z - step ) , every 2 . 5 min , for 30 min . At this level of sampling , the nascent RNA could be visualized in mul - tiple z planes . To facilitate acquisition of many data sets , we used a programmable xy - stage for parallel capture of multiple ﬁelds . The effects of phototoxicity are cell rounding , impaired motility , and loss of transcription . We eliminated these responses by means of a neutral density ﬁlter and a highly sensitive camera to minimize exposure . Cell polarity , motility , and de novo transcrip - tion were consistent and appropriate to developmental stage [ 11 , 17 ] throughout imaging , and the cells formed chemotactic streams , indicative of their well - being . A rapid elevation in the proportion of cells with detect - able transcription occurs during the ﬁrst 30 min of differ - entiation ( Figure 1G ) . This increase is progressive , likely reﬂecting variation in both intrinsic ( cell cycle , nutritional status ) and extrinsic ( proximity to signals ) factors . We extended this analysis to look at the entire early differen - tiation program , with 1500 – 2000 cells studied per time point ( Figure 1H ) . The proportion of expressing cells initially reaches more than 20 % , then falls during the next few hours . Just prior to the onset of aggregation ( 4 . 5 hr ) , a strong increase in the number of cells express - ing occurs . The dsc genes are repressed by cAMP signaling [ 18 , 19 ] , and we see marked repression of tran - scription in chemotactic streams ( 5 . 5 hr ) , although some expression can be detected . However , the level of both MS2 and discoidin RNAs is not diminished at 6 hr ( Fig - ure 1D ) , indicating that the RNA can persist after the re - pression of transcription . At no point in the differentia - tion program does the proportion of expressing cells approach 100 % . This is consistent with studies that use discoidin I antibodies indicating nonuniform expres - sion during differentiation [ 20 ] . Transcriptional pulses have a variable duration ( Fig - ures 2A and 2B ) . The two central cells in Figure 2A both express during the imaging period . The top cell has a detectable site for 4 frames / 10 min , while the lower cell expresses for only 2 frames . Shorter events ( < 10 min ) are more common , but spots persist in some cells for nearly 20 min ( Figure 2B ) . The mean pulse duration was 5 . 2 min . When we collate data from a large number of transcriptional pulses , we obtain decay curves that give robust exponential ﬁts ( r 2 > 0 . 99 , Figure S3 ) . We do not detect signiﬁcant varia - tion in mean pulse length at different developmental stages ( Figure 2C ) . The mean pulse intensity is also not subject to signiﬁcant variation during development ( Figure 2C ) . Transcription is discontinuous ( Figure 3A ) . We ob - serve multiple pulses of transcription in a large propor - tion of cells . The cell in Figure 3A expresses for the ﬁrst four frames , and then the gene is inactive for the next three frames before reinitiating again for two frames at the end of the movie . Intensity time series plots for typ - ical examples of pulsing cells are displayed in Figure S2 . The interval size between transcriptional pulses is subject to large variation ( Figure 3B ) : shorter intervals ( < 10 min ) are more common , but gaps as long as 25 min were recorded . Again , the decay curves give strong exponential ﬁts ( r 2 > 0 . 99 ) . The mean pulse interval is 5 . 8 min and is not subject to signiﬁcant developmental var - iation ( Figure 3C ) . It is unlikely that the discontinuity re - ﬂects pulsing in the detection system . The MS2 RNA - MS2 protein interaction has a nanomolar afﬁnity and is highly stable , as cytoplasmic RNA particles retain bound MS2 - GFP even if the unbound fraction is restricted to the nucleus [ 21 ] . The pulsing effect is also not a conse - quence of bleaching during imaging . The illumination strength was diminished by a strong neutral density ﬁl - ter , and the illumination time ( 7 s total ) was minimized to maintain cell health . While optimizing the imaging protocol , we found that the illumination dose for detect - able bleaching results in high phototoxicity . In addition , the intensity of individual pulses can increase over time ( Figure S2 ) . The discontinuity is also unlikely to result from RNA destruction at the transcription site . The sta - bility of the MS2 RNA is apparent in previous work on both prokaryotes and eukaryotes [ 2 , 9 ] . Stability is also evident in Dictyostelium , as both discoidin and MS2 RNAs increase strongly during development , remaining at high levels during aggregation , when fresh transcrip - tion is repressed ( Figures 1D and 1H ) . The pulsing is irregular , contrasting the periodic asso - ciations of transcriptional components with ER - respon - sive genes [ 22 ] and oscillations in RNA levels observed in E . coli due to the cell’s pumping out of the gene in - ducer [ 23 ] . The pulses are considerably slower than the oscillations in p53 protein levels ( mean duration 5 hr ) , which occur after DNA damage [ 6 ] . Therefore , our observations may reﬂect a distinct underlying process . Our data are more reminiscent of a recent study in E . coli [ 9 ] . By means of a lac - derived promotor inducible with IPTG , Golding et al . [ 9 ] observed a staggered in - crease in the number of RNA molecules that could be counted in the cell . These studies estimated a gene - on time of approximately 6 min , similar to the present study , but a considerably longer off time ( 37 min ) . Differences likely reﬂect the manner of observation ( visualizing na - scent RNA rather than RNA counting ) , eukaryote versus prokaryote , and the nature of the gene studied . During the capture periods , we observed cells with up to ﬁve pulses of transcription , although lower pulse fre - quencies were most common ( Figure 3D ) . The pulse fre - quency ( deﬁned as the number of pulses occurring in the 30 min capture period ) shows signiﬁcant variation between different developmental stages ( Figure 3D ) . Although there is no clear - cut developmental trend , at 4 . 5 hr there are a higher proportion of multiple pulsers than at 0 . 5 hr ( c 2 : p < 0 . 001 ) . However , the pulse frequen - cies at 1 . 5 hr are only slightly different from 4 . 5 hr , in spite of the large difference in the recruitment of ex - pressing cells ( Figure 1H ) . The basic properties of pulses ( length , height ) are consistent throughout development , and the changes in frequency are modest . This is striking given the dra - matic changes in dscA transcriptional cues , from cell - autonomous signals ( starvation ) to strong extracellular signaling ( cAMP and CMF [ 20 ] ) . Variation occurs not in these properties of the pulses , but in the number of cells recruited into the expressing population . In this context , Transcriptional Pulsing 1019 Figure 1 . Visualizing Transcription of a Developmental Gene in Living Cells ( A ) Schematic for RNA detection system . ( B ) Schematic for detection of expression of dscA gene . ( C ) SouthernanalysisofdscA - MS2knockincelllines . Extrawild - type bandforAX3corresponds towild - typegeneonduplicated portionofchro - mosome 2 . ( D ) Northern analysis of dscA - MS2 cells demonstrating appropriate induction by starvation ( left ) and high culture density during growth ( right ) . The MS2 RNA runs as a single major band at 1 . 5 kb . ( E ) Transformation of MS2 - GFP into dscA - MS2 cells reveals a single nuclear spot in expressing cells ( arrow ) . ( F ) Visualizing the induction of dscA transcription ( arrows , maximal projection of 3D stacks ) . Current Biology 1020 these pulses have some parallels with the p53 protein oscillations observed by Lahav et al . [ 6 ] . These have a duration and height that does not vary with strength of stimulus ( irradiation ) , but the proportion of cells that respond increases greatly with dosage . Together , these observations imply a simple threshold model . Below stimulus threshold , no expression occurs , yet above this threshold , stimulated cells display a standard range of transcriptional response , regardless of developmen - tal time , nature of signal , or signal strength . This model implies an absence of continuous reﬁnement in tran - scriptional regulation during differentiation , for example by chromatin modiﬁcation or by altering the wiring of intracellular signaling . Reinitiation is more common than de novo initiation at low population expression levels ( 1 . 5 hr and 3 hr ) . Where few cells initiate expression , cells that are expressing are more likely to have a second pulse than a nonex - pressing cell is to begin expression . We quantiﬁed this via a simple ratio of the probability of a second pulse to the probability of the ﬁrst . A value greater than 1 would exist if reinitiation were favored over de novo tran - scription . We calculated this ratio ( R m ) for our data , at different developmental stages . The value is higher than 1 for all stages ( Figure 3E ; p < 0 . 001 for 1 . 5 hr ) . This indicates , particularly during the midstarvation phase of differentiation , that reinitiation is more com - mon than de novo transcription . This effect could imply some form of ‘‘transcriptional memory’’ where cells use the memory of past transcriptional events to enhance new transcription . The frequency plot for pulse intervals associated with the strongest memory effect ( 1 . 5 hr ) can ﬁt a simple exponential decay function ( Figure S3 ) . In other words , the likelihood of reinitiation diminishes as time elapses after an event . Although more complex models are still possible , the memory effect could in - volve reinitiation from a preexisting transcription com - plex and / or cotranscriptional chromatin modiﬁcation temporarily maintaining template accessibility [ 24 ] . Al - ternatively , it may reﬂect preexisting differences be - tween cells such as cell - type differentiation or passive ﬂuctuations in upstream factors . Discoidin I protein is expressed in only a proportion of cells during develop - ment . It is therefore likely that this is a direct view of the sustained transcriptional decision underlying cell - type differentiation . ( G ) Increase in the proportion of expressing cells during the ﬁrst 30 min of differentiation . ( H ) Developmentalvariationintheproportionofexpressingcells . Dataarefrom30minmoviescommencingattheindicatedtimes . 30 – 40movies ( n = 1500 – 2000 cells ) were collected over 3 – 4 experimental days for each time point ( bars indicate standard deviation ) . Figure2 . VariationintheLengthofTranscrip - tional Pulses ( A ) Variation in pulse duration . The top cell hasavisibletranscriptionaleventfor4frames ( 10 min ) , whereas the neighboring lower cell expresses for only 2 frames ( maximal projec - tion ) . ( B ) Distribution of pulse durations for the 0 . 5 hr time point . Shorter pulses are more common . ( C ) Developmental proﬁle of mean pulse du - ration ( ﬁlled symbols ) and intensity ( open symbols ) . Pulse duration and intensity are not subject to major developmental variation ( bars reﬂect standard error ) . Transcriptional Pulsing 1021 Figure 3 . Transcription Is Discontinuous ( A ) Multiple pulses of dscA transcription . The central cell initially transcribes for 5 frames , then is inactive for 3 frames before reinitiating and ex - pressing for a further 2 frames ( maximal projection ) . ( B ) Variation in pulse spacing . The plot displays the spacing ( interval ) between pulses for all cells in the 0 . 5 hr time point . ( C ) The mean interval between pulses is approximately 6 min and is not subject to large developmental variation ( bars reﬂect standard error ) . ( D ) Developmental proﬁle of pulse frequency ( pulses per 30 min movie ) . Cells were scored for 1 , 2 , or 3 + pulses , at the indicated developmental times . There is signiﬁcant variation between the proportions of the different pulse classes between 0 . 5 hr and 4 . 5 hr time points ( c 2 : p < 0 . 001 ) . ( E ) High tendency for reinitiation is observed at time points where low numbers of cells express . Ratio of the probability of a second pulse to the probability of the ﬁrst ( R m ) plotted against developmental time . The expected R m value is 1 in a situation where reinitiation is not favored over de novo transcription . Cells at the 1 . 5 hr and 3 hr time points have a signiﬁcant elevation of R m over expected levels ( c 2 : p < 0 . 001 ) and are signiﬁcantly different from the 4 . 5 hr time point ( c 2 : p < 0 . 001 ) . Current Biology 1022 To assay the contribution of cell signaling to dscA in - duction during differentiation , we studied the relative distribution of dscA - expressing cells by means of an al - gorithm that can detect nonrandom clustering of cells based on expression . Community effect signaling would be reﬂected by close proximity of expressers , and sparseness of expressing cells would indicate lateral in - hibition . An intermediate distribution would reﬂect the dominance of the intrinsic stimulus ( e . g . , starvation ) or uniform concentrations of a global signal . We noticed that expressing cells are frequently close to other ex - pressing cells ( Figure 4A ) . To investigate the signiﬁ - cance of this , we compared the pair - wise distances be - tween transcription sites and the pair - wise distances between all cell centroids ( Figure 4B ) . Expressing cells at the onset of differentiation ( 0 hr ) show weakly signiﬁ - cant clustering . Expressing preaggregative cells ( 4 . 5 hr ) show strongly signiﬁcant clustering . These data likely reﬂect a community effect or similarity in access to global signaling cues . We extended the analysis further , as our data allow the assessment of the dynamics of transcription in cell groups . The observed clustering is yet more signiﬁcant if the analysis is restricted to coor - dinates obtained at pulse initiation ( Figure 4B ) , implying concerted transcription induction . This approach there - fore allows detection of the dynamic organization of transcription in cell populations and distinction between synchronous and asynchronous models of cell sig - naling . Our observations imply transient yet sharp varia - tions in extracellular signaling and a sharp transition in the cellular response . A preaggregative cell can experi - ence the peak and trough of a wave of extracellular cAMP within 2 – 3 min [ 25 ] . The simultaneous exposure of neighboring cells to ﬂuctuations in this repressive sig - nal , or a positive signal , such as the secreted glycopro - tein CMF [ 20 ] , may be responsible for simultaneous tran - scription initiation . Conclusions We have directly viewed the intrinsic transcriptional behavior of a developmentally regulated genetic locus . We have provided direct visual demonstration of dis - continuous eukaryotic transcription . The pulses of tran - scription are irregular in length and spacing , although mean gene - on and gene - off times were estimated to be 5 – 6 min , in transcribing cells . The basic properties of pulses ( length , intensity ) are consistent throughout development , and changes in frequency are modest . This is surprising in the light of the strong changes in transcriptional stimuli occurring through differentia - tion and implies rigidity in signaling circuits regulating a gene . Variation occurs not in these properties of the Figure 4 . Expression of dscA in Cell Clusters ( A ) Example image of the expression of dscA restricted to neighboring cells ( maximal pro - jection ) . ( B ) Signiﬁcant clustering of dscA expressers . Pairwise distances between all transcription sites in a ﬁeld were compared with pairwise distances between the centroids of all the cells ( > 10 5 total cell : cell comparisons ) in a ﬁeld . These data were analyzed from cells attheonsetofdifferentiation ( 0hr ) andpreag - gregation ( 4 . 5 hr ) . Most signiﬁcant clustering was detected when only the initiating frame of the pulse was used , suggestive of coordi - nated transcription induction . Transcriptional Pulsing 1023 pulses but in the number of cells recruited into the expressing population . The advantage to the cell of pulsatile rather than continuous transcription may be sensitivity in the control of gene expression . Pulsing per - mits greater ﬂexibility in transcriptional decisions—the cell is less committed to a particular program if it does not make all the required RNA in one burst . The ability to view transcription of a gene in vivo has also allowed direct observation of important develop - mental phenomena as they occur . We observe a tran - scriptional memory—in other words a sustained tran - scriptional decision . This is the basis of all cell - type differentiation . We can also view the transcriptional effects of signaling events in cell populations as they occur . The ability to view a living cell as it makes a tran - scriptional decision will illuminate the effect of the microenvironment on gene expression . Experimental Procedures Tagging the dscA Gene A 2 kb genomic fragment spanning the dscA locus was assembled from cloned genomic DNA into pBluescript . A fragment bearing 24 MS2 repeats upstream of the blasticidin resistance cassette [ 26 ] was insertedintothe AccIsite adjacent totheATG of thecoding sequence . PolylinkerNotI andApaIsites were used toyield atarget - ing fragment from this vector , which was transformed as described [ 27 ] . SouthernblottingofEcoRVdigestedgenomicDNAgaveaband shiftof 2 . 6 kbinappropriatelytargeted clones . InAX3 , correctinser - tionwasconﬁrmedby PCR withprimersoutside the regionspanned bythetargetingvectorincombinationwithprimerstotheresistancecassette . For expression of the MS2 - GFP fusion , MS2 protein se - quence was cloned upstream of GFP into the pDEXH 82 expression vector [ 28 ] previously modiﬁed to encode a STOP codon after the GFP sequence . This is an integrating vector expressing MS2 - GFP without an NLS , via the Dictyostelium Actin15 promotor . Selection of stable clones expressing MS2 - GFP was achieved by a selection of10 m g / mlG418 . Weobtainedseveralstablecloneswhereexpress - ing cells had only a 2 - to 3 - fold variation in absolute ﬂuorescence levels . Nonexpressersrepresented < 1 % oftotalcells . Northernanal - ysis was carried out as described [ 27 ] . Imaging of MS2 - dscA Expression We used log - phase growth cells maintained 4 – 6 days in HL5 media [ 29 ] in theabsenceof selection . Culture , differentiation , and imaging werecarriedoutintemperature - controlledroomsat22ºC . Cellswere washedfreeofmediaandplatedinKK2buffer ( 20mMKPO 4 [ pH6 . 2 ] ) on thin KK2 – 2 % agar at a density of 0 . 4 3 10 6 cells / cm 2 . After 5 min forcellstosettle , bufferwasremovedandcellsincubatedinahumid - iﬁedchamber . Atselectedtimesduringdifferentiation , 1cm 2 squares of agar were excised and inverted onto a Bioptechs D TPG imaging dish and covered with mineral oil to prevent dessication . CellswereimagedonanIX81invertedmicroscopewithaPlanApo 60x , 1 . 4 NA objective ( Olympus ) coupled with a Lambda DG - 4 / OF30 light source ( Sutter Instrument ) with a 1 . 0 OD neutral density ﬁlter ( # ND10A , Thor Labs ) to attenuate excitation and a GFP ﬁlter set ( # 41017 , Chroma Technology ) . Cells were imaged with a Cascade 512B CCD camera ( Photometrics ) in 3D by IPLab ( Windows v3 . 7 , Scanalytics ) . 38 z - slices were acquired with 250 nm step size with an exposure time of 30 ms . Stacks were collected every 2 . 5 min for 30 min and multiple ﬁelds were collected in parallel by means of a motorized xy stage ( MS2000 - XYPZ , Applied Scientiﬁc Instru - mentation ) . By spatially oversampling , transcriptional events were visible in several z - planes and occupied multiple pixels in individual z - frames . We therefore set the minimum threshold for an event as two adjacent pixels brighter than any other pixels in the cell . These pixels could be directly over each other in z or adjacent in xy . Pixel intensities were quantiﬁed by a program written to calculate the mean intensity of a 5 pixel circle ( 267 nm / pixel ) around a transcrip - tionalevent . BackgroundlevelsofGFPwereobtainedbycalculating the mean intensity of a 1 pixel circle surrounding the initial circle . Valueswereaveragedover5z - planes . Measuresofpulselengthand intervals were taken from complete events only . Pulses / intervals tailing into the beginning or end of movies were excluded because of the lack of complete information . Curve ﬁtting was carried out with Tablecurve 2D version 5 . 01 ( Systat Software Inc . ) . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include three ﬁgures and one movie and can be foundwiththisarticleonlineathttp : / / www . current - biology . com / cgi / content / full / 16 / 10 / 1018 / DC1 / . Acknowledgements This work was funded in part by a Medical Research Council Career Development Award to J . R . C . We would like to thank Professors C . Weijer and R . Insall for advice on the imaging of developing cells . Received : February 28 , 2006 Revised : March 30 , 2006 Accepted : March 30 , 2006 Published : May 22 , 2006 References 1 . Golding , I . , and Cox , E . C . ( 2004 ) . RNA dynamics in live Escheri - chia coli cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 11310 – 11315 . 2 . Bertrand , E . , Chartrand , P . , Schaefer , M . , Shenoy , S . M . , Singer , R . H . , and Long , R . M . ( 1998 ) . Localization of ASH1 mRNA parti - cles in living yeast . Mol . Cell 2 , 437 – 445 . 3 . Janicki , S . M . , Tsukamoto , T . , Salghetti , S . E . , Tansey , W . P . , Sachidanandam , R . , Prasanth , K . V . , Ried , T . , Shav - Tal , Y . , Bertrand , E . , Singer , R . H . , et al . ( 2004 ) . From silencing to gene expression : real - time analysis in single cells . Cell 116 , 683 – 698 . 4 . Elowitz , M . B . , Levine , A . J . , Siggia , E . D . , and Swain , P . S . ( 2002 ) . Stochastic gene expression in a single cell . Science 297 , 1183 – 1186 . 5 . Acar , M . , Becskei , A . , andvanOudenaarden , A . ( 2005 ) . Enhance - ment of cellular memory by reducing stochastic transitions . Nature 435 , 228 – 232 . 6 . Lahav , G . , Rosenfeld , N . , Sigal , A . , Geva - Zatorsky , N . , Levine , A . J . , Elowitz , M . B . , and Alon , U . ( 2004 ) . Dynamics of the p53 - Mdm2feedbackloopinindividualcells . Nat . Genet . 36 , 147 – 150 . 7 . Raser , J . M . , and O’Shea , E . K . ( 2004 ) . Control of stochasticity in eukaryotic gene expression . Science 304 , 1811 – 1814 . 8 . Blake , W . J . , Kaern , M . , Cantor , C . R . , and Collins , J . J . ( 2003 ) . Noise in eukaryotic gene expression . Nature 422 , 633 – 637 . 9 . Golding , I . , Paulsson , J . , Zawilski , S . M . , and Cox , E . C . ( 2005 ) . Real - time kinetics of gene activity in individual bacteria . Cell 123 , 1025 – 1036 . 10 . Rowekamp , W . , Poole , S . , and Firtel , R . A . ( 1980 ) . Analysis of the multigene family coding the developmentally regulated carbo - hydrate - binding protein discoidin - I in D . discoideum . Cell 20 , 495 – 505 . 11 . Devine , J . M . , Tsang , A . S . , and Williams , J . G . ( 1982 ) . Differential expression of the members of the discoidin I multigene family during growth and development of Dictyostelium discoideum . Cell 28 , 793 – 800 . 12 . Clarke , M . , Kayman , S . C . , and Riley , K . ( 1987 ) . Density - depen - dent induction of discoidin - I synthesis in exponentially growing cells of Dictyostelium discoideum . Differentiation 34 , 79 – 87 . 13 . Poole , S . , Firtel , R . A . , Lamar , E . , and Rowekamp , W . ( 1981 ) . Sequence and expression of the discoidin I gene family in Dic - tyostelium discoideum . J . Mol . Biol . 153 , 273 – 289 . 14 . Eichinger , L . , Pachebat , J . A . , Glockner , G . , Rajandream , M . A . , Sucgang , R . , Berriman , M . , Song , J . , Olsen , R . , Szafranski , K . , Xu , Q . , et al . ( 2005 ) . The genome of the social amoeba Dictyos - telium discoideum . Nature 435 , 43 – 57 . 15 . Alexander , S . , Shinnick , T . M . , andLerner , R . A . ( 1983 ) . Mutantsof Dictyostelium discoideum blocked in expression of all members of the developmentally regulated discoidin multigene family . Cell 34 , 467 – 475 . 16 . Femino , A . M . , Fogarty , K . , Lifshitz , L . M . , Carrington , W . , and Singer , R . H . ( 2003 ) . Visualization of single molecules of mRNA in situ . Methods Enzymol . 361 , 245 – 304 . Current Biology 1024 17 . Varnum , B . , Edwards , K . B . , and Soll , D . R . ( 1986 ) . The develop - mental regulation of single - cell motility in Dictyostelium discoi - deum . Dev . Biol . 113 , 218 – 227 . 18 . Williams , J . G . , Tsang , A . S . , and Mahbubani , H . ( 1980 ) . A change in the rate of transcription of a eukaryotic gene in response to cyclic AMP . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 77 , 7171 – 7175 . 19 . Blusch , J . , Alexander , S . , and Nellen , W . ( 1995 ) . Multiple signal transduction pathways regulate discoidin I gene expression in Dictyostelium discoideum . Differentiation 58 , 253 – 260 . 20 . Clarke , M . , and Gomer , R . H . ( 1995 ) . PSF and CMF , autocrine factors that regulate gene expression during growth and early development of Dictyostelium . Experientia 51 , 1124 – 1134 . 21 . Fusco , D . , Accornero , N . , Lavoie , B . , Shenoy , S . M . , Blanchard , J . M . , Singer , R . H . , and Bertrand , E . ( 2003 ) . Single mRNA mole - cules demonstrate probabilistic movement in living mammalian cells . Curr . Biol . 13 , 161 – 167 . 22 . Reid , G . , Hubner , M . R . , Metivier , R . , Brand , H . , Denger , S . , Manu , D . , Beaudouin , J . , Ellenberg , J . , and Gannon , F . ( 2003 ) . Cyclic , proteasome - mediated turnover of unliganded and liganded ERalpha on responsive promoters is an integral feature of estro - gen signaling . Mol . Cell 11 , 695 – 707 . 23 . Le , T . T . , Harlepp , S . , Guet , C . C . , Dittmar , K . , Emonet , T . , Pan , T . , and Cluzel , P . ( 2005 ) . Real - time RNA proﬁling within a single bacterium . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 9160 – 9164 . 24 . Ng , H . H . , Robert , F . , Young , R . A . , and Struhl , K . ( 2003 ) . Targeted recruitment of Set1 histone methylase by elongating Pol II pro - vides a localized mark and memory of recent transcriptional ac - tivity . Mol . Cell 11 , 709 – 719 . 25 . Durston , A . J . ( 1974 ) . Pacemaker activity during aggregation in Dictyostelium discoideum . Dev . Biol . 37 , 225 – 235 . 26 . Sutoh , K . ( 1993 ) . A transformation vector for dictyostelium dis - coideumwithanewselectablemarkerbsr . Plasmid 30 , 150 – 154 . 27 . Chubb , J . R . , Bloomﬁeld , G . , Xu , Q . , Kaller , M . , Ivens , A . , Skelton , J . , Turner , B . M . , Nellen , W . , Shaulsky , G . , Kay , R . R . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Developmental timing in Dictyostelium is regulated by the Set1 histone methyltransferase . Dev . Biol . 292 , 519 – 532 . 28 . Konzok , A . , Weber , I . , Simmeth , E . , Hacker , U . , Maniak , M . , and Muller - Taubenberger , A . ( 1999 ) . DAip1 , a Dictyostelium homo - logueoftheyeastactin - interactingprotein 1 , isinvolvedinendo - cytosis , cytokinesis , and motility . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 453 – 464 . 29 . Sussman , R . , and Sussman , M . ( 1967 ) . Cultivation of Dictyoste - lium discoideum in axenic medium . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 29 , 53 – 55 . Transcriptional Pulsing 1025