When do auditory / visual differences in duration judgements occur ? J . H . Wearden Keele University , Keele , UK N . P . M . Todd and L . A . Jones Manchester University , UK Four experiments examined judgements of the duration of auditory and visual stimuli . Two used a bisection method , and two used verbal estimation . Auditory / visual differences were found when durations of auditory and visual stimuli were explicitly compared and when durations from both modalities were mixed in partition bisection . Differences in verbal estimation were also found both when people received a single modality and when they received both . In all cases , the auditory stimuli appeared longer than the visual stimuli , and the effect was greater at longer stimulus durations , consistent with a “pacemaker speed” interpretation of the effect . Results suggested that Penney , Gibbon , and Meck’s ( 2000 ) “memory mixing” account of auditory / visual differences in duration judgements , while correct in some circumstances , was incomplete , and that in some cases people were basing their judgements on some preexisting temporal standard . It has been known since the 19th century that the durations of auditory and visual stimuli are usually perceived to be different , even when the stimuli actually last the same length of time . In the words of Goldstone and Lhamon ( 1974 ) “sounds are judged longer than lights” : In other words , auditory stimuli appear to last longer than visual stimuli . Wearden , Edwards , Fakhri , and Percival ( 1998 ) attributed the auditory / visual difference to differences in the operation of an underlying internal clock . The clock was proposed to be of a pacemaker – accumulator type ( Gibbon , Church , & Meck , 1984 ) , with stimuli timed in terms of the number of “ticks” from a pacemaker that were accumulated during the stimulus , and the modality effect was interpreted in terms of a faster pacemaker rate for auditory than for visual stimuli . This interpretation essentially regards the auditory / visual difference as a “pacemaker speed” effect , similar to that obtained when trains of clicks are used to apparently increase the speed of the pacemaker of a putative internal clock ( Penton - Voak , Edwards , Percival , & Wearden , 1996 ; see also Burle & Bonnet , 1999 ; Burle & Casini , 2001 ; Droit - Volet & Wearden , 2002 ; Wearden et al . , 1998 ; and Wearden , Philpott , & Win , 1999 , for replications of this effect ) . More recently , Penney et al . ( 2000 ) concurred with the idea that pacemaker speed was faster for auditory stimuli than for visual stimuli , but added an additional qualiﬁcation . They noted that most studies that had demonstrated Correspondence should be addressed to J . H . Wearden , School of Psychology , Dorothy Hodgkin Building , Keele University , Keele , Staffordshire ST5 5BG , UK . E - mail : j . h . wearden @ psy . keele . ac . uk We are grateful to Carla Hawkes , Joel White , and students from TP groups for help with data collection . # 2006 The Experimental Psychology Society 1709 http : / / www . psypress . com / qjep DOI : 10 . 1080 / 17470210500314729 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) , 1709 – 1724 auditory / visual differences in timing had used a within - group design , with people receiving both auditory and visual stimuli . Penney et al . ( 2000 ) compared different experimental conditions using a bisection procedure and found reliable auditory / visual differences only when people were exposed to both auditory and visual stimuli : When auditory stimuli alone , or visual stimuli alone , were used ( in their Experiment 2 ) there was no modality effect . Their explanation was in terms of “memory mixing” . Suppose that , as Wearden et al . ( 1998 ) proposed , auditory stimuli generate more “clock ticks” per unit time than do visual stimuli . If some standard duration with which subsequent durations are compared is composed of a “mixture” of the number of ticks occurring when this duration is presented in audi - tory and visual modalities , then on average an auditory stimulus will tend to be judged as longer than this standard and a visual one as shorter , giving rise to the modality effect . If , on the other hand , a person experiences only one modality , then memory mixing cannot occur , and no auditory / visual difference would be expected . The present article reports four experiments bearing on the issue of when auditory / visual differences in duration judgements are found and when they are absent . The ﬁrst two experiments use a bisection method , in a procedure similar to , but rather simpler than , that employed by Penney et al . ( 2000 ) . Although some earlier work on temporal bisec - tion in humans exists ( e . g . , Bovet , 1968 ) , most recent studies follow the technique used in an animal experiment by Church and DeLuty ( 1977 ) , which was developed for use with humans by Allan and Gibbon ( 1991 ) and Wearden ( 1991 ) . These experiments used a discrimination method , where subjects were initially presented with examples of “standard” durations , which were identiﬁed as either as a standard “short” dur - ation ( S ) or a standard “long” duration ( L ) . After several presentations of these standards , a range of stimuli with varying durations ( including S and L ) is presented . In Allan and Gibbon’s study , par - ticipants had to make a SHORT or LONG response to each stimulus , whereas in Wearden ( 1991 ) the SHORT or LONG response indicated whether the participant judged the comparison duration to be more similar to S than L , or vice versa . Suppose that we deﬁne a LONG response as that appropriate to L , then all studies with humans ﬁnd a monotonically increasing proportion of LONG responses as stimulus duration increases ( see , for example , Wearden & Ferrara , 1995 , 1996 ) . The bisection method has been used extensively to investigate the conformity of human perform - ance to scalar timing theory ( or scalar expectancy theory , SET : Gibbon et al . , 1984 ) , which was orig - inally developed as an explanation of the perform - ance of rats and pigeons on temporally constrained reinforcement schedules , but which has enjoyed considerable success as an account of human timing performance ( Allan , 1998 ; Wearden , 2003 ) . In the conventional explanation of bisection according to SET ( e . g . , Allan & Gibbon , 1991 ) , people are proposed to develop memories of the standards , S and L , and to compare each presented duration , t , with S and L according to some ratio decision process . Variants of this approach assume slightly different decision processes from those that Allan and Gibbon proposed ; see Wearden ( 2004 ) for discussion . However , all the research is motivated by potential links between bisection performance and the clock , memory , and decision structure of SET ( discussed more fully by Penney et al . , 2000 ) , and all is concerned with theoretically relevant features of behaviour on bisection tasks , such as the location of the bisection point or the property of superimposition . The bisection point is the stimulus duration giving rise to 50 % LONG responses , and dis - cussion of where this is located in humans is provided by Allan ( 2002 ) . The property of super - imposition is exhibited when measures of timed behaviour from different conditions ( e . g . , different stimulus ranges or absolute times ) superimpose when plotted on the same relative scale . Superimposition is a requirement of SET and implies an underlying constant - sensitivity timing mechanism as the interval timed varies—a form of conformity to Weber’s Law . 1710 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) WEARDEN , TODD , JONES EXPERIMENT 1 In Experiment 1 , participants received blocks of stimuli consisting of an initial presentation of the standards ( S and L ) , which differed from block to block , followed by nine comparison durations ( S and L , and durations spaced in 80 - ms steps between them ) . After presentation of each com - parison , the participant was required to judge whether its duration was more similar to S or to L ( by making a SHORT or LONG response ) . In Experiment 1 , all participants received four experimental conditions , two of which were unim - odal ( auditory S and L , auditory comparisons ; visual S and L , visual comparisons ) , and two of which were cross - modal ( auditory S and L , visual comparisons ; visual S and L , auditory compari - sons ) . Although all participants received both auditory and visual stimuli ( so allowing “memory mixing” as a possibility ) , the block structure of the experiment segregated the different con - ditions , so it was always clear to the participant which standard was appropriate to which comparison . If auditory stimuli are judged as longer than visual stimuli , then the cross - modal conditions should generate a large modality effect . The pre - dictions for the unimodal conditions are less clear . If “memory mixing” occurs here , then a modality effect would be expected , but if the audi - tory and visual memories are kept separate then no modality effect should manifest itself . The bisection task used in Experiment 1 is considerably simpler than that employed in most conditions by Penney et al . ( 2000 ) . Our unimodal conditions resemble those from Penney et al . ’s Experiment 2 , except that in their study , different participant groups received either auditory or visual stimuli , but never both . Experiments 1 and 3 of Penney et al . employed more complex methods , with participants not only receiving the two different modalities in a single experimental session , but sometimes trials in which the auditory and visual stimuli were sim - ultaneously present , but with asynchronous onset and variable overlap . Penney et al . never actually required explicit comparisons between auditory S and L and visual comparisons , or vice versa , but rather presented examples of S and L from both modalities at the start of an experimental session . Method Participants A total of 17 ﬁrst - year psychology undergraduates from the University of Manchester participated to gain course credits . Apparatus Participants were tested individually in a small room , which was insulated from external noise and light . An IBM - compatible computer with a colour monitor controlled the experiment , and the computer keyboard served as the response manipulandum . The experimental program was written in the MEL language ( Micro - Experimental Laboratory : Psychology Software Tools Inc . ) , which assured millisecond accuracy for timing of stimuli and responses . Procedure The auditory stimulus employed was a 500 - Hz tone produced by the computer speaker , and the visual stimulus was a 14 (cid:2) 14 - cm blue square , which was centred in the middle of the screen . The experimental session , which took around 25 minutes to complete , was divided into a series of blocks . Each block started with four presentations of the standard Short ( S ) and standard Long ( L ) stimuli , followed by the presentation of nine com - parison durations . S was a random value selected from a uniform distribution running from 150 to 300 ms , and L was always 640 ms longer than S . The comparison stimuli , which were presented in a random order within a block , included the S value for that block and increased in 80 - ms incre - ments up to L . Thus , for example , if on some block S was 225 ms , the comparison stimuli would have been 225 , 305 , 385 , 465 , 545 , 625 , 705 , 785 , 865 ms . S and L were presented as either auditory ( aud ) or visual stimuli ( vis ) , and the comparisons THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) 1711 AUDITORY / VISUAL DURATION DIFFERENCES within each block were either auditory or visual stimuli . This gave rise to four conditions : aud / aud ( i . e . , auditory standard , auditory comparison ) , vis / vis , aud / vis , and vis / aud . Each condition was repeated three times , so that each participant com - pleted 12 blocks within the experimental session . Instructions displayed on the screen informed the participants that they would be presented with four examples of S and L , and that they would then be required to classify the comparison stimuli as being more similar either to S or to L . Participants began the experiment by pressing the spacebar in response to a prompt displayed on the screen . After the presentation of the standards the participant was again prompted to press the space - bar to begin the next trial . After a random delay of between 1 , 000 and 3 , 000 ms a comparison stimulus was presented . The stimulus offset was followed by a display , which asked the subject : “Was that more like the standard SHORT or LONG ? Press short ( S ) or long ( L ) key . ” The participant began the next trial by pressing the spacebar in response to a prompt displayed on the screen . After the nine comparison stimuli had been presented , the partici - pant was informed that they were to be presented with new standard stimuli . This procedure was repeated until all 12 blocks had been completed . As there was no “correct” answer for this task , no feedback was given . Results and discussion Data were taken from all of the blocks , as there was no learning phase in this experiment . Consider ﬁrst the mean proportion of LONG responses as a function of stimulus duration and type of condition ( e . g . , aud / aud , vis / vis , etc . ) . When all four conditions were treated together , analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) found effects of condition , F ( 3 , 48 ) ¼ 24 . 45 , p , . 0001 , compari - son stimulus duration , F ( 8 , 128 ) ¼ 253 . 39 , p , . 0001 , and a signiﬁcant condition by stimulus duration interaction , F ( 24 , 384 ) ¼ 2 . 22 , p , . 001 . However , this overall analysis is somewhat uninformative about where the differences between conditions actually lay , whereas consider - ing them pairwise illustrates them . The upper panel of Figure 1 shows data from the within - modality conditions ( aud / aud and vis / vis ) , and the lower panel data from the two cross - modal conditions ( aud / vis and vis / aud ) . Inspection of the upper panel of Figure 1 shows that the aud / aud and vis / vis conditions produced very similar psychophysical functions . This was conﬁrmed by statistical analysis , which found no effect of condition , F ( 1 , 16 ) ¼ 1 . 12 , p ¼ . 31 , nor condition by stimulus duration interaction , F ( 8 , 128 ) ¼ 1 . 15 , p ¼ . 33 , but there was an obvious effect of stimulus duration , F ( 8 , 128 ) ¼ 181 . 55 , p , . 001 . In the cross - modal comparisons ( lower panel of Figure 1 ) , on the other hand , there was a marked difference between conditions . When the standards were visual and the comparisons auditory ( vis / aud ) the psychophysical function Figure 1 . Psychophysical functions ( mean proportion of LONG responses plotted against comparison stimulus duration , given in ms above S ) from the aud / aud and vis / vis conditions ( upper panel ) , and the aud / vis and vis / aud conditions ( lower panel ) of Experiment 1 . 1712 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) WEARDEN , TODD , JONES was displaced to the left of that obtained when the standards were auditory and the comparisons visual ( aud / vis ) . In this comparison there was a signiﬁcant effect of condition , F ( 1 , 16 ) ¼ 49 . 50 , p , . 0001 , a signiﬁcant effect of stimulus duration , F ( 8 , 128 ) ¼ 112 . 06 , p , . 001 , and a signiﬁcant condition by stimulus duration interaction , F ( 8 , 128 ) ¼ 3 . 80 , p , . 0001 . Such a cross - modal effect is consistent with the notion that for some constant real duration the auditory stimulus was perceived as signiﬁcantly longer than the visual one . The cross - modal effect depended on the relation between the standard and comparison durations , rather than on whether the standard was auditory or visual , or the comparisons auditory or visual , although these comparisons are not shown in Figure 1 , to save space . For example , sig - niﬁcant effects of condition were obtained in the vis / vis versus vis / aud comparisons , F ( 1 , 16 ) ¼ 12 . 49 , p , . 01 , and in the aud / aud versus aud / vis comparisons , F ( 1 , 16 ) ¼ 42 . 89 , p , . 001 . Table 1 shows bisection points ( expressed in terms of ms above S ) for the different experimental conditions . These were calculated from the psy - chophysical functions shown in Figure 1 by regres - sing the proportion of LONG responses against stimulus duration , taking values from the steepest part of the curve , a method introduced by Maricq , Roberts , and Church ( 1981 ) . The regression line was used to calculate the stimulus duration giving rise to 50 % LONG responses—the bisec - tion point . In addition , the regression line was used to calculate the difference limen , half the difference in the duration giving rise to 75 % and 25 % LONG responses . The difference limen divided by the bisection point is the Weber ratio , a measure of temporal sensitivity ( essentially a reﬂection of the steepness of the psychophysical function ) , where smaller values indicate greater temporal sensitivity . Inspection of the values in Table 1 shows that the bisection points from the unimodal conditions ( aud / aud and vis / vis ) were similar and also close to the arithmetic mid - point of the duration range used ( 320 ms above S ) , whereas the bisection points from the cross - modal conditions deviated markedly from this mid - point and were very different , with the aud / vis bisection point being 130 ms higher than the vis / aud one . The bisection points are , of course , consistent with the picture gained from Figure 1 that the unimodal conditions produced similar psychophysical functions , whereas the cross - modal conditions produced functions that were markedly displaced relative to one another ( lower panel of Figure 1 ) . In con - trast to the marked effect of condition on bisection point , Weber ratios remained much more similar , ranging from . 28 to . 36 . The bisection points in Table 1 were used to test the data from Experiment 1 for the property of superimposition , the requirement that data from different experimental conditions superim - pose when plotted on the same relative scale . The appropriate superimposition test for bisection ( Allan & Gibbon , 1991 ) is to plot the proportion of LONG responses produced for each compari - son stimulus against the duration value for that stimulus divided by the bisection point appropriate for the condition being considered . Figure 2 shows the results when this was done . It is clear that the quality of superimposition was good , showing that the main effect of the different conditions was left and right displacement of the psychophysical function . Our data are very similar in their implications to those of Penney et al . ( 2000 ) , although they differ slightly in emphasis . It is obviously the case from our results that having auditory and visual durations in the same experimental session does not guarantee an auditory / visual difference , as no Table 1 . Bisection points and Weber ratios from Experiments 1 and 2 Experiment BP WR 1 aud / aud 284 . 28 vis / vis 292 . 33 aud / vis 372 . 35 vis / aud 242 . 36 2 Auditory 458 . 19 Visual 561 . 16 Note : For Experiment 1 the bisection point is given in ms above S . BP ¼ bisection point . WR ¼ Weber ratio . THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) 1713 AUDITORY / VISUAL DURATION DIFFERENCES such difference was found in our unimodal conditions . This result implies that the “memory mixing” proposed by Penney et al . ( 2000 ) is not a necessary consequence of just experiencing audi - tory and visual durations . If people in our unimodal conditions had been using some mixture of the auditory and visual standards presented during the experiment , the psychophysical functions from aud / aud and vis / vis would have been dis - placed relative to one another . Perhaps memory mixing is avoided if the experimental design allows a clear distinction between the standards for different conditions . The design of Penney et al . ’s Experiments 1 and 3 intermixed auditory , visual , and simultaneous auditory and visual trials in a test session that followed initial pre - sentation of standards in the two modalities . Feedback was given for responses to comparison durations that actually were S and L during the test phase , but participants were required to classify each comparison duration as SHORT or LONG , not relative to a standard presented fairly recently ( e . g . , at the beginning of each block as in our Experiment 1 ) . Their study seems likely to have encouraged memory mixing , as the different conditions were not segregated into blocks as in our study . A slightly different bisection method from the one used above , which might be particu - larly susceptible to memory mixing , was employed in Experiment 2 . EXPERIMENT 2 Wearden and Ferrara ( 1995 ) developed a bisection technique ( their partition method ) in which humans bisected sets of durations without any explicit identiﬁcation of members of the set as S and L . We were interested in the question of what performance would look like if members of the to - be - bisected stimulus set were intermixed auditory and visual stimuli . In partition bisection , there are no durations explicitly identiﬁed as S and L , so the participant must presumably con - struct some kind of standard for themselves . Wearden and Ferrara ( 1995 ) suggested that the arithmetic mean of the set of all the presented dur - ations was the basis for judgements in this case . Following the logic of Penney et al . ( 2000 ) , if auditory durations are subjectively longer than visual durations , and some mixed memory of the auditory and visual durations is used as the basis for decision ( e . g . , the mean of all the durations , following Wearden & Ferrara , 1995 ) , then visual stimuli will tend to have durations shorter than this mixed standard , and auditory stimuli dur - ations longer , so an auditory / visual duration difference would be expected to manifest itself clearly in this situation . Experiment 2 tested this prediction by performing partition bisection on a set comprising auditory and visual stimuli . Essentially , participants received a set of durations in both modalities and simply had to classify each stimulus duration as SHORT or LONG . Method Participants A total of 15 psychology undergraduates from the University of Manchester participated in the experiment to gain course credits . Apparatus The apparatus was the same as that in Experiment 1 . Procedure The auditory and visual stimuli employed were the same as those in Experiment 1 . The experimental Figure 2 . Psychophysical functions from the four conditions of Experiment 1 ( aud / aud , vis / vis , aud / vis , vis / aud ) plotted against stimulus duration divided by the bisection point for the condition in force . Bisection point data were taken from Table 1 . 1714 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) WEARDEN , TODD , JONES session , which took approximately 20 minutes to complete , was divided into eight blocks . Within each block , nine visual stimuli and nine auditory stimuli were presented in a random sequence . Their durations were 200 , 280 , 360 , 440 , 520 , 600 , 680 , 760 , and 840 ms . Participants were informed via instructions displayed on the screen that they would be presented with stimuli , which they would have to classify as either SHORT or LONG . The participants were prompted by a display to press the spacebar to begin the experi - ment . After a random delay of between 2 , 000 and 3 , 000 ms , the stimulus was presented , and the participant pressed either the S key to classify the stimulus as SHORT or the L key to classify the stimulus as LONG . As there was no correct answer for this task , no feedback could , of course , be given . The participant began the next trial by pressing the spacebar , and the experiment continued , until all durations had been delivered . Results and discussion In Experiment 2 , the participants obviously required some preliminary experience before stable classiﬁcation of the durations presented as SHORT or LONG could be obtained . We there - fore included only data from the last 5 , of 8 , blocks in calculations . The upper panel of Figure 3 shows the mean proportion of LONG responses plotted against stimulus duration for the auditory and visual stimuli used . Obviously , the psychometric function from the visual stimuli was displaced to the right relative to that for the auditory stimuli , in spite of the fact that Experiment 2 never required explicit cross - modal comparisons . ANOVA conﬁrmed the difference between the psychometric functions . Auditory stimuli pro - duced more LONG responses overall than did visual stimuli , F ( 1 , 14 ) ¼ 35 . 6 , p , . 0001 , there was the usual effect of stimulus duration , F ( 8 , 112 ) ¼ 259 . 0 , p , . 0001 , and there was also a sig - niﬁcant stimulus duration by modality interaction , F ( 8 , 112 ) ¼ 11 . 95 , p , . 0001 . Bisection points and Weber ratios for the audi - tory and visual stimuli are shown in Table 1 . As in Experiment 1 , the auditory bisection point was displaced to the left of the arithmetic mean ( 520 ms ) , and the visual bisection point was dis - placed to the right of it . The bisection points were used to test the data in Experiment 2 for super - imposition , and the lower panel of Figure 3 shows results when this was done . Obviously , the data from the different modalities superimposed well . The data obtained in Experiment 2 are comple - tely consistent with Penney et al . ’s ( 2000 ) idea of memory mixing . Such an explanation ﬁts our data well , particularly if we follow Wearden and Ferrara ( 1995 ) and assume that when the partition method is used participants compare the durations presented with the arithmetic mean of all the stimulus lengths . Overall , the subjective mean of the auditory stimuli will be longer than the mean Figure 3 . Upper panel : Psychophysical functions from Experiment 2 . Data are shown separately for auditory stimuli ( ﬁlled circles ) and visual stimuli ( unﬁlled circles ) . Lower panel : Psychophysical functions from Experiment 2 , with mean proportion of LONG responses plotted against stimulus duration / bisection point . Bisection point data were taken from Table 1 . THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) 1715 AUDITORY / VISUAL DURATION DIFFERENCES of the visual stimuli , so combining these means by memory mixing will lead to some intermediate value . By comparison to this , auditory stimuli are relatively long , and visual stimuli relatively short , so a cross - modal effect like that observed in the upper panel of Figure 3 would be predicted . The results of Experiments 1 and 2 generally support the idea that modality effects are obtained readily when ( a ) there is some sort of comparison between “standards” in one modality and “com - parisons” in another ( our aud / vis and vis / aud con - ditions from Experiment 1 ) , and ( b ) when the method used seems likely to encourage some sort of memory mixing ( Experiment 2 ) . Results from the aud / aud and vis / vis conditions of Experiment 1 suggest a modiﬁcation to Penney et al . ’s ( 2000 ) conclusions , as it is clear that just experiencing auditory and visual durations in the same experimental session is not sufﬁcient to produce a modality effect when the standards and comparisons are in the same modality . The results from our two bisection studies using auditory and visual stimuli can be compared with those from another recent study using bisec - tion by Droit - Volet , Tourret , and Wearden ( 2004 ) . Participants were children of 5 and 8 years , as well as student - age adults , and all received two experimental sessions . In one of these ( unim - odal ) , both the short and the long standards ( 200 and 800 ms ) and the comparison durations ( 200 – 800 ms in 100 - ms steps ) were in the same modality , either auditory or visual . In the other session ( cross - modal ) the standards and compari - son durations were in different modalities . At all age groups , participants behaved as if the auditory stimuli were subjectively longer than the visual stimuli in the cross - modal session , as in our con - ditions requiring explicit ( Experiment 1 ) or implicit ( Experiment 2 ) comparisons between auditory and visual stimuli . Another point of com - parison was that , in adults at least , the Weber frac - tions from the visual / visual comparisons and the auditory / auditory comparisons were very similar , as in our Experiments 1 and 2 ( e . g . , see Table 1 ) . Our next two experiments involved between - group comparisons of verbal estimates of the dur - ation of auditory or visual stimuli . In Experiment 3 , different participant groups received either visual or auditory stimuli ( and no - one received both ) . This sort of manipulation was not actually used in Wearden et al . ’s ( 1998 ) study of modality effects , and in their experiment , participants received experimental sessions where auditory and visual durations were intermixed . If in these mixed conditions , people were using some sort of standard resulting from a mixture of auditory and visual durations , then by Penney et al . ’s memory - mixing notion , a modality effect would be expected , as in the present Experiment 2 , and one was indeed found . If different groups receive only either auditory or visual stimuli , then no memory mixing can occur , so no modality effect would be expected if this factor alone was responsible for auditory / visual duration differences . Experiment 3 tests this idea simply . Different groups estimated the duration of auditory or visual stimuli in two con - ditions . In one , the delivery of the duration to be estimated was preceded by a warning signal , and in another case the warning signal was absent , but in both cases , a between - group comparison of estimation of the duration of auditory or visual stimuli was possible . The experiment was actually intended to test the effect of the warning signal , but as will be seen later , this produced no signiﬁcant effect , so the data are used here to address the question of possible between - group effects on auditory / visual duration judgements . EXPERIMENT 3 Method Participants A total of 30 Manchester University psychology undergraduates participated for course credit . They were arbitrarily allocated to two equal - sized groups , one receiving auditory stimuli and the other visual stimuli . Apparatus The apparatus was the same as that in Experiments 1 and 2 . 1716 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) WEARDEN , TODD , JONES Procedure All participants received a single experimental session lasting about 30 minutes . An individual made judgements of the duration of either auditory stimuli ( 500 - Hz tones produced by the computer speaker ) , or visual stimuli ( 14 (cid:2) 14 - cm light - blue squares presented in the centre of the monitor screen ) , with no participant receiving both . Consider ﬁrst the procedure for the auditory group . The 10 stimulus durations used were 77 , 203 , 348 , 461 , 582 , 707 , 834 , 958 , 1 , 063 , and 1 , 183 ms , and a block of trials consisted of the presentation of each duration twice , once preceded by a warning signal and once without . To produce each stimulus , the participant pressed the spacebar in response to a “Press spacebar for next trial” . On no - warning - signal trials , this response was followed by a random delay between 3 , 000 and 7 , 000 ms and the presentation of the duration to be estimated . On warning - signal trials , the delay before the warning signal was random , between 1 , 000 and 5 , 000 ms , and the warning signal ( a 50 - ms 2 , 000 - Hz tone ) preceded the presentation of the stimulus by 2 s . When the stimulus terminated , the participant typed in the estimated duration of the stimulus in milliseconds using the numeric keypad on the computer keyboard . This was followed by the “Press spacebar . . . ” prompt and the next trial . No feedback as to accuracy of estimates was given . The procedure for the visual group was identical except for the stimuli presented . Before any trials were delivered , participants in both groups were instructed to estimate the duration in milliseconds , using a scale where 1 , 000 ¼ 1 s , and were also told that all durations presented were between 50 and 1 , 500 ms . They were further informed that on half the trials a brief beep would precede the presentation of the stimulus by exactly 2 s . Participants in both groups received ﬁve blocks of 20 trials ( 10 durations with and without warning signal ) , with the trials being randomly ordered within the block . Results and discussion Figure 4 shows mean verbal estimates of the dur - ation of the auditory and visual stimuli presented with data taken from the last four of the ﬁve blocks of the experiment . Verbal estimates were ﬁltered to remove all values outside the 50 – 1 , 500 - ms range . The upper panel shows data from trials without a warning signal , and the lower panel data from the warning - signal trials . Inspection of both panels immediately suggests that a modality effect was present in data obtained , as mean verbal estimates of the duration of auditory stimuli were always higher than those for visual stimuli of the same real duration . Furthermore , the difference between the mean estimates increased with increasing duration , suggesting that the estimation functions differed in slope . An overall ANOVA found no signiﬁcant effect of presence or absence of warning signal , although there was a trend towards an effect , F ( 1 , 298 ) ¼ 3 . 76 , p , . 07 , but there were signiﬁcant effects Figure 4 . Mean verbal estimates from Experiment 3 , plotted against stimulus duration in ms . Upper panel : no - warning - signal trials ; lower panel : warning - signal trials . Data are shown separately for auditory ( ﬁlled circles ) and visual ( unﬁlled circles ) stimuli . THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) 1717 AUDITORY / VISUAL DURATION DIFFERENCES of stimulus modality , F ( 1 , 28 ) ¼ 6 . 24 , p , . 02 , and stimulus duration , F ( 9 , 252 ) ¼ 257 . 70 , p , . 001 , and a signiﬁcant Modality ( auditory or visual ) (cid:2) Duration interaction , F ( 9 , 252 ) ¼ 3 . 97 , p , . 001 . The ﬁrst of these signiﬁcant effects shows that auditory stimuli produced longer duration estimates than did visual stimuli , even though no participant experienced more than one modality , the second shows the obvious effect of stimulus duration on mean estimate , and the third shows that the effect of modality increased with increas - ing stimulus duration . No other interactions were signiﬁcant , or approached signiﬁcance . When the no - signal and warning - signal conditions were analysed separately , the results were identical in form : There were signiﬁcant effects of modality : no signal , F ( 1 , 28 ) ¼ 6 . 65 , p , . 05 ; signal , F ( 1 , 26 ) ¼ 5 . 52 , p , . 05 , and stimulus duration : no signal , F ( 9 , 252 ) ¼ 184 . 35 , p , . 001 ; signal , F ( 9 , 252 ) ¼ 193 . 82 , p , . 001 , and a signiﬁcant Modality (cid:2) Stimulus duration interaction : no signal , F ( 9 , 252 ) ¼ 2 . 83 , p , . 01 ; signal , F ( 9 , 252 ) ¼ 3 . 59 , p , . 01 . The results of Experiment 3 demonstrate a very clear modality effect in duration judgements , even when different groups experienced only one stimu - lus modality . The modality effect was not only very clear in the between - group comparisons , but also seemed to have the same form as the moda - lity effect reported from within - group verbal estimation in Wearden et al . ( 1998 ) —that is , with the difference between the mean estimates from auditory and visual stimuli increasing with increasing duration . As discussed in Wearden et al . ( 1998 ) , such a result is exactly what would be predicted if the pacemaker of the internal clock ran faster for auditory than for visual stimuli . Wearden et al . ( 1998 , p . 104 ) show that according to the standard mathematical descrip - tion of a pacemaker – accumulator clock , pace - maker speed multiplies real - time duration , so if two conditions differ in pacemaker speed , the effect should be more marked at longer durations than short durations ( see also Droit - Volet & Wearden , 2002 ) . Alternative accounts of audi - tory / visual differences , such as the idea that switch processes of the internal clock operated with different latencies for auditory and visual stimuli , would , as Wearden et al . showed , generate a constant difference between auditory and visual duration judgements , rather than the multiplica - tive effect shown in Figure 4 . The between - group modality effect poses pro - blems for the memory mixing interpretation of auditory / visual differences in duration judge - ments , as no memory mixing could have occurred in Experiment 3 , yet a clear effect was found . It seems as if memory mixing is not necessary for auditory / visual differences to occur , although it may be sufﬁcient ( e . g . , Experiment 2 ) . EXPERIMENT 4 The ﬁnal experiment was a more elaborate version of Experiment 3 , involving three participant groups . For two of these , verbal estimation was performed on either auditory or visual stimuli ( as Experiment 3 ) , and for the third group partici - pants received both auditory and visual stimuli , as in the verbal estimation experiments of Wearden et al . ( 1998 ) . Method Participants A total of 60 Manchester University psychology undergraduates served . Apparatus The apparatus was the same as that in Experiment 3 . Procedure The participants were arbitrarily allocated to three equal - sized groups . For two of these ( aud and vis ) , the stimuli whose duration had to be estimated were either 500 - Hz tones ( aud ) , or blue squares ( vis ) , as Experiment 3 . The 10 stimulus durations were the same as those in Experiment 3 and ranged from 77 to 1 , 183 ms . Participants received ﬁve blocks of trials , where each block consisted of presentation of the 10 stimulus durations in a random order . For the third group ( aud / vis ) , participants received both auditory and visual 1718 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) WEARDEN , TODD , JONES stimuli , with the 10 stimulus durations being pre - sented once in each modality in a block of 20 trials . Participants received ﬁve blocks of trials , in each of two identical experimental sessions . All other details were as for the no - warning - signal trials of Experiment 3 except that when the spacebar was pressed to present the stimulus , the delay before stimulus presentation was a random value between 2 , 000 and 3 , 000 ms , rather than the longer values used in Experiment 3 . Results and discussion Data were taken from Blocks 2 to 5 of the exper - iment and were ﬁltered to remove all estimates outside the speciﬁed range ( 50 – 1 , 500 ms ) . The ﬁltering process resulted in 1 participant in the aud / vis group having no data for some stimulus durations , so all data from this participant were discarded , leaving 19 participants in the aud / vis group , and data for 1 participant in the aud group were lost as a result of a data storage error , leaving 19 participants in this group . Figure 5 shows mean verbal estimates plotted against stimulus from the aud and vis groups ( i . e . , the participants receiving only one modality : upper panel ) , and the aud / vis group ( participants receiv - ing both modalities : lower panel ) . Data are shown separately for the two experimental sessions , and for auditory and visual stimuli . Consider ﬁrst data from the between - groups comparison ( aud and vis : upper panel of Figure 5 ) . Inspection of the data suggests that there was ( a ) little effect of experimental session , ( b ) a large effect of stimulus duration on mean verbal estimate , and ( c ) a marked modality effect , which took the form of the estimates for auditory stimuli being longer than those for visual stimuli . In addition , it appeared as if the auditory / visual difference increased with increasing stimulus duration . All these suggestions were conﬁrmed by statistical analysis . ANOVA found no effect of session on mean verbal estimates , F ( 1 , 37 ) ¼ 2 . 96 , p ¼ . 10 , but there were signiﬁcant effects of stimulus duration , F ( 9 , 333 ) ¼ 426 . 90 , p , . 001 , and stimulus modality , F ( 1 , 37 ) ¼ 8 . 90 , p , . 01 , and a signiﬁcant Stimulus Modality (cid:2) Stimulus Duration interaction , F ( 9 , 333 ) ¼ 8 . 05 , p , . 001 . No other interactions ( Session (cid:2) Modality , Session (cid:2) Stimulus Duration , or Session (cid:2) Duration (cid:2) Modality ) approached signiﬁcance . The ﬁrst of the signiﬁcant effects shows that the auditory / visual difference was replicable over sessions , the second shows the obvious effect of stimulus duration on mean estimates , the third conﬁrms that there were signiﬁcantly higher estimates when auditory stimuli were used than when visual stimuli were used , and the ﬁnal result , the interaction , shows that the auditory / visual difference increased with increasing stimulus duration ( i . e . , was multiplicative with duration ) . Figure 5 . Upper panel : Mean verbal estimates from the between - group comparisons of Experiment 4 ( groups aud and group vis ) plotted against stimulus duration in ms . Data are shown separately for auditory and visual stimuli , and for the two experimental sessions ( s1 and s2 ) , see key for details . Lower panel : Mean verbal estimates from the aud / vis group of Experiment 4 . See key for details . THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) 1719 AUDITORY / VISUAL DURATION DIFFERENCES The lower panel of Figure 5 shows mean verbal estimates from auditory and visual stimuli , from both experimental sessions , from the aud / vis group who received auditory and visual stimuli intermixed within blocks . Once again , inspection suggests that effects of session were small , but that stimulus duration and stimulus modality had large effects , and that these two variables inter - acted so that the auditory / visual difference was greater at longer durations . The pattern of results , in fact , appears identical to that shown in the upper panel of Figure 5 , where data come from between - group comparisons . These suggestions were conﬁrmed by statistical analysis . There was no effect of session , F ( 1 , 18 ) ¼ 1 . 93 , p ¼ . 18 , but there were signiﬁcant effects of stimulus duration , F ( 9 , 162 ) ¼ 544 . 59 , p , . 001 , and of stimulus modality , F ( 1 , 18 ) ¼ 69 . 88 , p , . 001 , as well as a signiﬁcant Modality (cid:2) Stimulus Duration interaction , F ( 9 , 162 ) ¼ 12 . 32 , p , . 001 . No other effects approached signiﬁcance . It seems , therefore , that not only could audi - tory / visual differences in duration judgements be obtained from between - group comparisons ( as in Experiment 3 ) , but the effects of within - group comparisons , where people had received both auditory and visual stimuli , and those of between - group comparisons were highly similar . Another way of examining whether the between - group modality effect and the within - group one are the same is to plot the data in the form used in Figure 6 . Figure 6 shows the same data as those in Figure 5 , but this time all the auditory judgements are in the top panel , and all the visual judgements are in the bottom one . So , we can ask whether perceived durations of auditory ( or visual ) stimuli were the same when people received only one modality as when they received both of them . Inspection of both panels of Figure 6 suggests that the judgements of auditory ( or visual ) durations were more - or - less identical whether they came from between - or within - group comparisons , as there is little apparent difference in the judgements derived from the different ses - sions or different conditions ( one modality , or both ) , and no effect apart from the obvious effect of stimulus duration . These suggestions were conﬁrmed by statistical analysis . ANOVA was used to examine the between - condition effect of one modality or both being experienced by the participant and within - condition effects of stimulus duration and session . Consider ﬁrst judgements of the duration of auditory stimuli ( upper panel of Figure 6 ) . Having one modality or both produced no signiﬁcant difference in mean verbal estimates , F ( 1 , 36 ) ¼ 0 . 604 , p ¼ . 44 , and there were no signiﬁcant effects of session , F ( 1 , 36 ) ¼ 2 . 50 , p ¼ . 123 , nor any signiﬁcant interactions , although there was the obvious effect of stimulus duration , F ( 9 , 324 ) ¼ 686 . 68 , p , . 001 . When judgements of visual stimuli were considered ( lower panel of Figure 6 . Mean verbal estimates from Experiment 4 plotted against stimulus duration in ms . Upper panel : Data from judgements of auditory stimuli ; aud alone is from the aud group ; aud is from auditory judgements by the aud / vis group ; s1 and s2 indicate Sessions 1 and 2 . Lower panel : Data from judgements of visual stimuli ; vis alone is from the vis group ; vis is from the vis / aud group . 1720 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) WEARDEN , TODD , JONES Figure 6 ) , there was a nearly signiﬁcant effect of session , F ( 1 , 37 ) ¼ 3 . 96 , p , . 06 , but no other signiﬁcant effect or signiﬁcant interaction , apart from that of stimulus duration , F ( 9 , 333 ) ¼ 368 . 56 , p , . 001 . In particular , the effect of having one modality or both did not approach signiﬁcance , F ( 1 , 37 ) ¼ 0 . 33 , p ¼ . 57 . The data from Experiment 4 replicated those from the present Experiment 3 , as well as those from a within - group auditory / visual comparison in Wearden et al . ’s ( 1998 ) Experiments 2 and 3 . The principal novel contribution of Experiment 4 was the demonstration ( shown most clearly in Figure 6 ) that judgements of audi - tory and visual durations were not signiﬁcantly different whether the participant experienced only a single modality or both . So not only were auditory / visual duration differences obtained in within - group and between - group comparisons ( Figures 4 and 5 ) , but the behaviour observed in these two different cases was apparently nearly identical and certainly not different statistically ( Figure 6 ) . The implications of these results are discussed further below . GENERAL DISCUSSION Our results , like almost all previous results , conﬁrm the contention that “sounds are judged longer than lights” , but perhaps the most striking ﬁnding obtained was that from Experiments 3 and 4 . Here , not only could auditory / visual differ - ences in duration judgements be obtained when people received only one stimulus modality , but the effect on verbal estimation of duration seemed identical to that obtained when they received both . In fact , obtaining auditory / visual differences in duration judgements when people receive only one modality is not novel . Penney et al . ( 2000 , p . 1770 ) state that Wearden et al . ( 1998 ) and Walker and Scott ( 1981 ) used both between - and within - subject designs , whereas in fact in all experiments in both articles all participants received both audi - tory and visual stimuli , but one study that certainly obtained an auditory / visual duration judgement difference from a between - group experiment was Goldstone , Boardman , and Lhamon ( 1959 ) . In their Experiment 1 , four different groups received auditory stimuli alone , visual alone , visual / auditory , or auditory / visual , and in the mixed - modality conditions people received the ﬁrst - mentioned modality for a block of trials , followed by the second - mentioned modality . The task was to decide whether each stimulus pre - sented was greater or less than 1 s . Durations started at 1 s then either ascended or descended depending on what the response to the 1 - s stimu - lus was . If we consider just data from the auditory - and visual - alone groups , a very large auditory / visual difference was found : The auditory duration judged to be more or less than 1 s 50 % of the time was 0 . 59 s , whereas the visual duration was 1 . 02 s , a 0 . 43 - s difference . When people received both modalities the difference was 0 . 31 s for auditory then visual and 0 . 45 s for visual then auditory . So , just as in our Experiment 4 , Goldstone et al . ( 1959 ) not only found auditory / visual differences from single - modality conditions , but also found that the difference from these conditions seemed to be of about the same magnitude as when people experienced both modalities . How can the results obtained from the present experiments , from Penney et al . ( 2000 ) , and from previous studies be reconciled ? Perhaps the start - ing point is to assert that the “memory mixing” account of Penney et al . is deﬁnitely not incorrect ( indeed , we provide strong evidence for it in our Experiment 2 ) , but it is certainly incomplete . When memory mixing is likely to occur , audi - tory / visual differences in duration judgements will be manifested , but they can apparently occur , and be of large magnitude , in other situ - ations too , as in Goldstone et al . ( 1959 ) and our Experiments 3 and 4 . The critical factor may be the content and nature of the comparison processes used to produce the time judgements . Consider the conditions of our Experiment 1 . In the cross - modal conditions , the standards pre - sented at the start of the block and the comparison durations subsequently presented were in different modalities . Fewer “clock ticks” accumulate for the visual than for the auditory stimuli , so auditory THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) 1721 AUDITORY / VISUAL DURATION DIFFERENCES comparisons are perceived as relatively long compared to visual standards , and vice versa , and a marked modality effect occurs ( see also Wearden et al . , 1998 , for a similar result from a temporal generalization method ) . In our unimodal conditions , standards and comparisons are in the same modality , so pacemaker speed does not differ between them , and no modality effect is found . There is no memory mixing in our Experiment 1 because the block structure of the procedure essentially forces participants to use the standards at the start of the block as a basis for judgements of the comparisons . This apparent segregation of the auditory and visual stimuli is perhaps encouraged by the fact that the standard short and long durations changed between blocks , and participants have been informed that this is the case . There is thus no tendency to compare visual comparison durations with auditory stan - dards , or vice versa , in the unimodal conditions of our Experiment 1 . As mentioned above , the methods used by Penney et al . ( 2000 ) in their Experiments 1 and 3 did not segregate auditory and visual stimuli into blocks , and all had to be compared with standards learned at the start of the experimental session . In addition , the instructions did not emphasize comparing auditory comparisons with auditory standards , and visual comparisons with visual standards , so memory mixing seems more likely to have occurred than with our procedure . Penney et al . ’s Experiment 2 , on the other hand , used auditory S and L with auditory comparisons , and visual S and L with visual comparisons , and did not obtain a between - group modality effect . However , the critical feature in avoiding memory mixing in this experiment may not be the fact that people only experienced one modality , but that by doing so it was necessarily clear which comparison durations should be com - pared with which standards . Our Experiment 1 shows that people can experience both auditory and visual durations and still not show memory mixing , if experimental trials are appropriately arranged . The between - group effect obtained in our Experiments 3 and 4 , and by Goldstone et al . ( 1959 ) , can also be explained in terms of pace - maker speed differences between auditory and visual stimuli , albeit more speculatively . Penney et al . ( 2000 , p . 1770 ) argue that studies that have obtained between - group modality effects have “required participants to compare the [ auditory or visual ] signal to an internal representation held prior to the experiment ( e . g . , a clock second ) ” , and this is certainly true of the study of Goldstone et al . ( 1959 ) , although this work is not cited by Penney et al . We might also extend this idea to verbal estimation of duration . Suppose that people perform verbal estimation by comparing each duration presented to some preexisting internal standard—for example , some representation of 1 s that gives rise to a response of “1 , 000” . Any comparison of auditory and visual stimuli with a common standard will then give rise to a modality effect , if the pacemaker speed interpretation of auditory / visual differences is correct , as for any real - time value an auditory duration will produce more “ticks” than would a visual one and will thus appear longer by reference to some common standard . There is no require - ment that the common standard be accurate ( i . e . , what a person believes to be 1 s may be above or below the real time value of 1 s ) , although the mean verbal estimates produced in our exper - iments suggest that the standard cannot be wildly inaccurate ; it is only necessary that the same internal standard be used for both auditory and visual comparisons . If the internal standard is conceived of in terms of “ticks” of the internal clock , there is also no need for the rate of the pace - maker operative during creation of this internal standard to have any special relation to the rate during auditory or visual stimuli . That is , if the putative standard is based on x “clock ticks” per s , x can be between the rate obtaining for auditory stimuli and the , lower , rate for visual stimuli , can be higher than both , or can be lower than both . In all cases , auditory / visual modality effects would be obtained if a common standard were used . This interpretation implies that between - group modality effects may be commonly obtained , and it also implies that even in within - group 1722 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) WEARDEN , TODD , JONES auditory / visual comparisons ( like those in Experiment 4 , and in Wearden et al . , 1998 ) , the participants may not actually be comparing the auditory and visual durations directly , nor produ - cing any “mixture” of the two , but merely compar - ing each stimulus independently with some common standard . Indeed , the fact that between - group and within - group modality effects were identical in our Experiment 4 suggests that the processes involved might have been the same in both cases . Although our Experiments 3 and 4 have demonstrated large and reliable between - group differences in the estimation of the duration of auditory and visual stimuli , and they have attribu - ted this difference to the existence of some common “standard” , which probably exists prior to the experimental procedure ( as Penney et al . , 2000 , themselves assume ) , we have no deﬁnite sug - gestions at present as to what this putative standard might be , how it is generated , or how it is used in different situations . Many questions remain : For example , is the behaviour that a particular person exhibits when asked to produce or estimate “1 second” useful in predicting how this individual will respond when the duration to be produced or estimated is different ? Do temporal “standards” remain constant within individuals between tasks , or constant over time with the same task ? What characteristics of the individual ( such as age or measured intellectual ability ) predict the value of temporal “standards” that the individual uses on timing tasks ? Although it is a cliche´ of psychology to suggest that “further research is needed” , in the present case the search for putative extraexperi - mental temporal “standards” may be central to our understanding of how individuals perform on some commonly used timing tasks . To return to the question posed in the title of our article , differences in the judgements of the duration of auditory and visual stimuli will cer - tainly occur when a stimulus in one modality is compared with one in another modality , but may also occur without exposure to both stimulus types in some conditions , probably as the result of use of some common standard for judgement of the duration of both sorts of stimulus . Original manuscript received 13 February 2003 Accepted revision received 5 August 2005 First published online 30 January 2006 REFERENCES Allan , L . G . ( 1998 ) . The inﬂuence of the scalar timing model on human timing research . Behavioural Processes , 44 , 101 – 117 . Allan , L . G . ( 2002 ) . The location and interpretation of the bisection point . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 55B , 43 – 60 . Allan , L . G . , & Gibbon , J . ( 1991 ) . Human bisection at the geometric mean . Learning and Motivation , 22 , 39 – 58 . Bovet , P . ( 1968 ) . Echelles subjectives de dure´e obtenues par une me´thode de bissection . L’Anne´e Psychologique , 68 , 23 – 36 . Burle , B . , & Bonnet , M . ( 1999 ) . What’s an internal clock for ? From temporal information processing to the temporal processing of information . Behavioural Processes , 45 , 59 – 72 . Burle , B . , & Casini , L . ( 2001 ) . Dissociation between activation and attention effects in time estimation : Implications for clock models . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 27 , 195 – 205 . Church , R . M . , & Deluty , M . Z . ( 1977 ) . Bisection of temporal intervals . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Animal Behavior Processes , 3 , 216 – 228 . Droit - Volet , S . , Tourret , S . , & Wearden , J . ( 2004 ) . Perception of the duration of auditory and visual stimuli in children and adults . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 57A , 797 – 818 . Droit - Volet , S . , & Wearden , J . H . ( 2002 ) . Speeding up an internal clock in children ? Effects of visual ﬂicker on subjective duration . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 55B , 193 – 211 . Gibbon , J . , Church , R . M . , & Meck , W . ( 1984 ) . Scalar timing in memory . In J . Gibbon & L . Allan ( Eds . ) , Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences : Vol . 423 : Timing and time perception ( pp . 52 – 77 ) . New York : New York Academy of Sciences . Goldstone , S . , Boardman , W . K . , & Lhamon , W . T . ( 1959 ) . Intersensory comparisons of temporal judgments . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 57 , 243 – 248 . Goldstone , S . , & Lhamon , W . T . ( 1974 ) . Studies of auditory – visual differences in human time THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) 1723 AUDITORY / VISUAL DURATION DIFFERENCES judgment : 1 . Sounds are judged longer than lights . Perceptual and Motor Skills , 39 , 63 – 82 . Maricq , A . V . , Roberts , S . , & Church , R . M . ( 1981 ) . Metamphetamine and time estimation . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Animal Behavior Processes , 7 , 18 – 30 . Penney , T . B . , Gibbon , J . , & Meck , W . H . ( 2000 ) . Differential effects of auditory and visual signals on clock speed and temporal memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 26 , 1770 – 1787 . Penton - Voak , I . S . , Edwards , H . , Percival , A . , & Wearden , J . H . ( 1996 ) . Speeding up an internal clock in humans ? Effects of click trains on subjective duration . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Animal Behavior Processes , 22 , 307 – 320 . Walker , J . T . , & Scott , K . J . ( 1981 ) . Auditory – visual conﬂicts in the perceived duration of lights , tones , and gaps . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 7 , 1327 – 1339 . Wearden , J . H . ( 1991 ) . Human performance on an analogue of an interval bisection task . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 43B , 59 – 81 . Wearden , J . H . ( 2003 ) . Applying the scalar timing model to human time psychology : Progress and challenges . In H . Helfrich ( Ed . ) , Time and mind II : Information - processing perspectives ( pp . 21 – 39 ) . Gottingen , Germany : Hogrefe & Huber . Wearden , J . H . ( 2004 ) . Decision processes in models of timing . Acta Neurobiologiae Experimentalis , 64 , 303 – 317 . Wearden , J . H . , Edwards , H . , Fakhri , M . , & Percival , A . ( 1998 ) . Why “sounds are judged longer than lights” : Application of a model of the internal clock in humans . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 51B , 97 – 120 . Wearden , J . H . , & Ferrara , A . ( 1995 ) . Stimulus spacing effects in temporal bisection by humans . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 48B , 289 – 310 . Wearden , J . H . , & Ferrara , A . ( 1996 ) . Stimulus range effects in temporal bisection by humans . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 49B , 24 – 44 . Wearden , J . H . , Philpott , K . , & Win , T . ( 1999 ) . Speeding up and ( . . . relatively . . . ) slowing down and internal clock in humans . Behavioural Processes , 46 , 63 – 73 . 1724 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2006 , 59 ( 10 ) WEARDEN , TODD , JONES