Designing for Adaptable Learning AMIR HAJ - BOLOURI HÖGSKOLAN VÄST AKADEMISK AVHANDLING som med tillstånd av Forsknings - och forskarutbildningsnämnden vid Högskolan Väst , för avläggande av doktorsexamen i Informatik med Inriktning mot Arbetsintegrerat Lärande , framläggs för offentlig granskning . Onsdagen den 23 maj 2018 klockan 13 i F104 , Albertsalen , Högskolan Väst Opponent : Professor Maung Sein ABSTRACT Title : Designing for Adaptable Learning Keywords : Design , action design research , design science research , information systems , integration work , civic orientation , work - integrated learning , e - learning , adaptable learning ISBN ( Printed ) : 978 - 91 - 87531 - 84 - 2 ISBN ( Electronic ) : 978 - 91 - 87531 - 83 - 5 T he research in this thesis emphasizes the endeavor of designing for adaptable learning . Designing for adaptable learning is understood as an overall response to designing for integration work . Designing for integration work is thus classified as a special case of designing for adaptable learning . Integration work in this research is understood as a professional practice that aims to improve and support the integration process of newly arrived immigrants ( referred to as newcomers ) in society . As professional practitioners of integration work , integration workers face daily challenges that are wicked by nature . In order to understand and problematize these challenges , the empirical work of this research was or - ganized and performed within a case of digitalizing the civic orientation program in Sweden . The civic orientation program is a special case of integration work in Sweden , where integration workers organize and provide civic orientation to newcomers in Sweden . Different groups of newcomers are subsequently participating in a required 60 hours of civic orientation and are provided sessions through their na - tive language . The integration workers are responsible for organizing and performing civic orientation through a dynamic process of dialogues , exercises , and more . Integration work as a practice , however , does not incorporate a standardized knowledge base , which provides integration workers a unified way of organizing and performing civic orientation . Instead , different counties and municipalities in Sweden organize and perform civic orientation in various ways . Furthermore , due to the extreme heterogene - ity among newcomers as participants in civic orientation , the integration workers are forced to adapt . In turn , the integration workers themselves are heterogeneous due to their different roles , areas of re - sponsibilities , and more essentially , worldviews . In order to understand and problematize the aspects of designing for integration work , an explorative approach was adopted through three consecutive cycles of Action Design Research . The cycles were performed from 2013 until completion of this thesis . The thesis was subsequently governed through three research questions : ( 1 ) How to design for integration work ? ( 2 ) What makes designing for integration work significant ? ( 3 ) Why do design for integration work ? The research questions were addressed and answered through a body of produced knowledge that captures and provides the essential contributions of the thesis . The contributions of the thesis high - light different aspects of designing for integration work , as a special case of designing for adaptable learning . Thus , the contributions are presented and discussed with an explicit bearing toward designing for adaptable learning , as the general class of problems and solutions of this research . The contributions are consequently provided through : ( 1 ) an ensemble artifact that is termed a digital platform for civic orientation ; ( 2 ) an Information Systems Design Theory for adaptable e - learning ; ( 3 ) a design research methodology that incorporates work - integrated learning ; ( 4 ) the meta - design of an open learning plat - form that supports the social integration of newcomers in society ; and ( 5 ) a philosophical concept that problematizes and conceptualizes the essence of presence in e - learning . Ultimately , the research contributes to the research domains of information systems and work - integrated learning , by providing findings that problematize core aspects of designing for adaptable learning . Furthermore , the thesis ex - tensively discusses the findings of this research by emphasizing a philosophical perspective toward core aspects of the research contributions . Finally , the thesis concludes with a set of limitations of the current research and a brief discussion about potential endeavours of future research .