Children with autism are neither systematic nor optimal foragers Elizabeth Pellicano a , b , 1 , Alastair D . Smith c , Filipe Cristino d , Bruce M . Hood e , Josie Briscoe e , and Iain D . Gilchrist e a Centre for Research in Autism and Education , Department of Psychology and Human Development , Institute of Education , London WC1H 0AA , United Kingdom ; b School of Psychology , University of Western Australia , Crawley , 6009 , Australia ; c School of Psychology , University of Nottingham , Nottingham NG7 2RD , United Kingdom ; d School of Psychology , Adeilad Brigantia , Bangor University , Bangor , Gwynedd LL57 2AS , United Kingdom ; and e Department of Experimental Psychology , University of Bristol , Bristol BS8 1TU , United Kingdom Edited by Dale Purves , Duke University Medical Center , Durham , NC , and approved November 19 , 2010 ( received for review September 19 , 2010 ) It is well established that children with autism often show out - standing visual search skills . To date , however , no study has tested whether these skills , usually assessed on a table - top or computer , translate to more true - to - life settings . One prominent account of autism , Baron - Cohen ’ s “ systemizing ” theory , gives us good reason tosuspectthattheyshould . Inthisstudy , wetestedwhetherautistic children ’ s exceptional skills at small - scale search extend to a large - scaleenvironment and , in so doing , testedkeyclaims of the system - izing account . Twenty school - age children with autism and 20 age - andability - matchedtypicalchildrentookpartinalarge - scalesearch task in the “ foraging room ” : a purpose - built laboratory , with nu - merous possible search locations embedded into the ﬂ oor . Children wereinstructedtosearchan arrayof16 ( green ) locationsto ﬁ ndthe hidden ( red ) target as quickly as possible . The distribution of target locations wasmanipulatedsothattheyappearedononesideofthe midline for 80 % of trials . Contrary to predictions of the systemizing account , autistic children ’ s search behavior was much less ef ﬁ cient thanthat oftypicalchildren : they showedreducedsensitivitytothe statistical properties of the search array , and furthermore , their search patterns were strikingly less optimal and less systematic . Thenatureoflarge - scalesearchbehaviorinautismcannottherefore be explained by a facility for systemizing . Rather , children with au - tism showed dif ﬁ culties exploring and exploiting the large - scale space , whichmightinsteadbe attributedtoconstraints ( ratherthan bene ﬁ ts ) in their cognitive repertoire . autism spectrum conditions | navigation | spatial representation A utism is a common and often highly debilitating neuro - developmental condition that is characterized by dif ﬁ culties in social communication and repetitive and rigid patterns of be - havior that are believed to be rooted in disrupted neurocognitive processes ( 1 ) . Not all aspects of autistic cognition , however , are characterized by impairments in information processing . Rather , it is well established that people with autism show “ islets of ability ” ( 2 ) . In particular , individuals with autism have been shown re - peatedly to outperform typical children of similar age and ability on a range of visuospatial tasks . On classic visual search paradigms , children with autism are signi ﬁ cantly faster than typical children at detecting a target ( e . g . , a red S ) hidden among an array of dis - tracters ( e . g . , a red T and a green X ) , particularly when search is more challenging and requires multiple shifts of attention ( 3 – 5 ) . One important , yet hitherto unaddressed , question is whether this talent is advantageous to the daily lives of people with au - tism . Experimental investigations of the visual search advantage in autism have almost exclusively relied on behavioral paradigms designed for the computer or table top , which are presumed to represent the state of neurocognitive processes beyond the controlled test situation [ although see Caron et al . ( 6 ) ] . Such tasks nevertheless fail to model abilities in the larger - scale con - text that is typical of everyday life , including ﬁ nding carrots in the grocery store , looking for one ’ s keys in the kitchen , or ﬁ nding one ’ s favorite animal in the zoo — functional behaviors that comprise a large - scale spatial navigation or search component and are critical to achieving independence in adulthood . Here , we investigated whether the exceptional visual search skills of children with autism translate to behaviors in more true - to - life settings . One prominent theoretical account of autism gives us good reason to suspect that they should . Baron - Cohen et al . ( 7 – 10 ) contend that the so - called “ non - social ” features of autism , including the remarkable talents in visual search together with the de ﬁ ning restricted and repetitive behaviors , are mani - festations of an exaggerated form of an evolutionarily adaptive , predominantly male style of processing known as systemizing . Systemizing is the strong preference to understanding rule - based systems : to recognize the statistical regularities of stimuli within a system ( e . g . , prime numbers , computer programs , train timetables ) , to extract the “ if - then ” rules that govern the system , and to use these rules ( repeatedly ) to predict the system ’ s future behavior . Males , on average , show stronger systemizing than females , and people with autism — of all ages and ability levels — display an extreme form of this analytic information processing bias , or hypersystemizing ( 7 – 10 ) . Furthermore , the systemizing account explicitly states that those tasks containing a spatial navigation or search component are precisely the situations , in evolutionary terms , in which sys - temizing should have conferred an advantage : strong systemizers “ would have had greater success in both using and making tools for hunting , or navigating space to explore far a ﬁ eld ” ( ref . 9 , p . 67 , emphasis added ) . Accordingly , then , we hypothesized that the selective advantage for systemizing should be manifest in large - scale search , or foraging — a fundamental spatial behavior that not only relies on ef ﬁ cient navigational abilities but is one im - portant context in which the human brain evolved ( 11 ) . In this study , we directly assessed this possibility using a more ecologically valid search paradigm , which probes the kind of ef ﬁ cient navigational or foraging abilities at which individuals with autism — if they are hypersystemizers — should excel . Our large - scale search laboratory ( 12 ) ( Fig . 1 ) allowed us to maintain a high degree of experimental control while approximating more closely the spatial scale that corresponds to a range of real - world tasks in which movements within the search space are required to ﬁ nd the target . Twenty children diagnosed with an autism spectrum condition ( hereafter , “ autism ” ) and 20 typically de - veloping children of similar age , gender , and ability ( Table 1 ) took part in our “ foraging game . ” The child ’ s task was to search an array of 16 locations to ﬁ nd the hidden target as quickly as possible ( Fig . 1 B and C ) . They completed 40 experimental trials , divided into 2 blocks , separated by a short break . Critically — and akin to search in everyday environments ( 13 ) — we probabilistically manipulated the distribution of target Author contributions : E . P . , A . D . S . , B . M . H . , J . B , and I . D . G . designed research ; E . P . , A . D . S . , and J . B . performed research ; F . C . and I . D . G . contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; E . P . , A . D . S . , and F . C . analyzed data ; and E . P . , A . D . S . , F . C . , B . M . H . , J . B . , and I . D . G . wrote the paper . The authors declare no con ﬂ ict of interest . This article is a PNAS direct submission . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : l . pellicano @ ioe . ac . uk . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1014076108 PNAS | January 4 , 2011 | vol . 108 | no . 1 | 421 – 426 P S Y C H O L O G I C A L A ND C O GN I T I V E S C I E N C E S locations across trials so that they appeared on one side of the midline ( left or right ) for 80 % of trials ( the “ rich ” side ; see Fig . 1 A ) . This particular probability - cueing paradigm has been closely studied with adults ( 13 ) . Searching for a target in large - scale space poses a greater cost in terms of time and energy than searching in small - scale space ; being able to exploit successfully the statistical distribution of target items is therefore critical to effective search . Importantly , this experimental manipulation enabled us to test directly whether children with autism , who purportedly are “ expert in recognizing repeating patterns in stimuli ” ( ref . 8 , p . 1377 ) , should more readily infer the rule un - derlying this lawful , ﬁ nite “ system . ” Furthermore , close analysis of how children carried out their search allowed us to assess whether individual children with autism were more repetitive or “ systematic ” in their search behavior than typical children . Finally , we also examined the potential mechanisms un - derlying autistic children ’ s foraging behavior . Analysis of the component skills necessary for ef ﬁ cient large - scale search sug - A “rich” “sparse” C B Fig . 1 . The large - scale search laboratory . ( A ) A plan layout of the 4 × 4 - m room indicating an example set of locations ( green dots ) and the region of the room ( yellow shading ) , which had a higher probability of containing the target . ( B ) An example search location . The lights change from green ( Left ) to red ( Right ) to indicate the presence of the target . ( C ) A participant activating a ( red ) target location in the search laboratory . Table 1 . Descriptive statistics for chronological age , nonverbal ability , verbal ability , Social Communication Questionnaire ( SCQ ) , and experimental variables Group * Autism † Typical † F df P Background measures Chronological age ( mo ) 127 . 70 ( 16 . 54 ) ; 102 – 172 132 . 35 ( 24 . 36 ) ; 98 – 177 0 . 50 1 , 39 0 . 48 Nonverbal ability ‡ 36 . 30 ( 8 . 12 ) ; 25 – 48 36 . 20 ( 4 . 96 ) ; 24 – 45 0 . 01 1 , 39 0 . 96 Verbal ability § 103 . 35 ( 16 . 45 ) ; 80 – 137 105 . 80 ( 13 . 89 ) ; 82 – 132 0 . 26 1 , 39 0 . 61 SCQ score ( out of 39 ) ¶ 26 . 00 ( 5 . 56 ) ; 18 – 35 4 . 65 ( 3 . 22 ) ; 1 – 11 220 . 78 1 , 39 > 0 . 001 CEFT ( ms ) k 5 . 83 ( 3 . 85 ) ; 1 . 27 – 15 . 53 9 . 16 ( 4 . 22 ) ; 3 . 39 – 18 . 00 6 . 77 1 , 39 0 . 01 Corsi block ( out of 40 ) * * 17 . 40 ( 4 . 38 ) ; 11 – 26 21 . 20 ( 4 . 72 ) ; 15 – 33 6 . 96 1 , 39 0 . 01 Experimental measures % of visits to rich side †† Block 1 45 . 50 ( 16 . 77 ) 61 . 50 ( 20 . 91 ) Block 2 62 . 25 ( 17 . 43 ) 63 . 25 ( 25 . 30 ) Optimality metric †† Block 1 0 . 63 ( 0 . 11 ) 0 . 70 ( 0 . 07 ) Block 2 0 . 65 ( 0 . 12 ) 0 . 74 ( 0 . 07 ) Consistency metric †† Block 1 0 . 79 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 85 ( 0 . 08 ) Block 2 0 . 80 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 87 ( 0 . 08 ) Total no . of revisits †† Block 1 20 . 35 ( 23 . 68 ) 12 . 05 ( 12 . 00 ) Block 2 27 . 05 ( 29 . 70 ) 8 . 35 ( 8 . 56 ) * Mean ( SD ) ; range . † n = 20 . ‡ Raw scores on Raven ’ s Standard Progressive Matrices ( 30 ) . § Standard scores on the British Picture Vocabulary Scale ( BPVS ; ref . 29 ) . ¶ Total scores on the Social Communication Questionnaire ( SCQ ; ref . 27 ) , where elevated scores re ﬂ ect increased symptomatology . k Low times on the CEFT re ﬂ ect good local processing . * * High scores on the Corsi blocks task indicate good spatial memory . †† See text for full details of these variables . 422 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1014076108 Pellicano et al . gests that it depends on the abilities ( i ) to appraise perceptually the ( global ) layout of the space , and ( ii ) to remember constantly where one has searched previously ( since forgetting can be costly ; ref . 14 ) . Individual differences in one — or both — of these skills might be predictive of autistic children ’ s search behavior . To assess this possibility , we also administered independent measures of child - ren ’ s local - global processing ( Children ’ s Embedded Figures Test ; CEFT ) ( 2 , 15 ) and spatial memory ( Corsi blocks task ; ref . 16 ) . Results Our overarching aim was to test key claims of the systemizing account by examining the nature of large - scale search behavior in autism . We therefore examined whether : ( i ) children with autism were sensitive to the statistical properties of a large - scale search environment , ( ii ) children ’ s search follows an optimal path , and ( iii ) the search behavior of individual children was consistent or systematic across trials . The results below indicate that children with autism were not as sensitive to the probability manipulation as typical children and , further , that they were neither optimal nor systematic in their search — precisely the opposite to that predicted by the systemizing account . Our ﬁ nal analyses therefore examine the potential source ( s ) of autistic children ’ s inef ﬁ ciencies in foraging . Sensitivity to the Spatial Probability Rule . To test whether children with autism showed sensitivity to the statistical properties of the search array , a repeated - measures ANOVA with group ( autism , typical ) as a between - participants factor , and probability ( sparse , rich ) and block ( Block 1 , Block 2 ) as within - participants factors was carried out on the percentage of visits made to the rich side of space ( i . e . , 80 % targets ) . This variable was derived by calcu - lating the side of the array ( left , right ) showing the greatest density of button presses for each trial and indexes a child ’ s search strategy independent of the speed with which they moved through the display ( Table 1 ) . There was no overall effect of group , F ( 1 , 38 ) > 1 , but there was a main effect of block , F ( 1 , 38 ) = 11 . 96 , P = 0 . 001 , η p2 = 0 . 24 , and signi ﬁ cant block × group interaction , F ( 1 , 38 ) = 7 . 86 , P = 0 . 008 , η p2 = 0 . 17 . To explore this interaction we carried out a between group comparison for each block . Typical children were more likely to search in the rich side of space than children with autism in the ﬁ rst block of trials , F ( 1 , 39 ) = 7 . 13 , P = 0 . 01 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 84 , but not in the second , F ( 1 , 39 ) < 1 , suggesting , in direct contrast to predictions , that children with autism took signi ﬁ cantly longer to infer the rule . Search Pattern Comparison : Optimal Search . We further character - ized children ’ s behavior by analyzing their search paths trial - by - trial . Each trial in our search task can be seen as a chain of inspections to ﬁ nite spatial locations ; therefore , it is by nature very similar to eye movement sequences ( or “ scan paths ” ) . A powerful way to analyze such data is to compare directly each search path against ( i ) an optimal way of performing the task and ( ii ) a systematic ( but not necessarily optimal ) pattern of per - formance . We used the ScanMatch method ( 17 ) to compare search paths , with the Euclidean distance between the buttons in the foraging room as the substitution matrix and a gap value of − 200 . A low gap value here minimizes the introduction of gaps to match the two foraging sequences ( 17 ) . To establish the extent to which children ’ s paths were optimal , we de ﬁ ned optimality in terms of energy minimization , which approximates the shortest path to the target while ensuring that all intervening buttons are pressed . This description parallels the Euclidean traveling salesman problem ( E - TSP ) ( 18 ) , which in this context involves choosing a side on which to begin one ’ s search and pressing the buttons along the optimal path until the target has been located . Humans have an inherent ability to ﬁ nd high - quality and reliable solutions to the E - TSP when confronted with problems with less than 60 locations ( 18 ) , which is true for children as well as adults ( 19 ) . We therefore computed this op - timal path for any given trial using the open TSP genetic algo - rithm ( 20 ) . Given the side chosen by the participant ( with the greatest density of button presses , as described earlier ) , we truncated the path from the starting point to the target . This computation yielded an optimal path for a given trial ( see Fig . 2 ) , which was directly compared with the participant ’ s path using the ScanMatch method . A high score on this Optimality Metric ( approaching 1 ) is indicative of a near - optimal search path . Note that this comparison is independent of the probability manipu - lation , as the participant ’ s side choice is explicitly taken into account . Inspection of both the individual ( see Fig . 2 for examples ) and group ( Table 1 ) Optimality Metric data clearly shows that chil - dren with autism used a less optimal strategy than typical chil - dren for search in the foraging room . An ANOVA on the Optimality Metric data revealed signi ﬁ cant main effects of block , F ( 1 , 38 ) = 9 . 88 , P = 0 . 003 , η p2 = 0 . 21 , and group , F ( 1 , 38 ) = 6 . 24 , P = 0 . 02 , η p2 = 0 . 14 , which were quali ﬁ ed by a marginally - signi ﬁ cant block × group interaction , F ( 1 , 38 ) = 3 . 46 , P = 0 . 06 , η p2 = 0 . 09 . To explore this weak interaction we initially carried out a between group comparison for each block . Typical children followed an optimal search path to a signi ﬁ cantly greater extent than children with autism during block 1 , F ( 1 , 39 ) = 5 . 86 , P = 0 . 02 , d = 0 . 76 , and block 2 , F ( 1 , 39 ) = 7 . 63 , P = 0 . 009 , d = 0 . 92 . Further post hoc analyses ( with Bonferroni correction ) revealed that the source of the interaction lay with the degree to which children followed an optimal path from one block to the next : typical children ’ s search paths became signi ﬁ cantly more optimal over time , t ( 19 ) = 3 . 09 , P = 0 . 009 , while autistic children ’ s did not , t ( 19 ) = 1 . 16 , P = 0 . 26 ( Table 1 ) . Search Pattern Comparison : Systematic Search . It is possible that children with autism were using an alternative ( less - optimal ) strategy albeit in a systematic way . If children with autism are genuinely more “ systematic ” in their searches ( 7 – 10 ) , then the pattern of button presses for individual autistic children should be more consistent than those for typical children . We once again used the ScanMatch method to derive a metric that indexed the consistent or repetitive nature of children ’ s search . This method took into account both the side an individual visited and the length of his / her trial by truncating the longest path ( since , if a child follows a systematic route , then his / her initial search patterns should be highly similar despite the target being in different locations ) . A high score on this Consistency Metric ( approaching 1 ) re ﬂ ects a consistency in the child ’ s search behavior when faced with the same task on repeated trials ( Table 1 ) . A repeated - measures ANOVA of the Consistency Metric showed no main effect of block or signi ﬁ cant interaction in - volving block ( P > 0 . 24 for both ) but there was a signi ﬁ cant effect of group , F ( 1 , 38 ) = 6 . 13 , P = 0 . 02 , η p2 = 0 . 14 . In striking contrast to the systemizing account , children with autism were signi ﬁ cantly less consistent in their search overall ( mean = 0 . 80 , SD = 0 . 07 ) than typical children ( mean = 0 . 86 , SD = 0 . 07 ) . Together , these results strongly suggest that autistic children ’ s search in large - scale space is less ef ﬁ cient and less systematic than typical children ’ s search . What , then , might account for the more chaotic search strat - egies of children with autism ? One important measure of per - formance failure on our search task is the number of “ revisits ” children made during search ( i . e . , times that a location was inspected more than once in a trial ) . ( This variable was signi ﬁ - cantly positively skewed . A log transformation was applied to the data , which successfully normalized the data . Analyses are per - formed using the transformed scores , although untransformed revisit data are reported in Table 1 . ) Pellicano et al . PNAS | January 4 , 2011 | vol . 108 | no . 1 | 423 P S Y C H O L O G I C A L A ND C O GN I T I V E S C I E N C E S Revisits are costly and are rarely made by adults when searching in large - scale space ( 14 ) . A repeated - measures ANOVA on the total number of revisits revealed a signi ﬁ cant effect of group , F ( 1 , 38 ) = 4 . 12 , P = 0 . 04 , η p2 = 0 . 10 , and a signi ﬁ cant group × block interaction , F ( 1 , 38 ) = 8 . 15 , P = 0 . 007 , η p2 = 0 . 18 . To determine the source of this two - way interaction , we analyzed the group differences for each block separately . Autistic children made signi ﬁ cantly more revisits than typical children in block 2 , F ( 1 , 39 ) = 7 . 13 , P = 0 . 01 , d = 0 . 44 , but not in block 1 , F ( 1 , 39 ) = 2 . 12 , P = 0 . 15 . To probe which component skills contribute to inef ﬁ ciencies in autistic children ’ s foraging performance , we examined the relationship between revisit frequency and children ’ s scores on tests of local - global processing ( the CEFT ; refs . 2 and 15 ) and spatial memory ( the Corsi blocks task ; ref . 16 ) ( see Table 1 for scores ) . [ Note that preliminary data screening revealed one child who made an extreme number of revisits ( + 3 SD above the autism group mean ) . Following Wilcox ( 21 ) , this score was trimmed by replacing it with the value representing 3SD above the mean score , and subsequent correlational analyses were conducted using the trimmed score for this variable . ] In a hierarchical regression analysis , we ﬁ rst entered children ’ s age , verbal ability , and nonverbal ability simultaneously as pre - dictors of children ’ s revisit frequency . These variables failed to contribute signi ﬁ cantly to the model , Δ R 2 = 0 . 27 , Δ F ( 3 , 16 ) = 1 . 96 , P = 0 . 16 . Children ’ s Corsi blocks task scores and CEFT scores were entered into the second and third steps of the analysis , respectively . Independent of age , verbal ability , and nonverbal ability , both cognitive skills made unique ( negative ) contributions to predicting revisit frequency : children with au - tism who showed poorer spatial memory , β = − 0 . 71 , P < 0 . 01 , Δ R 2 = 0 . 33 , Δ F ( 1 , 14 ) = 12 . 34 , P = 0 . 003 , and better local processing ( and hence , poorer global processing ) , β = − 0 . 41 , P < 0 . 01 , Δ R 2 = 0 . 16 , Δ F ( 1 , 15 ) = 9 . 68 , P = 0 . 008 , made more revisits during search [ ﬁ nal model : F ( 5 , 19 ) = 9 . 01 , P = 0 . 001 , R 2 = 0 . 76 ] . Discussion We assessed whether the previously reported enhanced visual search skills in autism translate to search in a more real - world environment . In so doing , we directly tested key claims of the systemizing account ( 7 – 10 ) by analyzing the search patterns of children with and without autism within a large - scale space — a lawful , ﬁ nite experimental structure , which was especially suited to revealing autistic children ’ s propensity to systemize . Remarkably , children with autism showed reduced sensitivity to the probability rule governing the search array and were both less optimal and less systematic in their search strategies , compared with typical children . These results cannot be accounted for by general and developmental differences in age , verbal ability , or nonverbal ability . Not only were the autism and typical groups matched on these variables , but individual differences in these variables were unrelated to any of our experimental measures , especially the measure of performance failure ( revisit fre - quency ) . Furthermore , all children found the foraging game enjoyable and were eager to ﬁ nd the hidden target as quickly as they could , suggesting that the results cannot be attributable to general motivation or task - completion dif ﬁ culties . Together , these ﬁ ndings provide consistent evidence against the notion of systemizing in autism in two ways . First , they sug - A B Results from typical group Participant 1 , block 1 , trial 6 Results from typical group Participant 18 , block 1 , trial 17 Results from autism group Participant 5 , block 1 , trial 10 Results from autism group Participant 13 , block 1 , trial 17 Fig . 2 . Optimal search paths . Shown is the search array and example search paths ( blue line ) for ( A ) two typically developing children and ( B ) two children with autism . The optimal search path on each trial is also shown ( broad yellow line ) . 424 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1014076108 Pellicano et al . gest that systemizing cannot depend on an enhanced drive to analyze systems “ by observing the regularities in their behaviour and inferring the rules that govern the system via the analysis of input - operation - output relationships ” ( ref . 10 , p . 111 ) . On this view , one should predict that children with autism would be just as sensitive to the probability manipulation — or perhaps even more so — than age - and ability - matched typical children . In - stead , autistic children needed a greater number of trials to learn the rule and apply it to their search than their typical peers . Second , our results speak against the notion that systemizing inherently involves “ massive repetition in order to check and recheck the consistency of patterns ” ( ref . 9 , p . 69 ) . Rather than being signi ﬁ cantly more systematic in their search , we found the opposite pattern : children with autism were signi ﬁ cantly less re - petitive in searching across trials than typical children . It is possible that autistic children ’ s strengths do not lie in deducing the rules that govern systems but , rather , in applying rules ef - fectively once they become clearly known . Our data indicate , however , that despite having learned the rule by the second block of trials , children with autism showed no concomitant increase in the degree of consistency in their search . Our results therefore suggest not only that children with autism have dif ﬁ culty in - ferring the rule that governs a ( large - scale ) system but also that they are less consistent in the way that they exploit the rule . The pattern of ﬁ ndings reported here con ﬂ icts somewhat with previous investigations of implicit learning in autism . Several recent studies have shown that implicit learning , especially probabilistic implicit sequence learning , is unimpaired in autism ( 22 , 23 ) , despite initial reports suggesting that it was compro - mised ( 24 ) . Brown et al . ( 22 ) proposed that previous ﬁ ndings of poor implicit learning might be attributable to the use of ( faulty ) explicit strategies by children with autism . It is indeed possible that children in our study might have generated an explicit ( al - beit less ef ﬁ cient ) strategy to ﬁ nd the hidden target during search . But if this were true , one might have expected individual children to verify the validity of their strategy by applying it in a consistent way across trials . Our analysis showed that this was not the case . Children with autism were less repetitive in their search patterns than typical children . We suggest instead that children with autism have speci ﬁ c dif ﬁ culty inferring a probabi - listic rule within a large - scale environment , precisely because it requires continuous updating of egocentric and allocentric rep - resentations of space combined with the need to remember constantly where one has been in the environment ( 14 ) . An in - ability to coordinate one ’ s behavior in this way has far - reaching implications for navigating a local environment and may be one important barrier to achieving functional independence in adulthood . Our results demonstrate that children with autism do not show enhanced or systematic search during foraging . Differences in scale alone might be one reason for the discrepancy between the inef ﬁ ciencies reported here and the previous reports of height - ened performance on small - scale visual search tasks ( 3 – 5 ) , and future experiments will need to assess directly this possibility . We suggest , however , that the disadvantage for foraging is most likely directly attributable to the cognitive pro ﬁ le of autism ( 25 , 26 ) ( unrelated to systemizing ) , which now appears to be well - suited to table - top or computerized visual search but not to search in a wider context such as the foraging space . To forage successfully , participants must be able to orientate themselves effectively in space and to remember where they searched pre - viously within the space ; neither of these skills are required in classic small - scale visual search paradigms ( 14 ) . Close analysis of autistic children ’ s large - scale search behavior revealed that inef ﬁ ciencies as indexed by revisit frequency were in fact directly attributable to two limitations in exactly these areas . It was autistic participants ’ dif ﬁ culties in forming a global , coherent representation and fundamental problems in spatial short - term memory that hindered their performance . Put simply , then , autistic children ’ s search in a more true - to - life setting cannot be explained by a facility for systemizing but instead can be explained by their ( limited ) cognitive resources , which might otherwise permit them to show outstanding visual search in far more restricted contexts . In summary , this is a unique investigation of large - scale search — or foraging — in autism . Our ﬁ ndings clearly demonstrate the surprisingly un systematic nature of foraging behavior in children with autism . In contrast to the view that the nonsocial features of autism confer an advantage to autistic children ’ s real - world be - havior ( 7 – 10 ) , we have shown that their everyday functional behavior — the ability to explore and exploit one ’ s environment — instead may be limited by a speci ﬁ c pattern of constraints in their cognitive repertoire . Methods Participants . Twenty children ( 18 males ) with an autism spectrum condition , aged between 8 and 14 y ( mean = 10 y , 7 mo ; SD = 1 y , 4 mo ) , were recruited via community contacts . All children had an independent clinical diagnosis of either autism ( n = 14 ) or Asperger syndrome ( n = 6 ) made according to DSM - IV ( 1 ) criteria , and further scored above the threshold for autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) on the Social Communication Questionnaire ( SCQ ; ref . 27 ; Table 1 ) , and on the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule – Generic ( ADOS - G ; ref . 28 ) . All children obtained standard scores of at least 80 on a test of receptive vocabulary , the British Picture Vocabulary Scale ( BPVS ; ref . 29 ) , and were free of medication . Twenty typically developing children ( 18 boys ; mean = 11 y , 0 mo ; SD = 2 y 0 mo ) were recruited through local mainstream schools and community organizations and served as comparison individuals . No typical child had a current or past medical or psychiatric diagnosis as reported by parents , or displayed clinically signi ﬁ cant levels of autistic symptomatology , as indexed by the SCQ ( 27 ) , a screening tool for autism ( Table 1 ) . There were no signi ﬁ cant differences between the autism and typical groups in terms of age , F ( 1 , 39 ) = 0 . 50 , P = 0 . 48 , receptive vocabulary ability , F ( 1 , 39 ) = 0 . 26 , P = 0 . 61 , or nonverbal reasoning ability , F ( 1 , 39 ) = 0 . 01 , P = 0 . 96 , as assessed by Raven ’ s Standard Progressive Matrices ( ref . 30 ; Table 1 ) . Apparatus . The experiment was conducted in a large - scale search laboratory ( 12 ) , which was an isolated room , measuring 4 × 4 m , with a raised platform ﬂ oor . Embedded in the ﬂ oor were 49 search locations arranged in a con - centric structure ( see Fig . 1 A ) . Each location was formed from a circular stainless steel switch ( 2 . 5 - cm diameter ) surrounded by an annulus ( 6 - cm di - ameter ) of light - emitting diodes . Each location could be individually illu - minated green , red , or orange ( see Fig . 1 B and C ) . The array was surrounded by dark , featureless , ceiling - to - ﬂ oor curtains , without apparent breaks . This ensured that the room was devoid of obvious landmarks other than the il - luminated locations . The laboratory was evenly lit by dimmable units on the ceiling , all of which were obscured by white , semi - opaque material . The experimenter sat in an adjoining room controlling stimulus presentation and observing the participant via a hidden camera mounted in the laboratory . The location and timing ( with millisecond accuracy ) of each button press was recorded . Procedure . There were 16 ( green ) search locations illuminated on each trial , with 8 oneither side of thearray midline . The locations within the array were randomly assigned for each participant , and they remained ﬁ xed throughout theexperiment ( i . e . , thearraywas not extinguished ) . The task was to ﬁ ndthe hidden target , de ﬁ ned as the location that changed color from green to red when activated . This target appeared in each of the illuminated locations across the experiment and was always present in the array . There were 40 experimental trials , divided into 2 blocks of 20 trials . [ Pilot testing with more experimental trials ( 60 ) resulted in children becoming more distractible be - tween test trials . ] Critically , the distribution of target locations was manip - ulatedsothattheyappearedononesideofthemidline ( leftorright ) for80 % of trials ( see Fig . 1 ) . Across the 40 trials , the target therefore appeared on one side ( the “ rich ” side ) for 32 trials . The likelihoods remained equal across blocks . To begin , children were shown the laboratory and told that their task was to search the display of illuminated green locations to ﬁ nd the hidden target — the only light that changed from green to red when pressed . Children were instructed that a target was always present and they were to ﬁ nd it as quickly as they could . Importantly , they were never made aware of the Pellicano et al . PNAS | January 4 , 2011 | vol . 108 | no . 1 | 425 P S Y C H O L O G I C A L A ND C O GN I T I V E S C I E N C E S probability manipulation . Children began each trial by pressing an orange location at a ﬁ xed point on the perimeter of the array , which was extin - guished once activated . This starting location was ﬁ xed for each participant and appeared at either one end or the other of the midline ( this was counterbalanced across participants ) . They then searched the array by acti - vating the switch at each green location until they had located the target that illuminated red . Once children had found the target , the ( orange ) starting position was illuminated and the next trial began . To ensure that children understood fully the procedure , they ﬁ rst observed the experi - menter search the display for the target , followed by two practice trials in which children themselves searched the display with the aid of the experi - menter . Children then completed two blocks of trials , separated by a 5 - min break ( total = ∼ 25 min ) . The starting position ( front or back of room , along the midline ) , the rich side of space ( in room - based coordinates ; left or right ) , and the side of the child ’ s body that it appeared ( egocentric left or right from the starting position ) were fully counterbalanced across participants within each group . In addition to background assessments ( ADOS - G , BPVS , and Raven ’ s Ma - trices ) , children also completed two measures thought to tap component processes of foraging : the Children ’ s Embedded Figures Test ( CEFT ; ref . 15 ) , a measure of local - global information - processing , and the Corsi blocks ( 16 ) , a measure of spatial memory . For the CEFT , participants completed Set A followed by Set B ( 15 ) , which together included 3 practice trials and 25 test trials . In each set , children initially were shown a cardboard cut - out of a target shape ( set A : triangle ; set B : house ) and asked to ﬁ nd this shape hidden in a number of larger meaningful ﬁ gures ( e . g . , a pram ) as quickly as possible ( set A : 11 trials ; set B : 14 trials ) . Response latencies and accuracy were recorded for each trial . Children were given a maximum of 30 s to locate the target stimulus on each trial . One point was given for each trial on which they successfully located the hidden target . If the triangle was not located within 30 s , then an error was recorded , and the maximum time ( 30 s ) was given for that trial . The most sensitive dependent variable is time taken to ﬁ nd the hidden ﬁ gure . Children with autism typically perform well on this task purportedly because they are not captured by the global image , which allows them to focus on the individual elements and ﬁ nd quickly the hidden target ( 2 ) . As such , fast times on the CEFT re ﬂ ect good local processing ( and , hence , poorer global processing ) . The Corsi blocks tapping task ( 16 ) consists of a set of nine identical blocks positioned on a wooden board in a particular con ﬁ guration . To begin , children were told : “ Look at this board . It has nine blocks on it . I am going to tap 2 blocks , one after the other . Watch carefully , because I want you to copy what I do . Try to tap the blocks in exactly the same order as I did . ” The experimenter then pointed to the series of blocks at the rate of one block per second , and the child was instructed to point to the same blocks in the correct order . The experimenter recorded the sequence reproduced for each trial . There were a total of eight problem sets , which progressively increased in complexity ( i . e . , the length of the sequences ) with ﬁ ve trials per set . One point was given for each trial on which they successfully replicated the se - quence . If a child failed four or more of the trials within a problem set , testing ceased . Scores on each trial were summed to yield a total score out of 40 . A high score on the Corsi blocks task re ﬂ ects better spatial memory . Previous work with children has reported that better spatial memory is re - lated to better foraging performance ( 14 ) . Children completed the behavioral assessments followed by the “ foraging game . ” The procedures of this study were approved by the University of Bristol ’ s Faculty of Science Human Research Ethics Committee , and informed written consent was granted by parents of all children before participation . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank Laurie Ledger - Hardy , Victoria Wise , and Kaatje Verlinden for help with testing ; David Burr , Nancy Kanwisher , Gill Rhodes , and especially Marc Stears for thorough comments on the manu - script ; and all of the children and families who kindly gave up their time to participate in this project . This work was funded by the UK ’ s Experimental Psychology Society . 1 . American Psychiatric Association ( 2000 ) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM - IV ) ( American Psychiatric Association , Washington ) ( [ 4th edition ] ) . 2 . Shah A , Frith U ( 1983 ) An islet of ability in autistic children : a research note . J Child Psychol Psychiatry 24 : 613 – 620 . 3 . Jarrold C , Gilchrist ID , Bender A ( 2005 ) Embedded ﬁ gures detection in autism and typical development : preliminary evidence of a double dissociation in relationships with visual search . Dev Sci 8 : 344 – 351 . 4 . Joseph RM , Keehn B , Connolly C , Wolfe JM , Horowitz TS ( 2009 ) Why is visual search superior in autism spectrum disorder ? Dev Sci 12 : 1083 – 1096 . 5 . Plaisted K , O ’ Riordan M , Baron - Cohen S ( 1998 ) Enhanced visual search for a conjunctive target in autism : a research note . J Child Psychol Psychiatry 39 : 777 – 783 . 6 . Caron M - J , Mottron L , Rainville C , Chouinard S ( 2004 ) Do high functioning persons with autism present superior spatial abilities ? Neuropsychologia 42 : 467 – 481 . 7 . Baron - Cohen S , Knickmeyer RC , Belmonte MK ( 2005 ) Sex differences in the brain : implications for explaining autism . Science 310 : 819 – 823 . 8 . Baron - Cohen S , Ashwin E , Ashwin C , Tavassoli T , Chakrabarti B ( 2009 ) Talent in autism : hyper - systemizing , hyper - attention to detail and sensory hypersensitivity . Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 364 : 1377 – 1383 . 9 . Baron - Cohen S ( 2008 ) Autism , hypersystemizing , and truth . Q J Exp Psychol ( Colchester ) 61 : 64 – 75 . 10 . Baron - Cohen S , Belmonte MK ( 2005 ) Autism : a window onto the development of the social and the analytic brain . Annu Rev Neurosci 28 : 109 – 126 . 11 . Kelly RL ( 1995 ) The Foraging Spectrum : Diversity in Hunter - Gatherer Lifeways ( Smithsonian Institution Press , London ) . 12 . Smith AD , Hood BM , Gilchrist ID ( 2010 ) Probabilistic cuing in large - scale environmental search . J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 36 : 605 – 618 . 13 . Hollingworth A , Henderson JM ( 1998 ) Does consistent scene context facilitate object perception ? J Exp Psychol Gen 127 : 398 – 415 . 14 . Gilchrist ID , North A , Hood B ( 2001 ) Is visual search really like foraging ? Perception 30 : 1459 – 1464 . 15 . Witkin HA , Oltman PK , Raskin E , Karp S ( 1971 ) A Manual for the Embedded Figures Test ( Consulting Psychologists Press , Palo Alto , CA ) . 16 . Milner B ( 1971 ) Interhemispheric differences in the localization of psychological processes in man . Br Med Bull 27 : 272 – 277 . 17 . Cristino F , Mathôt S , Theeuwes J , Gilchrist ID ( 2010 ) ScanMatch : A novel method for comparing ﬁ xation sequences . Behav Res Methods 42 : 692 – 700 . 18 . MacGregor JN , Ormerod T ( 1996 ) Human performance on the traveling salesman problem . Percept Psychophys 58 : 527 – 539 . 19 . van Rooij I , Schactman A , Kadlec H , Stege U ( 2006 ) Perceptual or analytical processing ? Evidence from children ’ s and adults ’ performance on the Euclidean traveling salesperson problem . J . Prob . Solving 1 : 44 – 73 . 20 . Kirk J ( 2007 ) Traveling salesman problem — Genetic algorithm . Available at http : / / www . mathworks . com / matlabcentral / ﬁ leexchange / 13680 - traveling - salesman - problem - genetic - algorithm . Accessed May 5 , 2010 . 21 . Wilcox RR ( 2002 ) Understanding the practical advantages of modern ANOVA methods . J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol 31 : 399 – 412 . 22 . Brown J , Aczel B , Jimenez L , Kaufman SB , Grant KP ( 2010 ) Intact implicit learning in autism spectrum conditions . Q J Exp Psychol 63 : 1 – 24 . 23 . Nemeth D , et al . ( 2010 ) Learning in autism : implicitly superb . PLoS ONE 5 : e11731 . 24 . Mostofsky SH , Goldberg MC , Landa RJ , Denckla MB ( 2000 ) Evidence for a de ﬁ cit in procedural learning in children and adolescents with autism : implications for cerebellar contribution . J Int Neuropsychol Soc 6 : 752 – 759 . 25 . Happé F , Ronald A , Plomin R ( 2006 ) Time to give up on a single explanation for autism . Nat Neurosci 9 : 1218 – 1220 . 26 . Pellicano E ( 2010 ) Individual differences in executive function and central coherence predict developmental changes in theory of mind in autism . Dev Psychol 46 : 530 – 544 . 27 . Rutter M , Bailey A , Lord C ( 2003 ) SCQ : Social Communication Questionnaire ( Western Psychological Services , Los Angeles ) . 28 . LordC , RutterM , DiLavorePD , RisiS ( 1999 ) AutismDiagnosticObservationSchedule — Generic ( Western Psychological Services , Los Angeles ) . 29 . Dunn LM , Dunn LM ( 1997 ) Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test ( American Guidance Service , Circle Pines , MN ) , 3rd Ed . 30 . Raven JC , Court JH , Raven J ( 1991 ) Standard Progressive Matrices ( Oxford University Press , Oxford ) . 426 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1014076108 Pellicano et al .