http : / / www . jstor . org The Structure of the Nervous System of the Nematode Caenorhabditis elegans Author ( s ) : J . G . White , E . Southgate , J . N . Thomson , S . Brenner Source : Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London . Series B , Biological Sciences , Vol . 314 , No . 1165 , ( Nov . 12 , 1986 ) , pp . 1 - 340 Published by : The Royal Society Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2990196 Accessed : 24 / 07 / 2008 15 : 13 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / action / showPublisher ? publisherCode = rsl . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . JSTOR is a not - for - profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship . We work with the scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon , and to build a common research platform that promotes the discovery and use of these resources . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . THE MIND OF A WORM 9 largely autonomous unit , although there are two interneurons that originate in the central nervous system and enter it . These interneurons ( RIP ) are exclusively postsynaptic outside the pharnyx and so probably mediate the overall control of pharyngeal pumping from the central nervous system . The pharynx is used for ingesting food ( usually bacteria ) , concentrating it by filtration and then grinding it , and probably also for secreting digestive enzymes from its gland cells ( Albertson & Thomson 1976 ) . The processed food is pumped into the intestine , which has a lumen lined with microvilli . The intestine is connected with the anus ; defecation is controlled by three sets of specialized muscles ( figure 12 ) . There is an excretory system , which consists of a single excretory canal cell arranged in an , H ' configuration ( Bird 1971 ) . The two arms ofthe H run longitudinally down the lateral lines . These are joined by a cross bridge , which is connected to the excretory duct on the ventral side ; this opens to the outside of the animal via the excretory pore situated on the ventral mid - line . Two ventrally situated ' gland ' cells have anteriorly directed processes , which fuse and connect to the lumen of the excretory canal near the pore ( Nelson et ale 1983 ) . These processes continue running anteriorly on the ventral surface of the ventral nerve cord ( figure 16 ) until the nerve ring is reached , where they terminate . The function of these glands is not yet known . The adult hermaphrodite reproductive system consists of symmetrical pairs of uteri , oviducts , spermathecae and ovaries , which are joined at the uteri and connect to a vulva . This is situated on the ventral mid - line about halfway down the body ( Hirsh et ale 1976 ) . During development , sperm are produced before oocytes and are stored for subsequent use . Egg - laying is mediated by a set of sixteen muscle cells , eight of which act to squeeze the contents of the uteri and eight to open the vulval orifice ( figure 11 ) . The male gonad joins the rectum via the vas deferens to form a cloaca in the tail ( Sulston et ale 1980 ) . The cloaca is surrounded by a large , fan - like , copulatory bursa , which is richly endowed with sensory endings . These endings are derived from male - specific neurons , which are generated post - embryonically along with other neurons in the male . The male also has extra ventral body muscles and muscles that control the copulatory spicules ( Sulston et ale 1980 ) . THE NERVOUS SYSTEM Organization of the nervous system and musculature There are 302 neurons in the nervous system of C . elegans ; this number is invariant between animals . Each neuron has a unique combination ofproperties , such as morphology , connectivity and position , so that every neuron may be given a unique label . Groups of neurons that differ from each other only in position have been assigned to classes . There are 118 classes that have been made using these criteria , the class sizes ranging from 1 to 13 . Thus C . elegans has a rich variety of neuron types in spite of having only a small total complement of neurons . This is in marked contrast to structures such as the mammalian cerebellum , which contains more than 10 10 neurons ( Braitenberg & Atwood 1958 ) and yet has only five classes of component neuron ( Eccles et ale 1967 ) . Sensory transduction The bulk of the nervous system of C . elegans is situated in the head , which is richly endowed with sensory receptors . These are arranged in groups of sense organs , known as sensilla . The arrangement and structure of sensilla have been described in detail ( Ward et ale 1975 ; Ware