Cross - Domain Influences on Creative Processes and Products Victoria Scotney ( v . scotney @ alumni . ubc . ca ) , Sarah Weissmeyer ( sarah . weissmeyer @ alumni . ubc . ca ) , and Liane Gabora ( liane . gabora @ ubc . ca ) Department of Psychology , University of British Columbia Okanagan Campus , Fipke Centre for Innovative Research , 3247 University Way Kelowna BC , Canada V1V 1V7 Abstract According to the honing theory of creativity , the iterative process culminating in a creative work is made possible by the self - organizing nature of a conceptual network , or worldview , and its innate holistic tendency to minimize inconsistency . As such , the creative process is not limited to the problem domain , and influences on creativity from domains other than that of the final product are predicted to be widespread . We conducted a study in which participants with varying levels of creative experience listed their creative outputs , as well as influences ( sources of inspiration ) on these outputs . Of the 758 creative influences , 13 % were within - domain narrow , 13 % within - domain broad , 67 % cross - domain , and 6 % unclear . These findings support the hypothesis that to trace the inspirational sources or ‘conceptual parents’ of a creative output , and thus track its cultural lineage , one must look beyond the problem domain to the creators’ self - organizing , inconsistency - minimizing worldview at large . Keywords : art ; creativity ; cross - domain influence ; domain - general ; domain - specific ; innovation ; inspiration ; music Introduction Creativity is thought to involve the restructuring of information in a creative domain , sometimes referred to as the problem domain ( Runco , 2014 ) , or simply , the domain . Domain - specific theories of creativity emphasize the non - transferability of expertise from one creative domain to another ( Baer , 2015 ) . They appear to be supported by findings that creative individuals are rarely creative in more than a few domains , i . e . , someone known for their creativity in physics is rarely also known for their creativity as a dancer ( Baer , 2012 ; Kaufman & Baer , 2004a ) . Support also comes from studies in which individuals created products for different domains , such as poems and mathematical equations , which found a low correlation in the ratings of individuals’ creativity across domains ( Baer , 1991 ) . Domain - general theories emphasize the generalizability of creative thinking across different domains ( Hong & Milgram , 2010 ) . The domain general view is supported by personality studies , which suggest that there is something to the notion of a creative personality type ( Batey & Furnham , 2006 ; Eysenck , 1993 ; Feist , 1998 ; Martindale & Daily , 1996 ) , and by evidence that when people express themselves in different creative domains these outputs bear a recognizable style or ‘voice’ ( Gabora , O’Connor , & Ranjan , 2012 ; Ranjan , 2014 ) . Such findings suggest that the creative mind seeks to explore and express its distinctive structure and dynamics using whatever means available . Currently , many scholars espouse a less dichotomous view of creativity that incorporates both domain - specific and domain - general elements ( Gabora , 2017 ; Plucker & Beghetto , 2004 ; Kaufman & Baer , 2004c ) . Nevertheless , we believe that the domain - generality of creativity is still under - appreciated due to emphasis on the final product or output of the creative process . Even if creative individuals tend to express themselves in one domain this does not necessarily mean that prior phases of their creative process are domain - specific . This paper describes a study designed to test the hypothesis that cross - domain influences play a normal and natural role in creativity and constitute a ubiquitous part of the creative process , and that the prominence of cross - domain influences on creativity is not exclusive to expert creators . Honing Theory Central Aim and Core Concepts . While the central aim of most theories of creativity is to account for the existence of creative products , the honing theory of creativity ( HT ) arose to account for the cumulative , open - ended nature of cultural evolution . HT grew out of the view that humans possess two levels of complex , adaptive , self - organizing , evolving structure : an organismic level , and a psychological level ( Barton , 1994 ; Combs , 1996 ; Freeman , 1991 ; Gabora , 1998 , 2017 ; Pribram , 1994 ; Varela , Thompson , & Rosch , 1991 ) . We refer to this psychological level as a worldview : an individual’s unique dynamic web of understanding that provides a way of both seeing the world and being in the world , i . e . , a mind as it is experienced from the inside . In short , HT posits that the worldview is the hub of a second evolutionary process—cultural evolution—that rides piggyback on the first—biological evolution—and that creative thinking fuels this second evolutionary process ( Gabora , 1998 , 2004 , 2008 , 2013 , 2017 ) . Honing an idea entails reiteratively looking at it from the different angles proffered by one’s particular worldview , ‘putting ones’ own spin on it’ , and make sense of it in one’s own terms , followed by expressing it outwardly ( Gabora , 2017 ) . Honing may involve the restructuring of representations by re - encoding the problem such that new elements are perceived to be relevant , or relaxing goal constraints ( Weisberg , 1995 ) , and self - organized criticality , wherein small perturbations can have large effects ( Gabora , 1998 ) . As the creator’s understanding of the task shifts , the 2455 creative idea may find a form that fits better with the worldview as a whole , such that the worldview achieves a more coherent state , as formalized by the notion of conceptual closure ( Gabora , 1998 ; Gabora & Steel , 2017 ) . Creative acts and products render such cognitive transformation culturally transmissible . Thus , it is suggested that what evolves through culture is not creative contributions but worldviews , and cultural contributions give hints about the worldviews that generate them . Predictions of HT Concerning Cross - Domain Influences . HT posits that creative output reflects the idiosyncratic , transformative process by which a worldview restructures itself in response to perturbations such as the detection of threats , inconsistencies , ambiguity , or potentiality . Such perturbations cause arousal - provoking uncertainty ( Gabora , 2017 ) , which Hirsh , Mar , and Peterson ( 2012 ) refer to as psychological entropy , and which sets self - organized iterative honing into motion . HT posits that since the contents of the mind collectively self - organize , none are a priori excluded from the creative task , and it is possible for the domain - specific aspects of an idea to be stripped away such that it is amenable to re - expression in another form . Because a worldview can continuously renew its overall structure , there are no limits on the possible influences or ‘conceptual parents’ of a creative work such as a song or journal article . For example , consider the situation in which a book inspires a movie , which inspires an invention . To see the thread of continuity across this ‘line of descent’ it is necessary to consider how their creators navigate through webs of beliefs , attitudes , procedural and declarative knowledge , and habitual patterns of thought and action that emerge through the interaction between personality and experience . In short , HT predicts that cross - domain influences play a role in the creative processes that fuel the self - organized transformation of worldviews , and that this in turn is the driving force of cultural evolution . Previous Research on Creative Influences There have been efforts to corroborate anecdotal reports of creative influences ( see Feinstein , 2006 ) with machine learning techniques designed to resolve lines of influence ( Saleh , Abe , & Elgammal , 2014 ) . However , these techniques are not yet able to discern cross - domain influences , wherein a creator in one domain ( e . g . , artist ) is influenced by another domain ( e . g . , music ) . Chan , Dow , and Schunn ( 2015 ) examined the conceptual distance of inspirational sources on the quality of design ideas , and found that conceptually closer sources ( which were defined as sharing a ‘topic’ of closely associated words ) were associated with higher quality solutions . However , as the authors note , this finding is inconsistent with the relatively robust finding that problem solvers from outside a given problem domain often produce the most creative solutions ( Franke , Poetz , & Schreier , 2014 ; Hargadon & Sutton , 1997 ; Jeppesen & Lakhani , 2010 ) . Moreover , since the designers were not asked to provide all elements that inspired their work , the scope of study was limited to the kinds of influences that one might logically expect to have a direct bearing on the result . Thus , for example , they listed things like previously generated solutions or design ideas , but not things like a particular piece of music , or ‘a conversation with a friend’ . Studies of cross - domain inspiration showed that it is possible to re - interpret a creative work in one medium into another medium ( Ranjan , Gabora , & O’Connor , 2013 ; Ranjan , 2014 ) . When painters were instructed to paint what a particular piece of music would ‘look like’ if it were a painting , naïve participants were able to correctly identify at significantly above chance which piece of music inspired which painting . Although the medium of expression was different , something of its essence remained sufficiently intact for people to detect a resemblance between the new creative output and its inspirational source . This suggested that , at their core , creative ideas are less domain - dependent than is widely assumed . The study supported our intuitive conviction that when the creative output is not a blend but lies squarely in one domain , the creative process giving rise to it may be rooted in different domains . However , due to the artificial nature of this study it did not provide evidence that cross - domain plays a role in real - world creative endeavors . In a precedent to the current study , 66 individuals with demonstrable accomplishments in a fine arts domain ( e . g . , music , painting , or fiction writing ) were asked to list , for each of their most significant creative works , all influences on the creative process of generating these works ( Gabora & Carbert , 2015 ) . Of the 65 creative influences provided by the 66 participants , 47 % were cross - domain influences ( e . g . , a painting influenced by music ) , 27 % were narrow within - domain ( e . g . , a painting influenced by another painting ) , 8 % broad within - domain ( e . g . , a painting influenced by sculpture ) , and 18 % unclassifiable . Thus , the cross - domain influences were more widespread than within - domain influences , even when broad within - domain influences ( e . g . , technology influenced by music ) as well as narrow within - domain influences ( e . g . , music influenced by other music ) were taken into account . This result was surprising , for we had just been looking to see if cross - domain influence exists at all ; we were not expecting it to predominate . A limitation of this previous study was that the sample size was small , and because it included only expert level creative individuals it did not enable us to make conclusions about creative processes beyond this exclusive group . The goal of the current study was to replicate the above study on a participant population that is not characterized by expertise in a creative domain . Method Participants The participants were 463 undergraduate students ( 114 males , 347 females , and two who selected ‘no or different gender’ ) from the University of British Columbia . They were recruited through SONA , an online participant pool approved by the UBC Research Ethics Board . 2456 Procedure The SONA website provided a link to an online questionnaire hosted by FluidSurvey . After formally consenting to the study , participants were asked to provide their age , gender , and occupation . The questionnaire then asked the respondents to answer the following questions : 1 . What is the general category for the creative work for which you are most known ( e . g . , art , music , drama , science ) ? 2 . What is the subcategory for the creative work for which you are most known ( e . g . , painting , piano composition , biochemistry ) ? 3 . Please describe your creative outputs . 4 . Please describe as best you can your creative process . 5 . Describe all elements that have inspired your work ( natural or artificial , or it may be a particular event or situation , or something not in the concrete environment , that is , something abstract that you have been thinking about ) , and with each item , if possible , put as much identifying information as you can about the item it inspired ( e . g . , my Sunlight Sonata in B Flat composed in 2012 was inspired by going skiing in the alps with my sister who had just recovered from pneumonia ) . Do this for as many of your creative works as you can , itemizing them as ( a ) , ( b ) , ( c ) , and so forth . Provide as much detail as possible . The first three questions were used to determine the domains of creative outputs for each participant . Question five was used to assess the domain of the inspirational source associated with each creative output . Question four was not used in this study , as it did not provide additional clarification regarding either creative outputs or their inspirational sources . The questions were worded in an open - ended way so as not to constrain participants’ answers in any way . The study was designed as an online survey , rather than a personal interview , so that we could maximize the time we had to collect as much data as possible . Analysis Of the 463 participants , 111 were excluded because they left one or more of questions one , two , three , or five blank . ( They were able to receive partial course credit whether or not they completed the questionnaire . ) An additional 90 questionnaires were excluded because the participants did not provide classifiable answers . Some of the questionnaires were unclassifiable because participants either provided a description of their creative process , or answered with what motivated a creative output , rather than providing an inspiration ; e . g . , an answer was excluded if the only reason for engaging in the creative activity was that someone else , such as a parent , obliged them to participate . The second category of unclassifiable questionnaires were those in which no creative outputs were provided in conjunction with a creative influence . The last category of unclassifiable questionnaires were those for which both raters independently found them incomprehensible and impossible to evaluate . This left 262 completed questionnaires for analysis , and these questionnaires provided a total of 758 influences . By comparing the answers to questions one and two with those for question five , the provided influences were organized into four categories : within - domain narrow , within - domain broad , cross - domain , and uncertain . A response was classified as within - domain narrow ( WN ) if the domain of inspiration and the domain of the creative output fell within the same subcategory , e . g . , a painting inspired by another painting . An example of a within - domain broad ( WB ) influence is a photograph inspired by a painting . A photograph and a painting belong to the same domain of visual art , but not to the same subdomain . Cross - domain ( C ) influences were those for which the domain of the influence was different from the domain of creative expression . For example , a song ( domain : music ) that inspired a software program ( domain : technology ) was rated as a cross - domain influence . An answer was categorized as unclear ( U ) when insufficient information was provided to categorize the influence as WN , WB , or C . Two raters independently categorized these responses as either WN , WB , C , or U . Inter - rater reliability between the raters , calculated using both Cohen’s kappa ( κ = . 77 ) and Krippendorff’s alpha ( α = . 87 ) was well beyond what would be expected by chance ( see Davey , Gugiu & Coryn , 2010 ) . Where there were any inconsistencies between the ratings of the two raters , they reached a final decision through discussion . Results The total number of influences in each domain category , as well as the upper and lower limits for the 95 % confidence interval for each domain category , are provided in Table 1 . Table 1 : Frequency and Percentage of Domain Influences on Creative Output and Lower Limit and Upper Limit for a 95 % Confidence Interval . 2457 The participants’ creative outputs came from a variety of domains , including drawing , architecture , photography , scientific experiments , song writing , furniture design , biochemistry , and athletic performance . They also gave a wide variety of inspirational sources , ranging from people in their lives such as family , friends , and strangers , to African safaris and The Book of Kells . Each participant listed an average of 2 . 89 creative influences ( SD = 1 . 92 , Mdn = 3 , range : 1 - 15 ) . Of the 758 influences provided , 101 ( 13 . 32 % ) were WN , 101 ( 13 . 32 % ) were WB , 508 ( 67 . 02 % ) were C , and 48 ( 6 . 33 % ) were U . Thus , cross - domain influences constituted more than double the number of within - domain and unclear influences , even when broad as well as narrow within - domain influences were included . Since the participants were encouraged to list all the influences they could think of that inspired their creative outputs , there was variation in the number of influences that each participant provided . A possible explanation for the low frequency of WN influences could be that there is only one NW influence that can match a given creative output , but there is a larger number of WB influences , and a potentially infinite number of C influences . Thus , once someone has provided an influence that matches the domain of the creative output , any subsequent influences they provide will necessarily be either cross - domain or within - domain broad . To explore the possibility that our results give more weight to participants who gave multiple influences , we re - analyzed the data according to the number of influences provided by each participant , as shown in Table 2 . Table 2 : Percentage and Frequency ( in brackets ) of Within - Domain Narrow ( WN ) , Within - Domain Broad ( WB ) , Cross - Domain ( C ) and Unclear ( U ) Influences by Total Number of Influences ( N - Infl ) Provided by Participant . N - Partic is the number of participants who provided that number of influences . This re - analysis shows that there may be some merit to this explanation , for participants who gave only one influence did indeed have a higher frequency of WN influences than any other group ( 26 . 47 % versus between 8 . 89 – 14 . 41 % ) and a lower frequency of C influences ( 57 . 35 % versus between 66 . 08 – 75 . 56 % ) . However , this does not alter the overall pattern of the findings that even when only one influence was given , that influence was more often than not ( i . e . , 57 . 35 % of the time ) a cross - domain influence . Discussion The results of this study concur with previous finding ( Gabora & Carbert , 2015 ) that the majority of creative outputs were inspired by cross - domain influences . However , the current results show that this is not just the case for individuals with proven success or expertise in a creative domain ; it holds true for non - experts as well . This result has implications for our understanding of the creative process , because it demonstrates that it is substantially less domain - specific than it is widely presumed to be . Even if individuals primarily express their creativity in a single domain , they are often employing cross - domain thinking when they create . Although domain - specific knowledge may ensure that tools of the trade are appropriately applied , and one’s creative works may consistently be in one particular domain , the sources that initially triggered these creative processes may be diverse in nature . To the extent that this is the case , creativity may involve synthesizing information from different arenas of one’s life . Implications for a Theoretical Framework for Creativity The finding that cross - domain influences are widespread is consistent with HT , according to which it is not just one’s conception of the creative task ( or ‘problem domain’ ) but one’s worldview as an integrated whole that transforms— becoming less fragmented and / or more robust—through immersion in a creative task . Honing entails iteratively viewing the creative task from a new context , which may restructure the internal conception of it , and this restructuring may be amenable to external expression . This external change may in turn suggest a new context , and so forth recursively , until the task is complete . The view that creative honing can bring about sweeping changes to an individual’s second ( psychological ) level of complex , adaptive structure is consistent with findings that creativity is potentially therapeutic ( Barron , 1963 ; Forgeard , 2013 ) , and that through immersion in a creative task , a more stable image of the world , and one’s own relation to it , can emerge ( Pelaprat & Cole , 2011 ) . Thus , it is through the interaction and cross - fertilization of knowledge and ideas that conceptual closure is achieved , and psychological entropy kept to an acceptable minimum . Although the phenomenon cross - domain influence in creativity—and by implication , the abstraction and re - expression of abstract forms—may seem obvious to artists , it plays no role in the bulk of psychology and AI 2458 research , in which creativity is portrayed as heuristically guided search or selection amongst discrete , well - defined states , guided by domain - specific expertise ( e . g . , Simonton , 2010 ; Weisberg , 1995 ) . Implications for Cultural Evolution At first glance it might seem that the basic units of cultural evolution—i . e . , the cultural equivalent of the organism in biological evolution—are such things as catchy songs or rituals or tools . However , the above evidence for the cross - fertilization of different domains suggests that the only way to delineate the cultural lineage of a given idea is to look to the creator’s entire loosely - integrated web of knowledge and understandings , i . e . , the creative process transforms—not just the problem domain—but the worldview as a whole . In this way , the inspirational sources—or ‘conceptual parents’—of a sad ballad could include everything from other musicians , to the patter of rain , to the death of a loved one . Thus , creative products don’t just serve practical purposes or provide aesthetic pleasure ; they provide tangible external markers of the evolutionary states of the worldviews that generated them . This is consistent with the theory that what evolves through culture is , not creative outputs like songs or tools , but worldviews , with creative outputs as the externally visible ‘excrement’ of this transformation process ( Gabora , 2004 , 2008 , 2013 ) . In short , research into cross - domain influences has implications for not just how the creative process works but for how culture evolves . As discussed elsewhere , a worldview not only self - organizes in response to perturbations but it is imperfectly reconstituted and passed down through culture ( Gabora , 2013 ) . This is because it is not just self - organizing but self - regenerating : people share experiences , ideas , and attitudes with each other , thereby influencing the process by which other worldviews form and transform . Children expose elements of what was originally an adult’s worldview to different experiences , different bodily constraints , and thereby forge unique internal models of the relationship between self and world . In short , worldviews transform by interleaving ( 1 ) internal interactions amongst their parts , and ( 2 ) external interactions with others . It is through these social interactions that novelty accumulates , and culture evolves . Limitations and Future Directions We attribute the large fraction of respondents who did not complete the questionnaire to the anonymous nature of the study , and the fact that they could receive course credit even if they did not complete it . In future studies , it would be helpful to consider ways of further incentivizing participants to complete the questionnaire . Although the open - ended questionnaire was necessary to enable participants to give anything as an inspirational source , it may have been less inviting for those who prefer a structured format . Changing the format from an online questionnaire to an in - person interview may elicit a higher response rate . In addition , the instructions should actively discourage participants from providing motives ( e . g . , a desire to be creative ) instead of inspirational sources , and examples of each should be given so that the distinction is clear . Also , reformatting the questionnaire so that it is always clear which creative influence is associated with which creative output would help clarify the interpretation of the responses . Another study is planned to examine the hypothesis that scientists make less use of cross - domain influences than artists . Further research might also investigate developmental differences in the ability to employ cross - domain influences . Future research could investigate the factors that predispose individuals to employ cross - domain influences , such as their implicit conception of how the creative process works . Another direction for future research is to investigate the extent to which the application of cross - domain influences is associated with personality traits correlated with creativity , such as norm - doubting , high aspiration levels , tolerance of ambiguity , and openness to experience ( Batey & Furnham , 2006 ; Eysenck , 1993 ; Helson , 1996 ; Martindale & Daily , 1996 ) . If so , this would suggest that propensity toward cross - domain influence plays a mediating role between personality and creativity . Practical Implications The finding that the majority of creative outputs were inspired by cross - domain influences has implications for the development of practices that promote creativity in education , the workplace , and personal life . It suggests that creativity may be cultivated by interdisciplinary courses , as well as activities and cultural objects such as murals of ecological food chains or poetry about science that foster connections between different domains . Acknowledgements We acknowledge and are grateful for funding from grant 62R06523 from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada . References Baer , J . ( 1991 ) . Generality of creativity across performance domains . Creativity Research Journal , 4 , 23 - 39 . Baer , J . ( 2012 ) . Domain specificity and the limits of creativity theory . Journal of Creative Behavior , 46 , 16 - 29 . Baer , J . ( 2015 ) . The importance of domain - specific expertise in creativity . Roeper Review , 37 , 165 - 178 . Barron , F . ( 1963 ) . Creativity and psychological health . Princeton , NJ : Van Nostrand . Barton , S . ( 1994 ) . Chaos , self - organization , and psychology . American Psychologist , 49 , 5 - 14 . Batey , M . , & Furnham , A . ( 2006 ) . Creativity , intelligence , and personality : A critical review of the scattered literature . Genetic , Social , and General Psychology Monographs , 132 , 355 - 429 . Chan , J . , Dow , S . P . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2015 ) . Do the best design ideas ( really ) come from conceptually distant sources of inspiration ? Design Studies , 36 , 31 - 58 . 2459 Combs , A . ( 1996 ) . The radiance of being : Complexity , chaos and the evolution of consciousness . St . Paul , MN : Paragon House . Davey , J . , Gugiu , P . , & Coryn , C . ( 2010 ) . Quantitative methods for estimating the reliability of qualitative data . Journal of Multidisciplinary Evaluation , 6 , 140 - 162 . Eysenck , H . ( 1993 ) . Creativity and personality : Suggestions for a theory . Psychological Inquiry , 4 , 147 – 178 . Feinstein , J . S . ( 2006 ) . The nature of creative development . Stanford : Stanford University Press . Feist , G . J . ( 1998 ) . A meta - analysis of personality in scientific and artistic creativity . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 2 , 290 - 309 . Forgeard , M . ( 2013 ) . Perceiving benefits after adversity : the relationship between self - reported posttraumatic growth and creativity . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , Arts 7 , 245 – 264 . Franke , N . , Poetz , M . K . , & Schreier , M . ( 2014 ) . Integrating problem solvers from analogous markets in new product ideation . Management Science , 60 ( 4 ) , 1063 - 1081 . Freeman W . J . ( 1991 ) . The physiology of perception . Scientific American , 264 , 78 - 85 . Gabora , L . ( 1998 ) . Autocatalytic closure in a cognitive system : A tentative scenario for the origin of culture . Psycholoquy , 9 . Gabora , L . ( 2004 ) . Ideas are not replicators but minds are . Biology & Philosophy , 19 ( 1 ) , 127 - 143 . Gabora , L . ( 2008 ) . The cultural evolution of socially situated cognition . Cognitive Systems Research , 9 ( 1 - 2 ) , 104 - 113 . Gabora , L . ( 2013 ) . An evolutionary framework for culture : Selectionism versus communal exchange . Physics of Life Reviews , 10 , 117 - 167 . Gabora , L . , ( 2017 ) . Honing theory : A complex systems framework for creativity . Nonlinear dynamics , Psychology , and Life Sciences , 21 , 35 - 88 . Gabora , L . , & Carbert , N . ( 2015 ) . A study and preliminary model of cross - domain influences on creativity . In R . Dale , et al . ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 37th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 758 - 763 ) . Austin TX : Cognitive Science Society . Gabora , L . , O’Connor , B . , & Ranjan , A . ( 2012 ) . The recognizability of individual creative styles within and across domains . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 6 , 351 - 360 . Gabora , L . , & Steel , M . ( 2017 ) . Autocatalytic networks in cognition and the origin of culture . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 431 , 87 - 95 . Hargadon , A . , & Sutton , R . I . ( 1997 ) . Technology brokering and innovation in a product development firm . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 , 716 . Helson , R . ( 1996 ) . In search of the creative personality . Creativity Research Journal , 9 ( 4 ) , 295 - 306 . Hirsh , J . , Mar , R . , & Peterson , J . ( 2012 ) . Psychological entropy : A framework for understanding uncertainty - related anxiety . Psychological Review , 119 , 304 - 320 . Hong , E . , & Milgram , R . M . ( 2010 ) . Creative thinking ability : Domain generality and specificity . Creativity Research Journal , 2 , 272 - 287 . Jeppesen , L . B . , & Lakhani , K . R . ( 2010 ) . Marginality and problem - solving effectiveness in broadcast search . Organization Science , 21 ( 5 ) , 1016 - 1033 . Kauffman , S . ( 1993 ) . Origins of order . New York : Oxford University Press . Kaufman , J . , & Baer , J . ( 2004a ) . Hawking ' s haiku , Madonna ' s math : Why it is hard to be creative in every room of the house . In R . J . Sternberg , E . L . Grigorenko , & J . Singer ( Eds . ) , Creativity : From potential to realization . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Kaufman , J . C . , & Baer , J . ( 2004b ) . Sure , I ' m creative—but not in mathematics ! : Self - reported creativity in diverse domains . Empirical studies of the Arts , 22 , 143 - 155 . Kaufman , J . C . , & Baer , J . ( 2004c ) . The amusement park theoretical ( APT ) model of creativity . The International Journal of Creativity & Problem Solving , 14 , 15 - 25 . Martindale , C . , & Daily , A . ( 1996 ) . Creativity , primary process cognition and personality . Personality and Individual Differences , 20 , 409 – 414 . Pelaprat , E . , & Cole , M . ( 2011 ) . “Minding the gap” : Imagination , creativity and human cognition . Integrative Psychological and Behavioral Science , 45 ( 4 ) , 397 - 418 . Plucker , J . A . , & Beghetto , R . A . ( 2004 ) . Why creativity is domain general , why it looks domain specific , and why the distinction does not matter . In R . J . Sternberg , E . L . Grigorenko , & J . L . Singer ( Eds . ) , Creativity : From potential to realization . Washington , DC : APA . Pribram K . H . ( 1994 ) . Origins : brain and self - organization . Hillsdale NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Ranjan , A . ( 2014 ) . Understanding the creative process : Personal signatures and cross - domain interpretations of ideas . Ph . D . Thesis , University of British Columbia . Ranjan , A . , Gabora , L . , & O ' Connor , B . ( 2013 ) . The cross - domain re - interpretation of artistic ideas . Proceedings of the 35th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 3251 - 3256 ) . Houston TX : Cognitive Science Society . Runco , M . A . ( 2014 ) . Creativity : Theories and themes : Research , development , and practice . Elsevier . Saleh , B . , Abe , K . , & Elgammal , A . M . ( 2014 ) . Knowledge discovery of artistic influences : A metric learning approach . Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Computational Creativity . Paulo Alto : Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence . Simonton , D . K . ( 2010 ) . Creative thought as blind - variation and selective - retention : Combinatorial models of exceptional creativity . Physics of life reviews , 7 , 156 - 179 . Varela , F . , Thompson , E . and Rosch , E . ( 1991 ) . The embodied mind . Cambridge MA : MIT Press . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1995 ) . Prolegomena to theories of insight in problem solving : Definition of terms and a taxonomy of problems . In R . Sternberg & J . Davidson ( Eds . ) The nature of insight ( pp . 157 - 196 ) . Cambridge MA : MIT Press . 2460