VILI : Physiological Evidence J . D . Ricard , D . Dreyfuss , and G . Saumon Introduction Mechanical ventilation has been part of basic life support for several decades . Several potential drawbacks and complications were identified early in the use of mechanical ventilation [ 1 ] . Of these , ventilator - induced lung injury ( VILI ) has recently received much attention in both the experimental [ 2 ] and the clinical field [ 3 - 7 ] . The purpose of this chapter is to review the physiological evidence for VILI based on animal studies and to place these results into a clinical perspective of ventilatory management of acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) . Evidence for VILI Ventilation of Intact Lungs High lung volume VILI Webb and Tierney were the first to demonstrate that mechanical ventilation could cause pulmonary edema in intact animals [ 8 ] . They were able to show in rats subjected to positive airway pressure ventilation that pulmonary edema was more severeand occurred more rapidlywhen the animalswere ventilatedwith45 cmH 2 O than with 30 cmH 2 O peak airway pressure . Animals ventilated for 1 hour with 14 cmH 2 O peak airway pressure did not develop edema . It was later confirmed that ventilation with high airway pressure produces capillary permeability alterations , non - hydrostatic pulmonary edema and tissue damage resembling that observed duringARDS [ 9 ] . FurtherstudiesdemonstratedthatVILIdepended mainlyonlung volume and especially on the end - inspiratory volume [ 10 ] . The corresponding pressure is termed ‘plateau’ pressure and its clinical importance has been empha - sized in a Consensus Conference on mechanical ventilation [ 11 ] . The respective roles of increased airway pressure and increased lung volume on the development of VILI were clarified by showing that mechanical ventilation of intact rats with largeorlowtidalvolume ( V T ) , butwithidenticalpeakairwaypressures ( 45cmH 2 O ) [ 10 ] did not result in the same lung alterations . Pulmonary edema and cellular ultrastructural abnormalities were encountered only in rats subjected to high V T and not in those in which lung distention was limited by thoraco - abdominal strapping [ 10 ] . Furthermore , animals ventilated with large V T but negative airway pressure ( by means of an iron lung ) still developed pulmonary edema thus dem - onstrating that airway pressure is not a determinant for pulmonary edema [ 10 ] . Consequently , it was suggested that the term ‘volutrauma’ would be more appro - priate than barotrauma in this situation [ 12 , 13 ] . Other investigators have reached the same conclusions with differentprotocols and species . Hernandez and cowork - ers compared the capillary filtration coefficient ( a measure of capillary permeabil - ity ) of the lungs of rabbits ventilated with 15 , 30 and 45 cmH 2 O peak airway pressures with that of animals ventilated with the same airway pressures but with limitation of thoraco - abdominal excursions by plaster casts placed around the chest and the abdomen [ 14 ] . The capillary filtration coefficient of the lungs re - moved after ventilation was normal in animals ventilated at 15 cmH 2 O peak pressure , increased by 31 % at 30 cmH 2 O peak pressure and by 430 % at 45 cmH 2 O peakpressureinanimalswithoutrestrictionoflungdistention . Instrikingcontrast , limiting lung inflation prevented the increase of the capillary filtration coefficient [ 14 ] . Carlton and coworkers confirmed this observation in lambs [ 15 ] . Besides the lung distention that occurs during mechanical ventilation , the rate at which lung volume varies may also affect microvascular permeability . Peevy and coworkers [ 16 ] used isolated perfused rabbit lungs to determine the capillary filtration coef - ficient of lungs ventilated with various V T and inspiratory flow rates . They found that small V T with a high flow rate increased the filtration coefficient to the same extent ( approximately 6 times baseline value ) asventilation with amarkedlyhigher V T but a lower inspiratory flow rate for the same peak airway pressure [ 16 ] . Taken together , these experimental studies have demonstrated that large vol - ume rather than high intrathoracic pressures per se results in ventilator - induced lung edema in intact animals . Low lung volume VILI Unlike high volume lung injury ( which can be observed in non - injured animals ) , low lung volume injury is not seen in healthy lungs , which can tolerate mechanical ventilation with physiologic V T and low levels of positive end - expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) for prolonged periods of time without any apparent damage . Taskar and colleagues [ 17 ] have shown that the repetitive collapse and reopening of terminal units during 1 h does not seem to damage healthy lungs ( although it does alter gas exchange and reduces compliance ) . Ventilation of Damaged Lungs High - volume lung injury Several investigators have evaluated the effect of mechanical ventilation with overdistension on damaged lungs . Results from these studies consistently stress the increased susceptibility of diseased lungs to the detrimental effects of mechani - cal ventilation . The first studies were performed on isolated lungs . Bowton and Kong [ 18 ] showed thatisolatedperfusedrabbitlungs injuredby oleicacid gainedsignificantly more weight when ventilated with 18 ml / kg bw than when ventilated with 6 ml / kg bw V T . Hernandez and colleagues [ 19 ] compared the effects of oleic acid alone , 244 J . D . Ricard , D . Dreyfuss , and G . Saumon