Research Article 2001 Introduction Recruitment and concentration of cargos into clathrin - coated structures ( CCSs ) on the plasma membrane and selective receptor - mediated uptake of nutrients and signalling molecules are hallmarks of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) in mammalian cells ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) . Clathrin , AP - 2 and several other cytosolic proteins combine in a multi - layered membrane - scaffolding structure referred to as the vesicle coat , whose incessant remodelling controls clathrin - coated pit ( CCP ) size and shape ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Kirchhausen , 2000 ) . These rearrangements are crucial for the efficient completion of single endocytic events , which ultimately result in fission and formation of clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) ( Ungewickell and Hinrichsen , 2007 ) . Coat - associated machineries are required to modify the functional and structural properties of coat components and to generate force throughout CCV biogenesis . Not surprisingly , reversible phosphorylation of endocytic proteins ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ; Korolchuk and Banting , 2003 ; Ungewickell and Hinrichsen , 2007 ) and actin dynamics ( Kaksonen et al . , 2006 ; Perrais and Merrifield , 2005 ) are believed to be important to properly execute CME . Casein kinase 2 ( CK2 ) is a major serine / threonine kinase associated with brain - derived CCVs ( Bar - Zvi and Branton , 1986 ; Korolchuk and Banting , 2002 ) . The regulatory and catalytic subunits of CK2 (  and  and / or  (cid:2) , respectively ) exist as either free subunits or a holoenzyme composed of two regulatory and two catalytic subunits ( Bibby and Litchfield , 2005 ) . The CK2 tetramer , as well as isolated subunits , localize both in the nucleus and cytoplasm ( Meggio and Pinna , 2003 ) . Although CK2 is constitutively active ( Arrigoni et al . , 2008 ; Korolchuk and Banting , 2003 ; Meggio and Pinna , 2003 ) , its activity might be repressed on coated vesicles ( Korolchuk and Banting , 2002 ) . Neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) is a member of the WASP and WAVE family of nucleation - promoting factor ( NPF ) proteins , characterized by a C - terminal VCA ( for verprolin homology domain , cofilin homology domain and acidic domain ) region that binds to and activates the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) . An intramolecular interaction between the VCA and the N - terminal basic region ( B ) – GTPase - binding domain ( GBD ) module prevents VCA – Arp2 / 3 complex formation , thus locking N - WASP in an inhibited conformation . Proteins associating with either the B - GBD or the P - rich ( proline - rich ) region ( Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) , or mimicking the C domain of the VCA region ( Cheng et al . , 2008 ; Sallee et al . , 2008 ) , employ different mechanisms to unlock N - WASP . N - WASP removal impairs CME of epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) in both human and murine cells ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ; Innocenti et al . , 2005 ) . Although actin is not strictly essential for CME , it is required for the biogenesis of at least a subset of CCVs , on which N - WASP , cortactin and the Arp2 / 3 complex association peaks just before fission ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ; Ferguson et al . , 2009 ; Innocenti et al . , 2005 ; Lamaze et al . , 1997 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Merrifield et al . , 2004 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ) . Interestingly , N - WASP is present in low amounts from the early stages of CCP maturation ( Merrifield et al . , 2004 ; Perrais and Merrifield , 2005 ) , suggesting that it has multiple roles in this process . Despite this information , whether and how kinase and actin functions are integrated during CME remains unknown . We find that N - WASP and CK2 enter into a complex that controls CME and cell - surface distribution of EGFR . Interplay between N - WASP and CK2 activities regulates actin - based CME and requires the ability of both proteins to dynamically assemble in a complex . We conclude that the N - WASP – CK2 complex integrates kinase and actin - polymerizing machineries into a single molecular circuit optimizing CME . Summary Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) involves spatially and temporally restricted molecular dynamics , to which protein kinases and actin contribute . However , whether and how these two elements merge to properly execute CME remains unknown . Here , we show that neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) and casein kinase 2 ( CK2 ) form a complex and localize to clathrin - coated vesicles . N - WASP binds to and is phosphorylated by CK2 , thereby reducing the kinase activity of CK2 . By contrast , N - WASP - promoted actin polymerization is decreased upon both phosphorylation and binding of CK2 . Knockdown of CK2 and N - WASP , either alone or in combination , causes a similar inhibition in the initial rate of CME of epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) and its accumulation at the plasma membrane . Increased levels of EGFR at the cell surface can only be efficiently rescued by reconstituting the N - WASP – CK2 complex with either wild - type or phosphorylation - mimicking N - WASP and wild - type CK2 . Notably , perturbation of N - WASP – CK2 complex function showed that N - WASP controls the presence of F - actin at clathrin - coated structures . In summary , the N - WASP – CK2 complex integrates in a single circuit different activities contributing to CME . Key words : N - WASP , CK2 , Endocytosis , Actin cytoskeleton Accepted 9 March 2011 Journal of Cell Science 124 , 2001 - 2012 ©2011 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 081182 Interplay between N - WASP and CK2 optimizes clathrin - mediated endocytosis of EGFR Magda Galovic 1 , Dalu Xu 2 , Liliana Beatriz Areces 3 , Rob van der Kammen 1 and Metello Innocenti 1 , * 1 The Netherlands Cancer Institute ( NKI ) , Plesmanlaan 121 , 1066 CX Amsterdam , The Netherlands 2 Institute of Biochemistry II , Goethe University Medical School , Theodor - Stern - Kai 7 , D - 60590 Frankfurt , Germany 3 European Institute of Oncology , Via Ripamonti 435 , 20141 Milan , Italy * Author for correspondence ( m . innocenti @ nki . nl ) J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Results N - WASP and CK2 form a complex and localize onto CCVs Matrix - assisted laser - desorption ionization – time - of - flight mass spectrometry ( MALDI – TOF - MS ) analysis identified endogenous CK2  as a protein specifically co - precipitating with Flag - tagged full - length N - WASP in HEK - 293T cells ( data not shown ) . This interaction was validated by immunoblotting with anti - CK2  antibodies ( Fig . 1A ) . Next , we investigated whether endogenous N - WASP and CK2 form a complex using an anti - N - WASP antiserum ( supplementary material Fig . S1A ) . Immunoprecipitation studies revealed that all CK2 subunits interact in an EGF - insensitive manner with N - WASP in HeLa cells ( Fig . 1B ) . Similar observations were made in HEK - 293T and COS - 7 cells ( data not shown ) . Size - exclusion chromatography showed partial coelution of N - WASP and CK2 ( supplementary material Fig . S1B ) . 2002 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 12 ) Fig . 1 . N - WASP and CK2 form a complex . ( A , B )  N - WASP and CK2 coimmunoprecipitate . ( A )  HEK - 293T cells were transfected with Flag - N - WASP ( + ) or the corresponding empty vector ( – ) . Lysates ( 1 mg ) were incubated with anti - Flag agarose beads . After extensive washes , immunoprecipitates ( IP ) and lysates ( Lysate ) were separated by SDS - PAGE and blotted with anti - Flag and anti - CK2  antibodies . One of two experiments that were performed with similar results is shown . ( B )  HeLa cells were either left untreated ( – ) or stimulated with EGF ( + ) ( 100 ng / ml for 5 minutes ) . Lysates ( 1 mg ) were incubated with pre - immune rabbit ( Pre - I . ) or anti - N - WASP anti - serum and Protein - A – agarose beads . Immunoprecipitates were extensively washed , separated on SDS - PAGE and blotted as indicated . One of two experiments that were performed with similar results is shown . ( C )  CCV - recruitment kinetics during CME of the EGFR . The upper panels show cell homogenates and CCVs separated by SDS - PAGE and blotted with the indicated antibodies . The graphs indicate the results of densitometry analysis . Time indicates the duration of EGF stimulation . Results are means±s . d . in all cases ( n  3 ) ( D ) The N - WASP – CK2 complex localizes at CCVs . CCVs were purified from HeLa cells , solubilized and CCV lysates subjected to immunoprecipitation as in B . CCV lysates ( 33 % ) and immunoprecipitates were separated by SDS - PAGE and blotted as indicated . One of two experiments that were performed with similar results is shown . ( E )  CK2 binds directly to N - WASP . Recombinant GST - tagged full - length 1   M rat N - WASP ( FL ) or deletion mutants thereof ( lower - left schematic ) were immobilized and incubated with 1   M soluble purified CK2  ( upper panel and lower - right - hand schematic ) or  CK2  subunit ( lower panels and lower - right - hand schematic ) . Bound proteins were resolved by SDS - PAGE and subjected to immunoblotting as indicated . One of two experiments that were performed with similar results is shown . * 0 . 01 < P ≤ 0 . 05 ; * * 0 . 001 < P ≤ 0 . 01 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e To gain insight into the function of the N - WASP – CK2 complex , we analysed the cellular distribution of N - WASP and CK2 and purified CCVs . Bona fide markers of CCVs [ clathrin - heavy chain ( CHC ) , adaptor - related protein complex 2 ( AP - 2 ) and cyclin - G - associated kinase ( GAK ) , transferrin receptor protein ( TfR ) and EGFR ] proved that CCVs could readily be isolated from HeLa cells . Although they were retrieved mainly in the membrane - containing fractions , N - WASP and CK2 partitioned into both membranes and cytosol ( supplementary material Fig . S1C ) . These results confirm that CK2 is a CCV - associated protein ( Bar - Zvi and Branton , 1986 ; Korolchuk and Banting , 2002 ) and show that N - WASP localizes on these vesicles . Accordingly , both N - WASP and CK2 partially colocalized with CCSs at the plasma membrane ( supplementary material Fig . S2A , B ) . CME can be reversibly arrested by incubating cells at restrictive and permissive temperatures , 0°C and 37°C , respectively ( Puri et al . , 2005 ) . EGF stimulation concomitant with removal of the temperature block triggers a synchronized burst of EGFR internalization ( Puri et al . , 2005 ; Sorkin and Goh , 2008 ) . In this way , CCV - associated EGFR functions as a molecular tracer for ligand - induced CME . Rhodamine - conjugated EGF indicated that ligand internalization begins to be clearly detectable at 2 minutes after the release ( supplementary material Fig . S2C ) . Therefore , CCV - enriched fractions were prepared at 1 , 2 and 4 minutes after transferring arrested cells to the permissive temperature , with the concomitant EGF stimulation . Cells kept at 0°C remained unengaged in CME and served as a control , whereas EGF - treated cells showed a progressive increase in the amount of EGFR retrieved in the CCV - enriched fraction ( Fig . 1C ) . Grb2 followed the same kinetics as EGFR , as expected from its ability to specifically interact with active EGFR ( Jiang et al . , 2003 ) . Surprisingly , no major variation in either AP - 2 or clathrin was found ( Fig . 1C ) , suggesting that CCV number is either constrained by limiting factors or maintained at the steady state . Alternatively , plasma - membrane - derived CCVs might only constitute a small portion of the total CCVs and , hence , their variation was below our detection limit . Indeed , AP - 1 was more efficiently enriched in the CCV - containing fraction than AP - 2 ( data not shown ) . Whatever the case , both N - WASP and CK2 subunits could be found in the CCV - enriched fractions and , whereas N - WASP and EGFR displayed similar recruitment kinetics , the amount of CK2 increased less markedly ( Fig . 1C ) . CK2  and  (cid:2) could be specifically detected as proteins co - immunoprecipitating with N - WASP in CCV lysates ( Fig . 1D ) , thus showing that the N - WASP – CK2 complex localizes at CCVs . The low amount of CK2  in the N - WASP immunocomplexes suggested that either holo - CK2 , and its isolated subunits , reside in CCVs or holo - CK2 associates with N - WASP by means of  and / or  (cid:2) ( Fig . 1C ) . N - WASP and CK2 interact directly Immobilized full - length GST – N - WASP and deletion mutants thereof ( Fig . 1E , lower - left schematic ) , or GST as a control , were used to assess whether CK2  and  binding to N - WASP is direct and to map the interaction surfaces . Physical interaction between N - WASP and CK2  could be observed in vitro ( Fig . 1E , upper panels ) . Surprisingly , CK2  bound to N - WASP directly and to the same sites used by CK2  ( Fig . 1E , middle and lower panels ) . The deletion mutants revealed the existence of multiple CK2 - interacting surfaces ( Fig . 1E ) , whose availability is likely to be regulated by N - WASP conformation . CK2 phosphorylates N - WASP both in vitro and in vivo Serine 480 and 481 of N - WASP are putative acceptor sites for phosphorylation by CK2 ( Cory et al . , 2003 ; Meggio and Pinna , 2003 ) and were mutated to alanine , either singularly or simultaneously . The full - length protein and the VCA domain were purified as GST - fusion proteins to be used in in vitro kinase assays with CK2  . Phosphorylation of wild - type N - WASP and the VCA domain , but not GST alone , indicated that N - WASP is indeed a CK2 substrate ( Fig . 2A ) . The S480A , S481A ( hereafter referred to as AA ) mutation rendered both N - WASP and its isolated VCA domain resistant to phosphorylation , strongly suggesting that serine 480 and 481 are the only sites targeted by CK2  ( Fig . 2A ) . Next , we assessed N - WASP phosphorylation both in control and CK2 - knockdown ( KD ) HeLa cells . As a further control for specificity , we took advantage of N - WASP - KD cells . The ablation of N - WASP did not affect the CK2 association with CCVs and vice versa , indicating that independent mechanisms control CK2 and N - WASP localization at CCVs . Phosphorylation of serine 480 and 481 at CCVs was decreased in the absence of CK2 ( Fig . 2B ) . No change was detected in the homogenates , thus suggesting that multiple kinases can phosphorylate N - WASP on the same residues ( Fig . 2B ) . Inhibition of CK2 using 2 - dimethylamino - 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 - tetrabromo - 1H - benzimidazole ( DMAT ) ( Pagano et al . , 2004 ) in wild - type cells produced similar effects ( supplementary material Fig . S3A ) . Together , these data highlight the crucial contribution of CK2 to N - WASP phosphorylation at CCVs and also point towards a spatially restricted regulation of N - WASP . N - WASP is a CK2 inhibitor Because N - WASP binds to and is phosphorylated by CK2  , it might affect the kinase activity of the latter . CK2  was incubated with a tenfold molar excess of  - casein and GST – N - WASP AA , or  - casein and GST .  - Casein possesses 12 canonical CK2 phosphorylation sites ( Meggio and Pinna , 2003 ) and does not bind to CK2 ( data not shown ) . The phosphorylation - resistant N - WASP was exploited to specifically evaluate the impact of the N - WASP – CK2 interaction on CK2 activity . N - WASP significantly reduced  - casein phosphorylation by CK2 compared with that of the control ( Fig . 2C ) . This inhibitory effect turned out to be primarily exerted by the VCA region ( supplementary material Fig . S4A ) . Furthermore , the incubation of CK2  with a saturating tenfold molar excess of both  - casein and the VCA region strongly diminished the phosphorylation of the former , but not of the latter , compared with that of the controls ( Fig . 2D ) . The phosphorylation - mimicking ( S480D and S481D , hereafter referred to as DD ) and phosphorylation - resistant mutants of the VCA region were only slightly less effective than the wild - type protein , indicating that the CK2 - binding abilities of N - WASP play a key role ( Fig . 2D ) . Most importantly , these experiments collectively suggest that N - WASP can hold CK2 in check by functioning as an inhibitor . To evaluate the relevance of this phenomenon in a more physiological context , the kinase activity of CCV - associated CK2 was measured on  - casein in control , N - WASP - KD and CK2 - KD cells . The kinase activity associated with anti - CK2  antibody immunocomplexes increased in the absence of N - WASP ( Fig . 2E , F , supplementary material Fig . S4B ) . Phosphorylation of  - casein was unambiguously ascribed to CK2 , as shown by the lack of phosphorylation in the CK2 - KD cells ( Fig . 2E ) . Similar results were obtained assaying intact CCVs ( data not shown ) . In summary , these observations implicate N - WASP in buffering CK2 - dependent phosphorylation at CCVs . 2003 Interplay between N - WASP and CK2 in CME J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Phosphorylation reduces the CK2 - binding ability and basal NPF activity of N - WASP Phosphorylation of serine 480 and 481 by CK2 increases the negative charge at the boundary between the C and A domains in the VCA region . Thus , the affinity of VCA for the B - GBD module might be strengthened ( Kim et al . , 2000 ; Prehoda et al . , 2000 ) and N - WASP availability to CK2 reduced . As a result , the affinity of interaction between N - WASP and CK2 should decrease upon phosphorylation . Additionally , phosphorylation might also affect the association of CK2 with the isolated fully available VCA . To 2004 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 12 ) Fig . 2 . CK2 phosphorylates and its kinase activity is regulated by N - WASP . ( A )  CK2 phosphorylates N - WASP in vitro . Wild - type GST - tagged full - length N - WASP ( FL wt ) , the S480A and S481A double mutant ( FL AA ) , its isolated wild - type VCA domain ( VCA wt ) and mutants thereof [ VCA S480A , VCA S481A , VCA S480A - S481A ( AA ) ] , or GST as a control , were incubated with CK2  as described in the Materials and Methods . Proteins were resolved by SDS - PAGE and the gel stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue ( Coomassie ) , dried and subjected to autoradiography ( Autoradiography ) . One of two experiments that were performed with similar results is shown . Similar results were obtained with holo - CK2 , which simply attained a higher kinase activity towards N - WASP ( not shown ) . ( B )  CK2 phosphorylates N - WASP on CCVs . Homogenates ( 2 % ) or solubilized CCVs from control ( ctr ) , N - WASP - KD or CK2 - KD ( N - WASP and CK2 , respectively ) cells were analysed by SDS - PAGE and blotted as indicated . One of three experiments that were performed with similar results is shown . Densitometry indicated that N - WASP phosphorylation is reduced to 53±0 . 1 % in CK2 KD cells compared with the control ( n  3 ) . The solubility of N - WASP , but not its total expression ( see Fig . 4A ) , reproducibly increases in the absence of CK2 . ( C , D )  N - WASP inhibits CK2 activity in vitro . ( C )  Left - hand panel . Kinase assays were performed by incubating 0 . 2   M CK2  with 2   M GST – N - WASP AA or GST along with 2   M  - casein . Autoradiography and Coomassie - stained gel are illustrated . One experiment of four that were performed with similar results is shown . Right - hand panel .  - casein bands were excised from the gel and the c . p . m . measured . Values were normalized to the lowest value and the relative  - casein phosphorylation plotted . a . u . , arbitrary units . ( D )  Left - hand panel . Kinase assays were performed by incubating 0 . 4   M CK2  with 4   M wild - type VCA ( wt ) , VCA AA ( AA ) , VCA DD ( DD ) , or GST alone , with ( + ) or without ( – ) the addition of 4   M  - casein . One experiment of three that were performed with similar results is shown . Autoradiography and Coomassie - stained gel are illustrated . Right - hand panel . Quantification of three independent experiments was performed as in C and the significance evaluated with one - way ANOVA . ( E )  CK2 displays higher activity on CCVs in the absence of N - WASP . CK2 was immunopurified from CCVs of control ( ctr ) , N - WASP - KD or CK2 - KD cells ( N - WASP and CK2 , respectively ) ( left - hand panel ) and subjected to kinase assays ( ctr KD and N - WASP KD were performed in duplicates ) using  - casein as a substrate ( right - hand panel ) . One experiment of three that were performed with similar results is shown . ( F )  Quantification of E as in C . * * 0 . 001 < P ≤ 0 . 01 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e circumvent the inability to achieve complete N - WASP phosphorylation by CK2 in vitro ( data not shown ) , phosphorylation mimetic and resistant mutants were compared . Association equilibrium constants were determined for both GST – N - WASP and GST – VCA with CK2  ( supplementary material Fig . S5A – C ) , the relevant N - WASP - binding partner on CCVs . Although the affinity of the N - WASP AA – CK2  complex was 0 . 79  M , that of N - WASP DD and CK2  displayed an 80 % reduction ( Fig . 3A and supplementary material Fig . S5D , E ) . By contrast , the interaction affinities of CK2  with GST – VCA AA and DD were indistinguishable ( 0 . 133 compared with 0 . 137  M ) ( Fig . 3A ; supplementary material Fig . S5F , G ) , ruling out that extra negative charges result in VCA interacting less efficiently with CK2  . In keeping with the above results , non - saturating concentrations of N - WASP DD activated the Arp2 / 3 complex less efficiently than N - WASP AA ( Fig . 3B and supplementary material Fig . S6A , B ) . Cdc42 - dependent activation showed that the two mutants attained similar maximal activities ( supplementary material Fig . S6B ) . Consistently , the NPF activities of VCA AA and DD could not be distinguished ( Fig . 3D ) . CK2 binding decreases the NPF activity of N - WASP To investigate whether activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by N - WASP is sensitive to CK2 binding , a saturating concentration of CK2  was added to either full - length N - WASP or its isolated VCA domain . Both wild - type and kinase - dead ( K68A ) CK2  , as well as holo - CK2 , strongly inhibited the NPF activity of N - WASP ( Fig . 3B , C ) . By contrast , the constitutively active VCA domains were only marginally affected ( Fig . 3D ) . CK2  did not alter actin polymerization on its own ( Fig . 3C ) , nor did it phosphorylate or bind to the Arp2 / 3 complex ( supplementary material Fig . S6C , D ) , thus ruling out N - WASP - independent effects . CK2  did not modulate the activity of N - WASP , demonstrating the specificity of CK2  in regulating N - WASP ( Fig . 3C ) . Notably , GTP  S - bound Cdc42 relieved N - WASP inhibition by CK2  ( Fig . 3E ) . Hence , binding of CK2 to N - WASP results in VCA inhibition through a mechanism that might stabilize the closed conformation of N - WASP . CK2 deploys two mechanisms ( i . e . phosphorylation and binding ) to regulate N - WASP activity and can be considered as the founding member of a new class of N - WASP inhibitors . 2005 Interplay between N - WASP and CK2 in CME Fig . 3 . CK2 regulates N - WASP . ( A )  N - WASP AA displays higher affinity for CK2  than DD . Surface plasmon resonance measurements of the interactions between CK2  and the indicated N - WASP mutants were performed to derive equilibrium dissociation constants ( means±s . d . ; 0 . 001 < P ≤ 0 . 01 for FL AA compared with FL DD ; n  5 ) . Sensograms are presented in supplementary material Fig . S5D – G . ( B )  NPF activity of N - WASP AA and N - WASP DD and effects of CK2  . Pyrene - actin polymerization assays were performed with 15 nM GST – N - WASP ( either AA or DD ) and 1   M wild - type ( wt ) or kinase - dead ( K68A ) CK2  . ( C )  CK2  and holo - CK2 , but not CK2  , inhibit N - WASP . N - WASP AA was assayed , as in B , with 1   M CK2  and 1   M CK2  . CK2  slightly stimulated actin polymerization in the absence of N - WASP , whereas holo - CK2 did not ( not shown ) . Identical results were obtained with N - WASP DD ( not shown ) . ( D )  NPF activity of VCA AA and VCA DD and effects of CK2  . 1   M CK2  and 250 nM GST - VCA AA or DD were used . Identical results were obtained with wild - type GST – VCA ( not shown ) . ( E )  Cdc42 relieves N - WASP inhibition by CK2  . Conditions were as in C , but with 1   M GTP  S - loaded Cdc42 ( Cdc42 ) . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e N - WASP and CK2 jointly regulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis and cell - surface levels of the EGFR Stable N - WASP - KD HeLa cells could be readily generated ( Fig . 4A ) , whereas transient co - silencing of either CK2  and  (cid:2) or all three CK2 subunits was required to strongly reduce of CK2 expression ( data not shown ; Fig . 4A ) . Importantly , downregulation of CK2 and N - WASP , either alone or in combination , did not affect the expression levels of EGFR or the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Fig . 4A ) . Low doses of iodinated EGF were used to selectively induce EGFR endocytosis through the clathrin - dependent pathway and to measure its initial rate of internalization ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) . The removal of N - WASP resulted in a decreased EGF internalization rate compared with that in control cells ( Fig . 4B ) . CK2 - KD cells showed a similar phenotype and the concomitant silencing of N - WASP and CK2 did not further reduce the internalization rate ( Fig . 4B ) . Knockdown of the Arp2 / 3 complex phenocopied the absence of the N - WASP – CK2 complex . These results suggest that CK2 and N - WASP act together in a pathway , with the Arp2 / 3 complex as the end - effector , to modulate CME of EGFR . Notably , downregulation of either N - WASP or CK2 increased the cell - surface levels of EGFR without affecting its expression and recycling ( Fig . 4A – C and supplementary material Fig . S7 , respectively ) . The observation that knockdown of both N - WASP and CK2 failed to induce either additive or synergistic effects , compared with the single knockdowns , further supports that N - WASP and CK2 represent a functional unit ( Fig . 4B – D ) . Taken together , these data indicate that N - WASP and CK2 jointly optimize CME of the EGFR . N - WASP and CK2 activities and their ability to enter into a complex control cell - surface levels of EGFR To assess the physiological relevance of N - WASP phosphorylation , we transfected N - WASP - KD cells with short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) - insensitive EGFP - tagged wild - type , phosphorylation - resistant or phosphorylation - mimicking N - WASP and analysed cell - surface EGFR . Total EGFR was not affected by reintroducing either wild - type N - WASP or its phosphorylation mutants ( data not shown ) . However , wild - type N - WASP reduced the amount of EGFR at the plasma membrane ( Fig . 5A , B ) . Although the effect of N - WASP DD was indistinguishable from that of the wild type , EGFP alone and N - WASP AA did not cause a significant decrease in plasma membrane EGFR ( Fig . 5A , B ) . The identical maximal 2006 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 12 ) Fig . 4 . N - WASP - KD and CK2 - KD cells display decreased EGF endocytosis . ( A )  Characterization of HeLa knockdown cells . Representative immunoblot analysis of relevant proteins ( indicated on the right ) in the various knockdown ( KD ) cells ( indicated on top ) . Equal amounts of total cellular lysates were used ; TfR and actin served as loading controls . ( B )  Initial rate of EGF internalization ( k e ; minute – 1 ) [ means±s . d . ; 0 . 01 < P ≤ 0 . 05 for all KDs compared with the control KD ( ctr ) ; n  9 ] and the number of EGFRs on the plasma membrane ( means±s . d . ; 0 . 01 < P ≤ 0 . 05 for all KDs compared with the ctr ; n  6 ) in N - WASP - KD ( N - WASP ) , CK2 - KD ( CK2 ) and in N - WASP and CK2 double - knockdown ( N - WASP - CK2 ) cells . ( C )  Removal of N - WASP and CK2 increases EGFR at the cell surface . Control HeLa cells , stably expressing EGFP , were mixed with the indicated KD cells , seeded on coverslips and then left in 0 . 1 % fetal calf serum . The next day cells were fixed and cell - surface EGFR was selectively marked . Representative wide - field pictures are shown . EGFP - positive cells are marked with a red asterisk in the cell - surface EGFR panels . Scale bar : 20   m . ( D )  N - WASP - KD , CK2 - KD and N - WASP and CK2 double - knockdown cells are phenocopies . Surface EGFR intensities displayed by knockdown and neighbouring EGFP - positive wild - type cells were measured and plotted for each mixed population . Data are means + s . d . for four independent experiments performed as in C . One - way ANOVA was used to assess statistical significance . * * 0 . 001 < P ≤ 0 . 01 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e NPF activities of these two N - WASP mutants ( supplementary material Fig . S6B ) suggest that proper CK2 - binding abilities are also crucial for N - WASP function . Indeed , the phosphorylation - mimicking mutant bound to CK2  more efficiently with respect to its phosphorylation - resistant counterpart ( Fig . 5C ) . These findings agree with phosphorylation of serine 480 and 481 being required for N - WASP to accumulate on CCVs upon EGF stimulation ( supplementary material Fig . S1G and not shown ) and highlight 2007 Interplay between N - WASP and CK2 in CME Fig . 5 . Wild - type and phosphorylation - mimicking N - WASP and wild - type CK2  efficiently rescue cell - surface EGFR levels . ( A )  Wild - type and phosphorylation - mimicking , but not phosphorylation - resistant , N - WASP affect cell - surface EGFR levels in N - WASP - KD cells . N - WASP - KD cells were transfected with shRNA - insensitive wild - type EGFP – N - WASP ( N - WASP wt ) , its phosphorylation - resistant ( N - WASP AA ) and phosphorylation - mimicking ( N - WASP DD ) mutants , or the empty vector ( EGFP ) . Cells were left in 0 . 1 % fetal calf serum , fixed and stained as in Fig . 4C . Representative wide - field pictures are shown . All transfectants are marked with a red asterisk in the cell - surface EGFR panels . Scale bar : 20   m . shRNA - insensitive EGFP – N - WASPs were expressed at similar levels in N - WASP KD cells ( not shown ) . ( B )  N - WASP wild type and DD decrease cell - surface EGFR in N - WASP - KD cells . Surface EGFR was determined as described in the Materials and Methods . Data are means±s . d . for five independent experiments performed as in A . ctr , control ; Tfx , transfected ; wt , N - WASP wild type ; AA , N - WASP AA ; DD , N - WASP DD . One - way ANOVA was used to assess statistical significance . * * * P ≤ 0 . 001 . ( C )  Correlation between the rescuing abilities of N - WASP AA and DD and their binding to CK2 . N - WASP - KD cells were transfected with shRNA - insensitive EGFP – N - WASPs ( either AA or DD ) , or were mock - treated ( ctr ) . Immunoprecipitations ( IP ) with the anti - N - WASP serum were performed as in Fig . 1B , separated on SDS - PAGE and blotted as indicated . The CK2 : N - WASP ratio was calculated for both the AA and DD lanes as in supplementary material Fig . S1H and values were normalized with respect to DD . The amount of CK2  and  (cid:2) co - immunoprecipitating with N - WASP AA is reduced to 54±4 % compared with that of N - WASP DD . Similar results were obtained by expressing GST – N - WASP AA and DD in HEK - 293T cells ( not shown ) . ( D )  Wild - type , but not kinase - dead , CK2  affects cell - surface EGFR levels upon knockdown of both CK2  and  (cid:2) . siRNA - insensitive ECFP - tagged wild - type ( CK2  wt ) and kinase - dead ( CK2  K68A ) CK2  , or ECFP alone , were transfected in CK2  and CK2  (cid:2) double - knockdown cells . Cells were fixed and stained for surface EGFR as in A . Representative wide - field pictures are shown . All transfectants are marked with a red asterisk in the cell - surface EGFR panels . Scale bar : 20   m . The cells expressing wild - type CK2  were typically two times more abundant than CK2  K68A transfectants in the CK2  and CK2  (cid:2) double - knockdown cells ( not shown ) . ( E )  Wild - type CK2  decreases cell - surface EGFR in CK2  and  (cid:2) double - knockdown KD cells . Quantification was performed as in B . Data are means±s . d . for three independent experiments performed as in D . wt , CK2  wt ; K68A , CK2  K68A . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e that the CK2 - binding and CME - rescuing abilities of N - WASP are correlated . We also reconstituted CK2  and CK2  (cid:2) double - knockdown cells with either RNA interference ( RNAi ) - insensitive wild - type or kinase - dead ( K68A ) CK2  , or ECFP alone as a control . A significant reduction in cell - surface EGFR could be detected in ECFP – CK2  - expressing cells ( Fig . 5D , E ) . By contrast , CK2  K68A did not reduce the levels of cell - surface EGFR ( Fig . 5D , E ) , thus indicating that the kinase activity is essential for this CK2 function . The rescue was not due to a change in total EGFR ( data not shown ) . Most importantly , the rescuing effect of CK2 requires N - WASP because ectopic expression of CK2  failed to decrease surface levels of EGFR when CK2  , CK2  (cid:2) and N - WASP were all simultaneously knocked down ( Fig . 6 ) ; the same holds true for N - WASP ( Fig . 6 ) . In summary , the ability of N - WASP and CK2 to properly regulate CME of the EGFR correlates with their proficiency to assemble in a complex and requires their activities . N - WASP and CK2 regulate F - actin at CCSs Our observations predict that the perturbation of the function of the N - WASP – CK2 complex should alter actin dynamics at forming CCPs . Therefore , control , N - WASP - KD and CK2 - KD cells , as well as N - WASP and CK2 double - knockdown cells , were analysed for F - actin association with CCSs through total internal reflection ( TIRF ) microscopy . In control cells , phalloidin - labelled actin could be detected in ~ 70 % of peripheral CCSs ( Fig . 7A , B ) . Strikingly , most CCSs were devoid of F - actin in both N - WASP and the N - WASP and CK2 double knockdowns ( Fig . 7A , B ) . Thus , N - WASP appears to be central for the presence of F - actin at CCSs . Although the absence of CK2 did not affect the percentage of F - actin - positive CCSs ( Fig . 7A , B ) , its pharmacological inhibition ( Pagano et al . , 2004 ) resulted in a 25 % reduction in the internalization rate constant ( k e ) of the EGFR , in more CCSs being F - actin - free ( supplementary material Fig . S3B – D ) and in less N - WASP accumulating on CCVs upon EGF stimulation in wild - type HeLa cells ( supplementary material Fig . S1G ) . The finding that DMAT treatment phenocopies N - WASP but not CK2 silencing agrees with the notion of N - WASP inactivation upon CK2 binding and suggests that affinity - regulated assembly of the N - WASP – CK2 complex is crucial for actin polymerization at CCPs . The robust association between F - actin and CCPs is surprising given that actin recruitment is often only transient ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ; Ferguson et al . , 2009 ; Innocenti et al . , 2005 ; Lamaze et al . , 1997 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Merrifield et al . , 2004 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ) . However , the large cytosolic free pool and detrimental effects of mRFP and EGFP - tagged G - actin on actin dynamics ( Riedl et al . , 2008 ) might have resulted in an underestimation of the colocalization between F - actin and CCPs . Discussion The present study describes the first example of concerted action by kinases and actin during CME in mammalian cells . In this context , the N - WASP – CK2 complex represents a molecular platform that integrates different elements contributing to EGFR internalization in a single circuit . Notably , both N - WASP and CK2 activities and their abilities to assemble in a complex are required for the proper execution of this process . We have shown that N - WASP fulfils both NPF - dependent and NPF - independent roles in CME : it promotes actin polymerization by the Arp2 / 3 complex and inhibits CK2 , respectively . Both functions depend upon the CK2 - binding abilities of N - WASP , which are regulated by phosphorylation . Upon phosphorylation of serine 480 and 481 , N - WASP shows decreased CK2 - binding and Arp2 / 3 - complex - activating abilities . We did not record differences between phosphorylation - mimicking and phosphorylation - resistant N - WASP after Cdc42 - mediated derepression ( supplementary material Fig . S6B ) . At odds with this , WASP can be converted into a more potent NPF by CK2 phosphorylation ( Cory et al . , 2003 ) . Technical aspects , including the use of Cdc42 - insensitive WASP , along with structural differences between WASP and N - WASP might account for these discrepancies . 2008 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 12 ) Fig . 6 . Cell - surface EGFR levels can only be rescued by reconstituting the N - WASP - CK2 complex . ( A )  Cell - surface EGFR levels in CK2  and CK2  (cid:2) double - knockdown ( CK2 ) , N - WASP - KD and N - WASP , CK2  and CK2  (cid:2)  triple - knockdown ( N - WASP - CK2 ) cells transfected with EGFP , EGFP – CK2  or EGFP – N - WASP . Knockdown cells were transfected with shRNA - insensitive wild - type EGFP – N - WASP , siRNA - insensitive wild - type EGFP – CK2  , or EGFP alone . Cells were left in 0 . 1 % fetal calf serum , fixed and stained as in Fig . 4C . Representative wide - field pictures are shown . All transfectants are marked with a red asterisk in the cell - surface EGFR panels . Scale bar : 20   m . ( B )  The simultaneous presence of CK2 and N - WASP is required for controlling cell - surface EGFR levels . Data are means±s . d . for three independent experiments performed as in A and quantified as in Fig . 5B . ctr , control ; Tfx , transfected . One - way ANOVA was used to assess statistical significance . * * * P ≤ 0 . 001 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e We also demonstrated that CK2 is required for optimal clathrin - dependent internalization of the EGFR . To fulfil this function , CK2 modulates the actin - regulatory machinery involved in CME by means of both its scaffolding and kinase activities . Several lines of evidence support this interpretation . First , kinase - dead CK2  failed to rescue the increased cell - surface EGFR levels in CK2 - KD cells . Second , both silencing and pharmacological inhibition of CK2 impaired EGFR internalization , despite having opposite effects on N - WASP activity . Nevertheless , the N - WASP and CK2 double - knockdown cells did not reveal either additive or synergic effects with respect to the single knockdowns , nor did DMAT further decrease the initial rate of endocytosis of EGF in N - WASP - KD cells ( data not shown ) . Thus , phosphorylation - mediated regulation by CK2 probably extends to additional targets contributing to N - WASP - promoted actin dynamics at CCPs . Interestingly , several components of the actin machinery and N - WASP - binding proteins are potential CK2 substrates ( Meggio and Pinna , 2003 ) . Third , and in contrast to a previous report ( Korolchuk and Banting , 2002 ) , we found that CK2 is active in the intact CCV - enriched fraction ( data not shown ) . Fourth , the scaffolding abilities and kinase activity of CK2 are crucial for N - WASP inhibition . Interplay between N - WASP and CK2 is based on assembly of the N - WASP – CK2 complex . The cellular concentrations of N - WASP and CK2 ( 0 . 33 and 0 . 66  M , respectively ) , their membrane - associated fractions ( 70 % and 50 % of the total , respectively ) and high N - WASP phosphorylation at the steady state ( ~ 90 % ) ( supplementary material Fig . S1D – F ) , indicate that a membrane - bound N - WASP – CK2 complex can exist only where both partners are sufficiently concentrated and impose spatial constraints to its formation . The EGF - induced accumulation of N - WASP on CCVs sets conditions favourable to the localized assembly of the N - WASP – CK2 complex and causes CK2 to become limiting on nascent CCVs ( supplementary material Fig . S1G , H ) . As a result , the CCP - associated free fraction of N - WASP is able to boost actin polymerization when CK2 activity is minimal . Hence , the N - WASP – CK2 complex has the potential to initiate and to terminate the action of N - WASP and CK2 , respectively . This solves the paradox of the positive role played by the N - WASP – CK2 complex despite it having reduced NPF and kinase activities . We propose that CCP maturation is accompanied by an increase in N - WASP - dependent actin polymerization and a progressive reduction in CK2 activity orchestrated by the N - WASP – CK2 complex ( Fig . 8 ) . 2009 Interplay between N - WASP and CK2 in CME Fig . 7 . N - WASP and CK2 regulate actin dynamics at clathrin - coated structures . ( A )  Morphology and association of F - actin with CCSs in control KD , CK2 - KD , N - WASP - KD and N - WASP and CK2 double - knockdown cells . Knockdown cells were fixed and stained with anti - clathrin heavy chain ( CHC , green in the ‘merge’ image ) antibodies and rhodamine – phalloidin ( phalloidin , red in the merge ) to detect CCSs and F - actin , respectively . Representative TIRF micrographs are illustrated . Enlarged images are shown on the right . Scale bar : 10   m . ( B )  N - WASP controls the presence of F - actin at CCSs . Left - hand panel . Quantification was performed as explained in the Materials and Methods . Data are means±s . d . for two independent experiments as in A , in which at least five pictures per condition and 50 CCSs per cell were inspected . Two - way ANOVA was used to assess statistical significance . * * * P ≤ 0 . 001 . Right - hand panel . Schematic of the scored phenotypes and their classification . CHC , green ; actin , red ; yellow , colocalization of CHC and actin . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Consequently , the N - WASP – CK2 complex controls the contribution of its subunits to CME of EGFR . The integration of kinase and actin functions in a single circuit reveals a new pathway that sheds more light on our mechanistic view of CME . Materials and Methods Vectors , antibodies and reagents pECFP - CK2  and pGEX - 3 - CK2  were gifts from Ellen Haugsten ( Institute for Cancer Research , The Norwegian Radium Hospital , Oslo , Norway ) . pGEX - 4T - 3 - CK2  , pGEX - 4T - 3 - CK2  K68A and pECFP - CK2  were subcloned from pSG5 - CK2  and pSG5 - CK2  - HA , which were gifts from Yves Goldberg ( Commissariat a l’Energie Atomique , Grenoble , France ) . Full - length rat N - WASP ( amino acids 1 – 501 ) ,  CA ( amino acids 1 – 446 ) , VCA ( amino acids 394 – 501 ) , PP ( amino acids 274 – 400 ) , WH1 ( amino acids 1 – 182 ) , B - GBD ( amino acids 183 – 273 ) , GBD ( amino acids 200 – 273 ) , WH1 - GBD ( amino acids 1 – 273 ) were amplified by PCR and cloned into pGEX - 6P - 1 vector . pCDNA3 Flag - N - WASP ( 2 – 501 ) was obtained by PCR . Rat N - WASP S480A , S481A ( AA ) , N - WASP S480D , S481D ( DD ) , shRNA - insensitive N - WASP and RNAi - insensitive CK2  were generated by site - directed mutagenesis ( Stratagene ) . pRK - GST - N - WASP ( wild type , AA and DD ) were obtained by subcloning . All constructs were verified by sequencing . Goat anti - CK2  antibody , goat anti - CK2  (cid:2) antibody , rabbit anti - CK2  antibody , rabbit anti - GAK antibody , goat anti - clathrin - heavy - chain antibody , mouse anti - GST antibody , goat anti - Arp3 antibody and mouse anti - CD71 antibody ( against the transferrin receptor ) were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology . Mouse anti - CK2  and  (cid:2) antibody was from BD Biosciences , and mouse anti - clathrin - heavy - chain antibody was from ABR . Mouse anti - EGFR antibody ( Ab - 1 ) was from Oncogene . Mouse anti - AP - 2 antibody (  2 ) and mouse anti - p21 - ARPC3 antibody were from Transduction Laboratories . Mouse anti - Flag antibodies and mouse anti - actin antibody were from Sigma . Rabbit monoclonal anti - N - WASP antibody was from Cell Signaling . Mouse anti - clathrin - heavy - chain antibody ( X - 22 ) was from ABR . Polyclonal rabbit anti - N - WASP antibodies were generated against full - length GST – N - WASP according to standard procedures . Antibodies against N - WASP - P ( phosphorylated serines 480 and 481 ) were from UBL . Rabbit - anti Sec22 antibody was a gift from Tiziana Scanu ( The Netherlands Cancer Institute , Amsterdam , The Netherlands ) . Alexa - Fluor - 488 - or Alexa - Fluor - 555 - conjugated secondary antibodies and DAPI were from Invitrogen . If not otherwise specified , all chemicals were from Sigma . Biochemical assays Standard procedures for protein analysis , in vitro binding , protein purification , cell lysis and immunoprecipitation were as previously described ( Beli et al . , 2008 ; Innocenti et al . , 2004 ) . Full - length N - WASPs used in all actin polymerization assays and Biacore experiments were purified from mammalian cells in a manner similar to that previously described for WAVE2 ( Innocenti et al . , 2004 ) . Anti - GST antibodies were used to confirm correct loading in all pull - down experiments ( data not shown ) . Cleavage of full - length CK2  and CK2  from GST was performed with thrombin ( Novagen ) and Factor Xa ( Amersham Biosciences ) , respectively . Cleavage of VCAs from GST was performed with the Pre - scission protease ( GE Healthcare ) . Surface plasmon resonance The Biacore X100 system was used . Goat anti - GST antibodies were covalently linked to Sensor Chip CM5 ( Biacore ) , with the amine - coupling and GST - capture kits ( Biacore ) , according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Approximately 200 relative units ( RU ) of recombinant GST – N - WASP AA or DD were captured onto the chips . CK2  was diluted in HBS - EP running buffer [ 0 . 01 M HEPES pH 7 . 4 , 0 . 15 M NaCl , 3 mM EDTA and 0 . 005 % ( v / v ) Surfactant P20 ] and injected with a flow rate of 15  l per minute . Multi - cycle kinetics was performed . The surface was regenerated with 10 mM glycine - HCl pH 2 . 2 according to the GST capture kit instructions . The response in the control flow cell , which had a comparable amount of GST captured onto the surface , was subtracted from each sensogram . Data were analysed with Biacore Evaluation Software according to a 1 : 1 binding model . Kinase assays Purified recombinant GST - fusion proteins , attached to glutathione – Sepharose 4B beads , soluble CK2  and / or CK2  , or immunoprecipitates bound to Protein A beads , were resuspended in 30  l kinase buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 10 mM MgCl 2 and 20  M ATP ) , supplemented with 2 . 5  Ci [  - 32 P ] ATP ( Invitrogen ) and incubated at 30°C for 20 minutes . Reactions were boiled in sample buffer and resolved by SDS - PAGE , then either stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue , dried and subjected to autoradiography or transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane , subjected to autoradiography and subsequent western blotting . Generation of knockdown cells N - WASP - KD cells were created by infecting wild - type HeLa cells with pRS - N - WASP ( target sequence : 5 (cid:2) - GGAGCAAAGCCATTCATTC - 3 (cid:2) ) , followed by selection with puromycin ( 2 . 5  g / ml ) and clone isolation . Three selected single clones were further characterized for N - WASP protein levels and the response to EGF . Because similar results were obtained , all the subsequent experiments were then performed with only 2010 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 12 ) Fig . 8 . Proposed mechanism regulating the contribution of the N - WASP – CK2 complex to CME . ( A )  CCPs loaded with activated EGFR recruit N - WASP and CK2 by means of two independent pathways . This results in the assembly of the N - WASP – CK2 complex ( indicated by a solid arrow ) . The N - WASP – CK2 complex has reduced NPF and kinase activities compared with that of its isolated subunits . Initially , there is more CK2 than N - WASP bound to CCPs . CCP - associated CK2 is able to phosphorylate ( dashed arrow ) unknown proteins ( pink ovals ) involved in actin dynamics at CCPs and / or CCVs . In addition , phosphorylated N - WASP might be more efficiently retained on CCPs . ( B )  Although N - WASP accumulates on maturing CCPs with time , levels of CK2 remain substantially unchanged . Draining the CCP - associated free pool of CK2 progressively reduces the ability of CK2 to phosphorylate its targets . ( C )  At the late stages of CCV biogenesis , all CCP - associated CK2 is trapped in the N - WASP – CK2 complex and its kinase activity reaches a minimum . The CCP - associated free fraction of N - WASP promotes Arp2 / 3 - complex - dependent actin polymerization . ( D )  N - WASP binding to CCPs peaks just prior to fission , thus boosting the formation of new actin filaments that contribute to pinching off a CCV . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e one clone . Oligofectamine ( Invitrogen ) was exploited to deliver siRNA duplexes into cells . CK2  - KD cells were obtained with the target sequence 5 (cid:2) - CAAGATGACT - ACCAGCTGG - 3 (cid:2) ( Dharmacon ) ; CK2  (cid:2) - and CK2  - KD cells were obtained with siGENOME SMARTpool human CSNK2A2 and CSNK2B ( Dharmacon ) , respectively . Initially , parallel sets of cells were transfected with siCONTROL non - targeting siRNA ( Dharmacon ) or were mock - transfected to provide essential controls . No differences could be found and thereafter only the latter was performed . In all cases , cells were transfected twice according to Dharmacon’s instructions and analysed 3 days after the first round of transfection , as previously described ( Beli et al . , 2008 ) . p21 - ARPC3 - Arp3 - KD cells were obtained , as previously described ( Beli et al . , 2008 ) . Clathrin - coated vesicle purification After overnight starvation in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) containing 0 . 1 % serum , either 15 (cid:3) 10 6 ( Fig . 1C , supplementary material Fig . S1C , G , H and supplementary material Fig . S4B ) or 5 (cid:3) 10 6 HeLa cells ( Fig . 2E , F ) were supplemented with 50 mM HEPES pH 7 . 4 and incubated on ice for 1 hour . To release the temperature block and concomitantly induce EGFR internalization , this medium was replaced by pre - warmed medium supplemented with EGF ( 100 ng / ml ) and cells were incubated at 37°C . After the indicated time , plates were cooled on ice and all subsequent steps were performed on ice ( Girard et al . , 2005 ) . Cells were washed three times with ice - cold F - F - 54 - 30 - II Buffer A ( 0 . 1 M MES pH 6 . 5 , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM PMSF , 1  g / ml aprotinin , 1  g / ml leupeptin , 1  M pepstatin A , 1 mM DTT , 1 mM sodium orthovanadate and 5 mM NaF ) , scraped with a rubber policeman into Buffer A and dounce - homogenized ( 40 strokes with the tight pestle ) . The homogenate was centrifuged at 14 , 000 rpm in an F - 54 - 30 - II rotor for 20 minutes . The supernatant was further centrifuged at 38 , 000 rpm in an TLA - 100 . 3 rotor for 1 hour . The pellet was resuspended in 500  l Buffer A , loaded onto 3 ml of 8 % sucrose in Buffer A and centrifuged at 35 , 000 rpm in a SW - 55 Ti rotor : g for 2 hours . The pellet was either dissolved in sample buffer or solubilized , ultra - centrifuged and subjected to immunoprecipitation . The two methods resulted in an identical recovery of both CHC and other CCV - associated proteins ( data not shown ) . Internalization and recycling assays , and EGFR total surface levels 125 I - labelled EGF - internalization assays were performed as previously described ( Innocenti et al . , 2005 ) . 125 I - labelled EGF ( PerkinElmer ) was 1 . 5 ng / ml ( 500 nCi / ml ) . Non - specific binding was measured for each time point in the presence of 100 - fold molar excess of unlabeled EGF ( PreproTech ) . Cells were serum starved and then incubated with 125 I - labelled EGF ( 1 . 5 ng / ml ) for 2 , 4 and 6 minutes at 37°C . The ratios of internalized and surface - bound ( bound ) radioactivity were determined and plotted over time . k e values were derived as previously described ( Wiley and Cunningham , 1982 ) using PRISM3 software . EGFR surface levels were measured with saturating amounts of 125 I - labelled EGF as previously described ( Wiley and Cunningham , 1982 ) . In the fluorescence - based assay , cell - surface EGFR was selectively marked by staining unpermeabilized cells with antibodies targeted against the ectodomain . 125 I - labelled EGF recycling assays were performed as follows : knockdown cells were plated into 24 - well plates ( 100 , 000 cells per well ) . For each time point , four wells per knockdown were prepared . The day after , the cells were serum starved for 4 hours in basic buffer ( DMEM with 0 . 1 % BSA and 20 mM Hepes pH 7 . 4 ) . Subsequently , the basic buffer was removed and either ice - cold binding buffer ( DMEM with 0 . 1 % BSA , 20 mM Hepes pH 7 . 4 and 2 ng / ml 125 I - labelled EGF ) or ice - cold competition buffer ( DMEM with 0 . 1 % BSA , 20 mM Hepes pH 7 . 4 , 2 ng / ml 125 I - labelled EGF and 200 ng / ml EGF ) was added . A low dose of 125 I - labelled EGF ( 2 ng / ml ) was used to specifically trigger CME of EGFR . The cells were incubated on ice for 1 hour under slow shaking . Cold medium was replaced with warm basic buffer and the cells were transferred to 37°C for 15 minutes . Afterwards , they were washed twice with ice - cold PBS and incubated with a mildly acidic salt wash buffer ( 0 . 2 M sodium acetate pH 4 . 5 , 0 . 5 M NaCl ) for 5 minutes on ice , followed by two washes with ice - cold binding buffer . 125 I - labelled EGF - loaded cells were chased in basic buffer supplemented with unlabeled EGF ( 400 ng / ml ) at 37°C . At the end of each chase , the medium was collected and subjected to TCA precipitation to determine the amount of intact ( TCA precipitable ) and degraded ( TCA soluble ) 125 I - labelled EGF . Surface - bound 125 I - labelled EGF was extracted by acid treatment ( 0 . 2 M acetic acid pH 2 . 8 , 0 . 5 M NaCl ) . Finally , cells were lysed in 1 M NaOH to determine the level of intracellular 125 I - labelled EGF . Recycled EGF was expressed as follows : intact 125 I - labelled EGF in the medium plus surface - bound 125 I - labelled EGF divided by the total ( total medium plus total surface and total intracellular ) after subtraction of the non - specific counts . Non - specific counts were measured for each time point and were never higher than 3 – 8 % of the total counts . Transfection and microscopy Cells were seeded on gelatine - coated coverslips , transfected and processed for epifluorescence or indirect immunofluorescence microscopy as previously described ( Beli et al . , 2008 ) . Wide - field micrographs were acquired as 16 - bit images with a 63 (cid:3) ( 1 . 4 NA ) oil objective and subsequently converted into 8 - bit images with ImageJ . Confocal images were acquired using a Zeiss LSM510Meta set in the Multi - Track - acquisition mode with a 63 (cid:3) ( 1 . 4 NA ) oil objective . Sections of 500 nm were taken along the z - axis . Representative central sections are shown . TIRF images were acquired using a Cell ^ R workstation ( Olympus ) equipped with 488 nm and 561 nm laser lines ( both attenuated by 35 % ) and a PLAPO100xO / TIRFM - SP lens ( 1 . 45 NA ) . Incidence angles were set to achieve a penetration depth of 100 nm . Micrographs were captured as 16 - bit images and subsequently converted into 8 - bit images . Phenotypic quantifications Cell - surface EGFR levels were determined with ImageJ by measuring the average intensity of randomly selected regions of interest ( ROIs ) . We quantified at least 40 cells ( knockdown and rescued cells in Figs 4 , 5 and 6 ) , along with the neighbouring control cells , to derive average ROIs for a given sample . Mean values were always normalized with respect to the control ( wild - type and non - transfected cells in Figs 4 , 5 and 6 ) . Similar results were obtained by visually determining the intensity of the anti - EGFR staining of the cell under scrutiny to the nearest controls within the same field ( data not shown ) . Association of F - actin with CCSs was evaluated on peripheral areas to minimize the scoring of clathrin - positive endosomes and vesicles , which are abundant in the cell centre . CCSs were considered phalloidin - positive when the F - actin staining was off - centred but overlapping , adjacent or centred with respect to CCSs . When the phalloidin signal associated with or adjacent to that of CHC did not differ from the background , CCSs were defined as F - actin - free ( no actin ) . Only diffraction - limited CCSs were quantified . Blind counting of samples was performed in all instances . Actin polymerization assays The assay was performed as previously described ( Innocenti et al . , 2005 ) . The final concentrations of Arp2 / 3 complex , G - actin , pyrenyl - actin , GST – VCA , GST – N - WASP , CK2  , CK2  and Cdc42 were 0 . 02 , 2 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 25 , 0 . 015 , 1 , 1 and 1  M , respectively . Cdc42 production and loading were performed as previously described ( Innocenti et al . , 2005 ) . Purified bovine Arp2 / 3 complex , muscle and pyrene - labeled actin were from Cytoskeleton Inc . Actins were recycled prior to use ( Hertzog and Carlier , 2005 ) . In all cases , one of the three experiments that were performed with similar results is shown . Storage of CK2  and CK2  K68A resulted in a progressive loss of their N - WASP - inhibiting activities accompanied with partial degradation . To minimize this , CK2  and CK2  K68A were tested within 2 weeks of purification . The concentration of barbed ends ( [ F ] ) was derived from the rate of growth ( V ) using the equation V  k + [ F ] ( C – C c ) , where k + is the association rate constant ( 10  M – 1 s – 1 ) , C the concentration of G - actin at mid - polymerization ( 1 . 25  M ) and C c is the critical concentration ( 0 . 1  M ) . Gel filtration Lysates were prepared in buffer L ( 50 mM HEPES pH 7 . 5 , 1 % glycerol , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM EGTA , and protease and phosphatase inhibitors ) . After ultracentrifugation ( 23 , 000 rpm in a TLA - 100 . 3 rotor for 30 minutes at 4°C ) , 1 . 5 mg lysate was loaded onto a Superose 6 10 / 300 GL column ( GE Healthcare ) , pre - equilibrated in buffer GF ( 50 mM HEPES pH 7 . 5 , 1 % glycerol , 150 mM NaCl , 1 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM EGTA , and protease and phosphatase inhibitors ) . Gel filtration was performed at 4°C in buffer B at a flow rate of 0 . 5 ml / minute and fractions of 500  l were collected . Densitometry Eight - bit scans were analysed with Quantity One , as previously described ( Beli et al . , 2008 ) . Multiple and preferably non - saturated exposures of the same blot were quantified and data averaged in all cases . DMAT treatment DMAT was dissolved in DMSO at a concentration of 20 mM . Cells were incubated with DMAT ( 50  M ) for 3 hours to achieve CK2 inhibition . Control cells were mock - treated by adding an equivalent volume of DMSO . Under these conditions , CK2 activity was efficiently inhibited ( data not shown ) . Statistics Unless indicated , data are expressed as the means±s . d . for at least three independent experiments . Two - sided two - sample t - tests or appropriate ANOVA tests were performed . We thank E . Haugsten , T . Scanu and Y . Goldberg for reagents , Marie - France Carlier for help with the actin polymerization assays , the NKI Protein facility for gel filtrations and E . Argenzio for drawing Fig . 8 . D . X . was supported by a long - term fellowship from the Human Frontier Science Program . M . G . performed experiments and analysed data in Fig . 2B – D , Fig . 3C , Fig . 4A , B , supplementary material Fig . S1F , G , supplementary material Fig . S3A , B , supplementary material Fig . S4A , supplementary material Fig . S5E , supplementary material Fig . S6C , E , and supplementary material Fig . S7 . M . G . prepared reagents used in Fig . 3 and performed experiments in Fig . 5A , B . D . X . performed experiments and analysed data in Fig . 1D , E , Fig . 2A , E , F , Fig . 4B – D , Fig . 5D , E , Fig . 6 , supplementary material Fig . S1A , C , E , supplementary material Fig . S5B – G , supplementary material Fig . S6D . 2011 Interplay between N - WASP and CK2 in CME J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e L . B . A . performed the MS analysis identifying CK2 as an N - WASP - interacting protein . R . v . d . K . prepared reagents in Fig . 3 and provided technical support . M . I . conceived and directed the project , performed experiments and analysed data . M . I . wrote the manuscript . Supplementary material available online at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / cgi / content / full / 124 / 12 / 2001 / DC1 References Arrigoni , G . , Pagano , M . A . , Sarno , S . , Cesaro , L . , James , P . and Pinna , L . A . ( 2008 ) . Mass spectrometry analysis of a protein kinase CK2beta subunit interactome isolated from mouse brain by affinity chromatography . J . Proteome Res . 7 , 990 - 1000 . Bar - Zvi , D . and Branton , D . ( 1986 ) . Clathrin - coated vesicles contain two protein kinase activities . Phosphorylation of clathrin beta - light chain by casein kinase II . J . Biol . Chem . 261 , 9614 - 9621 . Beli , P . , Mascheroni , D . , Xu , D . and Innocenti , M . ( 2008 ) . WAVE and Arp2 / 3 jointly inhibit filopodium formation by entering into a complex with mDia2 . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 849 - 857 . Benesch , S . , Polo , S . , Lai , F . P . , Anderson , K . I . , Stradal , T . E . , Wehland , J . and Rottner , K . ( 2005 ) . N - WASP deficiency impairs EGF internalization and actin assembly at clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3103 - 3115 . Bibby , A . C . and Litchfield , D . W . ( 2005 ) . The multiple personalities of the regulatory subunit of protein kinase CK2 : CK2 dependent and CK2 independent roles reveal a secret identity for CK2beta . Int . J . Biol . Sci . 1 , 67 - 79 . Bolte , S . and Cordelieres , F . P . ( 2006 ) . A guided tour into subcellular colocalization analysis in light microscopy . J . Microsc . 224 , 213 - 232 . Cheng , H . C . , Skehan , B . M . , Campellone , K . G . , Leong , J . M . and Rosen , M . K . ( 2008 ) . Structural mechanism of WASP activation by the enterohaemorrhagic E . coli effector EspF ( U ) . Nature 454 , 1009 - 1013 . Conner , S . D . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 - 44 . Cory , G . O . , Cramer , R . , Blanchoin , L . and Ridley , A . J . ( 2003 ) . Phosphorylation of the WASP - VCA domain increases its affinity for the Arp2 / 3 complex and enhances actin polymerization by WASP . Mol . Cell 11 , 1229 - 1239 . Ehrlich , M . , Boll , W . , Van Oijen , A . , Hariharan , R . , Chandran , K . , Nibert , M . L . and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2004 ) . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 - 605 . Ferguson , S . , Raimondi , A . , Paradise , S . , Shen , H . , Mesaki , K . , Ferguson , A . , Destaing , O . , Ko , G . , Takasaki , J . , Cremona , O . et al . ( 2009 ) . Coordinated actions of actin and BAR proteins upstream of dynamin at endocytic clathrin - coated pits . Dev . Cell 17 , 811 - 822 . Girard , M . , Allaire , P . D . , Blondeau , F . and McPherson , P . S . ( 2005 ) . Isolation of clathrin - coated vesicles by differential and density gradient centrifugation . Curr . Protoc . Cell Biol . Chapter 3 , Unit 3 . 13 . Hertzog , M . and Carlier , M . F . ( 2005 ) . Functional characterization of proteins regulating actin assembly . Curr . Protoc . Cell Biol . Chapter 13 , Unit 13 . 6 . Innocenti , M . , Zucconi , A . , Disanza , A . , Frittoli , E . , Areces , L . B . , Steffen , A . , Stradal , T . E . , Di Fiore , P . P . , Carlier , M . F . and Scita , G . ( 2004 ) . Abi1 is essential for the formation and activation of a WAVE2 signalling complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 319 - 327 . Innocenti , M . , Gerboth , S . , Rottner , K . , Lai , F . P . , Hertzog , M . , Stradal , T . E . , Frittoli , E . , Didry , D . , Polo , S . , Disanza , A . et al . ( 2005 ) . Abi1 regulates the activity of N - WASP and WAVE in distinct actin - based processes . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 969 - 976 . Jiang , X . , Huang , F . , Marusyk , A . and Sorkin , A . ( 2003 ) . Grb2 regulates internalization of EGF receptors through clathrin - coated pits . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 858 - 870 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . and Drubin , D . G . ( 2006 ) . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 404 - 414 . Kim , A . S . , Kakalis , L . T . , Abdul - Manan , N . , Liu , G . A . and Rosen , M . K . ( 2000 ) . Autoinhibition and activation mechanisms of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Nature 404 , 151 - 158 . Kirchhausen , T . ( 2000 ) . Clathrin . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 69 , 699 - 727 . Korolchuk , V . I . and Banting , G . ( 2002 ) . CK2 and GAK / auxilin2 are major protein kinases in clathrin - coated vesicles . Traffic 3 , 428 - 439 . Korolchuk , V . and Banting , G . ( 2003 ) . Kinases in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 31 , 857 - 860 . Lamaze , C . , Fujimoto , L . M . , Yin , H . L . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1997 ) . The actin cytoskeleton is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 20332 - 20335 . Meggio , F . and Pinna , L . A . ( 2003 ) . One - thousand - and - one substrates of protein kinase CK2 ? FASEB J . 17 , 349 - 368 . Merrifield , C . J . , Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . and Almers , W . ( 2004 ) . Neural Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex are recruited to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in cultured fibroblasts . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 83 , 13 - 18 . Merrifield , C . J . , Perrais , D . and Zenisek , D . ( 2005 ) . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 - 606 . Pagano , M . A . , Meggio , F . , Ruzzene , M . , Andrzejewska , M . , Kazimierczuk , Z . and Pinna , L . A . ( 2004 ) . 2 - Dimethylamino - 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 - tetrabromo - 1H - benzimidazole : a novel powerful and selective inhibitor of protein kinase CK2 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 321 , 1040 - 1044 . Perrais , D . and Merrifield , C . J . ( 2005 ) . Dynamics of endocytic vesicle creation . Dev . Cell 9 , 581 - 592 . Prehoda , K . E . , Scott , J . A . , Mullins , R . D . and Lim , W . A . ( 2000 ) . Integration of multiple signals through cooperative regulation of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 290 , 801 - 806 . Puri , C . , Tosoni , D . , Comai , R . , Rabellino , A . , Segat , D . , Caneva , F . , Luzzi , P . , Di Fiore , P . P . and Tacchetti , C . ( 2005 ) . Relationships between EGFR signaling - competent and endocytosis - competent membrane microdomains . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 2704 - 2718 . Riedl , J . , Crevenna , A . H . , Kessenbrock , K . , Yu , J . H . , Neukirchen , D . , Bista , M . , Bradke , F . , Jenne , D . , Holak , T . A . , Werb , Z . et al . ( 2008 ) . Lifeact : a versatile marker to visualize F - actin . Nat . Methods 5 , 605 - 607 . Sallee , N . A . , Rivera , G . M . , Dueber , J . E . , Vasilescu , D . , Mullins , R . D . , Mayer , B . J . and Lim , W . A . ( 2008 ) . The pathogen protein EspF ( U ) hijacks actin polymerization using mimicry and multivalency . Nature 454 , 1005 - 1008 . Sigismund , S . , Woelk , T . , Puri , C . , Maspero , E . , Tacchetti , C . , Transidico , P . , Di Fiore , P . P . and Polo , S . ( 2005 ) . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 2760 - 2765 . Sorkin , A . and Goh , L . K . ( 2008 ) . Endocytosis and intracellular trafficking of ErbBs . Exp . Cell Res . 314 , 3093 - 3106 . Takenawa , T . and Suetsugu , S . ( 2007 ) . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 37 - 48 . Ungewickell , E . J . and Hinrichsen , L . ( 2007 ) . Endocytosis : clathrin - mediated membrane budding . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 , 417 - 425 . Wiley , H . S . and Cunningham , D . D . ( 1982 ) . The endocytotic rate constant . A cellular parameter for quantitating receptor - mediated endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 257 , 4222 - 4229 . Yarar , D . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2005 ) . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 964 - 975 . 2012 Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 12 ) J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e