Article mTORC1 Controls Phase Separation and the Biophysical Properties of the Cytoplasm by Tuning Crowding Graphical Abstract Highlights d GEMs enable high - throughput microrheology in unperturbed living cells d mTORC1 controls diffusion by tuning ribosome concentration d Diffusion can be accurately predicted as a function of ribosome concentration d Crowding of the cytoplasm by ribosomes increases phase separation Authors M . Delarue , G . P . Brittingham , S . Pfeffer , . . . , C . Jacobs - Wagner , B . D . Engel , L . J . Holt Correspondence engelben @ biochem . mpg . de ( B . D . E . ) , liam . holt @ nyumc . org ( L . J . H . ) In Brief mTORC1 signaling controls phase transitions in the cytoplasm through its effects on molecular crowding . Delarue et al . , 2018 , Cell 174 , 338 – 349 July 12 , 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 05 . 042 Article mTORC1 Controls Phase Separation and the Biophysical Properties of the Cytoplasm by Tuning Crowding M . Delarue , 1 , 9 G . P . Brittingham , 1 , 9 S . Pfeffer , 8 , 9 I . V . Surovtsev , 2 , 5 , 6 S . Pinglay , 1 K . J . Kennedy , 3 M . Schaffer , 8 J . I . Gutierrez , 3 D . Sang , 1 G . Poterewicz , 1 J . K . Chung , 4 J . M . Plitzko , 8 J . T . Groves , 4 , 5 C . Jacobs - Wagner , 2 , 5 , 6 , 7 B . D . Engel , 8 , * and L . J . Holt 1 , 10 , * 1 Institute for Systems Genetics , New York University Langone Health , New York , NY 10016 , USA 2 Department of Molecular , Cellular , and Developmental Biology , Yale University , New Haven , CT 06511 , USA 3 Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California , Berkeley , Berkeley , CA 95720 , USA 4 Department of Chemistry , University of California , Berkeley , Berkeley , CA 95720 , USA 5 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Chevy Chase , MD 20815 , USA 6 Microbial Sciences Institute , Yale West Campus , West Haven , CT 06516 , USA 7 Department of Microbial Pathogenesis , Yale School of Medicine , New Haven , CT 06511 , USA 8 Department of Molecular Structural Biology , Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry , 82152 Martinsried , Germany 9 These authors contributed equally 10 Lead Contact * Correspondence : engelben @ biochem . mpg . de ( B . D . E . ) , liam . holt @ nyumc . org ( L . J . H . ) https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 05 . 042 SUMMARY Macromolecular crowding has a profound impact on reaction rates and the physical properties of the cell interior , but the mechanisms that regulate crowding are poorly understood . We developed genetically encoded multimeric nanoparticles ( GEMs ) to dissect these mechanisms . GEMs are homomultimeric scaf - folds fused to a ﬂuorescent protein that self - assemble into bright , stable particles of deﬁned size and shape . By combining tracking of GEMs with genetic and pharmacological approaches , we discovered that the mTORC1 pathway can modulate the effective diffusion coefﬁcient of particles R 20 nm in diameter more than 2 - fold by tuning ribosome concentration , without any discernable effect on the motion of molecules % 5 nm . This change in ribosome concentration affected phase separation both in vitro and in vivo . Together , these results establish a role for mTORC1 in controlling both the mesoscale biophys - ical properties of the cytoplasm and biomolecular condensation . INTRODUCTION Molecular crowding is crucial for the efﬁcient function of biolog - ical systems ( Zhou et al . , 2008 ) . If Xenopus egg extracts are diluted by more than a few percent , fundamental biological processes such as mitosis and DNA replication fail ( Lohka and Maller , 1985 ) . High concentrations of crowding agents entropi - cally favor molecular association events , thereby accelerating molecular reactions ( Zhou et al . , 2008 ) . However , excessive crowding can also dramatically decrease molecular motion , just as the loss of a lane on a freeway can transform smooth trafﬁc ﬂow to instant gridlock ( Miermont et al . , 2013 ; Trappe et al . , 2001 ) . The impact of crowding depends strongly on parti - cle size : molecules with sizes equivalent to or larger than the dominant crowding agent will be more affected than small parti - cles . These smaller particles can move more easily through the gaps between crowding particles . Thus , changes in molecular crowding can have profound effects on cell physiology and may affect some pathways disproportionately depending on the sizes of the molecules or complexes involved . Phase separation is a key example of when the regulation of macromolecular crowding is crucial ( Woodruff et al . , 2017 ) . Pro - teins that have a stronger propensity to self - associate than to interact with the solvent can undergo a phase transition , where a large number of interacting proteins coalesce into a condensed liquid phase that is separate from the surrounding bulk liquid solvent ( Banani et al . , 2016 ; Brangwynne et al . , 2009 ) . These bio - logical condensates are increasingly observed in diverse ﬁelds including cell division ( Woodruff et al . , 2017 ) , development ( Brangwynne et al . , 2009 ) , cancer ( Grabocka and Bar - Sagi , 2016 ; Kaganovich et al . , 2008 ) , neurodegenerative disease ( Kwon et al . , 2014 ) , T cell activation ( Alberti and Hyman , 2016 ; Su et al . , 2016 ) , and even photosynthesis ( Freeman Rosenzweig et al . , 2017 ) . Macromolecular crowding tunes phase separation in vitro ( Woodruff et al . , 2017 ) . However , the physiological mech - anisms that control crowding within the cell and the effects of crowding on phase separation in vivo remain obscure . One method to study macromolecular crowding and other cellular biophysical properties is to observe the motion of tracer particles as they move within the cell . This approach , known as passive microrheology , can be used to infer the viscosity , elas - ticity , structure , and dynamics of the surrounding material from the characteristic motion of these tracer particles ( Wirtz , 2009 ) . Various groups have studied the motion of non - biological nano - particles in cells ( Daniels et al . , 2006 ; Luby - Phelps et al . , 1986 ) , 338 Cell 174 , 338 – 349 , July 12 , 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc . but these techniques are labor - intensive and typically perturb the cell . For example , microinjection dilutes the cytoplasm , disrupts the cell membrane and cortex , and is not feasible in or - ganisms with a cell wall , such as budding yeast . An alternative approach is to track the motion of endogenous structures , such as mRNA molecules tagged with speciﬁc loops that interact with loop - binding proteins tagged with ﬂuorescent proteins ( Shav - Tal et al . , 2004 ) . However , if the motion of an endogenous molecule is affected by a perturbation , it is difﬁcult to know if these changes in motion are due to impacts on the biophysical properties of the cell or caused by direct regulation of the tracer particle . In order to address these issues , we developed genetically encoded multimeric ( GEM ) nanoparticles ( henceforth GEMs ) , which are bright tracer particles of a deﬁned shape and size . GEMs can serve as a standard microrheological tool across a broad range of organisms ; in this study , we used GEMs in S . cerevisiae and human cell lines . By using GEMs from a different kingdom than the organism of study , we make it far less likely that the particles will be affected by speciﬁc interac - tions . With this technology in hand , we screened for mechanisms that regulate the biophysical properties of cells . We found that the mTORC1 kinase controls ribosome abundance through a combination of cell volume control , ribosome biogenesis , and autophagy . In situ cryo - electron tomography ( cryo - ET ) of the native cellular environment revealed that inhibition of mTORC1 nearly halves the cytosolic ribosome concentration in S . cerevisiae . As ribosomes account for (cid:1) 20 % of the total cyto - solic volume , modulation of their concentration has a dramatic effect on the biophysical properties of the cell . This modulation is signiﬁcant : inhibition of mTORC1 can double the effective diffusion coefﬁcient of particles that are R 20 nm in diameter . Using the phenomenological Doolittle equation , which relates the diffusion of a tracer particle to the fraction of crowding , we were able to predict changes in the effective diffusion coefﬁcient as a function of ribosome concentration in both budding yeast ( S . cerevisiae ) and human cells ( HEK293 ) . Finally , we found that changes in macromolecular crowding downstream of mTORC1 tune phase separation in both yeast and human cells , providing a direct link between in vivo crowding and phase separation . RESULTS GEMs Can Be Made from Both 15 - nm and 35 - nm Icosahedral Protein Cages We developed GEMs to study the rheological properties of the eukaryotic cytoplasm . We began with natural homomultimeric scaffolds that self - assemble into icosahedral geometries and fused these scaffolds to ﬂuorescent proteins ( T - Sapphire ) . In this study , we employed scaffolding domains based on the encapsulin protein from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus ( Akita et al . , 2007 ) and the lumazine syn - thase enzyme complex from the hyperthermophilic bacterium Aquifex aeolicus ( Zhang et al . , 2001 ) ( Figures 1A – 1C ) . When ex - pressed within cells , these GEMs self - assembled into bright , stable particles ( Figures 2A and 2B ) . Using in situ cryo - ET to image the native cellular environment ( Asano et al . , 2016 ) , we determined that the Pyrococcus furiosus encapuslin GEM has a diameter of 41 nm , a little larger than the 35 nm diameter reported from crystallography data ( Figure 1C ) . This larger diameter is likely due to the additional T - Sapphire molecules decorating the encapsulin particle . Thus , we termed these particles 40nm - GEMs . Using negative stain electron microscopy , we measured a diameter of 15 nm for the A . aeolicus lumazine synthase GEM ( Figures 1C and S1A ) , in good agreement with crystallography data ( Zhang et al . , 2001 ) ( Figure 1C ) . However , it is likely that the T - Sapphire density was not visible in the negative stain images ( see also Figure S1B , where Pyrococcus furiosus enca - puslin GEMs were measured at 37 nm by negative stain ) . Thus , to account for the expected extra diameter due to decoration with GFP molecules , we termed these particles 20nm - GEMs . The 20nm - GEMs and 40nm - GEMs are in the size range of multi - subunit assemblies such as ribosomes , proteasomes , and chromatin remodeling complexes ( Figure 1D ) , allowing us to investigate the mesoscale microrheological environment experienced by these complexes . Thus , these biologically orthogonal nanoparticles probe the biophysical properties of the cell at a length scale that was previously challenging to study . GEMs Allow Rapid Characterization of the Rheological Properties of the Cytosol in Yeast and Human Cells We expressed 40nm - GEMs in the budding yeast S . cerevisiae and an adenovirus transformed human embryonic kidney cell line ( HEK293 ) ( Figures 2A and 2B ; Videos S1 and S2 ) . 40nm - GEMs are bright enough to allow single particle tracking at 10 - ms frame rates ( Figure 2C ; STAR Methods ) . The duration of tracking was limited to the amount of time a particle remained in a single focal plane , as the required acquisition rate did not permit the collection of z stacks ; the median track length was 35 frames , corresponding to 350 ms of imaging ( Figure S1C ) . We compared thousands of individual traces to extract the effec - tive coefﬁcient of diffusion , D eff , at short timescales ( 100 ms ) . GEM motion differs between the two biological systems : 40nm - GEMs have a median effective diffusion coefﬁcient of (cid:1) 0 . 3 m m 2 s (cid:3) 1 in yeast and (cid:1) 0 . 5 m m 2 s (cid:3) 1 in mammalian cells ( Fig - ures 2D and 2E ) . These estimates are in good agreement with expectations from the literature ( Luby - Phelps et al . , 1986 ) , further supporting the use of GEMs as microrheological stan - dards . Using time and ensemble - averaging , we inspected the mean - squared displacement ( MSD ) curves at longer timescales and found that 40nm - GEMs were subdiffusive ( inset , Figures 2D , 2E , and S2A ) with an anomalous exponent of (cid:1) 0 . 8 in yeast and (cid:1) 0 . 9 in HEK293 cells . This subdiffusive motion could be due to local caging within a crowded environment and / or interactions between the tracer particle and the environment ( Wang et al . , 2012 ) . However , the anomalous exponent did not change signif - icantly in most of our perturbation experiments ( Figure S2A ) , so we focused on the effective diffusion coefﬁcient as our main metric to report on cytosolic rheology at the mesoscale . mTORC1 Affects the Biophysical Properties of the Cytosol In initial experiments in yeast , we observed that cell culture con - ditions changed the apparent diffusion coefﬁcients of 40nm - GEMs . When yeast cultures approached saturation , the effective Cell 174 , 338 – 349 , July 12 , 2018 339 diffusion of GEMs increased ( Figure S2B ) . By speciﬁcally depleting nitrogen , glucose , and amino acids , the main compo - nents of synthetic complete growth medium , we found that both nitrogen and glucose starvation caused a slight decrease in the apparent diffusion of 40nm - GEMs , but this decrease was subtle compared to previous reports with larger particles ( Joyner et al . , 2016 ; Munder et al . , 2016 ) ( Figure S2D ) . In contrast , we found that an increase in effective diffusion occurred in response to amino acid depletion ( Figure S2C ) . Themechanistic targetof rapamycin complex ( mTORC1 ) is the major amino acid sensor in eukaryotes ( Hara et al . , 1998 ) . There - fore , we hypothesized that mTORC1 signaling might cause the observed changes in cytoplasmic rheology . mTORC1 can be in - hibitedbythemacrolideantibioticrapamycin . Consistentwithour hypothesis , 40 - nm GEMs displayed increased mobility when mTORC1 was inhibited with rapamycin in both S . cerevisiae and HEK293 cells ( Figures 2D and 2E ; Videos S1 and S2 ) . This in - crease in effective diffusion reached full effect after 2 and 3 hr of rapamycin treatment in yeast and HEK293 cells , respectively ( Figures S2D and S2E ) . Changes in the distribution of diffusion coefﬁcients were highly signiﬁcant ( p < 1 3 10 (cid:3) 9 ; Kolmogorov - Smirnovtest , Figure2F ) . Importantly , insitu cryo - electrontomog - raphy ( cryo - ET ) showed that 40nm - GEMs did not change size after rapamycin treatment ( Figure S3 ) . These results suggest that mTORC1 controls the biophysical properties of the cytosol at the 40 - nm length scale in both yeast and mammalian cells . mTORC1 Does Not Affect Diffusion at the Length Scale of Individual Proteins The change in effective diffusion of 40nm - GEMs was clear , but cellular rheology can vary considerably between particles of different sizes . Therefore , we studied other particles to check the generality and length scale dependence of the changes in microrheology downstream of mTORC1 signaling . First , we repeated our experiments with 20nm - GEMs and found that their diffusion also increased upon mTORC1 inhibition ( Fig - ure 3A ) . We also saw an increase in the diffusion coefﬁcients of larger structures , including endogenous GFA1 mRNP tagged with the PP7 - GFP system ( Joyner et al . , 2016 ) and GFP - m NS particles ( Figures 3B and 3C ) . These structures are (cid:1) 100 nm and (cid:1) 200 nm in diameter , respectively . Thus , mTORC1 modulates the effective diffusion coefﬁcient of parti - cles in the mesoscale , ranging from 20 nm to 200 nm in diameter . To probe rheology at shorter length scales , we used ﬂuores - cence correlation spectroscopy to calculate the effective diffu - sion of a double - GFP molecule , which has a hydrodynamic radius of around 5 nm . The diffusion of this smaller protein was unaffected by the addition of rapamycin ( Figure 3D ; Table S1 ) . Thus , mTORC1 inhibition increases the diffusion coefﬁcients of particles at or above the typical size of multimeric protein complexes , but particles that are the typical size of monomeric proteins are unaffected ( Figure 3E ) . 60 monomers 120 monomers A B C D Figure 1 . GEMs Are Homomultimeric Fluorescent Nanoparticles that Self - Assemble to a Stereotyped Size and Shape ( A ) General gene structure of GEMs , which consist of an in - frame fusion of a multimerizing scaffold ( orange ) to a ﬂuorescent protein ( green ) . ( B ) Predicted structures of 40nm - GEMs and 20nm - GEMs . ( C ) Left : cryo - ET subtomogram average of 40nm - GEMs within the cell . Right : negative stain EM image of a 20nm - GEM . Diameters are shown in red . ( D ) Diameters of GEMs and other macromolecules at the meso length scale , shown in relation to small molecules , protein complexes , and cells . See also Figures S1 and S3 . 340 Cell 174 , 338 – 349 , July 12 , 2018 Changes in Cell Cycle , Translation , and the Cytoskeleton Do Not Account for the Effects of mTORC1 on the Motion of 40nm - GEMs Rapamycin treatment arrests cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle . Therefore , we hypothesized that the increase in the effec - tive diffusion coefﬁcients of 40nm - GEMs might be due to cell - cy - cle regulation of rheology . To test this idea , we inhibited the cdc28 - as1 allele of budding yeast cyclin - dependent kinase 1 ( Cdk1 ) with 10 m M 1 - NM - PP1 ( Bishop et al . , 2000 ) . Cell division arrested in G1 and cell volume continued to increase , but no changes were observed in the motion of 40nm - GEMs ( Figures S2F and S2G ) . Thus , cell - cycle regulation does not appear to explain the observed biophysical effects of mTORC1 inhibition . Protein translation is regulated by mTORC1 : when nutrients and growth factors are present , cells enter an anabolic state and protein translation is upregulated in an mTORC1 - dependent manner . Inhibition of mTORC1 with rapamycin leads to rapid in - hibition of translation . Therefore , we tested whether decreases in translation could explain the observed changes in the effective diffusion coefﬁcients of 40nm - GEMs . To investigate this idea , we stalled translation by addition of 1 m M cycloheximide . The median half - life of yeast proteins is (cid:1) 40 min under these condi - tions ( Belle et al . , 2006 ) . The motion of 40nm - GEMs was neither affected during acute cycloheximide treatment , nor after 180 min of treatment ( Figure S2F ) . These results suggest that neither translational inhibition nor protein degradation explain our observations . Another plausible hypothesis is that mTORC1 might alter the dynamics or structure of the cytoskeleton . We treated yeast cells with Latrunculin A to depolymerize the actin cytoskeleton ( Fig - ure S2H ) and found that , while the basal diffusion of 40nm - GEMs decreased , there was still a strong increase in D eff upon rapamycin treatment . We also arrested actin dynamics in HEK293 cells using the JLY cocktail ( Peng et al . , 2011 ) ( Fig - ure S2F ) . Similar to yeast , perturbation of actin dynamics decreased basal GEM diffusion , but rapamycin still had a strong effect ( Figure S2H ) . These results suggest that the actin cyto - skeleton contributes substantially to the viscosity of both the mammalian and yeast cytoplasm , but that mTORC1 does not modulate mesoscale rheology through actin - dependent effects . We then used nocodazole to depolymerize microtubules . There was a slight decrease in viscosity in both yeast and mammalian cells , but there was not a strong inﬂuence on the relative effect of rapamycin ( Figures S2G and S2H ) . Thus , actin and microtubules Figure 2 . mTORC1 Inhibition Increases the Effective Diffusion Coefﬁcient of GEMs ( A and B ) 40nm - GEMs expressed in ( A ) S . cerevisiae and ( B ) HEK293 cells . GEMs are visualized using the T - Sapphire ﬂuorescent protein ( green ) . The SiR - HoeschstDNAstainisusedtovisualizethenucleus ( Nuc , magenta ) . Yeastcellwallsarevisualizedusingcalcoﬂuor - whiteandHEK293membranewithwheat germ agglutinin ( cyan ) . ( C ) High - magniﬁcation example of tracking a 40nm - GEM particle ( green ) within a S . cerevisiae cell , imagedat 100frames per second . Three other GEMs and the nucleus ( magenta ) are also seen within the image . Raw pixels are displayed . ( D and E ) Distribution of 40nm - GEM effective diffusion coefﬁcients ( D eff ) within ( D ) S . cerevisiae and ( E ) HEK293 cells ; results from DMSO ( carrier control ) treatment and rapamycin treatment are displayed in blue and orange , respectively . Insets : time and ensemble - averaged mean - square displacements in log - log space with the anomalous exponent indicated . ( F ) Cumulative distribution function showing D eff data for both S . cerevisiae ( solid lines ) and HEK293 cells ( dashed lines ) in both control ( blue ) and rapamycin treatment ( orange ) . See also Figures S1 and S2 and Videos S1 and S2 . Cell 174 , 338 – 349 , July 12 , 2018 341 play an important role in deﬁning the mesoscale properties of the cytosol , but do not appear to be the primary mechanistic expla - nation for the regulation of rheology by mTORC1 . mTORC1 Controls Cytoplasmic Rheology by Tuning Ribosome Concentration In our S . cerevisiae experiments , we could collect thousands of traces within a few seconds . Because every cell expressed GEMs , there was no time - delay associated with ﬁnding cells , and no laborious manipulations like microinjection . These advantages enabled us to use GEMs in a candidate - based ge - netic screen ( Table S1 ) . In the absence of the FPR1 gene ( encod - ing FKBP12 ) , rapamycin cannot inhibit mTORC1 ( Heitman et al . , 1991 ) . There was no detectable effect of rapamycin on the fpr1 D strain ( Figure 4A ) , indicating that rapamycin was affecting rheology by a canonical mechanism . SIT4 encodes a subunit of the PP2A phosphatase required for a major signaling branch downstream of mTORC1 ( Di Como and Arndt , 1996 ) . Addition of rapamycin to sit4 D cells had little to no effect on particle diffu - sion , suggesting that the changes in physical properties of the cytoplasm were downstream of this gene . Together , these results validated the use of 40nm - GEMs in genetic screens and constrained our genetic screen to the PP2A - dependent branch of mTORC1 - signaling . We tested and rejected several hypotheses for the possible mechanism through which mTORC1 signaling might affect cyto - solic biophysics ( Table S1 ) . Eventually , we found that deletion of the SFP1 gene , which encodes a transcription factor involved in ribosomal RNA biogenesis ( Fingerman et al . , 2003 ) , increased the effective diffusion coefﬁcient of 40nm - GEMs even more than rapamycin treatment ( Figure 4A , left ) . Furthermore , the sfp1 D strain led to a complete loss of the rapamycin effect ( Fig - ure 4A , right ) . The results implicated ribosome biogenesis as a key mechanism in the control of cellular rheology . Ribosomes are usually quite stable , but starvation conditions can drive autophagy and ribophagy to accelerate ribosome degradation , especially when mTORC1 is inhibited ( Waliullah et al . , 2017 ) . This starvation response is thought to scavenge macromolecules and organelles to recycle cellular building blocks , but reduction in the concentration of ribosomes has also been proposed as a function for these pathways ( Tsukada and Ohsumi , 1993 ) . In accordance with this latter idea , mutations in the autophagy genes ATG1 , ATG13 , and ATG17 and the ribophagy gene RIM15 ( Waliullah et al . , 2017 ) all caused a signif - icant abrogation of the rapamycin effect ( Figure 4A , right ) . Next , we sought to determine whether the mechanisms that we identiﬁed in S . cerevisiae would also hold true in mammalian cells . To this end , we employed HEK293 cells stably transduced or transfected with 40nm - GEMs and used pharmacological per - turbations and small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) to test whether ribo - some concentration was important in setting the biophysical properties of mammalian cells at the 40 nm length scale . Inhibition of ribosome production using the small molecules BMH - 21 or CX5461 reduced the rapamycin effect ( Figure 4B , right ) . However , the basal diffusion coefﬁcient only increased in CX5461 treatment ( Figure 4B , left ) . We speculate that the failure of BMH - 21 to impact GEM motion could be due to off - target effects of this drug , which could lead to compensatory effects in the basal biophysical properties of the cytoplasm . Neverthe - less , these pharmacological perturbations suggest that control A C D B E Figure 3 . mTORC1 inhibition Increases the Effective Diffusion of Particles 20 nm and Larger in S . cerevisiae ( A – C ) Cumulative distribution plots showing D eff data for ( A ) 20nm - GEMs , ( B ) GFA1 mRNP particles , and ( C ) m NS condensates in yeast cells treated with DMSO ( blue ) or rapamycin ( orange ) . ( D ) Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) autocorrelation function for a tandem GFP dimer ( Stokes radius of (cid:1) 5 nm ) . There is no signiﬁcant difference between DMSO and rapamycin ( D DMSO = 13 . 3 ± 1 . 3 m m 2 / s and D rapamycin = 12 . 2 ± 2 . 8 m m 2 / s ) . ( E ) Effect of rapamycin on the effective diffusion coefﬁcients of endogenous molecules and tracer particles of various sizes . Indicated , the (cid:3) 2 power - law scaling of diffusion coefﬁcient as a function of diameter , which does not conform to Stokes - Einstein predictions . In all cases , control conditions are shown in blue and rapamycin in orange . Error bars represent mean ± SEM . See also Table S1 . 342 Cell 174 , 338 – 349 , July 12 , 2018 of rDNA transcription is part of the mechanism by which mTORC1 inhibition decreases the viscosity of mammalian cells . Stimulation of autophagy using the SMER28 compound , thereby reducing ribosome concentration , led to an increase in the basal diffusion of 40nm - GEMs ( Figure 4B , left ) and strongly suppressed the effect of rapamycin ( Figure 4B , right ) . In contrast , decreasing autophagy with Wortmannin , which is predicted to increase ribosome concentration , led to decreased basal diffu - sion ( Figure 4B , left ) . This perturbation also led to a partial loss of the rapamycin effect ( Figure 4B , right ) . Finally , we increased mTORC1 activity by siRNA - mediated knockdown of the mTORC1 inhibitor TSC1 ( Potter et al . , 2001 ) . This treatment led to a decrease in basal diffusion ( Figures 4B , left , and S2J ) . Thus , after screening over 40 mutants and drug treatments , we found that the conditions that most strongly affected the baseline of GEM diffusion and / or decreased the effect of rapamycin treatment fell into two general classes : ribo - some biogenesis and autophagy . Together , these data suggest that mTORC1 controls macromolecular crowding by tuning ribo - some concentration ( Figure 4C ) . Ribosomes Act as Crowding Agents To further investigate the control of ribosome concentration by mTORC1 , we used in situ cryo - ET to directly visualize ribo - somes . Brieﬂy , we thinned vitreous frozen yeast cells by focused ion beam ( FIB ) milling ( Schaffer et al . , 2017 ) and then performed in situ cryo - ET ( Albert et al . , 2017 ; Bykov et al . , 2017 ; Guo et al . , 2018 ) to produce three - dimensional images of the native cellular environment at molecular resolution ( Figures 5A , 5B , S3 , S4 , S5 , and S6 ; Videos S3 and S4 ) . Template matching enabled us iden - tify ribosomes within the cellular volumes with high sensitivity ( Figure S4 ) . Subsequent subtomogram averaging produced in situ structures of the (cid:1) 30 nm ribosomes and 40nm - GEMs at 11 . 5 A˚ and 26 . 3 A˚ resolutions , respectively ( Figures 5C , S3 , and S4 ) . In W303 yeast cells undergoing log phase growth , the concentration of ribosomes in the cytoplasm was (cid:1) 14 , 000 ribo - somes / m m 3 ( 23 m M ) , whereas this concentration decreased almost 2 - fold to (cid:1) 8 , 000 ribosomes / m m 3 ( 13 m M ) when cells were treated with rapamycin for 2 hr ( Figure 5D ) . This corre - sponds to a drop from ribosomes occupying (cid:1) 20 % to (cid:1) 12 % of the cytosolic volume . Ribosomes Control the Biophysical Properties of the Cytosol To further investigate how ribosome concentration controls the mesoscale viscosity of the cytosol , we developed a physical model based on the phenomenological Doolittle equation ( Doolittle , 1952 ) ( see Equation 5 in the STAR Methods ) . Originally , the Doolittle equation was used to describe the viscosity of liquid polymer melts as a function of polymer density ( i . e . , polymer crowding ) . Later , Cohen and Turnbull ( 1959 ) derived the equation theoretically to describe the viscosity of C S . cerevisiae BMH21 CX5461 SMER28 Wortmanin 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 - 0 . 3 - 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 HEK293 treatment TSC1 siRNA - 0 . 4 Magnitude of rapamycin effect ( ε ) Relative change in effective diffusion ( ∆ D eff / D eff ) A B Magnitude of rapamycin effect ( ε ) 1 r i bo s o m e p r odu c t i on r i bo s o m e deg r ada t i on fpr1 ∆ atg1 ∆ sfp1 ∆ atg17 ∆ rim15 ∆ atg13 ∆ sit4 ∆ 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 0 0 . 4 0 . 8 - 0 . 4 Relative change in effective diffusion ( ∆ D eff / D eff ) ribosomeproduction ribosomedegradation Crowding TORC1 r i bo s o m e p r odu c t i on r i bo s o m e deg r ada t i on + - mutant Figure 4 . mTORC1 Controls the Effective Diffusion Coefﬁcient of 40nm - GEMs by Tuning Ribosome Concentration ( A ) Selected mutants from a candidate screen in S . cerevisiae . The change in the baseline effective diffusion coefﬁcients of 40nm - GEMs ( left , blue ) is plotted for eachmutant , alongwiththemagnitudeoftherapamycineffectnormalizedtotheeffectinwild - typecells ( ε , right , orange ; 0 = norapamycineffect , 1 = sameeffect as wild - type ) . ( B ) Pharmacological and siRNA perturbations in HEK293 cells suggest that mTORC1 also modulates cytoplasmic rheology through ribosome crowding in mammals . ( C ) Proposed model of crowding control in S . cerevisiae and HEK293 cells . Error bars represent mean ± SEM . See also Figure S7 . Cell 174 , 338 – 349 , July 12 , 2018 343 hard - sphere colloids . Thus , the equation has been successfully used to ﬁt the viscosity of a range of materials ( Hunter and Weeks , 2012 ) . The Doolittle equation relates crowding to diffusion using an exponential function of the concentration of crowder ( f ) , maximum possible crowding ( f m ) , and a prefactor z related to the strength of interaction of the tracer particle with its surrounding microenvironment ( Figure 6A ; Equation 5 in the STAR Methods ) . To determine the degree of crowding in the cytoplasm under normal conditions ( f 0 ) , we manipulated crowding by rapidly changing cell volume through osmotic shock and measured the apparent diffusion coefﬁcient ( see Figures S7A and S7B ) . We found that f 0 / f m is smaller for HEK293 cells ( 0 . 35 ± 0 . 13 ) than for S . cerevisiae ( 0 . 48 ± 0 . 04 ) , conﬁrming our expectation that HEK293 cells are less crowded than yeast . Note that this Figure 5 . In Situ Cryo - Electron Tomography of FIB - Milled S . cerevisiae Reveals that Ribosome Concentration Dramatically De - creases upon mTORC1 Inhibition ( A ) DMSO - treated cell . ( B ) Rapamycin - treated cell . Left : slice through a representative cryo - electron tomogram of a FIB - milled yeast cell . The cell wall ( CW ) , plasma mem - brane ( PM ) , rough endoplasmic reticulum ( rER ) , lipid droplets ( LD ) , mitochondria ( M ) , Golgi appa - ratus ( G ) , vacuole ( V ) , aggregates ( Agg ) , and one exampleGEMnanoparticleareindicated . Right : 3D segmentation of the same tomogram showing ribosomes ( cyan ) and GEMs ( orange ) . The non - cytosolic volume is gray . ( C ) Subtomogram averages of the 40nm - GEM nanoparticles and (cid:1) 30 nm ribosomes from within the cellular volumes , shown in relative pro - portion . ( D ) Cytosolic ribosome concentrations after 2 hr DMSO ( blue ) and rapamycin ( orange ) treatment . Concentrations were calculated from 14 DMSO - treated and 13 rapamycin - treated cells ( see Fig - ures S5 and S6 ) . Errorbarsrepresentmean ± SEM . SeealsoFigures S3 and S4 and Videos S3 and S4 . ratio means that the cytoplasm of a cell is not close to a glass transition , where f 0 / f m would be (cid:1) 1 . The parameter z is roughly equivalent in both species , perhaps suggesting that 40nm - GEMs have similar interactions with the human and yeast cytosol , a result most easily ex - plained by GEMs having very little speciﬁc interaction with their local environment . This concordance further supports the use of GEMs as a microrheological stan - dard across organisms . Once we had determined the parame - ters f 0 / f m and z , we were able to predict the effective diffusion coefﬁcient of GEMs as a function of ribosome concentration ( see Equation 12 in the STAR Methods ) . All parameters were experimentally deter - mined with no data ﬁtting . We compared our prediction to experimentally determined ribosome concentrations ( Figures 5 and S7D – S7F ) . Our model was able to predict the effective diffusion coefﬁcient of GEMs for all mutants and perturbations over a wide range of ribosome concentrations in both yeast and mammalian cells . We also experimentally determined the prefactor z for the endogenous GFA1 messenger ribonucleoprotein complex ( mRNP ) tagged with the PP7 - GFP system . These particles are (cid:1) 100 nm in diameter . Our model accurately predicted their effective diffusion coefﬁcient as a function of ribosome concen - tration ( Figure S7C ) . Therefore , our results suggest that ribo - some concentration is a crucial determinant of the mesoscale biophysical properties of the cytosol . 344 Cell 174 , 338 – 349 , July 12 , 2018 mTORC1 Tunes Phase Separation by Controlling Ribosome Concentration When multivalent proteins exceed a critical nucleation concen - tration , they can condense to form a phase separated liquid droplet . Phase separation is tuned by multiple physicochemical effects including the association and dissociation constants of interaction domains , the strength of the interaction of each molecule with the solvent , depletion attraction effects that can entropically favor condensation ( Moura˜o et al . , 2014 ) , and linker solvation effects ( Harmon et al . , 2017 ) . These two latter effects depend on macromolecular crowding . Because our results strongly linked ribosomes to cytoplasmic crowding , we hypothesized that ribosome concentration tunes phase separation . To test this idea , we took advantage of a synthetic system that forms liquid droplets both in vitro and in vivo . This system is comprised of ten repeats of the small ubiquitin - like modiﬁer domain ( SUMO 10 ) and six repeats of SUMO interaction motif ( SIM 6 ) . The condensation of SUMO 10 and SIM 6 has been proven to be a reliable model for phase separation ( Banani et al . , 2016 ) . We assessed the effects of ribosomes on the phase separa - tion of SUMO 10 and SIM 6 . Beginning in vitro , we added ribo - somes puriﬁed from Escherichia coli over a biologically relevant concentration range determined from our cryo - ET experiments . We observed that the concentration of SUMO 10 and SIM 6 that partitioned into the condensed liquid droplet phase ( partition coefﬁcient ) increased as ribosome concentrations increased . Indeed , the partition coefﬁcient was > 50 % higher at 23 m M ribo - somes ( the in vivo concentration in normal conditions ) than at 13 m M ( the in vivo concentrations after rapamycin treatment ) ( Figure 7A ) . Next , we expressed an in - frame fusion of SUMO 10 and SIM 6 ( SUMO 10 - SIM 6 ) in yeast and HEK293 cells to study the effects of macromolecular crowding on phase separation in vivo . Inhibi - tion of mTORC1 for 2 hr led to an 80 % and 50 % decrease in SUMO 10 - SIM 6 droplet area in yeast and human HEK293 cells , respectively ( Figure 7B ) . We were able to partially recover phase separation in rapamycin - treated cells by using an acute osmotic shock that reduced cell volume to an extent that restored ribo - some concentrations to control levels ( Figure 7C , orange cross - hatched bars ) . The degree of phase separation is not completely recovered by osmotic compression , perhaps because this pro - cess cannot reach steady state before cells adapt or because mTORC1 inhibition has effects in addition to crowding . To avoid unknown effects that rapamycin may have in parallel to changes in ribosome concentration , we used the yeast deletion strains that we had previously determined to affect molecular crowding . For each mutant , we quantiﬁed ribosome concentration , the total concentration of SUMO 10 - SIM 6 , and the probability of ﬁnding a SUMO 10 - SIM 6 droplet in a cell . Inter - estingly , we found very little correlation between phase separa - tion and the concentration of SUMO 10 - SIM 6 . We also saw little correlation between SUMO 10 - SIM 6 concentration and ribosome concentration ( Figures S7G and S7H ) . In contrast , there was a strong correlation ( r 2 = 0 . 96 ) between droplet probability and ribosome concentration in this analysis ( Figure 7D ) . Taken together , these data suggest that ribosomes act as macromo - lecular crowders that tune phase separation . DISCUSSION Recent work has reported dramatic changes in cytoplasmic rheology in response to changes in cellular energy state and metabolism . For example , depletion of ATP in E . coli leads to a glass transition that greatly reduces macromolecular mobility ( Parry et al . , 2014 ) , and glucose starvation in yeast leads to decreases in cytoplasmic pH that lead to a gel transition in the cytosol ( Munder et al . , 2016b ) . All of these responses increase the viscosity of the cytosol . In contrast , we show that inhibition of mTORC1 decreases cytosolic viscosity . Using GEM nanopar - ticles , we were able to determine the mechanism for this biophysical change . Ribosome concentration dominates the rheological properties of the cytoplasm at the mesoscale of tens to hundreds of nanometers . mTORC1 both drives ribosome biogenesis and decreases degradation through inhibition of autophagy ( Zoncu et al . , 2011 ) . Therefore , mTORC1 regulates the physical properties of the cytoplasm by tuning the concen - tration of ribosomes . A B C Figure 6 . A Physical Model of the Cytosol Accurately Predicts Diffusion as a Function of Ribosome Concentration ( A ) The phenomenological Doolittle equation describes the effective diffusion coefﬁcient of particles as a function of excluded volume , the volume of the cytoplasm occupied by macromolecules . ( BandC ) AmodelbasedontheDoolittleequationtorelateD eff totheconcentration of ribosomes , log ð D Þ = z ð 4 0 = 4 m = 1 (cid:3) 4 0 = 4 m Þ ð 1 (cid:3) c ribo = 1 (cid:3) c ribo 4 0 = 4 m Þ , parameterized empirically with no parameter ﬁtting , accurately predicts thediffusioncoefﬁcientof40nm - GEMsinboth ( B ) yeastand ( C ) HEK293cellsas a function of the concentration of ribosomes ( measured by quantiﬁcation of a total extracted nucleic acids , see Figures S7E – S7G ) . Median coefﬁcients of diffusionarenormalizedtowild - typeconditionsonthedaythedatawereacquired . Predictionisshownasadashedblacklinewithgrayconﬁdenceintervalsbasedon the error associated with the estimation of z and 4 0 / 4 m . Error bars represent mean ± SEM . See also Figure S4 . Cell 174 , 338 – 349 , July 12 , 2018 345 Length scale considerations in cytoplasmic viscosity have interesting implications for previous ﬁndings ; for example , solid - iﬁcation of the yeast cytoplasm under glucose starvation was observed by tracking GFP - m NS particles , which are large condensates ( Munder et al . , 2016 ) . However , it would be surpris - ing if the diffusion of all macromolecules is greatly decreased in carbon starvation . Our results show that the mobility of 40nm - GEMs is only decreased by 20 % in this condition ( Figure S2B ) . This result is in agreement with the particle size - dependency observed in the bacterial cytoplasm ( Parry et al . , 2014 ) . In some scenarios , larger macromolecules may become spatially conﬁned while smaller macromolecules continue to diffuse unimpeded . This could affect processes dependent on large complexes , such as apoptosis , translation , or cell growth , while many basic cellular functions continue unaltered . In this way , general changes in cytoplasmic crowding could cause speciﬁc physiological consequences . A major advantage of GEM nanoparticles is that they assemble into deﬁned geometries and can therefore be used as rheological probes across multiple biological systems . We observe that GEMs have a higher diffusion coefﬁcient in HEK293 cells than in S . cerevisiae , indicating that this human cell line is less crowded . Indeed , our osmotic compression experiments show a larger free water volume in HEK293 cells , consistent with this notion . In future studies , it will also be inter - esting to compare the physical properties of mammalian cells in different mechanical contexts , for example within tissues . Addi - tionally , different cell types are likely to have distinct crowding , and disease mutations may lead to aberrant properties . GEMs will be a crucial tool to accelerate discovery in this area . Beyond the diffusion coefﬁcient , a second parameter that can be readily compared across conditions is the subdiffusive anom - alousexponent , a . GEMsundergosubdiffusivemotioninbothcell types , buttheoriginsofthissubdiffusionremainunclear . Astriking feature is that a is relatively invariant across conditions within one cell - type , but there is a species - dependent difference between yeast and human cells ( Figure S2I ) . This difference in a points to ageneral differencewithin thedisorderedmediaofthecytoplasm inthesetwoorganisms . Whilethephysicalexplanationforthisdif - ference is currently unknown , there are several possibilities . Notably , mammalian cells have intermediate ﬁlaments and far more extensive actin and microtubule networks . This more elab - orate cytoskeleton drives more substantial active ﬂows and rear - rangements , all of which can affect cytosolic rheology . We are excited to investigate these possibilities in the future . Ribosomes are one of the most abundant macromolecules in the cell ( around 200 , 000 ribosomes per yeast cell [ Warner , 1999 ] and 3 , 000 , 000 per HeLa cell [ Duncan and Hershey , 1983 ] ) , and we determined that ribosomes occupy 20 % of the total volume of the yeast cytosol . Under normal conditions , the fraction of crowder in the cytoplasm is (cid:1) 50 % of the maximum possible crowding ( Miermont et al . , 2013 ) , thus ribosomes account for about half of this excluded volume . Indeed , when we use the phenomenological Doolittle equation to model the cytosol , we can predict the diffusion coefﬁcient of 40nm - GEM tracer parti - cles and endogenous mRNPs as a function of ribosome Figure 7 . Ribosomes Act as a Crowding Agent that Drives Phase Separation Both In Vitro and In Vivo ( A ) A homodecamer repeat of SUMO ( SUMO 10 ) was mixed with a homohexamer repeat SUMO interaction motif peptide ( SIM 6 ) to achieve equi - molar concentrations of each monomer ( 60 m M ) . SUMO 10 + SIM 6 was kept at constant concentra - tion and incubated with an increasing concentra - tion of fully assembled 70S ribosomes ( puriﬁed from E . coli ) . There was a > 50 % increase in the partition coefﬁcient of SUMO 10 + SIM 6 when ribo - some concentration was increased from 13 m M ( equivalent to yeast treated with rapamycin ) to 23 m M ( the concentration of ribosomes in logarith - mically growing yeast cells ) . ( B ) An in - frame fusion of SUMO 10 - SIM 6 - GFP was expressed in budding yeast ( S . cerevisiae W303 ) and HEK293 cells . Micrographs of control cells ( DMSO ) and cells treated with rapamycin for 2 hr . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of total area of phase - separated droplets in control cells ( blue ) , cells treated with rapamycin ( orange ) , and cells treated with rapa - mycin followed with a hyperosmotic shock with 1 . 5 M ( yeast cells ) or 0 . 1 M ( human cells ) sorbitol ( orange bars with white cross hatches ) . ( D ) Probability of observing SUMO 10 - SIM 6 phase separation versus ribosome concentration in yeast ribosomal crowding mutants sfp1 D , rim15 D , and atg13 D as well as wild - type BY4741 . Error bars represent mean ± SEM . See also Figure S7 . 346 Cell 174 , 338 – 349 , July 12 , 2018 concentration . This predictive power suggests that ribosomes are crucial to set the biophysical properties of the cytosol . How - ever , the cytoplasm is unlikely to be well described by a purely colloidal model . This point is indicated by the scaling of diffusion coefﬁcients as a function of particle size ( Figure 3E ) . Recent the - ories provide predictions for particle diffusion within polymer meshes ( Cai et al . , 2011 ) . In this framework , the diffusion coefﬁ - cient ( D ) of tracer particles of a diameter comparable to the mesh size should scale with particle diameter ( d ) as D (cid:1) d (cid:3) 3 . On the other hand , a simple Newtonian ﬂuid or a dilute colloidal suspen - sion predicts D (cid:1) d (cid:3) 1 . In our case , we ﬁnd a scaling of D (cid:1) d (cid:3) 2 indicating that the cytoplasm neither satisﬁes the model of a simple polymer nor a simple Newtonian ﬂuid . Thus , the biophys - ical properties of the cytoplasm are likely to be driven by a mixture of the colloidal effects of ribosomes as well as polymer dynamics . Our model provides a starting point to begin to parse the relative contribution of these possible factors , for example from the cytoskeleton or polysomes . Physiological regulation of the thousands to tens of thousands of different proteins found within cells is a complex task . This regulation is achieved through ﬁne - grained mechanisms , including transcriptional and translational control of protein abundance as well as post - translational modiﬁcations such as protein phosphorylation and ubiquitylation . However , our studies suggest that macromolecular crowding could also lead to a broad regulation of cell state . Changes in macromolecular crowding may provide coarse - grained regulation of protein inter - actions , diffusion , and folding ; the cell may become more solid - like in states of extreme stress or ﬂuidize to tune reactions . It has long been understood that molecular crowding is crucial for biological systems . Our work begins to elucidate why . We show that changes in ribosomal crowding tune phase separation both in vitro and in vivo . The effects on phase separation in our system could be attributed to several possible causes including attraction depletion effects ( Woodruff et al . , 2015 ) and solvation impacts on the linkers in polyvalent proteins ( Harmon et al . , 2017 ) . Regardless of mechanism , our ﬁnding implies that mTORC1 , and indeed any signaling pathway that alters the steady - state concentration of ribosomes , is likely to affect the phase separation of many molecules . Thus , our work provides insights relevant to the burgeoning ﬁeld of phase separation of cytosolic biomolecular condensates . Interest in this topic is rapidly growing , as investigators elucidate the impacts of phase separation on proteins involved in many fundamental processes such as photosynthesis ( Freeman Rosenzweig et al . , 2017 ) , cell division ( Woodruff et al . , 2017 ) , development ( Brangwynne et al . , 2009 ) , learning ( Si et al . , 2010 ) , immune signaling ( Cai et al . , 2014 ; Hou et al . , 2011 ) , and human pathologies including cancer ( Kwon et al . , 2013 ) , aging , and neurodegeneration ( Jain and Vale , 2017 ; Kwon et al . , 2014 ) . STAR + METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following : d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS B Yeast B HEK293 Cells d METHOD DETAILS B Plasmid construction B Yeast transformation B Virus production and cell transduction B Drug treatments B Imaging and direct particle tracking B Extraction of the rheological parameters B Culture saturation and nutrient depletion experiments B mTORC1 overexpression - TSC1 siRNA experiments B 40nm - and 20nm - GEM purifcation for negative stain EM B Negative stain transmission electron microscopy B Cryo - EM grid preparation and data acquisition B Tomogram reconstruction B Determination of the cytosolic volume in tomograms B Subtomogram analysis B FCS and coefﬁcient of diffusion of 2xGFP B FCS calculations B Osmotic perturbation experiments and cell volume measurement B SUMO - SIM protein puriﬁcation B In vitro phase separation experiment B In vivo phase separation experiments B SUMO - SIM protein concentration and yeast cell size d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS B Crowding regulation through control of ribosome concentration d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes seven ﬁgures , one table , and four videos and can be found with this article online at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 05 . 042 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Christophe Renou for initial contributions to this project and Mona - trice Lam for additionalhelpwithFCSmeasurements . WethankDavid Savage for initial suggestions about how to build GEMs . We thank David Morgan , David Drubin , Karsten Weis , Jeremy Thorner , Mike Rosen , Amy Gladfelter , Jef Boeke , and Douglas Koshland for advice , strains , plasmids , and reagents ; William Ludington , Jasna Brujic , Mike Rosen , Jitu Mayor , Ron Vale , Jim Wilhelm , MarcusTaylor , JanvonSkotheim , RobertoZoncu , andJoshZimmer - berg for discussions ; and Emily Adney , David Truong , Jef Boeke , John Gerhart , Fred Wilt , Ryan Joyner , Carlos Pantoja , Tim Lionnett , Jon Ditlev , Matthew Maurano , and Gabrielle Riekhoff for help with the manuscript . We acknowledge the help and support of the Janelia Advanced Imaging Center , a facility jointly supported by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation and HHMI at HHMI’s Janelia Research Campus , in collecting 3D data using the aberration corrected multi - focal microscope—data necessary to validate our 2D simpliﬁcations . We thank NYULMC DART Microscopy Laboratory for the consultation and assistance with TEM work . We thank the Alison Killilea and the Cell Culture Core at UC Berkeley for generation and veriﬁcation of HEK293 cell lines . We gratefully acknowledge funding from the William Bowes Fellows program , the Vilcek Foundation , the HHMI HCIA Summer Institute ( to L . J . H . ) , and theNational Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellows Pro - gram : DGE 1342536 ( toG . P . B . ) . Christine Jacobs - Wagner isan Investigatorof the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . Cell 174 , 338 – 349 , July 12 , 2018 347 AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS L . J . H . conceived the project and developed GEMs . L . J . H . , M . D . , G . P . B . , and B . D . E . wrote the manuscript . M . D . and G . P . B . performed experiments except otherwise stated . S . Pfeffer , M . S . , J . M . P . , and B . D . E . performed and analyzed cryo - ET experiments . K . J . K . and J . I . G . performed genetic screens . S . Pinglay performed TSC RNAi experiments . D . S . undertook in vitro phase separation assays . M . D . and I . V . S . developed physical theory , advised by C . J . - W . J . K . C . performed FCS , advised by J . T . G . DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests . Received : December 19 , 2017 Revised : March 26 , 2018 Accepted : May 17 , 2018 Published : June 21 , 2018 REFERENCES Akita , F . , Chong , K . T . , Tanaka , H . , Yamashita , E . , Miyazaki , N . , Nakaishi , Y . , Suzuki , M . , Namba , K . , Ono , Y . , Tsukihara , T . , and Nakagawa , A . ( 2007 ) . The crystal structure of a virus - like particle from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus provides insight into the evolution of viruses . J . Mol . Biol . 368 , 1469 – 1483 . Albert , S . , Schaffer , M . , Beck , F . , Mosalaganti , S . , Asano , S . , Thomas , H . F . , Plitzko , J . M . , Beck , M . , Baumeister , W . , and Engel , B . D . ( 2017 ) . Proteasomes tether to two distinct sites at the nuclear pore complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 114 , 13726 – 13731 . Alberti , S . , and Hyman , A . A . ( 2016 ) . Are aberrant phase transitions a driver of cellular aging ? BioEssays 38 , 959 – 968 . Asano , S . , Engel , B . D . , and Baumeister , W . ( 2016 ) . In Situ Cryo - Electron Tomography : A Post - Reductionist Approach to Structural Biology ( Academic Press ) . Banani , S . F . , Rice , A . M . , Peeples , W . B . , Lin , Y . , Jain , S . , Parker , R . , andRosen , M . K . ( 2016 ) . Compositional control of phase - separated cellular bodies . Cell 166 , 651 – 663 . Belle , A . , Tanay , A . , Bitincka , L . , Shamir , R . , and O’Shea , E . K . ( 2006 ) . Quanti - ﬁcation of protein half - lives in the budding yeast proteome . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 13004 – 13009 . Bharat , T . A . M . , Russo , C . J . , Lo¨we , J . , Passmore , L . A . , and Scheres , S . H . W . ( 2015 ) . Advances in single - particle electron cryomicroscopy structure deter - mination applied to sub - tomogram averaging . Structure 23 , 1743 – 1753 . Bishop , A . C . , Ubersax , J . A . , Petsch , D . T . , Matheos , D . P . , Gray , N . S . , Blethrow , J . , Shimizu , E . , Tsien , J . Z . , Schultz , P . G . , Rose , M . D . , et al . ( 2000 ) . A chemical switch for inhibitor - sensitive alleles of any protein kinase . Nature 407 , 395 – 401 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Eckmann , C . R . , Courson , D . S . , Rybarska , A . , Hoege , C . , Gharakhani , J . , Ju¨licher , F . , and Hyman , A . A . ( 2009 ) . Germline P granules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled dissolution / condensation . Science 324 , 1729 – 1732 . Brazda , P . , Szekeres , T . , Bravics , B . , To´th , K . , Va´mosi , G . , andNagy , L . ( 2011 ) . Live - cell ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy dissects the role of coregula - tor exchange and chromatin binding in retinoic acid receptor mobility . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 3631 – 3642 . Broering , T . J . , Arnold , M . M . , Miller , C . L . , Hurt , J . A . , Joyce , P . L . , and Nibert , M . L . ( 2005 ) . Carboxyl - proximal regions of reovirus nonstructural protein muNS necessary and sufﬁcient for forming factory - like inclusions . J . Virol . 79 , 6194 – 6206 . Bykov , Y . S . , Schaffer , M . , Dodonova , S . O . , Albert , S . , Plitzko , J . M . , Baumeis - ter , W . , Engel , B . D . , and Briggs , J . A . ( 2017 ) . The structure of the COPI coat determined within the cell . eLife 6 , 6916 . Cai , L . - H . , Panyukov , S . , andRubinstein , M . ( 2011 ) . Mobilityofnonstickynano - particles in polymer liquids . Macromolecules 44 , 7853 – 7863 . Cai , X . , Chen , J . , Xu , H . , Liu , S . , Jiang , Q . - X . , Halfmann , R . , and Chen , Z . J . ( 2014 ) . Prion - like polymerization underlies signal transduction in antiviral immune defense and inﬂammasome activation . Cell 156 , 1207 – 1222 . Chen , Y . , Pfeffer , S . , Hrabe , T . , Schuller , J . M . , and Fo¨rster , F . ( 2013 ) . Fast and accurate reference - free alignment of subtomograms . J . Struct . Biol . 182 , 235 – 245 . Cohen , M . H . , and Turnbull , D . ( 1959 ) . Molecular transport in liquids and glasses . J . Chem . Phys . 31 , 1164 – 1169 . Daniels , B . R . , Masi , B . C . , and Wirtz , D . ( 2006 ) . Probing single - cell microme - chanicsinvivo : themicrorheologyofC . elegansdevelopingembryos . Biophys . J . 90 , 4712 – 4719 . DiComo , C . J . , and Arndt , K . T . ( 1996 ) . Nutrients , via the Torproteins , stimulate the association of Tap42 with type 2A phosphatases . Genes Dev . 10 , 1904 – 1916 . Doolittle , A . K . ( 1952 ) . Studies in Newtonian ﬂow . III . The dependence of the viscosityof liquidsonmolecular weight andfreespace ( inhomologous series ) . J . Appl . Phys . 23 , 236 – 239 . Duncan , R . , and Hershey , J . W . ( 1983 ) . Identiﬁcation and quantitation of levels of protein synthesis initiation factors in crude HeLa cell lysates by two - dimen - sional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis . J . Biol . Chem . 258 , 7228 – 7235 . Eibauer , M . , Hoffmann , C . , Plitzko , J . M . , Baumeister , W . , Nickell , S . , and En - gelhardt , H . ( 2012 ) . Unraveling the structure of membrane proteins in situ by transfer function corrected cryo - electron tomography . J . Struct . Biol . 180 , 488 – 496 . Fingerman , I . , Nagaraj , V . , Norris , D . , and Vershon , A . K . ( 2003 ) . Sfp1 plays a key role in yeast ribosome biogenesis . Eukaryot . Cell 2 , 1061 – 1068 . Fo¨rster , F . , and Hegerl , R . ( 2007 ) . Structure determination in situ by averaging of tomograms . Methods Cell Biol . 79 , 741 – 767 . Frangakis , A . S . , Bo¨hm , J . , Fo¨rster , F . , Nickell , S . , Nicastro , D . , Typke , D . , He - gerl , R . , and Baumeister , W . ( 2002 ) . Identiﬁcation of macromolecular complexes in cryoelectron tomograms of phantom cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 14153 – 14158 . Freeman Rosenzweig , E . S . , Xu , B . , Kuhn Cuellar , L . , Martinez - Sanchez , A . , Schaffer , M . , Strauss , M . , Cartwright , H . N . , Ronceray , P . , Plitzko , J . M . , Fo¨r - ster , F . , et al . ( 2017 ) . The eukaryotic CO 2 - concentrating organelle is liquid - like and exhibits dynamic reorganization . Cell 171 , 148 – 162 . Goddard , T . D . , Huang , C . C . , and Ferrin , T . E . ( 2007 ) . Visualizing density maps with UCSF Chimera . J . Struct . Biol . 157 , 281 – 287 . Grabocka , E . , and Bar - Sagi , D . ( 2016 ) . Mutant KRAS enhances tumor cell ﬁtness by upregulating stress granules . Cell 167 , 1803 – 1813 . Guo , Q . , Lehmer , C . , Martı´nez - Sa´nchez , A . , Rudack , T . , Beck , F . , Hartmann , H . , Pe´rez - Berlanga , M . , Frottin , F . , Hipp , M . S . , Hartl , F . U . , et al . ( 2018 ) . In situ structure of neuronal C9orf72 poly - GA aggregates reveals proteasome recruitment . Cell 172 , 696 – 705 . Hara , K . , Yonezawa , K . , Weng , Q . P . , Kozlowski , M . T . , Belham , C . , andAvruch , J . ( 1998 ) . AminoacidsufﬁciencyandmTORregulatep70S6kinaseandeIF - 4E BP1 through a common effector mechanism . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 14484 – 14494 . Harmon , T . S . , Holehouse , A . S . , Rosen , M . K . , and Pappu , R . V . ( 2017 ) . Intrinsi - callydisordered linkersdeterminetheinterplay betweenphaseseparationand gelation in multivalent proteins . eLife 6 , 5 . Heitman , J . , Movva , N . R . , and Hall , M . N . ( 1991 ) . Targetsforcellcyclearrestby the immunosuppressant rapamycin in yeast . Science 253 , 905 – 909 . Hou , F . , Sun , L . , Zheng , H . , Skaug , B . , Jiang , Q . - X . , and Chen , Z . J . ( 2011 ) . MAVS forms functional prion - like aggregates to activate and propagate anti - viral innate immune response . Cell 146 , 448 – 461 . Hrabe , T . , Chen , Y . , Pfeffer , S . , Cuellar , L . K . , Mangold , A . - V . , and Fo¨rster , F . ( 2012 ) . PyTom : a python - based toolbox for localization of macromolecules in cryo - electron tomograms and subtomogram analysis . J . Struct . Biol . 178 , 177 – 188 . 348 Cell 174 , 338 – 349 , July 12 , 2018 Hunter , G . L . , and Weeks , E . R . ( 2012 ) . The physics of the colloidal glass tran - sition . Rep . Prog . Phys . 75 , 066501 . Jain , A . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2017 ) . RNA phase transitions in repeat expansion disorders . Nature 546 , 243 – 247 . Joyner , R . P . , Tang , J . H . , Helenius , J . , Dultz , E . , Brune , C . , Holt , L . J . , Huet , S . , Mu¨ller , D . J . , and Weis , K . ( 2016 ) . A glucose - starvation response regulates the diffusion of macromolecules . eLife 5 , e09376 . Kaganovich , D . , Kopito , R . , and Frydman , J . ( 2008 ) . Misfolded proteins parti - tion between two distinct quality control compartments . Nature 454 , 1088 – 1095 . Kwon , I . , Kato , M . , Xiang , S . , Wu , L . , Theodoropoulos , P . , Mirzaei , H . , Han , T . , Xie , S . , Corden , J . L . , and McKnight , S . L . ( 2013 ) . Phosphorylation - regulated binding of RNA polymerase II to ﬁbrous polymers of low - complexity domains . Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 . Kwon , I . , Xiang , S . , Kato , M . , Wu , L . , Theodoropoulos , P . , Wang , T . , Kim , J . , Yun , J . , Xie , Y . , and McKnight , S . L . ( 2014 ) . Poly - dipeptides encoded by the C9orf72 repeats bind nucleoli , impede RNA biogenesis , and kill cells . Science 345 , 1139 – 1145 . Lohka , M . J . , andMaller , J . L . ( 1985 ) . Inductionofnuclearenvelopebreakdown , chromosome condensation , and spindle formation in cell - free extracts . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 518 – 523 . Luby - Phelps , K . , Taylor , D . L . , and Lanni , F . ( 1986 ) . Probing the structure of cytoplasm . J . Cell Biol . 102 , 2015 – 2022 . Mastronarde , D . N . ( 2005 ) . Automated electron microscope tomography using robust prediction of specimen movements . J . Struct . Biol . 152 , 36 – 51 . Miermont , A . , Waharte , F . , Hu , S . , McClean , M . N . , Bottani , S . , Le´on , S . , and Hersen , P . ( 2013 ) . Severe osmotic compression triggers a slowdown of intra - cellular signaling , which can be explained by molecular crowding . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 5725 – 5730 . Moura˜o , M . A . , Hakim , J . B . , and Schnell , S . ( 2014 ) . Connecting the dots : the effects of macromolecular crowding on cell physiology . Biophys . J . 107 , 2761 – 2766 . Munder , M . C . , Midtvedt , D . , Franzmann , T . , Nu¨ske , E . , Otto , O . , Herbig , M . , Ul - bricht , E . , Mu¨ller , P . , Taubenberger , A . , Maharana , S . , etal . ( 2016 ) . ApH - driven transitionofthecytoplasmfromaﬂuid - toasolid - likestatepromotesentryinto dormancy . eLife 5 , e09347 . Nickell , S . , Fo¨rster , F . , Linaroudis , A . , Net , W . D . , Beck , F . , Hegerl , R . , Baumeis - ter , W . , and Plitzko , J . M . ( 2005 ) . TOM software toolbox : acquisition and anal - ysis for electron tomography . J . Struct . Biol . 149 , 227 – 234 . Parry , B . R . , Surovtsev , I . V . , Cabeen , M . T . , O’Hern , C . S . , Dufresne , E . R . , and Jacobs - Wagner , C . ( 2014 ) . The bacterial cytoplasm has glass - like properties and is ﬂuidized by metabolic activity . Cell 156 , 183 – 194 . Peng , G . E . , Wilson , S . R . , and Weiner , O . D . ( 2011 ) . A pharmacological cocktail for arresting actin dynamics in living cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 3986 – 3994 . Petra´sek , Z . , and Schwille , P . ( 2008 ) . Precise measurement of diffusion coef - ﬁcientsusing scanning ﬂuorescencecorrelation spectroscopy . Biophys . J . 94 , 1437 – 1448 . Potter , C . J . , Huang , H . , and Xu , T . ( 2001 ) . Drosophila Tsc1 functions withTsc2 to antagonize insulin signaling in regulating cell growth , cell proliferation , and organ size . Cell 105 , 357 – 368 . Schaffer , M . , Mahamid , J . , Engel , B . D . , Laugks , T . , Baumeister , W . , and Plitzko , J . M . ( 2017 ) . Optimized cryo - focused ion beam sample preparation aimed at in situ structural studies of membrane proteins . J . Struct . Biol . 197 , 73 – 82 . Schindelin , J . , Arganda - Carreras , I . , Frise , E . , Kaynig , V . , Longair , M . , Pietzsch , T . , Preibisch , S . , Rueden , C . , Saalfeld , S . , Schmid , B . , Tinevez , J . Y . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 676 – 682 . Schindelin , J . , Rueden , C . T . , Hiner , M . C . , andEliceiri , K . W . ( 2015 ) . TheImageJ ecosystem : An open platform for biomedical image analysis . Mol . Reprod . Dev . 82 , 518 – 529 . Shav - Tal , Y . , Darzacq , X . , Shenoy , S . M . , Fusco , D . , Janicki , S . M . , Spector , D . L . , and Singer , R . H . ( 2004 ) . Dynamics of single mRNPs in nuclei of living cells . Science 304 , 1797 – 1800 . Shivanandan , A . , Radenovic , A . , and Sbalzarini , I . F . ( 2013 ) . MosaicIA : an Im - ageJ / Fiji plugin for spatial pattern and interaction analysis . BMC Bioinformat - ics 14 , 349 . Si , K . , Choi , Y . - B . , White - Grindley , E . , Majumdar , A . , and Kandel , E . R . ( 2010 ) . AplysiaCPEBcanformprion - likemultimersinsensoryneuronsthatcontribute to long - term facilitation . Cell 140 , 421 – 435 . Slaughter , B . D . , Schwartz , J . W . , and Li , R . ( 2007 ) . Mapping dynamic protein interactions in MAP kinase signaling using live - cell ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy and imaging . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 20320 – 20325 . Su , X . , Ditlev , J . A . , Hui , E . , Xing , W . , Banjade , S . , Okrut , J . , King , D . S . , Taunton , J . , Rosen , M . K . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2016 ) . Phase separation of signaling mole - cules promotes T cell receptor signal transduction . Science 352 , 595 – 599 . Trappe , V . , Prasad , V . , Cipelletti , L . , Segre , P . N . , and Weitz , D . A . ( 2001 ) . Jam - ming phase diagram for attractive particles . Nature 411 , 772 – 775 . Tsukada , M . , and Ohsumi , Y . ( 1993 ) . Isolation and characterization of auto - phagy - defective mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . FEBS Lett . 333 , 169 – 174 . Waliullah , T . M . , Yeasmin , A . M . , Kaneko , A . , Koike , N . , Terasawa , M . , Totsuka , T . , and Ushimaru , T . ( 2017 ) . Rim15 and Sch9 kinases are involved in induction of autophagic degradation of ribosomes in budding yeast . Biosci . Biotechnol . Biochem . 81 , 307 – 310 . Wang , B . , Kuo , J . , Bae , S . C . , and Granick , S . ( 2012 ) . When Brownian diffusion is not Gaussian . Nat . Mater . 11 , 481 – 485 . Warner , J . R . ( 1999 ) . The economics of ribosome biosynthesis in yeast . Trends Biochem . Sci . 24 , 437 – 440 . Wirtz , D . ( 2009 ) . Particle - tracking microrheology of living cells : principles and applications . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 38 , 301 – 326 . Woodruff , J . B . , Wueseke , O . , Viscardi , V . , Mahamid , J . , Ochoa , S . D . , Bunken - borg , J . , Widlund , P . O . , Pozniakovsky , A . , Zanin , E . , Bahmanyar , S . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Centrosomes . Regulated assembly of a supramolecular centrosome scaffold in vitro . Science 348 , 808 – 812 . Woodruff , J . B . , Ferreira Gomes , B . , Widlund , P . O . , Mahamid , J . , Honigmann , A . , andHyman , A . A . ( 2017 ) . Thecentrosomeisaselectivecondensatethatnu - cleates microtubules by concentrating tubulin . Cell 169 , 1066 – 1077 . Zapata - Hommer , O . , andGriesbeck , O . ( 2003 ) . Efﬁcientlyfoldingandcircularly permuted variants of the Sapphire mutant of GFP . BMC Biotechnol . 3 , 5 . Zhang , X . , Meining , W . , Fischer , M . , Bacher , A . , and Ladenstein , R . ( 2001 ) . X - ray structure analysis and crystallographic reﬁnement of lumazine synthase from the hyperthermophile Aquifex aeolicus at 1 . 6 A resolution : determinants of thermostability revealed from structural comparisons . J . Mol . Biol . 306 , 1099 – 1114 . Zheng , S . Q . , Palovcak , E . , Armache , J . - P . , Verba , K . A . , Cheng , Y . , and Agard , D . A . ( 2017 ) . MotionCor2 : anisotropic correction of beam - induced motion for improved cryo - electron microscopy . Nat . Methods 14 , 331 – 332 . Zhou , H . - X . , Rivas , G . , andMinton , A . P . ( 2008 ) . Macromolecular crowding and conﬁnement : biochemical , biophysical , and potential physiological conse - quences . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 37 , 375 – 397 . Zoncu , R . , Efeyan , A . , and Sabatini , D . M . ( 2011 ) . mTOR : from growth signal integration to cancer , diabetes and ageing . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 21 – 35 . Cell 174 , 338 – 349 , July 12 , 2018 349 STAR + METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies Hamartin / TSC1 ( D43E2 ) Rabbit mAb Cell Signaling Technology Cat # 6935 Bacterial and Virus Strains E . coli XL - 1 Blue Agilent Cat # 200249 Rosetta ( DE3 ) Competent Cells - Novagen Millipore Sigma Cat # 70954 - 3 Chemicals , Peptides , and Recombinant Proteins Rapamycin Tocris Bioscience Cat # 1292 Cycloheximide Sigma Cat # C104450 BMH21 Sellekchem Cat # S7718 CX - 5461 Sellekchem Cat # S2684 SMER 28 Tocris Bioscience Cat # 4297 Wortmannin Cell Signaling Technology Cat # 9951 TSC1 - SiRNA Thermo Fisher Cat # 16708 TSC2 - SiRNA Thermo Fisher Ca # 4392420 Trysin Protease Sigma - Aldrich Cat # T8658 PURExpress Solution A ( - spermidine ) and factor mix ( 10 reaction kit ) NEB Code # E3313Z Jasplakinolide Cayman Chemical CAS # 102396 - 24 - 7 Y - 27632 2HCL Selleckchem Cat # S1049 Latrunculin B Tocris Cat # 3974 Critical Commercial Assays Gibson Assembly Master mix NEB Cat # E2611S Q5 DNA Polymerase NEB Cat # M0491S Trans - IT transfection reagent Mirus Cat # MIR2704 Lipofectamine RNAiMAX Thermo - Fisher Cat # 13778030 Ni - NTA Beads Qiagen Cat # 30210 PD - 10 desalting column GE Cat # 17085101 Amicon Ultra - 0 . 5 Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracel - 3 membrane Millipore Sigma Cat # UFC500308 Alexa Fluor 488 Protein Labeling Kit Thermo Fisher Cat # A10235 Lipofectamine 2000 transfection reagent Thermo - Fisher Cat # 11668027 Deposited Data Subtomogram averages Electron Microscopy Data Bank EMD - 4372 , EMD - 4373 , EMD - 4374 , EMD - 4375 Tomograms from Figure 5 Electron Microscopy Data Bank EMD - 4376 , EMD - 4377 Experimental Models : Cell Lines HEK293 ATCC Cat # CRL - 1573 HEK 293 + PfV GEMs ( pLH1337 – lentivrius ) Holt Lab N / A HEK293 + PfV GEMS ( pLH 0611 – transient transfection ) Holt Lab N / A HEK293T Jef Boeke Lab N / A Experimental Models : Organisms / Strains S . cerevisiae : BY4741 MATa his21 leu20 met150 ura30 Jef Boeke Lab BY4741 S . cerevisiae : W303 MATa leu2 - 3 , 112 trip1 - 1 can1 - 100 ura3 - 1 ade2 - 1 ade2 - 1 his3 - 11 - , 15 David Morgan Lab DOM0090 S . cerevisiae : BY4741 + PINO4 : : PINO4 - PFV - GS - Sapphire - Leu2 Holt Lab LH 2129 ( Continued on next page ) e1 Cell 174 , 338 – 349 . e1 – e10 , July 12 , 2018 Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER W303 + ura3 : : PHIS3 - AqLumSynth - Sapphire Holt Lab LH3503 BY4741 + NDC1 / ndc1 : : NDC1 - tdTomato : : KanMX , GFA1 / gfa1 : : GFA1 - 24PP7 ; PP7 - CP - 3xYFP : : HIS3 Karsten Weis Lab LH3461 W303 + cd28 D : : cdc28 - as1 , pcl1d : : HIS3 , pcl2d : : URA3 , leu2 : : PINO3 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 David Morgan Lab LH3499 W303 + ura3 : : PHIS3 - GFP - muNS - URA3 Holt Lab LH3407 BY4741 + sit4 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3210 BY4741 + fpr1 D : : KAN , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3290 BY4741 + atg1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3164 BY4741 + atg13 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3165 BY4741 + atg17 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3166 BY4741 + atg18 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3220 BY4741 + snf1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3209 BY4741 + rim15 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3157 BY4741 + tap42 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3128 BY4741 + tor1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3095 BY4741 + sch9 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3097 BY4741 + rts1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3291 BY4741 + spe4 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3296 BY4741 + pep3 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3295 BY4741 + sap155 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3292 BY4741 + crz1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3289 BY4741 + cnb1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3288 BY4741 + cna1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3286 BY4741 + cna2 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3287 BY4741 + gtr1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3253 BY4741 + gtr2 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3271 BY4741 + rrd1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3255 BY4741 + rrd2 D : : KAN , PHIS3 : : PHIS3 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - URA3 Holt Lab LH3256 BY4741 + sfp1 D : : KANMX , PHIS3 : : PHIS3 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - URA3 Holt Lab LH3460 BY4741 + ypk3 D : : KANMX , PHIS3 : : PHIS3 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - URA3 Holt Lab LH3605 BY4741 + yak1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PHIS3 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - URA3 Holt Lab LH3446 BY4741 + sln1 D : : KANMX , PHIS3 : : PHIS3 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - URA3 Holt Lab LH3609 BY4741 + hog1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3653 BY4741 + sac1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3268 BY4741 + pmr1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3263 BY4741 + arf1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3305 BY4741 + glc7 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3332 BY4741 + cdc55 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3333 BY4741 + gcn2 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3338 BY4741 + npr1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3341 BY4741 + ypq1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3345 BY4741 + gat1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3339 BY4741 + gat2 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3340 BY4741 + mep1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3342 BY4741 + mep2 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3343 BY4741 + mep3 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3344 BY4741 + reg1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3371 ( Continued on next page ) Cell 174 , 338 – 349 . e1 – e10 , July 12 , 2018 e2 CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact , L . J . Holt ( liam . holt @ nyumc . org ) . Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER BY4741 + gln3 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3412 BY4741 + ssd1 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3334 BY4741 + msn2 D : : KANMX , PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 Holt Lab LH3158 BY4741 + msn4 D : : KANMX , PHIS3 : : PHIS3 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - URA3 Holt Lab LH4354 BY4741 + gis1 D : : KANMX , PHIS3 : : PHIS3 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - URA3 Holt Lab LH3455 W303 + ura3 : : PTDH3 - mCherry - Sumo 10 - Sim 6 - URA3 Holt Lab LH3922 BY4741 + PTDH3 : : PTDH3 - mCherry - Sum 10 Sim 6 - URA3 Holt Lab LH3914 BY4741 + sfp1 D : : KANMX , PTDH3 : : PTDH3 - mCherry - Sum 10 Sim 6 - URA3 Holt Lab LH3915 BY4741 + atg13 D : : KANMX , PTDH3 : : PTDH3 - mCherry - Sum 10 Sim 6 - URA3 Holt Lab LH3916 BY4741 + atg17 D : : KANMX , PTDH3 : : PTDH3 - mCherry - Sum 10 Sim 6 - URA3 Holt Lab LH3917 BY4741 + rim15 D : : KANMX , PTDH3 : : PTDH3 - mCherry - Sum 10 Sim 6 - URA3 Holt Lab LH3918 BY4741 + atg1 D : : KANMX , PTDH3 : : PTDH3 - mCherry - Sum 10 Sim 6 - URA3 Holt Lab LH3919 BY4741 + sit4 D : : KANMX , PTDH3 : : PTDH3 - mCherry - Sum 10 Sim 6 - URA3 Holt Lab LH3920 BY4741 + fpr1 D : : KANMX , PTDH3 : : PTDH3 - mCherry - Sum 10 Sim 6 - URA3 Holt Lab LH3921 W303 + GFA1 / gfa1 : : GFA1 - 24PP7 ; PP7 - CP - 3xYFP : : HIS3 Karsten Weis Lab LH3461 W303 + ura3 : : pRS306 - pHIS3 - 2xGFP Holt Lab LH3349 Oligonucleotides TSC1 siRNA Thermo Fisher AM16708 Recombinant DNA Yeast plasmid : pAV106 - pTDH3 - mCherry - 10xSumo - 6xSIM Holt Lab pLH1392 Mammalian plasmid : pCDNA3 . 1 - CMV - Sumo10Sim6 Holt Lab pLH1393 pRS305 - Leu2 - PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire Holt Lab pLH0497 pRS306 - URA3 - PHIS3 - AqLumSynth – Sapphire Holt Lab pLH1144 pRS306 - URA3 - PHIS3 - PfV - GS - Sapphire Holt Lab pLH1123 Mammalian : pCDNA3 . 1 - CMVP2 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - GGS Holt Lab pLH0611 Mammalian : CMB - PfV - Sapphire - IRES - DSRed - WPRE Holt Lab pLH1337 pRS306 - PHIS3 - GFP - muNS Holt Lab pLH1125 pRS306 - pHIS3 - 2xGFP - tURA3 Holt Lab pLH1115 Software and Algorithms FIJI ( FIJI is just ImageJ ) Schindelin et al . , 2012 https : / / idp . nature . com / authorize ? response _ type = cookie & client _ id = grover & redirect _ uri = http % 3A % 2F % 2F www . nature . com % 2Fnmeth % 2F journal % 2Fv9 % 2Fn7 % 2Ffull % 2Fnmeth . 2019 . html . Image J2 Schindelin et al . , 2015 https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / 10 . 1002 / mrd . 22489 / full MOSAIC for ImageJ Shivanandan et al . , 2013 https : / / bmcbioinformatics . biomedcentral . com / articles / 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2105 - 14 - 349 Matlab2016b Mathworks ( 2016 ) . https : / / www . mathworks . com / products / matlab . html Nikon Elements Nikon Instruments ( 2017 ) https : / / www . nikoninstruments . com / Products / Software e3 Cell 174 , 338 – 349 . e1 – e10 , July 12 , 2018 EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae BY4741 and W303 strains were used in this study as indicated in Table S1 . Strains were grown in synthetic complete media + 2 % dextrose ( SCD ) according to standard Cold Spring Harbor Protocols unless otherwise stated . Exponentially growing cultures between O . D . R 0 . 1 and % 0 . 4 were used in all experiments unless otherwise noted . Note : It is extremely important to avoid culture saturation - all cultures were started from single colonies and grown overnight to log phase ( typically we set up 1 / 5 serial dilutions to catch one culture at the correct OD ) . If cultures saturate , it takes many generations to reset the cellular rheology . All strains were grown at 30 o C in a rotating incubator . HEK293 Cells Mammalian cells were maintained at 37 o C with 5 % CO 2 . HEK293 and HEK293T were grown in high glucose DMEM ( Life Technol - ogies ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ; Gemini Bio - products ) , penicillin ( 50 U / mL ) and streptomycin ( 0 . 05 mg / mL ) ( Life Technologies ) unless otherwise stated . HEK293 cell lines are female with AMEL marker X , X . Cell lines were veriﬁed using short tandem repeat DNA proﬁling ( STR proﬁling ) by PCR ampliﬁcation of 9 STR loci plus Amelogeninusing Promega GenePrint 10 System , Fragment Analysis with ABI 3730XL DNA Analyzer , comprehensive data analysis with ABI Genemapper software and ﬁnal veriﬁcation using supplier databases including ATCC and DSMZ . METHOD DETAILS Plasmid construction The open reading frames encoding the Pyrococcus furious encapsulin and Aquifex aeolicus ( AqLS ) lumazine synthase protein based on the published crystal structures ( http : / / www . rcsb . org 2E0Z and 1NQU respectively ) were codon optimized for yeast and mamma - lian expression and synthesized as IDT gene blocks ( http : / / www . idtdna . com / pages ) . The 40nm - GEM plasmid for yeast expression was constructed by fusion at the 5 0 end of the gene with the yeast INO4 promoter and at the 3 0 end ( via a Gly - Ser linker ) with the T - Sapphire ﬂuorophore ( Zapata - Hommer and Griesbeck , 2003 ) by Gibson assembly into the pRS305 vector ( pLH0497 : pRS305 - PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire ) . The Mammalian expression vector was assembled similarly into the pCDNA3 . 1 vector ( Thermo Fisher ) with the CMV2 promoter ( pLH611 : pCDNA3 . 1 - CMVP2 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - GGS ) . To make a Lentiviral vector ( pLH1337 : CMV - PfV - Sapphire - IRES - DsRed - WPRE ) to express 40nm - GEMs , the PfV - GS - Sapphire sequence was digested from pLH611 and incorpo - rated into a Clontec V4 vector via Gibson assembly . We empirically determined that T - Sapphire was brighter than GFP in the context of GEMs , presumably because the long Stokes - shift of this ﬂuorophore avoids some of the autoquenching that may occur on the crowded surface of these particles . However , this crowded environment also appears to affect the photochemistry of T - Sapphire such that ﬂuorophore excitation is efﬁcient at 488 nm ; thus , for imaging purposes , we used settings optimized for GFP ( see Imaging below ) . The 20nm - GEM for yeast expression was assembled by fusion at the 5 0 with the yeast HIS3 promoter and at the 3 0 ( via a Gly - Ser linker ) with the T - Sapphire ﬂuorophore by Gibson assembly into the pRS306 vector ( pLH1144 : pRS306 - PHIS3 - AqLumSynth - Sapphire ) . m NS - GFP ( PHIS3 - GFP - m NS - URA3 ) fusion was constructed by Gibson assembly of the published N - termi - nal GFP fusion to the C - terminal fragment of m NS ( residues 471 - 721 ) ( Broering et al . , 2005 ) together with the yeast HIS3 promoter into the pRS306 vector ( pLH1125 : pRS306 - PHIS3 - GFP - muNS ) . The SUMO 10 - SIM 6 yeast reporter ( pLH1388 : pAV106 - pTDH3 - mCherry - 10xSumo - 6xSIM ) plasmid was generated by chemical synthesis of mCherry fused to a linked SUMO 10 - SIM 6 sequence that was based on the human sequence and then codon optimized for yeast . The mammalian SUMO 10 - SIM 6 was graciously gifted from the lab of Mike Rosen . All yeast plasmids were integrated into the host genome . Yeast transformation Yeast strains were created by transforming with a LiAc based approach according to standard methods . BY4741 deletion mutants were obtained from the Yeast Deletion Collection . pLH0497 : pRS305 - LEU2 - PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire or pRS306 - URA3 - PHIS3 - PfV - GS - Sapphire was transformed into the collection to allow for screening of mutants or into BY4741 and W303 strains for the rest of the experiments . The cdc28 - as1 strain was taken from ( Bishop et al . , 2000 ) . A list of yeast strains constructed is provided in Table S1 and the Key Resources Table . Virus production and cell transduction In order to create lentivirus , 800 , 000 HEK293T cells were plated in 10 mL media in 15 cm dishes . The next day , each well was transfected with 24 m g vector , 1 . 2 m g tat , 1 . 2 m g rev , 1 . 2 m g gag / pol , and 2 . 4 m g of vsv - g DNA with 90 m L trans - IT in 2 mL DMEM . Supernatants were collected at 24 , 48 , and 72 h after transfection and stored at 4 o C until they were spun at 20 , 000 rpm ( 52 , 931 r cf . ) for 90 minutes on a Beckman L - 80 Ultracentrifuge . Viral pellets were resuspended in 1 / 50 th of their original volume in DMEM ( with 10 % FBS ) and stored at (cid:3) 80 o C until their use . Stable HEK293 cell lines were created by transfection with ( pLH611 : pCDNA3 . 1 - CMVP2 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - GGS ) followed by neomycin selection . Additional HEK293 cell lines were created by lentiviral transduction with pLH1337 - CMV - PfV - Sapphire - IRES - DsRed - WPRE . No differences in terms of cellular rheology were seen between these different methods . In order to transduce these cell lines , 50 , 000 cells were plated in 2 mL of media in 6 well plates . The next day , Cell 174 , 338 – 349 . e1 – e10 , July 12 , 2018 e4 media was removed and replaced with media containing 8 m g / mL polybrene . Between 1 - 20 m L of concentrated virus was added to the well and then the media was replaced after 24 hours . Drug treatments In order to inhibit mTORC1 signaling , we treated yeast or mammalian cells with rapamycin ( Tocris Bioscience , Avonmouth , Bristol , UK ) at 1 m M for 2 h in yeast and 3 h in mammalian cells . To block translation we added cycloheximide to ﬁnal conecentartion of 1 m M ( Sigma - Aldrich , Allentown PA ) . In order to block ribosome production in HEK293 cells , we treated cells with PolI inhibitors BMH21 and CX5461 ( Selleckchem , Houston , Texas , USA ) at concentrations of 10 m M and 500 nM , respectively for 3 h . In order to increase autophagy in HEK293 cells , we treated cells with SMER28 ( Tocris Bioscience , Avonmouth , Bristol , UK ) at a concentration of 5 m M for 3 h . In order to decrease autophagy in HEK293 cells , we treated with 800nM Wortmannin ( Cell Signaling Technology , Danvers , MA , USA ) for 2 h . In order to de - polymerize actin and microtubules in yeast we incubated the cells with 200 m M latrunculinA and 50 m M nocodazole ( Tocris ) for 30 min . In order to depolymerize actin in HEK293 cells , we treated with 10 m M latrunculin A ( tocris ) for 20 min . In order to freeze the actin cytoskeleton , we treated with 10 m M y27632 ( selleckchem ) for 10 min then added jasplakinolide ( Cayman ) and latrunculinB ( Tocris ) to ﬁnal concentrations of 8 m M jasplakinolide and 5 m M latrunculinB and imaged immediately after . This treat - ment is called the JLY cocktail ( Peng et al . , 2011 ) . All stocks were prepared in DMSO and stored at (cid:3) 20 o C until needed . DMSO was used as a vehicle control in all experiments . Imaging and direct particle tracking Single particle tracking in Saccharomyces cerevisiae was performed for the 20nm - GEMs , 40nm - GEMs , AqLS particles , GFA1 mRNA particles , and m NS . The particles were imaged using TIRF Nikon TI Eclipse microscope in partial TIRF mode at 488 nm excitation , and ﬂuorescence was recorded with a scMOS camera ( Zyla , Andor ) with a 100x objective ( pixel size : 0 . 093 m m ) , with a time step that depended on the particles . The GEMs were imaged at a rate of one image every 10 ms , whereas both the RNA particles and the m NS were imaged with a 100 ms time step . Single particle tracking in HEK293 cells was performed for 40nm - GEMs using an Andor Yokogawa CSU - X confocal spinning disc on a Nikon TI Eclipse microscope and ﬂuorescence was recorded with a sCMOS Prime95B camera ( Photometrics ) with a 100x objec - tive ( pixel size : 0 . 11 m m ) , at a 10 ms image capture rate . The tracking of particles was performed with the Mosaic suite of FIJI , using the following typical parameters : radius = 3 ; cutoff = 0 ; 10 % of ﬂuorescence intensity , a link range of 1 , and a maximum displacement of 8 px , assuming Brownian dynamics . Extraction of the rheological parameters Various parameters were extracted from the particle trajectories . For every trajectory , we calculated the time - averaged mean - square displacement ( MSD ) , as deﬁned in Munder et al . ( 2016 ) as well as the ensemble - average of the time - averaged MSD . As measured in the insets of Figures 2D and 2E , where the ensemble - averaged MSD is plotted as a function of time in a log - log plot , the diffusion of the tracer particle is subdiffusive , and generally obeys the following law : MSD ð t Þ = 4 K t a ( Equation1 ) where a is the power exponent of the anomalous diffusion , and a < 1 in the case of a subdiffusive behavior . In this case , the apparent diffusion coefﬁcient , K , is not in units of m m 2 / s , but rather in units of m m 2 / s a . To characterize individual particle trajectories , we calculated apparent diffusion coefﬁcients by ﬁtting MSD with a linear ( diffusive ) time dependence at short timescales ( less than 100 ms for GEMs , 1 s for mRNP and m NS particles ) . To do this , we calculated the MSD and truncated it to the ﬁrst 10 points , and ﬁt‘ it with the following linear relationship : MSD truncated ð t Þ = 4 D eff t ( Equation 2 ) where D eff is the effective coefﬁcient of diffusion of the tracer particle , and plotted the distribution of this effective diffusion coefﬁcient . We used the Kolmogorov - Smirnov statistical test to assess the statistical difference between distributions ( kstest2 function in MATLAB ) . Culture saturation and nutrient depletion experiments Culture O . D . was measured from 0 . 2 to 5 . 2 on a Thermo Scientiﬁc Nano - Drop One spectrophotometer followed by GEM tracking as previously described . To measure the effects of depletion of amino acids , carbon , and nitrogen , synthetic complete media was prepared without 20 g / L dextrose ( carbon starvation ) , without Drop - put mix complete w / o Yeast Nitrogen Base ( US Biological ) , or without Yeast Nitrogen Base w / o amino acids ( Difco ) . Since dextrose is the major source of osmolytes in SCD media , 18 g / L of sorbitol was added to restore regular osmolarity in the carbon starvation condition . In order to ensure that all dextrose - containing media was removed , cells were spun down once at 3000 RPM then resuspended in starvation media . After plating on ConcanavalinA - treated imaging dishes , the cells were then washed 4 times in fresh starvation media . e5 Cell 174 , 338 – 349 . e1 – e10 , July 12 , 2018 mTORC1 overexpression - TSC1 siRNA experiments TSC1 ( s14433 or s14434 ) was targeted by Silencer Select siRNAs from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc . 75 pmoles of siRNA were trans - fected using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX transfection reagent from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc as per manufacturer’s instructions . Cells containing GEMs were assayed for diffusion at 72 h post transfection . Knockdown was validated by western blot using Hamartin ( TSC1 ) ( D43E2 ) Rabbit mAb # 6935 from Cell Signaling Technologies using standard techniques . 40nm - and 20nm - GEM purifcation for negative stain EM Puriﬁcation was performed at 4 (cid:4) C , unless otherwise noted . Two liters of yeast cells were grown overnight then lysed by cryogenic lysis in buffer B1 ( 20 mM Tris – HCl ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 10 mM MgCl2 , 50 mM NH4Cl , 10 mM 2 - mercapthoethanol , 10 % glycerol ( v / v ) , 1 mM PMSF , 2 mM spermidine ) . Cell debris removed by centrifugation at 9200 g for 25 min . Next , the lysate was warmed to 55 (cid:4) C for 30 min . The supernatant was further clariﬁed by centrifugation at 38 , 900 g for 1 h . The partially puriﬁed 40nm - GEM or 20nm - GEM particles were pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 185 , 000 g for 3 h and then the particles were resuspended in buffer B1 ( 20 mM Tris – HCl ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 10 mM MgCl2 , 50 mM NH4Cl , 10 mM 2 - mercapthoethanol , 10 % glycerol ( v / v ) , 1 mM PMSF , 2 mM spermidine ) . This suspension was gently mixed with 20 % Triton X - 100 in KCl buffer ( 20 mM Tris – HCl ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 10 mM MgCl2 , 50 mM NH4Cl , 10 mM 2 - mercapthoethanol , 10 % glycerol ( v / v ) , 1 mM PMSF , 2 mM spermidine , 2 . 5 M KCl ) at 30 (cid:4) C . Then the suspension of 40nm - GEM or 20nm - GEM particles was carefully overlaid on a cushion of 20 % sucrose in buffer B1 and pelleted by ultracentrifuga - tion at 185 , 000 g for 20 h . Next , the particles were resuspended in buffer B2 ( 20 mM Tris – HCl ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 5 mM MgCl2 , 50 mM NH4Cl , 10 mM 2 - mercapthoethanol , 10 % glycerol ( v / v ) , 1 mM PMSF , 2 mM spermidine ) and then gently mixed with buffer C ( 20 mM Tris – HCl ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 5 mM MgCl2 , 50 mM NH4Cl , 10 mM 2 - mercapthoethanol , 10 % glycerol ( v / v ) , 1 mM PMSF , 1 . 5 M KCl , 2 mM puromycin , 2 mM guanosine triphosphate ) at 30 (cid:4) C . Finally , the particles were overlaid carefully on a cushion of 25 % glycerol in buffer B2 and pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 185 , 000 g for 15 h . Negative stain transmission electron microscopy Puriﬁed particles were deposited on carbon - coated 400 mesh copper / rhodium grids ( Ted Pella Inc . , Redding , CA ) , stained with 1 % aqueous uranyl acetate , examined in a Philips CM - 12 electron microscope and photographed with a Gatan ( 4k x2 . 7k ) digital camera . Cryo - EM grid preparation and data acquisition W303 S . cerevisiae were grown on YPD plates for two days , then suspended in SCD media at low cell concentration by serial dilution and grown overnight at 30 o C on a roller drum to an OD of 0 . 25 . Cells were then incubated with 1 m M rapamycin in DMSO or only DMSO ( control ) for 2 h until an OD of 0 . 55 . Cells were frozen onto EM grids between 2 and 2 . 5 h after addition of the drug . 4 m L of culture was applied to R2 / 1 holey carbon copper EM grids ( Quantifoil ) and immediately vitriﬁed by plunge - freezing into a liquid ethane / propane mixture with a Vitrobot Mark IV ( FEI , the Netherlands ) using a blot time of 10 s , a blot force of 10 , and a chamber conditioned to 25 o C and 90 % humidity . EM grids with vitriﬁed yeast cells were transferred either to a Quanta or Scios dual - beam microscope ( both FEI , the Netherlands ) for focused ion beam micromachining . The vitriﬁed cells were platinum coated with organ - ometallic platinum and subsequently thinned by scanning gallium ions in a stepwise fashion from both sides . This yielded vitriﬁed cellular sections of 100 - 200 nm thickness that were suitable for cryo - electron tomography ( Schaffer et al . , 2017 ) . EM grids with milled samples were transferred to a Titan Krios TEM ( FEI , the Netherlands ) operated at an acceleration voltage of 300 kV , an object pixel size of 3 . 42 A˚ and a nominal defocus of (cid:3) 6 m m . The TEM was equipped with a Quantum energy ﬁlter ( Gatan ) and a K2 summit direct electron detector ( Gatan ) operated in movie mode ( 12 frames per second ) . Single - axis tilt series were acquired in SerialEM ( Mastronarde , 2005 ) using a bi - directional tilt scheme covering a tilting range of approximately (cid:3) 60 o to 60 o with a 2 o angular incre - ment . Depending on the pre - tilt of cellular sections in the TEM , the two tomogram halves were connected at either + 20 o or (cid:3) 20 o tilt . The cumulative electron dose for a tilt series was 70 - 120 electrons per A˚ 2 , depending on the sample thickness . Tomogram reconstruction Frames from the K2 direct detector were aligned with MotionCor2 ( Zheng et al . , 2017 ) using 3x3 patches for local alignment . For each tilt series , the resulting frame - aligned projections were sorted according to their tilt angles and compiled into an image stack that was loaded into IMOD for tilt series alignment via patch tracking . Projection - wise translations and rotations determined during patch tracking were extracted from IMOD’s output ﬁles and used for tilt series alignment in TOM / AV3 ( Fo¨rster and Hegerl , 2007 ; Nickell et al . , 2005 ) . Phase reversals introduced by the contrast transfer function ( CTF ) were determined on each individual projection using strip - based periodogram averaging ( Eibauer et al . , 2012 ) in TOM / AV3 and corrected in PyTom ( Hrabe et al . , 2012 ) . Finally , the aligned CTF - corrected tilt series was weighted for subsequent reconstruction of tomographic volumes via weighted back projection ( AV3 / TOM ) . For reconstruction of binned tomograms , the tilt series was scaled to 2 . 1 nm in Fourier space ( AV3 / TOM ) . Determination of the cytosolic volume in tomograms Binary masks encompassing exclusively the cytosolic volume were generated by manual segmentation of tomograms in Amira ( FEI , the Netherlands ) . As each voxel corresponds to a volume of ( 2 . 1 nm ) 3 = 9 . 26 nm 3 , the exact cytosolic volume included within the tomogram could be obtained by counting the voxels encompassed by the mask . Cell 174 , 338 – 349 . e1 – e10 , July 12 , 2018 e6 Subtomogram analysis Ribosomes : To generate a data - driven de novo template for correlation - based ribosome localization , 500 ribosomes were manually selected from one of the tomograms and reconstructed as described below . The subtomograms were iteratively aligned using fast rotational matching ( FRM ) ( Chen et al . , 2013 ) implemented in PyTom with a featureless sphere as a starting reference ( Figure S4A ) . The average converged into a ribosome within 12 iterations and was subsequently used as a template for correlation based localization of ribo - somes ( Frangakis et al . , 2002 ) in all tomograms . For each tomogram , the cross - correlation function resulting from template matching was masked to include only the cytosolic volume of the cell ( Figure S4B ) and the 5000 highest - scoring peaks were extracted . To avoid multiple detection events for the same ribosome , a minimal Euclidean distance of 18 . 9 nm ( 9 voxels ) between peaks was imposed . The distribution of correlation coefﬁcients for the extracted peaks showed clear separation of coefﬁcients corresponding to true and false positives ( Figure S4C ) . This allowed ﬁtting of a Gaussian function to the distribution of coefﬁcients corresponding to true positives and thus quantiﬁcation of ribosome abundance within the cytosolic volume . For detailed analysis of ribosome structures , all ribosomal particles with correlation coefﬁcients better than one standard deviation below the mean of the Gaussian ﬁt were retained and reconstructed at full spatial resolution in PyTom from the CTF - corrected , weighted and aligned projections covering approximately the ﬁrst half of the tilt series . Projections corresponding to the second half of the tilt series were excluded at this step due to excessive beam damage that dampens high - resolution signal . The recon - structed subtomograms were aligned until convergence with Relion’s gold standard ‘‘3D auto - reﬁne’’ functionality , which is now available for subtomograms ( Bharat et al . , 2015 ) . During subtomogram averaging , Relion’s 3D CTF model was used to compensate for beam damage with the recommended B - factor of (cid:3) 4 per electron per (cid:2) A 2 . Resolution of the resulting averages was estimated based on Fourier shell cross - correlation ( FSC ) of two completely independent halves of the data using FSC = 0 . 143 as the cutoff criterion . For computation of the difference density between ribosome structures from control and rapamycin - treated cells , the averages were ﬁltered to 15 A˚ resolution , normalized according to density mean and density standard deviation , and subtracted from each other . The UCSF Chimera software package ( Goddard et al . , 2007 ) was used for visualization of EM densities . GEMs : GEMs are readily visible in tomograms as high - contrast sphere - like particles ( Figure S3D ) . Consequently , template matching against a hollow sphere of appropriate size in combination with visual inspection of the 50 highest scoring cross - correlation peaks in the cyto - solic volume allowed highly speciﬁc localization of GEMs in the tomograms . Subtomogram reconstruction , alignment and resolution estimation were performed as described for the ribosome , with the only exception that icosahedral symmetry was applied during subtomogram alignment . FCS and coefﬁcient of diffusion of 2xGFP A custom - modiﬁed inverted microscope ( Nikon Eclipse Ti ; Nikon Instruments ) was used for ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) measurements . Prior to each measurement , a focal volume within a cell was located by eGFP epiﬂuorescence . A 100 - ps pulsed 482 nm diode laser ( PicoQuant ) was coupled to a single - mode ﬁber and collimated to a 4 - mm diameter , then focused on the sample through a 100x objective ( CFI Apo 100x Oil immersion TIRF NA 1 . 49 ; Nikon Instruments ) , with the laser power of 0 . 2 m W before the objective . The focal volume was calibrated with a ﬂuorescent dye with a known diffusion coefﬁcient ( Alexa 488 , D = 435 m m 2 / s ( Petra´sek and Schwille , 2008 ) . Each FCS measurement was the average of 10 - 20 cells . Fluorescence emitted from the sample was passed through a 50 - m m pinhole ( Thorlabs ) , and focused to a bandpass - ﬁltered single - photon avalanche diode with a 150 3 150 m m element ( PDM module ; Optoelectronic Components ) . The resulting ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation was processed by a hardware correlator ( Correlator . com ) , which generated the autocorrelation function . See Table S1 for results and more details on the ﬁtting procedure of the autocorrelation function . FCS calculations FCS data were ﬁt using a ‘‘blinking and anomalous diffusion’’ model , that has the following form ( Brazda et al . , 2011 ) : G ð t Þ = 1 (cid:3) F + Fe (cid:3) t = t f 1 (cid:3) F 1 N 1 + (cid:2) t t d (cid:3) a ! (cid:3) 1 1 + 1 s 2 (cid:2) t t d (cid:3) a ! (cid:3) 2 ( Equation 3 ) The term on the left before the 1 = N is the blinking term corresponding to the properties of GFP . In this term , t f was measured independently from whole cell lysate , t f = 3 : 5x10 (cid:3) 5 s . The term on the right corresponds to the anomalous 3D diffusion of GFP , where t d is the particle residence time in the focus volume , t d = w 2 = 4 D . w = 220 nm and s / w are the radial and axial dimensions of the 3D Gaussian laser focus , respectively , and they were measured using a dye with a known diffusion coefﬁcient ( Alexa Fluor 488 ) . In prac - tical terms , s does not affect the ﬁt , and was ﬁxed to be s = 10 . The result of the ﬁt yields D DMSO = 13 : 3 ± 1 : 3 m m 2 = s and D rapamycin = 12 : 2 ± 2 : 8 m m 2 = s , which are not signiﬁcantly different ( 3 biological replicates , n R 10 cells per condition ) ( Table S1 ) . Note that the anomalous diffusion exponent a is 0 . 8 in both cases , close to the measured anomalous parameter measured for GEMs . We chose an anomalous model , as commonly used in the literature to describe motion of GFP in a cell ( Slaughter et al . , 2007 ) , and as it yielded a better ﬁt than the normal diffusion model . e7 Cell 174 , 338 – 349 . e1 – e10 , July 12 , 2018 Osmotic perturbation experiments and cell volume measurement In order to calculate the dependence of GEM diffusion on the volume fraction of crowding agent , we performed hyper - and hypo - osmotic stresses ( see model below ) . LH2129 ( BY4741 + PINO4 : : PINO4 - PfV - GS - Sapphire - LEU2 ) cells were grown in log phase to an O . D . of 0 . 3 , then spun down for 1 min at 10000 rpm . Cells were washed with fresh medium , and placed in synthetic complete with dextrose medium ( CSM ) complemented with 0 M , 0 . 5 M , 1 M , 1 . 5 M or 2 M sorbitol . A subset of cells were directly ( within 15 min ) imaged for diffusion , and phase contrast images were acquired to assess cell area as a proxy for cell volume . The rest of the cells were left at various O . D . s in a shaker at 30 o C to adapt to the osmotic stress and grow overnight . The next day , cells were imaged for diffusion and cell volume ( Figure S7A ) , to check that cell volume and the diffusion of particles had recovered to their nominal values . These pre - adapted cells ( which had built up a high concentration of internal osmolyte ) were then spun down and placed in regular CSM , creating a hypo - osmotic stress of (cid:3) 0 . 5 M , (cid:3) 1 M , (cid:3) 1 . 5 M and (cid:3) 2 M , and immediately imaged for diffusion and cell volume . The same process was used for HEK293 cells ( Figure S7B ) , with osmotic stress of 0 . 25 M and 0 . 5 M sorbitol . In this case , cells were trypsinized and their volume measured from their area when the cells were spherical . SUMO - SIM protein puriﬁcation Tandem repeats of Small Ubiquitin - like Modiﬁer ( SUMO 10 ) and SUMO Interaction Motif ( SIM 6 ) proteins were expressed in Rosetta2 DE3 competent cells by induction with 100 m M IPTG for 18 hr at 16 (cid:4) C . 4 L of bacterial culture were collected and centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 20 min at 4 (cid:4) C . The cell pellet was resuspended in 100 mL cold lysis buffer ( 50 mM NaH2PO4 , 300 mM NaCl , 10 mM imidazole pH 7 . 6 ) containing 1 mM PMSF . After sonication , the lysate was centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 30 min at 4 (cid:4) C . The super - natant was mixed with 8 mL of 50 % slurry of Ni - NTA beads ( QIAGEN ) , and incubated at 4 (cid:4) C for 2 h . The bound beads were collected by centrifugation at 500 g for 1 min and rinsed 3 3 with 30 mL bacterial wash buffer containing ( 50mM NaH2PO4 , 300mM NaCl , 20 mM imidazole pH7 . 6 ) . Proteins were then eluted with 8 mL elution buffer ( 50mM NaH2PO4 , 300mM NaCl , 500 mM imidazole pH7 . 6 ) and exchanged into 2 mL of SUMO - SIM protein buffer ( 150 mM KCl , 20 mM HEPES pH 7 , 1 mM MgCl2 , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM DTT ) using a PD10 column ( GE Healthcare ) , followed by further concentrating to 300 - 600 m M with Amicon Ultra 30K device ( Millipore ) at 4 (cid:4) C . SIM 6 was labeled with Alexa Fluor (cid:2) 488 . The protein was conjugated with Alexa Fluor (cid:2) 488 using a large scale protein labeling kits ( A10235 , Thermo Scientiﬁc ) . In vitro phase separation experiment In order to determine if crowding by ribosomes affects SUMO / SIM phase separation in vitro , we added puriﬁed ribosomes from an in vitro translation kit ( IVT ) ( NEB , Ipswich , MA ) to a mix of 6 m M SUMO 10 and 10 m M SIM - Alexa Fluor 488 such that the concentrations of each individual SUMO domain and SIM motif were 60 m M . Ribosomes were added at the same concentrations measured in vivo by cryo - ET as well as at an intermediate concentration . Ribosomes , SUMO , and SIM were mixed in a well of a 384 well imaging plate , the top was covered with clear tape and then the plate was allowed to sit overnight in order to reach a steady - state before imaging . The plate was imaged on an Andor Yokogawa CSU - X confocal spinning disc on a Nikon TI Eclipse microscope and GFP ﬂuorescence was recorded with an scMOS ( Zyla , Andor ) camera with a 100x objective ( pixel size : 0 . 1 m m ) . Images were loaded into FIJI and the partition coefﬁcient ( amount of protein that has condensed into liquid droplets versus protein dissolved in the bulk aqueous phase ) was calculated by segmenting the image into two regions : bright condensed droplets and background . The total ﬂuorescence intensity was measured in each region using the raw integrated density value , and the partition coefﬁcient was calculated as the ratio of intensities in the condensed phase versus the bulk phase , then plotted in MATLAB . In vivo phase separation experiments In order to determine the effects of changes in ribosome concentration via mTORC1 signaling on phase separation , we expressed a mCherry - SUMO 10 - SIM 6 fusion protein in yeast ( pLH1392 ) and mammalian cells ( pLH 1393 ) . Wild - type and mutant yeast cells were grown from dilutions of single colonies overnight to log phase and then treated with rapamycin for 2 h . Sorbitol was added in the last ten min for the indicated conditions . Mammalian cells were treated for 3 h with rapamycin with sorbitol added in the ﬁnal 30 min where indicated . TIRF microscopy on a Nikon - TI microscope was performed using a 561 nm laser sample through a 100x objective ( CFI Apo 100x Oil immersion TIRF NA 1 . 49 ; Nikon Instruments ) . Images were segmented in FIJI to determine the 1 ) average size of droplets , 2 ) number of droplets and 3 ) number of cells . In the actute rapamycin / sobitol treatment conditions , we then used these data to deﬁne the total phase separated area as : avg size (cid:5) number of droplets number of cells ( Equation 4 ) Next , we expressed the mCherry - SUMO 10 - SIM 6 fusion protein in the ribosome biogenesis / autophagy mutants that we found to have an effect on crowding . We reasoned that these mutants would be a better test of our hypothesis , as they do not suffer the acute effects of rapamycin but rather sit at steady state . In these mutants , we measured the likelihood of having a droplet of any size and related this probability to the effects of crowding and protein concentration by ﬂow . Cell 174 , 338 – 349 . e1 – e10 , July 12 , 2018 e8 SUMO - SIM protein concentration and yeast cell size Cells were grown to log phase between O . D . 0 . 1 and 0 . 4 and then analyzed on a SONY SH800 Cell Sorter . Fluorescence was recorded for the mCherry - tagged SUMO 10 - SIM 6 fusion protein for every cell and then the average ﬂuorescence intensity was extracted using Flow - Jo . These values were normalized to wild - type and then averaged across replicates . QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Distributions of effective diffusion coefﬁcients were compared using the Kolmogorov - Smirnov test in MATLAB using the kstest2 function . Comparison of anomalous exponenents between and within yeast and mammalian treatments was conducted using a Student’s t test . Crowding regulation through control of ribosome concentration Model Basis In the following , we derive a model to describe the relationship between cellular crowding and the effectuve diffusion of a mesoscale tracer particle , like our 40nm - GEMs . We assume that there is a major source of crowding within the cell that impacts the mesoscale viscosity . We express the diffusion of the tracer particle as a function of volume fraction of the major crowder source , f , using the phenomenological Doolittle equation ( Doolittle , 1952 ) : D = D 0 e (cid:3) z = F = D 0 e (cid:3) z4 = ð 4 m (cid:3) 4 Þ ( Equation 5 ) where D 0 is the coefﬁcient of diffusion in an inﬁnitely diluted solution , f m is the maximum fraction of the crowder , and z is a constant . We write the volume fraction for the major source of crowder as : 4 = v crowder v water + v crowder + v other = v crowder v ( Equation 6 ) where v crowder is the volume occupied by the major source of crowding , v other the volume occupied by other macromolecules , and v water is the volume occupied by water in the cell . v is the volume of the cell . The maximum fraction of crowder in the cell is reached when the volume of water is close to 0 , such that 4 m z v crowder = ð v crowder + v other Þ . Validation of Doolittle equation and determination of parameters using instantaneous volume change through osmotic stress During an instantaneous volume change as a result of an osmotic stress , the total number of macromolecules remains , to a ﬁrst approximation , constant . The cell volume changes because of a passive outﬂow ( hyper - osmotic stress ) or inﬂow ( hypo - osmotic stress ) of water . We denote 4 0 the volume fraction of macromolecules before the osmotic shock , when the cell volume is v 0 : 4 0 = v crowder v 0 ( Equation 7 ) Denoting ~ v = v = v 0 the normalized cell volume , one can express F : F = 4 4 m (cid:3) 4 = 4 0 4 m ~ v (cid:3) 4 0 ( Equation 8 ) Note that the diffusion coefﬁcient D 0 in Equation 5 does not correspond to the coefﬁcient of diffusion under normal conditions , but corresponds to the coefﬁcient of diffusion for an inﬁnitely diluted solution of macromolecules . Rather , the coefﬁcient of diffusion under normal conditions , which we denote D 0 0 , is deﬁned when F = F 0 = 4 0 = 4 m (cid:3) 4 0 D 0 0 = D 0 e (cid:3) z = F 0 ( Equation 9 ) This leads to the formula that describes the instantaneous change of the coefﬁcient of diffusion upon a given volume change ~ v : log (cid:2) D D 0 0 (cid:3) = z 4 0 = 4 m 1 (cid:3) 4 0 = 4 m (cid:2) 1 (cid:3) 1 (cid:3) 4 0 = 4 m ~ v (cid:3) 4 0 = 4 m (cid:3) ( Equation 10 ) We used Equation 10 to ﬁt the coefﬁcient of diffusion for 40nm - GEMs under hypo - and hyper - osmotic stresses ( see Figures 7B and 7C ) . The model is in good agreement with our data ( r 2 = 0 . 85 ) , and gives parameters for S . cerevisiae z = 0 : 6 ± 0 : 2 , 4 0 = 4 m = 0 : 54 ± 0 : 5 . This number means that , under normal conditions , the fraction of crowder inside the cell is about 50 % the maximum crowding . We performed the same osmotic stress experiment on HEK293 cells , and initially measured different parameters ( z (cid:1) 1 : 6 , 4 0 = 4 m (cid:1) 0 : 35 ) . Osmotic stress is known to strongly affect the actin cytoskeleton in mammalian cells , which could affect the interac - tion parameter , z , which was conﬁrmed when we treated the cells with LatrunculinA at the same time we did the osmotic stress ( z (cid:1) 3 : 6 ) : the interaction parameter of the GEMs with the environment increased . When the actin cytoskeleton was stabilized e9 Cell 174 , 338 – 349 . e1 – e10 , July 12 , 2018 with the JLY cocktail ( Peng et al . , 2011 ) , we found that the two parameters of the model were closer to the yeast values : z (cid:1) 0 : 6 is very similar to yeast , suggesting that the interactions of the GEMs with the microenvironment is the same , and 4 0 = 4 m (cid:1) 0 : 35 is lower , suggesting that mammalian cells are less crowded . This result indicates that 40nm - GEMs seem may interact with the same species inside both S . cerevisiae and HEK293 cells in a diffusion - dependent manner . Homeostatic crowding , and homeostasis breaking under a rapamycin treatment What is the major source of crowding inside the cell ? Our genetic perturbations suggesti that ribosomes play a crucial role in crowd - ing regulation . Therefore , we can rewrite the volume fraction of crowder , considering ribosomes as the major crowder : 4 = v totalribo v = c ribo c (cid:5) ( Equation 11 ) with c (cid:5) = 1 = v ribo , v ribo being the typical volume of a single ribosome . This leads to the following equation : log ð D Þ = z 4 0 = 4 m 1 (cid:3) 4 0 = 4 m 1 (cid:3) c ribo 1 (cid:3) c ribo 4 0 = 4 m ( Equation 12 ) We used this equation with the parameters measured by osmotic stress to predict how particular mutations or chemical treatment should affect crowding , measured through the coefﬁcient of diffusion , as a function of ribosome concentration . The ribosome con - centration is determined by its number in the cells , N , and the volume of the cell , v . We measured the number of ribosomes N either by direct counting with in situ cryo - ET , or by measuring their relative amount compared to wild - type or normal conditions by quantiﬁ - cation of a total extracted nucleic acid on an agarose gel ( see Figures S7D – S7F ) . The cell volume was determined through brightﬁeld measurements . Figure 6 displays the model prediction for both S . cerevisiae and HEK293 cells , which is in very good agreement with the measured data . This suggests that : d Ribosomes are indeed the main determinant of cytosolic crowding inside the cell and can be considered as hard spheres . d The cytoplasm of mammalian cells and yeasts behave similarly in terms of crowding . DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY The accession numbers for the subtomogram averages reported in this paper are EMDB : EMD - 4372 , EMD - 4373 , EMD - 4374 , and EMD - 4375 . The accession numbers for the tomograms reported in Figure 5 are EMDB : EMD - 4376 and EMD - 4377 . Cell 174 , 338 – 349 . e1 – e10 , July 12 , 2018 e10 Supplemental Figures Figure S1 . Negative Stain EM of 40 nm - and 20 nm - GEMs and Track Length Histogram , Related to Figures 1 and 2 ( A ) 20nm - GEMs are observed to be 15 . 39 ± 0 . 84 nm by negative stain EM . ( B ) 40nm - GEMs , which are seen to be 41 nm in high - accuracy in situ cryo - ET , appear to be 37 . 23 ± 3 . 69nm by negative stain EM . ( C ) The median track length for 40nm - GEMs in DMSO and rapamycin treatment is similar at 35 . 2 ± 2 . 1 and 34 . 8 ± 2 . 2 frames , respectively . Track lengths < 10 displacements were excluded from all analyses ( gray shaded area ) . ( legend on next page ) Figure S2 . Subdiffusive Motion of GEMs , the Time Course of Rapamycin Treatment , and the Effects of Culture Conditions , Cell - Cycle Inhibition , and Cytoskeletal Perturbation on Diffusion , Related to Figure 2 ( A ) The anomalous exponent , a measure of subdiffusive motion , is similar for rapamycin and DMSO treatment in both yeast and HEK293 cells ( according a Student’s t test ) but is higher in HEK293 compared to yeast , indicating that mammalian cells are less subdiffusive ( p = 0 . 03 ) . ( B – I ) Cell volume increase , translation , and cytoskeletal perturbations do not explain rapamycin - dependent effects on GEM behavior . ( B ) Effect of culture saturation on the diffusion coefﬁcent of 40nm - GEMs in BY4741 yeast cells ( Normalized Units ( N . U . ) ) ( C ) Effects of2hours ofamino aciddepletion , 30minutes of carbon starvation and 30 minutes ofnitrogenstarvation on thediffusion coefﬁceintof 40nm - GEMs in BY4741 cells . ( D ) Effect of rapamycin treatment on the diffusion coefﬁcent of 40nm - GEMs in BY4741 cells over 4 hours . ( E ) Combined effects of starvation and rapamcyin treatment on the diffusion coefﬁcient of the MS2 - tagged GFA1 mRNA . ( F and G ) Change in coefﬁcient of diffusion ( F ) and normalized volume ( G ) over time for rapamycin treatment ( orange ) , cyclohexamide treatment ( green ) , and cell cycle inhibition of the conditional mutant cdc28 - as with NMPP1 ( blue ) . ( HandI ) Actinandmicrotubuleperturbationsalterthediffusionof40nm - GEMsinyeastandmammaliancellsbutdonotabolishtheeffectofrapamycin . Errorbars represent mean ± SEM . ( J ) TSC1 was targeted using Silencer Select siRNA ( Thermo Fisher ) . Knockdown was validated by western blot for Hamartin / TSC1 with a tubulin control using standard techniques ( see STAR Methods ) . Figure S3 . GEM Structures from DMSO - Treated and Rapamycin - Treated Cells Are Indistinguishable , Related to Figures 1 and 5 ( A ) GEM subtomogram averages obtained for DMSO - treated control ( left panels ) and rapamycin treated ( right panels ) cells ﬁltered to 26 . 3 A (cid:4) resolution . In the central two panels , averages have been sliced open to show the interiors . ( B ) Fourier shell correlation ( FSC ) between subtomogram averages derived from two independent halves of the data ( gold standard ) for control ( blue ) and rapamycin - treated ( orange ) cells . Resolution was determined to 26 . 3 A (cid:4) in both cases using the FSC = 0 . 143 resolution criterion . ( C ) FSC between the two resolution - limited subtomogram averages obtained for control and rapamycin - treated cells . High correlation ( FSC > 0 . 5 ) within the trustworthy resolution range suggests that GEM structures under both conditions are identical . ( D ) Gallery of individual GEM particles from control ( lower row ) and rapamycin - treated ( upper row ) cells . Each image corresponds to a central tomogram slice through the GEM particle . The amount of cargo within the GEM lumen varies . ( legend on next page ) Figure S4 . Ribosomes Were Located with Single Molecule Precision via Cryo - Electron Tomography and Template Matching , Related to Figures 5 and 6 ( A ) 500 manually selected ribosome - containing subtomograms were iteratively aligned with a sphere as a starting structure ( left ) . Within 12 iterations , the averageddensityconvergedtoayeast80Sribosome ( right ) thatwassubsequentlyusedasapurelydata - driven denovo templateforcorrelation - basedribosome localization ( template matching ) in the tomograms . ( B ) Example cross correlation function ( yellow ) obtained from template matching against the de novo ribosome structure , superposed with the non - cytosolic cellular volume ( gray ) excluded from the analysis . Peaks in the cross - correlation function ( yellow spots ) indicate putative ribosome positions . ( C ) Distributionofcross - correlationcoefﬁcientsforthe5000highest - scoringpeaks , whichwereextractedfromthecross - correlationvolumedepictedin ( B ) while imposing a minimal Euclidean distance of 18 . 9 nm ( 9 voxels ) between peaks . A Gaussian function ( red ) was ﬁt to the distribution of coefﬁcients corresponding to true positives . The integral of the Gaussian function corresponds to the number of ribosomes included in the cytosolic volume . ( D ) Ribosome subtomogram averages obtained for DMSO - treated control ( left ) and rapamycin - treated ( right ) cells ﬁltered to 11 . 5 A˚ resolution . ( E ) FSCbetweensubtomogramaveragesderivedfromtwoindependenthalvesofthedata ( goldstandard ) forcontrol ( blue ) andrapamycin - treated ( orange ) cells . Resolution was determined to 11 . 5 A˚ in both cases using the FSC = 0 . 143 resolution criterion . ( F ) Enlargedviewoftheregionindicatedwithaboxin ( D ) , comparingtheribosomestructuresfromrapamycin - treated ( upperpanel ) andcontrol ( lowerpanel ) cells . The most signiﬁcant density difference ( red mesh , threshold level of 6 sigma ) between both ribosome structures co - localizes with the P - site tRNA , which is resolved in the control but not the rapamycin - treated . Figure S5 . Gallery of 3D Segmentations from the Complete Cryo - ET Dataset of Control Yeast Cells , Related to Figure 5 Detected ribosomes are depicted in blue , GEMsin orange and thenon - cytoplasmicvolume that was excludedfrom the analysis in gray . The example tomogram from Figure 5 and the 14 th tomogram are not pictured here . Figure S6 . Gallery of 3D Segmentations from the Complete Cryo - ET Dataset of Rapamycin - Treated Yeast Cells , Related to Figure 5 Detected ribosomes are depicted inblue , GEMs inorange and thenon - cytoplasmic volumethat was excludedfrom the analysis ingray . The example tomogram from Figure 5 is not pictured here . ( legend on next page ) Figure S7 . Validation of the Doolittle Equation and Determination of Parameters Using Instantaneous Volume Change through Osmotic Stress , TSC Western Blot , and 18S rRNA Quantiﬁcation , Related to Figures 4 , 6 , and 7 ( A ) Afterperforminghyper - andhypo - osmoticshockstoperturbyeastcellvolumeandthenimmediatelyassessingthediffusioncoefﬁcientfor40nm - GEMs , weﬁt themodel ( Equation10 ) for S . cerevisiae andfoundthatitisinverygoodagreementwithourdata , suggestingthattheDoolittleequationreasonablydescribesthe dependence of diffusion coefﬁcient on volume fraction of crowding agent ( r 2 = 0 . 85 ) , enabling the determination of parameters z (cid:1) 0 : 6 , f 0 = f m (cid:1) 0 : 5 . ( B ) Weperformedthesameosmoticstressexperimentonmammaliancellsandinitiallymeasureddifferentparameters ( z (cid:1) 1 : 6 , f 0 = f m (cid:1) 0 : 35 ) . Osmoticstressis known to strongly affect the actin cytoskeleton in mammalian cells , which was conﬁrmed when we depolymerized actin with Latrunculin A concurrent with the osmoticstress ( z (cid:1) 3 : 6 , f 0 = f m (cid:1) 0 : 35 ) : the z interactionparameter oftheGEMswiththeenvironmentincreased . Whentheactincytoskeletonwasstabilizedwith theJLYcocktail ( Pengetal . , 2011 ) , wefoundthatthetwoparametersofthemodelwereclosertotheyeastvalues : z (cid:1) 0 : 6isverysimilartoyeast , suggestingthat the interactions of the GEMs with the microenvironment is the same , while f 0 = f m (cid:1) 0 : 35 is lower , suggesting that mammalian cells are less crowded . ( C ) f 0 / f m and the z parameter forcells containingmRNP ( inset ) were calibratedinordertopredict how thisparticle’s diffusion coefﬁcient would be affected by a change in ribosome concentration caused by rapamycin treatment . ( D – F ) For various chemical and genetic conditions , we extracted total nucleic acid by neutral phenol ( see STAR Methods ) and ran the extract on an agarose gel . The gel separates the DNA band ( used as a proxy for the amount of cellular material extracted ) , mRNA , rRNA and tRNA . To assess the relative amount of rRNA , used as a proxy for ribosome abundance , we normalized the band of rRNA to mRNA and subsequently to DNA to get the quantity per cell . This value was determined for each condition and normalized tothe control : thisgives us therelative change inribosome quantity inHEK293 drug and siRNA treatments ( E ) and yeast mutants ( F ) . ( G ) SUMO 10 - SIM 6 - mCherry concentration ( measured by ﬂow cytometry ) as a function of ribosome concentration ( measured by DNA gel ) ( r 2 = 0 . 63 ) . ( H ) SUMO 10 - SIM 6 - mCherryconcentration ( measuredbyﬂowcytometry ) versustheprobabilityofobservingphaseseparationinthecrowding mutants ( r 2 = 0 . 41 ) . Error bars represent mean ± SEM .