Sensemaking in Technology - Use Mediation : Adapting Groupware Technology in Organizations JØRGEN P . BANSLER & ERLING HAVN Center for Information and Communication Technologies , Technical University of Denmark , Building 371 , DK - 2800 , Kongens Lyngby , Denmark ( Phone : + 45 - 4525 - 5187 ; E - mail : bansler @ cict . dtu . dk ) Abstract . Understanding how people in organizations appropriate and adapt groupware technologies to local contexts of use is a key issue for CSCW research , since it is critical to the success of these technologies . In this paper , we argue that the appropriation and adaptation of groupware and other types of advanced CSCW technologies is basically a problem of sense - making . We analyze how a group of ‘‘technology - use mediators’’ ( Orlikowski et al . Org . Sci . ( 1995 ) 6 ( 4 ) , 423 ) in a large , multinational company adapted a groupware technology ( a ‘‘virtual workspace’’ ) to the local organizational context ( and vice versa ) by modifying features of the technology , providing ongoing support for users , and promoting appropriate conventions of use . Our ﬁndings corroborate earlier research on technology - use mediation , which suggests that such mediators can exert considerable inﬂuence on how a particular technology will be established and used in an organization . However , we also ﬁnd that the process of technology - use mediation is much more complex and indeterminate than prior research suggests . The reason being , we argue , that new , advanced CSCW technologies , such as ‘‘virtual workspaces’’ and other groupware applications , challenge the mediators’ and users’ sensemaking , because the technologies are equivocal and , therefore , open to many possible and plausible interpretations . Key words : appropriation , customization , groupware , sensemaking , tailoring , technology adaptation 1 . Introduction Implementation of new groupware technologies in organizations often fails , because managers and technologists neglect the need for mutual adaptation of the technology and the local context of use ( Orlikowski et al . , 1995 ; Ngwenyama , 1998 ; Majchrzak et al . , 2000 ; Mark , 2002 ) . Too often , they seriously underestimate the attention , support and resources it takes to successfully introduce new groupware systems and other CSCW technologies in the workplace ( Bowers , 1994 ; Ciborra , 1996 ) . Groupware technologies seem to be an ‘‘extremely fragile class’’ of tech - nology ( Ciborra , 1996 , p . 6 ) , for two reasons . First , they have to compete Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( 2006 ) 15 : 55 – 91 (cid:1) Springer 2006 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 005 - 9012 - x with existent media ( Ciborra , 1996 ; Kraut et al . , 1998 ) . No communication medium exists in the workplace in isolation and users are not passive con - sumers of media . They use the medium that suits their purpose at a particular point in time . When users experience problems using a new communication technology or get the impression that it is unreliable or malfunctioning , they will switch to another medium in order to continue their work . The alter - native can be fax , email , telephone , a shared LAN drive , ftp , etc . Even though these technologies may in certain regards be considered inferior , users may , nevertheless , prefer them because they are more familiar and well known . This is particularly the case in situations where the users are pressed for time ; why bother with something new . Second , conventions are essential for governing communication and cooperation , as Mark ( 2002 ) has recently pointed out . Users cannot just be given a new CSCW technology ( e . g . a groupware system ) and ‘‘be expected to optimally use it without some common agreements on the means of operation’’ ( p . 351 ) . Rather , conven - tions must be formed to regulate behavior and provide a ‘‘ modus vivendi for making interactions proceed smoothly’’ ( p . 351 ) – and if such conventions fail to develop , the technology will fail too . Research by Orlikowski and others suggests that the implementation and use of groupware technologies can be facilitated by an explicit and ongoing adaptation of those technologies to the organizational context and vice versa ( Orlikowski et al . , 1995 ) . This adaptation process , which they refer to as technology - use mediation , involves both ongoing adjustments of the tech - nology and initiatives that seek to inﬂuence the organizational context , for instance , by training users , changing existing procedures , and promoting the establishment of appropriate conventions for use . Despite its practical importance , the process of technology - use mediation is not yet well understood . Little is known about how mediators , in practice , cope with the challenge of bringing new technology and existing work practices together into a complementary whole . How do they make sense of the technology and discover what it can aﬀord ? How do they elicit users’ needs and requirements ? How do they ﬁgure out how to customize the technology , and how do they inﬂuence users’ behavior and attitudes ? These are the questions that motivate and guide our inquiry . To address these questions , we adopt a sensemaking perspective ( Weick , 1995 ) , which focuses on how people in organizations construe the situations in which they ﬁnd themselves and how they simultaneously enact those interpretations through their actions . We report on a longitudinal ﬁeld study of the implementation and use of a groupware technology ( a ‘‘virtual workspace’’ ) in a large , multinational company . Our ﬁndings conﬁrm that mediators may exert signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the nature and eﬀectiveness of electronic , organizational communication . At the same time , they show that technology - use mediation is a much more j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 56 emergent , complicated and unpredictable process than prior research sug - gests . We argue that it is , in essence , a sensemaking process and that it , therefore , is complex and open - ended . In the next section , we brieﬂy review prior research on technology adap - tation within CSCW . Drawing on recent developments in organization studies , we then present a sensemaking perspective on technology - use mediation , which highlights the signiﬁcance of meaning creation and enact - ment . In Section 4 , we introduce the empirical setting and explain our ap - proach to data collection and analysis . The ﬁndings from the ﬁeld study are presented in Section 5 . First , we identify and categorize the diﬀerent practices that the mediators in the study performed ( Section 5 . 1 ) , and then we focus on the activities of two mediators to demonstrate how they made very diﬀerent kinds of sense of the technology and , as a consequence , enacted very diﬀerent ‘‘technologies’’ ( Section 5 . 2 ) . In Section 6 we discuss our ﬁndings and explore how technology - in - practice is constructed through interwoven processes of meaning creation , enactment and social interaction . Finally , we summarize our main points and brieﬂy consider implications for further research . 2 . Tailoring and Adaptation in CSCW For many years , CSCW researchers have explored the issue of tailoring or customization , and it is now widely assumed that groupware systems must be adaptive and ﬂexible in order to eﬀectively support communication and cooperation in diﬀerent and ever changing work environments . It is also increasingly recognized that users often use groupware in ways not intended or expected by the designers of the technology and that users tend to re - invent the technology when they adapt and incorporate it into their working practices ( see e . g . the special issue of Computer Supported Cooperative Work on ‘‘Evolving Use of Groupware , ’’ vol . 12 , 2003 ) . Even so , relatively little is known about the actual process of tailoring or adaptation , i . e . about the way in which groupware technologies are appro - priated and modiﬁed by users . In looking at tailoring in CSCW , researchers have almost exclusively focused on the question of how to design ‘‘tailorable’’ or adaptive systems , i . e . systems that can be customized to the needs of particular users or settings . Many diﬀerent approaches to this problem have been pursued . Some researchers have explored the opportunities for the de - sign of ﬂexible software toolkits ( e . g . Malone et al . , 1995 ; Wasserschaﬀ and Bentley , 1997 ; Dourish and Keith , 2000 ) while others have focused on modeling languages ( Cortes , 2000 ; Ellis and Keddara , 2000 ) , design patterns ( Hummes and Merialdo , 2000 ) , or the technical foundations of ﬂexible component - based system ( Koch , 1995 ; Teege , 2000 ) . From this extensive body of research we now know a good deal about design principles for adaptive groupware technologies and about the tech - SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 57 nical foundations of ﬂexible systems . What we know little about , however , is how users , individually and collectively , go about tailoring these ﬂexible technologies and ﬁtting them into their working practices . A handful of case studies of customization practices were published at HCI and CSCW con - ferences back in the early 90s ( Mackay , 1990 ; MacLean et al . , 1990 ; Gantt and Nardi , 1992 ; Okamura et al . , 1994 ; Trigg and Bødker , 1994 ) ; but since then interest in how users , in practice , deal with adaptive and ﬂexible groupware technologies appears to have dwindled . It is our goal to renew this interest and thereby redress the current imbalance in CSCW research on tailoring and customization . We completely agree with Andriessen et al . ( 2003 ) when they claim that understanding the appropriation processes of groupware has to be seen as a ‘‘key research issue in the ﬁeld of Computer Supported Cooperative Work’’ ( p . 367 ) , because mutual adaptation of technology and organization is crucial to successful groupware use , and because a deeper understanding of the social processes of appropriation may help us build groupware systems that ‘‘encourage unan - ticipated and innovative patterns of use’’ ( p . 367 ) . In this paper , our goal is not to explore appropriation and technology adaptation in general , but to shed new light on technology - use mediation – as a particular , and potentially very important , kind of adaptation or custom - ization practice . Before we present our data , we would like to revisit some of the above - mentioned , early empirical studies of customization practices . These studies highlight the collaborative nature of customization and reveal that diﬀerent types of mediators or local developers play a crucial role by intervening in and shaping ( other ) users’ use of technology . The ﬁrst study was conducted by Wendy Mackay in the late 80s as part of an experiment in educational computing at MIT , Project Athena ( Balkovich et al . , 1985 ) . The project provided students , faculty and staﬀ with a com - putational infrastructure that consisted of over 1000 Unix workstations . Users had a range of text editors , window managers and other application software to choose from and they were able to customize the look and feel of each application . Mackay ( 1990 ) discovered that a small group of people – whom she called ‘‘translators’’ – played a critical role in the successful deployment of the technology by helping their colleagues customize their software environment . Translators enjoyed ‘‘talking directly to their col - leagues and [ got ] satisfaction from helping to make their colleagues’ lives easier’’ ( p . 219 ) . Translators had a basic understanding of the software , but few of them had any technical training , and they were more ‘‘interested in customizations that solve practical problems rather than those that demon - strate technical skill’’ ( p . 219 ) . The role of translator was not oﬃcially rec - ognized and few of the managers were aware of their accomplishments . Nardi and Miller ( 1990 ) , in a small exploratory study of spreadsheet use in diverse companies , found that ‘‘nearly all of the spreadsheets used in the j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 58 work environments studied were the result of collaborative work’’ among users ( p . 197 ) . Furthermore , their data showed that some users acquired a more advanced knowledge of computing and served as resources for other users , training them and developing code for them . Based on an ethnographic study of CAD users in seven companies , Gantt and Nardi ( 1992 ) also highlight the importance of ‘‘local developers’’ to provide support for other users , for instance , by writing the macros and scripts that are needed for many CAD applications . Characteristically , all the local developers in the study started out as end users and ‘‘grew into the position because they started specializing on their own initiative , usually out of frustration with the existing software’’ ( p . 111 ) . In contrast to the earlier studies , Gantt and Nardi found that in some CAD environments the support role had been formalized and argue that organizations are well served by recognizing the activities of local developers and formalizing their role . Trigg and Bødker ( 1994 ) studied the work of a small group of oﬃcially recognized local developers , consisting of one programmer and two domain experts ( labor inspectors ) , in a Danish governmental labor inspection agency . They were responsible for exploring , tailoring , integrating , and otherwise adapting the technology to the local context . Their tailoring work was approved by management and included as part of their job description . Trigg and Bødker stress that tailoring is a cooperative work process and that the local developers ‘‘work on the borders between technology development and everyday work’’ ( p . 47 ) . It is their embeddedness in the local community of practice that enables local developers to develop solutions that actually work . Finally , in a study of the use of a computer conferencing system in a Japanese R & D project group Orlikowski et al . ( 1995 ) found that the system’s use was signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the activities of a small group of people , referred to as ‘‘mediators , ’’ who adapted the technology to the local context of work . The group consisted of nine experienced computer users representing diﬀerent teams within the R & D project ( which totaled about 150 members ) . The group was approved by management and given time and resources to pursue its task . What is particularly interesting about this study is that Orlikowski et al . ( 1995 ) depict the mediators’ work – which they label ‘‘tech - nology - use mediation’’ – as much broader in scope than the previous studies . In addition to customizing the technology , the mediators in the study pro - moted use of the technology , established guidelines for its use , modiﬁed the organizational context , and engaged in eﬀorts to reinforce and institutionalize particular use patterns over time . Orlikowski et al . ( 1995 ) characterize this as ‘‘a process of structuring resembling that engaged in by users when they structure their technologies . Yet , the structuring involved in technology - use mediation shapes users’ own structuring of their technologies’’ ( p . 437 ) . For this reason , Orlikowski et al . ( 1995 ) refer to technology - use mediation as a kind of second - order or ‘‘meta’’ - structuring of technologies in use . SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 59 Taken together , these studies demonstrate that local developers and mediators can play a very valuable role in organizations , but at the same time they leave many unanswered questions about the processes through which mediators , in practice , intervene in and shape technology use in organiza - tions . In this paper , we are especially concerned with how mediators make sense of the technology , how they enact or ‘‘real - ize’’ ( Weick , 2001c ) their interpretations through their actions , and how they deﬁne their own role as mediators . Underlying this interest is the premise that understanding how people make sense of a technology is critical to understanding how they interact with it . To explore these issues , we draw on insights and concepts from organi - zational studies of sensemaking and use these to analyze the data from our ﬁeld study . 3 . A Sensemaking Perspective Organizational researchers have for some time been interested in under - standing processes of sensemaking , i . e . how people , individually and collec - tively , produce meanings and how their beliefs and understandings aﬀect their behavior and performance ( e . g . Winograd and Flores , 1986 ; Barley , 1986 ; Porac et al . , 1989 ; Ring and Van de Ven , 1989 ; Weick 1995 ) . Our approach is broadly inspired by this body of work , but draws primarily on the theoretical framework of Karl Weick who is one of its most inﬂuential exponents . 3 . 1 . SENSEMAKING , ENACTMENT AND IDENTITY According to Weick ( 1993 ) , the ‘‘basic idea of sensemaking is that reality is an ongoing accomplishment that emerges from eﬀorts to create order and make retrospective sense of what occurs’’ ( p . 635 ) . The point is that people try to make things rationally accountable to themselves and at - tempt to produce some kind of stability and order amidst continuing change . Sensemaking is ‘‘focused on equivocality’’ ( Weick et al . , 2005 ) . It is the search for meaning as a way to deal with uncertain and problematic situa - tions . How people ‘‘make sense’’ of the situations in which they ﬁnd them - selves , why , and with what consequences are the central questions for researchers interested in sensemaking ( Weick , 1995 , p . 4 ) . However , sensemaking should not be confused with interpretation per se ( although the latter is sometimes used as a synonym for sensemaking ) . Interpretation focuses on understanding or ‘‘reading’’ some kind of ‘‘text . ’’ Sensemaking , on the other hand , deals not only with how the text is read , but also how it is created . The key distinction , in other words , is that sensemaking is about ‘‘authoring as well as reading : ’’ j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 60 To talk about sensemaking is to talk about reality as an ongoing accom - plishment that takes form when people make retrospective sense of the situations in which they ﬁnd themselves and their creations . There is a strong reﬂexive quality to this process . People make sense of things by seeing a world on which they already imposed what they believe . People discover their own inventions , which is why sensemaking understood as invention , and interpretation understood as discovery , can be comple - mentary ideas . ( Weick , 1995 , p . 15 ) The central idea is that sensemaking is about action – as well as interpreta - tion – and that people ‘‘receive stimuli as a result of their own activity’’ ( Weick 1995 , p . 32 ) . They act , and in doing so participate in the creation of the environment they face , and this environment in turn constrains ( and enables ) their future actions . Weick refers to this process as enactment : Enactment is the stubborn insistence that people act in order to develop a sense of what they should do next . Enactment is about two questions : What’s the story ? Now what ? When people act in order to answer these questions , their acting typically codetermines the answer ( Weick , 2003 ) . Weick gives numerous examples of enactment , such as iatrogenic illness , i . e . physician - induced disease that occurs when diagnostic tests , lines of ques - tioning , or faulty procedures create sickness that was not present when the patient ﬁrst consulted with a physician . Or rumors that a stock trader has an unusually high hit rate , which draws attention to that person’s trading and leads others to duplicate his or her pattern of buying . This increases the action around the stock , which often raises its value and seems to conﬁrm that the trader is ‘‘hot . ’’ The point of these examples is that people externalize their interpretations and in doing so create situations and challenges , which they – as well as other people and other systems – then have to cope with ( Weick , 2003 ) . There are several additional properties of sensemaking that are worth mentioning , because they are important for our subsequent analysis of technology - use mediation . First , sensemaking is grounded in identity con - struction . Individuals attempt to make sense of ambiguous stimuli in ways that respond to their own identity needs . From the perspective of sense - making , ‘‘who we think we are ( identity ) as organizational actors shapes what we enact and how we interpret , which aﬀects what outsiders think we are ( image ) and how they treat us , which stabilizes or destabilizes our iden - tity’’ ( Weick et al . , 2005 , p . 416 ) . Second , sensemaking is driven by plausibility rather than accuracy . It is not about certainty or justiﬁed , true beliefs . ‘‘Instead , it is about continued redrafting of an emerging story so that it becomes more comprehensive , incorporates more of the observed data , and is more resilient in the face of SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 61 criticism’’ ( Weick et al . , 2005 , p . 415 ) . Sensemaking is not an occasion for objective , detached analysis . Quite the opposite , it is usually an experience of being ‘‘in the middle of things’’ ( Weick , 1995 , p . 43 ) , trying to ﬁgure out what is happening while simultaneously being forced to act . Third , the unfolding of sense is not just located inside peoples’ head , nor is it conﬁned to the level of the individual . On the contrary , sensemaking is a social process , as already indicated in the discussion of identity . Sensemaking is inﬂuenced by a variety of social factors , such as discussions among col - leagues , power relations , public discourse and institutionalized patterns of behavior and thinking . 3 . 2 . MEDIATION , SENSEMAKING AND TECHNOLOGY AFFORDANCES Now , let us consider again the work of the mediator . The mediator’s job is to adapt the technology to the local context of use by modifying features of the technology , promoting use , establishing appropriate communication norms , etc . To accomplish this , the mediator has to make sense of the technology in relation to the speciﬁc , local context . It does not suﬃce to have a general or abstract understanding of the technology . It is essential that the mediator’s understanding of the technology is connected to the speciﬁc needs and circumstances generated by the local use situation . This , however , is certainly no simple or straightforward task . As already mentioned , advanced CSCW technologies are generic , general - purpose media , which may be conﬁgured and used in a number of diﬀerent ways depending on the situation . The problem of adaptation , thus , does not have a single , more or less obvious , solution , but rather a number of possible solutions , all of which may be feasible . Weick ( 2001a ) has referred to such ﬂexible and customizable technologies as ‘‘equivoques’’ to indicate that ‘‘they admit of several possible or plausible interpretations’’ ( p . 148 ) . That CSCW technologies are equivocal and open to many diﬀerent interpretations does not , however , mean that they are a ‘‘ tabula rasa , ’’ on which actors can freely inscribe their own meanings and values ( Hutchby , 2001a ) . On the contrary , despite their interpretive ﬂexibil - ity , technological artifacts have a constraining as well as enabling materiality – in other words diﬀerent technologies do not lend themselves to the same set of interpretations . The reason is that diﬀerent technologies possess diﬀerent aﬀordances 1 ( Hutchby , 2001a , p . 444 ) , i . e . they oﬀer diﬀerent possibilities for action , and these aﬀordances ‘‘constrain both the possible meanings and the possible uses of the technologies : ’’ . . . aﬀordances are functional and relational aspects which frame , while not determining , the possibilities for agentic action in relation to an object . In j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 62 this way technologies can be understood as artefacts which may be both shaped by and shaping of the practices of human use in interaction with , around and through them ( Hutchby , 2001a , p . 444 ) . As Hutchby points out , the aﬀordances of a technological artifact are not just functional but also relational aspects of its materiality . Aﬀordances are functional in the sense that they facilitate certain actions : for instance calculating a number or communicating across distance . However , aﬀordances may diﬀer from person to person and from context to context , and in that sense they are relational . For instance , a PC with a compiler has the aﬀordance of programmability , but only if you are a skilled programmer and know the appropriate programming language . Likewise , an advanced , digital camera has diﬀerent aﬀordances for a novice and a professional photographer . The full range of aﬀordances of any artifact is generally not available to immediate perception . When people interact with ( and sometimes through ) technologies , it is necessary for them to learn about the aﬀordances that the technologies oﬀer to them , in their speciﬁc context of use . The aﬀordances , of course , exist whether or not people exploit them , but they only become manifest when people act in terms of those aﬀordances . ‘‘Sometimes , quite novel ways of accomplishing ( . . . ) actions arise at the interface of the actor’s aims and the technology’s aﬀordances’’ – often to the surprise of the designers of the technology ( Hutchby , 2001b , p . 30 ) . In other words , it is the job of the mediator to convert an abstract , generic technology into an intelligible ‘‘technology - in - practice’’ ( Orlikowski , 2000 ) by exploring its aﬀordances and ﬁguring out how to exploit them in a speciﬁc situation . An important point is that the mediator seldom has the luxury of being able to step back and think carefully about what to do . On the contrary , there is an imperative to act . The mediator is responsible for setting up and maintaining the operations of the technology , providing ongoing user support , responding to user requests and breakdowns , etc . She is literally ‘‘thrown’’ into situations where she is forced to act without the beneﬁt of a clear , stable understanding of what is going on ( Winograd and Flores , 1986 , pp . 33 – 36 ; Weick , 2001b ) . She constantly ﬁnds herself in the middle of things , taking stock of events as they unfold , trying to under - stand what is happening while she simultaneously intervene in the situation , responding to perceived problems and opportunities . The mediator’s experience , in other words , is not an occasion for passive diagnosis or detached reﬂection . Instead , it is an ‘‘attempt to grasp a developing situa - tion in which [ s ] he as an observer aﬀects the trajectory of that develop - ment’’ ( Weick , 2001d , p . 460 ) . This point will be developed further , after we present our empirical ﬁndings . SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 63 4 . Research Setting and Methods 4 . 1 . SETTING BioCorp ( a pseudonym ) is a multinational biotech company , which manu - factures a range of pharmaceutical products and services . BioCorp’s head - quarters are situated in Northern Europe , but the corporation has production facilities , research centers , and sales oﬃces in 68 countries around the world . In 2001 , BioCorp employed more than 16 , 000 people and the net turnover was $ 2 . 8 billion . The groupware system , ProjectWeb , which we studied , is a web - based application of the ‘‘virtual workspace’’ type , oﬀering facilities for sharing documents , exchanging ﬁles , publishing information , event notiﬁcations , group management , etc . ProjectWeb is developed in - house , as a collaborative eﬀort between people in BioCorp’s R & D division and the corporate IT department , but it has close resemblance to commercial systems like LOTUS TEAM WORKPLACE from IBM ( http : / / www . lotus . com ) and BSCW from GMD in Germany ( bscw . gmd . de ) . ProjectWeb is considered a highly suc - cessful system within BioCorp and the corporate IT department regularly produces updates and new versions of the system . ProjectWeb is a generic system and must be set up and conﬁgured before it can be used ( Henriksen et al . , 2002 ) . This includes designing a home page for the virtual workspace , creating a folder hierarchy ( to store documents and ﬁles ) , registering users , allocating access rights to diﬀerent user groups ( administrators , authors with ‘‘uploading’’ rights , and readers ) , etc . The purpose of the system is to support communication and collaboration among participants in the company’s drug development projects . These projects are complex , large - scale , long - term endeavors . A typical project lasts 9 – 10 years and involves up to 500 people from many diﬀerent functional areas within the company ( e . g . clinical research , engineering , marketing , and regulatory aﬀairs ) . Most of the activities are carried out at sites in Northern Europe , but clinical trials are conducted in the US , Singapore , Japan and a number of other countries worldwide . The fact that a growing number of BioCorp’s new drugs are developed in close collaboration with external partners in Japan , the U . S . and Europe further adds to the distributed and complex nature of these projects . Projects are organized in the following way : Work is carried out by a number of interdependent teams responsible for diﬀerent parts of the development process such as clinical testing and registration . Together , the managers of these teams form the so - called ‘‘core group’’ of the project . A full - time project director , responsible for meeting pre - established goals of cost , schedule and functionality imposed by senior management , heads the core group . Each project director has a project assistant who acts as his or j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 64 her ‘‘right hand . ’’ The project director ( and his or her assistant ) usually follow a project from beginning to end , while most other participants only work on the project for shorter periods of time and , in most cases , they work on several projects simultaneously . All project directors and project assistants are located at company headquarters , in the Project Management Unit ( PMU ) . Although formal as well as informal face - to - face meetings are central to communication within the projects , the dispersed nature of the organization means that project members must also rely heavily on a variety of commu - nication technologies to facilitate various modes of work . At the time of our study , these included familiar technologies like mail , telephone and fax , but also more advanced technologies like ftp , shared LAN drives , e - mail , video conferencing , and electronic calendars . In addition , the project assistants are responsible for setting up , designing and maintaining a common project web site ( a ‘‘virtual workspace’’ ) for each project . They use the ProjectWeb application to create and maintain these web sites . A so - called IT - supporter , a technology - savvy person who is also located in PMU , aids the project assistants with all kinds of IT - related tasks , including the conﬁguration and use of ProjectWeb . In other words , the project assistants and the IT - supporter together function as ‘‘mediators’’ responsible for the contextualization of ProjectWeb . 4 . 2 . DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS Consistent with the focus of our research , we followed an interpretive case study approach ( Myers , 1997 ; Walsham , 1993 ) . Interpretive ﬁeld research is particularly appropriate for understanding human thought and action in natural organizational settings ( Klein and Myers , 1999 ) . This approach allowed us to gain insights into the processes related to the adaptation and use of the groupware system and , in particular , to examine how diﬀerent mediators made sense of and enacted the technology . Moreover , this ap - proach is also useful for discovering new insights when little is known about a phenomenon . It allows for casting a new light on complex processes whose structure , dimensions , and character are yet to be completely understood ( Myers , 1997 ) . Our ﬁeld data collection lasted for more than three years and we used several data sources and modes of inquiry ( for triangulation ) . The two pri - mary data collection methods used were interviews and examination of archival data , but we also participated in a number of formal and informal meetings with developers and users . Finally , we examined diﬀerent versions of the software . Interviews . We began interviewing managers and employees of BioCorp in august 1998 and concluded the last interview 3 years later , in September SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 65 2001 . During this period , we conducted 34 semi - structured interviews of 60 – 120 min in length . All interviews were recorded and transcribed . Parti - cipants represented a diverse array of occupations and organizational posi - tions , and included project directors and project assistants from PMU as well as members of several development projects . The goal of these ongoing interviews was to gather information about important events as they unfolded and to track changes in the way people experienced the technology and perceived the new communicative aﬀordances provided by it . We also wished to avoid such problems as poor recall , hindsight bias and rational - izations . Archival data . We reviewed public materials such as annual reports and company brochures as well as internal documents such as the company newsletter , organization charts , the ‘‘project manual’’ concerning the dis - covery and development of new medicinal drugs , the guidelines for organi - zation and management of development projects , and the set of user manuals for the groupware system . This provided general information on company history , structure , core competencies , and culture as well as more speciﬁc data on the organization and management of the medicinal drug develop - ment projects ( including formal planning and project management models ) , and the groupware system itself . Meetings and informal conversations . We held two meetings with the director of PMU and several meetings with the manager in the IT - depart - ment responsible for ProjectWeb . We also participated in a one - day work - shop with users and developers in spring 2001 . The purpose of the workshop was to discuss user requirements to the next version of the system . In addi - tion to the formal meetings , we had many informal conversations with project assistants and users during our visits to the company and on the phone in connection with meetings or interviews . Examination of the application . We had the opportunity to inspect the diﬀerent versions of the groupware system on several occasions . In addition , when interviewing users we often asked them to demonstrate how they used the system and show us the content of the document base . In this way , we gained ﬁrst - hand knowledge about the system and its salient features . We used qualitative techniques to analyze the data , informed by the overall focus on mediation and sensemaking . We analyzed all data sources in a process of recursive scrutiny to get as complete a picture as possible of the design , implementation and use of the system . This process was ‘‘not unlike putting the pieces of a puzzle together , except that the pieces are not all given but have to be partially fashioned and adjusted to each other’’ ( Klein and Myers 1999 , p . 79 ) . We endeavored to place our ﬁndings in the context of relevant literature and in interpreting our data we constantly referred to relevant bodies of research on technology adaptation , sensemaking , and j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 66 CSCW . Thus , the processes of reporting the ﬁndings and conducting the analysis were highly connected and interwoven . We shared our preliminary ﬁndings with key informants in PMU and the IT department , and they provided helpful comments that conﬁrmed and elaborated the identiﬁed issues and conclusions drawn . By discussing our ﬁndings with the key informants , we explicitly recognize that the participants in the study – just as much as the researchers – are inter - preters and analysts and that the story we tell is a result of our interaction with the participants ( Klein and Myers , 1999 ) . 5 . Case Study Findings The project assistants and the IT - supporter have , individually and col - lectively , played an essential role in making the introduction of Project - Web a ‘‘success story . ’’ This does not mean that ProjectWeb is used to an equal extent in all projects . On the contrary , the use of ProjectWeb varies signiﬁcantly from one project to another . From our point of view , how - ever , the important point is that the extent of use in each project is closely connected with the project assistant’s eﬀort ( or lack thereof ) to adapt the technology to the local situation and motivate project members to use the system . Some project assistants have been wholehearted supporters of the new technology from the very beginning and enjoyed ‘‘playing around’’ and experimenting with it . Others have been more indiﬀerent , and a small minority has been a bit scared by the technology and quite reluctant to use it . As the IT - supporter told us , ‘‘two thirds [ of the project assistants ] have been enthusiastic about it , but the last third did not ‘see the light’ at once . ’’ She emphasized that the commitment of the project assistants is crucial to the adoption and use of ProjectWeb by project members : How much it is used depends on how enthralled the project assistant is . If she is very enthusiastic , then it will be more widely used . Many project members we talked to within BioCorp conﬁrmed that the motivation and skills of the project assistants varied signiﬁcantly and that this had a strong impact on the use of the technology . For instance , a manager from Scientiﬁc Marketing , noted : The greatest diﬀerence [ among the diﬀerent projects’ web sites ] is in the way the project assistants upload the material . Some are better than others in creating these things . That is the greatest diﬀerence ; some are really good at it . For those that are really good at it , they of course develop a web site that has many visitors . Their bosses also complain that they use all their time on it – ya , those kind of things take time . SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 67 5 . 1 . WORKING AS A MEDIATOR We can begin to understand the role of the mediators in making ProjectWeb a ‘‘success’’ by examining the everyday practices of the project assistants and the IT - supporter as they deal with the challenge of adapting the technology and the local context to each other . We begin by analyzing the work of the project assistants . 5 . 1 . 1 . The Project Assistants Through the data analysis we identiﬁed a repertoire of practices , which the project assistants engage in as part of their job as mediators . These practices can be characterized according to their overall focus . The ﬁrst group includes practices seeking to promote use and oﬀering ongoing assistance , encour - agement and support to the users . The second group includes practices aimed at adapting and maintaining the technology itself ( see Figure 1 ) . This cate - gorization provides a useful provisional classiﬁcation of essential practices involved in technology - use mediation , although we acknowledge that the speciﬁc form of some of the practices ( e . g . creating an interesting web site ) obviously depends on the particular type of technology employed ( e . g . web technology ) and that technology - use mediation can comprise other practices as well . Human - Centered Mediation Practices . As Ciborra ( 1996 ) notes , new elec - tronic communication media are an ‘‘extremely fragile class’’ of technology because ‘‘very often they are threatened by substitute media’’ ( p . 6 ) . Pro - jectWeb , for instance , have to compete with the already widespread use of email in the company . Thus , the project assistants continuously have to motivate people to use ProjectWeb and to assist them in learning how to use and integrate it in their daily work . As one of the project assistants put it , ‘‘we have to go out and sell the system , ’’ people are not waiting to ‘‘throw Project Assistants’ Technology - Use Mediation Activities Human - Centered Practices : (cid:127) Promoting Use (cid:127) Helping and supporting users (cid:127) Establishing conventions of use Technology - Centered Practices : (cid:127) Creating an interesting web site (cid:127) Improving usability (cid:127) Inventing work - arounds (cid:127) Collecting requests for changes Figure 1 . The Project Assistants’ technology - use mediation practices . j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 68 themselves into it . ’’ The project assistants address this challenge in several ways . First , they actively promote use of the system . For instance , when a new project is started , they introduce the core group members to the system at the ﬁrst project meeting and explain how it can improve communication within the project . They also regularly send out emails to prompt people to visit the web site , e . g . when important documents or interesting news have been posted . In addition , when newcomers join a project , they introduce them to the system by sending them a ‘‘welcome mail’’ with a link to the project’s web site . One project assistant explained : But every time there is a new employee – be it out in the subsidiaries or here at home – I’m informed about it and include them in the mail group , give them access to the web and send them a mail introducing myself . ( . . . ) I write : ‘‘Dear and then the name , welcome to the alfa project . You are hereby included in the mail group alfa info for regular project updating and have access to the project web – with a link . In case of any questions you are always welcome to contact me . Best regards Jean . ’’ Second , the project assistants help users to incorporate the new technology into their work practices by providing advice , technical assistance , support and handholding . The project assistants are always available for the users and the users often call them when they encounter problems using the system . Third , the project assistants attempt to establish appropriate conventions of use by monitoring and regulating user behavior . For instance , they told us that sometimes they have to ‘‘discipline’’ users in order to foster appropriate usage and discourage ineﬀective or inappropriate behavior . They have , for example , tried to establish the norm that it is the project members who are responsible for seeking the information they need by regularly visiting the project’s web site . One way the project assistants have tried to reinforce this norm is by refusing to distribute minutes from meetings and other important documents as email attachments ( as they used to do before ProjectWeb ) . This forces people to visit the project web site on a regular basis . We have , how - ever , also come across examples of project assistants , who directly monitor the behavior of users and reprove them if they have not visited the project web site for a while . One project assistant , for instance , told us that she uses the log ( containing data on the use of the system ) to check whether project members go in and fetch the information and documents they are supposed to : Yes , I mostly use the statistics to see who has been there [ visited the web site ] . If I need input from someone , I can go in and see when he or she was on last . So , I use it more that way . Q : How do you , then , proceed ? SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 69 Then I have to say to them that if you haven’t been there for a while and I was expecting to hear from you about this and that , then it’s right there . That way I sort of hit them on the head with it . It should , however , be noted that the project assistants do not necessarily agree on what constitutes as ‘‘appropriate’’ usage . On the contrary , as will be shown later in the paper . The project assistants’ human - centered technology - use mediation practices are summarized in Table I below . Technology - Centered Mediation Practices . ProjectWeb is a relatively open - ended and ﬂexible technology that must be adapted to the speciﬁc context of use . It is the project assistants who , on a day - to - day basis , are responsible for customizing and maintaining the technology to ensure that it reﬂects local needs and conditions as well as possible . As one of the project assistants said , ‘‘It is an important part of my job that it [ the project web site ] is always ﬁt for ﬁght , updated and with something new . ’’ The adaptation of the technology may be seen to involve at least four types of activities : First , the project assistants strive to make their project web sites attractive , interesting and dynamic with the explicit purpose of enticing people to visit the site . They do so by playing around with colors and graphics , putting up pictures of people and events , and frequently publishing news of interest to members of the project . Second , they continually adjust and enhance the structure and layout of the project web sites to make them easier to navigate and use . They pay close attention to user feedback and try to identify and remedy problems as quickly as possible . For example , they constantly adjust and extend the Table I . The Project Assistants’ repertoire of human - centered practices and activities Practice Activities comprising the practice ( examples ) Promoting use – Present ProjectWeb at meetings and workshops – Prompt people to visit the project web site by sending them emails with links to interesting news or impor - tant new documents – Introduce new project members to the project web site by sending them a ‘‘welcome’’ mail with a link Helping and supporting users – Provide technical assistance and explain how to use the system – Solve problems when they arise – Answer ad hoc questions by email or phone Establishing conventions of use – Refuse to distribute documents as email attachments – Monitor the behavior of users – Point out inappropriate behavior j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 70 hierarchy of document folders on the web site to support the easy storing and retrieval of the project’s documents . One of the project assistants emphasized that it is impossible at the beginning of a project to design the folder hier - archy once and for all . It is necessary to continually adapt it as new types of documents turn up : The more and varied documents you upload , the more ﬁles , the more you also need a clear classiﬁcation . So , it is also very , very diﬃcult to say , beforehand , what you’ll need . Actually you can’t do it until you have the document . Third , if a project assistant is unable to make the IT department correct a design ﬂaw or a programming error quickly enough , she sometimes tries to solve the problem by inventing a ‘‘work - around’’ solution . For instance , there have been repeated problems with downloading PowerPoint ﬁles from the web sites : It [ the ProjectWeb application ] is built up so that PowerPoint ﬁles open up as slide shows , which means that you can’t download them . And this is something that many people need to do . They need to download them , print them , use parts of them , copy something , and what not . So , I’ve made a deal – people can just contact me , because I have all the ﬁles or can at least get them . [ And then she will forward them as email attachments . ] By inventing such work - arounds the project assistants are able to compensate for some of the built - in shortcomings of the system . Fourth , because user demands change over time , the project assistants actively collect proposals for changes and modiﬁcations to the software . However , not being able to modify the code themselves , they have to pass the suggestions on to the IT department either by contacting the responsible programmer directly or by talking to the IT - supporter ( more on this later ) . Generally , the project assistants have a strong sense of commitment to their users and seek to comply with their wishes quickly and eﬀectively . As a consequence , the project assistants sometimes ﬁnd it particularly frustrating having to depend on the willingness of the IT - department to carry out the necessary software modiﬁcations : That means that you really have a responsibility for these people , for always keeping it updated and for optimizing it . And especially if they come to us with some ideas and suggestions on how to improve things . ( . . . ) This , sometimes , puts me on the spot , because . . . I’m not web master in the sense that I can go in and change things . . . and when I go to the IT - department and say : ‘‘Couldn’t you make it so and so ? ’’ No , they can’t just make it like that . It’s not that it’s technically impossible , but because it is something that they pick up and then prioritize before they [ at some point in time ] make a new version . I ﬁnd it deeply frustrating . SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 71 The most enthusiastic project assistants actively attempt to inﬂuence the design of new versions of the software by , whenever they have the oppor - tunity , lobbying for their proposals at e . g . , department meetings and design workshops , or in more informal ways . The project assistants’ technology - centered mediation practices are sum - marized in Table II below . 5 . 1 . 2 . The IT - Supporter The IT - supporter also plays a central role in the implementation and use of ProjectWeb , although she does not have any direct contact with the users of the system . Her role is to support the project assistants in their technology - related activities and to act as a link or a ‘‘translator’’ between the project assistants and the IT department . One might best characterize her as a ‘‘meta - mediator , ’’ because she intervenes in and shapes the project assistants’ tech - nology - use mediation . The IT - supporter’s repertoire of practices ( related to ProjectWeb ) can also be divided into two groups . The ﬁrst group of practices focuses on helping and supporting the project assistants while the second group focuses on adapting and developing the technology ( see Figure 2 ) . Human - Centered Mediation Practices . The project assistants’ knowledge of information and communication technologies is quite limited . As noted , some of them have a lively interest in the technologies and like to ‘‘play around’’ with them , but none of them have any formal technical training . As a consequence , they depend on the IT - supporter in carrying out their mediator role . The IT - supporter’s assistance involves the following practices . First , the IT - supporter helps and supports the project assistants with setting up , customizing , and using ProjectWeb . For example , when the IT department Table II . The Project Assistants’ repertoire of technology - centered practices and activities Practice Activities comprising the practice ( examples ) Creating an interesting web site – Play around with colors and graphics – Post pictures of people and events in the project – Regularly publish news of interest to project members Improving usability – Pay close attention to feedback from users – Quickly identify and remedy problems with the layout – Adjust the folder hierarchy to account for new types of documents Inventing work - arounds – Invent a ‘‘work - around’’ if a technical solution is impossible in the short run Collecting requests for change – Collect user requests for change – Ask the IT - supporter to make changes – Pass requests on to the IT department – Lobby for their proposals j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 72 releases a new version of the system , she writes a user manual for the project assistants and oﬀers to teach them about the system’s new facilities on an individual basis : I’ve made a deal with them [ the project assistants ] that they get half a day each where I go in and coach them through . We don’t have any teaching facilities . One would have to borrow a room where I could be with them ten at a time , and that . . . First of all , it’s diﬃcult to pull ten out in one go . Furthermore , when there is something as personal as your own project web site then you’re so focused on what can I use it for , that it is diﬃcult to teach a group . That’s why I go around teaching each individually . I’ve written a manual for them , which they don’t use very much , after all . It’s easier to walk down the hall and ask [ me ] . As the quote indicates , the oﬃces of the IT - supporter and the project assis - tants are closely located , and this gives the project assistants easy access to the IT - supporter . Second , she promotes knowledge sharing among the project assistants . She does so by arranging a monthly meeting to discuss the use of ProjectWeb ( as well as other IT - related issues ) , and by encouraging the project assistants to learn from each other : It’s the same if I discover that one of the assistants has come up with a bright idea [ then I make sure of telling the others about it ] . If someone comes up and says ‘‘I want to make this , ’’ then I say : ‘‘Go in and talk with Loretta , she has made something that is quite like what you want to do . ’’ That way they exchange ideas , right ? Third , she tries to establish appropriate conventions of design by monitoring and systematizing the project assistants’ work . For instance , she has for - mulated a set of guidelines for the ‘‘appropriate’’ administering of access rights to the projects’ web sites . She also monitors how the project assistants design their web sites and tries to promote ‘‘good’’ design principles . For The IT - Supporter’s Technology - Use Mediation Activities Human - Centered Activities : (cid:127) Helping and supporting project as - sistants (cid:127) Promoting knowledge sharing (cid:127) Establishing conventions of design Technology - CenteredActivities : (cid:127) Performing difficult adaptations (cid:127) Collecting requests for changes (cid:127) Participating in systems design Figure 2 . The IT - supporter’s technology - use mediation practices . SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 73 instance , in one case she criticized the way in which a project assistant had designed the menus on her web site : For example , Ann , who had a huge number of sub - menus , so when her site came up , you had to draw the arrow this way [ across ] , and it’s not natural for people to move that way across the screen . They don’t do it . When I discover this – that she does this kind of thing where she doesn’t think about it – then I go over to her and tell her that perhaps it’s better to turn the menu the other way around , so that it ﬁts with the template . The IT - supporter’s human - centered mediation practices are summarized in Table III . Technology - Centered Mediation Practices . The IT - supporter also plays a key role in the customization and development of the technology itself , because she is technically more proﬁcient than the project assistants . First , she often helps out the project assistants by setting up new web sites and performing some of the more diﬃcult or complex adaptations . In addi - tion , she assists with identifying and ﬁxing various technical problems . Second , as mentioned in the previous section , the project assistants and their users generate a constant stream of ideas on how to improve the Pro - jectWeb software . The IT - supporter systematically collects these proposals , rates them , and passes them on to the IT department , so that they have this information when they begin to develop a new version : Every time someone [ the project assistants ] writes me making suggestions , it’s put in a folder [ on her PC ] called ‘‘wishes . ’’ I made a presentation at a workshop with the IT department , titled ‘‘Wishes from our side , ’’ and it was based on what suggestions I had received . Table III . The IT - supporter’s repertoire of human - centered practices and activities Practice Activities comprising the practice ( examples ) Helping and supporting the project assistants – Instruct the assistants in how to set up ProjectWeb – Write user manuals – Coach individual assistants – Answer technical questions on an ad hoc basis Promoting knowledge sharing – Arrange monthly meetings to discuss IT - related issues – Encourage assistants to share tips and ideas with each other Establishing conventions of design – Lay down guidelines for allocating access rights to users – Keep an eye on how assistants design their web sites – Point out ‘‘design ﬂaws’’ and suggest better solu - tions j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 74 Q : Do you sort in them ? Yes , I prioritize them , at least Third , she participates in the design of new versions of ProjectWeb , acting as a representative of the project assistants and as a sparring partner to the programmers and analysts . As Trigg and Bødker ( 1994 ) have argued mediators are inevitably ‘‘border persons’’ and the reason for the IT - supporter’s critical role is her ability to act as a boundary spanner between the group of project assistants in PMU and the programmers and analysts in the IT department . She has , so to speak , a foot in both camps . Her oﬃce is situated in PMU , she is familiar with the work of the project assistants , and she knows their needs and wishes , their frustrations and their technical abilities ; but at the same time , she is able to understand and interact with the programmers and analysts , owing to her formal training and long experience with IT . Thus , we believe that without the help of the IT - supporter , the project assistants would not have succeeded as well in adapting the technology . The IT - supporter’s technology - centered mediation practices are summa - rized in Table IV . 5 . 2 . MAKING SENSE OF PROJECTWEB So far our account is in agreement with the existing , but limited , literature on technology - use mediation and supports the claim that ‘‘mediators add value by keeping technology usage aligned with user conditions and organizational circumstances’’ ( Orlikowski et al . 1995 , p . 442 ) . This is , however , not the whole story . By characterizing the mediators’ job as facilitating use , Orlikowski and others overlook the fact that mediators are not passive or neutral facilitators , but , on the contrary , actively involved in deﬁning what the technology is , how it should be used , for what purposes , and by whom . It is the essence of the mediator’s job to make sense of the technology – and this sensemaking is an active process where the mediator simultaneously enacts the technology and an environment in which it ﬁts . Our case shows that even when the ‘‘same’’ technology is implemented in similar projects in the same organization , it may be interpreted and used very diﬀerently by diﬀerent people . Thus , the project assistants have very diﬀerent conceptions of ProjectWeb and how it should be used . This is clearly reﬂected in the way they talk about it , the layout and content of their web sites , the way they choose to allocate access - and uploading rights , etc . And all this , of course , has important consequences for the usage of the system in the dif - ferent projects ( Henriksen et al . , 2002 ) . SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 75 In the following , we present two contrasting examples as a way of illus - tration . The ﬁrst project assistant , Jean ( a pseudonym ) , basically views ProjectWeb as a broadcast medium and this notion pervades her thinking about how to design , manage and use the project web sites , which she is responsible for . To the other project assistant , Maria ( a pseudonym ) , Pro - jectWeb is rather a type of groupware system , which may support coopera - tion and interaction in her projects . We have selected these cases because they represent two typical ways of conceptualizing and using ProjectWeb , and because Jean and Maria are both full of initiative and quite reﬂective persons . 5 . 2 . 1 . Enacting ProjectWeb as a Broadcast Medium Of all the project assistants , Jean is probably the one who is most articulate with regard to ProjectWeb . At a very early point in time , she had her own , relatively precise ideas about the nature of the technology and how she would adapt it . Later in the process , although she had reﬁned and elaborated her ideas , they had not changed substantially . Jean’s notion of ProjectWeb as a broadcast medium is bound up with her understanding of project manage - ment in BioCorp and her own role as project assistant . According to Jean , project management’s biggest challenge is to motivate people and create a common sense of identity among project members , who belong to diﬀerent organizational units , have several other projects to take care of , and are often distributed over ﬁve continents : It is a question of people management rather than project management , because once you get people on board , you can motivate them , and get them to all pull in the same direction , well , ya , then work becomes the least of it . Table IV . The IT - supporter’s repertoire of technology - centered practices and activities Practice Activities comprising the practice ( examples ) Performing diﬃcult adaptations – Set up new web sites – Carry out complex tailoring tasks – Identify and ﬁx technical problems Collecting requests for changes – Collect proposals from the project assistants – Systematize and save the proposals – Rate the proposals and pass them on to the IT department Participating in systems design – Participate in meetings and workshops with IT developers – Act as a ‘‘representative’’ of the project assistants j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 76 She believes that the best way to motivate people is by keeping them well informed about what happens in the project . ‘‘Because information equals motivation , as we say . ’’ As a result , she attaches great importance to broadly disseminating information about important results , events and decisions within her projects . She sees herself as the person responsible for project communication and she loves to be the center of attention : So , they [ the project members ] are used to that information comes from me . They always contact me and ask about almost anything . I’m the only one who can answer or otherwise I know who can answer . This is the part of the job that is most fun . Given Jean’s self - concept and her notion of project management , it is hardly surprising that she conceptualizes ProjectWeb as a broadcast medium , which can be used to facilitate a steady stream of information from the core group in corporate headquarters to all project members , irrespective of their geo - graphical location or position in the organizational hierarchy . For instance , she makes a point of keeping not just managers , but also secretaries , labo - ratory technicians , etc . in the loop . To Jean , ProjectWeb is simply ‘‘the ultimate project communication tool , ’’ more eﬃcient than traditional com - munication media and much more eﬀective and interesting than other elec - tronic media like email ( which is limited to text ) : It has simply got something to do with the underlying philosophy about project communication . And ProjectWeb has clearly demonstrated that it is an ideal communication tool , because you have the possibility of using graphics to make things a bit more lively – and this can include , what shall I say , the hard facts such as decisions made by top management , or it can be a picture from a seminar that we’ve just had . So , it is very mixed , but the information goes out to everyone . In a later interview , she directly compared ProjectWeb to mass media like TV and newspapers : Imagine , eh , what newspaper do you prefer , Information or Jyllandsposten [ two Danish newspapers ] ? Something loaded with text or something with pictures ? It’s obvious , you can better relate to things with pictures . The more , the better . ( . . . ) You can also see , all that happened last week in the U . S . What did people do ? Did they read the papers or sit glued in front of CNN and BBC World ? Pictures say more than a thousand words . Jean thinks of herself as a ‘‘webmaster . ’’ She provides virtually all the content on her project web sites , she decides how to edit and present it , and she even writes signiﬁcant portions of it herself . She strives to make her web sites dynamic , lively and interesting places to visit , for instance by regularly publishing news about the project : SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 77 We really want it to be a living forum , so people know that we regularly update the site and that it’s worthwhile visiting it . They should have it as a ‘‘favorite’’ [ bookmark ] , which they check every day to see if ‘‘there is something new . ’’ ( . . . ) News , it could be case stories . They’re very good . A case is when a doctor contacts BioCorp and says , ‘‘we’ve used this product and it really helped . ’’ We send it out in the organization , and everyone cheers . She has also thought a great deal about the notion of ‘‘organizational sto - rytelling’’ and how stories can be used to motivate people and create shared feelings of identity : I recently got a hold of this book . It’s called ‘‘Organizational Storytelling . ’’ Exactly . How one goes about building the employees’ sense of identity . As a consequence of these deliberations , she has asked key persons to write stories about important events , hardships and victories in their projects’ histories . As an example , she refers to the story about the product Gamma ( a pseudonym ) : how a single , heroic researcher – despite the skepticism of her colleagues and the reluctance of her superiors – believed so much in her idea that she succeeded in overcoming all obstacles and creating a new miraculous drug , which turned out to be a very lucrative business : Because there is a history behind this here gamma - product , and it is actually a researcher that has fought it through . ( . . . ) Because it was actually her , her alone – that is the interesting part , when you have a product that can be associated with one person . One thing is , you have a company that develops and introduces a product , but when there is only one person behind it all . It’s such a unique story that isn’t , so that ya , we shouldn’t miss a chance at . . . , at focusing on it . By publishing such moving stories , Jean hopes to raise the spirit of the project members and motivate them to work extra hard to achieve their common goals . In short , Jean’s interest in ProjectWeb lies in its aﬀordances as a broadcast medium , which may facilitate communication from the center ( project management ) to the periphery ( project members ) . In practice , this means that Jean positions herself as the central gatekeeper who controls the access to publishing information on the project web sites . Consistently , Jean categorically dismisses the idea that ProjectWeb could function as a platform for the exchange of documents and working papers among members of the many work teams , which make up a project . Asked directly , Jean answers : j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 78 It goes out by mail . It goes out by mail . It goes out by mail . You shouldn’t use the web for this . There is no reason to put drafts or working papers on the web . People have to go out there and download it , instead of just opening their mail . ( . . . ) I know , I’ve heard it before all that about the ﬂow of documents . But I think – I won’t use the word foolish – but I think it is extremely cumbersome . Really , I can’t see why it [ the web ] should be used for this , but it’s probably only me who hasn’t seen the light [ and then she laughs heartily ] . With this answer , Jean clearly conﬁrms that she deﬁnes ProjectWeb as a broadcast medium – and nothing else . 5 . 2 . 2 . Enacting ProjectWeb as a Groupware System The second project assistant , Maria , is more tentative and explorative in her approach to ProjectWeb and it is more diﬃcult for her to describe exactly what ProjectWeb means to her . Although she recognizes the advantages of using ProjectWeb to broadcast information , she is primarily interested in exploring how ProjectWeb can be used to support collaboration within distributed work groups , for instance by facilitating document sharing and co - authoring : It’s mostly documents we use it for – for exchanging information in the form of documents that go back and forth [ between the project partici - pants ] . She further explained that she regards the project web site as a ‘‘common place’’ and that it is a shared responsibility to ensure that the content is correct and up to date : But at the same time it [ ProjectWeb ] gives us a place where we can share information – something which wouldn’t have been possible , if we didn’t have it . When something is put there , then it is no longer theirs but everyone’s . So , we all have responsibility for making sure that the right things are there . Undoubtedly , the reason for Maria’s interest in using ProjectWeb to support document sharing has ( at least partly ) to do with the fact that her projects are joint ventures involving close collaboration with partners in the U . S . as well as several European countries . BioCorp demands that all emails , which are sent outside the company’s intranet , must be encrypted if they contain conﬁdential information . This rule makes it very cumbersome to exchange documents by means of mail attachments ( which is otherwise a common practice in Bio - Corp ) . Therefore , Maria sees ProjectWeb as a good alternative to email : But it is also because we at BioCorp have had it beaten into our brains how dangerous it is to send documents by mail . It [ the project web site ] is a much SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 79 safer place to exchange documents than by throwing them in a fax or sending them around by mail . And we don’t ﬁll our mailboxes either , or get the nasty messages about taking up too much space , because we’ve put it on the web instead . We’re very happy with it . I think it is really well suited . And we don’t have to cryptograph and pack it and send passwords all over the place , so it works really well . The result is that ProjectWeb is widely used to share information and docu - ments within the projects’ work teams ( which in most cases encompass people from several organizations ) . One of the team managers explained , for instance , how they use it to share drafts of documents they are working on : We have just , in connection with the pulmonary project , gotten a new web , which means that we have a web [ site ] with those we cooperate with in the U . S . And we use it to upload documents that are draft versions , and for review , where everyone can go in and see the same document . ( . . . ) In that case we simply use it to download documents and say ‘‘now we can all look at the same thing at the same time , ’’ instead of having to attach it to an email and of having the document cryptographed and of having to remember the code and what not . We have simply created a web where only key people have access . This practice is , of course , only possible , because Maria ( unlike Jean ) has chosen to distribute uploading rights to project members with the need to share documents . Another important factor is that version 3 of ProjectWeb includes a new facility , which allows authors to restrict read ( and write ) access to the documents they upload to the project web site . Without this aﬀordance , Pro - jectWeb would not be a feasible alternative to email attachments . A project member explained why work group members would not want ‘‘outsiders’’ to read their drafts and working papers : I too think that there is something psychological in uploading something that isn’t quite ﬁnished , or if there is to be a discussion among some people . It has to be a little bit private . That’s one aspect of it , you don’t want to embarrass yourself in front of a large audience by sending something out that is only half - ﬁnished – nor do you want to risk that someone visits the site and reads documents that may not even be correct . One could go in and quote some data that turn out to be wrong because it [ the document ] isn’t completely ﬁnished . That was the second risk , and the third risk is that it gets real messy if there are hundreds of small , half - completed documents lying around . ( . . . ) They have to be taken away and only be accessible to an inner circle . But it is also because information can be misused , not on purpose , but simply because people think that it is correct , if they can access it . j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 80 The problem for Maria and her co - workers is that ProjectWeb is not really designed to support collaboration . There are , for instance , no facilities for version control or for locking documents ( to prevent the ‘‘lost update problem , ’’ which occurs when two people collaborating on a single document overwrite each other’s work ( Fielding et al . , 1998 ) ) . Such issues must be solved via agreements and rules regulating the use of the system . For in - stance , Maria told us that she and her ‘‘counterpart’’ in one of the partner companies had negotiated a set of rules for updating the project plan ( a very important document used to coordinate activities across the entire project ) : But then we agreed that it was only me and my counterpart in the American company that could do it [ correct the project plan ] . Also , be - cause it would not be practical if more downloaded a document and worked on it at the same time . So the way that we do it is that when you download a document you also delete it from the web site . You make your corrections and upload it again . ( . . . ) Then we know , if it is gone , then someone is in the process of updating it . Of course , the missing mechanisms to support coordination make it diﬃcult to use ProjectWeb for collaboration , but , nevertheless , Maria and her co - workers are satisﬁed with it and ﬁnd it very useful . In summary , Maria has a strikingly diﬀerent conception of ProjectWeb than Jean . According to Maria ProjectWeb is a kind of ‘‘groupware system’’ and its prime importance lies in its ability to support collaboration among project members , across distance and organizational boundaries . This also means that Maria and Jean focus on diﬀerent aﬀordances of ProjectWeb and this appears to be linked to how they ‘‘see’’ themselves and their role in the organization . While Jean primarily pays attention to the facilities , which enable her to create visually attractive web content and disseminate it on a broad scale , Maria focuses more on the facilities , which make it possible for project members to share information and documents in a secure , private and relatively easy way . 6 . Discussion : Technology Adaptation and Sensemaking This study supports some earlier research ﬁndings regarding technology - use mediation ( Gantt and Nardi , 1992 ; Trigg and Bødker , 1994 ; Orlikowski et al . 1995 ) . First , mediators play a signiﬁcant role in organizations by facilitating the ongoing , mutual adaptation between particular technologies and the speciﬁc organizational context . Second , to facilitate this adaptation process , mediators employ a broad repertoire of diﬀerent practices , some of which aim at modifying the technology ( see Tables II and IV ) , while others aim at helping users and forming appropriate conventions of use ( see Tables I and III ) . Third , mediation is usually a collective process , involving people with SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 81 diﬀerent backgrounds and skills . Fourth , mediators ( as a group ) act as boundary spanners , connecting the communities of users and IT people . They work on the borders between technology development and use and it is their proximity to the context of use that enables them to ‘‘develop solutions that actually work’’ ( Trigg and Bødker , 1994 , p . 52 ) . More importantly , however , the study also provides some new insights into technology - use mediation . The ﬁndings highlight the fact that advanced CSCW technologies are equivocal and open - ended , i . e . they allow for several possible ( and plausible ) interpretations and they can be used for many dif - ferent purposes . These technologies are equivocal , not just because they make limited sense , but also , and maybe more importantly , because they make ‘‘many diﬀerent kinds of sense’’ ( Weick , 2001a , p . 148 ) . For instance , when ProjectWeb was ﬁrst introduced to the development projects in BioCorp , common interpretations of the technology included the following : ‘‘a graphic version of email , ’’ ‘‘an alternative to the LAN drives , ’’ ‘‘an electronic doc - ument management system , ’’ ‘‘some kind of library or archive , ’’ ‘‘a fantastic communication tool’’ for widely disseminating information , and ‘‘a common space where we can share information . ’’ Thus , the problem is that there are ‘‘too many meanings , not too few’’ ( Weick , 1995 , p . 27 ) . The problem is confusion created by multiple meanings , not unawareness per se . Because new CSCW technologies are equivocal and open - ended , they require ongoing sensemaking if they are to be managed , contextualized and adapted to changing conditions of use . In other words , to carry out their project , mediators must construct a plausible and meaningful vision of how the technology should be used in their local context . This involves two distinct , but intimately related tasks . They must , on the one hand , explore the aﬀordances of the technology to determine its potential uses and limitations . On the other hand , they must clarify the values , priorities , preferences and needs of the local use context . Clearly , this is not just a matter of discovery or interpretation ( of the technological artifact ) , but also of invention and social construction ( of the technology - in - practice ) , and related to the mediator’s own situation . For instance , one of the issues Jean and Maria had to address was how ProjectWeb should ﬁt in with the existing communication media in the company , including tele - phones , email , LAN drives , ftp and video conferencing . Was ProjectWeb essentially a one - way , broadcast technology or should it rather be viewed as an interactive medium , supporting two - way communication ? Should it replace ﬁle sharing via email or the existing LAN drives or should it only be used to disseminate news , information and oﬃcial documents from project management ? As we know , Jean and Maria reached very diﬀerent conclusions with regard to these and other questions . The case study draws attention to the fact that technology - use mediation is a sensemaking process that unfolds gradually over time as mediators learn j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 82 how to match the aﬀordances of the technology with the users’ ( evolving ) needs . In the beginning neither Jean nor Maria had a clear idea about the nature of ProjectWeb , what aﬀordances the new technology had , or how to adapt and use it in their projects . It was only by working with the technology that they gradually came to make sense of it and ﬁgure out how to contex - tualize and manage it . Jean stated it succinctly in one of her interviews : We’ve learned over time what it can be used for , both seen from our and the users’ perspective . So , it is a question of how things inﬂuence each other so that requirements , needs and technology all mesh and it develops along the way in the course of things . It was an action - driven process , a kind of ‘‘learning by doing , ’’ in which experimentation and retrospective sensemaking continually interacted and conditioned each other . Jean and Maria acted in order to think . They did not start by analyzing the technology , specifying the requirements of the use situation and making a plan . Instead , they simply began setting up the technology , deﬁning roles and promoting its adoption . In the beginning , their actions were informed by hunches and intuition rather than knowledge and well - developed visions . They had , of course , some initial images of the technology and ideas of how it might be used , but these images and ideas were highly ambiguous , underdeveloped and unclear . For instance , in our ﬁrst interview with Jean , she ﬂuctuated between characterizing ProjectWeb as a ‘‘communication tool’’ ( in the sense of a broadcast medium used to dis - seminate information from project management ) and as an ‘‘information tool’’ or electronic library , open 24 h a day , 7 days a week . It was not until they looked behind at what they had created and saw how people reacted to it and used it that they began to develop more precise and complete images of what ProjectWeb meant and what it could be used to accomplish : It is therefore important to get some user feedback . What is it that they really need ? Because the longer you use it , and luckily we’ve used it from the beginning , you ﬁnd out just what it is that people need . And of course , there are diﬀerent needs and diﬀerent uses , but one thing for sure is that the better we are at accommodating those who use it [ ProjectWeb ] , the more [ people ] will end up using it . An essential ingredient of successful technology - use mediation must neces - sarily be open - minded experimentation , probing , and trial and error , because the full range of a technology’s aﬀordances does not become manifest until people begin to exploit them ( Hutchby , 2001a ) and because it is never clear what the local needs and requirements are ( or how they will evolve once the new technology is introduced ) . In this situation , action is a precondition for SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 83 sensemaking . By acting , that is , by setting up the technology in a certain way and trying to shape how people use it , the mediators create an emerging technology - in - practice that they can then try to grasp and manage . This is an example of what Weick ( 1995 ) calls ‘‘sensemaking as manipulation : ’’ Manipulation is an operationalization of the advice , ‘‘leap before you look’’ or the advice , ‘‘ready , ﬁre , aim . ’’ Manipulation is about making things happen , so that a person can then pounce on those created things and try to explain them as a way to get a better sense of what is happening . ( Weick , 1995 , p . 168 ) Here , the focus is on the meaningful consequences of the action and the creation of an environment in which the new technology becomes appro - priate , sensible and useful . The notion of sensemaking as manipulation emphasizes that technology - use mediation is a process of enactment , i . e . a process where the mediators ‘‘act out and real - ize their ideas’’ ( Weick 2001c , p . 195 ) . The mediators in the case were not passive observers or interpreters of a self - evident technological artifact that presented itself to them as given and ﬁxed . On the contrary , the mediators actually took part in creating the technology by deﬁning what it meant and how it should be used . For instance , Jean deﬁned ProjectWeb as a broadcast medium while Maria considered it to be a groupware system . In both cases they simultaneously constructed and interpreted their own tech - nology - in - practice . Weick refer to this interplay of construction and inter - pretation as enactment to stress the fact that , in organizational life , ‘‘people often produce part of the environment they face’’ ( Weick , 1995 , p . 30 ) . They take some action or get involved in something in order to change what is happening , and the consequences of their actions – unintended as well as intended – becomes part of the ‘‘reality’’ they have to deal with later . A good example of this is the way in which Jean established ProjectWeb in her projects . Because she considered ProjectWeb to be a broadcast medium , Jean restricted the number of people with uploading rights to a minimum , namely to herself and members of the core group 2 ( a total of 22 people out of 413 with access to the web site ) . She also deﬁned herself as ‘‘webmaster’’ and organized the publishing process so that virtually all material would pass through her hands before it was published . In this way , she created a situ - ation where ProjectWeb was used for one - way , top - down communication only . The eﬀect was that ordinary project members perceived ProjectWeb to be a broadcast medium controlled by project management and consequently adopted a rather passive role , as receivers of information . Jean , in turn , interpreted their passivity as a general lack of need for or interest in using ProjectWeb to support more distributed and interactive communication patterns : j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 84 Q : Who can upload things ? Uh , potentially everyone can . We haven’t though . . . I will do it , if someone tells me ‘I would also like to upload news . ’ Then they will get access , but up until now no one has asked . But core group members are able to upload documents . And in principle , everyone can . But the need for it hasn’t come up yet . Q : They haven’t asked for it ? They haven’t asked for it , no . That’s correct . Q : But you haven’t just given it automatically ? Absolutely not . This is the way we manage , keeping tabs on it , with how it is actually used . But anyway , I mean , if we get a request , then they’ll be allowed . Simply because it is not that everyone comes up to us saying that they want to upload this and that . That’s not the way it works . It is more of a question of us having to sell the system than it is a question of people standing ready to pounce on it , right . In this way , Jean enacted a self - fulﬁlling prophecy ( see Figure 3 ) . Her initial ideas about ProjectWeb led her to centralize the process of publishing infor - mation ; the result was that project members considered ProjectWeb to be a one - way , top - down communication medium ; consequently they remained passive ; and their reaction , in turn , conﬁrmed Jean’s original expectations . Project members adopt a passive role vis - à - vis ProjectWeb Project members perceive ProjectWeb as a broadcast technology ‘owned’ by project management ProjectWeb is used as a top - down , one - way communi - cation medium Jean defines herself as “webmaster” and is very reluc - tant to give uploading rights to others Jean perceives ProjectWeb as a broadcast technology Figure 3 . Technology - use mediation and self - fulﬁlling prophecies . SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 85 Her expectations were conﬁrmed , not only because she ﬁltered information and saw what she expected to see , but also – and more importantly – because she had created an environment , which conformed to her initial ideas ( how - ever vague and unclear they were ) . Weick ( 1995 ) summarizes the process this way : When people ‘‘act on their expectations , they may enact what they predict will be there . And when they see what they have enacted , using their predictions as a lens , they often conﬁrm their prediction’’ ( p . 152 ) . Our point is not that self - fulﬁlling prophecies are inevitable or that the cycle of expectation and conﬁrmation shown in Figure 3 will keep repeating itself indeﬁnitely . Obviously , that will rarely be the case . There are several points where the cycle can be broken , for instance if project members learn about how ProjectWeb is used in other projects and start questioning the ‘‘broadcasting’’ frame . Our point is simply that expectations play a crucial role in the practice of the mediators , because they guide not only their interpretations of what is happening but also their ‘‘experiments’’ and interventions in the situation . Mediators of a new , open - ended technology like ProjectWeb do not have much ﬁrm knowledge to start with when their goal is to ‘‘ﬁgure out’’ what kind of technology they are dealing with and how to use it . This means that ‘‘their expectations cannot help but be a force that shapes the world they try to size up’’ ( Weick , 1995 , p . 148 ) . This reliance on anticipations and hypotheses – no matter how unfounded , speculative or tentative they may be – is reinforced by the fact that there is an imperative to act . Sensemaking , in this situation , is not a ‘‘scientiﬁc’’ process , in which a detached observer seeks to arrive at an ‘‘accurate’’ or ‘‘correct’’ description of the technology . Rather , the mediators must be pragmatic and simply seek to establish a plausible image of the technology that will allow them to get on with their project . The problem is , of course , that once a plausible image of the technology begins to develop , that image can be ‘‘terribly seductive’’ and therefore resist change and revision ( Weick , 2001d , p . 460 ) . It is also important to understand that sensemaking is ‘‘grounded in identity construction’’ ( Weick , 1995 , p . 18 ) . The sensemaker’s awareness of who he or she is , what threatens his or her identity and what is available to enhance and conﬁrm this concept of self all ‘‘provide a center from which judgments of relevance and sense fan out’’ ( Weick , 2001d , p . 461 ) . 3 For instance , Jean’s enactment of ProjectWeb as a broadcast medium was clearly linked to her identity as ‘‘the person responsible for communication’’ in her projects . She was very fond of this self - concept and when she became responsible for managing ProjectWeb , she created a new role for herself as ‘‘webmaster , ’’ which maintained and conﬁrmed her sense of identity . And as time went , this new role became a more and more integral part of her identity . An important consequence of this process of identiﬁcation was that she became so connected with her image of ProjectWeb as a broadcast medium that she eventually refused alternative viewpoints : j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 86 By deﬁnition we don’t discuss the ProjectWeb . Did that a long time ago . You can see web sites where the last news is from 1999 , and you can get the opposite extreme , where things are put up on an almost daily basis . So , we can’t discuss it . It is given much diﬀerent priority among the managers and the [ project ] assistants . There are , all in all , many things that can’t be discussed , because of the diﬀerences in opinion as to what project man - agement is all about . Seen from the perspective of the organization , this situation is , of course highly problematic , but it helps explain how two markedly diﬀerent version of ProjectWeb ( as technology - in - practice ) could co - exist over a sustained period of time within the same organization . It illustrates how the interplay between the dual processes of identiﬁcation and enactment may , in some cases , reduce learning and work against the exploration of new ideas and alternative solutions . 7 . Conclusion The reported research has conﬁrmed that technology - use mediation can play an important role in organizations by facilitating the implementation and use of new CSCW technologies . The ongoing user support and contextualization of the technology performed by mediators can promote eﬀective electronic communication and collaboration as user needs , preferences , and conditions change over time . At the same time , however , this study indicates that the practice of tech - nology - use mediation is much more complex than prior research suggests . Because advanced CSCW technologies are equivocal and open - ended , ongoing sensemaking is an essential , but usually overlooked , aspect of the mediation process . The notion of sensemaking draws attention to the fact that the practice of technology - use mediation is highly situated , contingent , and conditioned by the knowledge , experience , and identity of the mediators . It is a process of learning , exploration and construction , which is essentially open - ended and indeterminate . For example , this study demonstrates how diﬀerent mediators – dependent on their identity , previous experience , and local cir - cumstances – may develop very diﬀerent interpretations of the ‘‘same’’ tech - nology and , in eﬀect , enact strikingly diﬀerent technologies - in - practice . In other words , there is no guarantee that the process of technology - use mediation will lead to consensus about the ‘‘nature’’ of the technology , or that it will necessarily result in an ‘‘optimal’’ use of the technology . On the contrary , one should not ignore the risk that the process may lead to the establishment and institutionalization of use patterns that – seen from an organizational or management point of view – are sub - optimal or even counterproductive . SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 87 Our study shows that mediators can exert considerable inﬂuence on the adoption and use of a particular technology . Little is known , however , about how power and politics inﬂuence the mediation process ( and vice versa ) , or about how best to organize and manage the process so that organizational goals and priorities are met . Undoubtedly , this will to a large degree depend on the characteristics of the technology ( e . g . how novel and how ﬂexible it is ) and the speciﬁcs of the organizational setting ( e . g . the size and structure of the unit , previous experience with similar technologies , management style , and organizational culture ) . Thus , further research should pay more atten - tion to power and aim at understanding how to support , organize and manage the work of technology - use mediation under diﬀerent technological , organizational and cultural circumstances to make it as innovative and eﬀective as possible . In this paper , we have tried to provide a fresh theoretical perspective on technology adaptation by combining Weick’s notion of sensemaking with the concept of aﬀordances developed by Hutchby . We believe that our exami - nation of the ProjectWeb experience highlights the investigative value of this perspective . It allowed us to develop an understanding of how mediators cope with the inherent ambiguities and uncertainties associated with the introduction of new technologies . The notion of sensemaking provides a particularly powerful analytic lens because it keeps together thinking and action . The sensemaking perspective foregrounds meaning , but it also re - minds us that while expectations and beliefs guide and inform action , they are themselves the products of action . When people enact their ideas , they make things happen and set events in motion , which in turn generate new contextual cues , create new opportunities for constructing meaning , and lead to new actions . Notes 1 . The term aﬀordance is widely used within the ﬁelds of industrial design , human - computer interaction and CSCW and ‘‘has taken on a life far beyond the original meaning’’ ( Norman , 2005 ) . However , our use of the term is based on the work of the British sociologist Ian Hutchby ( Hutchby , 2001a , b , 2003 ; Rappert , 2003 ) and diﬀers from the common use in HCI and CSCW in that it is much closer to the original deﬁni - tion . The concept of aﬀordance was ﬁrst introduced by the American psychologist James J . Gibson ( 1977 , 1979 ) to refer to the possibilities for action , which objects in the world oﬀer to diﬀerent species ( humans or animals ) . ‘‘The aﬀordances of the environment are what it oﬀers the animal , what it provides or furnishes , either for good or ill’’ ( Gibson , 1979 , p . 127 ) . According to Gibson , these aﬀordances are objectively measurable and exist independently of the individual’s ability to recognize them . Within HCI and other design - oriented ﬁelds the term has taken on a new meaning and denotes perceived aﬀor - dance as opposed to real or objective aﬀordance . For instance , Donald Norman ( 1988 ) , in his inﬂuential book The Design of Everyday Things , uses the term to describe the j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 88 properties of a designed object ( e . g . a door handle ) which indicate how that object can be used . 2 . It was a general request from PMU management that core group members should have uploading rights , but few core group members in Jean’s projects uploaded anything . 3 . At the same time , it should be stressed that sensemaking is basically a social process . Identity is constituted out of the process of interaction and sensemaking is always inﬂu - enced by the actual , implied or imagined presence of others . Sensible meanings tend to be those for which there is social support ( Weick , 1995 ) . Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the members of BioCorp who participated in this research , as well as the editor and anonymous reviewers for their valuable suggestions on an earlier version of this paper . Special thanks also to Hanne W . Nicolajsen , Dixi L . Henriksen and Jens K . Pors for their assistance in the ﬁeldwork . This study was supported in part by a grant from the Danish Research Councils ( grant no . 99 - 00 - 092 ) . References Andriessen , J . H . E . , M . Hettinga and V . Wulf ( 2003 ) : Introduction to Special Issue on Evolving Use of Groupware . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 12 , no . 4 , pp . 367 – 380 . Balkovich , E . , S . Lerman and R . P . Parmelee ( 1985 ) : Computing in Higher Education : the Athena Experience . Communications of the ACM , vol . 11 , no . 28 , pp . 112 – 124 . Barley , S . ( 1986 ) : Technology as an Occasion for Structuring : Evidence from Observations of CAT Scanners and the Social Order of Radiology Departments . Administrative Science Quarterly , vol . 31 , 78 – 108 . Bowers , J . ( 1994 ) : The work to make a network work : studying CSCW in action , CSCW ’94 Proceedings , pp . 287 – 298 . Ciborra , C . U . ( 1996 ) : What Does Groupware Mean For the Organizations Hosting It ? In C . U . Ciborra ( eds . ) : Groupware & Teamwork , Wiley , pp . 1 – 19 . Cortes , M . ( 2000 ) : A Coordination Language for Building Collaborative Applications . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 9 , no . 1 , pp . 5 – 32 . Dourish , P . and E . W . Keith ( 2000 ) : A Tale of Two Toolkits : Relating Infrastructure and Use in Flexible CSCW Toolkits . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 9 , no . 1 , pp . 293 – 334 . Ellis , C . and K . Keddara ( 2000 ) : ML - DEWS : Modeling Language to Support Dynamic Evo - lution Within Workﬂow Systems . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 9 , no . 3 – 4 , pp . 33 – 52 . Fielding , R . T . , E . Whitehead Jr . , K . M . Anderson , G . A . Bolcer , P . Oreizy and R . N . Taylor ( 1998 ) : Web - Based Development of Complex Information Products . Communications of the ACM , vol . 41 , no . 8 , pp . 84 – 92 . SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 89 Gantt , M . and Nardi , B . A . ( 1992 ) : Gardeners and Gurus : Patterns of Cooperation Among CAD Users . Proceedings of CHI’92 , AMC : 107 – 117 . Gibson , J . J . ( 1977 ) : The theory of aﬀordances . In R . E . Shaw and J . Bransford ( eds . ) : Perceiving , Acting , and Knowing . , Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Gibson , J . J . ( 1979 ) : The Ecological Approach to Perception . London , UK : Houghton Miﬄin . Henriksen , D . L . , H . W . Nicolajsen and J . K . Pors ( 2002 ) : Towards variation or uniformity ? Comparing technology - use mediations of web - based groupware . Proceedings of ECIS 2002 , June 6 – 8 , Gdansk , Poland , pp . 1174 – 1184 . Hummes , J . and B . Merialdo ( 2000 ) : Design of Extensible Component - Based Groupware . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 9 , no . 1 , pp . 53 – 74 . Hutchby , I . ( 2001a ) : Technologies , Texts and Aﬀordances . Sociology , vol . 35 , no . 2 , pp . 441 – 456 . Hutchby , I . ( 2001b ) : Conversation and Technology . Cambridge , UK : Polity Press . Hutchby , I . ( 2003 ) : Aﬀordances and the Analysis of Technologically Mediated Interaction : A Response to Brian Rappert . Sociology , vol . 37 , no . 3 , pp . 581 – 589 . Klein , H . K . and M . D . Myers ( 1999 ) : A Set of Principles for Conducting and Evaluating Interpretive Field Studies in Information Systems . MIS Quarterly , vol . 23 , no . 1 , pp . 67 – 94 . Koch , M . ( 1995 ) : Design Issues and Model for a Distributed Multi - user Editor . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 3 , no . 3 – 4 , pp . 359 – 378 . Kraut , R . E . , R . E . Rice , C . Cool and R . S . Fish ( 1998 ) : Varieties of Social Inﬂuence : The Role of Utility and Norms in the Success of a New Communication Medium . Organization Science , vol . 9 , no . 4 , pp . 437 – 453 . Mackay , W . ( 1990 ) : Patterns of sharing customizable software . CSCW 90 Proceedings , pp . 209 – 221 . MacLean , A . , K . Carter , L . Lovstrand and T . Moran ( 1990 ) : User - tailorable systems : pressing the issues with buttons . CHI ’90 Proceedings , pp . 175 – 182 . Majchrzak , A . , R . E . Rice , A . Malhotra , N . King and S . Ba ( 2000 ) : Technology Adaptation : The Case of a Computer - Supported Inter - Organizational Virtual Team . MIS Quarterly , vol . 24 , no . 4 , pp . 569 – 600 . Malone , T . , K . - Y . Lai and C . Fry ( 1995 ) : Experiments With Oval : A Radically Tailorable Tool for Cooperative Work . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , vol . 13 , no . 2 , pp . 175 – 205 . Mark , G . ( 2002 ) : Conventions and Commitments in Distributed CSCW Groups . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 11 , 349 – 387 . Myers , M . D . ( 1997 ) : Qualitative Research in Information Systems . MISQ Discovery , http : www . misq . org / discovery / MISQD _ isworld / index . html Nardi , B . A . and Miller , J . ( 1990 ) . An ethnographic study of distributed problem solving in spreadsheet development . CSCW ’90 Proceedings , pp . 197 – 208 . Ngwenyama , O . K . ( 1998 ) : Groupware , Social Action and Organizational Emergence : On the Process Dynamics of Computer Mediated Distributed Work . Accounting , Management and Information Technology , vol . 8 , , 127 – 146 . Norman , D . ( 1988 ) : The Psychology of Everyday Things . New York , NY : Basic Books . Norman , D . ( 2005 ) : Aﬀordances and Design , viewed 23 November 2005 , < http : / / www . jnd . org / dn . mss / aﬀordances _ and _ desi . html > . Okamura , K , M . Fujimoto , W . J . Orlikowski and J . Yates ( 1994 ) : Helping CSCW applications succeed : the role of mediators in the context of use . CSCW ’94 Proceedings , pp . 55 – 65 . Orlikowski , W . J . ( 2000 ) : Using Technology and Constituting Structures : A Practice Lens for Studying Technology in Organizations . Organization Science , vol . 11 , no . 4 , pp . 404 – 428 . j Ø rgen p . bansler & erling havn 90 Orlikowski , W . J . , J . Yates , K . Okamura and M . Fujimoto ( 1995 ) : Shaping Electronic Communication : The Metastructuring of Technology in the Context of Use . Organization Science , vol . 6 , no . 4 , pp . 423 – 444 . Porac , J . F . , H . Thomas and C . Baden - Fuller ( 1989 ) : Competitive Groups as Cognitive Communities : The Case of Scottish Knitwear Manufacturers . Journal of Management Studies , vol . 26 , , 397 – 416 . Rappert , B . ( 2003 ) : Technologies , Texts and Possibilities : A Reply to Hutchby . Sociology , vol . 37 , no . 3 , pp . 565 – 580 . Ring , P . S . and A . H . Van de Ven ( 1989 ) : Formal and informal dimensions of transactions . In A . H . Van de Ven , H . L . Angle and M . S . Poole ( eds . ) : Research on the Management of Innovation : The Minnesota Studies . New York , NY : Ballinger . Teege , G . ( 2000 ) : Users as Composers : Parts and Features as a Basis for Tailorability in CSCW Systems . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 9 , no . 1 , pp . 101 – 122 . Trigg , R . and S . Bødker ( 1994 ) : From implementation to design : tailoring and the emergence of systematization in CSCW , CSCW ‘94 Proceedings , pp . 45 – 54 . Walsham , G . ( 1993 ) : Interpretive Case Studies in IS Research : Nature and Method . European Journal of Information Systems , vol . 4 , 74 – 81 . Wasserschaﬀ , M . and R . Bentley ( 1997 ) : Supporting Cooperation Through Customisation : The Tviews Approach . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 6 , no . 4 , pp . 305 – 325 . Weick , K . ( 1993 ) : The Collapse of Sensemaking in Organizations : The Mann Gulch Disaster . Administrative Science Quarterly , vol . 38 , no . 4 , pp . 628 – 652 . Weick , K . ( 1995 ) : Sensemaking in Organizations . Sage Publications . Weick , K . ( 2001a ) : Technology as equivoque : sensemaking in new technologies . In K . Weick ( ed . ) : Making Sense of the Organization , Blackwell Publishers , Oxford . ( Originally published in P . S . Goodman and L . Sproull ( eds . ) : Technology and Organization . San Francisco , CA : Jossey Bass , 1990 ) . Weick , K . ( 2001b ) : Organizational redesign as improvisation . In K . Weick ( ed . ) : Making Sense of the Organization , Blackwell Publishers , Oxford . ( Originally published in G . P . Huber and W . H . Glick ( eds . ) : Organizational Change and Redesign . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1993 ) . Weick , K . ( 2001c ) : Enactment processes in organizations . In K . Weick ( ed . ) : Making Sense of the Organization , Oxford : Blackwell Publishers ( Originally published in B . Shaw and G . Salanck ( eds . ) : New Directions in Organizational Behavior , Chicago , IL : St Clair , 1977 ) . Weick , K . ( 2001d ) : Sensemaking as an organizational dimension of global change . In K . Weick ( ed . ) : Making Sense of the Organization , Oxford : Blackwell Publishers ( Originally published in J . Dutton and D . Cooperrider ( eds . ) : The Human Dimensions of Global Change . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications , 1999 ) . Weick , K . ( 2003 ) : Enacting an environment : the infrastructure of organizing . In R . Westwood and S . R . Clegg ( eds . ) : Debating Organization – Point - Counterpoint in Organization Studies . Oxford : Blackwell Publishers . Weick , K . , K . M . Sutcliﬀe and D . Obstfeld ( 2005 ) : Organizing and the Process of Sensemaking . Organization Science , vol . 16 , no . 4 , pp . 409 – 421 . Winograd , T . and F . Flores ( 1986 ) : Understanding Computers and Cognition : A New Foundation for Design . Norwood NJ : Ablex . SENSEMAKING IN TECHNOLOGY - USE MEDIATION 91