JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 208 No . 4 457 – 473 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201406120 JCB 457 Correspondence to Janis K . Burkhardt : jburkhar @ mail . med . upenn . edu Abbreviations used in this paper : APC , antigen - presenting cell ; CFSC , carboxy - fluorescein succinimidyl ester ; DC , dendritic cell ; ICAM - 1 , intracellular cell adhesion molecule 1 ; IMDM , Iscove’s modified Dulbecco’s medium ; IS , immuno - logical synapse ; LFA - 1 , leukocyte functional antigen 1 ; pMHC , peptide - bound major histocompatibility antigen ; TCR , T cell receptor ; WT , wild type . Introduction T cell activation by antigen - presenting cells ( APCs ) requires the formation of a specialized cell – cell contact termed the immunological synapse ( IS ) , which facilitates the assembly of dynamic molecular signaling complexes . The T cell acto - myosin network plays a critical role in spatio - temporal regulation of IS organization ( Billadeau et al . , 2007 ; Burkhardt et al . , 2008 ) . Importantly , this network does not function as a static scaffold ; continued actin retrograde flow is required to maintain T cell signaling ( Babich et al . , 2012 ) . Recently , it has been suggested that cytoskeletal flow promotes signaling by exerting force on T cell signaling molecules that are bound to ligands on the sur - face of the APC ( Ma and Finkel , 2010 ; Springer and Dustin , 2012 ; Chen and Zhu , 2013 ) . Among the various activating and coactivating receptors on the surface of T cells , the T cell receptor ( TCR ) and the integ - rin leukocyte functional antigen 1 ( LFA - 1 ) have been proposed to act as mechanosensors , molecules that respond to physical force by changing conformation or initiating downstream sig - naling . Evidence that the TCR functions as a mechanosen - sor comes from conformational analysis of the TCR bound to activating antibodies , which shows that force applied tangen - tially to the peptide - bound major histocompatibility antigen ( pMHC ) / TCR bond can initiate downstream signaling ( Kim et al . , 2009 , 2012 ) . Moreover , multiple groups have observed that soluble monomeric pMHC is poorly suited to activating T cells , even at extremely high concentrations ( Boniface et al . , 1998 ; Hamad et al . , 1998 ; Casares et al . , 1999 ; Appel et al . , 2000 ; Cochran et al . , 2000 ) , despite TCR – pMHC half - lives otherwise associated with TCR triggering in a 2D environment ( Huppa et al . , 2010 ) , whereas surface - bound monomeric pMHC can trigger TCR activation in an F - actin – dependent manner ( Ma et al . , 2008 ; Xie et al . , 2012 ) . One interpretation of this find - ing is that forces on the TCR provided by the F - actin network , when opposed by surface - bound pMHC , produce a deformation in the TCR that induces signaling . Finally , agonist TCR – pMHC interactions have recently been found to engage in catch - bond type interactions in which force prolongs bond lifetime , and mechanically pulling on single pMHC – TCR bonds can initiate calcium signaling ( Liu et al . , 2014 ) . Mechanotransduction by the TCR remains controversial , and many details remain to be elucidated . In contrast , the role I ntegrity of the dendritic cell ( DC ) actin cytoskeleton is essential for T cell priming , but the underlying mecha - nisms are poorly understood . We show that the DC F - actin network regulates the lateral mobility of intracellular cell adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM - 1 ) , but not MHCII . ICAM - 1 mobility and clustering are regulated by maturation - induced changes in the expression and activation of moesin and  - actinin - 1 , which associate with actin filaments and the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic domain . Constrained ICAM - 1 mobility is important for DC function , as DCs expressing a high - mobility ICAM - 1 mutant lacking the cytoplasmic domain exhibit diminished antigen - dependent conjugate formation and T cell priming . These defects are associ - ated with inefficient induction of leukocyte functional antigen 1 ( LFA - 1 ) affinity maturation , which is consistent with a model in which constrained ICAM - 1 mobility op - poses forces on LFA - 1 exerted by the T cell cytoskeleton , whereas ICAM - 1 clustering enhances valency and further promotes ligand - dependent LFA - 1 activation . Our results reveal an important new mechanism through which the DC cytoskeleton regulates receptor activation at the immuno - logical synapse . The dendritic cell cytoskeleton promotes T cell adhesion and activation by constraining ICAM - 1 mobility William A . Comrie , Shuixing Li , Sarah Boyle , and Janis K . Burkhardt Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19102 © 2015 Comrie et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • volume 208 • numBer 4 • 2015 458 ( Kim et al . , 2003 ) , and inhibiting tail separation prevents cell spreading and protein phosphorylation downstream of the pro - totypic integrin  IIb  3 ( Zhu et al . , 2007 ) . To achieve tail separation and adoption of the extended - open conformation , pulling forces on the integrin  chain likely need to be opposed by retention forces on the integrin ligand . In support of this idea , Perez et al . ( 2003 ) showed that soluble ICAM - 1 fails to co - stimulate T cell priming . In agreement with this , glass - immobilized , but not soluble , ICAM - 1 triggers LFA - 1 to adopt the extended - open , signaling - competent conforma - tion ( Feigelson et al . , 2010 ) . Additionally , natural killer cells respond best to target cells when ICAM - 1 is highly clustered and immobile on the surface of the target ( Gross et al . , 2010 ) . Col - lectively , these studies indicate that ICAM - 1 mobility impacts integrin - based adhesion and signaling , and suggest that modula - tion of ICAM - 1 mobility on the APC surface may be an impor - tant variable in T cell activation . The importance of actin dynamics on the T cell side of the IS is well established , but much less is known about the func - tion of the dendritic cell ( DC ) F - actin network . DC maturation in response to inflammatory stimuli is associated with increased F - actin content and controlled changes in actin regulatory pro - teins . For example , LPS - induced maturation leads to robust up - regulation of the actin - bundling protein fascin ( Ross et al . , 2000 ) and activation of the severing protein cofilin ( Verdijk et al . , 2004 ) . In addition to regulating antigen uptake and migration , it is becoming clear that the DC cytoskeleton functions to pro - mote signaling events at the IS . F - actin and actin - binding pro - teins such as fascin reportedly accumulate at the IS ( Al - Alwan et al . , 2003 ) , and treatment of DCs with actin - depolymerizing agents impairs their ability to prime T cell responses ( Al - Alwan et al . , 2001 ) . Exactly how the DC cytoskeleton promotes T cell priming is unclear . One proposed mechanism involves T cell capture , a process that relies on signaling through Rho family GTPases ( Benvenuti et al . , 2004 ) . In keeping with this , DCs deficient for the Rho GTPase effector WASp exhibit fewer and shorter - lived contacts with cognate T cells , and a diminished ability to prime T cell proliferation ( Bouma et al . , 2011 ) . We now show that maturation - associated changes in the DC actin cytoskeleton function to restrain ICAM - 1 lateral mo - bility , a process that promotes affinity maturation of LFA - 1 on interacting T cells and lowers the threshold for T cell activation . These findings reveal a previously unrecognized function for the actin cytoskeleton at the DC side of the IS , whereby retention forces on T cell ligands modulate mechanosensing and force transduction by their cognate receptors on the T cell surface . Results Dendritic cells regulate the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 upon maturation The DC actin cytoskeleton has been shown to promote T cell priming , but the underlying mechanisms are unknown . In light of growing evidence that TCR and integrin activation at the IS involves mechano - transduction ( Kim et al . , 2009 ; Li et al . , 2010 ; O’Connor et al . , 2012 ; Springer and Dustin , 2012 ) , we reasoned that the DC cytoskeleton may promote the activation of force in integrin activation has been well established . Integ - rins are heterodimeric transmembrane proteins composed of an  and a  chain , and are the main adhesion receptors that sta - bilize T cell – APC contacts . In addition to acting as adhesion receptors , integrins can function as signaling molecules in a process termed “outside - in” signaling . Integrin adhesion and signaling functions occur coordinately , and together , these pro - cesses lower the threshold for T cell activation . For example , engagement of the  1 integrin very late antigen 4 ( VLA - 4 ) en - hances calcium mobilization and stimulation of the NF - AT pro - moter ( Nguyen et al . , 2008 ) . The canonical integrin involved in IS formation in naïve T cells is the  2 integrin LFA - 1 . Engage - ment of LFA - 1 enhances activation of key T cell signaling com - ponents such as PI3K , PLC  1 , ERK1 / 2 , JNK , and Src ( Ni et al . , 2001 ; Perez et al . , 2003 ; Li et al . , 2009 ) . The adapter molecule SLP - 76 also functions in outside - in integrin signaling , possibly by recruiting ADAP to sites of LFA - 1 engagement ( Baker et al . , 2009 ; Wang et al . , 2009 ) . Stronger activation of early signal - ing events upon co - stimulation through LFA - 1 has been shown to lead to enhanced IL - 2 production , T cell proliferation , and production of type 1 cytokines ( Perez et al . , 2003 ; Varga et al . , 2010 ) . Finally , it is known that intracellular cell adhesion mole - cule 1 ( ICAM - 1 ) expression on APCs is required for the proper generation of T cell memory responses ( Parameswaran et al . , 2005 ; Scholer et al . , 2008 ) . To tightly regulate adhesion and outside - in signaling , inte - grin activity is controlled through a series of conformational changes , relying on extracellular signals and ligand binding to modulate the affinity for ligand ( for review see Hogg et al . , 2011 ) . Integrins exist in three major conformational states . In resting T cells , they exist in a low affinity , “closed , ” conforma - tion in which the  and  chains are bent and the ligand binding I domain lies proximal to the plasma membrane . In a process is termed “inside - out signaling , ” external stimuli such as engage - ment of chemokine receptors or TCR induce the adoption of an intermediate affinity “extended” conformation in which the  and  chains are straight and the I domain is distal to the plasma membrane . This process depends in part upon association of talin and kindlins with the cytoplasmic tail of the  chain , re - lieving charge interactions with the  chain ( Tadokoro et al . , 2003 ; Feng et al . , 2012 ) . Finally , binding of ligand can induce the high - affinity , “extended - open” conformation in which the  and  chains are straight and their cytoplasmic domains have been separated . Importantly , integrins are known to engage in catch bonds , in which force applied to the integrin – ligand pair extends bond lifetime and assists LFA - 1 maturation from the intermediate - affinity extended conformation to the high - affinity extended - open conformation ( Zhu et al . , 2008 ; Kong et al . , 2009 ; Chen et al . , 2010a ) . Separation of the cytoplasmic tails is thought to be facilitated by cytoskeletal forces , transmitted to the  chain via actin binding of talin and kindlins ( Springer and Dustin , 2012 ) . On the surface of T cells , transition from the intermediate - to the high - affinity form of LFA - 1 is energy de - pendent , which is consistent with the idea that force provided by the cytoskeleton is required ( Schürpf and Springer , 2011 ) . The ability to provide a co - stimulatory , outside - in , signal is highly dependent on the physical separation of the cytoplasmic tails 459 Cytoskeletal control of ICAm - 1 mobility in dendritic cells • Comrie et al . Collectively , these data show that in addition to up - regulating the expression of T cell ligands , DC maturation leads to protein - specific changes in ligand mobility . The DC cytoskeleton clusters ICAM - 1 and constrains its lateral mobility To ask if the DC cytoskeleton controls lateral mobility of MHCII and ICAM - 1 , we first examined the distribution of these mol - ecules on the DC membrane before and after treatment with actin - depolymerizing agents . In untreated cells , MHCII was relatively evenly distributed over the cell surface , whereas ICAM - 1 exhib - ited a highly clustered , punctate distribution ( Fig . 2 A ) . Treat - ment with Latrunculin B ( LATB ) led to complete depletion of the F - actin network , whereas Cytochalasin D ( CytoD ) induced the accumulation of disordered F - actin – rich zones . Neither drug had a noticeable effect on the distribution of MHCII , but both induced a more homogeneous distribution of ICAM - 1 , with loss of the punctate organization . FRAP analysis revealed that disruption of F - actin also induced a significant increase in the mobile fraction of ICAM - 1 ( Fig . 2 B ) . This effect was specific to ICAM - 1 ; MHCII exhibited a decrease in the mobile fraction upon actin depolymerization , the magnitude of which was in - hibitor specific . Inhibitors had a minimal effect on the diffusion coefficient of either protein ( Fig . 2 C ) . The increased mobile fraction of ICAM - 1 is consistent with its redistribution on the of these receptors by constraining the mobility of their cognate ligands . To test this idea , we cultured mouse bone marrow – derived DCs ( BMDCs ) , and incubated them in the absence or presence of LPS to induce maturation , as verified by increased surface expression of MHCII , ICAM - 1 , CD40 , and CD86 ( Fig . 1 A ) . BMDCs were then surface labeled with fluorescent Fab fragments that recognize MHCII or ICAM - 1 , and lateral mobility of MHCII and ICAM - 1 on the plasma membrane was analyzed using FRAP , as detailed in Fig . S1 . As shown in Fig . 1 B , MHCII recovered rapidly while ICAM - 1 recovery was minimal . Quantitative analysis showed that the mobile fraction of MHCII does not change significantly upon matura - tion ( median values were 0 . 51 and 0 . 52 in immature and mature DCs , respectively ; Fig . 1 C ) . The diffusion coefficient ( which reflects only mobile molecules ) was modestly increased upon maturation , from 0 . 110 µm 2 / s in immature cells to 0 . 138 µm 2 / s in mature cells ( Fig . 1 D ) . These values for MHCII mobility are in good accord with previous findings in B cells ( Treanor et al . , 2010 ) , and are in the range expected for a freely diffus - ible membrane protein of this size . In contrast with the high mobility observed for MHCII , ICAM - 1 mobility was highly constrained in immature DCs ( median value 0 . 36 ) , and was de - creased to 0 . 25 upon maturation . The diffusion coefficient of the small mobile pool of ICAM - 1 molecules increased modestly after LPS treatment , from 0 . 025 to 0 . 040 µm 2 / s , though values remained significantly lower than those observed for MHCII . Figure 1 . Dendritic cells regulate the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 . ( A ) BMDCs were untreated ( broken lines ) or treated ( solid lines ) with 100 ng / ml LPS to induce matura - tion , stained for the indicated proteins , and analyzed by flow cytometry . Data are representative of three individual experiments . ( B ) Representative images of BMDCs labeled with Fabs against MHCII or ICAM - 1 and imaged at the in - dicated times after photobleaching at time = 0 . Bars , 1 µm . ( C and D ) Mobile fraction ( C ) and diffusion coefficient ( D ) of MHCII and ICAM - 1 on the ventral surface of control or LPS - matured BMDCs . Dots represent individual FRAP mea - surements ( n = 102 – 433 ) pooled from at least three inde - pendent experiments . * * * , P < 0 . 0001 . JCB • volume 208 • numBer 4 • 2015 460 ICAM - 1 mobility is controlled by interactions with moesin and  - actinin - 1 Immobilization of ICAM - 1 has been documented in endothelial cells , where it has been shown to depend upon binding of the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail to actin - binding proteins of the ERM and  - actinin families ( Carpén et al . , 1992 ; Barreiro et al . , 2002 ; Celli et al . , 2006 ; Oh et al . , 2007 ) . We therefore tested the ex - pression patterns of these proteins in DCs . As shown in Fig . 3 A , immature BMDCs express the ERM family members moesin and ezrin in an  8 : 1 ratio . Upon maturation , moesin expression was up - regulated , and a greater proportion was in the active form , as measured by phosphorylation at T558 . This effect was clearly detectable after 24 h , and by 48 h mature DCs expressed 10 - fold more active moesin than immature DCs . No change in the expression or phosphorylation of ezrin was observed . In addition to moesin , nonmuscle  - actinin was also expressed and was slightly up - regulated after LPS treatment ( Fig . 3 B ) . Immunofluorescence microscopy of mature DCs showed that the puncta containing high levels of cell surface ICAM - 1 colocalize with sites of moesin enrichment ( Fig . 3 C , inset ) . MHCII and moesin did not colocalize ( Fig . 3 D ) , which sug - gests a specific moesin – ICAM - 1 interaction . In addition to co - localizing on the ventral surface of DCs , moesin and ICAM - 1 were also observed to cap on one side of DCs , when imaged through a midplane ( Fig . 3 E ) . To ask if moesin and  - actinin - 1 control ICAM - 1 mobility in BMDCs , we used siRNA to suppress each protein separately or in combination . Moesin expression was reduced by 80 % , whereas only a 50 % reduction in  - actinin 1 could be achieved ( Fig . 3 F ) . This may reflect residual expression of  - actinin 1 , or the presence of  - actinin 4 ( the available antibody detects both isoforms ) . As shown in Fig . 3 G , suppression of either moesin or  - actinin 1 alone resulted in an increase in the mo - bile fraction of ICAM - 1 , and simultaneous suppression of both proteins had an additive effect . This change was accompanied by a small , but statistically significant decrease in the diffusion coefficient of ICAM - 1 ( Fig . 3 H ) . These changes were specific for ICAM - 1 ; MHCII mobility was unaltered by suppression of moesin and / or  - actinin . Interestingly , we noticed that when DCs were cultured in a cocktail containing both GM - CSF and IL - 4 , moesin was heavily phosphorylated before LPS treatment ( Fig . S2 A ) . This correlated with a low level of ICAM - 1 mo - bility in immature cells ( Fig . S2 , B and C ) , thus implicating moesin activation as a key element controlling ICAM - 1 mobil - ity . Collectively , these data indicate that maturation - dependent changes in actin - binding proteins modulate the lateral mobility of specific molecules on the DC surface . The intracellular tail is critical for regulation of ICAM - 1 mobility in DCs To determine if interactions between moesin /  - actinin - 1 and the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail control ICAM - 1 mobility , we created an ICAM - 1 mutant lacking most of the cytoplasmic tail , includ - ing the conserved polybasic region proposed to interact with moesin and  - actinin - 1 ( Oh et al . , 2007 ; Fig . 4 A ) . BMDCs Figure 2 . The DC actin cytoskeleton clusters ICAM - 1 and constrains its mobility . ( A ) Mature BMDCs were treated with the indicated actin - depoly - merizing agents , fixed , and labeled for cell surface MHCII and ICAM - 1 , followed by permeabilization and labeling for F - actin . Bar , 10 µm . ( B and C ) Mobile fraction ( B ) and diffusion coefficient ( C ) of MHCII and ICAM - 1 on mature BMDCs treated as indicated . Dots represent individual FRAP measurements ( n = 253 – 417 ) pooled from four independent experiments . * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * , P < 0 . 001 ; * * * , P < 0 . 0001 . cell surface shown in Fig . 2 A . Together , these data clearly show that ICAM - 1 mobility in mature DCs is selectively constrained by the F - actin network . 461 Cytoskeletal control of ICAm - 1 mobility in dendritic cells • Comrie et al . Figure 3 . Actin regulatory proteins moesin and  - actinin - 1 regulate the lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 . ( A and B ) Western blots showing levels of total and phosphorylated ERM proteins ( A ) and  - actinin1 in lysates from BMDCs matured with 100 ng / ml of LPS for 24 or 48 h ( B ) . E , ezrin ; M , moesin . ( C and D ) Immunofluorescence micrographs showing the distribution of F - actin and moesin with respect to cell surface ICAM - 1 ( C ) or MHC II ( D ) . Bottom panels show enlarged regions indicated by the white boxes . ( E ) Midplane of cell prepared as in C , demonstrating co - capping of ICAM - 1 and moesin . ( F ) West - ern blot showing siRNA - mediated knockdown of either moesin ( M ) ,  - actinin 1 ( A ) , or both proteins ( M / A ) in mature BMDCs . ( G and H ) Mature BMDCs treated with siRNA as in F were surface labeled with Fabs against MHCII or ICAM - 1 , and FRAP analysis was performed to determine the mobile fraction ( G ) and diffusion coefficient ( H ) . Dots represent individual FRAP measurements ( n = 143 – 285 ) pooled from three independent experiments . * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 0001 . Bars , 10 µm . JCB • volume 208 • numBer 4 • 2015 462 Quantitative analysis revealed that the defect was primarily due to the failure to undergo multiple rounds of division , rather than initial failure to enter the cell cycle ( Fig . 5 , D and E ) . Addi - tion of exogenous IL - 2 did not rescue the proliferation defect ( Fig . S3 , G and H ) , which is consistent with our observation that IL - 2 production and secretion are unaffected . As a complementary means of liberating ICAM - 1 and testing the effects on T cell priming , we interfered with moesin and  - actinin function . Initial efforts based on siRNA - mediated suppression proved uninterpretable because suppression did not last for the duration of T cell priming experiments ( unpublished data ) . We therefore expressed the moesin FERM domain , a dominant - negative mutant that dissociates endogenous ERM proteins from cortical binding partners ( Allenspach et al . , 2001 ) . The FERM domain increased ICAM - 1 mobility , and diminished conjugation and T cell priming , including early events not af - fected by mutation of the ICAM - 1 tail ( Fig . S4 ) . However , these results must be interpreted with caution , as this construct also perturbed expression of MHCII and CD86 . Collectively , our findings are consistent with a model in which constrained ICAM - 1 mobility promotes late events needed for optimal T cell activation . However , we considered the alternate possibility that the defect in T cell proliferation is the result of defects in ICAM - 1 – mediated signaling in the DC . ICAM - 1 signaling is best studied in endothelial cells , where it depends on phosphorylation of tyrosine 518 in the ICAM - 1 tail ( Liu et al . , 2012 ) . To ask if similar events are required for T cell priming , we mutated tyrosine 518 to phenylalanine ( Fig . 4 A ) . Transduced ICAM - 1  /  BMDCs expressed similar levels of Y518F and WT ICAM - 1 , and these molecules showed similar mobility ( Fig . 4 , C and D ) , and stimulated T cell proliferation equally well ( Fig . 5 F ) . Thus , the requirement for the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail most likely involves regulation of mobility rather than downstream signaling to the DC . Constrained ICAM - 1 mobility promotes conjugate formation and T cell homotypic interactions Because ICAM - 1 functions as the primary ligand for LFA - 1 – dependent T cell adhesion , we next asked if ICAM - 1 mobility is important for T cell – DC conjugation . As shown in Fig . 5 G , T cells failed to bind to ICAM - 1  /  DCs , and this defect was rescued by reconstitution with WT ICAM - 1 . In contrast ,  Tail ICAM - 1 supported significantly less T cell binding ; conjugation efficiency was only  50 % of that obtained with WT - ICAM - 1 reconstituted DCs . Because the chimeric ICAM - 1 molecule showed diminished lateral mobility , we also asked if DCs ex - pressing this mutant would show enhanced T cell binding . For reasons that are unclear , however , conjugation frequency for these cells varied widely , and was sometimes as low as the ICAM - 1  /  controls ( Fig . S3 J ) . Nonetheless , the chimera con - sistently failed to rescue T cell proliferation ( Fig . S3 I ) , even in experiments where conjugate formation occurred with high frequency . This result may demonstrate the need to actively redistribute ICAM - 1 on the surface of DCs through transient changes in moesin activity , analogous to the process that has from ICAM - 1  /  mice were then lentivirally transduced with either wild - type ( WT ) ICAM - 1 or the  Tail mutant ( Fig . 4 B ) , and lateral mobility was compared with endogenous ICAM - 1 in WT C57BL / 6 - derived BMDCs . Reconstituted WT ICAM - 1 exhibited a higher mobile fraction than the endogenous protein , but a similar diffusion coefficient , possibly due to the over - expression of the reconstituted protein ( Fig . 4 , C and D ) . When compared with reconstituted WT ICAM - 1 , the  Tail mutant ex - hibited a significantly higher mobile fraction and diffusion coef - ficient , despite expression levels similar to endogenous ICAM - 1 . Indeed , both values were consistent with free mobility ( compare with freely mobile MHCII in Fig . 1 , C and D ) . To test the effect of anchoring ICAM - 1 directly to actin filaments , we created a chimeric molecule in which the cytoplasmic tail was replaced with the flexible linker region and actin - binding domain of moe - sin ( Fig . 4 A ) . The chimera was expressed well in ICAM - 1  /  BMDCs ( Fig . 4 B ) , and demonstrated a mobile fraction below that of reconstituted WT ICAM - 1 and similar to endogenous ICAM - 1 . Not surprisingly , the  Tail mutant was much more evenly distributed on the DC surface than WT ICAM - 1 ( Fig . 4 E , quantified in Fig . 4 F ) . Additionally ,  Tail ICAM - 1 did not form a polarized cap as often as WT ICAM - 1 ( Fig . 4 G ) . Con - versely , the chimeric ICAM - 1 was more unevenly distributed than WT protein , and formed caps on the majority of cells ( Fig . 4 , E – G ) . Together , these data demonstrate that the limi - tations of ICAM - 1 lateral mobility are almost entirely due to its cytoplasmic domain . Because the chimeric molecule , which can bind directly to actin filaments , shows mobility similar to that of endogenous ICAM - 1 , this implies that most endoge - nous ICAM - 1 molecules are linked to the actin cytoskeleton . This most likely occurs through the combined action of moesin and  - actinin - 1 . Constrained ICAM - 1 mobility promotes late events needed for efficient T cell priming We next asked if immobilization of ICAM - 1 on the DC surface is important for T cell priming . ICAM - 1  /  DCs were reconsti - tuted with WT ICAM - 1 or the  Tail mutant , or transduced with GFP alone . Upon LPS treatment , these cells expressed simi - lar levels of MHC II , CD40 , ICAM - 1 , and CD86 ( Fig . S3 A ) . Cells were then pulsed with varying doses of Ova 323 – 338 peptide and used to prime OTII TCR transgenic T cells . As anticipated , ICAM - 1  /  DCs failed to prime T cells as measured by up - regulation of CD25 , production of IL - 2 , or carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester ( CFSE ) dilution ( Fig . 5 , A – C ) . Reconstitution with either the WT or  Tail ICAM - 1 constructs rescued CD25 up - regulation ( Fig . 5 A ) and induced equivalent production of IL - 2 at all peptide doses ( Fig . 5 B ) . Though it has been reported that ICAM - 1 – LFA - 1 interactions are important for early IL - 2 secretion ( Perez et al . , 2003 ) , we found no difference in the amount of IL - 2 produced at 6 , 12 , or 18 h , as measured by either ELISA or surface capture ( Fig . S3 , B – F ) . Despite their ability to drive early T cell activation events , however , DCs expressing the  Tail ICAM - 1 mutant were not as efficient at stimulating T cell proliferation as DCs expressing exogenous WT ICAM - 1 ( Fig . 5 C ; see also Figs . S3 , G – I ) . This was not an absolute defect , but rather a 1 / 2 to 1 log shift in the peptide dose response . 463 Cytoskeletal control of ICAm - 1 mobility in dendritic cells • Comrie et al . Figure 4 . The cytoplasmic tail of ICAM - 1 mediates clustering and lateral mobility in the plasma membrane of BMDCs . ( A ) Sequence alignments of the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail and ICAM - 1 constructs . ( B ) ICAM - 1  /  BMDCs were transduced with ICAM - 1 mutants , and cell surface levels were compared by flow cytometry . ICAM - 1  /  cells ( shaded gray line ) , WT cells expressing endogenous ICAM - 1 ( solid black line ) , ICAM - 1  /  cells reconstituted with WT ( solid gray line ) ,  Tail ( broken gray line ) , or chimera ( broken black line ) constructs . Results are representative of three individual experiments . ( C and D ) Mobility of endogenous ICAM - 1 and exogenous ICAM - 1 mutants expressed in ICAM - 1  /  BMDCs was analyzed using FRAP . ( C ) Mobile fraction ; ( D ) diffu - sion coefficient . Dots represent individual FRAP measurements ( n = 42 – 523 ) . Data were pooled from five independent experiments except for endogenous , which was pooled from two experiments , and Y518F , which was from a single experiment . ( E ) Immunofluorescence microscopy showing the distribution of moesin and F - actin with respect to ICAM - 1 in LPS matured ICAM - 1  /  BMDCs reconstituted with exogenous WT ,  Tail , or chimeric ICAM - 1 . Bars , 10 µm . ( F ) Images collected as in E were analyzed for ICAM - 1 clustering by measuring the coefficient of variation ( standard deviation / mean ) of surface ICAM - 1 intensity . Data are from one experiment ( n = 50 cells ) representative of three independent experiments . ( G ) Capping of exogenous ICAM - 1 in transduced DCs was quantified from midplane images similar to Fig . 3 E . Data are means ± standard deviation ( error bars ) from four replicate coverslips (  50 cells each ) in one experiment , representative of two independent experiments . * * , P < 0 . 001 ; * * * , P < 0 . 0001 . JCB • volume 208 • numBer 4 • 2015 464 T cell “docking sites” might correspond to the capped regions enriched in moesin and ICAM - 1 ( Fig . 3 E ) . In support of this idea , we frequently observed clusters of T cells in associa - tion with moesin / ICAM - 1 – rich caps ( Fig . 5 H , top ) . To test if ICAM - 1 mobility and interaction with moesin are important for maintaining homotypic T cell contacts , T cells were allowed to interact with DCs expressing either WT or  Tail ICAM - 1 , and randomly selected conjugates were scored for the presence been documented for CD43 on the T cell side of the IS ( Allenspach et al . , 2001 ; Delon et al . , 2001 ) . After DC binding , responding T cells form homotypic interactions , which augment T cell activation by allowing para - crine signaling of IL - 2 and IFN -  ( Sabatos et al . , 2008 ; Gérard et al . , 2013 ) . These stable homotypic interactions occur at pre - formed areas enriched in microvilli ( Fisher et al . , 2008 ) . Be - cause ERM proteins organize microvilli , we reasoned that these Figure 5 . Altering ICAM - 1 mobility perturbs T cell adhesion and priming . ( A ) ICAM - 1  /  DCs were transduced with GFP or the indicated ICAM - 1 con - structs , pulsed with peptide at the indicated concentrations , and used to prime CD4 + OTII T cells . CD25 surface expression was assessed after 18 h of stimulation . ( B ) T cells were stimulated as in A and IL - 2 secretion was assessed after 18 h using a surface capture assay . ( C ) CFSE - labeled T cells were stimulated as in A , and CFSE dilution was measured after 96 h to assess proliferation . ( D and E ) Data were further analyzed to assess the percentage of cells that underwent at least one division ( D ) and the mean number of divisions of dividing cells ( E ) . Results in A – E are representative of five independent experiments , with data in A , B , D , and E showing mean ± standard deviation ( error bars ) from triplicate samples in one representative experiment . ( F ) T cell proliferation was assessed after priming with ICAM - 1  /  DCs or ICAM - 1  /  DCs transduced with WT ICAM - 1 or the signaling - incompetent Y518 mutant . Results are representative of three independent experiments . ( G ) Conjugate formation was assessed by flow cytometry . Data shown are mean ± standard deviation ( error bars ) from triplicate samples in one experiment , representative of four individual experiments . ( H ) Representative midplane images showing T cells interacting with DCs that do or do not display capped ICAM - 1 . Bars , 10 µm . ( I ) Conjugates were prepared and imaged as in F . DCs interacting with two T cells were randomly selected and scored for homotypic T cell interactions . Data represent means ± standard deviation ( error bars ) from four independent experiments , with at least 50 cells each . * , P < 0 . 05 . 465 Cytoskeletal control of ICAm - 1 mobility in dendritic cells • Comrie et al . high - affinity conformation correlated inversely with ICAM - 1 mobility ( Fig . 6 , H and I ) . Consistent with our findings for con - jugate formation and T cell proliferation , the effect of liberat - ing ICAM - 1 from mobility constraints was not all - or - nothing . The 293T cells expressing the  Tail mutant did support some change to the high - affinity conformation above nontransduced 293T cells , though in two of three donors this did not reach statistical significance . The inverse correlation between ICAM - 1 mobility and LFA - 1 conformational change is consistent with a tension - based model , but cytoskeletal constraint of ICAM - 1 can also influence local concentrations , and it has been shown that ligand bind - ing can induce LFA - 1 conformational change and m24 epitope exposure ( Dustin , 1998 ) . Thus , it was important to assess the possible effects of differences in ligand density among our arti - ficial APCs . Analysis of ICAM - 1 density on the artificial APCs ( Fig . S5 ) shows that the efficiency of LFA - 1 conformational change did not depend on ICAM - 1 expression levels ; two clones expressing 20 - fold different levels of WT ICAM - 1 in - duced the same amount of high - affinity LFA - 1 . Moreover , cells expressing the  - tail mutant at high levels still yielded the low - est amount of high - affinity LFA - 1 . Together with our findings from the conjugate assay , these results support a model in which regulation of ICAM - 1 mobil - ity on mature DCs serves to facilitate integrin activation on re - sponding T cells , leading to firm adhesion and enhanced T cell priming ( Fig . 7 ) . Discussion While actin remodeling on the DC side of the IS is essential for conjugate formation and T cell priming ( Al - Alwan et al . , 2001 ; Eun et al . , 2006 ; Bouma et al . , 2011 ) , it has been unclear how the DC F - actin network contributes to T cell activation . We now show that in addition to the well - documented up - regulation of T cell stimulatory ligands , DC maturation induces cytoskeletal changes that modulate the mobility of those ligands . In mature DCs , actin - binding proteins constrain ICAM - 1 lateral mobility , thereby promoting affinity regulation of LFA - 1 . This process enhances T cell conjugation , T cell homotypic interactions , and T cell proliferation . Controlled immobilization of DC li - gands for mechanosensitive T cell molecules represents a novel mechanism by which the DC actin cytoskeleton enhances the potency of DCs as APCs . Integrin - dependent adhesion is regulated at two levels : affinity ( the strength of each individual bond ) and valency ( the total number of bonds ) . The product of the two factors gives avidity , or the total strength of the system ( Kinashi , 2005 ) . Our work shows that both regulatory mechanisms are impacted by interaction of integrin ligands with the APC cytoskeleton . With respect to affinity , we find that modulation of ICAM - 1 mobility aids LFA - 1 conformational change and T cell adhesion . Active LFA - 1 is linked to the T cell actin cytoskeleton ( Cairo et al . , 2006 ) , and has been predicted to undergo force - dependent con - formational change driven by the T cell actin network ( Zhu et al . , 2008 ; Schürpf and Springer , 2011 ; Springer and Dustin , 2012 ) . Moreover , the bond lifetime of ICAM - 1 and LFA - 1 increases of direct T cell – T cell contact . Analysis was restricted to con - jugates consisting of one DC and two T cells , to avoid effects of conjugate efficiency per se and to decrease the likelihood of coincidental homotypic T cell contacts . Under these conditions , 35 % of DCs reconstituted with WT ICAM - 1 showed homo - typic T cell interactions ( Fig . 5 I ) . In contrast , and consistent with their inability to form caps , only 22 % of DCs expressing the  Tail ICAM - 1 mutant supported homotypic T cell contacts . Collectively , these data show that constrained ICAM - 1 mobil - ity promotes the formation of stable T cell – APC conjugates , and that active redistribution of ICAM - 1 encourages T cell ho - motypic interactions . Both of these processes probably contrib - ute to lowering the antigen threshold for T cell proliferation . LFA - 1 affinity regulation is strengthened by restriction of ICAM - 1 lateral mobility The conformational changes associated with LFA - 1 activation are thought to involve force on the ICAM - 1 – LFA - 1 bond , ex - erted by the T cell actin cytoskeleton ( Schürpf and Springer , 2011 ; Springer and Dustin , 2012 ; Kong et al . , 2013 ) . If so , we reasoned that constraining lateral movement of ICAM - 1 could serve to enhance this process by providing resistance on the APC side of the IS . To test this idea , we took advantage of a panel of antibodies specific for conformational intermediates of human LFA - 1 ( Fig . 6 A , top ; Schürpf and Springer , 2011 ) . As surrogate APCs , we generated 293T cell lines stably ex - pressing ICAM - 1 variants and functionalized the plasma mem - branes with  CD3 , as detailed in Materials and methods and diagrammed in Fig . 6 A ( bottom ) . FRAP analysis confirmed that the variants behaved in 293T cells as they did in DCs ; i . e . , they showed low mobility ( Chimera ) , medium mobility ( WT ) , and high mobility (  Tail ; Fig . 6 , B and C ) . Human peripheral blood CD4 + T cells were then allowed to spread on these arti - ficial APCs , and labeled for LFA - 1 conformational interme - diates . The addition of ICAM - 1 to  CD3 - functionalized 293T cells resulted in the adoption of both the intermediate - affinity ( marked by Kim127 ) and high - affinity ( marked by m24 ) con - formations . Example images showing antibody labeling are pre - sented in Fig . 6 D . To assess the relative efficiency of conformational change independently of any changes in cell surface LFA - 1 levels , total cell surface labeling for the intermediate - and high - affinity epi - topes was normalized to total cell surface LFA - 1 ( marked by TS2 / 4 ) . We observed no correlation between adoption of the intermediate conformation and ICAM - 1 mobility ( Fig . 6 E ) , but we did observe adoption of the high - affinity conforma - tion , correlated with constraint of ICAM - 1 mobility ( Fig . 6 F ) . Compared with T cells stimulated with APCs expressing WT ICAM - 1 , T cells stimulated on APCs expressing the high - mobility  Tail ICAM - 1 showed reduced LFA - 1 conforma - tional change , whereas those stimulated on APCs expressing the low - mobility chimera showed increased conformational change . We also tested this question using resting T cell blasts , as blasts typically have more basally activated integrins than naive cells . Again , we found no relationship between ICAM - 1 mo - bility and the intermediate conformation of LFA - 1 ( Fig . 6 G ) , whereas in two separate donors we found that the adoption of the JCB • volume 208 • numBer 4 • 2015 466 Figure 6 . Restriction of ICAM - 1 lateral mobility promotes LFA - 1 affinity maturation . ( A , top ) Diagram of LFA - 1 conformational states with conformation - specific mAb binding sites . ( A , bottom ) Schematic showing 293T cell – based artificial APCs used to stimulate T cells , as detailed in the Materials and methods . ( B and C ) Mobile fraction ( B ) and diffusion coefficient ( C ) of ICAM - 1 in 293T artificial APCs . Dots represent individual FRAP measurements ( n = 140 – 215 ) pooled from three independent experiments . ( D ) Ex vivo human T cells were allowed to interact with artificial APCs lacking ICAM - 1 ( null ) or transduced with WT ICAM - 1 . Conjugates were fixed and labeled with conformation - specific anti – LFA - 1 antibodies . Representative micrographs are shown . Bars , 10 µm . ( E and F ) Conjugates were prepared as in D . ( E ) The relative proportion of LFA - 1 in the extended conformation was assessed based on the ratio of Kim127 : TS2 / 4 labeling intensity . ( F ) The relative proportion of LFA - 1 in the extended open conformation was assessed based on the ratio of m24 : TS2 / 4 labeling intensity . ( G – I ) Conjugates were prepared and analyzed as in D – F , except that resting T lymphoblasts were used . H and I show T cells from two different human donors in order to show reproducibility . Dots in E – I represent values from single cells ( n = 22 – 107 cells per condition ) pooled from two independent experiments ( E and F ) or three independent experiments ( G – I ) . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 001 ; * * * , P < 0 . 0001 . 467 Cytoskeletal control of ICAm - 1 mobility in dendritic cells • Comrie et al . et al . , 2010 ) . Two pieces of evidence lead us to favor direct tethering . First , we observe close colocalization of ICAM - 1 and moesin . Second , and more importantly , reconstituted WT ICAM - 1 , which is overexpressed  10 - fold , is more mobile than the endogenous protein . This phenomenon is consistent with saturation of direct tethers , but would not be expected in a corral - based mechanism . Single - particle tracking studies will be needed to resolve this question with certainty . Cytoskeletal regulation of ICAM - 1 mobility is likely to be of general importance for immune responses that require firm adhesion . In keeping with our findings , Gross et al . ( 2010 ) have shown that increasing ICAM - 1 mobility in target cells leads to decreased NK cell conjugate formation and granule polariza - tion , whereas decreasing ICAM - 1 mobility by overexpression of ezrin has the opposite effect ( Gross et al . , 2010 ) . Moreover , in endothelial cells , interruption of ICAM - 1 interactions with  - actinin and ezrin inhibits the ability of T cells to undergo dia - pedesis ( Celli et al . , 2006 ; Oh et al . , 2007 ) . We show that deletion of the ICAM - 1 tail leads to en - hanced mobility , which correlates with diminished LFA - 1 con - formational change , conjugate formation , and T cell priming . Although we attribute the observed functional effects to changes in ICAM - 1 mobility , it is important to consider other known functions of the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail . First , ICAM - 1 could deliver signals to the DC . Where such signals have been stud - ied , they depend Y518 in the ICAM - 1 tail ( Liu et al . , 2012 ) . We show that mutation of this residue has no effect on T cell prolif - eration . Thus , if signaling is involved , it must use other unknown mechanisms . The ICAM - 1 tail can also modulate dimerization . On the cell surface , ICAM - 1 exists largely as a homo - dimer formed by interactions in the extracellular and transmembrane regions and opposed by repulsive interactions between con - served basic residues in the cytoplasmic domain ( Miller et al . , 1995 ; Yang et al . , 2004 ; Oh et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , our tail mutants could affect ICAM - 1 dimeric status . This should not affect our results , however , as monomeric and dimeric ICAM - 1 show vir - tually identical affinities for LFA - 1 ( Jun et al . , 2001 ) . More - over , GPI - anchored ICAM - 1 and tailless ICAM - 1 ( which are largely monomeric and dimeric , respectively ) both fail to sup - port LFA - 1 – mediated adhesion ( Miller et al . , 1995 ; Oh et al . , 2011 ) . Consistent with our findings , Oh et al . ( 2011 ) point out with force ( Kong et al . , 2009 , 2013 ; Chen et al . , 2010a ) . TCR - induced inside - out signaling is not sufficient to induce the high affinity conformation of LFA - 1 , and surface - bound ligands support the high affinity LFA - 1 conformation much more ef - ficiently than soluble ligands ( Feigelson et al . , 2010 ) . In the ac - companying paper , we have directly tested the effects of T cell actin cytoskeletal dynamics on LFA - 1 conformational change ( see Comrie et al . in this issue ) . We show that ongoing cen - tripetal flow of the T cell actin network is required to maintain LFA - 1 in the high - affinity conformation at the IS , and that mo - bility of ICAM - 1 on artificial stimulatory surfaces influences the organization of active LFA - 1 molecules on the surface of interacting T cells . In light of those findings , it makes sense that constraints on ICAM - 1 mobility mediated by the DC cyto - skeleton would oppose F - actin flow on the T cell side of the IS , thereby maximizing the mechanical force on LFA - 1 . Interactions between ICAM - 1 and the DC actin cytoskel - eton also affect integrin valency . We show that ICAM - 1 is maintained in a clustered state , both at the submicron scale and in higher order “caps” at one pole of the DC , where T cells preferentially bind . Importantly , high local concentrations of ICAM - 1 may also contribute to affinity modulation through an “induced fit” mechanism ( Cabañas and Hogg , 1993 ; Dustin , 1998 ; Zhu et al . , 2013 ) . Indeed , we have found that full LFA - 1 activation requires both tension and ligand binding ( Comrie et al . , 2015 ) . Though we did not observe a correlation between the global ICAM - 1 expression level and LFA - 1 conforma - tional change , submicron - scale clustering may still be impor - tant , particularly under physiological conditions where ICAM - 1 is limiting . We find that lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 is regulated by maturation - induced up - regulation and activation of moesin and  - actinin through a mechanism involving the cytoplasmic domain of ICAM - 1 . It is currently unclear whether ICAM - 1 mobility is limited by direct tethering or by molecular fences that confine diffusion . The two mechanisms are not mutually exclusive , and there are precedents for both . Direct binding of ICAM - 1 to both ezrin and  - actinin has been demonstrated in endothelial cells ( Carpén et al . , 1992 ; Celli et al . , 2006 ; Oh et al . , 2007 ) . In B cells , moesin has been shown to create cyto - skeletal corrals that confine B cell receptor diffusion ( Treanor Figure 7 . Model showing how DCs regulate ICAM - 1 mobility to enhance LFA - 1 activation on T cells . ( left ) In immature DCs , levels of active moesin and  - actinin are low , allowing signifi - cant lateral mobility of ICAM - 1 . Upon maturation ( right ) , moesin and  - actinin are up - regulated and activated , leading to immobilization of ICAM - 1 via interactions between the cyto - skeleton and the ICAM - 1 cytoplasmic tail . Low - mobility ICAM - 1 provides increased resistance to forces applied to the LFA - 1  - chain by the T cell actin cytoskeleton . This process pro - motes LFA - 1 tail separation , and conformational changes in the extracellular domain associated with increased affinity for ICAM - 1 . Ultimately , these events lead to increased adhesion and T cell activation . JCB • volume 208 • numBer 4 • 2015 468 T cell proliferation ( John et al . , 2009 ) . Recent studies show that homotypic T cell interactions can enhance paracrine signaling via IL - 2 and IFN  , leading to enhanced CD8 + T cell prolifera - tion and memory responses ( Sabatos et al . , 2008 ; Steenblock et al . , 2011 ) . Homotypic T cell interactions are likely to be par - ticularly important in vivo , where the frequency of responding T cells is low , as well as during CD4 + T cell help with CD8 + T cell priming . It will also be interesting to test this in vivo , and to ask if increasing ICAM - 1 mobility shortens interaction times between T cells and DCs . If so , memory formation is likely to be impacted ( Scholer et al . , 2008 ) . An important concept arising from our work is that the mo - bility of individual T cell ligands on the DC surface is regulated independently . Our finding that MHC II is highly mobile has important implications for modeling of TCR - pMHC binding kinetics . Indeed , the differential regulation of ICAM - 1 and MHC II mobility allows for efficient activation of LFA - 1 , while permitting the T cell to scan a large number of pMHC complexes for low frequency antigens . While we focus here on the mobility of ICAM - 1 , the mechanism that we have un - covered likely applies to other receptor – ligand pairs that mod - ulate T cell activation . In particular , CD80 and CD86 interact with the actin cytoskeleton through motifs similar to those in ICAM - 1 ( Doty and Clark , 1998 ; Girard et al . , 2012 ) . These motifs control localization of CD80 and CD86 , as well as CD28 ( Tseng et al . , 2005 ) , and deletion of this region impairs co - stimulatory function . Much remains to be learned about mechanotransduction in T cell activation . We show that biophysical properties of the APC modulate the activation of mechanosensitive molecules . It is likely that the actin cytoskeleton controls not only ligand mo - bility , but also cortical stiffness , another important parameter for T cell activation ( Judokusumo et al . , 2012 ; O’Connor et al . , 2012 ) . Further understanding of these processes will be valu - able in modulating APC function in therapeutic settings . Materials and methods Mice All mice were obtained originally from The Jackson Laboratory and housed in the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia animal facility , according to guidelines put forth by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee . C57BL / 6 mice ( WT ) and ICAM - 1  /  mice ( B6 . 129S4 - ICAM1 tm1Jcgr / J ; Xu et al . , 1994 ) were used as a source of bone marrow from which to gen - erate DCs . The ICAM - 1  /  strain was generated by insertion of a vector con - taining the neo resistance gene into exon 4 of the Icam1 gene . T cells were prepared from heterozygous OTII TCR Tg mice , which express a TCR spe - cific for ovalbumin 323 – 339 presented on I - A b ( Barnden et al . , 1998 ) . Inhibitors and antibodies Cytochalasin D and Latrunculin B were from EMD Millipore . Flow cytome - try antibodies ( rat anti - CD4 APC , Armenian hamster anti - CD11c APC , rat anti - CD40 FITC , rat anti - CD54 Biotin , rat anti - CD54 Alexa Fluor 488 , Armenian hamster anti - CD80 FITC , rat anti - CD86 FITC , and rat anti - MHCII Alexa Fluor 488 ) were from BioLegend . Streptavidin Alexa Fluor 647 was from Invitrogen . A mouse anti - moesin antibody that detects all ERM pro - teins by Western blotting was from BD ( # 610401 ) . Rabbit anti - moesin for immunofluorescence microscopy ( # 3150 ) , a rabbit mAb reactive with an activation - dependent phospho - epitope expressed on all ERM isoforms ( pT567 in ezrin , pT558 in moesin ; # 3149 ) , and rabbit anti –  - actinin ( # 3134 ) were all from Cell Signaling Technology . Secondary antibodies for immunofluor - escence were from Invitrogen . Mouse anti - GAPDH was from EMD Millipore . that both proteins are evenly distributed , and likely highly mo - bile , compared with WT ICAM - 1 . The authors concluded that ICAM - 1 must be in an intermediate state , between monomer and dimer , that mediates strong adhesion . Given our finding that LFA - 1 affinity maturation can be rescued by linking  Tail ICAM - 1 to the actin cytoskeleton in a manner that is unlikely to modulate dimerization or deliver downstream signals , we deem it more likely that T cell adhesion and priming are modulated by changes to ICAM - 1 mobility than by changes in dimerization or signaling . LFA - 1 serves a dual purpose at the IS , functioning primar - ily as an adhesion molecule that stabilizes conjugate formation , but also as a co - stimulatory molecule , adding or augmenting signals that induce T cell activation ( Perez et al . , 2003 ; Wang et al . , 2008 ) . Importantly , the high - affinity conformation of in - tegrins generally represents the signaling - competent form ( Zhu et al . , 2007 ; Lefort et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , in addition to enhancing adhesion , ICAM - 1 mobility constraint would be expected to increase co - stimulatory signaling . Testing this idea biochemi - cally has proven to be challenging , largely because outside - in signaling by integrins overlaps with and requires TCR signals . Nonetheless , this concept is in line with the finding that  Tail ICAM - 1 can support up - regulation of CD25 and IL - 2 , but does not support full T cell proliferation , a late event that may be par - ticularly dependent on co - stimulation . It remains to be seen if other effector functions of activated T cells are altered by stim - ulation with mobile versus immobile ICAM - 1 bearing DCs . Though the APC has largely been regarded as a passive partner during IS formation , there is compelling evidence that it plays an active role in organizing IS structure . The classical “bull’s - eye” IS structure occurs in T cell – B cell conjugates , and in T cells spreading on supported planar lipid bilayers ( Monks et al . , 1998 ; Grakoui et al . , 1999 ) . In contrast , T cells interacting with DCs generally form “multifocal” synapses characterized by multiple patches of CD3 and LFA - 1 with variable overlap ( Brossard et al . , 2005 ; Reichardt et al . , 2007 ; Thauland and Parker , 2010 ) . The multifocal synapse has been suggested to arise from either topological or cytoskeletal barriers to diffusion ( Dustin et al . , 2006 ) . We now show that ICAM - 1 is , indeed , subject to actin - dependent diffusional barriers , whereas MHCII is not . Despite the lack of cytoskeletal mobility constraints , MHCII and TCR do not form a well - organized central supramolecular activation cluster ( cSMAC ) in T cell – DC conjugates ( Brossard et al . , 2005 ; Thauland and Parker , 2010 ) . Thus , topological bar - riers may also play a role . Interestingly , moesin helps to form microvilli , structures that have been observed on the DC side of the IS ( Bretscher et al . , 2002 ; Fisher et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , moesin could form both cytoskeletal barriers for ICAM - 1 and topologi - cal barriers for other proteins , including MHCII . It will be inter - esting to ask if moesin function is required for maintenance of the multifocal synapse in DC – T cell conjugates , and if so , how B cells differ in this regard . Whether or not moesin organizes the multifocal synapse , we found that moesin does organize higher - order adhesive caps on the DC surface , where T cells preferentially bind and contact one another . Similar clusters of T cells contacting DCs have been observed by multiphoton imaging in vivo , even prior to 469 Cytoskeletal control of ICAm - 1 mobility in dendritic cells • Comrie et al . Plasmid construction , viral production , and transduction of DCs Lentiviral packaging constructs psPAX2 and PDM2 . G as well as Gateway donor vector pDONR221 and destination vector PLX301 were all gifts of N . Hacohen , Broad Institute , Cambridge , MA . Mouse ICAM - 1 cDNA was purchased from OriGene . Site - directed mutagenesis was performed using QuikChange ( Agilent Technologies ) . To create the chimeric ICAM - 1 mole - cule , ICAM - 1 aa 1 – 512 ( comprising the extracellular and transmembrane domains ) were directly fused to mouse moesin aa 320 – 577 ( comprising the flexible linker and actin - binding domains ) . To create the Moesin dominant - negative ( DN ) protein , aa 1 – 320 of mouse moesin was fused at the C terminus to mKate2 . WT ICAM - 1 ,  Tail ICAM - 1 , T558D ICAM - 1 , chime - ric ICAM - 1 , Moesin DN - mKate2 , and mKate2 sequences were then trans - ferred to the Gateway donor vector , and finally to the destination vector according to the manufacturer’s protocol . The HIV - based lentiviral vector pReceiver - Lv105 expressing EGFP ( EX - EGFP - Lv105 , GeneCopoeia ) was used for control transductions . To generate recombinant lentivirus , 18 × 10 6 HEK293T cells ( ATCC ) were seeded in 15 - cm plates the day before transfection , and then cotrans - fected using the calcium phosphate method with 36 . 3 µg of psPAX2 and 12 . 1 µg of pDM2 . G , together with 48 µg of each DNA of interest ( all in PLX301 ) . Supernatants were harvested 30 h after transfection and used im - mediately to transduce BMDCs . BMDCs were transduced by spin infection with lentivirus on day 1 or 2 of culture . Lentivirus and 8 µg / ml Polybrene ( Sigma - Aldrich ) were added to the wells of a 6 - well culture plate and cen - trifuged at 2 , 000 rpm and 37°C for 2 h . Lentivirus - containing media was then replaced with DC culture media , and the cultures were maintained as described as described in the “Cell preparation and culture” section . On day 5 of culture , puromycin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was added to a final concen - tration of 2 µg / ml to select for virally transduced cells . Dead cells were re - moved by spinning the cell suspension at 2 , 000 rpm for 15 min on a cushion of Ficoll - Paque Plus ( GE Healthcare ) . Live cells that accumulated at the interface were then collected and washed three times in DC culture media before use . siRNA - mediated protein suppression Nontargeting siRNA # 2 , siRNA SMARTpool against  ACTN1 , and siMoe - sin ( 5  - GGAGCGUGCUCUCCUGGAAUU - 3  ) were all purchased from GE Healthcare . Electroporation of immature BMDCs was performed on day 6 of culture , followed by LPS maturation on day 7 . In brief , 500 pmol total of siRNA was added to 4 × 10 6 BMDCs at 10 7 cell / ml of Opti - MEM media in a 4 - mm gap cuvette ( Harvard Apparatus ) . Cells and siRNA were then electroporated using a ECM830 electroporation device ( BTX ) with a voltage of 1 , 000 V and a pulse length of 300 µs , using 2 pulses , with a pulse interval of 500 ms . Cells were then resuspended in DC media lacking GM - CSF for 3 h , after which GM - CSF was added back . Cells were used at day 8 ( 48 h after electroporation ) , which was found to be optimal for both moesin and  - actinin . Flow cytometry BMDCs were harvested and resuspended at 10 6 cells / ml in ice - cold FACS buffer ( PBS , 5 % FBS , 0 . 02 % NaN 3 , and 1 mM EDTA ) , 10 5 cells per sam - ple . After incubating for 20 min with the Fc blocking antibody 24G2 , cells were washed and resuspended in FACS buffer containing appropriate an - tibodies and incubated for 30 min on ice . Cells were then washed and re - suspended in FACS buffer , and data were collected on a flow cytometer ( Accuri C6 ; BD ) . Gating was performed based on forward and side scatter ( for live cells ) and expression of CD11c for DCs . Subsequent analysis was performed on FlowJo ( Version 9 . 5 . 3 ) . All flow plots are shown on a loga - rithmic scale for fluorescence intensity . Fixed cell microscopy 2 × 10 4 DCs were allowed to spread on 12 - mm round coverslips for 1 h at 37°C in DC medium . Cells were fixed in 3 % paraformaldehyde in PBS , quenched , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , and labeled as described previously ( Dehring et al . , 2011 ) . In brief , cells were washed in PBS with 1 % FBS , incubated with primary antibodies sequentially , washed three times in PBS with 1 % FBS , and incubated with secondary antibodies . Cells were then washed three times in PBS 1 % FBS , twice in PBS , and once in milli - Q H 2 O , and mounted on slides with mowiol mounting media ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . To label ICAM - 1 or MHCII on the cell surface , cells were incubated with antibodies before permeabilization . Cells were imaged on an inverted microscope ( Axiovert 200M ; Carl Zeiss ) equipped with a spinning disk confocal system ( UltraView ERS 6 ; PerkinElmer ) and a 63× Plan - Apochromat 1 . 4 NA objective lens . Images were collected using an ORCA - ER camera For Fab production , rat antibodies to MHCII ( M5 / 114 ) and ICAM - 1 ( YN1 / 1 . 7 . 4 ) were purchased from Bio X Cell . The Fab preparation kit and immobilized papain and pepsin were from Thermo Fisher Scientific . 1 mg of each antibody was digested for 3 h with immobilized papain according to the manufacturer’s protocol . The resulting mixtures of Fab and Fc fragments were then transferred to pepsin digestion buffer by three washes with Ultracel 10 kD centrifugal filters ( EMD Millipore ) , after which Fc fragments were digested by incubation with immobilized pepsin . Samples were then washed three times in 10 - kD centrifugal filters and re - suspended in PBS . Purity of the resulting Fab preparation was verified by reducing SDS - PAGE and Coomassie R250 staining . Fab fragments were labeled with Alexa Fluor 488 ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . Labeled Fab was tested by flow cytometry to verify intact antigen binding activity . LFA - 1 conformation - specific antibodies Mouse monoclonal antibodies TS2 / 4 ( anti - CD11a ) and Kim127 ( anti - CD18 ) were harvested from hybridomas ( ATCC ) . Mouse monoclonal anti - body m24 ( anti - CD18 ) was from Abcam . TS2 / 4 recognizes an epitope on the  propeller domain of CD11a (  L ) only in the assembled  heterodi - mer ( Huang and Springer , 1997 ) , and binds in an activation - independent manner ( Chen et al . , 2006 ) . Kim127 binds to an epitope within the EGF2 domain of CD18 (  2 ) that is hidden in bent , inactive integrins and ex - posed upon integrin extension and activation . Kim127 therefore reports on the extended and extended open conformations ( Lu et al . , 2001 ; Chen et al . , 2006 ) . Because Kim127 is an activating antibody , care was taken to use it only after fixation . m24 binds the activated I domain of CD18 (  2 ) after hybrid domain swing - out , and therefore reports on the high affinity extended - open conformation of LFA - 1 ( Dransfield and Hogg , 1989 ; Chen et al . , 2006 , 2010b ; Schürpf and Springer , 2011 ) . The epitope bound by m24 is sensitive to aldehyde fixation , necessitating prefixation labeling . However , m24 does not induce LFA - 1 conformational change . TS2 / 4 was directly conjugated to DyLight 650 , Kim127 was conjugated to Alexa Fluor 594 , and m24 was conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 , all according to the manufacturer’s protocols . Functionality of antibodies was verified by flow cytometry on unstimulated T cells or cells stimulated with Mn 2 + . Cell preparation and culture Unless otherwise specified , all tissue culture reagents were from Invitrogen / Life Technologies . GM - CSF was produced from the B78H1 / GMCSF . 1 cell line ( Levitsky et al . , 1994 ) . To generate BMDCs , leg bones of mice were cleaned of muscle tissues and sterilized in 70 % EtOH . Bone marrow was flushed using Iscove’s modified Dulbecco’s medium ( IMDM ) containing 1 % FBS . Cells were centrifuged at 1 , 500 rpm at RT for 5 min and resuspended in ACK lysis buffer for 1 min . After washing in IMDM / 1 % FBS , cells were resuspended in DC culture media ( IMDM , 10 % FBS , penicillin / streptomy - cin , GlutaMax , 55 µM  - ME , and 1 % GM - CSF supernatant ) at a concen - tration of 10 6 cells / ml . 2 ml of cell suspension was added to wells of 6 - well plates and supplemented with 4 ml of DC culture media on day 2 . Starting on day 5 , 3 ml of media was replaced daily . Differentiation into CD11c + DCs ( typically 70 – 80 % ) was verified on day 6 by flow cytometry . To in - duce maturation , DCs on days 7 or 8 were stimulated with 100 ng / ml LPS ( Escherichia coli 055 : B5 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) for 24 – 48 h . Maturation was verified by flow cytometry . OTII + CD4 + T cells were isolated from spleen and lymph nodes by magnetic bead - based depletion ( QIAGEN ) using anti - CD8 ( 2 . 43 ) and anti - MHCII ( M5 / 114 . 15 . 2 ) . T cell activation assays were performed in T cell media ( DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , Gluta - MAX , Hepes , NEAA , and  - mercaptoethanol at 37°C and 10 % CO 2 ) . HEK - 293T cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 20 mM Hepes , 10 % FBS , 1 % GlutaMAX , 1 % penicillin / streptomycin , and 1 % NEAA . Human peripheral blood CD4 + T cells were obtained from the Uni - versity of Pennsylvania’s Human Immunology Core under an Institutional Review Board approved protocol . In experiments using ex vivo cells , T cells were used within 3 h of purification . Alternatively , T lymphoblasts were generated by activation with human T - Activator CD3 / CD28 magnetic beads ( Dynabeads ; Life Technologies ) in RPMI ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Atlanta Biologicals ) , 1 % GlutaMAX ( Invitrogen ) , 1 % penicillin / streptomycin , and 50 U / ml of human rIL - 2 ( obtained through the AIDS Re - search and Reference Reagent Program , Division of AIDS , National Insti - tute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , National Institutes of Health ; human rIL - 2 was from M . Gately , Hoffmann - LaRoche , Nutley , NJ ) . T lymphoblasts were cultured in a humidified 37°C incubator with 5 % CO 2 . Beads were magnetically removed on day 6 after initial stimulation , and cells were then cultured for an additional day in the absence of IL - 2 . JCB • volume 208 • numBer 4 • 2015 470 Generation of artificial APCs and analysis of LFA - 1 conformational change 293T cells were transduced with WT ,  Tail , or Chimeric ICAM - 1 constructs and selected with 4 µg / ml puromycin . After two rounds of single cell cloning , clones expressing similar levels of exogenous ICAM - 1 molecules ( within a 10 - fold range ) were selected and expanded . 18 h before use , 3 × 10 5 cells were added to 12 - mm coverslips ( previously acid washed and coated sequentially with 0 . 1 % wt / vol poly - l - lysine [ Sigma - Aldrich ] for 15 min at RT and 1 µg / ml human fibronectin in PBS [ R & D Systems ] for 2 h at 37°C ) . Fusogenic lipid vesicles of DHPE - X - Biotin ( Biotium ) were pre - pared by evaporating chloroform from the lipid under vacuum for 0 . 5 – 1 h , and dispersal in H 2 O at a total lipid concentration of 2 mg / ml . The so - lution was vortexed for 2 min to create multilamellar liposomes , which were then homogenized in an ultrasonic water bath followed by passing through a 50 - µm extruder to create lipid vesicles of homogenous sizes . The vesicle solution was diluted 1 : 100 in prewarmed 293T cell media and added to the coverslips for 15 min at 37°C . Coverslips were then washed in imaging media ( L15 + 2 mg / ml glucose ) and incubated with 1 µg / ml streptavidin for 15 min at RT , washed again , and incubated with 10 µg / ml OKT3 - Biotin ( eBioscience ) for 15 min at RT . After final washing of artificial APCs , 10 5 freshly isolated human peripheral blood CD4 + T cells or resting CD4 + T cell blasts were then added and allowed to adhere for 20 min . Alexa Fluor 488 – labeled m24 antibody ( final concentration of 4 µg / ml ) was added to the coverslips for 5 min at 37°C , after which coverslips were quickly washed in PBS with Ca 2 + / Mg 2 + and fixed in 3 % PFA . After quenching excess fixative , cells were sequentially surface labeled with Kim127 and TS2 / 4 . T cell – APC conjugates were imaged by confocal microscopy by collecting z stacks that encompassed the cell – cell interface and the entire T cell . Total pixel intensity for each antibody was determined from the rendered images and normalized to T cells responding to APCs lacking ICAM - 1 . To determine the relative efficiency of LFA - 1 conformational change , the ratio of m24 or Kim127 to TS2 / 4 intensities was determined for each cell . Western blotting Cells were washed in cold PBS and lysed at 4°C in 1× RIPA lysis buffer ( 1 % IGEPAL , 0 . 5 % sodium deoxycholate , 0 . 1 % SDS , and 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 ) , then supplemented with 10 mM NaF , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , and Complete pro - tease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche ) . 10 5 cell equivalents per lane were separated on 4 – 12 % NuPAGE gradient gels ( Invitrogen ) , transferred to nitrocellulose , probed as indicated , and imaged on a fluorescence scanner ( Odyssey ; LI - COR Biosciences ) within the linear range . Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed using KaleidaGraph software ( Synergy ) . Pairwise comparisons were made using a two - tailed Student’s t test ( for nor - mally distributed data ) or a Mann - Whitney test ( for nonnormal distributions ) . Where multiple comparisons were made , a Kruskall - Wallis one - way test for variance was first performed , followed by pairwise Mann - Whitney tests . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 details FRAP experimental setup and analysis . Fig . S2 shows the assessment of ERM expression and phosphorylation as well as ICAM - 1 mo - bility in DCs cultured in the presence of IL - 4 . Fig . S3 shows additional data pertaining to the production and influence of IL - 2 during T cell activation as well as data related to T cell conjugation and proliferation in response to Chimeric ICAM - 1 – expressing DCs . Fig . S4 shows the effects of ERM DN expression in DCs on ICAM - 1 lateral mobility and T cell priming . Fig . S5 shows the expression of ICAM - 1 in the various 293T - based artificial APCs as well as the comparison of LFA - 1 conformational change in T cells re - sponding to low or high ICAM - 1 – expressing APCs . Video 1 shows FRAP of MHCII in a mature BMDC . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201406120 / DC1 . We thank members of the Burkhardt laboratory for helpful discussions and critical reading of the manuscript , Dr . Michael Edidin for helpful guidance , and Dr . Minsoo Kim for generously providing reagents . We thank the NAPCore and Flow Cytometry core facilities at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia for time and assistance . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants R01AI065644 , P01CA093615 , and GM104867 . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Submitted : 26 June 2014 Accepted : 17 November 2014 ( Hamamatsu Photonics ) using Volocity acquisition software and analyzed using Volocity software ( v6 . 1 . 1 ; PerkinElmer ) . To analyze ICAM - 1 clustering , cells were surface labeled for ICAM - 1 and intracellularly labeled for F - actin . The outline of each cell was defined based on F - actin intensity , and the pixel intensity of ICAM - 1 labeling across each cell was determined . The coefficient of variation was then calculated by dividing the standard deviation by the mean for each cell . To analyze T cell – DC interactions , DCs were labeled with CMAC ( Invitrogen ) incubated for 2 h at 37°C with 1 µg / ml OVA 323 – 339 peptide ( AnaSpec ) , and allowed to spread on coverslips for 10 min , at which time CFSE - labeled OTII T cells were added at a 4 : 1 ratio with DCs and allowed to interact for an additional 50 min . Conjugates were fixed , labeled for surface ICAM - 1 and intracellular moesin , and imaged . To analyze ho - motypic T cell interactions , conjugates of one DC with two T cells were randomly selected and scored for the presence or absence of direct T cell – T cell contact . FRAP BMDCs were allowed to spread on eight - chambered cover glasses ( Lab - Tek ) for 2 h at 37°C in DC media . Slides were then transitioned to 4°C , and fluorescently labeled Fab against MHCII or ICAM - 1 was added at 10 µg / ml for 20 min . Labeling media was then removed , and cells were washed and resuspended in prewarmed L15 media ( Invitrogen ) supple - mented with 2 mg / ml glucose . Cover glasses were equilibrated at 37°C on the microscope stage within an environmental chamber and imaged by spinning disk confocal microscopy using the Volocity FRAP plug - in . Before photobleaching , cells were imaged for 3 s at the glass – DC interface at 2 fps . 4 – 5 randomly selected circular regions / cell ( 1 . 7 µm diameter ) were then bleached , and images were captured at 2 fps for 20 s for MHCII or 2 fps for 20 s followed by 1 fps for 25 s for ICAM - 1 . Samples were cor - rected for photobleaching using the automated feature in Volocity 6 . 1 . 1 , and FRAP analysis was conducted using the Volocity FRAP Analysis plugin . This software obtains sequential intensity measurements and calculates the mobile fraction ( the maximal percentage of initial fluorescence intensity that is recovered by the plateau period ) based on the best fit to a single exponen - tial curve constrained through the origin ( Sprague and McNally , 2005 ) , the diffusion coefficient based on the half time required to reach maximal recovery ( T 1 / 2 ) , and the original bleach area diameter ( w ) using the equa - tion D = W 2 / ( 4T 1 / 2 ) ( Axelrod et al . , 1976 ) . For actin depletion experiments , cells were allowed to spread and stained with Fab as before . 15 min before performing photobleaching , La - trunculin B or Cytochalasin D were added to cells at a final concentration of 1 µM or 10 µM , respectively . Inhibitors were added as 5× concentrated solution in prewarmed media . Control cells received an equivalent amount of prewarmed media . T cell activation assays 2 × 10 4 DCs were added to each well of a flat - bottom 96 - well tissue cul - ture plate and pulsed for 2 h with the indicated amount of OVA 323 – 339 peptide . Plates were then spun at 1 , 500 RPM for 5 min and the media was replaced with fresh T cell media . For proliferation assays , OTII T cells purified by negative selection were labeled with 1 µM CFSE for 5 min at RT . 4 × 10 4 CFSE - labeled T cells were then added to each well containing peptide - pulsed DCs . Samples were collected after 72 – 96 h , stained for CD4 , and analyzed by flow cytometry . For early T cell activation markers , OTII cells were incubated with an IL - 2 capture reagent ( Miltenyi Biotec ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol , and were added to peptide - pulsed BMDCs . After 18 h , cells were washed with FACS buffer , stained with  - CD4 APC ,  CD25 Alexa Fluor 488 , and  IL - 2 PE , and analyzed by flow cytometry . Alternatively , OTII cells were added to DCs , and 100 µl of supernatant was collected at the indicated times and analyzed by ELISA ( eBioscience ) . T cell – DC conjugation assays 5 × 10 4 DCs / condition in FACS tubes were pulsed for 2 h with OVA 323 – 339 peptide , washed , and resuspended in 200 µl of prewarmed T cell media . 10 5 CFSE - labeled OTII T cells were then added and mixed with DCs . Sam - ples were incubated at 37°C for 45 min , after which anti - CD11c APC was added to a final dilution of 1 : 500 and incubated for an additional 15 min at 37°C . At 1 h after adding T cells , conjugates were vortexed at max speed for 5 s to break apart loosely adherent cells , fixed in 1 % PFA in FACS buffer , and analyzed by flow cytometry . Conjugation efficiency was calculated based on the percentage of CD11c - positive DCs bound to CFSE - labeled T cells . 471 Cytoskeletal control of ICAm - 1 mobility in dendritic cells • Comrie et al . cytoskeleton and  - actinin . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 1223 – 1234 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 118 . 5 . 1223 Casares , S . , C . S . Zong , D . L . Radu , A . Miller , C . A . Bona , and T . D . Brumeanu . 1999 . Antigen - specific signaling by a soluble , dimeric peptide / major histocom - patibility complex class II / Fc chimera leading to T helper cell type 2 differen - tiation . J . Exp . Med . 190 : 543 – 554 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 190 . 4 . 543 Celli , L . , J . J . Ryckewaert , E . Delachanal , and A . Duperray . 2006 . Evidence of a functional role for interaction between ICAM - 1 and nonmuscle  - actinins in leukocyte diapedesis . J . Immunol . 177 : 4113 – 4121 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 177 . 6 . 4113 Chen , W . , and C . Zhu . 2013 . Mechanical regulation of T - cell functions . Immunol . Rev . 256 : 160 – 176 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / imr . 12122 Chen , J . , W . Yang , M . Kim , C . V . Carman , and T . A . Springer . 2006 . Regulation of outside - in signaling and affinity by the  2 I domain of integrin  L  2 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 13062 – 13067 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0605666103 Chen , W . , J . Lou , and C . Zhu . 2010a . Forcing switch from short - to intermediate - and long - lived states of the  A domain generates LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 catch bonds . J . Biol . Chem . 285 : 35967 – 35978 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 155770 Chen , X . , C . Xie , N . Nishida , Z . Li , T . Walz , and T . A . Springer . 2010b . Requirement of open headpiece conformation for activation of leukocyte integrin  X  2 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 107 : 14727 – 14732 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1008663107 Cochran , J . R . , T . O . Cameron , and L . J . Stern . 2000 . The relationship of MHC - peptide binding and T cell activation probed using chemically defined MHC class II oligomers . Immunity . 12 : 241 – 250 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 00 ) 80177 - 6 Comrie , W . , A . Babich , and J . K . Burkhardt . 2015 . F - actin flow drives affinity maturation and spatial organization of LFA - 1 at the immunological syn - apse . J . Cell Biol . 208 : 475 – 491 . Dehring , D . A . , F . Clarke , B . G . Ricart , Y . Huang , T . S . Gomez , E . K . Williamson , D . A . Hammer , D . D . Billadeau , Y . Argon , and J . K . Burkhardt . 2011 . Hematopoietic lineage cell - specific protein 1 functions in concert with the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein to promote podosome array orga - nization and chemotaxis in dendritic cells . J . Immunol . 186 : 4805 – 4818 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1003102 Delon , J . , K . Kaibuchi , and R . N . Germain . 2001 . Exclusion of CD43 from the immunological synapse is mediated by phosphorylation - regulated reloca - tion of the cytoskeletal adaptor moesin . Immunity . 15 : 691 – 701 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 01 ) 00231 - X Doty , R . T . , and E . A . Clark . 1998 . Two regions in the CD80 cytoplasmic tail regulate CD80 redistribution and T cell costimulation . J . Immunol . 161 : 2700 – 2707 . Dransfield , I . , and N . Hogg . 1989 . Regulated expression of Mg2 + binding epi - tope on leukocyte integrin alpha subunits . EMBO J . 8 : 3759 – 3765 . Dustin , M . L . 1998 . Making a little affinity go a long way : a topological view of LFA - 1 regulation . Cell Adhes . Commun . 6 : 255 – 262 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3109 / 15419069809004481 Dustin , M . L . , S . Y . Tseng , R . Varma , and G . Campi . 2006 . T cell - dendritic cell immunological synapses . Curr . Opin . Immunol . 18 : 512 – 516 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . coi . 2006 . 05 . 017 Eun , S . Y . , B . P . O’Connor , A . W . Wong , H . W . van Deventer , D . J . Taxman , W . Reed , P . Li , J . S . Blum , K . P . McKinnon , and J . P . Ting . 2006 . Cutting edge : rho activation and actin polarization are dependent on plexin - A1 in dendritic cells . J . Immunol . 177 : 4271 – 4275 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 177 . 7 . 4271 Feigelson , S . W . , R . Pasvolsky , S . Cemerski , Z . Shulman , V . Grabovsky , T . Ilani , A . Sagiv , F . Lemaitre , C . Laudanna , A . S . Shaw , and R . Alon . 2010 . Occupancy of lymphocyte LFA - 1 by surface - immobilized ICAM - 1 is critical for TCR - but not for chemokine - triggered LFA - 1 conversion to an open headpiece high - affinity state . J . Immunol . 185 : 7394 – 7404 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1002246 Feng , C . , Y . F . Li , Y . H . Yau , H . S . Lee , X . Y . Tang , Z . H . Xue , Y . C . Zhou , W . M . Lim , T . C . Cornvik , C . Ruedl , et al . 2012 . Kindlin - 3 mediates integrin  L  2 outside - in signaling , and it interacts with scaffold protein recep - tor for activated - C kinase 1 ( RACK1 ) . J . Biol . Chem . 287 : 10714 – 10726 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 299594 Fisher , P . J . , P . A . Bulur , S . Vuk - Pavlovic , F . G . Prendergast , and A . B . Dietz . 2008 . Dendritic cell microvilli : a novel membrane structure associated with the multifocal synapse and T - cell clustering . Blood . 112 : 5037 – 5045 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2008 - 04 - 149526 Gérard , A . , O . Khan , P . Beemiller , E . Oswald , J . Hu , M . Matloubian , and M . F . Krummel . 2013 . Secondary T cell - T cell synaptic interactions drive the differentiation of protective CD8 + T cells . Nat . Immunol . 14 : 356 – 363 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni . 2547 Girard , T . , M . El - Far , D . Gaucher , O . Acuto , G . Beaulé , F . Michel , W . Mourad , and R . P . Sékaly . 2012 . A conserved polylysine motif in References Al - Alwan , M . M . , G . Rowden , T . D . Lee , and K . A . West . 2001 . The dendritic cell cytoskeleton is critical for the formation of the immunological syn - apse . J . Immunol . 166 : 1452 – 1456 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 166 . 3 . 1452 Al - Alwan , M . M . , R . S . Liwski , S . M . Haeryfar , W . H . Baldridge , D . W . Hoskin , G . Rowden , and K . A . West . 2003 . Cutting edge : dendritic cell actin cytoskeletal polarization during immunological synapse formation is highly antigen - dependent . J . Immunol . 171 : 4479 – 4483 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 171 . 9 . 4479 Allenspach , E . J . , P . Cullinan , J . Tong , Q . Tang , A . G . Tesciuba , J . L . Cannon , S . M . Takahashi , R . Morgan , J . K . Burkhardt , and A . I . Sperling . 2001 . ERM - dependent movement of CD43 defines a novel protein complex distal to the immunological synapse . Immunity . 15 : 739 – 750 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 01 ) 00224 - 2 Appel , H . , L . Gauthier , J . Pyrdol , and K . W . Wucherpfennig . 2000 . Kinetics of T - cell receptor binding by bivalent HLA - DR . Peptide complexes that ac - tivate antigen - specific human T - cells . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 312 – 321 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 275 . 1 . 312 Axelrod , D . , D . E . Koppel , J . Schlessinger , E . Elson , and W . W . Webb . 1976 . Mobility measurement by analysis of fluorescence photobleaching re - covery kinetics . Biophys . J . 16 : 1055 – 1069 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 76 ) 85755 - 4 Babich , A . , S . Li , R . S . O’Connor , M . C . Milone , B . D . Freedman , and J . K . Burkhardt . 2012 . F - actin polymerization and retrograde flow drive sus - tained PLC  1 signaling during T cell activation . J . Cell Biol . 197 : 775 – 787 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201201018 Baker , R . G . , C . J . Hsu , D . Lee , M . S . Jordan , J . S . Maltzman , D . A . Hammer , T . Baumgart , and G . A . Koretzky . 2009 . The adapter protein SLP - 76 medi - ates “outside - in” integrin signaling and function in T cells . Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 : 5578 – 5589 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00283 - 09 Barnden , M . J . , J . Allison , W . R . Heath , and F . R . Carbone . 1998 . Defective TCR expression in transgenic mice constructed using cDNA - based  - and  - chain genes under the control of heterologous regulatory elements . Immunol . Cell Biol . 76 : 34 – 40 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1440 - 1711 . 1998 . 00709 . x Barreiro , O . , M . Yanez - Mo , J . M . Serrador , M . C . Montoya , M . Vicente - Manzanares , R . Tejedor , H . Furthmayr , and F . Sanchez - Madrid . 2002 . Dynamic interaction of VCAM - 1 and ICAM - 1 with moesin and ezrin in a novel endothelial docking structure for adherent leukocytes . J . Cell Biol . 157 : 1233 – 1245 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200112126 Benvenuti , F . , S . Hugues , M . Walmsley , S . Ruf , L . Fetler , M . Popoff , V . L . Tybulewicz , and S . Amigorena . 2004 . Requirement of Rac1 and Rac2 expression by mature dendritic cells for T cell priming . Science . 305 : 1150 – 1153 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1099159 Billadeau , D . D . , J . C . Nolz , and T . S . Gomez . 2007 . Regulation of T - cell activa - tion by the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 7 : 131 – 143 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nri2021 Boniface , J . J . , J . D . Rabinowitz , C . Wülfing , J . Hampl , Z . Reich , J . D . Altman , R . M . Kantor , C . Beeson , H . M . McConnell , and M . M . Davis . 1998 . Initiation of signal transduction through the T cell receptor requires the multivalent engagement of peptide / MHC ligands [ corrected ] . Immunity . 9 : 459 – 466 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 00 ) 80629 - 9 Bouma , G . , A . Mendoza - Naranjo , M . P . Blundell , E . de Falco , K . L . Parsley , S . O . Burns , and A . J . Thrasher . 2011 . Cytoskeletal remodeling mediated by WASp in dendritic cells is necessary for normal immune synapse for - mation and T - cell priming . Blood . 118 : 2492 – 2501 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2011 - 03 - 340265 Bretscher , A . , K . Edwards , and R . G . Fehon . 2002 . ERM proteins and merlin : integrators at the cell cortex . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 : 586 – 599 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm882 Brossard , C . , V . Feuillet , A . Schmitt , C . Randriamampita , M . Romao , G . Raposo , and A . Trautmann . 2005 . Multifocal structure of the T cell - den - dritic cell synapse . Eur . J . Immunol . 35 : 1741 – 1753 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / eji . 200425857 Burkhardt , J . K . , E . Carrizosa , and M . H . Shaffer . 2008 . The actin cytoskeleton in T cell activation . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 26 : 233 – 259 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . immunol . 26 . 021607 . 090347 Cabañas , C . , and N . Hogg . 1993 . Ligand intercellular adhesion molecule 1 has a necessary role in activation of integrin lymphocyte function - associated molecule 1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 90 : 5838 – 5842 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 90 . 12 . 5838 Cairo , C . W . , R . Mirchev , and D . E . Golan . 2006 . Cytoskeletal regulation couples LFA - 1 conformational changes to receptor lateral mobility and clustering . Immunity . 25 : 297 – 308 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2006 . 06 . 012 Carpén , O . , P . Pallai , D . E . Staunton , and T . A . Springer . 1992 . Association of intercellular adhesion molecule - 1 ( ICAM - 1 ) with actin - containing JCB • volume 208 • numBer 4 • 2015 472 and eNOS signaling increase endothelial cell surface PECAM - 1 adhesiv - ity and neutrophil transmigration . Blood . 120 : 1942 – 1952 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2011 - 12 - 397430 Liu , B . , W . Chen , B . D . Evavold , and C . Zhu . 2014 . Accumulation of dynamic catch bonds between TCR and agonist peptide - MHC triggers T cell sig - naling . Cell . 157 : 357 – 368 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 02 . 053 Lu , C . , M . Ferzly , J . Takagi , and T . A . Springer . 2001 . Epitope mapping of anti - bodies to the C - terminal region of the integrin  2 subunit reveals regions that become exposed upon receptor activation . J . Immunol . 166 : 5629 – 5637 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 166 . 9 . 5629 Ma , Z . , and T . H . Finkel . 2010 . T cell receptor triggering by force . Trends Immunol . 31 : 1 – 6 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . it . 2009 . 09 . 008 Ma , Z . , K . A . Sharp , P . A . Janmey , and T . H . Finkel . 2008 . Surface - anchored mo - nomeric agonist pMHCs alone trigger TCR with high sensitivity . PLoS Biol . 6 : e43 . Miller , J . , R . Knorr , M . Ferrone , R . Houdei , C . P . Carron , and M . L . Dustin . 1995 . Intercellular adhesion molecule - 1 dimerization and its consequences for adhesion mediated by lymphocyte function associated - 1 . J . Exp . Med . 182 : 1231 – 1241 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 182 . 5 . 1231 Monks , C . R . , B . A . Freiberg , H . Kupfer , N . Sciaky , and A . Kupfer . 1998 . Three - dimensional segregation of supramolecular activation clusters in T cells . Nature . 395 : 82 – 86 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 25764 Nguyen , K . , N . R . Sylvain , and S . C . Bunnell . 2008 . T cell costimulation via the integrin VLA - 4 inhibits the actin - dependent centralization of signaling microclusters containing the adaptor SLP - 76 . Immunity . 28 : 810 – 821 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2008 . 04 . 019 Ni , H . T . , M . J . Deeths , and M . F . Mescher . 2001 . LFA - 1 - mediated costimulation of CD8 + T cell proliferation requires phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ac - tivity . J . Immunol . 166 : 6523 – 6529 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 166 . 11 . 6523 O’Connor , R . S . , X . Hao , K . Shen , K . Bashour , T . Akimova , W . W . Hancock , L . C . Kam , and M . C . Milone . 2012 . Substrate rigidity regulates human T cell activation and proliferation . J . Immunol . 189 : 1330 – 1339 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1102757 Oh , H . M . , S . Lee , B . R . Na , H . Wee , S . H . Kim , S . C . Choi , K . M . Lee , and C . D . Jun . 2007 . RKIKK motif in the intracellular domain is critical for spa - tial and dynamic organization of ICAM - 1 : functional implication for the leukocyte adhesion and transmigration . Mol . Biol . Cell . 18 : 2322 – 2335 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E06 - 08 - 0744 Oh , H . M . , M . S . Kwon , H . J . Kim , B . H . Jeon , H . R . Kim , H . O . Choi , B . R . Na , S . H . Eom , N . W . Song , and C . D . Jun . 2011 . Intermediate monomer - dimer equilibrium structure of native ICAM - 1 : implication for enhanced cell adhesion . Exp . Cell Res . 317 : 163 – 172 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2010 . 10 . 004 Parameswaran , N . , R . Suresh , V . Bal , S . Rath , and A . George . 2005 . Lack of ICAM - 1 on APCs during T cell priming leads to poor generation of cen - tral memory cells . J . Immunol . 175 : 2201 – 2211 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 175 . 4 . 2201 Perez , O . D . , D . Mitchell , G . C . Jager , S . South , C . Murriel , J . McBride , L . A . Herzenberg , S . Kinoshita , and G . P . Nolan . 2003 . Leukocyte functional antigen 1 lowers T cell activation thresholds and signaling through cytohesin - 1 and Jun - activating binding protein 1 . Nat . Immunol . 4 : 1083 – 1092 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni984 Reichardt , P . , B . Dornbach , S . Rong , S . Beissert , F . Gueler , K . Loser , and M . Gunzer . 2007 . Naive B cells generate regulatory T cells in the presence of a mature immunologic synapse . Blood . 110 : 1519 – 1529 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2006 - 10 - 053793 Ross , R . , H . Jonuleit , M . Bros , X . L . Ross , S . Yamashiro , F . Matsumura , A . H . Enk , J . Knop , and A . B . Reske - Kunz . 2000 . Expression of the actin - bundling protein fascin in cultured human dendritic cells correlates with dendritic morphology and cell differentiation . J . Invest . Dermatol . 115 : 658 – 663 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1523 - 1747 . 2000 . 00112 . x Sabatos , C . A . , J . Doh , S . Chakravarti , R . S . Friedman , P . G . Pandurangi , A . J . Tooley , and M . F . Krummel . 2008 . A synaptic basis for paracrine in - terleukin - 2 signaling during homotypic T cell interaction . Immunity . 29 : 238 – 248 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2008 . 05 . 017 Scholer , A . , S . Hugues , A . Boissonnas , L . Fetler , and S . Amigorena . 2008 . Intercellular adhesion molecule - 1 - dependent stable interactions between T cells and dendritic cells determine CD8 + T cell memory . Immunity . 28 : 258 – 270 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2007 . 12 . 016 Schürpf , T . , and T . A . Springer . 2011 . Regulation of integrin affinity on cell surfaces . EMBO J . 30 : 4712 – 4727 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2011 . 333 Sprague , B . L . , and J . G . McNally . 2005 . FRAP analysis of binding : proper and fitting . Trends Cell Biol . 15 : 84 – 91 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2004 . 12 . 001 Springer , T . A . , and M . L . Dustin . 2012 . Integrin inside - out signaling and the immunological synapse . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 24 : 107 – 115 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2011 . 10 . 004 CD86 cytoplasmic tail is necessary for cytoskeletal association and effective co - stimulation . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 423 : 301 – 307 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2012 . 05 . 116 Grakoui , A . , S . K . Bromley , C . Sumen , M . M . Davis , A . S . Shaw , P . M . Allen , and M . L . Dustin . 1999 . The immunological synapse : a molecular ma - chine controlling T cell activation . Science . 285 : 221 – 227 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 285 . 5425 . 221 Gross , C . C . , J . A . Brzostowski , D . Liu , and E . O . Long . 2010 . Tethering of inter - cellular adhesion molecule on target cells is required for LFA - 1 - dependent NK cell adhesion and granule polarization . J . Immunol . 185 : 2918 – 2926 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1000761 Hamad , A . R . , S . M . O’Herrin , M . S . Lebowitz , A . Srikrishnan , J . Bieler , J . Schneck , and D . Pardoll . 1998 . Potent T cell activation with dimeric peptide - major histocompatibility complex class II ligand : the role of CD4 coreceptor . J . Exp . Med . 188 : 1633 – 1640 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 188 . 9 . 1633 Hogg , N . , I . Patzak , and F . Willenbrock . 2011 . The insider’s guide to leukocyte integrin signalling and function . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 11 : 416 – 426 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nri2986 Huang , C . , and T . A . Springer . 1997 . Folding of the  - propeller domain of the integrin  L subunit is independent of the I domain and dependent on the  2 subunit . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 3162 – 3167 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 94 . 7 . 3162 Huppa , J . B . , M . Axmann , M . A . Mörtelmaier , B . F . Lillemeier , E . W . Newell , M . Brameshuber , L . O . Klein , G . J . Schütz , and M . M . Davis . 2010 . TCR - peptide - MHC interactions in situ show accelerated kinetics and increased affinity . Nature . 463 : 963 – 967 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature08746 John , B . , T . H . Harris , E . D . Tait , E . H . Wilson , B . Gregg , L . G . Ng , P . Mrass , D . S . Roos , F . Dzierszinski , W . Weninger , and C . A . Hunter . 2009 . Dynamic Imaging of CD8 + T cells and dendritic cells during infection with Toxoplasma gondii . PLoS Pathog . 5 : e1000505 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1000505 Judokusumo , E . , E . Tabdanov , S . Kumari , M . L . Dustin , and L . C . Kam . 2012 . Mechanosensing in T lymphocyte activation . Biophys . J . 102 : L5 – L7 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2011 . 12 . 011 Jun , C . D . , M . Shimaoka , C . V . Carman , J . Takagi , and T . A . Springer . 2001 . Dimer - ization and the effectiveness of ICAM - 1 in mediating LFA - 1 - dependent adhesion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 6830 – 6835 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 121186998 Kim , M . , C . V . Carman , and T . A . Springer . 2003 . Bidirectional transmembrane signaling by cytoplasmic domain separation in integrins . Science . 301 : 1720 – 1725 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1084174 Kim , S . T . , K . Takeuchi , Z . Y . Sun , M . Touma , C . E . Castro , A . Fahmy , M . J . Lang , G . Wagner , and E . L . Reinherz . 2009 . The  T cell receptor is an anisotropic mechanosensor . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 31028 – 31037 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 052712 Kim , S . T . , Y . Shin , K . Brazin , R . J . Mallis , Z . Y . Sun , G . Wagner , M . J . Lang , and E . L . Reinherz . 2012 . TCR mechanobiology : Torques and tunable struc - tures linked to early T cell signaling . Front . Immunol . 3 : 76 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fimmu . 2012 . 00076 Kinashi , T . 2005 . Intracellular signalling controlling integrin activation in lymphocytes . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 5 : 546 – 559 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nri1646 Kong , F . , A . J . García , A . P . Mould , M . J . Humphries , and C . Zhu . 2009 . Demon - stration of catch bonds between an integrin and its ligand . J . Cell Biol . 185 : 1275 – 1284 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200810002 Kong , F . , Z . Li , W . M . Parks , D . W . Dumbauld , A . J . García , A . P . Mould , M . J . Humphries , and C . Zhu . 2013 . Cyclic mechanical reinforcement of integrin - ligand interactions . Mol . Cell . 49 : 1060 – 1068 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2013 . 01 . 015 Lefort , C . T . , Y . M . Hyun , J . B . Schultz , F . Y . Law , R . E . Waugh , P . A . Knauf , and M . Kim . 2009 . Outside - in signal transmission by conformational changes in integrin Mac - 1 . J . Immunol . 183 : 6460 – 6468 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0900983 Levitsky , H . I . , A . Lazenby , R . J . Hayashi , and D . M . Pardoll . 1994 . In vivo priming of two distinct antitumor effector populations : the role of MHC class I expres - sion . J . Exp . Med . 179 : 1215 – 1224 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 179 . 4 . 1215 Li , D . , J . J . Molldrem , and Q . Ma . 2009 . LFA - 1 regulates CD8 + T cell activation via T cell receptor - mediated and LFA - 1 - mediated Erk1 / 2 signal path - ways . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 21001 – 21010 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 002865 Li , Y . C . , B . M . Chen , P . C . Wu , T . L . Cheng , L . S . Kao , M . H . Tao , A . Lieber , and S . R . Roffler . 2010 . Cutting Edge : mechanical forces acting on T cells im - mobilized via the TCR complex can trigger TCR signaling . J . Immunol . 184 : 5959 – 5963 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0900775 Liu , G . , A . T . Place , Z . Chen , V . M . Brovkovych , S . M . Vogel , W . A . Muller , R . A . Skidgel , A . B . Malik , and R . D . Minshall . 2012 . ICAM - 1 - activated Src 473 Cytoskeletal control of ICAm - 1 mobility in dendritic cells • Comrie et al . Steenblock , E . R . , T . Fadel , M . Labowsky , J . S . Pober , and T . M . Fahmy . 2011 . An artificial antigen - presenting cell with paracrine delivery of IL - 2 im - pacts the magnitude and direction of the T cell response . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 34883 – 34892 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 276329 Tadokoro , S . , S . J . Shattil , K . Eto , V . Tai , R . C . Liddington , J . M . de Pereda , M . H . Ginsberg , and D . A . Calderwood . 2003 . Talin binding to integrin  tails : a final common step in integrin activation . Science . 302 : 103 – 106 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1086652 Thauland , T . J . , and D . C . Parker . 2010 . Diversity in immunological synapse structure . Immunology . 131 : 466 – 472 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2567 . 2010 . 03366 . x Treanor , B . , D . Depoil , A . Gonzalez - Granja , P . Barral , M . Weber , O . Dushek , A . Bruckbauer , and F . D . Batista . 2010 . The membrane skeleton controls diffusion dynamics and signaling through the B cell receptor . Immunity . 32 : 187 – 199 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2009 . 12 . 005 Tseng , S . Y . , M . Liu , and M . L . Dustin . 2005 . CD80 cytoplasmic domain controls localization of CD28 , CTLA - 4 , and protein kinase C  in the immuno - logical synapse . J . Immunol . 175 : 7829 – 7836 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 175 . 12 . 7829 Varga , G . , N . Nippe , S . Balkow , T . Peters , M . K . Wild , S . Seeliger , S . Beissert , M . Krummen , J . Roth , C . Sunderkötter , and S . Grabbe . 2010 . LFA - 1 con - tributes to signal I of T - cell activation and to the production of T ( h ) 1 cy - tokines . J . Invest . Dermatol . 130 : 1005 – 1012 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / jid . 2009 . 398 Verdijk , P . , P . A . van Veelen , A . H . de Ru , P . J . Hensbergen , K . Mizuno , H . K . Koerten , F . Koning , C . P . Tensen , and A . M . Mommaas . 2004 . Morphological changes during dendritic cell maturation correlate with cofilin activation and trans - location to the cell membrane . Eur . J . Immunol . 34 : 156 – 164 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / eji . 200324241 Wang , Y . , K . Shibuya , Y . Yamashita , J . Shirakawa , K . Shibata , H . Kai , T . Yokosuka , T . Saito , S . Honda , S . Tahara - Hanaoka , and A . Shibuya . 2008 . LFA - 1 decreases the antigen dose for T cell activation in vivo . Int . Immunol . 20 : 1119 – 1127 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / intimm / dxn070 Wang , H . , B . Wei , G . Bismuth , and C . E . Rudd . 2009 . SLP - 76 - ADAP adaptor module regulates LFA - 1 mediated costimulation and T cell motility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 106 : 12436 – 12441 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0900510106 Xie , J . , J . B . Huppa , E . W . Newell , J . Huang , P . J . Ebert , Q . J . Li , and M . M . Davis . 2012 . Photocrosslinkable pMHC monomers stain T cells specifically and cause ligand - bound TCRs to be ‘preferentially’ transported to the cSMAC . Nat . Immunol . 13 : 674 – 680 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni . 2344 Xu , H . , J . A . Gonzalo , Y . St Pierre , I . R . Williams , T . S . Kupper , R . S . Cotran , T . A . Springer , and J . C . Gutierrez - Ramos . 1994 . Leukocytosis and resistance to septic shock in intercellular adhesion molecule 1 - deficient mice . J . Exp . Med . 180 : 95 – 109 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 180 . 1 . 95 Yang , Y . , C . D . Jun , J . H . Liu , R . Zhang , A . Joachimiak , T . A . Springer , and J . H . Wang . 2004 . Structural basis for dimerization of ICAM - 1 on the cell surface . Mol . Cell . 14 : 269 – 276 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1097 - 2765 ( 04 ) 00204 - 7 Zhu , J . , C . V . Carman , M . Kim , M . Shimaoka , T . A . Springer , and B . H . Luo . 2007 . Requirement of  and  subunit transmembrane helix separation for integrin outside - in signaling . Blood . 110 : 2475 – 2483 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2007 - 03 - 080077 Zhu , J . , B . H . Luo , T . Xiao , C . Zhang , N . Nishida , and T . A . Springer . 2008 . Structure of a complete integrin ectodomain in a physiologic resting state and activation and deactivation by applied forces . Mol . Cell . 32 : 849 – 861 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2008 . 11 . 018 Zhu , J . , J . Zhu , and T . A . Springer . 2013 . Complete integrin headpiece opening in eight steps . J . Cell Biol . 201 : 1053 – 1068 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201212037