Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 Technology as a complex adaptive system : evidence from patent data Lee Fleming a , ∗ , Olav Sorenson b , 1 a Morgan T97 , School of Business Administration , Harvard University , Boston , MA 02163 , USA b Anderson School of Management , University of California - Los Angeles , Suite B420 , Los Angeles , CA 90095 - 1481 , USA Received 22 August 2000 ; received in revised form 22 August 2000 ; accepted 23 August 2000 Abstract This paper develops a theory of invention by drawing on complex adaptive systems theory . We see invention as a process of recombinant search over technology landscapes . This framing suggests that inventors might face a ‘complexity catastrophe’ when they attempt to combine highly interdependent technologies . Our empirical analysis of patent citation rates supports this expectation . Our results also suggest , however , that the process of invention differs in important ways from biological evolution . We discuss the implications of these ﬁndings for research on technological evolution , industrial change , and technology strategy . © 2001 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . Keywords : Invention ; Complexity ; Interdependence ; Modularity ; Recombination 1 . Introduction The extensive literature on technological change primarily considers the adoption and economic impact of exogenous technologies without considering the origins of those inventions ( Rosenberg , 1982 ; Rogers , 1983 ) . This research typically focuses on commer - cial innovation rather than technological invention ( Schumpeter , 1939 ; Ruttan , 1959 ) , argues against considering them as distinct phenomena ( Marquis , 1969 ; Nelson and Winter , 1982 ) , or considers the organizational issues of technological change ( Aber - nathy and Utterback , 1978 ; Tushman and Anderson , 1986 ; Henderson and Clark , 1990 ) . As a result , we understand relatively well the processes of techno - logical diffusion , commercial innovation , and the ∗ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 1 - 617 - 495 - 6613 . E - mail addresses : lﬂeming @ hbs . edu ( L . Fleming ) , olav . sorenson @ anderson . ucla . edu ( O . Sorenson ) . 1 Tel . : + 1 - 310 - 825 - 7348 . inﬂuences on or implications of technological change on organizations ; however , we lack a systematic and empirically validated theory of invention . We believe that Kauffman’s ( 1993 ) recent work in evolutionary biology provides a useful framework for developing a theory of invention . Kauffman examines the role of complexity — the interaction of size and interdependence — in adaptive systems . Following an old tradition in biology , he conceptualizes evolution as a process of search over ﬁtness landscapes ( Wright , 1932 ) . Organisms seek higher positions — that repre - sent superior levels of biological ﬁtness — on these landscapes . Kauffman contributes to our understand - ing of evolution by linking this adaptive process to the genetic structure of the organism . Speciﬁcally , interde - pendence between an organism’s genes generates the topography of the landscapes in Kauffman’s model . Because the topography of the landscape determines the likelihood of fruitful search , this connects the in - terdependence of the individual genes to the adaptive ability of the organism as a whole . 0048 - 7333 / 01 / $ – see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . PII : S0048 - 7333 ( 00 ) 00135 - 9 1020 L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 By conceiving of technological evolution as a recombination of new and existing component tech - nologies , we draw on Kauffman’s work to develop a theory of invention as a search process over tech - nology landscapes . Let us assume that an invention’s components are analogous to an organism’s genes . Under this assumption , Kauffman’s ﬁndings imply a non - monotonic relationship between component in - terdependence and successful search . At low levels of interdependence , greater interdependence increases the probability of success by providing opportunities to combine components synergistically . Nevertheless , as the degree of interdependence rises , it becomes increasingly difﬁcult to ﬁnd these useful combina - tions . Kauffman’s work also suggests new hypotheses regarding the relationship between the number and interdependence of components combined and the expected usefulness of those combinations . Negative binomial models of patent citation counts demonstrate empirical support for the relevance of these ideas to invention . The results also suggest ways in which the process of invention differs from biological adaptive processes . 2 . A review of the contributing literatures 2 . 1 . Evolutionary analogies in the technology literatures This paper follows a long tradition of borrowing biological frameworks to understand technological change and the process of invention . As early as 1935 , Gilﬁllan noted that “The nature of invention . . . is an evolution , rather than a series of creations , and much resembles a biologic process” , ( p . 275 ) . A similar insight led Schumpeter to propose that the effects of inventions , “ . . . illustrate the same process of indus - trial mutation — if I may use that biological term — that incessantly revolutionizes the economic structure from within incessantly destroying the old , incessantly creating a new one” , ( 1942 , p . 82 ) . More recently , Abernathy and Utterback ( 1978 ) argued that tech - nologies follow a ‘technological life - cycle’ — like living organisms , they are born , mature , obsolesce , and die . Similarly , Tushman and Anderson ( 1986 ) draw on paleontology ( Eldredge and Gould , 1972 ) by arguing that technology moves through periods of equilibrium punctuated by intervals of rapid change . This rich history of borrowing concepts from evolu - tionary biology bears testament to the usefulness of these ideas to the study of technology . 2 . 2 . Invention as a process of recombination Many of the scholars who use evolutionary analo - gies also propose that technological novelty arises from the recombination and synthesis of existing tech - nologies ( Gilﬁllan , 1935 ; Schumpeter , 1939 ; Usher , 1954 ; Basalla , 1988 ; Henderson and Clark , 1990 ; Weitzman , 1996 ; Hargadon and Sutton , 1997 ) . 2 Thus , one can often describe inventions as a combi - nation of prior and / or new technologies . For example , one might think of the automobile as a combination of the bicycle , the horse carriage , and the internal combustion engine . The steam ship can be charac - terized as combining the boat with steam power . Similarly , one might consider the microprocessor to be a conjunction of a computer’s central processing unit with integrated circuit fabrication processes . The annals of history also document a variety of unsuc - cessful combinations , such as the plane – automobile combination or the nuclear powered aircraft ( Basalla , 1988 ) . Following these ideas , we consider an inven - tion to be either a new synthesis of existing and / or new technological components or a reﬁnement of a previous combination of technologies ( Henderson and Clark , 1990 ; Fleming , 2001 ) . This framework allows us to think of invention as a process of recombinant search for better combinations and conﬁgurations of constituent technologies . 2 . 3 . The landscape of recombinant search Landscapes provide a useful way to conceptualize these recombinant search processes . Imagine a terrain with hills and valleys . 3 Each unique set of genes or 2 Although they do not focus on recombination , many other researchers , including : Allen ( 1977 ) , Nelson and Winter ( 1982 ) , Von Hippel ( 1988 ) , Tushman and Rosenkopf ( 1992 ) , and Iansiti ( 1998 ) , implicitly assume or adopt this recombinant perspective . 3 Fitness landscapes include one dimension for each compo - nent plus an additional dimension for the ﬁtness associated with that combination of components . Although these landscapes typ - ically exist in many dimensions , we conceptualize search over a three - dimensional space for the intuitive value . L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 1021 Fig . 1 . Landscape without interdependence ( N = 3 , K = 0 ) . This relatively correlated landscape has only one minimum and one maximum , 100 ( 0 . 40 ) and 011 ( 0 . 80 ) , respectively . The component ﬁtness contributions come from a uniform [ 0 , 1 ] distribution . components corresponds to a different landscape . On these landscapes , each location represents a particu - lar conﬁguration of those genes or components . The height at that location indicates the ﬁtness ( i . e . value or usefulness ) of that particular conﬁguration or archi - tecture . In the biological sciences , higher points corre - spond to ﬁtter genotypes . In the technical world , higher points correspond to better inventions . Wright ( 1932 ) ﬁrst introduced these ‘ﬁtness landscapes’ as a tool for understanding the distribution of genes in the popula - tion of a species . In addition to many applications in bi - ology , organizational theorists have usefully extended this concept to the study of ﬁrms ( e . g . McPherson and Ranger - Moore , 1991 ; Bruderer and Singh , 1996 ; Levinthal , 1997 ; Sorenson , 1997 ; Gavetti and Levinthal , 2000 ; Rivkin , 2000 ) . We believe this con - cept can also inform the understanding of invention . For our purposes , Kauffman ( 1993 ) provides an important innovation by linking the topography of the ﬁtness landscape to the structure of the underlying components . 4 He does this by developing a simula - tion model that varies along two parameters , N , the number of components comprising a whole , and K , the degree of interdependence among these compo - nents . Using these models , Kauffman demonstrates that K primarily determines the topography of the landscape ( Weinberger , 1991 ; Kauffman , 1993 ) . Kauffman deﬁnes an organism as a binary string of N components . Different conﬁgurations of these N 4 This description closely follows Kauffman’s ( 1993 ) explanation of the NK model on page 42 . components correspond to different positions on the landscape . For example , 0 0 1 represents one of eight possible conﬁgurations when N = 3 ( as illustrated in Fig . 1 , the others would be 0 0 0 , 0 1 0 , 0 1 1 , 1 0 0 , 1 0 1 , 1 1 0 , 1 1 1 ) . Each of the eight vertices of the binary string correspond to different conﬁgurations and , hence , different points on the ﬁtness landscape . The calculation of the ﬁtness values for each con - ﬁguration depends on the value of K . We examine two cases : K = 0 ( no interdependence ) and K = 2 ( the maximum possible interdependence for N = 3 components ) . For K = 0 , Kauffman randomly assigns a value from the uniform unit distribution to each level ( 0 and 1 ) of the binary components . To calculate the ag - gregate ﬁtness value for each conﬁguration , he aver - ages the ﬁtness contributions of the components . When K = 0 , components contribute independently to the overall ﬁtness , so one simply averages the values for the components of that string . Fig . 1 illustrates this procedure . When K > 0 , however , the components in - teract to contribute to the overall ﬁtness . In addition to the focal component , the ﬁtness contribution for each element depends on the values of K other elements . For example , when K = 2 , the ﬁtness assigned to a partic - ular component depends not only on the value of that component ( i . e . 1 or 0 ) , but also on the value of two other components . Thus , a component can contribute any of eight ( 2 × 2 × 2 ) potential values to the ﬁtness of the organism . Kauffman maps each of these combina - tions to a ﬁtness value by randomly drawing from the uniform distribution [ 0 , 1 ] . Fig . 2 depicts this process . 1022 L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 Fig . 2 . Landscape with maximal interdependence ( N = 3 , K = 2 ) . This relatively uncorrelated landscape has multiple local minima , 001 ( 0 . 30 ) and 100 ( 0 . 37 ) , and maxima , 000 ( 0 . 63 ) and 101 ( 0 . 87 ) . Kauffman ( 1993 ) assumes that populations of or - ganisms search locally on these landscapes . In other words , they change one component at a time and assess whether that change improves ﬁtness . If it does , the population adopts the new combination of components . Otherwise , it retains the current com - bination . Graphically , this amounts to moving to neighboring positions when they offer an increase in altitude relative to the current location . Although this mode of search seems particularly relevant in the biological world , where agents ( e . g . genes ) often lack intelligence , researchers also note a tendency for local search across cognitive ( March and Simon , 1958 ) , organizational ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ; March , 1991 ; Sørensen and Stuart , 2000 ) , and technological ( Nelson and Winter , 1982 ; Stuart and Podolny , 1996 ) contexts . The key insight from this model for our purpose is that interdependence leads to less - correlated and , hence , more - jumbled landscapes . Consider the case without interdependence in Fig . 1 . As one moves be - tween adjacent vertices , the ﬁtness values associated with these neighboring points do not shift abruptly . Rather , the landscape changes smoothly because two of the three terms contributing to the ﬁtness calcula - tion remain the same . In contrast , contiguous ﬁtness values in Fig . 2 differ drastically because all three contributing ﬁtness scores vary even across neighbor - ing points . When combined with a search algorithm , these landscapes allow us to predict the ease or difﬁ - culty of adaptation . The topography of these landscapes determines the expected success of local search . For example , lo - cal search more likely yields favorable outcomes on low - K landscapes . These landscapes have fewer peaks ( maxima ) . Thus , incremental improvements tend to approach the best combinations on these terrains . Moreover , low - K landscapes exhibit a high degree of spatial autocorrelation . In other words , the maxima tend to cluster on the landscape ; knowing the location of one peak makes it easier to ﬁnd other peaks . As K increases , however , the number of maxima increases and the average height of these maxima declines . Furthermore , as K rises , the degree of autocorrelation diminishes . Thus , the location of the peaks becomes increasingly dispersed and unpredictable . These ef - fects suggest that , on average , local search and incre - mental adaptation strategies will generate less useful outcomes on high - K landscapes . Nevertheless , the increasing ruggedness of the landscape also implies that the potential for a breakthrough invention in - creases . Although the average peak height declines as interdependence rises , some of the ‘good’ positions on the high - K landscape dominate the best points on the low - K landscape . 3 . Theory : invention as a process of recombinant search over an NK landscape We conceptualize inventors’ efforts as a search pro - cess over technology landscapes . The fruitfulness of L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 1023 search on these landscapes varies according to the size and the degree of interdependence of these terrains . In our framework , each distinct set of technological components offers an unique landscape that an inven - tor can search . For each particular set of components , ﬁtness values indicate the usefulness of different con - ﬁgurations of these components . For example , given a bowl and a spoon as two components , applications tend to be more useful when the bowl faces upwards rather than downwards . Thus , the upwards conﬁgura - tions typically correspond to higher ﬁtness points on the landscape than the downwards conﬁgurations . In our conceptualization of technological search , the number of components that an inventor recom - bines corresponds to Kauffman’s N , whereas K coincides with the interdependence among these components . Note that our conceptualization of com - ponents extends beyond mere physical hardware to include any constituent technology ( Fleming , 2001 ) . We deﬁne interdependence as the functional sensitivity of an invention to changes in these con - stituent components . 5 Our deﬁnition of interdepen - dence closely mirrors Ulrich’s ( 1995 ) deﬁnition of ‘coupling’ , where , “ . . . change made to one com - ponent requires change to another for the product to work correctly” . Our deﬁnition also resembles Baldwin and Clark’s ( 2000 , p . 12 ) , ‘where ( design interdependencies ) exist , a seemingly small change in one design parameter can interact with other parame - ters to completely destroy the value of the particular artifact’ . For example , a silicon semiconductor’s re - sistance depends crucially on the amount of impurity doped into the silicon . If the dopant level changes by 1 part in 10 8 , the resistance at 30 ◦ C can change by a factor of 24 100 ( Millman , 1979 , p . 13 ) . In this ex - treme case , the modiﬁcation made to one component cannot be corrected by another — the device simply fails to work . The tremendous amount of research and investment in semiconductors over the past 50 5 Modular design techniques make components less interdepen - dent . We hesitate , however , to deﬁne interdependence strictly in terms of modularity because the existing literature deﬁnes modular - ity in a variety of ways ( for examples , see McCord and Eppinger , 1993 ; Ulrich , 1995 ; Ulrich and Eppinger , 1995 ; Simon , 1996 ; Christensen et al . , 1999 ; Baldwin and Clark , 2000 ) . Moreover , these deﬁnitions typically arise from studying products rather than invention ( Eppinger , 1999 ) . We consider the implications of our ﬁndings for the wider modularity literature in the discussion . years attests to the difﬁculty of combining these two highly interdependent components , both in determin - ing their optimal conﬁguration and in manufacturing them reliably . Nevertheless , one should remember that even though interdependence makes an invention difﬁcult to perfect , it also enables some very useful combinations . Kauffman’s ( 1993 ) simulation reveals a non - monotonic relationship between K and the ﬁtness or peaks found by local search ; essentially , an interme - diate level of interdependence is best for adaptation . As K increases , the height of the highest peak on the landscape rises . This occurs because the compo - nent ﬁtness values that contribute to the aggregate ﬁtness value become less - correlated . Fundamentally , the randomness of the aggregate ﬁtness values in - creases thereby increasing the likelihood that one of those draws yields a high value . Nevertheless , it also becomes increasingly difﬁcult to ﬁnd these good peaks ( Kauffman , 1993 ; Rivkin , 2000 ) . As K rises still further , the probability of conﬂicting constraints increases . Conﬂicting constraints imply that an incre - mental improvement along one dimension tends to coincide with a loss on another dimension , making it increasingly difﬁcult to ﬁnd monotonic and incre - mental paths to the peaks . This implies that the basins of attraction — the regions in which local search leads to the high peaks — become vanishingly small . Finding a high peak becomes a matter of luck . Along with the basins of attraction becoming microscopic , the peaks spread apart . Each discovery of a good peak provides less information regarding where to look for other tall peaks . Moreover , failing to ﬁnd the best peaks becomes increasingly costly because the average height of peaks declines with increasing K . To see the relation to the technological world , consider the extreme case . A complete lack of in - terdependence between components implies little opportunity for creativity . Inventors can change con - ﬁgurations easily , but they see little difference in functionality across these conﬁgurations . Ironically , engineers can and often do work to de - couple their systems , making the components less interdependent and more modular ( Mead and Conway , 1980 ) . This de - coupling makes it easier to mix and match com - ponents and reduces the uncertainty of recombinant search . Because inventors do not need to understand the internal workings of each ‘black box’ , they can 1024 L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 simply try new combinations without designing and building everything from scratch . Nevertheless , mod - ularity also constrains recombination to previously considered and available interfaces . Components combine easily , but they often operate less efﬁciently at a system level . For example , computer engineers can choose to use a modular microprocessor in their system or build the entire computer from scratch . Use of the modular microprocessor makes the process easier , more assured , and probably faster , but it also imposes various design choices upon the team , such as electrical characteristics , pinouts , and architectures . The team’s chances of building a working computer increases , but their ﬂexibility to optimize that system declines . Technological opportunities increase , however , as interdependence increases . Inventors can take ad - vantage of increasing sensitivities and opportunistic couplings between components . Unfortunately , the difﬁculty and uncertainty of the recombinant search process increases along with the opportunity ( Bald - win and Clark , 2000 ) . To understand how components interact with each other , inventors must delve into the internal workings of each ‘black box’ . Processing the interdependencies taxes the cognitive abilities of engineers ( March and Simon , 1958 ) . It also redirects attention , as well as cognitive and social resources , to other stages of the inventive process . Engineers spend their time trying to predict , avoid , and debug the subtle interactions between components , rather than exploring new combinations . The optimal degree of interdependence lies some - where between the extreme cases . Inventors must balance an increased mean outcome against de - creased variability ( March , 1991 ; Fleming , 2001 ) . De - coupling increases the probability that the inven - tion will function , because it truncates the downside risk , however , de - coupling also decreases the likeli - hood of a wildly successful breakthrough because it abbreviates the upside potential as well . The optimal degree of interdependence , therefore , lies where en - gineers can , “ . . . achieve the right balance between fruitful uncertainty and overwhelming complexity” , ( Baldwin and Clark , 2000 , p . 32 ) . Hypothesis 1 . The usefulness of inventors’ efforts in - creases when they combine components with an inter - mediate degree of interdependence . Although K primarily determines the topography of the landscape , the complexity catastrophe occurs most frequently when K increases faster than N ( Kauffman , 1993 ) . We expect to see this effect in a technological context as well . When inventors work with only a few extremely interdependent components , their inventive efforts will typically fail . For example , consider the gear shifting system on a bicycle . Cyclists prefer a greater number of gears because it allows them to ride varied terrain more efﬁciently . Newer bicycles incor - porate nine rear cogs and two front chainrings making 18 gears available . The additional rear cogs stack up to a wider spacing , however , and require a greater width of horizontal travel for the bicycle chain . Unfortu - nately , increasing the horizontal travel makes shifting more difﬁcult . The extreme interdependence between the number of available gears and the shifting mech - anism proves frustrating because it makes an increase in the number of gears impossible without deteriora - tion in the shifting . Fortunately , engineers can modify a third component , the bicycle chain . By decreasing the width of the chain , they can increase the number of gears without increasing the travel width and debil - itating the shifting mechanism . The additional com - ponent enables engineers to mitigate the complexity catastrophe of high interdependence within a small re - combinant space . Hypothesis 2 . When combining highly interdepen - dent components , the usefulness of inventors’ efforts declines most rapidly when they combine a small num - ber of components . As argued in Hypothesis 1 , interdependence be - tween components also makes the outcome of inven - tion inconsistent and unpredictable . Just as the heights of the peaks become more varied as K increases , in - ventive success becomes more varied as components become increasingly interdependent because of the difﬁculty in predicting their subtle interactions . In - deed , much of the beneﬁt to de - coupling stems from making the performance of a component consistent regardless of its interaction with other technologies . Nevertheless , this reduction in risk also reduces the likelihood of inventing revolutionary new combina - tions because the variability of the outcome declines . Variance implies outcomes at both extremes — some much better and some much worse . L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 1025 Hypothesis 3 . Inventors’ efforts become more varied in their usefulness as they combine components with a higher degree of interdependence . Kauffman’s ( 1993 ) work focuses on the impact of interdependence on the search process . Indeed , the NK model simulation results show little effect of N on the mean ﬁtness of local optima ( Weinberger , 1991 ; Kauffman , 1993 ) . The formula for the overall ﬁtness averages the component values , however , such that the typical ﬁtness value converges to the mean of the underlying distribution ( 0 . 5 in the uniform [ 0 , 1 ] dis - tribution above ) as N increases . In qualitative terms , the landscape ﬂattens and expands . Peaks occupy a smaller proportion of the landscape’s surface . If the search agents on such a landscape truly lack fore - sight and search only locally and incrementally , it will take them longer to ﬁnd the peaks . Nevertheless , inventors search their landscapes with varying degrees of knowledge and foresight ( Vincenti , 1990 ) . Hence , they might use the expansion and leveling of the land - scape to their advantage , making peaks easier to lo - cate . Think of spotting , for example , Pike’s peak from the prairies of Eastern Colorado , or Kilimanjaro from the plains of Eastern Africa . Technological , cognitive , and social factors all sug - gest a positive relationship between the number of components and the fruitfulness of invention . The exhaustion of combinatoric possibilities creates a technological constraint on combining a limited set of components . Inventors can only combine a bowl and spoon in so many ways . Nonetheless , this techno - logical constraint quickly disappears as increasing N explodes the combinatoric space ( Weitzman , 1996 ) . Cognitive and social exhaustion will also constrain invention if inventors become locked into established thought patterns when they work with only a few components . With variety , the juxtaposition of dis - parate ﬁelds of thought or physical technology can trigger new associations and breakthroughs ( Adam - son , 1952 ; Usher , 1954 ) . Such juxtapositions increase the possibility of frame breakage ( Amabile , 1988 ) or re - conceptualization of the problem ( Kaplan and Simon , 1990 ) . Nonetheless , the marginal beneﬁt of variety probably decreases with the increasing num - ber of components because inventors experience cog - nitive difﬁculty considering all the components and their potential relationships simultaneously . Hypothesis 4 . The usefulness of inventors’ efforts in - creases , but at a decreasing rate , when they recombine a larger set of components . The size of the recombinant search space also af - fects the variability of outcomes . Consider ﬁrst the case with many components and little interdepen - dence between them ( high - N and low - K ) . Because de - coupled components do not , by deﬁnition , interact to inﬂuence inventive outcomes , inventors who com - bine many de - coupled components can expect to av - erage the usefulness of their constituent components . Following the logic of the Central Limit Theorem , the variance of this mean should decrease as the number of components increases ( Weinberger , 1991 ; Macken et al . , 1991 ) . Hypothesis 5 . At low levels of interdependence , inventors’ efforts become less varied in their useful - ness as they recombine a greater number of compo - nents . Although the NK model does not predict an inter - action effect between K and N on the variability of the landscape ( Macken et al . , 1991 ) , we expect tech - nological outcomes to become more uncertain with a larger number of interdependent components ( high - N and - K ) due to the cognitive limits of inventors . With intensifying interdependence , inventors ﬁnd it increas - ingly difﬁcult to deal with a large set of components . Cognitive and social limits become increasingly se - vere . Thus , inventive outcomes become more and more uncertain . Hypothesis 6 . At high levels of interdependence , inventors’ efforts become more varied in their useful - ness as they recombine a greater number of compo - nents . 4 . Research design , data , and analysis Our theory places several unusual demands upon our empirical work . First , we need a quantitative mea - sure of ﬁtness or usefulness that spans a broad range of technologies . Second , we must identify the compo - nents of each invention and develop a measure of the interdependence among those components . Finally , we 1026 L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 must estimate the effect of the independent variables on both the mean and variability of usefulness to test our hypotheses . To satisfy these demands , we analyze US patents granted in May and June 1990 ( n = 17 264 ) . 6 We acquired these data from Micro - Patent . Patent data enable us to develop a quantitative measure of ﬁt - ness across a broad range of technologies and to identify measures of the number of components and component interdependence . We measure ﬁtness or usefulness as citations to these patents , N as the num - ber of sub - classes to which each patent belongs , and K as the observed ease of recombination for each patent’s sub - classes . To make maximal use of the data , we generate our explanatory variables using sub - class data from 1790 to 1989 . 7 We analyze these patent citations using negative binomial models with variance decomposition ( the gnbreg routine in STATA ) . Patent data admittedly offer imperfect measures of invention . Companies often fail to patent process in - ventions and industries vary in their propensities to patent ( Levin et al . , 1987 ) . Patents also do not allow us to observe all points on the ﬁtness landscape . Because inventors probably limit their patent applications to their more successful inventions , patents presumably represent only the higher slopes and peaks on these landscapes . This implies that we must infer the topog - raphy of the underlying landscape from these trun - cated data . Nonetheless , simulations indicated that an increase in the mean and variance of a normal distri - bution generates an increased mean and variance in that distribution’s right truncated observations . 8 6 We chose May and June at random from the months in 1990 . 7 In response to a reviewer’s suggestion , we also generated inter - dependence using a 10 years window , from 1980 to 1989 . Using this window attenuated the quadratic effect of K and increased the effects of N and the interaction , but does not alter the substantive interpretation of the results . 8 Kauffman’s ( 1993 ) model determines ﬁtness values by aver - aging the component values . Because the underlying component values come from a uniform distribution , we know , by the Central Limit Theorem , that the ﬁtness values converge to a normal distri - bution . Because the patent citation data represent right truncated observations of inventors’ efforts , we ran simulations to determine the effects of right truncation on the distribution of observed ﬁt - ness values . Contact Fleming for additional information on these simulations . 4 . 1 . Dependent variable We deﬁne usefulness as the number of citations that a patent receives in the 6 years and 5 months following its grant date . 9 Each patent must cite previous patents that relate closely to its own technology . Previous re - search has demonstrated that the number of citations a patent receives correlates highly with its technolog - ical importance , as measured by expert opinions and industry awards ( Albert et al . , 1991 ; Hall et al . , 2000 ) . Trajtenberg ( 1990 ) has also shown that the number of citations correlates strongly with the social value of patents in the computed tomography industry . Thus , citation counts offer a means of measuring inventive usefulness across a broad range of technologies . 10 4 . 2 . Independent variables 4 . 2 . 1 . N : number of components The number of sub - class references assigned to a patent provides our measure of the number of components of that invention . The US Patent Ofﬁce uses sub - class references to indicate which technolo - gies relate to the patent . The Patent Ofﬁce develops and updates these sub - classes such that they con - sistently track technology back to 1790 . The more than 70 000 sub - classes allow for ﬁne - grained classi - ﬁcation of inventions ( Carr , 1995 ) . For example , US Patent # 5 , 136 , 185 covers a test circuit for computer data buses . The Patent Ofﬁce classiﬁes this inven - tion as belonging to the test - facilitate feature , signal transmission , tristate , and current - driving technology sub - classes — all well - understood components in cir - cuit design ( McCluskey , 1986 ) . Every patent belongs to at least one sub - class of technology and , like our example , most ( 92 % ) have multiple memberships . We also include an interaction term : interdependence K divided by the number of sub - classes N . As main effects should take the same functional form as in the interaction term , we enter the inverse of the number of sub - classes as our measure of N . 9 We chose this period to make maximal use of our data which end in November 1996 . This period should capture the bulk of citations to a patent as these citations typically peak within 3 – 5 years from the grant date ( Jaffe and Trajtenberg , 1995 ) . 10 The propensity to cite varies across technologies as a function of the level of activity in that technology . We introduce controls for this activity in Section 4 . 3 . L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 1027 4 . 2 . 2 . K : degree of interdependence between components We calculate our measure of the interdependence K in two stages . 11 Eq . ( 1 ) details our measurement of the ease of recombination , or inverse of interdependence , of an individual sub - class i used in patent l . We ﬁrst identify every use of the sub - class i in previous patents . The sum of the number of previous uses provides the denominator . For the numerator , we count the num - ber of different sub - classes appearing with sub - class i on previous patents . Hence , our measure increases as a particular sub - class combines with a wider variety of other sub - classes , controlling for the total number of applications . This term captures the ease of com - bining a particular technology . To create our measure of interdependence for an entire patent , we invert the average of the ease of recombination scores for the sub - classes to which it belongs ( Eq . ( 2 ) ) . 12 Ease of recombination of sub - class i ≡ E i = count of sub - classes previously combined with sub - class i count of previous patents in sub - class i ( 1 ) Interdependence of patent l ≡ K l = count of sub - classes on patent l (cid:1) l ∈ i E i ( 2 ) 4 . 2 . 3 . Complexity : interaction of N and K Kauffman predicts that the complexity catastrophe occurs when interdependence is high relative to the number of components in the system . Therefore , we interact interdependence with the number of compo - nents as a ratio ( i . e . K / N ) . 4 . 3 . Additional variables 4 . 3 . 1 . Technology controls The technology controls follow a logic similar to ﬁxed - effect modeling . Essentially , they control for differences in the mean and variance of citation rates across technology classes . We compute each of the technology controls in two steps . First , for the tech - nology mean control , we consider citations to patents 11 Our measure of K only proxies for Kauffman’s ( 1993 ) construct . Thus , it differs at least in scaling from his measure . For example , unlike Kauffman’s K , which cannot take values in excess of N , the value of our proxy can exceed the number of components . 12 To explore whether the ‘worst’ sub - class might drive the phe - nomenon , we also modeled interdependence as the inverse of the minimum of the ease of all the sub - classes . This speciﬁcation did not substantively change our ﬁndings . granted between January 1985 through December 1989 . We begin by calculating the average number of citations that each patent in a particular class receives from patents granted from January 1985 to June 1990 ( Eq . ( 3a ) ) . 13 If all patents belonged to only one class , we could use this measure to control for differences in citation likelihood across classes , but most patents be - long to more than one class . Accordingly , we weight this term according to a patent’s class assignments ( Eq . ( 3b ) ) where p is the proportion of patent l ’s memberships that fall in class i . For example , if class 2 averages 2 . 0 cites per patent and class 16 averages 4 . 0 cites per patent , a patent classiﬁed in one class of 2 and three classes of 16 would have an expected citation count of ( 1 / 4 ) × 2 . 0 + ( 3 / 4 ) × 4 . 0 = 3 . 5 . We calculate the technology variance control with a similar process . First , we calculate the average variation in citation rates for patents in each sub - class ( Eq . ( 4a ) ) . We then weight these estimates according to sub - class membership to create a patent speciﬁc measure ( Eq . ( 4b ) ) . Average citations in patent class i ≡ µ i = (cid:1) j ∈ i citations j ( before 7 / 90 ) count of patents j in sub - class i ( 3a ) Technology mean control patent l ≡ M l = p il µ i ( 3b ) Citation variance in patent class i ≡ σ 2 i = (cid:1) j ∈ i ( citations j ( before 7 / 90 ) − µ i ) 2 count of patents j in sub - class i ( 4a ) 13 We allow all patents issued between January 1985 and 30 June 1990 to enter the estimation of the technology controls . This means that the patents used to calculate the technology controls vary in the time for which they can receive citations . Alternatively , we could select a small set of patents from 1985 and base the measures on the subsequent 5 years of citations , however , this approach would ignore the patent activity just prior to our sample . 1028 L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 Technology variance control patent l ≡ V l = p il σ 2 i ( 4b ) 4 . 3 . 2 . Prior art citations We include the number of prior art citations — references to prior patents assigned by the US Patent Ofﬁce — as a control for two reasons . First , previous researchers use prior art citations as a measure of the localness of search . Local search implies that inventors seek to make incremental improvements on existing combinations , rather than searching for breakthrough recombinations . Podolny and Stuart ( 1995 ) use the number of prior art citations to measure this con - cept , essentially assuming that patents making more citations to prior art do so because they expand on ex - isting knowledge more than they develop new ideas . Second , the number of citations provides an additional control for the propensity of patenting in a particular technological domain . We know that industries differ in the degree to which they patent ( Levin et al . , 1987 ) . Fields that patent more heavily provide a larger pool of patents for citation . Although the technology con - trols should capture much of this effect , the number of prior art citations may pick up idiosyncratic differ - ences in patenting activity that our class controls miss . 4 . 3 . 3 . Single class dummy control Eight percent of the patents in our dataset belong to only one sub - class . We believe that these inventions also come from a process of recombination , but this combination occurs at a ﬁner grain than our measures can capture . For this reason , we include a dummy vari - able to control for any systematic differences gener - ated by the coarseness of our measures . 4 . 3 . 4 . Number of classes control We include a count of the number of major classes to strengthen our test of Hypothesis 4 . Patents that cover a broad range of technologies might carry a higher risk of being cited simply because future inventions from each of those ﬁelds may potentially cite it — similar to what happens when an academic article merges sev - eral literatures . Nevertheless , the high citation counts of bridging technologies and articles do not necessar - ily indicate that they exceed the quality of those that ﬁt within a single socially constructed category . For - tunately , we can control for this possibility to some degree by taking advantage of the fact that the patent ofﬁce hierarchically organizes the 70 000 sub - classes into one of 400 major classes of similar technologies . 4 . 3 . 5 . Number of trials We measure the number of trials on a particular landscape by counting the number of previous patents that combine exactly the same set of sub - classes . This controls for two potentially confounding issues . First , local search has its limitations . As inventors ﬁnd useful combinations with a particular set of components , the potential for ﬁnding additional useful recombinations declines . In effect , inventors exhaust the combinatoric possibilities ( Fleming , 2001 ) . 14 Second , the number of trials could pick up residual information on the value of K for a particular set of components . We know that the number of peaks rises as a function of K ( Kauffman , 1993 ) . Since we expect patents to represent peaks in the landscape , the number of prior instances of a combination provides a measure of the number of peaks found to date . 4 . 4 . Descriptive statistics Tables 1 and 2 present descriptive statistics and bivariate correlations for our variables . 4 . 5 . Negative binomial count models Linear regression cannot properly estimate parame - ters for these models . Because the dependent variable , patent citation counts , cannot fall below zero , linear regression — which cannot account for this constraint — can yield inefﬁcient , inconsistent , and biased co - efﬁcient estimates ( Long , 1997 ) . Count models offer a better means of analyzing these data . Researchers often use Poisson models to analyze count data , but these models constrain the variance to equal the mean . Our data , like most count data , exhibit over - dispersion ( i . e . the variance exceeds the mean ) . To accommo - date this over - dispersion , researchers can use negative binomial regression ( Hausman et al . , 1984 ) . To test our hypotheses about both the usefulness and vari - ability of invention , we use a particular variant of the negative binomial model that allows us to model 14 Sorenson ( 2000 ) ﬁnds evidence of a similar exhaustion effect among entrepreneurs searching for new organizational forms within an existing industry . L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 1029 Table 1 Descriptive statistics Variable Mean S . D . Minimum Maximum Citations 3 . 80 4 . 88 0 . 00 82 . 00 Mean technology control 1 . 19 0 . 41 0 . 33 3 . 03 Variance technology control 4 . 65 2 . 65 0 . 36 20 . 55 Prior art citations 7 . 63 6 . 99 0 . 00 110 . 00 Single sub - class control dummy 0 . 08 0 . 27 0 . 00 1 . 00 Number of classes control 1 . 78 0 . 95 1 . 00 12 . 00 Number of repeated trials control 2 . 94 15 . 23 0 . 00 716 . 00 1 / N : 1 / components 0 . 35 0 . 23 0 . 01 1 . 00 K : interdependence 0 . 63 0 . 35 0 . 06 5 . 00 K / N : complexity 0 . 25 0 . 30 0 . 00 4 . 76 Table 2 Correlation matrix Cites Mean control Variance control Activity Single Classes Trials 1 / N K Mean control 0 . 308 Variance control 0 . 302 0 . 944 Prior cites 0 . 124 0 . 020 0 . 004 Single − 0 . 062 0 . 002 0 . 004 − 0 . 065 Classes 0 . 077 − 0 . 021 0 . 006 0 . 063 − 0 . 244 Trials − 0 . 033 − 0 . 028 − 0 . 033 − 0 . 007 0 . 448 − 0 . 143 1 / N − 0 . 103 0 . 007 − 0 . 013 − 0 . 106 0 . 829 − 0 . 470 0 . 415 K − 0 . 029 − 0 . 057 − 0 . 131 0 . 017 0 . 194 − 0 . 275 0 . 364 0 . 329 Complex − 0 . 062 − 0 . 023 − 0 . 067 − 0 . 047 0 . 613 − 0 . 351 0 . 575 0 . 719 0 . 798 heterogeneity in the variance parameter simultane - ously with heterogeneity in the mean ( King , 1989 ) . The basic Poisson model ( Eq . ( 5 ) ) estimates the probability of an observed value conditional on the values of a set of independent variables . To avoid neg - ative ( i . e . undeﬁned ) predicted values for the mean µ i , Poisson models typically parameterize indepen - dent variables as an exponential function ( Eq . ( 6 ) ) . Pr ( y i | x i ) = e − µ i µ y i i y i ! ( 5 ) E ( y i | x i ) = µ i = e x i β ( 6 ) The negative binomial model replaces the Poisson mean , µ i , with the random variable ˜ µ i ( Eq . ( 7 ) ) . This replacement enables the inclusion of an error term δ i = e ε i — and allows the predicted mean to vary according to the distribution of the error term . Most formulations specify a gamma function with parame - ter ν i for the random variable δ in Eq . ( 7 ) ( Hausman et al . , 1984 ; Cameron and Trivedi , 1986 ; King , 1989 ; Long , 1997 ) . 15 When ˜ µ i replaces µ i in Eq . ( 5 ) , the probability of the observed variable becomes depen - dent on δ . This conditioning can be removed , however , by specifying the error distribution and integrating with its probability density function to obtain the marginal density . Eq . ( 8 ) details the marginal density as a function of the mean and dispersion parameter ν . The parameterization of the mean follows the same form as the Poisson . ˜ µ i = e x i β e ε i = µ i δ i ( 7 ) Pr ( y i | x i ) = Γ ( y i + ν i ) y i ! Γ ( ν i ) (cid:2) ν i ν i + µ i (cid:3) ν i (cid:2) µ i ν i + µ i (cid:3) y i ( 8 ) Typically , the negative binomial model constrains the degree of over - dispersion to a constant multiple of the 15 Although the error term can take other distributions , this pa - rameterization is both ﬂexible and computationally tractable . 1030 L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 mean . This speciﬁcation , however , does not allow us to test our hypotheses regarding the variation in in - vention usefulness . Hence , we parameterize the dis - persion term using the Negbin II formulation shown in Eq . ( 9 ) ( Cameron and Trivedi , 1986 ) . In this model , α , the inverse of ν , is also parameterized as an ex - ponential function ( similar to Eq . ( 6 ) ) . This speciﬁca - tion ﬁts best when the variance to mean ratio exceeds a linear scaling of the mean . 16 STATA estimates the joint probability distribution of Eq . ( 8 ) using maxi - mum likelihood methods . Var ( y i | x ) = µ i (cid:2) 1 + µ i ν i (cid:3) = µ i + αµ 2 i ( 9 ) 4 . 6 . Results Table 3 presents the results of our estimation . We began our analysis by entering controls only in model 1 . We then added all ﬁrst and second order terms for the number of components , their degree of interdepen - dence , and the interaction term K / N to model 2 . With the exception of the quadratic effect of the number of components on the dispersion of citations , all the in - dependent variables in model 2 show signiﬁcant devi - ation from zero . Model 3 drops the quadratic term in the variance because N appears to increase dispersion monotonically . Model 4 demonstrates that the results remain insensitive to the inclusion of control variables . The results support the applicability of Kauffman’s model to the process of invention . Due to the difﬁ - culty of simultaneously interpreting the various NK terms , we graph their estimated effects from model 3 . Figs . 3 and 4 depict the effect of the various size and interdependence terms on the mean from two different 16 In contrast , the Negbin I holds the degree of over - dispersion to be constant with increases in the mean . Following Cameron and Trivedi ( 1986 ) , we veriﬁed use of the quadratic formulation by linear regression of ( citations − predicted citations ) 2 / predicted citations on predicted citations from a simple Poisson model . This regression estimated the co - efﬁcients of the constant and regressor as 2 . 64 ( 0 . 510 ) and 0 . 617 ( 0 . 123 ) , indicating an over - dispersed Poisson whose variance ex - ceeds a linear scaling of the mean . The 95 % conﬁdence interval of the regressor [ 0 . 377 , 0 . 857 ] lies above 0 ; if it included 0 , then we could not reject the Negbin I in favor of the Negbin II . Negbin II models also demonstrated higher log likelihoods . angles ( both graphs depict the same surface ) . 17 The ﬁgures clearly show a non - monotonic effect with re - spect to K . As predicted in Hypothesis 1 , an interme - diate amount of interdependence optimizes invention usefulness . At the mean value of N , 4 . 2 , the optimal value of K equals 1 . 37 . Most importantly , the best and worst points on this ﬁgure differ by almost 600 % . To understand the magnitude of this effect , note that the median citation count is 2 and the 94th percentile lies at 12 . In other words , the number and interdependence of the elements recombined can make the difference between an invention being average versus being in the top 6 % of successful patents . One might worry that we force K to take a quadratic relationship to the expected number of citations by in - cluding only linear and quadratic terms in the model . K might actually increase citation rates at a decreas - ing rate since the bulk of our data lie before the esti - mated inﬂection point . To investigate this possibility , we created a detailed spline of the estimated multiplier effects across the range of K . 18 The points in Fig . 5 appear to conform to a quadratic relationship , though the inﬂection point appears to occur at a slightly lower level of K than when modeled as a quadratic function . Returning to Figs . 3 and 4 , we ﬁnd little evidence of the intensiﬁcation of the complexity catastrophe for low - N in technological evolution . Hypothesis 2 pre - dicted that inventors would face a technological com - plexity catastrophe when they combine a few highly interdependent components . At high levels of interde - pendence ( lower left in Fig . 3 ) , increasing N does lead to increasing usefulness . Nonetheless , the weak slope of the bottom edge in Fig . 3 illustrates the practical weakness of this effect . 19 Still , these results support consideration of technology as a complex adaptive sys - tem , as motivating such an interaction effect from the 17 Figs . 3 , 4 and 6 present multiplier effects . A multiplier of 1 essentially indicates no effect . Thus , a multiplier of 0 . 6 indicates that the independent variable depresses citation rates by 40 % at that particular level of the variable . In multiplicative models , multiplier rates provide the easiest means of evaluating the effects of a variable because they do not require one to make assumptions regarding the levels of the other variables . 18 We sorted the data by K and split the variable into 20 equal sized categories ( i . e . ﬁfth percentiles ) . We assigned each category a dummy variable , except the bottom category which we used as a baseline ( hence , the intersection at the origin ) . 19 The 10 years truncated measure of K demonstrated stronger and signiﬁcant support for the complexity catastrophe . L . F l e m i ng , O . So r e n s on / R e s e a r c h P o li cy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 1031 1032 L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 Fig . 3 . Expected mean multiplier effect as a function of N and K ( estimated from model 3 ) : µ i = exp ( x i β ) = exp (cid:4) − 0 . 11single − 1 . 58 N + 0 . 88 N 2 + 0 . 29 K − 0 . 12 K 2 + 0 . 26 KN (cid:5) . classical literature on technological evolution would prove difﬁcult . As predicted in Hypothesis 4 , increasing the num - ber of components leads to increased citation counts . Nevertheless , this increase does not occur at an in - creasing rate with respect to N . Rather , an increase in the number of components dramatically improves ci - tation rates at low values , but this effect diminishes at higher values of N . This sharp immediate rise suggests that small recombinant search spaces severely con - strain researchers . Inventors need at least some critical number of components to generate useful inventions . Yet , beyond this threshold , adding components to the mix does little to improve invention . We suspect that cognitive limitations prevent inventors from taking full advantage of increasingly large search spaces . Fig . 6 illustrates the effect of the same variables on the dispersion of citations . As predicted in Hy - pothesis 3 , K contributes to an increase in disper - sion , but mostly at higher values . Over much of its range , K negligibly impacts variance . The interac - tion between size and complexity provides additional support for the applicability of the NK model . At low levels of K , increasing numbers of components stabilize invention . In contrast , an increase in com - ponents decreases the certainty of outcomes with highly interdependent components . Inventors appear capable of coping with increasing numbers of com - ponents as long as those components do not interact . Although the results demonstrate statistical support for the variability Hypotheses 3 , 5 and 6 , only the effect of increasing interdependence appears to entail important practical implications . Though signiﬁcant , Fig . 6 shows that the main effect of interdependence dramatically overshadows the consequences of the number of components . L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 1033 Fig . 4 . Expected mean multiplier effect as a function of N and K ( estimated from model 3 ) : µ i = exp ( x i β ) = exp (cid:4) − 0 . 11single − 1 . 58 N + 0 . 88 N 2 + 0 . 29 K − 0 . 12 K 2 + 0 . 26 KN (cid:5) . Fig . 5 . Piece - wise estimate of relation between expected mean and K . 1034 L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 Fig . 6 . Estimated dispersion parameter multiplier effect as a function of N and K ( estimated from model 3 ) : α = exp ( z i γ ) = exp (cid:6) − 0 . 21single + 0 . 97 N − 0 . 63 K + 0 . 26 K 2 − 0 . 37 KN (cid:7) . Although our results broadly conﬁrm Kauffman’s ( 1993 ) NK model of evolution in a technological con - text , they return disappointing results with respect to the relative importance of factors traditionally thought to inﬂuence inventive processes . In particular , despite arguments for the ubiquity and efﬁcacy of local search ( March and Simon , 1958 ; Nelson and Winter , 1982 ; March , 1991 ; Stuart and Podolny , 1996 ) , such strate - gies seem far less important to the outcome of inven - tion than the topography of the search space . Amongst the local search and number of trials variables , only the effect of the number of prior art citations on the mean differed signiﬁcantly from zero . Most dramati - cally , although earlier research points to this as an im - portant determinant of patent usefulness ( Podolny and Stuart , 1995 ) , the effect of prior art citations on the mean is an order of magnitude weaker than the NK terms . These results should be viewed cautiously for a va - riety of reasons . The typical reservations regarding the use of patent data apply , most notably that patent - ing practices and effectiveness vary across industries ( Levin et al . , 1987 ) . Although the models controlled for differences in technology and patent characteris - tics , they did not introduce explicit controls for in - dustries . In addition to differences in citations across communities , the accuracy of the independent vari - ables also varies across communities . Sub - classes and the inverse of their ease of recombination provide only a proxy for inventors’ components and interdepen - dence . Although the sub - classes of some technologies may correspond very closely to engineering compo - nents , other sub - classes may not . For example , while sub - classes for digital hardware may match inventor’s components quite closely ( Fleming , 2001 ) , others in ﬁelds such as genetics and ﬁnance may not . Given L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 1035 the difﬁculty of measuring interdependence , however , particularly across a large sample , the work provides promising initial results for the applicability of com - plexity theory to invention . The positive results justify more detailed measurement of interdependence in fu - ture research . 4 . 7 . Discussion Although the results provide broad statistical sup - port for the application of Kauffman’s model , two of these effects — the number of components and the interaction between components — only imply marginal practical import . In this sense , the ‘complex - ity catastrophe’ operates almost entirely as a function of the degree of interdependence among the system components . Since this diverges from the predictions of the NK model , these ﬁndings suggest a need to con - sider seriously how evolution in social systems differs from biological evolution . At ﬁrst glance , technological evolution differs from evolution in biological systems in at least one im - portant respect : the agent of recombination ( Basalla , 1988 ) . In natural evolution , recombination occurs primarily through haphazard sex . In contrast , inven - tors can purposely combine elements in technological evolution . Because inventors have a much higher de - gree of intelligence than the automata that navigate Kauffman’s landscapes , they can move beyond sim - ple search patterns , such as hill - climbing or random combination . Understanding the impact of more real - istic search heuristics strikes us as an important sub - ject for future research . For example , inventors might develop systems for hierarchically decomposing the search space ( Simon , 1996 ) . If these techniques allow them to deal more effectively with changes in the number of components than changes in the degree of interdependence among those components , one would expect the reduction in the importance of the number of components that we ﬁnd . Similarly , the ability of humans to move beyond blind search algorithms might systematically alter the nature of technological evolution over time . Intelli - gent actors can develop conceptual models , not just of the topography of the landscape , but also of the forces that create that terrain . Over time , inventors might become increasingly ‘foresighted’ and able to predict the outcomes of previously untried combina - tions ( Vincenti , 1990 ) . The development of broader scientiﬁc and technological knowledge might also improve the search process . Although the inherent difﬁculty of combining interdependent technologies does not change , inventors become more proﬁcient in searching these landscapes . Thus , the effective dif - ﬁculty of using interdependent technologies declines with time and experience . To the extent that this knowledge transforms the search process , the social construction of techno - logical communities will inﬂuence search and , thus , shape the evolution of technology . Although inven - tors might gain an understanding of the underlying forces creating interactions among some limited set of technological components , they cannot know the interdependencies of all technologies . Cognitive lim - its constrain such technological expertise to narrow ﬁelds . For this reason , people concentrate on particu - lar subjects in the course of their schooling and work . Since social processes largely deﬁne these subjects and the boundaries between them , these divisions might fail to provide researchers with the most rele - vant set of knowledge to explore new lines of inven - tion . Moreover , these socially constructed categories could inhibit useful search that would cross social boundaries because inventors typically focus their ef - forts within the boundaries of their ﬁeld of expertise ( Fleming , 2001 ) . For example , computing and amino acids appear to have little in common . Nevertheless , scientists recently used amino acids to compute a so - lution to the traveling salesperson problem ( Adleman , 1998 ) . When socially disparate ﬁelds manifest useful interactions , the technological community must often restructure the social deﬁnitions of ﬁelds , or even create a new ﬁeld , to support exploration of these new recombinant regions . The emergence and contin - ued straddling of software engineering between de - partments of mathematics and electrical engineering provides an example of this process . Regardless of the social constraints across different technological communities , our results have strategic implications for inventors . Inventors need not search locally to avoid risk and produce useful new technolo - gies . Indeed , as shown by the weak effect of our con - trol variables , if they only reﬁne existing combinations they will rarely enjoy breakthrough success . To max - imize the likelihood of useful invention , researchers should work with a large number of components that 1036 L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 interact to an intermediate degree . We suspect , how - ever , that inventors might work with pathological pres - sures for modularity . Engineers generally drive the interdependence out of their designs to reduce the uncertainty of their in - ventive outcomes . 20 Such risk aversion might simply be human nature ( Simon , 1945 ) , but educational in - stitutions and organizational pressures ( March , 1991 ) reinforce this tendency . Indeed , scholars in both the engineering and social sciences support these efforts . For example , Mead and Conway ( 1980 ) receive credit for simplifying integrated circuit design through mod - ularity ( admittedly at the expense of performance and silicon real estate ) . McCord and Eppinger ( 1993 ) developed a technique to map component interde - pendencies into a design and task structure matrix . They argue that engineers should strive to contain in - terdependencies behind standard modular interfaces . Baldwin and Clark ( 2000 ) propose that the modular - ization of IBM’s mainframes in the 1960s generated the ﬁrm’s windfall proﬁts of the time . Given avail - able modules , they propose that engineers can more easily create value with six simple operators : split - ting , substituting , augmenting , excluding , inverting , and porting . These institutional , organizational , and scholarly inﬂuences lead inventors to prefer modular components over less modular alternatives . In addition to providing modular methods , many scholars also argue that engineers actually underuti - lize the beneﬁts of modularity . Although we agree that modularization decreases inventive uncertainty , our re - sults show that intermediate levels of interdependence produce the most useful inventions . Engineers may unwittingly limit the long run development of many technologies by systematically de - coupling their com - ponents . These design practices move recombinant search from intermediate to very low - K landscapes and our results suggest that such movement ultimately gen - erates less useful inventions . Christensen et al . ( 1998 ) 20 This perspective suggests a subtle deﬁnitional difference be - tween interdependence and modularity . When working with fun - damental materials such as basic elements or natural materials , the intrinsic interdependence of those physical components constrains engineers . As they build more complex , hierarchical systems , en - gineers gain control over the interdependence of their components through design . Thus , interdependence is the intrinsic or poten - tial interaction between components , while modularity is the con - sciously designed de - coupling of components . also ﬁnd evidence that modularity does not uniformly beneﬁt design in their study of thin ﬁlm heads in the disk drive industry . The impact of modularization on recording density exhibits a non - monotonic curve with respect to time ; at ﬁrst negative , then positive , and ﬁnally insigniﬁcant . The onset of complete modular - ity severely limits opportunity . As Christensen et al . ( 1999 ) propose , “ . . . modularity narrows degrees of freedom in design” . Our results suggest a contingent resolution . When technologies exhibit extreme interdependence , engi - neers should actively promote efforts to make the technology more modular . For example , computer hardware probably entailed too much interdepen - dence when IBM began their modularization efforts ( Baldwin and Clark , 2000 ) . And continuing efforts to make software more modular , for example , object ori - ented code , probably represent a rational and proper response to the development of an extremely interde - pendent technology . 21 Past a certain point , however , lab directors might need to encourage inventors to play with more interdependent technologies . Our contingent explanation of the beneﬁts of mod - ularity remains consistent with work in the evolution of technological life - cycles and industrial change . Utterback ( 1996 ) proposes that radical innovations often synthesize well - known components . Radical innovations use these components in unintended ways , however , such that inventors do not know or poorly understand the interdependencies between the components . A high degree of uncertainty surrounds these new combinations – most fail , but some reveal unforeseeable usefulness . Engineers then modularize and reﬁne the successful inventions , using the oper - ators described by Baldwin and Clark ( 2000 ) . This effort moves the technological ﬁeld from its early high - K landscape to the intermediate - K landscape . This highly productive period in the technological tra - jectory might correspond to the region around K = 1 in Fig . 5 . From that point , further modularization becomes increasingly less productive . This period might correspond to the region from K = 0 . 8 to 0 in 21 Setting aside the debate of whether software is technology or knowledge of how to use technology , it clearly meets our deﬁnition of extreme interdependence . One bit out of place amongst millions can mean the difference between an incredibly useful or a crashed and useless tool . L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 1037 Fig . 5 . Unless inventors introduce new materials or reintroduce interdependence among the components , the technological trajectory exhausts itself . Unlike biological organisms , technology life - cycles do not necessarily progress in a uni - directional fash - ion . If we think of invention as a continuous and interdependent search process , we explicitly avoid the idea that novel technologies appear by chance and then progress monotonically through maturity and death . Instead , inventors’ recombinant search efforts drive technological life - cycles . These efforts alternate continuously between new syntheses and modularization . Inventors begin the process by trying completely new combinations of components . They then discard the obvious failures and re - organize the most promising combinations and interfaces be - tween components . This modularization of the initial synthesis decreases the effective interdependence be - tween components . Without new syntheses , however , the modularization process eventually exhausts cre - ative potential . Thinking of invention as a process of recombinant search over an interdependent landscape provides a more complete and causal explanation of the technological sources of the life - cycle , from birth by synthesis , growth and productivity through initial modularization , eventual exhaustion from complete modularization , and rebirth through new interdepen - dent syntheses . 5 . Conclusion This paper develops and tests a theory of invention as a process of recombinant search over technology landscapes . The work contributes a theory of invention that complements our more extensive understanding of technological diffusion , innovation , and organizational implications . In contrast to the bulk of previous work that has relied primarily on simulation - based studies ( Simon , 1996 ) , our study also presents empirical sup - port for complex adaptive systems theory . Although we ﬁnd that local search affects the outcome of inven - tion , the interdependence and size of the search space impacts the likelihood of successful search more than any other characteristic of the invention process . In - deed , the effect of interdependence K and the number of components N can make the difference between a median invention and one in the top 6 % . This study opens doors for a broad range of future research . Our strong empirical results should motivate the development of more speciﬁc NK simulation mod - els . Given that intelligent actors do not blindly recom - bine components , future simulations need to explore the consequences of intelligent agents that can imitate and learn from experience ( see Gavetti and Levinthal ( 2000 ) and Rivkin ( 2000 ) for steps in this direction ) . Moreover , future simulations should also consider the implications of truncated observation schemes , given the potential for testing these outcomes with patent ci - tation data and negative binomial variance decomposi - tion models . Such simulations would ideally give rise to the over - dispersed Poisson distributions so com - monly observed in the patent citation data . These sim - ulation efforts and additional empirical work might lead to new theoretical insights as well . For example , how does scientiﬁc knowledge inﬂuence search over an interdependent landscape ? Finally , how does the structure of interdependence affect invention ? Previ - ous work on modularity , architecture , and hierarchy suggests advantages to pockets of interdependent com - ponents linked by more modular interfaces ( Ulrich and Eppinger , 1995 ; Baldwin and Clark , 2000 ) . Thus , the mean level of interdependence might capture only a portion of the relevant design characteristics that inﬂu - ence invention . These and other opportunities suggest that conceptualizing technology as a complex adaptive system can yield useful new insights into our under - standing of inventive processes . Acknowledgements Both investigators contributed equally to this re - search ; authorship follows alphabetical order . We would like to thank our anonymous reviewers , Phillip Bromiley , Steven Eppinger , Carliss Baldwin , Marco Iansiti , Laurie Calhoun , and the participants of the TOM Innovation and doctoral seminars at the Harvard Business School for their useful feedback . In particu - lar , we wish to thank Jan Rivkin . We would also like to thank the Department of Research , Harvard Business School for their support , Firooz Partovi and William Simpson and the Faculty Research Center , Harvard Business School for their computing resources , and Corey Billington and Ellen King of Hewlett - Packard for donation of their patent database . 1038 L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 References Abernathy , W . , Utterback , J . , 1978 . Patterns of industrial innovation . Technology Review June , 40 – 47 . Adamson , R . , 1952 . Functional ﬁxedness as related to problem solving : a repetition of three experiments . Journal of Experimental Psychology 44 , 288 – 291 . Adleman , L . , 1998 . Computing with DNA . Scientiﬁc American August , 54 – 61 . Albert , M . , Avery , D . , Narin , F . , McAllister , P . , 1991 . Direct validation of citation counts as indicators of industrially important patents . Research Policy 20 , 251 – 259 . Allen , T . , 1977 . Managing the Flow of Technology . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Amabile , T . , 1988 . A model of creativity and innovation in organizations . Research in Organizational Behavior 10 , 123 – 167 . Baldwin , C . , Clark , K . , 2000 . Design Rules : The Power of Modularity . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Basalla , G . , 1988 . The Evolution of Technology . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Bruderer , E . , Singh , J . , 1996 . Organization evolution , learning , and selection : a genetic - algorithm - based model . Academy of Management Journal 39 , 1322 – 1349 . Cameron , A . , Trivedi , P . , 1986 . Econometric models based on count data : comparisons and applications of some estimators and tests . Journal of Applied Econometrics 1 , 29 – 53 . Carr , F . , 1995 . Patents Handbook : A Guide for Inventors and Researchers to Searching Patent Documents and Preparing and Making an Application . McFarland , Jefferson , NC . Christensen , C . , Suarez , F . , Utterback , J . , 1998 . Strategies for survival in fast - changing industries . Management Science 44 , S207 – S220 . Christensen , C . , Verlinden , M . , Westerman , G . , 1999 . Product Modularity , Vertical Disintegration , and the Diffusion of Competence . Working Paper , Harvard Business School , Boston , MA . Cohen , W . , Levinthal , D . , 1990 . Absorptive capacity : a new perspective on learning and innovation . Administrative Science Quarterly 35 , 128 – 152 . Eldredge , N . , Gould , S . , 1972 . Punctuated equilibria : an alternative to phyletic gradualism . In : Schopf , T . ( Ed . ) , Models in Paleobiology . Freeman , San Francisco , CA . Eppinger , S . , 1999 . Personal Communication in Sloan School of Management Seminar . 1 November . Fleming , L . , 2001 . Recombinant uncertainty in technological search . Management Science 47 , 117 – 132 . Gavetti , G . , Levinthal , D . , 2000 . Looking forward and backward : cognitive and experiential search . Administration Science Quarterly 45 , 113 – 137 . Gilﬁllan , S . , 1935 . Inventing the Ship . Follett Publishing Co . , Chicago . Hall , B . , Jaffe , A . , Trajtenberg , M . , 2000 . Market Value and Patent Citations : A First Look . NBER , Working Paper 7741 . Hargadon , A . , Sutton , R . , 1997 . Technology brokering and innovation in a product development ﬁrm . Administrative Science Quarterly 42 , 716 – 749 . Hausman , J . , Hall , B . , Griliches , Z . , 1984 . Econometric models for count data with an application to the patents – R & D relationship . Econometrica 52 , 909 – 938 . Henderson , R . , Clark , K . , 1990 . Architectural innovation : the reconﬁguration of existing product technologies and failure of established ﬁrms . Administration Science Quarterly 35 , 9 – 30 . Iansiti , M . , 1998 . Technology Integration : Making Critical Choices in a Dynamic World . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Jaffe , A . , Trajtenberg , M . , 1995 . Flows of Knowledge from Universities and Federal Labs : Modeling the Flow of Patent Citations Over Time and Across Institutional and Geographic Boundaries . National Academy of Sciences Colloquium on Science , Technology , and the Economy , 20 October . Kaplan , C . , Simon , H . , 1990 . In search of insight . Cognitive Psychology 22 , 374 – 419 . King , G . , 1989 . Event count models for international relations : generalizations and applications . International Studies Quarterly 33 , 123 – 147 . Kauffman , S . , 1993 . The Origins of Order . Oxford University Press , New York . Levin , R . , Klevorick , A . , Nelson , R . , Winter , S . , 1987 . Appro - priating the returns from industrial research and development : comments and discussion . Brookings Papers On Economic Activity 3 , 783 – 831 . Levinthal , D . , 1997 . Adaptation on rugged landscapes . Manage - ment Science 43 , 934 – 950 . Long , J . , 1997 . Modeling Frequency and Count Data . Oxford University Press , Oxford . Macken , C . , Hagen , P . , Perelson , A . , 1991 . Evolutionary walks on rugged landscapes . SIAM Journal of Applied Mathematics 51 , 799 – 827 . March , J . , 1991 . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organization Science 2 , 71 – 87 . March , J . , Simon , H . , 1958 . Organizations . Blackwell , Cambridge , MA . Marquis , D . , 1969 . The anatomy of successful innovations . Innovation 1 , 35 – 48 . McCluskey , E . , 1986 . Logic Design Principles with Emphasis on Testable Semi - Custom Circuits . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . McCord , K . , Eppinger , S . , 1993 . Managing the integration problem in concurrent engineering . Working paper 3594 , MIT Sloan School of Management , Cambridge , MA . McPherson , J . , Ranger - Moore , J . , 1991 . Evolution on a dancing landscape : organizations and networks in dynamic Blau space . Social Forces 70 , 19 – 42 . Mead , C . , Conway , L . , 1980 . Introduction to VSLI Systems . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA . Millman , J . , 1979 . Microelectronics . McGraw - Hill , New York . Nelson , R . , Winter , S . , 1982 . An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Belknap Press , Cambridge , MA . Podolny , J . , Stuart , T . , 1995 . A role - based ecology of technological change . American Journal of Sociology 100 , 1224 – 1260 . Rivkin , J . W . , 2000 . Imitation of complex strategies . Management Science 46 , 824 – 844 . Rogers , E . , 1983 . The Diffusion of Innovations . Free Press , New York . L . Fleming , O . Sorenson / Research Policy 30 ( 2001 ) 1019 – 1039 1039 Rosenberg , N . , 1982 . Inside the Black Box : Technology and Economic Change . Cambridge University Press , New York . Ruttan , V . , 1959 . Usher and Schumpeter on invention , innovation , and technological change . Quarterly Journal of Economics 73 , 596 – 606 . Schumpeter , J . , 1939 . Business Cycles . McGraw - Hill , New York . Simon , H . , 1945 . Administrative Behavior : A Study of Decision - making Processes in Administrative Organizations . Free Press , New York . Simon , H . , 1996 . The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Sørensen , J . , Stuart , T . , 2000 . Aging and organizational innovation . Administrative Science Quarterly 45 , 81 – 112 . Sorenson , O . , 1997 . The complexity catastrophe in the computer industry : interdependence and adaptability in organizational evolution . Unpublished Ph . D . dissertation , Sociology Department , Stanford University . Sorenson , O . , 2000 . The effect of population level learning on market entry : the American automobile industry . Social Science Research 29 , 307 – 326 . Stuart , T . , Podolny , J . , 1996 . Local search and the evolution of technological capabilities . Strategic Management Journal 17 ( Summer special issue ) , 21 – 38 . Trajtenberg , M . , 1990 . A penny for your quotes : patent citations and the value of innovations . Rand Journal of Economics 21 , 172 – 187 . Tushman , M . , Anderson , P . , 1986 . Technological discontinuities and organizational environments . Administrative Science Quarterly 31 , 439 – 465 . Tushman , M . , Rosenkopf , L . , 1992 . Organizational determinants of technological change : toward a sociology of technological evolution . Research in Organizational Behavior 14 , 311 – 347 . Ulrich , K . , 1995 . The role of product architecture in the manu - facturing ﬁrm . Research Policy 24 , 419 – 440 . Ulrich , K . , Eppinger , S . , 1995 . Product Design and Development . McGraw - Hill , New York . Usher , A . , 1954 . A History of Mechanical Invention . Dover , Cambridge , MA . Utterback , J . , 1996 . Mastering the Dynamics of Innovation . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Vincenti , W . , 1990 . What Engineers Know , and How They Know It ? Johns Hopkins University Press , Baltimore , MA . Von Hippel , E . , 1988 . The Sources of Innovation . Oxford University Press , New York . Weinberger , E . , 1991 . Local properties of Kauffman’s NK model : a tunably rugged energy landscape . Physical Review A 44 , 6399 – 6413 . Weitzman , M . , 1996 . Hybridizing growth theory . In : Proceedings of the American Economics Association . May , pp . 207 – 212 . Wright , S . , 1932 . The roles of mutations , inbreeding , crossbreeding and selection in evolution . In : Proceedings of the 11th International Congress of Genetics , Vol . 1 . pp . 356 – 366 .