Eurographics Conference on Visualization ( EuroVis ) 2022 R . Borgo , G . E . Marai , and T . Schreck ( Guest Editors ) Volume 41 ( 2022 ) , Number 3 Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization Eric P . S . Baumer , 1 Mahmood Jasim 2 , Ali Sarvghad 2 , Narges Mahyar 2 1 Lehigh University , Computer Science & Engineering , USA 2 University of Massachusetts Amherst , Manning College of Information and Computer Sciences , USA Abstract Recent developments in critical information visualization have brought the ﬁeld’s attention to political , feminist , ethical , and rhetorical aspects of data visualization . However , less work has explored the interplay between design decisions and political ramiﬁcations—structures of authority , means of representation , etc . In this paper , we build upon these critical perspectives and highlight the political aspect of civic text visualization especially in the context of democratic decision - making . Based on a critical analysis of survey papers about text visualization in general , followed by a review on the status quo of text visualization in civics , we argue that civic text visualization inherits an exclusively analytic framing . This framing leads to a series of issues and challenges in the fundamentally political context of civics , such as misinterpretation of data , missing minority voices , and excluding the public from decision making processes . To span this gap between political context and analytic framing , we provide a series of two - pole conceptual dimensions , such as from singular user to multiple relationships , and from complexity to inclusivity of visualization design . For each dimension , we discuss how the tensions between these poles can help surface the political ramiﬁcations of design decisions in civic text visualization . These dimensions can thus help visualization researchers , designers , and practitioners attend more intentionally to these political aspects and inspire their design choices . We conclude by suggesting that these dimensions may be useful for visualization design across a variety of application domains , beyond civic text visualization . CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → Visualization theory , concepts and paradigms ; 1 . Introduction Critical orientations towards visualization lend alternative lenses to examining the process and practices of visualization . For instance , prior work has considered ethical [ Cor19 ] , feminist [ DK20 ] , criti - cal theory [ DFCC13 ] , and rhetorical [ HD11 ] perspectives on data visualization . Building on that work , this paper offers conceptual tools that help highlight the political aspects of visualization espe - cially related to analyzing and utilizing text visualizations . By “po - litical , ” we refer to the ways that creating and using visualizations impact representation , delegation , interpretation , marginalization , and related processes in the exercise of power . This political as - pect of visualization becomes particularly prominent in the context of public input for civic decision making . Often , public input is collected as free - form text , pertaining to public opinions , sugges - tions , requests , etc . Civic decision makers must read , understand , and incorporate such public input into decisions about the provi - sion of social services , e . g . , urban planning [ MBX * 16 ; MJN * 18 ] , health services [ SOA * 20 ] , governmental procedures [ Bra13 ] , or environmental policy making [ FO05 ] . Improving the public in - put process has become an important goal in the ﬁeld of digital civics [ MNC * 19 ; VCL * 16 ; OW15 ] . To that end , researchers and practitioners have developed a variety of systems for , e . g . , shar - ing public opinions [ FBRG10 ] , building consensus [ KMF * 12a ; ZNB15 ] , summarizing public input [ 19 ] , or identifying people’s priorities , reﬂections , and hidden insights [ JHSM21 ] . Many of the aforementioned digital civics systems employ tech - niques drawn from work in text visualization [ KMF * 12a ; ZNB15 ; FBRG10 ; 19 ; JHSM21 ; HC16b ; ZVK17 ] . Text visualization is a well established research area , and at the time of this writing , K UCHER and K ERREN [ KK14 ] have documented 440 distinct text visualization techniques ( see https : / / textvis . lnu . se / ) . Furthermore , not only have text visualization researchers writ - ten multiple survey papers [ ŠB10 ; PSB10 ; AdOP12 ; SWLL13 ; GZL * 14 ; NPW14 ; WSJ * 14 ; LCWL14 ; KK15 ; JFCS15 ; CC16 ; FHKM17 ; JFCS17 ; KPK18 ; LWC * 19 ; MS20 ] , there is even at least one survey of surveys [ AL19b ] . Thus , rather than surveying tech - niques in text visualization , we examine how text visualization , both as a set of techniques and as a general orientation , has been applied in the inherently political context of digital civics . This paper argues that text visualization acts for digital civics as a double edged sword . On the one hand , it provides a variety of tools ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . PublishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization and techniques that help improve the tractability and efﬁciency of the public input process . On the other hand , the application of text visualization techniques treats the political process of public com - menting as an exclusively analytic endeavor , leading to a variety of issues and challenges . To make this argument , in Section 2 we clarify how our sense of the term “political” draws on prior work [ Asa00 ; Bec02 ; BS99 ; Mou99 ; Mou13 ; Win80 ] and highlight how visualization can and often should be seen as a political process , one that grants representation and authority to some voices while poten - tially marginalizing others . However , using a critical literature re - view [ a la BVSD07 ; BHP * 12 ; BKM * 14 ] of text visualization sur - vey papers [ ŠB10 ; PSB10 ; AdOP12 ; SWLL13 ; GZL * 14 ; NPW14 ; WSJ * 14 ; LCWL14 ; KK15 ; JFCS15 ; CC16 ; FHKM17 ; JFCS17 ; KPK18 ; LWC * 19 ; AL19b ; MS20 ] , we ﬁnd that text visualiza - tion research embodies a largely apolitical orientation that treats both the design and the use of text visualization systems purely as processes of analysis ( Section 3 ) . Then reviewing the status quo of civic text visualization [ e . g . , KMF * 12a ; ZNB15 ; FBRG10 ; 19 ; JHSM21 ; HC16b ; ZVK17 ] , we ﬁnd that civic text visualization in - herits this analytic orientation , implicitly casting the treatment of public input as an analytic process . In Section 4 , we highlight how several issues and challenges that emerge in civic text visualization arise , at least in part , from this exclusively analytic orientation . For example , applying aggregate analysis to understand public senti - ment can marginalize or ignore minority voices . In this way , the activities of civic text visualization—grouping similar individual comments , identifying salient topics , interpreting public opinion , etc . —should also be conceived of as much political as analytical . As we argue in Section 5 , what is needed , then , are means by which to help researchers , designers , and practitioners in digital civics to shift from a purely analytic stance on text visualization to one that acknowledges and considers its political aspects . To this end , we contribute a series of conceptual dimensions that can help shift at - tention and account for these political aspects and all the subtleties that comes along with it ( Section 6 ) . Our contribution in this paper is two - fold : we argue the impor - tance of and offer means of accounting for political aspects of civic text visualization . This type of contribution differs somewhat from that of most papers in visualization publication venues [ LIS * 19 ] . It is perhaps best described as an argument or critique , similar to pa - pers that have explored visualization through varied lenses beyond the purely technical [ HD11 ; DFCC13 ; Cor19 ; DK20 ] . While the paper focuses on civic text visualization , it concludes by suggest - ing that many of the issues highlighted here , and thus the concep - tual dimensions by which to address them , may apply quite broadly across a range of visualization systems . 2 . Data Visualization as Political Our use of the term “political” draws on prior work to analyze power differentials in the practices of visualization and to highlight how the status quo can be challenged and changed . For instance , we draw inspiration from the assertion that participatory design is less a design method and more a political process [ Bec02 ] [ also see Asa00 ] . For B ECK [ Bec02 , p . 78 ] , “political means concern about dominance patterns , ” i . e . , the means and structures by which some groups of people exert power or inﬂuence over others . B OWKER and S TAR [ BS99 ] also show how the design of classiﬁcatory sys - tems , such as the international classiﬁcation of diseases , embodies commitments about categories that are then used to exercise author - ity . Similarly , according to M OUFFE [ Mou99 ; Mou13 ] , “the polit - ical” pertains to aspects of disagreement , tension , and differences of opinion that emerge in any human society . D I S ALVO [ DiS12 ] makes a compelling argument for applying Mouffe’s broader po - litical theory , referred to as agonism , to understanding the general activity of design . Perhaps most notably , W INNER [ Win80 ] argues that some technologies ( e . g . , railroads , nuclear power , sailing ves - sels ) are highly compatible with , or may even require , certain ar - rangements of power . He shows how design decisions , both about what functionalities to include in a technology and about which technologies to build in the ﬁrst place , are concomitant with de - cisions about the organization of authority within society . That is , design decisions are often simultaneously political decisions . Such political questions—about representation , authority , inter - pretation , marginalization , etc . —closely resemble processes in - volved in data visualization . Design choices regarding datasets , visualization techniques , interactivity , and other aspects inﬂuence the conclusions that a viewer can reach [ HD11 ] . However , the “tendency to view [ visualization ] work as the mere reporting or structuring of objective fact” [ Cor19 , p . 2 ] obscures how data are neither neutral nor objective [ DK20 ] . Rather than a “view from nowhere” [ Nag86 ] , visualizations and the data they present are al - ways a view from some situated perspective [ Har88 ; Har91 ] . In this way , it is perhaps obvious that civic text visualization is political . And yet , relatively little visualization research closely at - tends to the interplay between design decisions and political rami - ﬁcations . To understand the origins of this disconnect , we now turn a critical eye toward the broader research on text visualization . 3 . A Critical Review of Text Visualization Research The review in this section focuses on prior text visualiza - tion survey papers , due both to the volume of text visualiza - tion research [ KK14 ] and to the existence of numerous prior surveys [ AL19b ] . To ﬁnd these survey papers , we searched scholarly repositories ( e . g . , IEEE Xplore , ACM Digital Library , Google Scholar ) with the queries “text visualization survey” and “text visualization review . ” Doing so identiﬁed 17 survey papers [ ŠB10 ; PSB10 ; AdOP12 ; SWLL13 ; GZL * 14 ; NPW14 ; WSJ * 14 ; LCWL14 ; KK15 ; JFCS15 ; CC16 ; FHKM17 ; JFCS17 ; KPK18 ; LWC * 19 ; MS20 ; AL19b ] , all of which are reviewed here . Our orientation continues a line of recent work on decentering the notion of the “user” in HCI [ BB17 ; CBD19 ; Tay15 ; For18 ] . In particular , the analysis is guided by two inter - related ques - tions . First , what are the kinds of activities these visualizations are meant to support ? Second , who is envisioned as engaging in these activities ? These two questions served as sensitizing con - cepts [ Bow06 ] —rather than being the only questions we asked , they were used to guide our attention to important assumptions made in this body of work . To address these questions , each of the above survey papers was ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization analyzed using an iterative , inductive approach drawn from qual - itative methods [ GS67 ; LSAL05 ; Cha06 ] and from previous criti - cal literature reviews [ e . g . , BHP * 12 ; BKM * 14 ; BVSD07 ] . In brief , this approach involves mapping thematic patterns , determining the implicit assumptions driving a body of work as revealed by those patterns , and interrogating the consequences of those assumptions . 3 . 1 . Who Is the User and What Are Their Tasks ? Across the 17 survey papers reviewed [ ŠB10 ; PSB10 ; AdOP12 ; SWLL13 ; GZL * 14 ; NPW14 ; WSJ * 14 ; LCWL14 ; KK15 ; JFCS15 ; CC16 ; FHKM17 ; JFCS17 ; KPK18 ; LWC * 19 ; MS20 ; AL19b ] , vi - sualizations were consistently described as supporting primarily analytic activities that are engaged in by some sort of analyst . For instance , Š ILI ´C and B AŠI ´C [ ŠB10 , p . 39 ] explicitly describe text vi - sualizations as being designed for “media analysts , historians and other scientists from all ﬁelds . ” As another example , J ÄNICKE , F RANZINI , C HEEMA , and S CHEUERMANN [ JFCS15 , p . 1 ] focus on “humanities scholars [ . . . ] interested in the analysis of related texts or text passages . ” Other surveys name the intended users less speciﬁcally . Analogous to B RYNJARSDÓTTIR , H ÅKANSSON , P IERCE , et al . [ BHP * 12 ] , some of these surveys were not expressly or solely about text visualization . For instance , L IU , C UI , W U , and L IU [ LCWL14 ] provide a general survey of information visualiza - tion , with a large section devoted speciﬁcally to text visualization . Similarly , F EDERICO , H EIMERL , K OCH , and M IKSCH [ FHKM17 ] survey visualizations for scientiﬁc literature and patents , with a sig - niﬁcant portion of the survey focused on text data . Despite these slight variations , all surveys clearly ( if implicitly ) framed the user as an analyst . Visualizations are meant “to aid users in exploring , understanding , and analyzing data” [ LCWL14 , p . 1373 ] . They “enable users to visually explore [ . . . ] large sets of documents” [ GZL * 14 , p . 29 ] , and they are intended “to support exploratory analysis of document collections” [ AdOP12 , p . 480 ] . Several of the surveys present taxonomies of the various “ana - lytic” tasks that a user might perform [ e . g . KK15 ; KPK18 ; JFCS17 ; FHKM17 ] . This phrasing implicitly suggests the tasks a user might perform with the visualization are primarily analytic . Some surveys go so far as to explicitly refer to the user as an “analyst” [ GZL * 14 ; WSJ * 14 ; SWLL13 ; AdOP12 ; FHKM17 ] . To some extent , this emphasis is perhaps unsurprising . As a ﬁeld , visualization is concerned with “the process of transforming data , information , and knowledge into visual form” [ GEC98 , p . 9 ] . It “seeks to augment human cognition by leveraging human visual ca - pabilities to make sense of abstract information” [ HCL05 , p . 421 ] [ citing CMS99 ] . Such deﬁnitions , which inherit from HCI’s semi - nal rhetoric of enhancing user cognition [ CNM83 ; CB95 ] , explic - itly set up information visualization as concerned with exactly the kinds of questions that arise when framing the user as an analyst . At the same time , this orientation has particular consequences in terms of shifting attention during the design of text visualization . 3 . 2 . What Are the Consequences of an Analytic Orientation ? Framing visualizations as primarily analytic results , among other things , in emphasizing the visualization itself , thereby drawing at - tention away from potential audiences or contexts of use . The ma - jority of each survey is spent describing various aspects of vi - sualization design and implementation . For instance , J ÄNICKE , F RANZINI , C HEEMA , and S CHEUERMANN [ JFCS17 ] talk about several aspects of data transformation , such as the “pre - processing steps to transform the given textual data into the visualization’s in - put format” [ JFCS17 , p . 230 ] . C AO and C UI [ CC16 ] devote sep - arate chapters to topics such as the underlying data model ( bag - of - words , n - grams , entity relations , etc . ) and the use of different visual representation techniques for presenting document content ( word clouds , frequency plots , animations , stream graphs , etc . ) . A LENCAR , de O LIVEIRA , and P AULOVICH [ AdOP12 ] describe the use of metadata to create visualizations that support network anal - ysis of documents . F EDERICO , H EIMERL , K OCH , and M IKSCH [ FHKM17 ] highlight visualization techniques expressly focused on analysis of temporal patterns . In such ways , these surveys ( and the research they summarize ) place more emphasis on the visualization itself than on the intended audience ( s ) or context ( s ) of use . Relatedly , K UCHER , P ARADIS , and K ERREN [ KPK18 ] provide far more parameters to describe the visualization itself ( the data source , the application domain , the variables of interest , etc . ) than on the analytic tasks a user might perform . L IU , W ANG , C OLLINS , et al . [ LWC * 19 ] link speciﬁc visualization techniques ( charts , time - lines , spatial projects , etc . ) with speciﬁc analytic tasks ( information retrieval , classiﬁcation , exploratory analysis , etc . ) . Indeed , most of these analytic “tasks” more closely align with the functions that a computational model is performing ( e . g . , cluster analysis , natural language processing ) rather than with the variety of possible goals that various audiences might have while engaging with the visual - ization in speciﬁc contexts . Furthermore , this emphasis on analysis draws attention away from the variety of ways that people might engage with such visu - alizations . While some audiences may be analysts , others are cer - tainly not , such those people who are the source of the data be - ing visualized [ BB17 ; Tay15 ] . Giving the people who thusly pro - vide such data a voice in how those data are represented and in - terpreted , and involving them in decision - making , is necessary for participatory democracy [ MHAG06 ] . Additionally , it may provide further beneﬁts , from ensuring accuracy to avoiding co - optation . However , the analytic framing of visualization as a largely apo - litical tool makes it difﬁcult to see , let alone to account for , such myriad complex relationships . 3 . 3 . What Are Alternative Approaches to Text Visualization Beyond Analysis ? It is informative to contrast this analytic emphasis with other evolv - ing discourses in information visualization . The prior work re - viewed above illustrates a few alternative orientations , including rhetoric [ HD11 ] , feminism [ DK16 ; DK20 ] , ethics [ Cor19 ] , and others [ DFCC13 ; VW08 ] . As a further example , work on visual - ization evaluation [ SP06 ; IZCC08 ; LBI * 12 ] has emphasized the importance of close attention to the various contexts in which a visualization will be applied . Interestingly , some of the survey pa - pers reviewed here comment on the need for detailed evaluations of text visualization systems with diverse users in real world set - tings [ AdOP12 ; SWLL13 ; LCWL14 ; JFCS17 ] . However , these as - pects do not emerge in the research summarized in the survey pa - ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization pers , but rather as important directions for future work . Thus , this kind of holistic approach seems to have gained traction in the in - formation visualization community’s approach to evaluation . How - ever , it seems to have had less of an inﬂuence speciﬁcally within text visualization , especially with respect to design , either in terms of developing novel visualization techniques and or of assembling a conﬂuence of existing techniques into a particular arrangement for a particular purpose . To clarify , we do not argue that text visualization is never ana - lytic , simply that it may also be otherwise , especially in civic text visualization . Framing text visualization as an exclusively analytic enterprise , hinders our ability to be aware of and design for other types of engagements . To elaborate on this point , the next section turns to considerations of text visualization that arise speciﬁcally in civics . 4 . Issues and Challenges in Digital Civics This section returns to this paper’s core argument : either intention - ally or unconsciously , civic text visualization has inherited the ana - lytic orientation found in text visualization research . The public are essentially treated as a source of data to be collected , processed , visualized , and analyzed . To demonstrate this point , this section reviews existing literature on civic text visualization . We ﬁrst searched scholarly repositories ( e . g . , IEEE Xplore , ACM Digital Library , Google Scholar ) with the queries “civic text visualization , ” “public opinion visualization , ” and “digital civics . ” The resulting ti - tles and abstracts were examined to ﬁnd papers that present ideas , theories , design guidelines , or examples of text visualization tools or systems in civics . Snowball searching of the reference lists in each paper identiﬁed further work . Of the potentially relevant work , this section focuses on the 17 most relevant and representative pa - pers [ MNC * 19 ; MJS20b ; KRH17a ; JKW * 21 ; JHSM21 ; HC16b ; ALND17 ; 19 ; FBRG10 ; Sav15 ; MJN * 18 ; AJM21 ; CRMH12 ; GHWM20 ; JSHM20 ; KMF * 12b ; DRRD12 ] . Reviewing this work shows how an analytic orientation gives rise to a collection of in - terconnected issues and challenges . Some of these issues are not entirely unique to civics but apply to data analysis or visualization in other domains where decisions are high - stakes . The reset of this section introduces and discusses these issues in detail . 4 . 1 . Providing an Environment for Collaborative Sensemaking Civic text analysis can be an expensive , time consuming , and labor intensive task [ MNC * 19 ; MJS20b ] . Decision - makers—who are re - sponsible for gathering , analyzing , and making policy decisions based on public - generated civic text—often outsource the analysis of public input to analysts in an attempt to mitigate the complex - ity and distribute the tasks [ MNC * 19 ] . In order to mitigate analyst bias [ WBFE17 ; KRH17a ] , they desire that multiple analysts would identify , converge , and conﬁrm the insights from civic text . Prior works suggest that analysts use a variety of tools to synthe - size and make sense of civic text . Some analysts use an assortment of spreadsheet applications and text editors [ MNC * 19 ; JKW * 21 ] . Others use qualitative data analysis tools such as NVivo [ 21 ] , De - doose [ 20a ] , or atlas . Ti [ ACM19 ] . Some tools provide both compu - tational and visualization features . For instance , CommunityPulse provides a scaffolding for multifaceted public input analysis using visualizations [ JHSM21 ] , and MultiConVis enables multilevel ex - ploration and analysis of threaded conversations [ HC16b ] . However , these tools and techniques are designed primarily for an individual analyst , and the functionalities they provide are not necessarily suitable for collaborative analysis . This aspect of the design represents a disjuncture from the desires of civic leaders to support collaboration among multiple analysts . Furthermore , the emphasis on a single analyst reaching conclusions belies the plural - ity and contention involved in political processes [ Mou99 ; Mou13 ] . To be truly democratic , such collaboration should occur not only among multiple analysts but also in participation with numerous diverse stakeholders . 4 . 2 . Integrating Participatory Approaches In participatory democracy , the involvement of all stakeholders is critical . Decision - makers , analysts , community envoys , and the general public [ MNC * 19 ] each have different roles , responsibili - ties , and relationships with the data [ JHSM21 ] . Civic leaders—who include community envoys and decision - makers—engage the pub - lic to gather data to inform decision - making are keen to leverage these relationships to gain a holistic understanding of people’s per - ceptions and dispositions towards civic issues . Researchers in HCI and digital civics have begun to explore methods to improve the analysis capabilities of visual analytics tools [ JHSM21 ; MJS20b ] . Although the broader community of vi - sualization researchers acknowledges the importance of designing for varied levels of expertise [ Mun14 ; GTS10 ; SNHS13 ] , existing work on text analytics in general , as well as civic text visualizations in particular , focuses research efforts towards designing for ana - lysts . Less effort has been put on designing and developing text vi - sualization for non - experts—people who are not trained in or have had limited exposure to visualization and analytics . These people , who often have local knowledge and deep expertise in areas out - side visualization and analytics ( e . g . , planning or urban design ) , constitute an integral part of the participatory democracy equa - tion [ Hea07 ; MNC * 19 ; Nel19 ] . Despite their central importance in the civic engagement pro - cess , members of the general public are not necessarily involved in the analysis process . Hence , they are often left out of the loop when designing civic text visualizations—their requirements , apti - tudes , knowledge , etc . are not given central consideration . Integrat - ing participatory approaches in civic text visualization could pave the way not only for more inclusive analysis but also for leveraging the general public’s knowledge to gather richer insights . 4 . 3 . Presenting Rich and Interpretable Data Civic leaders often demonstrate a strong preference towards gath - ering rich qualitative input as opposed to quantitative statis - tics [ CL18b ; CL18a ; ALND17 ; MNC * 19 ] . They want to move beyond aggregated measures of public preference ( e . g . , surveys , voting , or polling ) to understand people’s priorities and view - points [ JHSM21 ; MNC * 19 ] . Previous work has used various com - putational approaches to identify people’s sentiments [ HC16b ] ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization 1 Lack of representative and complete data fails to include all stakeholders Provides The Public Public Input and Opinions Subjectto Data Processing ToCreate Text Visualization Used by Analysts Civic Leaders – Decision - makers and CommunityEnvoys Engage Decision - makers To inform The use of computational analysis and aggregation causes a lack of richness and interpretability Lack of collaborative sensemaking approaches often leads to analysis biases and misinterpretation of public input Lack of participatory approaches omits the public from the decision - making process Figure 1 : The status quo of civic text visualization is predicated upon a mostly linear pipeline ( horizontal left - to - right arrows ) : civic leaders engage the public to provide input and opinions that go through data processing to create text visualizations used by analysts to inform decision - makers . However , our review highlights how , in practice , numerous disconnects emerge ( broken curved arcs ) . Decision makers lack means for collecting representative data from all stakeholders . The public has little means of participating in the analysis of their inputs . Computational analysis reduces the richness of public input data . Analysts lack environments and tools to support collaborative sensemaking . Civic text visualization thus becomes susceptible both to misinterpretation of public opinion and to marginalization of minority viewpoints . and extract the main discussion topics [ JHSM21 ; HC16b ] . Some have used clustering methods to group together similar opinions from the general public [ 19 ; FBRG10 ] . Others have used ﬁner - grained categorization of text to identify public emotions from civic text [ JHSM21 ; Sav15 ] . However , some of these tools rely on some form of aggregation or summarization to provide an overview . While useful for provid - ing high - level understanding , such overviews are susceptible to be - ing misinterpreted as the underlying text data themselves [ PAE19 ; Cai19 ] . That is , the fact that aggregation or summarization were used is not always readily apparent , nor is it always obvious the effects that those processes have on the resultant visualizations . Furthermore , summarizing or aggregating civic text can result in missing key comments [ JHSM21 ; MNC * 19 ] . Such oversights in turn inhibit the civic leaders from gathering rich and representa - tive insights from civic text . For example , civic leaders often want to know whether minority opinions are being suppressed by ag - gressive comments , or an unpopular but thought - provoking insight is obscured by support for popular ideas . Methods to enable civic leaders to combat oversimpliﬁcation and decontextualization of un - popular or marginalized opinions remain an under explored issue in the civic domain . 4 . 4 . Ensuring Representative and Complete Data Civic leaders are keen on broadening their outreach to ensure that they gather both a diverse and a representative set of opin - ions [ MNC * 19 ; JKW * 21 ] . This necessity stems from their desire to include every voice of opinion on civic issues and achieve a complete understanding of the general public’s perspectives with - out discrimination . To that end , civic leaders have adopted both in - person and online civic technologies to gather public input . Previous work has introduced several online engagement plat - forms to enable the public to asynchronously provide their com - ments , ideas , and feedback around civic issues [ 19 ; 20b ; MJN * 18 ] . These engagement tools have used micro - tasks [ MJN * 18 ] , visual - izations [ 19 ] , and forum - like discussions [ 20b ] to engage discon - nected and disenfranchised populations [ MNC * 19 ] . Others have proposed technologies to promote in - person engagement of ret - icent participants during town halls [ JKW * 21 ] and public meet - ings [ LLS ] using clicker - like devices . However , these methods of engagement introduce their own challenges to representivity . For example , using clicker devices in face - to - face town hall meetings generates data that are easy to an - alyze , but doing so simultaneously limits participants’ expressivity to a handful of options without a chance to unpack the reasoning be - hind their opinions [ JKW * 21 ] . The online engagement methods are often difﬁcult to disseminate , especially to people who do not have access to or are not comfortable using online technology [ AJM21 ] . Furthermore , these methods often lack mechanisms to identify and track demographic information , which is critical to understanding the origin of public input and to ensuring representivity in the col - lected data [ MNC * 19 ] . While collecting demographics is beneﬁcial for civic leaders , people often prefer to make anonymous contri - butions in online civic discussions to maintain privacy [ MJN * 18 ] . In addition to impacting representivity , such tensions and tradeoffs also have implications for bias and for uncertainty in the interpre - tation of the general public’s perspectives . 4 . 5 . Accounting for Bias and Uncertainty Bias and uncertainly , which can be detrimental to the civic decision - making process [ MNC * 19 ; TK74 ] , may manifest inad - vertently in the civic domain due to challenges involved both in ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization data collection and in analysis [ MJS20a ] . For example , even when using online and ofﬂine channels to collect public input , the col - lected opinions can be biased representations of false consensus or perspectives of a vocal minority [ JKW * 21 ] . Even if perfectly rep - resentative data were collected , there is a risk of injecting analysts’ personal biases into the analysis process unknowingly [ WBFE17 ; WAGJ19 ] . Furthermore , many visual analytics tools use computa - tional methods and prediction models to categorize and label public input [ JHSM21 ; HC16b ] . These computational methods can have inaccuracies [ CRMH12 ] that occur unevenly across different de - mographics [ BS16 ] , especially in the civic domain where there is a scarcity of labeled data to train prediction models [ JHSM21 ] . Coupled with the bias present in the data , such uncertainties might lead to a biased analysis H OFMAN , G OLDSTEIN , and H ULLMAN [ HGH20 ] , which is an incorrect interpretation of the underlying public input [ GHWM20 ] . In various domains other than digital civics , researchers have shown great interest in visualizing uncer - tainties and incompleteness to support transparency in matching user expectations from prediction models [ KKHM16 ] and to sup - port cognitive and meta cognitive processes in reasoning [ ZC07 ] . However , looking back at the existing literature in civic text vi - sualization , we observe a paucity of research on methods that ex - periment with how to combat biased analysis of public input and to visualize inherent uncertainty [ Hul19 ] . Data feminism [ DK20 ] has brought attention to how the data is neither neutral nor objec - tive . Others have argued that bias may inﬁltrate and jeopardizethe interpretation of data [ WBFE17 ] . These issues demand more atten - tion in the civics as data is seldom representative or inclusive , it is data collected from a self - selected participants and can be subject to misinterpretation as well as anlaysis biases . 4 . 6 . Synthesizing the Issues Looking across the literature in civic text visualization reveals how the status quo implicitly organizes a particular set of relationships among speciﬁc entities ( see Figure 1 ) . These entities and relation - ships include : 1 ) Civic leaders—community envoys and decision - makers—who engage the public to gather data to inform decision - making ; 2 ) The Public , who are the primary source of the text data gathered in the digital civics domain ; 3 ) Public Input and Opin - ions , which consist of comments , critiques , new ideas , and dispo - sition towards civic issues ; 4 ) Data Processing , which transforms raw public input text into data suitable for feeding into visualiza - tion systems ; 5 ) Text Visualizations , which depict the results of the data processing and the trends thereby identiﬁed in the data ; 6 ) Analysts , who use the visualizations to analyze the public input data , identify patterns , make inferences , and generate reports ; and 7 ) Decision - Makers , who solicit public input , assess and examine analysis reports , and leverage their position and expertise to make decisions that signiﬁcantly impact the public’s lives . Although never explicitly stated , the civic text visualization re - search reviewed above implicitly adheres to this unidirectional , lin - ear ﬂow from the public to decision makers . To some extent , this linear , sequential process resembles the software development wa - terfall model [ PWB09 ] . The input of each phase depends on the output of the previous one , corresponding to a specialization of tasks . Numerous cases in software engineering have demonstrated the vulnerabilities of this model , especially around its rigidity and inability to adjust to dynamic requests when multiple stakeholders are involved [ PWB09 ; AA13 ] . Similarly , this section highlights nu - merous disconnects that occur in practice , as depicted in Figure 1 . Some work in software engineering , HCI , visualization , and other areas offers examples that move beyond a linear model and adhere to a more human - centered approach [ Boe88 ; JHSM21 ] . However , the linear , stage - based model still seems dominant in civic text vi - sualization . The above review of text visualization research helps explain the origins of the implicit single - directional ﬂow from the public to decision - makers : work in civic text visualization has in - herited the primarily analytic orientation that dominates text visu - alization research . 5 . Combining Analytic Task and Political Process To reiterate this paper’s central claim , civic text visualization should be treated not only as an analytic task but also as a political process . The deﬁnition of the term “political” in Section 2 shows how many of the analytic tasks involved in text visualization—as described in Section 4—are simultaneously political processes . This point can be seen by referring back to Figure 1 . For in - stance , to say that the public provides input and opinions glosses over important details . It would be more accurate to say that civic leaders collect input and draw opinions from certain groups via particular sampling methods . In order for the process to be seen as legitimate , these leaders need to be able to claim that the data thusly collected speak on behalf of some broader population . That question—who gets to speak on behalf of whom—is fundamentally a question about political representation . However , the current ori - entation in civic text visualization instead treats public input as a process of data acquisition . As another example , numerous deci - sions must be made when processing public opinion data to create visualizations : what categories of people or opinions will be used , how will those categories be labeled , who or what belongs in each category , etc . In civic text visualization , these decisions are made via computational means for identifying topics , sentiments , clus - ters , etc . Treating such decisions as steps in an analytic process downplays how the crafting of such categories establishes power structures [ BS99 ] , thereby again drawing attention away from the political nature of this process . Essentially , treating civic text visualization as an entirely ana - lytic task , rather than acknowledging and accounting for its polit - ical nature , gives rise to disjunctures among the various entities involved . These disjunctures are evidenced in the various desider - ata [ JSHM20 ] identiﬁed in prior work on civic text visualization ( Section 4 ) . The desire for tools and environments that support collaborative sensemaking ( Section 4 . 1 ) occurs because of a dis - juncture across the visualizations , which are designed for a single analyst , and decision makers , who want multiple analysts to pro - vide different perspectives . The need for participatory approaches ( Section 4 . 2 ) serves as evidence of a disjuncture between text vi - sualizations and the public whose data and opinions are being rep - resented . That is , the public are neither involved in the data pro - cessing and creation of the visualizations that represent them , nor do they contribute to interpreting what those visualizations mean and how they should be used to inform decision making . The lack ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization of rich and interpretable data ( Section 4 . 3 ) occurs because of dis - junctures across ways that data about public opinion are collected and the ways that those data are represented in text visualizations . Although data processing and text visualizations seek to make data more comprehensible , they also introduce the potential for biases and uncertainty ( Section 4 . 5 ) , both of which are not always readily apparent . As a whole , this analytic orientation separates decision - makers and other leaders from the public about whose opinions those leaders gather , represent , and reﬂect on ( Section 4 . 4 ) . To reiterate , Figure 1 highlights these disjunctures . Each step in the visualization process involves numerous design decisions . These decisions impact the processes of assigning groups and labels , of choosing representative data points to speak on be - half of others , of delegating authority—essentially , the political processes—in civic text visualization . The conceptual orientation applied here [ Mou99 ; Asa00 ; Bec02 ; Mou13 ] highlights how each of these steps , rather than being a smoothly applied analytic task , embodies the conﬂicts and tensions inherent in a political process . 6 . Proposed Conceptual Dimensions Having analyzed the origins and consequences of a primarily an - alytic framing for civic text visualization , this section focuses on means for moving beyond that framing . The user - as - analyst fram - ing does not manifest in any single step in the visualization process . For this reason , interventions that seek to alter one or more of the activities , or to bridge one or more of the disconnects , depicted in Figure 1 will likely fall short of changing the overall analytic ori - entation . Indeed , the analytic orientation is what causes these activ - ities to be conceived of in a mostly linear fashion . What is needed , then , are not changes in visualization techniques or data manipu - lation processes , but conceptual dimensions that can help shift the ﬁeld’s overall orientation toward civic text visualization . To that end , this section offers a series of two - pole dimensions that can help those working in this area to step outside of an ana - lytic orientation ( summarized in Figure 2 ) . These dimensions were identiﬁed by taking assumptions identiﬁed in our critical review ( Section 3 ) and considering alternatives . For each dimension , we start by explaining how one pole represents the status quo of civic text visualization , illustrated via examples drawn from the litera - ture . We then describe the opposite pole of that dimension . For some dimensions , examples are available to illustrate this second pole , though they may come from other bodies of literature beyond text visualization or digital civics . Using this description of the two poles , we show how intentional positioning along each of these di - mensions can help balance one’s orientation to acknowledge both analytic tasks and political processes . 6 . 1 . From Data and Metadata to Provenance and Paradata It is perhaps unsurprising to note that most current approaches to civic text visualization emphasize data and / or metadata . For example , tools such as ConsiderIt [ KMF * 12b ] and Communi - tyPulse [ JHSM21 ] prominently feature speciﬁc comments from members of the public ( i . e . , the data ) . Such visualizations also pro - vide means for organizing those comments by speciﬁc attributes , such as sentiment toward a particular proposition or metadata about Figure 2 : Each conceptual dimension captures shifts between an analytic orientation ( left ) and a political orientation ( right ) . the commenter . While often informative , presenting data and meta - data alone may not be sufﬁcient to engage the public effectively . Visualizations focused on data and / or metadata implicitly draw attention away from the origins of those data and the processes used to collect them . Such concerns are sometimes referred to as prove - nance information or as paradata . Within information visualiza - tion , provenance “broadly includes consideration for the history of changes and advances throughout the analysis process” [ RESC16 , p . 31 ] , such as “subsetting , data merging , formatting , transfor - mations , [ . . . ] button pushes , view manipulations , query execu - tions” [ RESC16 , p . 34 - 35 ] , and others . We argue that what is miss - ing here is the notions of provenance from database research , which “accounts for the origin of a piece of data ( in a database , document or repository ) together with an explanation of how and why it got to the present place” [ Gup09 , p . 608 , emphasis added ] . A related concept also occurs in statistical survey research . Although orig - inally focused on byproducts of computer - aided survey data col - lection , the concept of paradata [ Cou17 ] later expanded to include any data that are collected or generated as a byproduct of the sur - vey process , as well as data that help us understand that process of data collection . This formulation of paradata differs from the concept of paradata in digital humanities [ Sam11 ] that draws on the notion of paratext [ Gen97 ] . Examples of paradata range from records about contact attempts , to researchers’ observations about the neighborhood where a particular respondent’s data were col - lected , to the time spent by researchers on various data collection tasks [ BOL * 21 ] . Such points about the origins of data and the processes of their collection are a key factor in civic text visualization . Indeed , a shift to emphasizing paradata can help draw attention to the representa - tiveness of data . Consider how systems such as MutiConVis [ HC16b ] and Com - munityClick [ JKW * 21 ] provide visual representations to help the viewer understand the structure and content of conversations . Such visualizations do less to expose the provenance or paradata of those conversational data . The CommunityClick interface , for instance , shows timepoints in community meeting transcripts where organiz - ers indicated a “good point , ” a “topic shift , ” or a “main issue . ” At the same time , this interface makes less visible the physical iClicker tools used to collect the data , the bodies for which such tools are and are not designed , the uncertainty a participant may have felt ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization about pushing on not pushing one of the relevant buttons , or the question of who is able to attend such meetings and who is not . These points are not intended as criticism , neither of Commu - nityClick in particular nor of the broader class of similar sys - tems [ LLS ; HC16b ] . It would be nearly impossible for any single visualization to expose all such paradata or provenance informa - tion , at least while remaining usable . The point here is to highlight what is not being shown in the visualization [ cf . DFCC13 ; DK20 ] . Who is included and excluded ? Who is represented and not repre - sented ? What are the processes by which that inclusion and rep - resentation happen ? Thus , instead of pure criticism , this example helps illustrate how an emphasis on paradata can shift attention to - ward more political aspects of representation and inclusion . Fur - thermore , the provision of such paradata can inﬂuence interpreta - tions of what the visualized data actually means . 6 . 2 . From Prescription to Interpretation Many extant systems in digital civics make prescriptive statements about what the data they present mean . For example , MultiCon - Vis [ HC16b ] makes prescriptive statements not only as to the senti - mental valence of individual conversations but also as to the topics that each conversation is about . Similarly , ConsiderIt [ KMF * 12b ] asks participants to place individual statements as either support - ing or opposing a given ballot proposition . Although ConsiderIt does not make this pro / con determination on behalf of participants , it still presents each statement as clearly in support of or clearly in opposition to the given ballot proposition . In these and other exam - ples , text visualizations can be designed in a way that prescribes a single , canonical meaning to the data being shown . As an alternative , systems can be designed to reveal patterns and trends in data but leave their interpretation up to users . For example , Reﬂext [ BCD * 14 ] identiﬁes statistical associations between nouns and verbs [ Res96 ] in political news coverage . As an example , in one corpus , the term “contraception” might be more likely to oc - cur as the direct object of “cover” and “access , ” while in another corpus it occurs as the direct object of “oppose” and “ban . ” Re - ﬂext does not assign an explicit meaning to these differences , but rather leaves the user to interpret what these patterns mean . Relat - edly , [ SG06 ] describe The History Tablecloth , which indicates how long objects in a home have been in a speciﬁc place by providing a slowly increasingly glow underneath stationary objects . This de - sign “suggests that whether objects are stationary or moving may be interesting to think about . It does not , however , suggest what the implications of this might be” [ SG06 , p . 103 ] . As another exam - ple , work in the digital humanities often explicitly emphasizes the interpretation both of texts themselves and of computational anal - ysis thereof [ Ram03 ; Joc13 ; Und14 ; BSM * 20 ] . While J ÄNICKE , F RANZINI , C HEEMA , and S CHEUERMANN [ JFCS17 ] describe this relationship between close and distant reading , it is not well repre - sented in the broader text visualization literature . Work tending toward each of these two poles thus takes opposing approaches to meaning . Systems more aligned with the ﬁrst pole provide speciﬁc , prescriptive meanings for data . In doing so , such designs effectively background the political dimensions of that pro - cess . That is , the decisions made during the design process become embedded in a proverbial black box [ Pas16 ; Mol17 ] , making them both more inscrutable and seemingly more objective . These deci - sions , however , can impact how the public and their opinions are represented to , and interpreted by , analysts and decision makers . As noted above , such questions of representation are fundamentally political in nature [ Bec02 ; Mou99 ; Mou13 ] . In contrast , systems more aligned with the second pole provide visualizations as a resource for interpretation . Such systems are de - signed to draw attention to speciﬁc patterns in text data , suggest - ing that those patterns may be worth thinking about without mak - ing commitments as to what exactly those patterns mean . Civic text visualizations similarly designed to foreground interpretation could help make clearer who is making these interpretive deci - sions , thereby highlighting the lack of neutrality and objectivity in data [ DK20 ] . If the system does not explicitly say what a given re - sult or pattern means , then it becomes more obvious when a given stakeholder makes a claim about what that result means or , more - over , what should be done based upon the result . Such a design ap - proach can also make clearer when and where disagreements occur about the meanings of speciﬁc patterns in public comment data . In line with Mouffe’s points about agonism [ Mou99 ; Mou13 ] , foregrounding these interpretive processes and decisions will not necessarily cause a consensus or common ground to be reached . Nor will doing so establish for stakeholders which interpretations are more or less valid . However , designing to foreground interpre - tation can support stakeholders in addressing these differences by calling attention to them . Put differently , a design approach that emphasizes interpretation , rather than prescription of meaning , can help draw attention to the political dimensions of civic text visu - alization . It can also help draw attention to questions of who is performing that interpretation . 6 . 3 . From Singular User to Multiple Relationships In much the same way that many designers are encouraged to ask themselves “who is the user ? ” [ SD09 ] , civic text visualizations are usually designed with a particular user in mind . Tools such as ConsiderIt [ KMF * 12b ] or Opinion Space [ FBRG10 ] are designed speciﬁcally for the public . In contrast , tools such as Community - Pulse [ JHSM21 ] or CommunityClick [ JKW * 21 ] are focused more on supporting community leaders and decision makers . Is such ways , the design of current civic text visualization sys - tems tends to take a monolithic view of “the user . ” That is , the de - sign of any given system is predicated on a speciﬁc type of user . The user is not the same for every system , but most systems tend to be designed with a single user in mind . In contrast , we could consider designing explicitly for multiple users . Doing so requires more than designing for different levels of expertise ( see the following subsection for more on expertise ) or designing for collaborative use , though both those things may be valuable in their own right . Rather , this dimension encourages accounting for the different types of relationalities that users may have with a system [ cf . BB17 ] . These considerations include not only the kinds of relationships that different users might have with the system itself but also how the system mediates relationships among various users . ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization Consider , for instance , the roles described above ( in Section 4 . 6 ) that are involved in many public input processes : the public , ana - lysts , and decision makers . One could approach designing for these different roles and their relationships among one another in a va - riety of ways . For example , perhaps all users should have access to the same data , but different visual representations of that data should be presented to different users ; visual representations specif - ically intended for the public may differ from representations in - tended for analysts . Alternatively , there may be data to which some users ( e . g . , decision makers ) should have access while other users ( e . g . , the public ) should not . Further still , a system could provide similar visual representations using similar data but allow differ - ent users varying analytic capabilities . For instance , if the kinds of questions that the public may wish to explore differ from the questions asked by analysts , then these different types of users may require different analytic tools or underlying models of the data to address their respective questions . This shift—from a monolithic view of a single user to explic - itly designing for a variety of relationalities—can draw attention to the political aspects of civic text visualization . In particular , it highlights power structures among the various groups of actors in - volved . Different actors in different roles will have different kinds of authority . There are things decision makers might be able to do that the public cannot ( e . g . , enacting policies ) , and there may in fact be things that the public can do but analysts or decision makers cannot ( e . g . , making claims about how and whether the data repre - sent them ) . At the same time , people such as analysts or decision makers are , in most cases , simultaneously a subgroup of the pub - lic . When holding ofﬁce as a decision maker or when playing the role of an analyst , one does not forgo their citizenship status . Why , then , do we not refer to such people as analyst - citizens , or perhaps as members of the public with decision - making authority ? The conceptual dimensions contributed by this paper are not in - tended to answer such questions . Rather , they offer concrete means of drawing attention to such questions . For instance , while it might be quite sensible to design certain visual representations , data ma - nipulations , etc . with speciﬁc roles in mind , one need not constrain the use of those manipulations or representations to people in those roles . Perhaps , for example , certain aspects of a visualization might be intended for use by analysts , but all members of the public could have access to them . Because of differences in skill , expertise , time , etc . , providing such access would not alone eliminate the power differentials between decision makers and members of the public . However , echoing points made above , the goal in designing civic text visualization should not necessarily be to remove such power imbalances . Instead , systems should be designed to foreground and account for these kinds of power structures . Designing for multiple relationships , rather than for a single user , provides one means of doing so . Such an approach can also highlight how an individual’s expertise may mediate their interactions with a visualization . 6 . 4 . From Complexity to Inclusivity Prior work has highlighted the importance of careful consideration about the balance between complexity and simplicity in visualiza - tion design generally [ Mun14 ; IHBD18 ] . Text visualizations span between very complex to simple , each serving their own analyti - cal purposes and target audiences . Complexity usually abounds in public - generated text data due to high dimensionality , lack of struc - ture , and ambiguity inherent in natural human language [ AL19a ] , which can impact how text visualizations of such data are gener - ated . However , in the context of civics , careful consideration is needed to decide on the level of complexity that a visualization should offer . One might argue that complex visualizations could be beneﬁcial for surfacing actionable insights , identify patterns , vi - sualizing uncertainty [ PKH20 ] and incompleteness [ DK16 ] in the data . Others might opine that such complex visualizations might exclude people with limited visualization literacy [ BBG19 ] , dis - engaging them from further exploration and analysis of civic input . For instance , visual analytic systems such as MultiConVis [ HC16b ] use multiple connected views to enable analysts to ﬁlter and explore text data at multiple levels . However , even some civic leaders , let alone the members of the general public , might not be comfortable working with such complex systems due to limited visualization literacy [ MJS20a ; MNC * 19 ] . On the other side of the spectrum , some tools elide certain de - tails in the data in favor of providing a “simpler” representation of otherwise complex data . For example , CommunityPulse [ JHSM21 ] uses common , simple visualizations and iconography , such as bar charts and emojis , to provide overviews of people’s emotions to - wards civic agendas and ideas . Similarly , ConsiderIt [ KMF * 12b ] uses bar charts to visualize people’s stance towards ballot measures . These two systems tend toward simpler interfaces that gloss over some of the complexities in the data . However , they do not provide information around the uncertainty and incompleteness present in the data , which could be beneﬁcial in understanding people’s ratio - nale and disposition in civic inputs . As an alternative to choosing between simplicity and complex - ity , we suggest that choices about complexity are simultaneously choices about inclusivity . Choosing a more complex visualization , for example , may provide accurate and detailed information and additional functionalities to investigate data at different levels to gather deeper insights . Indeed , MultiConVis [ HC16a ] and Commu - nityClick [ JKW * 21 ] support deriving insights that would be difﬁ - cult , perhaps impossible , to derive from simply reading conversa - tion transcripts . The choice to make visualizations complex also enables the designers to be transparent and avoid biases by adding explanations to visualized elements [ KRH17b ] . At the same time , such complex visualizations assume that users have relevant train - ing and experience , implicitly alienating segments of the popula - tion who may lack such skills or expertise [ GFM * 13 ] . On the other hand , moving towards simplicity can accommo - date a broader range of users [ Mun14 ] and increase engage - ment [ HHC * 08 ] . Such simple visualization can inform the pub - lic about civic issues and pave the way for broader participation . However , the elision of certain aspects of the data in the interest of simpliﬁcation distills meaningful nuances , thus watering down the impact , complexities , and dynamics inherent in the public input . Such simpliﬁcation may also may open doors for human biases and marginalization of minority opinions [ JHSM21 ] . Essentially , this dimension suggests recasting visualization de - sign decisions about complexity to instead focus on inclusivity . Rather than asking whether complexity is warranted in a certain ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization element of the visualization , design decisions can instead consider how speciﬁc types of complexity may include or exclude certain users or audiences . For instance , one could design visualizations to provide multiple views with different kinds of complexity for dif - ferent audiences [ e . g . , FBL * 10 ] . A member of the public whose family has lived in a given neighborhood for generations may have intimate understandings about the history of properties , relation - ships among different residents , etc . , while a government analyst may understand the neighborhood in terms of zoning regulations , building codes , etc . Neither of these understandings is necessarily less or more complex ; each is complex in their own different way . Furthermore , systems could be outﬁtted with interactive functional - ities that enables users to start either from simple visualizations or from complexities with which they are familiar and , through their interactions , gradually learn how to use other functionalities asso - ciated with different types of complexities [ e . g . , BLN07 ; FBL * 10 ] . At the same time , such learning should be optional , enabling the visualization to prove useful even in the most simpliﬁed views . Thus , this conceptual dimension does not suggest favoring sim - plicity over complexity , nor vice versa . However , it helps draw at - tention to the ways that choices about complexity simultaneously constitute choices about inclusivity in terms of who can use and understand a visualization , and who cannot . It also highlights the limitations of approaches to design visualization by adhering to the “one size ﬁts all” policy where a single design is used for multiple varied audiences [ DK16 ] . Furthermore , considerations about inclu - sivity apply not only to the users and audiences of a visualization but also to the people whose data are being visualized . 6 . 5 . From Aggregation to Articulation Many extant text visualizations have predominantly focused on high - level aggregation of data such as summaries of top - ics discussed [ JKW * 21 ] , collections of representative key - words [ JHSM21 ] , or statistics about sentiments [ HC16b ] . Such ag - gregation can provide civic leaders with a visual summary to help understand various facets of public input . At the same time , aggregation tends to highlight com - mon and popular opinions over nuances and often unpopular ideas [ MHAG06 ; MNC * 19 ] . Even when visualizations combine overviews and details [ Shn96 ] , the summary statistics or overviews provide high - level information at a granularity that often inad - vertently discards information that might represent unpopular or marginalized opinions . This can result in what has been termed the “tyranny of the majority” [ dToc10 , Pt . 2 , Ch . 7 , Sec . 2 ] , wherein a majority of the population forces their opinions upon various mi - nority groups . Indeed , prior work shows how summaries can sup - press “minority viewpoints” and miss some critical information as “not all the information is captured in the [ summaries ] due to im - perfections” which might result in “losing the visions that are actu - ally embedded into the [ individual perspectives ] ” [ MNC * 19 ] . On the other side of this spectrum , at the detail level , articulat - ing nuanced information present in raw text data can enable civic leaders to peruse and sublimate critical insights . Despite civic lead - ers’ preference for reading actual text over aggregate statistics that allows them “to make their [ own ] speciﬁc inferences” [ JHSM21 ] , there are few examples of prior systems that articulate the space of differing views , perhaps due in part to high dimensionality of text data . Furthermore , there are often no speciﬁc mechanisms for de - tailed analysis at individual levels [ DRRD12 ] , which demonstrates a scarcity for computational and design approaches to mitigate this gap in granular information dissemination from text data . This dimension , then , highlights how choices between visualiz - ing aggregate trends and articulating a space of myriad opinions has political ramiﬁcations in terms of who or what is represented ( and not represented ) . When designing civic text visualizations , one might ask “At what granularity should civic text be aggregated ? ” Rather than suggesting that any one application has a single , proper granularity , this conceptual dimension highlights the political na - ture of these choices that might otherwise seem purely analytic . 7 . Conclusion This paper argues that , in the context of civics , text visualization is a political activity and process just as much as it is analytic . However , prior visualization research has placed less emphasis on this politi - cal aspect , framing text visualization only as an analytic task . The implications of treating civic text visualization as solely analytic manifest throughout the visual data analysis pipeline . Examples in - clude collecting unrepresentative and biased data , missing minority voices in aggregation , and designing analyst - oriented tools that ex - clude the public from the process . Drawing on political theory and participatory design [ Asa00 ; Bec02 ; Mou99 ; Mou13 ] , we offer a series of conceptual dimensions that can assist researchers , design - ers , and practitioners in attending more intentionally to the political aspects of civic text visualization . Most of these dimensions involve gauging and balancing the tension between two poles , such as be - tween prescription and interpretations of meaning , between aggre - gating trends and articulating exceptions , and between designing for a singular user and designing for multiple relationships . We suggest that attending to these dimensions can aid in consciously navigating the balance between civic text visualization as an ana - lytic task and as a political process . The argument put forth in this paper , and the conceptual dimen - sions offered , come from speciﬁcally examining the use of text visualization in the domain of civics . At the same time , we sus - pect the conceptual dimensions contributed by this paper could be extended to a variety of different application domains , from de - mographics and census data , to scientiﬁc visualization , to visualiz - ing uncertainty . Indeed , the core activities that we argue character - ize political processes—deﬁning groups and categories , choosing representations , identifying aggregate trends , selecting prototypi - cal examples , etc . —lie at the heart of many visualization systems . Put differently , the conceptual dimensions offered in this paper can help future work acknowledge how politics is not the only thing that is political . Acknowledgments For comments on previous drafts , thanks to Ethan Zuckerman , Dominic DiFranzo , members of Lehigh’s Human - Centered Social Computing group , UMASS HCI - VIS Lab members , and the anony - mous reviewers . ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization References [ 19 ] Pol . is . https : / / pol . is / gov . Accessed : December 2019 . 2019 . [ 20a ] Dedoose . https : / / www . dedoose . com / . Accessed : September 2020 . 2020 . [ 20b ] Free open - source participatory democracy for cities and organiza - tions . https : / / decidim . org . Accessed : January 2020 . 2020 . [ 21 ] NVivo . https : / / www . qsrinternational . com / nvivo - qualitative - data - analysis - software / home . Accessed : January , 2021 . 2021 . [ AA13 ] A DENOWO , A DETOKUNBO AA and A DENOWO , B ASIRAT A . “Software Engineering Methodologies : A Review of the Waterfall Model and Object - Oriented Approach” . International Journal of Scientiﬁc & Engineering Research 4 . 7 ( 2013 ) , 427 – 434 . [ ACM19 ] ACM . ATLAS . ti . https : / / atlasti . com / . 2019 . [ AdOP12 ] A LENCAR , A RETHA B . , de O LIVEIRA , M ARIA C RISTINA F . , and P AULOVICH , F ERNANDO V . “Seeing beyond Reading : A Survey on Visual Text Analytics” . WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 2 . 6 ( 2012 ) , 476 – 492 . ISSN : 1942 - 4795 . DOI : 10 . 1002 / widm . 1071 . [ AJM21 ] A RAGÓN , C AROLINA , J ASIM , M AHMOOD , and M AHYAR , N ARGES . “RisingEMOTIONS : Bridging Art and Technology to Visual - ize Public’s Emotions about Climate Change” . Creativity and Cognition . 2021 , 1 – 10 . [ AL19a ] A LHARBI , M OHAMMAD and L ARAMEE , R OBERT S . “Sos textvis : An extended survey of surveys on text visualization” . Computers 8 . 1 ( 2019 ) , 17 . [ AL19b ] A LHARBI , M OHAMMAD and L ARAMEE , R OBERT S . “SoS TextVis : An Extended Survey of Surveys on Text Visualization” . Com - puters 8 . 1 ( Mar . 2019 ) , 17 . DOI : 10 . 3390 / computers8010017 . [ ALND17 ] A SAD , M ARIAM , L E D ANTEC , C HRISTOPHER A , N IELSEN , B ECKY , and D IEDRICK , K ATE . “Creating a Sociotechnical API : De - signing City - Scale Community Engagement” . Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM . 2017 , 2295 – 2306 . [ Asa00 ] A SARO , P ETER M . “Transforming Society by Transforming Technology : The Science and Politics of Participatory Design” . Account - ing , Management and Information Technologies 10 . 4 ( 2000 ) , 257 – 290 . [ BB17 ] B AUMER , E RIC P . S . and B RUBAKER , J ED R . “Post - Userism” . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems ( CHI ) . Denver , CO : ACM , 2017 , 6291 – 6303 . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4655 - 9 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025740 . [ BBG19 ] B ÖRNER , K ATY , B UECKLE , A NDREAS , and G INDA , M ICHAEL . “Data visualization literacy : Deﬁnitions , conceptual frameworks , exercises , and assessments” . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116 . 6 ( 2019 ) , 1857 – 1864 . [ BCD * 14 ] B AUMER , E RIC P . S . , C IPRIANI , C LAIRE , D AVIS , M ITCHELL , et al . “Broadening Exposure , Questioning Opinions , and Reading Pat - terns with Reﬂext : A Computational Support for Frame Reﬂection” . Journal of Information Technology & Politics 11 . 1 ( Jan . 2014 ) , 45 – 63 . ISSN : 1933 - 1681 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 19331681 . 2013 . 872072 . [ Bec02 ] B ECK , E EVI E . “P for Political : Participation Is Not Enough” . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 14 . 1 ( 2002 ) , 1 . [ BHP * 12 ] B RYNJARSDÓTTIR , H RÖNN , H ÅKANSSON , M ARIA , P IERCE , J AMES , et al . “Sustainably Unpersuaded : How Persuasion Narrows Our Vision of Sustainability” . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) . Austin , TX : ACM , 2012 , 947 – 956 . [ BKM * 14 ] B AUMER , E RIC P . S . , K HOVANSKAYA , V ERA , M ATTHEWS , M ARK , et al . “Reviewing Reﬂection : On the Use of Reﬂection in Interac - tive System Design” . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ) . Vancouver , BC : ACM Press , 2014 , 93 – 102 . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2902 - 6 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598598 . [ BLN07 ] B AILLY , G ILLES , L ECOLINET , E RIC , and N IGAY , L AURENCE . “Wave menus : improving the novice mode of hierarchical marking menus” . IFIP Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . Springer . 2007 , 475 – 488 . [ Boe88 ] B OEHM , B . W . “A Spiral Model of Software Development and Enhancement” . Computer 21 . 5 ( May 1988 ) , 61 – 72 . ISSN : 1558 - 0814 . DOI : 10 . 1109 / 2 . 59 . [ BOL * 21 ] B URNS , A LYXANDER , O N , T HAI , L EE , C HRISTIANA , et al . “Making the Invisible Visible : Risks and Beneﬁts of Disclosing Metadata in Visualization” . 2021 IEEE Workshop on Visualization for Social Good ( VIS4Good ) . IEEE . 2021 , 11 – 15 . [ Bow06 ] B OWEN , G LENN A . “Grounded Theory and Sensitiz - ing Concepts” . International Journal of Qualitative Methods 5 . 3 ( Sept . 2006 ) , 12 – 23 . ISSN : 1609 - 4069 . DOI : 10 . 1177 / 160940690600500304 . [ Bra13 ] B RABHAM , D AREN C . Using crowdsourcing in government . IBM Center for the Business of Government , 2013 . [ BS16 ] B AROCAS , S OLON and S ELBST , A NDREW D . “Big Data’s Dis - parate Impact” . California Law Review 104 . 3 ( 2016 ) , 671 – 732 . DOI : 10 . 15779 / Z38BG31 . [ BS99 ] B OWKER , G EOFFREY C . and S TAR , S USAN L EIGH . Sorting Things Out : Classiﬁcation and Its Consequences . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1999 . [ BSM * 20 ] B AUMER , E RIC P . S . , S IEDEL , D REW , M C D ONNELL , L ENA , et al . “Topicalizer : Reframing Core Concepts in Machine Learning Visualization by Co - Designing for Interpretivist Scholarship” . Hu - man – Computer Interaction 35 . 5 - 6 ( Apr . 2020 ) , 452 – 480 . ISSN : 0737 - 0024 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 07370024 . 2020 . 1734460 . [ BVSD07 ] B OEHNER , K IRSTEN , V ERTESI , J ANET , S ENGERS , P HOEBE , and D OURISH , P AUL . “How HCI Interprets the Probes” . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) . San Jose , CA : ACM , 2007 , 1077 – 1086 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240789 . [ Cai19 ] C AIRO , A LBERTO . How Charts Lie : Getting Smarter about Visual Information . WW Norton & Company , 2019 . [ CB95 ] C OOPER , G EOFF and B OWERS , J OHN . “Representing the User : Notes on the Disciplinary Rhetoric of HCI” . The Social and Interactional Dimensions of Human - Computer Interfaces . Ed . by T HOMAS , P ETER J . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1995 , 48 – 66 . [ CBD19 ] C HANCELLOR , S TEVIE , B AUMER , E RIC P . S . , and D E C HOUD - HURY , M UNMUN . “Who Is the " Human " in Human - Centered Machine Learning : The Case of Predicting Mental Health from Social Media” . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 . CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 147 : 1 – 147 : 32 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3359249 . [ CC16 ] C AO , N AN and C UI , W EIWEI . Introduction to Text Visualization . Paris : Atlantis Press , 2016 . ISBN : 978 - 94 - 6239 - 185 - 7 978 - 94 - 6239 - 186 - 4 . DOI : 10 . 2991 / 978 - 94 - 6239 - 186 - 4 . [ Cha06 ] C HARMAZ , K ATHY . Constructing Grounded Theory : A Practical Guide through Qualitative Analysis . London : SAGE Publications , 2006 . [ CL18a ] C ORBETT , E RIC and L E D ANTEC , C HRISTOPHER A . “Going the Distance : Trust Work for Citizen Participation” . Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM . 2018 , 312 . [ CL18b ] C ORBETT , E RIC and L E D ANTEC , C HRISTOPHER A . “The Prob - lem of Community Engagement : Disentangling the Practices of Munic - ipal Government” . Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM . 2018 , 574 . [ CMS99 ] C ARD , S TUART K . , M ACKINLAY , J OCK D . , and S HNEIDER - MAN , B EN . Readings in Information Visualization : Using Vision to Think . San Francisco , CA : Morgan Kaufmann , 1999 . [ CNM83 ] C ARD , S TUART K . , N EWELL , A LLEN , and M ORAN , T HOMAS P . The Psychology of Human - Computer Interaction . Hillsdale , NJ , USA : L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . , 1983 . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 89859 - 243 - 6 . ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization [ Cor19 ] C ORRELL , M ICHAEL . “Ethical Dimensions of Visualization Re - search” . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems ( CHI ) . Glasgow : ACM , May 2019 , 1 – 13 . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5970 - 2 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300418 . [ Cou17 ] C OUPER , M ICK P . “Birth and Diffusion of the Concept of Para - data” . Advances in Social Research 18 ( 2017 ) , 14 – 26 . [ CRMH12 ] C HUANG , J ASON , R AMAGE , D ANIEL , M ANNING , C HRISTO - PHER , and H EER , J EFFREY . “Interpretation and trust : Designing model - driven visualizations for text analysis” . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2012 , 443 – 452 . [ DFCC13 ] D ÖRK , M ARIAN , F ENG , P ATRICK , C OLLINS , C HRISTOPHER , and C ARPENDALE , S HEELAGH . “Critical InfoVis : Exploring the Politics of Visualization” . Extended Abstracts of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ) . Paris : ACM , 2013 , 2189 – 2198 . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1952 - 2 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468739 . [ DiS12 ] D I S ALVO , C ARL . Adversarial Design . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 2012 . [ DK16 ] D’I GNAZIO , C ATHERINE and K LEIN , L AUREN F . “Feminist Data Visualization” . Workshop on Visualization for the Digital Humanities , at IEEE VIS Conference . Baltimore , MD , 2016 . [ DK20 ] D’I GNAZIO , C ATHERINE and K LEIN , L AUREN F . Data Femi - nism . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 2020 . [ DRRD12 ] D ÖRK , M ARIAN , R ICHE , N ATHALIE H ENRY , R AMOS , G ON - ZALO , and D UMAIS , S USAN . “Pivotpaths : Strolling through faceted in - formation spaces” . IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 18 . 12 ( 2012 ) , 2709 – 2718 . [ dToc10 ] De T OCQUEVILE , A LEXIS . Democray in America . Ed . by N OLLA , E DUARDO . Trans . by S CHLEIFER , J AMES T . Indianapolis : Lib - erty Fund , 1835 ( 2010 ) . [ FBL * 10 ] F RANCONE , J ÉRÉMIE , B AILLY , G ILLES , L ECOLINET , E RIC , et al . “Wavelet menus on handheld devices : stacking metaphor for novice mode and eyes - free selection for expert mode” . Proceedings of the Inter - national Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces . 2010 , 173 – 180 . [ FBRG10 ] F ARIDANI , S IAMAK , B ITTON , E PHRAT , R YOKAI , K IMIKO , and G OLDBERG , K EN . “Opinion Space : A Scalable Tool for Browsing Online Comments” . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) . Atlanta , GA : ACM , 2010 , 1175 – 1184 . [ FHKM17 ] F EDERICO , P AOLO , H EIMERL , F LORIAN , K OCH , S TEFFEN , and M IKSCH , S ILVIA . “A Survey on Visual Approaches for Analyz - ing Scientiﬁc Literature and Patents” . IEEE Transactions on Visualiza - tion and Computer Graphics 23 . 9 ( Sept . 2017 ) , 2179 – 2198 . ISSN : 1941 - 0506 . DOI : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2016 . 2610422 . [ FO05 ] F EINDT , P ETER H and O ELS , A NGELA . “Does discourse matter ? Discourse analysis in environmental policy making” . Journal of Envi - ronmental Policy & Planning 7 . 3 ( 2005 ) , 161 – 173 . [ For18 ] F ORLIZZI , J ODI . “Moving Beyond User - Centered Design” . Inter - actions 25 . 5 ( Aug . 2018 ) , 22 – 23 . ISSN : 1072 - 5520 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3239558 . [ GEC98 ] G ERSHON , N AHUM , E ICK , S TEPHEN G . , and C ARD , S TUART . “Information Visualization” . Interactions 5 . 2 ( Mar . 1998 ) , 9 – 15 . ISSN : 1072 - 5520 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 274430 . 274432 . [ Gen97 ] G ENETTE , G ÉRARD . Paratexts : Thresholds of Interpretation . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1997 . [ GFM * 13 ] G OODMAN , M ADELINE , F INNEGAN , R OBERT , M OHADJER , L EYLA , et al . “Literacy , Numeracy , and Problem Solving in Technology - Rich Environments among US Adults : Results from the Program for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies 2012 . First Look . NCES 2014 - 008 . ” National Center for Education Statistics ( 2013 ) . [ GHWM20 ] G ELMAN , A NDREW , H ULLMAN , J ESSICA , W LEZIEN , C HRISTOPHER , and M ORRIS , G EORGE E LLIOTT . “Information , incen - tives , and goals in election forecasts” . Judgment and Decision Making 15 . 5 ( 2020 ) , 863 . [ GS67 ] G LASER , B ARNEY G . and S TRAUSS , A NSELM L . The Discovery of Grounded Theory . Oxon and New York : Routledge , 1967 . [ GTS10 ] G RAMMEL , L ARS , T ORY , M ELANIE , and S TOREY , M ARGARET - A NNE . “How information visualization novices con - struct visualizations” . IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 16 . 6 ( 2010 ) , 943 – 952 . [ Gup09 ] G UPTA , A MARNATH . “Data Provenance” . Encyclopedia of Database Systems . Ed . by LIU , LING and ÖZSU , M . TAMER . Boston , MA : Springer US , 2009 , 608 – 608 . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 387 - 39940 - 9 . DOI : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 0 - 387 - 39940 - 9 _ 1305 . [ GZL * 14 ] G AN , Q IHONG , Z HU , M IN , L I , M INGZHAO , et al . “Document Visualization : An Overview of Current Research” . WIREs Computa - tional Statistics 6 . 1 ( 2014 ) , 19 – 36 . ISSN : 1939 - 0068 . DOI : 10 . 1002 / wics . 1285 . [ Har88 ] H ARAWAY , D ONNA . “Situated Knowledges : The Science Ques - tion in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective” . Feminist Stud - ies 14 . 3 ( 1988 ) , 575 – 599 . ISSN : 0046 - 3663 . DOI : 10 . 2307 / 3178066 . [ Har91 ] H ARDING , S ANDRA . Whose Science ? Whose Knowledge ? Think - ing from Women’s Lives . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press , 1991 . [ HC16a ] H OQUE , E NAMUL and C ARENINI , G IUSEPPE . “MultiConVis : A Visual Text Analytics System for Exploring a Collection of Online Con - versations” . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Intelligent User In - terfaces ( IUI ) . IUI . Sonoma , CA : ACM , Mar . 2016 , 96 – 107 . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4137 - 0 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 2856767 . 2856782 . [ HC16b ] H OQUE , E NAMUL and C ARENINI , G IUSEPPE . “Multiconvis : A visual text analytics system for exploring a collection of online conver - sations” . Proceedings of the 21st international conference on intelligent user interfaces . 2016 , 96 – 107 . [ HCL05 ] H EER , J EFFREY , C ARD , S TUART K . , and L ANDAY , J AMES A . “Prefuse : A Toolkit for Interactive Information Visualization” . Proceed - ings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) . Portland , OR : ACM , Apr . 2005 , 421 – 430 . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 58113 - 998 - 3 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 1054972 . 1055031 . [ HD11 ] H ULLMAN , J ESSICA and D IAKOPOULOS , N ICK . “Visualization Rhetoric : Framing Effects in Narrative Visualization” . IEEE Transac - tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 17 . 12 ( Dec . 2011 ) , 2231 – 2240 . ISSN : 1077 - 2626 . DOI : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2011 . 255 . [ Hea07 ] H EAD , B RIAN W . “Community Engagement : Participation on Whose Terms ? ” : Australian Journal of Political Science 42 . 3 ( 2007 ) , 441 – 454 . [ HGH20 ] H OFMAN , J AKE M , G OLDSTEIN , D ANIEL G , and H ULLMAN , J ESSICA . “How visualizing inferential uncertainty can mislead readers about treatment effects in scientiﬁc results” . Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2020 , 1 – 12 . [ HHC * 08 ] H EER , J EFFREY , H AM , F RANK , C ARPENDALE , S HEELAGH , et al . “Information Visualization” . Ed . by K ERREN , A NDREAS , S TASKO , J OHN T . , F EKETE , J EAN - D ANIEL , and N ORTH , C HRIS . Berlin , Heidelberg : Springer - Verlag , 2008 . Chap . Creation and Collabo - ration : Engaging New Audiences for Information Visualization , 92 – 133 . ISBN : 978 - 3 - 540 - 70955 - 8 . DOI : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 70956 - 5 _ 5 . URL : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 70956 - 5 _ 5 . [ Hul19 ] H ULLMAN , J ESSICA . “Why authors don’t visualize uncer - tainty” . IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 26 . 1 ( 2019 ) , 130 – 139 . [ IHBD18 ] I NDRATMO , H OWORKO , L EE , B OEDIANTO , J OYCE M ARIA , and D ANIEL , B EN . “The efﬁcacy of stacked bar charts in supporting single - attribute and overall - attribute comparisons” . Visual Informatics 2 . 3 ( 2018 ) , 155 – 165 . ISSN : 2468 - 502X . [ IZCC08 ] I SENBERG , P ETRA , Z UK , T ORRE , C OLLINS , C HRISTOPHER , and C ARPENDALE , S HEELAGH . “Grounded Evaluation of Information Visualizations” . Proceedings of the Workshop on BEyond Time and Er - rors : Novel evaLuation Methods for Information Visualization ( BELIV ) . Florence , Italy : ACM , 2008 , 6 : 1 – 6 : 8 . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 60558 - 016 - 6 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 1377966 . 1377974 . ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization [ JFCS15 ] J ÄNICKE , S TEFAN , F RANZINI , G RETA , C HEEMA , M UHAM - MAD F AISAL , and S CHEUERMANN , G ERIK . “On Close and Distant Reading in Digital Humanities : A Survey and Future Challenges” . ( 2015 ) . DOI : 10 . 2312 / eurovisstar . 20151113 . [ JFCS17 ] J ÄNICKE , S . , F RANZINI , G . , C HEEMA , M . F . , and S CHEUER - MANN , G . “Visual Text Analysis in Digital Humanities” . Computer Graphics Forum 36 . 6 ( 2017 ) , 226 – 250 . ISSN : 1467 - 8659 . DOI : 10 . 1111 / cgf . 12873 . [ JHSM21 ] J ASIM , M AHMOOD , H OQUE , E NAMUL , S ARVGHAD , A LI , and M AHYAR , N ARGES . “CommunityPulse : Facilitating Community Input Analysis by Surfacing Hidden Insights , Reﬂections , and Priorities” . De - signing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 . 2021 , 846 – 863 . [ JKW * 21 ] J ASIM , M AHMOOD , K HALOO , P OOYA , W ADHWA , S OMIN , et al . “CommunityClick : Capturing and Reporting Community Feedback from Town Halls to Improve Inclusivity” . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 . CSCW3 ( Jan . 2021 ) , 213 : 1 – 213 : 32 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3432912 . [ Joc13 ] J OCKERS , M ATTHEW L . Macroanalysis : Digital Methods & Lit - erary History . Chicago : University of Illinois Press , 2013 . [ JSHM20 ] J ASIM , M AHMOOD , S ARVGHAD , A LI , H OQUE , E NAMUL , and M AHYAR , N ARGES . “Towards Understanding Desiderata for Large - Scale Civic Input Analysis” . Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2020 , 1 – 8 . [ KK14 ] K UCHER , K OSTIANTYN and K ERREN , A NDREAS . “Text Visu - alization Browser : A Visual Survey of Text Visualization Techniques” . Poster Abstracts of IEEE VIS . Vol . 2014 . Paris , 2014 . [ KK15 ] K UCHER , K OSTIANTYN and K ERREN , A NDREAS . “Text Visu - alization Techniques : Taxonomy , Visual Survey , and Community In - sights” . 2015 IEEE Paciﬁc Visualization Symposium ( PaciﬁcVis ) . IEEE , Apr . 2015 , 117 – 121 . DOI : 10 . 1109 / PACIFICVIS . 2015 . 7156366 . [ KKHM16 ] K AY , M ATTHEW , K OLA , T ARA , H ULLMAN , J ESSICA R , and M UNSON , S EAN A . “When ( ish ) is my bus ? user - centered visualiza - tions of uncertainty in everyday , mobile predictive systems” . Proceed - ings of the 2016 chi conference on human factors in computing systems . 2016 , 5092 – 5103 . [ KMF * 12a ] K RIPLEAN , T RAVIS , M ORGAN , J ONATHAN , F REELON , D EEN , et al . “Supporting Reﬂective Public Thought with ConsiderIt” . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooper - ative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ) . Seattle , Washington , USA : ACM Press , 2012 , 265 – 274 . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1086 - 4 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145249 . [ KMF * 12b ] K RIPLEAN , T RAVIS , M ORGAN , J ONATHAN , F REELON , D EEN , et al . “Supporting Reﬂective Public Thought with Considerit” . Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . CSCW ’12 . Seattle , Washington , USA : ACM , 2012 , 265 – 274 . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1086 - 4 . [ KPK18 ] K UCHER , K OSTIANTYN , P ARADIS , C ARITA , and K ERREN , A NDREAS . “The State of the Art in Sentiment Visualization” . Computer Graphics Forum 37 . 1 ( 2018 ) , 71 – 96 . ISSN : 1467 - 8659 . DOI : 10 . 1111 / cgf . 13217 . [ KRH17a ] K IM , Y EA - S EUL , R EINECKE , K ATHARINA , and H ULLMAN , J ESSICA . “Data through others’ eyes : The impact of visualizing others’ expectations on visualization interpretation” . IEEE transactions on visu - alization and computer graphics 24 . 1 ( 2017 ) , 760 – 769 . [ KRH17b ] K IM , Y EA - S EUL , R EINECKE , K ATHARINA , and H ULLMAN , J ESSICA . “Explaining the gap : Visualizing one’s predictions improves recall and comprehension of data” . Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2017 , 1375 – 1386 . [ LBI * 12 ] L AM , H EIDI , B ERTINI , E NRICO , I SENBERG , P ETRA , et al . “Empirical Studies in Information Visualization : Seven Scenarios” . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 18 . 9 ( Sept . 2012 ) , 1520 – 1536 . ISSN : 1077 - 2626 . DOI : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2011 . 279 . [ LCWL14 ] L IU , S HIXIA , C UI , W EIWEI , W U , Y INGCAI , and L IU , M ENGCHEN . “A Survey on Information Visualization : Recent Advances and Challenges” . The Visual Computer 30 . 12 ( Dec . 2014 ) , 1373 – 1393 . ISSN : 1432 - 2315 . DOI : 10 . 1007 / s00371 - 013 - 0892 - 3 . [ LIS * 19 ] L EE , B ONGSHIN , I SAACS , K ATE , S ZAFIR , D ANIELLE A LBERS , et al . “Broadening Intellectual Diversity in Visualization Research Pa - pers” . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 39 . 4 ( July 2019 ) , 78 – 85 . ISSN : 1558 - 1756 . DOI : 10 . 1109 / MCG . 2019 . 2914844 . [ LLS ] L UKENSMEYER , C AROLYN , L YONS , S USANNA H AAS , and S PEAKS , A MERICA . 21 st Century Town Meeting® . [ LSAL05 ] L OFLAND , J OHN , S NOW , D AVID A . , A NDERSON , L EON , and L OFLAND , L YN H . Analyzing Social Settings . Belmont , CA : Wadsworth , 1971 ( 2005 ) . [ LWC * 19 ] L IU , S HIXIA , W ANG , X ITING , C OLLINS , C HRISTOPHER , et al . “Bridging Text Visualization and Mining : A Task - Driven Survey” . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 25 . 7 ( July 2019 ) , 2482 – 2504 . ISSN : 1941 - 0506 . DOI : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2018 . 2834341 . [ MBX * 16 ] M AHYAR , N ARGES , B URKE , K ELLY J . , X IANG , J IALIANG E RNEST , et al . “UD Co - Spaces : A Table - Centred Multi - Display En - vironment for Public Engagement in Urban Design Charrettes” . Pro - ceedings of the 2016 ACM on Interactive Surfaces and Spaces . ACM . 2016 , 109 – 118 . [ MHAG06 ] M ANSBRIDGE , J ANE , H ARTZ - K ARP , J ANETTE , A MEN - GUAL , M ATTHEW , and G ASTIL , J OHN . “Norms of deliberation : An in - ductive study” . Journal of public deliberation 2 . 1 ( 2006 ) . [ MJN * 18 ] M AHYAR , N ARGES , J AMES , M ICHAEL R , N G , M ICHELLE M , et al . “CommunityCrit : inviting the public to improve and evaluate ur - ban design ideas through micro - activities” . Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2018 , 1 – 14 . [ MJS20a ] M AHYAR , N . , J ASIM , M . , and S ARVGHAD , A . “Designing Technology for Sociotechnical Problems : Challenges and Considera - tions” . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 40 . 6 ( Nov . 2020 ) , 76 – 87 . ISSN : 1558 - 1756 . DOI : 10 . 1109 / MCG . 2020 . 3017405 . [ MJS20b ] M AHYAR , N ARGES , J ASIM , M AHMOOD , and S ARVGHAD , A LI . “Designing Technology for Sociotechnical Problems : Challenges and Considerations” . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 40 . 6 ( 2020 ) , 76 – 87 . [ MNC * 19 ] M AHYAR , N ARGES , N GUYEN , D IANA V , C HAN , M AGGIE , et al . “The Civic Data Deluge : Understanding the Challenges of Analyzing Large - Scale Community Input” . Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference . ACM . 2019 , 1171 – 1181 . [ Mol17 ] M OLS , B ENNIE . In Black Box Algorithms We Trust ( or Do We ? ) https : / / cacm . acm . org / news / 214618 - in - black - box - algorithms - we - trust - or - do - we / fulltext . Mar . 2017 . [ Mou13 ] M OUFFE , C HANTAL . Agonistics : Thinking the World Politically . London : Verso , 2013 . [ Mou99 ] M OUFFE , C HANTAL . “Deliberative Democracy or Agonistic Plu - ralism ? ” : Social Research 66 . 3 ( 1999 ) , 745 – 758 . [ MS20 ] M ARTIN - R ODILLA , P ATRICIA and S ÁNCHEZ , M IGUEL . “Soft - ware Support for Discourse - Based Textual Information Analysis : A Sys - tematic Literature Review and Software Guidelines in Practice” . Infor - mation 11 . 5 ( May 2020 ) , 256 . DOI : 10 . 3390 / info11050256 . [ Mun14 ] M UNZNER , T AMARA . Visualization Analysis and Design . CRC Press , 2014 . [ Nag86 ] N AGEL , T HOMAS . The View from Nowhere . Oxford : Oxford Uni - versity Press , 1986 . [ Nel19 ] N ELIMARKKA , M ATTI . “A Review of Research on Participation in Democratic Decision - Making Presented at SIGCHI Conferences . To - ward an Improved Trading Zone Between Political Science and HCI” . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 . CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 29 . ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd . Baumer , Jasim , Sarvghad , Mahyar / Of Course it’s Political ! A Critical Inquiry into Underemphasized Dimensions in Civic Text Visualization [ NPW14 ] N UALART - V ILAPLANA , J AUME , P ÉREZ - M ONTORO , M ARIO , and W HITELAW , M ITCHELL . “Cómo dibujamos textos : Revisión de propuestas de visualización y exploración textual ( How we draw texts : a review of approaches to text visualization and exploration ) ” . Profesional de la Información 23 . 3 ( May 2014 ) , 221 – 235 . ISSN : 1699 - 2407 . DOI : 10 . 3145 / epi . 2014 . may . 02 . [ OW15 ] O LIVIER , P ATRICK and W RIGHT , P ETER . “Digital Civics : Tak - ing a Local Turn” . interactions 22 . 4 ( June 2015 ) , 61 – 63 . ISSN : 1072 - 5520 . [ PAE19 ] P ECK , E VAN M . , A YUSO , S OFIA E . , and E L - E TR , O MAR . “Data Is Personal : Attitudes and Perceptions of Data Visualization in Rural Pennsylvania” . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) . Glasgow : ACM , May 2019 , 1 – 12 . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5970 - 2 . [ Pas16 ] P ASQUALE , F RANK . The Black Box Society : The Secret Algo - rithms That Control Money and Information . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , Aug . 2016 . [ PKH20 ] P ADILLA , L ACE , K AY , M ATTHEW , and H ULLMAN , J ESSICA . “Uncertainty visualization” . ( 2020 ) . [ PSB10 ] P URETSKIY , A NDREY A . , S HUTT , G REGORY L . , and B ERRY , M ICHAEL W . “Survey of Text Visualization Techniques” . Text Mining . John Wiley & Sons , Ltd , 2010 . Chap . 6 , 105 – 127 . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 470 - 68964 - 6 . DOI : 10 . 1002 / 9780470689646 . ch6 . [ PWB09 ] P ETERSEN , K AI , W OHLIN , C LAES , and B ACA , D EJAN . “The waterfall model in large - scale development” . International Confer - ence on Product - Focused Software Process Improvement . Springer . 2009 , 386 – 400 . [ Ram03 ] R AMSAY , S TEPHEN . “Special Section : Reconceiving Text Anal - ysisToward an Algorithmic Criticism” . Literary and Linguistic Comput - ing 18 . 2 ( June 2003 ) , 167 – 174 . ISSN : 0268 - 1145 . DOI : 10 . 1093 / llc / 18 . 2 . 167 . [ Res96 ] R ESNIK , P HILIP . “Selectional Constraints : An Information - Theoretic Model and Its Computational Realization” . Cognition . Com - positional Language Acquisition 61 . 1 ( Oct . 1996 ) , 127 – 159 . ISSN : 0010 - 0277 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / S0010 - 0277 ( 96 ) 00722 - 6 . [ RESC16 ] R AGAN , E RIC D . , E NDERT , A LEX , S ANYAL , J IBONANANDA , and C HEN , J IAN . “Characterizing Provenance in Visualization and Data Analysis : An Organizational Framework of Provenance Types and Pur - poses” . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 22 . 1 ( Jan . 2016 ) , 31 – 40 . ISSN : 1941 - 0506 . DOI : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2015 . 2467551 . [ Sam11 ] S AMPLE , M ARK . The Poetics of Metadata and the Potential of Paradata ( Revised ) . https : / / samplereality . com / 2011 / 03 / 22 / the - poetics - of - metadata - and - the - potential - of - paradata / . Mar . 2011 . [ Sav15 ] S AVOLAINEN , R EIJO . “Expressing emotions in information shar - ing : a study of online discussion about immigration” . ( 2015 ) . [ ŠB10 ] Š ILI´C , A RTUR and B AŠI´C , B OJANA D ALBELO . “Visualization of Text Streams : A Survey” . Knowledge - Based and Intelligent Informa - tion and Engineering Systems . Ed . by S ETCHI , R OSSITZA , J ORDANOV , I VAN , H OWLETT , R OBERT J . , and J AIN , L AKHMI C . Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Berlin , Heidelberg : Springer , 2010 , 31 – 43 . ISBN : 978 - 3 - 642 - 15390 - 7 . DOI : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 15390 - 7 _ 4 . [ SD09 ] S ATCHELL , C HRISTINE and D OURISH , P AUL . “Beyond the user : use and non - use in HCI” . Proceedings of the 21st annual conference of the Australian computer - human interaction special interest group : De - sign : Open 24 / 7 . 2009 , 9 – 16 . [ SG06 ] S ENGERS , P HOEBE and G AVER , B ILL . “Staying Open to In - terpretation : Engaging Multiple Meanings in Design and Evaluation” . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ) . University Park , PA : ACM , 2006 , 99 – 108 . [ Shn96 ] S HNEIDERMAN , B EN . “The Eyes Have It : A Task by Data Type Taxonomy for Information Visualizations” . Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages . IEEE , 1996 , 336 – 343 . [ SNHS13 ] S CHULZ , H ANS - J ÖRG , N OCKE , T HOMAS , H EITZLER , M AG - NUS , and S CHUMANN , H EIDRUN . “A Design Space of Visualization Tasks” . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 19 . 12 ( Dec . 2013 ) , 2366 – 2375 . ISSN : 1941 - 0506 . DOI : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2013 . 120 . [ SOA * 20 ] S HAHID , F ARHANA , O NY , S HAHINUL H OQUE , A LBI , T AKRIM R AHMAN , et al . “Learning from Tweets : Opportunities and Challenges to Inform Policy Making During Dengue Epidemic” . Pro - ceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 . CSCW1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 27 . [ SP06 ] S HNEIDERMAN , B EN and P LAISANT , C ATHERINE . “Strategies for Evaluating Information Visualization Tools : Multi - Dimensional In - Depth Long - Term Case Studies” . Proceedings of the 2006 AVI Work - shop on BEyond Time and Errors : Novel Evaluation Methods for In - formation Visualization ( BELIV ) . Venice , Italy : ACM , 2006 , 1 – 7 . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 59593 - 562 - 5 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 1168149 . 1168158 . [ SWLL13 ] S UN , G UO - D AO , W U , Y ING - C AI , L IANG , R ONG - H UA , and L IU , S HI - X IA . “A Survey of Visual Analytics Techniques and Appli - cations : State - of - the - Art Research and Future Challenges” . Journal of Computer Science and Technology 28 . 5 ( Sept . 2013 ) , 852 – 867 . ISSN : 1860 - 4749 . DOI : 10 . 1007 / s11390 - 013 - 1383 - 8 . [ Tay15 ] T AYLOR , A LEX . “After Interaction” . interactions 22 . 5 ( Aug . 2015 ) , 48 – 53 . ISSN : 1072 - 5520 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 2809888 . [ TK74 ] T VERSKY , A MOS and K AHNEMAN , D ANIEL . “Judgment under uncertainty : Heuristics and biases” . science 185 . 4157 ( 1974 ) , 1124 – 1131 . [ Und14 ] U NDERWOOD , T ED . “Theorizing Research Practices We Forgot to Theorize Twenty Years Ago” . Representations 127 . 1 ( 2014 ) , 64 – 72 . [ VCL * 16 ] V LACHOKYRIAKOS , V ASILLIS , C RIVELLARO , C LARA , L E D ANTEC , C HRISTOPHER A . , et al . “Digital Civics : Citizen Empow - erment With and Through Technology” . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems . CHI EA ’16 . San Jose , California , USA : ACM , 2016 , 1096 – 1099 . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4082 - 3 . [ VW08 ] V IÉGAS , F ERNANDA B . and W ATTENBERG , M ARTIN . “Tag Clouds and the Case for Vernacular Visualization” . interactions 15 . 4 ( 2008 ) , 49 – 52 . [ WAGJ19 ] W ALL , E MILY , A RCALGUD , A RUP , G UPTA , K UHU , and J O , A NDREW . “A Markov Model of Users’ Interactive Behavior in Scatter - plots” . 2019 IEEE Visualization Conference ( VIS ) . IEEE . 2019 , 81 – 85 . [ WBFE17 ] W ALL , E MILY , B LAHA , L ESLIE M , F RANKLIN , L YNDSEY , and E NDERT , A LEX . “Warning , bias may occur : A proposed approach to detecting cognitive bias in interactive visual analytics” . 2017 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology ( VAST ) . IEEE . 2017 , 104 – 115 . [ Win80 ] W INNER , L ANGDON . “Do Artifacts Have Politics ? ” : Daedalus 109 . 1 ( 1980 ) , 121 – 136 . ISSN : 0011 - 5266 . [ WSJ * 14 ] W ANNER , F . , S TOFFEL , A . , J ÄCKLE , D . , et al . “State - of - the - Art Report of Visual Analysis for Event Detection in Text Data Streams” . Eurographics Conference on Visualization State - of - the - Art Report ( Eu - roVisSTAR ) . The Eurographics Association , 2014 . ISBN : 978 - 3 - 03868 - 028 - 4 . DOI : 10 . 2312 / eurovisstar . 20141176 . [ ZC07 ] Z UK , T ORRE and C ARPENDALE , S HEELAGH . “Visualization of uncertainty and reasoning” . International symposium on smart graphics . Springer . 2007 , 164 – 177 . [ ZNB15 ] Z ILOUCHIAN M OGHADDAM , R OSHANAK , N ICHOLSON , Z ANE , and B AILEY , B RIAN P . “Procid : Bridging consensus building theory with the practice of distributed design discussions” . Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . ACM . 2015 , 686 – 699 . [ ZVK17 ] Z HANG , A MY X , V EROU , L EA , and K ARGER , D AVID . “Wikum : Bridging discussion forums and wikis using recursive summa - rization” . Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Sup - ported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . 2017 , 2082 – 2096 . ©2022TheAuthor ( s ) ComputerGraphicsForum©2022TheEurographicsAssociationandJohnWiley & SonsLtd .