Object Names and Object Functions Serve as Cues to Categories for Infants Amy E . Booth and Sandra Waxman Northwestern University Can object names and functions act as cues to categories for infants ? In Study 1 , 14 - and 18 - month - old infants were shown novel category exemplars along with a function , a name , or no cues . Infants were then asked to “find another one , ” choosing between 2 novel objects ( 1 from the familiar category and the other not ) . Infants at both ages were more likely to select the category match in the function than in the no - cue condition . However , only at 18 months did naming the objects enhance categorization . Study 2 shows that names can facilitate categorization for 14 - month - olds as well when a hint regarding the core meaning of the objects ( the function of a single familiarization object ) is provided . Partitioning the world into meaningful categories is a formida - ble task , especially considering the vast amount of information that could be organized in the process . Nevertheless , infants succeed at forming a wide variety of categories within their first year of life ( e . g . , Quinn & Eimas , 1997 ; Mandler & McDonough , 1993 ) . Although it is commonly assumed that processing biases in the infant can help to explain this remarkable ability , the precise nature of such constraints , and the mechanisms by which they exert their influence , have proved difficult to specify . In this article , we attempt to articulate one possible means by which infants determine the intension of new categories . We propose that infants are biased to attend to a small set of cues that invite the careful comparison of objects to each other ( see Nelson , 1974 ; Reznick , 2000 ; Ward , Becker , Hass , & Vela , 1991 , for similar suggestions ) . By demarcating a restricted set of objects for processing , these cues substantially narrow the information to which infants attend in their attempts at categorization . As a result , infants may more readily detect other commonalities among ob - jects that help to define their category membership . To be most adaptive , these cues must reliably identify important categories and must be salient to infants . Object names and object functions both fit these criteria . Object names provide critical information by marking the categories about which older children and adults regularly communicate . Object functions ( or perhaps intended functions ) are critical cues to category membership for adults , particularly in the categorization of artifacts ( Bloom , 1998 ; Rips , 1989 ; Miller & Johnson - Laird , 1976 ; but also see Gentner , 1978 ) . In addition to marking important categories , object names and object functions are also salient to infants . Infants are able to parse object names from the ongoing speech stream within the first year of life ( Balaban & Waxman , 1997 ; Jusczyk , 1995 ) . Infants also become sensitive to relationships between the forms of objects and their functions within their first 2 years ( e . g . , Baldwin , Mark - man , & Melartin , 1993 ; Brown , 1990 ; Kemler Nelson , Russell , Duke , & Jones , 2000 ; Madole & Cohen , 1995 ; Madole , Oakes , & Cohen , 1993 ; Nelson , 1979 ) . Object names and object functions may be salient to infants for several reasons . For example , both implicitly embody a relation - ship between objects and human agents . Object names themselves are only arbitrary sounds , but they gain meaning in relation to the referential intent of the agent who produces them . Object functions ( at least those of artifacts ) are defined as the use , or intended use , of an object by an agent . Because it is well - known that infants are adaptively , perhaps evolutionarily , attracted to people ( faces and voices ) from near birth , the fact that human beings are critically associated with object names and object functions may enhance the salience of these cues ( Jones - Molfese , 1977 ; Mondloch et al . , 1999 ; Standley & Madsen , 1990 ; Valenza , 1998 ) . Indeed , infants in their first year of life respond to objects differently when they have been named by an adult than when they have not ( Balaban & Waxman , 1997 ; Waxman & Booth , 2001 ) . We also know that infants as young as 6 months attend to adults interacting with novel objects with sufficient engagement to imitate them at a later time ( e . g . , Collie & Hayne , 1999 ; Hayne , Boniface , & Barr , 2000 ; Meltzoff , 1988 ; Meltzoff & Moore , 1993 ) . Object names and object functions may also be salient because they each have consequences for the infant . Object names support communication , which can foster learning and richer social inter - actions and provide better means for reaching desired outcomes ( e . g . , asking for the “bottle” rather than crying ) . Naming may help infants to orient toward the objects about which others are com - municating , potentially supporting the acquisition of further knowledge ( e . g . , Baldwin & Markman , 1989 ) . In addition , even before infants are able to speak , their ability to comprehend object names may support useful predictions about what objects will be found in the immediate environment when the word is heard , as well as inductions regarding the nonobvious properties of those objects ( Nazzi & Gopnik , 2001 ; Welder & Graham , 2001 ) . Object Amy E . Booth and Sandra Waxman , Department of Psychology , North - western University . This research was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant HD - 08595 – 02 awarded to Amy E . Booth . Portions of this research were presented at the biennial meeting of the Society of Research on Child Development , Minneapolis , Minnesota , April 2001 . We thank Irena Braun , Jill Rushkewicz , Timothy Dunn , Jessica Hackenberg , and Jarilyn Woodard for their assistance with coding . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Amy E . Booth , Department of Psychology , Northwestern University , Evanston , Illinois 60208 – 2710 . E - mail : a - booth @ northwestern . edu Developmental Psychology Copyright 2002 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 2002 , Vol . 38 , No . 6 , 948 – 957 0012 - 1649 / 02 / $ 5 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1037 / / 0012 - 1649 . 38 . 6 . 948 948 functions also have a direct impact on the infant in that they are often played out in dynamic events that culminate in a desirable outcome ( e . g . , a bottle provides a drink when sucked ; a ball bounces when dropped ) . Observing adults using objects in func - tional ways provides a rich supply of information about how to effectively interact with the world ( e . g . , Meltzoff & Moore , 1994 ) . Recent research suggests that object names and functions do indeed highlight commonalities among objects for infants , and that these commonalities help infants to organize those objects into categories ( Balaban & Waxman , 1997 ; Booth , 2001 ; Waxman & Markow , 1995 ) . For example , infants pay more attention to category - relevant perceptual similarities among objects when they are labeled with a novel name than if no names are provided ( Waxman & Markow , 1995 ) . Neither nonreferential verbal phrases nor tones have the same facilitative effect ( Balaban & Waxman , 1997 ) . By 14 months of age , count nouns have become specifically associated with category - relevant commonalities among objects ( Booth & Waxman , 2002a ; Waxman & Booth , 2001 ) . Simple object functions ( in the form of agent - produced motions ) also seem to enhance infants’ attention to other perceptible object features . Booth ( 2001 ) familiarized 14 - month - old infants with exemplars from two similar - looking categories of novel objects that varied on four discrete visual dimensions , only two of which correlated with category membership . At test , infants were trained on a series of forced - choice trials to select exemplars from only one of these categories . Infants were most likely to succeed at this task , and to do so in fewer trials , if they observed the category - specific ways in which an agent could move the objects during familiarization . When infants were instead familiarized with equivalently dynamic , but nonfunctional features of the exemplars , they were less likely to respond consistently to the categories during testing . Thus , object functions , but not motions alone , enhanced infants’ categorization . In summary , the existing evidence suggests that both object names and object functions are salient to infants and facilitate the formation of early categories . Both appear to promote comparison among a restricted set of objects and to draw attention to category - relevant similarities and differences among objects . Unfortunately , however , because the studies addressing the influence of each of these cues differed in several ways , it is difficult to assess just how similar the effects of object names and functions are on categori - zation . First , these investigations have considered different aspects of the categorization process . Booth’s ( 2001 ) investigation of object functions focused on infants’ ability to detect differences between two perceptually similar categories , while the most rele - vant studies focusing on object names principally focused on infants’ ability to detect commonalities among perceptually dis - parate sets of objects ( Waxman & Booth , 2001 ; Waxman & Markow , 1995 ) . Second , the studies utilized very different stimuli . Object functions were studied using novel artificial stimuli ( e . g . , abstract flower - like objects ) , while object names were studied using familiar stimuli ( e . g . , animals or cars ) . Finally , different experimental paradigms were used . Booth ( 2001 ) familiarized infants to 10 exemplars from each category before beginning a lengthy operant - conditioning testing procedure . In contrast , Wax - man and her colleagues familiarized infants to just four exemplars from a single category before proceeding with a brief novelty preference task , a match - to - sample word extension task , or both . A principal goal of the current research was to evaluate the object name and object function cues under equivalent conditions at both 14 and 18 months of age . We adopted the methodology successfully used by Waxman and Booth ( 2001 , in press ) with infants ranging from 11 . 5 to 24 . 0 months of age but used novel stimuli ( as in Booth , 2001 ) . Infants were familiarized to four different exemplars from a novel category and then asked to select between another object from that category and an object from a different category in a forced - choice test . On the basis of previous research , we predicted that both object functions and names would facilitate categorization at both 14 and 18 months of age . However , we also considered the possibility that object functions and object names might not affect categori - zation in precisely the same manner . After all , although these two cues share many important characteristics , there are also funda - mental differences between them . Perhaps most important , func - tions are integrally bound to categories by causal links to object structure , whereas words are arbitrarily assigned to categories within a linguistic community . This leads to the possibility that for infants on the brink of language acquisition , functions may provide a more compelling basis for categorization than words . If this were the case , then the relative power of these cues might shift be - tween 14 and 18 months , as infants acquire a more substantial lexicon ( e . g . , Fenson et al . , 1993 ) . Study 1 Method Participants Thirty - six 14 - to 15 - month - old infants ( M (cid:1) 14 . 59 ; range (cid:1) 14 . 01 – 15 . 43 months ) and thirty - six 17 - to 18 - month - old infants ( M (cid:1) 18 . 2 ; range (cid:1) 17 . 60 – 18 . 95 months ) participated . There were equal numbers of males and females in the total sample , with an approximately equal distribution of the sexes maintained across condition and age . All infants were recruited through mailings to homes in the greater Chicago area . Materials Thirty - two objects , all easily grasped and manipulated by infants , served as stimuli . The objects were organized into four sets , each containing five different objects from a single category and three additional objects drawn from different categories . All stimuli were three - dimensional objects cre - ated by the experimenter with colorful FIMO clay . Novel stimuli were created to ensure that the objects were completely unfamiliar to the infants , thus minimizing any potential influences of prior knowledge of their category membership , their functions , or their names . Although the indi - vidual objects in each category varied somewhat in shape , size , color , and patterning , their similarities in overall shape ( Set A : blob - like , Set B : pot - like , Set C : peg - like , Set D : disk - like ) , color range ( Set A : blues and greens , Set B : yellows and oranges , Set C : browns and grays , Set D : pinks and purples ) , and parts or pattern elements ( Set A : loops and cross - hatching , Set B : lip bulges and base holes , Set C : rings and Velcro bases , Set D : spirals and squiggles ) allowed adults to easily sort them appropri - ately . See Figure 1 for an illustration of the stimuli . In addition to the stimuli , an apparatus was constructed on which the functions of the objects could be demonstrated . The apparatus consisted of ( a ) a hook on which objects from Set A could be hung and swung ; ( b ) a clear plastic container filled with couscous , which could be scooped and sifted through objects from Set B ; ( c ) a Velcro - topped platform mounted on a spring to which objects from Set C could be stuck and jiggled ; and ( d ) 949 OBJECT NAMES AND FUNCTIONS AS CUES TO CATEGORIES a slide down which objects from Set D could be slid . The apparatus remained in a stationary position out of the infants’ reach at all times . Procedure After being randomly assigned to one of three conditions ( novel name , novel function , and no cue ) , infants completed a familiarization , contrast , and test phase with each of the four sets of stimuli ( modified from Waxman & Booth , 2001 ) . Familiarization phase . Infants in all conditions were first familiarized with two pairs of objects , all of which were drawn from the same set . The experimenter introduced the first pair , attracting the infant’s attention by exclaiming , “Look at these ! ” The experimenter then commented on each object individually . In the novel name condition , she said , “This one is a dax and this one is a dax . ” In the novel function condition she said “Look what I can do with this one and look what I can do with this one” as she demonstrated the function of each one on the appropriate apparatus ( e . g . , sifted the couscous ) . In the no - cue condition , she simply said “Look at this one and look at this one” while looking intently at each object in turn . The first pair of objects was then given to the infant for 15 s . Although the infants were able to play freely with the objects , they never had access to the apparatuses and therefore could not explore their function . After retrieving the objects , the experimenter then said “Remember . . . ” and repeated her previous comments and / or demonstrations on them . She then followed the same procedure for the second pair of familiarization objects . Contrast phase . Next , the experimenter held up an object from a contrasting category . She shook her head solemnly , saying “Uh oh ! This one is not a dax ” ( novel name condition ) or “Uh oh ! I can’t do that with this one” ( novel function condition ) or “Uh oh ! Look at this one” ( no - cue condition ) . In the novel function condition , she also demonstrated that the contrast object did not function in the same way as the familiarization objects ( e . g . , she tried but failed to scoop and sift the couscous ) . The experimenter then introduced the target object that was drawn from the original familiarization set . She happily exclaimed “Yay , this one is a dax ” ( novel name condition ) or “Yay , I can do that with this one” ( novel function condition ) or “Yay , look at this one” ( no - cue condition ) . In the novel function condition , she also re - demonstrated the target object’s function once . Test phase . At this point , the experimenter simultaneously presented the infant with the familiar category test object ( e . g . , a previously unseen member of the familiarization category ) and the novel category test object . Infants played freely with these objects for 15 s , after which time the objects were retrieved and placed out of the infant’s reach on the table . The experimenter then re - presented the target object , drawing attention to it by pointing and saying “Remember , this one is a dax” ( novel name condition ) or “Remember , I can do this with this one” as she demonstrated its function ( novel function condition ) or “Remember , look at this one” ( no - cue con - dition ) . While pointing to the target object , she then asked the infant , “Can you find me another one of these ? ” She quickly pushed the test objects into the infant’s reach , approximately 12 in . ( 30 . 5 cm ) apart , and asked “Can you give me another one of these ? ” as she pointed to the target object and then to her hand . Because the functions or names of the test objects were not available , this task required the infants to infer category membership Figure 1 . Illustrations of the four sets of stimuli used in each phase of both Study 1 and Study 2 . Only one of the two contrast objects for each set is illustrated here . The colors comprising category members in Set A included shades of green and blue , and the out - of - category objects were orange , pink , white , and gold . Category members in Set B included shades of yellow and orange , and the out - of - category objects were silver , black , blue , green , and purple . Category members in Set C included shades of brown and gray , and the out - of - category objects were blue , yellow , green , and pink . Category members in Set D included shades of pink and purple , and the out - of - category objects were green , yellow , blue , and black . 950 BOOTH AND WAXMAN from other static perceptual features of the objects that were correlated with the names or functions presented to them during familiarization . The contrast and test phases were repeated once before proceeding with familiarization to the next set of stimuli . On this second round , a new contrast object was presented . Although the same target and test objects were presented on both the first and second tests , the left – right placement of the test objects was counterbalanced across the two trials . Coding The videotaped sessions were scored with the sound removed to ensure that the coders , who were blind to the experimental hypotheses , were also blind to condition assignment . Coders identified each infant’s choice of test objects on each trial . If the infant put one of the test objects in the hand of the experimenter , it was recorded as the infant’s choice . If the infant failed to give either object to the experimenter , the object that the infant touched first was recorded as the infant’s choice . However , in these cases , no choice was recorded if the infant touched the second object within 2 s of the first . Clear choices were obtained on 98 . 4 % of the trials . A primary coder scored all of the infants . A second coder independently scored 24 infants , evenly distributed across condition and age . Consistency was computed as the proportion of trials on which the coders agreed . Agreement was 96 . 0 % . There were no systematic inconsistencies among coders . The few dis - agreements detected were easily resolved through jointly viewing the videotapes . Results We first conducted an omnibus analysis of variance to assess effects of age ( 14 vs . 18 months ) and condition ( no cue vs . novel name vs . novel function ) on the proportion of test trials on which the familiar category test object was chosen . 1 This analysis re - vealed a main effect of condition , F ( 2 , 66 ) (cid:1) 15 . 77 , p (cid:2) . 001 , qualified by a Condition (cid:3) Age interaction , F ( 2 , 66 ) (cid:1) 4 . 17 , p (cid:2) . 025 ( see Figure 2 ) . To clarify the nature of this interaction , we analyzed the simple effects of condition at each age . A significant effect of condition emerged at both 14 months , F ( 2 , 33 ) (cid:1) 12 . 93 , p (cid:2) . 001 , and 18 months , F ( 2 , 33 ) (cid:1) 8 . 20 , p (cid:2) . 01 . However , the pattern of data underlying this effect differed across age . At 14 months , infants selected the familiar category test object more often in the novel function condition ( M (cid:1) 71 % ) than they did in the novel name ( M (cid:1) 44 % ) or no - cue ( M (cid:1) 51 % ) condition ( least significant difference [ LSD ] : p s (cid:2) . 01 ) . The novel name and no - cue conditions did not differ . At 18 months , infants selected the familiar category test object more often in both the novel function ( M (cid:1) 69 % ) and novel name ( M (cid:1) 59 % ) conditions than in the no - cue ( M (cid:1) 41 % ) condition ( LSD : p s (cid:2) . 025 ) . The novel func - tion and novel name conditions did not differ . Thus , object func - tions facilitated categorization at both ages , but object names did so only at 18 months of age . Because the preceding analyses cannot evaluate how consis - tently infants performed across the two test trials for each stimulus set , we tabulated the number of sets on which infants consistently chose the familiar category test object ( i . e . , chose the familiar category test object on both Test Trials 1 and 2 ) , consistently chose the novel test object ( i . e . , chose the novel test object on both Test Trials 1 and 2 ) , or made inconsistent choices ( i . e . , chose the familiar category test object on one test trial , but the novel test object on the other ) . These distributions ( see Table 1 ) reflect the same pattern of results obtained from the parametric analyses . There was a significant effect of condition at both 14 , (cid:1) 2 ( 4 , N (cid:1) 36 ) (cid:1) 19 . 25 , p (cid:2) . 001 , and 18 months of age , (cid:1) 2 ( 4 , N (cid:1) 36 ) (cid:1) 16 . 18 , p (cid:2) . 01 . 1 Preliminary analyses revealed no interactions between stimulus set ( Set A vs . B vs . C vs . D ) or trial ( Test 1 vs . Test 2 ) and the factors most pertinent to our predictions in Study 1 ( i . e . , age and condition ) or Study 2 ( i . e . , condition ) . Therefore , in all subsequent analyses , we collapsed the data across these variables . Figure 2 . Percentage of 14 - and 18 - month - old infants’ test object choices that corresponded to the familiar category in each condition of Study 1 . Solid bars represent 14 - month - olds ; hatched bars represent 18 - month - olds ; asterisks represent p (cid:2) . 05 versus the no - cue condition . 951 OBJECT NAMES AND FUNCTIONS AS CUES TO CATEGORIES To pinpoint the source of these effects , we conducted more specific comparisons between the conditions at each age . At 14 months , performance in the novel function condition differed reliably from that observed in the novel name , (cid:1) 2 ( 2 , N (cid:1) 24 ) (cid:1) 16 . 37 , p (cid:2) . 001 , and no - cue , (cid:1) 2 ( 2 , N (cid:1) 24 ) (cid:1) 9 . 37 , p (cid:2) . 01 , conditions , with a greater proportion of consistent familiar cate - gory choices being made in the novel function condition . The novel name and no - cue conditions did not differ . At 18 months , performance in the novel function and novel name conditions differed reliably from that observed in the no - cue condition : (cid:1) 2 ( 2 , N (cid:1) 24 ) (cid:1) 15 . 35 , p (cid:2) . 01 and (cid:1) 2 ( 2 , N (cid:1) 24 ) (cid:1) 6 . 73 , p (cid:1) . 04 , respectively . The novel function and novel name conditions did not differ . Discussion The results from Study 1 support two major conclusions , one pertaining to object functions , the other to object names . First , object functions facilitate categorization in both 14 - and 18 - month - old infants . As predicted , when objects shared a common function ( novel function condition ) , infants paid more attention to other static perceptual commonalities ( e . g . , shape , color , or part struc - ture ) among them that otherwise went unnoticed ( no - cue condi - tion ) . It is not yet clear , however , what it is about function that supports this effect . One possibility is that it is not object function per se , but rather object motion , that is critical . In the novel function condition , objects traversed distinctive paths of motion while executing their functions , and these motions alone could have enhanced categorization . After all , infants are highly sensi - tive to motion and use it to recognize objects from a very young age ( e . g . , Bertenthal , 1993 ; Kellman , 1993 ) . To address the possibility that motion , independent of function , was responsible for facilitating categorization , we tested an addi - tional 24 infants ( twelve 14 - month - olds and twelve 18 - month - olds ) in a new motion only control condition . These infants were treated in precisely the same manner as those in the original novel function condition , with one exception : The experimenter moved the familiarization objects in the distinctive paths associated with their functions , but she did not demonstrate the functions them - selves ( e . g . , objects from Set A were held in front of the hook and moved back and forth in a pendular motion ) . Infants in this motion only control condition failed to categorize the stimuli . At 14 months of age , infants in the motion only control condition se - lected the familiar category test object 42 % of the time , a rate that differed from that found in the original novel function condition , t ( 22 ) (cid:1) 4 . 32 , p (cid:2) . 01 , but not from that found in the no - cue or novel name conditions . At 18 months of age , infants in the motion only control condition selected the familiar category test object 40 % of the time , a rate that differed significantly from that found in the novel function and novel name conditions , t ( 22 ) (cid:1) 5 . 31 , p (cid:2) . 01 and t ( 22 ) (cid:1) 3 . 31 , p (cid:2) . 01 , respectively , but did not differ from that found in the no - cue condition . The results from the motion only control condition demonstrate that the distinctive motions associated with object functions were not , by themselves , responsible for infants’ successful categoriza - tion in the novel function condition . These results also rule out other spurious characteristics of the novel function condition ( e . g . , the language used during the introductory phrases , or the fact that objects were presented in the context of a specific apparatus ) as viable explanations of the results . The second major conclusion that can be reached from the results of Study 1 is that object names facilitate categorization at 18 months of age . However , object names did not have this facilitative effect at 14 months of age . This result was quite surprising . In previous research using a similar procedure ( Booth & Waxman , 2002a ; Waxman & Booth , 2001 ) , 14 - month - old in - fants were more likely to select a familiar category over a novel category test object after hearing a set of four familiarization objects labeled with the same novel count noun than if the objects were not labeled . What can explain these conflicting results ? We suggest that differences in the familiarity and meaningfulness of the stimuli may be responsible . Recall that Waxman and Booth ( 2001 , in press ) presented infants with small models of familiar objects ( e . g . , horses , cars ) for which infants likely already had some associated core meaning , perhaps in the form of domain membership , under - lying causal structure , or conditions of identity and individuation ( e . g . , Gelman & Coley , 1991 ; Gelman , Coley , & Gottfried , 1994 ; Medin & Ortony , 1989 ; Soja , Carey , & Spelke , 1991 ; Xu , 1999 ) . In contrast , in the current study , we used completely novel objects for which infants could have no knowledge of any such core meaning . This notion of core meaning may also help explain infants’ success in the novel function condition . Here , core meanings for the novel stimuli may well have been provided by the object functions themselves ( Nelson , 1974 ) . Object functions are embod - ied in dynamic events that are rich in causal relations between agents , their actions , and the properties of the objects being acted upon . We suggest that this complex causal structure represents an excellent example of core meaning . If these conjectures are cor - rect , then providing infants in the novel name condition with a hint regarding the core meaning of the novel stimuli should facilitate their categorization . Study 2 In Study 2 , we tested this hypothesis by providing infants with just such a hint . We demonstrated the function of the first ( and only the first ) familiarization object presented , and then compared performance of infants provided with this hint alone with that of infants provided with this hint in the context of naming ( name (cid:4) hint ) . If the facilitative effect of naming is in fact predicated on Table 1 Number of Consistently Familiar , Inconsistent , and Consistently Novel Responses Made by 14 - and 18 - Month - Old Infants in Each Condition of Study 1 Age and condition Consistentlyfamiliar Inconsistent Consistentlynovel 14 - month - olds No cue 9 31 8 Name 4 33 8 Function 22 24 2 18 - month - olds No cue 8 23 17 Name 13 27 6 Function 17 27 1 952 BOOTH AND WAXMAN infants’ ability to detect some core meaning for the labeled objects , then when infants are provided with the hint ( even in reference to a single object ) , naming should highlight category membership . We therefore predicted that infants in the name (cid:4) hint condition would categorize more successfully than those in the hint alone control condition . Method Participants Twenty - four 14 - to 15 - month - old infants ( M (cid:1) 14 . 99 ; range (cid:1) 14 . 34 – 15 . 53 months ) participated . An approximately equal distribution of the sexes was maintained across conditions . All infants were recruited through mailings to homes in the greater Chicago area , and the materials used were identical to those used in Study 1 . Materials and Procedure The stimuli and apparatuses were identical to those used in Study 1 . The procedure was modeled after Study 1 , the only difference being in infants’ condition assignment . Here , infants participated in either a name (cid:4) hint or hint alone condition . Infants in the name (cid:4) hint condition observed the experimenter label the first familiarization object and then demonstrate its function ( e . g . , “Look at these . This one is a dax and look what I can do with it . ” ) . In all other respects , these infants were treated identically to those in the novel name condition of Study 1 . Thus , infants in the name (cid:4) hint condition observed the function of only one familiarization object but heard all four objects labeled with the same name . The hint alone condition served as a control in which infants observed the function of the first familiarization object only . In all other respects , these infants were treated identically to those in the no - cue condition of Study 1 ( e . g . , “Look at these . Look what I can do with this one and look at this one . ” ) . Coding Coding was conducted as in Study 1 . Clear choices were obtained on 95 . 8 % of the trials . A primary coder scored all of the infants . A second coder independently scored eight infants , four per condition . Consistency was computed as the proportion of trials on which the coders agreed . Agreement was 100 . 0 % . Results As predicted , our analysis of familiar category choices revealed that infants in the name (cid:4) hint condition made more familiar category choices ( M (cid:1) 60 % ) than infants in the hint alone condi - tion ( M (cid:1) 49 % ) , one - tailed t ( 22 ) (cid:1) 1 . 77 , p (cid:2) . 05 ( see Figure 3 ) . Infants in the name (cid:4) hint condition also made more familiar category choices than did those in the novel name condition of Study 1 , t ( 22 ) (cid:1) 2 . 53 , p (cid:2) . 025 . We also evaluated the distributions of consistently familiar , consistently novel , and inconsistent responses across sets as in Study 1 ( see Table 2 ) . These analyses confirm the difference in performance detected in our parametric analysis . Infants in the name (cid:4) hint condition made proportionately more consistently familiar category choices than did infants in the hint alone condi - tion , (cid:1) 2 ( 2 , N (cid:1) 24 ) (cid:1) 6 . 81 , p (cid:2) . 05 , or in the novel name condition of Study 1 , (cid:1) 2 ( 2 , N (cid:1) 24 ) (cid:1) 13 . 38 , p (cid:2) . 01 . Discussion After observing the function of one of four familiarization objects , infants who heard names for all four objects ( name (cid:4) hint condition ) more readily detected category membership than did infants who observed the same single function in the absence of names ( hint alone condition ) . Object names therefore can act as cues to categories for young infants as long as a core meaning is evident . In the name (cid:4) hint condition , object function successfully provided this requisite core . Future research is necessary to specify whether other sources of core meaning are equally effective . For example , if infants have domain - specific knowledge about what features are important to attend to when classifying objects , then identifying novel objects as belonging to a particular domain may help infants to organize them into new categories ( Booth & Wax - man , 2002b ; Jones & Smith , 1993 ) . General Discussion The goal of the current research was to explore potential con - tributions of object functions and object names to categorization in infancy . We pursued this goal by assessing infants’ ability to form categories of novel objects in the presence and absence of these cues . Here , we review our conclusions regarding the effects of each cue , along with speculations regarding their underlying mechanism ( s ) . Object functions act as cues to categories . Observing the shared function of a series of novel objects facilitated categorization in infants at 14 and 18 months . But what is the mechanism by which object functions exert this effect ? We consider two possibilities . First , object functions might enhance infants’ categorization in a general way by helping infants to identify a set of objects for comparison . Infants may devote particular attention to functioning objects because of their interest in the meaningful information that function conveys . When more than one object functions in the same way , infants may be motivated to compare these objects in search of any readily perceptible properties that will support pre - dictions regarding the deeper , and often perceptually less obvious , functional information ( Nelson , 1974 , 1985 ) . Figure 3 . Percentage of 14 - month - old infants’ test object choices that corresponded to the familiar category in each condition of Study 2 . Aster - isk represents p (cid:2) . 05 versus the hint alone condition . 953 OBJECT NAMES AND FUNCTIONS AS CUES TO CATEGORIES The results from both studies are consistent with such a mech - anism . In Study 1 , when four objects were shown to have the same function ( novel function condition ) , infants were more likely to respond categorically to the perceptual commonalities among those objects than when no functional information was provided ( no - cue and motion only conditions ) . Moreover , in Study 2 , when the function of only a single familiarization object was provided ( hint alone condition ) , infants failed to respond to these common - alities . Although the novel function and hint alone conditions were not matched in all relevant ways ( e . g . , sheer amount of time exposed to object functions ) , the difference between them suggests that identifying multiple objects for comparison on the basis of their common function may be important in facilitating categori - zation in young infants ( see Eimas , Quinn , & Cowan , 1995 ; Greco , Hayne , & Rovee - Collier , 1990 ; Klibanoff & Waxman , 2000 , for additional evidence relating to the importance of multiple exem - plars in categorization ) . It is also possible , however , that function enhances infants’ categorization in a more directive way by helping infants to identify a subset of the features of objects on which to base their comparisons . To the extent that infants appreciate causal relations between functions and intrinsic object properties ( e . g . , shape or part structure ) , they may be able to focus specifically on those properties in forming new categories . Because those properties have critical relevance to core meanings , they are likely to be particularly diagnostic of category membership ( Kemler Nelson , Frankenfield , Morris , & Blair , 2000 ) . Therefore , a feature - identification mechanism could provide a very powerful tool . The possibility that such a mechanism may be contributing to the facilitative effect of object function in the current work is supported generally by the fact that even very young infants appear to appreciate a limited range of causal relations between form and function ( e . g . , Bates , Carlson - Luden , & Bretherton , 1980 ; Brown , 1990 ; Hespos & Baillargeon , 2001 ) . Although infants’ depth and breadth of understanding clearly undergo substantial development from these early beginnings ( Kemler Nelson , Frankenfield , Morris , & Blair , 2000 ; Madole & Cohen , 1995 ; Madole et al . , 1993 ) , by 2 years of age infants show remarkable capacities for evaluating the plausibility of novel form – function relations and applying their causal understanding to forming new categories . Indeed , these relations become so compelling to children that they are able to support the extension of novel names even when only a single functioning object is labeled ( Kemler Nelson , 1995 , 1999 ; Kemler Nelson , Frankenfield , Morris , & Blair , 2000 ; Kemler Nelson , Russell , Duke , & Jones , 2000 ) . Despite the documentation of these impressive capabilities , we must have some indication of infants’ ability to appreciate the specific causal relations between the appearance of our stimuli and their function in order to directly assess the plausibility of a feature - identification mechanism in the current work . Although our study was not specifically designed to evaluate this issue , comparing performance across stimulus sets may provide some insight . Adult ratings suggest that the stimulus sets varied system - atically in terms of the transparency of the form – function relations they embodied . Eight adults rated Sets A and B as embodying a tighter link between object properties and function than Sets C and D . If a feature - identification mechanism were active , infants should have performed better on sets embodying more transparent form – function relations ( Kemler Nelson , Frankenfield , Morris , & Blair , 2000 ; Kemler Nelson , Russell , Duke , & Jones , 2000 ) . The data reveal that both 14 - and 18 - month - old infants in the novel function condition of Study 1 chose the familiar category test object more frequently for Sets A and B ( M (cid:1) 0 . 79 , SD (cid:1) 0 . 25 ) than for Sets C and D ( M (cid:1) 0 . 62 , SD (cid:1) 0 . 28 ) . However , it is important to note that facilitation was evident even for those sets in which form – function relations were not obvious . This is con - sistent with previous work with stimuli embodying arbitrary form – function relations ( Booth , 2001 ) and suggests that both feature - identification and more general object - identification mechanisms are likely contributing to performance on the current task . Future work is clearly necessary to specify the mechanisms by which object functions facilitate categorization . Object names act as cues to categories . Previous research has revealed that novel names facilitate categorization of familiar objects in infants ( e . g . , Waxman & Booth , 2001 ; Waxman & Markow , 1995 ) . The current work goes further to document this effect with completely novel objects . Eighteen - month - old infants who heard novel familiarization objects labeled with the same novel noun were more likely to respond to the perceptual com - monalities among objects from that category than were infants who did not . The current work also reveals a potentially powerful interaction between the effects of object functions and object names on categorization . Although 14 - month - old infants benefited from the introduction of object names , they did so only when a core meaning for the novel objects was provided ( in the form of the function of a single exemplar ) . What mechanism ( s ) can account for these effects ? Neither of the mechanisms we discussed in the context of object functions pro - vides an adequate answer to this question . Although an object - identification mechanism is consistent with the behavior of our 18 - month - old participants , it cannot account for the fact that names facilitated categorization in 14 - month - olds only when a core meaning was evident . A feature - identification mechanism fares even worse , providing no feasible explanation for any of the data . The inadequacy of this alternative is related to a key difference between functions and names . Unlike object functions , names bear an arbitrary relation to the objects they denote . As a result , a name cannot provide a core meaning directly and cannot , in and of itself , focus infants’ attention on features that may be diagnostic of this core . Any identification of specific features that occurs in the context of naming must be supported by an independent source of core meaning . We offer the following as one possible explanation for the full developmental picture revealed in the current work . Early in lex - ical acquisition , infants focus attention on names for objects and devote particular attention to the link between objects and their Table 2 Number of Consistently Familiar , Inconsistent , and Consistently Novel Responses Made by 14 - Month - Old Infants in Each Condition of Study 2 Condition Consistentlyfamiliar Inconsistent Consistentlynovel Hint alone 8 30 9 Name (cid:4) hint 18 18 9 954 BOOTH AND WAXMAN names for objects that they find interesting and relevant to their own activity ( Fenson et al . , 1994 ; Mervis , 1984 ; Nelson , 1974 , 1979 ) . These words are rich in meaning to infants and are therefore particularly useful to them in communicating about important aspects of their environment . A 14 - month - old may therefore con - centrate intently on learning the name for a single novel object with a clear core meaning ( on the first familiarization trial in the name (cid:4) hint condition of Study 2 ) . When other objects are subsequently labeled with the newly acquired name , infants may assume that they share the same core meaning . To increase their chances of identifying additional members of the meaningful new kind , infants may search for other commonalities among the ob - jects ( i . e . , aspects of their appearance ) that are diagnostic of category membership . In contrast , if infants find no discernible core meaning associated with labeled objects ( novel name condi - tion of Study 1 ) , they may be less captured by the naming episode and may therefore fail to learn the new word or to categorize the objects labeled by it . Once infants acquire a sufficiently comprehensive lexicon ( per - haps by 18 months of age ) , they may come to appreciate that names typically refer to deep commonalities among objects even when the core meanings of those categories are not immediately obvious ( e . g . , Davidson & Gelman , 1990 ) . This general insight about naming may allow infants to use names as “essence place - holders” and to interpret novel names as referring to this essence even before they gain much specific information about it ( Gelman & Coley , 1991 ; Gelman et al . , 1994 ; Medin & Ortony , 1989 ) . This possibility is consistent with recent evidence revealing that infants use names to categorize and to make inductive inferences regard - ing the nonobvious properties of objects before their second birth - days even in the absence of any perceptual support ( Nazzi & Gopnik , 2001 ; Welder & Graham , 2001 ) . Older infants may also develop a better understanding of the causal relations that link intrinsic perceptible properties of objects to their core meanings ( Kemler Nelson , Frankenfield , Morris , & Blair , 2000 ; Kemler Nelson , Russell , Duke , & Jones , 2000 ; Madole & Cohen , 1995 ; Madole et al . , 1993 ) . As a result , they may be better able to infer the core meanings of objects without their demonstration and to determine which object features are likely to be most diagnostic of category membership . Such inferences could be based on general world knowledge ( e . g . , that parts often em - body important object features ; Rakison & Butterworth , 1998 ; Smith , Jones , & Landau , 1996 ; Tversky , 1989 ) , or they could be evoked by the perception of affordances in the experimental con - text ( e . g . , infants might hypothesize that objects from Category A could be hung on the hook apparatus by their loops ; Adolph , Eppler , & Gibson , 1993 ; Gibson , 1988 ) . The development of such skills may allow object names to facilitate categorization in the absence of any hints regarding the core meaning of the labeled objects . Regardless of the precise mechanism by which core meanings and object names interact to facilitate categorization , the fact that they do so at all in our young participants has strong implications for the ongoing debate over the contribution of conceptual infor - mation to early word learning . Previously , Landau , Smith , and Jones ( 1998 ; Smith et al . , 1996 ) argued that word learning is driven by purely associative mechanisms that focus on perceptual information . They demonstrated several cases in which perceptual information ( principally regarding object shape ) appears to more strongly influence preschoolers’ word extension than does concep - tual information ( as embodied in object functions ; see also Gent - ner , 1978 ; Tomikawa & Dodd , 1980 ) . Our research , however , joins a body of work providing evidence to the contrary ( Kemler Nel - son , 1995 , 1999 ; Kemler Nelson , Frankenfield , Morris , & Blair , 2000 ; Kemler Nelson , Russell , Duke , & Jones , 2000 ) . Kemler Nelson demonstrated that conceptual information ( again , in the form of object functions ) influences word extension in children as young as 2 years of age ( see also Brown , 1990 ) . The experiments reported here extend this finding to 14 months . Recall that in Study 2 , we demonstrated that object function mediated the influ - ence of naming on categorization . No new perceptual information was introduced here . Instead , the opportunity to glimpse the core meaning or conceptual substance of the stimuli made the crucial difference . In conclusion , this research has identified two salient cues that facilitate categorization in infancy : object functions and object names . Perhaps more important , the work has begun to specify the possible mechanisms by which these cues help infants to partition their vast perceptual experiences into more manageable units . Future research is necessary to more fully explicate the details of these mechanisms , the conditions under which they are active , and the ways in which they interact with other contributors to catego - rization ( e . g . , basic processes of comparison and evaluation of similarity ) . References Adolph , K . E . , Eppler , M . A . , & Gibson , E . J . ( 1993 ) . Development of perception of affordances . Advances in Infancy Research , 8 , 51 – 98 . Balaban , M . T . , & Waxman , S . R . ( 1997 ) . Do words facilitate object categorization in 9 - month - old infants ? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 64 , 3 – 26 . Baldwin , D . A . , & Markman , E . M . ( 1989 ) . Establishing word – object relations : A first step . Child Development , 60 , 381 – 398 . Baldwin , D . A . , Markman , E . M . , & Melartin , R . L . ( 1993 ) . Infants’ ability to draw inferences about nonobvious object properties : Evidence from exploratory play . Child Development , 64 , 711 – 728 . Bates , E . , Carlson - Luden , V . , & Bretherton , I . ( 1980 ) . Perceptual aspects of tool using in infancy . Infant Behavior & Development , 3 , 127 – 140 . Bertenthal , B . I . ( 1993 ) . Infants’ perception of biomechanical motions : Intrinsic image and knowledge - based constraints . In C . Granrud ( Ed . ) , Visual perception and cognition in infancy . Carnegie Mellon Symposia on Cognition ( pp . 175 – 214 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Bloom , P . ( 1998 ) . Theories of artifact categorization . Cognition , 66 , 87 – 93 . Booth , A . E . ( 2001 ) . The facilitative effect of agent - produced motions on categorization in infancy . Infant Behavior & Development , 23 , 153 – 174 . Booth , A . E . , & Waxman , S . R . ( 2002a ) . Mapping words to the world in infancy : On the evolution of expectations for nouns and adjectives . Manuscript submitted for publication . Booth , A . E . , & Waxman , S . R . ( 2002b ) . Word learning is ‘smart’ : Evidence that conceptual information affects preschoolers’ extension of novel words . Cognition , 84 ( 1 ) , B11 – B22 . Brown , A . L . ( 1990 ) . Domain - specific principles affect learning and trans - fer in children . Cognitive Science , 14 , 107 – 133 . Collie , R . , & Hayne , H . ( 1999 ) . Deferred imitation by 6 - and 9 - month - old infants : More evidence for declarative memory . Developmental Psycho - biology , 35 , 83 – 90 . Davidson , N . S . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1990 ) . Inductions from novel catego - ries : The role of language and conceptual structure . Cognitive Develop - ment , 5 , 151 – 176 . Eimas , P . D . , Quinn , P . C . , & Cowan , P . ( 1995 ) . Development of exclu - 955 OBJECT NAMES AND FUNCTIONS AS CUES TO CATEGORIES sivity in perceptually based categories of young infants . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 58 , 418 – 431 . Fenson , L . , Dale , P . S . , Reznick , J . S . , Bates , E . , Thal , D . J . , & Pethick , S . J . ( 1994 ) . Variability in early communicative development . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 59 ( 5 ) , v - 173 . Fenson , L . , Dale , P . S . , Reznick , J . S . , Thal , D . , Bates , E . , Hartung , J . , Pethick , S . , & Reilly , J . S . ( 1993 ) . User’s guide and technical manual for the MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories . San Diego , CA : Singular Press . Gelman , S . A . , & Coley , J . D . ( 1991 ) . Language and categorization : The acquisition of natural kind terms . In S . A . Gelman & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on language and thought : Interrelations in development ( pp . 146 – 196 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gelman , S . A . , Coley , J . D . , & Gottfried , G . M . ( 1994 ) . Essentialist beliefs in children : The acquisition of concepts and theories . In L . A . Hirschfeld & S . A . Gelman ( Eds . ) , Mapping the mind : Domain specificity in cognition and culture ( pp . 341 – 365 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . ( 1978 ) . On relational meaning : The acquisition of verb mean - ing . Child Development , 49 , 988 – 998 . Gibson , E . J . ( 1988 ) . Exploratory behavior in the development of perceiv - ing , acting , and the acquiring of knowledge . Annual Review of Psychol - ogy , 39 , 1 – 41 . Greco , C . , Hayne , H . , & Rovee - Collier , C . ( 1990 ) . Roles of function , reminding , and variability in categorization by 3 - month - old infants . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cogni - tion , 16 , 617 – 633 . Hayne , H . , Boniface , J . , & Barr , R . ( 2000 ) . The development of declarative memory in human infants : Age - related changes in deferred imitation . Behavioral Neuroscience , 114 , 77 – 83 . Hespos , S . J . , & Baillargeon , R . ( 2001 ) . Infants’ knowledge about occlu - sion and containment events : A surprising discrepancy . Psychological Science , 121 , 141 – 147 . Jones , S . S . , & Smith , L . B . ( 1993 ) . The place of perception in children’s concepts . Cognitive Development , 8 , 113 – 139 . Jones - Molfese , V . ( 1977 ) . Preferences of infants for regular and distorted natural speech stimuli . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 23 , 172 – 179 . Jusczyk , P . W . ( 1995 ) . Infants’ detection of the sound patterns of words in fluent speech . Cognitive Psychology , 29 , 1 – 23 . Kellman , P . J . ( 1993 ) . Kinematic foundations of infant visual perception . In C . Granrud ( Ed . ) , Visual perception and cognition in infancy . Carnegie Mellon Symposia on Cognition ( pp . 121 – 173 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Kemler Nelson , D . G . ( 1995 ) . Principle - based inferences in young chil - dren’s categorization : Revisiting the impact of function on the naming of artifacts . Cognitive Development , 10 , 347 – 380 . Kemler Nelson , D . G . ( 1999 ) . Attention to functional properties in tod - dlers’ naming and problem - solving . Cognitive Development , 14 , 77 – 100 . Kemler Nelson , D . G . , Frankenfield , A . , Morris , C . , & Blair , E . ( 2000 ) . Young children’s use of functional information to categorize artifacts : Three factors that matter . Cognition , 77 , 133 – 168 . Kemler Nelson , D . G . , Russell , R . , Duke , N . , & Jones , K . ( 2000 ) . Two - year - olds will name artifacts by their functions . Child Development , 71 , 1271 – 1288 . Klibanoff , R . S . , & Waxman , S . R . ( 2000 ) . Basic level object categories support the acquisition of novel adjectives : Evidence from preschool - aged children . Child Development , 71 , 649 – 659 . Landau , B . , Smith , L . , & Jones , S . ( 1998 ) . Object shape , object function , and object name . Journal of Memory and Language , 38 , 1 – 27 . Madole , K . L . , & Cohen , L . B . ( 1995 ) . The role of object parts in infants’ attention to form – function correlations . Developmental Psychology , 31 , 637 – 648 . Madole , K . L . , Oakes , L . M . , & Cohen , L . B . ( 1993 ) . Developmental changes in infants’ attention to function and form – function correlations . Cognitive Development , 8 , 189 – 209 . Mandler , J . M . , & McDonough , L . ( 1993 ) . Concept formation in infancy . Cognitive Development , 8 , 291 – 318 . Medin , D . L . , & Ortony , A . ( 1989 ) . Psychological essentialism . In S . O . A . Vosniadou ( Ed . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 179 – 195 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Meltzoff , A . N . ( 1988 ) . Infant imitation and memory : Nine - month - olds in immediate and deferred tests . Child Development , 59 , 217 – 225 . Meltzoff , A . N . , & Moore , M . K . ( 1993 ) . Why faces are special to infants : On connecting the attraction of faces and infants’ ability for imitation and cross - modal processing . In B . de Boysson - Bardies ( Ed . ) , Develop - mental neurocognition : Speech and face processing in the first year of life . NATO Advanced Studies Institute Series D : Behavioural and social sciences ( Vol . 69 , pp . 211 – 225 ) . Dordrecht , the Netherlands : Kluwer Academic . Meltzoff , A . N . , & Moore , M . K . ( 1994 ) . Imitation , memory , and the representation of persons . Infant Behavior & Development , 17 , 83 – 99 . Mervis , C . B . ( 1984 ) . Early lexical development : The contributions of mother and child . In C . Sophian ( Ed . ) , Origins of cognitive skills ( pp . 339 – 370 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Miller , G . A . , & Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1976 ) . Language and perception . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Mondloch , C . J . , Lewis , T . L . , Budreau , D . R . , Maurer , D . , Dannemiller , J . L . , Stephens , B . R . , & Kleiner - Gathercoal , K . A . ( 1999 ) . Face per - ception during early infancy . Psychological Science , 10 , 419 – 422 . Nazzi , T . , & Gopnik , A . ( 2001 ) . Linguistic and cognitive abilities in infancy : When does language become a tool for categorization ? Cogni - tion , 80 , B11 - B20 . Nelson , K . ( 1974 ) . Concept , word , and sentence : Interrelations in acquisi - tion and development . Psychological Review , 81 , 267 – 285 . Nelson , K . ( 1979 ) . Explorations in the development of a functional seman - tic system . In W . Collins ( Ed . ) , Children’s language and communica - tion : Minnesota Symposium on Child Psychology ( Vol . 12 , pp . 47 – 81 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Nelson , K . ( 1985 ) . Development of semantic representation in the child . Psychologie Francaise , 30 , 261 – 268 . Quinn , P . C . , & Eimas , P . D . ( 1997 ) . A reexamination of the perceptual - to - conceptual shift in mental representations . Review of General Psy - chology , 1 , 271 – 287 . Rakison , D . H . , & Butterworth , G . E . ( 1998 ) . Infants’ use of object parts in early categorization . Developmental Psychology , 34 , 49 – 62 . Reznick , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Interpreting infant conceptual categorization . Jour - nal of Cognition and Development , 1 , 63 – 66 . Rips , L . J . ( 1989 ) . Similarity , typicality , and categorization . In S . Vosni - adou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning . New York : Cambridge University Press . Smith , L . B . , Jones , S . S . , & Landau , B . ( 1996 ) . Naming in young children : A dumb attentional mechanism ? Cognition , 60 , 143 – 171 . Soja , N . N . , Carey , S . , & Spelke , E . S . ( 1991 ) . Ontological categories guide young children’s inductions of word meaning : Object terms and sub - stance terms . Cognition , 38 , 179 – 211 . Standley , J . M . , & Madsen , C . K . ( 1990 ) . Comparison of infant preferences and responses to auditory stimuli : Music , mother , and other female voice . Journal of Music Therapy , 27 , 54 – 97 . Tomikawa , S . A . , & Dodd , D . H . ( 1980 ) . Early word meanings : Percep - tually or functionally based ? Child Development , 51 , 1103 – 1109 . Tversky , B . ( 1989 ) . Parts , partonomies , and taxonomies . Developmental Psychology , 25 , 983 – 995 . Valenza , E . ( 1998 ) . Innate predispositions and the architecture of the mind : The case of faces . Giornale Italiano di Psicologia , 25 , 459 – 489 . Ward , T . B . , Becker , A . H . , Hass , S . D . , & Vela , E . ( 1991 ) . Attribute availability and the shape bias in children’s category generalization . Cognitive Development , 6 , 143 – 167 . 956 BOOTH AND WAXMAN Waxman , S . R . , & Booth , A . E . ( 2001 ) . Seeing pink elephants : Fourteen - month - olds’ interpretations of novel nouns and adjectives . Cognitive Psychology , 43 , 217 – 242 . Waxman , S . R . , & Booth , A . E . ( in press ) . The origins and evolution of links between word learning and conceptual organization : New evidence from 11 - month - olds , Developmental Science . Waxman , S . R . , & Markow , D . B . ( 1995 ) . Words as invitations to form categories : Evidence from 12 - to 13 - month - old infants . Cognitive Psy - chology , 29 , 257 – 302 . Welder , A . N . , & Graham , S . A . ( 2001 ) . The influence of shape similarity and shared labels on infants’ inductive inferences about nonobvious object properties . Child Development , 72 , 1653 – 1673 . Xu , F . ( 1999 ) . Object individuation and object identity in infancy : The role of spatiotemporal information , object property information , and lan - guage . Acta Psychologica , 102 , 113 – 136 . Received May 25 , 2001 Revision received June 3 , 2002 Accepted June 7 , 2002 (cid:1) 957 OBJECT NAMES AND FUNCTIONS AS CUES TO CATEGORIES