Neuron Review Growth Cone Travel in Space and Time : the Cellular Ensemble of Cytoskeleton , Adhesion , and Membrane Eric A . Vitriol 1 and James Q . Zheng 1 , * 1 Departments of Cell Biology and Neurology , Emory University School of Medicine , 615 Michael Street , Atlanta , GA 30322 , USA * Correspondence : james . zheng @ emory . edu DOI 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2012 . 03 . 005 Growth cones , found at the tip of axonal projections , are the sensory and motile organelles of developing neurons that enable axon pathﬁnding and target recognition for precise wiring of the neural circuitry . To date , many families of conserved guidance molecules and their corresponding receptors have been identi - ﬁed that work in space and time to ensure billions of axons to reach their targets . Research in the past two decades has also gained signiﬁcant insight into the ways in which growth cones translate extracellular signals into directional migration . This review aims to examine new progress toward understanding the cellular mechanisms underlying directional motility of the growth cone and to discuss questions that remain to be addressed . Speciﬁcally , we will focus on the cellular ensemble of cytoskeleton , adhesion , and membrane and examine how the intricate interplay between these processes orchestrates the directed movement of growth cones . As vividly described by Santiago Ramo´n y Cajal ( Ramo´n y Cajal , 1909 ) , ‘‘the growth cone may be regarded as a sort of club or battering ram , endowed with exquisite chemical sensitivity , with rapid ameboid movements , and with certain impulsive force , thanks to which it is able to proceed forward and overcome obstacles met in its way , forcing cellular interstices until it arrives at its destination . ’’ Cajal , who ﬁrst indentiﬁed the structures in 1890 ( Ramo´n y Cajal , 1890 ) , further postulated that growth cones exhibit and depend on chemotropism to cues presented in the developing brain to reach speciﬁc targets . However , direct support of chemotropic guidance of growth cones was not ob - tained until nearly a century later , highlighted by the identiﬁcation of the netrin family of chemoattractants in the ﬂoor plate of the spinal cord that guide the axons of commissural interneurons ( Kennedy et al . , 1994 ; Tessier - Lavigne et al . , 1988 ) and the corre - late discovery of unc - 6 / netrin and its receptors unc - 5 and unc - 40 in C . elegans ( Hedgecock et al . , 1987 , 1990 ; Ishii et al . , 1992 ) . The molecular identities of many factors involved in axon guid - ance have since been revealed , largely fueled by astonishing growth in molecular biology and genetic techniques . We have now learned that a variety of evolutionarily conserved guidance molecules , either attractive or repulsive in nature , provide the spatiotemporal cues for growth cone navigation through a complex physical and chemical topology to reach it speciﬁc destination ( Kolodkin and Tessier - Lavigne , 2011 ) . While Cajal provided the vivid description of nerve growth cones from the static images of histological staining , it was not until the invention of modern tissue culture by Ross Harrison that allowed the ﬁrst live microscopy of growth cones ( Harrison , 1910 ) . Subsequent studies have taken great advantage of cultured growth cones to gain a fairly detailed picture on their structure and motile properties . In particular , this ‘‘early’’ phase of growth cone research has advanced our understanding of how extracellular and intracellular signals inﬂuence axon extension and the cytoskeletal architecture underlying growth cone motility . For example , Ca 2 + was established as a key second messenger that profoundly inﬂuences growth cone motility . The discovery that an optimal range of intracellular Ca 2 + concentration is required for growth cone advancement provided the foundation for a wealth of research geared toward understanding the complex role of Ca 2 + signaling in growth cone guidance ( Gomez and Zheng , 2006 ; Kater et al . , 1988 ) . More - over , this phase of research yielded detailed imaging results on the cytoskeletal architecture of the growth cone , establishing distinct roles for actin and microtubules in controlling the protru - sive machinery and net migration ( Bentley and O’Connor , 1994 ; Lin et al . , 1994 ; Smith , 1988 ) . The identiﬁcation of in vivo guidance cues fueled the ‘‘second’’ phase of growth cone research . We now know that the cytoskel - eton and focal adhesion are the major targets of intricate signal - ing cascades to generate speciﬁc motile behaviors ( Dickson , 2001 ; Huber et al . , 2003 ; Kalil and Dent , 2005 ; Korey and Van Vactor , 2000 ; Myers et al . , 2011 ; Wen and Zheng , 2006 ) . Recent studies have also shown the involvement of membrane recycling in growth cone responses ( Tojima et al . , 2011 ) . It is conceivable that different signaling cascades elicited by extracellular factors could target a distinct component of growth cone motility , but the speciﬁc response likely involves concerted actions of multiple motility apparatuses ( Lowery and Van Vactor , 2009 ) . The next challenge is to fully elucidate the intricacies of these mechanisms and how they are orchestrated to enable the agile and adaptive motile behaviors of the growth cone . In this review , we will discuss three major mechanisms of growth cone motility : cytoskeleton , adhesion , and membrane turnover . Each topic , rather than providing an extensive overview , will be highlighted with speciﬁc examples of molecules that play a pivotal role in axon growth and guidance yet whose exact functions in these processes remains to be fully elucidated . We set out to reveal 1068 Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . the complexity of cellular behavior underlying growth cone direc - tional motility and to postulate important unknown questions . At the end , we will discuss the intricate interplay among these components and how multiple networks coordinate to enable the growth cone to respond and navigate through complex terrains in order to reach its speciﬁc target . Nerve Growth Cone : A Primer The growth cone is a dilated terminal of axonal and dendritic processes . Under light microscopy , the growth cone can be seen to have two distinct compartments : the peripheral and central regions ( P and C region ) ( see Figure 1 ) . The P region is abroadandﬂatareathatishighlightedbylamellipodiaandﬁlopo - dia , two types of membrane protrusions containing a meshwork of branched actin ﬁlaments and long parallel bundles of actin ﬁla - ments , respectively . The C region , located behind the P region and connected to the axonal shaft , is enriched in cellular organ - elles such as mitochondria and exocytotic vesicles . A predomi - nant feature of the C region is a dense microtubule array that extends from the axonal shaft to support growth cone movement andto serve asthetrackfortransportofmembranousorganelles . While the majority of microtubules terminate at the C region , single microtubules do venture into the P region where their inter - actions with actin and cell signaling components are of impor - tance for growth cone motility . High - resolution imaging studies of the growth cone’s cytoskeleton have revealed a third function - ally distinct region , the transitional zone ( T zone ) ( Lowery and Van Vactor , 2009 ; Rodriguez et al . , 2003 ) . The T zone is located between the P and C regions and is believed to contain the acto - myosin contractile structures that play a strong role in the regula - tion of both the actin and microtubules in the growth cone , including controlling the rearward ﬂow of actin in the P region andmaintainingtheCregionlocalizationofthemicrotubulelattice ( Burnette et al . , 2008 ; Medeiros et al . , 2006 ; Zhang et al . , 2003 ) . Growth cones represent the major site of attachment to the outside environment in both axons and dendrites . Actin - based protrusions are coupled with selective adhesion to extracellular components to provide the force necessary to drive the growth cone forward , leading to the elongation of axonal and dendritic processes . The growth cone is also the major site of membrane recycling in the form of exocytosis and endocytosis . Imaging work has shown that membranous organelles are largely concentrated in the C region ( Bunge , 1973 ) , though vesicular components can be found in the lamella and lamellipodia ( Tojima et al . , 2011 ) , and even more rarely in ﬁlopodia ( Sabo and McAllis - ter , 2003 ) . Membrane recycling at the growth cone can serve many purposes , ranging from the regulation of available membrane surface area to receptor trafﬁcking . While the cyto - skeleton , adhesion to the extracellular environment , and membrane turnover are often studied separately with respect to growth cone motility and guidance , work done in recent years has shown that there is an elaborate crosstalk between these components and that they must be carefully balanced to produc - tively steer a neuronal process to its speciﬁed target . Actin : In the Driver’s Seat Actin plays a pivotal role in growth cone motility and guidance responses . A combination of actin polymerization near the plasma membrane , myosin - based actin retrograde ﬂow , and selective engagement of the ‘‘clutch’’ to the adhesion substrate is believed to drive the growth cone forward ( Lowery and Van Vactor , 2009 ; Suter and Forscher , 1998 ) . The actin cytoskeleton Figure 1 . Actin Cytoskeleton of the Growth Cone ( A ) Schematicoftheactincytoskeletonofagrowth coneundergoinganattractiveguidanceresponse . The growth cone’s periphery contains actin - rich lamellipodia ( light red shaded ) and ﬁlopodia ( dark red lines ) . The lamellipodia consists of a network of short , branched actin ﬁlaments that serves as the protrusion machinery of the growth cone . Newly formed lamellipodia on the side undergoing a positive turning response is shown in blue . Filopodia are composed of long bundles of actin ﬁlaments . They participate inenvironment sensing and guidance . Microtubules in the growth cone ( shown in purple ) are largely restricted to the central region gray shaded by the actin cytoskel - eton . The inset on the top left shows a ﬂuorescent image of the actual F - actin architecture within the growth cone . This image was obtained using the Nikon N - SIM Super Resolution microscope and inverted in grayscale for display . Scale bar : 5 m m . ( B ) Two models of ADF / coﬁlin - mediated regula - tion of actin dynamics underlying lamellipodial protrusion . The # 1 is the classical model in which ADF / coﬁlinfunctionsmainlyindepolymerizationat the rear of the actin meshwork and recycling the actin monomers to the leading front for assembly . In the # 2 model , ADF / coﬁlin severing creates new barbed ends to promote actin assembly and membrane protrusion . ( C ) A hypothesized model in which an optimal range of ADF / coﬁlin activity may be required for growth cone motility . Above and below this range of ADF / coﬁlin activityinhibitsgrowthconemotility . DependingontheamountofactiveADF / coﬁlinandthedynamicstateoftheactinnetwork , agradientofguidancecuescould asymmetrically target ADF / coﬁlin activity to generate either attractive ( into the optimal range ) or repulsive ( out of the optimal range ) responses . Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1069 Neuron Review is targeted by many signaling cascades , of which the Rho - family GTPases represent a key node for connecting extracellular signals to regulated actin dynamics ( Burridge and Wennerberg , 2004 ; Hall and Nobes , 2000 ) . Rho GTPases have been shown to play a fundamental role in axonal growth and guidance ( Dick - son , 2001 ; Ng et al . , 2002 ) . However , the downstream effectors and precise actin mechanisms that control the directional motility of growth cones remain to be fully determined . Actin ﬁla - ments are built through a balancing act of ﬁlament assembly at the barbed ends and disassembly at the pointed ends , and these rates are inﬂuenced by a wide range of regulatory proteins . Moreover , an even larger number of accessory proteins are present in cells to organize actin ﬁlaments into distinct networks in speciﬁc subcellular locations ( Chhabra and Higgs , 2007 ; Pollard et al . , 2000 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . For example , lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , two membrane protrusions that func - tion in growth cone movement and environmental sensing , respectively , are based on distinct F - actin structures . The former contains a meshwork of short , branched actin ﬁlaments that depends on the Arp2 / 3 nucleation complex , whereas the later is supported by long unbranched actin ﬁlaments involving formin family of molecules and regulated by Ena / Vasp proteins . A number of excellent reviews are available that have provided comprehensive coverage on the actin structures and dynamics of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia in both nonneuronal cells and nerve growth cones ( Dent et al . , 2011 ; Lowery and Van Vactor , 2009 ; Pollard and Cooper , 2009 ; Rodriguez et al . , 2003 ) . Here , we will only discuss a few of the actin regulatory molecules whose function in growth cone motility is complex and remains to be fully understood . In vertebrate cells , a large array of regulatory proteins control the actin network and its dynamics through a diverse set of actions , including ﬁlament nucleation , severing , crosslinking , and end capping , as well as monomer sequestering . Many of these proteins have not been well studied in neuronal growth cones , and whether and how they function in growth cone migra - tion and guidance remains to be seen ( Dent et al . , 2011 ) . In a minimal model proposed for the actin assembly and disas - sembly underlying lamellipodial protrusion , just ﬁve families of actin - binding proteins were thought to be needed : WASp , Arp2 / 3 , capping protein , ADF / coﬁlin , and proﬁlin / b - thymosin ( Pollard et al . , 2000 ) . Of them , WASp , Arp2 / 3 , and ADF / coﬁlin have been investigated in nerve growth cones ( Dent et al . , 2011 ; Lowery and Van Vactor , 2009 ) , whereas thymosin / proﬁlin and capping protein have received less attention . Capping barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments represents an impor - tant mechanism to regulate ﬁlament elongation ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Capping proteins bind to free barbed ends and prevent addition or loss of actin subunits . Of the known actin - capping proteins , the predominant species in most nonmuscle cell types is CapZ ( commonly abbreviated as CP ) . CP is an obli - gate heterodimer consisting of a and b subunits ( Cooper and Sept , 2008 ; Schafer , 2004 ) . While both a 1 and a 2 isoforms are abundant in most tissues ( Hart et al . , 1997 ) , b 2 is the primary iso - form in the mammalian brain ( Schafer et al . , 1994 ) . Barbed end capping is believed to promote lamellipodial protrusion by increasing the local availability of polymerization competent G - actin for Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation ( Akin and Mullins , 2008 ) . A loss of CP leads to the formation of actin bundles and ﬁlopodia , which in part mediated by the anticapping activity of Ena / Vasp proteins ( Kapustina et al . , 2010 ; Mejillano et al . , 2004 ; Vitriol et al . , 2007 ) . It remains to be determined if a similar interplay of CP and Arp2 / 3 operates in nerve growth cones and if so , whether it plays a role in axon guidance . Speciﬁcally , it has not been determined if growth cone steering in response to guid - ance cues depends on spatiotemporally restricted capping activity . This question is confounded by our lack of knowledge as to how CP is regulated in living cells . We know that modulation of CP plays a major role in actin physiology , as its off - rate to actin ﬁlaments in vivo is three orders of magnitude faster than it is in vitro ( Miyoshi et al . , 2006 ) . CP is known to bind Phosphatidy - linositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) , and this interaction inhibits its ability to bind actin barbed end ( Schafer , 2004 ) . It was shown that asymmetric PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 phosphorylation by Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase mediates growth cone chemotaxis ( Henle et al . , 2011 ) , which could potentially lead to asymmetric capping and lamellipodial protrusion leading to growth cone steering . More - over , the Ena / VASP family of actin regulatory proteins exhibit anticapping activity and could play a role in antagonizing actin capping during growth cone steering ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) , though they are not essential for retinal axon pathﬁnding in Xenopus ( Dwivedy et al . , 2007 ) . Interestingly , a recent study shows that CP interacts with b - tubulin to regulate the extension of MTs in the growth cone ( Davis et al . , 2009 ) , thus providing a potential point of crosstalk among the actin and microtubule cytoskeletal systems . However , whether the CP - MT interaction plays a role in the growth cone directional response to guidance cues remains to be examined . Besides a long list of actin regulatory proteins whose function in growth cone guidance remains unclear ( Dent et al . , 2011 ) , several well - studied actin factors have complex ramiﬁcations on the actin physiology , even to the point of appearing to cause opposite effects on growth cone motile responses . One example is ADF / coﬁlin , which represents a highly conserved family of actin - associated proteins from different genes ( coﬁlin1 , 2 , and ADF ) but with similar functions on actin dynamics ( thus referred to as AC hereafter for simplicity ) ( Bernstein and Bamburg , 2010 ; Van Troys et al . , 2008 ) . AC was initially identiﬁed for its ability to increase the rate of ADP - actin dissociation from the pointed end of actin ﬁlaments to promote depolymerization ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ) , as well as to sever actin ﬁlaments into small fragments for disassembly ( Maciver , 1998 ) . In the classic model of lamelli - podial protrusion , ADF / coﬁlin functions at the rear of the lamellipodial actin meshwork to breakdown actin ﬁlaments and recycle the actin monomers for further leading edge assembly ( Figure 1B ) . However , AC severing of actin ﬁlaments also creates new barbed ends , which can synergize with actin polymerization factors to promote ﬁlament assembly and membrane protrusion ( Kuhn et al . , 2000 ; Pollard et al . , 2000 ) . The opposite functions of AC on actin ﬁlaments likely depend on its local concentration of AC and the ratio of AC against actin monomers : severing and disassembly are more favorable when AC is at a lower concen - tration , whereas nucleating occurs at higher AC concentrations ( Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ) . The precise function of AC in nerve growth cones remains to be fully understood . AC is expressed at high levels and 1070 Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review colocalizes with F - actin in neuronal growth cone ( Bamburg and Bray , 1987 ) . Overexpression of AC in neurons leads to increased neurite outgrowth ( Meberg et al . , 1998 ) , indicating that actin turn - over may promote motility ( Bradke and Dotti , 1999 ) . However , AC activation has also been associated with growth cone collapse ( Aizawa et al . , 2001 ; Hsieh et al . , 2006 ; Piper et al . , 2006 ) , demonstrating a negative impact of AC on growth cone motility . In growth cone steering , asymmetric AC inhibition was shown to mediate attractive turning of the growth cone , whereas local AC activation elicited repulsion ( Wen et al . , 2007 ) . These ﬁndings are consistent with the classic depolymerizing / severing functions of AC on the actin cytoskeleton . However , AC activa - tion was shown in some cases to promote actin - based membrane protrusion in nonneuronal cells ( DesMarais et al . , 2005 ; Ghosh et al . , 2004 ) and to mediate growth cone attraction in cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons ( Marsick et al . , 2010 ) . It is plausible that different types of cells exploit speciﬁc end results of AC activity , and their unique cytosolic environment may contribute to the opposite outcomes of increased AC activity on motility . It is also possible that the same neurons may have varying levels of basal actin dynamics , upon which AC may generate different effects . For example , growth cones from young neurons tend to be very motile and have a high level of actin turnover , whereas those from more mature neurons have relatively stable F - actin and reduced motility . AC activation could in principle impact the motility of these growth cones in an opposite manner . We propose that an optimal range of AC activity is required to generate the dynamic turnover of the actin cytoskeleton underlying high growth cone motility and that this range is dependent on the kinetic state of the actin network at that time . In this instance , modulation of AC activity in either direction could either accelerate or decrease motility ( Figure 1C ) or , if done assymetrically within the growth cone , cause a positive or negative turning response . As a result , attrac - tive steering may involve local elevated AC activity in growth cones with more stable actin cytoskeleton but require local AC inhibition for growth cones with a high actin turnover rate . Clearly , this model and the precise functions of AC in growth cone actin dynamics and guidance responses require further studies , which may beneﬁt from the emerging super resolution imaging techniques ( Toomre and Bewersdorf , 2010 ) . Microtubules : TIP s Are Welcome Microtubules ( MTs ) , the cylindrical ﬁlaments each consisting of 13 protoﬁlaments , are a major cytoskeletal system within the axonal and dendritic projections . MTs are intrinsically polar - ized due to their head - to - tail assembly from a / b tubulin hetero - dimers . While the plus and minus ends of MTs favor polymeriza - tion and depolymerization , respectively , the minus ends of MTs are often capped and stabilized inside cells ( Dammermann et al . , 2003 ) . Instead , MT plus ends exhibit ‘‘dynamic instability , ’’ in which their polymerization - based growth is interrupted by ‘‘catastrophe’’ phases of rapid depolymerization and shrinkage ( Cassimeris et al . , 1987 ) . It is believed that dynamic instability provides MTs with the ability to quickly remodel their organiza - tion and selectively grow in response to extracellular signals . In neurons , most of MTs are believed to be polymerized from the centrosome , but are severed , released , and transported into long axons and dendritic arbors where they form dense arrays ( or bundles ) . These condensed MT arrangements are the struc - tural foundation for the extension and maintenance of highly elongated and elaborated nerve processes . In addition , MT arrays serve as the railway tracks for long - range transport of cellular organelles and cargos , which is essential for the survival and function of the neuron ( Hirokawa et al . , 2010 ) . Finally , spatio - temporally regulated dynamics of these MTs may play an impor - tant role in specifying axonal and dendritic polarization ( Witte et al . , 2008 ) . How MTs are involved in the directional responses of the growth cone has only begun to be elucidated ( Dent et al . , 2011 ; Gordon - Weeks , 2004 ; Lowery and Van Vactor , 2009 ) . The dense MT arrays in the neurite shaft typically terminate in the growth cone C region , with a small number of MTs splaying out into the actin rich P region ( Figure 2 ) . These individual MTs appear to exhibit a high degree of dynamics and track along the actin ﬁlaments ( Schaefer et al . , 2002 ) . It should be noted that MTs in axons are organized in uniform polarity such that indi - vidual MTs in the growth cone are pioneered by their plus ends . Therefore , the behavior of MTs exploring the growth cone P region is largely dictated by how their dynamic instability is regu - lated . It is believed that actin - based growth cone movement requires the local stabilization of dynamic MTs exploring the P region , followed by site - directed MT polymerization and delivery of cellular cargos to consolidate the space created by the forward movement of the growth cone . Conversely , dynamic MTs in the growth cone could play a more direct role in migration , as local modiﬁcation of MT polymerization and depolymerization can impact actin - based membrane protrusion to elicit a growth cone steering response ( Buck and Zheng , 2002 ; Mack et al . , 2000 ; Rochlin et al . , 1999 ) . Therefore , dynamic MTs and the actin cytoskeleton appear to engage in bidirectional interactions that each can trigger the motile responses involving the other cyto - skeletal component for coordinated cell movement ( Goode et al . , 2000 ; Lowery and Van Vactor , 2009 ; Rodriguez et al . , 2003 ) . Similar to the actin cytoskeleton , a wide range of MT - binding proteins ( MAPs ) exist to regulate MT polymerization and depoly - merization , stability , crosslinking , motor interaction , severing , and transport ( Hirokawa et al . , 2010 ; Maccioni and Cambiazo , 1995 ) . Recent studies have revealed the importance of proteins associated with and localized to the plus ends of MTs in growth cone motility and responses to extracellular signals ( Lowery and Van Vactor , 2009 ) . In particular , the plus - end t rack i ng p roteins ( + TIPs ) , such as the end - binding protein ( EB ) and the cyto - plasmic - linker protein ( CLIP ) molecules , have been shown to especially relevant ( see Figure 2 ) . Many of these + TIPs can be targeted by a wide range of signaling cascades . For example , the CLIP - associated protein Orbit / MAST / CLASP acts down - stream of the tyrosine kinase Able to mediate axon guidance ( Lee et al . , 2004 ) . The CLIP family of + TIPs interact with Adeno - matous Polyposis Coli ( APC ) to regulate glycogen synthesis kinase 3 b activity , which has been shown to regulate MT dynamics and growth cone guidance by Wnt molecules ( Ciani et al . , 2004 ; Lucas et al . , 1998 ; Zhou et al . , 2004 ) . It has also been shown that CLIPs interact with IQGAP , which targets Rac1 / Cdc42 GTPases to regulate the actin dynamics in growth Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1071 Neuron Review cones ( Fukata et al . , 2002 ; Kholmanskikh et al . , 2006 ) . Moreover , several + TIPs interact with the dynactin complex , helping to localize to MT plus ends . Although plus - end localization of dy - nactin is not required for intracellular membrane trafﬁc ( Watson and Stephens , 2006 ) , it could be involved in local membrane turnover and recycling in the growth cone , leading to the modiﬁ - cation of growth cone locomotion ( Tojima et al . , 2011 ) or the generation of ‘‘signaling endosomes’’ for retrograde neurotro - phin signaling ( Zweifel et al . , 2005 ) . It is also possible , though not exclusively , that plus - end localization of the dynactin complex may function to regulate MT polymerization ( Ligon et al . , 2003 ) and / or to work with dynein and Lis1 to regulate MT advance during growth cone remodeling and extension in response to extracellular signals ( Grabham et al . , 2007 ) . Distinct from + TIPs , the mitotic centromere - associated kine - sin ( MCAK ) / KIF2c belongs to the kinesin - 13 family of the middle motor domain KIFs ( M - KIFs ) that bind to MT plus ends to promote MT depolymerization ( Hirokawa et al . , 2010 ; Howard and Hyman , 2007 ) . Both KIF2a and KIF2c exhibit ATP - depen - dent depolymerizing activity , presumably by removing the GTP - cap at the plus end to induce catastrophe ( Howard and Hyman , 2007 ) . KIF2a is highly expressed in postmitotic neurons of developing brains ; KIF2a knockout caused brain defects of disrupted migration and excessive axonal branching ( Homma et al . , 2003 ) . It is believed that the branching phenotype is caused by the lack of KIF2a - mediated MT depolymerization in the growth cones of collateral branches . While it is not known if KIF2 is involved in growth cone guidance , directional move - ment of the growth cone requires polarized membrane exten - sion on one side and retraction on the other . KIF2 mediated MT depolymerization could in principle be involved in the disas - sembly of the MTs on the retracting side of the growth cone ( see Figure 2 ) . For KIF2 to function in asymmetric modiﬁcation of MTs during growth cone guidance , its localization or depolymerizing Figure 2 . Microtubules in Growth Cone Steering This schematic shows the hypothesized model involving asymmetric modiﬁcation of MT dynamics during growth cone attraction and repulsion . Newly formed lamellipodia is shown in blue , retracting lamellipodia is indicated by the dotted red line . Microtubules in the growth cone ( shown in purple ) are largely restricted to the C region by the actin cytoskeleton , but some enter intothePregion , wheretheyplayanimportantrole in axon guidance . MT localization is controlled by the actin cytoskeleton and a host of MT regulatory proteins . During retraction , MTs are removed from the periphery through selective targeting by depolymerases and severing proteins . During attraction , proteins bind to MT plus ends , stabi - lizing them or enhancing polymerization and further growth . activity needs to be regulated in a spatio - temporal manner . Currently , there is little information in regards to how KIF2 is regulated in cells and whether or notthere is a spatiotemporal component to restrict its MT depolymerizing activity . However , the fact that KIF2a - induced MT depolymerization appears to be restricted only in the collateral growth cones suggests the existence of a local control mechanism . Finally , although KIF2s are not thought to move directionally along the MT lattice ( Helenius et al . , 2006 ) , KIF2a has been shown to function in transport of membranous organelles involved in growth cone membrane expansion ( Morﬁni et al . , 1997 ; Noda et al . , 1995 ; Pfenninger et al . , 2003 ) . The depolymerizing and trafﬁcking activities of KIF2s appear to be counterintuitive with regards to growth cone locomotion . Therefore , it would be of interest to determine if KIF2s may selectively engage in either MT depolymerization or vesicle transport at a speciﬁc time and / or location . KIF2s are not only the molecules that can negatively affect the MT structure and dynamics to potentially function in polarized growth cone extension . Recent studies have identiﬁed katanin and spastin as proteins that sever MTs to create shorter frag - ments that are more prone to depolymerization if not protected or stabilized ( Roll - Mecak and McNally , 2010 ) . In migrating non - neuronal cells , short MT fragments have been seen within the lamellipodial region of the leading edge . Live cell - imaging studies have yielded data indicating that MTs are severed within the lamellipodia due to physical stress caused by actin retrograde ﬂow ( Gupton et al . , 2002 ; Schaefer et al . , 2002 ; Waterman - Storer and Salmon , 1997 ) , though a possible involve - ment of enzymatic MT severing has not been excluded . Interest - ingly , a recent study has shown that katanin can function both as a MT severing enzyme and plus - end depolymerase to regulate the MT dynamics at the cell cortex ( Zhang et al . , 2011 ) . Impor - tantly , katanin was found to localize to the leading edge of polar - ized cells to negatively regulate their migration , demonstrating a negative role for MT severing enzymes in cell motility . It would be interesting to see if spatiotemporal katanin - mediated MT severing and depolymerization are employed to regulate growth 1072 Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review cone migration and directional responses to guidance cues ( Figure 2 ) . Like many of the actin regulatory proteins , the exact effects of MT severing on neurons can be complex and may depend on a number of factors such as how the MT is posttranslationally modiﬁed and what other MT - binding proteins are present . For example , severing of stable MTs enables the release of short MTs from the centrosomal region for their transport down the axon and organized into the dense MT array in the axonal shaft ( Yu et al . , 2005 ) . Local severing of MT arrays has been shown to be involved in the formation of collateral braches , a process that may involve the local creation of dynamic MT plus ends ( Yu et al . , 2008 ) . In nerve growth cones , MT severing has been observed to break down the looped MTs that are often associ - ated with stalled growth cones ( Dent et al . , 1999 ; Schaefer et al . , 2002 ) . Finally , very limited attention has been given to the minus ends of MTs . Both axons and dendrites contain micro - tubule fragments with exposed minus ends . Surprisingly , these minus ends undergo little depolymerization , indicating the exis - tence of a mechanism that caps and stabilizes them ( Dammer - mann et al . , 2003 ) . It is of interest to know that KIF2 localizes to both plus and minus ends for depolymerization . Therefore , protecting the minus ends could have a larger impact on axonal growth and guidance than one might think . Adhesion : It’s All about Turnover Cell - cell and cell - matrix adhesions are macromolecular protein complexes that provide a direct linkage between the cell and its external environment . They are essential for tissue morpho - genesis and cell migration . During brain development , adhesion molecules provide an important roadmap , and together with secreted cues , guide axonal and dendritic growth to form the neural circuitry ( Kamiguchi , 2007 ; Kolodkin and Tessier - Lavigne , 2011 ; Maness and Schachner , 2007 ; Myers et al . , 2011 ) . In growth cones , adhesions can be derived from several different receptors including integrins , cadherins , and the immunoglobin superfamily ( IgSF ) members . In neurons adhesions often appear as small , punctate structures and are referred to as point contacts . The ligands for integrins are found in the extracellular matrix , while cadherins and IgSF proteins interact homophilli - cally with molecules expressed on the surface of adjacent cells ( Kolodkin and Tessier - Lavigne , 2011 ) . Following receptor activation at the plasma membrane , intracellular adhesion components are recruited to the nascent contact , providing the platform needed for chemical and force - based adhesive signaling events ( Huttenlocher and Horwitz , 2011 ) . A popular model to describe how adhesions modulate motility is the ‘‘molecular clutch . ’’ The clutch hypothesis predicts that cell adhesions couple with actin undergoing retrograde ﬂow . Clutch engagement provides the mechanical resistance that is needed for the actin network to overcome the rearward current of retrograde ﬂow , which in turn allows the plasma membrane to translocate forward . Forces generated by clutch resistance of the F - actin network are transmitted back to the adhesions , resulting in increased surface traction ( Aratyn - Schaus and Gardel , 2010 ; Brown et al . , 2006 ; Giannone et al . , 2009 ; Hu et al . , 2007 ) . Compelling evidence of the clutch model has been demonstrated in neurons ( Bard et al . , 2008 ; Chan and Odde , 2008 ) . In nascent protrusions that result from clutch engagement , newly polymerized actin primes and positions integrins for activation ( Chan and Odde , 2008 ) . Adhesions experiencing increased force undergo higher component turn - over ( Wolfenson et al . , 2011 ) . Together , these create a cycle promoting dynamic ﬂuctuation and positive growth . It is clear that mechanical signaling plays an important role in outgrowth and guidance , but its exact mechanism of controlling overall movement has not yet been determined . Adhesions are dynamic complexes whose turnover is critical for cell movement ( Huttenlocher and Horwitz , 2011 ) . Stable adhesions immobilize the cell while lack of adhesion makes it incapable of crawling on a substrate . In a motile growth cone , adhesions assemble and disassemble to change in number , size , and position ( Myers and Gomez , 2011 ; Thoumine , 2008 ) . Additionally , the individual adhesion components , including the surface receptors , undergo turnover within the point contacts ( Dequidt et al . , 2007 ) . Adhesions are protein structures in constant ﬂux , ready to immediately respond to internal and external signals . Modiﬁcation of adhesion dynamics can effect overall migration or , if done locally within the growth cone , cause a directional guidance response ( Myers and Gomez , 2011 ; Myers et al . , 2011 ; Woo and Gomez , 2006 ) . Several traditional signaling pathways that work through focal adhesions have been shown to mediate both attractive and repulsive guidance responses . There are numerous reviews that are speciﬁcally dedicated to the vast signaling networks that work through adhesions ( Kamiguchi , 2007 ; Kolodkin and Tessier - Lavigne , 2011 ; Maness and Schachner , 2007 ; Myers et al . , 2011 ) . In this section , we would like to focus on focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) , a single , well - studied adhesion protein , to highlight how its complex regulation can induce polar effects in the migrating growth cone . We hope to demonstrate the need to understand the spatiotemporal regulation of adhesive contacts . Focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) is a protein - tyrosine kinase that provides a direct link between adhesions and intracellular signaling pathways ( Mitra et al . , 2005 ; Parsons , 2003 ) . FAK is downstream of both extracellular matrix and intracellular signaling components , therefore it is in a position to transduce signals to and from adhesions . FAK contains multiple tyrosine and serine phosphorylation sites that are crucial for its ability to regulate adhesions and the cytoskeleton ( Chaco´n and Fazzari , 2011 ; Grigera et al . , 2005 ; Ma et al . , 2001 ; Mitra et al . , 2005 ) . FAK is upstream of numerous signaling pathways inside the cell , including regulation of Src - family kinases , Rho - family GTPases , actin regulatory molecules , adhesion components , and microtu - bules ( Chaco´n and Fazzari , 2011 ; Mitra et al . , 2005 ) . In neuronal adhesions , FAK is activated downstream of netrins and integrins , where it has been shown to be essential for regulating outgrowth and guidance in response to adhesion receptor activation ( Bechara et al . , 2008 ; Chaco´n and Fazzari , 2011 ; Li et al . , 2004 ; Liu et al . , 2004 ; Myers and Gomez , 2011 ; Ren et al . , 2004 ; Robles and Gomez , 2006 ) . FAK mediates these effects in part by altering the dynamics of point contacts . In fact , FAK activity in neurons is necessary to assemble , stabilize , and break down adhesions ( Bechara et al . , 2008 ; Robles and Gomez , 2006 ) . Ultimately ( and purportedly through its ability to modulate adhesion dynamics ) , FAK is needed for proper organismal Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1073 Neuron Review development where it plays a role in ventral midline crossing , outgrowth of Rohan - beard neurons from the neural tube , and retinotopic mapping ( Chaco´n and Fazzari , 2011 ; Myers et al . , 2011 ) . In growth cones , localized regulation of FAK has been implicated in both attractive and repulsive signaling ( Bechara et al . , 2008 ; Chaco´n and Fazzari , 2011 ; Myers and Gomez , 2011 ) . How can a single molecule be involved in adhesion assembly and disassembly , outgrowth and inhibition , attraction and repul - sion ? The answer may be that it is highly spatiotemporally regu - lated , and that it can exhibit diverse effects within the growth cone depending on where , when , and how much it is activated . In addition to FAK’s speciﬁc localization to adhesive contacts , FAK activity is also controlled in time through its complex signaling interactions , autoinhibition , self phosphorylation , and instigation of feedback loop pathways . Furthermore , the fact that FAK is a mechanosensor indicates that it is asymmetrically activated among adhesions experiencing varying mechanical loads . As the tools necessary for elucidating the dynamics of FAK activation within subcellular structures ( Cai et al . , 2008 ; Seong et al . , 2011 ) and determining the functional outcome of its localized activation ( Karginov et al . , 2010 ; Slack - Davis et al . , 2007 ) become available , we will be able to resolve the complex - ities of FAK signaling during neuritogenesis axon pathﬁnding , and regeneration . Finally , FAK is but a single component of the 100 + member adhesome ( Geiger and Yamada , 2011 ) . We must understand the role it plays in the larger picture of adhesion based signaling . Membrane Recycling : Create and Destroy Membrane trafﬁcking that occurs at the growing axon tip involves both membrane addition and internalization in the forms of exocytosis and endocytosis , respectively . These processes may be constitutive or evoked . In addition to delivering or removing plasma membrane , trafﬁcking in the growth cone can involve the transport and internalization of cell adhesion molecules , signaling proteins such as Rho - Family GTPases and Src - family kinases , lipid mediators , and guidance receptors ( Bloom and Morgan , 2011 ) . Localized delivery of these cargos ensures the spatial organization of signaling networks within the growth cone that is needed for directed movement . Further , the removal or addition of plasma membrane may serve as an important physical constraint that regulates movement ( Meldo - lesi , 2011 ) . As a neurite continues to extend away from the cell body , it increases in autonomy and the trafﬁcking / recycling pathways are one way in which it can maintain a level of indepen - dence from the cell body . Though these processes were discov - ered in the growth cone nearly 40 years ago , a number of recent advances have shown how localized vesicle trafﬁc regulates axon growth and guidance . The plasma membrane ( or plasmalemma ) is the neuron’s largest organelle and during axon growth it must be expanded to accommodate the neuron’s rapidly increasing surface area ( Meldolesi , 2011 ) . Although lipid and protein synthesis do occur in the distal regions of the axon , the majority of plasmalemma expansion occurs through exocytosis within the growth cone . Bulk exocytic vesicles such as plasmalemma precursor vesicles ( PPVs ) and enlargeosomes , derived in the cell body and actively transported to the axon tip via microtubules , are constitutively inserted into the C domain where they promote axon growth ( Pfenninger et al . , 2003 ; Racchetti et al . , 2010 ) . Though fusion of this type of exosome with the plasma membrane can be induced downstream of guidance cues ( Pfenninger et al . , 2003 ) , there have been no studies that have linked this process to directional steering of the growth cone . A separate class of exocytic structure , VAMP2 positive synaptic precursor vesicles , has been shown to be involved in growth cone guidance responses . Tojima et al . demonstrated that VAMP2 exocytic vesicles are trafﬁcked from the C domain of the growth cone to the periphery in response to attractive intracellular Ca 2 + signals and that this type of exocytosis exclu - sively functions in attractive turning , not repulsion or overall outgrowth ( Tojima et al . , 2007 ) . Partial colocalization of VAMP2 vesicles with an endocytic marker and internalized cell surface receptors implies that this localized delivery of components to the plasmalemma is involved in the recycling pathway , thought the speciﬁc cargo of these vesicles has not been identiﬁed . It also remains to be determined if local exocytosis functions to cause an asymmetric expansion of the plasma membrane , to deliver and recycle important cell surface molecules , or both . As with membrane addition , the growth cone is the primary location for membrane internalization in the developing axon . Endocytosis in the growth cone can be constitutive or evoked ; these are distinct processes carried out by different types of vesicles ( Diefenbach et al . , 1999 ) . Bulk ( or constitutive ) endocy - tosis occurs in growing axons ( Bonanomi et al . , 2008 ) . It repre - sents a ﬂuid - phase type of endocytosis and its vesicles are free of any markers that would implicate them in the recycling pathway , such as clatherin or caveolin . Though , the fact that relevant cell surface proteins are excluded indicates there is some selectivity in bulk endosome vesicle content . Consistent with its role in positive outgrowth , the rate of bulk endocytosis positively correlates with neurite extension speed and occurs more prominently in the early developmental stages of out - growth ( Bonanomi et al . , 2008 ) . Both bulk endocytosis and exocytosis occur downstream of the activation of the small GTPase Rac ( Bonanomi et al . , 2008 ; Racchetti et al . , 2010 ) , begging the question if they are coordinated by the same intra - cellular signaling pathways . It is still unclear why this type of rapid , nonspeciﬁc back and forth membrane transport is needed for efﬁcient neurite elongation . It is plausible that bulk membrane recycling is involved in dynamic renewal and modiﬁcation of membrane lipid composition . Alternatively , it could simply func - tion in reshaping the membranous geometry . Despite its linkage to rapid outgrowth , there is little evidence showing that constitutive endocytosis occurs asymmetrically in the growth cone during guidance . Though recently , Kolpak and colleagues documented a functional role for asymmetric ﬂuid - phase endocytosis during repulsive signaling ( Kolpak et al . , 2009 ) . This was counterintuitive to previous studies showing positive correlations between bulk endocytosis and axon growth ( Bonanomi et al . , 2008 ) . In addition to demonstrating that bulk ﬂuid - phase uptake occurs during growth cone collapse and determining some of the regulatory molecules involved , direct evidence was provided that locally applied Sonic Hedgehog , at a repulsive concentration , caused a macropinocytic - like uptake 1074 Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review of dextran on the side of growth cone receiving the negative cue . The endocytic response was immediate and preceded growth cone turning . Interestingly , and true to form of bulk endocytosis , the internalized vesicles did not contain the Sonic Hedgehog receptor . What this type of membrane internalization’s role is in establishing repulsive asymmetry and why it can be utilized for both positive and negative migration of the growth cone remains to be determined . Evoked endocytosis is a stimulus dependent means of membrane internalization and recycling . It is relevant for both positive and negative regulation of axon growth ( Tojima et al . , 2011 ) . A hallmark of this process is that following membrane depolymerization , evoked endosomes are released from the growth cone ( Diefenbach et al . , 1999 ) . Though some studies have revealed a role for evoked ﬂuid - phase endocytosis in growth cone collapse downstream of Ca 2 + elevation and Sema - phorin 3A ( Kabayama et al . , 2009 , 2011 ) , stimulus dependent endocytosis in the growth cone has mostly been shown to occur through clatherin mediated endocytosis ( CME ) . CME is a known regulator of the surface expression of receptors involved in outgrowth and clatherin activity is necessary for both guidance and desensitization to guidance cues ( Tojima et al . , 2011 ) . CME occurs downstream of Ca 2 + elevation and is an essential mediator of Ca 2 + induced chemorepulsion ( Tojima et al . , 2010 ) . It is highly likely that CME is one of the ﬁrst downstream events following Ca 2 + elevation as it precedes any cytoskeletal remod - eling associated with the turning response ( Tojima et al . , 2010 ) . Recently , it has become evident that asymmetric CME is essential for mediating guidance responses within the growth cone during repulsion . During myelin - associated glycoprotein ( MAG ) induced repulsion , there is a rapid spatial remodeling of cell adhesion components , including the surface receptor b 1 - integrin , with their distribution shifting toward the side that is opposite to the one stimulated by MAG ( Hines et al . , 2010 ) . This is achieved through CME surface removal of the b 1 - integrin on the side of the growth cone undergoing repulsion . CME also occurs following local application of Semaphorin 3A ( Tojima et al . , 2010 ) . Furthermore , local inhibition of CME through appli - cation of the clatherin inhibitor MDC was sufﬁcient to cause an attractive guidance response ( Tojima et al . , 2010 ) . While these data support the notion that asymmetric alteration of the balance of exo - and endocytosis can elicit growth cone steering , they do not directly demonstrate that endocytosis is sufﬁcient to induce growth cone repulsion . An ultimate test for a sufﬁcient role of local endocytosis in growth cone repulsion would require tech - niques that can directly and speciﬁcally elicit local endocytosis to examine the growth cone’s response . Final Thoughts : A Myriad Network of Crosstalk and the Need for New Tools It has become increasingly clear that directional growth cone motility is controlled by a combination of mechanisms . While each of these processes regulates distinct sets of cellular activ - ities , they must work in concert to enable the growth cone to respond to environmental signals . Remarkably , there is a sub - stantial amount of crosstalk among different pathways ( Figure 3 ) . For example , while the actin cytoskeleton plays a predominant role in motility by providing the major force behind cell protru - sions , it also has been shown to spatially regulate microtubule dynamics and membrane recycling . This in turn would affect the delivery and retrieval of migration - relevant molecules , whose downstream targets are ultimately the actin cytoskeleton . Similarly , adhesions are both upstream and downstream of sig - nals from the actin cytoskeleton , microtubules , and membrane recycling pathways ( Kolodkin and Tessier - Lavigne , 2011 ; Myers et al . , 2011 ) . Moreover , both actin and microtubule cytoskeleton Figure 3 . Schematic Showing the Complexity of Crosstalk among Different Cellular Machineries The directional movement of the growth cone involves membrane protrusion at the front and retraction at the rear , which are controlled by bidirectional interactions between the actin and microtubules ( 1 ) . Successful locomotion requires the formation of new adhesions at the front and the destruction of adhesions at the rear , which are mediated by membrane recycling ( 2 ) . Vesic - ular trafﬁcking also controls and regulates the number and distribution of guidance re - ceptors on the surface , which will impact the spatiotemporal signal transduction ( 3 ) . While the actin cytoskeleton is the driving force for membrane protrusion , it also regulates endocy - tosis and exocytosis in a spatiotemporal fashion , which could impact both the adhesion and receptor recycling ( 4 ) . The actin cytoskeleton is a part of the integrin - adhesion complex and regulates the stability and turnover of adhesion ( 5 ) . Finally , microtubules and their plus ends play a role in trafﬁcking membrane channels and receptors ( 6 ) . Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1075 Neuron Review have been shown to be involved in regulating surface receptor trafﬁcking . For example , ADF / coﬁlin dynamics regulates the insertion of neurotransmitter receptors ( Gu et al . , 2010 ; Lee et al . , 2009 ) . Microtubule plus ends have also been shown to be involved in targeting of neuronal ion channels ( Gu et al . , 2006 ; Shaw et al . , 2007 ) . Therefore , guidance signaling cascades could also target the distribution of the guidance receptors for asymmetric signaling or the adaptation process ( Ming et al . , 2002 ) . Finally , recent studies have also provided evidence that regulated local translation of receptors , signaling components , and cytoskeletal proteins plays a role in growth cone migration and guidance ( Hengst and Jaffrey , 2007 ; Lin and Holt , 2008 ) . Given that translation is regulated by distinct sets of signaling pathways , these results further expand the intri - cate network of signaling pathways that can affect the growth cone motility in space and time . It is conceivable that the elaborate network of signaling cascades that regulates distinct aspects of cellular activities is ‘‘purposely’’ built , such that changes affecting one pathway will be transduced to and integrated with the other pathways to generate a particular growth cone behavior . Such an integra - tive mechanism could have two important advantages for growth cones . First , it empowers the growth cone with a much higher ability to adapt to the diverse array of environmental cues that it will encounter along its journey to a speciﬁc target . Given that a growth cone is likely to be exposed to more than one extra - cellular cue at a given time , the integration of multiple signaling pathways could be essential for the decision - making process that underlies guidance responses . Second , this mechanism can also ensure that a more subtle alteration of growth cone behavior , rather than a binary switch effect , could be generated from a single input in vivo . This may be one of the reasons that targeting a speciﬁc signaling pathway ( such as RhoA ) has failed in regeneration therapy ( To¨nges et al . , 2011 ) . Therefore , the chal - lenge for future growth cone research is that we must consider that seemingly separate aspects of cell biology are actually seamlessly integrated , that a loss of function in one process may have multiple outputs that alter the fate of the growth cone . For example , endocytic vesicles are found in regions undergoing repulsion and local inhibition of clatherin - mediated endocytosis is sufﬁcient to cause an attractive turning response ( Tojima et al . , 2010 ) . The immediate conclusion is that upregula - tion of local CME , in and of itself , is sufﬁcient to cause repulsion and that downregulation of CME will have the opposite effect . But what remains unclear are the downstream ramiﬁcations of altering locally CME . One consequence is that cell surface receptors are no longer internalized , numbing the cell to guid - ance cue gradients . Another is that the balance between endo - and exocytosis is simply upset ( assuming exocytosis remains at the same level ) , causing an asymetric distribution of protein and lipid in the cell membrane . Furthermore , what are the down - stream ramiﬁcations of locally altering CME and how is the guid - ance signal transduced ? Are adhesion dynamics affected because internalization of integrins is changed ? If so , what are the ramiﬁcations on the actin network that is directly coupled to these adhesions ? What happens after this ? Is the actin and actin regulatory proteins that are normally dedicated to CME being redirected to leading edge structures ? Surely microtubule dynamics are being altered as well , since they are intimately dependent upon actin regulation . Finally , when do these events occur relative to the physical guidance response ? The time has come for us to connect all of the dots between the initial signaling event and the ﬁnal downstream consequences . Understanding such a complex network of regulation on growth cone motility could provide the important ground for better identifying targets of pharmaceutical interventions for axon regeneration after nerve injury . For example , RhoA , a small GTPase that is a master regu - lator of the cytoskeleton , has been highly implicated in growth cone collapse , axon retraction , and inhibition of growth ( To¨nges et al . , 2011 ) . It is a logical target of pharmaceutical inhibition for nerve injury . However , some studies have reported that RhoA actually contributes to positive axon growth ( Arakawa et al . , 2003 ; Woo and Gomez , 2006 ) . While RhoA inhibition does aid regeneration somewhat , its effects on nerve injury in living organ - isms are not as potent as once hoped ( To¨nges et al . , 2011 ) . Perhaps if we focused on inhibiting RhoA in particular subcellular locations and at times where it has an inhibitory effect on axon growth and not in other instances where it promotes neuritogen - esis , using knowledge acquired from an understanding of the complete spatiotemporal picture of RhoA signaling in growth cones , that the in vivo effect of RhoA inhibition on nerve regener - ation would be more pronounced . A technical challenge in teasing out the exact functions of a particular player in growth cone motility and guidance is that these signals are often transient by nature and occur in small subcellular compartments . Additionally , these speciﬁc pathways are often a part of larger regulatory networks that involve substantial crosstalk and compensatory mechanisms . Current studies predominantly depend on the long term alterations of a protein level or activity ( e . g . , knockdown or overexpression ) . Since most of these proteins are involved in the fundamental structure and function of the cell , long - term manipulations may reveal their general importance but not their speciﬁc cellular functions . Moreover , compensatory mechanisms by homolo - gous proteins or other molecules could make it difﬁcult to accu - rately interpret results from long - term manipulation . While biochemical activities can help the understanding of a protein’s functions , they can not reveal the spatiotemporal dynamics of the protein and its activities which are often associated with its speciﬁc function in polarized cells , especially neurons . There - fore , the future challenge will be to develop tools that enable one to inactivate or activate a speciﬁc protein instantly and with subcellular precision , giving no chance for the cell to compensate for the change . One promising approach is optical manipulation of signaling networks using genetically engineered probes . For example , chromophore - assisted laser inactivation ( CALI ) , a process in which proteins are inactivated with light by irradiating an attached photosensitizer chromophore , has been successfully used in cells to knockdown target molecules in a spatiotemporal manner ( Jacobson et al . , 2008 ) . CALI occurs because highly reactive photoproducts are generated when the photosensitizer chromophore is excited . However , the short - lived nature of these reactive species limits the damage radius to only proteins that are immediately adjacent to the chromophore from which they arose , ensuring a measure of speciﬁcity . CALI has been 1076 Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review successfully used in neurons and growth cones ( Diefenbach et al . , 2002 ; Marek and Davis , 2002 ; Poskanzer et al . , 2003 ; Sy - dor et al . , 1996 ; Wang et al . , 1996 ) , though the technique never reached widespread appeal . This was in part due to cumber - some methodologies used to label target proteins with a CALI chromophore , which included microinjection of non - function blocking , labeled antibodies or the use of the biarsenical dyes FlAsH and ReAsH . Recent advances in CALI have made the technique much more feasible for studies in neurons . First , it has been shown that ﬂuorescent proteins ( FPs ) can be success - fully used as CALI chromophores ( Rajfur et al . , 2002 ; Tanabe et al . , 2005 ; Vitriol et al . , 2007 ) . FP - CALI obviates the need to add exogenous labeling reagents , because the chromophore is covalently attached to its target during translation . Furthermore , FP - fusion protein expression can be combined with knockdown of the endogenous homolog so that the only version of the target expressed is susceptible to light inactivation , enhancing the CALI effect ( Vitriol et al . , 2007 ) . EGFP has been primarily used for FP - CALI , but an exciting candidate , Killer red , has been developed that increases the efﬁciency of CALI so that it can be performed with minimal light irradiation ( Bulina et al . , 2006 ) . Killer red is more than an order of magnitude more efﬁcient at reactive oxygen species production than EGFP . Additionally , its 585 nm excitation peak allows the usage of yellow - orange light , rather than cyan , for CALI , minimizing nonspeciﬁc absorp - tion by off - target molecules . Another potential new genetically encoded CALI reagent is miniSOG ( miniature Singlet Oxygen Generator ) , a 106 amino acid monomeric ﬂuorescent ﬂavopro - tein that is less than half the size of conventional FPs ( Shu et al . , 2011 ) . In parallel , genetically engineered proteins that allow light - induced activation will enable one to fully appreciate the func - tions of a speciﬁc molecule at the subcellular level ( Toettcher et al . , 2011 ; Wu et al . , 2009 ) . While light - induced photoactivation has been in the cell biologists’ toolkit for decades , these methods have required chemical modiﬁcation of molecules or proteins , which must then be somehow introduced to the intra - cellular environment and uncaged with UV light . It is only in recent times that the technique has been combined with the ease of genetically encoded expression and the use of visible light wavelengths , making the experiments very amenable to live neurons in culture or even in vivo . This can be attributed to exploitation of light sensitive domains isolated from plant proteins . These can be used to either allosterically block an active protein from interacting with its effectors ( Wu et al . , 2009 ) , or to artiﬁcially dimerize two targets ( Kennedy et al . , 2010 ; Levskaya et al . , 2009 ) . In the latter example , artiﬁcial inter - action can be used to either anchor a target protein to a speciﬁc subcellular compartment or to cause an association between two targets . In both cases , light absorption activates a synthetic signaling cascade that is both reversible and dose dependent . Like CALI , light - induced photoactivation is instantaneous and can be performed at the subcellular level . Overall , this type of manipulation is a better approximation of actual signaling events and an invaluable tool for deducing the true function of a protein in a speciﬁc cellular process . Together with the development and deployment of super resolution imaging techniques ( Toomre and Bewersdorf , 2010 ) , we might be closer to a better understanding of the full orchestra of the players that power the growth cone . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Research in authors 0 lab is supported in part by grants from the National Insti - tutes of Health to J . Q . Z . and a Ruth L . Kirschstein National Research Service Award to E . A . V . REFERENCES Aizawa , H . , Wakatsuki , S . , Ishii , A . , Moriyama , K . , Sasaki , Y . , Ohashi , K . , Sekine - Aizawa , Y . , Sehara - Fujisawa , A . , Mizuno , K . , Goshima , Y . , andYahara , I . ( 2001 ) . Phosphorylation of coﬁlin by LIM - kinase is necessary for semaphorin 3A - induced growth cone collapse . Nat . Neurosci . 4 , 367 – 373 . Akin , O . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2008 ) . Capping protein increases the rate of actin - based motility by promoting ﬁlament nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Cell 133 , 841 – 851 . Andrianantoandro , E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol . Cell 24 , 13 – 23 . Arakawa , Y . , Bito , H . , Furuyashiki , T . , Tsuji , T . , Takemoto - Kimura , S . , Kimura , K . , Nozaki , K . , Hashimoto , N . , and Narumiya , S . ( 2003 ) . Control of axon elon - gation via an SDF - 1alpha / Rho / mDia pathway in cultured cerebellar granule neurons . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 381 – 391 . Aratyn - Schaus , Y . , and Gardel , M . L . ( 2010 ) . Transient frictional slip between integrin and the ECM in focal adhesions under myosin II tension . Curr . Biol . 20 , 1145 – 1153 . Bamburg , J . R . , and Bray , D . ( 1987 ) . Distribution and cellular localization of actin depolymerizing factor . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 2817 – 2825 . Bard , L . , Boscher , C . , Lambert , M . , Me ` ge , R . M . , Choquet , D . , and Thoumine , O . ( 2008 ) . A molecular clutch between the actin ﬂow and N - cadherin adhe - sions drives growth cone migration . J . Neurosci . 28 , 5879 – 5890 . Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 – 521 . Bechara , A . , Nawabi , H . , Moret , F . , Yaron , A . , Weaver , E . , Bozon , M . , Abouzid , K . , Guan , J . L . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . , Lemmon , V . , and Castellani , V . ( 2008 ) . FAK - MAPK - dependent adhesion disassembly downstream of L1 contributes to semaphorin3A - induced collapse . EMBO J . 27 , 1549 – 1562 . Bentley , D . , and O’Connor , T . P . ( 1994 ) . Cytoskeletal events in growth cone steering . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 4 , 43 – 48 . Bernstein , B . W . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2010 ) . ADF / coﬁlin : a functional node in cell biology . Trends Cell Biol . 20 , 187 – 195 . Bloom , O . E . , andMorgan , J . R . ( 2011 ) . Membranetrafﬁcking eventsunderlying axon repair , growth , and regeneration . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 48 , 339 – 348 . Bonanomi , D . , Fornasiero , E . F . , Valdez , G . , Halegoua , S . , Benfenati , F . , Menegon , A . , and Valtorta , F . ( 2008 ) . Identiﬁcation of a developmentally regu - lated pathway of membrane retrieval in neuronal growth cones . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 3757 – 3769 . Bradke , F . , and Dotti , C . G . ( 1999 ) . The role of local actin instability in axon formation . Science 283 , 1931 – 1934 . Brown , C . M . , Hebert , B . , Kolin , D . L . , Zareno , J . , Whitmore , L . , Horwitz , A . R . , and Wiseman , P . W . ( 2006 ) . Probing the integrin - actin linkage using high - reso - lution protein velocity mapping . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 5204 – 5214 . Buck , K . B . , and Zheng , J . Q . ( 2002 ) . Growth cone turning induced by direct local modiﬁcation of microtubule dynamics . J . Neurosci . 22 , 9358 – 9367 . Bulina , M . E . , Chudakov , D . M . , Britanova , O . V . , Yanushevich , Y . G . , Staroverov , D . B . , Chepurnykh , T . V . , Merzlyak , E . M . , Shkrob , M . A . , Lukyanov , S . , and Lukyanov , K . A . ( 2006 ) . Ageneticallyencodedphotosensitizer . Nat . Biotechnol . 24 , 95 – 99 . Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1077 Neuron Review Bunge , M . B . ( 1973 ) . Finestructureofnerveﬁbersandgrowthconesofisolated sympathetic neurons in culture . J . Cell Biol . 56 , 713 – 735 . Burnette , D . T . , Ji , L . , Schaefer , A . W . , Medeiros , N . A . , Danuser , G . , and Forscher , P . ( 2008 ) . Myosin II activity facilitates microtubule bundling in the neuronal growth cone neck . Dev . Cell 15 , 163 – 169 . Burridge , K . , and Wennerberg , K . ( 2004 ) . Rho and Rac take center stage . Cell 116 , 167 – 179 . Cai , X . , Lietha , D . , Ceccarelli , D . F . , Karginov , A . V . , Rajfur , Z . , Jacobson , K . , Hahn , K . M . , Eck , M . J . , and Schaller , M . D . ( 2008 ) . Spatial and temporal regula - tion offocaladhesionkinaseactivity inliving cells . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 201 – 214 . Carlier , M . F . , Laurent , V . , Santolini , J . , Melki , R . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1307 – 1322 . Cassimeris , L . U . , Walker , R . A . , Pryer , N . K . , and Salmon , E . D . ( 1987 ) . Dynamic instability of microtubules . BioEssays 7 , 149 – 154 . Chaco´n , M . R . , and Fazzari , P . ( 2011 ) . FAK : dynamic integration of guidance signals at the growth cone . Cell Adh . Migr . 5 , 52 – 55 . Chan , C . E . , and Odde , D . J . ( 2008 ) . Traction dynamics of ﬁlopodia on compliant substrates . Science 322 , 1687 – 1691 . Chhabra , E . S . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2007 ) . The many faces of actin : matching assembly factors with cellular structures . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1110 – 1121 . Ciani , L . , Krylova , O . , Smalley , M . J . , Dale , T . C . , and Salinas , P . C . ( 2004 ) . A divergent canonical WNT - signaling pathway regulates microtubule dynamics : dishevelled signals locally to stabilize microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 243 – 253 . Cooper , J . A . , andSept , D . ( 2008 ) . Newinsightsintomechanismandregulation of actin capping protein . Int . Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . 267 , 183 – 206 . Dammermann , A . , Desai , A . , and Oegema , K . ( 2003 ) . The minus end in sight . Curr . Biol . 13 , R614 – R624 . Davis , D . A . , Wilson , M . H . , Giraud , J . , Xie , Z . , Tseng , H . C . , England , C . , Hersco - vitz , H . , Tsai , L . H . , and Delalle , I . ( 2009 ) . Capzb2 interacts with beta - tubulin to regulate growth cone morphology and neurite outgrowth . PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000208 . Dent , E . W . , Callaway , J . L . , Szebenyi , G . , Baas , P . W . , andKalil , K . ( 1999 ) . Reor - ganization and movement of microtubules in axonal growth cones and devel - oping interstitial branches . J . Neurosci . 19 , 8894 – 8908 . Dent , E . W . , Gupton , S . L . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2011 ) . The growth cone cytoskel - eton in axon outgrowth and guidance . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 . 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a001800 . Dequidt , C . , Danglot , L . , Alberts , P . , Galli , T . , Choquet , D . , and Thoumine , O . ( 2007 ) . Fast turnover of L1 adhesions in neuronal growth cones involving both surface diffusion and exo / endocytosis of L1 molecules . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 3131 – 3143 . DesMarais , V . , Ghosh , M . , Eddy , R . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2005 ) . Coﬁlin takes the lead . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 19 – 26 . Dickson , B . J . ( 2001 ) . Rho GTPases in growth cone guidance . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 11 , 103 – 110 . Diefenbach , T . J . , Guthrie , P . B . , Stier , H . , Billups , B . , and Kater , S . B . ( 1999 ) . MembranerecyclingintheneuronalgrowthconerevealedbyFM1 - 43labeling . J . Neurosci . 19 , 9436 – 9444 . Diefenbach , T . J . , Latham , V . M . , Yimlamai , D . , Liu , C . A . , Herman , I . M . , andJay , D . G . ( 2002 ) . Myosin 1c and myosin IIB serve opposing roles in lamellipodial dynamics of the neuronal growth cone . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 1207 – 1217 . Dwivedy , A . , Gertler , F . B . , Miller , J . , Holt , C . E . , and Lebrand , C . ( 2007 ) . Ena / VASP function in retinal axons is required for terminal arborization but not pathway navigation . Development 134 , 2137 – 2146 . Fukata , M . , Watanabe , T . , Noritake , J . , Nakagawa , M . , Yamaga , M . , Kuroda , S . , Matsuura , Y . , Iwamatsu , A . , Perez , F . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2002 ) . Rac1 and Cdc42 capture microtubules through IQGAP1 and CLIP - 170 . Cell 109 , 873 – 885 . Geiger , B . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2011 ) . Molecular architecture and function of matrix adhesions . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 . 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a005033 . Ghosh , M . , Song , X . , Mouneimne , G . , Sidani , M . , Lawrence , D . S . , andCondee - lis , J . S . ( 2004 ) . Coﬁlin promotes actin polymerization and deﬁnes the direction of cell motility . Science 304 , 743 – 746 . Giannone , G . , Me ` ge , R . M . , and Thoumine , O . ( 2009 ) . Multi - level molecular clutches in motile cell processes . Trends Cell Biol . 19 , 475 – 486 . Gomez , T . M . , and Zheng , J . Q . ( 2006 ) . Themolecular basis for calcium - depen - dent axon pathﬁnding . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 7 , 115 – 125 . Goode , B . L . , Drubin , D . G . , and Barnes , G . ( 2000 ) . Functional cooperation between the microtubule and actin cytoskeletons . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 63 – 71 . Gordon - Weeks , P . R . ( 2004 ) . Microtubulesandgrowthconefunction . J . Neuro - biol . 58 , 70 – 83 . Grabham , P . W . , Seale , G . E . , Bennecib , M . , Goldberg , D . J . , and Vallee , R . B . ( 2007 ) . Cytoplasmic dynein and LIS1 are required for microtubule advance during growth cone remodeling and fast axonal outgrowth . J . Neurosci . 27 , 5823 – 5834 . Grigera , P . R . , Jeffery , E . D . , Martin , K . H . , Shabanowitz , J . , Hunt , D . F . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2005 ) . FAK phosphorylation sites mapped by mass spectrom - etry . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4931 – 4935 . Gu , C . , Zhou , W . , Puthenveedu , M . A . , Xu , M . , Jan , Y . N . , and Jan , L . Y . ( 2006 ) . The microtubule plus - end tracking protein EB1 is required for Kv1 voltage - gated K + channel axonal targeting . Neuron 52 , 803 – 816 . Gu , J . , Lee , C . W . , Fan , Y . , Komlos , D . , Tang , X . , Sun , C . , Yu , K . , Hartzell , H . C . , Chen , G . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Zheng , J . Q . ( 2010 ) . ADF / coﬁlin - mediated actin dynamics regulate AMPA receptor trafﬁcking during synaptic plasticity . Nat . Neurosci . 13 , 1208 – 1215 . Gupton , S . L . , Salmon , W . C . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2002 ) . Converging populations of f - actin promote breakage of associated microtubules to spatially regulate microtubule turnover in migrating cells . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1891 – 1899 . Hall , A . , and Nobes , C . D . ( 2000 ) . Rho GTPases : molecular switches that control theorganizationand dynamics oftheactin cytoskeleton . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 355 , 965 – 970 . Harrison , R . G . ( 1910 ) . The outgrowth of the nerve ﬁber as a mode of proto - plasmic movement . J . Exp . Zool . 9 , 787 – 846 . Hart , M . C . , Korshunova , Y . O . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1997 ) . Vertebrates have conserved capping protein alpha isoforms with speciﬁc expression patterns . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 38 , 120 – 132 . Hedgecock , E . M . , Culotti , J . G . , Hall , D . H . , and Stern , B . D . ( 1987 ) . Genetics of cell and axon migrations in Caenorhabditis elegans . Development 100 , 365 – 382 . Hedgecock , E . M . , Culotti , J . G . , and Hall , D . H . ( 1990 ) . The unc - 5 , unc - 6 , and unc - 40 genes guide circumferential migrations of pioneer axons and meso - dermal cells on the epidermis in C . elegans . Neuron 4 , 61 – 85 . Helenius , J . , Brouhard , G . , Kalaidzidis , Y . , Diez , S . , and Howard , J . ( 2006 ) . The depolymerizing kinesin MCAK uses lattice diffusion to rapidly target microtu - bule ends . Nature 441 , 115 – 119 . Hengst , U . , and Jaffrey , S . R . ( 2007 ) . Function and translational regulation of mRNA in developing axons . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 209 – 215 . Henle , S . J . , Wang , G . , Liang , E . , Wu , M . , Poo , M . M . , and Henley , J . R . ( 2011 ) . Asymmetric PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 and Akt signaling mediates chemotaxis of axonal growth cones . J . Neurosci . 31 , 7016 – 7027 . Hines , J . H . , Abu - Rub , M . , and Henley , J . R . ( 2010 ) . Asymmetric endocytosis and remodeling of beta1 - integrin adhesions during growth cone chemorepul - sion by MAG . Nat . Neurosci . 13 , 829 – 837 . Hirokawa , N . , Niwa , S . , and Tanaka , Y . ( 2010 ) . Molecular motors in neurons : transport mechanisms and roles in brain function , development , and disease . Neuron 68 , 610 – 638 . 1078 Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review Homma , N . , Takei , Y . , Tanaka , Y . , Nakata , T . , Terada , S . , Kikkawa , M . , Noda , Y . , andHirokawa , N . ( 2003 ) . Kinesinsuperfamilyprotein2A ( KIF2A ) functionsin suppression of collateral branch extension . Cell 114 , 229 – 239 . Howard , J . , and Hyman , A . A . ( 2007 ) . Microtubule polymerases and depoly - merases . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 , 31 – 35 . Hsieh , S . H . , Ferraro , G . B . , and Fournier , A . E . ( 2006 ) . Myelin - associated inhib - itors regulate coﬁlin phosphorylation and neuronal inhibition through LIM kinase and Slingshot phosphatase . J . Neurosci . 26 , 1006 – 1015 . Hu , K . , Ji , L . , Applegate , K . T . , Danuser , G . , andWaterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2007 ) . Differential transmission of actin motion within focal adhesions . Science 315 , 111 – 115 . Huber , A . B . , Kolodkin , A . L . , Ginty , D . D . , and Cloutier , J . F . ( 2003 ) . Signaling at the growth cone : ligand - receptor complexes and the control of axon growth and guidance . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 26 , 509 – 563 . Huttenlocher , A . , and Horwitz , A . R . ( 2011 ) . Integrins in cell migration . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , a005074 . Ishii , N . , Wadsworth , W . G . , Stern , B . D . , Culotti , J . G . , and Hedgecock , E . M . ( 1992 ) . UNC - 6 , a laminin - related protein , guides cell and pioneer axon migra - tions in C . elegans . Neuron 9 , 873 – 881 . Jacobson , K . , Rajfur , Z . , Vitriol , E . , and Hahn , K . ( 2008 ) . Chromophore - assis - ted laser inactivation in cell biology . Trends Cell Biol . 18 , 443 – 450 . Kabayama , H . , Nakamura , T . , Takeuchi , M . , Iwasaki , H . , Taniguchi , M . , Tokushige , N . , and Mikoshiba , K . ( 2009 ) . Ca 2 + induces macropinocytosis via F - actin depolymerization during growth cone collapse . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 40 , 27 – 38 . Kabayama , H . , Takeuchi , M . , Taniguchi , M . , Tokushige , N . , Kozaki , S . , Mizutani , A . , Nakamura , T . , and Mikoshiba , K . ( 2011 ) . Syntaxin 1B suppresses macropinocytosis and semaphorin 3A - induced growth cone collapse . J . Neurosci . 31 , 7357 – 7364 . Kalil , K . , and Dent , E . W . ( 2005 ) . Touch and go : guidance cues signal to the growth cone cytoskeleton . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 15 , 521 – 526 . Kamiguchi , H . ( 2007 ) . The role of cell adhesion molecules in axon growth and guidance . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 621 , 95 – 103 . Kapustina , M . , Vitriol , E . , Elston , T . C . , Loew , L . M . , and Jacobson , K . ( 2010 ) . Modeling capping protein FRAP and CALI experiments reveals in vivo regula - tion of actin dynamics . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) 67 , 519 – 534 . Karginov , A . V . , Ding , F . , Kota , P . , Dokholyan , N . V . , and Hahn , K . M . ( 2010 ) . Engineered allosteric activation of kinases in living cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 28 , 743 – 747 . Kater , S . B . , Mattson , M . P . , Cohan , C . , and Connor , J . ( 1988 ) . Calcium regula - tion of the neuronal growth cone . Trends Neurosci . 11 , 315 – 321 . Kennedy , T . E . , Seraﬁni , T . , de la Torre , J . R . , and Tessier - Lavigne , M . ( 1994 ) . Netrinsarediffusiblechemotropicfactorsforcommissuralaxonsintheembry - onic spinal cord . Cell 78 , 425 – 435 . Kennedy , M . J . , Hughes , R . M . , Peteya , L . A . , Schwartz , J . W . , Ehlers , M . D . , and Tucker , C . L . ( 2010 ) . Rapid blue - light - mediated induction of protein interac - tions in living cells . Nat . Methods 7 , 973 – 975 . Kholmanskikh , S . S . , Koeller , H . B . , Wynshaw - Boris , A . , Gomez , T . , Letourneau , P . C . , and Ross , M . E . ( 2006 ) . Calcium - dependent interaction of Lis1 with IQGAP1 and Cdc42 promotes neuronal motility . Nat . Neurosci . 9 , 50 – 57 . Kolodkin , A . L . , and Tessier - Lavigne , M . ( 2011 ) . Mechanisms and molecules of neuronal wiring : a primer . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 . 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a001727 . Kolpak , A . L . , Jiang , J . , Guo , D . , Standley , C . , Bellve , K . , Fogarty , K . , and Bao , Z . Z . ( 2009 ) . Negative guidance factor - induced macropinocytosis in the growth cone plays a critical role in repulsive axon turning . J . Neurosci . 29 , 10488 – 10498 . Korey , C . A . , and Van Vactor , D . ( 2000 ) . From the growth cone surface to the cytoskeleton : one journey , many paths . J . Neurobiol . 44 , 184 – 193 . Kuhn , T . B . , Meberg , P . J . , Brown , M . D . , Bernstein , B . W . , Minamide , L . S . , Jensen , J . R . , Okada , K . , Soda , E . A . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Regulating actin dynamics in neuronal growth cones by ADF / coﬁlin and rho family GTPases . J . Neurobiol . 44 , 126 – 144 . Lee , H . , Engel , U . , Rusch , J . , Scherrer , S . , Sheard , K . , and Van Vactor , D . ( 2004 ) . The microtubule plus end tracking protein Orbit / MAST / CLASP acts downstream of the tyrosine kinase Abl in mediating axon guidance . Neuron 42 , 913 – 926 . Lee , C . W . , Han , J . , Bamburg , J . R . , Han , L . , Lynn , R . , and Zheng , J . Q . ( 2009 ) . Regulation of acetylcholine receptor clustering by ADF / coﬁlin - directed vesic - ular trafﬁcking . Nat . Neurosci . 12 , 848 – 856 . Levskaya , A . , Weiner , O . D . , Lim , W . A . , and Voigt , C . A . ( 2009 ) . Spatiotemporal control of cell signalling using a light - switchable protein interaction . Nature 461 , 997 – 1001 . Li , W . , Lee , J . , Vikis , H . G . , Lee , S . H . , Liu , G . , Aurandt , J . , Shen , T . L . , Fearon , E . R . , Guan , J . L . , Han , M . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Activation of FAK and Src are receptor - proximal events required for netrin signaling . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 1213 – 1221 . Ligon , L . A . , Shelly , S . S . , Tokito , M . , andHolzbaur , E . L . ( 2003 ) . Themicrotubule plus - end proteins EB1 and dynactin have differential effects on microtubule polymerization . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1405 – 1417 . Lin , A . C . , and Holt , C . E . ( 2008 ) . Function and regulation of local axonal trans - lation . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 18 , 60 – 68 . Lin , C . H . , Thompson , C . A . , and Forscher , P . ( 1994 ) . Cytoskeletal reorganiza - tion underlying growth cone motility . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 4 , 640 – 647 . Liu , G . , Beggs , H . , Jurgensen , C . , Park , H . T . , Tang , H . , Gorski , J . , Jones , K . R . , Reichardt , L . F . , Wu , J . , and Rao , Y . ( 2004 ) . Netrin requires focal adhesion kinase and Src family kinases for axon outgrowth and attraction . Nat . Neuro - sci . 7 , 1222 – 1232 . Lowery , L . A . , and Van Vactor , D . ( 2009 ) . The trip of the tip : understanding the growth cone machinery . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 332 – 343 . Lucas , F . R . , Goold , R . G . , Gordon - Weeks , P . R . , and Salinas , P . C . ( 1998 ) . Inhi - bition of GSK - 3beta leading to the loss of phosphorylated MAP - 1B is an early event in axonal remodelling induced by WNT - 7a or lithium . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 1351 – 1361 . Ma , A . , Richardson , A . , Schaefer , E . M . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2001 ) . Serine phos - phorylation of focal adhesion kinase in interphase and mitosis : a possible role in modulating binding to p130 ( Cas ) . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 1 – 12 . Maccioni , R . B . , and Cambiazo , V . ( 1995 ) . Role of microtubule - associated proteins in the control of microtubule assembly . Physiol . Rev . 75 , 835 – 864 . Maciver , S . K . ( 1998 ) . How ADF / coﬁlin depolymerizes actin ﬁlaments . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 140 – 144 . Mack , T . G . , Koester , M . P . , andPollerberg , G . E . ( 2000 ) . Themicrotubule - asso - ciated protein MAP1B is involved inlocal stabilization ofturning growth cones . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 15 , 51 – 65 . Maness , P . F . , and Schachner , M . ( 2007 ) . Neural recognition molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily : signaling transducers of axon guidance and neuronal migration . Nat . Neurosci . 10 , 19 – 26 . Marek , K . W . , and Davis , G . W . ( 2002 ) . Transgenically encoded protein photo - inactivation ( FlAsH - FALI ) : acute inactivation of synaptotagmin I . Neuron 36 , 805 – 813 . Marsick , B . M . , Flynn , K . C . , Santiago - Medina , M . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Letour - neau , P . C . ( 2010 ) . Activation of ADF / coﬁlin mediates attractive growth cone turning toward nerve growth factor and netrin - 1 . Dev . Neurobiol . 70 , 565 – 588 . Meberg , P . J . , Ono , S . , Minamide , L . S . , Takahashi , M . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 1998 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor and coﬁlin phosphorylation dynamics : response to signals that regulate neurite extension . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 39 , 172 – 190 . Medeiros , N . A . , Burnette , D . T . , and Forscher , P . ( 2006 ) . Myosin II functions in actin - bundle turnover in neuronal growth cones . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 , 215 – 226 . Mejillano , M . R . , Kojima , S . , Applewhite , D . A . , Gertler , F . B . , Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2004 ) . Lamellipodial versus ﬁlopodial mode of the actin nanoma - chinery : pivotal role of the ﬁlament barbed end . Cell 118 , 363 – 373 . Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1079 Neuron Review Meldolesi , J . ( 2011 ) . Neurite outgrowth : this process , ﬁrst discovered by Santiago Ramon y Cajal , is sustained by the exocytosis of two distinct types of vesicles . Brain Res . Brain Res . Rev . 66 , 246 – 255 . Ming , G . L . , Wong , S . T . , Henley , J . , Yuan , X . B . , Song , H . J . , Spitzer , N . C . , and Poo , M . M . ( 2002 ) . Adaptation in the chemotactic guidance of nerve growth cones . Nature 417 , 411 – 418 . Mitra , S . K . , Hanson , D . A . , and Schlaepfer , D . D . ( 2005 ) . Focal adhesion kinase : in command and control of cell motility . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 , 56 – 68 . Miyoshi , T . , Tsuji , T . , Higashida , C . , Hertzog , M . , Fujita , A . , Narumiya , S . , Scita , G . , and Watanabe , N . ( 2006 ) . Actin turnover - dependent fast dissociation of capping protein inthe dendritic nucleation actin network : evidence of frequent ﬁlament severing . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 947 – 955 . Morﬁni , G . , Quiroga , S . , Rosa , A . , Kosik , K . , and Ca´ceres , A . ( 1997 ) . Suppres - sion of KIF2 in PC12 cells alters the distribution of a growth cone nonsynaptic membrane receptor and inhibits neurite extension . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 657 – 669 . Myers , J . P . , andGomez , T . M . ( 2011 ) . Focaladhesionkinasepromotesintegrin adhesion dynamics necessary for chemotropic turning of nerve growth cones . J . Neurosci . 31 , 13585 – 13595 . Myers , J . P . , Santiago - Medina , M . , and Gomez , T . M . ( 2011 ) . Regulation of axonal outgrowth and pathﬁnding by integrin - ECM interactions . Dev . Neuro - biol . 71 , 901 – 923 . Ng , J . , Nardine , T . , Harms , M . , Tzu , J . , Goldstein , A . , Sun , Y . , Dietzl , G . , Dick - son , B . J . , andLuo , L . ( 2002 ) . RacGTPases controlaxongrowth , guidanceand branching . Nature 416 , 442 – 447 . Noda , Y . , Sato - Yoshitake , R . , Kondo , S . , Nangaku , M . , and Hirokawa , N . ( 1995 ) . KIF2 is a new microtubule - based anterograde motor that transports membranous organelles distinct from those carried by kinesin heavy chain or KIF3A / B . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 157 – 167 . Parsons , J . T . ( 2003 ) . Focaladhesionkinase : theﬁrsttenyears . J . CellSci . 116 , 1409 – 1416 . Pfenninger , K . H . , Laurino , L . , Peretti , D . , Wang , X . , Rosso , S . , Morﬁni , G . , Ca´ceres , A . , and Quiroga , S . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of membrane expansion at the nerve growth cone . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1209 – 1217 . Piper , M . , Anderson , R . , Dwivedy , A . , Weinl , C . , van Horck , F . , Leung , K . M . , Cogill , E . , and Holt , C . ( 2006 ) . Signaling mechanisms underlying Slit2 - induced collapse of Xenopus retinal growth cones . Neuron 49 , 215 – 228 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . Pollard , T . D . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 , 1208 – 1212 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Molecular mechanisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 – 576 . Poskanzer , K . E . , Marek , K . W . , Sweeney , S . T . , and Davis , G . W . ( 2003 ) . Synap - totagminIisnecessaryforcompensatory synapticvesicle endocytosisinvivo . Nature 426 , 559 – 563 . Racchetti , G . , Lorusso , A . , Schulte , C . , Gavello , D . , Carabelli , V . , D’Alessandro , R . , and Meldolesi , J . ( 2010 ) . Rapid neurite outgrowth in neurosecretory cells and neurons is sustained by the exocytosis of a cytoplasmic organelle , the enlargeosome . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 165 – 170 . Rajfur , Z . , Roy , P . , Otey , C . , Romer , L . , andJacobson , K . ( 2002 ) . Dissectingthe link between stress ﬁbres and focal adhesions by CALI with EGFP fusion proteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 286 – 293 . Ramo´n y Cajal , S . ( 1890 ) . Notas anato´micas . I . Sobre la aparicio´n de las expansiones celulares en la me´dula embrionaria . Gac . Sanit . Barc . 12 , 413 – 419 . Ramo´n y Cajal , S . ( 1909 ) . Histologie du System Nerveux de l’Homme et des Vertebres ( Paris : Malonine ) . Ren , X . R . , Ming , G . L . , Xie , Y . , Hong , Y . , Sun , D . M . , Zhao , Z . Q . , Feng , Z . , Wang , Q . , Shim , S . , Chen , Z . F . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Focal adhesion kinase in netrin - 1 signaling . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 1204 – 1212 . Robles , E . , and Gomez , T . M . ( 2006 ) . Focal adhesion kinase signaling at sites of integrin - mediated adhesion controls axon pathﬁnding . Nat . Neurosci . 9 , 1274 – 1283 . Rochlin , M . W . , Dailey , M . E . , andBridgman , P . C . ( 1999 ) . Polymerizing microtu - bulesactivatesite - directedF - actinassembly innervegrowthcones . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 2309 – 2327 . Rodriguez , O . C . , Schaefer , A . W . , Mandato , C . A . , Forscher , P . , Bement , W . M . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2003 ) . Conserved microtubule - actin interactions in cell movement and morphogenesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 599 – 609 . Roll - Mecak , A . , andMcNally , F . J . ( 2010 ) . Microtubule - severingenzymes . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 96 – 103 . Sabo , S . L . , and McAllister , A . K . ( 2003 ) . Mobility and cycling of synaptic protein - containing vesicles in axonal growth cone ﬁlopodia . Nat . Neurosci . 6 , 1264 – 1269 . Schaefer , A . W . , Kabir , N . , and Forscher , P . ( 2002 ) . Filopodia and actin arcs guide the assembly and transport of two populations of microtubules with unique dynamic parameters in neuronal growth cones . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 139 – 152 . Schafer , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Cell biology : barbed ends rule . Nature 430 , 734 – 735 . Schafer , D . A . , Korshunova , Y . O . , Schroer , T . A . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1994 ) . Differentiallocalizationandsequenceanalysisofcappingproteinbeta - subunit isoforms of vertebrates . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 453 – 465 . Seong , J . , Ouyang , M . , Kim , T . , Sun , J . , Wen , P . C . , Lu , S . , Zhuo , Y . , Llewellyn , N . M . , Schlaepfer , D . D . , Guan , J . L . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Detection of focal adhesion kinase activation at membrane microdomains by ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer . Nat . Commun . 2 , 406 . Shaw , R . M . , Fay , A . J . , Puthenveedu , M . A . , von Zastrow , M . , Jan , Y . N . , and Jan , L . Y . ( 2007 ) . Microtubule plus - end - tracking proteins target gap junctions directly from the cell interior to adherens junctions . Cell 128 , 547 – 560 . Shu , X . , Lev - Ram , V . , Deerinck , T . J . , Qi , Y . , Ramko , E . B . , Davidson , M . W . , Jin , Y . , Ellisman , M . H . , and Tsien , R . Y . ( 2011 ) . A genetically encoded tag for corre - lated light and electron microscopy of intact cells , tissues , and organisms . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1001041 . Slack - Davis , J . K . , Martin , K . H . , Tilghman , R . W . , Iwanicki , M . , Ung , E . J . , Autry , C . , Luzzio , M . J . , Cooper , B . , Kath , J . C . , Roberts , W . G . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2007 ) . Cellular characterization of a novel focal adhesion kinase inhibitor . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 14845 – 14852 . Smith , S . J . ( 1988 ) . Neuronalcytomechanics : theactin - basedmotilityofgrowth cones . Science 242 , 708 – 715 . Suter , D . M . , and Forscher , P . ( 1998 ) . An emerging link between cytoskeletal dynamics and cell adhesion molecules in growth cone guidance . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 8 , 106 – 116 . Sydor , A . M . , Su , A . L . , Wang , F . S . , Xu , A . , and Jay , D . G . ( 1996 ) . Talin and vinculin play distinct roles in ﬁlopodial motility in the neuronal growth cone . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 1197 – 1207 . Tanabe , T . , Oyamada , M . , Fujita , K . , Dai , P . , Tanaka , H . , and Takamatsu , T . ( 2005 ) . Multiphoton excitation - evoked chromophore - assisted laser inactiva - tion using green ﬂuorescent protein . Nat . Methods 2 , 503 – 505 . Tessier - Lavigne , M . , Placzek , M . , Lumsden , A . G . , Dodd , J . , and Jessell , T . M . ( 1988 ) . Chemotropic guidance of developing axons in the mammalian central nervous system . Nature 336 , 775 – 778 . Thoumine , O . ( 2008 ) . Interplay between adhesion turnover and cytoskeleton dynamics in the control of growth cone migration . Cell Adh . Migr . 2 , 263 – 267 . Toettcher , J . E . , Voigt , C . A . , Weiner , O . D . , andLim , W . A . ( 2011 ) . Thepromiseof optogeneticsincellbiology : interrogatingmolecularcircuitsinspaceandtime . Nat . Methods 8 , 35 – 38 . Tojima , T . , Akiyama , H . , Itofusa , R . , Li , Y . , Katayama , H . , Miyawaki , A . , and Kamiguchi , H . ( 2007 ) . Attractive axon guidance involves asymmetric mem - brane transport and exocytosis in the growth cone . Nat . Neurosci . 10 , 58 – 66 . Tojima , T . , Itofusa , R . , and Kamiguchi , H . ( 2010 ) . Asymmetric clathrin - medi - atedendocytosisdrivesrepulsivegrowthconeguidance . Neuron 66 , 370 – 377 . 1080 Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review Tojima , T . , Hines , J . H . , Henley , J . R . , and Kamiguchi , H . ( 2011 ) . Second messengers and membrane trafﬁckingdirect and organize growth cone steer - ing . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 13 , 1 . To¨nges , L . , Koch , J . C . , Ba¨hr , M . , andLingor , P . ( 2011 ) . ROCKing regeneration : Rho kinase inhibition as molecular target for neurorestoration . Front . Mol . Neurosci . 4 , 39 . Toomre , D . , and Bewersdorf , J . ( 2010 ) . A new wave of cellular imaging . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 26 , 285 – 314 . Van Troys , M . , Huyck , L . , Leyman , S . , Dhaese , S . , Vandekerkhove , J . , and Ampe , C . ( 2008 ) . Ins and outs of ADF / coﬁlin activity and regulation . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 649 – 667 . Vitriol , E . A . , Uetrecht , A . C . , Shen , F . , Jacobson , K . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2007 ) . EnhancedEGFP - chromophore - assisted laserinactivationusingdeﬁcientcells rescued withfunctional EGFP - fusion proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 6702 – 6707 . Wang , F . S . , Wolenski , J . S . , Cheney , R . E . , Mooseker , M . S . , and Jay , D . G . ( 1996 ) . Function of myosin - V in ﬁlopodial extension of neuronal growth cones . Science 273 , 660 – 663 . Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and Salmon , E . D . ( 1997 ) . Actomyosin - based retro - grade ﬂowofmicrotubulesinthelamella ofmigrating epithelialcellsinﬂuences microtubule dynamic instability and turnover and is associated with microtu - bule breakage and treadmilling . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 417 – 434 . Watson , P . , and Stephens , D . J . ( 2006 ) . Microtubule plus - end loading of p150 ( Glued ) is mediated by EB1 and CLIP - 170 but is not required for intracel - lular membrane trafﬁc in mammalian cells . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 2758 – 2767 . Wen , Z . , and Zheng , J . Q . ( 2006 ) . Directional guidance of nerve growth cones . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 16 , 52 – 58 . Wen , Z . , Han , L . , Bamburg , J . R . , Shim , S . , Ming , G . L . , and Zheng , J . Q . ( 2007 ) . BMP gradients steer nerve growth cones by a balancing act of LIM kinase and Slingshot phosphatase on ADF / coﬁlin . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 107 – 119 . Witte , H . , Neukirchen , D . , and Bradke , F . ( 2008 ) . Microtubule stabilization speciﬁes initial neuronal polarization . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 619 – 632 . Wolfenson , H . , Bershadsky , A . , Henis , Y . I . , andGeiger , B . ( 2011 ) . Actomyosin - generated tension controls the molecular kinetics of focal adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 1425 – 1432 . Woo , S . , and Gomez , T . M . ( 2006 ) . Rac1 and RhoA promote neurite outgrowth throughformationandstabilizationofgrowthconepointcontacts . J . Neurosci . 26 , 1418 – 1428 . Wu , Y . I . , Frey , D . , Lungu , O . I . , Jaehrig , A . , Schlichting , I . , Kuhlman , B . , and Hahn , K . M . ( 2009 ) . A genetically encoded photoactivatable Rac controls the motility of living cells . Nature 461 , 104 – 108 . Yu , W . , Solowska , J . M . , Qiang , L . , Karabay , A . , Baird , D . , and Baas , P . W . ( 2005 ) . Regulationofmicrotubuleseveringbykataninsubunitsduringneuronal development . J . Neurosci . 25 , 5573 – 5583 . Yu , W . , Qiang , L . , Solowska , J . M . , Karabay , A . , Korulu , S . , and Baas , P . W . ( 2008 ) . The microtubule - severing proteins spastin and katanin participate differently in the formation of axonal branches . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 1485 – 1498 . Zhang , X . F . , Schaefer , A . W . , Burnette , D . T . , Schoonderwoert , V . T . , and Forscher , P . ( 2003 ) . Rho - dependent contractile responses in the neuronal growth cone are independent of classical peripheral retrograde actin ﬂow . Neuron 40 , 931 – 944 . Zhang , D . , Grode , K . D . , Stewman , S . F . , Diaz - Valencia , J . D . , Liebling , E . , Rath , U . , Riera , T . , Currie , J . D . , Buster , D . W . , Asenjo , A . B . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Drosophila katanin is a microtubule depolymerase that regulates cortical - microtubule plus - end interactions and cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 361 – 370 . Zhou , F . Q . , Zhou , J . , Dedhar , S . , Wu , Y . H . , and Snider , W . D . ( 2004 ) . NGF - induced axon growth is mediated by localized inactivation of GSK - 3beta and functions of the microtubule plus end binding protein APC . Neuron 42 , 897 – 912 . Zweifel , L . S . , Kuruvilla , R . , and Ginty , D . D . ( 2005 ) . Functions and mechanisms of retrograde neurotrophin signalling . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 6 , 615 – 625 . Neuron 73 , March 22 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1081 Neuron Review