 Request Information  Download PDF  Permalink  Print Gateway to Innovation , Research and Entrepreneurship Technology Development Group Available Technologies Contact Our Team Quantitative Deformability Cytometry : Rapid , Calibrated Measurements Of Cell Mechanical Properties Tech ID : 29401 / UC Case 2017 - 99C - 0 SUMMARY UCLA researchers in the Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology have developed a novel microfluidic device that enables rapid measurement of cell mechanical properties . BACKGROUND Cell mechanical properties are emerging as a label - free biomarker for altered cell and pathological states . Information about cells , such as their elastic modulus , viscosity , or compliance , can be acquired using a variety of standard measurement techniques . However , these measurements are often at slow rates ( ~ 1 cell / min ) and faster throughputs are difficult to achieve . Deformability cytometry methods have been developed for high throughput methods , but these typically do not enable calibrated measurements of cell mechanical properties and / or cannot enable higher throughput analyses of single cells . INNOVATION UCLA researchers have developed a novel method of cytometry to measure cell mechanical properties . Cells are constrained using air pressure through a microfluidic device and their progress through the network of channels is measured using a brightfield microscope . Images are captured at rates between 200 and 2000 frames per second , and morphological changes in the cells are tracked using a software algorithm . The applied stress within the microfluidic device is accurately calibrated using agarose gel particles of known properties and then used to calculate cell mechanical properties ( time - dependent strain , critical strain , creep time , and transit time ) . APPLICATIONS ▶ Mechanical measurements of single cells ▶ Mechanotyping of cells ▶ Detection of diseases in which the cell undergoes a mechanical change ▶ Evaluation of disease treatment efficacy in vitro ADVANTAGES ▶ Measures 10 cells / min ▶ Single - cell measurements ▶ Calibrated to agarose gel particles of known properties STATE OF DEVELOPMENT Successful measurement of cell mechanical properties using the developed microfluidic device . The method was validated by measuring human leukemia cells before and after treatment with cytoskeletal - perturbing drugs . PATENT STATUS Country Type Number Dated Case Patent Cooperation Treaty Published Application WO2018006188 01 / 03 / 2019 2017 - 99C Additional Patent Pending 3 SHARE THIS CONTACT UCLA Technology Development Group ncd @ tdg . ucla . edu tel : View Phone Number . INVENTORS ▶ Rowat , Amy C . OTHER INFORMATION KEYWORDS fluid - based deformability cytometry , cell mechanotype , disease , microfluidics , bag of words , single cell analysis CATEGORIZED AS ▶ Engineering ▶ Engineering ▶ Imaging ▶ Medical ▶ Molecular ▶ Nanotechnology ▶ NanoBio ▶ Tools and Devices ▶ Sensors & Instrumentation ▶ Physical Measurement RELATED CASES 2017 - 99C - 0 ADDITIONAL TECHNOLOGIES BY THESE INVENTORS ▶ High - Throughput Instrumentation for Screening Mechanical Properties of Cells and Particles ▶ Mechanical Phenotyping Of Single Cells : High Throughput Quantitative Detection And Sorting UCLA Technology Development Group 10889 Wilshire Blvd . , Suite 920 , Los Angeles , CA 90095 tdg . ucla . edu Tel : 310 . 794 . 0558 | Fax : 310 . 794 . 0638 | ncd @ tdg . ucla . edu © 2018 , The Regents of the University of California Terms of use Privacy Notice     