Niraula , Dulal and Koirala Linguistic Taboos and Euphemisms in Nepali Nobal B . Niraula Nowa Lab Madison , Alabama , USA nobal @ nowalab . com Saurab Dulal The University of Memphis Memphis , Tennessee , USA sdulal @ memphis . edu Diwa Koirala Nowa Lab Madison , Alabama , USA diwa @ nowalab . com ABSTRACT Languages across the world have words , phrases , and behaviors - the taboos - that are avoided in public communication considering them as obscene or disturbing to the social , religious , and ethical values of society . However , people deliberately use these linguistic taboos and other language constructs to make hurtful , deroga - tory , and obscene comments . It is nearly impossible to construct a universal set of offensive or taboo terms because offensiveness is determined entirely by different factors such as socio - physical set - ting , speaker - listener relationship , and word choices . In this paper , we present a detailed corpus - based study of offensive language in Nepali . We identify and describe more than 18 different categories of linguistic offenses including politics , religion , race , and sex . We discuss 12 common euphemisms such as synonym , metaphor and circumlocution . In addition , we introduce a manually constructed data set of over 1000 offensive and taboo terms popular among contemporary speakers . This in - depth study of offensive language and resource will provide a foundation for several downstream tasks such as offensive language detection and language learning . CCS CONCEPTS • Computingmethodologies → Languageresources ; Discourse , dialogue and pragmatics . KEYWORDS Offensive Language , Linguistic Taboo , Data Set , Nepali Language 1 INTRODUCTION Disclaimer : Due to the nature of this topic , this paper contains highly offensive language , hate speech and adult content . They don’t reflect the views of the authors in any way . The goal of this paper is to build a foundation to stop hate speech and discrimination in the use of language . Offensiveness is a socio - cultural and situational phenomenon . Constructing a universal set of offensive terms for all the languages is near impossible because a culture , language , or situation defines what terms , phrases , or actions are offensive . Furthermore , the semantics of terms keeps changing with time . These variations warrant the language and culture - specific study of taboos and of - fenses 1 . This paper presents the study of linguistic taboos and euphemisms in Nepali , a language belonging to the Indo - Aryan family . Nepali is the official language of Nepal and several eastern 1 Throughout this paper , the word “offense” is explicitly used to refer linguistic offense only Authors’ addresses : Nobal B . Niraula , Nowa Lab , Madison , Alabama , USA , nobal @ nowalab . com ; Saurab Dulal , The University of Memphis , Memphis , Tennessee , USA , sdulal @ memphis . edu ; Diwa Koirala , Nowa Lab , Madison , Alabama , USA , diwa @ nowalab . com . Indian regions including Sikkim , Darjeeling , and Kalimpong . It is spoken by more than 20 million people , mainly in Nepal , and other places in the world including Bhutan , India and Myanmar 2 . To the best of our knowledge , this is the first study of linguistic taboos and euphemisms in Nepali . Thus , it provides a foundation for many Nat - ural Language Processing ( NLP ) tasks such as offensive language detection , comment moderation and natural language generation . Today social media , online forums and news portals are increas - ingly under pressure to stop offensive content . Manually reviewing streams of content is labor - intensive , costly and slow . NLP can greatly assist the moderation task . However , NLP for this task re - quires a language - specific understanding of offensive constituents . To this end , this study provides great insights into understanding how offensive languages are formed , what varieties of offensive content exist and how to generate non - offensive content in Nepali . Furthermore , it also provides benefits to Nepali language learners e . g . to avoid making offensive content and apply euphemisms to circumvent embarrassing situations . Language is a medium through which one expresses thoughts and feelings to others . It is used in every aspect of human com - munication , expressing emotions such as love , hate and anger , re - vealing identity , disseminating information , and so on . Although language is used freely , society sometimes imposes restrictions and constraints on the use of certain terms , expressions , or behaviors , called “taboos” . Breaking a taboo is usually considered objection - able because it is harmful to the social , religious , or ethical values of the society . Taboo can be verbal or non - verbal . The non - verbal taboo ( aka . behavioral taboo ) restricts the use of behavioral pat - terns that are offensive to the social values or customs . For instance , entering a house with shoe on , and eating food during a classroom session are non - verbal taboos in Nepali culture . The verbal taboo ( aka . linguistic taboo ) restricts the use of certain words or parts of a language in public discourse due to social constraints e . g . kando ( buttock ) . Therefore , instead of using linguistic taboos , euphemisms are used to alleviate or erase the harshness . They are roundabout ways of expressing unpleasant terms to neutralize or lessen the unpleasantness . Nonetheless , people do deliberately use linguistic taboos to make hurtful , derogatory , and obscene comments . However , a language does not necessarily need linguistic taboos to be offensive . Some words or phrases that do not have taboo meaning lexically can also be offensive if used in certain contexts . For example , the sentence tan kukur hos ( you are a dog ) does not have any unmentionable linguistic taboo , yet it is an offensive sentence . In this study , we refer to both linguistic and contextual taboo terms as offensive terms . 2 https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Nepali _ language Linguistic Taboos and Euphemisms in Nepali The offensiveness is determined entirely by pragmatics 3 vari - ables such as socio - physical setting , speaker - listener relationship along with the words used and tone of voice [ 14 ] . Many actions or expressions that are considered normal in one society may not be considered normal in other societies [ 15 ] . For example , asking person’s age can be considered normal in Nepali culture due to its honorific system . People use appropriate pronouns and verbs in conversations based on the relative age . A younger person uses pronouns like tapai , hajur when talking to an elder , the latter uses pronouns like timi , tan to the younger . In contrast , asking person’s age isn’t considered normal in Western culture [ 10 ] . Similarly , touching a book with feet is fine in Western society while it is examined as sinful act in Nepali culture . Likewise , diverse animal names are used for personal insults in Nepali ( more on Sections 3 & 4 ) compared to English which has fewer cases like bitch , pig , ass , snake , and monkey . Different dialects of a language can have extremely different meanings of a term . The term coger , for example , is a normal word in Colombian Spanish which means to take but it is a taboo word in Argentine Spanish which refers to have sex . Similarly , Chholnu is a normal word in Far - Western Nepal and means to scrub . This is a taboo term in Eastern Nepal and means to masturbate . Offensiveness level can also be different across the dialects e . g . bloody in Australian and American English is not as offensive as it is in British English [ 22 , 27 ] . The offensiveness of a term evolves with society . The term breast meat was considered offensive in the 20 𝑡ℎ century and white meat was its euphemism [ 10 ] . It has lost the offensiveness in modern - day English . Similarly , in Nepali , the term bhalu had just a single meaning in the past referring to the animal bear . Nowadays it can also mean a prostitute in an offensive context . Ambiguity is an inherent property of a language . Pragmatics and contextual evaluation are required to measure the offensiveness of a term . The word gadha ( donkey ) is offensive in the sentence ta gadha hos ( you are a donkey ) but is not offensive in gadhale bhari bokchha ( donkey carries load ) . Likewise , the word baby is more offensive to young boys than to their parents [ 15 ] . In this paper , we present a detailed corpus - based study of offen - sive language in contemporary Nepali . We collected and analyzed thousands of offensive social media posts and comments from di - verse sources . Specifically , we studied over 7000 social media posts and manually collected over 1000 tabooed and offensive terms . Fur - thermore , we identified 18 different varieties of linguistic offenses such as Bodily Excretion , Death , Disease , Relation , Sex , Gender , Plant , and Animal . Our major research contributions are as follows : ( 1 ) The detailed study of linguistic offenses in 18 different cate - gories ( 2 ) A reference data set of over 1000 linguistic taboos and their categories ( 3 ) Common euphemism techniques 2 BACKGROUND In this section , we provide a general overview of the taboo and offensive language and related work . 3 Branch of linguistics that deals with context of utterance [ 16 ] 2 . 1 Taboo Language Wardhaughdefinestabooasthethingsthatareprohibitedoravoidedinanysocietyofbehaviorbecausetheyarebelievedtobeharmfultoitsmembersandwouldcausethemanxiety , embarrassment , or shame [ 29 ] . If necessary , they are expressed in very roundabout ways , i . e . , using euphemisms . Popular English dictionaries also define taboo similarly : Cambridge Dictionary of English 4 defines taboo as a subject , word , or action that is avoided for religious or social reasons . According to Longman Dictionary 5 , a taboo subject , word , activity , etc . is one that people avoid because it is extremely offensive or embarrassing . It is not accepted as socially correct or it is too holy or evil to be touched or used . The word taboo is derived from the Tongan word tabu towards the end of the eighteenth century [ 1 ] . Its first use was found in the log entry for 15 June 1777 by Captain James Cook who was sent to Tahiti . In Togan , the languages of Polynesia , the word tabu was used to reference things that are forbidden , holy , or untouchable . At present , there are wide varieties of tabooed subjects including sex , death , illness , excretion , bodily functions , and religious matters [ 14 , 29 ] . There exists numerous sociolinguistic studies of taboos for sev - eral languages but Nepali . Gao [ 10 ] investigated English taboos and euphemisms . She described seven different varieties of taboos in English : bodily excretions , death and disease , sex , four - letter words , swear words , privacy , and discriminatory language . Similar studies also exist in Igbo society in Nigeria [ 9 ] , Algerian Society [ 11 ] , Ye - mani Culture [ 21 ] , Karonese Culture in Indonesia [ 3 ] , Russian [ 12 ] and Finnish [ 13 ] . Closest to our work is by Behzad et al . who studied linguistic taboos in Pahari culture , the culture of the hilly northern part of India , Pakistan , and Nepal [ 4 ] . Pahari language is the mother tongue of people of Azad Jammu and Kashmir where the majority of people are Muslims . Since Hindu is the majority in Nepal and Nepali is the most spoken language , the study of linguistic taboos in Pahari does not apply to Nepali language and culture . 2 . 2 Offensive Language Offensive language is used to make hurtful , derogatory , and obscene comments to a target – usually an individual , organization , or a social group . As mentioned previously , offensive language can contain unmentionable as well as contextual linguistic taboos . Nowadays people heavily use computer - mediated communica - tion ( CMC ) such as social media , emails , and blogs to express opin - ions and exchange messages . CMC differs in many ways with tradi - tional communication . Users can partially or fully anonymize their identities behind the Internet . The anonymity provides strength to express things that one cannot express in someone’s face [ 24 ] . With anonymity and physically distant from their audiences , of - fensive language is more likely to occur on the Internet and has a far - reaching and determinative impacts [ 24 ] . The proliferation of hate speech in CMC has created a huge research interest and momentum towards automated offense detection in social media such as identifying offensive posts , comments , and memes [ 23 ] . 4 https : / / dictionary . cambridge . org / us / dictionary / english / taboo 5 https : / / www . ldoceonline . com / dictionary / taboo Niraula , Dulal and Koirala Nepali ( Devanagari ) : मासाला पागल भए जस्तो छ ! English : it seems he got pagal ( mad ) Nepali ( Transliterated ) : muji talai ta ma thookxuu gooli saala des drohi English : muji ( pubic hair ) I will shoot you , traitor Nepali ( Transliterated ) : sale khate aphu matra educated thhanndo rahexa English : sale ( brother - in - law ) khate ( pejorative term for people living in urban slum dwellers ) thinks he is the only educated Nepali ( Transliterated ) : bahun le desh bigare English : bahun ( an upper cast ) spoiled the country Table 1 : Sample Nepali social media posts and their English translations with offensive terms in Italics . Posts are written in Devanagari as well as in Transliterated Roman Script To the extent of our knowledge , there is not a single study of identifying offensive content in the Nepali language . In other lan - guages , this has been studied under different topics including detec - tion of hate speech [ 7 , 8 ] , abusive language [ 19 , 20 ] , cyberbullying [ 5 , 25 , 30 ] , aggression [ 2 , 6 ] , and insults [ 26 ] . Recently , shared task initiatives such as SemEval Task 6 [ 32 ] for English and GermEval [ 31 ] for German have united researchers to develop and evaluate their approaches in consistent ways . These efforts have produced resources such as training and testing data sets that are critical for identifying offensive content and their types and targets . Although the goal of this paper is to study and characterize offensive language , taboos and euphemisms in Nepali , the data set of tabooed and contextually offensive terms that we have produced can serve as a baseline system for offense detection . Such system can flag a content in CMC ( e . g . a social media post ) as offensive if any of the terms in the data set is present in the content . We follow a corpus - based study in which we investigate a data set of human conversation to identify tabooed and offensive terms . Social media such as Twitter 6 , YouTube 7 , Facebook 8 and Blogs are excellent sources of human conversation where users discuss a wide range of topics including politics , gender , religion , movies and television shows , and so on . They participate in the discussions by writing , sharing , reacting , and commenting . Some users in these conversations express their opinions which are insulting or offensive to others . These offensive content are of our interest as they contain tabooed and offensive terms or phrases . 3 METHODOLOGY Over 90 % of current Nepali social media users are young ( age < 54 years ) 9 . With the older generation being more mature , we assume they generate very few offensive comments . The offensive terms that we identify from the current social media posts are the contemporary offensive terms mostly popular among the younger generation . 3 . 1 Corpus to Study Offensive Terms Social media provides a platform for people to discuss in public , private , or secret forums . We are particularly interested in the 6 http : / / twitter . com 7 http : / / youtube . com 8 http : / / facebook . com 9 https : / / www . slideshare . net / DataReportal / digital - 2019 - nepal - january - 2019 - v01 conversations at public forums because any offensive language used in such places is not acceptable to the general audience . Since most of the posts in social media are non - offensive ( e . g . around 0 . 2 % swear word rate for Myspace [ 14 ] ) , it is highly likely that we obtain just a few offensive posts even while annotating a very large number of posts . So , we narrowed down the search by manually listing posts presumably rich in offensive content . The identified posts were either outright offensive ( e . g . vulgar YouTube videos , sexist and racist Tweets ) , or had potentially offensive content ( e . g . racial hatred posts ) , or had generated debate among participants ( e . g . political issues ) . In addition to the social media posts , we also extracted the associated comments . In total , we obtained over 7000 records including both the posts and the comments . Sample social media posts that contained offensive language are shown in Table 1 along with the corresponding English translations . The offensive terms in the original Nepali are highlighted in italics . If the translation seems to undermine the offensiveness level , we kept the offensive term as is in the English translation . Note that the last example in the table “bahun le desh bigare” does not contain a single offensive word but the overall meaning of this post is offensive i . e . racist comment targeting a cast , bahun . 3 . 2 Data Set Creation Three human annotators , all native Nepali speakers , studied the social media posts and identified the offensive terms . Confusing and borderline terms were discussed together and the final decision was taken in consensus . As expected , the social media posts were very noisy and contained many variants of the same term . For example , the offensive term khate was written as khatee , khaate , khte , khatey etc . Besides , the social media posts were written in Devanagari script and Romanized text ( using phonetics ) for the ease of typing . We extracted all of these raw variants , normalized them , and included in the data set . We normalized the raw offensive terms and obtained their syn - onyms using Nepali Shabdakosh 10 dictionary service . However , since the offensiveness of synonyms can be different from its term’s offensiveness , manual revision was required . For instance , pisap is a non - offensive synonym of the offensive term mut ( urine ) . In total , we discovered 1077 offensive terms and made them publicly avail - able 11 . We believe this first public data set of linguistic taboos for a 10 http : / / nepalishabdakosh . com 11 https : / / github . com / nowalab / offensive - nepali Linguistic Taboos and Euphemisms in Nepali RawRom RawNep NormNep NormRom IsTaboo Class kandoo कन्ढो कन्डो kando 1 Body Part boksi वोक्सी बोक्सी boksi 1 Others goru गोरू गोरु goru 0 Animal damini दमीनी दिमनी damini 1 Race pani pade पानी पादे पानी पादे pani pade 0 Excretion aatankabadhi आतङ्कवादी आतङ्कवादी aatankabadi 0 Politics goli hanna गोली हान्न गोली हान्नु goli hannu 0 Action Table 2 : A snippet of the manually constructed data set . Notations : Rom = Romanized , Nep = Nepali and Norm = Normalized . IsTaboo column value 1 indicates if the term is a taboo term . low - resource Nepali language can facilitate the research towards this important topic . The snippet of the data set is shown in Table 2 . It consists of RawRom and RawNep designating raw terms in Romanized form and in Devanagari script respectively . Their normalized forms are stored at NormNep and NormRom columns . In addition , we labeled “1” for taboo terms and “0” for contextually taboo terms in IsTaboo column . We also provided a primary class type ( more on Section 4 ) for each entry in Class column . The statistics of the manually derived data set are presented in Table 3 . Out of 1077 identified offensive terms , 158 ( about 15 % ) were absolute taboo , offensive outright . Body Part , Race , Relation , Sex , and Vulgar are the top categories that contained a higher proportion of absolute taboos . Categories such as Action , Cloth , Animal , Death , Geographic Location , Plant , Politics , Religion , and Weapon have very few or no taboo terms at all . Thus , the terms in these categories require contexts to be offensive . Interestingly , Politics , with 115 offensive terms , is the largest category . Race with 77 offensive terms is the second - largest category . Unlike in English , use of diverse animal names are observed in Nepali offensive language . With 72 terms , Animal category is the third - largest category in our data set . As expected , universal taboo topics such as Sex , Vulgur , and Body Parts are also in the top most popular categories . Lastly , relations being very important in Nepali culture , the offensive terms related to kinship are also very common – a unique characteristic of Nepali culture compared to the Western cultures . 4 VARIETIES OF LINGUISTIC OFFENSES IN NEPALI We carefully studied the data set of offensive terms that we con - structed in Section 3 and identified over eighteen interesting va - rieties ( categories ) such as Animal and Plant names , Race , and Sex . While some of these categories exist in other cultures and lan - guages , others are unique to Nepali culture . Besides , the identified varieties are not mutually exclusive , i . e , a term can belong to mul - tiple categories . Importantly , the main rationale for the selection of these categories is to explore several dimensions of linguistic offenses existing in the language , keeping in mind that these cate - gories will largely assist to do a fine - grained classification in offense delectation task . In this section , we describe these categories in detail . 1 . Action : We identified many offensive comments that contained action verbs or expressions that were threatening , defaming , or Category Taboo Contextual Total Action 0 45 45 Animal 0 72 72 Body Part 21 23 44 Cloth 0 12 12 Death 1 13 14 Disability 6 31 37 Disease 3 25 28 Excretion 4 17 21 Gender 7 8 15 Geographic Location 0 10 10 Idiom 3 26 29 Marriage 15 15 30 Plant 0 12 12 Politics 0 115 115 Race 12 65 77 Relation 11 32 43 Religion 0 12 12 Vulgar 31 19 50 Weapon 0 17 17 Other 44 350 394 Grand Total 158 919 1077 Table 3 : Summary of offensive data set manually mined from thousands of social media posts described or called for harmful action to the target ( e . g . a person or an organization ) . Examples : • Yeslai chhitai goli thokna parcha ( Need to shoot him soon ) • Party karyaalaya aaago lagauna jaau ( Let’s go to burn down the party office ) Other actions include katnu , pitnu , jalaunu , pata kasnu , lakhetnu , jel halnu , sutnu , chiknu , mutnu , chusnu , polnu , chhiraunu , latta hannu and so on . Most of the actions are context - sensitive i . e . offensiveness depends on their use in the language . 2 . Body Part : Body parts are commonly tabooed across different cultures and languages . Female and male genital parts and pubic hair are tabooed outright while others need contexts to be tabooed . Our observation shows that body parts mostly appear in comments that are vulgar , racist , sexist , and personal insults . Commonly mentioned body parts include puti , gula , chak , laando , geda , laantho , Niraula , Dulal and Koirala poka , thun , thun ko tuppo , junga , jhus , naak , kapal , taauko , muji . Examples : • Sabaiko taauko katera gift pathaidim ( Let’s behead every - one and send the heads as a gift ) • Muji tero kaam chaina , turuntai rajinama de ( Muji you are useless , resign immediately ) Interestingly , the expressions following the pattern : ( tera | tero | teri | mero | meri ) + ( baau | ama | hajurba | budi ) + ko + body part ( especially head – taauko or genital parts ) are offensive , e . g . , tero baau ko taauko ( your father’s head ) , teri amako puti ( your mother’s vagina ) , tero hajurba ko taauko ( your grandfather’s head ) . Because body parts are often required to be mentioned in normal conversations , euphemisms related to body parts are widely used in the Nepali . Wakṣhyastal and chhati are used for breast , guptaanga is used for male or female genitals , yoni is used for vagina , and so on . For instance , mahinawari bhako bela “yoni” safa rakhnu jaruri cha ( it is important to sanitize your vagina during menstruation ) . Interestingly , the term linga has multiple senses which can mean penis ( a taboo term ) or the word gender ( non - taboo term ) . Shiva Linga ( Lord Shiva’s penis ) , however , is a non - taboo term which is a revered icon in Shiva temple . 3 . Cloth : Clothes that have direct connections with the internal body parts or sexual organs are contextually tabooed in Nepali language . Words such as thun choli , bra , petikot , taalo – sanitary pads , kanchuki , kachha , kattu etc . are commonly avoided in public and euphemisms are used in substitution . Aaimai ko bhitri bastra or simply bhitri cholo is used instead of bra and thun choli . Simi - larly , bhitra lagaune is used for kachha , kattu , kanchuki etc . The use of alternatives are also contextual , for example bhitra lagaune can refer to underwear , but it can also refer to bra or petikot in a separate context . Example : mero bhitra lagaune khoi ( where is my underwear ) . Additionally , we identified clothes that are unrelated to internal body parts or sexual organs are contextually used in offensive languages . Words such as seto kapada or katro ( shroud ) are used to express personal attacks : talai katro odayera ghat ma purauchu . Dhoti , topi , kandani , janai , etc are used to express racial offenses . Examples : • Dhoti lai india tira lakhetna parcha ( Should chase this dhoti out towards india ) • Kandane ( or toppe ) 12 bahun 4 . Animal : Animals are the commonly used metaphors in Nepali offense . Frequently used creatures in offensive dialect include badar ( monkey ) , gadha ( donkey ) , kukur ( dog ) , bheda ( sheep ) , hanuman – a divine monkey in Hinduism – is used here to refer a fanatic follower , goru ( ox ) , bwaso ( hyena ) , bwasha , bhaishi ( buffalo ) , hatti ( elephant ) , boka ( he - goat ) , bakhri ( she - goat ) and pothi ( hen ) . Most of these names are used in general offence , however , we also found some of them being used in sexist and racial comments . Examples : • Boka haru bakhri khojna hide ( Boka – pervert boys are heading in search of bakhri ) • Ta pani tah tai party ko hanuman hos ni ( You are also a hanuman of the same party ) 12 kandane and toppe are terms especially used to abuse Bahun or bhramin cast . These terms come from the word kandani – long lace or belt to hold loin - cloth – and topi – hat respectively • Anuhar nai bhaisi ko jasto cha ( Face looks like that of buf - falo ) ( can be racist , depends on context ) • Pothi baseko suhaudaina ( It does not suit a woman to raise her voice ) ( sexist idiom ) Interestingly , based on our observation , we found that the terms referring to female are more offensive than their male counterparts . For instance , kukur ( dog ) and bandar ( monkey ) are not offensive but their female versions Kukurni ( bitch ) and Badarni are taboo terms . This phenomenon is also observed in other cases e . g . ( newar , newarni ) , ( rai , raini ) and ( chor , chorni ) – here , the masculine terms are generally non - offensive while the respective feminine terms are highly offensive . 5 . Plant : Like animal names , plant names are also commonly used in offensive languages . Commonly used plant names include kera ( banana ) , aalu ( potato ) , mula ( radish ) , pharsi ( pumpkin ) , kandamul ( wild plants ) , and paat ( leaf ) . Examples : • Mero kera khanchas ? ( Want to eat my penis ? ) ( kera – ba - nana is used here to indicated penis ) • Tyo mula ko kura nagar ( Don’t talk about that mula – radish ) • Pharsi ko poi ( Husband of a fat women ) ( pharsi – pumpkin here means fat ) 6 . Death and Disease : Many words related to death and disease are contextually offensive and are frequently found in personal attacks . Examples include words such as pagal , cancer , haija related to diseases , and words such as hariyo bash , katro , chihan , masan , maranchayshe , murda related to death . Examples : • Tero sarir le hariyo baas khojya jasto cha ( Looks like your body is looking for a coffin ) ( context sensitive personal at - tack ) • Yo pagal ho ( He is a lunatic – direct offense ) Euphemisms related to death include bitnu , swargabash hunu , paralok hunu , and khasnu for marnu ( die ) and ghat for masan ghat ( cemetery ) . Disease related euphemisms include manasik santulan thik nabhayeko for pagal ( mentally ill person ) and a generic term birami ( sick ) for all kind of diseases . 7 . Disability : Disability is another category that accumulates words often tabooed across different cultures and languages . Dis - ability terms such as lulo , langado , kano , bahiro , andho , psycho , kupro , lathebro , bhakbhake , maranchyashe are tabooed when asso - ciated with human . They are not tabooed when associated with non - human entities e . g . bahiro sarkar ( deaf government ) . Human rights and political movements have made many of these terms tabooed in recent years . Despite this , they are frequently used in offensive languages for personal insults and attacks . Examples : • Bahiro chas ki kya ho ? ( Are you deaf or what ? ) • Kulangar saape 13 ( You black - sheep lame ) – extremely abu - sive phrase referring to a physically disable person . • Dekhdai khana na pako maranchyashe chas , k furti la - gauchas . ( You look emaciated , why are you showing off ? ) • lati chhilli , lato jaat janai hali ( Dumb pervert , showing off her dumb caste ) 13 Saape comes from the word saanp which means snake . It is offensively used to indicate a handicap person abusing their inability to walk Linguistic Taboos and Euphemisms in Nepali Euphemisms are preferred when these terms are used for hu - man . For example , euta aakha na bhako , kaan nasunne , manasik santulan thik na bhako are used instead of andho , bahiro , and pagal respectively . 8 . Excretions : Most of bodily excretions such as paad ( fart ) , muut ( urine ) , gu ( shit ) , cher ( watery diarrhea ) , and virya ( sperm ) are tabooed . However , some others such as ashu ( tears ) , pasina ( sweat ) , khakar ( cough ) , dakar ( burp ) and ulti ( vomit ) are not . Verbs associ - ated with the production of the tabooed bodily excretions are also tabooed e . g . padhnu ( to fart ) for paad ( fart ) and hagnu ( excrete ) for gu ( shit ) . Examples : • Kasto cher jasto aachar ( This pickle looks like a shit ) • Ta gu ko poka hos ( You are a pack of shit ) • Gobar bhariyeko tero dimag ( Your mind is full of dung ) Euphemisms for tabooed excretions are commonly used in public and hospitals e . g . hawa instead of paad , aaka instead of gu / cher , susu instead of mut and seto pani instead of birya / shukrakit . 9 . Marriage : Marriage is one of the most prominent traditions in Nepalese culture . There are several rituals related to marriage . These rituals along with the associated human participants are identified using specific terms such as dulaha ( bridegroom ) , dulahi ( bride ) , janti ( participants from bridegroom side ) , daijo ( dowry ) , kanya ( unmarried young girl or damsel ) . These terms can appear in the offensive comments related to the same . Traditionally , di - vorce was a rare phenomenon in Nepali culture , and women seldom remarry after the death of the husband . Living together before mar - riage is still a taboo . These activities resulted in many linguistic taboos that are unique to Nepali culture compared to western . Ex - amples include : bidhuwa ( widow ) , bidhur ( widower ) , batashe ( a child whose father is unknown ) , rando ( ) . One interesting taboo expression is baau ko bihe , which means father’s marriage . The expression is used to threaten the target with the harm that is so unprecedented that it will be equivalent to seeing his ( target’s ) father’s marriage , a very rare event to perceive in Nepali culture . Examples : • Bhaisi lai daijo ko lagi bihe garya hola ( Married a bhaisi for dowry ) ( Bhaisi i . e . buffalo is used here as a metaphor to indicate a fat / dark girl ) • Kunai bidhawa ko aakha nalagos ( May a widow’s curse not affect you ) • Batashe dherai nabol ( Don’t you talk more , bastard ) 10 . Politics : Politics has been a long standing subject around the world for centuries . The advent of social media and the connectivity among the people have fostered the expression of frustrations and disagreements in several topics regarding policies , political parties and their activities . In Nepali language , we found the following words contextually used offensively in political conversations : des - drohi ( traitor ) , bhrasta ( corrupt ) , bhastrachar ( corruption ) , man - dale ( support of Nepali panchayat ) , maobadi ( maoist ) , rastraghati ( traitor ) , bikhandankari ( separatist ) , hatyara ( killer ) , puchhar ( tail to refer a blind supporter ) , fascist , bheda ( sheep – refer to fanatic follower ) , bhate , and hanuman . The words in this category are temporal and can change with the dynamics of politics . A word that was neutral in the past may now be offensive and may become obsolete in the future . Hanuman , for example , had a single positive meaning in the past i . e . exemplifying the devotion towards his master , lord Ram . Currently , this word is also used to refer a fanatic follower of a party / ideology in an offensive context . Examples : • Deshdrohi lai goli thok sala ( Shoot the traitor sala ) • Ram ko bachan jharna pa chaina , hanuman haru le chati pitna thali sake ( Fanatic followers started obeying their mas - ter in no time . ) 11 . Vulgar : Words that are explicitly and offensively used to refer sex , sexual acts , and human biological process are categorised as vulgar . People usually tends to avoid vulgar words , specifically sex talks and sexuality ( menstruation , masturbation , and intercourse ) in public as they are likely to cause anxiety . In Nepali too , almost all of the words that fall under this category are tabooed . Examples include : chiknu ( have sex ) , { gula , lado } ( penis ) , puti ( vagina ) , jhatha ( pubic hair ) , phusi ( semen ) , thankanu ( to have an erection ) . In addition , imported terms from English such fuck , condom , cock , suck and blue film are tabooed too . These terms are used very often in offensive remarks . Examples : • Tero aama lai chickne mai hu bujhis ? ( I am the one who fucked your mother , do you understand ? ) • Lado kha ( Eat my penis ) As discussed above , the direct use of these words are eschewed and euphemisms are used instead . For example , garba nirodhak sadhan for condom , swapnadosh for wet dream , purus or mahila ko guptaanga for lado or puti respectively , seto pani for briya and so on . Please note that our classification being mutually inclusive , the words in this category can appear in other categories as well . 12 . Race : Nepal is a land of racial , ethnic and linguistic diversity . There are more than 125 ethnic groups and languages [ 18 ] in the country . Bahun , Chhetri , Tamang , Magar , Newar , Gurung , Kami , Muslim , Yadav , and Rai are some of the most populous races . Des - ignating people by their ethnic groups has a long history , starting from religion and followed by rulers , dictators , aristocratic cultures , patricians , and so on . Several Hindu holy scripts categorize people as untouchable [ 28 ] ( baishya , sudhra , caste - less etc . ) and educated or upper - cast ( Brahmin , Chettri etc . ) , to avoid eating food touched by lower - class people , and even touching them ( e . g . Damai , Kami le choko khana hudaina ) . Traditionally , the upper - cast people are downgraded should they eat the food touched by the lower - cast people or marry them . Due to political awareness and human rights activities , the narratives are changing , and the cast system is slowly fading . But still , racist comments using these terms are highly prevalent in contemporary society . Examples : • Oi bhote , noon bechna chodis ? ( Hey bhote , haveyoustopped selling salt ? ) • Bahun tero tuppi ukheldim ? ( Bahun , can I pluck your tuppi ? ) Tuppi – sikha is a tuft of hair left on the top of shaved head of traditional Hindu ; stereotypically associated with Brahmin . • Yesko buddhi kami kaha lagera sojhauna parcha ( His head is not right , need to take him to kami – blacksmith to straighten it ) • Rajako kaam chhodi kamiko dewali ( Going to kami’s festi - val over king’s assignment ) is a traditionally non - tabooed idiom that is considered racist now . Niraula , Dulal and Koirala We also found abundant words and phrases that are used to make racist comments . It includes dhoti , madhise , tapare , pate , chimre , bhote , toppa , pahade , ganaune , kote , sarki , jyami , sinu khane jaat ( carcass eating people ) , sikarmi , dakarmi , and pode . The use of these words to a totally unrelated people are offensive outright . Substitution for cast names such as bahun baje for bahun , kaji for chhetri , sahu for newar , mijar for sarki , and bishwokarma for kami can serve as euphemisms if they are used properly . 13 . Relation : Relational offensive terms in Nepali include both human - human relations such as ‘maa’ chikne ( ‘mother’ fucker ) and randi ko ‘chora’ ( son of a prostitute ) and human - nonhuman relation such as raandi ko ‘baan’ ( widow’s ‘rider’ ) . Other linguistic taboos in this category include harami ( bastard ) , chutiya , rakhel , raandi , batase ( one without a known father ) and rando which are outright offensive . Contextually offensive terms in this category include bidhwa , dadha , logne , bau , kuputra , sali , and bhena . Examples : • Talai kina chayieo ? tero baule banako ho ra ? ( Why do you need it ? did your father made it ? ) • Raandi ko chora , talai pakh na maile janya chu ( Son of widow , you’ll see what I am going to do ) The popular euphemism for a widow is ekal mahila ( single women ) which also refers an unmarried / divorced woman . 14 . Gender : Gender - related taboos and offensive terms exist in most of the cultures . Pothi baseko ramro hudaina , thangne aaimai , gireki aaimai are historically prevalent sexist phrases in Nepali household . Discrimination based on a person’s gender is extremely common in Nepal . Mostly , females and LGBT are found to be af - fected by this segregation . Several words for making gender bias such as ghopte , kukhuri , pothi , bakhre , budi kanya , boka , bokie , ut - tauli , nakharmauli , chothale , maal ( slang referring to a female ) are routinely used in offensive remarks . The discriminatory and deroga - tory use of certain words such as aaimai , taruni , taruno , bidhuwa have changed their actual meanings over the course of time . Today , direct use of these words brings discomfort and are mostly avoided or substituted by euphemisms in public use . Additionally , observing thousands of social media comments , we found that a set of words such as ge , hijada , napubsahk , lesbian – supposed to refer LGBTQ are misleadingly used to offend others . Examples : • Bidhuwa le bisait pari ( Widow brought a bad luck ) • Hijada jastai chhe ( She looks like a transgender ) • Thangne aaimai ( Dirty women ) • Yo aaimai ko jaat lai jati bhane pani lagdaina , jaat janai halchan ( A sexist phrase which semantically means “All women are foolish” ) 15 . Weapon : Weapon names are rarely considered offensive when used in general conversation . Our observation shows that they are occasionally used to threaten or attack others . Commonly used terms includes khukuri ( Nepali knife ) , chhura ( small knife ) , tarwar ( long knife ) , goli ( bullet ) , bhala ( spear ) , and bikh ( poison ) . Interestingly , we also observed these words being frequently used on posts related to political disagreements , social criminals , and racist bigotry . Examples : • Bhala le hanna parcha yeslai ( Need to strike him with a spear ) • Bhukdai gar , chadai khukuri khanchas taile ( Keep barking , soon you will be struck with a khukuri – knife ) • Balatkari lai jhundyaunu parcha ( We need to hang the rapist ) 16 . Religion : There are many religious taboo activities in Nepal such as wearing shoes in temples , touching god’s cculpture with the left hand and so on . The religious linguistic taboos in Nepali language are mostly related to death , devil , mystical words ( associ - ated with religious texts ) , and God names . And these taboos are mostly context - dependent e . g . raakshyas , bhoot , masan , daanab , raawan . Below are some examples of offensive comments in this category : • Manav rupi daanab hun ini ( He is an evil in the face of man ) . • Kukarmi daitya , tero narka ma bas hos ( Immoral evil , I wish you go to hell ) 17 . Geographic Location : Offending people based on their geo - graphic location or country is a widely discussed topic in Nepal . There are routinely used racial slurs to discriminate people based on their origins . Slurs such as bihari , indian and madhishe are used for people from Terai ( Southern plain ) region and the slurs bhote 14 and pahade are used for people from Pahad ( Northern Himalayan and hilly ) region . In fact , we encountered hundreds of comments containing these abusive terms in our corpus . Additional , jhapali , sangjali , jangali , khaire were also abundant in the corpus . We also identified a few specific locations referring to red light areas such as ratna park and balanju bus park . Some examples of offensive comments in this category are given below : • Herdai ratna - park ma beluki grahak khojne jasti che ( “She looks like the one who seeks for the costumers at ratna - park in the evening” in local context , is citing a woman as a whore ) • Thangne bhoteni ( Dirty bhoteni ) 18 . Other : There cannot be a closed set of offensive varieties . Be - low we list some other interesting varieties that are not previously covered . A . Composite Offensive Terms : Complex offensive terms are formed using the individual offensive terms such as dhoti ko chhauro and muji bhatuwa . More common case is to use a taboo term with a contextually offensive term such as randi ko baan , sala kukur , gobar gwatch and tapare bahun . Although these terms mostly collocate as bigrams , they might appear at different locations in a sentence . In the sentence “bahun jati sabai tapare nai bhaye” , the composite term tapare bahun is formed using bahun and tapare appearing at different locations . In general , the degree of offensiveness increases with the increase in offensive terms count . For instance , the expression muji bhatuwa is more offensive than the individual offensive terms muji and bhatuwa . B . Imported Terms : There is a large list of imported offensive terms from other local and foreign languages such as Hindi ( dekha jayega , murga , ulluka patta , behen chod , bhosadi ) , Arabic ( aaulad , saitan ) and English ( over , virgin , blue , bra , saiko – psycho , fuck ) . C . Code Switching : Code switching is a process of forming a composite term by mixing more than one language . Examples of 14 Bhote , also known as Bhotiya are group of people related with Tibetan ethnically or linguistically Linguistic Taboos and Euphemisms in Nepali offensive terms due to code switching include over nabol ( English + Nepali ) , randiko aaulad ( Nepali + Arabic ) , and ta murga ( Nepali + Hindi ) D . Exclamation : Also known as Bismayadibodhak in Nepali , ex - clamations in communication pertain to strong emotions , especially anger , surprise , dissatisfaction , or agony . Words such as thukka , thuiya , chyaa , murdabad , jindabaad , thu - thu , bajo paros , mari ja etc . are a few examples of exclamatory terms in Nepali that can appear in offensive comments . 5 EUPHEMISMS IN NEPALI Sometimes the use of taboo terms is unavoidable , e . g . , patients de - scribing doctors about their genital - related issues , talking with kids about bodily excretions , mentioning disabled persons in a conver - sation , and so on . Euphemisms are the ways people use to lessen or completely remove the unpleasantness of taboo expressions . They are often the replacement words or phrases that substitute the of - fensive terms and expressions to neutralize or reduce the nuisance [ 10 ] . For example , in English the phrase make love is preferred over fuck in a conversation with mixed participants [ 15 , 17 ] . Similarly , instead of using underdeveloped nations for Third World countries , the United Nations calls them less - developed countries [ 10 ] . In this section , we discuss common types of euphemisms used in Nepali . Many of these euphemisms are applicable to the offense varieties we listed in Section 4 . ( 1 ) Synonym : Synonyms of a term can help to eliminate the offensiveness of a taboo term . The non - offensive terms ra - jkhani , pisab and disha are the synonyms for taboo terms geda ( testis ) , muut and gu respectively . ( 2 ) Word Replacement : The changes in sociopolitical structure and human right movements have helped to coin and encour - aged to use non - offensive terms instead of tabooed terms : Ykal mahila for bidhuwa , Jestha Nagarik for buda - budi , Tesro Lingi for Hijada , Sadak balbalika for Khate and Yaunkarmi for Besya etc . ( 3 ) Circumlocution : Circumlocution is an evasive way of expres - sion using multiple words rather than being explicit with fewer and apter words . It is commonly practiced to avoid the use of taboo terms . One popular way of circumlocution is to use the definitions of offensive terms . Examples include Pisap ferne anga / Pisap aaune thaau instead of laado or turi for man and puti for women . ( 4 ) Word Translation : Sometimes translation to another lan - guage can enfeeble the offensiveness of a taboo term . In Nepali , the translation is typically done in English or San - skrit for euphemism . It is easier to use mens or period instead of nachhune menstruation . Similarly , stool is commonly pre - ferred over gu in hospitals . Occasionally , the translated forms are shorter than the offensive terms and thus are pre - ferred . One such example is nipple instead of dudh ko tuppo . ( 5 ) Child Language : People in any society have different terms that replace the corresponding tabooed terms when talking with a child . Here are few examples in Nepali : aaka for gu , susu for mut , tun - turi or simply turi for lado ( male genital ) , hawa for paad etc . ( 6 ) Suffix : Addressing a person with his first name is very com - mon in western societies . In Nepali culture , which has an honorific system , addressing people having more honor ( e . g . parents ) with their names is considered offensive . Use of person names , however , is common among the peers or to the persons with lower honors , e . g . , children . There are some suffixes ( e . g . jee and jyu ) that can be attached to per - son names to increase the politeness . For example , using Ramjee for Ram and Sitajee for Sita in a conversation can provide more honor than using the direct names . Adding jee after a person’s name can also mean the speaker has a good relationship with the person and therefore is common across friends . Also , jee can be used after the surnames ( e . g . Dahaljee ) or nicknames ( e . g . Prachanda jee ) . Use of jyu provides respects to superiors , e . g . , ministers , presidents and managers . Unlike the suffix jee , this suffix is mostly used after the complete name of a person e . g . Madhav Nepal jyu . It is also commonly used in formal writing , official letters , legalese and public speech . ( 7 ) Family Alias : Using alias for names inside a family is a com - mon practice in Nepali culture . Instead of using husband’s name directly ( which is considered abnormal ) , a wife uses aliases such as ”X ko Baba” ( X is offsprings’ name ) , baba , and daddy . Similarly , aliases for wife include sani , kanchhi , and ”X ki ama” . However , parents can directly use the first names of their children . Also , it is common to use rank alias for children e . g . jetho / jethi ( the first male / female child ) , mailo / maili ( the second male / female child ) , kancho / kanchhi ( the last male / female child ) , etc . ( 8 ) Relation Name : This is probably the most widely used ap - proach in Nepali culture to avoid using person name in a conversation . Relations to superiors in the family tree ( hajurba / hajurama , buwa / ama ) , elder siblings ( daju / didi ) , younger siblings ( bhai / bahini ) , rank of siblings by order ( jetha / jethi , maila / maili , saila / saili , kaila / kaili , antare / antari , thaila / thaili , jantare / jantarni , kanchha / kanchhi ) , peers ( sathi , mitra ) , inferiors ( chhora / chhori , bhanja / bhanjee , keta / keti ) and other alias ( sane / sani , maya , mayalu , maiya , mitjyu , mi - tini ) etc . ( 9 ) Title : People of high political rank or that are of a promi - nent post of an organization are addressed using their ti - tles or titles followed by their names . Examples include Pradhan Mantri ( Prime Minister ) , Upapradhan mantri ( Vice - president ) , Rastrapati ( President of a country ) , Sabhamukh ( House Speaker ) , Adyakchya ( President ) , Swastha Mantrin ( Health Minister ) , Purba Mantri ( Ex - minister ) , etc . Adding ”Sir” after the name is also a popular practice e . g . Hari sir , Madhav sir , etc . ( 10 ) Metaphor : Metaphoricexpressionsarealso usedaseuphemisms . If someone is very talkative ( negative connotation ) , he is called Narad , a Vedic sage ( in Hindu religion ) who is a trav - eling musician , storyteller , news carries , and enlightening wisdom . Other examples include : dhunga jasto mutu ( heart is like a stone ) for nisthuri ( cruel ) , Gobar Ganesh for pata murkha ( stupid ) . ( 11 ) Idiom : Idioms are very common in both written and spoken languages . Some examples in this category include : sangai Niraula , Dulal and Koirala uth bas garnu ( up down together ) for sex , para sarnu or nachune hunu for menstruation , swarga ma baas hunu ( move to heaven ) for death , and chura phutnu ( to get bangle broken ) for bidhuwa hunu ( to be a widow ) . ( 12 ) Proverb : Proverbs can be used as euphemisms . One such example is bhukne kukurle tokdaina ( barking dog seldom bites ) which can contextually mean bataure ( braggart or blowhard ) . Interestingly , euphemisms more than needed can reverse the purpose of euphemism [ 10 ] . The expression “Yaauna karmi ko pisab pherne anga” has a negative meaning although euphemistic terms Yaauna karmi and pisab pherne anga are used in the expression . 6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK Social media are excellent platforms for sharing information . They are also misused to spread hate speech through offensive posts and comments . With enormous amount of content generated ev - ery day , automated methods are required to prevent them from spreading . Because offensiveness is a socio - cultural and situational phenomenon , language agnostic automated methods do not work for hate speech detection . Language specific study is necessary to understand what can be considered offensive . To this end , we presented our corpus - based study of offensive language in Nepali . We primarily focused on linguistic taboos and euphemisms . We believe this is the first study of its kind . We collected and studied over 7000 social media posts containing high degree of linguistic taboos and offensive terms . Furthermore , we carefully extracted and characterized over 1000 tabooed and contextually offensive terms into 18 different varieties . The an - notated data set is made publicly available at Github 15 . Besides the universal taboo topics like Sex , Body Part , and Excretion , we identified many varieties that are unique to Nepali language and culture e . g . Relation and Plant Names . Since no related prior work or resource exists for Nepali , the study and the data set lay a foun - dation for future research on this important topic . For example , in hate speech detection task , a baseline system can be built from the aforementioned data set that can flag content ( e . g . a Tweet or Reddit post ) as offensive if the terms in the data set appear in the content . It can further help to do a fine grained classification of linguistic offenses . We also studied euphemisms – ways for people to lessen or com - pletely remove the offensiveness . We discussed 12 common types of euphemisms in Nepali . While euphemisms such as Circumlo - cution and Child Language are common across the cultures in the world , many other discovered euphemisms are specific and unique to Nepali culture . Offensive language detection in Nepali is the immediate next topic we are considering to fight against racism , discrimination and cyberbullying . Other future work includes constructing an ontol - ogy of offensive categories . For example , many of the identified varieties such as Disability , Race , Religion , Gender , and Location can be put together under a higher - order Discriminatory category . Likewise , Plant and Animal can be grouped , and so on . The study of behavioral taboos is another future topic in this direction . 15 https : / / github . com / nowalab / offensive - nepali ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to Professor Dr . Kumar Prasad Koirala and Mr . Daniel Whyatt for their valuable inputs and inspiration . We would also like to acknowledge Nepali Shabdakosh ( http : / / nepalishab - dakosh . com ) for providing synonyms of the offensive terms . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Keith Allan and Kate Burridge . 2006 . Taboos and their origins . Forbidden words : Taboo and the censoring of language ( 2006 ) , 1 – 28 . [ 2 ] Segun Taofeek Aroyehun and Alexander Gelbukh . 2018 . Aggression detection in social media : Using deep neural networks , data augmentation , and pseudo label - ing . In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Trolling , Aggression and Cyberbullying ( TRAC - 2018 ) . 90 – 97 . [ 3 ] Jumat Barus , Robert Sibarani , Amrin Saragih , et al . 2018 . Linguistic Taboos in Karonese Culture . KnE Social Sciences ( 2018 ) , 411 – 421 . [ 4 ] Anwar Behzad , Waseem Malik , and Sara Azam . 2017 . Linguistic Taboos in the Pahari Culture : A Sociolinguistic Analysis . ARIEL - An International Research Journal of English Language and Literature 27 ( 2017 ) . [ 5 ] Amy Bellmore , Angela J Calvin , Jun - Ming Xu , and Xiaojin Zhu . 2015 . The five W’s of “bullying” on Twitter : Who , what , why , where , and when . Computers in human behavior 44 ( 2015 ) , 305 – 314 . [ 6 ] Despoina Chatzakou , Nicolas Kourtellis , Jeremy Blackburn , Emiliano De Cristo - faro , Gianluca Stringhini , and Athena Vakali . 2017 . Mean birds : Detecting aggression and bullying on twitter . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on web science conference . 13 – 22 . [ 7 ] Thomas Davidson , Dana Warmsley , Michael Macy , and Ingmar Weber . 2017 . Automated hate speech detection and the problem of offensive language . In Eleventh international aaai conference on web and social media . [ 8 ] FabioDelVigna12 , AndreaCimino23 , FeliceDell’Orletta , MarinellaPetrocchi , and MaurizioTesconi . 2017 . Hateme , hatemenot : Hatespeechdetectiononfacebook . In Proceedings of the First Italian Conference on Cybersecurity ( ITASEC17 ) . 86 – 95 . [ 9 ] Gbenga Fakuade , Ngozi Kemdirim , Ikechukwu Nnaji , and Florence Nwosu . 2013 . Linguistic taboos in the Igbo society : A sociolinguistic investigation . Language Discourse & Society 2 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 117 – 132 . [ 10 ] Chunming Gao . 2013 . A sociolinguistic study of English taboo language . Theory and Practice in Language Studies 3 , 12 ( 2013 ) , 2310 . [ 11 ] Nadia Ghounane . 2014 . A sociolinguistic view of linguistic taboos and eu - phemistic strategies in the Algerian Society : Attitudes and beliefs in Tlemcen speech community . International Journal of Research in Applied , Natural and Social Sciences 2 , 3 ( 2014 ) , 73 – 88 . [ 12 ] Carole Teresa Greene . 2001 . The use of euphemisms and taboo terms by young speakers of Russian and English . ( 2001 ) . [ 13 ] Minna Hjort . 2017 . Swearing in Finnish . Advances in Swearing Research : New Languages and New Contexts . Amsterdam / Philadelphia : John Benjamins ( 2017 ) , 231 – 56 . [ 14 ] Timothy Jay . 2009 . The utility and ubiquity of taboo words . Perspectives on psychological science 4 , 2 ( 2009 ) , 153 – 161 . [ 15 ] Timothy Jay and Kristin Janschewitz . 2008 . The pragmatics of swearing . Journal of Politeness Research . Language , Behaviour , Culture 4 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 267 – 288 . [ 16 ] Kepa Korta and John Perry . 2020 . Pragmatics . In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ( spring 2020 ed . ) , Edward N . Zalta ( Ed . ) . Metaphysics Research Lab , Stanford University . [ 17 ] Johan Tobias Kristiano and Priyatno Ardi . 2018 . Swear words in Bad Boys II : A semantic analysis . LLT Journal : A Journal on Language and Language Teaching 21 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 191 – 198 . [ 18 ] Nepal Government NG . 2014 . Population Monograph of Nepal , Volume II , Social Demographics . Central Bureau of Statistics II ( 2014 ) . [ 19 ] Chikashi Nobata , Joel Tetreault , Achint Thomas , Yashar Mehdad , and Yi Chang . 2016 . Abusive language detection in online user content . In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on world wide web . 145 – 153 . [ 20 ] Ji Ho Park and Pascale Fung . 2017 . One - step and two - step classification for abusive language detection on twitter . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1706 . 01206 ( 2017 ) . [ 21 ] Nada Qanbar . 2011 . A sociolinguistic study of the linguistic taboos in the Yemeni society . Modern Journal of Applied Linguistics 3 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 86 – 104 . [ 22 ] Allen Walker Read . 2004 . The geolinguistics of verbal taboo . ETC : A Review of General Semantics 61 , 4 ( 2004 ) . [ 23 ] Benet Oriol Sabat , Cristian Canton Ferrer , and Xavier Giro - i Nieto . 2019 . Hate Speech in Pixels : Detection of Offensive Memes towards Automatic Moderation . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1910 . 02334 ( 2019 ) . [ 24 ] LaShel Shaw . 2011 . Hate speech in cyberspace : Bitterness without boundaries . Notre Dame JL Ethics & Pub . Pol’y 25 ( 2011 ) , 279 . [ 25 ] Peter K Smith . 2015 . The nature of cyberbullying and what we can do about it . Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs 15 , 3 ( 2015 ) , 176 – 184 . [ 26 ] Sara Owsley Sood , Elizabeth F Churchill , and Judd Antin . 2012 . Automatic identification of personal insults on social news sites . Journal of the American Linguistic Taboos and Euphemisms in Nepali Society for Information Science and Technology 63 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 270 – 285 . [ 27 ] Teresa Stone and Lyn Francis . 2010 . What’s the bloody law on this ? Nurses , swearing , and the law in New South Wales , Australia . Contemporary nurse 34 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 248 – 257 . [ 28 ] Trinicenter . [ n . d . ] . Racism In Hinduism . http : / / www . trinicenter . com / more / India / invasionsandracism . htm . Accessed : 2020 - 07 - 06 . [ 29 ] Ronald Wardhaugh . 2011 . An introduction to sociolinguistics . Vol . 28 . John Wiley & Sons . [ 30 ] ElizabethWhittakerandRobinMKowalski . 2015 . Cyberbullyingviasocialmedia . Journal of school violence 14 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 11 – 29 . [ 31 ] Michael Wiegand , Melanie Siegel , and Josef Ruppenhofer . 2018 . Overview of the germeval 2018 shared task on the identification of offensive language . ( 2018 ) . [ 32 ] Marcos Zampieri , Shervin Malmasi , Preslav Nakov , Sara Rosenthal , Noura Farra , and Ritesh Kumar . 2019 . Semeval - 2019 task 6 : Identifying and categorizing offensive language in social media ( offenseval ) . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1903 . 08983 ( 2019 ) .