Hypothesis Is carotenoid ornamentation linked to the inner mitochondria membrane potential ? A hypothesis for the maintenance of signal honesty James D . Johnson , Geoffrey E . Hill * Department of Biological Sciences , 331 Funchess Hall , Auburn University , Auburn , AL 36849 - 5414 , USA a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 29 June 2012 Accepted 26 October 2012 Available online 3 November 2012 Keywords : Carotenoid oxidation Ketolation Coq biosynthesis Mitochondria Cotingins Animal coloration a b s t r a c t Several mechanistic hypotheses have been proposed for how carotenoid pigmentation of integumentary structures can serve as an honest signal of individual quality . These hypotheses are founded on proposed links between carotenoids , immuno responsiveness , and oxidative stress , but an absence of biochemical information on the oxidative pathways of carotenoids has limited the sophistication of such hypotheses . Based on published evidence , we propose that the oxidation of carotenoids for the purpose of orna - mentation in birds and reptiles is coupled to the inner mitochondria membrane . We predict that several carotenoid oxidation reactions yielding ornamental pigments occur on the inner mitochondrial membrane . Three of these reactions are proposed to occur within the ubiquinone biosynthesis cluster known as the Coq cluster consisting of approximately a dozen Coq members , tightly integrated and intimately associated with Complex I and III of the electron transport system . Ubiquinone and highly oxidized ornamental carotenoids share a stereochemically - conserved binding region suggesting that these two molecules may have shared similar pathways in the past . Carotenoids and ubiquinones may cooperate as redox participants in anti - radical reactions or independently in helping to maintain membrane or supra - complex stabilization during times of high - energy demand . Under this hypothesis , oxidation of carotenoids is coupled to the inner mitochondria membrane potential such that ornamental coloration re ﬂ ects the ef ﬁ ciency of cellular respiration . (cid:1) 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Among the best - studied ornamental traits in animals are bright yellow , orange , and red color displays produced by deposition of carotenoid pigments in integumentary structures such as eyes , bills , skin , or feathers [ 1 , 2 ] . Current theory proposes that bright carotenoid displays are honest signals of individual quality [ 3 , 4 ] and abundant empirical evidence in many bird species supports an association between the showiness of carotenoid coloration and individual performance [ 5 ] . The mechanisms that link carotenoid ornamentation to performance , however , remain poorly under - stood [ 6 ] . Carotenoids cannot be synthesized by vertebrates de novo , so they must be sequestered in the diet [ 7 ] . In many birds , carotenoids are metabolized before theyare deposited [ 2 ] . The majority of these reactions are oxidations ( carotenoids lose electrons ) while some may involve reductive hydride ( H : (cid:1) ) transfers ( gains electrons ) . In this paper we will consider only oxidation reactions . Because carotenoids readily receive and transfer electrons , carotenoids are believed to serve as antioxidants within animal systems [ 8 , 9 ] , and empirical studies consistently ﬁ nd links between oxidative stress , immunocompetence , and carotenoid intake [ 10 , 11 ] . These obser - vations have led to the development of the Resource Tradeoff Hypothesis for the maintenance of honest signaling via carotenoid pigmentation [ 12 e 14 ] . By this hypothesis , carotenoids are essential and limiting resources serving as immuno - stimulants , antioxi - dants , and integumentary colorants , and only individuals with large pools of carotenoid resources are able to both maintain oxidative homeostasis and produce brightly colored integuments [ 15 ] . Alternatively , the Shared Pathway Hypothesis proposes that production of ornamental traits is fundamentally linked to vital cellular processes needed for general organism functionality [ 16 ] . By this latter hypothesis , carotenoid ornamentation is a direct indicator of the physiological state of the individual and is not simply a function of resource availability [ 17 e 19 ] . A shortcoming of both the Resource Tradeoff Hypothesis and the Shared Pathway Hypothesis is lack of speci ﬁ c cellular mechanisms . The locations and circumstances under which carotenoids might serve as critical antioxidants remain to be resolved even for model * Corresponding author . Tel . : þ 1 334 844 9269 , þ 1 334 332 4930 ( mobile ) ; fax : þ 1 334 844 9234 . E - mail address : ghill @ auburn . edu ( G . E . Hill ) . Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Biochimie journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / biochi 0300 - 9084 / $ e see front matter (cid:1) 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biochi . 2012 . 10 . 021 Biochimie 95 ( 2013 ) 436 e 444 species like the laboratory mouse ( Mus musculus ) and are completely unexplored in vertebrates with integumentary orna - mentation . Such vagueness has made the Resource Tradeoff Hypothesis dif ﬁ cult to critically assess but easy to support with statistical associations . Similarly , the speci ﬁ c pathways that are shared between vital cellular processes and mechanisms of orna - ment production have not been proposed for any color display . In this paper we propose a biochemical model for the pathways that are shared in the production of cellular energy and the production of oxidized carotenoid pigments used in ornamenta - tion . We propose that the oxidation of carotenoids occurs within the inner mitochondria membrane ( IMM ) . We ﬁ rst highlight the similarities between carotenoids and ubiquinones in both structure and function . We next show that the pathways leading to UQ biosynthesis involve the same stereo - speci ﬁ c biochemical modi ﬁ - cations required for carotenoid metabolism . We then explore the various core reactions of which ubiquinones are the principal redox participants . Finally , we introduce the IMM carotenoid oxidation hypothesis in detail providing supporting evidence from the liter - ature . We conclude by considering the implications of linking ornamental coloration to cellular respiration for understanding both color signals and basic mitochondrial processes . 2 . Structural and functional links between carotenoids and ubiquinone Ubiquinone ( UQ ) , also referred to as Coenzyme Q ( CoQ n ) , is best known for its role in aerobic respiration where it carries electrons and protons from the matrix side of the IMM to the inner mito - chondria space ( IMS ) . The movement of protons into the IMS provides the proton - motive force that drives ATP synthesis [ 20 ] . UQ has a multi - oxygenated aromatic planar ring and a ten - member ( CoQ 10 ) isoprenoid or farnesyl tail ( Fig . 1 ) . The aromatic ring is redox active and the isoprenoid side chain is ﬂ exible enough to allow ﬂ uid movement within and across the bilayer lea ﬂ ets and interaction with UQ binding sites . The redox - active aromatic end ring oscillates between the IMM surfaces accepting and trans - porting both protons and electrons [ 21 , 22 ] . Because UQ is especially lipophilic , it does not engage in radical transfer reactions with water - soluble anti - oxidants such as vitamin C and glutathione ( GSH ) . If it is found outside the normal electron transfer pathways , however , it can interact with other lipophilic radical partners such as vitamin E ( a - tocopherol ) and carotenoids [ 23 ] . The aromatic ring of UQ derives from L - Tyrosine and L - Phenylalanine , and the iso - prenoid tail is synthesized via condensation of isoprene monomers originating from acetyl Co - A via the mevalonate pathway [ 24 ] . In carotenogenic bacteria , plants , and fungi , carotenoids are also assembled via the mevalonate pathway and so share a part of their biosynthesis with prenylated quinones [ 24 e 26 ] . Unlike caroten - oids , UQ is very dif ﬁ cult to assimilate in the diet due to its higher lipophilicity [ 27 ] . Carotenoids are acquired by animals in their diets [ 1 ] , and they fall into two major groups : xanthophylls and carotenes ( Fig . 1 ) . Two dietary carotenes ( b , b - carotene , b , 3 - carotene ) as well as one dietary xanthophyll ( b - cryptoxanthin ) are pro - vitamin A carot - enoids . Pro - vitamin A carotenoids are sequestered primarily for vitamin A homeostasis [ 28 , 29 ] . In all birds and some reptiles ( turtles and most lizards ) , ingested carotenoids are subject to one or more rounds of oxidation leading to the production of some combination of canary xanthophylls , keto - carotenoids , and cotingins ( involving the loss of 4 , 8 or 12 electrons respectively across 2 end - rings ) ( Fig . 2 ) . Several of these oxidation reactions of dietary carotenoids create the pigments that are used in oil droplets in the retina [ 30 ] and that are deposited to produce some of the most brilliant color displays in animals . Beyond precursor e product relationships , the biochemical natures of the oxidation reactions as well as the identities of the enzymes that catalyze these reactions remain completely unknown in animals . Like UQs , carotenoids actively interact with radicals undergoing both elec - tron abstraction and electron transfer reactions , covering a wide range of anti - and pro - oxidant behavior [ 31 ] . 2 . 1 . Structural similarities of UQ and carotenoids On ﬁ rst consideration , UQ and carotenoids appear to share few similarities in structure : UQ has an aromatic planar end - ring with a non - conjugated isoprenoid tail , and carotenoids have a weakly conjugated hexene end - ring with a conjugated isoprenoid back - bone . UQ has an additional ketone at position C2 while carotenoids have a lipophilic dimethyl group in the same position . On closer inspection , however , the two ring systems share important simi - larities in molecular structure ( Fig . 1 ) . Using cotingin ( a carotenoid pigment isolated from the feathers of the Pompadour cotinga , Xipholena punicea [ 32 ] ; ) as a fully oxidized carotenoid to compare to UQ , we found that carbons C6 e C5 e C4 e C3 e C2 of the carotenoid ring system was stereochemically identical to the same sequence in UQ ( Fig . 1 ) . Astaxanthin ( 3 , 3 0 - dihydroxy - 4 , 4 0 - diketo - b - carotene ) mimics C6 e C5 e C4 e C3 of UQ and retains the stereochemistry for binding ( considering the four binding residues on UQ and electron transfer ( ketone ) ) . All three of these molecules are planar within the known binding sequence of UQ . This degree of similarity favors a potential for carotenoids and UQs to occupy similar binding sites . The single exception we found occurred at site Q o in Complex III ( ubiquinol - cytochrome c oxidoreductase , E . C . 1 . 10 . 2 . 2 ) ( discussed below ) . In general we found that binding sites for the UQ ring and tail systemwithin the various ETC complexes were accommodating ( with suf ﬁ cient volume ) and appeared electrostatically compatible ( with no apparent charge incompatibilities ) . Ohshima et al . [ 33 ] found the quinone reduction site at Complex I was spacious enough to accommodate bulky exogenous UQ analogs . This latter site was comparable in many ways to sites we inspected visually from available ETC 3D Protein Data Bank ﬁ les revealing quinone binding ( 3H1J , 2WQY , 2H88 et al . ) . Fig . 1 . Stereochemical representations of the end rings of ubiquinone ( UQ ) , ubiquinol ( UQH 2 ) and carotenoids ( shown as one half a carotenoid in ( B ) ) . b - Ionone ring posi - tions are numbered . UQ ( A ) has mirror symmetry across the end ring with the exception of the methyl group , which determines the binding con ﬁ guration of this pigment with UQ redox complexes . The stereochemistry of the methyl group is maintained in carotenoids ( B ) . Carotenoids with oxygenated functional groups ( B ) are considered xanthophylls ; the removal of these hydroxyl groups convert them caro - tenes . Zeaxanthin can be converted to lutein ( not shown ) by relocation of the double bond within the b - ionone ring from position C5 ] C6 to C4 ] C5 . Molecular mimicrycan beseen inthe oxidation of pompadourin tocotingin ( C ) when comparedwiththe same oxidation of ubiquinol to ubiquinone ( D ) . J . D . Johnson , G . E . Hill / Biochimie 95 ( 2013 ) 436 e 444 437 2 . 2 . Shared domains between UQ and carotenoids Quinones and carotenoids have shared similar lipophilic domains for more than 3500 my . A large number of deeply rooted bacteria phyla are carotenogenic , and many of these have a ketolase to produce C4 keto - carotenoids [ 34 ] . We have discovered in our phylogenetic review of bacterial genomes from carotenogenic phyla that at least one carotenoid hydroxylase , known as crtD , has homology with Coq6 , a hydroxylase found within the Coq biosyn - thesis cluster . We also observed that carotenoid enzymes often appeared to lie within or directly adjacent to operons occupied by primary oxidoreductases known to be active in electron transport . In Arabidopsis , electrons are transported directly from nascent carotenoids to the photosynthetic electron transport chain by plastoquinones [ 35 ] . There are numerous other examples of inter - actions of quinones and carotenoids across several carotenogenic bacteria phyla , including examples of electron transfer between the two . All of these observations support the ancient ties between UQ and carotenoids in fundamental redox biochemistry . Prior to the rise of the cyanobacteria and the oxygenation of the biosphere , carotenoids evolved alongside low - potential quinones known as menaquinones ( MK ) that survive today in anaerobic bacteria [ 24 ] . Following the rise of oxygen of the biosphere approximately 1900 mya , later - evolving classes of proteobacteria ( such as the a - proteobacteria which became mitochondria in eukaryotes ) switched from anaerobic MKs to high - potential aerobic - UQs to adapt to increasing levels of molecular oxygen [ 36 ] . With the appearance of increased levels of molecular oxygen , quinones ( and likely carotenoids as well ) became more oxidized , thereby providing increasing protection against oxidation from rising levels of reactive oxygen . Simultaneously , the various redox centers within the ETC increased their midpoint oxidation poten - tials to accommodate the rise in carrier potential . 2 . 3 . Shared function between UQ and carotenoids UQ and carotenoids share a common basis for stabilizing radical intermediates allowing longer periods of time for redox recycling ( repair ) by locally cooperating anti - oxidants such as a - tocopherol ( a TOH ) [ 37 ] . A stable radical is less reactive and long - lived allowing suf ﬁ cient time to be reduced by local anti - oxidants . Among the simplest radical reactions involving carotenoids is the transfer of an electron from a carotenoid to a nearby radical , thereby producing CAR (cid:3) þ , a positively charged radical with a half - life of up to 0 . 5 s [ 23 , 38 e 40 ] . Such radical stabilization by carotenoids is achieved across the conjugated polyene backbone of the carotenoid system [ 41 ] . UQ , on the other hand , is stabilized in radical form by its aromatic benzene ring nucleus , and presumably has extended radical lifetimes in various compartments , most notably within circulating lipoproteins where they are quite active as anti - oxidants . Both UQ and carotenoids are lipophilic redox - active pigments capable of both anti - and pro - oxidant behavior with a strong dependence on local redox participants [ 31 , 42 e 45 ] . Electrochemi - cally , the midpoint potentials of UQ and carotenoids suggest that these molecules are redox coupled under physiologic conditions because both molecules reversibly interact with the O 2 = O 2 (cid:3) (cid:1) couple and with each other [ 23 , 42 , 44 ] . Common redox reactions that are shared by UQ and carotenoids and likely to have a physiologic role in vivo are summarized in Table 1 . The most notable anti - oxidant reaction shared by UQ and oxidized carotenoids such as astaxanthin is the direct quenching of superoxide ( O 2 (cid:3) (cid:1) ) . UQ and oxidized carotenoids both have enhanced oxidation potentials ( high electron af ﬁ nities ) and are able to oxidize ( remove an electron from ) superoxide , thus quenching the radical directly . Interestingly , the potential to oxidize superoxide directly increases with redder ( more oxidized ) pigments suggesting a potential link of oxidative state to animal ornamentation [ 42 , 44 ] . Both UQ and carotenoids serve diverse functions . UQ is found in nearly all membranes outside of the mitochondria and serves several unique and independent functions in addition to providing anti - oxidant protection throughout the intracellular endomem - brane system . UQ ’ s primary function appears to be the shunting of electrons between NADH dehydrogenase to Complex III within the Table 1 Radical reactionsthat arecommon between carotenoids and ubiquinones and likely to be physiologically important in vivo . The quenching superoxide through direct oxidation is a reaction uniquely shared between carotenoid and ubiquinones . Typical anti - oxidant behavior of carotenoid and ubiquinone involves giving up an electron to a radical ( carbon centered ) thereby reducing it and leaving a radical carotenoid and ubiquinone to be recovered by local anti - oxidants . Both carotenoids andubiquinones havethe capacity toreducevitamin E ( a - tocopherol ) andtherefore may interact with the well known ascorbate - a - TOC - Quinone relay of lipophilic radical reactions . Name of reaction Reaction equation a Quenching of superoxide ASTA þ HO 2 (cid:3) 0 ASTA (cid:3) (cid:1) þ O 2 þ H þ UQ þ HO 2 (cid:3) 0 UQ (cid:3) (cid:1) þ O 2 þ H þ Radical quenching ( lipid ) b - CAR þ R (cid:3) 0 b - CAR (cid:3) þ þ R (cid:1) UQH 2 þ R (cid:3) 0 UQH (cid:3) þ RH Regeneration of vitamin E ( a - TOC ) CAR þ a TO (cid:3) 0 CAR (cid:3) þ þ a TO (cid:1) UQH 2 þ a TO (cid:3) 0 UQH (cid:3) þ a TO (cid:1) þ H þ Conjugation reactions ( radical ) Conjugation reactions ( Michael addition ) X (cid:3) þ GS (cid:3) 0 GS e X X þ GSH 0 GS w X a ASTA ¼ astaxanthin ; UQ ¼ ubiquinone ; UQH 2 ¼ ubiquinol ; b - CAR ¼ b - carotene ; R ¼ alkyl / peroxyl ; X ¼ adduct ; a TO ¼ a - tocopherol ; GS ¼ glutathione radical ; GSH ¼ glutathione . Fig . 2 . The sequential oxidation of carotenoids from the least oxidized ( dietary , far left ) to the most highly oxidized ( cotingin , far right ) . Evidence of the initial oxidation occurring within mitochondria under pro - oxidant conditions has been reported in mammals [ 50 ] . The initial oxidation products of dietary carotenoids are isoelectronic with either canary - xanthophyll A or B . The second round of oxidation leads to the production of more oxidized carotenoids such as rhodoxanthin and keto - carotenoids . Finally , in the neotropical Cotingas , a third round of oxidation , a reaction which take carotenoids to their peak oxidation state , leads to cotingin . All of these oxidations are potentially viable within the IMM and are discuss in the text in more detail . J . D . Johnson , G . E . Hill / Biochimie 95 ( 2013 ) 436 e 444 438 electron transport chain . UQ has been found to serve as proton translocators in lysosomes [ 46 ] and as an electron accepting co - factor in numerous mitochondria enzymes including mitochon - dria glycerol - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ( GPDH - M , E . C . 1 . 1 . 5 . 2 ) , electron transfer ﬂ avoprotein dehydrogenase ( ETFDH , E . C . 1 . 5 . 5 . 1 ) , choline dehydrogenase ( CHDH , E . C . 1 . 1 . 99 . 1 ) and dihydroorotate dehydrogenase ( DHODH , E . C . 1 . 3 . 3 . 1 ) . UQ also serves to link several ETC auxiliary redox proteins in the mitochondria where they shunt electrons to Complex III . Speci ﬁ c roles for carotenoids in cellular processes of vertebrates are less clear , although there is mounting evidence that carotenoids do contribute to quenching radical reactions in the membranes in which they reside . There is also evidence that carotenoids can modulate and stimulate the cellular immune response [ 47 , 48 ] . The role of carotenoids in ﬁ ltering light and quenching reactive singlet oxygen within the macula lutea has been well characterized in retinal biochemistry [ 49 ] . Physiologically , carotenoids may behave as either anti - or pro - oxidant depending on the redox partners with which they associate and the local physiologic conditions [ 31 ] . Unesteri ﬁ ed carotenoids with C3 keto groups ( canary xanthophylls ) are likely candidates for Michael addition reactions with sulfhydryl groups such as those provided byglutathione and protein cysteines . 3 . The IMM carotenoid oxidation hypothesis We advance the hypothesis that in some reptiles and birds carotenoids and ubiquinones may share similar domains among potentially bi - functional enzymes including those found in the Coq biosynthesis cluster on the IMM [ 26 ] . Coq enzymes are proposed to oxidize and modify both UQ and carotenoids at speci ﬁ c stereo - chemical positions on the end rings . Substrate exposure and co - localization of both UQ and carotenoids provide the opportunity for such shared biosynthetic pathways , and such shared pathways would have signi ﬁ cant implications for broadening our under - standing of carotenoid metabolism in vertebrates . The three biosynthetic steps that we propose are shared between UQ and carotenoids are ( 1 ) ketolation ( hydroxylation ) , ( 2 ) O - methylation , and ( 3 ) ﬁ nal oxidation to cotingin resulting in 2 , 3 - desaturation ( Fig . 2 ) . 3 . 1 . Production of canary xanthophylls In vertebrates , the production of highly oxidized carotenoids begins with the conversion of dietary zeaxanthin and lutein to carotenoids that are isoelectronic with canary xanthophylls ( Fig . 2 ) . The ﬁ rst step in the pathway involves the initial loss of two elec - trons converting the b - ionone ring to an 3 - ionone canary - xanthophyll C3 ketone . This initial reaction is responsible for the production of 3 0 - dehydro - lutein ( 3 0 - oxolutein ) , a carotenoid oxidation product found in the plasma of many vertebrates . Dide - hydrolutein , a carotenoid isoelectronic with canary - xanthophyll B , and 3 0 - dehydro - lutein were found to be oxidized from dietary carotenoids within the mitochondria of mammals [ 50 ] . In other mammalian studies , the production of 3 0 - dehydro - lutein is proposed to be carried out by dehydrogenases based on ﬁ nding equi - molar concentrations of ( 3 R , 6 0 S ) - and ( 3 R , 6 0 R ) - 3 0 - dehydro - lutein [ 51 ] . Carotenoids isoelectronic with canary xanthophylls have been detected in numerous vertebrates tested for this metabolite [ 40 , 51 e 56 ] . Isoelectronic is used here to de ﬁ ne a condition inwhich simple enzyme assistance ( generally acid - base catalyzed ) can overcome small activation energy barriers of substrate isomeriza - tion leading to more stable products . Because the reaction does not require the transfer of electrons , the isomerization is isoelectronic . Generally these isomerizations take the form of keto e enol isomerizations , and account for many of the similar structures seen between carotenoids and UQ . Whether the pathway ( s ) to canary - xanthophylls is shared by the unknown ketolase in a second series of oxidations is uncertain because the enzymes involved are unknown . The pathway to canary - xanthophylls may be completely independent of the pathway to ketolation and may vary signi ﬁ - cantly across species . 3 . 2 . Carotenoid C4 ketolation may be supported by a Coq hydroxylase There are several potential biosynthetic routes to the production of oxidized ornamental carotenoids in birds . Evidence must be garnered from pigment pro ﬁ les and a few data on circulating carotenoids [ 2 ] . To date not a single non - destructive carotenoid - modifying enzyme has been identi ﬁ ed in birds [ 2 , 45 ] . Many sequential reactions happen rapidly , and intermediates may be strongly bound within an oligomeric arrangement of enzymes and hence be generally undetectable . The most popular route to avian keto - carotenoids ( based on bacteria non - heme di - iron oxygenases ) is via a double hydroxylation event at C4 on the dietary carotenoid b - ionone ring . In this catalytic scenario the carotenoid would be held within the catalytic site for two activated rounds of hydrox - ylation ( presumably consuming two NAD ( P ) Hs and two O 2 ’ s ) . Following the second hydroxylation and the formation of a gem - diol , the carotenoid would spontaneously dehydrate to a ketone at the C4 position . The latter reaction was ﬁ rst proposed by Hudon [ 57 ] within the catalytic site of an activated P450 . One might expect this scheme to occasionally result in the deposition of singularly hydroxylated carotenoids in feathers and integument , but to date not a single C4 hydroxylated product has been proven to be a ketolated intermediate . Stradi et al . ( 1995 ) identi ﬁ ed a C4 hydroxylated pigment known as isoastaxanthin ( 4 , 4 0 - dihydroxy - 3 , 3 - carotene - , 3 0 - dione ) from gold ﬁ nches that appeared to be the product of a direct hydroxylation of C4 on the end ring of canary - xanthophyll B ( note that enzyme assistance could convert iso - astaxanthin to astaxanthin and vice versa because isoastaxanthin and astaxanthin are isoelectronic ) . There appears to be clear evidence for a C4 hydroxylation event , but whether the carotenoid stays for two rounds of hydroxylation remains unknown . Peroxide attack from a co - factor such as FAD or perhaps an unknown oxy - genase could lead to a direct C4 ketolation , but because the ketolase remains unknown , any arguments claiming lack of detectable intermediates as proof of absence or of catalytic mechanisms to ketolation remains speculative [ 58 ] . A second pathway to ketolation involves the desaturation of the b - ionone ring at the C3 e C4 position . Many hydroxylases share bi - functional behavior between hydroxylation and desaturation because the two reactions share similar mechanisms [ 59 ] . In the case of the proposed ketolase , a slight shift of the oxygen activated iron center ( should the ketolase have an iron center ) could alter hydroxylation and favor hydrogen abstraction leading to C3 e C4 desaturation ( as in fatty acid desaturations ) . The end product is a keto e enol isomer that can spontaneously transform to a ketone . If the C3 e C4 desaturation occurs prior to the initial hydroxylation event , the product is capable of spontaneously relaxing into canary - xanthophyll ( hydroxylation of this species would account for iso - astaxanthin reported by Stradi et al . [ 60 ] ) . Although no interme - diate products of C3 e C4 desaturation have been found , desaturation of the b - ionone ring remains a viable alternative pathway considering the nature of hydroxylases and desaturases that commonly convert between these two reactions [ 61 ] . Finally , a hydroxylation event could be followed by a dehydro - genase reaction converting the C4 hydroxyl group to a ketone , a very common reaction in cells . This would require two enzymes in J . D . Johnson , G . E . Hill / Biochimie 95 ( 2013 ) 436 e 444 439 close proximity ( perhaps even fused ) because there is little evidence in avian pigment pro ﬁ les that singularly hydroxylated products are found . Here the absence of intermediates might carry more weight in arguing against this particular reaction sequence , but it would depend on the degree and nature of coupling between the hydroxylase and dehydrogenase . Within the Coq biosynthesis cluster three UQ hydroxylases participate in the hydroxylation of the nascent UQ ring : Coq6 , Coq ? ( unk ) , and Coq7 [ 24 , 26 , 62 ] . Coq7 , a glutamate non - heme di - iron enzyme , is not a likely candidate for carotenoid hydroxylation because hydroxylation by this enzyme is directed at C5 on carot - enoids and not C4 ( relative to the isoprenoid polyene backbone and tail of carotenoids and UQ respectively ) . Both Coq6 and Coq ? Are , however , catalytically aligned with the C4 position of carotenoids . In both UQ and oxidized carotenoids an sp 2 hybridized C e H bond is oriented toward the axis of catalysis and the local topologies are identical ( Fig . 1 ) . Note that the sp 2 planar con ﬁ guration at C4 would not apply to zeaxanthin . Both UQ and the proposed carotenoid are hydroxylated at the same equivalent position relative to the C6 b - ionone ring carbon . For carotenoids , the hydroxylation would be followed by keto e enol relaxation , perhaps enzyme assisted , to the known C4 ketolated product . At this point in the synthesis the C4 ketolated product may escape the mitochondria , perhaps en masse across membranes in close contact with mitochondria ( mitochondria associated membranes or MAMs ) [ 24 , 26 , 62 e 65 ] or be shuttled by an unknown lipid transporter ( s ) [ 66 ] . Carotenoids leaving the mito - chondria may be deposited within the secretory systemwhere they are esteri ﬁ ed and packaged into nascent VLDL particles . Alterna - tively they may be stored in nearby oil - droplets . For animals that use ketolated carotenoids as integumentary colorants or as retinal pigments , ketolation is the terminal step in the carotenoid oxida - tion process . It is important to note that the UQ hydroxylase Coq ? has not been identi ﬁ ed . Evidence suggests that it is not likely a ﬂ avin - containing oxidoreductase , at least in the fungi Saccharomyces cerevisiae but this observation may or may not apply to vertebrates since S . cerevisiae is missing Complex I ( NADH - coenzyme Q reductase , E . C . 1 . 6 . 5 . 3 ) [ 62 , 67 ] . Without knowledge of the identity of this enzyme , little can be deduced regarding mechanisms of hydroxylation . Phenyl - based aromatic hydroxylases originate from a number of enzyme families , including P450s as well as fatty acid hydroxylases / desaturases . Both types of enzymes hydroxylate aromatic rings via hydrogen atom extraction , a reaction compatible with carotenoid ketolation . Without further knowledge of the unknown Coq ? hydroxylase , the compatibility or incompatibility of a single enzyme capable of hydroxylating both UQ and carotenoids remains speculative . It is interesting to note that ubiH , a required serine / threonine kinase for Coq ? hydroxylase activity , was recently found linked to a core QTL map position on chromosome 5 ( Tgu5 ) in a study on Zebra Finch ( Taeniopygia guttata ) beak color , which is pigmented with ketolated carotenoids [ 68 ] . 3 . 3 . C4 ketocarotenoids are further oxidized in some birds In a few bird species belonging to the neotropical Cotingidae , carotenoid hydroxylation is followed by O - methylation of astax - anthin to pompadourin ( for clarity we do not show the methylation reaction in Fig . 2 ) . We propose that the methyl transferase Coq3 , a member of the Coq UQ biosynthesis cluster , is the enzyme that O - methylates astaxanthin to produce pompadourin ( Fig . 3 ) . Given that this methylation reaction appears restricted to one family of neotropical birds , the substrate availability of the methylase following C4 ketolation may be a signi ﬁ cant selective barrier to overcome . On the other hand , the channeling between the methylase and the ﬁ nal site of oxidation to cotingin appears to be somewhat less restrained since O - methylation generally occurs concomitant to 2 , 3 - desaturation . Coq3 has broad substrate speci - ﬁ city and utilizes S - Adenosyl methionine ( SAM ) as co - factor in the methyl transfer reaction [ 69 ] . It is likely that substrate channeling also plays a role in directing product out of the IMM . Substrate channeling of UQ between Complex I and III has been demon - strated in supra - complex assemblies of the ETC [ 22 ] . Once astaxanthin is O - methylated to pompadourin , it is either transported outof the IMMorchanneled alongthe UQH 2 pathtothe Q o binding site of Complex III ( ubihydroquinone : cytochrome c oxidoreductase or cyt bc 1 ) , one of only two principal sites in mito - chondria for UQH 2 oxidation [ 22 , 23 ] . Complex III , which functions as a homodimer in vivo , consists of three core protein sub - units , an Fe e S Rieske protein , a cytochrome b complex ( with both cyto - chrome b L and b H bound ) and cytochrome c 1 which transfers elec - trons to cytochrome c for delivery to Complex IV . The proposed Q o siteisavailableontheIMSsideof theIMMandsitsclosetothe2Fe2S Rieske cluster and the low potential heme cytochrome b L . The oxidation of UQH 2 at the Q o site of Complex III is the rate - limiting step through this complex and appears to be dependent on the mid - point potential of a Rieske 2Fe2S center near Q o [ 62 ] . Bound distally within the Q o site of Complex III , UQH 2 yields two electrons in a bifurcated oxidation , delivering each electron to two independent acceptors . The ﬁ rst electron is transferred to a 2Fe2S Rieske iron sulfur center ( ISC ) and is the rate - limiting step in this oxidation [ 70 ] . The second electron , following relocation of the ubisemiquinone radical from the distal to the proximal site within Q o , is transferred to a low potential cytochrome b heme ( cyt b L ) [ 70 , 71 ] . The bifurcated nature of this two - electron oxidation is unique among all cytochrome - bc 1 family members . Thermody - namically it is more favorable for UQH 2 to send both electrons to the high potential 2Fe2S Rieske center ( following 2Fe2S recycling ) but conformational changes in the cytochrome b protein prevent the second electron from reaching the Rieske center and is trans - ferred separately to the low potential cytochrome b L , a component of the proton pumping Q cycle of Complex III ( Fig . 3 ) [ 72 e 74 ] . Pompadourin is missing the C2 keto group that is found in UQ , suggesting it may not be compatible with competent cycling of bifurcated electron transfer within Complex III and therefore may not participate directly in the Q cycle of the complex . We suggest that the lack of a C2 keto group on the carotenoid may allow the carotenoid to sit longer in the distal Q o site and deliver the second electron to the 2Fe2S Rieske center following cytochrome c 1 reduction [ 70 , 75 , 76 ] . Other possibilities for the second electron oxidation in carotenoids may involve homodimer inter - protein electron transfer [ 71 , 76 , 77 ] or other bypass reactions including oxidation by molecular oxygen forming superoxide [ 75 , 78 ] . 3 . 4 . Carotenoid metabolism in IMM The above hypothesis d linking the biosynthesis of ubiquinone and the metabolism of carotenoid pigments d places controlled carotenoid oxidation in the IMM within liver hepatocytes . The liver is a likely location for carotenoid oxidation because it is active in lipogenesis within the secretory system . Liver cells are involved in the homeostasis of glycolysis , fatty acids , triglycerides , cholesterol and carotenoids and their transport into and out of circulation . Liver tissue has been proposed to be the tissue in which the keto - lase is active during molt [ 79 e 81 ] . We advance the hypothesis that the hepatic IMM in birds provides a suf ﬁ cient and sustainable oxidative environment with potentially compatible enzymes necessary for the sequential oxidation of dietary carotenoids to more highly oxidized forms . Along with these specialized and potentially bi - functional oxidative J . D . Johnson , G . E . Hill / Biochimie 95 ( 2013 ) 436 e 444 440 enzymes this system would have in place an ef ﬁ cient import / export mechanism to transporting carotenoids into and out of the mito - chondria rather than unidirectionally into the mitochondria for destruction by BCDO2 . Carotenoids have been shown to preferen - tially concentrate in the outer and inner membranes of mitochon - dria in many cell types , but these results vary and are strongly dependent on species and tissue sampled . For example , in avian hepatocytes and lymphocytes , carotenoids are highly concentrated within their mitochondria following supplementation [ 82 e 84 ] . In bovine milk fat globules , carotenoids are highly concentrated in mitochondriaandwithinthecorpusluteumwheretheyappeartobe sequestered in luteal cells [ 85 , 86 ] . However , in mammalian mito - chondria isolated from hepatocytes , carotenoids are generally absent in supplemented animals ( see next section ) . After more then a century of carotenoid - based research , the physiologic roles sup - ported by carotenoids and the intracellular locations in which they take place remain relatively unde ﬁ ned . The anti - oxidant and immuno - stimulating properties of carotenoids have been well documented , but the molecular mechanisms behind these events remain uncertain . 3 . 5 . Carotenoids as pro - oxidants within mitochondria In mammals [ 50 ] and ﬁ sh [ 87 ] , carotenoids have been found to interfere with electron transport and mitochondria functionality , leading to the up - regulation of anti - oxidant enzymes and in many cases triggering apoptosis . Amengual et al . [ 50 ] demonstrated in a study using BCDO2 knockout mice that hepatic mitochondria became dysfunctional when mice were given a diet supplemented with zeaxanthin and lutein . Similar observations have also been made in studies of zebra ﬁ sh , Danio rerio [ 87 ] . The impairment was proposed to be the result of interference with electron transport , presumably originating from radical carotenoid behavior within the IMM as evidenced by oxidized carotenoid metabolites . Carot - enoids triggered signi ﬁ cant mitochondrial anti - oxidant responses including the induction of manganese superoxide dismutase ( Mn - SOD ) , phosphorylated MAPK and AKT , and other anti - oxidant systems as well as depolarizing the IMM potential . In wild - type mice having intact mitochondria BCDO2 , Mn - SOD was induced 9 - fold following carotenoid supplementation . Presumably caroten - oids entered into oxidation reactions with unknown complexes resulting in increased superoxide leakage from the ETC followed by lipid peroxide and other ROS radical attacks . Similar oxidative stress effects have been characterized for numerous redox - sensitive drugs engaging in superoxide forming redox reactions with Complex I [ 88 , 89 ] . Interestingly [ 50 ] found that 3 , 3 0 - didehydrolutein formed from zeaxanthin and 2 , 3 - anhydrolutein ( end ring ) formed from lutein were much more effective inducers of oxidative stress in BCDO2 knockout mice mitochondria ( or intact HepG2 cells which do not Fig . 3 . Simpli ﬁ ed diagram of Complex I and III depicting their assembly within a supercomplex ( respirasome ) showing the coenzyme Q ( Coq ) biosynthesis cluster associated with Complex I . Several of the Coq biosynthesis enzymes ( Coq1 e Coq10 ) are not labeled for clarity . Entering dietary carotenoids are proposed to be initially oxidized at site Q R1 ( currently unknown except by experimental results e see text ) in a reverse ﬂ ow of 2 electrons to NAD þ resulting in the conversion of zeaxanthin and lutein to oxidized carotenoids that are isoelectronic withcanary xanthophylls ( asecond oxidation sitefordietarycarotenoidsmayoccuratQ R2 butis notaddressedhere ) . Notshownisthe proposedoxidative dehydration of lutein to 2 , 3 - anhydrolutein catalyzed by the acidic P ( positive ) side of the IMM ( requires an acidic environment for catalysis ) . Following initial oxidation at Q R1 carotenoids are proposedtofollowsubstrate channels tothe Coq hydroxylaseCoq ? , a hydroxylasethat is currently unknown . Not shown is Coq6 , the second candidateforcarotenoidhydroxylation . Both Coq ? and Coq6 are stereochemically competent to hydroxylate the equivalent position on carotenoids . K depicts the serine / threonine kinase ( ubiH ) required for hydroxylation ( appears to be required for the phosphorylation of the C4 hydroxylase ) . Carotenes such as b - carotene and b - cryptoxanthin ( 1 / 2 is carotene ) may be desaturated at site Q R1 prior to hydroxylation or may be hydroxylated twice at Coq ? forming a diol that spontaneously decomposes to a ketone ( see text for details ) . Atthis point the ketolated product astaxanthin ( ASTA ) may be routed out of the IMM and back to the endoplasmic reticulum for export or storage in oil - droplets . The purple arrows depict the normal Q cycle path for electrons which are not expected to be supported with oxidized carotenoids ( though this cannot be ruled out ) . In cotingas such as Xipholena punicea ( Pompadour cotinga ) ASTA presumably travels through substrate channels , likely gated , to Coq3 , an O - methylase with broad substrate speci ﬁ city . The resulting product is pompadourin ( POMP ) , stereochemically equivalent to reduced UQH 2 ( see Fig . 2 ) . Following the methylation reaction POMP may be either routed out of the IMM to the ERor continue on to Q o , the most likelyoxidation site for the conversion of POMP to cotingin ( COTIN ) . As discussed in the text this latter reaction is likely to occur via a 2 electron transfer to the 2Fe2S Rieske iron sulfur center . The IMM is electropositive on the inner membrane space ( IMS ) and electronegative on the matrix side ( N side ) . The Q cycle , responsible for cycling protons for the establishment of a proton - motive gradient is depicted within Complex III . Q i is a binding site for UQ on the matrix side that participates in proton cycling . Not all redox centers are shown to improve clarity . Cardiolipin , discussed in the text , is depicted as phospholipids adjacent to the core complex proteins . ( For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) J . D . Johnson , G . E . Hill / Biochimie 95 ( 2013 ) 436 e 444 441 express BCDO2 ) than their parent dietary compounds . This latter result supports the argument that BCDO2 likely removes these oxidized pigments as waste before they can escape the mitochon - dria or interfere with the ETC on the IMM . 3 , 3 0 - didehydrolutein , having two unsaturated a , b C3 ketone groups on each end - ring , may enter into a Michael addition reaction with nearby nucleo - philes forming conjugates with glutathione ( GSH ) , protein cysteinyl groups , or other available anion centers [ 88 e 92 ] . GSH is a critical anti - oxidant within the matrix of mitochondria and depletion of GSH levels would have immediate toxic consequences . These results support that argument that the ﬁ rst level of carotenoid oxidation in mammalian mitochondria is a conversion of zeax - anthin and lutein into oxidized products isoelectronic with both canary - xanthophyll A and B . Despite these observations showing that carotenoid can be damaging in the mitochondria of mammals and ﬁ sh , we advance the hypothesis that in birds there exists a redox window of toler - ance within the IMM in which carotenoids may enter the mito - chondria and support several biochemical processes . Birds have a much lower superoxide leakage rate from their ETC than to ﬁ sh or mammals [ 93 e 95 ] , which may allow carotenoids to enter the avian IMM under controlled redox conditions without the immediate danger of their transformation to pro - oxidant radical carotenoids or escaped reactive aldehydes . The high levels of carotenoids measured in the mitochondria of chickens [ 84 ] supports the idea that carotenoids can and do exist in quantities in the mitochondria . 4 . General discussion If our hypothesis linking carotenoids to the UQ pool is correct , then the oxidation of dietary carotenoids occurs within the IMM of hepatic cells . The transport of carotenoids into and out of the mitochondria has important implications for what is being signaled by carotenoid - based pigmentation in ornamented animals but also for a general role of carotenoids in the IMM serving as electron - scavengers or in yet uncharacterized roles . We propose that carotenoids entering the IMM are integrated locally within the UQ pool where they may serve as anti - radical anti - oxidants , super - oxide quenchers ( for highly oxidized carotenoids such as astax - anthin ) , or perhaps modulators of respirasome assembly . Anti - oxidant activity of carotenoids is likely to support the synergistic redox partners : a - tocopherol and ascorbate . In our model , the initial oxidation of carotenoids to products isoelectronic with canary xanthophylls is carried out by unknown IMM protein ( s ) . There is no way to determine at this time whether this ﬁ rst round of oxidation may be shared by the C4 ketolase or is independent of it . From this pool of initially oxidized carotenoids , C4 hydroxylation by either Coq6 or the unknown Coq ? hydroxylase could lead to the formation of keto - carotenoids . Presumably redox gating along substrate channels will determine whether or not a carotenoid continues on to the next Coq enzyme for further oxidation . In cotingas , the neotropical group of birds that produce cotingins , the most oxidized carotenoids in vertebrates , C4 ketola - tion is followed by O - methylation . This latter reaction is proposed to be carried out by Coq3 , a broad substrate - accepting O - methyl transferase that methylates an equivalent position on UQ . The O - methylated product , pompadourin , may either escape the IMM or continue along a pathway similar to newly synthesized UQH 2 , ﬁ nally being oxidized to cotingin at the proposed Q o site of Complex III . The availability of UQ is likely the condition most critical for maintaining a homeostatic ﬂ ux of electrons through the ETC [ 22 , 96 ] . Moreover , the ratio of UQ to UQH 2 is the redox couple that is primarily responsible for maintaining the IMM potential ( Dm H þ ) [ 75 , 76 ] . The Coq biosynthesis cluster is required for Complex III assembly in certain strains of S . cerevisiae [ 97 ] ( Dr . P . Cobine pers . comm . ) . Given that for stability and function Complex I requires interactions with both the Coq biosynthesis cluster and Complex III , the interaction between Complex III and the Coq biosynthesis complex could couple ef ﬁ cient assembly of the supra - complexes to UQ as well as carotenoid access [ 22 ] . To maximize ef ﬁ cient ATP production , birds have evolved a spare capacity of ETC complexes compared to other tetrapods [ 93 e 95 ] . Excess ETC complexes are designed to meet instantaneous energy demands for activities such as powered ﬂ ight . A conse - quence of such spare capacity is low radical superoxide leakage under metabolic resting conditions and low electron transport rates as seen in state 4 electron transport as described [ 93 , 94 , 98 ] . So long as electrons entering the ETC are equal to the electrons leaving , superoxide radical leakage from the electron transport chain is maintained at minimal levels . In the resting condition , the excess ETC Complexes of birds are more then adequate for main - taining superoxide leak - free electron ﬂ ow through the ETC . Based on the physical arrangement of excess complex assemblies , it seems likely that carotenoids and ubiquinones have potential to interact in a cooperative manner . Opportunities for accessibility to ETC proteins may be more numerous in birds than in other vertebrates . The implications of linking carotenoid metabolism to UQ and the function of the ETC in the IMM are substantial . For more than a decade , physiological ecologists have been reporting associations between circulating carotenoids , immune system parameters , oxidative state , various measures of individual performance , and ornamentation [ 11 ] . To date , the best explanation for these asso - ciations has been that carotenoids are crucial and limiting resources in their roles as antioxidants in cells [ 13 ] . Without knowledge of the pathways involved in carotenoid utilization , including carotenoid metabolism , researchers have treated the mechanisms of carotenoid utilization as a black box , tweaking conditions at the input phase and measuring output parameters [ 6 ] . By proposing speci ﬁ c mechanisms for the utilization and metabo - lism of ingested carotenoids , we have engaged in a ﬁ rst attempt to open the box and understand the mechanism of carotenoid utili - zation . If we are correct in our hypothesis , then the links between organismal functionality and carotenoid ornamentation arise not because of tradeoffs in the allocation of carotenoid pigments but because of links between carotenoid pathways and the systems for energy production that occur at the level of the IMM . The impli - cations are that carotenoid pigmentation is potentially signaling the most fundamental aspect of the quality of the individual and that studies of carotenoid systems in ornamented birds might provide key new insights into fundamental processes in the IMM . Acknowledgment The authors were supported by NSF grant IOS200272 during the preparation of this manuscript . Paul Cobine commented on an earlier version of the manuscript . References [ 1 ] H . M . Fox , G . Vevers , The Nature of Animal Colors , Macmillan , New York , 1960 . [ 2 ] K . J . McGraw , Mechanics of carotenoid coloration , in : G . E . Hill , K . J . McGraw ( Eds . ) , Bird Coloration , Measurements and Mechanisms vol . 1 , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA , 2006 , pp . 177 e 242 . [ 3 ] G . E . Hill , A Red Bird in a Brown Bag : The Function and Evolution of Orna - mental Plumage Coloration in the House Finch , Oxford University Press , New York , 2002 . [ 4 ] V . A . Olson , I . P . F . Owens , Costly sexual signals : are carotenoids rare , risky or required ? Trends Ecol . Evol . 13 ( 1998 ) 510 e 514 . J . D . Johnson , G . E . Hill / Biochimie 95 ( 2013 ) 436 e 444 442 [ 5 ] G . E . Hill , Environmental regulation of ornamental coloration , in : G . E . Hill , K . J . McGraw ( Eds . ) , Bird Coloration , Meachanisms and Measurements , vol . 1 , Harvard University Press , Cambridge MA , 2006 . [ 6 ] P . A . Svensson , B . B . M . Wong , Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology : a review , Behaviour 148 ( 2011 ) 131 e 189 . [ 7 ] G . Britton , The Biochemistry of Natural Pigments . Cambridge Texts in Chem - istry and Biochemistry , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , 1993 . [ 8 ] G . A . Lozano , Carotenoids , parasites , and sexual selection , Oikos 70 ( 1994 ) 309 e 311 . [ 9 ] T . von Schantz , S . Bensch , M . Grahn , D . Hasselquist , H . Wittzell , Good genes , oxidative stress and condition - dependent sexual signals , P . Roy . Soc . B Biol . Sci . 266 ( 1999 ) 1 e 12 . [ 10 ] D . Arnoult , F . Soares , I . Tattoli , S . E . Girardin , Mitochondria in innate immunity , EMBO Rep . 12 ( 2011 ) 901 e 910 . [ 11 ] K . J . McGraw , A . A . Cohen , D . Constantini , P . Horak , The ecological signi ﬁ cance of antioxidants and oxidative stress : a marriage of functional and mechanistic approaches , Funct . Ecol . 24 ( 2010 ) 947 e 949 . [ 12 ] E . Aguilera , J . A . Amat , Carotenoids , immune response and the expression of sexual ornaments in male green ﬁ nches ( Carduelis chloris ) , Natur - wissenschaften 94 ( 2007 ) 895 e 902 . [ 13 ] C . Alonso - Alvarez , L . Perez - Rodriguez , R . Mateo , O . Chastel , J . Vinuela , The oxidation handicap hypothesis and the carotenoid allocation trade - off , J . Evol . Biol . 21 ( 2008 ) 1789 e 1797 . [ 14 ] A . P . Moller , C . Biard , J . D . Blount , D . C . Houston , P . Ninni , N . Saino , P . F . Surai , Carotenoid - dependent signals : indicators of foraging ef ﬁ ciency , immunocom - petence or detoxi ﬁ cation ability ? Avian Poult . Biol . Rev . 11 ( 2000 ) 137 e 159 . [ 15 ] L . Rowe , D . Houle , The lek paradox and the capture of genetic variance by condition dependent traits , P . Roy . Soc . B Biol . Sci . 263 ( 1996 ) 1415 e 1421 . [ 16 ] G . E . Hill , Condition - dependent traits as signals of the functionality of vital cellular processes , Ecol . Lett . 14 ( 2011 ) 625 e 634 . [ 17 ] J . Hudon , Showiness , carotenoids , and captivity : a comment on Hill ( 1992 ) , Auk 111 ( 1994 ) 218 e 221 . [ 18 ] C . W . Thompson , N . Hillgarth , M . Leu , H . E . McClure , High parasite load in house ﬁ nches ( Carpodacus mexicanus ) is correlated with reduced expression of a sexually selected trait , Am . Nat . 149 ( 1997 ) 270 e 294 . [ 19 ] H . Weber , Über die ursache des verlustes der roten federfarbe bei gekä ﬁ gten birkenzeisigen , J . Ornithol . 102 ( 1961 ) 158 e 163 . [ 20 ] P . Mitchell , Coupling of phosphorylation to electron and hydrogen transfer by a chemi - osmotic type of mechanism , Nature 191 ( 1961 ) 144 e 148 . [ 21 ] S . Di Bernardo , R . Fato , R . Casadio , P . Fariselli , G . Lenaz , A high diffusion coef ﬁ cient for coenzyme Q ( 10 ) might be related to a folded structure , FEBS Lett . 426 ( 1998 ) 77 e 80 . [ 22 ] G . Lenaz , M . L . Genova , Structure and organization of mitochondrial respira - tory complexes : a new understanding of an old subject , Antioxid . Redox Signal . 12 ( 2010 ) 961 e 1008 . [ 23 ] A . M . James , R . A . J . Smith , M . P . Murphy , Antioxidant and prooxidant properties of mitochondrial coenzyme Q , Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 423 ( 2004 ) 47 e 56 . [ 24 ] B . Nowicka , J . Kruk , Occurrence , biosynthesis and function of isoprenoid quinones , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Bioenergy 1797 ( 2010 ) 1587 e 1605 . [ 25 ] G . Sandmann , Carotenoid biosynthesis in microorganisms and plants , Eur . J . Biochem . 223 ( 1994 ) 7 e 24 . [ 26 ] U . C . Tran , C . F . Clarke , Endogenous synthesis of coenzyme Q in eukaryotes , Mitochondrion 7 ( 2007 ) S62 e S71 . [ 27 ] Y . Saito , A . Fukuhara , K . Nishio , M . Hayakawa , Y . Ogawa , H . Sakamoto , K . Fujii , Y . Yoshida , E . Niki , Characterization of cellular uptake and distribution of coenzyme Q ( 10 ) and vitamin E in PC12 cells , J . Nutr . Biochem . 20 ( 2009 ) 350 e 357 . [ 28 ] M . L . Bonet , J . Ribot , A . Palou , Lipid metabolism in mammalian tissues and its control by retinoic acid , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Mol . Cell . Biol . Lipids 1821 ( 2012 ) 177 e 189 . [ 29 ] G . E . Hill , J . D . Johnson , The vitamin A - redox hypothesis : a basis for honest signaling via carotenoid pigmentation , Am . Nat 180 ( 2012 ) E127 e E150 . [ 30 ] M . Vorobyev , D . Osorio , A . T . D . Bennett , N . J . Marshall , I . C . Cuthill , Tetrachro - macy , oil droplets and bird plumage colours , J . Comp . Physiol . A Neuroethol . Sens . Neural Behav . Physiol . 183 ( 1998 ) 621 e 633 . [ 31 ] F . Bohm , R . Edge , T . G . Truscott , Interactions of dietary carotenoids with singlet oxygen ( O - 1 ( 2 ) ) and free radicals : potential effects for human health , Acta Biochim . Pol 59 ( 2012 ) 27 e 30 . [ 32 ] A . M . LaFountain , S . Kaligotla , S . Cawley , K . M . Riedl , S . J . Schwartz , H . A . Frank , R . O . Prum , Novel methoxy - carotenoids from the burgundy - colored plumage of the Pompadour Cotinga Xipholena punicea , Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 504 ( 2010 ) 142 e 153 . [ 33 ] M . Ohshima , H . Miyoshi , K . Sakamoto , K . Takegami , J . Iwata , K . Kuwabara , H . Iwamura , T . Yagi , Characterization of the ubiquinone reduction site of mitochondrial complex I using bulky synthetic ubiquinones , Biochemistry 37 ( 1998 ) 6436 e 6445 . [ 34 ] S . P . Balashov , E . S . Imasheva , V . A . Boichenko , J . Anton , J . M . Wang , J . K . Lanyi , Xanthorhodopsin : a proton pump with a light - harvesting carotenoid antenna , Science 309 ( 2005 ) 2061 e 2064 . [ 35 ] S . R . Norris , T . R . Barrette , D . DellaPenna , Genetic dissection of carotenoid synthesis in arabidopsis de ﬁ nes plastoquinone as an essential component of phytoene desaturation , Plant Cell 7 ( 1995 ) 2139 e 2149 . [ 36 ] B . Schoepp - Cothenet , C . Lieutaud , F . Baymann , A . Vermeglio , T . Friedrich , D . M . Kramer , W . Nitschke , Menaquinone as pool quinone in a purple bacte - rium , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 106 ( 2009 ) 8549 e 8554 . [ 37 ] M . Burke , R . Edge , E . J . Land , T . G . Truscott , Characterisation of carotenoid radical cations in liposomal environments : interaction with vitamin C , J . Photochem . Photobiol . B Biol . 60 ( 2001 ) 1 e 6 . [ 38 ] L . Cabrini , P . Pasquali , B . Tadolini , A . Sechi , I . L . Land , Antioxidant behaviour of ubiquinone and beta - carotene incorporated in model membranes , Free Radic . Res . Commun . 2 ( 1986 ) 85 e 92 . [ 39 ] H . L . Shi , N . Noguchi , E . Niki , Comparative study on dynamics of antioxidative action of alpha - tocopheryl hydroquinone , ubiquinol , and alpha - tocopherol , against lipid peroxidation , Free Radic . Biol . Med . 27 ( 1999 ) 334 e 346 . [ 40 ] P . A . Thurmann , W . Schalch , J . C . Aebischer , U . Tenter , W . Cohn , Plasma kinetics of lutein , zeaxanthin , and 3 0 - dehydro - lutein after multiple oral doses of a lutein supplement , Am . J . Clin . Nutr . 82 ( 2005 ) 88 e 97 . [ 41 ] A . A . Woodall , S . W . M . Lee , R . J . Weesie , M . J . Jackson , G . Britton , Oxidation of carotenoids by free radicals : relationship between structure and reactivity , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Gen . Subj . 1336 ( 1997 ) 33 e 42 . [ 42 ] A . Galano , R . Vargas , A . Martinez , Carotenoids can act as antioxidants by oxidizing the superoxide radical anion , Phys . Chem . Chem . Phys . 12 ( 2010 ) 193 e 200 . [ 43 ] H . D . Martin , C . Ruck , M . Schmidt , S . Sell , S . Beutner , B . Mayer , R . Walsh , Chemistry of carotenoid oxidation and free radical reactions , Pure Appl . Chem . 71 ( 1999 ) 2253 e 2262 . [ 44 ] A . Martinez , M . A . Rodriguez - Girones , A . Barbosa , M . Costas , Donator acceptor map for carotenoids , melatonin and vitamins , J . Phys . Chem . A 112 ( 2008 ) 9037 e 9042 . [ 45 ] R . Stradi , The Colour of Flight : Carotenoids in Bird Plumage , University of Milan Press , Milan , Italy , 1998 . [ 46 ] L . Gille , H . Nohl , The existence of a lysosomal redox chain and the role of ubiquinone , Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 375 ( 2000 ) 347 e 354 . [ 47 ] B . P . Chew , J . S . Park , Carotenoid action on the immune response , J . Nutr . 134 ( 2004 ) 257S e 261S . [ 48 ] A . Bendich , Carotenoids and the immune response , J . Nutr . 119 ( 1989 ) 112 e 115 . [ 49 ] J . von Lintig , Metabolism of carotenoids and retinoids related to vision , J . Biol . Chem . 287 ( 2012 ) 1627 e 1634 . [ 50 ] J . Amengual , G . P . Lobo , M . Golczak , H . N . M . Li , T . Klimova , C . L . Hoppel , A . Wyss , K . Palczewski , J . von Lintig , A mitochondrial enzyme degrades carotenoids and protects against oxidative stress , FASEB J . 25 ( 2011 ) 948 e 959 . [ 51 ] G . I . Albert , U . Hoeller , J . Schierle , M . Neuringer , E . J . Johnson , W . Schalch , Metabolism of lutein and zeaxanthin in rhesus monkeys : identi ﬁ cation of ( 3 R , 6 0 R ) - and ( 3 R , 6 0 S ) - 3 0 - dehydro - lutein as common metabolites and comparison to humans , Comp . Biochem . Physiol . B Biochem . Mol . Biol . 151 ( 2008 ) 70 e 78 . [ 52 ] P . Bhosale , B . Serban , D . Y . Zhao , P . S . Bernstein , Identi ﬁ cation and metabolic transformations of carotenoids in ocular tissues of the japanese quail Coturnix japonica , Biochemistry 46 ( 2007 ) 9050 e 9057 . [ 53 ] T . H . Goldsmith , J . S . Collins , S . Licht , The cone oil droplets of avian retinas , Vis . Res . 24 ( 1984 ) 1661 e 1671 . [ 54 ] D . Hartmann , P . A . Thurmann , V . Spitzer , W . Schalch , B . Manner , W . Cohn , Plasma kinetics of zeaxanthin and 3 0 - dehydro - lutein after multiple oral doses of synthetic zeaxanthin , Am . J . Clin . Nutr . 79 ( 2004 ) 410 e 417 . [ 55 ] F . Khachik , F . F . de Moura , D . Y . Zhao , C . P . Aebischer , P . S . Bernstein , Trans - formations of selected carotenoids in plasma , liver , and ocular tissues of humans and in nonprimate animal models , Invest . Ophth . Vis . Sci . 43 ( 2002 ) 3383 e 3392 . [ 56 ] K . J . McGraw , E . Adkins - Regan , R . S . Parker , Anhydrolutein in the zebra ﬁ nch : a new , metabolically - derived carotenoid in birds , Comp . Biochem . Physiol . B Biochem . Mol . Biol . 132 ( 2002 ) 811 e 818 . [ 57 ] J . Hudon , Biotechnological applications of research on animal pigmentation , Biotechnol . Adv . 12 ( 1994 ) 49 e 69 . [ 58 ] T . A . Dailey , H . A . Dailey , Identi ﬁ cation of an FAD superfamily containing pro - toporphyrinogen oxidases , monoamine oxidases , and phytoene desaturase e expression and characterization of phytoene desaturase of Myxococcus xan - thus , J . Biol . Chem . 273 ( 1998 ) 13658 e 13662 . [ 59 ] P . Broun , J . Shanklin , E . Whittle , C . Somerville , Catalytic plasticity of fatty acid modi ﬁ cation enzymes underlying chemical diversity of plant lipids , Science 282 ( 1998 ) 1315 e 1317 . [ 60 ] R . Stradi , G . Celentano , E . Rossi , G . Rovati , M . Pastore , Carotenoids in bird plumage e I . The carotenoid pattern in a series of Palearctic Carduelinae , Comp . Biochem . Physiol . B Biochem . Mol . Biol . 110 ( 1995 ) 131 e 143 . [ 61 ] J . A . Broadwater , E . Whittle , J . Shanklin , Desaturation and hydroxylation e residues 148 and 324 of Arabidopsis FAD2 , in addition to substrate chain length , exert a major in ﬂ uence in partitioning of catalytic speci ﬁ city , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 2002 ) 15613 e 15620 . [ 62 ] M . Ozeir , U . Muhlenhoff , H . Webert , R . Lill , M . Fontecave , F . Pierrel , Coenzyme Q biosynthesis : Coq6 is required for the C5 - hydroxylation reaction and substrate analogs rescue CoQ6 de ﬁ ciency , Chem . Biol . 18 ( 2011 ) 1134 e 1142 . [ 63 ] O . M . de Brito , L . Scorrano , An intimate liaison : spatial organization of the endoplasmic reticulum - mitochondria relationship , EMBO J . 29 ( 2010 ) 2715 e 2723 . [ 64 ] R . Rizzuto , S . Marchi , M . Bonora , P . Aguiari , A . Bononi , D . De Stefani , C . Giorgi , S . Leo , A . Rimessi , R . Siviero , E . Zecchini , P . Pinton , Ca2 þ transfer from the ER to mitochondria : when , how and why , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Bioenergy 1787 ( 2009 ) 1342 e 1351 . [ 65 ] J . E . Vance , Phospholipid - synthesis in a membrane - fraction associated with mitochondria , J . Biol . Chem . 265 ( 1990 ) 7248 e 7256 . J . D . Johnson , G . E . Hill / Biochimie 95 ( 2013 ) 436 e 444 443 [ 66 ] E . T . Gugger , J . W . Erdman , Intracellular beta - carotene transport in bovine liver and intestine is not mediated by cytosolic proteins , J . Nutr . 126 ( 1996 ) 1470 e 1474 . [ 67 ] T . Joseph - Horne , D . W . Hollomon , P . M . Wood , Fungal respiration : a fusion of standard and alternative components , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Bioenergy 1504 ( 2001 ) 179 e 195 . [ 68 ] H . Schielzeth , B . Kempenaers , H . Ellegren , W . Forstmeier , QTL linkage mapping of zebra ﬁ nch beak color shows an oligogenic control of a sexually selected trait , Evolution 66 ( 2012 ) 18 e 30 . [ 69 ] M . Turunen , J . Olsson , G . Dallner , Metabolism and function of coenzyme Q , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Biomembr . 1660 ( 2004 ) 171 e 199 . [ 70 ] I . Forquer , R . Covian , M . K . Bowman , B . L . Trumpower , D . M . Kramer , Similar transition states mediate the Q - cycle and superoxide production by the cytochrome bc ( 1 ) complex , J . Biol . Chem . 281 ( 2006 ) 38459 e 38465 . [ 71 ] J . W . Cooley , A structural model for across membrane coupling between the Q ( o ) and Q ( l ) active sites of cytochrome bc ( 1 ) , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Bio - energy 1797 ( 2010 ) 1842 e 1848 . [ 72 ] A . R . Crofts , B . Barquera , R . B . Gennis , R . Kuras , M . Guergova - Kuras , E . A . Berry , Mechanistic aspects of the Qo - site of the bc1 - complex as revealed by muta - genesis studies , and the crystallographic structure , in : G . A . Peschek , W . Loeffelhard , G . Schmetterer ( Eds . ) , The Phototrophic Prokaryotes , Springer , Bern , Switzerland , 1996 , pp . 229 e 239 . [ 73 ] U . Brandt , Bifurcated ubihydroquinone oxidation in the cytochrome bc ( 1 ) complex by proton - gated charge transfer , FEBS Lett . 387 ( 1996 ) 1 e 6 . [ 74 ] U . Brandt , Energyconservationbybifurcatedelectron - transferinthecytochrome - bc ( 1 ) complex , Biochim . Biophys . ActaBioenergy1275 ( 1996 ) 41 e 46 . [ 75 ] J . L . Cape , J . R . Strahan , M . J . Lenaeus , B . A . Yuknis , T . T . Le , J . N . Shepherd , M . K . Bowman , D . M . Kramer , The respiratory substrate rhodoquinol induces Q - cycle bypass reactions in the yeast cytochrome bc ( 1 ) complex e mechanistic and physiological implications , J . Biol . Chem . 280 ( 2005 ) 34654 e 34660 . [ 76 ] A . Osyczka , C . C . Moser , F . Daldal , P . L . Dutton , Reversible redox energy coupling in electron transfer chains , Nature 427 ( 2004 ) 607 e 612 . [ 77 ] R . Covian , B . L . Trumpower , The dimeric structure of the cytochrome bc ( 1 ) complex prevents center P inhibition by reverse reactions at center N , Bio - chim . Biophys . Acta Bioenergy 1777 ( 2008 ) 1044 e 1052 . [ 78 ] S . Drose , U . Brandt , The mechanism of mitochondrial superoxide production by the cytochrome bc ( 1 ) complex , J . Biol . Chem . 283 ( 2008 ) 21649 e 21654 . [ 79 ] E . del Val , J . C . Senar , J . Garrido - Fernandez , M . Jaren , A . Borras , J . Cabrera , J . J . Negro , The liver but not the skin is the site for conversion of a red carot - enoid in a passerine bird , Naturwissenschaften 96 ( 2009 ) 797 e 801 . [ 80 ] K . Schiedt , F . J . Leuenberger , M . Vecchi , E . Glinz , Absorption , retention and metabolic transformations of carotenoids in rainbow - trout , salmon and chicken , Pure Appl . Chem . 57 ( 1985 ) 685 e 692 . [ 81 ] O . J . Torrissen , R . W . Hardy , K . D . Shearer , Pigmentation of salmonids e carot - enoid deposition and metabolism , Rev . Aquatic Sci . 1 ( 1989 ) 209 e 225 . [ 82 ] B . P . Chew , T . S . Wong , J . J . Michal , F . E . Standaert , L . R . Heirman , Subcellular - distribution of beta - carotene , retinol , and alpha - tocopherol in porcine lymphocytes after a single injection of beta - carotene , J . Anim . Sci . 69 ( 1991 ) 4892 e 4897 . [ 83 ] J . V . Ofallon , B . P . Chew , The subcellular - distribution of beta - carotene in bovine corpus - luteum , Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 177 ( 1984 ) 406 e 411 . [ 84 ] S . T . Mayne , R . S . Parker , Subcellular - distribution of dietary - beta - carotene in chick liver , Lipids 21 ( 1986 ) 164 e 169 . [ 85 ] S . Patton , J . J . Kelly , T . W . Keenan , Carotene in bovine - milk fat globules e observations on origin and high content in tissue mitochondria , Lipids 15 ( 1980 ) 33 e 38 . [ 86 ] S . Arikan , H . S . Sands , R . G . Rodway , D . N . Batchelder , Raman spectroscopy and imaging of beta - carotene in live corpus luteum cells , Anim . Reprod . Sci . 71 ( 2002 ) 249 e 266 . [ 87 ] G . P . Lobo , A . Isken , S . Hoff , D . Babino , J . von Lintig , BCDO2 acts as a carotenoid scavenger and gatekeeper for the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway , Devel - opment 139 ( 2012 ) 2966 e 2977 . [ 88 ] R . Fato , C . Bergamini , S . Leoni , P . Strocchi , G . Lenaz , Generation of reactive oxygen species by mitochondrial complex I : implications in neuro - degeneration , Neurochem . Res . 33 ( 2008 ) 2487 e 2501 . [ 89 ] X . H . Sun , Z . X . Zhou , Y . J . Kang , Attenuation of doxorubicin chronic toxicity in metallothionein - overexpressing transgenic mouse heart , Cancer Res . 61 ( 2001 ) 3382 e 3387 . [ 90 ] M . N . Nagi , H . A . Almakki , Thymoquinone supplementation induces quinone reductase and glutathione transferase in mice liver : possible role in protection against chemical carcinogenesis and toxicity , Phytother . Res . 23 ( 2009 ) 1295 e 1298 . [ 91 ] M . J . Schlosser , R . D . Shurina , G . F . Kalf , Prostaglandin H synthase catalyzed oxidation of hydroquinone to a sulfhydryl - binding and DNA - damaging metabolite , Chem . Res . Toxicol . 3 ( 1990 ) 333 e 339 . [ 92 ] D . N . R . Rao , N . Takahashi , R . P . Mason , Characterization of a glutathione conjugate of the 1 , 4 - benzosemiquinone - free radical formed in rat hepato - cytes , J . Biol . Chem . 263 ( 1988 ) 17981 e 17986 . [ 93 ] G . Barja , Mitochondrial free radical production and aging in mammals and birds , Ann . New York Acad . Sci . 854 ( 1998 ) 224 e 238 . [ 94 ] G . Barja , Free radicals and aging , Trends Neurosci . 27 ( 2004 ) 595 e 600 . [ 95 ] N . Lane , Mitonuclear match : optimizing ﬁ tness and fertility over generations drives ageing within generations , Bioessays 33 ( 2011 ) 860 e 869 . [ 96 ] C . H . Snyder , T . Merbitz - Zahradnik , T . A . Link , B . L . Trumpower , Role of the Rieske iron - sulfur protein midpoint potential in the protonmotive Q - cycle mechanism of the cytochrome bc ( 1 ) complex , J . Bioenergy Biomembr . 31 ( 1999 ) 235 e 242 . [ 97 ] C . Santos - Ocana , T . Q . Do , S . Padilla , P . Navas , C . F . Clarke , Uptake of exogenous coenzyme Q and transport to mitochondria is required for bc ( 1 ) complex stability in yeast coq mutants , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 2002 ) 10973 e 10981 . [ 98 ] M . Rigoulet , E . D . Yoboue , A . Devin , Mitochondrial ROS generation and its regulation : mechanisms involved in H2O2 signaling , Antioxid . Redox Signal . 14 ( 2011 ) 459 e 468 . J . D . Johnson , G . E . Hill / Biochimie 95 ( 2013 ) 436 e 444 444