Journal of Microscopy , Vol . 266 , Issue 2 2017 , pp . 115 – 125 doi : 10 . 1111 / jmi . 12520 Received 2 March 2016 ; accepted 15 December 2016 Quantification of substrate and cellular strains in stretchable 3D cell cultures : an experimental and computational framework P . GONZ ´ALEZ - AVALOS ∗ , † , ‡ , ¶ , M . M ¨URNSEER § , ¶ , J . DEEG (cid:3) , # , A . BACHMANN § , ∗∗ , J . SPATZ (cid:3) , # , S . DOOLEY § , R . EILS ∗ , † & E . GLADILIN ∗ , † , †† ∗ Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics , German Cancer Research Center , Mathematikon - Berliner Str . 41 , 69120 Heidelberg , Germany † BioQuant and IPMB , University of Heidelberg , Im Neuenheimer Feld 267 , 69120 Heidelberg , Germany ‡ Current address : COS , University of Heidelberg , Im Neuenheimer Feld 230 , Germany § Mol . Hepatol . , Department of Medicine II , Medical Faculty Mannheim , University of Heidelberg , 68167 Mannheim , Germany (cid:3) Max - Planck - Institute for Intelligent Systems , Heisenbergstr . 3 , 70569 Stuttgart , Germany # Biophysical Chemistry , University of Heidelberg , Im Neuenheimer Feld 253 , 69120 Heidelberg , Germany ∗∗ Current address : BG Trauma Centre , University of T¨ubingen , Schnarrenbergstr . 95 , 72076 T¨ubingen , Germany †† Current address : Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research , Corrensstrasse 3 , 06466 Gatersleben , Germany Key words . Cell strain quantification , Collagen hydrogel , Epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition , Extracellular matrix , Live cell imaging , Stretchable 3D cell culture . Summary The mechanical cell environment is a key regulator of bio - logical processes . In living tissues , cells are embedded into the 3D extracellular matrix and permanently exposed to me - chanical forces . Quantification of the cellular strain state in a 3D matrix is therefore the first step towards understanding how physical cues determine single cell and multicellular be - haviour . The majority of cell assays are , however , based on 2D cell cultures that lack many essential features of the in vivo cellular environment . Furthermore , nondestructive measure - ment of substrate and cellular mechanics requires appropri - ate computational tools for microscopic image analysis and interpretation . Here , we present an experimental and compu - tational framework for generation and quantification of the cellular strain state in 3D cell cultures using a combination of 3D substrate stretcher , multichannel microscopic imaging andcomputationalimageanalysis . The3Dsubstratestretcher enables deformation of living cells embedded in bead - labelled 3D collagen hydrogels . Local substrate and cell deformations are determined by tracking displacement of fluorescent beads with subsequent finite element interpolation of cell strains over a tetrahedral tessellation . In this feasibility study , we de - bate diverse aspects of deformable 3D culture construction , ¶ Thesetwoauthorscontributeequally . AuthorP . Gonz´alez - AvalosispresentlyatCOS , UniversityofHeidelberg , ImNeuen - heimerFeld230 , Germany . AuthorA . BachmannispresentlyatBGTraumaCentre , UniversityofT¨ubingen , Schnarrenbergstr . 95 , 72076T¨ubingen , Germany . Author E . GladilinispresentlyatLeibnizInstituteofPlantGeneticsandCropPlantResearch , Corrensstrasse 3 , Gatersleben , Germany . Correspondenceto : EvgenyGladilin , e - mail : evgeny . gladilin @ gmail . com quantification and evaluation , and present an example of its applicationforquantitativeanalysisofacellularmodelsystem based on primary mouse hepatocytes undergoing transform - inggrowthfactor ( TGF - β ) inducedepithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . Introduction The mechanical environment of a cell plays an important role in the determination of its behaviour ( Levental et al . , 2007 ; Eyckmans et al . , 2011 ) . Cell – matrix interactions regulate cru - cial biological processes during development ( Mammoto & Ingber , 2010 ) , homeostasis ( Bissell et al . , 1982 ; Kolahi & Mofrad , 2010 ) and pathogenesis ( Jaalouk & Lammerding , 2009 ; Przybyla et al . , 2016 ) . To understand how mechani - cal environment affects behaviour of cells , in vitro cell culture systems are employed . Incomparisontotraditional2Dcellculturesystems , 3Dcul - ture mimics structural , dimensional and mechanical proper - tiesoftissue ( Page etal . , 2013 ) andallowsamorephysiological arrangement of cellular structures . To investigate how the mechanical environment influences cellular processes , the mechanical strain sensed by cells needs to be quantified . This requires a method for induction and measurement of substrate deformations on subcellular spatial scale . Planar stretchers have been previously used to study force application to cells ( Vaziri & Gopinath , 2008 ; Rodriguez et al . , 2013 ) . These exert mechanical forces to cells cul - tured on flat membranes with subsequent determination of the effects on molecular or biochemical levels ( Boerma C (cid:4) 2017TheAuthors . JournalofMicroscopy publishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtdonbehalfofRoyalMicroscopical Society . Thisisanopenaccessarticle underthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution - NonCommercial License , whichpermits use , distribution andreproductioninany medium , providedtheoriginalworkisproperly citedandisnotusedforcommercialpurposes . 116 P . GONZ ´ALEZ - AVALOS ET AL . Fig . 1 . The 3D substrate stretcher . ( A ) The 3D substrate stretcher is the experimental tool to induce deformation in 3D culture of living cells embedded in a matrix . The collagen matrix containing the cells and fluorescent beads is biaxially stretched , when the attached silicone membrane is pulled down to the sides upon vacuum induction in the chamber ( dashed arrows ) . A special supporter ring and cover glass lid enable the mounting of the chamber on an inverted confocal line scanning microscopy ( CLSM ) . ( B ) The multichannel 3D image stack including fluorescent beads , nuclei and cells is acquired via CLSM . Structural information extracted from the different channels via image analysis allows reconstruction of fluorescent beads and the 3D cellular domain ( see ‘Methods’ section ) . By comparison of consecutive time steps , the displacement of beads and cells is calculated . et al . , 2005 ; Hornberger et al . , 2005 ) , or characterization of cellular ( Gavara et al . , 2008 ; Huang et al . , 2010 ) and nuclear ( Lammerding et al . , 2007 ) deformations . However , these methods are restricted to applications in 2D cell culture systems . Although , 3D culture systems provide a more physiological extracellular environment , the majority of current systems is based on embedment of cells into a static extracellular envi - ronment . For example , in traction force microscopy the goal is to measure forces exerted by transmigrating cells onto an C (cid:4) 2017TheAuthors . JournalofMicroscopy publishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtdonbehalfofRoyalMicroscopical Society . , 266 , 115 – 125 QUANTIFICATION OF SUBSTRATE AND CELLULAR STRAINS IN STRETCHABLE 3D CELL CULTURES 117 Fig . 2 . Biocompatibility of the stretcher with primary cells and micromorphological analysis of the collagen matrix . The 3D substrate stretcher chamber allows visualization of living cells , embedded in a 3D cell culture matrix within the working distance of a confocal microscope . ( A ) Confocal image of mouse hepatocytes in 3D cell culture . GFP expression allows visualization of cell bodies ( green ) fluorescent tracer beads are shown in blue . Plating of cells between two collagen layers enables the analysis of epithelial sheets . ( B ) A bile salt secretion assay reveals maintenance of epithelial polarity with functional epithelial cell - cell contacts ( bile canaliculi ; white arrows ) . Uniform fibre distribution in the network and high reproducibility of collagen preparation are important prerequisites for 3D substrate stretcher experiments . Backscattered light from collagen fibres and beads was imaged by confocal reflection microscopy ( C and D ) . Maximum projection overlays of representative z - stack images are displayed . ( C ) Imaging a large microscopic field revealed a dense network of collagen fibres with isotropic distribution . Fibres form a continuous network without matrix discontinuities . No air inclusions or matrix distortions are present . ( D ) Imaging of single beads with high resolution revealed random inclusion of beads within network pores ; no integration of beads into collagen fibres or attachment of collagen fibres to beads was observed . ( E ) Directionality analysis revealed equal frequencies for fibre directions . Relative frequency distribution histograms of fibre and pore dimension measurements ( F – H ) and the Young’s moduli measured by atomic force microscopy ( I ) . The corresponding number of measurements ( n ) , mean ( M ) , skewness ( S ) , Kurtosis ( K ) are listed above each histogram . ( J – M ) Reproducibility of collagen preparation was evaluated by comparison on the morphological measurements ( J – L ) and elastic moduli ( M ) from three individual gels . Scale bars correspond to 10 µ m . otherwise static 3D extracellular matrix ( Gjorevski & Nelson , 2012 ; Koch et al . , 2012 ) . Deformable 3D cell cultures enable application of me - chanical forces on living cells in a native 3D environment . Thereby , local substrate deformations can be determined by tracking of naturally occurring inhomogeneities in stained extracellular and intracellular structures ( Bell et al . , 2012 ) . However , from our experience large and , especially , out - of - focal - plane displacements can substantially alter optical ap - pearance of natural image inhomogeneities and make their automated tracking less accurate ( Gonz´alez Avalos et al . , 2011 ) . To overcome the above drawbacks , we extend the planar stretching principle to a 3D substrate stretcher and combine it with advantages of traction force microscopy that rely on the robustness of fluorescently labelled beads . This set - up enables us to perform 3D live cell imaging of cells embedded into bead - labelled extracellular matrix , and to accurately C (cid:4) 2017TheAuthors . JournalofMicroscopy publishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtdonbehalfofRoyalMicroscopical Society . , 266 , 115 – 125 118 P . GONZ ´ALEZ - AVALOS ET AL . Fig . 3 . Detection , tracking and meshing of beads ( from Gonz´alez Avalos , 2013 ) . ( A ) Bead domains are segmented from raw images . ( B ) The size of segmented bead domains ( here indicated by the standard deviation of image intensity around mass centres ) depends on the segmentation threshold . ( C ) The calculated size of objects serves as an efficient filter for identification of beads suitable for the calculation of substrate deformation . Because of the small variation in size , considerably smaller objects belong to beads out of focus and bigger objects belong to bead clusters . ( D ) Bead displacements were calculatedasdifferenceofthebeadcoordinatesbetweeneachtwoadjacenttimepoints . ( E ) Finally , thepointcloudofbeadscoordinateswasinterconnected to a tetrahedral mesh using Matlab to span a network of interpolating elements over the entire 3D substrate and the embedded cell . determine their local strain using canonical interpolation of continuum deformation over displacements of bead points . We apply our experimental and computational framework for analysis of primary mouse hepatocytes that undergo epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) upon treatment with the transforming growth factor ( TGF - β ) ( Godoy et al . , 2009 ) . EMT , the morphologic and molecular transition of dif - ferentiated , interconnected epithelial cells to a solitary , me - chanically more robust mesenchymal phenotype . It is seen as progression step of malignant transformation in a variety of C (cid:4) 2017TheAuthors . JournalofMicroscopy publishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtdonbehalfofRoyalMicroscopical Society . , 266 , 115 – 125 QUANTIFICATION OF SUBSTRATE AND CELLULAR STRAINS IN STRETCHABLE 3D CELL CULTURES 119 Fig . 4 . Consistency check of the bead network . In order to quantify substrate inhomogeneities and discontinuities , a consistency check of the bead network was carried out . ( A ) Surface beads were identified and displacements of internal beads were interpolated . ( B ) Interpolation was performed over displacements of the neighbouring beads that form an enclosing tetrahedron ( see ‘Methods’ section for more details ) . ( C ) Beads with high deviation of experimentally observed from interpolated displacement are identified in an iterative manner by evaluating all beads contributing to the deviating bead displacement . ( D ) Afterexclusionofasmallfractionofbeadswithhighdeviationmeasure , theaccuracyofthedisplacementinterpolationbythenetwork of remaining nodes was improved . epithelial cancer types ( van Zijl et al . , 2009 ; Lim & Thiery , 2012 ) , which is accompanied by characteristic changes in cytoskeletal protein composition and organization includ - ing formation of actin stress fibre bundles ( Haynes et al . , 2011 ) and overexpression of vimentin intermediate filaments ( Willipinski - Stapelfeldt et al . , 2005 ) . Our preliminary exper - iments with untreated ( epithelial ) and TGF - β treated ( mes - enchymal ) mouse hepatocytes indicate an alteration of the mechanical cell response within a 3D environment in depen - dence of EMT . Experimental results The experimental and computational framework of this study consists of ( i ) cell and extracellular matrix deformation by the 3D substrate stretcher , ( ii ) microscopic imaging of fluorescent tracer beads and morphology of cells embedded in 3D fibrous hydrogels and ( iii ) computational image analysis with subse - quent calculation of substrate and cell strain . 3D substrate stretcher The working principle of the stretcher is schematically dis - played in Figure 1 ( A ) . A radial stretch is applied to a silicone membrane , placed in a metal chamber on top of a central plastic loading station , similar to previously described planar – stretcher devices ( Caille et al . , 1998 ; Wall et al . , 2007 ) . A vac - uum generated in the air chamber , aspirates the membrane at theperiphery , resultinginahomogeneousradialstretchofthe membrane on top of the circular plastic loading station ( Fig . 1 B , arrows ) . Several technical adaptations enable acquisition of 3D con - focal microscopy images . Chamber height and diameter were adjusted to the confocal microscope stand and sample holder . Totalweightwasadjustedtotheweightlimitofthemicroscope piezoelectric stage motor , necessary for precise z - step control duringconfocalmicroscopy . Aspeciallidwasdesignedtoallow inversion of the chamber , in order to enable standard inverted confocal line scanning microscopy ( CLSM ) . A supporter ring C (cid:4) 2017TheAuthors . JournalofMicroscopy publishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtdonbehalfofRoyalMicroscopical Society . , 266 , 115 – 125 120 P . GONZ ´ALEZ - AVALOS ET AL . Fig . 5 . Quantification of local strains . ( A ) Two examples of substrate deformation within the image fields of around 100 × 100 × 30 µ m 3 show the distribution of the main strain in the 3D culture matrix . Local strain variations are visualized with the colour map . ( B ) Surface distribution of the mean strain sensed by the cell is computed using standard linear interpolation over neighbouring beads . Surface distribution of the mean strain values is visualized with the colour map . ( C ) Staining of the actin cytoskeleton in primary hepatocytes depicts morphological changes upon treatment with TGF - β . Untreated hepatocytes show epithelial polarity with a fine actin mesh below the bile canaliculi at cell – cell contacts , whereas TGF - β treated cells display actin stress fibre bundles and mesenchymal morphology . ( D ) Stress - induced cell death occurs at high strain rates . ( E ) Analysis of susceptibility to strain - induced cell death in healthy and TGF - β treated cells . Individual untreated hepatocytes ( i . e . epithelial cells ) have an elevated frequency of stress - induced cell death events ( D ) at mid - high strain rates 60 – 90 % , whereas TGF - β treated cells are capable to tolerate significantly higher strain of up to 120 % . Interestingly , untreated cells in cell bundles turn out to be also more resistant to high strain than single untreated hepatocytes . on the lid was designed , in order to mount a cover glass to cre - ate a cell culture chamber high enough for 3D cell culture and gel movement , but small enough for image acquisition within the working distance of high - resolution objectives , see Figure 1 ( A ) . A syringe stamp system attached to the air valve of the chamber through a rubber tube served as an air - controlling device to fine - tune force generation and its application to gels , and to fix the area of interest during image acquisition . To study strain application to cells within a 3D environ - ment , 3D collagen cell cultures were cast onto flexible silicone membranes . Precoatingsiliconemembraneswithanadhesion mediating layer of rigid , UV - cross - linked collagen allowed an - chorage of collagen gels to membranes . Gel thickness was ad - justed to enable visualization of cell volume and surrounding matrix within the working range of a 40 × objective ( Fig . 2 A ) . Embedding the cells between two layers of collagen allowed observation and strain application to quasi - planar epithelial cell sheets . In the optimized 3D cell culture , primary hepato - cytesshowedpolarizedepithelialmorphologywithspecialized , organotypic cell – cell contacts and formation of functional bile canaliculi ( white arrows Fig . 2B ) after 48 h of cultivation . Col - lagen gelation is influenced by many factors , like source and extraction method , concentration , pH value , ionic strength , temperature and CO 2 concentration during polymerization ( Wood & Keech , 1960 ; Christiansen et al . , 2000 ) . Further , mechanical agitation during the nucleation phase can affect polymerization ( Yang etal . , 2009 , 2010 ) . Microstructuralfea - tures of the network structure , such as lateral fibril alignment to fibres , pore size and fibre length in self - assembled colla - gen depend on these factors ( Billiar , 2011 ) . The network mi - crostructure of the collagen matrix is an important determi - nant of mechanical properties ( Raub et al . , 2008 ; Wen et al . , C (cid:4) 2017TheAuthors . JournalofMicroscopy publishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtdonbehalfofRoyalMicroscopical Society . , 266 , 115 – 125 QUANTIFICATION OF SUBSTRATE AND CELLULAR STRAINS IN STRETCHABLE 3D CELL CULTURES 121 2012 ) . Morphologyoffibreorganizationwasanalysedbycon - focal reflectance microscopy . The Young’s modulus of mem - brane anchored 3D substrate stretcher collagen matrices was measured by atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) . Collagen fibres in the 3D substrate stretcher gels form a dense , isotropic net - work ( Fig . 2C ) . Collagen fibres are continuously distributed without in - continuities , discontinuities or air bubbles in the collagen matrix ( Fig . 2C ) . Fluorescent tracer beads incorpo - rated into the matrix prior to gelation are visible as bright dots are not incorporated into fibres ( Fig . 2D ) . The collagen fibres were isotropically distributed in the imaging plane without preferred fibre direction ( Fig . 2E ) . Fibres in the 3D substrate stretchermatriceshadamedianthicknessof0 . 27 µ m ( Fig . 2F ) . The median fibre length was 5 . 73 µ m ( Fig . 2G ) , and the me - dian pore size was 0 . 77 µ m ( Fig . 2H ) . The collagen gels had a mean Young’s modulus of 26 . 15 Pa ( Fig . 2I ) . To evaluate whether variation in preparation or other factors cause differ - ences between individually prepared gels , microstructures of three gels were compared . Median differences values of fibre diameter ( Fig . 2J ) , fibrelength ( Fig . 2K ) , porediameter ( Fig . 2L ) and Young modulus ( Fig . 2M ) between the three gels were not significantlygreaterthanexpectedbychance ( Kruskal – Wallis test , Dunn’s posttest ) . Analysis of 3D substrate deformation In order to determine matrix deformation , we reconstructed the 3D substrate at each time point by identifying xyz co - ordinates of the fluorescent tracer beads , that were embed - ded into the substrate prior to gelation ( see ‘Experimental’ section ) . The bright dyes of the fluorescent beads , presenting with a high signal - to - noise ratio , facilitated identification and segmentation of individual beads at micrometer resolution ( Fig . 3A ) . Centre of mass coordinate determination for each bead was very robust in regard to changes of parameters in the segmentation algorithm , despite threshold - dependent ob - ject size variations ( Fig . 3B ) . Beads at the edge of the image field as well as larger clusters of beads were excluded by size - threshold selection ( Fig . 3C ) . Displacement of corresponding beads at two adjacent time points was calculated by subtract - ing x , y , z components . Figure 3 ( D ) shows an example of dis - placements projected in 2D . The final and complete substrate reconstruction generated a 3D tetrahedral mesh that served as scaffold for strain calculation ( Fig . 3E ) . Substrate ( dis ) continuity analysis In tissues and biopolymeric gels like collagen matrices , forces are transferred along fibres and fibrils , resulting in non - isotropicandnonhomogeneousforcepropagationthroughout theoverallnonlinear - elasticpropertiesofthesubstrate ( Billiar , 2011 ; Wen et al . , 2012 ) . To identify local ( dis ) continuities of thematrix , weconstructedatestingprocedure , whichisbased on a comparison of experimentally observed and interpolated displacements of beads . We introduce the deviation - measure ( DM ) to quantify the relative deviation of the bead displace - ment from its interpolated value . High values of DM indicate deviation from the displacement in an elastic continuum . The entire procedure is basically iterative . For every bead from the bead network ( Fig . 4A ) , displacement is interpolated over dis - placements of four neighbouring beads that form the enclos - ing tetrahedron ( Fig . 4B ) . For details of linear interpolation on tetrahedralelements , wereferto‘Experimental’section . Linear interpolation could predict real bead displacements for most of theanalysedbeadswithameandeviationofaround2 % which corresponds to less than 1 µ m . For a small fraction of beads ( about 5 % ) , a higher deviation from the interpolated displace - ment ( i . e . over 10 % ) was determined . In a second step , beads with DM > 5 % were selected , and it was evaluated whether the selected bead or one of the four interpolating beads caused a high DM . After integrating all DM values , beads that con - tribute to high DM were identified ( Fig . 4C ) . After exclusion of this rather small fraction of beads , an improved accuracy of displacementinterpolationbythenetworkofremainingnodes was achieved ( Fig . 4D ) . 3D cell strain computation and analysis In order to quantify local substrate and cell deformation in an arbitrary point P , the linearized strain tensor was computed from the displacement gradient between the four beads of the P - enclosing tetrahedron : (cid:3) = 1 2 ( ∇ u + ∇ u T ) . ( 1 ) For characterization of maximum local deformation , the largest eigenvalue of (cid:3) was calculated , which describes the maximum rate of local stretching or contraction . Calculations show that maximum strain magnitudes in different experi - ments reach up to 68 % on the cellular surface and up to 180 % in the substrate . The median value of strain distribution is 29 % . Examples in Figures 5 ( A ) and ( B ) show spatial distri - butions of the mean strain in the 3D matrix and on the cell surface for two different experiments . Hepatocyte EMT on the 3D stretcher Figure 5 ( C ) shows drastic morphological changes associated with EMT in mouse hepatocytes upon TGF - β treatment , illus - trating suitability of this model system . Untreated hepatocytes show rounded epithelial morphology with large cell – cell con - tact areas , whereas TGF - β treated cells show a dediffertiated fibroblastoid , mesenchymal morphology . During the stretch - ing procedure , sudden cell death , associated with formation of membrane - bubbles at cell – matrix boundary and damage in the cell nucleus was observed for some cells ( Fig . 5D ) . By estimating the magnitude of cell deformation , we could reveal that rupture events correlated with large substrate C (cid:4) 2017TheAuthors . JournalofMicroscopy publishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtdonbehalfofRoyalMicroscopical Society . , 266 , 115 – 125 122 P . GONZ ´ALEZ - AVALOS ET AL . deformations ( Fig . 5E ) . Substrate strain magnitude at which this effect occurs depends on the degree of EMT . Interestingly , untreatedhepatocytesstartedtodieatalowerstrainthreshold than their TGF - β treated , dedifferentiated counterparts . This finding indicates overall enhancement of mechanical proper - ties of TGF - β treated cells . Untreated hepatocytes are capable to survive strains above the critical threshold of 60 % relative deformation only when being interconnected to multicellular bundles . This observation supports the assumption that formation of cell bundles provides epithelial cells with higher mechanical resistance , as compared to single cells . Conclusion In this work , we present a novel experimental and compu - tational framework for quantitative characterization of the cellular strain state in 3D fibrous hydrogels . By combining planar stretcher with 3D bead - labelled cell culture and com - putational analysis of microscopic cell images , a detailed pic - ture of mechanical cell behaviour in a deformable 3D matrix is obtained . To overcome shortcomings of previous 2D / 3D culturing systems , we combine advantages of traction force microscopy with induction of 3D substrate deformation . Our imageanalysisindicatesthatdeformationofbead - labelledcol - lagen hydrogels is associated with local substrate discontinu - ities . Automated discontinuity detection was introduced to improve accuracy of interpolating local substrate and cell dis - placements . In general , continuous substrate description by the vector field of displaced beads can also be applied for com - parativeanalysisofmaterialbehaviourofdifferentlycomposed hydrogels . Here , we quantified the spatial strain distribution sensed by primary mouse hepatocytes upon treatment with the EMT - inducing growth factor TGF - β . Our experimental results in - dicate that interconnected epithelial and single dedifferenti - ated mesenchymal cells are less sensitive to mechanical stress in comparison to untreated individual epithelial hepatocytes . These findings support the assumption that loss of cell – cell contacts enhances EMT - triggering effects of TGF - β . Further biological experiments are required to verify our exemplary observations of the differential cell response to mechanical stress in 3D environment . The presented framework for nondistructive analysis of me - chanically loaded 3D cell cultures can be applied to other cel - lular systems and biomedical problems related to the rapidly growing field of 3D cell culture and phenotypic screening . Experimental methods and protocols Cell isolation Primary mouse hepatocytes were freshly isolated by collage - nase perfusion with subsequent Percoll gradient purification as described ( Klingm¨uller et al . , 2006 ) . Preparation of deformable 3D collagen cell cultures Forthepreparationofmembraneanchoreddeformable3Dcell cultures , 43 - mm silicone membranes ( Flexcell ) were placed in a standard 60 - mm cell culture dish , and precoated with an adhesion mediating air dried 1 h UV - cross linked ( 254 nm , 60 W for 1 h under laminar flow ) collagen layer ( Fujimori , 1965 ; Weadock et al . , 1995 ) . Soft 3D collagen hydrogels were prepared by gelation of acid solubilized , isotonic rat tail colla - gen I ( 8 . 3 g mL − 1 rat tail tendon collagen I , Roche , Germany ) through neutralization to pH 7 . 4 ( Klingm¨uller et al . , 2006 ) . To visualize matrix deformation , the collagen solution was supplemented 1 : 200 with blue fluorescent beads ( diameter : 1 . 0 µ m ) prior to gelation . For the first layer of the collagen sandwich system , 250 µ L collagen solution was carefully dis - tributed on the precoated membrane and allowed to gel . Cells were plated at a density of 2 . 5 × 10 4 cells cm − 2 . After 4 h ad - hesion , unattachedcellswereremovedand200 µ Lofafreshly prepared collagen solution containing beads was added drop wise on top of the cell layer and allowed to polymerize . Gela - tion steps were carried out for 1 h at 37 ◦ C 5 % CO 2 . Cell culture medium was added after gelation of the second collagen layer . The medium contained a recombinant adeno - associated vi - ral ( AAV ) vector pseudotyped with the chimeric capsid DJ ( Grimm et al . , 2008 ) and encoding green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) , which transduced the hepatocytes and allowed us to visualize their cell body . After overnight starvation , medium was changed and cells were treated with the EMT - inducing cytokine TGF - β ( 5 ng / mL ) as indicated . Confocal reflection microscopy For imaging of the collagen matrix , the backscattered light from the collagen fibrils was detected by confocal reflection microscopy with 488 - nm excitation wave length as described by Artym & Matsumoto ( 2010 ) using the Leica SP5 laser scanning confocal microscope in the reflection mode . Bright - ness and contrast were optimized for visualization in printed formats . Micromorphological analysis of the collagen matrix Directionality of the collagen fibres was analysed with the directionality plugin for Fiji ( Liu ( 1991 ) ) and displayed as fre - quency distribution histogram as fraction of measured values in percent . Due to orientation - dependent light scattering dur - ingconfocalreflectancemicroscopyinthe z - axis ( Jawerth etal . , 2010 ) , directionality was analysed from 2D maximum projec - tion overlay images . 3D fibre length was determined from 3D z - stack images using the Simple Neurite Tracer plugin in Fiji ( Longair et al . , 2011 ) . Fibre diameter was measured by draw - ing lines perpendicular to the longitudinal axis in maximum intensity z - projection images . Pore size was determined by measuring the shortest inter fibre distance adjacent to a void . C (cid:4) 2017TheAuthors . JournalofMicroscopy publishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtdonbehalfofRoyalMicroscopical Society . , 266 , 115 – 125 QUANTIFICATION OF SUBSTRATE AND CELLULAR STRAINS IN STRETCHABLE 3D CELL CULTURES 123 Statistical analysis Results are displayed as Tukey box and whiskers plot . Top and bottom of the box represent the first and third quar - tile , the band in the box shows the median . Mean is repre - sented as cross , and outliers are shown as dots . The whisker ends span to the lowest and highest datum still within 1 . 5 times the interquartile distance or , if shorter , up to the highest or lowest point . The Kruskal – Wallis test with Dunn’s posttest was applied to compare three groups ; p values are reported as not significant ( ns ) for p > 0 . 05 ; or significant with * for p ≤ 0 . 05 , * * for p ≤ 0 . 01 and * * * if p ≤ 0 . 001 . Frequency distributions are shown as relative frequencies in percent . Determining the elastic modulus using AFM Reviews suggest application of AFM to probe 3D cell cul - ture matrices ( Billiar , 2011 ; Miron - Mendoza et al . , 2013 ) . Billiar ( 2011 ) report testing AFM for this purpose , but they could not measure differences between polymerized and non - polymerized collagen . A surface tension – induced artefact is mentioned in a comment from Wu et al . ( 2005 ) for appli - cation of dynamic mechanical analysis of hydrated collagen gels . Our own observations allow the same conclusion . Sub - merging the collagen gels and cantilever in buffer - enabled measurement of the elastic moduli of collagen hydrogels by AFM . The Young’s moduli of the collagen gels were mea - sured via Nano Wizard I AFM ( JPK Instruments AG ) . The AFM was mounted on an inverse AxioVert 200 microscope ( Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH ) equipped with an additional CellHesion module ( JPK Instruments AG ) and a custom - made incubator for temperature maintenance at 37 ◦ C . To avoid bias by surface tension at the hydrogel to air interface ( Wu et al . , 2005 ) , all measurements were conducted with the cantilevers submerged in preheated phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) . Force spectroscopy measurements were con - ductedusingsilicon – nitridecantilevers ( CSC38 , Mikromasch ) with force constants ranging from 0 . 03 to 0 . 08 N m − 1 and quasi - conical tips with an opening angle between 34 ◦ and 40 ◦ . Both parameters were individually determined for each cantilever . The spring constant was measured using the ther - mal noise method by software provided by the manufacturer . Opening angles were determined by evaluating scanning elec - tron microscopy ( SEM ) images of the cantilever tips acquired with a Zeiss LEO 1530 scanning electron microscopy . Dur - ing force spectroscopy z - scan velocity was kept constant at 1 µ m s − 1 and the relative detection set point of the cantilever was adjusted between 20 and 50 nm . Force curves were eval - uated using the software provided by the manufacturer ( JPK Instruments AG ) . Fit ranges were chosen to be in a low in - dentation regime ranging from 300 to 600 nm . In order to calculate the parameter of interest a quadratic equation is fit - ted to the force curve . This approach is based on the Hertz model ( Hertz , 1881 ; Sneddon , 1965 ) and is well described and generally applied to determine the Young’s modulus of soft materials ( for further discussion see Lin & Horkay , 2008 ) . At least 12 different force curves at different places were col - lected and at least eight force curves were evaluated for each individual substrate . Bile salt secretion assay Secretion of glutathione - methylfluorescein ( GMSF ) , the flu - orescent metabolite of chloromethylfluorescein diacetate ( CMFDA ) was measured via live cell confocal line scanning microscopy in the substrate stretcher chamber 30 min af - ter addition of the cell tracker ( 1 µ M CellTrackerTM Green CMFDA , Invitrogen ) and 1 : 1000 Hoechst33258 to the cell culturemedium ( Godoy etal . , 2009 ) . Imagesareshowncolour inverted . Brightness and contrast were optimized for visual - ization in printed formats . Immunofluorescent staining Immunofluorescent staining of the actin cytoskeleton ( Phalloidin - Rhodamin1 : 1000 , LifeTechnologies ) andthenu - cleus ( Hoechst33528 1 : 1000 , Thermo Fischer Scientific ) was performed as described in Artym & Matsumoto ( 2010 ) in fixed cells . Brightness and contrast of the colour - inverted images were optimized for print . 4D live cell imaging and stress induction on the substrate stretcher A detailed protocol of the experimental pipeline for the 3D substrate stretcher is described in the supplementary mate - rial . Briefly , flexible membranes containing living 3D cell cul - ture constructs were transferred to the 3D substrate stretcher chamber and into the environmental chamber of the micro - scope . A 3D scan of cell body and surrounding fluorescent bead - labelled matrix was recorded prior to stretching . Air was removed from a chamber below the flexible membrane , in - ducing deflection of the membrane and thereby matrix - and cell deformation . Immediately afterwards , a second 3D scan of the region of interest was taken . Confocal microscopy was performed with a Leica SP5 laser scanning confocal micro - scope equipped with an environmental control chamber and the LAS software . A 40 × oil objective was used ; 512 × 512 pixel images were scanned at a speed of 700 mHz and with a line average of two scans , with a z - step size kept constant at 0 . 3 µ m , a pinhole aperture of 1 AU and a working zoom be - tween 2 . 5 and 3 . 5 . Standard excitation and detection wave - lengths were used for the different fluorophores . When com - bining fluorophores with overlapping emission wavelength ranges , the sequential mode between stacks was used to avoid fluorescent bleed - through . C (cid:4) 2017TheAuthors . JournalofMicroscopy publishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtdonbehalfofRoyalMicroscopical Society . , 266 , 115 – 125 124 P . GONZ ´ALEZ - AVALOS ET AL . Calculation of bead displacements Extraction of the xyz positions for beads embedded in the ma - trix was performed with the 3D Object Counter ImageJ plugin ( Bolte & Cordelieres , 2006 ) on each image stack after applica - tion of an edge - preserving filtering step . Beads located on the image edges and inside the cell were left out of the calculation to avoid bias . Individual beads displacements were calculated by coordinate subtraction after multiplication with the corre - sponding voxel values . A first evaluation of strain visualized in 2D was rendered to assess if the degree of substrate defor - mation was large enough to continue processing the rest of the series and to continue with the mechanical analysis . The coordinates and displacements calculated for the individual beads were analysed with Matlab ; the points were intercon - nected to an unstructured tetrahedral mesh ( Fig . 2E ) , which was used for continuous interpolation of substrate and cell displacements . Displacement interpolation on the tetrahedral element Displacements of the cell surface points are interpolated over the displacements of the neighbour beads . Consider the point N 0 of the cellular body enclosed by four neighbour bead points ( N 1 , N 2 , N 3 , N 4 ) that form a tetrahedron . The displacement vector in the point N 0 is interpolated over the displacements of the four tetrahedral points using the standard linear inter - polation : u 0 = u 1 + ( u 2 − u 1 ) α + ( u 3 − u 1 ) β + ( u 4 − u 1 ) γ , ( 2 ) where ( α , β , γ ) are the three parameters of the linear shape interpolation function that are determined from coordinates of four points : ⎛ ⎝ α β γ ⎞ ⎠ = ⎛ ⎝ x 2 − x 1 x 3 − x 1 x 4 − x 1 y 2 − y 1 y 3 − y 1 y 4 − y 1 z 2 − z 1 z 3 − z 1 z 4 − z 1 ⎞ ⎠ ⎛ ⎝ x 0 − x 1 y 0 − y 1 z 0 − z 1 ⎞ ⎠ , ( 3 ) where ( x , y , z ) denote Euclidic coordinates of the points de - rived from microscopic images . The matrix whose inverse is indicated on the right side of the equation is called the Jacobi matrix of the tetrahedron . Substrate ( dis ) continuity analysis Todetectlocalsubstratediscontinuities , thefollowingDMwas constructed : D M = 100 % (cid:6)(cid:7) i = 1 . . 3 ( u i − ˜ u i ) 2 (cid:7) i = 1 . . 3 ( ˜ u i ) 2 , ( 4 ) where u i denotes the experimentally determined 3D displace - ment of the bead and ˜ u i is the displacement of the same bead obtained from the standard linear interpolation over the nodal displacements of the enclosing tetrahedron ( Eq . ( 2 ) ) . Auto - mated generation of tetrahedral meshes and calculation of DM on bead nodes was implemented in Matlab . Beads with the DM exceeding the quality threshold of DM > 5 % were ex - cluded from the network of bead nodes . In the next step , the new tetrahedral grid was recomputed in Matlab for only those beads that match the criterion DM < 5 % . Acknowledgements We would like to thank Philipp Egger , Grundfos Arnold AG , Schachen Switzerland for his expert advices with 3D CAD - images and Elena Senis Herrero , BioQuant , University of Hei - delberg , Heidelberg Germany for kindly providing an adeno - associated viral ( AAV ) GFP expression vector . Funding M . M . , A . B . and S . D . were supported by the BMBF program ‘Virtual Liver’ ( Grants 0315755 , 0315764 ) . E . G . was sup - ported by the DKFZ - MOST Cooperation in Cancer Research ( Grant C160 ) . Competing interests The authors declare that no competing interests exist . References Artym , V . V . & Matsumoto , K . ( 2010 ) Imaging cells in three - dimensional collagen matrix . Curr . Protoc . Cell Biol . 10 , 10 . 18 . 1 – 20 . Bell , B . , Nauman , E . & Voytik - Harbin , S . ( 2012 ) Multiscalestrainanalysis of tissue equivalents using a custom - designed biaxial testing device . Biophys . J . 102 , 1303 – 1312 . Billiar , K . L . ( 2011 ) The mechanical environment of cells in collagen gel models . Cellular and Biomolecular Mechanics and Mechanobiology ( ed . by A . Gefen ) , pp . 201 – 245 . Springer , Berlin Heidelberg . Bissell , M . J . , Hall , H . G . & Parry , G . ( 1982 ) How does the extracellular matrix direct gene expression ? J . Theor . Biol . 99 , 31 – 68 . Boerma , M . , van der Wees , C . G . C . , Vrieling , H . , Svensson , J . P . , Won - dergem , J . , van der Laarse , A . , Mullenders , L . H . F . & Zeeland , A . a . v . ( 2005 ) Microarray analysis of gene expression profiles of cardiac my - ocytes and fibroblasts after mechanical stress , ionising or ultraviolet radiation . BMC Genom . , 6 : 6 . Bolte , S . & Cordelieres , F . P . ( 2006 ) Aguidedtour intosubcellular colocal - ization analysis in light microscopy . J . Microsc . 224 , 231 – 232 . Caille , N . , Tardy , Y . & Meister , J . J . ( 1998 ) Assessment of strain field in endothelial cells subjected to uniaxial deformation of their substrate . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 26 , 409 – 416 . Christiansen , D . L . , Huang , E . K . & Silver , F . H . ( 2000 ) Assembly of type I collagen : fusion of fibril subunits and the influence of fibril diameter on mechanical properties . Matrix Biol . 19 , 409 – 420 . Eyckmans , J . , Boudou , T . , Yu , X . & Chen , C . S . ( 2011 ) Ahitchhiker’sguide to mechanobiology . Dev . Cell 21 , 35 – 47 . Fujimori , E . ( 1965 ) Ultraviolet light - induced change in collagen macro - molecules . Biopolymers 3 , 115 – 119 . Gavara , N . , Roca - Cusachs , P . , Sunyer , R . , Farr , R . & Navajas , D . ( 2008 ) Mapping cell – matrix stresses during stretch reveals C (cid:4) 2017TheAuthors . JournalofMicroscopy publishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtdonbehalfofRoyalMicroscopical Society . , 266 , 115 – 125 QUANTIFICATION OF SUBSTRATE AND CELLULAR STRAINS IN STRETCHABLE 3D CELL CULTURES 125 inelastic reorganization of the cytoskeleton . Biophys . J . 95 , 464 – 471 . Gjorevski , N . & Nelson , C . M . ( 2012 ) Mapping of mechanical strains and stresses around quiescent engineered three - dimensional epithelial tis - sues . Biophys . J . 103 , 152 – 162 . Godoy , P . , Hengstler , J . G . , Ilkavets , I . , et al . ( 2009 ) Extracellular matrix modulates sensitivity of hepatocytes to fibroblastoid dedifferentiation and transforming growth factor beta – induced apoptosis . Hepatology 49 , 2031 – 43 . Gonz´alez Avalos , P . ( 2013 ) Image and model based methods for mechanical phenotyping of cells in 3D . PhD Thesis , University of Heidelberg . [ Verlag Dr . Hut , Mu ` Inchen , ISBN 978 - 3 - 8439 - 0899 - 3 . ] Gonz´alez Avalos , P . , Reichenzeller , M . , Eils , R . & Gladilin , E . ( 2011 ) Prob - ing compressibility of the nuclear interior in wild - type and lamin defi - cient cells using microscopic imaging and computational modeling . J . Biomech . 44 , 2642 – 2678 . Grimm , D . , Lee , J . S . , Wang , L . , Desai , T . , Akache , B . , Storm , T . A . & Kay , M . A . ( 2008 ) In vitro and in vivo gene therapy vector evolution via multispeciesinterbreedingandretargetingofadeno – associatedviruses . Nat . Mater . 82 , 5887 – 5911 . Haynes , J . , Srivastava , J . , Madson , N . , Wittmann , T . & Barber , D . ( 2011 ) Dynamic actin remodeling during epithelialˆa mesenchymal transition depends on increased moesin expression . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 4750 – 4764 . Hertz , H . ( 1881 ) ¨Uber die Ber¨uhrung fester elastischer K¨orper . J . Reine Angew . Math . , 92 , 156 – 171 . Hornberger , T . A . , Armstrong , D . D . , Koh , T . J . , Burkholder , T . J . & Esser , K . A . ( 2005 ) Intracellular signaling specificity in response to uniaxial vs . multiaxial stretch : implications for mechanotransduction . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 288 , C185 – C194 . Huang , L . , Mathieu , P . S . & Helmke , B . P . ( 2010 ) A stretching device for high – resolution live - cell imaging . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 38 , 1728 – 1740 . Jaalouk , D . E . & Lammerding , J . ( 2009 ) Mechanotransductiongoneawry . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 63 – 73 . Jawerth , L . M . , M¨unster , S . , Vader , D . A . , Fabry , B . & Weitz , D . A . ( 2010 ) A blind spot in confocal reflection microscopy : the dependence of fiber brightness on fiber orientation in imaging biopolymer networks . Bio - phys . J . 98 , L1 – L3 . Klingm¨uller , U . , Bauer , A . , Bohl , S . , et al . ( 2006 ) Primary mouse hepato - cytesforsystemsbiologyapproaches : astandardizedinvitrosystemfor modelling of signal transduction pathways . IEE Proc . Syst . Biol . , 153 , 433 – 447 . Koch , T . M . , M¨unster , S . , Bonakdar , N . , Butler , J . P . & Fabry , B . ( 2012 ) 3D traction forces in cancer cell invasion . PLoS One 7 , e33476 . Kolahi , K . S . & Mofrad , M . R . ( 2010 ) Mechanotransduction : a major regu - latorofhomeostasisanddevelopment . Wiley Interdiscip . Rev . Syst . Biol . Med . 2 , 625 – 639 . Lammerding , J . , Dahl , K . N . , Discher , D . E . & Kamm , R . D . ( 2007 ) Nuclear mechanics and methods . Methods Cell Biol . 83 , 269 – 294 . Levental , I . , Georges , P . C . & Janmey , P . A . ( 2007 ) Softbiologicalmaterials and their impact on cell function . Soft Matter 3 , 299 – 306 . Lim , J . & Thiery , J . P . ( 2012 ) Epithelial – mesenchymaltransitions : insights from development . Development , 139 , 3471 – 3486 . Lin , D . C . & Horkay , F . ( 2008 ) Nanomechanics of polymer gels and bio - logicaltissues : acriticalreviewofanalyticalapproachesinthehertzian regime and beyond . Soft Matter , 4 , 669 – 682 . Liu , Z . Q . ( 1991 ) Scale space approach to directional analysis of images . Appl . Opt . 30 , 1369 – 1373 . Longair , M . H . , Baker , D . A . & Armstrong , J . D . ( 2011 ) Simpleneuritetracer : open source software for reconstruction , visualization and analysis of neuronal processes . Bioinformatics , 27 2453 – 2454 . Mammoto , T . & Ingber , D . E . ( 2010 ) Mechanical control of tissue and organ development . Development , 137 , 1407 – 1420 . Miron - Mendoza , M . , Koppaka , V . , Zhou , C . & Petroll , W . M . ( 2013 ) Tech - niques for assessing 3 - D cell – matrix mechanical interactions in vitro and in vivo . Exp . Cell Res . 319 , 2470 – 2480 . Page , H . , Flood , P . & Reynaud , E . G . ( 2013 ) Three - dimensional tis - sue cultures : current trends and beyond . Cell Tissue Res . 352 , 123 – 131 . Przybyla , L . , Muncie , J . M . & Weaver , V . M . ( 2016 ) Mechanical control of epithelial - to - mesenchymal transitions in development and cancer . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 32 , 8 . 1 – 8 . 28 . Raub , C . B . , Unruh , J . , Suresh , V . , Krasieva , T . , Lindmo , T . , Gratton , E . , Tromberg , B . J . & George , S . C . ( 2008 ) Image correlation spectroscopy of multiphoton images correlates with collagen mechanical properties . Biophys . J . 94 , 2361 – 2373 . Rodriguez , M . L . , McGarry , P . J . & Sniadecki , N . J . ( 2013 ) Review on cell mechanics : experimentalandmodelingapproaches . ASME . Appl . Mech . Rev . 65 , 060801 – 060801 – 41 . Sneddon , I . N . ( 1965 ) The relation between load and penetration in the axisymmetric boussinesq problem for a punch of arbitrary profile . Int . J . Eng . Sci . 3 , 47 – 57 . van Zijl , F . , Zulehner , G . , Petz , M . , et al . ( 2009 ) Epithelial – mesenchymal transition in hepatocellular carcinoma . Future Oncol . , 5 , 1169 – 1179 . Vaziri , A . & Gopinath , A . ( 2008 ) Cell and biomolecular mechanics in silico . Nat . Mater . 7 , 15 – 23 . Wall , M . E . , Weinhold , P . S . , Siu , T . , Brown , T . D . & Banes , A . J . ( 2007 ) Comparison of cellular strain with applied substrate strain in vitro . J . Biomech . 40 , 173 – 181 . Weadock , K . S . , Miller , E . J . , Bellincampi , L . D . , Zawadsky , J . P . & Dunn , M . G . ( 1995 ) Physical crosslinking of collagen fibers : comparison of ultravioletirradiationanddehydrothermaltreatment . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . 29 , 1373 – 1379 . Wen , Q . , Basu , A . , Janmey , P . A . & Yodh , A . G . ( 2012 ) Non - affine defor - mations in polymer hydrogels . Soft Matter , 8 , 8039 – 8049 . Willipinski - Stapelfeldt , B . , Riethdorf , S . , Assmann , V . , Woelfle , U . , Rau , T . , Sauter , G . , Heukeshoven , J . & Pantel , K . ( 2005 ) Changesincytoskeletal proteincompositionindicativeofanepithelial – mesenchymaltransition in human micrometastatic and primary breast carcinoma cells . Clin . Canc . Res . 11 , 8006 – 8014 . Wood , G . C . & Keech , M . K . ( 1960 ) The formation of fibrils from collagen solutions . Biochem . J . 75 , 588 – 598 . Wu , C . - C . , Ding , S . - J . , Wang , Y . - H . , Tang , M . - J . & Chang , H . - C . ( 2005 ) Mechanical properties of collagen gels derived from rats of different ages . J . Biomater . Sci . Polym . Ed . 16 , 1261 – 1275 . Yang , Y . , Motte , S . & Kaufman , L . J . ( 2010 ) PoresizevariabletypeIcollagen gels and their interaction with glioma cells . Biomaterials , 31 , 5678 – 5688 . Yang , Y . - L . , Leone , L . M . & Kaufman , L . J . ( 2009 ) Elastic moduli of colla - gen gels can be predicted from two – dimensional confocal microscopy . Biophys . J . 97 , 2051 – 2060 . C (cid:4) 2017TheAuthors . JournalofMicroscopy publishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtdonbehalfofRoyalMicroscopical Society . , 266 , 115 – 125