http : / / jis . sagepub . com / Science Journal of Information http : / / jis . sagepub . com / content / 15 / 4 - 5 / 237 The online version of this article can be found at : DOI : 10 . 1177 / 016555158901500406 1989 15 : 237 Journal of Information Science David Ellis A behavioural model for information retrieval system design Published by : http : / / www . sagepublications . com On behalf of : Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals can be found at : Journal of Information Science Additional services and information for http : / / jis . sagepub . com / cgi / alerts Email Alerts : http : / / jis . sagepub . com / subscriptions Subscriptions : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsReprints . nav Reprints : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsPermissions . nav Permissions : http : / / jis . sagepub . com / content / 15 / 4 - 5 / 237 . refs . html Citations : What is This ? - Jan 1 , 1989 Version of Record > > at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from 237 A behavioural model for information retrieval system design David Ellis Department of Information Studies , University of Sheffield , Sheffield S10 2TN , UK Received 7 April 1989 A behavioural model derived from analysis of the informa - tion - seeking patterns of academic social scientists is employed to provide recommendations for information retrieval system design . The six major characteristics identified in the informa - tion - seeking patterns & mdash ; starting , chaining , browsing , differenti - ating , monitoring and extracting & mdash ; are descnbed in relation to retrieval system facilities , and the possibility of implementing an experimental system in a hypertext environment is consid - ered . 1 Introduction : the derivation of the behavioural model The traditional focus of information retrieval research has been on laboratory testing of index - ing systems [ 66 , 71 , 72 ] ; associated with this tradi - tion has been a relatively simple set of cognitive and behavioural assumptions concerning the na - ture of the retrieval situation itself [ 36 , 37 , 62 ] . Re - cently there has been considerable interest shown in cognitive aspects of the retrieval interaction and in cognitive approaches to retrieval [ 13 , 14 , 34 ] ; this has included studies of retrieval through human - computer dialogue [ 60 , 61 ] , anomalous - states - of - knowledge for information retrieval [ 11 , 12 , 15 , 16 , 17 ] , stereotype - based fiction retrieval [ 64 , 65 ] , the development of expert intermediary systems [ 18 , 25 , 26 ] and utilizing domain knowledge to en - hance retrieval [ 27 , 28 , 29 ] . Studies of behavioural aspects of the retrieval interaction have focused on interface design [ 19 , 74 ] or search heuristics [ 7 , 8 , 9 ] . There have been stud - ies of searcher behaviour involving comparisons of keyword with citation searching using the experi - mental & dquo ; DBASE & dquo ; system [ 56 , 57 , 67 , 68 ] . However , there appeared to be no study which attempted to systematically derive recommendations for infor - mation retrieval system design from analysis of actual information - seeking behaviour . This paper describes the results of such a study undertaken in relation to the information - seeking activities of academic social scientists [ 39 , 40 ] . The group selected for study consisted of academics and researchers in social science and related departments at the University of Sheffield . The sample groups were identified from : ( 1 ) MRC / SSRC SAPU and Psychology staff list ( A ) ; ( 2 ) MRC / SSRC SAPU research assistants ( B ) ; ( 3 ) Social Science Faculty staff list ( C ) ; and ( 4 ) library computer search records ( D ) . The first group was chosen to compare the information - seeking activities of full - time re - searchers with those of academics involved in both research and teaching ; the second to enable a comparison to be made between the information - seeking activities of permanent and more expe - rienced research staff with those of less senior contract research staff ; the third to provide infor - mation on the information - seeking activities of academics from across the range of the different social science subjects ; and the fourth to compare the information - seeking activities of social scien - tists who had had an online search carried out with those who had not . The broad subject group - ings of the social scientists interviewed , their indi - vidual research and teaching interests , and the sample groups from which individuals were selected ( indicated by alphabetical coding ) are given in the Appendix . Interviewing was chosen as the only practicable way of obtaining sufficiently detailed first - hand accounts of the social scientists’ information - seek - ing activities , which were likely to be too diffuse for observation . The results of the analysis of the interviews were then extensively cross - referenced to the findings of other studies of social science information use [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 10 , 23 , 24 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 38 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 51 , 52 , 54 , 69 , 70 , 73 , 75 , 76 , 77 ] . The analysis at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from 238 of the individual patterns was based on Glaser and Strauss’s [ 47 ] grounded theory approach in which categories and properties are derived induc - tively from the data and used to guide further data collection . This analysis indicated that six broad character - istics were sufficient to subsume the major differ - ent generic features of those patterns , while pro - viding the framework for a flexible behavioural model to underpin recommendations for informa - tion retrieval system design [ 39 , 40 ] . The character - istics were as follows : ( 1 ) Starting : activities characteristic of the ini - tial search for information . ( 2 ) Chaining : following chains of citations or other forms of referential connection be - tween material . ( 3 ) Browsing : semi - directed searching in an area of potential interest . ( 4 ) Differentiating : using differences between sources as a filter on the nature and quality of the material examined . ( 5 ) Monitoring : maintaining awareness of de - velopments in a field through the monitor - ing of particular sources . ; ( 6 ) Extracting : systematically working through a particular source to identify material of interest . A number of recommendations for information retrieval system design based on these features and the possibility of implementing an experimen - tal system in a hypertext environment will be outlined later . 2 Characteristics of the social scientists in - terviewed In this section the characteristics of the differ - ent groups of social scientists interviewed are briefly described in relation to their organizational and academic settings and the nature and scope of their research and teaching specialisms . 2 . l I MRC / SSRC Social and Applied Psychology Unit The MRC / ESRC Social and Applied Psy - chology Unit is a separate research centre of the university , attached to the department of Psy - chology . The staff are engaged on full - time re - search projects for the unit’s sponsors , and on other contracted research projects with interested organizations . At the time of the interviews the unit’s principal research areas were in occupa - tional , clinical , social and cognitive psychology ; there were 10 permanent staff in the unit and 15 other research staff working on the various pro - jects . The name of the unit at the time of the interviews was the MRC / SSRC Social and Ap - plied Psychology Unit ; therefore , for historical accuracy , it is that title which is employed here . The researchers in the MRC / SSRC Unit repre - sented the most cohesive and the most obviously research - oriented of the groups of social scientists studied . The researchers in the unit were all work - ing full - time on research projects . The different research projects were undertaken without the dis - traction of teaching , and so the & dquo ; life cycle & dquo ; of the research projects was not distorted by the need to accommodate them to the demands of the teach - ing year . The researchers were not working in isolation from each other but with several others in a research group ; there were close affinities of research interests both within and between the project groups and the researchers were located in close physical proximity to each other . This en - abled efficient and effective cross - fertilization of ideas and information within and between the groups , which was enhanced by the coordinating role of the unit’s director , who also alerted the researchers in the unit to material which might be of interest to them . Finally , the nature of the research projects carried out , and the turnover of contract researchers , means that there is a con - tinuous need to induct new researchers into the unit and to set them to work on new and existing projects . Notable features of the information - seeking ac - tivities of the researchers were use of the Institute for Scientific Information’s Current Contents services as a surrogate for monitoring the actual journals , the frequent mention of the value of review articles when starting on a new topic , and the relatively large number who had at some time undertaken forward chaining using the Institute for Scientific Information’s citation indexes . Although there was institutionally a close re - lationship between the MRC / SSRC Unit and the Psychology Department it was clear that the working environment of the researchers in the MRC / SSRC Unit differed in a number of ways at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from 239 from that of their colleagues in the Psychology Department , so that comparison of the informa - tion - seeking activities of the researchers in the unit with those of the psychologists working in the Psychology Department was of particular interest . 2 . 2 Psychology The Department of Psychology had 15 academic staff working on a wide variety of research topics , many of which were interdisciplinary . The depart - ment has joint faculty status in the Faculty of Pure Science and the Faculty of Social Sciences of the University . It is associated both with the MRC / SSRC Social and Applied Psychology Unit and with a newly established Artificial Intelligence Vision Research Unit . Despite the similarity in broad disciplinary base between the researchers in the MRC / SSRC Unit and the psychologists , the working environment of the psychologists was very different from that of the researchers in the MRC / SSRC Unit . The psychologists were working only part - time on research and so had to accommodate their research projects with the demands of teaching , and some had to cover a broader span of subjects for their teaching than for their research . There was some similarity of interests and research col - laboration between some of the psychologists and some were also responsible for research students , who might be conceived of as representing a small research team , but , in general , there was a greater diversity of research interests between the psy - chologists than between the researchers in the unit ; more individuals were working separately on their own research interests and the induction of research students or assistants was more sporadic . The diversity of interests meant that there was less scope , internally , for cross - fertilization of ideas and information and , of course , the Head of De - partment could not operate in the same integrat - ing and coordinating role in relation to the depart - ment’s research activities as the Director of the MRC / SSRC Unit could . Nevertheless , the information - seeking activities of the two groups proved to be similar in form and content . Both made extensive use of the In - stitute for Scientific Information’s Current Con - tents service to monitor the journal literature , and members of both groups employed forward chain - ing using the Institute for Scientific Information’s citation indexes . 2 . 3 Education and Continuing Education The Division of Education and the Division of Continuing Education together constitute the Fa - culty of Educational Studies . The main teaching activities of the Division of Education centre on the Postgraduate Certificate of Education and other taught diploma , higher degree and in - service courses . The research interests of the 20 staff covered most aspects of educational theory and practice . The Division of Continuing Education offers a diverse range of courses for adults and the research and teaching interests of the 16 staff reflected that diversity of interests . The educationalists presented a far more dis - parate group than either the researchers in the MRC / SSRC Unit or the psychologists . Their original disciplinary base was varied and there was a further difference in interests between those working in the Division of Continuing Education , who represented subject specialists dealing with a particular type of student , and those in the Divi - sion of Education , who , although possessing dif - ferent types of subject expertise , were primarily concerned with the professional and intellectual problems in the field of education . The educationalists were similar to the psy - chologists and different from the researchers in the MRC / SSRC Unit in that they could only engage part - time in research and , again , their teaching interests might have to cover a broader span than their research interests . The differences in research interests were more pronounced than for the psychologists and offered even less scope for collaborative research within the divisions . In general , the educationalists’ research interests were specific to the individuals concerned ( rather than representing the kind of team project research characteristic of the researchers in the MRC / SSRC Unit and some of the psychologists ) and the induction of research students was sporadic . There were also some significant differences between the information - seeking activities of the educationalists and those of the other two groups . There was little mention of reviews as a means of starting off in an area ; none of the educationalists employed forward chaining ; and none used Cur - rent Contents , although some did mention making at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from 240 use of a similar current awareness service provided by the education librarian . However , the educationalists did make more mention of brows - ing than did the researchers in the MRC / SSRC Unit and the psychologists , and many reported making heavy use of publishers’ lists , a source which was hardly mentioned by the other two groups . Some of those in the Division of Educa - tion also stressed the importance of the distinction between & dquo ; academic & dquo ; and & dquo ; practitioner & dquo ; journals in the field . The non - use of forward chaining may be due to lack of awareness or lack of familiarity with the Institute for Scientific Information’s citation indexes , but why the educationalists should be so much less aware of their existence , or familiar with their use , is not clear . This is also the case for the non - use of Current Contents , although this may also relate to the existence of the similar current awareness service provided by the educa - tion librarian . The relatively close proximity of the library to the Division of Education may also encourage browsing through the library collection itself . The heavy use of publishers’ lists by some of the educationalists is evidence for the existence of a significant difference in the information - seeking patterns of some of the educationalists , compared to those of the researchers in the MRC / SSRC Unit and the psychologists , in the relatively greater emphasis placed on book as opposed to journal materials for those concerned . However , this dif - ference of content in the information - seeking pat - terns can be accommodated without alteration in form of the behavioural model , by substituting the monitoring and extracting from publishers’ lists for monitoring and extracting from journals . 2 . 4 Economics , Economic and Social History , Geography , Politics , Sociology , Prehistory and Archaeology The Division of Economic Studies , Depart - ments of Economic and Social History , Geogra - phy , Political Theory and Institutions , and Socio - logical Studies , together with the Departments of Psychology , Information Studies , and Japanese Studies , form the Faculty of Social Sciences . The Department of Prehistory and Archaeology is in the Faculty of Arts . The teaching and research activities of the members of the various depart - ments cover the whole range of subjects in the social sciences . This group was the most disparate in terms of disciplinary background , research and teaching in - terests and departmental affiliation . The group was similar to the psychologists and educational - ists in that ( with the exception of the research student interviewed ) all were engaged part - time in teaching and part - time in research and so had to balance the demands of the one against the de - mands of the other . The research interests of the other social scientists were similar to those of the educationalists , in that they tended to be specific to the individual concerned , there was little scope for collaboration on research within their own departments , and the induction of research stu - dents was relatively sporadic . In terms of their information - seeking activities there were both similarities and differences be - tween this group and the others described . Some had made use of forward chaining , which was similar to the researchers in the MRC / SSRC Unit and to the psychologists but different from the educationalists . However , similar to the education - alists but different from the researchers in the MRC / SSRC Unit and the psychologists , there was virtually no use of Current Contents . Pub - lishers’ lists were mentioned as a significant source of information by some of the social scientists , which was again similar to the educationalists but different from the researchers in the MRC / SSRC Unit and the psychologists . Some of the sociolo - gists also stressed a distinction which had been made by some of the educationalists between academic and practitioner journals . But , overall , the information - seeking patterns of the other so - cial scientists interviewed could be accommodated within the framework of the behavioural model without modification of the form or content of that model as it applied to the other groups . 3 The behavioural model and information retriev - al system design In the following sections the features of the model are employed to derive a set of general recommendations for information retrieval system design and to consider the issues involved in im - plementing the features of the behavioural model on an experimental system . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from 241 3 . 1 1 Starting It was clear that although a variety of ways of identifying references were used when commenc - ing on a new project , the objective was not ini - tially to undertake a totally comprehensive search but to identify references , which would : ~ alert individuals to key ideas or studies ; ~ provide overview of an area ; and ~ serve as the basis for chaining . Some researchers might already have such starter references when they come to use an infor - mation retrieval system , while others may be hop - ing that the system will provide them with such references . If the system is to provide assistance in the former case , then it would be useful if material could be identified which cited the key articles . In the latter case , material on the subject might be identified which was either highly cited , or con - tained a large number of references . A similar procedure could be employed to identify sources of interest , either from the extent to which indi - vidual sources were identified as containing material of interest , or the extent to which those sources were highly cited . 3 . 2 Chaining Following citation or reference connections be - tween material has two aspects : ~ backward chaining - identifying references from material ; and ~ forward chaining - identifying references to material . Backward chaining is a well established , tradi - tional and extremely common feature of the infor - mation - seeking activities of academics and re - searchers in all disciplines . It simply involves fol - lowing up references or footnotes given in material . This can take place as a result of direct consulta - tion of the original material , or can be undertaken using citation indexes such as those produced by the Institute for Scientific Information . Forward chaining is a less well - known and far less common feature of researchers’ information - seeking activities ( outside the area of legal cita - tion ) , but can prove very useful when it is used . The reason for the comparative lack of use of forward chaining and ( again outside the area of legal research ) frequent lack of knowledge or un - derstanding of the concept , is that , in practice , forward chaining requires the use of a specialized bibliographical service - the Institute for Scien - tific Information’s citation indexes - and re - searchers are either unaware of the existence of this service , unsure of how to consult it or unwill - ing to use it . A retrieval system which offered facilities for chaining would need to provide the searcher with lists of references cited in material to enable back - ward chaining to take place , and the opportunity to carry out simple forward chaining should also be available . Possible enhancements to the basic chaining facility might include identifying other papers on the database by the same author , other papers by the authors of cited references , or all references to any paper by the same author . The system could indicate to the searcher the level of generality of specificity of chaining which it was possible to carry out . More sophisticated forms of citation chasing which it would be possible to provide for include bibliographic coupling , co - citation searching and identifying all reference connections , both up and down , to ensure that the searcher has exhausted all possible trails . 3 . 3 Browsing If purely random browsing is excluded then most forms of browsing can be understood as representing semi - directed or semi - focused searches in areas of potential interest . The sim - plest way to incorporate a browsing facility into a retrieval system is to allow the searcher to browse while the system provides the information which the searcher requires in order to browse effec - tively . The principal types of information required for browsing are lists of : ~ authors ; ~ journals ; ~ conference proceedings ; ~ working papers ; ~ publishers’ lists ; ~ cited works ; ~ subject terms ; and ~ broad and narrow subject headings . Providing access for browsing for most of these is relatively unproblematic , as the searcher is merely browsing through contents lists of material contained on the database . However , providing access for broad and narrow subject headings necessitates the provision of some form of at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from 242 thesaurus structure and , as such , would require some intellectual ( as opposed to clerical ) effort at the point at which material was entered onto the database . Browsing facilities might also be en - hanced by , for example , the provision of graphical displays of terms , or by providing the searcher with information derived from statistical analysis of the database . 3 . 4 Differentiating Differentiating between sources in terms of their likelihood of containing interesting or relevant material was an extremely common feature of the information - seeking patterns of the researchers , being employed as a filter on the amount and nature of material consulted . A frequent criticism of the results of conventional computer - based searches was that they produced undifferentiated lists of references , and it seemed largely for this reason that such searches were perceived as being insufficiently discriminating . Three principal differentiating criteria were em - ployed : . by substantive topic ; . by approach or perspective ; and . by level , quality , or type of treatment . These criteria were applied to the sources , and types of sources , within which material might ap - pear , so that an information retrieval system could employ existing differences or distinctions in the literature of a field to refine searches in ap - propriate ways , the searcher specifying which sources or types of source were thought most likely to contain material of relevance or interest , and the system then employing this information in the course of a search . Alternatively , the searcher might browse through broad subject categories of sources held on the database indicating any pre - ferred sources . There are three ways in which a differentiating facility could be employed in a retrieval system : ~ to restrict a search to a limited number of sources or types of source ; ~ to exclude certain sources or types of source from the search ; and ~ to rank material identified by source or type of source . It would always be possible to expand a re - stricted search , or restrict , exclude or rank sources following a general subject search . It would also be possible to expand a general subject search either by relaxing the subject term restrictions while maintaining the source restrictions , or by maintaining the subject term restrictions while relaxing the source restrictions . 3 . 5 Monitoring A monitoring facility is a relatively straightfor - ward feature to include in an information retrieval system . The searcher may specify a list of sources and the system can then search these each time the searcher uses the database , or each time the sources are updated on the database . The search may take the form of : ~ a specific search undertaken generally or only in specified sources ; ~ a display of the contents pages of specified journals or publishers’ lists ; or ~ a display of recent additions to the database . Monitoring could be applied to all sources , or could be carried out only for certain sources or types of source on the database . Searchers could always broaden or restrict the scope of their moni - toring profile depending on the amount of material they were identifying , or wished to consult at any particular time . A simple monitoring facility could be enhanced by allowing the searcher to rank the sources moni - tored in order of the searcher’s perceptions of the likelihood of their containing relevant or interest - ing material , which would enable them to con - centrate their attention on sources ranked highest if they so wished . It would also be possible to enhance a monitoring facility by the provision of an alerting function to identify frequently cited sources or newly cited sources not previously cited in updates of the sources monitored . The searcher could then decide whether to examine these sources or to include them in the monitoring profile . 3 . 6 Extracting Systematically working through a particular source or sources to identify material of interest was an activity which many researchers had en - gaged in at some time in their career . This would take place either by direct consultation of the source , using cumulative indexes to the source , or through some combination of the two . A retrieval system which offered an extracting facility should at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from 243 provide for both types of approach . In addition it must allow : . continuous movement through a source stream ; and . the re - composition of source material in the original format . These conditions mean that a searcher should be able , for example , to search not only through the run of a journal for particular subjects but also through sets of contents pages of that journal . 4 Implementing the behavioural model on an ex - perimental system A number of operational and experimental sys - tems embody some of the features outlined above [ 39 , 40 ] . The Institute for Scientific Information’s online versions of their citation indexes represent a way in which researchers can undertake both backward and forward chaining . A variety of dif - ferent systems offer differing types of provision for online browsing [ 6 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 35 , 41 , 48 , 49 , 58 , 59 , 63 ] . A monitoring service can be provided using standard search - save techniques on conventional databases and , more recently , it has been possible to carry out extracting - style searches through the use of the online version of the Institute for Scien - tific Information’s Current Contents service on BRS [ 42 ] . However , although these features are useful , they are piecemeal , and no current retrieval service offers the kind of comprehensive facilities for interaction with a database which users are accustomed to having with more conventional paper sources . A way to approach the question of implement - ing the kind of features indicated by the behavioural model on an experimental system would be to employ hypertext software [ 33 , 53 ] . The database would be similar to that envisaged for the hypercatalog project [ 50 ] in that it would consist of bibliographic descriptions of items with their references . The individual items would then be connected in a network by their citation and other linkages . The relationships which it would be necessary to specify in a general reference system based on the behavioural model are similar to those outlined by Moon [ 55 ] for a personal information system , that is , they must establish : ( 1 ) that articles are contained in the same book , conference proceedings or special issue of a journal ; ( 2 ) citation linkages to or from articles ; ( 3 ) subject connections not covered by ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) above ; ( 4 ) that articles are by the same person , group or organization ; ( 5 ) connections of articles with previously pub - lished work or republications ; and ( 6 ) user defined relationships . In addition , it would be useful to provide facili - ties for the user to : . ( 1 ) indicate the document type and its likely use for the user ( that it is to be used in a particular article perhaps ) ; and ( 2 ) attach comments to the links . A system possessing features indicated by the behavioural model and implemented in a hyper - text environment would enable the searcher to carry out the kinds of searches which are possible and natural employing conventional manual sources , in a computer database . For example . a searcher might start from a paper by a particular author , note a reference of interest from that paper and follow a link to it ; the searcher may then wish to know whether any papers have cited either the original paper or the cited reference . One or more of the papers may have appeared in a particular journal or as part of published con - ference proceedings and the searcher may wish to scan through the contents pages of a few issues of the journal or check the others papers presented at the conference . The enhancements of the system by the provi - sion of search aids such as information on citation structures , collection hierarchies , link structures , classification schedules or thesauri [ 50 ] , would offer the searcher the possibility of quickly gaining an overview of the citation networks present , or of the conceptual or terminological characteristics of the database ; he could then employ this informa - tion to increase the effectiveness of his search . Acknowledgements I should like to record my thanks to the social scientists who agreed to be interviewed for this study , to David Jones of the University of Shef - field Library for providing me with records of online searches undertaken by the library for so - cial scientists , and to the Department of Educa - tion and Science for providing a research student - ship . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from 244 Appendix : research / teaching interests of the so - cial scientists interviewed * MRC / SSRC Social and Applied Psychology Unit lA Personnel psychology ; social psychology of health and illness ; unemployment ; entry into work ; youth training . 2D Job design ; new technology ; organizational behaviour . 3B Psychological effects of unemployment . 4A Psycholinguistics ; human factors in program - ming and office computing . 5D Effects of introduction of new technology in manufacturing on job satisfaction and men - tal health . 6B Relationship between unemployment and health and psychological well - being . 7A Life span development ; work role transi - tions ; organizational behaviour ; employee re - lations . 8A Organizational psychology ; occupational stress ; unemployment ; stress in and out of work . 9B Human computer interaction ; psycholinguis - tics ; cognitive ergonomics . 10A Clinical psychology ; psychotherapy process and outcome ; stress in the working popula - tion . 11A Computer - controlled decision - making pro - cesses ; man - machine communication ; com - puters and decision making . 12A Industrial psychology ; employee participa - tion ; social and occupational psychology ; job design ; new technology . Psychology 1A Cognitive / perceptual and motor development in children . 2A The development of written language and the acquisition of communicative skills ; language and communication and communicative com - petence in normal and handicapped children . 3A Computer models of visual function ; binocu - lar vision . 4A Human memory development and learning ; cognition ; computer - aided learning . 5A Neurobiology of motivational systems ; psy - chopharmacology . 6A Behavioural pharmacology ; neurochemical correlates of behaviour ; behavioural genetics ; psychobiological aspects of occupational stress . 7A Quantitative methods ; laterality . 8A Early social development ; play ; human ethol - ogy and sociobiology . 9A Environmental psychology ; social psychology of drug dependence . Education 1 D Teaching of English ; teaching of drama and its role in education ; curriculum studies ; media and creative studies . 2D Philosophy of education ; philosophy of sci - ence ; philosophy of the curriculum ; relation - ships between philosophy and the social scien - ces ; philosophy of language . 3C Sociology of education ; educational policy ; school and teacher effectiveness ; evaluation of educational institutions ; research methods . 4D Child development ; primary education , espe - cially early years and pre - school ; parental in - volvement in the teaching of reading ; psy - chology of thinking . 5D Science education in primary and secondary schools ; curriculum development and evalua - tion ; individualized instruction ; learning of scientific concepts ; research methods . 6D Psychology of education ; classroom interac - tion and classroom process ; adolescence ; pas - toral care and counselling ; research methods . 7C Social psychology of education ; special educa - tion ; pastoral care and counselling ; qualita - tive research methods . 8D Educational psychology ; adult learners ; gui - dance and counselling ; special education . Continuing Education 9D Industrial relations ; 19th and 20th century labour history ; educational provision for people in work . 10D Local government and urban politics , espe - cially public participation and community education . 11C Local history within South Yorkshire and North Derbyshire . * For key to alphabetical coding , see Introduction . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from 245 Economics 1C Consumer behaviour ; family aspects of buying behaviour ; marketing . 2D Wage determination ; prices and incomes policy in control of inflation ; the long wave or Kondratief cycle . 3D Accounting theory ; management information systems . Economic and Social History 4C History of economic thought ; economic his - tory of South Africa and Eastern Europe . 5C History of economic policy ; economic theory and economic policy in Britain . Geography 6C Agricultural and historical geography of the Mediterranean area ; history of cartography ; the Venetian cartography of Crete . 7C Precipitation origins and analyses ; micro - climatology ; windchill effects in upland areas ; cave climates . Politics 8C Russian and East European history and politics , especially medieval and 20th century . 9C Political economy ; Marx and Marxism ; the Conservative Party and British economic policy ; development of political studies in Bri - tain . Sociology 10C Community care ; relationship between infor - mal and statutory care . 11 D Social planning ; research , policy and plan - ning in the personal social services ; old age and social policy ; the role of research in policy making . 12C Sociology of the police ; deviance ; religion . 13C Client studies in social services and child care ; social work skills and methods ; com - puting and video use in social work . 14C Sociological theory ; social and applied phil - osophy ; sociology of sport , leisure and health ; moral and physical education . Prehistory and Archaeology 15D Physical and chemical properties of soil as a source of evidence for ancient land use , espe - cially in respect of ancient field systems and settlements . References [ 1 ] R . Adam , Social Science information and its users , Jour - nal of Librarianship 3 ( 1971 ) 150 - 157 . [ 2 ] R . Adam , Language and information retrieval in the so - cial sciences , Aslib Proceedings 34 ( 1982 ) 394 - 405 . [ 3 ] American Psychological Association , Report on Scientific Information Exchange in Psychology , Volume 1 ( American Psychological Association , Washington DC , 1963 ) . [ 4 ] American Psychological Association , Report on Scientific Information Exchange in Psychology , Volume 2 ( American Psychological Association , Washington DC , 1965 ) . [ 5 ] American Psychological Association , Report on Scientific Information Exchange in Psychology , Volume 3 ( American Psychological Association , Washington DC , 1969 ) . [ 6 ] P . Ayris , The stimulation of creativity : a review of the literature concerning the concept of browsing , 1970 - 1985 . ( Department of Information Studies Consultancy and Re - search Unit ( CRUS ) working paper no . 5 ( University of Sheffield , Sheffield , 1985 ) . [ 7 ] M . J . Bates , Idea tactics , Journal of the American Society for Information Science 30 ( 1979 ) 205 - 214 . [ 8 ] M . J . Bates , Information search tactics , Journal of the American Society for Information Science 30 ( 1979 ) 280 - 289 . [ 9 ] M . J . Bates , Search techniques , Annual Review of Informa - tion Science and Technology 16 ( 1981 ) 139 - 169 . [ 10 ] Bath University , Toward the improvement of social sci - ence information systems : overview of research carried out 1971 - 1975 . Design of Information Systems in the Social Sciences ( DISISS ) Research Report , Series A , no . 1 ( Bath University Library , Bath , 1980 ) . [ 11 ] N . J . Belkin , Progress in documentation : information con - cepts for information science , Journal of Documentation 34 ( 1978 ) 55 - 85 . [ 12 ] N . J . Belkin , Anomalous states of knowledge as the basis for information retrieval , Canadian Journal of Information Science 5 ( 1980 ) 133 - 143 . [ 13 ] N . J . Belkin , Cognitive models and information transfer , Social Science Information Studies 4 ( 1984 ) 111 - 129 . [ 14 ] N . J . Belkin and A . Vickery , Interaction in information systems : a review of research from document retrieval to knowledge based systems . Library and Information Re - search Report no . 35 ( British Library , Boston Spa , 1985 ) . [ 15 ] N . J . Belkin , H . Brooks and R . N . Oddy , Representing and classifying anomalous states of knowledge . In : M . Mac - Cafferty and K . Gray ( Editors ) , The Analysis of Meaning : Proceedings of Informatics 5 . Proceedings of a conference held by the Aslib Informatics Group and the BCS Infor - mation Retrieval Specialist Group ( Aslib , London , 1979 ) 227 - 238 . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from 246 [ 16 ] N . J . Belkin , R . N . Oddy and H . M . Brooks , ASK for infor - mation retrieval I : background and theory , Journal of Documentation 38 ( 1982 ) 61 - 71 . [ 17 ] N . J . Belkin , R . N . Oddy and H . M . Brooks , ASK for infor - mation retrieval II : results of a design study , Journal of Documentation 38 ( 1982 ) 145 - 164 . [ 18 ] N . J . Belkin , T . Seeger and G . Wersig , Distributed expert problem treatment as a model for information system analysis and design , Journal of Information Science 5 ( 1983 ) 153 - 167 . [ 19 ] J . L . Bennett , The user interface in interactive systems , Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 7 ( 1972 ) 159 - 196 . [ 20 ] S . Bertrand - Gastaldy and C . H . Davidson , Improved des - ign of graphic displays in thesauri & mdash ; through technology and ergonomics , Journal of Documentation 42 ( 1986 ) 225 - 251 . [ 21 ] K . T . Bivins - Noerr and P . L . Noerr , The display device : a user oriented intelligent terminal . In : Proceedings of the 6th International Online Information Meeting , London , 1982 ( Learned Information , Oxford , 1982 ) 373 - 378 . [ 22 ] J . D . Bovey and P . J . Brown , Interactive document display and its use in information retrieval , Journal of Documenta - tion 43 ( 1987 ) 125 - 377 . [ 23 ] J . M . Brittain , Information and its Users : a Review with Special Reference to the Social Sciences ( Oriel , Bath Uni - versity Press , Bath , 1970 ) . [ 24 ] J . M . Brittain , Information services and the structure of knowledge in the social sciences , International Social Sci - ence Journal 31 ( 1979 ) 714 - 728 . [ 25 ] H . M . Brooks , Developing and using problem descriptions . In : B . C . Brookes ( Editor ) , Intelligent Information Systems for the Information Society : Proceedings IRFIS 6 Con - ference , Frascati , Italy , 1985 ( North - Holland , Amsterdam , 1986 ) 141 - 161 . [ 26 ] H . M . Brooks , P . J . Damels and N . J . Belkin , Problem de - scription and user models : developing an intelligent inter - face for document retrieval systems . In : Advances in Intel - ligent Retrieval : Proceedings of Informatics 8 ( Aslib , London , 1985 ) 191 - 214 . [ 27 ] W . B . Croft , An expert assistant for a document retrieval system . In : Recherche d’Informations Assist & eacute ; e par Ordinateur : Actes de la Conf & eacute ; rence RIAO 85 , Grenoble , France ( IMAG , Grenoble , 1985 ) . [ 28 ] W . B . Croft , user specified domain knowledge for docu - ment retrieval . In : F . Rabiitti ( Editor ) , Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( ACM , Washington , 1986 ) 201 - 206 . [ 29 ] W . B . Croft and R . H . Thompson , 13R : a new approach to the design of document retrieval systems , Journal of the American Society for Information Science 38 ( 1987 ) 389 - 404 . [ 30 ] B . Cronin , The need for a theory of citing , Journal of Documentation 37 ( 1981 ) 16 - 24 . [ 31 ] B . Cronin , Invisible colleges and information transfer : a review and commentary with particular reference to the social sciences , Journal of Documentation 38 ( 1982 ) 212 - 236 . [ 32 ] B . Cronin , The Citation Process : the Role and Significance of Citations in Scientific Communication ( Taylor Graham , London , 1984 ) . [ 33 ] J . Conklin , Hypertext & mdash ; an introduction and survey , Com - puter 20 ( 1987 ) 17 - 41 . [ 34 ] P . J . Daniels , Cognitive models in information retrieval & mdash ; an evaluative review , Journal of Documentation 42 ( 1986 ) 272 - 304 . [ 35 ] M . Dover , Public information in rural areas : technology experiment ( PIRATE ) . Library and Information Report 64 ( British Library . Boston Spa , 1988 ) . [ 36 ] D . Ellis , The effectiveness of information retrieval sys - tems : the need for improved explanatory frameworks , Social Science Information Studies 4 ( 1984 ) 261 - 272 . [ 37 ] D . Ellis , Theory and explanation in information retrieval research , Journal of Information Science 8 ( 1984 ) 25 - 38 . [ 38 ] D . Ellis , Social science information research , Journal of the American Society for Information Science 37 ( 1986 ) 86 - 88 . [ 39 ] D . Ellis , The denvation of a behavioural model for infor - mation retrieval system design . PhD thesis ( University of Sheffield , Sheffield , 1987 ) . [ 40 ] D . Ellis , A behavioural approach to information retrieval system design . Accepted for publication in Journal of Documentation ( 1989 ) . [ 41 ] H . P . Frei and J . F . Jauslin , Graphical presentation of information and services : a user oriented interface , Infor - mation Technology Research and Development 2 ( 1983 ) 23 - 42 . [ 42 ] E . Garfield , Current Contents search : new online version of Current Contents expands your coverage and retrieval options , Current Contents 30 ( 1987 ) 3 - 9 . [ 43 ] W . D . Garvey and B . C . Griffith , Communication and in - formation processing within scientific disciplines : em - pirical findings for psychology , Information Storage and Retrieval 8 ( 1972 ) 123 - 136 . [ 44 ] W . D . Garvey , N . Lin and C . E . Nelson , Communication in the physical and social sciences , Science 170 ( 1970 ) 1166 - 1173 . [ 45 ] W . D . Garvey , N . Lin and C . E . Nelson , A comparison of scientific communication behaviour of social and physical scientists , International Social Science Journal 23 ( 1971 ) 256 - 272 . [ 46 ] W . D . Garvey , S . D . Gottfred and J . G . Simmons , A com - parison of two major scientific information exchange processes in psychology : 1962 - 1976 , American Psycholo - gist 39 ( 1984 ) 11 - 21 . [ 47 ] B . G . Glaser and A . L . Strauss , The Discovery of Grounded Theory : Strategies for Qualitative Research ( Aldine , Chicago , 1967 ) . [ 48 ] R . J . Greene , The effectiveness of browsing , College and Research Libraries 38 ( 1977 ) 313 - 316 . [ 49 ] P . J . Hills , J . Hull , J . Pullinger and D . Pullinger , An experiment on the redesign of journal articles for online viewing ( British Library Research and Development De - partment , London , 1983 ) . [ 50 ] R . Hjerppe , Project HyperCatalog : vision and preliminary conceptions of an extended and enhanced catalog . In : B . C . Brookes ( Editor ) , Intelligent Information Systems for the Information Society : Proceedings IRFIS 6 Conference , Frascati , Italy , 1985 ( North - Holland , Amsterdam , 1985 ) 211 - 232 . [ 51 ] H . P . Hogeweg de Haart , Characteristics of social science information : a selective review of the literature : part I , Social Science Information Studies 4 ( 1983 ) 147 - 164 . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from 247 [ 52 ] H . P . Hogeweg de Haart , Characteristics of social science information : a selective review of the literature : part II , Social Science Information Studies 4 ( 1984 ) 15 - 30 . [ 53 ] E . Hyatt , Hypertext : a review and evaluation . MSc disser - tation ( University of Sheffield , Sheffield , 1988 ) . [ 54 ] M . B . Line , The information uses and needs of social scientists : an overview of INFROSS , Aslib Proceedings 23 ( 1971 ) 412 - 434 . [ 55 ] C . Moon , Computerized personal information systems for research scientists , International Journal of Information Management 8 ( 1988 ) 265 - 273 . [ 56 ] D . R . Morehead and W . B . Rouse , Models of human infor - mation seeking , Information Processing and Management 18 ( 1982 ) 193 - 205 . [ 57 ] D . R . Morehead and W . B . Rouse , Human computer inter - action in information seeking tasks , Information Processing and Management 19 ( 1983 ) 243 - 253 . [ 58 ] P . L . Noerr , Information navigation . In : M . MacCafferty and K . Gray ( Editors ) , The Analysis of Meaning : Pro - ceedings of Informatics 5 . Proceedings of a conference held by the Aslib Informatics Group and the BCS Information Retrieval Specialist Group ( Aslib , London , 1979 ) 202 - 205 . [ 59 ] P . L . Noerr and K . T . Bivins - Noerr , Browse and navigate : an advance in database access methods , Information Processing and Management 21 ( 1985 ) 205 - 213 . [ 60 ] R . N . Oddy , Information retrieval through man - machine dialogue , Journal of documentation 33 ( 1977 ) 1 - 14 . [ 61 ] R . N . Oddy , Retrieving references by dialogue rather than by query formulation , Journal of Informatics 1 ( 1977 ) 37 - 53 . [ 62 ] R . N . Oddy , Laboratory tests : automatic systems . In : K . Sparck Jones ( Editor ) , Information Retrieval Experiment ( Butterworth , London , 1981 ) 156 - 178 . [ 63 ] A . J . Palay and M . S . Fox , Browsing through databases . In : R . N . Oddy , S . E . Robertson , C . J . van Rijsbergen and P . W . Williams ( Editors ) , Information Retrieval Research ( But - terworth , London , 1981 ) . [ 64 ] E . Rich , User modelling via stereotypes , Cognitive Science 3 ( 1979 ) 329 - 354 . [ 65 ] E . Rich , Users are individuals : individualising user mod - els , International Journal of Man - Machine Studies 18 ( 1983 ) 199 - 214 . [ 66 ] S . E . Robertson , The methodology of information retneval experiment . In : K . Sparck Jones ( Editor ) Information Retrieval Experiment ( Butterworth , London , 1981 ) 9 - 31 . [ 67 ] W . B . Rouse and S . H . Rouse , Human information seeking and design of information systems , Informations Processing and Management 20 ( 1984 ) 313 - 318 . [ 68 ] W . B . Rouse , S . H . Rouse and D . R . Morehead , Human information seeking : online searching of bibliographic citation networks , Information Processing and Manage - ment 18 ( 1982 ) 141 - 149 . [ 69 ] B . Skelton , Comparison of results of science user studies with investigation into information requirements of the social sciences . Design of Information Systems in the Social Sciences ( DISISS ) working paper no . 1 ( Bath Uni - versity Library , Bath , 1971 ) . [ 70 ] B . Skelton , Scientists and social scientists as information users : a comparison of results of science user studies with the investigation into information requirements of the social sciences , Journal of Librarianship 5 ( 1973 ) 138 - 156 . [ 71 ] K . Sparck Jones . The Cranfield tests . In : K . Sparck Jones ( Editor ) , Information Retrieval Experiment ( Butterworth , London , 1981 ) 256 - 284 . [ 72 ] K . Sparck Jones , Retrieval system test 1958 - 1978 . In : K . Sparck Jones ( Editor ) , Information Retrieval Experiment ( Butterworth , London , 1981 ) 213 - 255 . [ 73 ] D . F . Swift , V . A . Winn and D . A . Bramer , A sociological approach to the design of information systems , Journal of the American Society for Information Science 30 ( 1979 ) 215 - 223 . [ 74 ] D . E . Walker ( Editor ) Interactive Bibliographic Search : the User - Computer Interface ( AFIPS Press , Montvale , New Jersey , 1971 ) . [ 75 ] L . E . Watson , P . Gammage , M . C . Grayshon , S . Hockey , R . K . Jones and D . Oldma . Sociology and information science , Journal of Librarianship 5 ( 1973 ) 270 - 283 . [ 76 ] V . A . Winn , A case study in the problem of information processing in the social science field : the OSTI - SEA pro - ject , Aslib Proceedings 23 ( 1971 ) 76 - 88 . [ 77 ] K . Wright , Social science information characteristics with particular reference to the Educational Resources Infor - mation Centre ( ERIC ) , Journal of the American Society for Information Science 24 ( 1973 ) 193 - 204 . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 29 , 2014 jis . sagepub . com Downloaded from