“A balanced perspective cannot be acquired by studying disciplines in pieces but through pursuit of the consilience among them . ” From “Consilience . The Unity of knowledge . ” by E . O . Wilson , Vintage Books , Random House , 1998 . How chromosomes are folded inside the nucleus is a fascin ating question in cell biology and genetics . Over the past two decades there has been tremendous pro­ gress in our understanding of the 3D organization of chromo somes and its roles in gene regulation , chromo­ some condensation and segregation , and genome stabil­ ity . Some of the recent progress is discussed in three Review articles in this issue . The field of 3D genome organization has been driven forward by two different sets of methodologies : on the one hand , imaging techniques such as fluorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) and live­cell imaging have prov­ ided increasingly dynamic and higher resolution views of chromatin domains and selected loci in single cells . On the other hand , chromosome conformation capture ( 3C ) ­based genomic methods such a 3C­seq , circular chromosome conformation capture ( 4C ) ­seq , chromo­ some conformation capture carbon copy ( 5C ) , genome­ wide chromosome conformation capture ( Hi­C ) and chromatin interaction analysis paired­end tag ( ChIA­ PET ) sequencing have begun to provide views of the spatial organization of loci , domains and entire genomes at kilobase resolution by measuring contact probabil­ ities between loci . The 3C­based methods are mostly performed on large cell populations and provide a population­averaged view or , perhaps more correctly , a probabilistic view of spatial chromosome folding . Now that large data are being obtained using this diverse array of methods , it is becoming increasingly important to determine whether the different data types that are produced by these technologies can prov­ ide coherent insights into chromosome folding and nuclear organization . For instance , generally it is good practice to validate observations that were made using a method of one type with those made using a method of another type . Indeed , there is often good corres­ pondence between data obtained with genomic meth­ ods such as Hi­C and imaging data obtained by FISH 1 . However , considerable discrepancies have also been found ( for example , see REF . 2 ) and the two types of data can produce different models of genome organization . This has led to discussions in the field about whether the methods suffer from false positives and negatives and whether data obtained from either method are correctly interpreted . However , is it reasonable to assume that FISH­ and 3C­based methods are measuring the same features of chromosome structure and hence that they can be readily used to validate each other ? I argue that this validation is usually not straightforward because they capture very different aspects of chromosome folding . Given cell­to­cell and time­dependent variation in chromatin folding , the spatial distance between two loci will display a rather wide distribution in the cell popu­ lation ( see FIG . 1 ) . 3C­based methods detect only events where the two loci are in close spatial proximity , that is , events present in only the small fraction of cells in the left tail of the distrib ution . FISH can determine the spatial distance between the loci in any cell , and when a relatively small number of cells ( for example , several hundred ) are analysed , it will mostly detect cells in the middle part of the distrib ution given that this part rep­ resents the majority of cells . These differences illustrate two important points . First , 3C­based and FISH­based methods interro gate different subpopulations of cells . Second , if one intends to valid ate data that was obtained with 3C­based methods by using imaging­based meth­ ods , or vice versa , one should restrict the comparison to an analy sis of those cells in which the pairs of loci are closely colocal ized . In other words , one should compare the contact frequencies that are detected by 3C­based methods with the colocalization frequencies that are detected by FISH . This is often not how FISH data have been used to valid ate contact frequency data : Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Program in Systems Biology , Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology , University of Massachusetts Medical School , 368 Plantation Street , Worcester , Massachusetts 01605 - 0103 , USA . job . dekker @ umassmed . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2016 . 151 Published online 21 Nov 2016 Mapping the 3D genome : Aiming for consilience Job Dekker Abstract | The spatial organization of genomes is studied using microscopy - and chromosome conformation capture ( 3C ) - based methods . The two types of methods produce data that are often consistent , but there are cases where they appear discordant . These cases provide opportunities to derive better models of chromatin folding , which can reconcile the datasets . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | DECEMBER 2016 | 741 COMMENT T h e 3 D g e n o m e © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . in many cases , studies have simply compared the con­ tact probability with the average distance between loci in the population . Since genomic and imaging methods intrinsically measure different characteristics of the 3D genome , it is to be expected that there will be instances where they produce data that appear to be inconsistent 3 . For instance , two different pairs of loci that have very differ­ ent average spatial distances in the population may be found to have identical contact probabilities by 3C­based methods ( see FIG . 1 ) . Such discordance can of course point to technical artefacts , false positives and negatives , and limited sensitivity or specificity but , more interest­ ingly , it could also indicate a gap in our understanding of how both data types can be true . Instead of just using these methods to validate one another , we should aim to develop better models of chromosome structure that will unify genomic and imaging data , especially when they appear at first glance to be at odds with one another . This is the notion of consilience , or the joining together of facts and models that are derived from different disciplines into a coherent framework of knowledge . Consilience is a goal in many scientific endeavours . One way to obtain consilience is to employ chroma­ tin folding simulation approaches to explore how locus dynamics , the presence of looping interactions , the organization of chromatin domains and different levels of compaction can produce such apparently inconsist­ ent patterns of contact probabilities and locus distance distributions . For instance , a recent study used polymer simulations to show that the presence of just one dynamic loop can lead to a scenario in which 3C data are in appar­ ent conflict with FISH­derived average spatial distances 4 . Such models can then be compared to the experimental data and tested by additional rounds of experimentation that include genome­editing methods to alter predicted features . In this way , instances of discordance provide not a reason to disprove one data type , but an opportunity to gain important new insights into how chromosomes fold . The recently established 4D Nucleome project ( https : / / commonfund . nih . gov / 4Dnucleome / index ) will develop and employ a range of genomic , imaging and modelling approaches to study 3D genome organiza­ tion . This project will provide an opportunity to unify the many different data types . Public sharing of data in agreed­upon formats and data analysis , preferably using open source platforms , could attract scientists from around the world and from different disciplines to participate in this effort . The 4D Nucleome project is just one example of many ongoing related efforts around the world , in both consortia and individual labs . Through their work , a coherent view of the 3D genome may well be within reach . 1 . Wang , S . et al . Spatial organization of chromatin domains and compartments in single chromosomes . Science 353 , 598−602 ( 2016 ) . 2 . Williamson , I . et al . Spatial genome organization : contrasting views from chromosome conformation capture and fluorescence in situ hybridization . Genes Dev . 28 , 2778−2791 ( 2014 ) . 3 . Giorgetti , L . & Heard , E . Closing the loops : 3C versus DNA FISH . Genome Biol . 17 , 215 ( 2016 ) . 4 . Fudenberg , G . & Imakaev , M . FISH - ing for captured contacts : towards reconciling FISH and 3C . bioRxiv http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 081448 ( 2016 ) . Acknowledgements The author thanks G . Fudenberg , M . Imakaev , L . Mirny and members of the Dekker laboratory for discussions and sharing insights . Figure 1 | Measuring the distributions of distances between two pairs of loci in a cell population . Two pairs of loci ( A and B , C and D ) may display the same frequency of interaction or colocalization ( purple area of the distribution ) despite having different population - average spatial distances . Chromosome conformation capture ( 3C ) - based assays only detect chromatin interactions in the subpopulation of cells indicated in purple , whereas imaging - based assays detect all cells and sample mostly the middle part of the distribution . When directly validating the data obtained with 3C - and imaging - based methods , only the subpopulation of cells indicated in purple should be used . New insights into chromosome folding can come from studies that aim to explain unknown or counterintuitive relationships between contact probabilities and distance distributions . Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Distance between loci Loci C and D Loci A and B N u m b e r o f c e ll s Potential for validation 3C - based detectionImaging - based detection Exploration of the relationship between contact probability and distance distribution : potential for new insights C O M M E N T 742 | DECEMBER 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm C O M M E N T © 2016 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .