ORGANIZATION SCIENCE Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 http : / / pubsonline . informs . org / journal / orsc / ISSN 1047 - 7039 ( print ) , ISSN 1526 - 5455 ( online ) A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance : Workers’ Invisibility Practices and Managerial Justiﬁcation Michel Anteby , a Curtis K . Chan b a Organizational Behavior Department , Boston University , Boston , Massachusetts 02215 ; b Management and Organization Department , Boston College , Massachusetts 02467 Contact : manteby @ bu . edu , http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 2629 - 2529 ( MA ) ; curtis . chan @ bc . edu , http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 8344 - 834X ( CKC ) Received : May 25 , 2014 Revised : July 14 , 2016 ; March 12 , 2017 ; June 18 , 2017 ; July 26 , 2017 Accepted : September 16 , 2017 Published Online in Articles in Advance : March 30 , 2018 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2017 . 1175 Copyright : © 2018 INFORMS Abstract . In the past few decades , the growth of surveillance has become a ﬁxture of organizational life . Past scholarship has largely explained this growth as the result of traditional managerial demands for added control over workers , coupled with newly available cheap technology ( such as closed - circuit televisions and body - worn cameras ) . We draw on the workplace resistance literature to complement these views by suggesting that workers can also drive such growth . More speciﬁcally , we show that workers under surveillance can feel constantly observed and seen , but they can also feel largely unnoticed as individuals by management . This paradoxical experience leads them to interpret the surveillance as coercive and to engage in invisibility practices to attempt to go unseen and remain unnoticed . Management , in turn , interprets these attempts as justiﬁcation for more surveillance , which encourages workers to engage in even more invisibility practices , thus creating a self - fulﬁlling cycle of coercive surveillance . Our study therefore oﬀers one of the ﬁrst endogenous explanations for the growth of surveillance while also isolating unique forms of resistance attached to such surveillance . Supplemental Material : The e - companion is available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 2017 . 1175 . Keywords : surveillance • invisibility • camera • workplace resistance • transportation security administration Introduction In the past few decades , surveillance has permeated numerous social arenas , including inner cities and school systems ( e . g . , Goﬀman 2009 , 2015 ; Monahan and Torre 2010 ) . But it is in the workplace that the growth of surveillance has perhaps been most strik - ing ( Sewell 1998 , Marx 1999 , Staples 2000 , Sewell and Barker 2006 , Lyon 2007 , Ball 2010 ) . Today , the number of workers exposed to surveillance seems to have risen exponentially . Whether it is commercial truck drivers , waste collectors , home - care workers , or nannies , a growing segment of the workforce operates under surveillance ( Brown and Korczynski 2010 , Brown 2011 , Nagle 2013 , Levy 2015 , Snyder 2016 ) . Recent calls for police oﬃcers to adopt body - worn video devices or “body cams” are only the latest illustration of this trend ( Harris 2010 , Ariel et al . 2015 ) . Managerial attempts to control the workforce are nothing new . Surveillance ( in the form of a fore - man’s gaze ) has been a staple of managerial ideol - ogy ever since Frederick Taylor’s ( 1911 ) writings on scientiﬁc management , yet the increased reliance on technologies—such as wide - angle cameras and remote monitoring systems—has rendered surveillance ever more salient in recent years . Despite some evidence of the adverse eﬀects of surveillance on employees’ moti - vation , job satisfaction , and even productivity ( Lepper et al . 1975 , Grant and Higgins 1989 , Enzle et al . 1993 , Bernstein 2012 ) , managers have continued to adopt technology - enabled surveillance widely throughout contemporary work settings . Similar to inspectors at the center of Jeremy Bentham’s panopticon who can judge “without anything being concealed” how an entire establishment functions ( Foucault 1977 , p . 204 ) , managers aided by technology can increasingly assess workers’ entire performance . Such developments have led the editors of the Routledge Handbook of Surveillance Studies to remark , “In many workplaces employee per - formance is now scrutinized at a level of detail that would delight the early advocates of scientiﬁc man - agement” ( Ball et al . 2012 , p . 4 ) . In short , the primary methods of controlling the workforce have gone from simple managerial supervision to an often technology - enabled “SuperVision” ( Gilliom and Monahan 2012 ) . But what explains the growth of workplace surveil - lance ? Past scholarship has mostly explained this growth by forces exogenous to an organization’s work - force ( e . g . , Staples 1997 , Garland 2001 , Molotoch and McClain 2003 , Kupchik 2010 , Marx 2016 ) . The rea - sons cited include the traditional managerial desire for increased control and the new availability of cheaper technology . In other words , the surveillance system ( including its growth ) has been treated as the result of dynamics mostly located outside of workers’ purview . Missing from these explanations , however , are the 1 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance 2 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS watched individuals’ own interpretations of and roles in the surveillance system , and how these shape the system’s evolution . As Foucault ( 1977 ) makes clear , the watched ones are also part of the surveillance system ; thus , workers’ interpretations and behavior within the surveillance system—what we label “endogenous” forces—might aﬀect the way surveillance operates , including , possibly , its growth . This article posits that studying workers’ interpre - tations of and resistance to surveillance helps us bet - ter understand the growth of surveillance . We develop an endogenous explanation for such growth by study - ing the experiences and resistance strategies of secu - rity screening personnel at a large urban airport . These individuals , employed by the U . S . Transporta - tion Security Administration ( TSA ) , reported work - ing under heavy and increasingly technology - enabled surveillance . Relying on interview data , we unpack the ( 1 ) managerial rationale for creating a surveillance apparatus , ( 2 ) employees’ complex experiences of this apparatus , ( 3 ) employees’ associated resistance strate - gies , and ( 4 ) management’s reaction to these strategies and how these strategies aﬀect the surveillance system itself . Overall , our analysis suggests a cycle of surveil - lance that we label “self - fulﬁlling” because it reveals endogenous dynamics that produce , and are produced by , increased surveillance . Empirically , we ﬁrst show that surveillance was introduced with the hope of strengthening manage - rial control over employee theft . Second , we docu - ment an experience of surveillance in which workers reported being at once highly visible and yet simul - taneously invisible at work . While workers reported a sense of visibility of behavior ( i . e . , they felt that they were seen or physically observed by management ) , they also reported being largely unnoticed as distinct individu - als by managers—what we label a sense of invisibility of self . 1 Third , we argue that these paradoxical experi - ences of being seen and going unnoticed under surveil - lance led workers to interpret the surveillance as coer - cive and to engage in invisibility practices to try to go unseen and remain unnoticed by management . Finally , we explain how these practices justiﬁed management’s eﬀorts to increase surveillance even further . Through these steps , we develop an endogenous explanation for the rise of coercive surveillance and identify unique ways in which workers resist it . Explaining the Growth of Workplace Surveillance With the spread of industrialization and the growth in scale of many workplaces over the last century , controlling the workforce has been a recurring man - agerial concern in organizations . Since the advent of scientiﬁc management , a perceived need to monitor employees’ eﬀorts has gained increased salience across industries ( Braverman 1974 , p . 267 ; Burawoy 1979 , pp . 7 – 10 ; Edwards 1979 ; Perrow 1986 ) . Many scholars have traced the contemporary rise in workplace surveil - lance to the same long - documented managerial desire forcontrol , coupledwiththenew availabilityofcheaper technology ( Attewell1987 ; Lyon1994 , 2007 ; Sewell1998 ; Stanton 2000 ; Staples 2000 ; Haggerty and Ericson 2006 ; Kroener and Neyland 2012 ; Marx 2016 ; Bernstein 2017 ) . To go beyond these exogenous explanations , one ﬁrst ought to account for workers’ interpretations of surveillance . Scholars have noted that workplace surveillance is often interpreted primarily as either car - ing or coercive ( Lyon 2001 , Sewell and Barker 2006 ) . Surveillance is interpreted as caring when people believe that the observers have beneﬁcent motivations ( such as developing and protecting the observed ) . By contrast , surveillance is viewed as coercive when peo - ple believe that the observers have contentious motiva - tions ( such as punishing the observed ) . The interpre - tations of the observed individuals are therefore what ultimately make surveillance caring or coercive . There are abundant examples of contemporary set - tings where workers primarily interpret managerial surveillance as coercive rather than caring ( e . g . , Allen et al . 2007 ) . In many call centers , after their initial train - ing , few workers receive developmental feedback from the extensive remote monitoring of their calls ( Batt et al . 2009 , Russell 2009 , Patel 2010 , Sewell et al . 2012 ) ; instead , they are called out when they go oﬀ script and thus view the monitoring as coercive . Similarly , in police departments , the focus of surveillance eﬀorts is often viewed as catching misbehaving oﬃcers , not developing oﬃcers . Body - worn cameras , for instance , are typically interpreted to mean that police oﬃcers “must take seriously the possibility that irrefutable images of their actions” may “contradict their own ver - sion of what happened” Harris ( 2010 , p . 329 ) . Indeed , scholars have argued that intense coercive surveillance may be becoming the norm in contemporary work - places ( Attewell 1987 ; Staples 1997 , 2000 ; Sewell 1998 ; Marx 1999 ; Stanton 2000 ; Ball 2010 ) . Workers’ interpretations of surveillance matter be - cause they can shape how workers react to and behave in the face of surveillance . Past literature informs us , more generally , that workers’ experiences of their work context can inﬂuence their reactions to managerial directives . For instance , studies have shown that in the presence of perceived interpersonal conﬂict with supervisors and with the support of unions , workers are likely to strike against management ( Roscigno and Hodson 2004a ) . By contrast , when operating in settings where interpersonal conﬂicts and unions are perceived to be absent , workers might resist managerial directives in subtler ways . Disneyland employees , for example , resisted the managerial injunction never to oﬀend cus - tomers by “mistakenly” overtightening misbehaving amusement - park riders’ seatbelts ( Van Maanen 1990 ) . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS 3 To fully grasp the dynamics of surveillance , then , scholars ought to account for watched individuals’ interpretations and actions in the face of surveillance . Surveillance systems cannot only be depicted as being imposed by managers upon workers ( e . g . , Sewell 1998 , Brown and Korczynski 2010 , Bernstein 2012 ) or driven by outside technical developments ( e . g . , Lyon 1994 , Ball 2010 , Stanko and Beckman 2015 , Marx 2016 ) , but need to be conceptualized as the results of both managers’ and workers’ interactions . In fact , work - ers are also crucial agents who shape and constitute the surveillance dynamics in which they work . What Foucault ( 1977 ) labels the watched individuals’ “ state of conscious and permanent visibility” ( p . 200 , empha - sis added ) is as inherent to a surveillance apparatus as the observer’s gaze . Dynamics endogenous to the workforce should therefore not be ignored when ana - lyzing surveillance systems . Workplace Resistance Under Coercive Surveillance Viewing surveillance as the combined interactions of watchers and watched , rather than as imposed or exogenously driven , requires paying close attention to workers’ resistance strategies . Resistance strategies are understood as “any individual or small - group act [ s ] intended to mitigate claims by management on work - ers or to advance workers’ claims against manage - ment” Hodson ( 1995 , p . 80 ) and include activities such as sabotage , work avoidance , absenteeism , and theft ( Roscigno and Hodson 2004a ) . Ranging from the infor - mal “banana time” pauses taken during working hours ( Roy 1959 ) and the preference for “Stayin’ Alive” songs on workshop radios ( Korczynski 2014 ) to the “making - out” games played on factory lines ( Burawoy 1979 ) , forms of resistance vary widely across settings . While past scholarship on resistance has explored numerous settings—from factories to amusement parks—the literature has largely omitted examin - ing workers’ interpretations of new , highly coercive surveillance contexts ( for exceptions , see Fleming and Sturdy 2009 , Sallaz 2009 ) . The timing of publication of most workplace resistance studies—namely , before the intensiﬁcation of coercive surveillance—explains in large part this lacuna ( e . g . , Ditton 1979 , Edwards 1979 , Mars 1982 , Jermier et al . 1994 , Fleming and Spicer 2003 , Vallas 2003 ) . The most comprehensive track - ing and documentation of workplace resistance forms can be found in the Workplace Ethnography Project led by Roscigno and Hodson ( 2004b ) , which exam - ined 204 ethnographic cases published in monographs between 1944 and 2002 . Most of the data gathering for these cases was , however , conducted before the recent intensiﬁcation of coercive surveillance . We posit that in contexts where surveillance is per - ceived as particularly coercive , we might observe— in addition to traditional resistance strategies—novel ones with potential consequences for surveillance growth . Past scholarship has often depicted resistance as covert ( Morrill et al . 2003 ) and somewhat mundane ( Scott 1985 , Prasad and Prasad 2000 ) , but with the power of modern surveillance technology at their dis - posal , managers have an expanded capacity to see and take note of what workers are doing , including resist - ing . Under these circumstances , workplace resistance might prove to be very diﬀerent today than it was in the past . And because resistance can shape the work context ( e . g . , Courpasson et al . 2012 ) , these diﬀerent forms of resistance might also yield unexpected orga - nizational dynamics . In this study , we argue that workers’ resistance to what they interpret as coercive surveillance can serve as motivation for managers to enact further surveillance , leading to workplace surveillance as a self - fulﬁlling cycle . Conceptualizing workplace surveillance as a self - fulﬁlling cycle of interactions and interpretations between workers and managers helps us to move beyond exogenous explanations for growth in surveil - lance and toward explanations involving dynamics endogenous to the organization’s workforce . In the rest of this article , we detail our research context and methodology , analyze the elements that constitute the cycle of coercive surveillance , explain how this cycle can be self - fulﬁlling , and discuss the broader implications of our ﬁndings . Research Setting and Methods Large Urban Airport’s Transportation Security Administration Unit In the wake of the September 11 , 2001 , passenger - plane hĳackings used in the coordinated attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon , the U . S . Congress passed the Aviation and Transportation Security Act ( S . 1447 , 107th Congress , 2001 – 2002 ) , establishing the Transportation Security Administration ( TSA ) as a fed - eral agency . The act assigned the TSA responsibility for all passenger and baggage screening and , more broadly , for maintaining the safety and security of the traveling public in the United States . Before the advent of the TSA , screening was the responsibility of com - mercial airline carriers . Upon establishment of the TSA , however , screening at U . S . airports became federalized . Over the course of 2002 , the TSA grew to encompass more than 60 , 000 employees ; at the start of data col - lection in 2011 , it still employed close to 58 , 000 people ( Hatch 2004 , p . 39 ; U . S . Department of Homeland Secu - rity 2011 , p . 85 ) . TSA policies and programs are orga - nized nationally , but implementation is decentralized to local TSA units ( Fosher 2009 ) . This study’s setting is a TSA unit based at a large U . S . urban airport , henceforth called Large Urban Airport ( LUA ) ; the unit is typical of other similarly large TSA D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance 4 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS units . The study’s focus is the screening workforce— that is , TSA employees who perform passenger and baggage screening . At the time of the study , 1 , 223 screening employees were employed by LUA’s TSA . Most ( 71 . 5 % ) were entry - level transportation security oﬃ - cers ( TSOs ) , who are the mainstay of the screening workforce and the primary focus of our study . The screening workforce also included lead transportation security oﬃcers ( LTSOs or “leads” ) , who direct the TSOs , and supervisory transportation security oﬃcers ( STSOs , “supervisors , ” or “sups” ) , who oversee both TSOs and LTSOs . We consider and refer to leads and supervisors as “managers” because they were collectively respon - sible for overseeing , controlling , and watching TSOs . The remainder of the workforce consisted of behavioral detection oﬃcers ( BDOs ) , a position for oﬃcers trained to identify suspicious behavior within and outside of checkpoints . TSA’s screening workforce at LUA was mostly full time ( 68 % ) and predominantly male ( 68 . 6 % ) , with an average age of 39 . 2 years and an average tenure of 4 . 6 years . ( See Table 1 for more details on work - force demographics . ) TSA oﬀered working conditions intended to be an improvement over those previously oﬀered by private security contractors ( Pinnock 2007 , p . 302 ) . Starting pay for TSOs in 2011 was approx - imately $ 12 per hour , and beneﬁts included health insurance and a retirement plan . At the time of the study , the workforce had been unionized for only a few months , and TSOs had generally had few direct con - tacts with union representatives . 2 In general , screening employees worked one of three shifts : morning ( approximately 4 a . m . to noon ) , after - noon ( noon to 8 p . m . ) , or overnight ( 8 p . m . to 4 a . m . ) . Most Table 1 . Demographics of TSA LUA’s Screening Workforce Population Interview sample ( N (cid:3) 1 , 223 ) ( n (cid:3) 89 ) Male ( percentage ) 839 ( 68 . 6 ) 52 ( 58 . 4 ) Female ( percentage ) 384 ( 31 . 4 ) 37 ( 41 . 6 ) Average age in years 39 . 2 ( 13 . 7 ) 43 . 2 ( 14 . 7 ) ( standard deviation ) Average years of 4 . 6 ( 3 . 1 ) 5 . 0 ( 3 . 0 ) service at TSA ( standard deviation ) Full - time employees 828 ( 68 ) 70 ( 79 ) ( percentage ) Part - time employees 395 ( 32 ) 19 ( 21 ) ( percentage ) Position at TSA Transportation security 874 ( 71 . 5 ) 55 ( 61 . 8 ) oﬃcer ( percentage ) Lead transportation 144 ( 11 . 8 ) 21 ( 23 . 6 ) security oﬃcer ( percentage ) Supervisor transportation 123 ( 10 . 0 ) 6 ( 6 . 7 ) security oﬃcer ( percentage ) Behavioral detection 82 ( 6 . 7 ) 7 ( 7 . 9 ) oﬃcers ( percentage ) full - time employees were given two days oﬀ per week , and part - time employees typically worked three full days per week or shorter shifts scattered over ﬁve days . All screening employees ( except BDOs ) were assigned to six - month stints at a given baggage - check room or security checkpoint , such as the Delta checkpoint . At the end of each six - month period , screening employees “bid” on new assignments based on their seniority . 3 Most employees , and especially those with little senior - ity , tended to be assigned a new location at the start of each new bidding period , but more senior employees could typically remain at a given location for multi - ple periods if they wished to . Moreover , because secu - rity checkpoints created a high demand for labor , most TSOs worked checkpoints , some worked checkpoints and baggage rooms , while only a few worked exclu - sively in baggage rooms . An airport checkpoint or baggage - check room is a physical space that mediates between the public area where ticketing takes place and the “sterile area” where travelers board their ﬂights . As the term sterile suggests , only individuals already screened for pro - hibited items ( objects determined by TSA to be poten - tially dangerous to travelers’ safety ) can enter and cir - culate in that space . At each checkpoint , passengers can advance and be screened for prohibited items via mul - tiple lanes . At each lane , TSOs occupy multiple posi - tions such as checking travel documents and operating the body scanner . Similar to a checkpoint , the baggage - check room’s objective is to identify and remove pro - hibited items from travelers’ checked baggage . The room is often located underground or away from the checkpoint . Its smaller team of TSOs ﬁll fewer ﬁxed positions , typically viewing on - screen images of bag - gage or manually checking bags . TSOs are assigned to positions by the lead in charge of the lane or baggage - check room . Leads are expected to rotate TSOs through their task positions . A lead is responsible for the overall operation of one or two lanes or a baggage room , and his or her manage - rial tasks include coordinating TSOs’ work , monitor - ing operational performance , and scheduling breaks . Among their other responsibilities , leads also ensure the proper maintenance of equipment and ﬁll out attendance sheets , coordinate with and report to super - visors , and ﬁll in for absent supervisors . By contrast , supervisors observe lanes or baggage rooms to deal with “exceptions” ; they are responsible for multiple lanes , and together , they are ultimately collectively responsible for the entire checkpoint . Supervisors com - municate mainly with leads . Data Collection and Analysis To understand TSOs’ work experiences under surveil - lance , we conducted and analyzed a total of 89 inter - views with a range of TSA respondents . Interviews D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS 5 are particularly well suited to capture individuals’ sub - jective interpretations of given contexts ( Weiss 1994 ) . We interviewed mostly TSOs ( n (cid:3) 55 ) but also other members of the screening workforce—namely , leads ( n (cid:3) 21 ) , supervisors ( n (cid:3) 6 ) , and BDOs ( n (cid:3) 7 ) , most of whom were former TSOs . We also spoke with sev - eral TSA leaders to clarify aspects of the job that inter - viewees referenced but understood only partially ( e . g . , staﬃng procedures ) . All interviewees were told at the outset not to share with us any data that might consti - tute what TSA calls “sensitive security information” or any information whose public release would be detri - mental to transportation security . Despite this limi - tation , the interviews and targeted questions to TSA leaders provided a fairly comprehensive view of TSOs’ work . The interview sample was constructed by sending electronic invitations to a randomized set of LUA’s TSA screening workforce—mainly TSOs , leads , and super - visors . This request followed an informational email message sent to the entire workforce by LUA’s federal security director announcing the study’s launch . Two electronic reminders were sent at two - week intervals after the initial invitation . To increase awareness of the study and maximize the response rate , we posted infor - mational ﬂyers in all TSA break rooms ( where many TSOs donned their uniforms before their shifts ) and made several visits to training sessions for the screen - ing workforce to introduce ourselves and answer ques - tions . Interviewees were also compensated for their time . The response rate was about 40 % , and the demo - graphic proﬁle of our sample seemed fairly consistent with LUA’s TSA screening population of employees ( see Table 1 ) . We suspect several TSOs did not reply to our interview requests because of the diﬃculty for them to plan their schedules suﬃciently in advance . The general informational email and ﬂyer included our contact information , and a few volunteers who con - tacted us were also interviewed ( n (cid:3) 5 ) . The study’s two coauthors and a research asso - ciate conducted approximately equal numbers of inter - views . Collectively , the interviewers represented a diverse set of individuals in terms of age , ethnicity , and gender . Interviews were conducted at airport hotel lobbies , in cafés , in restaurants , and in respondents’ homes . Each interview lasted about an hour and was digitally recorded and transcribed with the respon - dent’s consent . In the case of respondents who did not consent to being recorded ( n (cid:3) 3 ) , detailed notes were taken during and right after the interviews . The inter - views followed an open - ended protocol that included such topics as career history , an account of a typical workday , and hopes and challenges associated with the job . We also encouraged interviewees to tell us what they thought we should know to understand their work . ( See Online Appendix 1 for sample interview questions . ) As the themes of invisibility practices at work gained saliency in our analysis , we started adding a few pointed questions at the end of our interview protocol on this topic . We began our analysis by examining how intervie - wees described their experience at work . In keeping with grounded - theory guidelines ( Glaser and Strauss 1967 , Miles and Huberman 1994 ) , we made con - stant eﬀorts to compare interviewees’ experiences and descriptions within and across interviews . Each inter - viewer separately read a set of transcripts that included some of his or her own interviews and some collected by the other interviewers . We then collectively dis - cussed the themes that arose in our sets and gradu - ally tracked recurrent themes , such as constantly being seen . As themes emerged , we returned to previously analyzed interview data to reexamine them in light of newly identiﬁed and revised themes . 4 Meanwhile , we noted the interviewees’ proﬁles alongside their descriptions of their experiences . From these analyses , we induced the paradoxical experience of TSOs feel - ing that their behaviors were both highly observed yet , simultaneously , that their selves went unappreciated and unnoticed . Iterating back and forth between our analysis and the literature ( Charmaz 1983 , Locke 2001 ) , we real - ized two further points : ﬁrst , that the analysis pointed to an experiential disjuncture between workers ( TSOs ) and managers ( leads and supervisors ) around surveil - lance , and second , that the paradoxical experiences of TSOs could be linked to shifts in managerial surveil - lance at TSA . For the ﬁrst point , we considered worker interviews and manager interviews as groupings to help construct the narrative of the ﬁndings , particularly noting that workers’ experiences of surveillance were disconnected from managers’ justiﬁcations for surveil - lance . For the second point of realizing that work - ers’ experiences and practices of surveillance might be connected to shifts in TSA surveillance , we sought to supplement our interview data . To better understand these dynamics , we identiﬁed ( mainly governmen - tal ) archives relevant to the development of surveil - lance . By triangulating data sources , we elaborated a narrative around how workers’ resistance under surveillance can enable a self - fulﬁlling cycle of coercive surveillance . Once we reached saturation in terms of emerging themes , we reviewed the entire data set . The few disagreements between coauthors were resolved through discussion . Findings Surveillance as a Means of Heightened Control Almost a decade after its inception , recurring accu - sation of employee theft was one of the most criti - cal workforce issues that TSA faced . Travelers made a substantial number of claims that oﬃcers had stolen D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance 6 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS from their belongings . Analysis suggests that of the 12 , 473 passenger claims reported nationwide to TSA in 2009 , “7 , 327 were claims for passengers’ property loss from checked - in baggage and at checkpoint [ s ] ” ( Marteache Solans 2013 , p . 98 ) . According to inter - nal TSA data , the number of “adjudicated miscon - duct cases” ( namely , cases that were investigated ) involving “unauthorized taking / theft” was actually quite low : only 28 cases on average per year over the period of 2010 – 2012 ( U . S . Government Accountability Oﬃce 2013 , p . 11 ) . But any level of employee theft was problematic , and regular media reports across the country ( including ones on the location we studied ) heightened the perception of rampant employee theft at TSA . Two main reasons can explain this discrepancy between passengers’ perception of widespread em - ployee theft and the internal data suggesting lim - ited theft . First , local TSA units might prefer to have employees caught stealing quietly resign , rather than document an occurrence of theft at their airport or an “adjudicated” case of misconduct . As one TSO explained , “They’ll [ management ] strongly encourage the person just to quit , so they don’t have to report it” ( 2020 ) . 5 Second , and perhaps more critical to the discrepancy , passengers might blame TSA even when individuals from other organizations ( such as airline bag handlers ) were the ones involved in the theft . As another TSO clariﬁed , And this [ theft ] was going on at our beginning because they knew they could blame it on TSA . A lot of the airlines have a lot of theft going on . To this day , they have a lot of theft . . . . We used to check the luggage , we used to put a TSA tag on it that it was checked . We stopped doing that because we ﬁgured out if the bag handler sees that we already opened up that bag , because there’s a TSA tag on it , guess what ? Let’s open it up and take what TSA looked at . . . . But they’re still doing it now . The theft is still on now . ( 1003 ) Regardless of the extent of employee theft or the degree of TSA employees’ involvement in it , TSOs were well aware that theft happened , because they had either heard about it or observed someone stealing from travelers . As one TSO remarked , “We have seen everything here , from people swearing at passengers to people stealing , you know , you name it” ( 2016 ) . A sec - ond TSO’s comment illustrates these views : “With oﬃcers—there’s quite a strong level of theft . . . . I never believed it : Because I said , ‘First of all , you know , they do the background checks . . . . Secondly , there’s noth - ing in those bags . . . that I would want to go to federal prison over . ’ But they have had time and time again , cases of theft” ( 2020 ) . Even when not witnessing ﬁrst - hand employee theft , TSOs were frequently exposed via the news to occurrences of such theft at airports across the country . A third TSO brought this up when commenting on his colleagues : “We have these bunch of guys that are stealing things . ” When pressed to artic - ulate how he knew about such theft , he answered , “It’s all over the news . . . you can go on websites that tell you all the things—all the TSOs who have been arrested since its inception” ( 3021 ) . In an eﬀort to identify the few potential “bad apples” and “protect” other employees from unjust accusa - tions , LUA TSA’s management gradually introduced heightened surveillance at checkpoints . The idea was “to review video so you can help point out what’s going on in the situation” and “go to tapes , . . . check it out , make sure it’s legitimate” ( 2029 ) . As a TSO explained , “The camera helps , like , you know , if some - body forgot their money or property , like a computer and they say somebody took it . . . . So always they go to the cameras and check that” ( 2033 ) . LUA’s management emphasized that most ex post viewing of camera feeds would be used to exonerate TSOs from travelers’ accu - sations , and a TSA manager at another airport empha - sized that “checkpoint CCTV [ closed circuit television ] video is often invaluable in helping to resolve allega - tions of wrongdoing” ( Bierle 2013 , p . 49 ) . What most concerned TSOs , however , was the addition of cameras pointed at diﬀerent angles on them . The installation of additional CCTV systems at LUA was part of a larger multimillion dollar national TSA eﬀort to use surveillance cameras to counter the pub - lic’s perception of employee theft . Similar to what we found in our ﬁeld site , the U . S . Government Account - ability Oﬃce ( 2013 , p . 20 ) noted , “TSA oﬃcials at airports often have to rely upon video footage to substantiate whether misconduct has occurred , such as alleged theft of a passenger’s property . ” Another report explained that customer service representatives charged with handling travelers’ complaints could review “video footage of the incident to help identify additional details of the incident , such as the identity of the screener ( s ) who may have been involved in the incident and what had actually happened during the incident” ( U . S . Government Accountability Oﬃce 2012 , p . 13 ) . Furthermore , the 2006 TSA guidelines for the physical design of checkpoints stipulate that cameras can “deter burglary” ( Transportation Security Admin - istration 2006 , p . 104 ) . Workers’ Perceptions of Being Constantly Seen As a result of this surge in technology - enabled surveil - lance , almost all interviewed TSOs asserted with - out prompting that their work at checkpoints was highly visible to management . TSOs’ sense of visibility was evidenced by their perceptions of a comprehen - sive managerial surveillance apparatus that included ( i ) security cameras , ( ii ) regular on - the - job testing , and ( iii ) travelers who could report oﬃcers’ behaviors to management . Although LUA’s management claimed D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS 7 to only observe TSOs’ behavior in real time in cases of identiﬁed security concerns , and mainly used the CCTV system to analyze “critical” events after the fact , most TSOs felt as though they were constantly being watched , which contributed to their interpretation of the surveillance system as highly coercive . First , interviewees’ heightened awareness of the presence of security cameras throughout checkpoints and baggage rooms contributed to the sense of coer - cive surveillance . The impression of being constantly watched and seen by the “ops” ( operations ) depart - ment and by management recurred throughout the TSOs’ interviews . TSOs knew that the staﬀ of the oper - ations department , located in a central building , was equipped to view all surveillance feeds . Managers sug - gested that such monitoring enabled higher - ups to step in and help oﬃcers if necessary ( e . g . , to help calm an agitated passenger or counter travelers’ accusations ) and to make adjustments to streamline the screening process ( by reassigning oﬃcers from less busy check - points to busier ones ) , but most TSOs experienced such monitoring simply as a means of coercive control . The following TSO’s reaction was shared by many of his peers : Oh , it’s a ton of surveillance cameras . As a matter of fact , within the last three or four months , they have installed so many diﬀerent cameras . I’m talking in one area you can have six or seven diﬀerent cameras—all diﬀerent angles . They want to see what you’re doing sitting at this chair , they want to see what you’re doing when you get on this computer , they want to see what you’re doing when you’re operating this machine . . . . You know what ? It’s weird because , as an employee , you kind of feel like we should be watching passengers , passen - ger behavior , passenger activity . But instead they watch employees . ( 2008 ) TSOs prevalently interpreted cameras as being used for “spying , ” a word that exuded negative connota - tions . One TSO summarized this by noting , “I don’t know if you’ve heard about the spying ? They [ man - agement ] wired up all the cameras live . So now they have a new toy where they’ve started spying on every - body” ( 2031 ) . Another TSO conﬁrmed this impression : “They [ management ] can just spy on you 24 / 7” ( 3021 ) . A third TSO characteristically explained that the recent addition of new checkpoint cameras was intended pri - marily to keep tabs on the oﬃcers’ behavior . This TSO acknowledged that cameras help fulﬁll TSA’s mission of protecting travelers , but added , “I think what people are saying about the cameras is that they use the term ‘Big Brother’s watching you , ’ OK ? You know . So , say if someone’s slacking oﬀ at the job , they [ are ] . . . just wait - ing for someone to mess up , or see someone leaning when they maybe shouldn’t be leaning” ( 3027 ) . “Every - one [ at work ] has rules , ” explained a fourth TSO , but “there are some people here [ at LUA TSA ] who will watch you like a hawk” ( 3010 ) . The cameras , a ﬁfth TSO summed up , were all about “trying to eyeball every - body” and enabling managers to say , “bad apple , bad apple , bad apple” ( 3004 ) . Any behavior that did not follow standard operating procedures , or “SOPs , ” could be picked up on - screen and corrected on the spot via remote communication with the on - site hierarchy . TSOs felt that managers monitored them excessively closely for their behavior and appearance . As an illustration , one TSO noted that management focuses on “what is this person doing ? Why are their hands in their pockets while they are on duty ? ” ( 1024 ) . Other TSOs recounted similarly cor - rective episodes . One said , “They’re live cameras . And three times last week , management called and said ‘the girl on the metal detector , her hair is two inches below her collar’ ” ( 3006 ) . Another TSO recalled a man - ager complaining remotely that a female TSO’s dress breached uniform rules because “her earring’s more than a quarter of an inch” ( 3001 ) . Both TSOs were incensed about what they saw as the excessive regula - tion of workers’ appearance . Many TSOs also felt that managers were closely critical of the work performed at checkpoints via cameras . As another TSO explained , the only work positions in which “you can talk and not get into trouble” ( 3014 ) were those positions explic - itly requiring oﬃcers to talk with passengers to check documents or make announcements to them . In other checkpoint positions , prolonged exchanges with trav - elers could register as potential security problems . Second , besides the use of cameras , many TSOs men - tioned on - the - job testing practices that reinforced their sense of being continually observed . On - the - job test - ing practices involved TSOs being regularly screened for prohibited items prior to the start of their shifts . This screening was conducted by fellow TSOs who were assigned this job on a rotating basis . As one TSO explained , “They make us take oﬀ all our stuﬀ and walk through—you know , act as a regular passenger” ( 3014 ) . Also , TSOs mentioned how local training oﬃ - cers , federal - level TSA staﬀ members , and other gov - ernment representatives conducted covert and overt testing of screening to ensure compliance with federal laws and regulations . For instance , fake x - ray images of prohibited items were randomly ﬂashed on x - ray oper - ators’ screens to test their detection abilities . Too many missed images would lead to a TSO’s “decertiﬁcation , ” followed by obligatory retraining and “recertiﬁcation” before returning to the x - ray position . ( Repeated fail - ures to gain recertiﬁcation could lead to dismissal . ) Third , on top of having to deal with cameras and on - the - job testing , TSOs reported feeling scrutinized and observed by travelers—creating an added layer of surveillance . Travelers functioned as a conduit by which managers gained surveillance onto workers because travelers also monitor and evaluate workers D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance 8 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS by potentially bringing complaints against particular TSOs to TSA management . For example , TSOs often encountered passengers irate about the prospect of going through body - scanning machines or about being selected for inspection . Such interactions could easily go awry and “escalate up the chain of command . ” And in nearly all checkpoint positions , TSOs were in trav - elers’ line of sight . As illustrations , TSOs in the “travel document checker” position ( examining passengers’ ticket information and identiﬁcation documents ) and in the “backﬁeld” position ( standing at the back of the checkpoint nearest to the sterile area , and responding as needed to tasks such as bag checks ) were constantly interacting with travelers . The perception of constant visibility was further reinforced by travelers’ use of smartphones and other devices to capture photos and video of TSOs’ behav - ior . TSOs often commented on the possibility of being “shot” and seen by management , or related instances in which this had happened to colleagues . One TSO described how he was ﬁlmed by a traveler using her iPhone : “You know , it’s uncomfortable . You’re trying to do your job . I don’t come to your place of work , video - tape you all day long , you know ? ” ( 1013 ) . Another TSO elaborated on the experience of being recorded by pas - sengers : “People are always ﬁlming us with their cell phones—like taking pictures , like , ‘Oh , smile , let me tag you on Facebook . ’ And it’s like , ‘No , I don’t want to be tagged on Facebook . ’ You know ? But everything is , like , they can look right on your badge , and they get your name , and then they can do it” ( 2011 ) . Instantly , she added , one could become “a local celebrity , ” infa - mous for some breach of a member of the public’s sen - sibilities . In eﬀect , the traveling public functioned as an added layer of surveillance in service of the man - agerial apparatus , and TSOs saw this added layer of surveillance as also coercive . Overall , TSOs encountered a surveillance apparatus in which they felt constantly visible to and coercively observed by management , whether directly through the use of cameras or on - the - job testing practices or indirectly through travelers’ constant gaze and use of smartphones . Yet as the next section shows , being seen did not always equate with being noticed . In fact , somewhat paradoxically , most TSOs spoke of often feeling “invisible” to management ( until devi - ating from procedures ) while simultaneously feeling constantly and coercively observed . Workers’ Interpretations of Going Unnoticed While TSOs interpreted that they were seen ( i . e . , that their behavior was visible to managers ) through a sys - tem of cameras , testing , and observation , they also reported feeling mostly unnoticed and uncared for ( i . e . , their unique and valued selves remaining mostly invis - ible to management ) when performing their duties properly . Here , workers’ interpretations of their inter - actions with others—whether or not these interactions are directly related to surveillance—matter since these interpretations set the context for workers’ overall interpretation of surveillance as coercive . Thus , next , we describe TSOs’ interpretations of these interactions . First , many TSOs reported a sense of invisibility of self when interacting with managers . For exam - ple , one TSO expressed such perceived invisibility by saying that TSOs quickly “disappear into the wood - work” ( 3019 ) . Commenting on the general feeling amongst fellow TSOs , another interviewee remarked that management simply did not notice them , elab - orating that “these leads and supervisors don’t see that . . . . They don’t see individuals” ( 2003 ) . Yet another TSO captured this general feeling more starkly : “They [ management ] do not see that we’re a person ! ” ( 3009 ) . TSOs came to this conclusion in part through their interpretations of management’s behavior . For exam - ple , a TSO said , “So he [ the manager ] is , like , talking to us , and he’s , like , not making any eye contact with me . . . . So , like , in that sense , a lot of people are invisi - ble , I believe . Because a lot of people don’t get noticed until . . . they’re , like , the mayor of the airport” ( 3025 ) . Another TSO reported that TSOs felt invisible since “no one is really looking at your face , ” and “individually you kind of all blend together” ( 3028 ) . Although slightly attenuated by length of tenure on the job , a sense of invisibility to management pre - vailed among a majority of TSOs across a variety of entry dates . The size and high turnover rate of LUA’s TSA workforce only partially explained this ﬁnding : over the last 10 years , an average of 190 employees ( close to 15 % of LUA TSA’s 1 , 300 - strong workforce ) left their job each year , a turnover rate that could discour - age management from paying much attention to short - tenure employees . However , even many seasoned TSOs reported not being noticed as individuals . One TSO who served for four years noted that certain managers “may not even look in my direction or acknowledge you” ; instead “they walk right by you” ( 1017 ) . Another oﬃcer , working as a BDO , concurred : “I’ve been here for about ﬁve and a half years , and one of the peo - ple in charge , every time I’m introduced to the person , he’ll shake my hand and go [ peering at the employee’s badge ] . . . . ‘Hello , [ name of the employee ] . ’ He has no idea who I am” ( 1007 ) . He recounted an occasion when he and a work partner ( both in civilian clothes because of their BDO duties ) were not recognized on camera despite having worked at TSA for over ﬁve years : We were in front of the airline checkpoint not too long ago , my partner and I , and our operation cen - ter called us and wanted to know where we were . “In front of the checkpoint where we’re supposed to be ! ” “OK . ” And the gentleman from operations who called D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS 9 us , it’s not—he’s not the type of guy that would ran - domly call us to ask us where we were . We knew there had to be a reason . . . . So we called him later and said , “Why did you want to know where we were ? ” Because somebody . . . didn’t see a BDO team in front of the checkpoint . We were there . He just doesn’t know who we are . So he had no idea who we were . ( 1007 ) Second , this sense of invisibility of self was also present in TSOs’ interaction with travelers . As noted above , because travelers functioned as part of the surveillance system on TSOs , interactions with passen - gers were also consequential for the overall interpre - tation of the coerciveness of the surveillance system . As in other airport security - screening settings , TSOs mostly avoided prolonged interactions with passen - gers ( Pütz 2012 ) , but even in these brief encounters , many TSOs reported that travelers did not “hear” or “see” them . Emblematic of such experiences , one TSO noted , “For the most part , it’s basically like talking to a wall . . . . Because it’s like , you look at people , [ and ] you say , ‘Make sure to take your belt oﬀ . . . I look him [ a passenger ] in the face , he looked right at me [ with no reaction ] ” ( 2012 ) . Another TSO added , “There is like a switch for passengers . . . they just ignore you” ( 3009 ) . The following quote by a third TSO captures well this impression of barely being noticed by travelers : Let’s say you’re [ a passenger ] ﬂying and you see me [ TSO ] for 30 seconds , or two minutes , or whatever it is . And my interaction with you is for that little amount of time , but after you leave , there’s hundreds more in the back . . . . And sometimes it kind of gets to you [ the TSO ] because it’s like you’re talking . . . and nobody listens . . . . I don’t know if they [ travelers ] tune out . . . . It’s like , I don’t know , there’s some kind of a metamorphosis that happens when they come to the airport . ( 2004 ) That is not to say that management did not ever notice TSOs as individuals . Management did notice some oﬃcers because travelers brought them to their attention ( via praise on comment cards ) or because TSOs sought out detail duties ( i . e . , special assign - ments ) located in buildings where upper management worked . The TSOs on detail duties connected individ - ually with upper management , even just informally in the hallways , and thus gave them some visibility as distinct individuals . Management could also be made aware of select TSOs by regularly seeing them “put their names in” for internal job openings ( even if TSOs knew they would not get the job ) . One former TSO who had been promoted to the supervisory rank explained why this mattered : “This [ is ] kind of a joke , but [ I say ] , ‘Put in for everything , because eventually they [ man - agers ] are going to get sick of seeing you and they’re going to give you a new job . ’ But that’s not what it is . It’s [ that ] they get to know you” ( 1018 ) . Yet his com - ment is atypical—the more typical situation for TSOs at checkpoints , on the other hand , is one where man - agement did not know the TSOs as distinct individuals . Workers’ Invisibility Practices While going unnoticed has thus far been described as being part of TSOs’ own interpretations of their work context , TSOs themselves also played an active role in what we label “invisibility practices” at work . Given their understanding of surveillance as coercive , many TSOs tried to actively go unseen and remain unnoticed because they feared the negative repercussions of what they viewed as a punitive surveillance system . Being “called to attention” for possible disciplinary action by management was , for TSOs , the most salient outcome of being surveilled . Those seen misbehaving could face sanctions . TSOs mentioned getting “writ - ten up” and receiving either a “letter of guidance and direction” ( a ﬁrst - level sanction , or warning ) or a “let - ter of reprimand” ( a second - level sanction , or formal admonishment ) for violating standard operating pro - cedures . Such violations could include being caught on camera “reading a newspaper” or “using a per - sonal device” even during downtime on the job ( 2008 ) . The disciplinary write - up process could result in tem - porary “restrictions” preventing a TSO from applying for certain promotions or receiving bonuses . ( Restric - tions were lifted after approximately a year . ) Although only 5 % of TSA’s workforce received letters of repri - mand or a higher sanction each year , TSOs considered it risky to “mess around” ( 2020 ) because management was “looking for excuses to slap you on the hand” ( 2019 ) . By contrast , there were very few rewards for doing good work . 6 Only one TSO mentioned cameras when trying to positively impress management . She usually started her shift early and noted , “The cameras watch me every morning coming in early . . . eventually I will get rewarded” ( 2025 ) . The vast majority of TSOs sought , however , to occasionally go unseen and remain unnoticed . Within this punitive context , TSOs felt they were aﬀorded two main ways to become less visible : by evading management’s and passengers’ gaze and by attempting not to “stick out” when under their gaze . First , invisibility - of - behavior practices primarily entailed attempts not to be seen by escaping or evading man - agement’s line of sight . Many TSOs achieved such dis - appearing acts by “extending” their scheduled breaks , but they also disappeared by using other less obvi - ous strategies . At checkpoints , for example , some TSOs ﬁlling the back dynamic oﬃcer position took advan - tage of hiatuses in calls for bag checks or pat downs to disappear . As one TSO explained , individuals ﬁll - ing this position “can wander around , or disappear if they feel like it” and “go to the restroom a lot” ( 3015 ) . Such absences were rarely lengthy , yet TSOs could still ﬂeetingly disappear . In addition , some TSOs sought out the opportunity to be “sent out” from their home checkpoint ( the one they reported to at the start of a shift ) to also disappear ( 3013 ) . A TSO explained that , D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance 10 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS upon being sent out , he could then “just wander the airport . . . you know , go hide someplace . Come back , sign in” ( 2024 ) . This same strategy applied when a TSO was assigned to the “Lost and Found” room located on the other side of the airport . As another oﬃcer commented , it could take “a half an hour [ to reach ] ” the location when it “actually only takes 10 minutes , ” and “you learn to work under the umbrella , you know what I mean ? ” ( 1021 ) . Collectively , these strategies allowed TSOs to attain a form of temporary invisibility of behavior . In addition to these disappearing acts , TSOs also tried to remain out of sight from the travelling pub - lic who could indirectly focus management’s atten - tion on speciﬁc oﬃcers . This practice proved more challenging than escaping management’s direct gaze since travelers were everywhere in the airport . The main way TSOs tried to escape management indirect gaze was by quickly changing out of their blue uni - forms into civilian clothes at the end of their shift , and even covering their uniforms during breaks . As TSOs commented , their uniforms made them stick out like “ [ blue ] Smurfs” ; so by hiding their uniforms , they could eﬀectively hide from passengers who could then not see them as TSA oﬃcers . “When you wear that TSA uniform , people are looking at you . . . . As soon as I leave , I run into the break room and I rip my shirt oﬀ as soon as I get out , ” remarked one TSO ( 3014 ) . Another colleague concurred and shared his practice to remain out of sight : covering his uniform . “That’s why I wear a jacket when I go on the subway , ” he said ( 2009 ) . Thus , attempts to physically hide from travelers were fairly common . Second , when TSOs could not hide their behavior from the layered surveillance system , the best they felt they could do was to refrain from “sticking out . ” These invisibility - of - self practices primarily involved attempts to remain unnoticed by managers via keeping a low proﬁle and remaining inconspicuous in plain sight . As one typical TSO explained , “You might get noticed for the wrong reasons , so I would rather just do my job and go home , rather than be noticed a lot and . . . then maybe later get in trouble for something” ( 3028 ) . Her strategy , similar to that of many other TSOs , was to lay low or “ﬂoat under the radar . ” She clariﬁed , When I’m working in the checkpoint . . . I don’t know if I necessarily ever want to feel noticed . . . . Sometimes it’s hard to be noticed as a good worker . . . . There’s peo - ple who do their job better than others , and sometimes you don’t get noticed for that . . . [ so ] most of the time it doesn’t really matter about being noticed , because sometimes it’s just better to ﬂoat under the radar and not have people know who you are . ( 3028 ) Many other TSOs tried to avoid standing out by leaving their “private selves” at home and by keep - ing their “private life” out of work ( 2010 ) . Whether at work or outside of work , these individuals refrained from socializing with other TSOs or superiors with the intention of keeping their “selves” separate from their work and “not to be known” by management . Another typical TSO tried to keep “a line” or “a dis - tance” between his “job” and his “real life” ( 1018 ) . Yet another oﬃcer spoke of “not putting [ herself ] out there” so her boss would not recall her ; instead , she pretended not to pay attention to overheard conversa - tions among her supervisors in order “to be left alone” and remain “not known” ( 1025 ) . Unlike more “caring” surveillance contexts ( Sewell and Barker 2006 ) where workers might actively seek to be noticed , here , in a context they viewed as coercive , workers felt compelled to shield themselves from punitive actions by down - playing their selfhood . As with their interactions with managers , TSOs also actively engaged in invisibility practices with travelers . A type of invisibility - of - self practice that TSOs enacted was by actively downplaying their emotions in front of passengers to have passengers pay less attention to them . Instances like this occurred in particular during pat downs . While one might expect travelers to per - ceive pat downs as fairly intrusive , TSOs themselves also saw these moments as an unsettling reversal of their usual invisibility to management . In such situ - ations , TSOs felt that travelers “infringed” on them and put them at risk of identiﬁcation . One TSO noted that during such situations some travelers “will yell at you . . . they will tell you how much you suck” ( 1014 ) . A few travelers even asked for TSOs’ badge numbers , threatening to ﬁle a complaint . Despite the “very few” travelers reporting TSOs to management , the sheer volume of travelers meant that such instances were actual possibilities and could lead to “rough days” ( 2010 ) . Thus , contentious moments with passengers left many TSOs with a sense of being possibly individ - ually uncovered . The most common way for TSOs to respond to these potential disclosures was to suppress their anger and to not react outwardly , with the hope of returning to being unnoticed . For instance , a TSO recounted a time when she did this during a bag check . She got frustrated as a passenger “rolled his eyes” through the process of the bag check and was verbally resistant by saying “I don’t know” to all of her questions . While admitting that she would have liked to have said , “I’m going to spit in your bag , ” she instead said , “Have a great day . I just , like , turn [ ed ] away and , like , whew , took a deep breath and like brushed it oﬀ” ( 1009 ) . Another TSO typically explained how he also learned to deal similarly with travelers during such critical moments : “I am actually even more reserved [ with travelers ] now , just because of the calmness that you have to display when you’re in this checkpoint situation” ( 3004 ) . This practice of D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS 11 appearing calm was echoed by another TSO who sum - marized what a colleague once taught him upon join - ing TSA : basically , “just let go” and don’t let “travelers enter into your head” ( 1017 ) . A third TSO noted the “emotional absence” ( 1026 ) that he needed to convey when interacting with travelers . All TSOs mentioning these practices added that few TSOs initially excelled at being “absent” and that they needed to learn the part of going unnoticed . Finally , another kind of practice that helped TSOs emotionally disconnect and not be noticed by travel - ers was by treating passengers like nonpersons them - selves . This is ironic because TSOs had felt like they were not cared for and essentially were mostly treated as objects by management , and in this practice , TSOs imposed on travelers a similar dehumanization to more easily portray the emotional absence they felt they needed to remain unnoticed . TSOs sometimes described thinking of passengers as “cattle moving through” ( 3008 ) or “delivering numbers” ( 2011 ) . After all , at some large checkpoints , more than 1 , 000 travel - ers passed through per hour . One oﬃcer said that , in the face of a stressful interaction , he thought of passen - gers as being brainless , saying , “We say what happens is when they get out , out front , out of the taxi or their car or whatever , that’s where their brain stays” ( 2012 ) . These practices allowed TSOs to attempt to disconnect in order to remain unnoticed and enact an invisibility of self . In summary , TSOs selectively performed prac - tices of invisibility ( both of behavior and of self ) to go unseen and remain unnoticed since they interpreted the surveillance as coercive . Managerial Justiﬁcation for Added Surveillance Sometimes , TSA’s management picked up on its employees’ invisibility practices and , instead of under - standing them as potential outcomes of increased coer - cive surveillance , interpreted them as added reasons for increased surveillance . The detection by management of TSOs’ unique form of resistance under surveillance justiﬁed the need for more surveillance . This detection occurred in two main ways . First , management occasionally detected and took oﬀense at TSO’s invisibility - of - behavior practices , par - ticularly employees “missing” by extending their break periods . As a lead explained , “You know , they’ll get sent on break , tell them , you know , ‘take 15 - minutes’ break , ’ and they’ll be back in 20 . Tell them to take 30 - minute lunch ; they’ll be back in 40” ( 1006 ) . The major - ity of supervisors complained about such practices . For example , one noted , “Well , it’s very diﬃcult ; if you have manned positions and you’re missing two peo - ple , how do you do that function ? ” ( 3026 ) . Also , the TSOs’ absences could easily get the supervisors into trouble—thus calling for an even “harsher” managerial reaction . The most common managerial answer to such disappearance was to enforce even more surveillance . As a supervisor noted , So they’ll [ TSOs ] take an unscheduled break or what - ever , and you know , that’s your responsibility to watch over this because all of a sudden you’re missing peo - ple , and a lot of times things change very quickly at the checkpoints . . . . [ I might need ] to send three people out to JetBlue . . . . You go to pick your three and people are missing . Where the hell are they ? . . . But I try and keep an eye on that . You know . ( 2013 ) Second , even when trying to “keep an eye” on dis - appearing TSOs , several supervisors realized that it was diﬃcult to keep track of employees as distinct individuals , even though oﬃcers were in plain sight . Some managers detected the invisibility - of - self strate - gies that TSOs were enacting . To deal with these strate - gies , managers attempted to increase their monitoring and noticing . A supervisor detailed such a challenge and shared his trick for trying to notice people a bit more : “It’s a blank to me , you know ? So I’ll go out and [ see ] everybody’s nametag , look at their nametag , and say their name a couple of times to them , you know , until it kind of sticks in there” ( 2013 ) . Another super - visor similarly conveyed attempting to pay attention to “quieter [ people ] ” and people who “just do [ their ] TSO duties and that’s it” or who “just come to work every day , sign in , sign out , and that’s it , and go home” ( 3029 ) . In the context of “disappearing” and “unknown” oﬃcers , managers could easily justify closer moni - toring of workers . This increased surveillance ranged from observing more attentively oﬃcers in certain positions ( e . g . , backﬁeld operators ) to installing more CCTV cameras . Although detailed historical spending data on CCTV equipment by local TSA units ( includ - ing LUA ) are not public , some aggregated federal ﬁg - ures suggest a signiﬁcant growth around the time of our data collection in what TSA calls the Advanced Surveillance Program . This program is described in the TSA budget justiﬁcation as utilizing “the existing infrastructure owned and operated by the local air - port authority for remote monitoring , threat detection and assessment in a partnership agreement to pro - vide enhanced situational awareness to local TSA” ( U . S . Department of Homeland Security 2010 , p . AS - 26 ) . From 2011 to 2012 , the program had reached 26 % of its “full operational capacity” ( i . e . , 26 % of oper - ational surveillance needs were being met by fund - ing ) . With the addition of 25 % capacity over each of the following three years , the Advanced Surveil - lance Program reached full operational capacity by 2014 ( U . S . Department of Homeland Security 2013 ) . Hence , by 2014 , TSA management could fully observe ( mainly via CCTV ) employees’ behavior at check - points and beyond . The addition of more cameras was couched in a broader TSA narrative on reducing D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance 12 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS “insider threats” that included turning “outside cam - eras and other monitoring resources inward” toward employees ( Wallace and Loﬃ 2014 , p . 322 ) . The managerial demand for added control was also evidenced in the TSA’s revised recommended guide - lines for the physical design of airport checkpoints . While the 2006 guidelines only called for “correct placement of one or more cameras in the PSSC [ passen - ger security screening checkpoint ] ” to increase security and deter theft ( Transportation Security Administra - tion 2006 , p . 104 ) , the revised 2011 guidelines called for “a suﬃcient number of cameras” to “cover each lane , all secondary screening areas , and co - located exit lanes , ” or basically the entire checkpoint ( Trans - portation Security Administration 2011 , p . 98 ) . Put another way , the extensive use of CCTV cameras had become one of the many “best practices” advocated by TSA’s management ( Kosatka 2011 , p . 34 ) . Many of our interviewees remarked on the addition of these new cameras , with LUA’s management justifying them as a way to “reinforce security . ” Even beyond cam - eras , a closer monitoring of employees’ behaviors also occurred through other means of surveillance . The example quoted below , involving a lead’s increasing surveillance of a TSO who was perceived to often go missing , is illustrative of this close monitoring : A lead followed somebody [ a TSO ] to get their lunch , then the person went to the bathroom . He followed that person to the bathroom , thought they were taking too much time on their break—which I think is inappro - priate , to follow someone into the bathroom , but that’s like another story . [ He ] went back and told a supervisor that he thinks that he should take disciplinary action on the TSO for , you know , going to the thing , going to the bathroom , and coming back . And the person got a G & D [ guidance and direction ] . . . for taking like a 20 - minute break [ instead of 15 ] . ( 3010 ) Discussion In summary , our analysis shows that surveillance was initially promoted as a way to control the workforce and to deter employee theft . Most workers operating under such a system of surveillance felt constantly observed , but at the same time , they also believed that they went largely unnoticed until deviating from pro - cedures . Indeed , while they thought their behavior to be highly visible , they felt that their selves remained largely invisible to management . This sense of invisi - bility of self was akin to what Erving Goﬀman ( 1963 , p . 18 ) describes as being in a “non - person” role , or that of an individual “not present at all as someone of whom ritual notice is to be taken . ” When man - agement noticed workers , it tended to be in negative ways , and so workers actively deployed eﬀorts to go unseen and remain unnoticed . These resulting dynam - ics encouraged management to intensify surveillance Figure 1 . ( Color online ) A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance Workers’ interpretation of surveillance as coercive Workers’invisibilitypractices Managerial justification for surveillance Managerialincrease in surveillance measures to make more “visible” their workers’ ever - ﬂeeting behaviors and selves—thus leading to even more surveillance , or what we label the self - fulﬁlling cycle of coercive surveillance . From these ﬁndings , we suggest a more general model of how coercive surveillance can prove self - re - inforcing , as illustrated in Figure 1 . First , managers enact a surveillance eﬀort to increase managerial con - trol . Second , workers can interpret the surveillance eﬀort as coercive—rather than caring—based on their experience of the surveillance system and how man - agers treat them . Third , workers’ interpretations of the surveillance eﬀort as coercive can encourage them to attempt to resist the surveillance system by enact - ing invisibility practices . Fourth , managers can detect workers’ resistance and interpret the resistance as jus - tiﬁcation for further surveillance eﬀorts . Then , another turn on the cycle of surveillance can follow , as workers experience additional managerial surveillance eﬀorts , again interpreting them as coercive , seeking to resist , and inadvertently providing further justiﬁcation for even more surveillance . Overall , this cycle of workplace surveillance can be self - fulﬁlling through such endoge - nous dynamics of interpretation and action . While we present this cycle as an unraveling sequence of distinct elements that relate to one another unidirectionally , we do so primarily for reasons of ana - lytic clarity . We recognize that the elements in the cycle might occur simultaneously and might inﬂuence each other reciprocally . For instance , workers’ invisibility practice of attempting to keep their personal lives pri - vate from managers might have fueled their interpreta - tion that surveillance was coercive in addition to being fueled by that interpretation ; thus , our ﬁgure does not capture all interactions in the cycle . Furthermore , we suggest that our theorized cycle of surveillance is D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS 13 simply a starting point . Future studies might further ﬂesh out elements of our model or reveal additional processes in the self - fulﬁlling cycle . Our above analysis aims to generate new theoretical insights by challeng - ing past explanations for the phenomenon observed , rather than to oﬀer an exhaustive mapping of all pos - sible dynamics present in our ﬁeld setting . Contribution to Literature on Surveillance Our study’s ﬁndings ﬁrst carry important implica - tions for the literatures on surveillance . Workplace surveillance has captured managerial attention for more than a century now , and scholars have noted the recent growth of technology - enabled surveillance across industries and countries ( Staples 1997 , 2000 ; Sewell 1998 ; Marx 1999 ; Stanton 2000 ; Sewell and Barker 2006 ; Ball 2010 ; Pierce et al . 2015 ) . Thanks to CCTVs , body - worn cameras , motion detectors , and other technologies , workers’ ( mis ) behaviors can increasingly be seen by management and hence cor - rected . But what explains this growth ? Up until now , scholars have argued that this growth has been driven largely by exogenous factors , with speciﬁc reference to managerial demands for control , coupled with the new availability and aﬀordability of technology . Our analy - sis , however , reveals a complementary explanation for the development of surveillance . We argue that surveillance , when interpreted as coercive and when motivating invisibility practices , can endogenously feed a managerial justiﬁcation for added surveillance . Like self - fulﬁlling prophecies or predictions that come true because individuals act as if they are likely to be true ( Merton 1968 ) , surveillance can spread because managers act as if such surveil - lance is needed . Yet the prophecy might not merely be symbolically self - fulﬁlling . Surveillance might also be fueled in part by workers’ actual resistance strate - gies and managers’ reaction to such resistance strate - gies . This view challenges prior depictions of the rise of surveillance as being only exogenously driven . While Foucault ( 1977 ) already noted the observed individuals’ critical roles in participating in their own surveillance , we show that workers’ resistance ( not only their participation ) to such surveillance also strengthens surveillance . As Foucault ( 1977 ) argued , “He who is subject to a ﬁeld of visibility , and who knows it , assumes responsibility for the constraints of power . . . he becomes the principle of his own subjec - tion” ( p . 203 ) . Foucault’s ( 1977 ) theory assumes that subjects participate in their own surveillance by inter - nalizing the observer’s gaze and adjusting their behav - ior as though they were endlessly watched ( even when not actually observed ) . The subjects we studied also adjusted their behavior in the face of surveillance , but rather than acquiesce to it , they attempted to resist it . Their resistance ultimately served , however , to further increase surveillance . Subjects in our study thereby indirectly participated in the intensiﬁcation of their own surveillance . Paradoxically , then , we show that even though workers’ can exercise agency through resistance , deviating from the Foucaultian assumption of acquiescence , their agency can still reinforce and perpetuate the surveillance system . Future research could build on these ﬁndings by uncovering other ways workers might themselves perpetuate surveillance . In addition , while the invisibility dynamics de - scribed above might apply to many other work set - tings , certain types of settings might prove more suited than others to their occurrence . Speciﬁcally , high - reliability organizations entrusted with perform - ing routine activities characterized by extremely dan - gerous consequences in the cases of failure might be more likely than other organizations to harbor such dynamics . In organizations that aim for failure - free performance ( Roberts 1990 , Weick and Roberts 1993 , Frederickson and LaPorte 2002 ) , anybody’s missteps ( including those of insiders ) can have catastrophic out - comes . Under such circumstances , invisibility practices might serve as defense mechanisms ( Menzies 1960 ) against the stress of possibly being responsible for such a catastrophic failure . Future research might compare and contrast contexts ( e . g . , high versus low reliabil - ity contexts , such as policing versus call - center work ) to further explore contextual inﬂuences on the self - fulﬁlling cycle of coercive surveillance . Contribution to the Resistance Literature Our study’s ﬁndings also carry important implications for the workplace resistance literature . First , our study sheds empirical light on forms of resistance in the context of a prevalent , important , and growing work - place context of intense , technology - enabled surveil - lance . Many studies of workplace resistance took place in an era before the introduction of numerous tech - nologies aiding managerial surveillance ( e . g . , Burawoy 1979 , Paules 1991 , Jermier et al . 1994 , Roscigno and Hodson 2004a ) or otherwise did not focus on the inter - play between surveillance and workers’ resistance to it ( e . g . , Scott 1985 , Prasad and Prasad 2000 ) . By examin - ing workplace surveillance in the contemporary work - place context in which managers beneﬁt from highly extensive means of surveillance , our study meets this lacuna . Second , our study brings to light the potential nega - tive outcomes ( from workers’ perspectives ) that could result from workers’ resistance—namely , an outcome that contradicts what workers were trying to achieve by enacting their invisibility strategies . Most recent literature on workplace resistance emphasizes resis - tance’s potential boons for workers , such as gaining a sense of dignity ( Hodson 2001 ) , experiencing “micro - emancipation” ( Alvesson and Willmott 1992 ) , limiting D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance 14 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS control eﬀorts ( Prasad and Prasad 2000 ) , and enact - ing organizational change ( Meyerson and Scully 1995 , LaNuez and Jermier 1994 ) . But , because our study points to the possibility for an outcome of increased surveillance to stem from workers’ resistance , we illu - minate the darker side of resistance by pointing to the potential self - fulﬁlling cycles of surveillance . Such a focus on the downside of resistance echoes Burawoy’s ( 1979 ) conclusions that resisting by playing games on factory lines ultimately equates to “consenting” ( p . 234 ) to the managerial rule since “making out” ( p . 63 ) helps sustain the management’s production targets . Third , our analysis points to particular forms of re - sistance—here , invisibility - of - behavior and invisibility - of - self practices—that seem likely to emerge from work - ers’ interpretations of a coercive system of surveillance . We suspect that workers’ attempts to enact invisibility - of - self practices—going unnoticed—might be one of the more contemporary forms of workers’ resistance under surveillance . In the face of growing surveillance , the scope of employees’ “backstage” ( Goﬀman 1959 , pp . 106 – 140 ) —a region where employees can step out of character and need no longer perform for a man - agerial or client audience—is likely to be signiﬁcantly diminished . The shrinkage of the backstage means that employees are less able to go unseen and to hide their behaviors . Workers might therefore attempt to enact resistance diﬀerently , in the form of invisibility - of - self resistance . While past scholarship has examined simi - lar invisibility - of - self practices that members of speciﬁc occupational groups perform as part of their job—such as covert police oﬃcers attempting to have “no strik - ing or distinguishing features” ( Loftus and Goold 2012 , p . 282 ) and to “blend” into their environment without deploying any “decoy strategy” Marx ( 1988 , p . 116 ) — our study shows that other workers might perform such practices as well in an attempt to resist managerial con - trol eﬀorts . Mobilizing invisibility of self at work might also be a contemporary way that workers attempt to ﬁnd dig - nity at work . Such attempts to become inconspicuous , to not stand out , and to not be noticed as an individ - ual at all can prove quite empowering . When studying young marginalized men of color in the United States , Oeur ( 2016 ) labels their attempts to “remain unknown” in high school and beyond a form of “dignity” because of what visibility typically entails for them . As another commentator on surveillance explains , “The invisible is what is here without being an object” ( Brighenti 2007 , p . 328 ) . Put otherwise , remaining unknown can some - times be a digniﬁed resistance stance to adopt when a nonperson role or an object is the default role oﬀered to participants . More generally , we posit that a wide scope of contem - porary workplaces might harbor similar invisibility - of - self ( and invisibility - of - behavior ) practices as the ones described above . Today , many workplaces involve surveillance systems that workers interpret as at least partially coercive , and so we suspect that the invisibility practices we observed might exist beyond the context of airport security screening . For instance , part - time fac - ulty members at community colleges , who often report being seen but not noticed ( Krier and Staples 1993 ) , might engage in invisibility practices as resistance . Sim - ilarly , police oﬃcers equipped with body - worn cameras might also develop invisibility practices . Anecdotal evi - dence suggests how this may already be happening : the police oﬃcers , for example , who shot Keith Lam - ont Scott in Charlotte , North Carolina , forgot or claim to have forgotten to turn their cameras on in time to record the incident ( Funk 2016 , p . 48 ) . Furthermore , a recent multisite global study of police oﬃcers’ use of body - worn cameras notes and tries to control for “the continued debate around police oﬃcers’ discre - tion” or their ability to turn their cameras oﬀ during select interactions ( Ariel et al . 2016 , p . 456 ) , hinting to the potential prevalence of such invisibility behaviors across police precincts in several countries . Other work settings might prove equally prone to the rise of invisi - bility practices . Overall , our study’s ﬁndings suggest the possibil - ity for an endogenous growth of coercive surveillance as an unintended consequence of a relatively novel form of workers’ resistance . Only by taking these com - plex resistance dynamics into account can we grasp fully what drives the contemporary spread of work - place surveillance . What airport security screeners can teach us has therefore to do with far more than sim - ply screening travelers and baggage . They can teach us what the experience of coercive surveillance might look like for other workers and why such surveillance is likely to continue spreading . Acknowledgments The authors are extremely appreciative to Martha Feldman and the three Organization Science reviewers for their con - structive feedback . They thank Large Urban Airport’s federal security director and staﬀ for their support throughout this project , as well as the TSA members who shared their stories . They also thank Ayn Cavicchi for helping in collecting and analyzing data ; Barbara Cleary and Andrea Truax for tran - scribing interviews ; and Caitlin Anderson , Ann Goodsell , and Jake Watson for editorial suggestions . Previous versions of this article beneﬁted from comments by Sarah Babb , Emily Barman , Ethan Bernstein , Mary Ann Glynn , Alya Guseva , Stine Grodal , Leslie Perlow , Smitha Radhakrishnan , Lakshmi Ramarajan , and András Tilcsik , as well as from discus - sions with Julie Battilana , Beth Bechky , Jane Dutton , Robin Ely , Emily Heaphy , Mike Pratt , Michael Sauder , John Van Maanen , and Amy Wrzesniewski . The authors are grate - ful as well for feedback from participants at the American Sociological Association , Eastern Sociological Association , and Society for the Advancement of Socio - Economics annual meetings , and in presentations at Boston College , Boston D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS 15 University , Cornell , Duke , ESSEC , Queen’s University , the London School of Economics , the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Stanford , the University of Toronto , the Univer - sity of California at Irvine , and Yale . Endnotes 1 The notion of self is understood here as “all those qualities , attributes , values , feelings , and moral sentiments that a person assumes to be his or her own” ( Belgrave and Charmaz 2007 , p . 4165 ) . This distinctive self - concept is a product of a reﬂexive activity : the result of humans’ ability to reﬂect back on themselves and to view themselves as distinct objects ( see Cooley 1902 ; Mead 1934 ; Gecas 1982 , pp . 2 - 4 ) . 2 The AFL - CIO American Federation of Government Employees started representing TSA employees in June 2011 . 3 Bidding was governed by seniority within subgroups deﬁned by gender , rank , and full - or part - time status . For instance , all full - time female TSOs bid together ; the most senior member of that subgroup got ﬁrst choice among various available combinations of shift hours , daysoﬀ , andcheckpoints ( knownas“lines” ) . Thesecond - mostsenior person then did the same , and so on . 4 Another publication emerged from this same set of interviews ( Chan and Anteby 2016 ) , but the current article constitutes a dis - tinct usage of these data for two reasons . First , it became apparent that the diﬀerent inductive analyses were pointing to distinct sets of processes that explained diﬀerent phenomena within the ﬁeld site , which called for distinct write - ups . Second , like in many other inductive research projects that “start where you are” ( Loﬂand et al . 2006 , p . 9 ) , the focus of this paper was in part guided by a coauthor’s resonance with emerging ﬁeld themes . In this case , the TSOs’ dis - cussions of invisibility echoed with the coauthor’s past experience of invisibility in a very diﬀerent setting . 5 The format for citing interview sources is as follows : The ﬁrst two digits of the interviewee’s identiﬁer ( e . g . , 10xx or 30xx ) identify the member of the research team who conducted the interview . The last two digits ( e . g . , xx08 or xx26 ) indicate the interview’s temporal posi - tion in the sequence of interviews . 6 TSA managers had little discretionary say in TSOs’ promotion and rewards . As an example , the cash bonuses available to TSOs involved little managerial discretion : TSOs with high scores on their annual examinations and TSO checkpoint teams in which no mem - ber missed a single test x - ray image ( within a certain time period ) could all earn bonuses . But the organizational triggers for such bonuses were mostly predetermined . Similarly , the promotion pro - cess from TSO to lead entailed a detailed online application ﬁlled out by TSOs that did not require input from their current lead or supervisor . References Allen MW , Coopman SJ , Hart JL , Walker KL ( 2007 ) Workplace surveillance and managing privacy boundaries . Management Comm . Quart . 21 ( 2 ) : 172 – 200 . Alvesson M , Willmott H ( 1992 ) On the idea of emancipation in management and organization studies . Acad . Management Rev . 17 ( 3 ) : 432 – 464 . Ariel B , Farrar WA , Sutherland A ( 2015 ) The eﬀect of police body - worn cameras on use of force and citizens’ complaints against the police : A randomized controlled trial . J . Quant . Criminology 31 ( 3 ) : 509 – 535 . Ariel B , Sutherland A , Henstock D , Young J , Drover P , Sykes J , Megicks S , Henderson R ( 2016 ) Report : Increases in police use of force in the presence of body - worn cameras are driven by oﬃcer discretion : A protocol - based subgroup analysis of ten random - ized experiments . J . Experiment . Criminology 12 ( 3 ) : 453 – 463 . Attewell P ( 1987 ) Big brother and the sweatshop : Computer surveil - lance in the automated oﬃce . Sociol . Theory 5 ( 1 ) : 87 – 99 . Ball K ( 2010 ) Workplace surveillance : An overview . Labor History 51 ( 1 ) : 87 – 106 . Ball KD , Haggerty KD , Lyon D , eds . ( 2012 ) Routledge Handbook of Surveillance Studies ( Routledge , New York ) . Batt R , Holman D , Holtgrewe U ( 2009 ) The globalization of service work : Comparative institutional perspectives on call centers . Indust . Labor Relations Rev . 62 ( 4 ) : 453 – 488 . Belgrave LL , Charmaz K ( 2007 ) Self . Ritzer G , ed . The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology ( Blackwell Publishing , Malden , MA ) , 4165 – 4168 . Bernstein ES ( 2012 ) The transparency paradox : A role for privacy in organizational learning and operational control . Admin . Sci . Quart . 57 ( 2 ) : 181 – 216 . Bernstein ES ( 2017 ) Making transparency transparent : The evolution of observation in management theory . Acad . Management Ann . 11 ( 2 ) : 217 – 266 . Bierle PS ( 2013 ) Improving TSA’s public image : Customer - focused initiatives to encourage public trust and conﬁdence . Report , Naval Postgraduate School , Monterey , CA . Braverman H ( 1974 ) Labor and Monopoly Capital : The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century ( Monthly Review Press , New York ) . Brighenti A ( 2007 ) Visibility acategory for the socialsciences . Current Sociol . 55 ( 3 ) : 323 – 342 . Brown K , Korczynski M ( 2010 ) When caring and surveillance tech - nology meet : Organizational commitment and discretionary eﬀort in home care work . Work Occupations 37 ( 3 ) : 404 – 432 . Brown TM ( 2011 ) Raising Brooklyn : Nannies , Childcare , and Caribbeans Creating Community ( New York University Press , New York ) . Burawoy M ( 1979 ) Manufacturing Consent : Changes in the Labor Pro - cess Under Monopoly Capitalism ( University of Chicago Press , Chicago ) . Chan CK , Anteby M ( 2016 ) Task segregation as a mechanism for within - job inequality : Women and men of the transportation security administration . Admin . Sci . Quart . 61 ( 2 ) : 184 – 216 . Charmaz K ( 1983 ) The grounded theory method : An explication and interpretation contemporary ﬁeld research . Emerson RM , ed . Contemporary Field Research : A Collection of Readings ( Little , Brown , Boston ) , 109 – 126 . Cooley CH ( 1902 ) Human Nature and the Social Order ( Charles Scrib - ner’s Sons , New York ) . Courpasson D , Dany F , Clegg S ( 2012 ) Resisters at work : Generat - ing productive resistance in the workplace . Organ . Sci . 23 ( 3 ) : 801 – 819 . Ditton J ( 1979 ) Baking time . Sociol . Rev . 27 ( 1 ) : 157 – 167 . Edwards RC ( 1979 ) Contested Terrain : The Transformation of the Work - place in the Twentieth Century ( Basic Books , New York ) . Enzle ME , Sharon SC , Anderson C ( 1993 ) Surveillant intentions and intrinsic motivation . J . Personality Soc . Psych . 64 ( 2 ) : 257 – 266 . Fleming P , Spicer A ( 2003 ) Working at a cynical distance : Implica - tions for power , subjectivity and resistance . Organization 10 ( 1 ) : 157 – 179 . Fleming P , Sturdy A ( 2009 ) “Just be yourself ! ” Towards neo - normative control in organisations ? Employee Relations 31 ( 6 ) : 569 – 583 . Fosher KB ( 2009 ) Under Construction : Making Homeland Security at the Local Level ( University of Chicago Press , Chicago ) . Foucault M ( 1977 ) Discipline and Punish : The Birth of the Prison ( Vin - tage Books , New York ) . Frederickson HG , LaPorte TR ( 2002 ) Airport security , high reli - ability , and the problem of rationality . Public Admin . Rev . 62 ( September ) : 33 – 43 . Funk M ( 2016 ) Should we see everything a cop sees ? New York Times Magazine ( October 23 ) , 31 – 35 , 48 – 49 , 51 . Garland D ( 2001 ) The Culture of Control : Crime and Social Order in Contemporary Society ( University of Chicago Press , Chicago ) . Gecas V ( 1982 ) The self - concept . Annual Rev . Sociol . 8 : 1 – 33 . Gilliom J , Monahan T ( 2012 ) SuperVision : An Introduction to the Surveillance Society ( University of Chicago Press , Chicago ) . Glaser B , Strauss AL ( 1967 ) The Discovery of Grounded Theory ( Aldine , Chicago ) . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance 16 Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS Goﬀman E ( 1959 ) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life ( Doubleday , New York ) . Goﬀman E ( 1963 ) Stigma : Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity ( Simon & Schuster , New York ) . Goﬀman A ( 2009 ) On the run : Wanted men in a Philadelphia ghetto . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 74 ( 3 ) : 339 – 357 . Goﬀman A ( 2015 ) On the Run : Fugitive Life in an American City ( Picador , New York ) . Grant R , Higgins C ( 1989 ) Monitoring service workers via computer : The eﬀect on employees , productivity , and service . National Pro - ductivity Rev . 8 ( 2 ) : 101 – 112 . Haggerty KD , Ericson RV , eds . ( 2006 ) The New Politics of Surveillance and Visibility ( University of Toronto Press , Toronto ) . Harris DA ( 2010 ) Picture this : Body worn video devices ( “head cams” ) as tools for ensuring fourth amendment compliance by police . Texas Tech Law Rev . 43 : 357 – 371 . Hatch J ( 2004 ) Employment in the public sector : Two recessions’ impact on jobs . Monthly Labor Rev . 127 ( October ) : 38 – 47 . Hodson R ( 1995 ) Worker resistance : An underdeveloped concept in the sociology of work . Econom . Indust . Democracy 16 ( 1 ) : 79 – 110 . Hodson R ( 2001 ) Dignity at Work ( Cambridge University Press , Cam - bridge , UK ) . Jermier JM , Knights DE , Nord WR ( 1994 ) Resistance and Power in Organizations ( Taylor & Francis / Routledge , London ) . Korczynski M ( 2014 ) Songs of the Factory : Pop Music , Culture , and Resis - tance ( Cornell University Press , Ithaca , NY ) . Kosatka A ( 2011 ) Recommended security guidelines for airport plan - ning , design and construction . J . Airport Management 6 ( 1 ) : 32 – 39 . Krier D , Staples WG ( 1993 ) Seen but unseen : Part - time faculty and institutional surveillance and control . Amer . Sociologist 24 ( 3 / 4 ) : 119 – 134 . Kroener I , Neyland D ( 2012 ) New technologies , security and surveil - lance . Ball K , Haggerty KD , Lyon D , eds . Routledge Handbook of Surveillance Studies ( Routledge , New York ) , 141 – 148 . Kupchik A ( 2010 ) Homeroom Security : School Discipline in an Age of Fear ( New York University Press , New York ) . LaNuez D , Jermier JM ( 1994 ) Sabotage by managers and technocrats : Neglected patterns of resistance at work . Jermier JM , Knights D , Nord WR , eds . Resistance and Power in Organizations ( Taylor & Francis / Routledge , London ) , 219 – 251 . LepperMR , GreeneD , CarskaddonG , GronnerP ( 1975 ) Turningplay into work : Eﬀects of adult surveillance and extrinsic rewards on children’s intrinsic motivation . Personality Soc . Psych . 31 ( 3 ) : 479 – 486 . Levy KEC ( 2015 ) The contexts of control : Information , power , and truck driving work . Inform . Soc . 31 ( 2 ) : 160 – 174 . Locke K ( 2001 ) Grounded Theory in Management Research ( Sage , London ) . Loﬂand J , Snow A , Anderson L , Loﬂand LH ( 2006 ) Analyzing Social Settings : A Guide to Qualitative Observations and Analysis ( Thomp - son / Wadsworth , Belmont , CA ) . Loftus B , Goold B ( 2012 ) Covert surveillance and the invisibilities of policing . Criminology Criminal Justice 12 ( 3 ) : 275 – 288 . Lyon D ( 1994 ) The Electronic Eye : The Rise of Surveillance in Modern Society ( University of Minnesota Press , Minneapolis ) . Lyon D ( 2001 ) Surveillance Society : Monitoring Everyday Life ( Open University Press , Buckingham , UK ) . Lyon D ( 2007 ) Surveillance Studies : An Overview ( Polity Press , Cam - bridge , UK ) . Mars G ( 1982 ) Cheats at Work : An Anthropology of Workplace Crime ( Allen & Unwin , London ) . Marteache Solans N ( 2013 ) Employee theft from passengers at U . S . airports : An environmental criminology perspective . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Rutgers University Graduate School , Newark , NJ . Marx GT ( 1988 ) Undercover : Police Surveillance in America ( University of California Press , Berkley ) . Marx GT ( 1999 ) Measuring everything that moves : The new surveil - lance at work . Res . Sociol . Work 8 : 165 – 189 . Marx GT ( 2016 ) Windows into the Soul : Surveillance and Society in an Age of High Technology ( University of Chicago Press , Chicago ) . Mead GH ( 1934 ) Mind , Self and Society from the Standpoint of a Social Behaviorist ( University of Chicago Press , Chicago ) . Menzies IEP ( 1960 ) A case - study in the functioning of social systems as a defense against anxiety : A report on the study of a nursing service of a general hospital . Human Relations 13 ( 2 ) : 95 – 121 . Merton RK ( 1968 ) Social Theory and Social Structure ( Free Press , New York ) . Meyerson DE , Scully MA ( 1995 ) Tempered radicalism and the poli - tics of ambivalence and change . Organ . Sci . 6 ( 5 ) : 585 – 600 . Miles MB , Huberman AM ( 1994 ) Qualitative Data Analysis ( Sage , Thousand Oaks , CA ) . Molotoch H , McClain N ( 2003 ) Dealing with urban terror : Heritages of control , varieties of intervention , strategies of research . Inter - nat . J . Urban Regional Res . 27 ( 3 ) : 679 – 698 . Monahan T , Torre RD , eds . ( 2010 ) Schools Under Surveillance : Cultures of Control in Public Education ( Rutgers University Press , New Brunswick , NJ ) . Morrill C , Zald M , Rao H ( 2003 ) Covert political conﬂict in organiza - tions : The view from below . Annual Rev . Sociol . 29 : 391 – 415 . Nagle R ( 2013 ) Picking Up : On the Streets and Behind the Trucks with the Sanitation Workers of New York City ( Macmillan , New York ) . Oeur F ( 2016 ) Recognizing dignity : Young black men growing up in an era of surveillance . Socius : Sociol . Res . Dynamic World 2 : 1 – 15 . Patel R ( 2010 ) Working the Night Shift : Women in India’s Call Center Industry ( Stanford University Press , Stanford , CA ) . Paules GF ( 1991 ) Dishing It Out : Power and Resistance Among Wait - resses in a New Jersey Restaurant ( Temple University Press , Philadelphia ) . Perrow C ( 1986 ) Complex Organizations : A Critical Essay ( McGraw - Hill , New York ) . Pierce L , Snow DC , McAfee A ( 2015 ) Cleaning house : The impact of information technology monitoring on employee theft and productivity . Management Sci . 61 ( 10 ) : 2299 – 2319 . Pinnock S ( 2007 ) Campaign to organize federal transportation secu - rity oﬃcers : A model of open source unionism . J . Labor Soc . 10 ( 3 ) : 301 – 310 . Prasad P , Prasad A ( 2000 ) Stretching the iron cage : The constitu - tion and implications of routine workplace resistance . Organ . Sci . 11 ( 4 ) : 387 – 403 . Pütz O ( 2012 ) From non - places to non - events : The airport security checkpoint . J . Contemporary Ethnography 41 ( 2 ) : 154 – 188 . Roberts KH ( 1990 ) Characteristics of one type of high reliability orga - nization . Organ . Sci . 1 ( 2 ) : 160 – 176 . Roscigno VJ , Hodson R ( 2004a ) The organizational and social foun - dations of worker resistance . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 69 ( 1 ) : 14 – 39 . Roscigno VJ , Hodson R ( 2004b ) Workplace Ethnography Project . Accessed January 30 , 2018 , https : / / www . icpsr . umich . edu / icpsrweb / ICPSR / studies / 3979 . Roy D ( 1959 ) “Banana time” : Job satisfaction and informal interac - tion . Human Organ . 18 ( 4 ) : 158 – 168 . Russell B ( 2009 ) Smiling Down the Line : Info - service Work in the Global Economy ( University of Toronto Press , Toronto ) . Sallaz J ( 2009 ) The Labor of Luck : Casino Capitalism in the United States and South Africa ( University of California Press , Berkeley ) . Scott JC ( 1985 ) Weapons of the Weak : Everyday Forms of Peasant Resis - tance ( Yale University Press , New Haven , CT ) . Sewell G ( 1998 ) The discipline of teams : The control of team - based industrial work through electronic and peer surveillance . Admin . Sci . Quart . 43 ( 2 ) : 397 – 428 . Sewell G , Barker JR ( 2006 ) Coercion versus care : Using irony to make sense of organizational surveillance . Acad . Management Rev . 31 ( 4 ) : 934 – 961 . Sewell G , Barker JR , Nyberg D ( 2012 ) Working under intensive surveillance : When does “measuring everything that moves” become intolerable ? Human Relations 65 ( 2 ) : 189 – 215 . Snyder BH ( 2016 ) The Disrupted Workplace : Time and the Moral Order of Flexible Capitalism ( Oxford University Press , New York ) . Stanko TL , Beckman CM ( 2015 ) Watching you watching me : Bound - ary control and capturing attention in the context of ubiquitous technology use . Acad . Management J . 58 ( 3 ) : 712 – 738 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Anteby and Chan : A Self - Fulﬁlling Cycle of Coercive Surveillance Organization Science , Articles in Advance , pp . 1 – 17 , ©2018 INFORMS 17 Stanton JM ( 2000 ) Reactions to employee performance monitoring : Framework , review , and research directions . Human Performance 13 ( 1 ) : 85 – 113 . Staples WG ( 1997 ) The Culture of Surveillance : Discipline and Social Control in the United States ( St . Martin’s Press , New York ) . Staples WG ( 2000 ) Everyday Surveillance : Vigilance and Visibility in Postmodern Life ( Rowman & Littleﬁeld , Lanham , MD ) . Taylor F ( 1911 ) The Principles of Scientiﬁc Management ( Harper & Brothers , New York ) . Transportation Security Administration ( 2006 ) Recommended secu - rity guidelines for airport planning , design and construction . Report , Transportation Security Administration , U . S . Depart - ment of Homeland Security , Washington , DC . Transportation Security Administration ( 2011 ) Recommended secu - rity guidelines for airport planning , design and construction . Report , Transportation Security Administration , U . S . Depart - ment of Homeland Security , Washington , DC . U . S . Department of Homeland Security ( 2010 ) Fiscal year 2011 congressional budget justiﬁcation . Report , U . S . Department of Homeland Security , Washington , DC . U . S . Department of Homeland Security ( 2011 ) Fiscal year 2012 budget - in - brief . Report , U . S . Department of Homeland Security , Washington , DC . U . S . Department of Homeland Security ( 2013 ) Fiscal year 2014 budget - in - brief . Report , U . S . Department of Homeland Security , Washington , DC . U . S . Government Accountability Oﬃce ( 2012 ) Air passenger screen - ing : Transportation Security Administration could improve complaint processes . Report GAO - 13 - 43 , U . S . Government Accountability Oﬃce , Washington , DC . U . S . Government Accountability Oﬃce ( 2013 ) Transportation Secu - rity Administration could strengthen monitoring of allegations of employee misconduct . Report GAO - 13 - 624 , U . S . Government Accountability Oﬃce , Washington , DC . VallasSP ( 2003 ) Theadventuresofmanagerialhegemony : Teamwork , ideology , and worker resistance . Soc . Problems 50 ( 2 ) : 204 – 225 . Van Maanen J ( 1990 ) The smile factory : Work at Disneyland . Frost P , MooreL , LouisMR , LundbergCC , MartinJ , eds . ReframingOrga - nizational Culture ( Sage , Newbury Park , CA ) , 58 – 76 . Wallace RJ , Loﬃ JM ( 2014 ) The unmitigated insider threat to avia - tion ( part 2 ) : An analysis of countermeasures . J . Transportation Security 7 ( 4 ) : 307 – 331 . Weick KE , Roberts KH ( 1993 ) Collective mind in organizations : Heedful interrelating on ﬂight decks . Admin . Sci . Quart . 38 ( 3 ) : 357 – 381 . Weiss RS ( 1994 ) Learning from Strangers : The Art and Method of Quali - tative Interview Studies ( Free Press , New York ) . Michel Anteby is an associate professor of organizational behavior and ( by courtesy ) sociology at Boston University . He received a joint Ph . D . in management from New York University and sociology from EHESS ( France ) . His research looks at how people relate to their work , their occupations , and the organizations to which they belong . Field settings for past studies have included aeronautics factory workshops , MBA classrooms , and whole - body donation programs . Curtis K . Chan is an assistant professor of management and organization at Boston College . He received a Ph . D . in organizational behavior from the Harvard Business School , Harvard University . His research examines how people expe - rience and interpret their work , as well as how this shapes inequality and diversity in occupational and organizational contexts . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 155 . 41 . 52 . 213 ] on 23 A p r il 2018 , a t 12 : 58 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d .