The 15th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication ( RO - MAN06 ) , Hatfield , UK , September 6 - 8 , 2006 The role of physical embodiment in human - robot interaction Joshua Wainer David J . Feil - Seifer Dylan A . Shell Maja J . Mataric Interaction Laboratory Center for Robotics and Embedded Systems Department of Computer Science , University of Southern California Los Angeles , CA USA 90089 - 0781 jwainer dfseifer shell mataric @ usc . edu Abstract - Autonomous robots are agents with physical bod - virtual sociable agents [ 14 ] , or smart spaces [ 7 ] . A broad ies that share our environment . In this work , we test the understanding of embodiment is necessary to provide a solid hypothesis that physical embodiment has a measurable effect on footing for HRI and to contextualize its relationship with performance and perception of social interactions . Support of other human - factors issues . this hypothesis would suggest fundamental differences between seekr ctrueca virtual agents and robots from a social standpoint and have sig - HRI seeks constructive constraints that can serve as nificant implications for human - robot interaction . We measure guidelines to assist in making design decisions . A roboticist task performance and perception of a robot ' s social abilities in constructing a system for use around humans currently has a structured but open - ended task based on the Towers of Hanoi few established design principles . Yet , such principles are puzzle . Our experiment compares aspects of embodiment by . . . evaluating : ( 1 ) the difference between a physical robot and paticar itica au of to the number of factors a simulated one ; ( 2 ) the effect of physical presence through that can influence an HRI system . Insight into the nature a co - located robot versus a remote tele - present robot . We of human social interaction , particularly evidence showing present data from a pilot study with 12 subjects showing fundamental differences between embodied and disembodied interesting differences in perception of remote physical robot ' s communication , would be valuable . and simulated agent ' s attention to the task , and task enjoyment . This paper presents pilot data from an empirical study Index Terms - Human - robot interaction , embodiment of the role of physical embodiment in a task involving a social robot . In particular , we attempt to distinguish between I . INTRODUCTION the effect of physical presence and virtual versus material A growing human - robot interaction ( HRI ) community is embodiment . Trials with human participants permit com - focusing on the social aspects of autonomous robots . This parison of task performance and perceived social awareness research is critical if robots are to become part of people ' s ( by the robot ) in three conditions : ( 1 ) a co - located physical everyday lives . Research in HRI is challenging because , in robot , ( 2 ) a remotely located ( tele - present ) robot , and ( 3 ) addition to engineering and technological hurdles , the many a simulated robot . In each case , the robot engages the factors that interact to form a rich social experience must participants through a simple Towers of Hanoi puzzle . The be teased apart for proper study . One factor with possible robot supervises the task , including explaining the puzzle , implications for social interaction is that a robot has a setting intermediate goals , directing the person ' s behavior , physical body . A robot ' s experience of the physical world and enforcing the rules of the game . and social situation , its perception , computing , and actions Our results support the belief that physical embodiment is are thus all attributable to a tangible artifact . Moreover , an important factor in social tasks and that it has an effect such attribution ( be it implicit , explicit or both ) may have on the perception of robot ' s social situatedness . In particular , an important role in natural social interaction . This paper presence of a physical robot is most enjoyable and believed addresses the question : " yes a robot ' s physical embodiment to be more watchful than either a virtual agent , or even a have a measurable affect on its social interactions ? " physical one separated via a video conferencing setup . A greater understanding of the social implications of embodiment will inform design of social robots . In robot II . RELATED WORK systems designed with social interaction as their primary The role of embodiment within social robot interactions goal ( e . g . , entertainment robots [ 1 ] and socially assistive has notyet been the subject of directinvestigation . Anumber robots [ 4 ] ) this study addresses the question of how robots of reasons exist for this , but perhaps most significant is that differ , and could complement , alternative technologies like the relationship between embodiment and situatedness has 1 - 4244 - 0565 - 3 / 06 / $ 20 . OO ©r2006 IEEE . 117 not been explicitly articulated within a social context . For example , Fong et al . [ 5 ] define social situatedness for robots in a manner that could apply to virtual agents . Situatedness ( social or otherwise ) has been thought of as applicable to virtual agents within a broader Al view [ 11 ] . On the other - hand , Pfeifer and Scheier [ 13 ] argued that : " Intelligence cannot merely exist in the form of an abstract algorithm but requires a physical instantiation , a body . " Several authors Fig . 1 . The classic Towers of Hanoi puzzle with three rings ( slightly view the a virtual avatar as adequate embodiment , while exploded for clarity ) and three pegs as used in the experiments . In our set - others have asserted that a robot may not be adequately up each of the three rings has a different color and mass . Three weight sensors under each peg and a single camera allow the robot to estimate the embodied ; see Ziemke [ 17 ] for this debate . We use the state of the puzzle . term physically embodied to refer exclusively to a robot ' s body , and this study seeks to understand the key impact such embodiment and physical presence have on social bodies and that rendering a graphical body for a virtual interactions . agent is not equivalent . Our view is teleological : if physical Frequently , an HRI component is added to an existing embodiment has unique properties , e . g . , producing patient system . Furthermore , novelty alone is usually sufficient to compliance through mutual empathy , then those aspects justify robots for entertainment purposes , at least initially . should be exploited . More serious and sustained needs ( e . g . , rehabilitation , elder care . nursing , educating ) require a better understanding of III . FORMAL HYPOTHESES the factors involved . Kiesler and Goetz [ 9 ] examined the Robots offer uniquely controllable experimental condi - nature of robot personality ( terse versus jovial ) as one such tions which allow social characteristics that have , until now , factor . They evaluated aspects of robot form , like height not been accessible for controlled study . Social robots also comparable to a person versus a pet , and discussed human raise new questions . We believe this to be the case in mental models of the robot . Their findings were that , while dealing with embodiment . To tease apart the difference the appearances were different , the dialog directed toward between realism and physical situatedness , we formulated the robot was the same in each case . the following hypotheses : The closest existing work to the present study was carried Hi . A A co - located physical robot will result in a per - out by Kidd and Breazeal [ 8 ] in which three characters : a ception of higher social awareness than a remote human , a robot , and an animated character , each verbally physical robot . instructed participants in a block stacking exercise . Unlike Hi . B A co - located physical robot will elicit longer inter - that work , however , our experiments consider scenarios in actions than a remote physical robot in an open - which the robot is not obscured ( only the character ' s eyes ended interaction domain . were visible in Kidd and Breazeal [ 8 ] ) . Our work considers a very similar task , but , as famously shown by Zhang and H2 . A A co - located physical robot will result in a percep - Norman [ 16 ] , small changes to the Towers of Hanoi task , tion of higher social awareness than a simulated even isomorphic variations i . e . , changes preserving task ( virtual ) robot . structure can have a marked effect on task performance . H2 . B A co - located physical robot will elicit longer inter - Woods et al . [ 15 ] also studied perception differences between actions than a simulated ( virtual ) robot in an open - live and video recorded robot performances . They proposed ended interaction domain . using video during system development as a complementary research tool , but this becomes less straightforward when H3 . A A remote physical robot will result in a percep - considering experiments , like those presented in this paper , tion of higher social awareness than a simulated in which the robot ' s behavior depends on the human sub - ( virtual ) robot . ject ' s responses . H3 . B A remote physical robot will elicit longer interac - Finally , those in a position to investigate aspects of tions than a simulated ( virtual ) robot . embodiment may have vested interests . Roboticists might The term " co - location " refers to the robot being physically favor a study with an outcome that demonstrates the sig - located in the same place as a human interacting with it . By nificant positive effects of physical embodiment . ( This pa - " remote physical robot " we mean to a physical robot in a per ' s authors are robotics researchers , but are aware and differentphysical location butwhich has sensing relayed to it vigilant against any predisposition . ) While we qualify the ( over a wireless network ) and its actions relayed back to the term embodiment within this paper with " physical " , many human through a video conferencing system . The simulated roboticists may feel that embodiment refers only to physical robot replaces the physical robot altogether , rendering the 118 Legend Towers of Hanoi I I ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ Puzzle l Pioneer 2 DX Robot KX / with PTZ Camera Gazebo Simulation Server Display / Screen Remote Video 0 ~ 0 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Fig . 2 . The three experimental conditions : ( a ) the participant interacts directly with a physical robot ; ( b ) the participant interacts with a physical robot over a real - time video - conferencing link ; ( c ) the participant interacts with a simulated robot . robot to a computer monitor and playing the audio feedback ( details in Section IV - C ) provides the user with a particular directly for the human . stacking goal ; for example , " Move the rings to the middle peg . " The robot can perceive the puzzle state allowing for * V . METHOD supervision of the ring movement ; feedback is provided Three cases we considered : interaction with a physical based on an estimate of task progress . robot , interaction with a remote physical robot ( through Since three rings provide relatively few states , some users tele - conferencing ) , and interaction with a virtual ( simulated ) are expected to explore the limits of the robot by breaking robot . We measured the user ' s task - oriented performance the rules of the game , or doing nothing to see how the robot relative to the physical presence of the robot . In order to test will react . The system is sufficiently robust to catch errors task - oriented performance , we believe that some minimal and will explain how to put the puzzle back into the last task complexity is necessary for the difference between legal state . embodiment conditions to be measurable . We thus used a task that , while simple , provides a shared context for the B . Experimental Design robot and human participant . The task is also relevant to our broader assistive robotics agenda since the physical effort The pegs , rings , and robot ( when appllcable ) are placed on tables with hei ht of approximately 1 . 2m . The human required to move the rings between pegs is useful in a participant faces e y . . . . . , parhclpant faces ~ ~ the robot ( placed on an adjoining table ) post - stroke rehabilitation setting . The experiments employ with only the three pegs between them . Figure 2 shows these a simple robot , as prior experience ( see Eriksson et al . [ 3 ] ) three experimental conditions diagrammatically . The same has shown that even simple robots can be engaging . set of rings are used in all conditions ; this consistency is A . Towers of Hanoi Problem Domain important since variations , even up to an isomorphism , can We designed a task around the classical Towers of Hanoi affect the performance at the puzzle [ 16 ] . puzzle [ 16 , pp . 92 ] , in which different sized rings are in - ( a ) This is the co - located physical robot condition , as a dividually moved from one peg to another ( see Figure 1 ) . typical model of human - robot interaction . The robot The three pegs form the focus of the interaction : the robot is placed on the table in front of the user . ( remote and co - present as well as the simulated versions ) ( b ) This is the remote physical robot case , in which the introduces the game and the rules that apply to it . The robot audio - video tele - conferencing system provides real - 119 time playback of the robot , despite being situated in a * 11111111111111 different room - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ( c ) This is the virtual robot case . The same screen and audio setup as ( b ) is used , but without a physical robot ; instead output from a simulated robot is used . Each participant performs the three conditions in a ran - domly assigned order . A questionnaire is filled out after each condition and the questions are presented before running the condition . Questions asked after each condition are identical and are given in the Appendix . After completion of all three conditions , the participants answer a final questionnaire with Fig . 3 . The ActivMedia Pioneer 2 DX robot used in the experiments , as comparative rankings , again listed in the Appendix . seen in the remote robot setting . The motions of the PTZ camera provide The robot provides feedback to the participant through feedback that supplements the audio . physical movement : the robot moves toward and away from the user , a Pan - Tilt - Zoom ( PTZ ) camera nods when appropriate , as per previous studies with head gestures [ 12 ] . Audio feedback is a pre - recorded female voice , played back _ by generating segments of sentence - length . In conditions ( b ) _ and ( C ) , the audio is played through speakers beside the Before each condition , the subject is instructed to follow the robot ' s instructions for the Tower of Hanoi task , and to press a button when desiring to stop . We recorded the amount of time ( in seconds ) between start of the task and the Fig . 4 . The standard Gazebo simulation of the above robot . indication to stop the task . We assume that this corresponds to how long the robot can encourage the subject to remain on the task . placed on which pegs . The result is an accurate observation of the state by the camera - blobfinder combination . Player C . Implementation details software allowed virtual sensing to be done transparently Player [ 6 ] provides an abstraction layer for programming for conditions ( b ) and ( c ) through the use of a driver called the robot we used . The robot is a Pioneer 2DX from passthrough that relays sensor readings across the network . ActivMedia with a Sony Pan - Tilt - Zoom camera that is used V EUT for the ACTS blob - finder ( and simulating head - gestures ) as V EUT well as speakers for audio output ( see Figure 3 ) . As an We tested a series of human participants as described abstraction layer , the software allowed the same code to above ( nm 11 ) . The gender spread was 9M - 2F . Most be executed in all conditions , helping to ensure comparable subjects were experienced with computers and some were autonomous behavior in each condition . The simulated robot experienced with robots . While the sample size is fairly is rendered using Gazebo [ 10 ] ( see Figure 4 ) . This simulator small and more uniform than we would like , it was adequate contains an approximate physical model of the Pioneer and to evaluate the experimental design and determine areas for the PTZ camera used in the physically embodied parts Of improvement . the experiment . The simulation is also controlled through We examined the survey results in order to determine player using the same control code as for the physical robot if the embodiment of the moderator has any effect on the situations . The result is a simulation that behaves as exactly subject ' s reported perception of it as a guide for the task . For as can be approximated to a real - world robot . the analysis , we used a pairwise t - test on the comparative The pegs used for the Tower of Hanoi task are equipped rankings used in Form 2 ( see Figure 7 ) . with weight sensors . Though not sensitive enough to deter - mine exactly which weights are on the pegs , the sensors are Coprio ( n 1 ) Sgiiac able ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ todtcIhnarn a enrmvdfo Co - located more watchful than remote - located p < 0 . 001 pe Co - located more watchful than simulation Ip < 0 . 0011 or placed on a peg . The rings used for the Tower of Hanoi | Co - located more enjoyable than remote - located | p = 0 . 012 task are covered in brightly - colored paper . When the weight | Co - located more enjoyable than simulation | p < 0 . 001 | senors have detected a change in state for the pegs , the ACTS color blob tracker is used to determine which rings are Fig . 5 . Significance for survey data 120 While most of the survey data were discarded as not steps ( looking at the state of the rings ) within the puzzle relating to the hypotheses , we were able to use the post - hoc state . questions : " ( The moderator ) I enjoyed the most " and " ( The VII . CONCLUSION moderator that ) Watched me the most closely " to address hypotheses Hi . A , H2 . A , and H3 . A . As shown in Figure V , Out results suggest that our current experimental setup the co - located physical robot was seen as both more watchful is inadequate for fully addressing questions that deal with and more enjoyable than either the simulation of a robot or embodiment for the purposes of the task , not for social the remote robot . interaction itself . We have suggested some improvements We also collected data on how much time a user spent on for such direction of inquiry to be tackled . the task for each moderator . The difference between the time Our initial data suggest that physically embodied in - spent on each moderator did not vary significantly . Thus no teractions are favored over virtual ones and remote tele - conclusions regarding Hi . B , H2 . B and H3 . B could be drawn . conference ones . Dautenhahn et al . [ 2 ] discussed the nature Since none of the recorded times for the participants of embodiment , but left the question of " embodiment with - indicate a significant difference of result , we conclude that out a physical ontology " as future work , thus leaving open the embodiment of the moderator does not affect the time the question of what makes " material embodiment " special . spent on the task we tested . We conclude from our results that physical or " material " embodiment in a task - oriented setting can make a difference VI . DIscusSION in perception of a social agent ' s capabilities and the user ' s Mean time spent on each of the conditions did decrease , enjoyment of a task . as might be expected due to novelty for the first trial and VIII . FUTURE WORK a satiation effect thereafter . The open - endedness of the task contibutd t aprtiulary wde vriace i tak ties : We will continue to explore the nature of embodiment as it contributed to a particularly widevarianceintasktime relates to HRI . As part of an ongoing research program into several participants ' minimum time ( across conditions ) ex - socially assistive robotics , we intend to compare a physical ceeded other participants ' maximum times . Time spent with robot to a non - embodied agent for the purposes of education the puzzle is not an ideal measurement of social interaction . in a special education classroom and physical therapy for A more structured task would make measurement of time patients post - stroke . spent on task more meaningful , as task performance is particularly critical for domains in which social cues must be Thetocs of t frer will bet exam the factors that inform a proper desi n for a robot system for used to steer interactions toward particular outcomes ( e . g . , in socially assistive pp g y socially assistive robots [ 4 ] ) . This highlights the observations applications . We pain tosfocu ' o thet oriented nature of the system to gain insight into proper of Kiesler and Goetz [ 9 ] showing that a less friendly ( or as we interpret in our results , fun ) robot may result in lower task performance . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The effect of novelty is difficult to avoid . If three different We gratefully acknowledge the feedback from the anony - tasks with different scenarios for interaction are used for mous reviewers . We thank Emily Mower and Eem Wainer each condition , then the door is opened to questions about for lending their voices to the robot . We thank the Player task comparability . An alternative is to perform a suitable and Gazebo developers , and particularly Brian Gerkey for number of pre - experiment tasks and wait for the novelty to his passthrough driver . This work was supported by the wear off . The idea of capturing only rote actions seems to USC Provost ' s Center for Interdisciplinary Research , the measure a factor of HRI that may show the least difference USC Institute for Creative Technologies , and the Okawa between the three conditions . Our future work will try to Foundation . obtain statistical significance for task - related measures by considering only participant ' s first trials . This will require a REFERENCES large number of participants . [ 1 ] C . Breazeal , A . Brooks , J . Gray , M . Hancher , Our experience with the experimental implementation has J . McBean , D . Stiehl , and J . Strickon . Interactive robot suggested several additions and improvements . We believe theatre . Communications of the ACM , 46 ( 7 ) : 76 - 85 , that the task interaction can be improved by grounding 2003 . interactions more directly with the puzzle . For example , the [ 2 ] K . Dautenhahn , B . Ogden , and T . Quick . From em - PTZ camera gestures should make better reference to the bodied to socially embedded agents - implications for state rings on each peg . Greater turn - taking and interleaved interaction - aware robots . Cognitive Systems Research , interactions would make the interactions more natural for 3 ( 3 ) : 397 - 428 , 2002 . all three conditions . As per the previous discussion , a better [ 3 ] J . Eriksson , M . Mataric , and C Winstein . Hands - off metric for task performance would quantify intermediate assistive robotics for post - stroke arm rehabilitation . In 121 International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics , [ 17 ] T . Ziemke . Are robots embodied ? In Balkenius , Zlatev , pages 21 - 24 , Chicago , IL , USA , June 2005 . Brezeal , Dautenhahn , and Kozima , editors , Proceed - [ 4 ] D . Feil - Seifer and M . Mataric . Defining socially ings of the First International Workshop on Epigenetic assistive robotics . In Proceedings of the International Robotics : Modeling Cognitive Development in Robotic Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics , Chicago , IL , Systems , volume 85 , pages 75 - 93 , Lund , Sweden , USA , July 2005 . 2001 . [ 5 ] T . Fong , I . Nourbakhsh , and K . Dautenhahn . A survey of socially interactive robots . Robotics and APPENDIX Autonomous Systems , 42 ( 3 - 4 ) : 143 - 166 , 2003 . We include the two questionnaires filled out by the exper - [ 6 ] Brian P . Gerkey , Richard T . Vaughan , and Andrew iment participants . Figure 6 shows the questions answered Howard . The player / stage project : Tools for multi - robot after each condition . Figure 7 has the final questions , com - and distributed sensor systems . In Proceedings of the pleted after the third condition . International Conference on Advanced Robotics , pages 317 - 323 , Coimbra , Portugal , Jul 2003 . ID # [ 7 ] S . S . Intille . Designing a home of the future . IEEE Gender Pervasive Computing , 1 ( 2 ) : 76 - 82 , April - June 2002 . Date _ Trial # _ _ _ [ 8 ] C . D . Kidd and C . Breazeal . Effect of a robot on user perceptions . InEEE / RSJ Internatonal ConferenceRank how much you agree with the following statements : perceptions . In IEEEIRSJ Intemnational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , pages 3559 - 3564 , strongly middle strongly Sendai , Japan , Sep 2004 . The moderator was engaged in the task . 0 0 0 0 0 x [ 9 ] S . Kiesler and J . Goetz . Mental models and cooperation The moderator affected my behavior . 0 0 0 0 0 x with robotic assistants . In Proceedings of Conference The moderators reaction delay was perceptible . 0 0 0 0 0 X on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 576 - 577 , Minneapolis , Minnesota , USA , April 2002 . ACM I liked to test the limits ofthe moderator . 0 0 0 0 0 x Press . I was frustrated by the task . 0 0 0 0 0 x [ 10 ] N . Koenig and A . Howard . Design and use paradigms ( Circle the x for don ' t know / care ) for gazebo , an open - source multi - robot simulator . In IEEE / RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , pages 2149 - 2154 , Sendai , Japan , Fig . 6 . Form 1 : Completed after each case . Sep 2004 . [ 11 ] P . Maes . Modeling adaptive autonomous agents . Arti - ficial Life , I ( I - 2 ) : 135 - 162 , 1994 . ID # [ 12 ] T . Ono , T . Kanda , M . Imai , and H . Ishiguro . Embodied Gender communications between humans and robots emerging Date _ _ from entrained gestures . In Proceedings of IEEE Inter - Trial A Trial B _ _ _ _ national Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Trial C _ Robotics and Automation , pages 558 - 563 , Kobe , Japan , Please score the moderators based on following descriptions : July 2003 . ( For example , writing A - C - B for a description applies most to trial A , [ 13 ] R . Pfeifer and C . Scheier . Understanding Intelligence . least to B . ) Most Middle Least MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1999 . Rules were made most clear Most - - [ 14 ] J . Rickel and W . Lewis Johnson . Task - oriented col - Watched me most closely Helped me the most laboration with embodied agents in virtual worlds . In I enjoyed the most Embodied conversational agents , pages 95 - 122 . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , USA , 2000 . How much experience with robots do you have ? A lot Some A little None [ 15 ] S . Woods , M . Walters , K . Lee Koay , and K . Dauten - hanoprn Huan Roo Ineato . cnr How much experience with computers do you have ? hahn . Comparing Human Robot Interaction Scenar - A lot Some A little None ios Using Live and Video Based Methods : Towards a Nove Methoologicl Apprach . I Procedings Fig . 7 . Form 2 : Comparative rankings of the three conditions completed the 9th International Workshop on Advanced Motion at the end of the experiment . Control , Istanbul , march 2006 . [ 16 ] J . Zhang and D . A . Norman . Representations in Distributed Cognitive Tasks . Cognitive Science , 18 ( 1 ) : 87 - 122 , 1994 . 122