Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method Author ( s ) : Arend Lijphart Source : The American Political Science Review , Vol . 65 , No . 3 ( Sep . , 1971 ) , pp . 682 - 693 Published by : American Political Science Association Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 1955513 . Accessed : 29 / 09 / 2014 10 : 41 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . . American Political Science Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to The American Political Science Review . http : / / www . jstor . org This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method * AREND LIJPHART University of Leiden Among the several fields or subdisciplines into which the discipline of political science is usually divided , comparative politics is the only one that carries a methodological instead of a substantive label . The term " comparative poli - tics " indicates the how but does not specify the what of the analysis . The label is somewhat misleading because both explicit methodologi - cal concern and implicit methodological aware - ness among students of comparative politics have generally not been very high . 1 Indeed , too many students of the field have been what Giovanni Sartori calls " unconscious thinkers " - unaware of and not guided by the logic and methods of empirical science , although perhaps well versed in quantitative research techniques . One reason for this unconscious thinking is un - doubtedly that the comparative method is such a basic , and basically simple , approach , that a methodology of comparative political analysis does not really exist . As Sartori points out , the other extreme - that of the " overconscious thinkers , " whose " standards of method and the - ory are drawn from the physical paradigmatic sciences " - is equally unsound . 2 The purpose of this paper is to contribute to " conscious think - ing " in comparative politics by focusing on comparison as a method of political inquiry . The paper will attempt to analyze not only the inevitable weaknesses and limitations of the comparative method but also its great strengths and potentialities . * This article is a revised version of a paper pre - sented to the Round Table Conference on Compara - tive Politics of the International Political Science Association , held in Turin , Italy , September 10 - 14 , 1969 . I am very grateful to David E . Apter , Donald T . Campbell , Robert A . Dahl , Giuseppe Di Palma , Harry Eckstein , Lewis J . Edinger , Samuel E . Finer , Galen A . Irwin , Jean Laponce , Juan J . Linz , Stefano Passigli , Austin Ranney , Stein Rokkan , Dankwart A . Rustow , and Kurt Sontheimer for their comments and suggestions on earlier drafts of the paper , which were very helpful in the preparation of the revision . 1 The reverse applies to the relatively new field of " political behavior " : its name indicates a substantive field of inquiry , but especially the derivative " be - haviorism " has come to stand for a general approach or set of methods . See Robert A . Dahl , " The Be - havioral Approach in Political Science : Epitaph for a Monument to a Successful Protest , " American Politi - cal Science Review , 55 ( December , 1961 ) , pp . 763 - 72 . 2 Giovanni Sartori , " Concept Misformation in Com - parative Politics , " American Political Science Review , 64 ( December , 1970 ) , p . 1033 . In the literature of comparative politics , a wide variety of meanings is attached to the terms " comparison " and " comparative method . " The comparative method is defined here as one of the basic methods - the others being the experimental , statistical , and case study methods - of establishing general empiri - cal propositions . It is , in the first place , defi - nitely a method , not just " a convenient term vaguely symbolizing the focus of one ' s research interests . " 3 Nor is it a special set of substantive concerns in the sense of Shmuel N . Eisenstadt ' s definition of the comparative approach in social research ; he states that the term does not " properly designate a specific method . . . , but rather a special focus on cross - societal , institu - tional , or macrosocietal aspects of societies and social analysis . " 4 Second , the comparative method is here de - fined as one of the basic scientific methods , not the scientific method . It is , therefore , narrower in scope than what Harold D . Lasswell has in mind when he argues that " for anyone with a scientific approach to political phenomena the idea of an independent comparative method seems redundant , " because the scientific ap - proach is " unavoidably comparative . " 5 Like - wise , the definition used here differs from the very similar broad interpretation given by Ga - briel A . Almond , who also equates the compar - ative with the scientific method : " It makes no sense to speak of a comparative politics in po - litical science since if it is a science , it goes without saying that it is comparative in its ap - proach . " 6 " Arthur L . Kalleberg , " The Logic of Comparison : A Methodological Note on the Comparative Study of Political Systems , " World Politics , 19 ( October 1966 ) , p . 72 . 4Shmuel N . Eisenstadt , " Social Institutions : Com - parative Study , " in David L . Sills , ed . , International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences ( New York : Macmillan & Free Press , 1968 ) , Vol . 14 , p . 423 . See also Eisenstadt , " Problems in the Comparative Analy - sis of Total Societies , " Transactions of the Sixth World Congress of Sociology ( Evian : International Sociological Association , 1966 ) , Vol . 1 , esp . p . 188 . " Harold D . Lasswell , " The Future of the Com - parative Method , " Comparative Politics , 1 ( October , 1968 ) , p . 3 . 6 Gabriel A . Almond , " Political Theory and Po - litical Science , " American Political Science Review , 60 ( December , 1966 ) , pp . 877 - 78 . Almond also ar - gues that comparative politics is a " movement " in political science rather than a subdiscipline . See his 682 This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 1971 Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method 683 Third , the comparative method is here re - garded as a method of discovering empirical re - lationships among variables , not as a method of measurement . These two kinds of methods should be clearly distinguished . It is the latter that Kalleberg has in mind when he discusses the " logic of comparison . " He defines the com - parative method as " a form of measurement " ; comparison means " nonmetrical ordering , " or in other words , ordinal measurement . 7 Simi - larly , Sartori is thinking in terms of measure - ment on nominal , ordinal ( or comparative ) , and cardinal scales when he describes the con - scious thinker as " the man that realizes the lim - itations of not having a thermometer and still manages to say a great deal simply by saying hot and cold , warmer and cooler . " 8 This impor - tant step of measuring variables is logically prior to the step of finding relationships among them . It is the second of these steps to which the term " comparative method " refers in this paper . Finally , a clear distinction should be made between method and technique . The comparative method is a broad - gauge , general method , not a narrow , specialized technique . In this vein , Gunnar Heckscher cautiously refers to " the method ( or at least the procedure ) of compari - son , " 9 and Walter Goldschmidt prefers the term comparative approach , because " it lacks the preciseness to call it a method . " ' 0 The com - parative method may also be thought of as a basic research strategy , in contrast with a mere tactical aid to research . This will become clear in the discussion that follows . The Experimental , Statistical , and Comparative Methods The nature of the comparative method can be understood best if it is compared and con - " Comparative Politics , " in International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences , Vol . 12 , pp . 331 - 36 . TKalleberg , op . cit . , pp . 72 - 73 ; see also pp . 75 - 78 . " Sartori , op . cit . , p . 1033 . See also Paul F . Lazars - feld and Allen H . Barton , " Qualitative Measurement in the Social Sciences : Classification , Typologies , and Indices , " in Daniel Lerner and Harold D . Lasswell , eds . , The Policy Sciences : Recent Developments in Scope and Method ( Stanford : Stanford University Press , 1951 ) , pp . 155 - 92 . 9Gunnar Heckscher , The Study of Comparative Government and Politics ( London : Allen and Un - win , 1957 ) , p . 68 ( italics added ) . " Walter Goldschmidt , Comparative Functionalism : An Essay in Anthropological Theory ( Berkeley : Uni - versity of California Press , 1966 ) , p . 4 . Oscar Lewis argues that " there is no distinctive ' comparative meth - od ' in anthropology , " and that he therefore prefers to discuss " comparisons in anthropology rather than the comparative method . " See his " Comparisons in Cul - tural Anthropology " in William L . Thomas , Jr . , ed . , Current Anthropology ( Chicago : University of Chi - cago Press , 1956 ) , p . 259 . trasted with the two other fundamental strate - gies of research ; these will be referred to , following Neil J . Smelser ' s example , as the ex - perimental and the statistical methods . " All three methods ( as well as certain forms of the case study method ' 2 ) aim at scientific explana - tion , which consists of two basic elements : ( 1 ) the establishment of general empirical relation - ships among two or more variables , ' 3 while ( 2 ) all other variables are controlled , that is , held constant . These two elements are inseparable : one cannot be sure that a relationship is a true one unless the influence of other variables is controlled . The ceteris paribus condition is vital to empirical generalizations . The experimental method , in its simplest form , uses two equivalent groups , one of which ( the experimental group ) is exposed to a stim - ulus while the other ( the control group ) is not . The two groups are then compared , and any difference can be attributed to the stimulus . Thus one knows the relationship between two variables - with the important assurance that no other variables were involved , because in all respects but one the two groups were alike . Equivalence - that is , the condition that the cetera are indeed paria - can be achieved by a process of deliberate randomization . The exper - imental method is the most nearly ideal method for scientific explanation , but unfortunately it u For the idea of discussing the comparative meth - od in relation to these other basic methods , I am in - debted to Neil J . Smelser ' s outstanding and most en - lightening article " Notes on the Methodology of Comparative Analysis of Economic Activity , " Trans - actions of the Sixth World Congress of Sociology ( Evian : International Sociological Association , 1966 ) , Vol . 2 , pp . 101 - 17 . For other general discussions of the comparative method , see LUo Moulin , " La Moth - ode comparative en Science Politique , " Revue Inter - nationale d ' Histoire Politique et Constitutionelle , 7 ( January - June , 1957 ) , pp . 57 - 71 ; S . F . Nadel , The Foundations of Social Anthropology ( London : Cohen and West , 1951 ) , pp . 222 - 55 ; Maurice Duverger , MAthodes des Sciences Sociales ( 3rd ed . , Paris : Presses Universitaires de France , 1964 ) , pp . 375 - 99 ; John W . M . Whiting , " The Cross - Cultural Method , " in Gardner Lindzey , ed . , Handbook of Social Psy - chology ( Reading , Mass . : Addison - Wesley , 1954 ) , Vol . 1 , pp . 523 - 31 ; Frank W . Moore , ed . , Readings in Cross - Cultural Methodology ( New Haven , Conn . : HRAF Press , 1961 ) ; Adam Przeworski and Henry Teune , The Logic of Comparative Social Inquiry ( New York : Wiley - Interscience , 1970 ) ; and Robert T . Holt and John E . Turner , " The Methodology of Com - parative Research , " in Holt and Turner , eds . , The Methodology of Comparative Research ( New York : Free Press , 1970 ) , pp . 1 - 20 . 13 The case study method will be discussed below . " Eugene J . Meehan , The Theory and Method of Political Analysis ( Homewood , Ill . : Dorsey Press , 1965 ) . He expresses this idea in three short sentences : " Science seeks to establish relationships " ( p . 35 ) ; " Science . . . is empirical " ( p . 37 ) ; " Science is a generalizing activity " ( p . 43 ) . This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 684 The American Political Science Review Vol . 65 can only rarely be used in political science be - cause of practical and ethical impediments . An alternative to the experimental method is the statistical method . It entails the conceptual ( mathematical ) manipulation of empiricially ob - served data - which cannot be manipulated sit - uationally as in experimental design - in order to discover controlled relationships among vari - ables . It handles the problem of control by means of partial correlations . For instance , when one wants to inquire into the relationship between political participation and level of edu - cation attained , one should control for the in - fluence of age because younger generations have received more education than older genera - tions . This can be done by partialing - dividing the sample into a number of different age groups and looking at the correlations between participation and education within each sepa - rate age group . Paul F . Lazarsfeld states that this is such a basic research procedure that it " is applied almost automatically in empirical research . Whenever an investigator finds him - self faced with the relationship between two variables , he immediately starts to ' cross - tabu - late , ' i . e . , to consider the role of further vari - ables . " 114 The statistical method can be regarded , therefore , as an approximation of the experi - mental method . As Ernest Nagel emphasizes , " every branch of inquiry aiming at reliable gen - eral laws concerning empirical subject matter must employ a procedure that , if it is not strictly controlled experimentation , has the es - sential logical functions of experiment in in - quiry . " 15 The statistical method does have these essential logical functions , but it is not as strong a method as experimentation because it cannot handle the problem of control as well . It cannot control for all other variables , merely for the other key variables that are known or suspected to exert influence . Strictly speaking , 14 Paul F . Lazarsfeld , " Interpretation of Statistical Relations as a Research Operation , " in Lazarsfeld and Morris Rosenberg , eds . , The Language of Social Re - search : A Reader in the Methodology of Social Re - search ( Glencoe , Ill . : Free Press , 1955 ) , p . 115 . How - ever , control by means of partial correlations does not allow for the effects of measurement error or unique factor components ; see Marilynn B . Brewer , William D . Crano and Donald T . Campbell , " Testing a Single - Factor Model as an Alternative to the Misuse of Par - tial Correlations in Hypothesis - Testing Research , Soci - ometry , 33 ( March , 1970 ) , pp . 1 - 11 . Moreover , par - tial correlations do not resolve the problem of the codiffusion of characteristics , known in anthropology as " Galton ' s problem " ; see Raoul Naroll , " Two So - lutions to Galton ' s Problem , " Philosophy of Science , 28 ( January , 1961 ) , pp . 15 - 39 , and Przeworski and Teune , op . cit . , pp . 51 - 53 . 16 Ernest Nagel , The Structure of Science ( New York : Harcourt , Brace , and World , 1961 ) , pp . 452f . even the experimental method does not handle the problem of control perfectly , because the investigator can never be completely sure that his groups are actually alike in every respect . 16 But experimental design provides the closest approximation to this ideal . The statistical method , in turn , is an approximation - not the equivalent - of the experimental method . Con - versely , one can also argue , as Lazarsfeld does , that the experimental method constitutes a spe - cial form of the statistical method , but only if one adds that it is an especially potent form . ' 7 The logic of the comparative method is , in accordance with the general standard ex - pounded by Nagel , also the same as the logic of the experimental method . The comparative method resembles the statistical method in all respects except one . The crucial difference is that the number of cases it deals with is too small to permit systematic control by means of partial correlations . This problem occurs in sta - tistical operations , too ; especially when one wants to control simultaneously for many vari - ables , one quickly " runs out of cases . " The com - parative method should be resorted to when the number of cases available for analysis is so small that cross - tabulating them further in or - der to establish credible controls is not feasible . There is , consequently , no clear dividing line between the statistical and comparative meth - ods ; the difference depends entirely on the number of cases . ' 8 It follows that in many re - 16 For instance , if the groups are made equivalent by means of deliberate randomization , the investigator knows that they are alike with a very high degree of probability , but not with absolute certainty . More - over , as Hubert M . Blalock , Jr . , states , so - called " forcing variables " cannot be controlled by randomi - zation . See his Causal Inferences in Nonexperimental Research ( Chapel Hill : University of North Carolina Press , 1964 ) , pp . 23 - 26 . In general , Blalock empha - sizes " the underlying similarity between the logic of making causal inferences on the basis of experimental and nonexperimental designs " ( p . 26 ) . 17Lazarsfeld , " Interpretation of Statistical Relations as a Research Operation , " p . 119 . Talcott Parsons makes a similar statement with regard to the com - parative method : " Experiment is . . . nothing but the comparative method where the cases to be compared are produced to order and under controlled condi - tions . " See his The Structure of Social Action ( 2nd ed . , New York : Free Press , 1949 ) , p . 743 . Another advantage of the experimental method is that the time variable is controlled , which is especially important if one seeks to establish causal relationships . In statistical design , this control can be approximated by means of the panel method . 18In order to highlight the special problems arising from the availability of only a small number of cases , the comparative method is discussed as a distinct method . Of course , it can be argued with equal justice that the comparative and statistical methods should be regarded as two aspects of a single method . Many authors use the term " comparative method " in the This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 1971 Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method 685 search situations , with an intermediate number of cases , a combination of the statistical and comparative methods is appropriate . Where the cases are national political systems , as they of - ten are in the field of comparative politics , the number of cases is necessarily so restricted that the comparative method has to be used . From the vantage point of the general aims and the alternative methods of scientific in - quiry , one can consider the comparative method in proper perspective and answer such questions as the following , raised by Samuel H . Beer and by Harry Eckstein : Can comparison be regarded as " the social scientist ' s equivalent of the natural scientist ' s laboratory ? " ' 9 and : " Is the comparative method in the social sciences . . . really an adequate substitute for experimen - tation in the natural sciences , as has sometimes been claimed ? " 20 The answer is that the com - parative method is not the equivalent of the ex - perimental method but only a very imperfect substitute . A clear awareness of the limitations of the comparative method is necessary but need not be disabling , because , as we shall see , these weaknesses can be minimized . The " conscious thinker " in comparative politics should realize the limitations of the compara - tive method , but he should also recognize and take advantage of its possibilities . broad sense of the method of multivariate empirical , but nonexperimental , analysis , i . e . , including both the comparative and statistical methods as defined in this paper . This is how A . R . Radcliffe - Brown uses the term when he argues that " only the comparative method can give us general propositions . " ( Brown , " The Comparative Method in Social Anthropology , " Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland , 81 [ 1951 ] , p . 22 . ) Pmile Durkheim also follows this usage when he declares that " comparative sociology is not a particular branch of sociology ; it is sociology itself , in so far as it ceases to be purely descriptive and aspires to account for facts . " ( Durkheim , The Rules of Sociological Method , translated by Sarah A . Solovay and John H . Mueller , [ 8th ed . , Glencoe , Ill . : Free Press , 1938 ] , p . 139 . ) See also the statements by Lasswell and Almond cited above . Rodney Needham combines the two terms , and speaks of " large - scale statistical comparison , " i . e . , the statistical method . ( Needham , " Notes on Compara - tive Method and Prescriptive Alliance , " Bijdragen tot de Taal - , Land - en Volkenkunde , 118 [ 1962 ] , pp . 160 - 82 . ) On the other hand , E . E . Evans - Pritchard uses exactly the same terminology as used by Smelser and as adopted in this paper , when he makes a distinction between " small - scale comparative studies " and " large - scale statistical ones . " See his The Comparative Meth - od in Social Anthropology ( London : Athlone Press , 1963 ) , p . 22 . " ' Samuel H . Beer , " The Comparative Method and the Study of British Politics , " Comparative Politics , 1 ( October , 1968 ) , p . 19 . 20Harry Eckstein , " A Perspective on Comparative Politics , Past and Present , " in Eckstein and David E . Apter , eds . , Comparative Politics : A Reader ( New York : Free Press of Glencoe , 1963 ) , p . 3 . The Comparative Method : Weaknesses and Strengths The principal problems facing the compara - tive method can be succinctly stated as : many variables , small number of cases . These two problems are closely interrelated . The former is common to virtually all social science research regardless of the particular method applied to it ; the latter is peculiar to the comparative method and renders the problem of handling many variables more difficult to solve . Before turning to a discussion of specific sug - gestions for minimizing these problems , two general comments are in order . First , if at all possible one should generally use the statistical ( or perhaps even the experimental ) method in - stead of the weaker comparative method . But often , given the inevitable scarcity of time , en - ergy , and financial resources , the intensive comparative analysis of a few cases may be more promising than a more superficial statisti - cal analysis of many cases . In such a situation , the most fruitful approach would be to regard the comparative analysis as the first stage of re - search , in which hypotheses are carefully for - mulated , and the statistical analysis as the sec - ond stage , in which these hypotheses are tested in as large a sample as possible . In one type of comparative cross - national re - search , it is logically possible and may be ad - vantageous to shift from the comparative to the statistical method . Stein Rokkan distinguishes two aims of cross - national analysis . One is the testing of " macro hypotheses " concerning the " interrelations of structural elements of total systems " ; here the number of cases tends to be limited , and one has to rely on the comparative method . The other is " micro replications , " de - signed " to test out in other national and cul - tural settings a proposition already validated in one setting . " 21 Here , too , one can use the com - parative method , but if the proposition in ques - tion focuses on individuals as units of analysis , one can also use the statistical method ; as Mer - ritt and Rokkan point out , instead of the " one - nation , one - case " approach , nationality can simply be treated as an additional variable on a par with other individual attributes such as oc - cupation , age , sex , type of neighborhood , etc . 22 21 Stein Rokkan , " Comparative Cross - National Re - search : The Context of Current Efforts , " in Richard L . Merritt and Rokkan , eds . , Comparing Nations : The Use of Quantitative Data in Cross - National Research ( New Haven : Yale University Press , 1966 ) , pp . 19 - 20 . Rokkan specifically recommends the use of " paired comparisons " for this purpose ; see his " Methods and Models in the Comparative Study of Nation - Build - ing , " in Citizens , Elections , Parties : Approaches to the Comparative Study of the Processes of Development ( Oslo : Universitetsforlaget , 1970 ) , p . 52 . 22Merritt and Rokkan , op . cit . , p . 193 . This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 686 The American Political Science Review Vol . 65 Terence K . Hopkins and Immanuel Wallerstein make a similar distinction between truly " cross - national studies " in which total systems are the units of analysis , and " multi - national but cross - individual research . " 23 The second general comment concerns a dangerous but tempting fallacy in the applica - tion of the comparative method : the fallacy of attaching too much significance to negative findings . The comparative method should not lapse into what Johan Galtung calls " the tradi - tional quotation / illustration methodology , where cases are picked that are in accordance with the hypothesis - and hypotheses are re - jected if one deviant case is found . " 24 All cases should , of course , be selected systematically , and the scientific search should be aimed at probabilistic , not universal , generalizations . The erroneous tendency to reject a hypothesis on the basis of a single deviant case is rare when the statistical method is used to analyze a large sample , but in the comparative analysis of a small number of cases even a single deviant fitiding tends to loom large . One or two deviant cases obviously constitute a much less serious problem in a statistical analysis of very many cases than in a comparative study of only a few - perhaps less than ten - cases . But it is never - theless a mistake to reject a hypothesis " be - cause one can think pretty quickly of a con - trary case . " 25 Deviant cases weaken a probabi - listic hypothesis , but they can only invalidate it if they turn up in sufficient numbers to make the hypothesized relationship disappear alto - gether . 26 23 Terence K . Hopkins and Immanuel Wallerstein , " The Comparative Study of National Societies , " So - cfrzl Science Information , 6 ( October , 1967 ) , pp . 27 - 33 ( italics added ) . See also Przeworski and Teune , op . cit . , pp . 34 - 43 . 24He adds : " This is a very naive conception of so - cial science propositions ; if only perfect correlations should be permitted social science would not have come very far . " Johan Galtung , Theory and Methods of Social Research ( Oslo : Universitetsforlaget , 1967 ) , p . 505 . The functions of deviant case analysis will be discussed below . 25W . J . M . Mackenzie , Politics and Social Science ( Harmondsworth : Penguin Books , 1967 ) , p . 52 . I have been guilty of committing this fallacy myself . In my critique of Giovanni Sartori ' s proposition relating political instability to extreme multipartism ( systems with six or more significant parties ) , one of my argu - ments consists of the deviance of a single historical case : the stable six - party system of the Netherlands during the interwar years . See Arend Lijphart , " Typol - ogies of Democratic Systems , " Comparative Political Studies , 1 ( April , 1968 ) , pp . 32 - 35 . 26 t is clearly incorrect , therefore , to argue that on logical grounds a probabilistic generalization can never be invalidated ; cf . Guenter Lewy ' s statement : " To be sure , a finding of a very large number of . . . ( deviant cases would cast doubt upon the value of the After these introductory observations , let us turn to a discussion of specific ways and means of minimizing the " many variables , small N " problem of the comparative method . These may be divided into four categories : ( 1 ) Increase the number of cases as much as possible . Even though in most situations it is impossible to augment the number of cases suf - ficiently to shift to the statistical method , any enlargement of the sample , however small , im - proves the chances of instituting at least some control . 27 Modern comparative politics has made great progress in this respect as a result of the efforts of the field ' s innovators to fashion universally applicable vocabularies of basic po - litically relevant concepts , notably the ap - proaches based on Parsonian theory and Ga - briel A . Almond ' s functional approach . 28 Such a restatement of variables in comparable terms makes many previously inaccessible cases avail - able for comparative analysis . In addition to extending the analysis geographically , one should also consider the possibilities of " longi - tudinal " ( cross - historical ) extension by in - cluding as many historical cases as possible . 29 It was the promise of discovering universal laws through global and longitudinal compari - sons that made Edward A . Freeman enthusias - tically espouse the comparative method almost proposition , but logically such evidence would not compel its withdrawal . The test of the hypothesis by way of a confrontation with empirical or historical data remains inconclusive . " Lewy , " Historical Data in Comparative Political Analysis : A Note on Some Problems of Theory , " Comparative Politics , 1 ( Octo - ber , 1968 ) , p . 109 . 27Furthermore , unless one investigates all available cases , one is faced with the problem of how repre - sentative one ' s limited sample is of the universe of cases . 28On the necessity of establishing general concepts not tied to particular cultures , see Smelser , op . cit . , pp . 104 - 09 ; Nadel , op . cit . , pp . 237 - 38 ; Doualas Oliver and Walter B . Miller , " Suggestions for a More Systematic Method of Comparing Political Units , " American Anthropologist , 57 ( February , 1955 ) , pp . 118 - 21 ; and Nico Frijda and Gustav Jahoda , " On the Scope and Methods of Cross - Cultural Research , " In - ternational Journal of Psychology , 1 ( 1966 ) , pp . 114 - 16 . For critiques of recent attempts at terminological innovation in comparative politics , see Sartori , " Con - cept Misformation in Comparative Politics " ; Robert T . Holt and John M . Richardson , Jr . , The State of The - ory in Comparative Politics ( Minneapolis : Center for Comparative Studies in Technological Development and Social Change , 1968 ) ; Robert E . Dowse , " A Functionalist ' s Logic , " World Politics , 18 ( July , 1966 ) , pp . 607 - 23 ; and Samuel E . Finer , " Almond ' s Concept of ' The Political System ' : A Textual Critique , " Gov - ernment and Opposition , 5 ( Winter , 1969 - 70 ) , pp . 3 - 21 . 29 Michael Haas , " Comparative Analysis , " Western Political Quarterly , 15 ( June , 1962 ) , p . 298n . See also Lewy , op . cit . , pp . 103 - 10 . This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 1971 Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method 687 a century ago . In his Comparative Politics , published in 1873 , he called the comparative method " the greatest intellectual achievement " of his time , and stated that it could lead to the formulation of " analogies . . . between the po - litical institutions of times and countries most remote from one another . " Comparative poli - tics could thus discover " a world in which times and tongues and nations which before seemed parted poles asunder , now find each one its own place , its own relation to every other . " 30 The field of comparative politics has not yet achieved - and may never achieve - the goals that Freeman set for it with such opti - mism . But his words can remind us of the fre - quent utility of extending comparative analyses both geographically and historically . ( The value of this suggestion is somewhat dimin - ished , of course , because of the serious lack of information concerning most political systems ; for historical cases in particular this problem is often irremediable . ) ( 2 ) Reduce the " property - space " of the analysis . If the sample of cases cannot be in - creased , it may be possible to combine two or more variables that express an essentially simi - lar underlying characteristic into a single vari - able . Thus the number of cells in the matrix representing the relationship is reduced , and the number of cases in each cell increased cor - respondingly . Factor analysis can often be a useful technique to achieve this objective . Such a reduction of what Lazarsfeld calls the " prop - erty - space " increases the possibilities of further cross - tabulation and control without increasing the sample itself . 31 It may also be advisable in certain instances to reduce the number of classes into which the variables are divided ( for instance , by simplifying a set of several catego - ries into a dichotomy ) , and thus to achieve the same objective of increasing the average num - ber of cases per cell . The latter procedure , however , has the disadvantage of sacrificing a part of the information at the investigator ' s dis - posal , and should not be used lightly . ( 3 ) Focus the comparative analysis on " comparable " cases . In this context , " compara - ble " means : similar in a large number of im - portant characteristics ( variables ) which one wants to treat as constants , but dissimilar as far 1 Edward A . Freeman , Comparative Politics ( Lon - don : Macmillan , 1873 ) , pp . 1 , 19 , 302 . See also Gideon Sjoberg ' s argument in favor of global com - parative research : " The Comparative Method in the Social Sciences , " Philosophy of Science , 22 ( April , 1955 ) , pp . 106 - 17 . 31 Lazarsfeld and Barton , op . cit . , pp . 172 - 75 ; Bar - ton , " The Concept of Property - Space in Social Re - search , " in Lazarsfeld and Rosenberg , op . cit . , pp . 45 - 50 . as those variables are concerned which one wants to relate to each other . If such compara - ble cases can be found , they offer particularly good opportunities for the application of the comparative method because they allow the es - tablishment of relationships among a few vari - ables while many other variables are con - trolled . 32 As Ralph Braibanti states , " the move - ment from hypothesis to theory is contingent upon analysis of the total range of political sys - tems , " 33 but it is often more practical to accord priority to the focus on a limited number of comparable cases and the discovery of partial generalizations . Whereas the first two ways of strengthening the comparative method were mainly con - cerned with the problem of " small N , " this third approach focuses on the problem of " many variables . " While the total number of variables cannot be reduced , by using comparable cases in which many variables are constant , one can re - duce considerably the number of operative vari - ables and study their relationships under con - trolled conditions without the problem of run - ning out of cases . The focus on comparable cases differs from the first recommendation not only in its preoccupation with the problem of ' ' many variables " rather than with " small N , " but also in the fact that as a by - product of the search for comparable cases , the number of cases subject to analysis will usually be decreased . The two recommendations thus point in fundamentally different directions , although both are compatible with the second ( and also the fourth ) recommendation . This form of the comparative method is what John Stuart Mill described as the " method of difference " and as the " method of concomi - tant variations . " The method of difference con - sists of " comparing instances in which [ a ] phe - nomenon does occur , with instances in other respects similar in which it does not . " The 12 Smelser , op . cit . , p . 113 . Holt and Turner refer to this strategy as the process of " specification " ( op . cit . , pp . 11 - 13 ) . It is probably also what Eisenstadt has in mind when he mentions the possibility of constructing " special intensive comparisons of a quasi - experimental nature " ( op . cit . , p . 424 ) . See also Erwin K . Scheuch , " Society as Context in Cross - Cul - tural Comparison , " Social Science Information , 6 ( Oc - tober , 1967 ) , esp . pp . 20 - 23 ; Mackenzie , op . cit . , p . 151 ; Fred Eggan , " Social Arithopology and the Method of Controlled Comparison , " American Anthro - pologist , 56 ( October , 1954 ) , pp . 743 - 63 ; and Erwin Ackerknecht , " On the Comparative Method in An - thropology , " in Robert F . Spencer , ed . , Method and Perspective in Anthropology ( Minneapolis : Univer - sity of Minnesota Press , 1954 ) , pp . 117 - 25 . 33Ralph Braibanti , " Comparative Political Analytics Reconsidered , " Journal of Politics , 30 ( February , 1968 ) , p . 36 . This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 688 The American Political Science Review Vol . 65 method of concomitant variations is a more so - phisticated version of the method of difference : instead of observing merely the presence or ab - sence of the operative variables , it observes and measures the quantitative variations of the op - erative variables and relates these to each other . As in the case of the method of difference , all other factors must be kept constant ; in Mill ' s words , " that we may be warranted in inferring causation from concomitance of variations , the concomitance itself must be proved by the Method of Difference . " 34 Mill ' s method of concomitant variations is often claimed to be the first systematic formu - lation of the modern comparative method . 35 It should be pointed out , however , that Mill him - self thought that the methods of difference and of concomitant variations could not be applied in the social sciences because sufficiently simi - lar cases could not be found . He stated that their application in political science was " com - pletely out of the question " and branded any attempt to do so as a " gross misconception of the mode of investigation proper to political phenomena . " 36 Durkheim agreed with Mill ' s negative judgment : " The absolute elimination of adventitious elements is an ideal which can - not really be attained ; . . . one can never be even approximately certain that two societies agree or differ in all respects save one . " 37 These objections are founded on a too exacting scientific standard - what Sartori calls " over - conscious thinking . " It is important to remem - ber , however , that in looking for comparable cases , this standard should be approximated as closely as possible . The area approach appears to lend itself quite well to this way of applying the compara - tive method because of the cluster of character - istics that areas tend to have in common and that can , therefore be used as controls . 38 But opinions on the utility of the area approach ' John Stuart Mill , A System of Logic ( 8th ed . , London : Longmans , Green , Reader , and Dyer , 1872 ) , Book III , chapter 8 . 35 Nadel , op . cit . , pp . 222 - 23 ; Kenneth E . Bock , " The Comparative Method of Anthropology " Com - parative Studies in Society and History , 8 ( April , 1966 ) , p . 272 . 86Mill , op . cit . , Book VI , chapter 7 ; see also Book III , chapter 10 . " Durkheim , op . cit . , pp . 129 - 30 . But he hailed the method of concomitant variations , which he evidently interpreted to mean a combination of the statistical and comparative methods , as " the instrument par excellence of sociological research " ( p . 132 ) . See also Francois Bourricaud , " Science Politique et So - ciologie : Reflexions d ' un Sociologue , " Revue Francqise de Science Politique , 8 ( June , 1958 ) , pp . 251 - 63 . " If the area approach is often preferable to re - search efforts with a global range in order to maximize comparability , the era approach may be preferable to longitudinal analysis for the same reason . Cf . the differ sharply : Gunnar Heckscher states that " area studies are of the very essence of com - parative government , " and points out that " the number of variables , while frequently still very large , is at least reduced in the case of a happy choice of area . " 39 Roy C . Macridis and Richard Cox also argue that if areas are characterized by political as well as non - political uniformi - ties , " the area concept will be of great value , since certain political processes will be com - pared between units within the area against a common background of similar trait configura - tion " ; they cite Latin America as an example of an area offering the prospect of " fruitful intra - area comparison . " 40 On the other hand , Dank - wart A . Rustow declares in a recent article that area study is " almost obsolete , " and he shows little faith in it as a setting for " manageable comparative study . " He argues that " mere geo - graphic proximity does not necessarily furnish the best basis of comparison , " and furthermore that " comparability is a quality that is not in - herent in any given set of objects ; rather it is a quality imparted to them by the observer ' s per - spective . " ' ' 4 This is a compelling argument that should be carefully considered . It is not true that areas reflect merely geo - graphic proximity ; they tend to be similar in many other basic respects . By means of an in - ductive process - a factor analysis of 54 social and cultural variables on 82 countries - Bruce M . Russett discovered socio - culturally similar groupings of countries , which correspond closely to areas or regions of the world as usually de - following statement by C . E . Black : " There is much greater value in comparing contemporary events and institutions than those that are widely separated in time . The comparison of societies or smaller groups that are concerned with reasonably similar problems is more likely to lead to satisfactory conclusions than comparisons between societies existing many centuries apart . " Black , The Dynamics of Modernization : A Study in Comparative History ( New York : Harper and Row , 1966 ) , p . 39 . ' 9 Heckscher , op . cit . , p . 88 . 40 Roy C . Macridis and Richard Cox , " Research in Comparative Politics , " American Political Science Re - view , 47 ( September , 1953 ) , p . 654 . See also John D . Martz , " The Place of Latin America in the Study of Comparative Politics , " Journal of Politics 28 ( Feb - ruary , 1966 ) , pp . 57 - 80 . 41 Dankwart A . Rustow , " Modernization and Com - parative Politics : Prospects in Research and Theory , " Comparative Politics , 1 ( October , 1968 ) , pp . 45 - 47 . Area study may also be criticized on the ground that , in the words of Dell G . Hitchner and Carol Levine , in Comparative Government and Politics ( New York : Dodd , Mead , 1967 ) : " Its very method of delimitation puts emphasis on what may be particular to a limited group of states , as opposed to the universal general - izations which fully comparative study must seek " ( pp . 7 - 8 ) . This argument has been answered above in terms of the need for partial generalizations as a first step . See also Braibanti , op . cit . , pp . 54 - 55 . This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 1971 Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method 689 fined . 42 Comparability is indeed not inherent in any given area , but it is more likely within an area than in a randomly selected set of coun - tries . It seems unwise , therefore , to give up the area approach in comparative politics . But two important provisos should be attached to this conclusion . First , the area approach can con - tribute to comparative politics if it is an aid to the comparative method , not if it becomes an end in itself . Otherwise , area study may indeed become " a form of imprisonment . " 43 It is against this danger that the thrust of Rustow ' s argument is directed . Second , the area ap - proach should not be used indiscriminately , but only where it offers the possibility of establish - ing crucial controls . In this respect , some of the smaller areas may offer more advantages than the larger ones - Scandinavia , for example , which has barely been exploited in this manner , or the Anglo - American countries , which have received greater comparative attention ( but which do not constitute an area in the literal sense ) . 44 An alternative way of maximizing compara - bility is to analyze a single country diachroni - cally . Such comparison of the same unit at dif - ferent times generally offers a better solution to the control problem than comparison of two or more different but similar units ( e . g . , within the same area ) at the same time , although the con - trol can never be perfect ; the same country is not really the same at different times . A good example of diachronic comparative analysis is Charles E . Frye ' s study of the empirical rela - tionships among the party system , the interest group system , and political stability in Ger - many under the Weimar and Bonn Republics . Frye argues that " for the study of these rela - tionships , Weimar and Bonn make a particu - 42 Bruce M . Russett , " Delineating International Re - gions , " in J . David Singer , ed . , Quantitative Inter - national Politics : Insights and Evidence ( New York : Free Press , 1968 ) , pp . 317 - 52 . See also Russett , In - ternational Regions and the International System ( Chicago : Rand McNally , 1967 ) . 13George I . Blanksten , " Political Groups in Latin America , " American Political Science Review , 53 ( March , 1959 ) , p . 126 . See also Sigmund Neumann , " The Comparative Study of Politics , " Comparative Studies in Society and History , 1 ( January , 1959 ) , pp . 107 - 10 ; and I . Schapera , " Some Comments on the Comparative Method in Social Anthropology , " American Anthropologist , 55 ( August , 1953 ) , pp . 353 - 361 , esp . p . 360 . " See Seymour Martin Lipset , " The Value Patterns of Democracy : A Case Study in Comparative Analy - sis , " American Sociological Review , 28 ( August , 1963 ) , pp . 515 - 31 ; Robert R . Alford , Party and Society : The Anglo - American Democracies ( Chicago : Rand Mc - Nally , 1963 ) ; Leslie Lipson , " Party Systems in the United Kingdom and the Older Commonwealth : Causes , Resemblances , and Variations , " Political Stud - ies , 7 ( February , 1959 ) , pp . 12 - 31 . larly good case [ strictly speaking , two cases ] because there are more constants and relatively fewer variables than in many cross - national studies . Yet the differences could hardly be sharper . " 145 Unless the national political system itself constitutes the unit of analysis , comparability can also be enhanced by focusing on intrana - tion instead of internation comparisons . The reason is again the same : comparative intrana - tion analysis can take advantage of the many similar national characteristics serving as con - trols . 46 Smelser illustrates the utility of this strategy with the example of a hypothetical re - search project on industrialization in Germany and Italy : " For many purposes it would be more fruitful to compare northern Italy with southern Italy , and the Ruhr with Bavaria , than it would be to compare Germany as a whole with Italy as a whole . These two countries differ not only in level of industrialization , but also in cultural traditions , type of governmental structure , and so on . " The advantage of intra - unit comparison is that inter - unit differences can be held constant . " Then , having located what appear to be operative factors in the in - tra - unit comparisons , it is possible to move to the inter - unit comparisons to see if the same differences hold in the large . " 47 As Juan J . Linz and Amando de Miguel point out , a particularly promising approach may be the combination of intranation and in - ternation comparisons : " The comparison of those sectors of two societies that have a greater number of characteristics in common while differing on some crucial ones may be more fruitful than overall national compari - sons . " 48 An illustrative example of this ap - proach in the political realm is suggested by Raoul Naroll : " If one wishes to test theories about the difference between the cabinet and I Charles E . Frye , " Parties and Pressure Groups in Weimar and Bonn , " World Politics , 17 ( July , 1965 ) , pp . 635 - 55 . ( The quotation is from page 637 . ) The postwar division of Germany also offers the oppor - tunity of analyzing the effects of democratic versus totalitarian development against a similar cultural and historical background . See Ralf Dahrendorf , " The New Germanies : Restoration , Revolution , Re - construction , " Encounter , 22 ( April , 1964 ) , pp . 50 - 58 . See also Sylvia L . Thrupp , " Diachronic Methods in Comparative Politics , " in Holt and Turner , eds . , The Methodology of Comparative Research , pp . 343 - 58 . 46Heckscher , p . 69 ; Heinz Eulau , " Comparative Political Analysis : A Methodological Note , " Midwest Journal of Political Science , 6 ( November , 1962 ) , pp . 397 - 407 . Rokkan , too , warns against the " whole - nation " bias of comparative research ( " Methods and Models , " p . 49 ) . 47 Smelser , op . cit . , p . 115 . " Juan J . Linz and Amando de Miguel , " Within - This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 690 The American Political Science Review Vol . 65 the presidential systems of government . . . one is better advised to compare Manitoba and North Dakota than to compare Great Britain and the United States , since with respect to all other variables Manitoba and North Dakota are very much alike , while Great Britain and the United States have many other differen - ces . " 49 ( 4 ) Focus the comparative analysis on the " key " variables . Finally , the problem of " many variables " may be alleviated not only by some of the specific approaches suggested above but also by a general commitment to theoretical parsimony . Comparative analysis must avoid the danger of being overwhelmed by large numbers of variables and , as a result , losing the possibility of discovering controlled relation - ships , and it must therefore judiciously restrict itself to the really key variables , omitting those of only marginal importance . The nature of the comparative method and its special limitations constitute a strong argument against what Lass - well and Braibanti call " configurative " or " con - textual " analysis : " the identification and inter - pretation of factors in the whole social order which appear to affect whatever political func - tions and their institutional manifestations have been identified and listed for comparison " ( Braibanti ' s definition ) . 50 Lasswell argues that the comparative method as usually applied has been insufficiently configurative , and calls for the exploration of more variables : the entire context - past , present , and future - " must be continually scanned . " 51 Scanning all variables is not the same as in - cluding all variables , of course , as long as one is on one ' s guard against an unrealistic and eventually self - defeating perfectionism . Com - parative politics should avoid the trap into which the decision - making approach to the study of international politics fell , of specifying and calling for the analysis of an exhaustive list of all variables that have any possible influence on the decision - making process . 52 Parsimony Nation Differences and Comparisons : The Eight Spains , " in Merritt and Rokkan , op . cit . , p . 268 . 49Naroll , " Scientific Comparative Politics and In - ternational Relations , " in R . Barry Farrell , ed . , Ap - proaches to Comparative and International Politics ( Evanston , Ill . : Northwestern University Press , 1966 ) , pp . 336 - 37 . " Braibanti , op . cit . , p . 49 . In this context , " con - figurative " analysis is not synonymous with the tradi - tional single - country approach , as in Eckstein ' s defini - tion of the term : " the analysis of particular political systems , treated either explicitly or implicitly as unique entities " ( " A Perspective on Comparative Politics , " p . 11 ) . " I Lasswell , op . cit . , p . 6 . ' 3 See Richard C . Snyder , H . W . Bruck , and Burton suggests that Joseph LaPalombara ' s call for a " segmented approach " aiming at the formula - tion of middle - range propositions concerning partial systems makes a great deal of sense . 53 Similarly , Eckstein ' s urgent call for greater manageability of the field should be carefully heeded : " The most obvious need in the field at present is simplification - and simplification on a rather grand scale - for human intelligence and scientific method can scarcely cope with the large numbers of variables , the heaps of con - cepts , and the mountains of data that seem at present to be required , and indeed to exist , in the field . " 54 It is no accident that the most fruitful appli - cations of the comparative method have been in anthropological research . In primitive societies , the number of variables is not as bewilderingly large as in more advanced societies . All rele - vant factors can therefore be more easily sur - veyed and analyzed . In this respect , anthropol - ogy can be said to provide " almost a laboratory for the quasi - experimental approach to social phenomena . " 55 Political science lacks this ad - vantage , but can approximate it by focusing at - tention on the key variables in comparative studies . A final comment is in order about the rela - tionship of comparative politics as a substantive field and comparison as a method . The two are clearly not coterminous . In comparative poli - tics , other methods can often also be employed , and the comparative method is also applicable in other fields and disciplines . A particularly in - structive example is James N . Rosenau ' s study of the relative influence of individual variables ( personal policy beliefs and " personalizing ten - dencies " ) and role variables ( party role and committee role ) on the behavior of United States senators during two similar periods : the " Acheson era , " 1949 - 1952 , and the " Dulles era , " 1953 - 1956 . Rosenau argues that these two eras were characterized by a generally sim - ilar international environment and that the two secretaries of state conducted similar foreign Sapin , eds . , Foreign Policy Decision - Making ( New York : Free Press of Glencoe , 1962 ) . sJoseph LaPalombara , " Macrotheories and Micro - applications in Comparative Politics , " Comparative Politics , 1 ( October , 1968 ) , pp . 60 - 77 . As an example he cites Robert A . Dahl , ed . , Political Oppositions in Western Democracies ( New Haven : Yale University Press , 1966 ) , esp . chapters 11 - 13 . See also LaPalom - bara , " Parsimony and Empiricism in Comparative Politics : An Anti - Scholastic View , " in Holt and Tur - ner , eds . , The Methodology of Comparative Research , pp . 123 - 49 . 54Eckstein , " A Perspective on Comparative Poli - tics , " p . 30 . 5 Nadel , op . cit . , p . 228 . This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 1971 Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method 691 policies and also resembled each other in per - sonal qualities . He terms the method that he uses in his analysis the method of " quantitative historical comparison . " One of its basic charac - teristics is the testing of hypotheses by compar - ing two eras ( cases ) that are " essentially com - parable . . . in all respects except for the . . . variables being examined . " The method is called " quantitative " because the variables are operationally defined in quantitative terms , and " historical " because the two cases compared are historical eras . 56 The method is , therefore , a special form of the comparative method . It il - lustrates one of very many ways in which an imaginative investigator can devise fruitful ap - plications of the comparative method . 57 The Comparative Method and the Case Study Method The discussion of the comparative method is not complete without a consideration of the case study method . The statistical method can be applied to many cases , the comparative method to relatively few ( but at least two ) cases , and the case study method to one case . But the case study method can and should be closely connected with the comparative method ( and sometimes also with the statistical method ) ; certain types of case studies can even be considered implicit parts of the comparative method . The great advantage of the case study is that by focusing on a single case , that case can be intensively examined even when the research resources at the investigator ' s disposal are rela - tively limited . The scientific status of the case study method is somewhat ambiguous , how - ever , because science is a generalizing activity . A single case can constitute neither the basis for a valid generalization nor the ground for disproving an established generalization . Indirectly , however , case studies can make " James N . Rosenau , " Private Preferences and Po - litical Responsibilities : The Relative Potency of In - dividual and Role Variables in the Behavior of U . S . Senators , " in Singer , ed . , Quantitative International Politics , pp . 17 - 50 , esp . p . 19 . Rosenau adds that if " the findings are not so clear as to confirm or negate the hypotheses unmistakably , then of course the analyst moves on to a third comparable period " ( p . 19 ) . If such a third or even more periods can be found - which seems unlikely in the case of Rosenau ' s particular research problem - they should be included regardless of the outcome of the analysis of the first two eras ( if the available resources permit it , of course ) . 57 See also the proposed use of " multiple compari - son groups , " as an approximation of the experimental method , by Barney G . Glazer and Anselm L . Strauss , " Discovery of Substantive Theory : A Basic Strategy Underlying Qualitative Research , " American Behavior - al Scientist , 8 ( February , 1965 ) , pp . 5 - 12 . an important contribution to the establishment of general propositions and thus to theory - building in political science . Six types of case studies may be distinguished . These are ideal types , and any particular study of a single case may fit more than one of the following catego - ries : ( 1 ) Atheoretical case studies ; ( 2 ) Interpretative case studies ; ( 3 ) Hypothesis - generating case studies ; ( 4 ) Theory - confirming case studies ; ( 5 ) Theory - infirming case studies ; ( 6 ) Deviant case studies . Cases may be selected for analysis because of an interest in the case per se or because of an interest in theory - building . The first two types of cases belong to the former category . Theoretical case studies are the traditional sin - gle - country or single - case analyses . They are entirely descriptive and move in a theoretical vacuum : they are neither guided by established or hypothesized generalizations nor motivated by a desire to formulate general hypotheses . Therefore , the direct theoretical value of these case studies is nil , but this does not mean that they are altogether useless . As LaPalombara emphasizes , the development of comparative politics is hampered by an appalling lack of in - formation about almost all of the world ' s politi - cal systems . 58 Purely descriptive case studies do have great utility as basic data - gathering opera - tions , and can thus contribute indirectly to the - ory - building . It can even be claimed that " the cumulative effect of such studies will lead to fruitful generalization , " but only if it is recog - nized that this depends on a theoretically ori - ented secondary analysis of the data collected in atheoretical case studies . 59 As indicated earlier , the atheoretical case study and the other types of case studies are ideal types . An actual instance of an atheoreti - cal case study probably does not exist , because almost any analysis of a single case is guided by at least some vague theoretical notions and some anecdotal knowledge of other cases , and usually results in some vague hypotheses or conclusions that have a wider applicability . Such actual case studies fit the first type to a large extent , but they also fit one or more of the other types ( particularly the third , fourth , and fifth types ) at least to some extent . ' LaPalombara , " Macrotheories and Microapplica - tions , " pp . 60 - 65 . 59 See Michael Curtis , Comparative Government and Politics : An Introductory Essay in Political Science ( New York : Harper and Row , 1968 ) , p . 7 . See also Macridis , The Study of Compardttve Government ( New York : Random House , 1955 ) . This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 692 The American Political Science Review Vol . 65 Interpretative case studies resemble atheoret - ical case studies in one respect : they , too , are selected for analysis because of an interest in the case rather than an interest in the formula - tion of general theory . They differ , however , in that they make explicit use of established theo - retical propositions . In these studies , a general - ization is applied to a specific case with the aim of throwing light on the case rather than of im - proving the generalization in any way . Hence they are studies in " applied science . " Since they do not aim to contribute to empirical general - izations , their value in terms of theory - building is nil . On the other hand , it is precisely the pur - pose of empirical theory to make such interpre - tative case studies possible . 60 Because of the still very limited degree of theoretical develop - ment in political science , such case studies are rare . One interesting example is Michael C . Hudson ' s imaginative and insightful case study of Lebanon in the light of existing development theories , in which he discovers a serious dis - crepancy between the country ' s socioeconomic and political development . , " The remaining four types of case studies are all selected for the purpose of theory - building . Hy ) pothesis - generating case studies start out with a more or less vague notion of possible hy - potheses , and attempt to formulate definite hy - potheses to be tested subsequently among a larger number of cases . Their objective is to de - velop theoretical generalizations in areas where no theory exists yet . Such case studies are of great theoretical value . They may be particu - larly valuable if the case selected for analysis provides what Naroll calls a sort of " crucial ex - periment " in which certain variables of interest happen to be present in a special way . 62 Theory - confirming and theory - infirming case studies are analyses of single cases within the framework of established generalizations . Prior knowledge of the case is limited to a single d0 As Przeworski and Teune state : " The main role of a theory is to provide explanations of specific events . These explanations consist of inferring , with a high degree of probability , statements about particular events from general statements concerning classes of events " ( p . 86 ) . ' Michael C . Hudson , " A Case of Political Under - development , " Journal of Politics , 29 ( November 1967 ) , pp . 821 - 37 . See also Beer , " The Comparative Method and the Study of British Politics , " pp . 19 - 36 . 82 Naroll , " Scientific Comparative Politics and In - ternational Relations , " p . 336 . An example of such a case study is my analysis of the determinants of Dutch colonialism in West Irian . In most cases , both objective ( especially economic ) and subjective factors can be discerned , but the case of West Irian is unique because of the complete absence of objective Dutch interests in the colony . See Lijphart , The Trauma of Decolonization : The Dutch and West New Guinea ( New Haven : Yale University Press , 1966 ) . variable or to none of the variables that the proposition relates . The case study is a test of the proposition , which may turn out to be con - firmed or infirmed by it . If the case study is of the theory - confirming type , it strengthens the proposition in question . But , assuming that the proposition is solidly based on a large number of cases , the demonstration that one more case fits does not strengthen it a great deal . Like - wise , theory - infirming case studies merely weaken the generalizations marginally . The theoretical value of both types of case studies is enhanced , however , if the cases are , or turn out to be , extreme on one of the variables : such studies can also be labeled " crucial experi - ments " or crucial tests of the propositions . Deviant case analyses are studies of single cases that are known to deviate from estab - lished generalizations . They are selected in or - der to reveal why the cases are deviant - that is , to uncover relevant additional variables that were not considered previously , or to refine the ( operational ) definitions of some or all of the variables . 63 In this way , deviant case studies can have great theoretical value . They weaken the original proposition , but suggest a modified proposition that may be stronger . The validity of the proposition in its modified form must be established by further comparative analysis . 64 Of the six types of case studies , the hypothe - sis - generating and the deviant case studies have the greatest value in terms of their contribution to theory . Each of these two types , however , has quite different functions in respect to the - ory - building : The hypothesis - generating case study serves to generate new hypotheses , while the deviant case study refines and sharpens ex - isting hypotheses . The deviant case study - as " 3 See Patricia L . Kendall and Katherine M . Wolf , " The Analysis of Deviant Cases in Communications Research , " in Lazarsfeld and Frank Stanton , eds . , Communications Research : 1948 - 49 ( New York : Har - per , 1949 ) , pp . 152 - 57 ; Sjoberg , op . cit . , pp . 114 - 15 ; and Lijphart , The Politics of Accommodation : Plural - ism and Democracy in the Netherlands ( Berkeley : University of California Press , 1968 ) , chapter 10 . " This process of refining generalizations through deviant case analysis is what Robert M . Marsh calls " specification . " See his article " The Bearing of Com - parative Analysis on Sociological Theory , " Social Forces , 43 ( December , 1964 ) , pp . 191 - 96 . Specifica - tion should therefore definitely not be regarded as " the garbage bin " of comparative research ; see Conrad Phillip Kottak , " Towards a Comparative Science of Society , " Comparative Studies in Society and History , 12 ( January , 1970 ) , p . 102 . See also Milton M . Gor - don , " Sociological Law and the Deviant Case , " Soci - ometry , 10 ( August , 1947 ) , pp . 250 - 58 ; and Andre J . F . Kobben , " The Logic of Cross - Cultural Analysis : Why Exceptions ? " , in Rokkan , ed . , Comparative Re - search Across Cultures and Nations ( Paris : Mouton , 1968 ) , pp . 17 - 53 . This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 1971 Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method 693 well as the theory - confirming and theory - in - firming case studies - are implicitly compara - tive analyses . They focus on a particular case which is singled out for analysis from a rela - tively large number of cases and which is ana - lyzed within the theoretical and empirical con - text of this set of cases . The deviant case may be likened to the " experimental group " with the remainder of the cases constituting the " control group . " Just as the analytical power of the comparative method increases the closer it ap - proximates the statistical and experimental methods , so the analytical power of the case study method increases the more it approxi - mates the comparative method in the form of deviant case analysis . Such case analysis re - quires , of course , that the position of the devi - ant case on the variables under consideration , and consequently also its position relative to the other cases , are clearly defined . The different types of cases and their un - equal potential contributions to theory - building should be kept in mind in selecting and analyz - ing a single case . Some of the shortcomings in Eckstein ' s otherwise insightful and thought - provoking case study of Norway may serve as instructive examples . 65 Eckstein argues that the Norwegian case deviates from David B . Tru - man ' s proposition concerning " overlapping memberships , " 60 because Norway is a stable de - mocracy in spite of the country ' s deep and non - overlapping geographic , economic , and cul - tural cleavages . But he fails to place the case of Norway in relation to other cases . In fact , al - though he describes Norway ' s divisions as " as - tonishingly great , sharp , and persistent , " he ex - plicitly rules out any comparison with the cleavages in other countries . This exclusion se - riously weakens the case study . Furthermore , instead of trying to refine Truman ' s proposition with the help of the deviant findings , Eckstein simply drops it . In terms of the sixfold typology of case studies discussed above , his analysis of the Norwegian case is only a theory - infirming one and is not made into a deviant case study . From then on , the case study becomes a the - I Eckstein , Division and Cohesion in Democracy : A Study of Norway ( Princeton , N . J . : Princeton Uni - versity Press , 1966 ) , esp . pp . 60 - 77 , 177 - 201 . Part of the critique which follows is included in my review of this book in the Journal of Modern History , 41 ( March , 1969 ) , pp . 83 - 87 . 6 David B . Truman , The Governmental Process : Political Interests and Public Opinion ( New York : Knopf , 1951 ) . ory - confirming one . Eckstein finds that the Norwegian case strikingly bears out his own " congruence " theory , which states that govern - ments tend to be stable if there is considerable resemblance ( congruence ) between govern - mental authority patterns and the authority pat - terns in society . 67 He demonstrates persuasively that both governmental and social patterns of authority are strongly democratic in Norway and thus highly congruent . The problem here is not that the Norwegian facts do not fit the the - ory , but that they fit the theory too perfectly . The perfect fit strengthens the theory margin - ally , but does not contribute to its refinement . The theory does not hold that complete congru - ence of authority patterns is required for stable democracy . In his original statement of the congruence theory , Eckstein himself points out the necessity of further work on the important questions of how much disparity can be toler - ated and how degrees of congruence and dis - parity can be measured . 68 Because the Norwe - gian case turns out to be a perfect theory - con - firming one , it cannot be used to refine the the - ory in any of these respects . Therefore , Eck - stein was unlucky in his selection of this case as far as the development of his congruence the - ory is concerned , and he fails to take fUll ad - vantage of the case study method in analyzing the case in terms of Truman ' s theory of over - lapping memberships . * * * The comparative method and the case study method have major drawbacks . But precisely because of the inevitable limitations of these methods , it is the challenging task of the inves - tigator in the field of comparative politics to apply these methods in such a way as to mini - mize their weaknesses and to capitalize on their inherent strengths . Thus , they can be highly useful instruments in scientific political inquiry . In one respect , it is not altogether correct to call the Norwegian case study a theory - confirming study . Because the congruence theory has a rather narrow empirical basis , consisting chiefly of only two cases ( Britain and Germany ) , it is a hypothesis rather than an established theory . The case study of Norway is , of course , not a hypothesis - generating study either . Perhaps it should be called a " hypothesis - strengthen - ing " case study or , as Eckstein himself suggests , a " plausibility probe " ( oral comment at the IPSA Round Table Conference in Turin , September 1969 ) . 6sEckstein , A Theory of Stable Democracy , Re - search Monograph No . 10 ( Princeton , N . J . : Center of International Studies , 1961 ) . This content downloaded from 130 . 217 . 227 . 3 on Mon , 29 Sep 2014 10 : 41 : 39 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions