Abstract . Natural small - molecule inhibitors of actin cyto - skeleton dynamics have long been recognized as valuable molecular probes for dissecting complex mechanisms of cellular function . More recently , their potential use as chemotherapeutic drugs has become a focus of scientific investigation . The primary focus of this review is the molecular mechanism by which different actin - targeting natural products function , with an emphasis on structural considerations of toxins for which high - resolution struc - tural information of their interaction with actin is avail - able . By comparing the molecular interactions made by different toxin families with actin , the structural themes of those that alter filament dynamics in similar ways can be understood . This provides a framework for novel syn - thetic - compound designs with tailored functional prop - erties that could be applied in both research and clinical settings . Keywords . Cytotoxic compound , anti - cancer drugs , actin filament dynamics , sequestering , capping , severing , fila - ment stabilization . Introduction Actin is the most abundant protein in eukaryotic cells and its ability to reversibly assemble into long and flex - ible polymers , or filaments , provides the foundation upon which many essential cellular functions rely [ 1 ] . For example , the interaction between actin filaments and the molecular motor myosin drives dynamic functions such as locomotion , division and growth , while their interaction with membrane - associated proteins gives eukaryotic cells their shape and mechanical strength , and facilitates attachments to other cells or substrates [ 2 , 3 ] . Performing these functions demands strict regu - lation of the spatial and temporal organization of the actin cytoskeleton . This is facilitated on many levels by a myriad of accessory proteins [ 4 ] . These proteins influence every aspect of actin filament dynamics : the rate of actin polymerization and depolymerization , the balance between the concentration of monomeric and filamentous actin forms within the cell , interfilament interactions and filament branching [ 5 – 7 ] . Certain pro - teins bind monomeric actin and physically inhibit its addition to growing filaments , and are therefore known as ‘sequestering’ proteins ( e . g . thymosin β 4 , profilin , vitamin D binding protein ) . There are those that bind to filament ends and inhibit both monomer addition and dissociation , called ‘capping’ proteins ( e . g . CapZ ) , as well as those that stimulate polymerization from pools of actin monomers in a process known as ‘nucle - ation’ ( e . g . the Arp2 / 3 complex and formins ) . Other actin - binding proteins actively break or ‘sever’ actin filaments [ e . g . actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) and cofilin ] . Finally , many actin - binding proteins exhibit multiple actin - modulating functions , where for exam - ple gelsolin is able to both sever actin filaments and cap the newly severed ends . Review Actin - targeting natural products : structures , properties and mechanisms of action J . S . Allingham , V . A . Klenchin and I . Rayment * Department of Biochemistry , University of Wisconsin , 433 Babcock Drive , Madison , Wisconsin 53706 ( USA ) , Fax : + 1 608 262 1319 , e - mail : Ivan _ Rayment @ biochem . wisc . edu Received 6 April 2006 ; received after revision 31 May 2006 ; accepted 19 June 2006 Online First 11 August 2006 * Corresponding author . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 63 ( 2006 ) 2119 – 2134 1420 - 682X / 06 / 182119 - 16 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 006 - 6157 - 9 © Birkhäuser Verlag , Basel , 2006 Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 2120 J . S . Allingham , V . A . Klenchin and I . Rayment Actin - targeting natural products Besides endogenous actin filament - regulating proteins , numerous natural product small molecules also display potent abilities to affect the polymeric state of actin fila - ments [ 8 – 10 ] . This property has earned these compounds significant recognition as valuable molecular probes for dissecting complex cellular pathways that are dependent upon the actin cytoskeleton . It has also drawn attention to the possibility of their use as promising leads for anti - cancer drug development [ 8 , 9 , 11 ] . Indeed , extensive evidence has shown that the actin cytoskeleton plays a fundamental role in the cellular properties of oncogenic transformed cells . Here , the molecular composition , or - ganization and polymeric state of the actin cytoskeleton is altered as a result of changes in the abundance or activ - ity of some of the actin filament - regulating proteins de - scribed above [ 12 – 15 ] . This creates the characteristic cel - lular morphologies as well as the aggressive phenotypes of cancer cells , including anchorage - independent cell growth , cell migration and invasion [ 11 , 16 – 18 ] . Such characteristics are facilitators of metastasis and angio - genesis , two hallmarks of malignant cell progression and the primary contributors to most cancer - related deaths [ 10 , 18 – 21 ] . Thus the ability of certain actin - targeting natural products to manipulate actin filament structure may provide a valuable strategy to compensate for , or par - tially reverse , some of the changes to the cytoskeleton in malignant cells that are created by abnormal actin regula - tory protein levels or activities , thereby controlling can - cer proliferation . An undeniable limitation to the use of actin - targeting natural products as therapeutic drugs is their inability to distinguish between the actin of normal and transformed cells , making them too toxic for direct clinical use due to the ubiquity of actin and its importance in non - neoplastic cells . However , this caveat can also be applied to microtu - bule - targeting drugs , such as Taxol , which is a successful and widely used anti - cancer drug [ 22 , 23 ] . Furthermore , this does not rule out the possibility that the natural forms of actin - targeting small molecules can provide valuable functional and chemical information to inspire the design of more efficacious chemotherapeutics for cancer treat - ment . In the past few years , our knowledge of the com - plete chemical structures and mode of actin binding , and our understanding of the mechanisms of action of actin - targeting natural products have advanced tremendously . The purpose of this review is to outline these recent ad - vances and to apply information about their molecular in - teractions with actin to cytotoxins with similar chemical structures and functional properties . By considering the connection between conserved structural features of par - ticular toxin families , their manner of actin interaction , and the potency with which they affect the polymeric state of actin filaments , a framework is established for the design of specifically tailored functional analogues by chemical synthesis . When combined with an ability to exploit the differences in the molecular composition and organization of actin filaments in cancer cells , this information may allow actin - targeting drugs to have dis - criminating effects on normal and transformed cells [ 12 , 24 ] . This would increase the technological potential of these compounds for both biological and pharmaceutical applications . Monomeric and filamentous actin structures The primary structure of actin is highly conserved among eukaryotic organisms . Its monomeric form , known as globular or G - actin , is 43 - kDa in size with four subdo - mains ( Fig . 1a ) . ATP , along with Mg 2 + , binds within a deep cleft between subdomains 2 and 4 , and can be hy - drolyzed to ADP + Pi . In physiological conditions , G - ac - tin can self - assemble into a long double - stranded helical polymer , known as filamentous or F - actin . Within the filament , the position of each monomer is related to the preceding one by a translation of ∼ 27 . 5 Å and a rotation of ∼ – 166° , giving a two - stranded filament with a right - handed helical twist [ 4 ] . Actin polymerization occurs in an organized manner , in - volving head - to - tail interactions , producing filament po - larity ( Fig . 1b ) . The end that is comprised of subdomains 2 and 4 is called the pointed or minus end . The opposite end is known as the barbed or plus end . The assembly of three actin monomers , known as ‘nucleation’ , occurs spontaneously at physiological ionic strength and initi - ates filament growth . Filament elongation can then con - tinue from both ends ; however , the rate of monomer ad - dition at each end is asymmetric , such that the barbed end elongates roughly five - to tenfold faster than the pointed end . The likely basis of this asymmetry is that after in - corporation into the filament , actin monomers hydrolyze ATP , resulting in a conformational change in subdomain 2 [ 25 ] . This change probably weakens the intermolecular interactions made at the pointed end of actin monomers , leading to increased dissociation from the pointed end where ADP actin accumulates , while new ATP - bound ac - tins are predominantly added to the barbed end . This pro - cess is referred to as ‘treadmilling’ , and is a fundamental component of actin filament dynamics , as well as the functional target of actin - binding natural products [ 4 ] . Classification of actin - targeting natural products A diverse group of natural products found to specifically target and demonstrate cytotoxic activity against the actin cytoskeleton have been isolated from a variety of sources : terrestrial plants , sponges , marine nudibranchs , algae , fungi and bacteria . Excellent reviews depicting the detailed structures of actin - targeting compounds and Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 2121 their effects on specific cell lines are available [ 8 , 10 , 26 ] . Their common structural features include a primarily hy - drophobic component and stereochemically complex side groups . In general , these compounds can be divided into two groups : ( 1 ) those that inhibit filament assembly or destabilize filaments , and ( 2 ) those that stabilize actin filaments . Filament - blocking / destabilizing compounds Toxins that block or destabilize actin filaments have been shown to do so by binding two distinct regions of the actin monomer : ( i ) the ATP - binding cleft and ( ii ) the barbed end ( Fig . 1a ) . Due to the dynamic nature of actin filaments , filament - destabilizing compounds can be further subdivided into those which merely seques - ter actin monomers when they passively dissociate from filaments , and those that also actively promote filament severing by binding directly to the filament and disrupt - ing interactions between adjacent actin monomers . Since both mechanisms can lead to the apparent disassembly of actin filaments , the inherent mechanism of disassembly used by each toxin is outlined below . Actin - binding mode of ATP - binding cleft - targeting compounds Latrunculin cytotoxins are potent inhibitors of actin fila - ment formation isolated from the Red Sea sponge Ne - gombata magnifica ( Fig . 2a ) [ 27 , 28 ] . The crystal struc - ture of latrunculin A in complex with actin shows that this compound binds within the interface between actin subdomains 2 and 4 , above the ATP - binding site ( Fig . 2b ) [ 27 – 30 ] . Here , the 2 - thiazolidinone group is inserted into a pocket lined by residues Tyr69 , Asp157 , Arg183 , Thr186 , Arg206 and Arg210 , where specific contacts in - volving the NH , OH , CO , and O - ester are formed . Altogether , eight forms of latrunculin have been isolated to date , all of which contain the biologically rare thiazolid - inone ring ( Fig . 2a ) [ 27 , 31 ] . Comparisons of the struc - ture - activity relationships for each latrunculin isoform have demonstrated the importance of the NH group on the thiazolidinone ring , as well as the OH side group on the pyrone ring for potent microfilament inhibition [ 31 , 32 ] . Based on the orientation of latrunculin A in complex with actin , insertion of the 2 - thiazolinone group is facilitated , and stabilized , by the rigid macrocyclic ring , which makes primarily hydrophobic contacts with actin ( Fig . 2b ) . In - terestingly , latrunculin B , which is also isolated from N . magnifica and differs from latrunculin A by the absence of two carbons in the macrocyclic ring , displays slightly lower cytotoxicity toward yeast and hamster fibroblast cell growth than latrunculin A [ 31 , 33 , 34 ] . This reduced activ - ity likely results from the loss of hydrophobic interactions normally made by these two carbons and residue Gln59 in the latrunculin A - actin complex . This illustrates that the shape and size of the ring are also important determinants in the overall binding affinity of these cytotoxins for actin . An additional latrunculin - like compound , named latrun - culeic acid , which lacks the macrocyclic and thiazolidi - none rings , has recently been isolated . Not surprisingly , this compound is inactive toward actin [ 31 ] . Figure 1 . Structure of monomeric and filamentous actin . ( a ) Monomeric actin is shown as a ribbon representation and the bound nucleotide is shown as a stick representation . Actin subdomains 1 – 4 are labeled and colored individually ( PDB accession 1J6Z [ 25 ] ) . ( b ) A model of the actin filament is shown as a surface representation of five actin monomers . The subdomains for each actin monomer are colored as in ( a ) . The structure is based upon the filament model by Tirion et al . [ 59 ] . 2122 J . S . Allingham , V . A . Klenchin and I . Rayment Actin - targeting natural products Mechanism of filament destabilization of ATP - binding cleft - targeting compounds The effect of latrunculins on actin is strictly limited to monomer sequestration [ 28 , 33 ] . Comparison of actin fil - ament models derived from fiber diffraction analysis and the binding mode of latrunculin A with actin in the crystal structure suggest that this compound inhibits assembly of actin monomers into filaments allosterically [ 29 ] . That is , latrunculin binding may act as a wedge between subdo - mains 2 and 4 ( Figs . 1a , 2b ) , restricting conformational changes that normally allow the formation of stable in - teractions between actin monomer interfaces , thereby se - questering actin monomers from polymerization . What is not clear at this point is the exact nature of the conforma - tional changes in actin that normally facilitate filament formation and whether the effects of latrunculin binding have a greater influence over interactions between axial or lateral actin monomer contacts ( Fig . 1b ) . Barbed end - targeting compounds Unlike nucleotide - binding cleft - targeting toxins , those that bind to the barbed end of actin are numerous and their chemical structures are highly variable . There is also more structural information available for these com - pounds . In general , this class of toxins tends to have a larger and more diverse ring structure than latrunculins , as well as a long , stereochemically complex side chain . At least seven different classes of natural products target the barbed end ( Fig . 3 ) . This conclusion is based upon direct observations of toxin - actin interactions through X - ray co - crystallization data of five of these classes and the close similarities of their chemical structures to the remain - ing classes . ( i ) The trisoxazole toxins are isolated from Pacific sponges and nudibranch egg masses and contain many structural analogues . Over 30 forms of these com - pounds have been identified so far including mycalolides , ulapualides , kabiramides and halichondramides [ 8 , 35 – 37 ] . ( ii ) Reidispongiolides and sphinxolides are isolated from the New Caledonian marine sponges Reidispongia coerulea and Neosiphonia superstes , respectively , and consist of numerous congeners [ 38 – 40 ] . ( iii ) Aplyronines are isolated from the Pacific sea hare Aplysia kurodai and exhibit structural differences from reidispongiolide / sphinxolide and trisoxazole macrolides primarily in the main chain of their ring structures [ 41 ] . Other structural differences characteristic of this group include the ad - dition of the amino acid - like moieties , trimethylserine and dimethylalanine , on the ring and tail regions , respec - tively . ( iv ) Swinholide and misakinolide ( bistheonellide ) are dimeric macrolides isolated from the marine sponge Theonella swinhoei . Swinholide consists of a 44 - mem - bered dimeric cyclic lactone [ 42 ] , while misakinolide has a 40 - membered dimeric cyclic lactone that differs from swinholide by the absence of two double - bonded carbons from each repeated lactone moiety [ 43 , 44 ] . ( v ) Scyto - phycins , such as tolytoxin , which are isolated from the terrestrial cyanobacterium Scytonema pseudohofmanni , resemble monomeric versions of swinholide , with tail sections similar to those of trisoxazole and reidispon - giolide / sphinxolide toxins [ 45 ] . ( vi ) Lobophorolide is a recently identified 22 - membered cyclic lactone isolated from the brown alga Lobophora variegata . Its ring and tail moieties together are essentially the structural equiva - lent for half of the dimeric cyclic lactone of swinholide A [ 46 ] . ( vii ) Finally , bistramides are a unique family of dilactam polyethers isolated from the marine ascidian Lissoclinum bistratum that have recently been shown to target actin with high affinity and inhibit filament forma - tion and promote filament disruption [ 47 – 49 ] . Interest - Figure 2 . Latrunculin chemical structures and actin - binding site . ( a ) The chemical structures of latrunculins A , B , and C are shown . ( b ) Latrunculin A is shown as green ball and sticks bound between subdomains 2 and 4 of actin . Amino acid residues in contact with latrunculin A are shown as purple sticks . ATP is shown as yellow sticks ( pdb accession 1ESV [ 29 ] ) . a b Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 2123 Figure 3 . Barbed end - targeting macrolides . The chemical structures of representative members of known or inferred barbed end - targeting natural products are shown . 2124 J . S . Allingham , V . A . Klenchin and I . Rayment Actin - targeting natural products ingly , there is virtually no structural similarity between bistramides and other known G - actin - binding toxins . Actin binding mode of barbed end targeting compounds Recent crystallographic studies have determined the structures of representative members of the trisoxazole , reidispongiolide / sphinxolide , aplyronine , swinholide and bistramide classes of cytotoxins in their respective complexes with G - actin ( Fig . 4 ) [ 50 – 55 ] . These studies have provided important details of the molecular interac - tions that confer their high affinity for actin . For each of the trisoxazole and reidispongiolide / sphinxolide com - pounds , this has also allowed assignment of the absolute stereochemical configuration for all stereocenters . In the structures of kabiramide C , jaspisamide A and ulapual - ide , their large hydrophobic ring lies against a large hy - drophobic patch on the surface of actin that leads into the narrow cleft separating subdomains 1 and 3 at the barbed end ( Fig . 5a ) . The ring portion of reidispongiolide A and C , and aplyronine A contacts this hydrophobic patch as well . However , the conformation of their ring appears to be flipped to the opposite face and interacts primarily with subdomain 3 , while the trisoxazoles lie against sub - domain 1 ( Fig . 5b ) . This can be attributed to the opposite stereochemistries of the carbon at the ring - tail junction for these toxin families [ 54 ] . Sphinxolide B displays the same side of its ring to the solvent as reidispongiolide A and C and aplyronine A ( Fig . 5c ) . However , here the replacement of a hydrogen atom at C10 ( R 2 ) with a hydroxyl group and the absence of a methyl group at O19 ( R 3 ) relative to reidispongiolide A and C produce limitations in the conformational free - dom of the ring compared with the other toxins ( Fig . 3 ) . This results in a rotation of the plane of the ring away from the surface of actin in a manner that displaces over half of the ring - actin contact sites [ 53 ] . Loss of these con - tacts would substantially weaken the interaction between the toxin and actin . A reduction in the filament severing and capping activity of sphinxolide B relative to other toxins observed in in vitro studies using purified actin supports this conclusion [ 53 ] . Several aspects of the binding mode of swinholide A on actin are qualitatively similar to the other macrolides [ 52 ] . Here , the macrolide ring adopts a figure eight - like conformation that allows each half of the large ring to interact with the same hydrophobic patch on each actin monomer as the other toxins ( Fig . 4e ) . Interestingly , the Figure 4 . Structures of representative members of the trisoxazole , reidispongiolide / sphinxolide , aplyronine , bistramide and swinholide classes of cytotoxins in their respective complexes with actin . Actin is shown as a ribbon representation . Toxins are shown as ball and sticks . ( a ) Reidispongiolide A ( PDB accession 2ASM [ 53 ] ) . ( b ) Kabiramide C ( PDB accession 1QZ5 [ 50 ] ) . ( c ) Aplyronine A ( PDB accession 1WUA [ 54 ] . ( d ) Bistramide A ( PDB accession 2FXU [ 55 ] ) . ( e ) Swinholide A is shown bound to two actin monomers ( PDB accession 1YXQ [ 52 ] ) . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 2125 conformation of each half of the ring resembles the mir - ror image of the conformation of the reidispongiolide A and C ring , and lies against subdomain 1 ( Fig . 5d ) . The interaction between actin and misakinolide A will likely be quite similar , although the smaller ring size may limit the conformational freedom , such that acquisition of the twisted configuration observed in swinholide A is more difficult [ 52 ] . The strikingly different chemical structure of bistramide A creates a unique actin - binding mode relative to the other barbed end - targeting toxins [ 55 ] . Like the other toxins , bistramide A is situated within the cleft between subdomains 1 and 3 . However , it does not contact the large hydrophobic patch on the surface of actin that leads into this cleft ( Fig . 5e ) . Instead its interaction with actin spans the entire length of the cleft , beyond the termina - tion point of the other toxins’ tails . Its interactions with actin also involve considerably more polar contacts than the other toxins . Based on this collective structural and functional infor - mation , a pharmacophore model of barbed end - targeting toxins can begin to be developed . In toxins containing the large hydrophobic ring , this component serves to maxi - mize contacts with the comparatively large hydrophobic patch on the surface of actin ( Fig . 5 ) . It also provides con - formational constraints that ensure appropriate presenta - tion of key atoms to a discrete patch of residues on this surface . Within this binding surface , amino acid contacts common to each of these classes of toxin include Tyr143 , Ala144 , Gly146 , Ile341 and Ile345 . These contacts are made by a stretch of atoms that branch from analogous sides of the intersection of the ring and tail of all toxins and exist in an extended conformation ( Fig . 6 ) . This re - gion could represent the pharmacophore component of the ring . Also , the conservation of this binding position among the majority of the toxin structures determined thus far indicates that this region on actin is a critical binding determinant for the toxins . It also implies that it is a critical site for axial actin monomer interactions within the filament . The region surrounding this surface appears to be large enough and amenable to a variety of chemical configurations and is thus less likely to be a critical contact surface for filament assembly . Establishment of the observed interactions between the toxin ring and actin also aligns the tail section of the toxins for intercalation into the hydrophobic cleft sepa - rating domains 1 and 3 . In nearly all of the structures of barbed end - targeting macrolides available to date , the conformation and actin interactions of the tail are virtually identical ( Figs . 6 , 7 ) . Common amino acid Figure 5 . Binding modes of toxin ring moieties . ( a ) The actin - binding conformation of reidispongiolide A ( yellow ) and kabiramide C ( magenta ) are shown as an overlay using the actin coordinates from each structure as a reference . Actin is shown as a surface representation in white . ( b ) Reidispongiolide A ( yellow ) and aplyronine A ( purple ) . ( c ) Reidispongiolide A ( yellow ) and sphinxolide B ( teal ) . ( d ) Reidis - pongiolide A ( yellow ) and half of the dimeric lactone of swinholide A ( green ) . ( e ) Reidispongiolide A ( yellow ) and bistramide A ( blue ) . 2126 J . S . Allingham , V . A . Klenchin and I . Rayment Actin - targeting natural products residue interactions between the tails of the trisoxazole , reidispongiolide / sphinxolide and aplyronine toxins in - clude Tyr133 , Val139 , Tyr143 , Gly146 , Arg147 , Thr148 , Gly168 , Tyr169 , Thr351 and Met355 . For most family members of these toxins , there are also hydrogen - bond - ing interactions that occur between the highly conserved N - methyl - vinylformamide ( MVF ) moiety located at the end of the tail and two water molecules that are co - or - dinated by the backbone amide hydrogens of Ile136 and Ala170 ( Fig . 7a ) . Importantly , crystal structures of toxins lacking the MVF component , such as reidispongiolide C , or toxins whose tail contains side groups that interfere with this interaction , such as ulapualide , have a highly disordered tail terminus [ 51 , 53 ] . They also display dra - matically reduced filament severing and capping potency [ 53 ] . Although analyses of the cytotoxicity and in vitro actin - depolymerizing effects of synthetic analogues of aplyronine A lacking the MVF showed partial recovery of activity when it was replaced by a different hydrophilic group , the level of activity was nevertheless significantly low relative to the natural form [ 56 , 57 ] . Taken together , this would suggest that the MVF moiety makes a signifi - cant contribution toward stabilizing the intercalation of the tail deep within the barbed end cleft . Thus , along with the backbone of the rest of the tail , this moiety makes up the remainder of the pharmacophore of these toxins ( Fig . 6 ) . All known forms of swinholide , misakinolide , lobopho - rolide and bistramide lack the MVF group . However , nu - merous atoms within the tail segments of swinholide A , and a large portion of the atoms in bistramide A , occupy the same space and interact with a number of the same residues within the cleft of actin as the tail of the other toxins [ 55 ] . In the case of swinholide A , the terminal py - Figure 6 . Pharmacophore model of barbed end - targeting toxins . The chemical structures of reidispongiolide / sphinxolide , trisoxazole , aply - ronine A , swinholide A and bistramide A toxins are shown . Atoms covered by dots interact with the same residues on actin or overlap within van der Waals radii for all toxin families . Atoms covered by boxes on bistramide A spatially overlap with the water molecules coordinated to the N - methyl - vinylformamide ( MVF ) moieties of the reidispongiolide / sphinxolide , trisoxazole , aplyronine A toxins ( dashed boxes ) . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 2127 rone ring of their side chains may provide compensatory hydrophobic binding strength to stabilize their interaction with actin ( Fig . 7b ) [ 52 ] . Verification of this hypothesis will require direct comparisons of the capping and sever - ing activities of these toxins to synthetic analogues lack - ing the pyrone ring , and to monomeric toxins containing the MVF group . For bistramide A , superposition of its structural coordinates onto those of reidispongiolide A re - veal that the central hydroxyl and carbonyl groups occupy the same spatial position as the bridging water molecules found to interact with the MVF group of trisoxazoles , reidispongiolides , sphinxolides and aplyronines ( Fig . 6 ) . Furthermore , like their water counterparts , these groups also make direct hydrogen - bonding interactions with Ile136 and Ala170 of actin ( Fig . 7c ) . This re - emphasizes the functional importance of formation of these specific polar interactions for toxin binding . Considerations of the structure - activity relationship of toxin side groups other than the tail itself have not been characterized in detail either structurally or functionally for any of the barbed end - targeting toxins , with the ex - ception of aplyronine . Comparisons of the cytotoxicity and actin depolymerization activity of natural and syn - thetic aplyronine analogues have produced a number of interesting observations about the various chemical mod - ifications of these compounds [ 56 , 57 ] . In particular , loss of the conjugated diene and trimethylserine components of the macrolide ring ( Fig . 6 ) , and the dimethylalanine on the tail , correlated with a dramatic reduction in cyto - toxicity against HeLa S 3 cells . Conversely , the absence of the amino acid esters had little effect , and loss of the conjugated diene only had a moderate effect on actin depolymerization measurements by flow birefringence , relative to their cytotoxicity . A possible explanation for this discrepancy is that within a cellular environment these components facilitate uptake and retention within the cell . Alternatively , they may prevent compartmental - ization and / or metabolism to less active forms . Another possibility is that the amino acid additions , in particu - lar , may disrupt the function of proteins other than actin , since they do not contribute significantly to the primary actin - binding surface of the toxin , as evidenced in the crystal structure . The fact that there was a moderate re - duction in actin depolymerization of analogues lacking the conjugated diene ( 44 % of aplyronine A ) is undoubt - edly related to the functional importance of this part of the ring , as previously described . This chemical form not only exists in aplyronines , but is also found in reidispon - giolides , sphinxolides , swinholides , scytophycins and lo - bophorolide ( Fig . 3 ) . In each of these compounds , its pur - pose may be to reduce the conformational freedom of the ring and to facilitate the appropriate interaction with the hydrophobic surface on actin . Its absence in trisoxazole macrolides can be accounted for by the presence of the trisoxazole component on the opposite side of the ring , which provides compensatory ring rigidity . Mechanism of filament - destabilization of barbed end - targeting compounds While latrunculins bind within the ATP - binding pocket , barbed end toxins mainly interact at the surface of ac - tin and are solvent exposed ( Figs . 2b , 4 , 5 ) . Therefore , although it is possible that the effect of both classes of toxins on actin is allosteric , it seems more likely that the mechanism of action of the latter group involves the cre - ation of steric clashes between axial actin monomers in the filament ( Fig . 1b ) [ 50 , 53 , 58 ] . Although the atomic details of actin - actin interactions within the filament are not entirely established , an examination of the Tirion et al . [ 59 ] model of F - actin derived from X - ray fiber diffraction Figure 7 . Binding modes of toxin tail moieties . ( a ) The tail conformations of reidispongiolide A ( yellow ) and kabiramide C ( magenta ) are shown within the cleft separating domains 1 and 3 of actin . Hydrogen - bonding interactions between the terminal MVF moiety and waters bridging actin residues Ile136 and Ala170 are shown . ( b ) The tail conformation of swinholide ( green ) is shown . ( c ) The tail conformation of reidispongiolide A ( yellow ) and C13 to C39 of bistramide A . Hydrogen - bonding interactions between the terminal MVF of reidispon - giolide A and waters bridging actin residues Ile136 and Ala170 are shown as are the hydrogen - bonding interactions of the C13 carbonyl oxygen and C15 hydroxyl of bistramide A . 2128 J . S . Allingham , V . A . Klenchin and I . Rayment Actin - targeting natural products studies indicates that the position of bound toxin creates a steric clash between a stretch of hydrophobic residues found in the DNase I - binding loop of the ‘lower’ actin monomer and the hydrophobic cleft separating domains 1 and 3 of the axial ‘upper’ monomer ( Fig . 8 ) [ 50 , 59 , 60 ] . If this model is correct , a conformational change in - volving a loop - to - helix transition in the DNase I - binding loop observed upon conversion from the ATP - to ADP - bound state actin would provide an elegant explanation for the higher critical concentration for polymerization of MgADP - actin [ 25 , 61 ] . Furthermore , the toxin - binding site is also targeted by a number of actin - binding proteins , such as gelsolin , CapG and profilin , which sequester and sever actin , respectively , demonstrating the importance of accessibility of this site for intermonomer contacts [ 58 , 62 – 64 ] . All of the barbed end - targeting toxins described above possess actin monomer - sequestering abilities . Not all of them , however , possess the ability to sever actin filaments [ 53 , 65 , 66 ] . The primary reason for this discrepancy is probably related to differences in the binding affinity of the particular toxin for actin due to its chemical structure . As outlined above , the capacity to sever is likely related to the ability of the toxin to compete with the DNase I - binding loop once the intermonomer interaction has been formed . To do this , it has been proposed that , in ring - con - taining toxins , the ring makes an initial interaction with the hydrophobic patch on the side of actin , which is predicted to be exposed in the filament [ 50 , 58 ] . This in turn ori - ents and directs the long flexible tail into the cleft between subdomains 1 and 3 where hydrophobic contacts and , in the case of MVF - containing toxins , hydrogen bonds are formed , simultaneously displacing the DNase I - binding loop from the upper monomer ( Fig . 8 ) . Disruption of ac - tin monomer contacts by what is , comparatively speaking , such a small molecule indicates that the interaction be - tween axial monomers in the filament is relatively weak . Because filament integrity is largely dependent upon co - operativity , involving actin monomer interactions within and between filament strands , disruption of axial contacts in one filament strand would be sufficient to cause com - plete filament severing . Once this occurs , the toxin would prevent both monomer addition and dissociation by re - maining attached to its actin - binding site , thereby capping the newly formed barbed end [ 53 , 58 ] . With the markedly different overall chemical structure of swinholide A and misakinolide B , one might presuppose an alternate mechanism of filament disruption relative to monomeric barbed end - targeting macrolides ( Fig . 3 ) [ 52 , 65 , 66 ] . However , because their binding mode on actin bears such remarkable similarity to monomeric macro - lides ( Figs . 5d , 7b ) , their mode of filament disruption is undoubtedly the same . What remains to be determined is how bistramide A , which lacks the discrete ring and tail components common to the other toxins , promotes F - actin depolymerization . Structurally uncharacterized filament - destabilizing compounds The current actin toxin structures may provide a model for the interactions of other toxins , like scytophycins and lobophorolide , with actin as well as their mechanism of filament - destabilization ( Fig . 3 ) [ 45 , 46 , 67 ] . Although attempts to map the binding site of tolytoxin , a member of the scytophycin family , indicated that a region near the nucleotide - binding cleft on the back face of subdomains 2 and 4 was a likely site of contact , its ring resembles part of the monomeric unit of swinholide A [ 68 ] . Fur - thermore , its tail is remarkably similar to the trisoxazole , reidispongiolide / sphinxolide and aplyronine macrolides , terminating with an MVF moiety . Therefore , the binding mode and mechanism of filament - destabilization of this class of compound is undoubtedly the same . Pectenotoxins are given separate mention from the other filament - destabilizing cytotoxins due to the unusual na - ture of their chemical structures ( Fig . 9 ) . Pectenotoxins Figure 8 . Proposed mechanism of filament - destabilization by barbed end - targeting macrolides . A surface representation of the structure of three monomers within the structural model for F - actin is shown with kabiramide C superimposed onto the barbed end of one actin monomer . The model shows the steric clash cre - ated between the DNase I - binding loop ( D - loop ) of the lower actin monomer and the bound toxin on the upper monomer , leading to displacement of the DNase I - binding loop from the cleft separating subdomains 1 and 3 of the upper monomer . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 2129 represent a family of cyclic polyether macrolides pro - duced by dinoflagellates such as Dinophysis fortii [ 69 , 70 ] . They have also been found in the digestive glands of the toxic shellfish Patinopecten yessoensis , Perna canalicus , and D . acuta , where they are converted to other pectenotoxin chemical forms [ 71 – 73 ] . It has been reported that pectenotoxin - 2 does not exhibit actin fila - ment severing or capping activity , but only sequesters monomeric actin [ 8 , 74 ] . Such activity is also reported for pectenotoxin - 6 , a derivative of pectenotoxin - 2 [ 70 ] . Al - though pectenotoxins are structurally quite distinct from the other compounds that contain both ring and tail moi - eties , they contain a number of chemical features similar to those of bistramides . They are therefore likely to bind within the cleft separating actin subdomains 1 and 3 as well . What will be interesting is to see how their interac - tion with actin compares with the other actin - destabiliz - ing compounds . Filament - forming / stabilizing compounds Natural compounds that stabilize actin filaments represent a separate class of cytotoxins that have been extremely useful as tools to understand actin filament assembly and organization , as well as actin - mediated cellular functions . As with the filament - destabilizing cytotoxins , elucida - tion of the molecular interactions made between these compounds and actin is important for understanding their mechanism of action as well as the structural prop - erties of actin filaments . However , actin polymerization in the presence of these compounds makes crystallization impossible and thus the primary sources of information about the interaction of these toxins with actin have been derived from X - ray fiber diffraction data , electron mi - croscopy and biochemical analyses [ 75 – 78 ] . The most common chemical feature of these cytotoxins is the cyclic depsipeptide , which is a polymeric compound containing both amino acids and hydroxy acids joined by peptide and ester bonds , respectively . Representative members of six different families of these compounds are shown in Figure 10 . The best - known actin filament stabilizing compound is phalloidin , a phallotoxin synthe - sized by the poisonous ‘Death Cap’ mushroom Amanita phalloides [ 79 , 80 ] . Its chemical structure consists of a bicyclic heptapeptide that contains several uncommon amino acids [ 9 ] . The ring containing Cys3 - Pro ( OH ) 4 - Ala5 - Trp6 is essential for the cytotoxicity of the com - pound [ 76 , 81 ] . Jasplakinolide is another actin filament stabilizer , as well as a potent inducer of actin polymerization , that is synthesized by the marine sponge Jaspis johnstoni [ 82 ] . Functionally , this cyclic depsipeptide behaves like phal - loidin and even competes with its binding site . However , its structure is significantly different and it is membrane permeable , unlike phalloidin [ 82 , 83 ] . Jasplakinolide contains a single 19 - membered macrocyclic ring with branching aromatic side chains in the form of uncom - mon amino acids N - methyl - 2 - ( bromo ) - L - tryptophan and β - tyrosine , as well as L - alanine [ 8 , 84 , 85 ] . The L - tryp - tophan derivative is particularly important for actin bind - ing in jasplakinolide , as is its analogue in phalloidin [ 82 ] . Jasplakinolide is closely related to the geodiamolide and neosiphoniamolide families of cytotoxins [ 86 , 87 ] . Chrondramides are 18 - membered cyclic depsipeptides from the myxobacterium Chondromyces crocatus and are remarkably similar in structure to jasplakinolide [ 88 , 89 ] . These compounds also compete with phalloidin for actin binding [ 90 , 91 ] . The dolastatin family of cytotoxins , isolated from the Indian Ocean sea hare Dolabella auricularia , are gain - ing recognition as useful F - actin stabilizers and potential anti - cancer agents [ 92 ] . Congeners of these compounds include both linear and cyclic forms . Studies of dolas - tatin - 11 in particular , a 30 - membered cyclic depsipeptide , indicate that its in vitro and cellular effects are similar but more potent than those of jasplakinolide and phalloidin , although it does not compete with phalloidin for actin - binding [ 93 ] . Doliculide is a 16 - membered cyclic depsipeptide with a D - tyrosine derivative that is also isolated from D . auricu - laria , but in animals found off the coast of Japan [ 94 , 95 ] . Biochemical studies on the ( – ) - doliculide isoform indi - cate its activity is identical to that of jasplakinolide and that it competitively inhibits phalloidin binding [ 96 ] . Finally , amphidinolides represent a unique group of cy - totoxic compounds in that their interaction with actin , at least for amphidinolide H , involves formation of a resi - due - specific covalent bond [ 78 ] . Isolated from Amphi - dinium sp . dinoflagellates that live off the coasts of Japan and the U . S . Virgin Islands , these potent 26 - membered macrolides display unique structural features including an allyl epoxide [ 97 ] . Studies by Kobayashi and col - leagues have determined that the allyl epoxide , S - cis - di - ene moiety , and the ketone at C20 are important for the cytotoxicity of this compound [ 98 ] . One of the few examples of a non - depsipeptide that stabi - lizes actin filaments is the hectochlorin family of cytotox - ins ( Fig . 10 ) . Compounds in this family come in the form Figure 9 . Chemical structure of pectenotoxin - 2 . 2130 J . S . Allingham , V . A . Klenchin and I . Rayment Actin - targeting natural products of cyclic lipopeptides isolated from the cyanobacterium , Lyngbya majuscula , and have been demonstrated to be quantitatively identical to jasplakinolide in their ability to promote actin polymerization [ 99 ] . However , like dol - astatin , hectochlorins do not compete with phalloidin for F - actin binding . Toxins bearing structural resemblance to hectochlorins include the lyngbyabellin class of natural products [ 100 , 101 ] . Actin - binding mode The phalloidin - binding site on actin has been character - ized by microscopic and X - ray fiber diffraction methods and appears to interact with three actin monomers simul - taneously via three different binding sites ( Fig . 11 ) [ 75 – 77 ] . In particular , contacts between the weakly interacting two long - pitch strands of the filament appear to be stabi - lized by phalloidin binding between the loop containing residues 198 – 201 of the lower actin subunit , and the loop of residues 73 – 75 and residue 179 of the diagonal subunit of actin [ 76 ] . Similarly , the binding site of dolastatin 11 has also been derived from X - ray fiber diffraction of actin filaments and , like phalloidin , appears to enhance fila - ment stability by bridging the two long - pitch strands be - tween subdomain 4 of one actin subunit and subdomain 1 of the diagonal subunit ( Fig . 11 ) [ 102 ] . However , these studies demonstrated that within the filament , dolastatin 11 occupies a position that is clearly different from that of phalloidin . This is in agreement with the observation that this cytotoxin is incapable of displacing the phalloidin fluorescent derivative from actin polymers [ 93 ] . Identification of the binding site of amphidinolide H within the filament has been made possible by determin - ing the site of the covalent interaction formed between this compound and actin [ 78 ] . Formation of this inter - action seems to occur between the epoxide and Tyr198 ( Tyr200 in mammalian actin ) on subdomain 4 of actin ( Fig . 11 ) , such that only one toxin molecule is bound per actin monomer [ 78 ] . Because the site of covalent attach - Figure 10 . Filament - stabilizing macrolides . The chemical structures of representative members of known or inferred filament - stabilizing natural products are shown . Dots show the predicted pharmacophore of actin - stabilizing toxins based on shape matched alignment studies of phalloidin , jasplakinolide , dolastatin and ( – ) - doliculide [ 96 ] . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 2131 ment of amphidinolide H is near the actin - actin contact between subdomain 4 of one subunit and subdomain 1 of the diagonally located subunit in F - actin , this suggests that this compound acts in a manner similar to phalloidin , jasplakinolide and dolastatin . Based on the similar effects of phalloidin , jasplakinolide , dolastatin and doliculide on actin filament stabilization [ 82 , 90 , 93 , 96 , 103 , 104 ] , as well as their apparent in - teractions with a similar region of the actin filament , shape - matched alignment studies have recently been employed to identify a common pharmacophore within these diverse compounds [ 96 ] . This work concluded that a segment of the macrolide ring spanning from the benzyl group to the isopropyl side chain of ( – ) - doliculide over - lapped significantly with analogous sections of the other filament - stabilizing macrolides . This segment was there - fore considered the core pharmacophore component of these compounds ( Fig . 10 ) . Mechanism of filament stabilization A vast amount of structural , biochemical and theoreti - cal analysis has been devoted to understanding the nature of monomer - monomer interactions during nucleation , filament elongation , and propagation of conformational changes through F - actin [ 105 – 108 ] . A key finding of these studies is that , as with many polymeric macromol - ecules , actin filaments rely on structural co - operativity for their assembly and stability . Based on their binding site and biochemical effects on polymeric actin , filament - stabilizing cytotoxins appear to take advantage of this co - operativity by binding to several actin monomers simulta - neously ( Fig . 11 ) . Furthermore , under substoichiometric concentrations , their effects of stabilizing discrete loca - tions of the filament are propagated through large dis - tances via co - operativity within the filament [ 108 – 110 ] . Like the filament - destabilizing toxins , the affinity of these toxins for actin is determined by a subset of key structural features . All actin - stabilizing toxins consist of a ring component that limits the conformational flex - ibility of the compound . They also contain specific side groups whose configurations are undoubtedly important for molecular interactions with discrete actin residues . The necessity of these interactions re - emphasizes the in - dispensability of the ring , as its defined shape ensures appropriate presentation of these functional groups to the toxin - binding surface on actin . Part of what remains to be learned about this class of complex and fascinating molecules are the details of their molecular interactions with actin , as well as their allosteric effects on filament structure . Deciphering these key elements will require higher - resolution structural studies than those obtained by fiber diffraction . Conclusions The technological potential of natural product pharmacol - ogy is vast . Realization of this potential is considerably facilitated by understanding how these chemically diverse natural products interact with their biological targets and the specific molecular surfaces involved . X - ray crystal - lography , in combination with biochemical studies , has provided a powerful means of revealing this information . By characterizing the functional importance of both con - served and variable regions within these cytotoxic com - pounds , the structural themes that determine their bioactiv - ity begin to emerge . This provides a useful framework from which synthetic chemistry can be used to create analogues with tailored chemical features to improve specificity and targeting toward malignant cells . This also reduces the ne - cessity for chemical prospecting in delicate terrestrial and marine ecosystems that produce these rare compounds , providing much needed protection of biodiversity . Figure 11 . Binding locations of actin filament - stabilizing macro - lides . Three monomers of G - actin are shown associating as in their F - actin form . The phalloidin - ( red spheres ) binding site within the filament shows it to interact with three actin monomers simultane - ously [ 76 ] . Dolastatin 11 ( yellow spheres ) binds between subdo - main 4 of one actin subunit and subdomain 1 of the diagonal sub - unit [ 102 ] . Amphidinolide H is not shown , although its interaction with actin is known to involve formation of a covalent bond with Tyr198 ( blue sticks ) [ 78 ] . 2132 J . S . Allingham , V . A . Klenchin and I . Rayment Actin - targeting natural products Acknowledgements . This work was supported by a fellowship to JSA from the Canadian Insitutes of Health Research ( 64606 ) and a re - search grant to IR from the National Institutes of Health ( AR35186 ) . 1 Schmidt , A . and Hall , M . N . ( 1998 ) Signaling to the actin cy - toskeleton . Annu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 14 , 305 – 338 . 2 Luna , E . J . and Hitt , A . L . ( 1992 ) Cytoskeleton - plasma mem - brane interactions . Science 258 , 955 – 964 . 3 Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) Reflections on a quarter century of research on contractile systems . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 607 – 611 . 4 Sheterline , P . , Clayton , J . and Sparrow , J . C . ( 1998 ) Actin . Ox - ford University Press , New York . 5 Pantaloni , D . , Le Clainche , C . and Carlier , M . F . ( 2001 ) Mech - anism of actin - based motility . Science 292 , 1502 – 1506 . 6 Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . , Vignal , E . and Rottner , K . ( 2002 ) The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell . Biol . 12 , 112 – 120 . 7 Pollard , T . D . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . 8 Spector , I . , Braet , F . , Shochet , N . R . and Bubb , M . R . ( 1999 ) New anti - actin drugs in the study of the organization and func - tion of the actin cytoskeleton . Microsc . Res . Tech . 47 , 18 – 37 . 9 Giganti , A . and Friederich , E . ( 2003 ) The actin cytoskeleton as a therapeutic target : state of the art and future directions . Prog . Cell Cycle Res . 5 , 511 – 525 . 10 Fenteany , G . and Zhu , S . ( 2003 ) Small - molecule inhibitors of actin dynamics and cell motility . Curr . Top . Med . Chem . 3 , 593 – 616 . 11 Jordan , M . A . and Wilson , L . ( 1998 ) Microtubules and actin filaments : dynamic targets for cancer chemotherapy . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 123 – 130 . 12 Janmey , P . A . and Chaponnier , C . ( 1995 ) Medical aspects of the actin cytoskeleton . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 111 – 117 . 13 Weed , S . A . and Parsons , J . T . ( 2001 ) Cortactin : coupling membrane dynamics to cortical actin assembly . Oncogene 20 , 6418 – 6434 . 14 Button , E . , Shapland , C . and Lawson , D . ( 1995 ) Actin , its as - sociated proteins and metastasis . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 30 , 247 – 251 . 15 Lambrechts , A . , Van Troys , M . and Ampe , C . ( 2004 ) The ac - tin cytoskeleton in normal and pathological cell motility . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 36 , 1890 – 1909 . 16 Pawlak , G . and Helfman , D . M . ( 2001 ) Cytoskeletal changes in cell transformation and tumorigenesis . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 11 , 41 – 47 . 17 Rao , J . and Li , N . ( 2004 ) Microfilament actin remodeling as a potential target for cancer drug development . Curr . Cancer Drug Targets 4 , 345 – 354 . 18 Hayot , C . , Debeir , O . , Van Ham , P . , Van Damme , M . , Kiss , R . and Decaestecker , C . ( 2006 ) Characterization of the activi - ties of actin - affecting drugs on tumor cell migration . Toxicol . Appl . Pharmacol . 211 , 30 – 40 . 19 Wittekind , C . and Neid , M . ( 2005 ) Cancer invasion and metas - tasis . Oncology 69 Suppl . 1 , 14 – 16 . 20 Harlozinska , A . ( 2005 ) Progress in molecular mechanisms of tumor metastasis and angiogenesis . Anticancer Res . 25 , 3327 – 3333 . 21 Cherrington , J . M . , Strawn , L . M . and Shawver , L . K . ( 2000 ) New paradigms for the treatment of cancer : the role of anti - angiogenesis agents . Adv . Cancer Res . 79 , 1 – 38 . 22 Jordan , A . , Hadfield , J . A . , Lawrence , N . J . and McGown , A . T . ( 1998 ) Tubulin as a target for anticancer drugs : agents which interact with the mitotic spindle . Med . Res . Rev . 18 , 259 – 296 . 23 Shi , Q . , Chen , K . , Morris - Natschke , S . L . and Lee , K . H . ( 1998 ) Recent progress in the development of tubulin in - hibitors as antimitotic antitumor agents . Curr . Pharm . Des . 4 , 219 – 248 . 24 Stehn , J . R . , Schevzov , G . , O’Neill , G . M . and Gunning , P . W . ( 2006 ) Specialisation of the tropomyosin composition of ac - tin filaments provides new potential targets for chemotherapy . Curr . Cancer Drug Targets 6 , 245 – 256 . 25 Otterbein , L . R . , Graceffa , P . and Dominguez , R . ( 2001 ) The crystal structure of uncomplexed actin in the ADP state . Sci - ence 293 , 708 – 711 . 26 Yeung , K . S . and Paterson , I . ( 2002 ) Actin - binding marine macrolides : total synthesis and biological importance . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 41 , 4632 – 4653 . 27 Spector , I . , Shochet , N . R . , Kashman , Y . and Groweiss , A . ( 1983 ) Latrunculins : novel marine toxins that disrupt micro - filament organization in cultured cells . Science 219 , 493 – 495 . 28 Coue , M . , Brenner , S . L . , Spector , I . and Korn , E . D . ( 1987 ) Inhibition of actin polymerization by latrunculin A . FEBS Lett . 213 , 316 – 318 . 29 Morton , W . M . , Ayscough , K . R . and McLaughlin , P . J . ( 2000 ) Latrunculin alters the actin - monomer subunit interface to pre - vent polymerization . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 376 – 378 . 30 Bubb , M . R . , Govindasamy , L . , Yarmola , E . G . , Vorobiev , S . M . , Almo , S . C . , Somasundaram , T . , Chapman , M . S . , Ag - bandje - McKenna , M . and McKenna , R . ( 2002 ) Polylysine induces an antiparallel actin dimer that nucleates filament as - sembly : crystal structure at 3 . 5 - Å resolution . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 20999 – 21006 . 31 Vilozny , B . , Amagata , T . , Mooberry , S . L . and Crews , P . ( 2004 ) A new dimension to the biosynthetic products iso - lated from the sponge Negombata magnifica . J . Nat . Prod . 67 , 1055 – 1057 . 32 Spector , I . , Shochet , N . R . , Kashman , Y . and Blasberger , D . ( 1986 ) Structure - activity study of latrunculin effects on mi - crofilament organization . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 393a . 33 Spector , I . , Shochet , N . R . , Blasberger , D . and Kashman , Y . ( 1989 ) Latrunculins – novel marine macrolides that disrupt microfilament organization and affect cell growth . I . Compar - ison with cytochalasin , D . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 13 , 127 – 144 . 34 Ayscough , K . R . , Stryker , J . , Pokala , N . , Sanders , M . , Crews , P . and Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) High rates of actin filament turn - over in budding yeast and roles for actin in establishment and maintenance of cell polarity revealed using the actin inhibitor latrunculin - A . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 399 – 416 . 35 Roesener , J . A . and Scheuer , P . J . ( 1986 ) Ulapualide A and B , extraordinary antitumor macrolides from nudibranch egg - masses . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 108 , 846 – 847 . 36 Matsunaga , S . , Fusetani , N . , Hashimoto , K . , Koseki , K . , Noma , M . , Noguchi , H . and Sankawa , U . ( 1989 ) Further kabi - ramides and halichondramides , cytotoxic macrolides embrac - ing trisoxazole , from the Hexabranchus egg masses . J . Org . Chem . 54 , 1360 – 1363 . 37 Kernan , M . R . and Faulkner , J . D . ( 1987 ) Halichondramide , an antifungal macrolide from the sponge Halichondria sp . Tetra - hedron Lett . 28 , 2809 – 2812 . 38 Zhang , X . , Minale , L . , Zampella , A . and Smith , C . D . ( 1997 ) Microfilament depletion and circumvention of multiple drug resistance by sphinxolides . Cancer Res . 57 , 3751 – 3758 . 39 D’Auria , M . V . , Paloma , L . G . , Minale , L . , Zampella , A . , Ver - bist , J . F . , Roussakis , C . and Debitus , C . ( 1993 ) Three new po - tent cytotoxic macrolides closely related to sphinxolide from the New Caledonian sponge Neosiphonia superstes . Tetrahe - dron 49 , 8657 – 8664 . 40 D’Auria , M . V . , Paloma , L . G . , Minale , L . , Zampella , A . , Ver - bist , J . F . , Roussakis , C . , Debitus , C . and Patissou , J . ( 1994 ) Reidispongiolide A and B , two new potent cytotoxic macro - lides from the New Caledonian sponge Reidispongia coeru - lea . Tetrahedron 50 , 4829 – 4834 . 41 Yamada , K . , Ojika , M . , Ishigaki , T . , Yoshida , Y . , Ekimoto , H . and Arakawa , M . ( 1993 ) Aplyronine - A , a potent antitumor substance , and the congeners aplyronine - B and aplyronine - C Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 2133 isolated from the sea hare Aplysia kurodai . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 115 , 11020 – 11021 . 42 Kobayashi , M . , Tanaka , J . , Katori , T . and Kitagawa , I . ( 1990 ) Marine natural products . XXIII . Three new cytotoxic dimeric macrolides , swinholides B and C and isoswinholide A , conge - ners of swinholide A , from the Okinawan marine sponge The - onella swinhoei . Chem . Pharm . Bull ( Tokyo ) 38 , 2960 – 2966 . 43 Kato , Y . , Fusetani , N . , Matsunaga , S . , Hashimoto , K . , Sakai , R . , Higa , T . and Kashman , Y . ( 1987 ) Antitumor macrodiolides isolated from a marine sponge Theonella sp : structure revision of misakinolide A . Tetrahedron Lett . 28 , 6225 – 6228 . 44 Tanaka , J . , Higa , T . , Kobayashi , M . and Kitagawa , I . ( 1990 ) Marine natural products . 24 . The absolute stereostructure of misakinolide - A , a potent cytotoxic dimeric macrolide from an Okinawan marine sponge Theonella sp . Chem . Pharm . Bull ( Tokyo ) 38 , 2967 – 2970 . 45 Smith , C . D . , Carmeli , S . , Moore , R . E . and Patterson , G . M . ( 1993 ) Scytophycins , novel microfilament - depolymerizing agents which circumvent P - glycoprotein - mediated multidrug resistance . Cancer Res . 53 , 1343 – 1347 . 46 Kubanek , J . , Jensen , P . R . , Keifer , P . A . , Sullards , M . C . , Col - lins , D . O . and Fenical , W . ( 2003 ) Seaweed resistance to mi - crobial attack : a targeted chemical defense against marine fungi . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 6916 – 6921 . 47 Gouiffes , D . , Juge , M . , Grimaud , N . , Welin , L . , Sauviat , M . P . , Barbin , Y . , Laurent , D . , Roussakis , C . , Henichart , J . P . and Ver - bist , J . F . ( 1988 ) Bistramide A , a new toxin from the urochor - data Lissoclinum bistratum Sluiter : isolation and preliminary characterization . Toxicon 26 , 1129 – 1136 . 48 Biard , J . F . , Roussakis , C . , Kornprobst , J . M . , Gouiffes - Barbin , D . , Verbist , J . F . , Cotelle , P . , Foster , M . P . , Ireland , C . M . and Debitus , C . ( 1994 ) Bistramides A , B , C , D , and K : a new class of bioactive cyclic polyethers from Lissoclinum bistratum . J . Nat . Prod . 57 , 1336 – 1345 . 49 Statsuk , A . V . , Bai , R . , Baryza , J . L . , Verma , V . A . , Hamel , E . , Wender , P . A . and Kozmin , S . A . ( 2005 ) Actin is the primary cellular receptor of bistramide , A . Nat . Chem . Biol . 1 , 383 – 388 . 50 Klenchin , V . A . , Allingham , J . S . , King , R . , Tanaka , J . , Mar - riott , G . and Rayment , I . ( 2003 ) Trisoxazole macrolide tox - ins mimic the binding of actin - capping proteins to actin . Nat . Struct . Biol . 10 , 1058 – 1063 . 51 Allingham , J . S . , Tanaka , J . , Marriott , G . and Rayment , I . ( 2004 ) Absolute stereochemistry of ulapualide A . Org . Lett . 6 , 597 – 599 . 52 Klenchin , V . A . , King , R . , Tanaka , J . , Marriott , G . and Ray - ment , I . ( 2005 ) Structural basis of swinholide A binding to actin . Chem . Biol . 12 , 287 – 291 . 53 Allingham , J . S . , Zampella , A . , D’Auria , M . V . and Rayment , I . ( 2005 ) Structures of microfilament - destabilizing toxins bound to actin provide insight into toxin design and activity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 14527 – 14532 . 54 Hirata , K . , Muraoka , S . , Suenaga , K . , Kuroda , T . , Kato , K . , Tanaka , H . , Yamamoto , M . , Takata , M . , Yamada , K . and Ki - goshi , H . ( 2006 ) Structure basis for antitumor effect of aply - ronine A . J . Mol . Biol . 356 , 945 – 954 . 55 Rizvi , S . A . , Tereshko , V . , Kossiakoff , A . A . and Kozmin , S . A . ( 2006 ) Structure of bistramide A - actin complex at a 1 . 35 Å resolution . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 128 , 3882 – 3883 . 56 Suenaga , K . , Kamei , N . , Okugawa , Y . , Takagi , M . , Akao , A . and Kigoshi , H . ( 1997 ) Cytotoxicity and actin depolymeriz - ing activity of aplyronine A , a potent antitumor macrolide of marine origin , and the natural and artificial analogs . Bioorg . Med . Chem . Lett . 7 , 269 – 274 . 57 Kigoshi , H . , Suenaga , K . , Takagi , M . , Akao , A . , Kanematsu , K . , Kamei , N . , Okugawa , Y . and Yamada , K . ( 2002 ) Cyto - toxicity and actin - depolymerizing activity of aplyronine A , a potent antitumor macrolide of marine origin , and its analogs . Tetrahedron 58 , 1075 – 1102 . 58 Tanaka , J . , Yan , Y . , Choi , J . , Bai , J . , Klenchin , V . A . , Rayment , I . and Marriott , G . ( 2003 ) Biomolecular mimicry in the ac - tin cytoskeleton : mechanisms underlying the cytotoxicity of kabiramide C and related macrolides . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 13851 – 13856 . 59 Tirion , M . M . , Ben - Avraham , D . , Lorenz , M . and Holmes , K . C . ( 1995 ) Normal modes as refinement parameters for the F - actin model . Biophys . J . 68 , 5 – 12 . 60 Holmes , K . C . , Popp , D . , Gebhard , W . and Kabsch , W . ( 1990 ) Atomic model of the actin filament . Nature 347 , 44 – 49 . 61 Graceffa , P . and Dominguez , R . ( 2003 ) Crystal structure of mo - nomeric actin in the ATP state : structural basis of nucleotide - dependent actin dynamics . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 34172 – 34180 . 62 McLaughlin , P . J . , Gooch , J . T . , Mannherz , H . G . and Weeds , A . G . ( 1993 ) Structure of gelsolin segment 1 - actin complex and the mechanism of filament severing . Nature 364 , 685 – 692 . 63 Dawson , J . F . , Sablin , E . P . , Spudich , J . A . and Fletterick , R . J . ( 2003 ) Structure of an F - actin trimer disrupted by gelsolin and implications for the mechanism of severing . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 1229 – 1238 . 64 Schutt , C . E . , Myslik , J . C . , Rozycki , M . D . , Goonesekere , N . C . and Lindberg , U . ( 1993 ) The structure of crystalline profilin - beta - actin . Nature 365 , 810 – 816 . 65 Terry , D . R . , Spector , I . , Higa , T . and Bubb , M . R . ( 1997 ) Mi - sakinolide A is a marine macrolide that caps but does not sever filamentous actin . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 7841 – 7845 . 66 Bubb , M . R . , Spector , I . , Bershadsky , A . D . and Korn , E . D . ( 1995 ) Swinholide A is a microfilament disrupting marine toxin that stabilizes actin dimers and severs actin filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 3463 – 3466 . 67 Patterson , G . M . , Smith , C . D . , Kimura , L . H . , Britton , B . A . and Carmeli , S . ( 1993 ) Action of tolytoxin on cell morphol - ogy , cytoskeletal organization , and actin polymerization . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 24 , 39 – 48 . 68 Belmont , L . D . , Patterson , G . M . and Drubin , D . G . ( 1999 ) New actin mutants allow further characterization of the nu - cleotide binding cleft and drug binding sites . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1325 – 1336 . 69 Draisci , R . , Lucentini , L . , Giannetti , L . , Boria , P . and Poletti , R . ( 1996 ) First report of pectenotoxin - 2 ( PTX - 2 ) in algae ( Dinophysis fortii ) related to seafood poisoning in Europe . Toxicon 34 , 923 – 935 . 70 Leira , F . , Cabado , A . G . , Vieytes , M . R . , Roman , Y . , Alfonso , A . , Botana , L . M . , Yasumoto , T . , Malaguti , C . and Rossini , G . P . ( 2002 ) Characterization of F - actin depolymerization as a major toxic event induced by pectenotoxin - 6 in neuroblas - toma cells . Biochem . Pharmacol . 63 , 1979 – 1988 . 71 Suzuki , T . , Mitsuya , T . , Matsubara , H . and Yamasaki , M . ( 1998 ) Determination of pectenotoxin - 2 after solid - phase ex - traction from seawater and from the dinoflagellate Dinophysis fortii by liquid chromatography with electrospray mass spec - trometry and ultraviolet detection . Evidence of oxidation of pectenotoxin - 2 to pectenotoxin - 6 in scallops . J . Chromatogr . A . 815 , 155 – 160 . 72 Yasumoto , T . , Murata , M . , Oshima , Y . and Sano , M . ( 1985 ) Diarrhetic shellfish toxins . Tetrahedron 41 , 1019 – 1025 . 73 Yasumoto , T . and Murata , M . ( 1993 ) Marine toxins . Chem . Rev . 93 , 1897 – 1909 . 74 Hori , M . , Matsuura , Y . , Yoshimoto , R . , Ozaki , H . , Yasumoto , T . and Karaki , H . ( 1999 ) Actin depolymerizing action by ma - rine toxin , pectenotoxin - 2 . Nippon Yakurigaku Zasshi 114 Suppl 1 , 225P - 229P . 75 Lorenz , M . , Popp , D . and Holmes , K . C . ( 1993 ) Refinement of the F - actin model against X - ray fiber diffraction data by the use of a directed mutation algorithm . J . Mol . Biol . 234 , 826 – 836 . 76 Oda , T . , Namba , K . and Maeda , Y . ( 2005 ) Position and ori - entation of phalloidin in F - actin determined by X - ray fiber diffraction analysis . Biophys . J . 88 , 2727 – 2736 . 2134 J . S . Allingham , V . A . Klenchin and I . Rayment Actin - targeting natural products 77 Steinmetz , M . O . , Stoffler , D . , Muller , S . A . , Jahn , W . , Wol - pensinger , B . , Goldie , K . N . , Engel , A . , Faulstich , H . and Aebi , U . ( 1998 ) Evaluating atomic models of F - actin with an undecagold - tagged phalloidin derivative . J . Mol . Biol . 276 , 1 – 6 . 78 Usui , T . , Kazami , S . , Dohmae , N . , Mashimo , Y . , Kondo , H . , Tsuda , M . , Terasaki , A . G . , Ohashi , K . , Kobayashi , J . and Osada , H . ( 2004 ) Amphidinolide H , a potent cytotoxic mac - rolide , covalently binds on actin subdomain 4 and stabilizes actin filament . Chem . Biol . 11 , 1269 – 1277 . 79 Low , I . and Wieland , T . ( 1974 ) The interaction of phalloidin : some of its derivatives , and of other cyclic peptides with muscle actin as studied by viscosimetry . FEBS Lett . 44 , 340 – 343 . 80 Wieland , T . and Faulstich , H . ( 1977 ) The action of phalloidin . Curr . Prob . Clin . Biochem . 7 , 11 – 14 . 81 Wieland , T . ( 1986 ) Peptides of Poisonous Amanita Mush - rooms . Springer , New York . 82 Bubb , M . R . , Senderowicz , A . M . , Sausville , E . A . , Duncan , K . L . and Korn , E . D . ( 1994 ) Jasplakinolide , a cytotoxic natu - ral product , induces actin polymerization and competitively inhibits the binding of phalloidin to F - actin . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 14869 – 14871 . 83 Cramer , L . P . ( 1999 ) Role of actin - filament disassembly in la - mellipodium protrusion in motile cells revealed using the drug jasplakinolide . Curr . Biol . 9 , 1095 – 1105 . 84 Crews , P . , Manes , L . V . and Boehler , M . ( 1986 ) Jasplakino - lide , a cyclodepsipeptide from the marine sponge Jaspis sp . Tetrahedron Lett . 27 , 2797 – 2800 . 85 Zabriskie , T . M . , Klocke , J . A . , Ireland , C . M . , Marcus , A . H . , Molinski , T . F . , Faulkner , J . D . , Xu , C . and Clardy , J . ( 1986 ) Jaspamide , a modified peptide from a Jaspis sponge , with insecticidal and antifungal activity . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 108 , 3123 – 3124 . 86 Coleman , J . E . , Van Soest , R . and Andersen , R . J . ( 1999 ) New geodiamolides from the sponge Cymbastela sp . collected in Papua New Guinea . J . Nat . Prod . 62 , 1137 – 1141 . 87 D’Auria , M . V . , Gomez Paloma , L . , Minale , L . , Zampella , A . , Debitus , C . and Perez , J . ( 1995 ) Neosiphoniamolide A , a novel cyclodepsipeptide , with antifungal activity from the marine sponge Neosiphonia superstes . J . Nat . Prod . 58 , 121 – 123 . 88 Kunze , B . , Jansen , R . , Sasse , F . , Hofle , G . and Reichenbach , H . ( 1995 ) Chondramides A approximately D , new antifungal and cytostatic depsipeptides from Chondromyces crocatus ( myxobacteria ) : production , physio - chemical and biological properties . J . Antibiot . ( Tokyo ) 48 , 1262 – 1266 . 89 Jansen , R . , Kunze , B . , Reichenbach , H . and Hofle , G . ( 1996 ) Chondramides A - D , new cytostatic and antifungal cyclodepsi - peptides from Chondromyces crocatus ( Myxobacteria ) : isola - tion and structure elucidation . Libigs Ann . 2 , 285 – 290 . 90 Sasse , F . , Kunze , B . , Gronewold , T . M . and Reichenbach , H . ( 1998 ) The chondramides : cytostatic agents from myxobacte - ria acting on the actin cytoskeleton . J . Natl . Cancer Inst . 90 , 1559 – 1563 . 91 Holzinger , A . and Lutz - Meindl , U . ( 2001 ) Chondramides , novel cyclodepsipeptides from myxobacteria , influence cell development and induce actin filament polymerization in the green alga Micrasterias . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 48 , 87 – 95 . 92 Pettit , G . R . ( 1997 ) The dolastatins . Fortschr . Chem . Org . Naturst . 70 , 1 – 79 . 93 Bai , R . , Verdier - Pinard , P . , Gangwar , S . , Stessman , C . C . , Mc - Clure , K . J . , Sausville , E . A . , Pettit , G . R . , Bates , R . B . and Hamel , E . ( 2001 ) Dolastatin 11 , a marine depsipeptide , arrests cells at cytokinesis and induces hyperpolymerization of puri - fied actin . Mol . Pharmacol . 59 , 462 – 469 . 94 Ishiwata , H . , Nemoto , T . , Ojika , M . and Yamada , K . ( 1994 ) Isolation and stereostructure of doliculide , a cytotoxic cy - clodepsipeptide from the Japanese sea hare Dolabella auricu - laria . J . Org . Chem . 59 , 4710 – 4711 . 95 Ishiwata , H . , Sone , H . , Kigoshi , H . and Yamada , K . ( 1994 ) To - tal synthesis of doliculide , a potent cytotoxic cyclodepsipep - tide from the Japanese sea hare Dolabella auricularia . J . Org . Chem . 59 , 4712 – 4713 . 96 Bai , R . , Covell , D . G . , Liu , C . , Ghosh , A . K . and Hamel , E . ( 2002 ) ( – ) - Doliculide , a new macrocyclic depsipeptide en - hancer of actin assembly . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 32165 – 32171 . 97 Kobayashi , J . , Tsuda , M . , Ishibashi , M . , Shigemori , H . , Yamasu , T . , Hirota , H . and Sasaki , T . ( 1991 ) Amphidinolide F , a new cytotoxic macrolide from the marine dinoflagellate Amphidinium sp . J . Antibiot . ( Tokyo ) 44 , 1259 – 1261 . 98 Kobayashi , J . , Shimbo , K . , Sato , M . and Tsuda , M . ( 2002 ) Amphidinolides H2 – H5 , G2 , and G3 , new cytotoxic 26 - and 27 - membered macrolides from dinoflagellate Amphidinium sp . J . Org . Chem . 67 , 6585 – 6592 . 99 Marquez , B . L . , Watts , K . S . , Yokochi , A . , Roberts , M . A . , Verdier - Pinard , P . , Jimenez , J . I . , Hamel , E . , Scheuer , P . J . and Gerwick , W . H . ( 2002 ) Structure and absolute stereochem - istry of hectochlorin , a potent stimulator of actin assembly . J . Nat . Prod . 65 , 866 – 871 . 100 Luesch , H . , Yoshida , W . Y . , Moore , R . E . and Paul , V . J . ( 2000 ) Isolation and structure of the cytotoxin lyngbyabellin B and absolute configuration of lyngbyapeptin A from the marine cyanobacterium Lyngbya majuscula . J . Nat . Prod . 63 , 1437 – 1439 . 101 Luesch , H . , Yoshida , W . Y . , Moore , R . E . , Paul , V . J . and Moo - berry , S . L . ( 2000 ) Isolation , structure determination , and biological activity of lyngbyabellin A from the marine cyano - bacterium Lyngbya majuscula . J . Nat . Prod . 63 , 611 – 615 . 102 Oda , T . , Crane , Z . D . , Dicus , C . W . , Sufi , B . A . and Bates , R . B . ( 2003 ) Dolastatin 11 connects two long - pitch strands in F - actin to stabilize microfilaments . J . Mol . Biol . 328 , 319 – 324 . 103 Dancker , P . , Low , I . , Hasselbach , W . and Wieland , T . ( 1975 ) Interaction of actin with phalloidin : polymerization and stabi - lization of F - actin . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 400 , 407 – 414 . 104 Bubb , M . R . , Spector , I . , Beyer , B . B . and Fosen , K . M . ( 2000 ) Effects of jasplakinolide on the kinetics of actin polymeriza - tion : an explanation for certain in vivo observations . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 5163 – 5170 . 105 Miki , M . , Wahl , P . and Auchet , J . C . ( 1982 ) Fluorescence an - isotropy of labeled F - actin : influence of divalent cations on the interaction between F - actin and myosin heads . Biochem - istry 21 , 3661 – 3665 . 106 Muhlrad , A . , Cheung , P . , Phan , B . C . , Miller , C . and Reisler , E . ( 1994 ) Dynamic properties of actin : structural changes induced by beryllium fluoride . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 11852 – 11858 . 107 Orlova , A . and Egelman , E . H . ( 1997 ) Cooperative rigor bind - ing of myosin to actin is a function of F - actin structure . J . Mol . Biol . 265 , 469 – 474 . 108 Orlova , A . , Prochniewicz , E . and Egelman , E . H . ( 1995 ) Structural dynamics of F - actin . II . Cooperativity in structural transitions . J . Mol . Biol . 245 , 598 – 607 . 109 Drewes , G . and Faulstich , H . ( 1993 ) Cooperative effects on filament stability in actin modified at the C - terminus by sub - stitution or truncation . Eur . J . Biochem . 212 , 247 – 253 . 110 Visegrady , B . , Lorinczy , D . , Hild , G . , Somogyi , B . and Nyitrai , M . ( 2005 ) A simple model for the co - operative stabilisation of actin filaments by phalloidin and jasplakinolide . FEBS Lett . 579 , 6 – 10 .