Available at : http : / / hdl . handle . net / 2078 . 1 / 177366 [ Downloaded 2018 / 11 / 27 at 03 : 30 : 54 ] " The interaction of protamine nanocapsules with the intestinal epithelium : A mechanistic approach . " Thwala , Lungile ; Beloqui Garcia , Ana ; Csaba , Noemi Stefania ; González - Touceda , David ; Tovar , Sulay ; Dieguez , Carlos ; Alonso , Maria Jose ; Préat , Véronique Abstract Single - layer protamine and double layer polysialic acid ( PSA ) / protamine nanocapsules ( NCs ) were designed in order to be used as carriers to facilitate the transport of macromolecules across the intestinal epithelium . The rational for the design of these NCs was based on that protamine is a non - toxic yet potent cell - penetrating peptide , capable of translocating protein cargos through cell membranes , while PSA is a low molecular weight polysaccharide used to enhance the stability of macromolecules and nanocarriers . The aim of this work was to study in vitro the mechanism of interaction of these NCs with different intestinal cell models ( Caco - 2 , Caco - 2 / Raji mimicking follicle associated epithelium and Caco - 2 / HT29 - MTX to study the effect of mucus ) . For this , a fluorescent marker , TAMRA was covalently linked to protamine . The interaction and transport of the NCs with the Caco - 2 cells was found to be concentration , temperature and size dependent . In all cases , the double layer PSA - protamin . . . Document type : Article de périodique ( Journal article ) Référence bibliographique Thwala , Lungile ; Beloqui Garcia , Ana ; Csaba , Noemi Stefania ; González - Touceda , David ; Tovar , Sulay ; et . al . The interaction of protamine nanocapsules with the intestinal epithelium : A mechanistic approach . . In : Journal of Controlled Release , Vol . 243 , p . 109 - 120 ( 2016 ) DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . jconrel . 2016 . 10 . 002 The interaction of protamine nanocapsules with the intestinal epithelium : A mechanistic approach Lungile Nomcebo Thwala a , b , Ana Beloqui b , Noemi Stefania Csaba a , David González - Touceda c , Sulay Tovar c , Carlos Dieguez c , Maria Jose Alonso a , ⁎ , Véronique Préat b , ⁎⁎ a Center for Research in Molecular Medicine and Chronic Diseases ( CIMUS ) , Faculty of Pharmacy , Universidad de Santiago de Compostela , 15706 Santiago de Compostela , Spain b Université catholique de Louvain , Louvain Drug Research Institute , Advanced Drug Delivery and Biomaterials , 1200 Brussels , Belgium c Biomedical Research Group , Center for Research in Molecular Medicine and Chronic Diseases ( CIMUS ) , Universidad de Santiago de Compostela , 15706 Santiago de Compostela , Spain a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 13 May 2016 Received inrevised form 3 October 2016 Accepted 4 October 2016 Available online 06 October 2016 Single - layer protamine and double layer polysialic acid ( PSA ) / protamine nanocapsules ( NCs ) were designed in order to be usedas carriers to facilitate the transport of macromoleculesacross the intestinal epithelium . The ra - tionalfor thedesignoftheseNCswasbasedonthatprotamineisanon - toxicyet potentcell - penetrating peptide , capableoftranslocatingproteincargosthroughcellmembranes , whilePSAisalowmolecularweightpolysaccha - ride usedto enhancethestability of macromolecules and nanocarriers . The aim ofthis workwas to study invitro the mechanism of interaction of these NCs with different intestinal cell models ( Caco - 2 , Caco - 2 / Raji mimicking follicleassociatedepitheliumand Caco - 2 / HT29 - MTXtostudytheeffectofmucus ) . For this , a ﬂ uorescentmarker , TAMRA was covalently linked to protamine . The interaction and transport of the NCs with the Caco - 2 cells was foundtobeconcentration , temperatureandsizedependent . In allcases , thedoublelayerPSA - protamineNCsex - hibited a signi ﬁ cantly higher transport compared to protamine NCs . On the other hand , the transport of the NCs was signi ﬁ cantlyhigherin theco - culture ( Caco - 2 / Rajimonolayer ) compared to the monoculture model ( Caco - 2 monolayer ) , implying that M cells are involved in the transport of these nanosystems . The formulations , admin - isteredintra - jejunally tohealthy rats ( 4h fasting ) resultedinamoderatereduction ofthe glucoselevels ( 20 % re - duction ) , whichlastedforupto4h . Thisworkraisesprospectsthatprotamine - basednanocapsulesmayhavethe potential as oral peptide delivery nanocarriers . © 2016 Published by Elsevier B . V . Keywords : Peptide delivery Endocytosis Nanocapsules Caco - 2 cells M cells Mucus 1 . Introduction Theintestinalmucosaisalargeinterfacethatconsistsofamonolayer of epithelial cells connected by tight junctions ( TJs ) and protected by a thick mucus layer . Although this mucosa is highly specialized in the ab - sorption of nutrients , e . g . amino acids , it represents a phenomenal bar - rier for the absorption of large molecules , e . g . peptide drugs [ 1 ] . As a consequence , the development of strategies to make the oral adminis - tration of peptides feasible has become a primary goal in the biophar - maceutical world [ 2 ] . The possibility to deliver peptides by the oral route is particularly critical in the case of drugs used in the treatment of chronic diseases . In the speci ﬁ c case of anti - diabetic drugs ( e . g . insu - lin and glucagon - like peptide ( GLP - 1 ) ) , their administration by the oral route has the additional advantage of simulating the normal physiological pathway e . g . via hepatic portal circulation [ 3 ] . Indeed , in - sulin transported across the intestinal epithelium would directly reach the liver , the target organ for pancreas - secreted insulin , whereas injected insulin goes directly into the systemic circulation and only a limited amount becomes effective at the target site . A variety of strategies attempting to provide structural protection and improved absorption of peptide drugs have been disclosed . These include the use of enzyme inhibitors [ 4 ] and absorption enhancers [ 2 ] , chemical modi ﬁ cation [ 5 , 6 ] and encapsulation of peptide drugs within microspheres [ 7 ] , nanoparticles [ 8 ] and nanocapsules ( NCs ) [ 9 ] . Some of these nanocarriers have been shown to protect peptides from degra - dationbyintestinalenzymes [ 10 , 11 ] . Thesubsequentbarrier , themucus layer , has been found to be more dif ﬁ cult to overcome and , hence , the development of muco - diffusive nanocarriers has become a crucial chal - lenge in the area of nanoparticle - based oral peptide delivery [ 12 , 13 ] . In addition to this , the interaction of nanocarriers and transport of the as - sociated peptide across the intestinal epithelium , which is supposedly highly dependent on the nature of the nanocarrier , remains poorly understood . Based on this background information , the aim of this work was to study the mechanism of interaction and transport of single layer Journal of Controlled Release 243 ( 2016 ) 109 – 120 ⁎ Corresponding author . ⁎⁎ Correspondenceto : V . Préat , UniversitécatholiquedeLouvain , LouvainDrugResearch Institute , Advanced Drug Delivery and Biomaterials , Avenue Mounier 73 bte B1 73 . 12 , B - 1200 Brussels , Belgium . E - mail addresses : mariaj . alonso @ usc . es ( M . J . Alonso ) , veronique . preat @ uclouvain . be ( V . Préat ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jconrel . 2016 . 10 . 002 0168 - 3659 / © 2016 Published by Elsevier B . V . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Controlled Release journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / jconrel protamine and double layer polysialic acid ( PSA ) / protamine NCs across the intestinal epithelium , using insulin as a model peptide . The oily core oftheseNCs iscomposedof Miglyol ® oil , anditcontainsinsulintogether with the penetration enhancer , sodium glycocholate ( SGC ) . The shell of theNCsismadeofprotamine , whichhastheroleoffacilitatingtheinter - action with the epitheliumand PEG - stearate , whichis supposed tofacil - itate thetransport of theNCs across themucus layer [ 14 ] . Inaddition , an extra layer of PSA wasadded to theNCs with theaimofpreventing their interactionwithproteolyticenzymesfollowedbythedegradationofthe associated insulin . PSA , a polysaccharide that forms part of the mucus in mammals , is a non - toxic and biodegradable polymer [ 15 ] that has al - ready been used to improve the stability and lengthen the circulatory half - life of proteins [ 16 ] . For example , in a recent study , polysialylated insulinwasfoundtoexhibita2 - foldlongerhalf - lifecomparedtonormal insulin following subcutaneous injection in mice [ 17 ] . Moreover , pep - tide loaded nanocarriers have been decorated with PSA to protect the peptide from degradation and to improve their function following par - enteral administration . For these reasons , we hypothesized that coating the nanosystem with PSA may render it with improved stability and muco - penetrative properties allowing it to penetrate the intestinal mucus layer . Toachievetheabove - indicatedobjective different invitro cellmono - layer models simulating the different mucosal barriers ( e . g . enterocytes and mucus ) of the intestinal epithelium were adopted [ 18 , 19 ] . The in - ﬂ uence of parameters that could potentially affect the toxicity and mechanism of interaction with the monolayers , including particle size , surface composition , particle concentration as well as time and temper - ature of exposure were investigated . Finally , in vivo studies were per - formed in healthy rats in order to elucidate the pharmacological activityofinsulinloadedprotaminebasednanocapsulesafterintra - jeju - nal administration . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Materials and animals Protamine sulfate of low molecular weight ( 5 kDa ) was purchased from Yuki Gosei Kogyo , Ltd . ( Tokyo , Japan ) . The stabilizing surfactants , polyoxyethylene 40 monostearate , and sodium glycocholate ( SGC ) were bought from Croda Europe Ltd . ( Snaith , UK ) and Dextra ( Reading , UK ) respectively . Caprylic / capric triglyceride ( Miglyol ® 812 ) was pur - chased from Cremer , Oleo Division ( Witten , Germany ) and colominic acid sodium salt ( polysialic acid , PSA ) from Nacalai Tesque Inc . ( Tokyo , Japan ) . Insulin ( insulin glulisine ) was obtained from Sano ﬁ ( Paris , France ) . 5 - TAMRA , SE ( 5 - carboxytetramethylrhodamine , succinimidylester , single isomer ) , was purchased from Emp Biotech ( Berlin , Germany ) . Alexa ﬂ uor ® 488 phalloidin was purchased from Life Technologies ( Eugene , USA ) . Triton ™ X - 100 , chlorpromazine , Filipin III , partially puri ﬁ ed mucin type III from porcine stomach and Alcian blue were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich ( Leuven , Belgium ) . All cell culture media and reagents were purchased from Invitrogen ( Merelbeke , Belgium ) . Anhydrous monobasic sodium phosphate and sodium hydroxide were purchased from Scharlab ( Barcelona , Spain ) . Pancreatin ( 8 % USP speci ﬁ cation ) was purchased from Biozym ( Ham - burg , Germany ) . Organic solvents used were of HPLC grade and all other products used were of high purity or reagent grade . Male Sprague – Dawley rats ( 250 – 300 g ) were obtained from the Central Animal House , University of Santiago de Compostela ( Spain ) . Theywerekeptunder 12 hlight / 12 hdarkcycles andfed astandard lab - oratory rodent diet ( Panlab A04 , Panlab laboratories ) . All animal exper - iments were reviewed and approved by the ethics committee of the University of Santiago de Compostela ( ref . 1500AE / 12 / FUN01 / FIS02 / CDG3 ) according to the European and Spanish regulations for the use of animals in animal studies ; performed therefore in compliance with the Directive 2010 / 63 / EU of the European Parliament and Council . 2 . 2 . Preparation and characterization of protamine nanocapsules 2 . 2 . 1 . Preparation of insulin - loaded protamine nanocapsules Insulin loaded protamine NCs were prepared by the solvent dis - placement technique following the procedure described by our group [ 14 ] . Brie ﬂ y , PEGstearate - 40 ( 16 mg ) , sodium glycocholate ( 5 mg ) and Miglyol ® 812 ( 59 mg ) were dissolved in 3 mL ethanol . Acetone ( 1 . 95 mL ) was then added to this lipid phase followed by the addition of 1 . 5 mg insulin dissolved in 50 μ L 0 . 01 M HCl . This organic phase was immediately poured over 10 mL of an aqueous phase containing 0 . 15 % w / v protamine under magnetic stirring at 300 rpm . The elimina - tion of organic solvents was performed by evaporation under vacuum ( Rotavapor Heidolph , Germany ) , until a ﬁ nal volume of 5 mL . Finally the nanoparticles were isolated by ultracentrifugation ( Avanti ® J - E , Ultracentrifuge , Beckman Coulter , USA ) at 82 , 656 g for 1 h ( at 15 °C ) . Nanocapsules with a double protamine / polysialic acid polymer layer were obtained upon addition of 0 . 1 mL of PSA solution ( concentration : 3 mg / mL ) to a volume of 0 . 5 mL of NCs ( concentration : 18 . 6 mg / mL ) under mild shaking ( 300 rpm ) for half an hour . The ﬁ nal protamine : PSA ratio was of 5 : 1 w / w ) . 2 . 2 . 2 . Preparation of TAMRA - labelled protamine nanocapsules For cell uptake studies , ﬂ uorescent protamine NCs were prepared with TAMRA - labelled protamine ( TAMRA - protamine ) . Protamine ( 10 mg ) was dissolved in 0 . 1 M sodium bicarbonate buffer ( 1 mL , pH 8 , 60 ) and TAMRA ( 10 mg / mL in DMSO ) was slowly added under mild stirring . After 1 h incubation ( mild stirring , 300 rpm ) at room tem - perature , the labelled protamine was dialyzed for 72 h to remove free TAMRA ( SnakeSkin , cellulose membrane MW 3 . 5 KDa , Thermo , Spain ) . The obtained polymer conjugate ( TAMRA - protamine ) was freeze - dried and NCs were prepared according to the procedure de - scribed in Section 2 . 2 . 1 . 2 . 2 . 3 . Physicochemical and morphological properties of protamine NCs The mean size and polydispersity index ( PDI ) of the protamine NCs were measured after dilution ( 50× ) with ultrapure water by dynamic light scattering using a Zetasizer ® Nano series DTS 1060 ( Malvern Instruments , Malvern , UK ) . The zeta potential was measured by laser - Doppler anemometry after diluting the samples in 1 mM KCl ( Zetasizer ® , NanoZS , Malvern Instruments , Malvern , UK ) . The transmis - sion electron microscopy ( TEM , Joel 2010 , 80 kV , Philips , Netherlands ) was used to analyze the shape and surface properties of the NCs . For TEM analysis samples were deposited on a copper grid and stained with 2 % ( w / v ) phosphotungstic acid solution , allowed to dry and then viewed under transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) . 2 . 2 . 4 . Insulin association ef ﬁ ciency ( AE % ) and loading capacity ( LC % ) of the nanocapsules The association ef ﬁ ciency ( AE % ) of insulin was determined after iso - lation of the NCs by ultracentrifugation at 82 , 656 g for 1 h at 15 °C ( Avanti ® J - E , Ultracentrifuge , Beckman Coulter , USA ) . The amount of free insulin in the aqueous phase ( indirect method ) and also that asso - ciated to the NCs ( direct method ) was determined by HPLC ( described below ) . For the extraction of insulin from the NCs , 0 . 1 mL of the isolated NCssuspension ( concentration : 18 . 6 mg / mL ) were mixed with acetoni - trile ( 0 . 1 mL ) , 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer ( 0 . 75 mL ) and Triton ™ X - 100 ( 0 . 05 mL ) . The mixture was vortexed at a high speed to obtain a clear solution . The amount of insulin loaded into the NCs was quanti ﬁ ed by an HPLC ( Agilent model 1100 series LC and a diode - array detector set at 214 nm ) method in an isocratic mode . The chromatographic system was equipped with a reversed - phase 125 × 4 mm Supersphere ® 100 - RP - 18e - 125 - 4 column ( particle size 4 μ m ) . The mobile phases , eluted at 1 mL / min at 44 : 56 v / v , were a mixture of phosphate buffer ( 0 . 1 M , pH 2 . 3 ) and acetonitrile ( phase A 93 : 7 and phase B 43 : 57 v / v ) . The col - umn was set at 35 °C and the injection volume was 10 μ L . Calibration 110 L . N . Thwala et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 243 ( 2016 ) 109 – 120 curves ranging from 5 μ g / mL up to 1 , 050 μ g / mL ( r 2 = 0 . 999 ) were ob - tained . The limit of quanti ﬁ cation ( LOQ ) and limit of detection ( LOD ) were 200 μ g / mL and 80 μ g / mL , respectively . Samples were transferred into auto - sampler vials , capped and placed in the HPLC auto - sampler . Each sample was assayed in triplicate . The concentration of insulin in the aliquots was used to calculate the association ef ﬁ ciency ( AE % ) using the equation : AE % ¼ Amount of insulin in isolated destructed NCs Total insulin (cid:2) 100 2 . 2 . 5 . Assessment of in vitro behaviour of nanocapsules in cell culture me - dia : Insulin release , TAMRA release and colloidal stability Insulin loaded TAMRA - labelled NCs were incubated in Hank ' s Bal - anced Solution Salt ( HBSS ) , used for in vitro cellular assays , at a dilution ratio of 1 : 50 , NCs : HBSS ( v / v ) , a ﬁ nal NC concentration of 0 . 37 mg / mL , and shaken at 100 rpm at 37 °C . At speci ﬁ ed time intervals ( 0 , 0 . 5 , 1 , 2 , 4 and 6 h ) , insulin released was evaluated after isolating the NCs by ultracentrifugation ( Avanti ® J - E , Ultracentrifuge , Beckman Coulter , USA ) at 30 , 000 rpm for 1 h ( at 15 °C ) . The concentrations of insulin in the aqueous medium were determined by reverse phase HPLC method ( Section 2 . 2 . 4 ) . The stability of the NCs was determined in cell culture medium DMEM and transport buffer HBSS . Brie ﬂ y , the NCs were diluted 50× with the relevant medium , DMEM or HBSS ( NC concentra - tion : 0 . 37 mg / mL ) and shaken at 100 rpm at 37 °C . The size and mean count rate ( estimating the number of particles ) of the NCs were monitored at speci ﬁ c time intervals ( 0 , 0 . 5 , 1 , 2 , 4 and 6 h ) . The absence of leakage of TAMRA from the NCs during the transport studies was also evaluated . Insulin loaded TAMRA - labelled NCs ( 1mLof 2mg / mL ) wereplacedindialysisdevices ( Spectra / PorFloat - A - LyzerG2 , MWCO : 5KD , SpectrumLaboratories , USA ) andintroducedinto50mLof HBSS , maintained under magnetic stirring at 37 °C . At pre - determined timepoints ( 0 , 0 . 5 , 1 , 2 and 4 h ) , sampleswere withdrawn from the me - dium ( the volume removed was replaced with fresh medium ) and analysed using the ﬂ uorescence reader ( SpectraMax M3 , Molecular de - vices ) at 583 nm wavelength . The free TAMRA and TAMRA - protamine conjugate were also used as controls . 2 . 2 . 6 . Stability in simulated intestinal ﬂ uids containing enzymes The ability of protamine NCs to protect the associated insulin was evaluated by quantifying the amount of insulin remaining in the NCs after proteolysis . For this purpose , insulin - loaded protamine NCs , PSA - protamine NCs and free insulin solution ( as control ) were mixed at 1 : 1 v / v with simulated intestinal ﬂ uids ( simple SIF ) supplemented with 1 % pancreatin then incubated in a 37 °C incubator and shaken at 100 rpm for up to 2 h . At predetermined time intervals ( 0 , 0 . 25 , 0 . 5 , 1 and 2 h ) , 500 μ L aliquots were withdrawn and the enzyme activity of pancreatin in the samples was terminated by the addition of 300 μ L ice - cold 0 . 1 M HCl . The samples were subsequently treated with aceto - nitrile ( 0 . 01 mL ) and Triton ™ X - 100 ( 0 . 01 mL ) and vortexed , to disrupt the NCs and extract insulin , and ﬁ nally analysed by HPLC to determine the amount of insulin remaining in the NCs . 2 . 3 . In vitro cell culture studies 2 . 3 . 1 . Cell cultures Caco - 2 cells ( clone 1 ) were kindly provided by Dr . Federico Benetti ( Veneto Nanotech , Venice , Italy ) and used from passage 18 to 28 . Human Burkitt ' s lymphoma Raji B cell line was purchased from Ameri - canTypeCultureCollection ( Manassas , VA , USA ) andusedbetweenpas - sages x + 5 tox + 10 . Caco - 2 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) inactivated fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 1 % ( v / v ) non - es - sential amino - acids ( NEAA ) , 1 % ( v / v ) L - glutamine , and 1 % ( v / v ) of pen - icillin – streptomycin ( PEST ) at 37 °C under a 10 % CO 2 / 90 % air atmosphere . Raji cells were grown in suspension , cultivated in RPMI medium supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) inactivated FBS , 1 % ( v / v ) NEAA , 1 % ( v / v ) L - glutamine , and 1 % ( v / v ) PEST , at 37 °C in a 5 % CO 2 / 95 % air atmosphere . HT29 - MTX cells were kindly provided by Dr . T . Lessu ﬂ eur ( INSERM UMR S 938 , Paris , France ) and used between pas - sages x + 16 and x + 20 [ 20 ] . HT29 - MTX cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) heat inactivated fetal bovine serum , 1 % ( v / v ) NEAA , 1 % ( v / v ) L - glutamine , and 1 % ( v / v ) PEST in a humidi ﬁ ed in - cubator with 5 % CO 2 atmosphere at 37 °C . 2 . 3 . 2 . Cytotoxicity studies Cell viability was assessed after the co - incubation of 20 , 000 Caco - 2 cells / well on a 96 - well tissue culture plate ( Costar ® Corning ® CellBIND Surface ) with the formulations , protamine NCs and PSA - protamine NCs in dispersion in culture medium ( concentration range : 0 . 5 to 8 mg / mL ) . After 2 , 6 and 24 h of incubation , the cells were rinsed with PBS and incu - batedat37°Cfor3hwith100 μ L0 . 5mg / mL3 - ( 4 , 5 - dimethylthiazol - 2 - yl ) - ( 2 , 5 - diphenyltetrazolium bromide ) solution ( Sigma - Aldrich , Belgium ) ( MTS assay ) . Cellular supernatants were then transferred into a new 96 - well plate and the amount of soluble formazan produced by cellular re - duction of MTS was determined by recording absorbance at 490 nm with Synergy 4 microplate reader ( BioTek Instruments , Inc . , Winooski , USA ) . Before performingMTS assay , 50 μ L of cellculture media were trans - ferred intoanew 96 - well plate , mixed with 50 μ Lof workingreagentfor LDH detection ( LDH assay ) ( Roche Diagnostics Belgium , Vilvoorde , Bel - gium ) , and incubated for 20 min at room temperature in the dark . The reaction was stopped by adding 25 μ L of stop solution , and measured by recording absorbance at 500 nm with Synergy 4 microplate reader [ 21 ] . The IC 50 s for the different formulations were calculated using the GraphPad Prism 5 program ( California , USA ) . 2 . 3 . 3 . Interaction of TAMRA - protamine nanocapsules with Caco - 2 cell monolayers The interaction of TAMRA - protamine NCs and TAMRA - PSA - prot - amine NCs with Caco - 2 cells was quantitatively and qualitatively studied using ﬂ ow cytometry ( FACS ) and confocal laser scanning mi - croscopy ( CLSM ) , respectively . For the FACS study , Caco - 2 cells were seeded in 24 - well cell culture plates at a density of 5 × 10 5 cells per well and allowed to adhere for 48 h until con ﬂ uency . For the transport studies , cells were co - incubated with a - 400 μ L of a TAMRA - protamine NCs or TAMRA - PSA - protamine NCs suspension in transport buffer ( NC concentration 1 , 1 . 5 or 2 mg / mL ) corresponding to a ﬁ nal insulin concentration of 4 , 8 and 12 μ g / mL , respectively . After 2 h of co - incubation , cells were washed three times with PBS and detached from the plates by trypsinization . Cells were then centri - fuged at 1 , 500 × g ( Eppendorf centrifuge 5804 R , Daigger Scienti ﬁ c Inc . , USA ) the supernatant was discarded and the cells were resuspend - ed in PBS . Fluorescence was measured using a BD FACS Verse ﬂ ow cytometer and BD CellQuest software ( Becton Dickinson Biosciences , San Jose , CA , USA ) . Cell ﬂ uorescence was quanti ﬁ ed by measuring the ﬂ uorescence of TAMRA ( red ) at 583 nm . For cell viability measure - ments , the TOPRO - 3 reagent was employed ( blue ) . The reagent was added to each sample at a ﬁ nal concentration of 10 μ g / mL , and , after 10 min of incubation , the ﬂ uorescence corresponding to dead cells was measured at 642 nm . For each sample , 10 , 000 events were collect - ed . The data were subsequently analysed using the FlowJo data analysis software package ( TreeStar , USA ) . For subsequent imaging , Transwell ® inserts were ﬁ xed in parafor - maldehyde ( PFA ) 4 % were gently washed in HBSS . Actin was stained with 200 μ L of Alexa ﬂ uor ® 488 phalloidin ( 1 : 50 ) in buffered HBSS + 0 . 2 % ( v / v ) Triton ™ X - 100 for 10 min in the dark to reveal cell borders as described by des Rieux et al . [ 22 ] . Cell nuclei were stained with DAPI ( 1 : 20 ) . Subsequently , insertswerewashedinHBSS , cutandmountedon glass slides . Images were captured using a Zeiss ™ confocal microscope ( LSM 150 ) . Data were analysed by the Axio Vision Software ( version 4 . 8 ) to obtain y - z , x - z and x - y views of the cell monolayers . 111 L . N . Thwala et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 243 ( 2016 ) 109 – 120 2 . 4 . Transport across intestinal cell monolayers cell culture models 2 . 4 . 1 . Caco - 2 and Caco - 2 / Raji cell monolayers ( follicle - associated epitheli - um model ) Caco - 2 cells were seeded at a density of 5 × 10 5 cells / well onto Matrigel ® ( BD Biosciences , Belgium ) ( 10 μ L / mL in DMEM ) - coated Transwell ® polycarbonate inserts ( 12 mm insert diameter , 3 μ m pore size ) ( Corning Costar , Cambridge , U . K . ) and cultivated over 21 days . The medium was replaced every second day . The inverted follicle - asso - ciated epithelium ( FAE ) model was obtained by co - culturing Raji and Caco - 2 cells as previously reported by des Rieux et al . and Beloqui et al . [ 1 , 23 ] . Brie ﬂ y , after 3 to 5 days of Caco - 2 seeding , inserts were inverted , a piece of silicone tube was placed into the inserts and main - tained until day 21 in large Petri dishes . The medium was replaced every other day , until day 9 to 11 when Raji cells were then added on top of the Caco - 2 cells for the conversion of the Caco - 2 cells into M cells at a density of 2 . 5 × 10 5 cells / well [ 23 ] . For the assessment of FAE model functionality , in each experiment transport studies were conducted under theaforementioned conditions with commercial ﬂ uorescent carboxylated nanoparticles ( 0 . 2 μ m ) ( Gentaur , Belgium ) . A nanoparticle suspension ( 400 μ L at a concentra - tion of 4 . 5 × 10 9 NPs / mL ) was added on the apical side and inserts were incubated at 37 °C for 2 h . After this incubation time , basolateral solutions were then sampled and the number of transported nanoparti - cles was measured by FACS ( BD FACS Verse ) . Nanoparticle transport was expressed as mean ± SD . 2 . 4 . 2 . Caco - 2 and Caco - 2 / HT29 - MTXcell monolayers ( mucus model ) The in ﬂ uence of the mucus was studied by co - culturing Caco - 2 and HT29 - MTX cells , seeded at a density of 5 × 10 5 cells / well in a 3 : 1 ratio ( Caco - 2 : HT29 - MTX ) and maintained until day 21 [ 24 ] . The medium was replaced every after two days . The Alcian blue staining technique was employed to demonstrate thepresenceofacidmucinsandsulfatedmucosubstancesonthesurface of the Caco - 2 / HT29 - MTX co - culture [ 19 ] . For this purpose , both the Caco - 2 monoculture and the Caco - 2 / HT29 - MTX co - culture were grown and seeded as described above . After con ﬁ rming the integrity of the monolayer by measuring the TEER , cells were washed 2× with HBSSand ﬁ xedwith4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) for30min , thenrinsed 3×withPBSandstainedwith1 % AlcianblueatpH2 . 5for1h . Theywere then washed 3× with PBS , mounted on slides and viewed under a mi - croscope ( Axioskop 40 , Carl Zeiss Microscopy , LLC , New York , USA ) equipped with the Zen lite 2012 software for capturing images . In all cases the integrity of the monolayers was corroborated by mea - suring the trans - epithelial electrical resistance ( TEER ) , before and after the transport studies on day 21 . These measurements were carried out at 37 °C using an epithelial voltohm meter ( EVOM , World Precision In - struments , Berlin , Germany ) . TEER values over 250 Ω cm 2 for both Caco - 2 and Caco - 2 / HT29 - MTX monolayers and values above 160 Ω cm 2 forCaco - 2 / Rajimonolayerswereused . TEERvaluesaftertransportstudies were not signi ﬁ cantly different to initial values unless otherwise stated . All transport experiments were conducted at 37 °C ( or 4 °C ) by adding a volume of 400 μ L at 12 μ g / mL insulin concentration in HBSS on the apical side and 1 mL of HBSS on the basolateral side . After the speci ﬁ c incubation time ( 1 , 2 or 4 h ) , samples were collected from the basolateral side and the amount of ﬂ uorescence ( TAMRA ) was mea - sured using a ﬂ uorescence plate reader ( λ Ex = 540 and λ Em = 570 ) . The apparent permeability coef ﬁ cient ( P app , cm / s ) was calculated ac - cording to the following equation : P app ¼ dQ dt (cid:2) 1 ACo Where d Q / d t is the transport rate ( μ g / s ) , C o is the initialdrug concentra - tion on the apical side ( μ g / mL ) and A is the surface area of the mem - brane ﬁ lter ( cm 2 ) . The absence of cytotoxicity in the presence of the NCs was assessed by measuring the LDH activity released from the cytosol of damaged cells in the apical medium after each transport experiment ( procedure in Section 2 . 3 . 2 ) . The cell monolayers were then washed twice in cold HBSS to stop endocytosis or uptake of NCs and ﬁ xed in PFA 4 % for sub - sequent staining and imaging . 2 . 5 . Mechanism of interaction of insulin – loaded protamine NCs with Caco - 2 and Caco - 2 / Raji monolayers To evaluate the mechanism of interaction of protamine and PSA - protamine NCs with Caco - 2 cells and Caco - 2 / Raji cells , the monolayers were pre - incubated for 1 h at 37 °C with 400 μ L of a solution of endocy - tosis inhibitors in HBSS . Namely , chlorpromazine at 10 μ g / mL was used as an inhibitor of receptor - mediated and clathrin - mediated endocytosis [ 25 , 26 ] and Filipin III ( 1 μ g / mL ) , was used for the inhibition of caveolae and clathrin - mediated pathways by cholesterol depletion [ 27 , 28 ] . After 1 h of incubation with the inhibitors , formulations were added onto the apical side of the monolayer and co - incubated for 2 h . Control transport studies were carried out in transport buffer without inhibitor solutions . The absence of cytotoxicity in the presence of inhibitors was assessed by measuring the LDH activity released from the cytosol of damaged cells into the apical medium after the interaction experiments following the same procedure in Section 2 . 3 . 2 . 2 . 6 . In vivo ef ﬁ cacy studies in non - diabetic rats Male non - diabetic Sprague - Dawley rats ( average weight 267 ± 11 g ) , used for the intra - jejunal ( IJ ) administration underwent an oper - ation where , a catheter was implanted surgically into the jejunum of each rat with the proximal end of the cannula tunneled subcutaneously to exit at the back of the neck , and sutured . The rats were allowed to re - cover for 6 days and were monitored for recovery and weighed every - day . They were fasted for 4 h before the experiment with free access to water . Formulations ( insulin - loaded protamine NCs , PSA - coated protamine NCs and blank protamine NCs ) were injected intrajejunally at a constant volume of 300 μ L at a dose of 50 IU / kg . A solution of free insulin was also administered as a control . Before administration ( 0 h ) , blood samples were withdrawn from the tail vein and initial blood glucose levels were measured using a hand - held glucometer ( Glucocard ™ G + meter , Arkray Factory , Japan ) , thereafter the glucose levels were measured every hour . 2 . 7 . Statistics Statistical analysis was performed using the GraphPad Prism 5 pro - gram ( CA , USA ) . Normal distribution was assessed with the Shapiro – Wilk normality test . One - wayANOVA inmultiplecomparisons followed by Tukey ' s post - hoc test was applied according to the result of the Bartlett ' s test of homogeneity of variances for the 37 °C and 4 °C trans - port comparisons . Regarding the in vivo data , the statistical analysis was carried out using a two - way ANOVA test followed by Bonferroni ' s post - hoc test . All other analyses were performed using a Student ' s t - test . Differenceswere consideredstatisticallysigni ﬁ cantat * p b 0 . 05 . Re - sults are expressed as mean ± SD . 3 . Results and discussion In this work , we studied the interaction of protamine - based NCs with theintestinalepithelialcells and the mucus layer asimportant bar - riers to successful oral peptide delivery . Preceding work showed that NCs consisting of an oily core and a poly ( alkyl cyanoacrylate ) coating arepotentialcarriersforimprovinginsulinabsorption [ 9 ] . TheNCsstud - ied here present the same structure , although the components were ra - tionally selected and organized in order to overcome speci ﬁ c biological barriers , e . g . the mucus layer and the underlying epithelium . The 112 L . N . Thwala et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 243 ( 2016 ) 109 – 120 selection of protamine was based on its ability to penetrate cell mem - branes , as an arginine rich polypeptide [ 29 , 30 ] . On the other hand , the formation of a double layer with PSA was aimed at increasing stability and enhancing the penetration of the NCs through the mucus layer by avoidingtheinteractionwiththeextracellularmatrixincludingproteins [ 31 ] . Finally , thesurfactants , SGCandPEG - stearate 40 were addedtothe nano - composition , with the objective of improving the penetration properties of the nanocarrier as well as their colloidal stability and mucodiffusion properties . 3 . 1 . Physicochemical properties , stability and release behaviour of prot - amine nanocapsules Insulin - loaded protamine NCs were successfully prepared using the simple solvent displacement technique , a mild and easily scalable prep - aration technique . The particle size , zeta potential and association ef ﬁ - ciency of the two formulations are summarized in Table 1 . The particle size range for both formulations was between 300 and 400 nm . The zeta potential for protamine NCs was + 6 ± 3 mV while PSA coated protamine NCs showed a slightly negative zeta potential ( − 4 ± 1 mV ) , con ﬁ rmingthepresence of PSA on theoutershell . The insulin as - sociation ef ﬁ ciency was 62 ± 16 % and 51 ± 9 % for protamine and PSA - protamine NCs respectively . The size of the nanocapsules was con - ﬁ rmed by TEM analysis . The images presented in Fig . 1 , illustrate the spherical shape of the NCs and different appearance of the single layer protamine nanocapsules as compared to the double layer PSA / prot - amine nanocapsules . In vitro stability was evaluated in terms of particle size and PDI mea - surement and insulin release studies were performed to ensure that the cell culture medium ( DMEM ) and transport buffer , HBSS , do not com - promise the stability of the NCs and does not cause a burst release of the associated insulin . The results shown in Table 1 , indicate that the stability of the NCs was not compromised upon incubation in the trans - port buffer medium ( HBSS ) during 6 h at 37 °C . On the other hand , for both , protamine and PSA - protamine NCs , b 30 % of the associated insulin was released in the same period of time ( 6 h ) . Comparable data were obtained when the NCs were incubated in SIF and SGF for 6 h ( Supple - mentary dataFig . 2S ) . Fig . 2 shows that therewere nosigni ﬁ cant chang - es in the size and PDI of the NCs when they were incubated in these media , con ﬁ rming their stability in simulated gastrointestinal media i . e . no degradation or aggregation . The stability of the NCs was attribut - ed to the presence of PEG ( and PSA in the case of PSA - coated protamine NCs ) . PEG exerts steric hindrance to the nanocarrier systems and hence improves their stability in biological media and this strategy is widely used to design stable nanoparticles by providing them with a protective coating of PEG [ 32 ] . Moreover , no TAMRA leakage from the NCs was ob - served over the period of 0 to 6 h in HBSS . 3 . 2 . Protection of the insulin from proteolysis The ability of the NCs to preserve the associated insulin against deg - radation by enzymes was studied by incubating insulin - loaded prot - amine NCs and PSA - protamine NCs and free insulin solution ( control ) in SIF containing pancreatic enzymes . The results in Fig . 3 indicate that free insulin , was totally degraded in the ﬁ rst 15 min of incubation . In contrast , insulin entrapped into protamine NCs was preserved from degradation , maintaining between 55 and 75 % insulin in the same peri - od of time ( 15 min ) . This stabilizing role of the nanocapsules was even more pronounced when they were provided with the external coating of PSA . This behaviour , expected in the rational design of the nanocapsules , was attributed to the shielding effect of the PSA layer , whichcould be able toreducetheattachmentof thedegradingenzymes [ 33 ] . Moreover , both PSA and SGC could have a role in terms of inhibiting protease activity [ 34 ] . 3 . 3 . Cytotoxicity of protamine nanocapsules in Caco - 2 cells The cytotoxicity of the different types of NCs was studied in order to estimate the highest safe concentration of NCs that can be used for sub - sequentmechanisticstudies . Twodifferentincubationtimes , 2hand6h were tested as they fall within the average transit time in the intestinal tract . As shown in Fig . 4 , protamine NCs were found to induce no signif - icant cytotoxicity ( p N 0 . 05 ) after 6 h incubation at concentration range of 0 . 5 to 2 mg / mL . However , the highest concentration tested , 8 mg / mL , signi ﬁ cantly decreased cell viability of theCaco - 2 cells for both formula - tions regardless of the incubation time , implying that cytotoxicity of protamine NCs is concentration dependent . The cytotoxicity of unloaded NCs was also tested ( Supplementary data Fig . 4S ) . 3 . 4 . In vitro evaluation of nanocapsule interaction with the intestinal barrier 3 . 4 . 1 . Intracellular uptake in Caco - 2 and Caco - 2 / Raji monolayers The adherence and internalization of the ﬂ uorescent NCs into the Caco - 2 monolayers was studied using confocal microscopy and ﬂ ow cy - tometry . Fig . 5A represents the y - z , x - z and x - y view of Caco - 2 and FAE monolayers after 2 h of incubation with TAMRA - labelled protamine NCs and TAMRA - labelled PSA - protamine NCs . The images show that the two formulations were internalized by the cells up to a certain ex - tent , although a signi ﬁ cant amount was also localized on the surface of the cell monolayers . Based on this , it could be expected that the NCs would release the associated insulin on the surface or into the enterocytes . The interaction of the NCs with the Caco - 2 monolayers was also quantitatively analysed by ﬂ ow cytometry . In this study , the TOPRO - 3 reagent was employed to measure cell viability and untreated cells were used as controls . As shown in Fig . 5B , the cellular uptake of both , protamine NCs and PSA - protamine NCs , was concentration ( dose ) dependent . This observation is consistent with des Rieux et al . , who found that transport of yellow - green carboxylated particles ( Fluospheres ® ) across Caco - 2 cells , was concentration dependent [ 22 ] . Interestingly , as observed by confocal microscopy , at all concentrations PSA - protamine NCs exhibited signi ﬁ cantly higher count values ( * p b 0 . 05 ) than protamine NCs . Initially , this result was surprising as , in general , the cell internalization of positively charged nanoparticles is more important than that of negatively charged ones [ 30 , 35 ] . Howev - er , there is also the possibility that the PSA coating minimizes the inter - action of the NCs with the proteins present in the cell culture medium , thereby enhancing their internalization [ 15 ] . Moreover , PSA has been reported to havethe capacity to transport peptide drugsinto cells by re - ceptor - mediated endocytosis , increasing the ef ﬁ ciency of drug trans - portation . The charge of PSA can modulate membrane surface charge density , while the carboxyl groups of PSA can regulate its own pH . The surface charge density and pH co - ordinately regulate the transmem - brane transport capacity of cell membranes [ 33 , 36 ] . Table 1 Characteristicsof protamine NCs and PSA - protamine NCs ( mean ± SD , n = 9 ) . ( AE : association ef ﬁ ciency ; LC : loading capacity . ) Formulation Size ( nm ) PDI ζ - Potential ( mV ) AE % LC % Stability in HBSS , SGF , SIF Protamine NCs 382 ± 69 0 . 28 ± 0 . 05 + 6 ± 3 62 ± 16 1 . 0 ± 0 . 03 Stable ( 6 h ) PSA protamine NCs 301 ± 84 0 . 16 ± 0 . 03 − 4 ± 1 51 ± 9 0 . 8 ± 0 . 01 Stable ( 6 h ) HBSS - Hank ' s Balanced Salt Solution ; SGF - simulated gastric ﬂ uid ; SIF - simulated intestinal ﬂ uid . 113 L . N . Thwala et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 243 ( 2016 ) 109 – 120 3 . 4 . 2 . Permeability across model cell monolayers The ultimate goal of this work was to evaluate the potential of prot - amine and PSA / protamine NCs to transport peptide drugs such as insu - lin across the epithelial barrier . For this , the enterocyte - like model ( Caco - 2 monolayers ) and the FAE model ( Caco - 2 / Raji co - culture ) , con - taining M cells , were employed . The conversion of Caco - 2 cells into M cells in the FAE model was con ﬁ rmed by measuring the number of ﬂ uo - rescent commercial carboxylated particles transported using ﬂ ow cy - tometry [ 1 , 23 ] . The results of this control study indicated that the number of transported nanoparticles after 2 h incubation time , was sig - ni ﬁ cantly higher in the FAE model than in the Caco - 2 model ( 9 , 532 ± 133 vs . 108 ± 91 nanoparticles , respectively n = 6 , * p b 0 . 05 ) . The ability of the NCs to cross the cell monolayers was estimated by quantifying the amount of ﬂ uorescent maker covalently linked to prot - amine , detected in the basolateral side compared to the initial amount added in the apical side of the monolayer , expressed as percentages ( % ) [ 22 , 37 ] . Fig . 6A represents the ﬂ uorescence detected in the basolateral side of Caco - 2 and FAE monolayers , after1 , 2 and 4 hincuba - tion time . In agreement with previous work [ 22 , 38 ] , the results showed that the transport of both protamine NCs and PSA - protamine NCs , mea - sured in terms of ﬂ uorescence , increased over the time in both types of monolayers and that this transport was signi ﬁ cantly higher in the FAE monolayer as compared to the Caco - 2 monolayer ( γγγ p b 0 . 001 ) . More - over , as observed in confocal microscopy studies ( Section 3 . 4 . 1 ) , the Fig . 1 . TEM images of protamine NCs ( A ) and PSA - protamine NCs ( B ) . Fig . 2 . The evolution of the particle size and PDI of insulin loaded protamine NCs and PSA - coated protamine NCs followingtheir incubation in SGF ( a ) , SIF ( b ) and HBSS ( c ) . 114 L . N . Thwala et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 243 ( 2016 ) 109 – 120 transport was signi ﬁ cantly higher for the NCs with a PSA layer ( * p b 0 . 05 ) . This phenomenon could be attributed to the different sur - face compositions of the NCs . The lack of a signi ﬁ cant difference be - tween protamine NCs and PSA - protamine NCs in Caco - 2 cells at 2 h andintheFAEmodelat4hcouldbeattributedtothelargerSDobserved within these groups . The explanation of the higher transport observed in the FAE mono - layer , as compared to the Caco - 2 monolayer , could be found in the in - trinsic nature of the M cells , which unlike the neighbouring absorptive enterocytes , lack a highly organized apical brush border and glycocalyx , and are poorly equipped with digestive enzymes [ 39 ] . They also possess a high transcytotic capacity and are able to transport a broad range of materials , including nanoparticles [ 40 ] . Moreover , protamine has been shown to enter primary human dendritic cells ( DCs ) in a dose - depen - dent manner [ 41 ] . The transport pro ﬁ le observed in this study correlat - ed with other similar studies where b 10 % of the NPs added to the apical side were transported to the basolateral side [ 22 ] . The authors also con ﬁ rmed that NP transport depends on the surface composition of the nanocarriers . Subsequently , the NCs were evaluated for their ability to enhance the intestinal paracellular transport by monitoring the alternation of TEER , which correlates to the tightness of the cell layer . Fig . 6B shows that the prototypes tested resulted in a signi ﬁ cant reduction of TEER after 4 h incubation time ( * p b 0 . 05 ) . However , after the removal of the NCs and the replacement with fresh medium , the initial TEER was completely recovered . These results suggest that protamine - based NCs could induce a transient opening of TJs between Caco - 2 cells , especially as an effect of time . This phenomenon was mainly associated to the presence of protamine in the nanocapsules . In fact , the permeabilizing effect of protamine has already been reported by several authors using a ﬁ shmodel [ 42 ] , aratbrainperfusionmodel [ 43 ] andtheintestinalper - fusionmodelinrats [ 44 ] andtheeffectwasfoundtobedoseand / ortime dependent . Although the mechanism is still unclear , the authors pre - sumed thatprotaminemightinteract withintracellularcalciumtransfer or cause disruption of the micro ﬁ laments on the TJproteins . In addition , this effect was also the hypothetical mechanism by which the intestinal absorption of insulin was promoted after its conjugation to protamine [ 5 ] . On the other hand , the fact that the effect on TEER was transient and reversible is very important since loss of the tight junction barrier function is undesirable as it may lead to the penetration of pathogens and other harmful immunoreactive antigens into the mucosa . The re - sults of this study also showed that the extra layer of PSA does not alter the penetration enhancing properties of the NCs . Consequently , it could be inferred that somehow , the hidden protamine layer interacts with the anions on the cell surface and the TJ proteins along the cell membranes [ 45 ] . Caco - 2 and HT29 - MTX cells represent the two most abundant cell populations in the intestinal epithelium , enterocytes and goblet cells , respectively . Therefore , co - cultures of Caco - 2 cells and mucus - produc - ing goblet cells HT29 - MTX would provide a drug absorption model in - corporating the mucus barrier [ 19 ] . The presence of mucus on the surface of the Caco - 2 / HT29 - MTX monolayers was veri ﬁ ed by the Alcian blue test ( Supplementary data Fig . 7S ) and the permeability pro ﬁ les of the NCs , measured in terms of ﬂ uorescence , are shown in Fig . 7 . The statistical analysis of these data indicated that there was no signi ﬁ cant difference in the amount of ﬂ uorescence transported in Caco - 2 / HT29 - MTX compared to Caco - 2 monolayer for either protamine NCs or PSA / Fig . 3 . Stability pro ﬁ les of the associated insulin after incubation of protamine NCs and PSA - coated protamine NCs in SIF supplemented with pancreatic enzymes ( mean ± SD , n = 3 , * p b 0 . 05 signi ﬁ cant difference of PSA - coated protamine NCs compared to protamine NCs and free insulin and # p b 0 . 05 signi ﬁ cant difference of protamine NCs compared to free insulin ) . Fig . 4 . Cytotoxicityofinsulin - loadedprotamine ( PrNCs ) andpolysialicacid ( PSA ) coated - PrNCsonCaco - 2cellviabilitymeasuredbyMTSassay ( mean±SD , n = 6 ; * p b 0 . 05vs . thecontrol , without the formulation , 0 mg / mL ) . 115 L . N . Thwala et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 243 ( 2016 ) 109 – 120 Fig . 5 . ( A ) CLSM images showing y - z , x - z and x - y sections of TAMRA - labelled protamine formulations ( red ) . Cell membranes are stained in green with Alexa ﬂ uor ® 488 phalloidin . ( B ) Cellular uptake of TAMRA - protamine NCs and PSA - protamine NCs at different NC concentrations , 1 ( a ) , 1 . 5 ( b ) and 2 ( c ) mg / mL in Caco - 2 cells , measured by ﬂ ow cytometry ( mean ± SD , n = 9 ; * p b 0 . 05 , * * * p b 0 . 001 ) . ( For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) 116 L . N . Thwala et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 243 ( 2016 ) 109 – 120 protamineNCs ( p N 0 . 05 ) . This observationsuggeststhatthepresenceof mucus did not hinder the permeation enhancing property of the nanocarriers . In a similar study , Shan et al . found no signi ﬁ cant differ - ence in the transport of nanoparticles ( NPs ) across the Caco - 2 / HT29 - MTX - E12 co - culture in the presence or absence of mucus , implying that the presence of the mucus did not hinder the internalization of these NPs . This observation was attributed to the structure of the NPs as they possessed a nanocomplex core composed of insulin and a cell penetrating peptide ( CPP ) , coated with a dissociable hydrophilic and mucodiffusive polymer [ 46 ] . Further studies evaluating PrNCs and PSA - coated PRNCs interactions with mucin were also carried out , cor - roborating these observations . PSA - coated protamine NCs interacted less with mucin as compared to protamine NCs ( Supplementary data Fig . 7S2 ) . 3 . 5 . Mechanistic study of NC transport across Caco - 2 cells 3 . 5 . 1 . Characterization of NC endocytosis mechanism Nanoparticles have been reported to predominantly enter cells ac - tively by pinocytic or endocytic uptake at 37 °C [ 47 ] . Conformably , we observed a signi ﬁ cant reduction of transport at 4 °C ( Supplementary data Fig . 8S ) which implies that the cell membrane could be involved during transport of these formulations since membrane ﬂ uidity is high - ly restrictive at 4 °C and several proteins and enzymes are sensitive to temperature , thus active processes are inhibited by lowered tempera - tures [ 25 ] . In order to elucidate the speci ﬁ c mechanisms involved in the uptake of protamine - based NCs and the transcytosis of the cargo , transport studies were performed in the presence of inhibitors and compared to transport without inhibitors ( controls ) . The formulations were co - incu - bated with chlorpromazine ( 10 μ g / mL ) , which reduces the number of coated pits associated receptors at the cell surface by disrupting the as - sembly of clathrin [ 48 ] . Under this particular condition a reduction ( 30 % ) in ﬂ uorescence internalized into the cells and transported to the basolateral side was observed ( * * p b 0 . 01 , * * * p b 0 . 001 ) ( Fig . 8 ) . This im - plies that clathrin is involved in the transcytosis of protamine NCs and cargo . Caveolae - mediated endocytosis was evaluated by incubating cells with the NCs in the presence of 1 μ g / mL Filipin III . Filipin disrupts the caveolae structure by binding to sterols such as cholesterol and disorganizing caveolae proteins [ 48 ] . A signi ﬁ cant decrease ( approxi - mately 80 % ) in ﬂ uorescence transported to the basolateral side was ob - served in the presence of Filipin III ( * * * p b 0 . 001 ) ( Fig . 8 ) . Collectively , the data presented here suggest that caveolae and clathrinarebothinvolved inthetranscellulartransport ofcargobyprot - amine - based NCs , although caveolae ( 80 % decrease ) transport is pre - dominantly higher than clathrin ( 30 % decrease ) . Caveolae - mediated endocytosis involves clustering of lipid raft components on the plasma membrane into ﬂ ask - shaped invaginations formed by the interaction of different proteins mainly caveolin with the cellular membrane [ 46 ] . Roger et al . reported that caveolae was predominantly involved in the transcytosis of paticlaxel ( Ptx ) - loaded lipid nanocapsules ( LNCs ) when they found a signi ﬁ cant decrease in the amount of Ptx transported across Caco - 2 cells to the basolateral after co - incubation LNCs with ﬁ lipin [ 28 ] . These results are in agreement with Rejman et al . , who sug - gested thatcaveolaeinvaginationsareabletointernalizelargerparticles more easily than clathrin coated pits [ 49 ] . Dos Santos et al . also found that none of the inhibitors used could completely inhibit NP - uptake in differentcelltypesandconcludedthatthereisapossibilitythatmultiple pathways are used simultaneously to internalize the same NP [ 25 ] . Moreover , the ability of protamine to enhance membrane translocation has been reported [ 45 , 50 ] . Different mechanisms have been postulated for this property , includingthe factthat thebasicguanidine groupof the arginine forms stable hydrogen bonds with sulfates or phosphate pres - ent in biological membranes [ 51 ] . This interaction is considered essen - tial for membrane translocation and can consequently improve the cellular uptake of protamine - based nanosystems [ 47 ] . The implications and fate of internalized nanoparticles is debatable . Hillaireau et al . described polymeric nanoparticles as ef ﬁ cient vehicles that can be modi ﬁ ed to ferry their cargo to the target site . In this man - ner , it is predicted that internalized nanoparticles are degraded and hence release the drug into the enzymatic environment ( lysosomes ) or directly into the cell cytoplasm [ 52 ] . In this study , it was observed that both formulations used multiple endocytosis pathways to enter the cells ( Fig . 9 ) , which implies that once within the cells the cargo can be released in different organelles i . e . within the cytoplasm , the Golgi complex , endoplasmic reticulum or even in the lysosomes , de - pending on the speci ﬁ c pathway . Hence the amount of ﬂ uorescence Fig . 6 . ( A ) and ( B ) : A - Fluorescence ( % ) ofPrNCandPSA - PrNCtransportoverthetimeacrossCaco - 2andFAEmonolayers ( mean±SD , n = 6 ; * p b 0 . 05and * * * p b 0 . 001PrNCvs . PSA - PrNC ; γγγ p b 0 . 001Caco - 2vs . Caco - 2 / Raji ) . B - EffectsofPrNCsandPSA - PrNCsontheTEERvaluesofCaco - 2andFAEmonolayers ( mean±SD , n = 6 ; * * p b 0 . 01TEERvaluesvs . initialvaluesat0h ) . Fig . 7 . TransportofPSA coated anduncoated protamineNCsinCaco - 2andCaco - 2 / HT29 - MTX monolayers after 2 h incubation ( C ) ( mean ± SD , n = 6 ) . 117 L . N . Thwala et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 243 ( 2016 ) 109 – 120 detected on the basolateral compartment could be the TAMRA - protamine or free TAMRA , transcytosed at the basolateral as a product of the nanocarrier degradation that occurs intracellularly [ 49 , 53 ] . Trans - port of insulin in the basolateral compartment was assessed by LCMS - MSbutnoinsulinwasquanti ﬁ ed , presumablybecausetheamountofin - sulin that crossed the monolayer was below the LOQ ( 0 . 005 μ g / mL ) . 3 . 6 . In vivo ef ﬁ cacy of insulin - loaded nanocapsules Taking into account that the developed nanocapsule formulations ful ﬁ lled a number of criteria , such as stability in simulated GI ﬂ uids and adequate interaction with Caco - 2 cells , we studied the in vivo ef ﬁ cacy of the insulin - loaded NCs in non - diabetic rats by measuring the decrease in the plasma glucose levels . The formulations were ad - ministered upon intrajejunal cannulation ( 50 IU / kg ) after 4 h fasting [ 54 – 56 ] . The results presented in Fig . 10 indicate that both formulations ( protamineNCsand PSA / protamineNCs ) , ledto a 20 % decrease of blood glucose levels and this effect was maintained for the duration of the study . This effect was signi ﬁ cantly different to the one observed for the blank protamine NCs ( placebo control ) and the free insulin ( control ) , where no response was observed ( Fig . 10 ) . These results suggested that although a low bioavailability is observed , the prot - amine - based NCs possess the capacity to protect a fraction of insulin from degradation and enhance its intestinal absorption as compared to the free insulin . Theglycaemicresponseinhealthyratsobservedinthisstudyismod - est , when compared to other reported glycaemic responses in diabetic rats [ 57 ] . This difference is due to physiological differences of the two models i . e . the autoregulation process triggered by exogenous insulin in the blood suppresses the endogenous secretion of insulin by β - cells in healthy rats whereas this autoregulation phenomenon does not exist in diabetic rats [ 58 ] . However , in this study we preferred to work with non - diabetic rats in order to reduce the variability in the data asso - ciated totheinduction of diabetes usingstreptozotocin ( STZ ) , whichcan lead to varying degrees of hyperglycaemia amongst rats due to beta cell de ﬁ ciency / failure . Moreover , because of the beta cell de ﬁ ciency , diabetic animals become prone to hypoglycaemia and very sensitive to insulin , which implies that even a minor amount of insulin may produce a dras - tic reduction of glucose . Hence , we hypothesized that even a minor re - sponse in healthy rats would be much more admissible in terms of clinical relevance as compared to diabetic rats . Not surprising , low re - sponses and even no response at all have been reported for healthy rats following intra - gastric administration of insulin loaded nanoparti - cles [ 58 , 59 ] . Nonetheless , some authors have reported good responses in non - diabetic rats . On this regard some authors foundthat a glycaemic response could only be observed when the healthy rats were given a glucose challenge . Effectively , the minor response observed in this study con ﬁ rms that the insulin loaded in protamine - based NCs cross the intestinal epithelium and is absorbed into the blood circulation but the effect could be suppressed by autoregulation [ 9 , 58 ] . Fig . 8 . Comparison of transport under clathrin and caveolae inhibitors , ( chlorpromazine and Filipin III , respectively ) , in Caco - 2 and FAE monolayers after 2 h incubation with inhibitors . Formulations under no inhibition were considered as controls and represent P app values of 100 % . Hence , P app ( % ) represents the amount of ﬂ uorescence transported to the basolateral side incomparison to that inthe basolateral side of the respective control ( mean ± SD , n = 9 ; * p b 0 . 05 , * * p b 0 . 01 , * * * p b 0 . 001 ) . Fig . 9 . Schematic representation of proposed transport mechanisms used by protamine - based NCs . 118 L . N . Thwala et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 243 ( 2016 ) 109 – 120 4 . Conclusion A novel formulation of protamine - based nanocapsules was devel - oped and characterised for the oral delivery of peptides using insulin as a model peptide . The insulin - loaded NCs with a single protamine or a double PSA / protamine layer exhibit a very low toxicity in the Caco - 2 cell culture models . The NCs interacted with the monolayers and affect - ed both , the transcellular and paracellular mechanisms of transport . Ir - respective of their composition , the NCs were internalized in a dose and time dependent manner mainly via the caveolae and clathrin endocytic pathways . NCs led to a signi ﬁ cant but reversible decrease in the TEER values of the monolayers . On the other hand , following intra - jejunal administration of the formulation , a moderate reduction of the glucose levels was observed and this effect was maintained for at least 4 h . All in all , based on these studies , protamine - based NCs ex - hibit a promising pro ﬁ le as oral peptide delivery carriers capable of interacting with the intestinal epithelium . Acknowledgements The authors declare no potential con ﬂ ict of interest regarding the content of this work . The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 / 2007 – 2013 ) under grant agreement no 281035 ( TRANSINT ) . L . N . Thwala acknowledges her doctoral fellowship from the European Com - mission , Education , Audiovisual and Culture ExecutiveAgency ( EACEA ) , under the Erasmus Mundusprogramme , “ NanoFar : EuropeanDoctorate in Nanomedicine and Pharmaceutical Innovation ” ( ref : 2012 0028 ) . A . Beloqui is a postdoctoral researcher from the F . R . S . - FNRS ( Fonds de la Recherche Scienti ﬁ que ) , Belgium . Appendix A . Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jconrel . 2016 . 10 . 002 . References [ 1 ] A . desRieux , V . Fievez , I . Théate , J . Mast , V . Préat , Y . J . Schneider , Animprovedinvitro model of human intestinal follicle - associated epithelium to study nanoparticle transport by M cells , Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . 30 ( 2007 ) 380 – 391 . [ 2 ] T . A . S . Aguirre , D . Teijeiro - Osorio , M . Rosa , I . S . Coulter , M . J . Alonso , D . J . Brayden , Cur - rent status of selected oral peptide technologies in advanced preclinical develop - ment and in clinical trials , Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . ( 2016 ) ( In press ) . [ 3 ] O . Bouttefeux , A . Beloqui , V . Préat , Delivery of peptides via the oral route : diabetes treatment by peptide - loaded nanoparticles , Curr . Pharm . Des . 22 ( 2015 ) 1 – 30 . [ 4 ] F . - Y . Su , K . - J . Lin , K . Sonaje , S . - P . Wey , T . - C . Yen , Y . - C . Ho , N . Panda , E . - Y . Chuang , B . Maiti , H . - W . Sung , Protease inhibition and absorption enhancement by functional nanoparticles for effective oral insulin delivery , Biomaterials 33 ( 2012 ) 2801 – 2811 . [ 5 ] H . He , J . Sheng , A . E . David , Y . M . Kwon , J . Zhang , Y . Huang , J . Wang , V . C . Yang , Theuse of low molecular weight protamine chemical chimera to enhance monomeric insu - lin intestinal absorption , Biomaterials 34 ( 2013 ) 7733 – 7743 . [ 6 ] S . Sun , N . Liang , H . Piao , H . Yamamoto , Y . Kawashima , F . Cui , Insulin - S·O ( sodium oleate ) complex - loaded PLGA nanoparticles : formulation , characterization and in vivo evaluation , J . Microencapsul . 27 ( 2010 ) 471 – 478 . [ 7 ] A . Trapani , V . Laquintana , N . Denora , A . Lopedota , A . Cutrignelli , M . Franco , G . Trapani , G . Liso , Eudragit RS 100 microparticles containing 2 - hydroxypropyl - beta - cyclodextrin and glutathione : physicochemical characterization , drug release and transport studies , Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . 30 ( 2007 ) 64 – 74 . [ 8 ] P . Fonte , F . Araújo , C . Silva , C . Pereira , S . Reis , H . A . Santos , B . Sarmento , Polymer - based nanoparticles for oral insulin delivery : revisited approaches , Biotechnol . Adv . ( 2015 ) 30 – 45 . [ 9 ] C . Damgé , C . Michel , M . Aprahamian , P . Couvreur , J . P . Devissaguet , Nanocapsules as carriers for oral peptide delivery , J . Control . Release 13 ( 1990 ) 233 – 239 . [ 10 ] S . H . Bakhru , S . Furtado , A . P . Morello , E . Mathiowitz , Oraldeliveryofproteinsbybio - degradable nanoparticles , Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 65 ( 2013 ) 811 – 821 . [ 11 ] E . P . Herrero , M . J . Alonso , N . Csaba , Polymer - basedoralpeptidenanomedicines , Ther . Deliv . 3 ( 2012 ) 657 – 668 . [ 12 ] S . Dünnhaupt , O . Kammona , C . Waldner , C . Kiparissides , A . Bernkop - Schnürch , Nano - carrier systems : strategies to overcome the mucus gel barrier , Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . ( 2015 ) 1 – 7 . [ 13 ] R . A . Cone , Barrier properties of mucus , Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 61 ( 2009 ) 75 – 85 . [ 14 ] C . Prego , D . Torres , E . Fernandez - Megia , R . Novoa - Carballal , E . Quiñoá , M . J . Alonso , Chitosan – PEG nanocapsules as new carriers for oral peptide delivery , J . Control . Re - lease 111 ( 2006 ) 299 – 308 . [ 15 ] P . Bader , P . R . Wardwell , Polysialic acid : overcoming the hurdles of drug delivery , Ther . Deliv . 5 ( 2014 ) 235 – 237 . [ 16 ] G . Gregoriadis , S . Jain , I . Papaioannou , P . Laing , Improving the therapeutic ef ﬁ cacy of peptides and proteins : a role for polysialic acids , Int . J . Pharm . 300 ( 2005 ) 125 – 130 . [ 17 ] S . Jain , D . H . Hreczuk - Hirst , B . McCormack , M . Mital , A . Epenetos , P . Laing , G . Gregoriadis , Polysialylated insulin : synthesis , characterization and biological activi - ty in vivo , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1622 ( 2003 ) 42 – 49 . [ 18 ] A . Beloqui , A . des Rieux , V . Préat , Mechanisms of transport of polymeric and lipidic nanoparticles across the intestinal barrier , Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . ( 2016 ) ( In press ) . [ 19 ] F . Antunes , F . Andrade , F . Araújo , D . Ferreira , B . Sarmento , Establishment of a triple co - culture in vitro cell models to study intestinal absorption of peptide drugs , Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . 83 ( 2013 ) 427 – 435 . [ 20 ] T . Lesuf ﬂ eur , A . Barbat , C . Luccioni , J . Beaumatin , M . Clair , A . Kornowski , E . Dussaulx , B . Dutrillaux , A . Zweibaum , Dihydrofolate reductase gene ampli ﬁ cation - associated shift of differentiation in methotrexate - adapted HT29 cells , J . Cell Biol . 115 ( 1991 ) 1409 – 1418 . [ 21 ] P . B . Memvanga , V . Préat , Formulation design and in vivo antimalarial evaluation of lipid - based drug delivery systems for oral delivery of β - arteether , Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . 82 ( 2012 ) 112 – 119 . [ 22 ] A . des Rieux , E . G . E . Ragnarsson , E . Gullberg , V . Préat , Y . J . Schneider , P . Artursson , Transport of nanoparticles across an in vitro model of the human intestinal follicle associated epithelium , Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . 25 ( 2005 ) 455 – 465 . [ 23 ] A . Beloqui , M . Á . Solinís , A . R . Gascón , A . del Pozo - Rodríguez , A . des Rieux , V . Préat , Mechanism of transport of saquinavir - loaded nanostructured lipid carriers across the intestinal barrier , J . Control . Release 166 ( 2013 ) 115 – 123 . [ 24 ] A . Beloqui , M . Á . Solinís , A . des Rieux , V . Préat , A . Rodríguez - Gascón , Dextran - protamine coatednanostructuredlipidcarriersasmucus - penetrating nanoparticles for lipophilic drugs , Int . J . Pharm . 468 ( 2014 ) 105 – 111 . Fig . 10 . Standardized hypoglycemic effect following intra - jejunal administration of insulin loaded protamine NCs ( 50 IU / kg , n = 8 ) , PSA - coated protamine NCs ( 50 IU / kg , n = 8 ) , blank protamineNCs ( placebo n = 5 ) atthesameNCconcentrationandinsulinsalinesolution ( 50IU / kg , n = 8 ) innon - diabeticrats . ( Mean±SEM , * p b 0 . 05signi ﬁ cantdifferenceforprotamine NCs and PSA / protamine NCs compared to the placebo control . ) 119 L . N . Thwala et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 243 ( 2016 ) 109 – 120 [ 25 ] T . dos Santos , J . Varela , I . Lynch , A . Salvati , K . A . Dawson , Effects of transport inhibi - tors on the cellular uptake of carboxylated polystyrene nanoparticles in different cell lines , PLoS One 6 ( 2011 ) , e24438 . [ 26 ] A . Makhlof , S . Fujimoto , Y . Tozuka , H . Takeuchi , In vitro and in vivo evaluation of WGA - carbopol modi ﬁ ed liposomes as carriers for oral peptide delivery , Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . 77 ( 2011 ) 216 – 224 . [ 27 ] J . E . Schnitzer , P . Oh , E . Pinney , J . Allard , Filipin - sensitive caveolae - mediated trans - port in endothelium : reduced transcytosis , scavenger endocytosis , and capillary permeability of select macromolecules , J . Cell Biol . 127 ( 1994 ) 1217 – 1232 . [ 28 ] E . Roger , F . Lagarce , E . Garcion , J . - P . Benoit , Lipid nanocarriers improve paclitaxel transport throughout human intestinal epithelial cells by using vesicle - mediated transcytosis , J . Control . Release 140 ( 2009 ) 174 – 181 . [ 29 ] F . Reynolds , R . Weissleder , L . Josephson , Protamine as an ef ﬁ cient membrane - translocating peptide , Bioconjug . Chem . 16 ( 2005 ) 1240 – 1245 . [ 30 ] J . V . González - Aramundiz , M . P . Olmedo , Á . González - Fernández , M . J . A . Fernández , N . S . Csaba , Protamine - based nanoparticles as new antigen delivery systems , Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . 97 ( 2015 ) 51 – 59 . [ 31 ] D . R . Wilson , N . Zhang , A . L . Silvers , M . B . Forstner , R . A . Bader , Synthesis and evalua - tion of cyclosporine A - loaded polysialic acid – polycaprolactone micelles for rheu - matoid arthritis , Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . 51 ( 2014 ) 146 – 156 . [ 32 ] M . Tob ı ́ o , A . Sánchez , A . Vila , I . Soriano , C . Evora , J . Vila - Jato , M . J . Alonso , The role of PEGonthe stabilityindigestive ﬂ uidsandinvivofate ofPEG - PLA nanoparticles fol - lowing oral administration , Colloids Surf . B : Biointerfaces 18 ( 2000 ) 315 – 323 . [ 33 ] T . Zhang , Z . She , Z . Huang , J . Li , X . Luo , Y . Deng , Application of sialic acid / polysialic acid in the drug delivery systems , Asian J . Pharm . Sci . 9 ( 2014 ) 75 – 81 . [ 34 ] A . Yamamoto , T . Taniguchi , K . Rikyuu , T . Tsuji , T . Fujita , M . Murakami , S . Muranishi , Effectsofvariousproteaseinhibitorsontheintestinalabsorptionanddegradationofinsulininrats , Pharm . Res . 11 ( 1994 ) 1496 – 1500 . [ 35 ] W . Shan , X . Zhu , M . Liu , L . Li , J . Zhong , W . Sun , Z . Zhang , Y . Huang , Overcoming the diffusion barrier of mucus and absorption barrier of epithelium by self - assembled nanoparticles for oral delivery of insulin , ACS Nano 9 ( 2015 ) 2345 – 2356 . [ 36 ] G . Gregoriadis , S . Jain , I . Papaioannou , P . Laing , Improvingthe therapeuticef ﬁ cacyof peptides and proteins : a role for polysialic acids , Int . J . Pharm . 300 ( 2005 ) 125 – 130 . [ 37 ] C . B . Woitiski , B . Sarmento , R . A . Carvalho , R . J . Neufeld , F . Veiga , Facilitated nanoscale delivery of insulin across intestinal membrane models , Int . J . Pharm . 412 ( 2011 ) 123 – 131 . [ 38 ] E . Caliot , C . Libon , S . Kernéis , E . Pringault , Translocation of ribosomal immunostimulant through an in vitro - reconstituted digestive barrier containing M - like cells , Scand . J . Immunol . 52 ( 2000 ) 588 – 594 . [ 39 ] M . A . Clark , M . A . Jepson , B . H . Hirst , Exploiting M cells for drug and vaccine delivery , Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 50 ( 2001 ) 81 – 106 . [ 40 ] L . Kou , J . Sun , Y . Zhai , Z . He , Theendocytosisandintracellularfateofnanomedicines : implication for rational design , Asian J . Pharm . Sci . 8 ( 2013 ) 1 – 8 . [ 41 ] A . E . Sköld , J . J . P . van Beek , S . P . Sittig , G . Bakdash , J . Tel , G . Schreibelt , I . J . M . de Vries , Protamine - stabilized RNA as an ex vivo stimulant of primary human dendritic cell subsets , Cancer Immunol . Immunother . 64 ( 2015 ) 1461 – 1473 . [ 42 ] C . J . Bentzel , M . Fromm , C . E . Palant , U . Hegel , Protamine alters structure andconduc - tance of Necturus gallbladder tight junctions without major electrical effects on the apical cell membrane , J . Membr . Biol . 95 ( 1987 ) 9 – 20 . [ 43 ] M . A . Deli , Potentialuseoftightjunctionmodulatorstoreversiblyopenmembranous barriers and improve drug delivery , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1788 ( 2009 ) 892 – 910 . [ 44 ] C . Gisol ﬁ , X . Shi , Paracellular transportof water and carbohydrates duringintestinal perfusion of protamine in the rat , Am . J . Med . Sci . 311 ( 1996 ) 107 – 112 . [ 45 ] M . Kristensen , D . Birch , H . MørckNielsen , Applicationsandchallengesforuseofcell - penetrating peptides as delivery vectors for peptide and protein cargos , Int . J . Mol . Sci . 17 ( 2016 ) 185 – 192 . [ 46 ] M . Liu , J . Zhang , W . Shan , Y . Huang , Developments of mucus penetrating nanoparti - cles , Asian J . Pharm . Sci . 10 ( 2015 ) 275 – 282 . [ 47 ] B . He , P . Lin , Z . Jia , W . Du , W . Qu , L . Yuan , W . Dai , H . Zhang , X . Wang , J . Wang , X . Zhang , Q . Zhang , The transportmechanisms of polymernanoparticles inCaco - 2 ep - ithelial cells , Biomaterials 34 ( 2013 ) 6082 – 6098 . [ 48 ] P . A . Orlandi , P . H . Fishman , Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains , J . Cell Biol . 141 ( 1998 ) 905 – 915 . [ 49 ] J . Rejman , V . Oberle , I . S . Zuhorn , D . Hoekstra , Size - dependent internalization of par - ticles via the pathways of clathrin - and caveolae - mediated endocytosis , Biochem . J . 377 ( 2004 ) 159 – 169 . [ 50 ] C . Bechara , S . Sagan , Cell - penetrating peptides : 20 years later , where do we stand ? FEBS Lett . 587 ( 2013 ) 1693 – 1702 . [ 51 ] J . B . Rothbard , T . C . Jessop , P . A . Wender , Adaptive translocation : the role of hydrogen bonding and membrane potential in the uptake of guanidinium - rich transporters into cells , Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 57 ( 2005 ) 495 – 504 . [ 52 ] H . Hillaireau , P . Couvreur , Nanocarriers ’ entry into the cell : relevance to drug deliv - ery , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 66 ( 2009 ) 2873 – 2896 . [ 53 ] E . M . Damm , L . Pelkmans , J . Kartenbeck , A . Mezzacasa , T . Kurzchalia , A . Helenius , Clathrin - and caveolin - 1 - independent endocytosis : Entry of simian virus 40 into cells devoid of caveolae , J . Cell Biol . 168 ( 2005 ) 477 – 488 . [ 54 ] M . Morishita , T . Goto , N . A . Peppas , J . I . Joseph , M . C . Torjman , C . Munsick , K . Nakamura , T . Yamagata , K . Takayama , A . M . Lowman , Mucosal insulin delivery sys - tems based on complexation polymer hydrogels : effect of particle size on insulin enteral absorption , J . Control . Release 97 ( 2004 ) 115 – 124 . [ 55 ] M . Morishita , N . Kamei , J . Ehara , K . Isowa , K . Takayama , A novel approach using functional peptides for ef ﬁ cient intestinal absorption of insulin , J . Control . Release 118 ( 2007 ) 177 – 184 . [ 56 ] N . Reix , A . Parat , E . Seyfritz , R . Van Der Werf , V . Epure , N . Ebel , L . Danicher , E . Marchioni , N . Jeandidier , M . Pinget , Y . Frère , S . Sigrist , In vitro uptake evaluation inCaco - 2cells and invivoresults indiabeticrats of insulin - loaded PLGA nanoparti - cles , Int . J . Pharm . 437 ( 2012 ) 213 – 220 . [ 57 ] P . Fonte , T . Nogueira , C . Gehm , D . Ferreira , B . Sarmento , Chitosan - coated solid lipid nanoparticles enhance the oral absorption of insulin , Drug Deliv . Transl . Res . 1 ( 2011 ) 299 – 308 . [ 58 ] C . Damgé , C . Michel , M . Aprahamian , P . Couvreur , New approach for oral adminis - trationofinsulinwithpolyalkylcyanoacrylatenanocapsulesasdrugcarrier , Diabetes 37 ( 1988 ) 246 – 251 . [ 59 ] M . Morishita , T . Goto , K . Nakamura , A . M . Lowman , K . Takayama , N . A . Peppas , Novel oral insulin delivery systems based on complexation polymer hydrogels : single and multiple administration studies in type 1 and 2 diabetic rats , J . Control . Release 110 ( 2006 ) 587 – 594 . 120 L . N . Thwala et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 243 ( 2016 ) 109 – 120