1 Running title : Han et al . How enlightened self - interest benefits all . Cite as : Han Z , Chen L , Hao Q , He Q , Budeski K , Jin D , Xu F , Tang K , and Li Y . How enlightened self - interest guided global vaccine sharing benefits all : a modelling study . J Glob Health 20xx ; xx : xxx . How enlightened self - interest guided global vaccine sharing benefits all : a modelling study Zhenyu Han 1 , 2 ( https : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0001 - 9634 - 7962 ) , Lin Chen 2 ( https : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 2605 - 749X ) , Qianyue Hao 1 , 2 ( https : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 7109 - 3588 ) , Qiwei He 3 , 4 ( https : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0003 - 1410 - 3839 ) , Katherine Budeski 5 , Depeng Jin 1 , 2 , Fengli Xu 2 † ( https : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 5720 - 4026 ) , Kun Tang 3 , 4 † ( https : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 5444 - 186X ) , Yong Li 1 , 2 † ( https : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0001 - 5617 - 1659 ) 1 Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology ( BNRist ) , Beijing , P . R . China 2 Department of Electronic Engineering , Tsinghua University , Beijing , P . R . China 3 Vanke School of Public Health , Tsinghua University , Beijing , P . R . China 4 Institute for Healthy China , Tsinghua University , Beijing , P . R . China 5 Nuffield Department of Medicine , University of Oxford , UK †Joint senior authorship . ABSTRACT Background Despite the consensus that vaccines play an important role in combating the global spread of infectious diseases , vaccine inequity is still rampant with deep - seated mentality of self - priority . This study aims to evaluate the existence and possible outcomes of a more equitable global vaccine distribution and explore a concrete incentive mechanism that promotes vaccine equity . Methods We design a metapopulation epidemiological model that simultaneously considers global vaccine distribution and human mobility , which is then calibrated by the number of infections and real - world vaccination records during COVID - 19 pandemic from March 2020 to July 2021 . We explore the possibility of the enlightened self - interest incentive mechanism , i . e . , improving one’s own epidemic outcomes by sharing vaccines with other countries , by evaluating the number of infections and deaths under various vaccine sharing strategies using the proposed model . To understand how these strategies affect the national interests , we distinguish the imported and local cases for further cost - benefit analyses that rationalize the enlightened self - interest incentive mechanism behind vaccine sharing . 2 Results The proposed model accurately reproduces the real - world cumulative infections for both global and regional epidemics with R 2 > 0 . 990 , which can support the following evaluations of different vaccine sharing strategies . High - income countries can reduce 16 . 7 ( 95 % CI : 8 . 4 - 24 . 9 , P < 0 . 001 ) million infection cases and 82 . 0 ( 95 % CI : 76 . 6 - 87 . 4 , P < 0 . 001 ) thousand deaths on average by more actively sharing vaccines in an enlightened self - interest manner , where the reduced internationally imported cases outweigh the threat from increased local infections . Such vaccine sharing strategies can also reduce 4 . 3 ( 95 % CI : 1 . 2 - 7 . 5 , P < 0 . 01 ) million infections and 7 . 0 ( 95 % CI : 5 . 7 - 8 . 3 , P < 0 . 001 ) thousand deaths in middle - and low - income countries , achieving a win - win situation for the globe . Lastly , the more equitable vaccine distribution can largely avoid the global mobility reduction needed for pandemic control . Conclusions We study the incentive mechanism of enlightened self - interest that can motivate vaccine equity by realigning the national interest to more equitable vaccine distributions . The positive results could promote multilateral collaborations in global vaccine redistribution and reconcile conflicted national interests , which facilitates a mutually benefiting world . INTRODUCTION Vaccines continue to be the most crucial resource for curbing the global spread of infectious diseases [ 1 ] , achieving effective epidemic control at a relatively low economic cost compared with lockdown or quarantine measures . The scarcity of vaccine resources during the early stage of disease outbreak makes them a sought - after commodity , hoarded by high - income countries under the influence of self - priority policies . For instance , during the combat against the COVID - 19 pandemic , more than three - fourths of the 7 . 8 billion manufactured vaccine doses are possessed by a few high - income countries as of 27 November 2021 [ 2 ] , which is “not a supply problem , but an allocation problem” urged by World Health Organization ( WHO ) . The inequity of vaccine resources not only creates a hotbed for disease transmission in the low - and middle - income countries , but also undermines epidemic control in high - income countries in this highly intertwined and globalized world [ 3 - 5 ] . To remedy the inequitable vaccine distribution , international organizations are taking action . A global risk - sharing mechanism for pooled procurement and equitable redistribution of vaccines was proposed by the COVID - 19 Vaccines Global Access ( COVAX ) Facility in April 2020 , which purchases vaccine doses in bulk at a discount and distributes equitably among the participants [ 6 , 7 ] . Although it aims ambitiously to 3 provide at least 2 billion vaccine doses to cover 20 % of each country ' s population in 2021 [ 7 ] , it has been repeatedly falling behind its goals and only delivered less than half of the target doses by the beginning of 2022 [ 8 , 9 ] . One crucial reason for its failure is the absence of clear incentives for high - income participants to promote global vaccine sharing with their own wealth . According to the rational choice theory , the decisions made by individuals will maximize their own utility considering the corresponding costs and benefits [ 10 ] . Although it is ethically recognized that more equitable vaccine distribution is in “everyone ' s best interest” [ 11 , 12 ] , a practical incentive with quantitative , real - world data supported evaluation is an important yet missing piece for promoting global vaccine equity [ 13 - 15 ] . Motivated by the importance vaccine equity , many scientists and public health researchers are dedicated to optimizing the distribution of vaccine doses and understanding its consequences . A large body of recent works focused on improving the effectiveness [ 16 - 18 ] and equity [ 19 - 23 ] of the domestic distribution of vaccines . These studies are incapable of modelling the national interests of sovereign countries and scaling up to global vaccine distribution [ 11 , 24 ] . To explore the effect of global vaccine sharing , several early attempts employed highly simplified models with hypothetical parameters , which usually overlook the structure of global mobility [ 20 ] and are lack of real - world data supported evidence [ 14 , 15 , 25 , 26 ] . Although these works provided important theoretical results for various hypothetical scenarios , they cannot adequately reflect the complex situation of real - world pandemics , which limited their capability of promoting global vaccine sharing with practical incentives . In this study , we aim to investigate the incentive mechanism of enlightened self - interest for global vaccine sharing through quantitative modelling analyses , where each party ' s willingness to share a portion of vaccines to assist others in return promotes their own interest . Specifically , we propose a novel epidemiological model that provides a connected perspective of the world by simultaneously considering global vaccine distribution and human mobility . Leveraging the proposed model , we evaluate a wide range of vaccine sharing strategies to explore the feasibility of enlightened self - interest phenomenon , which has the potential to substantially 4 motivate global cooperation in combating infectious diseases with equitable vaccine access . We assume the shared vaccines are pooled globally and redistributed to all regions in proportion to their population sizes as COVAX , based on which enlightened self - interest can be achieved through balancing the two competing influence pathways of vaccine sharing and human mobility . The objective of this study is to propose and rationalize the practical incentive mechanism of enlightened self - interest that facilitates more equitable global vaccine distribution through a quantitative , real - world data supported modelling approach . METHODS We conduct a modelling study that extends the classic epidemiological model ( e . g . , SIR model [ 27 ] ) by considering regional mobility flows and vaccination process . Leveraging the calibrated model on real - world infection records , we explore several vaccine sharing scenarios and the corresponding outcomes in terms of averted infections and deaths , aligned national interests with more equitable vaccine distribution . We use one - way Analysis of Variance ( ANOVA ) to validate the statistical significance among the contrasting scenarios . Regional division and scenario setup In this study , we take the COVID - 19 pandemic as an example to evaluate the existence and possible outcomes of a more equitable global vaccine distribution with rich real - world data support . Considering the varying epidemic situation and abilities to access vaccine supplies across the world , we divide the globe into seven regions according to the World Bank definitions [ 28 ] in Figure 1 , panel A : East Asia & Pacific ( EAS ) , Europe & Central Asia ( ECS ) , Latin America & Caribbean ( LCN ) , Middle East & North Africa ( MEA ) , North America ( NAC ) , South Asia ( SAS ) , and Sub - Saharan Africa ( SSF ) ( see Supplementary Table S1 , S2 in the Online Supplementary Document ) . We divide these regions into two groups based on their production capability ( see Supplementary Method in the Online Supplementary Document ) [ 29 , 30 ] : EAS , ECS , NAC and SAS are noted as vaccine - producing 5 regions . Other regions that lack manufacturing capability ( LCN , MEA and SSF ) are referred to as non - vaccine - producing regions . Since high - income countries have enough resources to secure their vaccine production capability , we observe the vaccine - producing regions mainly contain high - income countries , while lower - middle - income countries mostly are located in non - vaccine - producing regions ( see Supplementary Table S3 in the Online Supplementary Document ) . Global mobility - aware epidemiological model design To capture the epidemic dynamics under different vaccine sharing strategies , we propose a novel epidemiological model that systematically accounts for the breakthrough infection during vaccination process and the global mobility network . Specifically , each region maintains its own compartmentalized states for susceptible ( S ) , vaccinated ( V ) , infectious ( I ) , recovered ( R ) , and deceased ( D ) people . To faithfully reproduce real - world COVID - 19 spreading with these compartmentalized states and avoid the strong assumption of once - and - for - all vaccination [ 15 ] , we consider infections as a probabilistic process where the vaccinated population has a reduced infection probability according to the up - to - date medical research [ 31 - 33 ] , i . e . , the breakthrough infection . We argue that to faithfully model the epidemic outcomes under different vaccine sharing strategies without overestimating their effectiveness , breakthrough infection is necessary for the model , where both susceptible people and part of vaccinated people ( considering the non - 100 % vaccine effectiveness ) can get infected , which generates 𝐼 ! and 𝐼 " accordingly . In our model , the vaccinated infection cases tend to have a lower death rate [ 31 - 33 ] , which affects the transfer possibility from infectious to recovered and deceased . The above contagion process in each region is characterized by the following ordinary differential equations : dS n d𝑡 = −𝑣𝑐𝑐 ( 𝑛 , 𝑡 ) − β $ 𝑆 $ / 𝐼 ! , $ + 𝐼 " , $ 1 , d𝑉 $ d𝑡 = 𝑣𝑐𝑐 ( 𝑛 , 𝑡 ) − β $ ( 1 − κ ) 𝑉 $ / 𝐼 ! , $ + 𝐼 " , $ 1 , d𝐼 ! , $ d𝑡 = β $ 𝑆 $ / 𝐼 ! , $ + 𝐼 " , $ 1 − γ $ 𝐼 ! , $ − ψ𝐼 ! , $ , 6 d𝐼 " , $ d𝑡 = β $ ( 1 − κ ) 𝑉 $ / 𝐼 ! , $ + 𝐼 " , $ 1 − γ $ 𝐼 " , $ − ψ ( 1 − σ ) 𝐼 " , $ , d𝑅 ! , $ d𝑡 = γ $ 𝐼 ! , $ , d𝑅 " , $ d𝑡 = γ $ 𝐼 " , $ , d𝐷 ! , $ d𝑡 = ψ𝐼 ! , $ , d𝐷 " , $ d𝑡 = ψ ( 1 − σ ) 𝐼 " , $ , where 𝑆 $ , 𝑉 $ , 𝐼 ⋆ , $ , 𝑅 ⋆ , $ , 𝐷 ⋆ , $ are the susceptible , vaccinated , infected , recovered and deceased people in region n . 𝑣𝑐𝑐 ( 𝑛 , 𝑡 ) is the number of people who can be vaccinated in region n at time t derived by various vaccine sharing strategies . Specifically , we divide the infected , recovered and deceased people according to their vaccination status into 𝐼 ! , $ , 𝑅 ! , $ , 𝐷 ! , $ and 𝐼 " , $ , 𝑅 " , $ , 𝐷 " , $ for unvaccinated and vaccinated people accordingly . It enables us to explicitly model the breakthrough infection process . Based on these regional models , we overlay a mobility network connecting these regions to form a global view of the epidemic . We adopt the international air traffic records from OAG , which has been proven to be highly informative for epidemic modelling [ 34 ] . Leveraging this air traffic records , we reconstruct the global mobility network with all transportations . Considering the privacy issue , the detailed health status of passengers cannot be acquired . The continued existence of asymptomatic COVID - 19 cases makes it harder to distinguish the flow of infection cases [ 35 ] . Under this circumstance , we assume infection cases move across regions proportionally to the prevalence of the source region . This assumption maximizes the utility of real - world mobility data , while also providing us the ability to simulate the epidemic dynamics under different vaccine sharing strategies . Detailed mobility network construction can be found in Supplementary Method in the Online Supplementary Document . 7 Characterizing different vaccine sharing strategies We define two parameters to characterize different vaccine sharing strategies : the start - sharing point and the sharing percentage . Each vaccine - producing region starts with only vaccinating its citizens until its vaccination rate reaches the start - sharing point . Then it starts to share the newly acquired vaccines by the sharing percentage . The shared vaccines are pooled globally and redistributed to all regions in proportion to their population sizes , which is consistent with the COVAX framework [ 36 ] . As such , we can design a series of typical vaccine sharing strategies by formulating different combinations of the start - sharing point ( a ) and the sharing percentage ( b ) . For example , when b = 0 % , vaccine - producing regions will not share any vaccine even after all their citizens are fully vaccinated , which we refer to as the non - sharing strategy . When a = 100 % , b = 100 % , the vaccine - producing regions will share all their newly produced vaccines after finishing their own citizens , which is denoted as the selfish strategy . Both the non - sharing and selfish strategies indicate the vaccine - producing region will prioritize their own citizens for full vaccination before they start sharing , which represents the typical self - priority behaviours . On the contrary , an altruistic strategy will share 100 % of their vaccine supplies from the very beginning , where a = 0 % , b = 100 % . More fine - grained vaccine sharing strategies can be defined with specific combinations of a and b , ranging from the non - sharing to the altruistic strategy . We evaluate the vaccine sharing strategies with different parameters and compare the corresponding number of infections or deaths in each region with the selfish strategy . The feasible parameter combinations for enlightened self - interest guided vaccine sharing are defined as those simultaneously reducing the infections in both vaccine - producing regions and non - vaccine - producing regions . Disentangling imported transmission and local transmission New cases can be divided into two types : local transmission caused by the initial cases in the region , and imported transmission caused by the inflow of infection cases and their descendant cases . To investigate how vaccine sharing strategies affect the epidemic outcomes in vaccine - producing regions and non - vaccine - producing regions , we need to disentangle these two types of transmission . In this work , we 8 define the imported transmission by summing up the number of imported infections and their subsequent infections , and define the local transmission as infections caused by pre - existing local cases . We trace back the above process until the COVID - 19 vaccines are available , which is in December 2020 . Detailed calculation process and illustration can be found in Supplementary Method and Supplementary Figure S5 in the Online Supplementary Document . Quantifying the impact of vaccine sharing on inter - regional mobility policy We measure the mobility benefit of different vaccine sharing strategies as the equivalent mobility reduction under the selfish strategy . That is , we calculate the required reduction of inter - regional mobility under the selfish strategy in order to achieve a similar level of infection prevention as the inspected vaccine sharing strategies with no mobility constraint , which is considered as the equivalent mobility benefit of the given vaccine sharing strategy . RESULTS Reproducing epidemic developments under real - world vaccine distribution We first showcase the significant global mismatch between COVID - 19 prevalence , measured by seroprevalence statistics , and vaccine distribution in different regions ( see Figure 1 , panel A , B ) . Regions with high seroprevalence possess few vaccine supplies , where nearly ten people share a single vaccine in SSF . By contrast , vaccine - producing regions such as EAS and NAC have the largest vaccine supplies , albeit with relatively lower seroprevalence . The mismatch between seroprevalence and vaccine distribution demonstrates the substantial vaccine inequity around the world , suggesting the great potential for more equitable vaccine sharing . To capture the above global mismatch and evaluate the epidemic outcomes under more equitable vaccine sharing strategies , we propose a quantitative , real - world data supported modelling approach . Leveraging a metapopulation schema with compartmentalized states for susceptible ( S ) , vaccinated ( V ) , infectious ( I ) , recovered ( R ) , and deceased ( D ) people , we model the world into several regions that are 9 interconnected by both vaccination sharing and population flows . It captures both the spatial and temporal heterogeneity of the epidemiological severity and vaccine resources ( see Methods and Supplementary Methods for details in the Online Supplementary Document ) . The proposed model accurately reproduces the vastly different and ever - changing epidemic dynamics in all the regions with R 2 > 0 . 990 ( Figure 1 , panel C , blue lines ) , which demonstrates sufficient capability to capture the disease transmission processes in a connected world . Enlightened self - interest guided vaccine sharing strategies As an intuitive example , we try to reduce the mismatch between COVID - 19 prevalence and vaccine distributions through altruistic strategy , where vaccine - producing regions will share all of their vaccine supplies to the global vaccine pool from the beginning . This naïve policy will lead to a reduction of 10 . 77 % ( 95 % CI : 10 . 38 % - 11 . 17 % , P < 0 . 001 ) global infections compared to the selfish strategy ( see Supplementary Fig S1 in the Online Supplementary Document ) , which is a significant improvement in terms of global epidemic outcome , yet at the cost of incurring more infections in vaccine - producing regions , e . g . , ECS suffers 4 . 37 % ( 95 % CI : 3 . 97 % - 4 . 74 % , P < 0 . 001 ) more infections . We argue that such trade - offs can be avoided with more deliberated vaccine sharing strategies . As shown in Figure 2 , panel A , we demonstrate the likelihood to achieve such enlightened self - interest of each parameter combination by different colours . We find when the start - sharing point reaches 60 % , there are possibilities to achieve enlightened self - interest , as the dotted line in Figure 2 , panel A shows . Besides , at a higher start - sharing point , vaccine - sharing strategies can share more vaccine supplies with other regions . As a conservative estimation , we also provide the parameter combinations that achieve enlightened self - interest over 80 % likelihood , as the dashed line in Figure 2 , panel A shows . Under this strict definition , we still observe that when the local vaccination rate reaches around 80 % , vaccine - producing regions can still share most of their vaccine supplies with other regions . Under enlightened self - interest guided vaccine sharing strategies , sharing vaccines not only benefits the non - vaccine - producing regions but also benefits the vaccine - producing 10 regions themselves . Detailed epidemic outcomes for each region are available in Supplementary Fig S2 in the Online Supplementary Document . We further evaluate how different levels of sharing , represented by the parameter sharing percentage ( b ) , affect the infections and deaths . Specifically , we search the optimal start - sharing point for different sharing percentages to achieve their best epidemic outcomes in the feasible parameter combinations of enlightened self - interest guided strategies , noted as b % - Sharing accordingly . In Figure 2 , panel B , we observe a higher sharing percentage will result in a greater reduction in both infections and deaths for all kinds of regions . As an example , the 100 % - sharing strategy reduces 16 . 7 ( 95 % CI : 8 . 4 - 24 . 9 , P < 0 . 001 ) million infections in vaccine - producing regions and 4 . 3 ( 95 % CI : 1 . 2 - 7 . 5 , P < 0 . 01 ) million in non - vaccine - producing regions . It also reduces 82 . 0 ( 95 % CI : 76 . 6 - 87 . 4 , P < 0 . 001 ) thousand infections and 7 . 0 ( 95 % CI : 5 . 7 - 8 . 3 , P < 0 . 001 ) thousand deaths in vaccine - producing regions and non - vaccine - producing regions , respectively . Moreover , 79 . 5 % ( 95 % CI : 76 . 9 % - 87 . 5 % ) of globally reduced infections belong to vaccine - producing regions , which provides a strong incentive for proactively sharing vaccines . On the other side , the non - sharing strategy guided by extreme self - priority results in considerably more infections in every region . In EAS that receives the greatest impact , we observe 14 . 8 ( 95 % CI : 13 . 3 - 16 . 4 , P < 0 . 001 ) million extra infections . Furthermore , we compare the geographical distributions of vaccines under the 100 % - sharing strategy and the selfish strategy . Under the selfish strategy ( Figure 2 , panel C left ) , non - vaccine - producing regions , such as LCN and SSF , possess few vaccine supplies . By contrast , under 100 % - sharing strategy ( Figure 2 , panel C right ) , non - vaccine producing regions receive vaccines without bringing great vaccine loss in vaccine - producing regions , which reduces the significant inequity in vaccine distribution . From the above , we demonstrate the feasibility of vaccine sharing strategies guided by the enlightened self - interest incentive mechanism , which can effectively relieve the epidemic outcomes for both vaccine - producing and non - vaccine - producing regions . 11 Rationalizing the enlightened self - interest incentive mechanism Having shown the feasibility of vaccine sharing strategies that benefit all regions , we further explore how such mutual benefits are achieved . The epidemic dynamics of different regions are coupled via two competing influence pathways : vaccine sharing and inter - regional mobility ( Figure 3 , panel A ) . As for vaccine sharing , vaccine - producing regions will share their vaccines with non - vaccine - producing regions , which can improve the global vaccine equity but might also increase their own local epidemic risk . However , due to the second pathway of highly intertwined inter - regional mobility , vaccine sharing might in return also benefit the vaccine - producing regions . To validate the above hypothesis , first we evaluate the marginal utility of vaccines , i . e . , the averted cases per extra vaccine . As shown in Figure 3 , panel B , the marginal utility of vaccines is significantly higher in non - vaccine - producing regions due to the severe shortage , where , for example , the averted cases per vaccine in SSF is 79 . 2 ( 95 % CI : 58 . 2 - 100 . 1 , P < 0 . 001 ) times of NAC . In fact , we observe a strong negative correlation ( Spearman R = - 0 . 429 ) between the vaccination rate and the averted cases per extra vaccine ( see Supplementary Method in the Online Supplementary Document ) . Therefore , due to the inter - regional mobility , the higher marginal utility of vaccines in non - vaccine - producing regions indicates that vaccine sharing could reduce imported cases in return for vaccine - producing regions by maximizing the potential value of limited vaccine supplies , achieving enlightened self - interest . We evaluate how the second influence pathway , i . e . , the inter - regional mobility , affects vaccine - producing regions . Specifically , we simulate the flow of reduced infection cases under the enlightened self - interest guided sharing strategy compared with the selfish strategy in Figure 3 , panel C . We observe a significant reduction of imported cases in ECS and NAC , which accounts for 49 . 7 % ( 95 % CI : 48 . 8 % - 50 . 6 % , P < 0 . 001 ) in all regions . Such benefits for vaccine - producing regions are mainly achieved from reduced infection cases in EAS , SAS , SSF and MEA . Except for EAS , where its large population base contributes to the reduction of 12 infected inter - regional travellers , these regions have relatively fewer vaccines per capita , which validates the findings in Figure 3 , panel B . The significantly reduced imported cases in vaccine - producing regions compensate for or even benefit their vaccine sharing behaviours ( see Supplementary Figure S3 , S4 in the Online Supplementary Document ) . These results suggest the disproportionate COVID - 19 vaccine effect and strong inter - regional mobility coupling combined to facilitate the vaccine sharing strategies that meet the vaccine - producing regions ' enlightened self - interests , where the vaccine - producing regions are in fact better off by sharing vaccines globally instead of adopting the selfish strategy . To further quantify the trade - off between the competing influence pathways of vaccine sharing and inter - regional mobility , we disentangle the averted local transmission and imported transmission with respect to the selfish strategy as the measurements for our proposed enlightened self - interest guided vaccine sharing strategy ( see Method for details ) . As shown in Figure 3 , panel D , all the regions have a net positive benefit in imported transmission since the global COVID - 19 infection is reduced by vaccine sharing . Moreover , the vaccine - producing regions , i . e . , ECS , NAC , EAS , and SAS , receive the most benefit from reduced imported transmission as the main destination of global mobility flow ( see Supplementary Figure S3 in the Online Supplementary Document ) . Besides , for the non - vaccine - producing regions in Group Ⅰ , i . e . , LCN , MEA and SSA , they receive more benefit from local transmission than imported transmission under the enlightened self - interest guided vaccine sharing strategy , because they gain access to more globally pooled vaccines . Group Ⅱ are the regions where both the imported and local transmission are reduced substantially , which consists of the regions with large population and relatively small vaccine production capabilities , i . e . , EAS and SAS . Therefore , they actually receive more vaccines from the global pool albeit being vaccine - producing regions . As a result , the averted case in local transmission is 6 . 65 ( 95 % CI : 5 . 28 - 9 . 02 , P < 0 . 001 ) and 15 . 1 ( 95 % CI : 13 . 7 - 16 . 5 , P < 0 . 001 ) times of the imported transmission accordingly . For group Ⅲ of NAC and ECS , the change in local transmission is relatively small , because they are the main regions that give out extra vaccines with low margin utility . However , the benefit of reduced imported transmission outweighs the slight increase 13 in local transmission by over 32 . 9 ( 95 % CI : 27 . 5 - 38 . 2 , P < 0 . 001 ) times , which aligns vaccine sharing with their enlightened self - interest . Therefore , we reveal a feasible incentive mechanism to promote equitable global vaccine redistribution driven by enlightened self - interest . Equitable vaccine sharing promotes a connected world During the pandemic , most parts of the world have implemented various travel restriction policies , which significantly reduced the inter - regional mobility by approximately 80 . 7 % ( measured by the number of travellers ) . As another incentive for more equitable vaccine distribution , we examine how active vaccine sharing promotes global connectivity without worsening the epidemic outcomes . Intuitively , a more equitable global vaccine distribution can reduce the infection risk embedded in the inter - regional population flow . Figure 4 , panel A shows that a more altruistic sharing strategy , i . e . , when the vaccine sharing starts earlier and the sharing percentage is larger , can facilitate a higher level of inter - regional mobility , which can prevent up to 94 . 8 % ( 95 % CI : 94 . 3 % - 95 . 3 % , P < 0 . 001 ) of mobility reduction . Moreover , a major portion of the averted mobility reduction is associated with the vaccine - producing regions , as shown in Figure 4 , panel B . NAC and ECS account for 48 . 8 % ( 95 % CI : 48 . 3 % - 49 . 3 % , P < 0 . 001 ) of the total prevented mobility inflow reduction around the world , and EAS also accounts for 15 . 3 % ( 95 % CI : 15 . 2 % - 15 . 5 % , P < 0 . 001 ) of prevented mobility inflow reduction due to its large population . We further validate this finding across different sharing strategies in Figure 4 , panel C , where vaccine - producing regions constantly benefit more than non - vaccine - producing regions . Major vaccine - producing regions , i . e . , NAC and ECS , benefit most under different enlightened self - interest guided vaccine sharing strategies in terms of averted mobility reduction . Specifically , more than 3 . 21 ( 95 % CI : 3 . 16 - 3 . 27 , P < 0 . 001 ) billion inter - regional travellers can move freely under 100 % - sharing strategies to NAC and ECS . These observations on global mobility provide yet another incentive for vaccine - producing regions to actively share vaccine supplies with the world , which suggests they can also benefit more in the transition back to a more connected world . 14 DISCUSSION In this study , we propose a novel epidemiological model that can simultaneously model global vaccine distribution and real - world human mobility , which serves as a platform for revealing how different vaccine sharing strategies affect the connected world . We quantitatively demonstrate the existence and potential value of enlightened self - interest incentive mechanism during COVID - 19 pandemic , which can promote global vaccine sharing without harming the interest of vaccine - producing regions . Principal Findings Our epidemiological model goes beyond existing research that adopts a once - and - for - all vaccination assumption by explicitly considering the breakthrough transmission process for vaccinated people . Combined with the global mobility network reconstructed from the OAG international air traffic records , we successfully reproduce real - world COVID - 19 epidemic dynamics with R 2 > 0 . 990 on both global and regional scales . Our model provides a solid real - world basis for evaluating practical vaccine sharing strategies , which is an important advantage compared with existing research . As an example , Wagner et al . [ 14 ] construct a highly simplified scenario with only two regions without fitting to real - world epidemic , which forbids them to propose a practical vaccine sharing strategy that suits the real - world scenario with complicated international mobility . Similarly , Lampert et al . [ 13 ] propose a game theoretic approach to identify the condition for hypothetical vaccine - rich countries to share their extra vaccines , while the lack of epidemiological models weakens their credibility . Rotesi et al . [ 15 ] find that after reaching herd immunity , the US could donate vaccine doses to other countries without harming their own interest . However , the absence of real - world mobility patterns weakens its conclusion , and the absence of breakthrough infection processes makes it fails to provide concrete incentives for vaccine - rich countries . Going beyond these important theoretical works in hypothetical scenarios , our model enables the practical policy design rooted in strong real - world data . Specifically , our model maps the vaccine distributions to their potential outcomes , supporting the quantitative evaluation of enlightened self - interest incentive 15 mechanism . Based on the model , we showcase the feasibility of enlightened self - interest in COVID - 19 vaccine sharing , where vaccine - producing regions can share their vaccines with other parts of the world after nearly 80 % of their domestic people are vaccinated . Contradicting the common idea that sharing vaccines must sacrifice their own interest , we highlight that the vaccine sharing guided by the enlightened self - interest incentive mechanism can relieve epidemic outcomes in the vaccine - producing regions , which even surpass those in non - vaccine - producing regions . This phenomenon provides strong incentives for active vaccine sharing where the epidemic outcomes in both vaccine - producing regions and non - vaccine - producing regions can be simultaneously improved . We provide a larger feasible region for safely sharing vaccines with high credibility than existing works [ 13 - 15 ] , where the global mobility enables quick action in promoting vaccine equity and the consideration of breakthrough infection guarantees conservative analyses . Furthermore , we demonstrate the mechanism behind such win - win vaccine sharing strategies , where the benefit from reduced internationally imported cases outweighs the threat from increased local infections due to the disproportionate vaccine effect and highly intertwined global mobility . Finally , we evaluate the benefit of active vaccine sharing in terms of global connectivity . While the strong travel restriction policies might be necessary to curb the pandemic , they also considerably disrupted global supply chains and undermined the world economy [ 37 , 38 ] . However , simply lifting these policies might lead to unexpected epidemic resurgence . By more actively sharing vaccine resources under enlightened self - interest incentive mechanism , up to 94 . 8 % ( 95 % CI : 94 . 3 % - 95 . 3 % , P < 0 . 001 ) of inter - regional mobility reduction can be averted compared with the selfish strategy , promoting the free movements of talents and goods [ 39 - 41 ] in these regions . Under a more equitable global vaccine distribution , vaccine - producing regions can maintain a higher level of inter - regional mobility , providing another incentive for actively sharing vaccines . Leveraging the proposed modelling approach , several different allocation problems can be solved to promote more equitable resource distribution driven by enlightened self - interest . Specifically , we summarize three different scenarios that can be solved by the proposed model with necessary adaptions . First , the medicines . 16 Similar to vaccine resources for COVID - 19 , equitably distributing drugs for other infectious diseases is also critical to mitigating the possible global crisis , such as ZMapp for Ebola [ 42 ] . Considering the similarity in cost and efficacy of vaccines and medicines , our model can be extended to the medicine allocation problem with few modifications . Second , the medical equipment . Different from vaccines and medicines that usually have a high research and development cost but a low production cost , medical equipment has a high price and is not intended for one - time use . Besides , the benefit of medical equipment is not to reduce the possible transmission , but to resecure severe patients . We can adapt the epidemiological model to capture the imbalance between patient demand and the availability of medical equipment in terms of time and space , which further informs the years of potential life lost ( YPLL ) or human capital metrics [ 43 ] to solve the allocation problem from the enlightened self - interest perspective . Third , the health workforce . By organizing international medical teams and flexibly deploying the health workforce , the potential impact of epidemic outbreaks can be greatly mitigated [ 44 ] . Unlike the distribution of high - value medical equipment , the cost of scheduling healthcare personnel is much lower . However , due to the long training procedure required for skilled healthcare professionals , the cost of potential loss is extremely high . With proper modelling approaches to quantify the cost and benefit , we can deploy the proposed model in a series of allocation tasks . Limitations There are several limitations in the present work . First , our proposed model adopts a classic compartmental framework , which might simplify real - world epidemic dynamics . The primary source of uncertainties lies in the estimation of epidemiological parameters , i . e . the infection rate and recovery rate of COVID - 19 . To capture these uncertainties , our solution is three - fold : 1 ) We adopt a metapopulation framework that fits different sets of parameters for each region , accounting for the spatial heterogeneity . 2 ) We divide the simulation period into three phases according to the mutation timeline ( see Supplementary Table S6 in the Online Supplementary Document ) , accounting for the temporal heterogeneity . 3 ) We capture the randomness of the parameters by 40 random initializations of the model , which generates confidential intervals in all the analyses . However , it still relies on several classic 17 assumptions . As an example , the countries within each region in the same phase share the same epidemiological parameters , and the vaccine effectiveness is constant across time . Besides , we also assume the epidemiological parameters are decoupled from different vaccine sharing strategies . More fine - grained behaviour and demographic data are needed to challenge these conventional assumptions . Since our model is proven effective in tracing global epidemic development , we leave the more fine - grained epidemic model as a future work . Second , we adopt a relatively straightforward strategy in redistributing the shared vaccine doses according to regional population , without considering the capacity of medical infrastructures . However , this redistributing strategy is in accordance with the COVAX project , which is easier to be implemented in the real world . Nevertheless , with such a redistribution scheme we are still able to reveal the feasibility of a more equitable vaccine distribution , which in turn emphasizes the robustness of our findings . Our study provides general evidence that we can achieve such Pareto improvement and a more equitable vaccine distribution , based on which more detailed , fine - grained vaccine distribution can be explored by introducing more advanced modelling assumptions . To further magnify the benefit , future studies are needed to devise more targeted redistribution schemes based on the epidemic dynamics and detailed profiles of each region . Third , we focus on how to share vaccines globally , without probing into the domestic distribution of vaccines . For domestic distribution , several studies have provided important insight [ 17 , 19 , 45 ] . However , the global vaccine distribution received woefully inadequate research attention due to the difficulty of reconstructing the worldwide pandemic , even though this problem is becoming increasingly important . With the enlightenment of enlightened self - interest , we have proved both the possibility and the importance of equitable vaccine sharing at the global level , and it is worth putting future efforts to combine these two perspectives of vaccine sharing . With simultaneous consideration of both domestic and global vaccine distribution , we can form a hierarchical vaccine distribution framework , providing more fine - grained insights for vaccine sharing . 18 Fourth , we noticed the possible reliability issue of COVID - 19 case statistics during the early outbreaks of COVID - 19 [ 46 , 47 ] . To minimize these errors , we refer to the most comprehensive systematic review of COVID - 19 seroprevalence , which contains 968 studies with more than 9 . 3 million participants in 74 countries [ 48 ] . It helps to preclude a large percentage of studies with insufficient reliability ( 496 , 51 % of all the studies ) and to provide cross - validated , corrected median seroprevalence data . Nevertheless , there may still be certain flaws in the case estimation during the early stage of the pandemic . CONCLUSIONS In summary , we propose an accurate epidemiological model that simultaneously considers global vaccine distribution and human mobility , acting as a powerful tool for us to examine the feasibility and effectiveness of global vaccine sharing . Based on the proposed model , we highlight the surprising fact that the enlightened self - interests of high - income countries are aligned with more equitable global vaccine distribution . During the COVID - 19 pandemic , we highlight that high - income countries should start sharing their extra vaccines after when nearly 80 % of their citizens are vaccinated . To promote vaccine equity , the best weapon is not to criticize from the moral high ground , but to provide tangible incentives for the noble action . Our findings enlighten such incentives to promote multilateral collaborations in global vaccine redistribution and vaccine equity , which facilitates a mutually benefiting world . After all , in the combat against the pandemic , “no one is safe until everyone is safe” [ 49 ] . Acknowledgements : We thank Katherine Budeski for the careful proof - reading thought out the paper , which provides valuable language support from a native - speaker perspective . Data availability : Most of the data used in our work can be freely accessed . The empirical epidemic data and vaccination data are available in the GitHub repository maintained by Johns Hopkins University [ 50 ] in https : / / github . com / CSSEGISandData / COVID - 19 . The global population data is maintained by World Bank in https : / / data . worldbank . org / indicator / SP . POP . TOTL . We purchase the global air traffic records from the Official Aviation Guide ( OAG ) . It contains all the international flight orders at country level from January 2019 to July 19 2021 . The data purchase agreement with OAG prohibits us from sharing these data with third parties , but interested parties can contact OAG to make the same data purchase . For the detailed description about the data in this study , please refer to the Online Supplementary Document . Funding : This work was supported in part by The National Key Research and Development Program of China under grant 2020AAA0106000 , the National Natural Science Foundation of China under U1936217 . Authorship contributions : Y . L . , K . T . and F . X . contributed to conceptualizing the study . Z . H . , C . L . , QY . H . processed the raw data , performed the experiments , and prepared all the figures . Q . H . , K . B . , D . J . provided critical revisions . All the authors jointly analysed the results and participated in writing the manuscript . Disclosure of interest : The authors completed the ICMJE Disclosure of Interest Form ( available upon request from the corresponding author ) and disclose no relevant interests . Additional material Online Supplementary Document . REFERENCES 1 Kim JH , Marks F , Clemens JD . Looking beyond COVID - 19 vaccine phase 3 trials . Nat Med . 2021 ; 27 : 205 - 11 . 2 Bansal A . Vaccine equity : there is no time to waste . Bulletin of the World Health Organization . 2022 ; 100 : 2 . 3 Mthembu P . Travel bans erode global trust . Nat Hum Behav . 2022 ; 6 : 174 - . 4 Gupta RK , Topol EJ . COVID - 19 vaccine breakthrough infections . Science . 2021 ; 374 : 1561 - 2 . 5 Fenwick C , Turelli P , Pellaton C , Farina A , Campos J , Raclot C , et al . A high - throughput cell - and virus - free assay shows reduced neutralization of SARS - CoV - 2 variants by COVID - 19 convalescent plasma . Science Translational Medicine . 2021 ; 13 . 6 Cohen J , Kupferschmidt K . FAIRER SHARES . Science . 2021 ; 372 : 903 - 6 . 7 Excler J - L , Saville M , Berkley S , Kim JH . Vaccine development for emerging infectious diseases . Nat Med . 2021 ; 27 : 591 - 600 . 8 Padma TV . COVID VACCINES WON ' T REACH POOREST COUNTRIES BEFORE 2023 . Nature . 2021 ; 595 : 342 - 3 . 9 Taylor A . Covax vaccine deliveries surge in final stretch of 2021 , with a record 300 million doses sent out in December . 2022 . Available : https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / world / 2022 / 01 / 01 / covid - covax - doses - delivered / . Accessed : June 20 , 2022 . 10 Boudon R . Beyond rational choice theory . Annual Review of Sociology . 2003 ; 29 : 1 - 21 . 11 Emanuel EJ , Persad G , Kern A , Buchanan A , Fabre C , Halliday D , et al . An ethical framework for global vaccine allocation The Fair Priority Model offers a practical way to fulfill pledges to distribute vaccines fairly and equitably . Science . 2020 ; 369 : 1309 - 12 . 12 Ulmer JB , Liu MA . Ethical issues for vaccines and immunization . Nat Rev Immunol . 2002 ; 2 : 291 - 6 . 13 Lampert A , Sulitzeanu - Kenan R , Vanhuysse P , Tepe M . A game theoretic approach identifies conditions that foster vaccine - rich to vaccine - poor country donation of surplus vaccines . Commun Med . 2022 ; 2 : 1 - 10 . 14 Wagner CE , Saad - Roy CM , Morris SE , Baker RE , Mina MJ , Farrar J , et al . Vaccine nationalism and the dynamics and control of SARS - CoV - 2 . Science . 2021 ; 373 : eabj7364 . 20 15 Rotesi T , Pin P , Cucciniello M , Malik AA , Paintsil EE , Bokemper SE , et al . National interest may require distributing COVID - 19 vaccines to other countries . Sci Rep . 2021 ; 11 : 18253 . 16 Schmidt H , Weintraub R , Williams MA , Miller K , Buttenheim A , Sadecki E , et al . Equitable allocation of COVID - 19 vaccines in the United States . Nat Med . 2021 ; 27 : 1298 - 307 . 17 Matrajt L , Eaton J , Leung T , Brown ER . Vaccine optimization for COVID - 19 : Who to vaccinate first ? Sci Adv . 2021 ; 7 : eabf1374 . 18 Subbaraman N . WHO GETS A COVID VACCINE FIRST ? ACCESS PLANS ARE TAKING SHAPE . Nature . 2020 ; 585 : 492 - 3 . 19 Bubar KM , Reinholt K , Kissler SM , Lipsitch M , Cobey S , Grad YH , Larremore DB . Model - informed COVID - 19 vaccine prioritization strategies by age and serostatus . Science . 2021 ; 371 : 916 - 21 . 20 Hogan AB , Winskill P , Watson OJ , Walker PGT , Whittaker C , Baguelin M , et al . Within - country age - based prioritisation , global allocation , and public health impact of a vaccine against SARS - CoV - 2 : A mathematical modelling analysis . Vaccine . 2021 ; 39 : 2995 - 3006 . 21 Shi W , Tong C , Zhang A , Shi Z . A spatial and dynamic solution for allocation of COVID - 19 vaccines when supply is limited . Commun Med . 2021 ; 1 : 23 . 22 Wrigley - Field E , Kiang MV , Riley AR , Barbieri M , Chen Y - H , Duchowny KA , et al . Geographically targeted COVID - 19 vaccination is more equitable and averts more deaths than age - based thresholds alone . Sci Adv . 2021 ; 7 : eabj2099 . 23 Chen L , Xu F , Han Z , Tang K , Hui P , Evans J , Li Y . Strategic COVID - 19 vaccine distribution can simultaneously elevate social utility and equity . Nat Hum Behav . 2022 . 24 Persad G , Peek ME , Emanuel EJ . Fairly Prioritizing Groups for Access to COVID - 19 Vaccines . JAMA . 2020 ; 324 : 1601 - 2 . 25 Colizza V , Barrat A , Barthelemy M , Valleron A - J , Vespignani A . Modeling the worldwide spread of pandemic influenza : Baseline case and containment interventions . PLoS Med . 2007 ; 4 : 95 - 110 . 26 Ye Y , Zhang Q , Wei X , Cao Z , Yuan H - Y , Zeng DD . Equitable access to COVID - 19 vaccines makes a life - saving difference to all countries . Nat Hum Behav . 2022 ; 6 : 207 - 16 . 27 Ross R . An application of the theory of probabilities to the study of a priori pathometry . — Part I . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series A , Containing papers of a mathematical and physical character . 1916 ; 92 : 204 - 30 . 28 Bank W . World bank open data . Available : https : / / data . worldbank . org / . Accessed : Apirl 5 , 2022 . 29 Data OWi . COVID - 19 vaccine doses administered . 2022 . Available : https : / / ourworldindata . org / grapher / cumulative - covid - vaccinations . Accessed : June 2 , 2022 . 30 Statista . The countries dominating COVID - 19 vaccine production . 2022 . Available : https : / / www . statista . com / chart / 24492 / total - covid - 19 - vaccine - production - by - country / . Accessed : June 2 , 2022 . 31 Nasreen S , Chung H , He S , Brown KA , Gubbay JB , Buchan SA , et al . Effectiveness of COVID - 19 vaccines against symptomatic SARS - CoV - 2 infection and severe outcomes with variants of concern in Ontario . Nat Microbiol . 2022 ; 7 : 379 - 85 . 32 Dagan N , Barda N , Kepten E , Miron O , Perchik S , Katz MA , et al . BNT162b2 mRNA Covid - 19 Vaccine in a Nationwide Mass Vaccination Setting . N Engl J Med . 2021 ; 384 : 1412 - 23 . 33 Chodick G , Tene L , Rotem RS , Patalon T , Gazit S , Ben - Tov A , et al . The Effectiveness of the Two - Dose BNT162b2 Vaccine : Analysis of Real - World Data . Clin Infect Dis . 2022 ; 74 : 472 - 8 . 34 Colizza V , Barrat A , Barthelemy M , Vespignani A . The role of the airline transportation network in the prediction and predictability of global epidemics . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2006 ; 103 : 2015 - 20 . 35 Ma Q , Liu J , Liu Q , Kang L , Liu R , Jing W , et al . Global Percentage of Asymptomatic SARS - CoV - 2 Infections Among the Tested Population and Individuals With Confirmed COVID - 19 Diagnosis A Systematic Review and Meta - analysis . JAMA Netw Open . 2021 ; 4 . 21 36 WHO . Allocation mechanism for covax facility vaccines . 2020 . Available : https : / / www . who . int / initiatives / act - accelerator / covax . Accessed : December 25 , 2021 . 37 Guan D , Wang D , Hallegatte S , Davis SJ , Huo J , Li S , et al . Global supply - chain effects of COVID - 19 control measures . Nat Hum Behav . 2020 ; 4 : 577 - 87 . 38 WTO . Cross - border mobility , COVID - 19 and global trade . 2020 . Available : https : / / www . wto . org / english / tratop _ e / covid19 _ e / mobility _ report _ e . pdf . Accessed : January 16 , 2022 . 39 Bonaccorsi G , Pierri F , Cinelli M , Flori A , Galeazzi A , Porcelli F , et al . Economic and social consequences of human mobility restrictions under COVID - 19 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2020 ; 117 : 15530 - 5 . 40 Pappalardo L , Smoreda Z , Pedreschi D , Giannotti F , editors . Using Big Data to study the link between human mobility and socio - economic development . IEEE International Conference on Big Data ; 2015 . 41 Kraemer MUG , Sadilek A , Zhang Q , Marchal NA , Tuli G , Cohn EL , et al . Mapping global variation in human mobility . Nat Hum Behav . 2020 ; 4 : 800 - 10 . 42 Qiu X , Wong G , Audet J , Bello A , Fernando L , Alimonti JB , et al . Reversion of advanced Ebola virus disease in nonhuman primates with ZMapp . Nature . 2014 ; 514 : 47 - 53 . 43 Opper IM , Park RJ , Husted L . The effect of natural disasters on human capital in the United States . Nat Hum Behav . 2023 . 44 Beaglehole R , Dal Poz MR . Public health workforce : challenges and policy issues . Hum Resour Health . 2003 ; 1 : 4 . 45 Buckner JH , Chowell G , Springborn MR . Dynamic prioritization of COVID - 19 vaccines when social distancing is limited for essential workers . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2021 ; 118 : e2025786118 . 46 Van Noorden R . COVID death tolls : scientists acknowledge errors in WHO estimates . Nature . 2022 ; 606 : 242 - 4 . 47 Perkins TA , Cavany SM , Moore SM , Oidtman RJ , Lerch A , Poterek M . Estimating unobserved SARS - CoV - 2 infections in the United States . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2020 ; 117 : 22597 - 602 . 48 Bobrovitz N , Arora RK , Cao C , Boucher E , Liu M , Donnici C , et al . Global seroprevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 antibodies : a systematic review and meta - analysis . PLoS One . 2021 ; 16 : e0252617 . 49 WHO . Vaccine equity . 2020 . Available : https : / / www . who . int / campaigns / vaccine - equity . Accessed : January 14 , 2022 . 22 23 Figure 1 . Model description and its performance in capturing real - world epidemic dynamics . ( A ) Illustration of our model framework . The globe is divided into 7 geographical regions , where each region consists of an individual epidemiological model considering breakthrough infections after vaccinated . People in different regions can move from one region to another , forming a global mobility network that characterized by the air traffic data from OAG . ( B ) Vaccines per capita and seroprevalence of COVID - 19 in each region until 2021 - 11 - 14 . Vaccine availability disobeys the epidemic situation in different regions . Specifically , SAS has the highest seroprevalence , while its vaccines per capita are much less than high - income regions such as NAC . ( C ) Result of model fitting in global and regional level , where shaded area represents the 99 % confidence interval . We have R 2 > 0 . 990 for all the regions , demonstrating the accuracy of our proposed model . Figure 2 . Impacts of enlightened self - interest guided vaccine sharing strategies . ( A ) Feasible parameter combinations of enlightened self - interest guided vaccine sharing strategies . The colours indicate the possibilities for each vaccine - producing region and the globe to have fewer infections compared with selfish strategy . Strategies that can achieve such simultaneous improvement over 80 % possibility are noted as enlightened self - interest incentive mechanism . The boundary of 20 % and 80 % possibility are labelled by the dotted line and dashed line accordingly . ( B ) Increase of infections and deaths for different vaccine sharing strategies compared with selfish strategy 24 around the globe , in the non - vaccine - producing regions and in the vaccine - producing regions . ( C ) Geographical vaccine distribution under the selfish strategy ( left ) and the 100 % - sharing strategy ( right ) . The vaccine coverage factor is calculated by the logarithm of the ratio between the number of vaccines and the population . Figure 3 . Rationalizing the enlightened self - interest incentive mechanism . ( A ) Illustration of the incentive mechanism behind the enlightened self - interest guided vaccine sharing strategies . By categorizing the infection into local infections ( orange area ) and imported infections ( blue area ) , we expect under 25 more active vaccine sharing strategies , there will be a net reduction in infections ( deep blue line ) , although the local infections may increase ( red line ) , due to the reduced imported infections . ( B ) Marginal utility of vaccines based on real - world vaccine distribution . It demonstrates that the effectiveness of extra vaccines vanishes in regions with high vaccination rates , such as NAC and ECS . The error bar demonstrates 95 % of confidence intervals . ( C ) Flow of reduced infection cases under the enlightened self - interest guided vaccine sharing strategy , started from 90 % vaccination with 90 % vaccines shared , comparing with the selfish strategy . ( D ) Quantifying the disentangled imported transmission and local transmission . For Group Ⅰ , they have reduced local transmission due to vaccine sharing . For Group Ⅱ , both the imported transmission and local transmission will reduce . For Group Ⅲ , the received imported transmission benefit outweighs the increasing of local transmission . The shaded area represents the standard deviation . Figure 4 . Active vaccine sharing promotes inter - region mobility . ( A ) Percentage of averted reduction in mobility under different vaccine sharing strategies . A more active sharing can prevent more mobility reduction , where up to 94 . 8 % ( 95 % CI : 94 . 3 % - 95 . 3 % , P < 0 . 001 ) of mobility reduction can be averted . ( B ) Proportion of averted reduction in global mobility for each region , under the enlightened self - interest guided vaccine sharing strategy . ( C ) Volume of averted reduction in mobility under different enlightened self - interest guided vaccine sharing strategies , where error bars represent the 99 % confidence interval . From ( B ) and ( C ) , we can find vaccine - producing regions , such as ECS and NAC , are expected to benefit most from mobility recovery in both relative proportion and absolute mobility volume . 26 Correspondence to : Fengli Xu Department of Electronic Engineering , Tsinghua University , Beijing , P . R . China , fenglixu @ tsinghua . edu . cn Kun Tang Vanke School of Public Health , Tsinghua University , Beijing , P . R . China Institute for Healthy China , Tsinghua University , Beijing , P . R . China tangk @ mail . tsinghua . edu . cn Yong Li Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology ( BNRist ) , Beijing , P . R . China Department of Electronic Engineering , Tsinghua University , Beijing , P . R . China liyong07 @ tsinghua . edu . cn