How Middle School Students Represent Phase Change and Interpret Textbook Representations : a Comparison of Student and Textbook Representations Funda Savasci - Acikalin 1 # Springer Nature B . V . 2019 Abstract The purposes of this study were to identify middle school student representations of phase change , explore how they interpret textbook representations , and compare student and text - book representations of phase change . A total of 21 middle school students ( 12 sixth - graders and nine eighth - graders ) voluntarily participated in the study . Semi - structured interviews with each participant were conducted in order to identify students ’ representations of phase change of matter and explore how they interpret the representations of phase change in their textbooks . Findings indicated that students ’ representations of phase change mostly do not match the criteria for a scientific understanding of phase change . Moreover , student interpretations of representations seem to be different than the intended meanings of the textbook representa - tions . Finally , the student and textbook representations are similar in terms of the types of particles and the distances among them , while they are different from each other in terms of the motion of particles . Textbook representations do not seem to help students understand the distances and the motion of particles during phase change . Students need more guidance than that provided by textbook authors and more class discussion to understand the language used by teachers and textbook authors . Keywords Middleschoolstudents . Sciencetextbooks . Multiplelevelsofrepresentations . Phase change Introduction Chemistry is a visual science utilizing a variety of inscriptions ( Han and Roth 2006 ; Wu and Shah 2004 ) . Conceptual understanding of chemistry topics depends on an understanding of the three levels of representation in chemistry — including macroscopic , submicroscopic , and https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11165 - 019 - 9834 - z * Funda Savasci - Acikalin fsavasci @ istanbul . edu . tr 1 Department of Mathematics and Science Education , Hasan Ali Yucel College of Education , Istanbul University - Cerrahpasa , Beyaz ı t Fatih , Istanbul , Turkey Published online : 10 April 2019 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 symbolic — and the ability to move among them ( Chandrasegaran et al . 2008 ; De Jong and Taber 2007 ; Gabel1993 , 1999 ; Johnstone 1991 , 1999 ; Talanquer 2011 ; Treagust et al . 2003 ) . The macroscopic level of representation refers to the observable features of matter ; the submicroscopic level of representation refers to occurrences at molecular level ; and the symbolic level of representation is based on both chemical and mathematical signs and their relationships , such as equations , formulas or graphs , molecular structure drawings , models , and computer animations ( Gabel 1993 , 1999 ; Nakhleh and Krajcik 1994 ; Talanquer 2011 ) . Research has shown that students ’ inability to properly transfer one level of representation into another may result in the development of nonscientific understandings of chemistry concepts ( Taber 2009 ; Treagust et al . 2003 ) . Therefore , using multiple levels of representation in teaching chemistry has been widely discussed and supported in the literature ( Adadan et al . 2009 ; Ainsworth 2008 ; Chittleborough 2014 ; Gilbert and Treagust 2009 ; Tsaparlis 2014 ; Waldrip and Prain 2012 ; Yakmaci - Guzel and Adadan 2013 ) . Textbooks are one of the main teaching tools frequently used ( Cheng and Gilbert 2015 ; Chiappetta and Fillman 2007 ) and are available to all students in schools and at home ( Gkitzia et al . 2011 ) . Most teachers also heavily use textbooks in their planning ( Sanchez and Valcarcel 1999 ) and use them as a source for solving problems and exercises related to the concepts they are teaching ( Nakibo ğ lu 2009 ) . Moreover , textbooks are also one of the major sources of represen - tations that students face in science classrooms ( Justi and Gilbert 2002 ) . Chemistry textbooks also use the most models ( Harrison 2001a ) . Therefore , studies focusing on the multiple levels of representation of science concepts in textbooks have received a great deal of attention in the literature ( e . g . , Aydin et al . 2014 ; Akaygun 2018 ; Han and Roth 2006 ; Kapici and Savasci - Acikalin 2015 ; Niaz and Co ş tu 2009 ; Nyachwaya and Wood 2014 ; Papageorgiou et al . 2017 ; Yaseen and Akaygun 2016 ) . On the other hand , most of these studies ( Aydin et al . 2014 ; Akaygun 2018 ; Devetak et al . 2010 ; Han and Roth 2006 ; Kapici and Savasci - Acikalin 2015 ; Nyachwaya and Wood 2014 ) have focused on only document analyses in terms of representations , without considering how students understand them . Therefore , studies are also needed that focus on how students understand representations of chemical concepts in science textbooks . The purposes of this study are to investigate middle school student representations of phase change , explore how they interpret representations of phase change in their textbooks , and compare student represen - tations and textbook representations of phase change . In the following section , the related literature regarding students ’ conceptions of phase change and the role of multiple levels of representation on visualizations and textbook studies will be discussed . Students ’ Conceptions of Phase Change Matter is one of the fundamental concepts in science ( Harrison and Treagust 2002 ; Taber 2002 ) and has become a widely investigated topic by researchers over the past 30 years ( Hadenfeldt et al . 2014 ; Özmen 2013 ) . As listed in Table 1 , many studies have investigated students ’ conceptions of matter and found that students at all grade levels have difficulty comprehending the particulate nature of matter ( Adbo and Taber 2009 ; Boz 2006 ; Kapici and Akçay 2016 ; Nakhleh and Samarapungavan 1999 ; Nakhleh et al . 2005 ; Othman et al . 2008 ; Papageorgiou and Johnson 2005 ; Singer et al . 2003 ; Taber and García - Franco 2010 ) . This problem has been attributed to the fact that the particulate nature of matter contradicts students ’ everyday view of matter as something continuous ( Treagust et al . 2000 ) . From an early age ( grades 1 , 3 , 5 , and 7 ) , children have difficulty in defining matter , making distinctions between matter and nonmatter , 1652 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 and accepting gas a form of matter ( Stavy 1991 ) . In everyday language , matter has an ambiguous meaning ( Stavy 1991 ) . In another Stavy ( 1990 ) study , younger students believe that matter does not exist unless it is visible , and its weight disappears when it becomes a gas . Older students believe that matter exists even if it is invisible , but gas particles are weightless or weigh less than liquid particles . Bar and Travis ( 1991 ) found that grade 1 – 9 students explained drying of laundry or the floor by stating that water disappeared or penetrated solid objects . They stated that students ’ difficulty in understanding evaporation , boiling and condensation comes from the problem concerning the existence of vapor in the air . The gas phase was the most problematic concept among students ( Stavy 1988 ; Johnson 1998a , b ) . Johnson ( 1998a , b ) conducted a series of studies examining students ’ conceptions of boiling water , evaporation and condensation and found that students ’ conceptions of these concepts were associated with an understanding of the nature of gas with particle theory . Benson et al . ( 1993 ) stated that students from the second grade to college had several misconceptions . such as considering air a continuous substance and that there is relatively little space between gas particles . Nakhleh et al . ( 2005 ) found that one - third of the students in their study had macroscopic views of matter , while others had submicroscopic views with significant alterna - tive conceptions of matter . They indicated that students in their study held nonscientific Table 1 Students ’ alternative conceptions of phase change in the literature Matter has an ambiguous meaning ( Stavy 1991 ) Gas is not matter ( Stavy 1991 ) Solids or matters have continuous structure ( Ayas et al . 2010 ; Nakhleh 1992 ; Nakhleh and Samarapungavan 1999 ) Bubbles in boiling water are made up of heat , air , or hydrogen and oxygen ( Johnson 1998a ) Water droplets on a cold coke come through the metal of the can ( Johnson 1998b ) While particles in a solid do not move , particles in a liquid or gaseous object move ( Boz 2006 ; Özmen 2011a , b ) There are gaps among atoms , which can be seen ( Kapici and Akçay 2016 ; Özmen 2011a , b ) There is something among the molecules ( Johnson 1998a , b ; Lee et al . 1993 ) When ice melts , ice molecules melt , too ( Boz 2006 ) When matter is heated , its molecules expand ( Stojanovska et al . 2012 ) When water is heated , water molecules expand ( Kokkotas et al . 1998 ) Molecules are the same size as tiny objects ( i . e . , dust , bacteria , cells ) ( Lee et al . 1993 ) In liquids and gases , the particles just have rotational movement ; they do not shake ( Kapici and Akçay 2016 ; Özmen 2011a , 2011b ) There are no gaps among the particles in liquids or gases ( Özmen 2011a , 2011b ) Thawing is a chemical process ( Kapici and Akçay 2016 ) When matter is heated , the number of particles changes ( Özmen 2011a , b ) Matter does not exist unless it is visible ( Stavy 1990 ) Gas particles are weightless or weigh less than liquid particles ( Lee et al . 1993 ; Stavy 1990 ) When ice changes to water , the water weighs less because ice has more stuff in it than water ( Lee et al . 1993 ) The gas phase was the most problematic concept among students ( Lee et al . 1993 ; Stavy 1988 ; Johnson 1998a , b ; Paik et al . 2004 ) The size of molecules changes across different phase changes ( Griffiths and Preston 1992 ) Water in the solid phase has the largest and heaviest molecules ( Garnett et al . 1995 ) Gas molecules are arranged in an orderly rather than a disorderly way . ( Garnett et al . 1995 ) There is relatively little space between gas particles ( Benson et al . 1993 ; Harrison 2001a ; Harrison and Treagust 2002 ) Gas particles show visible liquid behavior ( Benson et al . 1993 ) 1653 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 conceptions regarding the relative size of atoms and molecules . Griffiths and Preston ( 1992 ) reported that twelfth grade students thought that the size of molecules changed across different phase changes and had difficulty understanding empty space among particles . Most of the alternative conceptions were associated with an understanding of the particulate and dynamic nature , size , and arrangements of particles . Researchers agree that there can be various sources of students ’ misconceptions , including their teachers ( Çal ı k and Ayas 2005 ; Ginns and Watters 1995 ; Quilez - Pardo and Solaz - Portole ’ s 1995 ) , textbooks ( Abimbola and Baba 1996 ; Zajkov et al . 2017 ) , ineffective traditional instruc - tion ( Bunce and Gabel 2002 ) , and models and analogies ( Glynn 1995 ; Treagust 1993 ; Orgill and Bodner 2004 ) . Theoretical Framework This study is grounded in both social semiotics and cognitive science , since it deals with the meaning - making of students ’ and textbooks ’ representations of phase change and how textbook representations might be perceived by middle school students . In a variety of forms ( e . g . , graphs , tables , photographs , drawings , diagrams ) , representations have a key role in helping students to illustrate phenomena and processes that can be directly visible or invisible , as well as relationships that are difficult to describe verbally ( Cook 2008 ; Lee 2010 ; Ge et al . 2018 ; Meneses et al . 2018 ) . The dual coding theory proposed by Paivio ( 1986 ) suggests that humans have different channels for processing visual and verbal representations , and recommends using both verbal and visual representations support student learning . Similarly , Mayer ( 2011 ) used the term multimedia instruction in order to describe instruction that includes both words and pictures , and claimed that people learn better from words and pictures than from words alone . Learners can benefit from learning with more than one external representation ( Treagust and Tsui 2013 ) . Multiple representations can serve many functions for learning ( Seufert 2003 ) . Using multiple levels of representation simultaneously allows them to ( a ) complement each other by adding more information ; ( b ) constrain each other by limiting possible meanings ; and ( c ) help individuals construct deeper understanding by aiding abstraction , generalization , and translation ( Ainsworth 1999 ) . Meaningful learning is assumed to occur only if corresponding information from the different external representations is integrated into a coherent mental representation ( Mayer 2001 ) . However , learners often fail to integrate and build coherent mental representations . Learners may need extra support in identifying and mapping - related elements in text and pictures by means of instructional techniques like signaling in order to enable meaningful learning from multimedia ( Ge et al . 2017 ; Richter et al . 2016 ) . Moreover , there is also growing recognition in science education research that science as a discourse is a mix of languages involving multimodal forms of representation , where linguistic , numerical , and graphic and tabular modes are integrated to represent scientific explanations ( Ainsworth 1999 ; Tytler 2007 ; Tytler and Prain 2010 ; Tytler et al . 2007 ) . Language and culture have a fundamental role in the construction of knowledge ( Tytler 2007 ) . According to social semiotics perspectives , representations are created based on authors ’ motivations and intentions , which cannot be isolated from the influence of cultural conventions ( Ge et al . 2018 ) . As Kress and van Leeuwen ( 2006 ) state , representations are B bound up with the interests of the social institutions within which the images are produced , circulated and read ^ ( p . 47 ) . Research in social and cultural tradition pays more attention to the ways in which a teacher promotes a discourse community 1654 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 aimed at the establishment within the class of shared meanings . From sociocultural perspectives , the role of the teacher is to work with students ’ ideas , scaffolding them to establish the very powerful discourses of the scientific culture and to consider individual or group differences in the meaning - making processes ( Tytler et al . 2007 ) . Textbooks are still an important part of the instructional process ( Abd - El - Khalick et al . 2017 ; Devetak and Janez 2013 ; Gegios et al . 2017 ; Irez2009 ; Yaseen and Akaygun 2016 ) and they are the most widely and frequently used teaching aid at all educational levels ( Justi and Gilbert 2002 ) . Modern textbooks include more images than did textbooks in the past ( Dimopoulos et al . 2003 ) , and they are one of the main resources of multiple levels of representations that students face ( Justi and Gilbert 2002 ) . Nevertheless , science textbooks have a variety of multiple levels of representations that are different signs to be understood by students ( Han and Roth 2006 ) . Since textbooks as a major source of multiple levels of representation play a significant role in students ’ visualization and understanding of chemistry concepts , they have received considerable attention from scholars . Studies related to textbooks will be discussed in the following section . Textbook Studies Studies on textbooks have received significant attention from various scholars in many countries over the last decade ( e . g . , Akaygun 2018 ; Aydin et al . 2014 ; Bowen and Roth 2002 ; Bungum 2008 ; Devetak et al . 2010 ; Gegios et al . 2017 ; Hrast and Savec 2017 ; Kapici and Savasci - Acikalin 2015 ; Nakibo ğ lu and Yildirir 2009 ; Nyachwaya and Wood 2014 ; Shebab and BouJaoude 2017 ) . Aydin et al . ( 2014 ) compared inscriptions related to chemical reactions using Turkish , Indian , and American textbooks and found that textbooks disproportionately used inscriptions at the symbolic level and failed to present the sub - microscopic level . Moreover , Turkish and Indian textbooks ’ explicit connections between all three levels of representations were inadequate , whereas in American textbooks they were sufficient . Gkitzia et al . ( 2011 ) studied five chemistry textbooks used in Greece and found that the most common type of representations were the macroscopic and symbolic representations . Nyachwaya and Wood ( 2014 ) analyzed twelve physical chemistry textbooks used in the USA in terms of the nature and types of representations and found that the majority of representations were at the symbolic level . Kapici and Savasci - Acikalin ( 2015 ) investigated visuals related to the particulate nature of matter in middle school science textbooks used in Turkey and found that the macroscopic level of representation was the most commonly used , with the sub - microscopic level the least commonly used ; there was little relevance of the visuals to the text . Similarly , Demirdogen ( 2017 ) studied four chemistry textbooks from the ninth grade to the twelfth grade levels used in Turkey and found that the most common type of representation in high school textbooks was macroscopic representations , followed by symbolic , hybrid , and submicroscopic representations . Akaygun ( 2018 ) investigated visual representations used in ninth - grade chemistry textbooks and found that macroscopic representations were the most common type in eight out of nine textbooks . Shebab and BouJaoude ( 2017 ) analyzed seven secondary Lebanese chemistry textbooks in order to evaluate chemical representations by using the five - criteria - based instrument developed by Gkitzia et al . ( 2011 ) . They found that the chemical representations used in the selected textbooks were focused on the macro level with either implicit or ambiguous labels , while multiple , hybrid , or mixed representations were rarely used . Yaseen and Akaygun ( 2016 ) analyzed ninth , tenth , and eleventh grade students ’ mental models of atoms 1655 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 and compared them with a total of 507 textbook visualizations that they had probably seen previously . They found no significant consistency between the mental models of students and the textbooks visualizations , and that the Bohr atomic model was the most preferred representation in students ’ responses . Devetak et al . ( 2010 ) studied the content and pictorial material of Slovenian science textbooks related to states of matter . They found that the content of textbooks was related to the national curriculum recommendations but the ways ( content of the images ) in which authors presented the topic varied . Although there have been many studies of chemistry textbooks , as previously discussed , some of these studies focused only on content analysis of representations without considering students ’ perspectives ( Aydin et al . 2014 ; Kapici and Savasci - Acikalin 2015 ; Devetak et al . 2010 ; Nyachwaya and Wood 2014 ) while some others were based on more quantitative analysis from general perspectives ( Gegios et al . 2017 ; Yaseen and Akaygun 2016 ) . Moreover , most of these studies focused on textbooks at the secondary school level . However , students are generally introduced to representations in the textbooks at earlier grades , especially at the middle school level . An in - depth analysis of how middle school students interpret represen - tations and a comparison between their understanding of representations and their conceptions is needed , since middle school students ’ early experiences with representations in their textbooks may shape their further conceptions and understanding of science . The current study thus focuses on middle school students ’ representations of phase change , exploring how they interpret representations of phase change in their textbooks and comparing their own representations with textbook representations of phase change . The research was guided by the following research questions : 1 . How do the interviewed middle school students represent phase change ? 2 . How do the interviewed middle school students interpret representations of phase change in the science textbooks currently used in their classrooms ? 3 . What are the similarities and differences between student representations and textbook representations related to phase change of matter ? Methodology Qualitative research methodology was adopted in this study . Qualitative research is B an umbrella concept covering several forms of inquiry that help us understand and explain the meaning of social phenomena with as little disruption of the natural setting as possible ^ ( Merriam 1998 ; p . 5 ) . The purposes of qualitative research are to achieve an understanding of how people make sense of their lives , delineate the process of meaning - making , and describe how people interpret what they experience ( Merriam 2009 ) . Since the purposes of the current study were to identify how middle school students represent phase change and how they interpret the representations of phase change in their textbooks , qualitative research method - ology in this study seems to be more appropriate for an in - depth analysis of how students represent and interpret the representations . Participant of the Study A total of 21 middle school students ( 12 sixth - grader , nine eighth - grader ) voluntarily partic - ipated in the study . Fourteen of the participants were female and seven were male . Participants 1656 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 were selected from the sixth - and the eighth - grade students studying at one of the middle schools in Istanbul based upon their willingness and their teacher ’ s preferences . The school was a state school located in a middle - class district . Like many neighborhoods in Istanbul , this district was very culturally diverse , as the parents of the students and / or their former families most likely had moved from different regions of Turkey . Thus , the culturally mixed student sample in the school could be considered representative of the general population . Teachers were asked to select the participants from different classrooms at the same grade level . Participants were likely to be more talkative , eager to participate in the interviews , and middle - and high - achievers in science . Participants were quite familiar with the textbook , since they frequently used it in their science classes . All classes had followed the national science curriculum and used the same textbook approved and delivered by the Ministry of National Education ( MNE 2013a ) . Participants were selected among the sixth - and the eighth - grade students because the particulate nature of matter , including phase change , was intro - duced in the sixth grade . By the end of the eighth grade , students would have learned all three levels of representation including macroscopic , submicroscopic , and symbolic ( including chemical formulas and element symbols ) from their textbooks . Before data collection , school district approval was obtained and participants were informed about the study and interview questions related to phase change that were taught in their science class . Data Collection Data were collected in semi - structured interviews with each participant . Interviews were recorded and transcribed . All quotations used in the manuscript were translated into English independently by the researcher and another qualitative researcher fluent in English , and both translations were compared for any discrepancies . Moreover , one of the graduate students also translated the English version of transcripts made by the main researcher to Turkish and the translated version was compared with the original version . There were no discrepancies of meaning between the English and Turkish versions of the quotations . Only minor revisions such as adding parentheses were made for clarity . Each interview took 40 – 50 min . Semi - structured interviews were conducted in two main steps : in the first step , students ’ definitions and examples of matter were elicited and recorded ( See Appendix A ) . Then , each participant was asked to draw phase change . In the second step , the students were shown selected representations related to phase change taken from their current textbook and asked how they interpreted different representations in their science textbooks ( See Appendix B ) . By the time of data collection , topics related to phase change had been taught , and students already had seen these representations in their classrooms . Procedure The interview questions were designed by the researchers based on the curriculum , the literature , and the images of the phase changes of matter in the science textbooks currently used in their classrooms . The interview questions were revised and validated in terms of accuracy and consistency with the objectives of the curriculum by one science professor with 12 years of teaching experience and two science teachers with 2 and 4 years of teaching experience , respectively . Although the units about matter and its properties have been taught from the third grade in elementary schools , the particulate nature of matter is introduced at the sixth - grade level in the science curriculum developed by the Ministry of National Education 1657 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 ( MNE 2013a , b ) . Sixth - graders are introduced to the particulate nature of matter , elements , and compounds and mixtures , but they are not introduced to chemical symbols and formulas such as H 2 O , H 2 , O 2 , and He . In the seventh grade , the unit entitled B Structure and Properties of Matter ^ introduces students to elemental symbols and teaches that compounds can be more scientifically described by using symbols in addition to macroscopic and submicroscopic representations of matter . By the time students reach the eighth grade , they will have learned about the concepts of atoms , molecules , ions , elements , and compounds . They will have further realized that symbols identify elements and formulae identify compounds , and they will have become aware of chemical bonds , classified elements , and the periodic table ( MNE 2013a , b ) . Interview questions covered the particulate nature of matter , including elements , compounds , mixtures , dissolving , phase change , physical change , and chemical change . In this study , findings regarding phase change will be discussed . Selection of Textbooks Textbooks have been selected based on two criteria : First , that they were approved and delivered by the Ministry of National Education ( MNE 2013a ) ; second , that they were used in the classroom where the study was conducted prior to the time of the study . Selection of Representations Representations have been selected based on two criteria : First , they were found in science textbooks currently used in the study classrooms by the time of the study . The second criterion was to select multiple levels of representations related to phase change . Three questions with representations were shown , and the researchers asked the participants what they meant to them ( See Appendix B ) . Data Analysis All interview recordings were transcribed before analyzing data . For the first research question , student representations of phase change at the macroscopic , submicroscopic , and symbolic levels were analyzed in terms of criteria in Appendix C . Students ’ representations of phase change at the macroscopic level were analyzed in terms of four criteria regarding matter and phase change , including having mass ; occupying space ; being different states as solids , liquids , and gases , with examples ; and explaining phase changes as a physical change . Students ’ representations of phase change at the submicroscopic level were analyzed in terms of five criteria including consisting of particles , an empty space among particles , distance of particles at different phases , motion of particles at different phases , and types of particles at different phases . Students ’ representations of phase change at the symbolic level were analyzed in terms of five criteria including types ( shapes ) of particles , motion of particles , and distances of the particles in solids , in liquids , and in gases . For the second research question , students ’ understandings of representations were catego - rized into two categories : the same as or different from the intended meaning in the textbooks ( see Appendix D ) . For the third research question , student representations and textbook representations related to phase change at the symbolic level were compared in terms of five criteria , including type of particles , motion of particles , and distances of the particles in solid , 1658 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 liquid , and gaseous states . All of the categories were also analyzed by a researcher in science education , and minor disagreements between researchers were resolved by discussion . Findings Research Question 1 : How Do the Interviewed Middle School Students Represent Phase Change ? Students ’ drawings and interview transcripts were analyzed in order to investigate student representations of phase change at macroscopic , submicroscopic , and symbolic levels . Student Representations of Phase Change at the Macroscopic Level Student responses were analyzed in terms of four criteria in order to identify student representations of phase change at the macroscopic level . All participants had difficulty in scientifically defining matter . According to the definition from their textbook used in the classroom , B matter is anything that has mass and occupies space ^ ( p . 91 ) . However , the meanings of matter for students were different than the textbook definition , since students tended to define matter based on examples in their field of vision at the time the question was asked . Only one eighth - grader ( S17 ) stated that all matter has mass . A total of seven participants ( four sixth - grader [ S4 , S9 , S11 , S12 ] and three eighth - grader [ S14 , S16 , S17 ] ) defined matter as anything occupying space . Moreover , although water was a common example of matter in their textbook , only six students ( S8 , S9 , S10 , S12 sixth - grader and S18 , S19 eighth - grader ) listed water as an example of matter . Matter had a variety of meanings for the students . Since the word B matter ^ has different meanings in Turkish such as articles in law and drugs , two of the participants initially tried to define matter using meanings out of the science context and needed guidance to explain matter in scientific terms . For example , S17 initially tried to explain matter as a drug ; then after being given guidance in the context of science class , she successfully explained that B matter is anything having mass and occupying volume . ^ The following excerpt is another example of how students interpret B matter ^ as a word differing from the scientific meanings . R : How do you understand the term B matter ^ ? How would you define matter ? S10 : Rules , articles in law , something like that . R : When you think about science classes , what would you say ? S10 : Atoms and molecules . R : How would you define it [ matter ] ? S10 : Umm … I do not know , really . R : What is the meaning of matter in science classes ? What comes to your mind when you hear it ? S10 : I mean umm anything like solids , liquids , and gases to my mind with regard to science classes , but normally rules and laws are coming to my mind . R : Air , water , soil are these matter ? S10 : Yes . Moreover , other students also provided a variety of meanings of matter . Many students seemed to confuse objects and the materials of which they are made and tried to define matter by only giving examples of objects in their surroundings . Students generally tended to think that matter 1659 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 should be anything people can use . Most of the examples of matter given by students were objects that people can use , such as a curtain , table , chair , cupboard , pencil , and so on . For example , S2 sixth - grader said that B we can call matter things like tables and curtains that we can use a lot in our daily lives . Water is matter , too . Air is matter as well because we cannot live without water and air . ^ Similarly , S21 eighth - grader stated that B cloud is not matter since we cannot use it . ^ In addition , students also tended to think that matter should be anything that can be touched or felt . Six of the participants ( four sixth - graders and two eighth - graders ) explained matter as tangible solid objects around themselves such as a table , a chair , a piece of paper , or a pencil , and stated that matter is anything that they can touch and feel . For example , S11 sixth - grader defined matter as B anything having specific volume and that we can see and hold ^ and gave examples by saying that B everything we can see around us such as a table , playdough , and an eraser . ^ S6 sixth - grader said that B matter is anything we can see , touch , and feel with our senses , such as walls , objects , human beings , playdough , and bags ^ while another student ( S21 ) eighth - grader defined matter similarly by stating that B matter is objects that we can see , touch , and anything felt by our senses . ^ Lower grade students tended to explain matter in terms of phases in which matter can be found . Half of the sixth graders explained matter as being in different phases such as solids , liquids , and gases , while one third of the eighth graders mentioned different phases in defining matter . Except for two sixth - grader ( S9 , S10 ) and two eighth - grader ( S19 and S21 ) , almost all students were aware of the fact that phase change is a physical change , stating that all were the same matter even though they were at the different phases . S10 sixth - grader said that phase change is a physical change . However , her reasoning behind this explanation was not scientific , as she thought that B physical change occurs by itself while chemical change occurs by human action . ^ In sum , student representations of phase change at the macroscopic level tended to be more student experiences in daily lives . Students tended to define matter differently than their textbooks , as anything used or touched , felt , or seen . Only two sixth - grade participants ( S11 and S12 ) and two eighth - graders ( S14 and S17 ) seemed to have more scientific representations of phase change at the macroscopic level than other participants , since their explanations fit with three out of four criteria in Appendix C . Student Representations of Phase Change at the Submicroscopic Level Student responses were analyzed in terms of five criteria in order to identify student representations of phase change at the submicroscopic level . Almost half of the students were aware of the particulate nature of matter . Five sixth - graders and five eighth - graders stated specifically that all matter is made up of particles . However , students had trouble understanding tiny particles [ scale ] and empty spaces among them . Four sixth - graders stated that there are atoms , minerals , or other particles between the particles , while two sixth - graders and one eighth - grader stated that there is air between the particles . One sixth - grader ( S6 ) said that B there must be empty space otherwise fish cannot pass through them . ^ One eighth - grader ( S14 ) stated that B there is nothing between the particles of solids since they are so closely packed but there is a little air between the particles of liquids and a lot of air between the particles of gases . ^ Another eighth - grader ( S20 ) stated that B there must be something . It seems to be impossible to think of particles sitting there without touching anything . ^ A total of six students ( four sixth - graders and two eighth - graders ) stated that there is empty space between the particles of matter . However , they did not seem to be sure . For example , S1 from the sixth grade responded that B there might be an empty space ^ but she also added that she is not sure , just guessing . More importantly , some students might have used the words B an empty space ^ [ bosluk in Turkish ] to 1660 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 mean distances or gaps among the particles . For example , S7 from the sixth grade explained that B emptiness [ distance ] among the particles in solids are too little , almost nothing , while those [ distances ] in liquids are larger and in gases they [ particles ] do not touch each other . ^ Similarly , S8 said that B since solids cannot be compressed , all particles [ of solids ] are in touch , there is no space [ distance ] among them , but there is a little in liquids . ^ As can be seen from all of the quotations , students had difficulty understanding empty space among the particles , and also misused the word B space ^ instead of B distance . ^ All students except one sixth - grader and four eighth - graders stated that particles of solids , liquids , and gases are arranged differently . However , it is difficult to understand what students think about how close the particles in solids , liquids , and gases are based on their responses during the interviews . Another concept that students had difficulty understanding was the motion of particles at different phases of matter . Only five ( S1 , S6 , S7 , S9 , S12 ) sixth - graders and three ( S14 , S15 , S17 ) eighth - graders were aware of the fact that particles of solids , liquids , and gases are in constant motion . Twelve students ( seven sixth - graders and five eighth - graders ) believed that particles in solids lack motion . The following excerpt shows a student thinking about the motion of particles . S18 : Particles of gases are moving more , particles of solids are constant , particles of water move less than those in gases but still they are moving . R : Do not the particles in solids have any motion at all ? S18 : If you push them , they do . R : Normally ? S18 : They do not have any motion unless you force them . Another student ( S2 ) from the sixth grade was not sure about the motion of particles in solids . She stated that B I mean that solids [ particles ] do not move because its particles are tight so they can ’ t make them move ^ and added that B I mean I guess there should not be any motion . ^ Furthermore , many students were aware that phase change is a physical change , so the particles of matter do not change during the phase change . However , a total of four students ( two from each grade level ) seemed to have difficulty in distinguishing between physical and chemical change . For example , one eighth - grader ( S21 ) stated that B ice is an element but water is a compound since there are other particles in the water . ^ Another eighth - grader ( S19 ) said that phase change is a chemical change since the structure of matter was changed . He also added that B the change is a chemical since we can drink water but we cannot drink ice or water vapor since their structure was changed . ^ In conclusion , two sixth - graders ( S1 and S7 ) and two eighth - graders ( S15 , S18 ) seemed to have more scientific representations of phase change at the submicroscopic level than their counterparts , since their explanations fit with four or five out of the five criteria in Appendix C . In particular , students generally had difficulty understanding empty spaces among particles and vibrations of the particles in solids . Students ’ Representations of Phase Change at the Symbolic Level Students ’ responses and drawings of phase change were analyzed in terms of five criteria in order to identify students ’ representations of phase change at the symbolic level . As seen in Fig . 1 , students ’ representations show a variety of differences in terms of types , motion , and distances of the particles at solid , liquid , and gaseous states . With respect to the types of particles in students ’ representations , a circle is the most preferred shape to represent a particle . 1661 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 Students generally represented particles as single circles , but a couple of students preferred to use double ( S21 ) or triple circles ( S3 ) to represent water molecules as a liquid . S3 explained why he drew triple circles to represent water molecules by stating that B there is some other matter in the water but in the ice some of it might have been lost . ^ As understood from this quote , he represented some other substances in the water such as chloride and sodium by using triple circles rather than representing oxygen and hydrogen atoms consisting of water mole - cules . Similarly , S21 explained her reason showing double circles to represent water particles as follows : R : Why did you indicate water molecules as double circles , but the particles in solids and gases with single circles ? S21 : Water umm , I guess , consisting of a mixture . R : Which mixtures formed water ? Could you explain more ? S21 : Inside [ of the mixture ] umm for example water is not pure [ and ] there is some matter in it ; that is why I drew like this . R : Which matter [ is there in the water ] ? S21 : Umm I do not know . R : What about gases ? S21 : They are separated in the gases . As stated in the excerpts , students tended to think that water consisted of some substances other than hydrogen and oxygen atoms , although they had seen in their textbooks that water molecules were formed of one oxygen and two hydrogen atoms . One of the reasons why students thought that water contained some other substances may come from the bottled water that students drink in their daily lives . In bottled water , there are some ingredients listed on a label of the bottle that make students think water molecules consist of these substances . As shown in Fig . 1 , one sixth - grader ( S9 ) used different shapes to represent particles of matter in different states . However , although their drawings showed different types of particles in different states , he knew that phase change is a physical change in which there is no change at the particle level of matter and he explained why he drew different shapes to represent distances among particles at different phases . On the other hand , another eighth - grader ( S19 ) said that phase change is a chemical change , although he represented the same types of particles of matter at different states . Motion of the particles at different phases of matter was not represented in students ’ drawings at all . As seen in Fig . 1 , none of the drawings showed any signs or arrows representing the motion of particles . However , some of the students verbally explained the motion of particles at different phases . For example , S12 explained clearly that B particles in solids vibrate but don ’ t move , but particles in liquids and gases both vibrate and move . ^ Although all but three students indicated that particles of solids , liquids , and gases are arranged differently , their drawings did not indicate that particles of solids and liquids are spaced similarly , but there are large distances between the particles of gases . Student drawings of the distance among particles at different phases are quite different from each other . Students seemed to have more scientific representations of particles in solids than in their representa - tions of particles in liquids and gases . Except S4 and S10 , all students represented that the particles in solids are closely packed . Drawings of S4 and S10 do not represent that the particles in solids are closely packed in a fixed order . S4 drew the irregular shape of solids as if 1662 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 Fig . 1 Students ’ representations of phase change at the symbolic level . * In students ’ drawings , the translation from Turkish to English was made as follows : kat ı → solid ; s ı v ı → liquid ; gaz → gas ; su → water ; buz → ice ; hava → air ; masa → table 1663 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 representing liquids . As understood from the following excerpt , the reason why she drew solids as irregular shapes was that she chose a pebble as an example . R : Could you draw and explain how particles are distributed at different phases ? S4 : For example , the particles of gases like in a cube are apart from each other , they are independent . R : Could you write it down in your drawing ? S4 : At the solid phase , they are close to each other like there are pebbles they are closer in here . R : How about the liquid phase ? S4 : Here [ at the liquids ] particles are neither far away nor adjoining . S10 explained her drawing by stating that B there is not much gap in solids , there is some gap in liquids , and there is more gap in gases . ^ She did not seem to be aware that particles of solids and liquids are spaced similarly . More than half of the students seemed to have more difficulty understanding the distances among particles in liquids and gases . A total of seven students ( five [ S1 , S2 , S7 , S9 , S12 ] sixth - graders and two [ S16 , S18 ] eighth - graders ) seemed to have more scientific representations of particles in liquids , since the distance between particles of liquids is close to the distance between particles of solids in their drawings . Other student drawings are varied with respect to the distance of particles in liquids . Although the eighth - graders were expected to have more scientific understandings of the distance among particles at different phases , most of the eighth grade students ’ representations of liquids did not seem to be scientific . As seen in the following excerpt , although S19 indicated that water molecules [ as a liquid ] were side by side , his drawing showed they were quite far away . R : How could you draw water molecules if we were able to see them ? S19 : I would draw that all were side by side [ by drawing ] but solids are different . R : Is this liquid ? S19 : Yes . R : Could you write it below as a liquid . What would happen if we froze it ? S19 : [ drawing particles of solids ] All of them would be tight . There would not be any gap . R : What if boiled it ? S19 : [ drawing particles of gases ] There would be more gaps . Similarly , S3 , S5 , S17 , and S20 also represented that the distance of particles in liquids are similar to the distance of particles in gases . The following excerpt indicates that students thought that the distance among the particles of liquids is somewhere between the distances of solids and gases . S20 : In solids umm how can I say ? Umm , they are closer to each other . In liquids the gaps among the particles are bigger ; in gases they are far away . R : Could you show me what you said by drawing ? S20 : Here are the particles in solids ( drawing ) . R : Could you give me an example of solids ? S 20 : A table . R : A table ? Okay . 1664 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 S20 : In liquids the gap is getting larger as compared to the solids . This [ by showing the drawings of particles in liquids ] is water . [ continuing drawing ] In gases they are separated , like air , oxygen or carbon dioxide . A total of nine students ( five [ S4 , S8 , S10 , S11 , S12 ] sixth - graders and four [ S13 , S17 , S19 , S21 ] eighth - graders ) seemed to have more scientific representations of particles in gases due to much larger gaps among the particles compared to the distances of particles in solids and liquids . The following excerpt taken from the interview with S12 from the sixth grade indicated the scientific conceptions of distances of particles at different phases . R : Could you draw molecules of solids , liquids , and gases if we were able to see ? S12 : [ by drawing ] There would be little , almost no distance among particles of solids . Liquids have bigger distances but they would not be squeezed either . Particles of gases are independent , they are everywhere , therefore they can be squeezed . R : Could you write the name under your drawing please ? What would you say about the motion of the particles in different phases ? Are the particles of solids moving ? S12 : No they are not moving , only they vibrate since they are too close to each other . R : What about the particles in liquids and gases ? S12 : They both vibrate and move . To summarize , none of the student representations of phase change at the macrocsopic , the submicroscopic , or the symbolic level can be categorized as scientific . Students had difficulty explaining matter and phase change scientifically at the macroscopic level . Although they were aware that matter consists of particles , they had difficulty understanding how small the particles were . Overall , students seemed to have difficulty understanding the motion of particles in solids and distances among particles , especially in liquids and gases . Research Question 2 : How Do the Interviewed Middle School Students Interpret Representations Related to Phase Change of Matter in the Science Textbooks Currently Used in Their Classroom ? In order to respond to the second research question , selected representations of phase change in Appendix B were shown to each participant . Participants were then asked what they had seen , and to explain their interpretation based on the representations . Table 2 shows the number of students who had difficulty understanding the intended meanings of the representations in their textbooks . As shown in Table 2 , more than half of the students in the study had difficulty simply understanding the macroscopic level of representations in their textbooks . First of all , macroscopic levels of representations showing ice as an example of solids , the sea as an example of liquids , and steam as an example of gases ( see Q1 at Appendix B ) were shown to the students during the interviews . The most confusing representation was the one related to the gas phase , since most of the students did not distinguish between steam and smoke . More than half of the participants ( seven sixth - graders and six eighth - graders ) had difficulty in understanding macroscopic representation of the matter as a gas phase . The following quotation is an example of one sixth - grader ’ s interpretation from the macroscopic representations of steam as a gas phase . 1665 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 S2 : Sky umm looks like a kind of sea but it is not exactly sea , either . Smoke is rising . R : What was that ? S2 : Smoke it looks like a part of the land , but there is also some water . As previously seen in the excerpt , she thought that there were parts of the land and some water but never thought that it could be steam . One of the sixth - graders ( S11 ) interpreted the picture as a mountain , and was not aware of the steam in the picture . Another example was given in the following quotation taken from an interview with one of the sixth - grade students thinking of smoke rather than steam . S10 : I think that there is something burned here [ in this picture ] . R : What might be burned ? S10 : It does not look like anything . R : Look carefully , what is could be ? S10 : It might be burning coal . R : What do you think about the whiteness [ in the picture ] ? S10 : Smoke . R : Where does smoke come from ? S10 : Smoke comes from burning coal . R : Is there any possibility this might be water ? S10 : If we poured water on it [ burning coal ] , it might turn white . R : Is it possible that there might be something such as steam ? S10 : I do not think so . Similarly , some of the eighth - graders also had difficulty understanding the intended meaning of the representations at the textbooks . Three of these students thought that the picture showed an explosion . For example , S22 said at first that B there was a volcanic eruption ^ then changed her response to B a kind of explosion . ^ S15 also said that B smoke is rising , a volcanic eruption happened . ^ According to S14 , there was a volcanic explosion or something out in space . In a similar way , S20 also explained his thinking about the picture by stating that B crater or meteorite pit , because we call it a meteorite pit if it is on the earth and a crater if it is in space . It is probably a crater since it is not clear and smoke is coming from a crater . ^ One sixth - grader ( S1 ) also explained the representation as a crater on the moon . S1 : There might be something on the Moon . R : What might be ? S1 : I do not know their names . R : Well , what might be on the Moon ? Do you think that it is a picture of the Moon ? S1 : Either a space object or something else in space . Table 2 The number of students having difficulty for understanding the representations in their textbooks Sixth grade Eighth grade Total Macroscopic levels 7 6 13 Macroscopic and symbolic levels for Q2 7 4 11 Macroscopic and symbolic levels for Q3 3 4 7 1666 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 R : What do you think are these [ pointing to the picture ] ? What do you think that the whiteness [ in the picture ] might be ? S1 : Well … [ it might be ] steam . R : Yeah … It might be steam , right ? Well , what does the picture tell you about steam ? S1 : Umm . . . the state of the matter is a gas . Nine of the students ( five sixth - graders and four eighth - graders ) realized that it was steam , and explained the macroscopic representation of gas , as expected . All of the students realized it was ice , and gave a correct explanation about the macroscopic representation of the matter as a solid . Only four eighth - graders needed a clue to interpret the representation , since they first turned their attention to stalactites and stalagmites . Almost all of the students ( except one sixth - grader ) realized it was the sea , and gave a correct response about the macroscopic represen - tation of the matter . Three sixth - graders and five eighth - graders gave more attention to other things such as a boat , a dock , and a fisherman rather than to the sea in the picture . In summary , textbook representations even at the macroscopic level did not seem to be helpful for students to make connections between real world examples and the topic taught in the class . Although these representations were already introduced in the textbooks currently taught in their classroom , student interpretations of representations were different from the intended meanings of representations by textbook authors . One reason for this might be the inappropriate selection of representations for the textbooks . None of the textbook representa - tions were appropriate examples of solids , liquids , and gases . Moreover , the link between representation and explanation in the textbook was missing . Students seemed to need more guidance and discussion in order to understand representations as intended by textbook authors . Secondly , students were asked what they understand by showing representations of solids , liquids , and gases including both the macroscopic and symbolic levels in question 2 ( see Appendix B ) . This image included a representation of copper particles with their movements and speed by showing arrows and lines in solids , liquids , and gases . More than half of the students ( seven sixth - graders and four eighth - graders ) in the study were not aware of the meaning of the arrows and lines in the picture . Students explained the lines as bonding between particles , heat , distance between particles , or evaporation rates rather than speed and direction of the particles . For example , S2 from the sixth grade explained as follows : R : What do you see when you look at the picture ? S2 : umm it wants to show what particles of this teapot made from umm for example teapot is a solid matter and there is little space between them ; they are structured regularly . R : What else do you see when you look carefully ? Something else around these blue particles ? S2 : Actually there is something between them but it should be something to bond them — I do not know [ what it is ] exactly [ because ] we have not learned this topic yet . S4 from the sixth grade , explained the lines as less distance by saying that B these lines show that they are so close each other umm I mean there is no space between them . ^ Similarly , students from the eighth grade gave similar responses . For example , one student ( S19 ) said that B these lines show distance ; for example , here is one line but there are three lines so the distance between them , three lines mean more distance , two lines show less distance . ^ Another student ( S10 from the sixth grade ) responded that the lines represent evaporation even 1667 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 with the particles of solids . She declared that B few lines mean less evaporation , more lines mean more evaporation . ^ More students in the study understood the intended meaning of the arrows than the lines in the picture . More than half of the participants ( six sixth - graders and seven eighth - graders ) were aware of the intended meaning of the arrows . However , three sixth - graders thought that arrows represented heat given or taken , while two eighth - graders said that the arrows show the particles to each other without mentioning their movements . In this question , the picture shows a teapot made from copper as an example of solids with macroscopic representations of liquid and gas phases of copper . Although they are macro - scopic representations of solids , liquids , and gases , students still had difficulty understanding the intended meaning of the picture . A copper teapot was used in the picture as an example of the solid . However , students used teapots to boil water to make tea in their daily lives ; therefore , they had difficulty in understanding what was melting or boiling and they interpreted the picture as a phase change of water . Some examples of students ’ quotations are as follows : R : What do you see here ? S10 : A teapot . R : What is teapot made of ? S10 : Copper . R : What else do you see in the picture ? S10 : Solid phase . R : What can the lines between particles tell us ? S10 : More water evaporation , as this movement [ shows ] water boiling slowly . R : What is the color of the picture ? S10 : Orange . R : What might be orange [ in there ] ? S10 : Fire . I think they are heating something . R : What could it be ? S10 : I guess , they are showing ice melting . R : Can ice be orange ? S10 : It might be since there is fire . Similarly , another student also thought that the picture showed ice cubes as the phase change of water . R : Which matter can this be ? S5 : Is it ice ? R : But , can an ice cube be yellow ? S5 : No . R : Then , what it might be ? S5 : [ It ] might be gold . R : Maybe . What else ? S5 : Copper … [ or ] maybe melted copper . In addition , the picture represents the liquid and gas phases of copper , and some students misinterpret the image . Four students ( three sixth - graders and one eighth - grader ) thought that it was lava , while five students ( three sixth - graders and two eighth - graders ) responded that it was fire or burning . Four students ( one sixth - grader and three eighth - graders ) stated that it was the 1668 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 liquid form of something , but they did not understand that it was liquid copper . The following quote taken from one eighth - grader is a good example of students ’ thinking : R : What do you see here ? S13 : There is water here . R : Is it water ? Can water be yellow ? S13 : No . R : What it could be ? S13 : I do not know what it is but it is something liquid . R : Could it be copper ? S13 : No . R : Why ? S13 : Because copper is solid . R : What about when we heat copper ? S13 : Oh ! Then it could be [ copper ] . In summary , the second set of representations related to the copper teapot with particles at three states was not helpful for students to understand the motion and arrangement of particles at solid , liquid , and gaseous states . Although they had probably seen these representations in their textbooks in their science classroom , they still had difficulty understanding them . One reason might be the inappropriate selection of representations for phase change , since they were not related to their daily lives . Students had more experience boiling water to make tea in a teapot than melting a copper teapot . Moreover , the arrows and lines for representing velocity and direction of particles did not seem to be helpful unless they were explained and discussed in detail in class , as shown in the previous excerpt . The third representation sets ( see Appendix B , Q3 ) taken from the current textbook show images of ice and water at both the macroscopic and symbolic levels . When students were asked to interpret what they saw , almost all students recognized the macroscopic representations of ice and water , but one sixth - grader ( S8 ) had difficulty in identifying the ice at the macroscopic level . R : What do you see [ in his picture ] ? S8 : Sugar . R : Is it sugar or ice ? S8 : Ohh , [ it is ] ice but it looks like sugar . Moreover , students had more difficulties interpreting the particles of ice and water . Students might have thought that there were particles inside the ice rather than ice made of particles . For example , one sixth - grader ( S4 ) said that B there are particles in the ice ^ when they saw the representation of ice . Moreover , students have learned that an element consists of the same type ( showing one color in the textbooks ) of particles while a compound include at least two different types ( showing two colors in the textbooks ) of particles . As a result , they thought that ice was an element , since it had one type of particles in the picture . The following excerpt from S9 , a sixth - grader , could be an example of how students might think . R : I am going to show you a new picture . What do you see in it ? Could you explain ? S9 : I see a solid [ item ] . 1669 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 R : What is it ? S9 : Ice . R : What does this representation in the circle show ? S9 : It shows its particulate nature , there is little space between them . R : What is ice , a compound or an element ? S9 : An element . R : Why do you think so ? S9 : Because it consists of one type of particles . Another example from S11 at the sixth grade below shows how students think that ice can be an element . R : What do you see in the picture ? S11 : Ice particles . R : Is ice a compound or an element ? S11 : Element . R : You said that it was a compound before . Why did you change your response ? S11 : Because it consists of one type of atom . Even when students knew that ice or water is a compound , they could get confused when they saw the representation . The following excerpt from the interview with S17 , an eighth - grader , is one example . R : Now you are saying that water is a compound . S17 : Yes , I did but … R : Why did you change your response when you see the picture ? S17 : I said that there but here umm … R : You changed your response because of the picture ? S17 : Yes . R : If we put the picture aside , what would you think that water is ? S17 : Umm actually I would think that water is a compound as it consists of two types of particles . R : Did you change your response after you saw the picture ? S17 : Yes , since it only consists of one type of atom , I am thinking it is an element . In conclusion , students in the study had difficulty interpreting the representations they saw in the textbooks currently used in their classrooms , and they tended to interpret the representations differently than the textbook authors intended . Although students had difficulty understanding both the macroscopic and symbolic levels of phase change based on the textbook representations , they had most difficulty understanding the motion of particles in solids , liquids , and gases . Arrows and lines used for representing motion and directions of particles seemed to be confusing for students . Since the textbooks are two - dimensional , representing the dynamic nature of particles can be problematic . Thus , students became confused in understanding the roles of the lines and arrows . Moreover , using one type and color in representations was another problem for students , leading to students thinking that water is an element . 1670 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 Research Question 3 : What Are the Similarities and Differences Between Student Representations and Textbook Representations Related to Phase Change of Matter ? In order to respond to the third research question , student representations and textbook representations of matter and phase change were compared . Table 3 shows a comparison of textbook representations and student representations of matter . Textbook representations of matter vary widely from foods such as apricots , eggs , milk , flour , salt , and sugar to coal , a golden ring , a balloon , the sea , ice , steam , and a geyser . All of the examples in the textbook were given only as pictures , without any descriptions about what they were . Students were asked to classify them in terms of states such as solids , liquids , and gases by looking at the pictures . Students ’ examples of matter at three states different than those in the textbook were based on objects in their surroundings at the time the question was asked , and includes such responses as table , window , pencil , eraser , book , wall , and air . Neither the textbooks ’ repre - sentations nor students ’ representations made the distinction clearly between objects and the materials of which they are made . Table 3 Comparison of student representations and textbook representations of matter Student representations Textbook representations Examples for solids Table , curtain , wall , pencil , eraser ( commonly given examples ) p . 91 coal p . 91 sugar p . 91 salt p . 91 flour Matter are anything we can use in daily lives ( S2 , S20 ) Matter is anything we can see and touch ( S11 , S20 ) p . 91 ring p . 85 ice p . 85 egg p . 85 apricot Examples for liquids “we can call matters such as tables , curtains that we can use a lot in daily lives . Water is a matter , too . Air is a matter as well because we cannot live without water and air . ” ( S2 ) p . 91 Milk p . 91 oil p . 85 sea p . 107 water molecule p . 108 water as a liquid Water ( the most common example ) Examples for gases Air ( the most common examples ) p . 91 [ Balloon filled by air ] p . 85 steam “Cloud is not a matter since we cannot use it . ” ( S21 ) p . 87 [ Smell of meal p . 102 steam ( by using a wave of whiteness ) ] ( by using the lines ) 1671 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 Moreover , most of the examples of matter in both the textbook and student responses were solids , while the least used examples of matter were gases . Reasons for this situation might come from the limitation of representations of matter at the gas phase in the textbook or the abstract nature of gases , which could be difficult for students to understand . As seen in Table 3 , the gas phase was represented in the textbook by using balloons filled with air , drawing a wave of whiteness for the smell of meal cooking in the kitchen , curvy lines coming from the teapot for steam , and condensation above a geyser . None of them was an appropriate representation for an example of gases , since gases are not usually visible . Colored gas such iodine or bromine in a gas state could have been used to represent to have gases visible for students . Students ’ representations for a gas state was limited with air because the gas phase was not visible for them easily , either in their lives or in their textbook . Table 4 shows a comparison of textbook representations and student representations of phase change . The student representations are similar to the textbook representations with respect to the types of shapes used for representations of particles . The shape most frequently used in both student drawings and textbook representations is a circle . Textbook representations included mostly phase change representations depicting a single circle in three phases ( see Appendix B Q3 ) . Similarly , student drawings include single circles to represent particles . Only one student , a sixth - grader ( S9 ) , used triangles and squares to distinguish between particles in different phases ( see student drawing ( S9 ) in Fig . 1 ) . Two students [ S3 and S21 ] used triple and double circles to represent water molecules as a liquid . Although water as a liquid was represented by showing two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen in the textbook ( as seen in Table 4 ) , the reason why students depicted liquid water as double or triple circles was that they thought of water as a mixture rather than as a pure substance . This may be due to representations of mixtures ( sugar water or salty water solutions ) presented in the same chapter . This belief may also come from students ’ daily lives , in which they heard that water has minerals , and bottles of water are often labeled as such . For example , S6 said that B water is a compound because there are minerals such as chloride in it . ^ As seen in Table 4 , textbook representations did not seem to be helpful for students to understand that there is nothing among the particles , since they represented that particles were embedded in something . As previously discussed , students also might have interpreted lines representing the motion as heat , or other particles , rather than the motion of the particles . In addition , lines also were used in the textbook representations to show steam or gas , as seen in Table 3 . There is a difference between student representations and textbook representations in terms of the motion of particles in different phases . Some of the textbook representations ( e . g . , Q2 ) used arrows and lines to represent the motion of particles in different phases . Many students seemed to have difficulty understanding the functions of arrows and lines in the representation . Using lines for multiple purposes in the textbook may have caused students to get confused about the meaning of lines . For example , one student ( S19 ) said that B these lines show distance ; for example , here is one line , but there are three lines , so the distance between them , three lines means more distance , two lines show less distance . ^ Another student ( S10 , a sixth - grader ) responded that the lines represent evaporation even among the particles of solids . She said that B few lines mean less evaporation ; more lines mean more evaporation . ^ Three sixth - graders thought that 1672 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 arrows represented heat given or taken , while two eighth - graders said that the arrows point one particle to the others without mentioning their movements . Student representations seemed to be similar to textbook representations with respect to the distance among the particles in different phases . Many students represented that the distance among particles in liquids was the middle between the distance among particles in solids and gases . Similarly , textbook representations also showed no significant difference between the distance of particles in liquids and in gases , as seen in Table 4 . Table 4 Comparison of student representations and textbook representations of phase change Student representations Textbook representations Types of particles S17 p . 112 ( solid ) p . 113 ( liquid ) p . 113 ( gas ) S3 p . 107 water molecule p . 108 water as a liquid S21Water is consisted of minerals ( S4 ) Empty space among particles There is air among the particles of matter ( S3 , S11 , S14 ) There are atoms or minerals between the particles ( S2 , S4 , S5 ) There isn’t empty space among the particles in solids but there are in liquids and gases ( S6 , S16 ) p . 113 ( solid ) There is nothing between the particles of solids since they are so closely packed but there is little air between the particles of liquids and much air between the particles of gases ( S14 ) There must be empty space otherwise fish cannot pass through them ( S6 ) p . 113 ( liquid ) S6 Motion of particles Particles in solid do not have motion ( S2 , S3 , S4 , S5 , S8 , S10 , S11 , S16 , S18 , S19 , S20 , S21 ) Copper Teapot ( Appendix B Q2 ) p . 113 ( gas ) p . 113 ( solid ) Distance of particles The distance among particles in liquids is in the middle of the distances among particles between those in gases and solids ( S4 , S5 , S6 , S7 , S8 , S9 , S10 , S11 , S12 , S13 , S14 , S15 , S16 , S17 , S19 , S20 , S21 ) S5 Ice with particles ( Appendix B Q3 ) Water with particles ( Appendix B Q3 ) p . 113 ( liquid ) p . 113 ( gas ) 1673 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 Discussion This study has offered findings related to middle school students ’ representations of phase change , and how students interpret textbooks ’ representations of phase change . First of all , one of the findings suggest that middle school students have difficulty understanding matter and phase change at the macroscopic and submicroscopic levels . A significant number of previous research studies have shown that students at all grade levels lack scientific understanding of matter and its particulate nature ( e . g . , Harrison and Treagust 2002 ; Kokkotas et al . 1998 ; Lee et al . 1993 ; Samarapungavan et al . 2017 ; Stojanovska et al . 2012 ) . As discussed in the literature ( Stavy 1991 ) , students have difficulty in defining matter and explaining matter as anything used in their daily lives . In this study , all students are aware of the fact that matter consists of particles and matter can be found in different phases as solids , liquids , and gases , as opposed to the findings of other studies suggesting that students think that matter has continuous structure rather than particulate ( Ayas et al . 2010 ; Nakhleh 1992 ; Nakhleh and Samarapungavan 1999 ; Nakhleh et al . 2005 ) , and emphasizing students ’ difficulty in accepting gases as a phase of matter ( Stavy 1991 ) . As previously reported in the literature ( Griffiths and Preston 1992 ; Johnson 1998a , b ) , students in the current study had difficulty understanding the concept of the empty space among particles , and believe that there should be something among particles . Another finding of the current study was that students believed in the proportional distance among particles in solids , liquids , and gases . They thought that the distances among particles of liquids fell between the distances between the particles of gases and solids in length . This finding is consistent with the findings reported in the literature ( Harrison 2001a ; Harrison and Treagust 2002 ) . In addition , the finding of the current study is consistent with some other studies ( Gökulu 2013 ; Özmen 2011a , b ; Öztuna - Kaplan and Boyac ı o ğ lu 2013 ) in that students believe that particles of solids do not move , whereas particles of liquids and gases do move . Students in the current study had difficulty distinguishing between atoms and molecules , and use these concepts interchangeably ( Merritt and Krajcik 2013 ; Taber 2003 ) . The current study suggests that students tend to use molecular representations for particles of liquids , since they probably are familiar with water molecules in a liquid phase , whereas they tend to use atomic representations for particles of solids and gases . Students ’ experiences making their own water molecules with playdough may help them in meaning - making of water molecules as a liquid more than molecules of ice and stream . This is consistent with Jakab ’ s ( 2013 ) study in which students began to domesticate the textbook images to their own purposes when given the opportunity to interact with molecular artifacts in a supported activity . Secondly , the current study points out students ’ difficulty in interpreting representations in their textbooks . Students in the current study seem to have difficulty understanding the intended meaning of the representations , even at the macroscopic level . Although the repre - sentations included common examples such as ice , steam , water from students ’ daily lives , they still had trouble identifying them . One of the most difficult representations for students to identify was related to the gas phase of matter , such as steam . As indicated in the literature ( Stavy 1991 ; Lee et al . 1993 ) , students have difficulty identifying gas as a phase of matter . Textbook representations of gases do not seem to help students understand it . Since steam is colorless and cannot be seen in the figures of the textbook , it is not an appropriate represen - tation for an example of gases . Thus , colored gases such as bromine or iodine in a gaseous state could be selected as examples of gases for textbook representation . Similarly , students failed to distinguish evaporation from burning when viewing the representations . Moreover , they were also unable to identify ice and water representations as examples of solids and 1674 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 liquids . Another difficulty that students faced in the current study was to differentiate the types of particles , either atoms or molecules , to describe phenomena at the particulate level . As stated by Barke et al . ( 2009 ) , the term B particles ^ is fuzzy for most people , and term diversity increases after introducing the concept of atoms . Since the term B particle ^ could give rise among children to confusion with the macro world use of B particle ^ to indicate dust and grains of materials in the air and general environment , the term B molecule ^ should be used as the most appropriate term for younger students ( Jakab 2013 ; Lui and Lesniak 2006 ) . In the current study , although students properly used the terms particles , atoms , and molecules to explain phase change within different contexts , they failed to identify them in the representations of the textbook . One of the reasons for this problem may come from the fact that students learn that an element consists of one type of atoms ; therefore , when they see a circle representing a compound such as water in the textbooks , they may tend to think that water is an element as well , since it consists of one type of particles . One of the findings of the current study points out that students fail to identify the motion of the particles shown as lines and arrows in the representations . As pointed out by Harrison ( 2001b ) , the two - dimensional format of textbooks limits the ways authors can represent process for their readers . Textbook authors prefer to use some signals such as circles with shadow tails or line tails ( Han and Roth 2006 ) to represent the dynamic nature of phenomena . The textbook in the current study used the lines and arrows to show the motion of the particles . On the other hand , students failed to understand that these lines showed the directions and speeds of the particles . Reasons for this situation might come from the limitation of represen - tations of matter at the gas phase in the textbook , or the abstract nature of gases for students to understand . One of the reasons for this situation may come from students ’ lack of knowledge and inadequate explanations found in the textbooks or made by teachers in classes . As described by Yun and Park ( 2018 ) , another reason may be that science teachers and the authors of science textbooks often overlook the fact that they are B native speakers ^ of scientific language , while students are like immigrants to a new land who are still unfamiliar with the local language . Moreover , science teachers ’ spoken language in class may also differ from science textbooks ( Yun and Park 2018 ) . Language is not considered just to be a communica - tion system , but a mirror of the mind and a system to express thoughts ( Chomsky 2002 ; Hauser 1996 as cited in Yun and Park 2018 ) . Therefore , it is important to have students share what they see and understand from representations and help them understand the meanings of symbols and representations as intended by textbooks ’ authors , using a classroom discussion as guidance . Finally , the current study made a comparison between student representations and textbook representations related to matter and phase change . Most of the examples of matter in the textbook and student responses were solids , while the least - used examples of matter were gases . The findings indicated that student representation and textbook representations seem to have similarities in terms of types of particles and the distance among the particles , whereas they seem to be different from each other in terms of the motion of particles . The findings of the current study partially confirm Yaseen and Akaygun ’ s ( 2016 ) findings of no significant consistency between students ’ mental models of atoms and textbook visualizations . As stated by Han and Roth ( 2006 ) , textbook representations in the current study include a circle to represent particles , similar to students ’ drawings in which circles were the most common way to represent particles . Moreover , the current study offers that students ’ drawings are similar to textbook representations in terms of the distance among particles . As stated in the literature ( Harrison 2001a ; Harrison and Treagust 2002 ) , students ’ beliefs that the distances among 1675 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 particles of liquids are between the distances of the particles of gases and solids in length may come from textbook representations . On the other hand , the current study points out that students ’ drawings do not include any signals for the motion of the particles , although textbooks representations do . Students might have difficulty understanding and representing the dynamic nature of phase change in the two - dimensional format of textbooks . As indicated by Ge et al . ( 2017 ) , not all explicit visual cues in textbook representations are significantly efficient . Therefore , in addition to visual cues , more guidance through explana - tion in the text and discussion in class should be provided to help students understand textbook representations ’ intended meaning . Implications and Conclusions The current study may provide important findings and implications that can be useful for teaching concepts of matter and phase change by using multiple levels of representation and developing textbooks and instructional materials . First of all , the finding of the study points out that students ’ representations of phase change did not entirely meet with the criteria of scientific understanding . Although studies on students ’ conceptions related to phase change have been well documented in the literature for several decades , students still have difficulty understanding matter and phase change at both macroscopic and submicroscopic levels . One of the reasons for students ’ misconceptions may come from inadequate connections among different representation levels , both in text - books and in science classes . Teachers have a key role in using multiple levels of represen - tations in teaching the concepts of matter and phase change . Therefore , teachers should be aware of the importance of multiple levels of representations in teaching science , and should know how to use them in their classrooms . Teachers should be guides , having students ask questions and share their ideas with peers in the process of meaning making of representations . Teachers should provide more opportunities for students to interact with molecular artifacts through a classroom discussion , so that students may begin to select representations more appropriate to their own purposes . Moreover , teachers may need more professional support in determining how to overcome student misconceptions and in using appropriate representations and language for students with different prior knowledge and experiences . For example , students at lower grade levels should be introduced to the ideas of B molecules ^ prior to the introduction of particle concepts in formal schooling in order to avoid many of the alternative conceptions voiced by young learners ( Jakab 2013 ) . Science teachers and textbook authors should ensure that the language and representations used in the textbook and in class should be consistent with each other and easy to understand for all students with different backgrounds . Teachers should pay more attention to textbook representations and save more class time for discussion in order to build shared meanings of representations . In addition , teachers also should develop knowledge in assessing the quality of the representations in textbooks or other instructional materials they use in the classroom . Further research could be done with teachers to follow up on teachers ’ knowledge and practice about using multiple levels in their teaching . Teacher education programs have significant roles in preparing teachers to teach science by using models and representations . In teacher education programs , science content courses should offer more opportunities for pre - service teachers with a more model - based learning environment so that teachers can be more familiar and comfortable with using multiple models , not only for teaching , but also in understanding how models and modeling can be 1676 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 used in science . In addition , pre - service teachers should be educated not only for selecting and using representations , but also for helping students understand representations more scientif - ically , since representations cannot convey the complete idea . Preservice teachers can gain more experiences during their teaching practice by making more model - based activities in which students use or create molecular artifacts or representations to discuss and ask their own questions during the meaning - making process . Secondly , textbook writers and publishers have a significant responsibility to provide textbooks with scientifically correct and pedagogically helpful texts and representations . Textbooks should be related to students ’ daily lives and prepared based on research on students ’ prior knowledge and cognitive development . Textbook writers should make sure that they choose simple and understandable representations with adequate explanations by considering student diversity , and publishers need to receive some level of approval that the met the criteria from a committee of experts in this area . Textbook writers and publishers can provide students with supplemental materials such as CDs , DVDs , or a digital portal to show the dynamic nature of scientific phenomena , since the format of textbooks is limited to two dimensions . All of these instructional materials should be clear , easy to understand , and prepared by experts in the fields of science education , instructional technology , and cognitive psychology . Finally , although the current study presents important findings and implications , it also has some limitations . The findings of this study should be interpreted within the context of the methodological choices made and constraints based on the research design . All of the participants were from two different teachers ’ classrooms at only one middle school , so there is the possibility of teacher and / or school effect . Further research could be done to investigate how science teachers use textbooks and different representation levels for teaching science and the ways to improve teaching practice . Moreover , the study was limited by data coming from students ’ responses related to textbook representations and interview questions , without considering the possibility of other representations that students may have encountered during their learning . Moreover , students face many sources of representations other than textbooks , especially with the increase in instructional technology . As a result , more research could be done to investigate the quality and effectiveness of multimedia sources that students are likely to encounter during the learning process . Further research might be done to investigate textbook representations in terms of other content areas such as biology , physics , astronomy , and earth science concepts , since representations are indispensable to teaching the dynamic nature of scientific phenomena . Appendix A : Some examples of the interview questions 1 . How do you understand the term B matter ^ ? How would you define matter ? 2 . Could you give me some examples of matter ? 3 . What are the common characteristics of these examples of matter ? 4 . What would you think will happen if we heat up a bowl of water ? 5 . What would happen if we put some water in the refrigerator ? 6 . Could you tell me more what could happen during these changes ? 7 . How can we name these changes ? 8 . Could you draw the particles during the phase change ? 9 . Could you explain your drawing please ? 1677 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 Appendix B : Selected Representations from Textbooks for Interview Questions 1 . Could you tell me what you see from the following pictures ? What do you understand from these photos * ? a . What is in the first picture ? What does the picture tell us ? b . What is in the second picture ? What does the picture tell us ? c . What is in the third picture ? What does the picture tell us ? * These pictures were taken from the middle school science textbook used at the time of the study ( Lider , p . 85 ) . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) 2 . Could you tell me about what you see from these pictures ? a . What could this be ? b . What are the lines seen in the first circle ? c . What are the lines seen in the second circle ? What are the arrows showing us ? d . What is happening in the third circle ? What does it tell us ? 1678 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 3 . Could you describe what you are seeing from the following pictures ? a . b . Appendix C : Scientific Understanding of Phase Change of Matter I . Macroscopic level 1 . All matter has mass . 2 . All matter occupies space . 3 . Matter is found in different phases as solids , liquids , and gases ( by giving examples of solids , liquids , and gases ) 4 . Phase change is a physical change . A physical change in a substance does not change what the substance is . II . Submicroscopic level 1 . All matter is made up of particles . 2 . There is empty space between particles of solids , liquids and gases . 3 . Particles of solids , liquids and gases are arranged differently . 4 . Particles of solids , liquids , and gases are in constant motion . ( Particles of a solid vibrate but generally do not move from place to place . Particles of a liquid vibrate , move about and slide past each other . Particles of a gas vibrate and move freely at high speeds . 5 . The particles of the matter are not changed during the phase change . III . Symbolic level 1 . Students ’ drawings of particles in terms of type [ shape ] are not changed during the phase . 2 . Students ’ drawing of particles of solids , liquids and gases are in constant motion . 3 . Students ’ drawings of particles of solids are closely packed in a fixed order . 4 . Students ’ drawings of particles of liquids are closer to each other . They are not regularly packed . They take the shape of a container . Particles of solids and liquids are spaced similarly . 1679 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 5 . Students ’ drawings of particles of gases are separated by relatively large distances . They fill the container . Data analysis criteria for RQ 2 Representation types in the textbook Intended meaning Responses given by students Macroscopic Representations in Appendix B Q1 a ) 1a Ice , solid Stalactites and stalagmites SeaSkyClouds 1b Sea , liquid A boat A dock Fisherman 1c Steam , gas Something burned b ) c ) SmokeA mountain An explosion A volcanic eruption Crater or meteorite pit Macroscopic & Symbolic Representations in Appendix B Q2 2a Copper teapot and its particles Water boiling HeatFireIce melting 2b Vibration of particles in solid ParticlesHeatDistance between particles Evaporation rates 2c Vibration of particles in liquid ; particles move and slide past each other in liquid . ( liquid copper ) And arrows show the direction of particle movement LavaFire Burning 2d Gas phase And particles in a gas vibrate and move freely Arrows show the direction of the particles moving . Macroscopic & Symbolic Representations in Appendix B Q3 a ) b ) 3a Ice and its particles SugarParticles inside the ice 3b Water and its particles Appendix D . Data analysis criteria for RQ 2 1680 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 References Abd - El - Khalick , F . , Myers , J . Y . , Summers , R . , Brunner , J . , Waight , N . , Wahbeh , N . , Zeineddin , A . A . , & Belarmino , J . ( 2017 ) . A longitudinal analysis of the extent and manner of representations of nature of science in U . S . high school biology and physics textbooks . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 54 ( 1 ) , 82 – 120 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / tea . 21339 . Abimbola , I . O . , & Baba , S . ( 1996 ) . Misconceptions & alternative conceptions in science textbooks : the role of teachers as filters . The American Biology Teacher , 58 ( 1 ) , 14 – 19 . Adadan , E . , Irving , K . E . , & Trundle , K . C . ( 2009 ) . Impacts of multi - representational instruction on high school students ’ conceptual understandings of the particulate nature of matter . International Journal of Science Education , 31 ( 13 ) , 1743 – 1775 . Adbo , K . , & Taber , K . S . ( 2009 ) . Learners ’ mental models of the particle nature of matter : a study of 16 - year - old Swedish science students . International Journal of Science Education , 31 ( 6 ) , 757 – 786 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500690701799383 . Akaygun , S . ( 2018 ) . Visualizations in high school chemistry textbooks used in Turkey . In C . Cox & W . Schatzberg ( Eds . ) , International perspectives on chemistry education research and practice ( pp . 111 – 127 ) . Washington , DC : American Chemical Society . Ainsworth , S . ( 1999 ) . The functions of multiple representations . Computers & Education , 33 ( 1999 ) , 131 – 152 . Ainsworth , S . ( 2008 ) . How should we evaluate multimedia learning environments ? In J . F . Rouet , R . Lowe , & W . Schnotz ( Eds . ) , Understanding multimedia documents ( pp . 249 – 260 ) . New York , NY : Springer . Ayas , A . , Özmen , H . , & Çal ı k , M . ( 2010 ) . Students ’ conceptions of the particulate nature of matter at secondary and tertiary level . International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education , 8 ( 1 ) , 165 – 184 . Aydin , S . , Sinha , S . , Izci , K . , & Volkmann , M . ( 2014 ) . Turkish , Indian , and American chemistry textbooks use of inscriptions to represent ‘ types of chemical reactions ’ . EURASIA Journal of Mathematics , Science & Technology Education , 10 ( 5 ) , 383 - 393 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 12973 / eurasia . 2014 . 1060a . Bar , V . , & Travis , S . A . ( 1991 ) . Children ’ s views concerning phase changes . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 28 , 363 – 382 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / tea . 3660280409 . Barke , H . D . , Hazari , A . , & Yitbarek , S . ( 2009 ) . Misconceptions in chemistry : addressing perceptions in chemical education . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 70989 - 3 _ 1 , Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg . Benson , D . L . , Wittrock , M . C . , & Baur , M . E . ( 1993 ) . Students ’ preconceptions of the nature of gases . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 ( 6 ) , 587 – 597 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / tea . 3660300607 . Bowen , G . M . , & Roth , W . - M . ( 2002 ) . Why students may not learn to interpret scientific inscriptions . Research in Science Education , 32 , 303 – 327 . Boz , Y . ( 2006 ) . Turkish pupils ’ conceptions of the particulate nature of matter . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 15 ( 2 ) , 203 – 213 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10956 - 006 - 9003 - 9 . Bunce , D . M . , & Gabel , D . ( 2002 ) . Differential effects on the achievement of males and females of teaching the particulate nature of chemistry . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 39 ( 10 ) , 911 – 927 . Bungum , B . ( 2008 ) . Images of physics : an explorative study of the changing character of visual images in Norwegian physics textbooks . NorDiNa , 4 ( 2 ) , 132 – 141 . Chandrasegaran , A . L . , Treagust , D . F . , & Mocerino , M . ( 2008 ) . An evaluation of a teaching intervention to promote students ’ ability to use multiple levels of representation when describing and explaining chemical reactions . Research in Science Education , 38 ( 2 ) , 237 – 248 . Cheng , M . M . W . , & Gilbert , J . K . ( 2015 ) . Students ’ visualization of diagrams representing the human circulatory system : the use of spatial isomorphism and representational conventions . International Journal of Science Education , 37 ( 1 ) , 136 – 161 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500693 . 2014 . 969359 . Chiappetta , E . L . , & Fillman , D . A . ( 2007 ) . Analysis of five high school biology textbooks used in the United States for inclusion of the nature of science . International Journal of Science Education , 29 ( 15 ) , 1847 – 1868 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500690601159407 . Chittleborough , G . ( 2014 ) . The development of theoretical frameworks for understanding the learning of chemistry . In I . Devetak & S . A . Glazar ( Eds . ) , Learning with understanding in the chemistry classroom ( pp . 25 – 40 ) . The Netherlands : Springer . Chomsky , N . ( 2002 ) . On nature and language . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Cook , M . ( 2008 ) . Students ’ comprehension of science concepts depicted in textbook illustrations . Electronic Journal of Science Education , 12 ( 1 ) , 1 – 14 . Çal ı k , M . , & Ayas , A . ( 2005 ) . A comparison of level of understanding of eigth - grade students and science student teachers related to selected chemistry concepts . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 42 ( 6 ) , 638 – 667 . De Jong , O . , & Taber , K . S . ( 2007 ) . Teaching and learning the many faces of chemistry . In S . Abell & N . G . Lederman ( Eds . ) , Handbook of research on science education ( pp . 631 – 652 ) . New York , NY : Routledge . Demirdogen , B . ( 2017 ) . Examination of chemical representations in Turkish high school chemistry textbooks . Journal of Baltic Science Education , 16 ( 4 ) , 472 – 499 . 1681 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 Devetak , I . , Vogrinc , J . , & Glazar , S . A . ( 2010 ) . States of matter explanations in Slovenian textbooks for students aged 6 to 14 . International Journal of Environmental and Science Education , 5 ( 2 ) , 217 – 235 . Devetak , I . , & Janez , V . ( 2013 ) . The criteria for evaluating the quality of the science textbooks . In M . S . Khine ( Ed . ) , Critical analysis of science textbooks : evaluating instructional effectiveness ( pp . 3 - 15 ) : Springer . Dimopoulos , K . , Koulaidis , V . , & Sklaveniti , S . ( 2003 ) . Towards analysis of visual images in school science textbooks and press articles about science and technology . Research in Science Education , 33 ( 2 ) , 189 – 216 . Gabel , D . L . ( 1993 ) . Use of the particle nature of matter in developing conceptual understanding . Journal of Chemical Education , 70 ( 3 ) , 193 – 194 . Gabel , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Improving teaching and learning through chemistry education research : a look to the future . Journal of Chemical Education , 76 ( 4 ) , 548 – 554 . Garnett , P . J . , Garnett , P . J . , & Hacking , M . W . ( 1995 ) . Students ’ alternative conceptions in chemistry : a review of research and implications for teaching and learning . Studies in Science Education , 25 ( 1 ) , 69 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03057269508560050 . Ge , Y . P . , Unsworth , L . , & Wang , K . H . ( 2017 ) . The effects of explicit visual cues in reading biological diagrams . International Journal of Science Education , 39 ( 5 ) , 605 – 626 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500693 . 2017 . Ge , Y . P . , Unsworth , L . , Wang , K . H . , & Chang , H . P . ( 2018 ) . What images reveal : a comparative study of science images between Australian and Taiwanese junior high school textbooks . Research in Science Education , 48 ( 6 ) , 1409 – 1431 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11165 - 016 - 9608 - 9 . Gegios , T . , Salta , K . , & Koinis , S . ( 2017 ) . Investigating high - school chemical kinetics : the Greek chemistry textbook and students ’ difficulties . Chemistry Education Research and Practice , 18 ( 1 ) , 151 – 168 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c6rp00192k . Gilbert , J . , & Treagust , D . ( 2009 ) . Multiple representations in chemical education https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4020 - 8872 - 8 , Springer Science + Business Media . Ginns , I . S . , & Watters , J . J . ( 1995 ) . An analysis of scientific understandings of pre - service elementary teacher education students . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 32 , 205 – 222 . Gkitzia , V . , Salta , K . , & Tzougraki , C . ( 2011 ) . Development and application of suitable criteria for the evaluation of chemical representations in school textbooks . Chemistry Education : Research and Practice , 12 ( 1 ) , 5 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c1rp90003j . Glynn , S . ( 1995 ) . Conceptual bridges : using analogies to explain scientific concepts . Science Teacher , 62 , 24 – 27 . Gökulu , A . ( 2013 ) . Bilgisayar destekli ö ğ retimin etkisinin incelenmesi ve maddenin tanecikli yap ı s ı konusu ile ilgili ö ğ rencilerin kavram yan ı lg ı lar ı n ı n tespiti . ( Investigation of computer - supported teaching and diagnos - ing students ’ misconceptions of the particulate nature of matter ) . International Journal of Social Science , 6 ( 5 ) , 571 – 585 . Griffiths , A . K . , & Preston , K . R . ( 1992 ) . Grade - 12 students ’ misconceptions relating to fundamental character - istics of atoms and molecules . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 29 ( 6 ) , 611 – 628 . Hadenfeldt , J . C . , Liu , X . , & Neumann , K . ( 2014 ) . Framing students ’ progression in understanding matter : a review of previous research . Studies in Science Education , 50 ( 2 ) , 181 – 208 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03057267 . 2014 . 945829 . Han , J . , & Roth , W . - M . ( 2006 ) . Chemical inscriptions in Korean textbooks : semiotics of macro - and microworld . Science Education , 90 ( 2 ) , 173 – 201 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sce . 20091 . Harrison , A . G . ( 2001a ) . How do teachers and textbook writers model scientific ideas for students ? Research in Science Education , 31 , 401 – 435 . Harrison , A . G . ( 2001b ) . Textbooks for outcomes science : a review . The Queensland Science Teacher , 27 ( 6 ) , 20 – 22 . Harrison , A . G . , & Treagust , D . F . ( 2002 ) . The particulate nature of matter : challenges in understanding the submicroscopic world . In J . K . Gilbert , O . D . Jong , R . Justi , D . F . Treagust , & J . H . Van Driel ( Eds . ) , Chemical education : towards research - based practice ( pp . 189 – 212 ) . Netherlands : Kluwer . Hauser , M . D . ( 1996 ) . The evolution of communication . Cambridge : MIT Press . Hrast , S . , & Savec , V . F . ( 2017 ) . Informational value of submicroscopic representations in Slovenian chemistry textbook sets . Journal of Baltic Science Education , 16 ( 5 ) , 694 – 705 . Irez , S . ( 2009 ) . Nature of science as depicted in Turkish biology textbooks . Science Education , 93 ( 3 ) , 422 – 447 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sce . 20305 . Jakab , C . ( 2013 ) . Small talk : children ’ s everyday ‘ molecule ’ ideas . Research in Science Education , 43 ( 4 ) , 1307 – 1325 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11165 - 012 - 9305 - 2 . Johnstone , A . H . ( 1991 ) . Why is science difficult to learn ? Things are seldom what they seem . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 7 ( 2 ) , 75 – 83 . Johnson , P . ( 1998a ) . Children ’ s understanding of changes of state involving the gas state , part 1 : boiling water and the particle theory . International Journal of Science Education , 20 ( 5 ) , 567 – 583 . Johnson , P . ( 1998b ) . Children ’ s understanding of changes of state involving the gas state , part 2 : evaporation and condensation below boiling point . International Journal of Science Education , 20 ( 6 ) , 695 – 709 . 1682 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 Johnstone , A . H . ( 1999 ) . The nature of chemistry . Education in Chemistry , 36 ( 2 ) , 45 – 47 . Justi , R . , & Gilbert , J . ( 2002 ) . Models and modelling in chemical education . In J . Gilbert , O . De Jong , R . Justi , D . Treagust , & J . Van Driel ( Eds . ) , Chemical education : towards research - based practice ( pp . 47 – 88 ) . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Kluwer . Kapici , H . Ö . , & Akçay , H . ( 2016 ) . Particulate nature of matter misconceptions held by middle and high school students in Turkey . European Journal of Education Studies , 2 ( 8 ) , 43 – 57 . Kapici , H . Ö . , & Savasci - Acikalin , F . ( 2015 ) . Examination of visuals about the particulate nature of matter in Turkish middle school science textbooks . Chemistry Education Research and Practice , 16 ( 3 ) , 518 – 536 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c5rp00032g . Kress , G . , & van Leeuwen , T . ( 2006 ) . Visual interaction . In Jaworski , A . & N . Coupland ( Eds . ) , The discourse reader ( 2nd ed . , pp . 362 – 384 ) . New York : Routledge . Kokkotas , P . , Vlachos , I . , & Kouladis , V . ( 1998 ) . Teaching the topic of the particulate nature of matter in prospective teachers ’ training courses . International Journal of Science Education , 20 ( 3 ) , 291 – 303 . Lee , O . , Eichinger , D . C . , Anderson , C . W . , Berkheimer , G . D . , & Blakeslee , T . S . ( 1993 ) . Changing middle school students ’ conceptions of matter and molecules . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 ( 3 ) , 249 – 270 . Lee , V . R . ( 2010 ) . Adaptations and continuities in the use and design of visual representations in US middle school science textbooks . International Journal of Science Education , 32 ( 8 ) , 1099 – 1126 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500690903253916 . Lui , X . , & Lesniak , K . ( 2006 ) . Progression of children ’ s understanding of the matter concept from elementary to high school . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 43 ( 3 ) , 320 – 347 . Mayer , R . E . ( 2001 ) . Multimedia learning . New York : Cambridge University Press . Mayer , R . E . ( 2011 ) . Instruction based on visualizations . In R . E . Mayer & P . A . Alexander ( Eds . ) , Handbook of research on learning and instruction . New York , NY : Routledge . Meneses , A . , Escobar , J . S . , & Veliz , S . ( 2018 ) . The effects of multimodals texts on science reading compre - hension in Chilean fifth - graders : text scaffolding and comprehension skills . International Journal of Science Education , 70 ( 18 ) , 2226 – 2244 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500693 . 2018 . 1527472 . Merriam , S . B . ( 1998 ) . Qualitative research and case study applications in education : revised and expanded from case study research in education . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Merriam , S . B . ( 2009 ) . Qualitative research : a guide to design and implementation . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Merritt , J . , & Krajcik , J . ( 2013 ) . Learning progression developed to support students in building a particle model of matter . In G . Tsaparlis & H . Sevian ( Eds . ) , Concepts of matter in science education ( pp . 11 – 45 ) . New York , NY : Springer . Ministry of National Education ( MNE ) ( 2013a ) , Science education curriculum for graders 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 and 8 , retrieved from http : / / ttkb . meb . gov . tr / www / guncellenenogretim - programlari / icerik / 151 . Ministry of National Education ( MNE ) ( 2013b ) , Chemistry education curriculum for graders 9 , 10 , 11 and 12 , retrieved from http : / / ttkb . meb . gov . tr / www / guncellenenogretim - programlari / icerik / 151 . Nakhleh , M . B . ( 1992 ) . Why some students don ’ t learn chemistry : chemical misconceptions . Journal of Chemical Education , 69 , 191 – 196 . Nakhleh , M . , & Krajcik , J . S . ( 1994 ) . Influence of levels of information as presented by different technologies on students ’ understanding of acid , base , and pH concepts . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 31 ( 10 ) , 1077 – 1096 . Nakhleh , M . B . , & Samarapungavan , A . ( 1999 ) . Elementary school children ’ s beliefs about matter . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 36 ( 7 ) , 777 – 805 . Nakhleh , M . B . , Samarapungavan , A . , & Saglam , Y . ( 2005 ) . Middle school students ’ beliefs about matter . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 42 ( 5 ) , 581 – 612 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / tea . 20065 . Nakibo ğ lu , C . ( 2009 ) . Deneyimli kimya ö ğ retmenlerinin ortaö ğ retim kimya ders kitaplar ı n ı kullan ı mlar ı n ı n incelenmesi [ Examination on expert chemistry teachers ’ secondary school chemistry textbook usage ] . Ahi Evran Üniversitesi K ı r ş ehir E ğ itim Fakültesi Dergisi , 10 ( 1 ) , 91 – 101 . Nakibo ğ lu , C . , & Yildirir , H . E . ( 2009 ) . Analysis of Turkish high school chemistry textbooks and teacher generated questions about gas laws . International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education , 9 ( 5 ) , 1047 – 1071 . Niaz , M . , & Co ş tu , B . ( 2009 ) . Presentation of atomic structure in Turkish general chemistry textbooks . Chemistry Education Research and Practice , 10 ( 3 ) , 233 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / b914503f . Nyachwaya , J . M . , & Wood , N . B . ( 2014 ) . Evaluation of chemical representations in physical chemistry textbooks . Chemistry Education Research and Practice , 15 ( 4 ) , 720 – 728 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c4 rp00113c . Orgill , M . K . , & Bodner , G . ( 2004 ) . What research tells us about using analogies to teach chemistry . Chemistry Education : Research and Practice , 5 ( 1 ) , 15 – 31 . 1683 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 Othman , J . , Treagust , D . F . , & Chandrasegaran , A . L . ( 2008 ) . An investigation into the relationship between students ’ conceptions of the particulate nature of matter and their understanding of chemical bonding . International Journal of Science Education , 30 ( 11 ) , 1531 – 1550 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500690701459897 . Özmen , H . ( 2011a ) . Effect of animation enhanced conceptual change texts on the 6th grade students ’ under - standing of the particulate nature of matter and transformation during phase changes . Computers & Education , 57 , 1114 – 1126 . Özmen , H . ( 2011b ) . Turkish primary students ’ conceptions about the particulate nature of matter . International Journal of Environmental & Science Education , 6 ( 1 ) , 99 – 121 . Özmen , H . ( 2013 ) . A cross - national review of the studies on the particulate nature of matter and related concepts . Eurasian Journal of Physics and Chemistry Education , 5 ( 2 ) , 81 – 110 . Öztuna - Kaplan , A . , & Boyac ı o ğ lu , N . ( 2013 ) . Çocuk karikatürlerinde maddenin tanecikli yap ı s ı . [ The particulate nature of matter in children ’ s comics ] . Türk Fen E ğ itimi Dergisi , 10 ( 1 ) , 156 – 175 . Paik , S . H . , Kim , H . N . , Cho , B . K . , & Park , J . W . ( 2004 ) . K - 8th grade Korean students ’ conceptions of changes of state and conditions for changes of state . International Journal of Science Education , 26 ( 2 ) , 207 – 224 . Paivio , A . ( 1986 ) . Mental representations : A dual - coding approach . New York : Oxford University Press . Papageorgiou , G . , Amariotakis , V . , & Spiliotopoulou , V . ( 2017 ) . Visual representations of microcosm in textbooks of chemistry : constructing a systemic network for their main conceptual framework . Chemistry Education Research and Practice , 18 ( 4 ) , 559 – 571 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c6rp00253f . Papageorgiou , G . , & Johnson , P . ( 2005 ) . Do particle ideas help or hinder pupils ’ understanding of phenomena ? International Journal of Science Education , 27 ( 11 ) , 1299 – 1317 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500690500102698 . Quilez - Pardo , J . , & Solaz - Portoles , J . J . ( 1995 ) . Students ’ and teachers ’ misapplication of le chatelier ’ s principle : Implications for the teaching of chemical equilibrium . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 32 ( 9 ) , 939 – 957 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / tea . 3660320906 . Richter , J . , Scheiter , K . , & Eitel , A . ( 2016 ) . Signaling text - picture relations in multimedia learning : a compre - hensive meta - analysis . Educational Research Review , 17 , 19 – 36 . Samarapungavan , A . , Bryan , L . , & Wills , J . ( 2017 ) . Second graders ’ emerging particle models of matter in the context of learning through model - based inquiry . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 54 ( 8 ) , 988 – 1023 . Sanchez , G . , & Valcarcel , M . V . ( 1999 ) . Science teachers ’ views and practices in planning for teaching . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 36 ( 4 ) , 493 – 513 . Seufert , T . ( 2003 ) . Supporting coherence formation in learning from multiple representations . Learning and Instruction , 13 , 227 – 237 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0959 - 4752 ( 02 ) 00022 - 1 . Shehab , S . S . , & BouJaoude , S . ( 2017 ) . Analysis of the chemical representations in secondary Lebanese chemistry textbooks . International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education , 15 ( 5 ) , 797 – 816 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10763 - 016 - 9720 - 3 . Singer , J . E . , Tal , T . , & Wu , H . - K . ( 2003 ) . Students ’ understanding of the particulate nature of matter . School Science and Mathematics , 103 ( 1 ) , 28 – 44 . Stavy , R . ( 1988 ) . Children ’ s conception of gas . International Journal of Science Education , 10 ( 5 ) , 553 – 560 . Stavy , R . ( 1990 ) . Children ’ s conception of changes in the state of matter : from liquid ( or solid ) to gas . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 2 , 247 – 266 . Stavy , R . ( 1991 ) . Children ’ s ideas about matter . School Science and Mathematics , 91 ( 6 ) , 240 – 244 . Stojanovska , M . I . , Soptrajanov , B . T . , & Petrusevski , V . M . ( 2012 ) . Addressing misconceptions about the particulate nature of matter among secondary - school and high - school students in the Republic of Macedonia . Creative Education , 3 ( 5 ) , 619 – 631 . Taber , K . S . ( 2002 ) . Chemical misconceptions — Prevention , diagnosis and cure : theoretical background . London : Royal Society of Chemistry . Taber , K . S . ( 2003 ) . The atom in the chemistry curriculum : fundamental concept , teaching model or epistemo - logical obstacle ? Foundations of Chemistry , 5 ( 1 ) , 43 – 84 . Taber , K . S . ( 2009 ) . Learning at the symbolic level . In J . Gilbert & D . Treagust ( Eds . ) , Multiple representations in chemical education ( pp . 75 – 105 ) . Milton Keynes , UK : Springer . Taber , K . S . , & García - Franco , A . ( 2010 ) . Learning processes in chemistry : drawing upon cognitive resources to learn about the particulate structure of matter . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 19 ( 1 ) , 99 – 142 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10508400903452868 . Taber , K . S . ( 2013 ) . Revisiting the chemistry triplet : drawing upon the nature of chemical knowledge and the psychology of learning to inform chemistry education . Chemistry Education Research and Practice , 14 , 156 – 168 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c3rp00012e . Talanquer , V . ( 2011 ) . Macro , submicro , and symbolic : the many faces of the chemistry B triplet ^ . International Journal of Science Education , 33 ( 2 ) , 179 – 195 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500690903386435 . 1684 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685 Treagust , D . F . ( 1993 ) . The evolution of an approach for using analogies in teaching and learning science . Research in Science Education , 23 ( 1 ) , 293 – 301 . Treagust , D . , Chittleborough , G . , & Mamiala , T . ( 2003 ) . The role of submicroscopic and symbolic representa - tions in chemical explanations . International Journal of Science Education , 25 ( 11 ) , 1353 – 1368 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0950069032000070306 . Treagust , D . , Duit , R . , & Nieswandt , M . ( 2000 ) . Sources of students ’ difficulties in learning chemistry . Educación Química , 11 ( 2 ) , 228 – 235 . Treagust , D . F . , & Tsui , C . - Y . ( 2013 ) . introduction to multiple representations : their importance in biology and biological education . In d . f . treagust & C . - Y . Tsui ( Eds . ) , Multiple representations in biological education ( pp . 3 – 18 ) . New York , NY : Springer . Tsaparlis , G . ( 2014 ) . Linking the macro with the submicro levels of chemistry : demonstrations and experiments that can contribute to active / meaningful / conceptual learning . In I . Devetak & S . A . Glazar ( Eds . ) , Learning with understanding in the chemistry classroom ( pp . 41 – 63 ) . New York , NY : Springer . Tytler , R . ( 2007 ) . Re - imagining science education : engaging students in science for Australia ’ s future . Camberwell , Victoria : Australian Council for Educational Research ( ACER ) Press . Tytler , R . , & Prain , V . ( 2010 ) . A framework for re - thinking learning in science from recent cognitive science perspectives . International Journal of Science Education , 32 ( 15 ) , 2055 – 2078 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500690903334849 . Tytler , R . , Prain , V . , & Peterson , S . ( 2007 ) . Representational issues in students learning about evaporation . Research in Science Education , 37 ( 3 ) , 313 – 331 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11165 - 006 - 9028 - 3 . Waldrip , B . , & Prain , V . ( 2012 ) . Learning from and through representations in science . In B . Fraser , K . G . Tobin , & M . C . J . ( Eds . ) , Second international handbook of science education ( pp . 145 – 155 ) . London : Springer . Wu , H . - K . , & Shah , P . ( 2004 ) . Exploring visuospatial thinking in chemistry learning . Science Education , 88 ( 3 ) , 465 – 492 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sce . 10126 . Yakmaci - Guzel , B . , & Adadan , E . ( 2013 ) . Use of multiple representations in developing preservice chemistry teachers ’ understanding of the structure of matter . International Journal of Environmental and Science Education , 8 ( 1 ) , 109 – 130 . Yaseen , Z . , & Akaygun , S . ( 2016 ) . Lise ö ğ rencilerinin atom ile ilgili zihinsel modellerinin ders kitaplar ı ndaki görseller ile kar şı la ş t ı r ı lmas ı [ A comparison of high school students ’ mental models on atom and textbook visualizations ] . Mehmet Akif Ersoy Üniversitesi E ğ itim Fakültesi Dergisi , 40 , 469 – 490 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21764 / efd . 39536 . Yun , E . , & Park , Y . ( 2018 ) . Extraction of scientific semantic networks from science textbooks and comparison with science teachers ’ spoken language by text network analysis . International Journal of Science Educaiton , 40 ( 17 ) , 2118 – 2136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500693 . 2018 . 1521536 . Zajkov , O . , Gegovska - Zajkova , S . , & Mitrevski , B . ( 2017 ) . Textbook - caused misconceptions , inconsistencies , and experimental safety risks of a grade 8 physics textbook . International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education , 15 ( 5 ) , 837 – 852 . Publisher ’ s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . 1685 Research in Science Education ( 2021 ) 51 : 1651 – 1685