Role of Coated Vesicles , Microfilaments , and Calmodulin in Receptor - mediated Endocytosis by Cultured B Lymphoblastoid Cells ABSTRACT (cid:9) Cell surface receptor IgM molecules of cultured human lymphoblastoid cells ( WiL2 ) patch and redistribute into a cap over the Golgi region of the cell after treatment with multivalent anti - IgM antibodies . During and after the redistribution , ligand - receptor clusters are endocytosed into coated pits and coated vesicles . Morphometric analysis of the distribution of ferritin - labeled ligand at EM resolution reveals the following sequence of events in the endocytosis of cell surface IgM : ( a ) binding of the multivalent ligand in a diffuse cell surface distribution , ( b ) clustering of the ligand - receptor complexes , ( c ) recruitment of clathrin coats to the cytoplasmic surface of the cell membrane opposite ligand - receptor clusters , ( d ) assembly and ( e ) internalization of coated vesicles , and ( f ) delivery of label into a large vesicular compartment , presumably partly lysosomal . Most of the labeled ligand enters this pathway . The recruitment of clathrin coats to the membrane opposite ligand - receptor clusters is sensitive to the calmodulin - directed drug Stelazine ( trifluo - perazine dihydrochloride ) . In addition , Stelazine inhibits an alternate pathway of endocytosis that does not involve coated vesicle formation . The actin - directed drug dihydrocytochalasin B has no effect on the recruitment of clathrin to the ligand - receptor clusters and the formation of coated pits and little effect on the alternate pathway , but this drug does interfere with subsequent coated vesicle formation and it inhibits capping . Cortical microfilaments that decorate with heavy meromyosin with constant polarity are observed in association with the coated regions of the plasma membrane and with coated vesicles . SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis of a coated vesicle preparation isolated from WiL2 cells demonstrates that the major polypeptides in the fraction are a 175 - kdalton component that comigrates with calf brain clathrin , a 42 - kdalton component that comigrates with rabbit muscle actin and a 18 . 5 - kdalton minor component that comigrates with calmodulin as well as 110 - , 70 - , 55 - , 36 - , 30 - , and 17 - kdalton components . These results clarify the pathways of endocytosis in this cell and suggest functional roles for calmodulin , especially in the formation of clathrin - coated pits , and for actin microfilaments in coated vesicle formation and in capping . The cell surface plays an important role in the control of cell proliferation , growth , behavior , and differentiation . Cellular response to external factors is often mediated through the binding ofa ligand to its specific cell surface receptor followed by endocytosis . Although the details of how cells deal with ligand - receptor complexes vary , a fundamental pathway is starting to emerge . This pathway involves the association of clathrin coats with the cytoplasmic surface of membrane con - taining specific receptors , the invagination of these coated membranes , and finally the formation ofcoated vesicles within 132 J . L . SALISBURY , J . S . CONDEELIS , and P . SATIR Department of Anatomy , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , New York 10461 the cell ( 16 , 40 , 41 ) . Many receptors are originally diffuse in the membrane before ligand challenge but some , including low - density - lipoprotein receptors , may not be ( 5 , 15 - 17 , 34 ) . For the former , patching or clustering in the plane of the membrane may precede association with the coat and endo - cytosis . In certain specialized cells , including human lympho - cytes , some surface determinants redistribute further after patching in the energy - dependent process known as capping . Endocytosis is known to accompany capping ( 46 ) , but until the present study it was not known that internalization was , at least THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 87 OCTOBER 1980 132 - 141 © The Rockefeller University Press " 0021 - 9525 / 80 / 10 / 0132 / 10 $ 1 . 00 in part , by way of the coated vesicle pathway . The relation of a ligand - receptor patch to the cell cytoske - leton , particularly the actin - based microfilament system , also has not been clarified . Presumably , such a relationship is important for subsequent capping or endocytosis ( but see ref - erences 2 and 3 ) . There is both indirect ( 8 , 39 , 43 ) and direct experimental evidence ( 12 , 14 ) for the association of microfil - aments with clustered ligand - receptor complexes . Using a human B lymphoblastoid cell line ( WiL2 ) , we have studied the mobility and endocytosis of the surface - bound 19M - ligand complex in these cells . We show that this involves the clathrin - coated vesicle system and the actin microfflament system in the cell cortex . The interactions between receptor - ligand complexes , coated vesicles , and microfilaments have been analyzed in four ways : ( a ) by reconstruction of the sequence of endocytosis from light and electron micrographs , ( b ) by morphometric analysis of ligand distribution after stim - ulation and inhibition of endocytosis , using specific inhibitors such as Stelazine and dihydrocytochalasin B ( dhCB ) , ( c ) by direct visualization of heavy meromyosin - labeled actin fila - ments associated with coated membranes , and ( d ) by direct isolation ofa coated vesicle fraction and analysis ofthe proteins associated with this fraction . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cultures of the human B lymphoblastoid cell line WiL2 ( 28 ) were grown to a density of 1 . 5 x 106 cells / ml in RPMI medium supplemented with t mM glutamine and20 % fetal calfserum ( Flow Laboratories , Inc . , Rockville , Md . ) at 37°C and 5 % C02 in air . Washed cells were resuspended to 5 x 10 ' cells / ml in HEPES ( pH 7 . 4 ) buffered Hanks ' medium with 5 % fetal calf serum at 4°C . Surface IgMwas labeled , using sandwich technique , with rabbit Ig antihuman IgM ( P - chainspecific ; N . L . CappelLaboratories Inc . , Cochranville , Pa . ) followed by three washes in 10 vol of buffer and then with goat antirabbit IgG . The secondary antibody was conjugated with either fluorescein or ferritin ( N . L . Cappel Laboratories ) , or was radioiodinated with IzeI , using the chloramine - T method ( 7 ) . Afterthe cells were washed free ofunbound antibody . the suspension waswarmed to 37°C for varying periods of time . Uptake of horseradish peroxidase was measured according to the methods outlined by Steinman ( 45 ) . Heavy meromyosin ( HMM ) wasmade from rabbit muscle myosin according to Lowey and Cohen ( 33 ) . Cellular actin was decorated with HMM after glycerination according to Ishikawa et al . ( 20 ) . Cells were fixed for electron microscopy at room temperature with 2 % glutaraldehyde in phosphatebuffer ( pH7 . 0 ) withor without 0 . 1 % tannic acid ( 6 ) for l h andpostfixed at 4°Cwith 1 % OS0 , in phosphatebuffer ( pH6 . 0 ) for 20 min . Thematerial wasdehydrated in an ethanol series , infiltrated with Epon 812 . thin sectioned , stained with uranyl acetate andlead citrate or bismuthsubnitrate ( 1 ) , andobserved on aSiemens 101 electron microscope operated at 80 kV . Analysis ofthe distribution offerritin - labeled ligand - receptor clusters relative to membrane cytoplasmic specializations ( membrane coats ) was carried out according to the stereological principles for morphometry outlined by Weibel ( 49 ) . Sample selection was randomized by sectioning multiple blocks and levels within thepellets ofcells from each treatment . Sections ( silverinterferencecolors ) weremounted on 200 - meshgrids , stainedwith bismuthsubnitrate ( 1 ) , andviewed with the electron microscope at x 6 , 000 magnification without the aid of binoc - ulars . Under these conditions , neither ferritin clusters normembrane specializa - tions can be discerned . Cell profiles that included nuclear cross sections were chosen from the upper left or lower right corner of a given grid hole , centered , focused with the aid ofbinoculars , and photographed . Electron micrographs were printed at a final magnification of x 42 , 000 . The prints were then analyzed by point - counting planimetry for volumetric analysis and differential intersection counting for estimation of fractional boundaries for cell surface specialization . Raw data total 77 , 779 points and 12 , 134 linear intercepts from 480 electron micrograph prints at x42 , 000 magnification . Calculations are based on an average cell surface area of300Am ' , an averagecoated vesicle membrane surface area of 7 . 2 x 103 ran ' , andan estimated section thickness of 750 A . Coated vesicles were isolated by a modification ( 23 ) of the Pearse ( 38 ) procedure from WiL2 cells that were actively endocytosing at 37°C just before cell lysis . Clathrin standards for SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( SDS - PAGE ) were prepared from calf brain coated vesicles after a single cycle of depolymerization in 0 . 5 M Tris buffer ( pH 7 . 5 ) and basket reassembly from an 85 , 000 x gsupernate by dialysis against theisolation buffer . SDS - PAGE wascarried outin 5 - 15 % gradient polyacrylamide gels containing 0 . 1 % SDS , using the buffer system ofLaemmli ( 25 ) . Drug treatments were for 15 min before fixation with either 20 ILM dhCB ( substoichiometric relative to cell actin [ J . CarboniandJ . Condeelis , unpublished observation ] ) or 25 pM Stelazine ( trifluoperazine dihydrochloride ; Smith , Kline andFrench Labs , Philadelphia , Pa . ) . dhCB has been shown to be quite spec for actin - related motility processes andhaslittle or no effect on glucose transport ( 29 , 31 ) . Thecytochalasins inhibit in vitro polymerization andreduce the rate of elongation of actin filaments when applied at substoichiometric concentrations relative to actin ( 9 , 10 , 30 ) . Stelazine , aphenothiazine derivative , is a potent and highly specific inhibitor ofcalmodulin - mediated regulation ( l9 , 27 , 50 ) . Stelazine binds with high affinity to the calcium - dependent regulator in thepresence of calcium and inactivates calmodulin in the brain phosphodiesterase stimulation assay ( 27 , 50 ) , in the adenylate cyclase stimulation assay ( 50 ) , andin regulation of smooth muscle contraction ( 19 ) . RESULTS Redistribution and Endocytosis WiL2 cells patch and cap fluorescein - labeled Ig - IgM com - plexes . After challenge with fluorescein - labeled anti - IgM an - tibody , the cells initially display a diffuse pattern ofcell surface labeling ( Fig . 1 a ) . Patches develop within minutes and when the cells are warmed to 37°C these ligand clusters rapidly gather into a cap over one pole ofthe cell ( Fig . 1 b ) . In a typical experiment , 50 % ofthe cells have a polar distribution of label over less than half their cell surface within 15 min of raising the temperature , whereas the rest of the surface is devoid of label . 80 - 90 % ofthe cells display this type ofdistribution by 30 min . For EM study at higher resolution , ferritin - labeled antibody has been used so that ligand is indicated by the electron opaque ferritin . When cells are maintained and fixed at 4°C , the ferritin is observed dispersed more or less uniformly along the cell membrane ( Fig . 2a ) . When the cells are warmed to 37°C , the ferritin label redistributes into a cap over the Golgi region ofthe cell . A typical thin section of the capped region of a cell fixed 15 min after challenge is shown in Fig . 2b . By this time , numerous channels filled with ferritin penetrate the cell cortex , suggesting that endocytosis of the bound ligand has begun . FIGURE 1 Distribution of WiL2 cell surface receptor IgM before and after capping . ( a ) Cell fixed immediately after labeling with rabbit antihuman IgM and fluorescein - conjugated goat antirabbit antibodies . The labeled receptor IgM is located in a diffuse cell surface distribution . ( b ) Cell fixed after 15 - min incubation at 37°C , postlabel . The receptor IgM has redistributed into a cap . a and b : Phase ; a ' and b ' fluorescence image . x 2 , 000 . SALISBURY ET AL . (cid:9) Coated Vesicles , Microfilaments , Calmodulin (cid:9) 133 FIGURE 2 (cid:9) Distribution of WiL2 cell surface receptor IgM at ultrastructure resolution , using ferritin - conjugated secondary antibody . ( a ) Cell fixed immediately after antibody labeling shows a diffuse cell surface distribution of ferritin label ( arrows ) with few clustered receptors . Stain : uranyl acetate followed by bismuth subnitrate . ( b ) Cell fixed after 15 - min incubation at 37°C , postlabel . The label was redistributed into a cap . Beneath the cap , numerous channels filled with ferritin penetrate the cell cortex ( arrows ) , suggesting that endocytosis of bound ligand has begun . Stain : uranyl acetate followed by lead citrate . ( c ) A region of the same capped cell as in b that has been cleared of its cell surface IgM . ( d ) Cell treated with Stelazine ( 25 uM ) , fixed after 15 - min incubation at 37°C , postlabel . The ligand has capped normally but endocytic channels are absent . Stain : bismuth subnitrate . ( e ) Cell treated with dhCB ( 20 AM ) , fixed after 15 - min incubation at 37° , postlabel . The ferritin - labeled ligand - receptor complexes cluster normally but do not cap . The clustered receptors ( arrows ) associate with clathrin coats ( open arrows ) but internalization is reduced . Stain : bismuth subnitrate . Bars , 0 . 5 pm . a , d , and e : x 48 , 000 , b and c : x 31 , 000 . 134 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 87 , 1980 FIGURE 3 (cid:9) Cell surface receptor IgM is internalized along a coated vesicle pathway of endocytosis . ( a ) At high magnification of a capped cell , the ligand often appears in small separate clusters over straight or slightly convex expanses of plasma membrane without underlying cytoplasmic coats . ( b ) Some clusters are observed over indented regions of the plasma membrane that clearly have coats on their cytoplasmic surface ( arrow ) . ( c ) Ferritin clusters also occur in deep coated depressions or pits ; the coated region ( arrow ) is at the end of a long channel . ( d ) Also , the ligand is observed in the cytoplasm beneath the cap within coated vesicle profiles of - 100 - nm diameter , and ( e ) within larger uncoated structures ( open arrows ) of approximately 0 . 2 - to 0 . 4 - Am diameter . Some of these larger structures have features of lysosomes ( see text ) . Other large vesicles with ferritin label do not have these features . a - d : bar , 0 . 1 Am , x 100 , 000 , e : bar , 0 . 2 Am , x 50 , 000 . At higher magnification of capped cells , the ligand often appears in small separate clusters over straight or slightly convex expanses of the plasma membrane without underlying cytoplasmic coats ( Fig . 3a ) . Some clusters are observed over indented regions of the plasma membrane that clearly have coats on their cytoplasmic surface ( Fig . 3 b ) . Clusters also occur in deep coated depressions or coated pits ( Fig . 3 c ) . Finally , ligand is observed in the cytoplasm beneath the cap in the Golgi region of the cell within coated vesicle profiles - 100 nm in diameter ( Fig . 3 d ) and within large uncoated structures of - 0 . 2 - 0 . 4 ILm in diameter ( Fig . 3 e ) . Some of these larger struc - tures have a granular matrix in addition to the ferritin particles and have an electron - transparent halo just beneath their lim - iting membrane . These features are hallmarks of lysosomes ( 37 ) and we will refer to these vesicles as presumptive lyso - somes . Other large ( 0 . 2 - 0 . 4 tLm in diameter ) vesicles with ferritin label that occur in this region of the cell do not have these features . We postulate that Fig . 3 a - d represent the se - quence of events in the transport and processing of the cell surface ferritin - labeled ligand via a coated vesicle pathway . In this sequence , coated vesicle formation begins after ligand - receptor patching and continues during and after capping . The sequence ends when coated vesicles presumably fuse with and deposit ligand into presumptive lysosomes ( Fig . 3 e ) . Morphometric Analysis of Controls This postulated pathway is confirmed in the morphometric analysis ( Table I ) . When the cells are fixed immediately after antibody treatment , - - 18 ' Um2 or 6 % of the total cell surface area ( 300 fam ) is scored as occupied by ferritin - labeled ligand . The label is dispersed more or less uniformly over the cell surface . 94 % of this label is over unspecialized membrane ( without cytoplasmic coats ) , whereas only 5 % is over coated membranes . When the cells are warmed to 37°C for 15 min and allowed to cap the ligand , - . , 15 jAm2 or 5 % ofthe membrane surface area is scored as occupied by ferritin - labeled ligand . The slight drop in cellmembrane scored as occupied by ferritin - labeled ligand is a result of superposition of marker in the thickness of the section because of receptor clustering . By 15 min of incubation , the ferritin label distribution rela - tive to membrane coats has changed dramatically . After a 15 - min incubation , only 35 % of the label remains over unspecial - ized plasma membrane , whereas 36 % is over regions of mem - brane with cytoplasmic coats , 7 % is found within coated vesicle profiles and 22 % within the presumptive lysosomal compart - ments . The ligand clusters represent preferred sites of coated pit formation . Within 15 min after ligand challenge , coated pits occupy 2 . 8 % of the total cell surface area ( 8 . 4 fam ) yet 64 % ( 5 . 4 tam ) of the coated pits contain label . Also by 15 min , ligand challenge has stimulated threefold the number of coated pits formed at the cell surface ( 2 . 7 pmt membrane surface area is coated initially , and l5 min after challenge 8 . 4 tLm2 is coated ) . This increase in the coated membrane can be accounted for entirely by the recruitment of clathrin coats to the membrane opposite ligand clusters . Effect of Various Treatments on Ligand - Receptor Distribution and Endocytosis Preliminary studies on endocytosis ofexogenous horseradish peroxidase by WiL2 cells indicated that uptake is cold , azide SALISBURY ET AL . (cid:9) Coated Vesicles , Microfilaments , Calmodulin (cid:9) 135 TABLE I Effect of Actin - and Calmodulin - directed Drugs on lgand - Receptor Distribution Relative to Membrane Specializations ( 10 - 3 M ) , dhCB ( 20 AM ) and Stelazine ( 25 , AM ) sensitive , yet colchicine ( 10 - 5 M ) and dimethyl sulfoxide ( 0 . 1 % ) insensitive . We chose to study in some detail the effects of Stelazine and dhCB on ligand - receptor distribution and internalization after a 15 - min incubation . Cells that have been treated with 25 AM Stelazine , added at the time of ligand challenge , cap normally within 15 min after warming to 37°C . However , endocytic channels are rarely seen in the capped regions of these cells ( Fig . 2d ) . In the presence of Stelazine , over 90 % of the total labeled ligand receptor clusters remain at the cell surface . Nearly 80 0Jo of this label is over uncoated regions ofthe membrane and has not yet entered an endocytic pathway ( Table I ) . The amount ofligand entering an endocytic pathway is reduced by > 50 % ofthe control values . A similar reduction also occurs in the number of ligand - labeled coated vesicles scored . This is taken to indicate that once the coat is recruited to the membrane , the percentage of coated pits converted to coated vesicles in 15 min in the presence of Stelazine is the same as the percentage converted in the control . Because the coated vesicles scored are the resultant sum of both those formed and those degraded ( by fusion with lysosomes ) , we assume that the rate of these processes is the same in Stelazine vs . control samples . Thus , Stelazine has an effect on the overall recruitment of coat material to the membrane but not on further processing of the coated vesicles . However , this effect on recruitment does not completely account for the level of inhibition of overall endo - cytosis seen in the presence of the drug . Note that Stelazine shuts down > 80 % of the transfer of cell surface label into the larger vesicles . In contrast to Stelazine , dhCB prevents cell capping , al - though ligand - receptor clustering seems unaffected by dhCB ( Fig . 2 e ) . Also in contrast to Stelazine , dhCB has little effect on the recruitment ofclathrin coats to the cell membrane or on the amount of ferritin - labeled ligand entering the endocytic pathway ( Table I ) . Two - thirds of the total labeled clusters remain at the cell surface and one - half of these clusters lie above coated pits . The number of coated pits formed is about the same in dhCB as in the control , at least within the error of our measurements . Thus we conclude that dhCB has no effect on the recruitment of coats to ligand - receptor clusters and that entry into the coated vesicle pathway in general is therefore 136 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 87 , 1980 Membrane surface area occupied by ferritin clusters Cell surface (cid:9) Intracellular (cid:9) Total Based on morphometric analysis according to the methods of Weibel ( 49 ) , using point planimetry for volumetric analysis and differential intersection counting for estimation of fractional boundaries for cell surface specializations . Calculations based on an average cell surface area of 300 lam ' and coated vesicle membrane surface area of 7 . 2 x 10 3 nm ' and average section thickness of 750 A . Student ' s unpaired t test analysis of data distributions indicate significant differences ( P < 0 . 05 ) . * 15 min control vs . 0 min control . $ 15 min drug treatments vs . 15 min control . separated from capping in these cells . However , this drug does have an effect on the internalization of the clusters . The number of labeled coated vesicle profiles scored in dhCB - treated preparations is significantly lower than the control values , despite an equivalent amount of membrane entering the endocytotic pathway and an equivalent amount of coated cell surface . The number ofcoated vesicle profiles scored after dhCB is even lower than the number seen with Stelazine ( Table I ) . We conclude that conversion of coated pits into coated vesicles is inhibited by dhCB . Despite the fact that fewer coated vesicle profiles are scored after dhCB than after Stelazine treatment , the transfer of labeled ligand into the large vesicular compartment in dhCB is four times greaterthan after Stelazine . A possible explanation of this finding might be that a second pathway of endocytosis of ligand exists , independent of the coated vesicle pathway . For example , taken from uncoated cell surfaces ( Fig . 3 a ) directly to electron - transparent large vesicles may represent an alternate pathway ( Fig . 3 e ) . Such an explanation is consistent with the conclusions of other workers ( 13 ) regarding bulk membrane flow endocytosis in cells . Because Stelazine inhibits overall endocytosis and transfer oflabel into the large vesicular compartment much more effectively than it inhibits the coated vesicle pathway , we deduce that Stelazine inhibits this second pathway . Because considerable label is present in the large vesicular compartment in dhCB , this drug would seem to have little effect on an alternate pathway . In untreated cells , just over 20 % of the total surface label reaches the large vesicular compartment in 15 min after ligand challenge . Based on our observations , the total label found in the presumptive lysosomal compartment would be the sum of labeled membrane derived from both the coated vesicle pathway and alternate pathway . Analysis of Proteins Associated with the Endocytotic Pathway The drug studies presented above demonstrate that Stelazine and dhCB are effective inhibitors of different processes along the endocytotic pathway . Because inhibitor studies are indirect , we turned to specific labeling and direct isolation to demon - strate the involvement of calmodulin and actin as components of the coated vesicle pathway . These procedures have also Unspecialized Coated Coated vesicle Large vesicles Ferritin - labeledmem - Coatedpits ( tferri - membrane membrane profiles ( lysosomes ) brane tin ) lam 2 % Total AM 2 % Total Jim % Total lam ' % Total tam z Control , 0 min 17 . 1 ( 94 ) 0 . 9 ( 5 ) 0 ( 0 ) 0 . 2 ( 1 ) 18 . 2 2 . 7 Control , 15 min 5 . 1 * ( 34 ) 5 . 4 * ( 36 ) 1 . 0 * ( 7 ) 3 . 3 * ( 22 ) 14 . 8 8 . 4 * Dihydrocytochalasin B , 15 min 5 . 6 ( 39 ) 6 . 0 ( 41 ) 0 . 4t ( 3 ) 2 . 4t ( 16 ) 14 . 4 8 . 1 Stelazine , 15 min 11 . 41 ( 73 ) 3 . Ot ( 19 ) 0 . 6 ( 4 ) 0 . 6t ( 4 ) 15 . 6 5 . 7t clarified the protein composition of a coated fraction from the WiL2 cell . ASSOCIATION OF HMM - DECORATEDMICROFILAMENTS WITH COATED PITS ANDCOATED VESICLES : Thecortical region of the cell is rich in microfilaments that decorate with HMM . These decorated filaments have an arrowhead perio - dicity of - 37 nm and are decorated actin filaments . Together with the microfilaments , many coated regions of the cell mem - brane and coated vesicles survive the glycerination necessary for HMM labeling , although the cell membrane is permeabil - ized and the cytoplasm extracted . Frequently , structural asso - ciations are observed between ferritin - labeled ligand - receptor patches over uncoated membrane and the ends of decorated microfilaments ( Fig . 4a ) . Actin - containing microfilaments also run outward from coated pits and coated vesicles ( Fig . 4a and b ) . When microfilaments are observed in association with the plasma membrane , the arrowhead polarity ofdecoration points away from the membrane . This is also true when microfila - ments are associated with coated pits or completely formed coated vesicles . The constant polarity ofHMM - decorated actin filaments relative to the coated membrane suggests that the actin - membrane association is a specific one . ISOLATED COATED VESICLES : (cid:9) Coated vesicleshave been isolated from cells that were actively capping and internalizing ligand - receptor complexes . When cells were challenged with secondary antibody radiolabeled with 1251 , the final coated vesicle fraction retained significant levels of ` 251 label . In a typical experiment , 2 . 3 % of the initial 1251 label was recovered in the coated vesicle preparation . From our morphometric studies with ferritin label ( Table 1 ) , this is the amount of radiolabel one could expect if the isolation procedure resulted in yields of one - third of the initial labeled coated vesicle population . In control experiments , where the primary anti - body ( anti - IgM ) was omitted , no 1251 secondary antibody label ( counts above background ) was recovered in the final coated vesicle preparation . The isolated coated vesicles ( Fig . 5 ) are generally uniform , 109 f 5 nm in diameter , and enclose unit membrane vesicles of - 48 ± 5 nm diameter . Some contami - nating particles and a few smooth vesicles are also present . Actin microfilaments are not seen , and presumably have largely been dissociated or depolymerized from the coat during isola - tion . Thus , by structural criteria , the coated vesicles in these cell fractions are comparable to those obtained by other work - ers ( 22 , 38 ) . PROTEIN PROFILE OF THE COATED VESICLE FRACTION : One - dimensional SDS - PAGE analysis of the coated vesicle fraction isolated from WiL2 cells is shown in Fig . 6 . The major components of the preparation are a poly - peptide that comigrates with authentic calf brain clathrin with an apparent molecular mass of 175 kdaltons and a polypeptide that comigrates with authentic rabbit muscle actin with an apparent molecular mass of 42 kdaltons . A minor component ofthe coated vesicle fraction that comigrates with authentic rat testis calmodulin can be seen at 18 . 5 kdaltons . Other polypep - tide components in the coated vesicle fraction migrate with apparent molecular mass values of 110 , 70 , 55 , 36 , 30 , and 17 kdaltons . Some of these may be breakdown products of clath - rin . Myosin is not present , nor are other muscle proteins except actin . The relative amounts of actin vs . clathrin in such prep - arations vary , depending upon how the cells are treated before homogenization . For example , if the cells are maintained at 0° - 4°C for extended periods of time before cell lysis , the amount of actin that copurifies with the coated vesicles is diminished . DISCUSSION Cultures of the human lymphoblastoid cell line WiL2 ( 28 ) provide a relatively uniform and homogeneous population of cells . WiL2 cells have immunoglobulin of the IgM class specif - ically associated with their plasma membrane ( 24 , 26 ) . The cells appear to be arrested at an early stage of differentiation along a B lymphocyte lineage ( 21 , 26 , 36 ) , because they do not secrete large quantities of antibody . This system is amenable to morphometric and biochemical characterization ofcell sur - face events , such that a detailed picture of the initial stages of response at the cell surface to a specific ligand challenge can be reconstructed . IgM originally is dispersed in the WiL2 cell membrane because , when anti - IgM is presented , the multivalent ligand FIGURE 4 (cid:9) Microfilaments are found in association with coated membranes ( thick arrows ) . ( a ) Structural associations are observed between HMM decorating microfilaments and coated pits . In all instances the polarity of HMM decoration points away from the coated membrane , into the cytoplasm . Similarly , decorated microfilaments are often seen associated with ferritin at the cell surface ( thin arrows ) . ( b ) This image shows a coated vesicle profile associated with a decorated actin filament that is in turn associated with a second actin filament of opposite polarity by a thicker filament ( open arrow ) . This is the orientation expected for an active involvement of microfilaments in the formation and movement of coated vesicles through the cytoplasm . Bar , 0 . 1 lam . x 85 , 000 . SALISBURY ET AL . (cid:9) Coated Vesicles , Microfilaments , Calmodulin (cid:9) 137 FIGURE 5 (cid:9) Isolated WiL2 coated vesicles . Note that all of the coats surround membrane vesicles ; none of the coats are " empty . " x 150 , 000 . Inset : negatively stained coated vesicle . x 200 , 000 . Bar , 0 . 1 jm . initially binds with a diffuse distribution . In this paper we have shown that the cell deals with the ligand - receptor complexes formed after antibody challenge by activating a specific endo - cytic pathway involving the following sequence ofevents ( Fig . 7 ) : ( a ) Clustering of the diffuse ligand - receptor complexes ( patching ) . Patch formation is thought to involve receptor mobility in the membrane and to depend on the multivalent nature ofthe ligand ( 13 , 46 ) . The clustering of ligand - receptor complexes is not sensitive to the drugs employed in this study . ( b ) Recruitment of clathrin to the clustered ligand - receptor complexes to form a coated pit . This recruitment occurs in response to ligand - induced receptor clustering , because the amount of cell surface that is coated increases threefold after antibody challenge , and all the new coated pits seen can be accounted for by ferritin - labeled regions ofthe membrane that have acquired coats . The coat recruitment is Stelazine sensitive and is unaffected by dhCB . ( c ) The internalization of the coated pit to form a coated vesicle . This process is dhCB sensitive and is unaffected by Stelazine . The internalized vesicles containing ligand then migrate toward the Golgi - lysosome region of the cell and fuse with the lysosomes . In addition , there is probably an alternate endocytic pathway in these cells that accounts for a portion of the internalized label . This pathway presumably moves labeled ligand from uncoated cell membrane directly to the large uncoated vesicles in the cytoplasm , and may correspond to a general pinocytotic mechanism described in other systems ( 13 ) . Most ofthe labeled ligand enters the coated vesicle pathway . Both the coated vesicle and the alternate pathway are separable from capping of the receptor , which redistributes label further at the cell surface . Our results suggest that in these cells capping may be inhibited without significant inhibition of coated pit formation , and that bulk flow endocytosis may be blocked without in - hibiting capping . However , internalization of coated pits and 138 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL Of CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 87 , 1980 capping are inhibited simultaneously by dhCB , suggesting that both events , although independent , require actin - microfila - ment interaction with the ligand - receptor complex . The sequence of events for receptor - mediated endocytosis via the coated vesicle pathway illustrated in this paper is a general one , although specific details may vary with differing cell types . For example , the lymphocyte response to antibody shares a number of features in common with uptake ofepider - mal growth factor and insulin in fibroblasts ( 15 , 34 ) and with uptake of Semliki Forest virus into BHK - 21 cells ( 18 ) . Quantitative Considerations regarding Coat Recruitment Our morphometric analysis shows that , initially , - 18 jLm2 or 6 % of the total cell surface membrane area is scored as pos - sessing receptor IgM molecules as determined by ferritin - la - beled antibody binding . The initially diffuse labeling pattern , however , rapidly changes as ligand - receptor complexes cluster and begin to redistribute in the plane of the membrane . By 15 min after antibody challenge , the membrane scored as ferritin - labeled , in all treatments studied , drops to - " 15 Jum2 or 5 % of the initial cell surface area . This reduction is mainly because of superpositioning of ferritin in the thickness of the sections as a result ofreceptor clustering . The constancy of ferritin - labeled membrane scored after 15 - min incubation is a reflection ofthe stability of the ligand - receptor complex over time and the absence of any effect of the drug treatments studied on either the number of initially available receptors or on their ability to bind ligand . The amount of total labeled membrane scored after a 15 - min incubation is therefore an internal control for the morphometric analysis and is a measure of the sensitivity of the technique . When cells were fixed for electron microscopy as soon after antibody labeling as possible ( our zero time ) , 94 % of the ferritin - label was observed to be over uncoated regions of the FIGURE 6 SDS - PAGE analysis of coated vesicle proteins . Track a : WiL2 coated vesicle fraction . Arrows indicate major polypeptide components and those polypeptides that are found in coated vesicle fractions from diverse sources . Track b : calf brain coated vesicle clathrin , 175 kdaltons . Track c : polypeptide standards : ( top to bot - tom ) Dictyostelium myosin heavy chain , 225 kdaltons ; rabbit muscle myosin heavy chain , 200 kdaltons ; phosphorylase a , 94 kdaltons ; human transferrin 78 kdaltons ; bovine serum albumin , 68 kdaltons ; rabbit muscle actin , 42 kdaltons ; concanavalin A , 27 kdaltons ; cy - tochrome c , 11 . 7 kdaltons . Track d : rat testis calmodulin , 18 . 5 kdal - tons . 5 - 15 % gradient polyacrylamide gel , 0 . 1 % SIDS . cell membrane and 5 % over coated pits . Because coated pits occupy ^ - 1 % of the cell surface area , at zero time we would expect to see only 1 % of the ferritin - label associated with pits ifthe receptor IgM were randomly distributed . We believe that this discrepancy is attributable to receptor clustering and re - cruitment of coat material or movement over coats in the short time before and possibly during fixation . There are no ferritin - labeled coated vesicles at this early time after antibody chal - lenge ; however , a small amount oflabel is observed in the large uncoated vesicular compartment . 15 min after ligand challenge , the amount of coated surface membrane has increased to three times the initial value so that - 5 - 6 f , m2 ofnew coated surface has come into being . As mentioned above , the coat material is recruited quite specifically to the clustered ligand - receptor complexes , so that at this time nearly 40 % of all receptor IgM is found associated with coated membrane . This represents an eightfold increase of total ferritin - labeled clusters associated with coated membrane . In contrast , the amount of coated membrane without ferritin label remains unchanged . The coat material recruited to the membrane is clathrin , by morphological and biochemical criteria . Because the total amount of coat material found increases dramatically upon and Endocytosis FIGURE 7 This diagram summarizes pathways constructed using data in Table I . Control : ferritin - labeled ligand initially binds to the cell surface with a diffuse distribution over regions that do not have clathrin coats . After clustering of the receptors , clathrin recruitment to the cell membrane is stimulated and coated regions form below the clusters . These specialized coated regions invaginate and inter - nalize bits of membrane with ligand in coated vesicles . The ligand is then shuttled to a large vesicular compartment , part of which we have identified as lysosomal by morphological criteria . This se - quence represents the coated vesicle pathway of endocytosis . Some portion of the cell surface label is internalized by an alternate , nonspecific , endocytic pathway that does not involve coated vesi - cles . dhCB : dhCB has no apparent effect on clustering of the receptors or association with clathrin coats opposite the ferritin clusters . This drug does , however , significantly reduce the number of coated vesicle profiles scored as well as the amount of label observed in the large vesicular compartment . Stelazine : Stelazine has no apparent effect on clustering of the receptors , but this drug does inhibit the association of clathrin coats with the ligand - receptor complexes . Stelazine also shuts down the alternate endocytic path - way almost completely . Major rate reductions are indicated by small blocked arrows ; minor rate reductions are indicated by large blocked arrows . ligand challenge , we believe that clathrin is assembled into coats under the ligand - receptor complex from a cytoplasmic pool , although an alternate source of the newly visualized coating material may be by a rearrangement ofa submembrane network of clathrin . In either case , the signal for recruitment or rearrangement appears to be receptor clustering , but the detailed molecular mechanism is not known . Involvement of Calmodulin in Coat Recruitment The recruitment of coat material to the cytoplasmic side of the membrane opposite ferritin - labeled ligand - receptor clusters is Stelazine sensitive . Stelazine reduces both the amount of labeled coated surface and the number of coated vesicles formed to about 60 % of control values by 15 min . This result suggests that calmodulin is an important mediator of clathrin recruitment to the membrane . In support of this conclusion , we find a polypeptide that comigrates with calmodulin associ - ated with coated vesicles isolated from WiL2 cells . Similarly , Linden et al . ( 32 ) have used the sensitive radioimmunoassay technique to demonstrate calmodulin in highly purified coated vesicles from pig brain . Because the reductions by Stelazine in both coated surface and coated vesicle formation are roughly proportional , we have assumed that Stelazine does not signifi - cantly affect other processes in the coated vesicle pathway of receptor - mediated endocytosis ( Fig . 7 ) . A consequence of this assumption is that the significant reduction in the ferritin - labeled membrane seen in the large vesicular compartment after 15 min ofStelazine treatment is the result of inhibition of the postulated alternate pathway . Thus , pinocytosis in general may be calmodulin regulated . SALISBURY ET AL . (cid:9) Coated Vesicles , Microfilaments , Calmodulin (cid:9) 139 Involvement of Actin in Receptor Redistribution and Endocytosis Ourmorphometric analysis indicates that the coated vesicle - mediated internalization of cell surface immunoglobulin is sensitive to dhCB . In our study , dhCB treatment results in a complete inhibition of capping and a reduction in the number of coated vesicles containing ferritin label . This drug has little or no effect on the recruitment of coat material to the cell membrane opposite ferritin clusters and reduces only slightly the alternate endocytic pathway . These results implicate the actin microfilament system in ( a ) capping , but notin clustering or patching of receptors ( in accord with other investigators [ 12 , 46 ] ) , and ( b ) conversion of coated pits into coated vesicles . Our observations of HMM - decorated filaments in direct association with uncoated plasma membrane below ligand - receptor com - plexes support the role ofactin microfilaments in capping ( 12 , 46 ) . The association of HMM - decorated filaments with clath - rin - coated pits and vesicles is evidence of an active role ofactin microfilaments in the formation of coated vesicles . Evidence for recruitment and / or assembly of actin filaments to capping cell surface determinants is accumulating . Co - cap - ping of actin and myosin with cross - linked cell surface deter - minants has been observed ( 8 ) . In addition , Flanagan and Koch ( 14 ) have demonstrated an association of cross - linked surface Ig and cytoplasmic actin in lymphocytes and P3 mye - loma cells . Furthermore , a dynamic association of actin and myosin with capping concanavalin Areceptors of Diciyostelium hasbeen shown recently by one of us ( 12 ) . In contrast to the apparent role of microfilaments in lateral movement of membrane surface receptors , their involvement in endocytosis is less clear ( for example , see references 4 , 48 , 51 ) . Earlier reports of failure of cytochalasin B to inhibit endocytosis , even along a pathway involving coated vesicles ( e . g . , 51 ) must be reinterpreted in light ofour findings . Clearly , given enough time in our system , a portion of endocytosis of labeled ligand will occur via coated vesicles even in the pres - ence of dhCB , because it is the rate of coated vesicle formation that is affected , not the entry oflabel into the coated membrane pathway . Because the alternate pathway is little affected by cytochalasin ( at the concentration we have employed ) , perhaps in the presence of the drug a different equilibrium would be established so that some labeled ligand in coated pits would eventually be endocyoed via the alternate pathway . Just how dhCB prevents coated vesicle formation is unde - termined . We score independent , fully coated membrane pro - files in the cell cytoplasm as coated vesicles . We have not determined in each case that these are totally free from the cell surface ; perhaps some ofthem are connected via along channel as seen in Fig . 3 c . This may mean that actin attached to the coated pit pulls the surface inward to form such deep channels , at which time a rearrangement of the coat material completes the vesiculation , as suggested by others ( 22 ) . In our observations of microfilament associations with coated membranes , the arrowhead polarity of HMM decora - tion points into the cytoplasm , away from the membrane . This polarity appears to be constant and is similar to that seen elsewhere ( 35 , 47 ) . Sometimes , actin filaments from different places on the membrane are connected by " thick filaments " in the manner predicted by Spudich ( 44 ) as in Fig . 4b . This orientation mightbe expected for active involvement of micro - filaments in pulling the coated membrane into the cytoplasm . Additional evidence for active linkage between actin and 140 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY - VOLUME 87 , 1980 clathrin - coated vesicles is shown in Fig . 6 . Isolated coated vesicle fractions contain , as their principal components , poly - peptides that comigrate with authentic brain clathrin and rabbit muscle actin . The amount of actin relative to clathrin varies , suggesting that the association is somewhat labile or dynamic . A Ca 2 + Signal in Endocytosis ? The suggestion that calmodulin is associated with early events such as coat recruitment in receptor - mediated endocy - tosis via the coated vesicle pathway as well as the alternate pathway , and that actin interactions may provide the motive force for events such as capping and coated vesicle internali - zation tempts us to postulate that endocytosis begins with a transient flux of Ca " beneath the cell membrane . Is receptor - ligand clustering then equivalent to Ca 21 channel formation ? Ca " binding to calmodulin at the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane might activate enzymes such as adenylate cyclase , phosphodiesterase , and myosin light chain kinase ( 11 ) , among others . We may then ask which , if any , of these enzymes is associated with clathrin binding to the membrane , with sub - sequent activation of the actin microfilament system , and so forth . Myosin light chain kinase would be asuitable candidate enzyme that might link the Stelazine - sensitive step to the later dhCB - sensitive step , because actin - myosin interaction is envi - sioned as providing the motile mechanism for capping and for coated vesicle formation . The authors thank Dr . B . Bloom for providing the WiL2 stock andhis assistance andinstruction on cell culture . We are grateful to Dr . S . Lin for the dihydrocytochalasin Bandto Dr . A . Means for the calmodulin standard . This work was supported by grants from the American Cancer Society ( BC - 302 ) and the U . S . Public Health Service ( USPHS ) ( GM 25813 ) to J . S . Condeelis andUSPHS ( HL22560 ) to P . Satir . J . S . Condeelis is a Rita Allen Foundation Scholar . J . L . Salisbury is a Leukemia Society of American Fellow . A portion of this work was presented at The American Society for Cell Biology meeting in Toronto , Canada , in November 1979 ( 42 ) . Receivedforpublication 14April 1980 , andin revisedform 11 June 1980 . REFERENCES 1 . Ainsworth , S . K . , and M . l . Kamovsky . 1972 . An ultrastructural staining method for enhancing thesize and electronopacityofferritin inthin sections . J Hisiochern . Cytocheat . 20 : 225 - 229 . 2 . Albertini , D . F . , R . D . Berlin , and J . M . Oliver . 1977 . The mechanism ofconcanavalin A cap formation in leukocytes . J . Cell Sci . 26 : 57 - 75 . 3 . Albertini , D . F . , and J . I . Clark . 1975 . Membrane - microtubule interactions : concanavalin A tapping induced redistribution of cytoplasmic microtubules and colchicine binding proteins . Proc . Nall Acad . ScL U . S . A . 72 : 4976 - 4980 . 4 . Allison , A . C . , P . Davies , and S . DePetris . 1971 . Role of contractile microfilaments in macrophage movement andendocytosis . Nature New Biology . 232 : 153 - 155 . 5 . Anderson , R . G . W . , E . Vasile , R . J . Mello , M . S . Brown , and J . L . Goldstein . 1978 . Immunocytochemical visualization of coated pits and vesicles in human fibroblasts : relation to low density lipoprotein receptordistribution . Cell . 15 : 919 - 933 . 6 . Begg , D . A . , R . Rodewald , and L . I . Rebhun . 1979 . The visualization of actin filament polarity in thin sections : evidence for the uniform polarity of membrane - associated filaments . J . Cell Biol . 79 : 846 - 852 . 7 . Bolton , A . E . 1977 . Radioiodination techniques . Review 18 . Amersham Corporation , Arlington Heights , Ill . 71 . 8 . Bourguigrton , L . Y . W . , K . T . Tokuyasu , and S . J . Singer . 1978 . The capping of lymphocytes and other cells , studied by an improved method of immunofiuorescence staining of frozen sections . J . Cell Physiol 95 : 239 - 258 . 9 . Brenner , S . L . , and E . D . Kom . 1979 . Substoichiometric concentrations ofcytochalasin D inhibit actin polymerization . J . Siol . Chem 254 : 9982 - 9985 . 10 . Brown , S . S . , and J . A . Spudich . 1979 . Cytochalasin inhibits therate ofelongation ofactin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 83 : 657 - 662 . 11 . Cheung , W . Y . 1980 . Calmodulinplays apivotal role in cellularregulation . Science ( Wash . D . C . ) . 207 : 19 - 27 . 12 . Condeelis , J . S . 1979 . Isolation ofconcanavalin A caps during various stages offormation and their association with actin and myosin . J . Cell Biol . 80 : 751 - 758 . 13 . DePetris , S . , and M . C . Raft 1973 . Normal distribution , patching and capping ofsurface immunoglobulin studied by electron microscopy . Nature New Biol . 241 : 257 - 259 . 14 . Flanagan , J . , and G . L . E . Koch . 1978 . Cross - linked surface Ig attaches to actin . Nature ( Land . ) . 273 : 278 - 281 . 15 . Fox , C . F . , and M . Das . 1979 . Internalization and processing of the EGF receptor in the induction ofDNA synthesis in cultured fibroblasts : the endocytic activation hypothesis . J . Supramol . Siruct . 10 : 199 - 214 . 16 . Goldstein , J . C . , R . G . W . Anderson , and M . S . Brown . 1979 . Coated pits , coated vesicles , and receptor mediatedendocytosis . Nature ( Land . ) . 279 : 679 - 685 . 17 . Gordon , P . , l . L . Carpentier , S . Cohen , and L . Orci . 1978 . Epidermal growth factor : morphological demonstration of binding , internalization , and lysosomal association in human fibroblasts . Proc . Nod . Acad Sci . U . S . A . 75 : 5025 - 5029 . 18 . Helenius , A . , J . Kartenbeck , K . Simons ~ andE . Fries . 1980 . Onthe entry ofSemliki Forest vine into BHK - 21 cells . J . Cell Biol . 84 : 404 - 420 . 19 . Hidaka , H . , T . Yamaki , T . R . Totsuka , and M . Asanio . 1979 . Selective inhibition ofCa " - binding modulator of phosphodiesterase produces vascular relaxation and inhibits actin - myosin interaction . Mol . Pharnmcol . 15 : 49 - 59 . 20 . Ishikawa , H . , M . Bischoff , and H . Holtzer . 1969 . Formation ofarrowhead complexes with heavy meromyosin in a variety of cell types . J . Cell Biol . 43 : 312 - 328 . 21 . Jett , M . , and C . Hickey - Williams . 1977 . Lymphoid cells in mammalian cell membranes . Surface Membranes ofSpecific Cell Types . Vol . 3 . G . A . Jamieson and D . M . Robinson . editors . Butterworth & Co . , London . 47 - 88 . 22 . Kanaseki , T . , and K . Kadota . 1969 . The " vesicle in a basket " : a morphological study of coated vesicle isolated from nerve endings of the guinea pig brain , with special reference to the mechanism ofmembrane movements . J . Cell Biol . 42 : 202 - 220 . 23 . Keen , J . H . , M . D . Willingham , and I . H . Pastan . 1979 . Clathrin - coatedvesicles : isolation , dissociation and factor - dependent reassociation ofclathrin baskets . Cell 16 : 303 - 312 . 24 . Kennel , S . J . , andR . A . Lerner . 1973 . Isolation and characterization of plasma membrane associated immunoglobulin from cultured human diploid lymphocytes . J . Mol Bial . 76 : 485 - 502 . 25 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage ofstructural proteins during theassembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature ( Land . ) . 277 : 680 - 685 . 26 . Lemer , R . A . , P . 1 . McConahey , and F . 1 . Dixon . 1971 . Quantitative aspects of plasma membrane - associated immunoglobulin in clones in diploid human lymphocytes . Science ( Wash . D . C . ) 173 : 6 - 62 . 27 . Levin , R . M . , and B . Weiss . 1976 . Mechanism by which psychotropic drugs inhibit adenosine cyclic 3 ' , 5 ' - monophosphate phosphodiesterase of brain . Mal . Pharinacol . 12 : 581 - 589 . 28 . Levy , J . A . , M . Virolainen , and U . Defenoli . 1968 . Human lymphoblastoid lines from lymph node and spleen . Cancer ( Phila . ) 22 : 517 - 524 . 29 . Lin , S . , D . C . Lin . and M . D . Flanagan . 1978 . Specificity of the effects ofcytochalasin B on transport and motile processes . Proc . Nall . Acad . Sct U . S . A . 75 : 329 - 333 . 30 . Lin , D . C . , K . D . Tobin , M . Grumet , and S . Lin . 1980 . Cytochalasins inhibit nuclei induced actin filament polymerization by blocking filament elongation . J . Cell Biol . 84 : 455 - 460 . 31 . Lin , S . , and C . E . Snyder , Jr . 1977 . High affinity cytochalasin B binding to red cell membrane proteins which are unrelated tosugar transport . J Biol . Chem . 252 : 5464 - 5471 . 32 . Linden , C . D . , T . F . Roth , and J . R . Dedman . 1979 . The association of calmodulin with coated vesicles . J Cell Biol . 83 : 289a ( Abstr . ) . 33 . Lowey , S . , and C . Cohen . 1962 . Studies on the structure of myosin . J . Mol Biol . 7 : 293 - 308 . 34 . Maxfield , F . R . , J . Schlessinger , Y . Schechter , I . Pastan , and M . C . Willingham . 1978 . Collection of insulin , EGF and a , macroglobulin in the same patches on the surface of cultured fibroblasts and common internalization . Cell . 14 : 805 - 810 . 35 . Mooseker , M . S . , and L . G . Tilney . 1976 . Organization of actin filament - membrane complex : filament polarity and membrane attachment in the microvilli of intestinal epithelial cells . J Cell Biol . 67 : 724 - 743 . 36 . Nossel , G . J . J . 1977 . B - lymphocyte receptors and lymphocyte activation . In International Cell Biology 1976 - 1977 . B . R . Brinkley and K . R . Porter , editors . The Rockefeller University Press , New York . 107 - 111 . 37 . Novikoff , A . 1973 . Lysosomes : a personal account . In Lysosomes and Storage Diseases . G . Hers and F . Van Hoof , editors . Academic Press , Inc . , New York . 1 - 41 . 38 . Pearse , B . M . F . 1975 . Coated vesicles from pig brain : purification and biochemical characterization . J Mol Biol . 97 : 93 - 98 . 39 . Poste , G . , D . Papahadjopoulos , and G . L . Nicolson . 1975 . Local anesthetics affect transmembranecytoskeletal control ofmobility and distribution ofcell surface receptors . Proc . Nail . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 72 : 4430 - 434 . 40 . Roth , T . F . , J . A . Cutting , and S . B . Atlas . 1976 . Protein transport : a selective membrane mechanism . J Supramol Siruct . 4 : 527 - 548 . 41 . Roth , R . F . , and K . R . Porter . 1964 . Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte ofthe mosquito , Aedesaegypti . J . Cell Biol . 20 : 313 - 332 . 42 . Salisbury , l . L . , J . S . Condeelis , and P . Satin 1979 . Microfilaments and clathrin play a direct role in endocytosis ofcrosslinhed cellsurface immunoglobulin . J . Cell Biol . 83 : 72a ( Abstr . ) . 43 . Singer , S . J . , J . F . Ash , L . Y . W . Bourguignon , M . H . Heggenes , and D . Louvard . 1978 . Transmembrane interactions and the mechanism of transport of proteins across mem - branes . J . Supramol . Struct . 9 : 373 - 389 . 44 . Spudich , J . A . 1974 . Biochemical and structural studies ofactomyosin - like proteins from non - muscle cells . Il . Purification , properties and membrane association of actin from amoebae ofDictyostelium discoideum . J Biol . Chem . 249 : 6013 - 6020 . 45 . Steinman , R . M . 1976 . Horseradish peroxidase as a marker for studies ofpinocytosis . In In Vitro Methods ofCell - Mediated and Tumor Immunity . B . R . Bloom and J . R . David , editors . Academic Press , Inc . , New York . 379 - 386 . 46 . Taylor , R . B . , W . Duffus , M . Rata , and S . DePetris . 1971 . Redistribution and pinocytosis of lymphocyte surface immunoglobulin molecules induced byanti - immunoglobulin anti - body . Nature New Biology . 233 : 225 - 229 . 47 . Tilney , L . G . 1975 . The role ofactin in non - muscle cell motility . In Molecules and Cell Movement . S . Inoub and R . E . Stephens , editors . Raven Press , New York . 339 - 388 . 48 . Wagner , R . , M . Rosenberg , and R . Estensen . 1971 . Endocytosis in Chang liver cells : quantitation by sucrose - ' H uptake and inhibition by cytochalasin B . J . CellBiol . 50 : 804 - 817 . 49 . Weibel , E . R . 1969 . Stereological principles for morphometry in electron microscopic cytology . Inc . Rev . Cytol 26 : 325 - 307 . 50 . Weiss , B . , and R . M . Levin . 1978 . Mechanism for selectively inhibiting the activation of cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase and adenylate cyclase by antipsychotic agents . Adv . Cyclic NucleotideRes . 9 : 285 - 304 . 51 . Wills , E . J . , P . Davis , A . C . Allison , and A . D . Haswell . 1972 . Cytochalasin B fails to inhibit pinocytosis by macrophages . Nature New Biology . 240 : 58 - 60 . SALISBURY ET AL . (cid:9) Coated Vesicles , Microfilaments , Calmodulin (cid:9) 141