THE JOURNAL OP BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 0 1993 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Inc . Val . 268 , No . 12 , Issue of April 25 , , pp . 8507 - 8513 , 1993 Printed in U . S . A . Nucleotide Binding Properties of Bovine Brain Uncoating ATPase * ( Received for publication , December 4 , 1992 ) Baochong GaoS , Yumiko Emotos , Lois Greene , and Evan Eisenberg From the Laboratory of Cell Biology , National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland 20892 and the § Department of Physiology , Medical College of Oita , Oita , 879 - 56 , Japan Many functions of the 70 - kDa heat - shock proteins ( hsp7Os ) appear to be regulated by bound nucleotide . In this study we examined the nucleotide binding prop - erties of purified bovine brain uncoating ATPase , one of the constitutively expressed members of the hsp7O family . We found that uncoating ATPase purified by ATP - agarose column chromatography retained one ADP molecule bound per enzyme molecule which could not be removed by extensive dialysis . Since this bound ADP exchanged rapidly with free ADP or ATP , the inability to remove the bound nucleotide was not due to slow dissociation but rather to strong binding of the nucleotide to the uncoating ATPase . In confirmation of this view , equilibrium dialysis experiments sug - gested that the dissociation constants for both ADP and ATP were less than 0 . 1 WM . Schmid et ul . ( Schmid , S . L . , Braell , W . A , , and Rothrnan , J . E . ( 1985 ) J . Biol . Chem 260 , 10057 - 10062 ) suggested that the uncoat - ing ATPase had two sites for bound nucleotide , one specific for ATP and one binding both ATP and ATP analogues but not ADP . In contrast , we found that enzyme with bound ADP did not bind further adeno - sine 5’ - ( B , y - imino ) triphosphate or dATP , nor did more than one ATP molecule bind per enzyme even in 200 PM free ATP . These results strongly suggest that the enzyme has only one binding site for nucleotide . Dur - ing steady - state ATP hydrolysis , 85 % of the bound nucleotide at this site was determined to be ATP and 15 % ADP ; this is consistent with the rate of ADP release determined in the exchange experiments noted above , where ADP release was found to be six times faster than the overall rate of ATP hydrolysis . The hsp7Os are one of the major classes of heat - shock proteins produced by cells under stress conditions . They are well conserved with purified hsp7Os from all organisms shar - ing a similar structure and having similar properties ( see reviews by Craig ( 1985 ) , Lindquist ( 1986 ) , and Nover and Scharf ( 1991 ) ) . Many of the hsp70s are also constitutively expressed and are apparently required for cell viability ( Wer - ner - Washburne et al . , 1987 ) . During the past few years studies have revealed that the constitutively expressed hsp7Os are involved in antigen presentation ( Vanbuskirk et al . , 1989 ) , uncoating of clathrin - coated vesicles ( Schlossman et al . , 1984 ; Greene and Eisenberg , 1990 ) , protein translocation across the membranes of endoplasmic reticulum ( Chirico et al . , 1988 ) and mitochondria ( Deshaies et af , 1988 ) , nacent protein fold - * The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges , This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . 4 TO whom correspondence should be addressed : National Insti - tutes of Health , Bldg . 3 , Rm . B1 - 23 , Bethesda , MD 20892 . ing ( Beckmann et al . , 1990 ) , multisubunit protein assembly ( Bole et al . , 1986 ; Flynn et al . , 1989 ) , and protein degradation in lysosomes ( Terlecky et al . , 1992 ) . Since many of these functions of the hsp7Os have been found to be affected by the binding of ATP , it is important to gain an understanding of the interaction between the hsp70s and ATP . Perhaps the most thoroughly studied constitutive hsp70 is the bovine brain uncoating ATPase which is able to uncoat clathrin - coated vesicles in an ATP - dependent reaction . Three of the seven constitutive yeast hsp70s have also been shown to be capable of uncoating clathrin - coated vesicles ( Gao et al . , 1991 ) . Because ATP apparently plays a key role in the un - coating reaction , Schmid et al . ( 1985 ) investigated the inter - action of nucleotide with the uncoating ATPase in some detail . They found that the uncoating reaction specifically required ATP , while the rates of binding and dissociation of clathrin from the uncoating ATPase were increased not only in the presence of ATP but also in the presence of numerous ATP analogues such as dATP . As even a 40 - fold excess of dATP over ATP did not inhibit the uncoating reaction , they suggested that the uncoating ATPase has two sites for nu - cleotide , a hydrolytic site which is specific for the binding of ATP and ADP and a catalytic site which not only binds ATP but also binds several ATP analogues such as AMP - PNP , ’ ( LATP , and ATPyS but not ADP . Although Schmid et al . suggested that the uncoating ATP - ase has two nucleotide binding sites , they were unable to demonstrate directly the binding of two nucleotide molecules per uncoating ATPase . They did find that , following their normal preparative procedure using ATP - agarose column chromatography followed by ammonium sulfate precipitation , the uncoating ATPase contained about 0 . 7 mol of bound nucleotide per mol of uncoating ATPase . This bound nucleo - tide appeared on HPLC chromatography to be a mixture of ATP and ADP . Since this bound nucleotide was so difficult to remove , they suggested that it bound very strongly to the hydrolytic site . On the other hand , when Palleros et al . ( 1991 ) directly measured the binding of ATP and ADP to the un - coating ATPase using equilibrium dialysis , they reported that ATP bound with a dissociation constant of 10 WM and ADP bound with a dissociation constant of 2 p ~ . Given such relatively weak binding , it should have been easy to dissociate bound ATP and bound ADP from the uncoating ATPase during its preparation . In the present study we reinvestigated the binding of nu - cleotide to the uncoating ATPase . We found that the uncoat - ing ATPase purified in the usual fashion ( Schlossman et al . , 1984 ) , retained about 0 . 8 bound nucleotide per enzyme mole - cule , all in the form of ADP . This bound ADP could not be The abbreviations used are : AMP - PNP , adenosine 5’ - ( @ , y - im - in0 ) triphosphate ; ATP + , adenosine 5’ - O - ( thio ) triphosphate ; HPLC , high - performance liquid chromatography ; FPLC , fast - protein liquid chromatography . 8507 Uncoating ATPase and Bound Nucleotide removed by extensive dialysis , but did rapidly exchange with free ADP , suggesting that it was not a slow rate of dissociation but rather very strong binding which prevented dissociation of the ADP from the enzyme ; equilibrium dialysis experiments confirmed that the dissociation constant was less than 0 . 1 PM . Even if the bound ADP was converted to ATP by an ATP - regenerating system , it could not be removed by exten - sive dialysis . Like ADP , the bound ATP exchanged rapidly with free ATP and equilibrium dialysis experiments suggested that it too bound very strongly to the enzyme . At concentra - tions of free nucleotide as high as 200 FM , there was no further binding of ADP , dATP , AMP - PNP , or ATP , itself to the uncoating ATPase , suggesting that the enzyme has only one nucleotide binding site . During steady - state ATP hydrolysis , 85 % of the bound nucleotide at this site was ATP and 15 % was ADP suggesting that ATP hydrolysis is the major rate - limiting step in the ATPase cycle with ADP release occurring about six times faster : this is consistent with the rate of ADP release determined in the exchange experiments noted above . with bound [ “CIADP was preincubated with creatine kinase and creatine phosphate for 30 min at 4 or 25 “C before being mixed with 1 mM ATP ( Sigma , catalogue number A - 5394 ) . For bound ADP exchange , 10 pM uncoating ATPase with bound [ “CJADP was mixed with 1 mM ADP ( Fluka , catalogue number 01899 ) or 1 mM ATP at 4 “C or 25 “C . At desired time points , an aliquot of 200 pl was loaded onto a Superose - 12 FPLC column ( Pharmacia , code 17 - 0538 - 01 , HR 10 / 30 ) to separate the free and bound nucleotide . The column was equilibrated in buffer A and run at a flow rate of 0 . 5 ml / min for a total running time of 50 min . Protein fractions of 0 . 5 ml were collected , and scintillation was counted to quantify the “C - nucleo - tides remaining associated with the uncoating ATPase . Equilibrium Dialysis for Measurement of Nucleotide Binding - Equilibrium dialysis was performed in dialysis chambers ( from Technilab , Model E - l ) which held about 1 ml of solution on each side of the dialysis membrane . [ 14C ] ATP ( 50 mCi / mmol , ICN , catalogue number 13018 ) and creatine kinase / creatine phosphate or [ 14C ] ADP and 50 units / ml hexokinase / lO mM glucose were added to both sides of the membrane , while uncoating ATPase with a known amount of bound nucleotide ( determined bv HPLC ) was added to onlv one side of the membrane at the beginnini of the experiment : Then tie dialysis chambers were put in a - 4 “C cold room for 24 - 30 h with gentle agitation . Control exneriments with free [ ‘ * ClATP or - ADP showed that equilibrium was - reached within 20 h - of & alysis under the same conditions . Equilibrium dialysis with creatine kinase / creatine phos - phate or hexokinase / glucose alone on both sides of the membrane showed that these systems did not cause uneven distribution of nucleotide between the two sides of the membrane . The nucleotide contents on each side of the membrane were quantified by scintilla - tion counting at the end of the dialysis . In some experiments , both HPLC and scintillation counting were used for nucleotide quantifi - cation . MATERIALS AND METHODS Purification of Bovine Brain Uncoating ATPose - The uncoating ATPase was purified from fresh calf brains as described by Schloss - man et al . ( 1984 ) with slight modifications ( Greene and Eisenberg , 1990 ) . Generally , a yield of 60 mg of uncoating ATPase was obtained from 10 calf brains ( approximately 2 . 5 kg of tissue ) . The purified uncoating ATPase was stored as ammonium sulfate pellets . Before use , the ammonium sulfate pellets were dissolved and dialyzed for 20 - 24 h in buffer A ( 20 mM imidazole , 25 mM KCl , 10 mM ammonium sulfate , 2 mM magnesium acetate , and 1 mM dithiothreitol , at pH 7 . 0 ) . The uncoating ATPase purified according to this procedure is about 95 % pure as determined by SDS - gel scanning using an LKB Ultrascan XL laser densitometer . The concentration of uncoating ATPase was determined using the extinction coefficient ( t : g = 6 . 2 ) reported previously ( Greene and Eisenberg , 1990 ) . HPLC Analvsis of Nucleotide Content - The HPLC svstem used consisted of an”HP 1690 liquid chromatograph from Hewlett - Packard , a Hewlett - Packard 3393A integrator , and an LC 9563 variable detec - tor from IBM Instruments Inc . All samples were treated with 0 . 6 M perchloric acid and then centrifuged ( 100 , 000 rpm , 10 min , TL - 100 . 1 ; otor in a Beckman TL - 100 centrifuge ) . The supernatant was col - lected and neutralized with KOH and clarified bv another centrifu - gation . Samples were then diluted with water to the desired nucleotide concentration and loaded onto a SynChropak AX - 100 column ( Thom - son Instrument Co . Catalogue number CA 101 - 10 ) with a 100 . ~ 1 sample loop . The column was run at a flow rate of 0 . 5 ml / min for a total elution time of 30 min . The elution buffer was the same as the running buffer , containing 0 . 6 M sodium acetate and 0 . 075 M sodium phosphate at pH 7 . 3 . Each nucleotide was identified by its distinct retention time compared to nucleotide standards and quantified either by integration , or by cutting and weighing the peak area on the recordings , and where possible by scintillation counting the collected peak fraitions when “C - nucleotides were used . Preparation of Uncoating ATPase with Bound r’C ] ADP or f”C ] ATP - For preparation of uncoating ATPase with bound [ ‘“CIADP , purified uncoating ATPase ( about 10 pM ) in buffer A was mixed with equimolar [ 14C ] ADP ( 50 mCi / mmol ; ICN , catalogue number 13004 ) and incubated at 25 “C for 60 min . The mixture was then dialyzed in buffer A for 20 h to remove free ADP . Uncoatine ATPase with bound [ 14C ] ATP was prepared by incubating uncoating ATPase with bound [ “CIADP with an ATP - regenerating system containing 30 units / ml creatine kinase ( Sigma , catalogue number P - 6915 ) and 10 mM crea - tine phosphate ( these are the standard concentrations used in all exneriments involving ATP - regenerating system unless otherwise indicated ) at 25 “C fir 30 min - before use . HPLC showed that the creatine kinase treated uncoatine ATPase had 85 % bound I“‘ClATP and 15 % bound [ 14C ] ADP . The - specific activity of the b & ni 14C - nucleotide was measured by HPLC analysis of total bound nucleotide ( see below for method ) followed bv scintillation counting . Determination of Exchange of Bound Nucleotide with Free Nucleo - tide by FPLC - The Pharmacia LKB Biotechnology Inc . FPLC sys - tem used in these experiments included a GP - 250 gradient program - mer , two P - 500 pumps , a Single - Path UV - 1 monitor , and a Frac - 100 fraction collector . For bound ATP exchange , 10 FM uncoating ATPase RESULTS Nature and Amount of Nucleotide Bound to Purified Un - coating ATPase - We first investigated the nature and amount of nucleotide bound to the uncoating ATPase purified in the usual manner by ATP - agarose affinity chromatography . In this procedure the uncoating ATPase , eluted from the ATP - agarose column by ATP , is concentrated by ammonium sul - fate precipitation and then dialyzed over night to remove the ammonium sulfate and free nucleotide . We used HPLC to monitor the amount of nucleotide which remained associated with the uncoating ATPase during dialysis . As a control , a sample with a similar amount of free ADP was dialyzed under the same condition . The concentration of uncoating ATPase used in this experiment was 120 pM . Fig . 1 shows that the free ADP was dialyzed out within 12 h , while about 100 pM of nucleotide remained associated with the uncoating ATPase . After a further 18 h of dialysis less 1607 I I - - - - 1 . 20 g a ci 5 120 I 1 0 . 0 . 90 0 2 g 60 9 a 0 . 60 F i % 0 . 00 t 0 10 20 30 40 50 Time of Dialysis ( h ) FIG . 1 . Dialysis of ammonium sulfate precipitated uncoat - ing ATPase . The uncoating ATPase was precipitated using 70 % saturated ammonium sulfate after it was eluted from an ATP - agarose column . The pellet was dissolved in buffer A ( see “Materials and Methods” ) and dialvzed in 1000 volumes of the same buffer at an uncoating ATPase concentration of 120 pM . ADP concentrations in uncoating ATPase sample ( 0 ) and in free ADP sample ( 0 ) were determined by HPLC . Arrows indicate buffer changes during dialysis . Uncoating ATPase and Bound Nucleotide 8509 than 0 . 2 p ~ ADP remained in the free ADP sample , while there was still 100 p ~ ADP associated with the uncoating ATPase . Extensive dialysis with changes of buffer every 8 - 15 h resulted in very little further loss of nucleotide from the uncoating ATPase sample . The HPLC profile in Fig . 2b showed that almost all of the nucleotide remaining associated with the uncoating ATPase was ADP . Therefore these data suggest that , following dialysis , ADP is bound to the uncoating ATPase at a ratio of bound nucleotide to uncoating ATPase of 0 . 83 . If the ADP associated with the uncoating ATPase after dialysis is indeed bound to the enzyme , it should be relatively inaccessible to creatine kinase . Therefore its rate of conver - sion to ATP by creatine kinase should be much slower than the rate of conversion of free ADP to ATP . Fig . 3 shows the rate of converting ADP to ATP with both free ADP and with the ADP associated with the uncoating ATPase after dialysis for 20 h . The free ADP was converted into ATP within 2 s , while less than 5 % of the ADP in the dialyzed uncoating ATPase was converted into ATP during the same incubation time . This observation confirms that the ADP present in the uncoating ATPase preparation following dialysis is bound to the uncoating ATPase . Rate of Bound ATP Release from the Uncoating ATPase - If , indeed , the dissociation constant for ADP is in the micro - molar range as reported by Palleros et al . ( 1991 ) , our obser - vation that ADP remains bound to the uncoating ATPase even after extensive dialysis could be due to the nucleotide 1 . % & a < Q k b C . I I I I 5 10 15 20 Retention Time ( min ) J FIG . 2 . HPLC analysis of nucleotide bound to uncoating ATPase . Nucleotide standard ( a ) contained 1 FM AMP , 1 FM ADP , and 1 . 5 FM ATP . b , nucleotide extracted from 1 PM uncoating ATPase after 20 h of dialysis , and then ( c ) incubated 30 min with creatine kinase / creatine phosphate at 25 “C . The minor peak after ADP was an artifact caused by nucleotide extraction procedure . 75 H $ 5 0 1 25 0 10 20 30 Tme ( s ) FIG . 3 . Conversion of ADP into ATP by creatine kinase . 10 PM free ADP ( 0 ) or 10 pM purified uncoating ATPase containing 8 PM associated ADP after 20 h of dialysis ( 0 ) was incubated with 30 units / ml creatine kinase and 10 mM creatine phosphate at 25 “C . The reaction was stopped by mixing with perchloric acid and nucleotide content was determined by HPLC . - 0 Time ( rntn ) W . . 9 0 120 240 360 480 Time ( min ) FIG . 4 . Exchange of uncoating ATPase - bound nucleotide with free ADP or ATP . Exchange was determined by monitoring the loss of bound [ “CIADP or - ATP in 10 p ~ uncoating ATPase ( see “Materials and Methods” ) . The zero time samples were loaded on FPLC immediately after cold nucleotide was added . a , exchange of bound ADP with free ATP ( 0 ) or free ADP ( 0 ) and exchange of bound ATP with free ATP ( A ) at 25 “C . b , exchange of bound ADP with free ATP ( 0 ) or free ADP ( 0 ) at 4 “C . Exchange of bound ATP with free ATP was carried out in the presence of an ATP - regenerating system . The lower rate of exchange of bound ATP compared to bound ADP was not due to the presence of creatine phosphate which had no effect on the rate of exchange of bound ADP ( data not shown ) . being trapped at the active site of the enzyme , i . e . dissociating very slowly , just like the bound nucleotide of F - actin ( Korn , 1982 ) . In this regard , it is of interest that the structure of the nucleotide binding site of the uncoating ATPase appears to be similar to that of actin ( Flaherty et al . , 1991 ; Bork et al . , 1992 ) , and like actin , the uncoating ATPase forms dimers and higher order aggregates in the presence of ADP ( Schlossman et al . , 1984 ; Schmid et al . , 1985 ) . On the other hand , the bound nucleotide may bind so strongly to the enzyme that even after extensive dialysis , very little is removed from the enzyme although it can bind and dissociate quite rapidly . To distinguish between these possibilities we determined the rate of exchange of uncoating ATPase - bound ADP with both free ADP and free ATP . Fig . 4 shows that the ADP bound to the uncoating ATPase exchanged quite rapidly with both free ATP and free ADP . Nearly all of the bound ADP was replaced by free ADP or ATP within 10 min of incubation 8510 Uncoating ATPase and Bound Nucleotide at 25 " C ( open and closed circles in Fig . 4a ) . Exchange at 4 " C occurred at about 1 / 15 the rate with 100 % exchange occurring within 2 h of incubation ( Fig . 4b ) . Since the rate of exchange of the bound ADP with free ADP or ATP was independent of the concentration of free nucleotide ( data not shown ) , the rate of exchange must be due to the rate of bound ADP release from the enzyme . Therefore , these data suggest that our inability to remove the bound ADP from the enzyme was not due to slow dissociation but rather to such strong binding of the ADP to the enzyme that very little dissociation occurred even after extensive dialysis . The equilibrium dialysis experiments shown in the first two lines of Table I support the view that ADP is bound very tightly . At the concentrations of ADP and uncoating ATPase used in this experiment , if the dissociation constant of ADP from the enzyme were indeed 2 p ~ as reported by Palleros et al . ( 1991 ) , then 50 % of the ADP should have dissociated from the enzyme . In fact only 4 % of the ADP dissociated over a 30 - h period suggesting that the dissociation constant is less than 0 . 1 p ~ , too strong to be determined accurately by equi - librium dialysis . Rate of Bound ATP Release from the Uncoating ATPase - Even though we were unable to remove bound ADP from the uncoating ATPase during extensive dialysis , we thought that it might be possible to remove bound ATP . This would be the case if the tight binding of ADP were related to the presence of dimers and higher order aggregates of uncoating ATPase , since these would not occur in the presence of ATP which converts all of the uncoating ATPase to monomers . In addi - tion , Palleros et al . ( 1991 ) reported that ATP bound weaker than ADP with the dissociation constant of ATP from the uncoating ATPase equalling 10 pM , & fold greater than the value they reported for the dissociation constant for ADP . Therefore , we repeated the dialysis experiment shown in Fig . 1 with an ATP - regenerating system present ; creatine kinase was added to the dialysis bag and creatine phosphate was present both inside and outside the dialysis bag . Using HPLC , we tested the state of the bound nucleotide in the presence of the ATP - regenerating system and found that more than 80 % was in the form of ATP ( Fig . 2c ) . Surprisingly , however , we were again unable to remove a significant fraction of this bound ATP even after 4 days of dialysis ( data not shown ) . As in the case of ADP , our inability to dissociate ATP from the uncoating ATPase by dialysis is not due to a slow rate of dissociation of the ATP . Using uncoating ATPase with bound [ 14C ] ATP in the presence of the ATP regenerating system , Fig . 4a ( closed triangles ) shows that the half - life for exchange of bound ATP with free ATP is 5 min , only slightly slower than the 3 - min half - life we observed with bound ADP . This suggests that the bound ATP does not dissociate during dialysis , because it is bound very strongly to the enzyme , and the last two lines in Table I confirm this conclusion . If the dissociation constant of ATP to the uncoating ATPase were TABLE I Equilibrium dialysis of bound and free ADP and ATP E , 5 PM UC ATPase with 82 % bound [ 14C ] ADP or - ATP . HK / Glu , 50 units / ml hexokinase and 10 mM glucose . ADP , 5 . 2 pM free [ ' ' CC ] ADP . PK / PC , 30 units / ml creatine kinase and 10 mM creatine phosphate . ATP , 6 . 0 p ~ free [ 14C ] ATP . % of total nucleotide Enzyme side Free side E + HK / Glu 96 4 ADP + HK / Glu 50 50 E + PK / PC 92 8 ATP + PK / PC 52 48 10 pM as reported by Palleros et al . ( 1991 ) , 75 % of the bound ATP should dissociate in this experiment . In fact , we find that only 8 % dissociates suggesting that the dissociation constant is less than 0 . 1 pM , too strong to determine accu - rately by equilibrium dialysis . Note that although creatine kinase is present on both sides of the membrane in this experiment , almost all of the nucleotide remains on the en - zyme side of the membrane showing that , despite the high concentration of creatine kinase , it binds very little nucleo - tide . Number of Nucleotide Binding Sites on the Uncoating ATP - ase - We next investigated the number of nucleotide binding sites present on the uncoating ATPase by equilibrium dialysis . Table I1 ( second line ) shows that the ratio of bound ADP to uncoating ATPase remains below 1 even at a free ADP concentration of 192 pM . This indicates that the uncoating ATPase has only one binding site for ADP . This is not unexpected since a previous study by Schmid et al . ( 1985 ) suggested that , although the uncoating ATPase has two bind - ing sites for nucleotide , a hydrolytic site and a catalytic site ; ADP binds only to the hydrolytic site . On the other hand , they suggested that ATP analogues like AMP - PNP and dATP bind only to the catalytic site . Therefore their model predicts that AMP - PNP and dATP should bind to the catalytic site even in the presence of bound ADP . Contrary to this model , we detected almost no binding of AMP - PNP or dATP at free AMP - PNP or dATP concentrations near 200 WM ( last two lines of Table 11 ) . These data provide no evidence for a second nucleotide binding site on the uncoating ATPase . Further - more , they show that these ATP analogues must bind very weakly to the hydrolytic site where ADP is bound since almost no bound ADP is replaced in the presence of a considerable excess of analogue . To confirm that the uncoating ATPase has only one site for nucleotide , we determined the number of bound nucleo - tides in the presence of free ATP . Table I1 ( third line ) shows the result of equilibrium dialysis of purified uncoating ATPase with excess ATP in an ATP - regenerating system . Under this condition , it would be expected that , if the uncoating ATPase has two sites for ATP , both would be occupied . In fact , the result shows that the binding did not exceed 1 ATP per uncoating ATPase even at a free ATP concentration close to 200 p ~ . Therefore , we find no evidence that the uncoating ATPase has two binding sites for nucleotide . Although it appears that the uncoating ATPase has only one nucleotide binding site , we did find that the amount of ATP bound to the enzyme following equilibrium dialysis varied between 0 . 7 and 1 mol per mol of uncoating ATPase depending on the preparation . Furthermore , we found that the level of bound ATP during equilibrium dialysis in excess ATP was always nearly equal to the level of bound ADP associated with the uncoating ATPase immediately after it TABLE I1 Binding of nucleotide or analogues to UC ATPase determined by equilibrium dialysis Concentration of UC ATPase used was 80 p ~ . ATP - regenerating system was present when ATP was added , and hexokinase / glucose were present in rest of the samples . Nucleotide added Free Bound / UC ATPase PM None 0 0 . 83 ( ADP ) ADP 192 0 . 80 ATP 198 0 . 85 AMP - PNP 190 0 . 06 ( + 0 . 80 ADP ) dATP 200 0 . 00 ( + OB5 ADP ) Uncoating ATPase and Bound Nucleotide 8511 was prepared . Therefore , it seemed likely that a small fraction of the enzyme preparation was becoming irreversibly dena - tured during the preparation procedure . One point where this might occur is during the ammonium sulfate precipitation step . Indeed , Table 111 shows that there is loss of bound nucleotide following ammonium sulfate pre - cipitation , particularly in the absence of free ATP or at low enzyme concentration . The data also indicate that this loss of bound nucleotide is irreversible since the lost nucleotide does not rebind during equilibrium dialysis against excess ATP . These data show that it is possible to denature the uncoating ATPase irreversibly and also suggest that the pos - sible level of denaturation of a particular preparation can be determined by assaying its content of bound ADP immedi - ately after preparation . Nucleotide Bound to the Enzyme during Steady - State ATP Hydrolysis - As we noted above , in the presence of creatine kinase and creatine phosphate , almost all of the bound ADP on the enzyme is converted to bound ATP ( Fig . 2c ) . This suggests that the slowest step in the ATPase cycle is the ATP hydrolysis step . In fact , comparison of the half - life of ADP release measured in the exchange experiments ( Fig . 4 ) with that of steady - state ATP hydrolysis at 25 " C ( 20 min , Gao et al . ( 1992 ) ) shows that the rate of ADP release is about six times faster than the overall rate of ATP hydrolysis . If the same rate of ADP release occurs during the steady - state ATPase cycle as in these exchange experiments and ATP hydrolysis is , indeed the rate - limiting step , about 85 % of the bound nucleotide should be in the form of ATP and 15 % should be in the form of ADP during the steady - state ATPase cycle . Fig . 5 shows that this is indeed what we observed . In the presence of creatine kinase and creatine phosphate , when the system reached steady - state , 15 % of the bound nucleotide present was ADP and 85 % was ATP . As expected , the rate at which steady - state was reached is identical to the rate of ADP release from the uncoating ATPase determined from the exchange experiments in Fig . 4 both at 25 " C ( Fig . 5a ) and 4 " C ( Fig . 56 ) . The occurrence of ADP at steady - state was not due to inadequate rates of ATP regeneration since increasing the creatine kinase concentration 6 - fold had no effect ( Fig . 5a , closed triangles uersus closed circles ) . To be certain that the 15 % ADP present in this system was bound to the uncoating ATPase and not free in solution or bound to creatine kinase , we added 1 mM free ATP to the steady - state system ( indicated by the arrow , Fig . 5a ) . As expected , all of the bound [ 14C ] ADP exchanged with free ATP and was then converted to [ 14C ] ATP by the ATP - regenerating system . TABLE I11 Effect of ammonium sulfate precipitation on bound nucleotide Purified uncoating ATPase with 0 . 85 bound ADP per enzyme molecule was precipitated with ammonium sulfate and resuspended in buffer A at protein concentration of about 10 p ~ and dialyzed in the same buffer for 20 h at 4 " C . Nucleotide contents of the samples were determined by HPLC . Equilibrium dialysis was performed in the presence of 10 pM free [ I4C ] ATP and the ATP - regenerating system . Conditions Nucleotide bound / UC ATPase UC ATPase ATP After dialysis $ ~ y ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ! WM mM 10 " 0 0 . 80 10 0 0 . 82 0 . 45 10 0 . 47 1 1 1 0 . 72 0 . 76 0 . 66 0 . 63 a Sample was not precipitated . 100 a 100 l b 0 120 240 360 480 Time ( rnin ) FIG . 5 . Nucleotide bound to uncoating ATPase during steady - state ATP hydrolysis . a , 10 p ~ uncoating ATPase with 8 . 5 pM bound [ " CIADP was incubated with 30 units / ml ( 0 , 0 , A ) or 5 units / rnl ( A ) creatine kinase and 10 mM creatine phosphate at 25 " C . The nucleotide content of the reaction mixture was determined by HPLC peak integration ( 0 , A , A ) or by scintillation counting of collected peaks ( 0 ) . A , 1 mM NaH , PO , was added to determine the effect of inorganic phosphate on the conversion . b , same as 0 in a , except that the temperature was 4 " C . Earlier observations had indicated that ADP and inorganic phosphate together inhibit uncoating of clathrin - coated vesi - cles by uncoating ATPase more than just ADP itself ( Greene and Eisenberg , 1990 ) suggesting that inorganic phosphate may slow the rate of ADP release from the enzyme . We therefore tested the state of the enzyme - bound nucleotide in the presence of excess inorganic phosphate . Under the exper - imental condition described above , if the presence of free inorganic phosphate inhibits the rate of product release from the enzyme , the level of ADP bound to the enzyme should increase , while the rate of ADP release should decrease . Fig . 5a ( open triangles ) shows that with inorganic phosphate pres - ent this is exactly what occurs . The rate of bound ADP release decreased by a factor of 2 , while the amount of ADP bound to the enzyme during steady - state ATP hydrolysis increased from 15 to 30 % . DISCUSSION In 1985 Schmid et al . proposed a detailed model for the action of the uncoating ATPase which suggested that the uncoating ATPase has two nucleotide binding sites , a hydro - lytic site which is specific for ATP and ADP and a catalytic site which binds both ATP and ATP analogues but not ADP . This proposal was based on two observations : first , that although ATP is required for the uncoating reaction , the binding of ATP analogues such as AMP - PNP or dATP facil - itated the binding of clathrin to the uncoating ATPase , and second , a 40 - fold excess of dATP over ATP did not inhibit the uncoating reaction . The model of Schmid et al . ( 1985 ) predicts that ATP should bind to the uncoating ATPase with a stoichiometry of 2 to 1 . To test this proposal , they carried out direct binding studies but they observed only 0 . 4 mol of ATP bound per mol of uncoating ATPase , possibly because their uncoating ATPase as it was normally prepared already contained about 0 . 7 mol of nucleotide bound per mol of uncoating ATPase , two - thirds of which was ADP and one - third ATP . 8512 Uncoating ATPase and Bound Nucleotide In the present study we reinvestigated the binding of nu - cleotide to the uncoating ATPase . We first found that , as it is normally prepared , the uncoating ATPase contains approx - imately 1 bound ADP per uncoating ATPase molecule which could not be removed by extensive dialysis . This was the case whether or not the bound ADP was converted to ATP by the presence of an ATP - regenerating system . The fact that the uncoating ATPase preparation retains a bound nucleotide even after dialysis could be due either to the nucleotide binding very strongly to the enzyme or to the nucleotide binding more weakly but dissociating very slowly just as ADP dissociates very slowly from F - actin . The latter possibility is intriguing , because the uncoating ATPase has been reported to be similar in structure to actin ( Flaherty et al . , 1991 ; Bork et al . , 1992 ) . In addition , there has been a report that the dissociation constants of both ADP and ATP from the uncoating ATPase are in the micromolar range ( Palleros et al . , 1991 ) which should allow the bound nucleotide to easily dissociate during extensive dialysis . How - ever , we found that both the ATP and ADP bound to the uncoating ATPase exchanged very rapidly with free nucleo - tide . Therefore , it seems likely that the bound nucleotide cannot be removed by extensive dialysis , because it is bound very strongly to the enzyme . In confirmation of this view our equilibrium dialysis experiments suggested that the dissocia - tion constants for ADP and ATP are less than 0 . 1 p ~ , too strong to measure directly by equilibrium dialysis . Therefore , we conclude that the binding of both ADP and ATP to the uncoating ATPase is so strong that it prevents the bound nucleotide from being removed by dialysis . Our observation that not only ATP but also ADP bind very strongly to the uncoating ATPase may be related to the unusual affinity of the 70 - kDa proteins for ATP - agarose columns ; even if the ATP linked to the column is hydrolyzed to ADP , the enzyme will remain strongly bound . Equilibrium dialysis experiments in which we added free nucleotide to the uncoating ATPase preparation showed that even at ADP or ATP concentrations as high as 200 p ~ there was still only 1 nucleotide bound per uncoating ATPase molecule . Furthermore the nucleotide analogues , AMP - PNP and dATP , at concentrations up to 200 p ~ did not bind to uncoating ATPase which already contained a bound ADP . These data strongly suggest that the uncoating ATPase has only one site for nucleotide . In agreement with this finding , a recent report by Wang and Chirico ( 1991 ) using affinity labeling suggested that the yeast constitutive hsp70s only have a single nucleotide binding site . The data of Schmid et al . ( 1985 ) suggesting that nucleotide analogues facilitate clathrin binding but not the uncoating reaction may be due to differential effects of ATP and the nucleotide analogues even when they bind to the same site . Unlike ATP , the nucleotide analogues are not hydrolyzed by the uncoating ATPase . In addition , we now have preliminary evidence that the nucleotide analogues AMP - PNP and dATP bind to the same site as ATP but about 2 to 3 orders of magnitude more weakly ( Gao et al . , 1992 ) . It would therefore not be surprising if ATP is required for uncoating , while both ATP and the ATP analogues can facilitate the binding of clathrin to the uncoating ATPase . Although our equilibrium dialysis data suggest that the uncoating ATPase has one nucleotide binding site , we , in fact , observed that , depending on the preparation , bound ATP or ADP varies from 0 . 7 to 1 mol per mol of uncoating ATPase in the presence of excess nucleotide . The amount of nucleotide which bound during equilibrium dialysis in excess nucleotide was , in all cases almost identical to the amount of ADP initially bound to the enzyme immediately after preparation . These data suggest that it is possible to denature the uncoat - ing ATPase during its preparation , possibly during the am - monium sulfate precipitation step . Our results suggest that one way to detect this denaturation is to determine the amount of bound ADP present initially ; if the amount is low , denaturation of the enzyme is a possibility . One way to rule out this denaturation is by directly measuring the stoichiom - etry of nucleotide binding using equilibrium dialysis . Our experiments on the state of the nucleotide bound to the uncoating ATPase in the presence of an ATP - regenerat - ing system showed that at steady - state , 85 % is present as bound ATP and 15 % is present as bound ADP . In these experiments we took advantage of the fact that the uncoating ATPase binds ATP strongly and at the same time hydrolyses it slowly , while the creatine kinase / creatine phosphate ATP - regenerating system binds nucleotide relatively weakly but turns over orders of magnitude more rapidly than the uncoat - ing ATPase . Interestingly , our observation that 15 % of the bound nucleotide is ADP correlates with the rate of ADP release from the enzyme as determined from both bound nucleotide exchange experiments and from the rate at which the ATP - regenerating system converts bound ADP to ATP . The rate of the bound ADP release is six times faster than the overall ATP hydrolysis rate . On this basis the following simple model can be proposed for the hydrolysis of ATP by the uncoating ATPase where kl is the rate of ATP hydrolysis and & is the rate of product release . Since kz is six times faster than kl , this model predicts that , during steady - state ATP hydrolysis , about 15 % of the enzyme will be in the form of E . ADP , while 85 % of the enzyme will be in the form of E . ATP just as we observed experimentally . When free inorganic phosphate is present , our data shows that kz is reduced by 50 % . Therefore , our model predicts that in the presence of inorganic phosphate the amount of E . ADP will increase from 15 to 30 % of the total enzyme just as we observe experimen - tally . Although we find quantitative agreement between the level of bound ADP observed during steady - state ATP hydrolysis and the rates of ATP hydrolysis and ADP release , it is possible that both the overall ATPase rate and the rate of product release during the ATPase cycle may be slower than our measurements indicate . A small amount of contaminant ATP - ase activity could make our measurement of the overall rate of ATP hydrolysis too high . Likewise , it is only an assumption that the rate of product release during steady - state ATP hydrolysis is equal to the measured rate of bound ADP release from the enzyme . The fact that we cannot yet be certain of the rate constants of individual steps in the ATPase cycle does not affect our experimental observation that most of the nucleotide bound to the enzyme during steady - state ATP hydrolysis is ATP . Very recently , there has been a report that the most of the bound nucleotide is ADP based on the observation that the rate of ADP release and the overall ATPase rates were similar ( Sadis and Hightower , 1992 ) . Since this experiment was per - formed at 37 " C , we repeated our observations at this temper - ature and once again found that 85 % of the bound nucleotide was ATP . Furthermore , in preliminary experiments we have found that when the enzyme is mixed with excess ATP and then isolated on a column as an enzyme - nucleotide complex , almost all of the bound nucleotide is ATP . Braell et al . ( 1984 ) have made a similar observation . In conclusion , we find that uncoating ATPase has a single nucleotide binding site . As the uncoating ATPase is normally prepared , this site contains a strongly bound ADP molecule Uncoating ATPase and Bound Nucleotide 8513 which cannot be removed by dialysis but exchanges rapidly with free ADP . During steady - state ATP hydrolysis most of the nucleotide bound to this site is in the form of ATP and only a small amount is in the form of ADP . The ratio of ATP to ADP during steady - state ATP hydrolysis appears to be due to the relative rates of the hydrolytic step and the product release step . REFERENCES Beckmann , R . P . , Mizzen , L . A . , and Welch , W . J . ( 1990 ) Science 248 , 850 - 854 Bole , D . G . , Hendershot , L . M . , and Kearney , J . F . ( 1986 ) J . Cell Bid 102 , 1558 - 1566 Bork , P . , Sander , C . , and Valencia , A . ( 1992 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 89 , Braell , W . A . , Schlossman , D . M . , Schmid , S . L . , and Rothman , J . E . ( 1984 ) J . Chirico , W . J . , Waters , M . G . , and Blobel , G . ( 1988 ) Nature 332 , 805 - 810 Craig , E . A . ( 1985 ) Crit . Reu . Biochern . 18 , 239 - 280 7290 - 7294 CeU BWL 99 , 734 - 741 Deshaies . R . J . . Koch . B . D . , Werner - Washburne , M . , Craig . E . A , , and Schek - we 332 800 - 805 BY . D . d . . Kabsch . W . . and Holmes . K . C . ( 1991 ) P m . Flaheky k . M Mckr man R . 1988 ) NatL Flynn G . C . Cha pel1 T G . , and Rothman J . E . ( 1989 ) Science 246 , 385 - 390 Natl . hcad . d i . U . S . - A . 88 , 5041 - 5045 ' Gao h . , Biosca f Crh ; E . A . , Greene , L . I ? . , and Eisenberg , E . ( 1991 ) J . Biol . Chern . 266 , i9 $ 65 - & 71 Gao B . Elsenbe ? E . , and Greene L . E . ( 1992 ) Mol . BWl . CeU 3 , 58a GrAne ' L . E . an Elsenber E lb90 ) J . BWL Chem . 266 , 6682 - 6687 Korn I & D . ( i982 ) PhysWL % eu : & 2 672 - 727 Lindiuist S . 1986 ) Annu . Reu . B & hern . 66 , 1151 - 1191 Nover , L . : an6 Scharf , K . - D . ( 1991 Heat Shock Response ( Nover , L . , ed ) pp . . . 41 - 177 . CRi ! Press Rorn Ratnn bT . Palleros . " " . , " " - " " , " " ~ , - - D , - R . / W & h , _ W . J . , and Fink , A . L . ( 1991 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . Sadis S . and Hi htower L . E . ( 1992 ) Biochemistry 31 , 9406 - 9412 Sch $ nm ; nbg . fiz S : h $ d , S . L . , Braell , W . A . , amd Rothman , J . E . ( 1984 ) J . u . s . A . BB , SYIY - S ' UY sc Tc Vanbusk Chem . : hmid , S . L . , Braell , W . A . , and Rothman , J . E . ( 1985 ) J . BWL Chern 260 , ? rlecky , S . R . , Chian H . - L . , Olson , T . S . , and Dice , J . F . ( 1992 ) J . Biol . 10057 - 10062 irk , & & . ~ mp ~ B . L . , Margoliash , E . , and Pierce , S . K . ( 1989 ) J . Exp . 267 9202 - 928b US ' I uIv * mw , , * u - , uu Wang N . M . and Chirico W . J . ( 1991 ) J . Cell BWl . 116 255a Wern & Washburne , M . , Stone , D . E . , and Craig , E . A . ( 1987 ) Mol . CeU Biol . 7 , Med . 17U , 17YY - lWY 2568 - 2577