Special issue : Review Conceptual representations in mind and brain : Theoretical developments , current evidence and future directions Markus Kiefer a , * and Friedemann Pulvermu¨ller b a University of Ulm , Department of Psychiatry , Ulm , Germany b Medical Research Council , Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit , Cambridge , UK a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 5 August 2010 Reviewed 29 November 2010 Revised 18 February 2011 Accepted 4 April 2011 Published online 30 April 2011 Keywords : Semantic memory Language Grounded cognition Brain - damaged patients Neuroimaging a b s t r a c t Conceptual representations in long - term memory crucially contribute to perception and action , language and thought . However , the precise nature of these conceptual memory traces is discussed controversially . In particular , the grounding of concepts in the sensory and motor brain systems is the focus of a current debate . Here , we review theoretical accounts of the structure and neural basis of conceptual memory and evaluate them in light of recent empirical evidence . Models of conceptual processing can be distinguished along four dimensions : ( i ) amodal versus modality - speciﬁc , ( ii ) localist versus distributed , ( iii ) innate versus experience - dependent , and ( iv ) stable versus ﬂexible . A systematic review of behavioral and neuroimaging studies in healthy participants along with brain - damaged patients will then be used to evaluate the competing theoretical approaches to conceptual representations . These ﬁndings indicate that concepts are ﬂexible , distributed representations comprised of modality - speciﬁc conceptual features . Conceptual features are stored in distinct sensory and motor brain areas depending on speciﬁc sensory and motor experiences during concept acquisition . Three important controversial issues are highlighted , which require further clariﬁcation in future research : the existence of an amodal conceptual representation in the anterior temporal lobe , the causal role of sensory and motor activation for conceptual processing and the grounding of abstract concepts in perception and action . We argue that an embodiment view of conceptual representations realized as distributed sensory and motor cell assemblies that are complemented by supramodal integration brain circuits may serve as a theoretical framework to guide future research on concrete and abstract concepts . ª 2011 Elsevier Srl . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Concepts held in semantic long - term memory are important building blocks of human cognition . They are the basis for object recognition , action planning , language , and thought , because they constitute the meaning of objects , events and abstract ideas ( Humphreys et al . , 1988 ; Levelt et al . , 1999 ) . Concepts have a central role in information processing * Corresponding author . University of Ulm , Department of Psychiatry , Section for Cognitive Electrophysiology , Leimgrubenweg 12 , 89075 Ulm , Germany . E - mail address : Markus . Kiefer @ uni - ulm . de ( M . Kiefer ) . URL : http : / / www . uni - ulm . de / ~ mkiefer / Available online at www . sciencedirect . com Journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / cortex cortex 48 ( 2012 ) 805 e 825 0010 - 9452 / $ e see front matter ª 2011 Elsevier Srl . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cortex . 2011 . 04 . 006