© 2005 Nature Publishing Group Superspreading and the effect of individual variation on disease emergence J . O . Lloyd - Smith 1 , 2 , S . J . Schreiber 3 , P . E . Kopp 4 & W . M . Getz 1 Population - level analyses often use average quantities to describe heterogeneous systems , particularly when variation does not arise from identiﬁable groups 1 , 2 . A prominent example , central to our current understanding of epidemic spread , is the basic repro - ductive number , R 0 , which is deﬁned as the mean number of infections caused by an infected individual in a susceptible population 3 , 4 . Population estimates of R 0 can obscure consider - able individual variation in infectiousness , as highlighted during the global emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) by numerous ‘superspreading events’ in which certain individuals infected unusually large numbers of secondary cases 5 – 10 . For diseases transmitted by non - sexual direct contacts , such as SARS or smallpox , individual variation is difﬁcult to measure empiri - cally , and thus its importance for outbreak dynamics has been unclear 2 , 10 , 11 . Here we present an integrated theoretical and statistical analysis of the inﬂuence of individual variation in infectiousness on disease emergence . Using contact tracing data from eight directly transmitted diseases , we show that the distri - bution of individual infectiousness around R 0 is often highly skewed . Model predictions accounting for this variation differ sharply from average - based approaches , with disease extinction more likely and outbreaks rarer but more explosive . Using these models , we explore implications for outbreak control , showing that individual - speciﬁc control measures outperform population - wide measures . Moreover , the dramatic improvements achieved through targeted control policies emphasize the need to identify predictive correlates of higher infectiousness . Our ﬁndings indi - cate that superspreading is a normal feature of disease spread , and to frame ongoing discussion we propose a rigorous deﬁnition for superspreading events and a method to predict their frequency . For sexually transmitted and vector - borne diseases , host contact rates have long served as surrogates for individual infectious - ness 3 , 12 – 14 , leading to the assertion of a general ‘20 / 80 rule’ ( whereby 20 % of cases cause 80 % of transmission 13 ) and to the inﬂuential concept of high - risk ‘core groups’ 3 , 12 , 13 . For directly transmitted infections , however , the overall infectiousness of each case—that is , the number of other individuals infected during the infectious lifetime of a single individual—arises from a complex mixture of host , pathogen and environmental factors ( see Supplementary Notes ) . Consequently , the degree of infectiousness is distributed continuously in any population 4 , 7 , 11 , 15 , 16 and , crucially , distinct risk groups often cannot be deﬁned a priori 2 , 11 . This impedes the conventional approach to adding heterogeneity to epidemic models , in which populations are divided into homogeneous subgroups 2 – 4 , 17 . Research on continuous individual variation in infectiousness for directly transmitted infections has been largely restricted to within - household transmission 18 , 19 , or to variation in infectious period 20 , 21 or social network 22 . Some recent studies have used contact tracing data to investigate speciﬁc questions in light of observed variation 8 , 16 , but a broad understanding of the role of individual variation in outbreak dynamics is lacking . As a theoretical basis , we introduce the ‘individual reproductive number’ , n , as a random variable representing the expected number of secondary cases caused by a particular infected individual . Values for n are drawn from a continuous probability distribution with population mean R 0 that encodes all variation in infectious histories of individuals , including properties of the host and patho - gen and environmental circumstances . In this framework , super - spreading events ( SSEs ) are not exceptional events 9 , but important realizations from the right - hand tail of a distribution of n ( refs 7 , 15 ) . Stochastic effects in transmission are modelled using a Poisson process 4 , so that the number of secondary infections caused by each case , Z , is described by an ‘offspring distribution’ Pr ( Z ¼ k ) where Z , Poisson ( n ) . By considering three possible distributions of n , we generate three candidate models for the offspring distribution : ( 1 ) in generation - based models neglecting individual variation , n ¼ R 0 for all cases , yielding Z , Poisson ( R 0 ) ; ( 2 ) in differential - equation models with homogeneous transmission and constant recovery rates , n is expo - nentially distributed , yielding Z , geometric ( R 0 ) ; ( 3 ) in a more general formulation , we let n be gamma - distributed with mean R 0 and dispersion parameter k , yielding Z , negative binomial ( R 0 , k ) ( ref . 23 ) . The negative binomial model includes the conventional Poisson ( k ! 1 ) and geometric ( k ¼ 1 ) models as special cases . It has variance R 0 ( 1 þ R 0 / k ) , so smaller values of k indicate greater heterogeneity . We gathered empirical offspring distributions from detailed con - tact tracing or surveillance data sets , and challenged the candidate models using model selection techniques 24 ( see Supplementary Notes ) . For SARS outbreaks in Singapore and Beijing , the negative binomial model is unequivocally favoured ( Fig . 1a and Supplemen - tary Table 1 ) . Conventional models assuming homogeneity cannot reproduce the observed transmission patterns . For the Singapore outbreak , the maximum - likelihood estimate ^ k is 0 . 16 ( 90 % conﬁ - dence interval 0 . 11 – 0 . 64 ) , indicating an underlying distribution of n that is highly overdispersed ( Fig . 1a , inset ) . According to this analysis , the great majority of SARS cases in Singapore were barely infectious ( 73 % had n , 1 ) but a small proportion were highly infectious ( 6 % had n . 8 ) . This is consistent with ﬁeld reports from SARS - afﬂicted regions 5 , 6 but contrasts with published SARS models 9 , 10 , 25 , 26 . Comparing results for eight directly transmitted infections reveals the differing degree of individual variation among diseases and outbreak settings ( Fig . 1b , c and Supplementary Tables 1 , 2 ) . The Poisson offspring distribution is almost always strongly rejected . The geometric model has considerable support for several data sets , which indicates signiﬁcant individual variation in transmission LETTERS 1 Department of Environmental Science , Policy and Management , 140 Mulford Hall , University of California , Berkeley , California 94720 - 3114 , USA . 2 Biophysics Graduate Group , University of California , Berkeley , California 94720 - 3200 , USA . 3 Department of Mathematics , The College of William and Mary , Williamsburg , Virginia 23187 - 8975 , USA . 4 Centre for Mathematics , University of Hull , Hull HU6 7RX , UK . Vol 438 | 17 November 2005 | doi : 10 . 1038 / nature04153 355 © 2005 Nature Publishing Group rates because real infectious periods are less dispersed than the exponential distribution 20 , 21 . The negative binomial model is selected decisively for several data sets , and enables comparative study of diseases through the dispersion parameter . Like SARS , measles in highly vaccinated populations shows high variation in two surveillance data sets , with narrow conﬁdence intervals excluding the conventional models ( note that heterogeneous vaccination cover - age is an important environmental factor contributing to this pattern ) . Monkeypox and smallpox viruses show intermediate variation , consistent across multiple data sets , and pneumonic plague transmission is slightly less variable . Data limitations prevent deﬁnitive conclusions for other diseases . Comparing our ﬁndings to the 20 / 80 rule proposed for sexually transmitted and vector - borne diseases 13 , no general rule emerges but the core principle of hetero - geneous transmission is certainly supported ( Fig . 1c ) . Numerous reports of superspreading events provide further evi - dence for variation in n . We reviewed 37 published accounts of SSEs for 11 directly transmitted infections ( Fig . 1d ; see Supplementary Notes ) . Unrecognized or misdiagnosed illness is the most common cause of these SSEs , followed by alternative modes of spread ( especially airborne ) , high contact rates , and co - infections that aid transmission . High pathogen load or shedding rates are occasionally implicated , but are rarely measured . A consistent and general deﬁnition of SSEs is currently lacking—for SARS , an SSE has been arbitrarily deﬁned as Z $ 8 ( ref . 6 ) , Z $ 10 ( ref . 5 ) , Z . 10 ( ref . 26 ) or ‘many more than the average number’ 9 , and different thresholds are surely needed for measles ( R 0 , 11 – 18 ; ref . 3 ) or monkeypox ( R 0 , 1 ) . We propose this general protocol for deﬁning a superspreading event : ( 1 ) estimate the effective reproductive number , R , for the disease and population in question ; ( 2 ) construct a Poisson distri - bution with mean R , representing the expected range of Z due to stochasticity without individual variation ; ( 3 ) deﬁne an SSE as any infected individual who infects more than Z ( n ) others , where Z ( n ) is the n th percentile of the Poisson ( R ) distribution . A 99th - percentile SSE is then any case causing more infections than would occur in 99 % of infectious histories in a homogeneous population ( Fig . 1d ) . This approach complements a priori identiﬁcation of potential superspreaders when that is feasible , as for sexually transmitted diseases ( where promiscuity drives risk ) 3 , 12 . In addition , the deﬁ - nition enables prediction of the frequency of SSEs once R 0 and k have been estimated ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) —an outstanding challenge in emerging disease epidemiology 8 , 9 . To assess the effect of individual variation on disease outbreaks , we analyse a branching process model with negative binomial offspring distribution , corresponding to gamma - distributed n ( Fig . 2a ; see Supplementary Notes ) . Of primary interest is the probability of stochastic extinction , q , after the introduction of a single infected Figure 1 | Evidence for variation in individual reproductive number n . a , Transmission data from the SARS outbreak in Singapore in 2003 ( ref . 5 ) . Bars show observed frequency of Z , the number of individuals infected by each case . Lines show maximum - likelihood ﬁts for Z , Poisson ( squares ) , Z , geometric ( triangles ) , and Z , negative binomial ( circles ) . Inset , probability density function ( solid ) and cumulative distribution function ( dashed ) for gamma - distributed n ( corresponding to Z , negative binomial ) estimated from Singapore SARS data . b , Expected proportion of all transmission due to a given proportion of infectious cases , where cases are ranked by infectiousness . For a homogeneous population ( all n ¼ R 0 ) , this relation is linear . For ﬁve directly transmitted infections ( based on ^ k values in Supplementary Table 1 ) , the line is concave owing to variation in n . c , Proportionoftransmissionexpectedfromthemostinfectious20 % of cases , for10outbreakorsurveillancedatasets ( triangles ) . Dashedlinesshow proportions expected under the 20 / 80 rule ( top ) and homogeneity ( bottom ) . Superscript ‘v’ indicates a partially vaccinated population . d , Reported superspreading events ( SSEs ; diamonds ) relative to estimated reproductive number R ( squares ) for twelve directly transmitted infections . Lines show 5 – 95 percentile range of Z , Poisson ( R ) , and crosses show the 99th - percentile proposed as threshold for SSEs . Stars represent SSEs caused by morethanonesourcecase . ‘Other’diseasesare : 1 , Streptococcusgroup A ; 2 , Lassa fever ; 3 , Mycoplasma pneumonia ; 4 , pneumonic plague ; 5 , tuberculosis . R is not shown for ‘other’ diseases , and is off - scale for monkeypox . See Supplementary Notes for details . LETTERS NATURE | Vol 438 | 17 November 2005 356 © 2005 Nature Publishing Group individual ( Fig . 2b ) . For R 0 , 1 , all invasions die out , as in standard models . For R 0 . 1 , increased variation strongly favours extinction 8 . For example , if R 0 ¼ 3 then q ¼ 0 . 06 under the assumption of homogeneous n ( k ! 1 ) , or q ¼ 0 . 33 if k ¼ 1 , but if k ¼ 0 . 16 ( as estimated for SARS ) then q ¼ 0 . 76 . Extinction risk rises owing to a higher proportion of non - transmitting cases when n is overdispersed ( Figs 1a , 2a and Supplementary Fig . 2a ) . This effect thwarts invasion by diseases that are very potent spreaders on average : for arbitrarily high R 0 , q ! 1 as k ! 0 ( Supplementary Fig . 2b ) . The expected number of cases before extinction is hardly affected by k ( Sup - plementary Fig . 2c ) , because low - k outbreaks that fail probably lacked SSEs and thus resemble homogeneous outbreaks with lower R 0 . Accordingly , when individual variation is large , extinction occurs rapidly or not at all ( Supplementary Fig . 2d ) . For outbreaks avoiding stochastic extinction , epidemic growth rates strongly depend on variation in n ( Fig . 2c and Supplementary Fig . 2e , f ) . Diseases with high individual variation show infrequent but explosive epidemics after introduction of a single case . This pattern recalls SARS in 2003 , for which many settings experienced no epidemic despite unprotected exposure to SARS cases 27 , 28 , whereas a few cities suffered explosive outbreaks 8 – 10 , 15 , 26 . Our results , using ^ k ¼ 0 : 16 for SARS , explain this simply by the presence or absence of high - n individuals in the early generations of each out - break 6 . In contrast , conventional models ( with k ¼ 1 or k ! 1 ) cannot simultaneously generate frequent failed invasions and rapid growth rates without additional , subjective model structure . Disease control interventions could increase or decrease individual variation in infectiousness . Infected individuals might reduce their number of non - essential contacts , or governments might impose quarantine or isolation on particular individuals . Here we explore Figure 2 | Outbreak dynamics with different degrees of individual variation ininfectiousness . a , The individual reproductive number n is drawn from a gamma distribution with mean R 0 and dispersion parameter k . Probability density functions are shown for six gamma distributions with R 0 ¼ 1 . 5 ( ‘ k ¼ Inf’ indicates k ! 1 ) . b , Probability of stochastic extinction of an outbreak , q , versus population - average reproductive number , R 0 , following introduction of a single infected individual . The value of k increases from top to bottom ( values and colours as in a ) . c , Growth of simulated outbreaks with R 0 ¼ 1 . 5 and one initial case , conditional on non - extinction . Boxes show median and interquartile range ( IQR ) of the ﬁrst disease generation with 100 cases ; whiskers show most extreme values within 1 . 5 £ IQR of the boxes , and crosses show outliers . Percentages show the proportion of 10 , 000 simulated outbreaks that reached the 100 - case threshold ( roughly 1 2 q ) . Figure 3 | Implications for control measures . a , Increase in extinction probability ( q ind 2 q pop ) under individual - speciﬁc control compared to population - wide control , for diseases with R 0 ¼ 3 and different degrees of individual variation , k , subject to control effort c . With population - wide control , the infectiousness of all individuals is reduced by a factor c . With individual - speciﬁc control , a proportion c of infectious individuals ( selected at random ) have their infectiousness reduced to zero . The outbreak is assumed to begin with one case , with control present from the outset . b , Estimates of ^ R and ^ k from outbreak data sets before and after control measures were initiated ( joined by solid lines ; Supplementary Table 2 ) , and post - control values of k c estimated from theoretical models of control as described in the Supplementary Notes . c , Effect of random versus targeted control measures . The probability of outbreak containment ( deﬁned as never reaching the 100 - case threshold ) for four diseases with R 0 ¼ 3 and k ¼ 0 . 1 ( blue ) , k ¼ 0 . 5 ( green ) , k ¼ 1 ( black ) or k ! 1 ( purple ) . Control policies are population - wide ( solid lines ) , random individual - speciﬁc ( dotted lines ) , or targeted individual - speciﬁc ( dashed lines , where half of all control effort is focused on the most infectious 20 % of cases ) . For k ! 1 , all individuals are identical , so targeting has no effect and dotted and dashed lines overlay one another . d , The factor by which targeting increases the effect of control on preventing a major outbreak , relative to random individual - speciﬁc control ( see Supplementary Notes ) , when 20 % , 40 % or 60 % of the total population is controlled . Results in c and d are the mean of 10 , 000 simulations , with control beginning in the second generation of cases . NATURE | Vol 438 | 17 November 2005 LETTERS 357 © 2005 Nature Publishing Group several idealized cases theoretically , for an outbreak with offspring distribution Z , negative binomial ( R 0 , k ) before control ( see Sup - plementary Notes ) . Consider the effect of control effort c , where c ¼ 0 reﬂects no control and c ¼ 1 reﬂects complete blockage of transmission . Under population - wide control , the infectiousness of every individual in the population is reduced by a factor c ( that is , n pop c ¼ ð 1 2 c Þ n for all individuals ) . Under random , individual - speciﬁc control , a proportion c of infected individuals ( chosen at random ) is traced and isolated completely such that they cause zero infections ( that is n ind c ¼ 0 for a proportion c of infected individuals , and n ind c ¼ n for the rest ) . Individual - speciﬁc control raises the degree of heterogeneity in the outbreak as measured by the variance - to - mean ratio of Z , whereas population - wide control reduces hetero - geneity . Both approaches yield effective reproductive number R ¼ ( 1 2 c ) R 0 , so the threshold control effort for guaranteed disease extinction is c $ 1 2 1 / R 0 as in conventional models . For inter - mediate values of c , however , the individual - speciﬁc approach always works better ( Fig . 3a and Supplementary Fig . 3a , b ) , consistent with our ﬁnding that higher variation favours disease extinction ( Fig . 2b ) . Branching process theory conﬁrms that q ind . q pop whenever c [ ( 0 , 1 2 1 / R 0 ) ( see Supplementary Notes ) . To assess the realism of these idealized control scenarios , we analysed contact tracing data from four outbreaks before and after imposition of control measures . Control always lowered the esti - mated dispersion parameter ( that is ^ k c , ^ k ) as predicted by the individual - speciﬁc model ( Fig . 3b ) , although small sample sizes often led to overlapping conﬁdence intervals ( Supplementary Table 2 ) . This increased skew in transmission arose chieﬂy from undiagnosed or misdiagnosed individuals , who continued to infect others ( and even cause SSEs ) , whereas controlled individuals infected very few . To further examine our control theories , we calculated k pop c and k ind c for each data set ; ^ k c was always closer to k ind c , although twice it fell between the two predictions , indicating a possible combination of control mechanisms ( Fig . 3b ) . Real - world control thus seems to increase individual variation , favouring extinction but risking ongoing SSEs . Larger data sets are needed to establish this pattern deﬁnitively . If highly infectious individuals can be identiﬁed predictively ( see Supplementary Notes ) then the efﬁciency of control could be greatly increased ( Fig . 3c , d ) . Focusing half of all control effort on the most infectious 20 % of cases is up to threefold more effective than random control ( Fig . 3d ) . When k ¼ 0 . 1 or 0 . 5 , outbreak containment is assured for targeted control levels at roughly half the threshold level of c ¼ 1 2 1 / R 0 for random control . Gains in efﬁciency increase with more intense targeting of high - n cases , but saturate as overall cover - age c increases ( Supplementary Fig . 3c , d ) . Again , branching process theory generalizes these ﬁndings : for a given proportion c of individuals controlled , greater targeting of higher - n individuals leads to lower effective reproductive number R and higher extinction probability q ( see Supplementary Notes ) . The data sets analysed here were collected from published litera - ture , and may be subject to selection bias for successful invasions and SSEs rather than typical disease behaviour . Surveillance data sets are less vulnerable to this bias , but may under - report isolated cases . We urge that detailed transmission tracing data be collected and made public whenever possible , even if unexceptional . At a minimum , we propose a new measure for inclusion in outbreak reports : the proportion of cases not transmitting ( p 0 ) , which , together with R 0 is sufﬁcient to estimate the degree of variation in n ( Supplementary Fig . 4 ) . As more data become available , trends may emerge in the degree of variation present , for example , for different modes of spread or levels of virulence . Richer data sets may also enable testing of the branching process assumption that case outcomes are inde - pendent and identically distributed , by detecting possible corre - lations in n values within transmission lineages or systematic changes as outbreaks progress . Our results have broad implications for emerging disease epidemiology , and open challenges for further work . Explosive epidemics demand rapid action by authorities and can strain health infrastructures . High extinction probabilities indicate that disease introductions or host species jumps may be more frequent than currently suspected . Cluster - size surveillance for pathogen adap - tation 29 or dwindling population immunity 30 should be tuned to observed levels of variation . Realization of targeted control measures requires a better understanding of factors determining individual infectiousness . This work must be integrated with established theory of sexually transmitted diseases and social networks , where high - risk groups exert nonlinear inﬂuence on R 0 because contact rates affect infectiousness and susceptibility equally 3 , 4 , 12 , 13 , 22 . All diseases probably show intermediate degrees of covariation between infec - tiousness and susceptibility , a topic demanding empirical and theo - retical study 17 . The central role of R 0 in epidemic analysis is unassailable , but our ﬁndings show that emerging disease outbreaks cannot be fully understood if individual variation in infectiousness is neglected . Examination of other population processes dependent on small numbers of individuals may yield similar insights . METHODS Analysis of disease data . For data sets including the full distribution of Z , we estimated ^ R 0 and ^ k using maximum - likelihood methods . The candidate models were compared using Akaike’s information criterion ( AIC c ) modiﬁed for small sample size . Conﬁdence intervals for ^ k were estimated by bias - corrected non - parametricbootstrapping andcorroboratedbyfourothermethods . Fordatasets including onlyestimates of ^ R 0 and the proportion of cases not transmitting ( ^ p 0 ) , we estimated ^ k by solving ^ p 0 ¼ ð 1 þ ^ R 0 = k Þ 2 k numerically , and evaluated the candidate models using conﬁdence intervals calculated by two methods . Expected proportions of transmission due to particular groups of infectious individuals ( Fig . 1b , c ) were calculated using the gamma distribution of n with estimated values of ^ R 0 and ^ k . See Supplementary Notes for details , and for descriptions of data sets . Branching process analysis . Analysis of branching process models centres on the probability generating function ( pgf ) of the offspring distribution , g ð s Þ ¼ P 1 j ¼ 0 Pr ð Z ¼ j Þ s j , deﬁned for j s j # 1 . When R 0 . 1 , the long - term probability of disease extinction after introduction of a single infected individual is the unique solution of q ¼ g ( q ) on the interval ( 0 , 1 ) . For a negative binomial offspring distribution Z < NegB ( R 0 , k ) , the pgf is g ð s Þ ¼ ð 1 þ R 0 k ð 1 2 s ÞÞ 2 k . Under population - wide control , Z pop c < NegB ðð 1 2 c Þ R 0 ; k Þ and therefore g pop ð s Þ ¼ ð 1 þð 1 2 c Þ R 0 k ð 1 2 s ÞÞ 2 k ; and the variance - to - mean ratio is 1 þ ( 1 2 c ) R 0 / k . Under random individual - speciﬁc control , the exact pgf is g ind ð s Þ ¼ c þð 1 2 c Þ 1 þ R 0 k ð 1 2 s Þ (cid:1) (cid:2) 2 k with variance - to - mean ratio 1 þ R 0 = k þ cR 0 . This scenario can be approximated by Z ind ; NB c < NegB ðð 1 2 c Þ R 0 ; k ind c ) , where k ind c is the solution to p 0 þ c ð 1 2 p 0 Þ ¼ 1 þ R ind c = k ind c (cid:1) (cid:2) 2 k ind c and decreases monotonically as c increases . Further details , descriptions of outbreak simulations and formal analysis of control measures are found in the Sup - plementary Notes . Received 1 March ; accepted 22 August 2005 . 1 . Levin , S . A . , Grenfell , B . , Hastings , A . & Perelson , A . S . Mathematical and computational challenges in population biology and ecosystems science . Science 275 , 334 – - 343 ( 1997 ) . 2 . Becker , N . G . & Britton , T . Statistical studies of infectious disease incidence . J . R . Stat . Soc . B 61 , 287 – - 307 ( 1999 ) . 3 . Anderson , R . M . & May , R . M . Infectious Diseases of Humans : Dynamics and Control ( Oxford Univ . Press , 1991 ) . 4 . Diekmann , O . & Heesterbeek , J . A . P . Mathematical Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases : Model Building , Analysis , and Interpretation ( Wiley , Chichester , 2000 ) . 5 . Leo , Y . S . et al . Severe acute respiratory syndrome—Singapore , 2003 . Morbid . Mortal . Wkly Rep . 52 , 405 – - 411 ( 2003 ) . 6 . Shen , Z . et al . Superspreading SARS events , Beijing , 2003 . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 10 , 256 – - 260 ( 2004 ) . 7 . Dye , C . & Gay , N . Modeling the SARS epidemic . Science 300 , 1884 – - 1885 ( 2003 ) . 8 . Lipsitch , M . et al . Transmission dynamics and control of severe acute respiratory syndrome . Science 300 , 1966 – - 1970 ( 2003 ) . 9 . Riley , S . et al . Transmission dynamics of the etiological agent of SARS in Hong Kong : Impact of public health interventions . Science 300 , 1961 – - 1966 ( 2003 ) . 10 . Bauch , C . T . , Lloyd - Smith , J . O . , Coffee , M . & Galvani , A . P . Dynamically modeling SARS and other newly - emerging respiratory illnesses : past , present , future . Epidemiology 16 , 791 – - 801 ( 2005 ) . LETTERS NATURE | Vol 438 | 17 November 2005 358 © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 11 . Koopman , J . Modeling infection transmission . Annu . Rev . Public Health 25 , 303 – - 326 ( 2004 ) . 12 . May , R . M . & Anderson , R . M . Transmission dynamics of HIV infection . Nature 326 , 137 – - 142 ( 1987 ) . 13 . Woolhouse , M . E . J . et al . Heterogeneities in the transmission of infectious agents : Implications for the design of control programs . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 338 – - 342 ( 1997 ) . 14 . Lloyd - Smith , J . O . , Getz , W . M . & Westerhoff , H . V . Frequency - dependent incidence in models of sexually transmitted diseases : portrayal of pair - based transmission and effects of illness on contact behaviour . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B 271 , 625 – - 634 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Anderson , R . M . et al . Epidemiology , transmission dynamics and control of SARS : the 2002 – - 2003 epidemic . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B 359 , 1091 – - 1105 ( 2004 ) . 16 . Gani , R . & Leach , S . Epidemiologic determinants for modeling pneumonic plague outbreaks . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 10 , 608 – - 614 ( 2004 ) . 17 . Becker , N . & Marschner , I . in Stochastic Processes in Epidemic Theory ( eds Picard , P . , Gabriel , J . P . & Lefevre , C . ) 90 – - 103 ( Springer - Verlag , New York , 1990 ) . 18 . Becker , N . Analysis of Infectious Disease Data 48 – - 59 ( Chapman & Hall , London , 1989 ) . 19 . Bailey , N . T . J . The Mathematical Theory of Infectious Diseases 2nd edn , 263 – - 265 ( Grifﬁn , London , 1975 ) . 20 . Keeling , M . J . & Grenfell , B . T . Disease extinction and community size : Modeling the persistence of measles . Science 275 , 65 – - 67 ( 1997 ) . 21 . Lloyd , A . L . Destabilization of epidemic models with the inclusion of realistic distributions of infectious periods . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B 268 , 985 – - 993 ( 2001 ) . 22 . Meyers , L . A . , Pourbohloul , B . , Newman , M . E . J . , Skowronski , D . M . & Brunham , R . C . Network theory and SARS : predicting outbreak diversity . J . Theor . Biol . 232 , 71 – - 81 ( 2005 ) . 23 . Boswell , M . T . & Patil , G . P . Random Counts in Models and Structures ( ed . Patil , G . P . ) 7 – - 8 ( Pennsylvania State Univ . Press , University Park , 1970 ) . 24 . Burnham , K . P . & Anderson , D . R . Model Selection and Multimodel Inference : A Practical Information - Theoretic Approach ( Springer , New York , 2002 ) . 25 . Lloyd - Smith , J . O . , Galvani , A . P . & Getz , W . M . Curtailing transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome within a community and its hospital . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B 270 , 1979 – - 1989 ( 2003 ) . 26 . Wallinga , J . & Teunis , P . Different epidemic curves for severe acute respiratory syndrome reveal similar impacts of control measures . Am . J . Epidemiol . 160 , 509 – - 516 ( 2004 ) . 27 . Ha , L . D . et al . Lack of SARS transmission among public hospital workers , Vietnam . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 10 , 265 – - 268 ( 2004 ) . 28 . Park , B . J . et al . Lack of SARS transmission among healthcare workers , United States . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 10 , 244 – - 248 ( 2004 ) . 29 . Ferguson , N . M . , Fraser , C . , Donnelly , C . A . , Ghani , A . C . & Anderson , R . M . Public health risk from the avian H5N1 inﬂuenza epidemic . Science 304 , 968 – - 969 ( 2004 ) . 30 . Farrington , C . P . , Kanaan , M . N . & Gay , N . J . Branching process models for surveillance of infectious diseases controlled by mass vaccination . Biostatistics 4 , 279 – - 295 ( 2003 ) . Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www . nature . com / nature . Acknowledgements We are grateful for comments and data suggestions from B . Bolker , J . Edmunds , N . Ferguson , A . Galvani , R . Gani , N . Gay , J . Gog , B . Grenfell , H . Hethcote , D . Heymann , A . Hubbard , N . Jewell , J . Lauer , R . May , T . Porco , C . Roth , D . Smith and B . Williams . We thank R . Gani for providing unpublished data from a previous publication , and L . Matthews for sharing work ahead of print . Our research was supported by the NSF , NIH - NIDA , the James S . McDonnell Foundation , the NSF / NIH Ecology of Infectious Disease Program , and the South African Centre for Epidemiological Modelling and Analysis ( SACEMA ) . Author Contributions J . O . L . - S . and W . M . G . conceived the study . J . O . L . - S . collected and analysed outbreak data , conducted dynamic modelling , and drafted and revised the text . S . J . S . conducted formal analysis of branching processes and control measures . W . M . G . provided technical input on superspreading and control analyses . All authors contributed conceptually , and edited or commented on the text . Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at npg . nature . com / reprintsandpermissions . The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to to J . O . L . - S . ( jls @ nature . berkeley . edu ) . NATURE | Vol 438 | 17 November 2005 LETTERS 359