Issue 42 , January 2004 www . proteinspotlight . org The bubble’s bend Vivienne Baillie Gerritsen ubbles are not reserved to the likes of champagne or beer . Our cells also sprout bubbles – or vesicles . Vesicles are formed by means of two cellular processes : exocytosis and endocytosis . The point of such bubbles in living organisms is to relieve the plasma membrane of a number of constituents . Be it to down regulate a pathway – by removing a given receptor from the plasma membrane for example – or to transport molecules from one side of a cell to another . One species of vesicle – the clathrin - coated vesicles – are particularly important in vesicle trafficking in endocytosis and in exocytosis . And in the process of endocytosis , one protein – epsin – has a major role in the initial steps of membrane budding . A horde of proteins are involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis : receptors , accessory factors , the clathrin adaptor protein AP2 and clathrin . In the process of endocytosis , patches are observed on the surface of the cell’s membrane . Such patches form when specific molecules cluster . Clathrin is one such molecule . Clathrin molecules form a spherical scaffolding and accompany the membrane as it moves inwards , thus forming a spherical shell : the clathrin - coated vesicle . Epsin acts as cement by binding not only to clathrin – and in doing so promoting its assembly – but also to the plasma membrane . Yet this is not epsin’s major asset . Epsin – an accessory factor – was discovered in 1988 by virtue of its binding to a second accessory factor : Eps15 . As a result , it became the ‘Eps15 interacting protein’ , or epsin for short . The N - terminal domain – known as the ENTH domain ( from epsin NH2 terminal homology domain ) – is a neat , compact bundle of alpha helices , one of which changes its orientation depending on whether epsin is bound to its ligand or not . The C - terminal portion of epsin binds to Eps15 , its central portion binds both to clathrin adaptor protein AP2 and clathrin itself , and the ENTH domain binds to phosphatidyl inositols , with a clear preference for phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisposphates or PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . And this is the ligand upon which epsin will act to initiate cell budding . We have all had fun stretching part of the torn rubber remnants of a balloon between our thumbs to suck out a mini - balloon . Such playful invagination is very much what happens in the process of cell endocytosis . By sucking a bubble out of the rubber , we were applying stress to make it bend and curve into a small sphere . Cell endocytosis puts bending stress on the plasma membrane and rearranges its underlying structure – first to form a budding vesicle and then to form the vesicle in its entirety . In the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles , epsin rearranges the underlying structure of the plasma membrane so that it curves spontaneously . How ? When epsin spots a patch of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 within a lipid layer , it inserts part of its N - terminal ENTH domain into the plasma membrane , by way of a short alpha helix with a particularity . Indeed , epsin is a soluble protein yet it presents hydrophobic residues on its outer B Clathrin - mediated vesicle formation . Courtesy of Harvey McMahon MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology surface . When this amphipathic helix encounters a membrane enriched in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , it folds back onto the other neatly bundled helices and forms a pocket into which the PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 head can fit . Such movement disrupts the organisation of the lipid layer causing it to adopt a different arrangement . The effect is not dissimilar to that caused by a large man who – despite a tight squeeze – decides to seat himself on an already crowded bench , making all the others shift a little on either side of him for comfort . This shift in location causes the membrane to curve as the lipids rearrange in the membrane . Why ? Epsin insertion into the lipid layer creates chemical asymmetry in the plasma membrane as a whole , i . e . a difference arises between the interfacial tension and the internal surface pressure of the membrane , the result of which is the curving of the membrane . So epsin not only stimulates clathrin assembly and serves as an initial scaffolding onto which the clathrin cage could grow , but it also causes the membrane to camber , thanks to its ENTH domain . The popularity of the ENTH domain is growing fast . As research progresses , this specific domain is showing signs of recruiting and bridging vesicle coat components other than clathrin , and could well have a role not only in forming the container in which cargo is transported but also in transporting the cargo itself . Cross - references to Swiss - Prot Epsin 1 , Homo sapiens ( Human ) : Q9Y6I3 Epsin 1 , Rattus norvegicus ( Rat ) : O88339 References 1 . Hurley J . H . , Wendland B . Endocytosis : driving membranes around the bend Cell 111 : 143 - 146 ( 2002 ) PMID : 12408856 2 . Ford M . G . J . , Mills I . G . , Peter B . J . , Vallis Y . , Praefcke G . J . K . , Evans P . R . , McMahon H . T . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin Nature 419 : 361 - 366 ( 2002 ) PMID : 12353027 3 . Nossal R . , Zimmerberg J . Endocytosis : curvature to the ENTH degree Curr . Biol . 12 : 770 - 772 ( 2002 ) PMID : 12445401 Protein Spotlight ( ISSN 1424 - 4721 ) , http : / / www . proteinspotlight . org , is published by the Swiss - Prot group at the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics ( SIB ) . Authorization to photocopy or reproduce this article for internal or personal use is granted by the SIB provided its content is not modified . Please enquire at spotlight @ isb - sib . ch for redistribution or commercial usage .