(cid:211) University of Lancaster 1994 . Copying without fee is permitted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage and credit to the source is given . For other copying , write for permission to : - Computing Department , Lancaster University , LANCASTER , LA1 4YR , UK . Phone : + 44 - 524 - 593041 ; Fax : + 44 - 524 - 593608 ; E - Mail : cscw - info @ comp . lancs . ac . uk LANCASTER U ComputingDepartment NIVERSITY Running the Network : Supporting Cooperative Systems John Bowers * , James Pycock * , Graham Dean and Tom Rodden Centre for Research in CSCW Research report : CSCW / 3 / 1994 * Department of Psychology , Manchester University COMIC ESPRIT BASIC RESEARCH PROJECT 6225 RUNNING THE NETWORK : SUPPORTING COOPERATIVE SYSTEMS ABSTRACT Commercial software systems intended to support the work of groups are now freely available . However , uptake of these systems has been relatively poor and limited user experience has been reported . The authors present some experiences from a study of a network that explicitly aims to investigate the effectiveness of CSCW tools . This paper focuses on the currently hidden cost of managing the network . The authors also explore the implications for CSCW systems development by outline an exploration of support for the management of a CSCW network . Document ID COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 Status DRAFT Type Working Paper Version 1 . 0 Date Mon , Aug 08 , 1994 Author ( s ) John Bowers , James Pycock ( MAN ) , Graham Dean , Tom Rodden ( LANCS ) Task TASK - NO 1 . Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2 . The Field Study : A ' CSCW Network ' in a U . K . Central Government Organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 3 . Managing the Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 3 . 1 Varying Perceptions of the Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 3 . 2 Application Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 3 . 3 Password and Security Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 3 . 4 Inconsistent Versions Numbers and Other Horrors : The Beast is Out of Control ! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 3 . 5 Network Management as a Project Threatening Overhead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 3 . 6 Visualising the Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 4 . Supporting the Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1 5 . Distributed Systems Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 3 5 . 1 Management via a Shared Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 5 . 2 The Modelling Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 6 . Using PCL to Model the Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 8 6 . 1 Using the Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 6 . 2 Modeling the CSCW Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 7 . The Management Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 2 8 . Summary and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 4 9 . References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 5 COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 1 1 . Introduction Research interest in CSCW has grown quite dramatically over the last decade . Associated with this growth a large number of CSCW prototypes have emerged from research labs . Many of the early prototypes have now matured in a wide range of software products which are now identified collectively as groupware . The ( as yet ) lack of development of a user community for this substantial body of CSCW software has , however , contrasted with the enthusiasm evident within the research community . A number of researchers have investigated potential reasons for the apparent failure of CSCW systems . In particular , studies undertaken by both Grudin [ 1 ] and Markus and Connely [ 2 ] have argued that the success is strongly dependant on balancing the cost of adoption against the benefits offered by the software . An extensive study of the use of a particular groupware product by Orlikowski [ 3 ] highlighted the significant role individuals ' perceptions of the organisation played in determining its use . To complement these previous investigations into the use of CSCW systems we wish to present excerpts from an ethnographic study of the installation and use a number of different commercial software systems within a CSCW network . In contrast to these previous studies which have focused on either a particular CSCW product or a specific domain application , we wish to consider the more general case of a network populated by a heterogeneous collection of CSCW applications . The network is specifically intended to meet the everyday and often unspecified needs of a community of users to work together . The focus of this paper is on the inter - relationship between the facilities provided by the network and its management . Network management is a crucial factor in determining the success of CSCW systems . In addition to developing specific cooperative tools we would argue that CSCW needs to consider how best to support management . We present an approach to supporting management which builds upon our fieldwork and outline an initial toolkit to support network management . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 2 2 . The Field Study : A ' CSCW Network ' in a U . K . Central Government Organisation The setting for our fieldwork has been an organisation within the United Kingdom ' s central government . This organisation , which we shall call ' CGO ' , is responsible for developing the standards , procurement policies and specifications of good practice which central government organisations should observe with respect to government computing . Amongst CGO ' s various branches , the Future Technology Branch ( FTB ) is most concerned with exploring new computing developments and research in computer science and allied trades . Anticipating that it may be of relevance to central government computing , FTB has conducted a number of studies of CSCW , employing a series of consultants over the last five years who have between them written a review monograph on the subject and explored how CSCW may impact upon more established methods of systems analysis and design . Over the last 24 months , FTB , in response to a series of proposals by one of their members , whom we shall call Dan , have themselves installed a network of computers which runs a variety of applications of the sort discussed in CSCW . It is this network ( known to members as " The CSCW Network " ) , the issues involved in its construction and maintenance and in the use of the applications present and how all of these matters are experienced in CGO which is the subject of the rest of this section . Our account of the Network and of CGO is based on a prolonged year study of this organisation and its interest in CSCW . One of us ( JB ) has conducted numerous interviews ( mostly open ended and tape - recorded ) with organisation members throughout this period as well as tape - recording meetings , and being present as a participant - observer while work was being done . Another ( TR ) has been closely involved with the technical issues surrounding the initial set up and configuration of the Network . What follows is based on both the experiences of establishing a CSCW network and analyses of the varied and large corpus of materials we have accumulated related to its use ( transcriptions , field notes , documents , memos , correspondence ) . A fuller account of this fieldwork is given in [ 4 ] . Here , we concentrate on aspects of the experience of the CSCW Network relevant to network management issues . The principle focus for investigating the applicability of CSCW at FTB was the procurement and installation of the CSCW Network . At any one time , this Network has consisted of about 20 Apple Macintosh (cid:212) computers connected together via Ethernet (cid:212) . During the lifetime of the project , the exact models of machines has undergone change as older machines have been upgraded and faulty machines replaced . Indeed , as will be discussed below , this changing constitution of the Network has led to some problems in its management and use . Initially , the Network consisted of Macintoshes drawn from the Mac II range . At the time of writing ( February 1994 ) , the Network mixes four Mac Centris (cid:212) machines , two Quadras (cid:212) and one LC (cid:212) Series I alongside the remaining Mac II machines . The Network topology is a straight line connecting the machines which are spread over the 6th , 7th and 8th floors of CGO ' s London building . After much experimentation , two machines ( a Quadra and a Mac IIfx ) have been dedicated to running server applications : one running the electronic mail server , one running all the other server applications . Additionally , the Mac LC machine is now dedicated to running modem and remote COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 3 access software . The remaining desktop machines reside in individuals’ offices and are used as personal , networked machines . In addition , 10 Apple Powerbooks (cid:212) have been purchased . Each machine connected to the Network has a number of groupware systems installed including : Inforum (cid:212) A computer conferencing system Timbuktu (cid:212) A screen sharing application MeetingMaker (cid:212) A group diary system Quickmail (cid:212) An advanced electronic mail facility Aspects (cid:212) A group editing application Markup (cid:212) A group commenting and annotation system Rather than assess these individual applications in an isolated and experimental manner the intent of the Network was to allow users to utilise these applications to support the work of FTB in as naturalistic a manner as possible . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 4 3 . Managing the Network In this section we note some of the components of network management which arose and which became problematic . These observations from fieldwork have suggested to us the importance of considering CSCW network management issues as integral to CSCW research . Just as cooperative work is amenable to computer support , so ( we shall argue ) is the management of the use of such computer support itself a piece of cooperative work for which computer support can be explored . Accordingly , our observations form the basis of some specific suggestions for management support later in this paper . 3 . 1 Varying Perceptions of the Applications As the Network interconnected a set of users with varying backgrounds , job descriptions and expertises , it is perhaps not surprising that the applications installed on the Network were understood in a variety of different ways . What is perhaps more surprising is that the management of the users ' perceptions and accounts of the Network turned out to be a noteworthy aspect of network management itself . Let us illustrate these observations with three cases : the differing perceptions which were abroad concerning the screen sharing application Timbuktu , the respective uses of email and bulletin board / conferencing applications , and the use of an application , SmartForm (cid:212) , designed to support the production and completion of ' intelligent ' forms . First , the CSCW Network Project manager saw Timbuktu as an application with which he could deliver remote training or assist with troubleshooting the problems of other users on the Network . If a difficulty arose , Dan imagined that he could use Timbuktu to " take over the screen " of the person in difficulty and demonstrate a solution to their problem while never leaving his desk . By contrast , Louise considered Timbuktu to be " Big Brother " , an application well suited to prying eyes and not for the provision of training , help in troubleshooting or serving any other useful purpose for her for that matter . To give our second example , the Network users varied in their use of and perceptions of email versus bulletin board and conferencing applications which were available . Some users remarked that the UK Civil Service is a " need to know organization " where " interested others " are informed of one ' s work , its products and its status if they are acknowledged as having some need to be . Some users used this as an argument for not using bulletin boards or computer conferences . " You do not know who is going to read what you write or what meaning they will give to it . " On this view electronic mail is the appropriate application for informing others in CGO . You can specifically decide as the originator of a message who has the ' need to know ' . In contrast , Jon , one of the senior managers on the Network , argued that using bulletin boards / conferences would be an ideal technology for increasing the level of teamwork in CGO . People could , then , keep each other aware of what was going on , thereby ( according to him ) cutting down on the duplication of work and " the re - invention of the square wheel " . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 5 Thirdly , one of the applications procured by the FTB supports the production of ' smart forms ' where fields can be designed and constraints expressed over the kinds of material that can be placed in the fields . At one meeting , two consultants to the Network project and Dan , the project manager , were exploring the possibility of using this application to support the production of business cases within FTB . According to Dan , fields could be defined mimicking the standard structure of CGO business cases . It became apparent , however , that the application placed limits on how large fields could be . This was taken as a reason by the consultants to reject the application for supporting business cases as sections from existing business cases in FTB frequently exceeded the limits the application would impose . In contrast , the project manager took this as an advantage of the use of ' smart forms ' as it would encourage the writing of more concise business cases , indeed ones which were more strictly compliant with CGO ' s guidelines for their production . These are just three examples of what turned out to be a general phenomenon for the CSCW Network in CGO : there were widely varying perceptions of the applications installed on the Network . These perceptions in some cases varied in relation to the skills and interest of the parties involved : a CGO member with a background interest in CSCW would see an application differently from someone who just wanted to get a specific job done . On other occasions these perceptions varied according to different accounts of what CGO was like as an organization and how - given the organization it was taken to be - people could or should use technology within it . The debates over the use of ' smart forms ' turned into a discussion of the appropriateness of current working practice within CGO , whether it should be respected as a given constraint or changed . It is in this connection also that organizational standards are sometimes invoked to underwrite a particular account of what an application ( or operating system for that matter ) is or can do . One senior FTB member described the Macintosh interface as " not a CGO interface " . It is important to recognise that we are not arbitrating over which of these accounts and perceptions of applications are right and which wrong . We do not want to take sides with Louise against Dan over screen sharing applications or with Jon against other Network users over the utility of computer conferencing . Rather , we want to observe that - no matter how these different positions are to be arbitrated over - they have consequences for the work done with the Network . If one sees one ' s organization on a " need to know " basis , this may mean you will resist certain forms of CSCW applications . If one sees the need to make business cases more concise , one will consider using one set of applications which others will reject . If one has to work with others with different accounts , then the negotiation of these accounts will become a component of your work . If one is managing a group of users connected together on a network like the one we have studied , then - whether one seeks to instil a common view of what the network is all about and how it should be used or prefers a more laissez - faire style - managing the different views different users have will become part of one ' s task . In the case of the CSCW Network in CGO , this turned out to be an unanticipated extra burden of system management which Dan , in particular , felt was an awkward and time - consuming piece of extra work he would rather not have to do . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 6 3 . 2 Application Integration The strategy adopted in CGO ' s CSCW Network Project was to procure a series of applications from a mixed set of vendors and explore their concerted , co - ordinated use in their own working environment . At the time the CSCW Network was first proposed and business cases for its components first researched and assembled , there was no integrated groupware or CSCW - related package on the market . Since then , we have seen the commercial release of applications which integrate a range of functionality appropriate for the support of cooperative working . Perhaps Lotus Notes (cid:212) is the clearest example of an integrated product to emerge from CSCW research . This product ( for one instance ) was not available at the time the components of CGO ' s CSCW Network were purchased . Accordingly , a series of separate applications were procured - one dedicated for email , one for shared authoring , a different one again for computer conferencing and so forth . This led to some difficulties . First , different vendors implemented related functionality in slightly different ways . For example , the organization of ( and within ) menus and command key equivalents were rarely consistent across packages . Secondly , exchanging data from one application to another was not always possible . For example , the only way to copy an email message to the bulletin board / conferencing application was by cutting its text to the clipboard and pasting . To give a second example , data could not be easily exported from a word processor and imported to the fields of the ' smart forms ' discussed above . Purchasing applications from independent vendors highlights dramatically what , though , is a common problem : it is important to know what applications work with what and what steps have to be taken to integrate applications by hand or otherwise . This information is not always clear from manufacturers ' own documentation and often has to be worked out by trying various alternatives . However , knowing how to integrate various computer tools is important for any complex cooperative activity . 3 . 3 Password and Security Management Formulating an appropriate password and security policy for the CSCW Network turned out to be quite a difficult task . An early problem concerned the unusualness of a local area network like the CSCW Network within CGO . CGO ' s standard corporate information system , TYSIM , is a Unix system which is accessed by running VT100 terminal emulation software from PCs which reside in every office and in some shared and public places . A particular user ' s directory space can be accessed on providing a username and a password . A series of policies have emerged in CGO surrounding this system and how it should be used . An important one is that any CGO employee should be able to access their own directory space from any PC networked to TYSIM , no matter which particular machine is used . This system presents a series of contrasts with the Macintosh - based CSCW Network which led to a number of difficulties especially with respect to password and security management . For example , if someone wishes to access their own information on the CSCW Network but is in someone else ' s office , gaining access to the remote machine would require ( a ) that a user account has been already set up permitting access or that the information in question was present in a ' guest ' accessible folder , and ( b ) that the machine was switched on ! Not only did this - at least in the early stages - make for an unfavourable contrast with the corporate standard information system , it also opened up a whole set of difficult security issues . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 7 For example , to mimic TYSIM ' s ease of access from different machines , should every machine be accessible to every other user ? Or should the spirit of the existing organizational policy be ignored ? The first alternative , while it may enable remote users to easily access their information from any other machine seemed far too liberal however with respect to data security and privacy . Equally , setting up the machines in this way would itself be an onerous task . Accordingly , the balance of these problems led to the local suspension of the organizational policy that any user should be able to access their data from any physical machine - a solution which , in organizational terms , is not without risk of potential censure . Several of the applications installed on the Network offered their own means of username and password based protection . However , because these application were purchased from a variety of different vendors as noted above , this protection was not always implemented equivalently across the applications . In addition , the tools which employed a client - server model of information distribution frequently implemented username and password protection for both client and server applications . Additionally , some of the applications offered ' layers ' of security with different rights at each layer . Finally , the strategy adopted by some manufacturers seemed to be " if in doubt , include password protection " . This situation led to a proliferation of passwords and usernames on the Network , not all of which were consistent the one with the other . To illustrate some of these difficulties , let us report a case in which screen sharing software ( e . g . Timbuktu ) is to be used to access a shared document which has been placed for comments in a System 7 shared folder on a remote machine - a commenting tool ( e . g . MarkUp ) to be used for the purpose . Although this sounds like a fairly simple scenario ( commenting on a remotely located shared document ) and indeed CGO members explored this a number of times as a sensible scenario for their work , the approach to security issues taken by manufacturers could greatly obstruct it . This scenario might require ( i ) permission for Timbuktu ' s remote access to be established at the machine which stores the document to be commented , ( ii ) the establishment of a password protected shared folder in which the shared form of the document to be commented on resides , ( iii ) the shared version of the document itself could be password protected and ( iv ) each layer of comments from different commentors would have further access controls . Thus , an apparently simple task like ' remote commenting ' may require the memorisation of up to four passwords ! Clearly , it lies within a user ' s discretion not to use the unwieldy password protection mechanisms the Network considered as a whole offers . Indeed , it was ultimately agreed that the right level of security protection was to have passwords attached to each individual machine but to tend not to inhibit access to each application . But this was agreed upon as policy and recognised as legitimate only after a quite lengthy period of understandable confusion and debate . It is not an easy thing to accept that one should not use the security protection a manufacturer offers you ! 3 . 4 Inconsistent Versions Numbers and Other Horrors : The Beast is Out of Control ! Some of the work of the CGO members connected together on the CSCW Network actually concerns comparing and evaluating different operating systems with a view to advising other government departments what is appropriate for their needs . At the early COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 8 stages of the CSCW Network , these members needed to still work with versions of Apple ' s operating system prior to System 7 so that they could continue their investigation of their version of A / UX which was not System 7 compatible at the time . However , all of the CSCW - related applications on the Network only worked with System 7 . Eventually , this problem was solved by the use of an application which allowed switching between System 7 ( when the CSCW Network ' s applications were being used ) and earlier versions ( when A / UX was being used ) . Even so , although this solved some problems for the point of view of the users who needed to employ both operating systems , it had the Network wide implications that ( i ) shared folders on their machines suddenly became invisible when they moved out of System 7 and ( ii ) their entire machines would become invisible to any application which needed to communicate with them if it only ' saw ' machines running the later operating system . Clearly , then , the compatibilities between different operating systems ( or between different version numbers of applications for that matter ) are Network wide issues requiring some management . After about 12 months of the Network being in place , Dan became concerned that he did not know what applications , system extensions , hardware add - ons were actually on the Network . His concern to have this knowledge was precipitated by a number of " mysteries " which he could not fathom ( mail delivery failures , machines being invisible to others , undocumented error messages appearing unexpectedly , unexpected application and system crashes ) . Dan , remarking that " The beast is out of control ! " , proposed to a consultant to the project that he should do a " technology audit " of all the machines , applications and so forth that were on the Network . The consultant aided by a junior CGO worker reluctantly spent an entire day trying to work out what was on just one machine . At the end of the day , Dan received a long list for the one machine . The consultant pointed out to him how long it would take to do a full audit , by which time the Network would have doubtless changed anyway , and how much at his consultancy rates it would cost CGO ! 3 . 5 Network Management as a Project Threatening Overhead We have identified just four issues which arose in the implementation and use of the CSCW Network . These together with many others came to constitute a significant management overhead for the Network . The Network was not just used , its use was managed . Indeed , network management became practically a full time job for Dan who repeatedly complained that the sheer quantity of work involved in keeping the Network in working order was often ignored or not understood by Network users . Dan pointed to the irony of network management : if you are successful , your work becomes invisible ; if your work is visible , it suggests the Network is failing . At several moments during the period the Network has been operational , the network management overhead looked large enough to threaten the viability of the CSCW Network project itself . Observations like this have convinced us that providing support for the management of networks running CSCW applications should become an important component of CSCW research . Accordingly , we have begun to examine how problems like those above could be addressed in the development of a network management tool in which a COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 9 shared model of the network , its applications and their capabilities is made available to users . 3 . 6 Visualising the Network As well as suggesting problems which require attention in CSCW research , we look to our field site to provide us with some inspiration for their solutions . Indeed , one way to start exploring possible network support tools is to examine the techniques used in the management of the CSCW Network in the absence of computer support for management . What is noticeable , when network management problems arise , is that Network users frequently resort to drawing diagrams of the Network which often combine depictions of Network topology with relations and dependencies between various entities . A full study of how these means for ' visualising the Network ' are used is beyond the scope of the current paper . However , let us sketch some ways in which these pictures are used as practical devices for formulating , discussing and resolving problems . 1 ) Pictures manage the complexity of the Network by depicting only some entities and relations which are those subsequently taken to be the ones of interest and importance . In this way , problems can be transformed into a manageable set of ( now visible ) considerations . 2 ) Pictures , accordingly , are variable in their construction and format . They are drawn in relation to the current purposes and problems at hand and do not need to be accurate in any absolute sense . They need be accurate enough though ' for current purposes ' . Indeed , it is those purposes which give ' accuracy ' its practical sense . 3 ) The pictures enable quite heterogeneous entities to be displayed in a common spatialised form . Applications , files , machines , printers , gateways , other networks , even users themselves can all be displayed in varying relations the one to another . In this , depicting the Network enables heterogeneous considerations to be weighed up against each other . 4 ) Pictures can serve as a visual inventory of the Network . By drawing entities in relation to each other , we can ask " have we forgotten anything ? is there more that needs be noted ? " and so forth . The picture becomes a means of recording the completeness ( that is , completeness for all practical purposes ) of a user ' s deliberations over the factors which might be relevant . We have accumulated a small corpus of pictures of the Network , mostly hand - drawn . That this seemed to be a prominent activity in ' troubleshooting ' the Network , we take as a prima facie indication that tools for constructing various ways of picturing network entities in relation to each other might be a valuable feature of a CSCW network management application . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 10 4 . Supporting the Network The previous sections of this paper have examined a series of management issues which were central to the work of the CSCW Network . Our particular focus has been on the problematic nature of management much of which results from its unvalued status across within organisations . Management has proven to be an acute issue within this Network and we would suggest it will pose similar difficulties in many organisations as CSCW facilities become more common place . Many of the issues surrounding a consideration of how best to support management are organisational and cultural . The most notable of these is the need to recognise the nature of network management . The CGO experience is not untypical and systems management is seldom seen as " real work " . One consequence of this is that little consideration has been given to how best to support the activities surrounding management of CSCW systems . In this and the following sections we wish to pay particular attention to the technical issues surrounding the provision of management support tools . In outlining this support we wish to reflect on what lessons we can draw from our empirical study and what type of support tools we would like to provide . As a starting point for our consideration of the Network we can outline a set of shortcomings outline by our field study . Perceptions of the Network . Users of the Network exhibited a variety of different views of the facilities on the Network . No single interpretation of the Network was evident and tools to support the management of a network need to reflect this diversity . No facilities were provided to generate different views of the Network or associate personal notes with different applications . Application Integration To provide an effective set of CSCW facilities the Network needed to support a heterogeneous collections of applications . These often inter - related in quite complex ways and few facilities were provided to understanding the various configurations of applications . Password and Security Management The diverse collection of applications on the Network adopted different approaches to representing users and passwords . This causes considerable problems particularly as their was no central point of reference for users and passwords . No facilities were available to record this common information in an agreed form . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 11 Inconsistent Versions of Software The complex relationships between applications on the Network often led to incompatibilities between software versions . Central to this problem was the issue of configuration and the lack of access to configuration information provided to users . Users of the Network were provided with no facilities to represent or remember the configuration of applications on the Network . The Use of Pictures Drawings of the Network were central to the articulation and understanding of network management issues . However , no facilities were provided to present graphical representations of the Network . In the following sections we will examine the development of a toolkit to support distributed systems management which has taken place alongside the field study of CGO ' s CSCW Network . The developed facilities focus on a number of key issues : • A shared representation of network configurations . • The provision of tools to support different graphical views of networks • The provision of annotation facilities to record personal information . Our particular approach to network management has developed from a wider consideration of the problems in managing distributed systems and needs to be consider in that light . Consequently , it is worth briefly reviewing current approaches to distributed management which have also helped shape our approach . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 12 5 . Distributed Systems Management Network management has traditionally concentrated on the physical level of networked systems . The information of most interest at this level is statistics on network load and traffic , workstation load and other associated event reporting . This information may then be used by an experienced and skilled network administrator to inform the formation of management policies such as the number of users allowed to log onto a particular machine . This information has proved invaluable to network managers in the past and is still an essential aid to the successful management of a network . However , over a number of years the physical size and complexity of networks has increased beyond all expectation . It has proven difficult , if not impossible , for traditional management techniques to keep up with this growth of computing resources . A requirement for higher level information about the network has become obvious for network managers . Details regarding hardware and software configuration , the adoption of roles by people involved in management of the network and the management policies implemented become important for effective management to take place . At present , this is done in rather an ad hoc manner , with little or no resources explicitly allocated to the configuration and planning of the network . The development of increasingly powerful personal computer systems and low cost networking technology has increased the prominence of the issues surrounding network management within the workplace . As Langsford and Moffett [ 5 ] point out , the management of distributed systems , such as the CSCW Network , is particularly complex for a number of reasons . The core points they highlight include : • Applications may span computer systems belonging to a number of different departments and organisations . Authority for an application is not centralised and may spread across cultural , organisational and legal boundaries . • Heterogeneous components exist in the network . There may be a range of different technologies and components co - existing on the network . The complexity of these components will be very diverse and may offer quite different functionality . • Components and services may be provided by different vendors with quite different management interfaces , assuming these interfaces are provided at all . • The components and services will by physically distributed , possibly across international borders . This makes it very difficult to obtain a single consistent impression of the network to inform management decisions . Overcoming these difficulties is a major research problem and has led to the formation of a distributed systems management community which has recently staged its first international conference [ 6 ] . Langsford and Moffett suggest that three themes lie at the heart of solving these management problems : ( i ) the need to provide an integrated view of the various tasks of management ; ( ii ) the need to provide managers with as much support as possible ; and ( iii ) the challenge of providing management facilities which COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 13 give an integrated and unified view to the manager of a distributed and heterogeneous network . The DOMINO project [ 7 ] has been looking at the issues surrounding distributed computing systems for a considerable amount of time . A central component within their work is the concept of a domain which provides a means of grouping system objects under a common management policy . The specification of management policy also features in their work along with understanding the relationship between management policy and domains . A follow - up project called SysMan [ 8 ] is now looking at ways of efficiently implementing the model of management proposed within the Domino framework . The DOMAINS project [ 9 ] has also looked at means of structuring management via domain based techniques . Work looking directly at supporting the activities of system administrators includes TOBIAS [ 10 ] which proposes a contractual model for management services . This work considers the notion of responsibility within a management framework and how it relates to the adoption of various roles by an administrator . A traditional view of systems management has focused on the maintenance and support of the distributed technology . The areas of work within systems management research reflect this focus and management activities are viewed principally from a technical focus . For example , the International Organisation for Standardisation [ 11 ] look upon management activities from a purely functional viewpoint [ 12 ] . The five areas they consider are : • Accounting management • Configuration management • Fault management • Performance management • Security management . This view of management adopts a prescriptive approach which characterises the task of management as enforcing some controlling policy on a technical artefact . Management is considered abstractly with little or no concern given to the organisation within which the network is placed or the work which it supports . An alternative view of management is to consider how best to facilitate the different activities of a number of people to support the networked systems . The focus of this approach is to provide an appropriate set of management mechanisms which are open to a range of different management approaches . These mechanisms should allow management by both users and designated systems adminstrators alike . 5 . 1 Management via a Shared Model Our particular approach is to provide support for the variety of cooperative activities involved in distributed systems management . The provision of tools to achieve this aim is greatly aided by the overall focus of the cooperation involved . In general , administrators of a distributed system such as the CSCW Network cooperate about and via a shared artefact , " the Network " , which provides a focus for much of their work . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 14 This general style of work allows a separation of the attributes of the system being managed ( which we represent in a network model ) and the activities of management . While the focus of our work is on the support of the management process through the development of tools . We make no distinction between users and managers in our approach and these are used interchangeably within this section . The system model has a crucial role to play in our approach . A model of the system provides a central point of integration for tools and a focus for management . This allows configuration information to be readily recorded and accessed by a number of users of the network . Our approach centres on a number of systems managers ( and users ) simultaneously accessing a shared system model . However , it should be stressed that while these systems managers share this information they may have quite different perspectives on it . For example , considering a simple user directory , the user to whom the directory belongs would be interested in the details of the files and directories it contains ( e . g . , name , size , access rights etc . ) . In contrast , a system administrator in charge of enforcing a strict policy of space usage would be interested only in who owns the directory and how much space the directory consumes . We characterise these alternative perspectives as different views on the same shared entities within the system model . Views are characterised by the system entities a user can see and the attributes of these entities that they may access . These different views are controlled by individual user views on the shared model and are displayed graphically . Each user can customise their view and will see the system differently depending on the management facilities they have access to . The separation of these different perspectives allows us to control access to the shared system model . In addition , the deconstruction of certain features of the system allows the model to concentrate on the configuration of the systems and the interdependencies found within it . Thus , rather than embed much of the semantics of the management process , our system model contains only information on the structure of the systems and the interdependencies within it . Additional management information , such as expertise and policy , are held outside the model . This decision is reflected within the modelling language we have chosen to use to represent the network . 5 . 2 The Modelling Language The configuration and structure of the network system being modelled is described in a language called PCL [ 13 ] which has been derived from module interconnection languages such as MIL75 [ 14 ] INTERCOL [ 15 ] and SySL [ 16 ] . PCL allows the configuration of hardware and software systems to be described at varying levels of abstraction . System models in PCL are expressed as a network of PCL family entities . Family entities represent one or more versions of some logical system or part of a system . They may be related to other family entities in a number of different ways : • They may inherit information from other family entities . • They may be logically composed of other family entities . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 15 • They may participate in a variety of user - defined and built - in relationships with other family entities . We choose the family as the basic entity in PCL in recognition of the fact that we wished to model systems which , in general , exist in a number of different configurations . We required this system model to reflect the stable and the variable parts of systems so a single model which described different configurations seemed the most appropriate approach . PCL family entity Interfacedescription Relationshipparticipation Compositionstructure Physical part structure Classifications Attributes Versiondescriptor Applied - to Maps - onto Attribute value set Figure 1 PCL entity structure Each family entity has a number of ( optional ) associated sections which provide additional information about it . These sections are : • A classification section . This is used to associate a number of classification terms with the entity . The use of these classification terms allows a close match between an application domain and the language . They may be used to associate external tools with particular classes of entities and are also important in checking the consistency of system descriptions . • An attributes section which defines attributes which may be used for entity documentation or for conditional selection . The following built - in attribute types are offered : STRING , INTEGER and B OOLEAN . • An interface section which documents the services that a particular entity offers to other entities . It defines the names exported by the entity to other entities and may be used in consistency and completeness checks for system descriptions . • A parts section used to specify the composition of an entity in terms of other PCL entities . The composition relation is treated quite liberally within a PCL description and allows users’ to interpret this relation in a flexible manner . • A physical section which specifies the physical entities that make up a system . This is an important part of a PCL description as it allows multiple logical viewpoints to be reconciled through a description of physical entities . • A relationships section which is used to set out the relationships between PCL entities . Relationships may be user - defined but several built in relations may also be used . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 16 Finally , family entities may have associated version descriptions which uniquely describe a single version of the family . Different families are identified by associating different values with some of their attributes . We have developed a tool which applies a version description to a family and create a model of a unique system . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 17 6 . Using PCL to Model the Network The central feature of our approach to management is the provision of a network model constructed in PCL . The model allows specific application details and network configuration information to be shared by users of the network . To illustrate the type of information represented in a PCL model of the network let us turn to an example of network use drawn from our field study and its implications for management information . 6 . 1 Using the Network One of the earliest uses of the facilities provided by CGO ' s CSCW Network concerned computer - based support for the writing of monthly reports . FTB is responsible for the production of monthly reports of their activities , including accounts of meetings attended , deliverables produced , in - line work planning changes as well as a whole section concerning financial management and expenditure in the previous calendar month . The production of these reports - prior to the introduction of the Network ' s facilities - involved the soliciting of individual contributions from FTB members by the Branch Head , who would then edit their ( often hand - written contributions ) into an appropriately organised report together with contributions of his own . The Branch Head reported that this whole process would typically take him two solid days of work . The facilities of the Network were considered to see how they might be employed to assist the electronic production of this document . A number of facilities were viewed by the Branch Head as beneficial to the production of monthly reports . These facilities included : • A computer conference in which members would commit to and report on their completion of contributions . • A series of named and shared ' drop folders ' where members would deposit raw text for inclusion . • Templates for use in preparing contributions and giving an overall organisation to each report . • A shared archive of past reports for use by branch members . While seen as a critical and often time consuming activity within CGO , the preparation of branch reports is not considered complex or involved . In fact , much of the motivation for choosing branch reports as the starting point for the use of cooperative network facilities was the relative simplicity of the task at hand . However , in suggesting the use of these applications to support what he views as a straightforward task the Bran Head is in fact requesting considerable investment in terms of the management of the Network . The production of monthly reports in the manner suggested above assumes that a number of management activities have taken place . In particular , the preparation of branch reports assumes the existence and maintenance of : COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 18 • A machine offering a shared folder which has the correct set of users defined and that the access permissions on the folder are maintained . • Mechanisms on each users ' machine which allow simple access to the shared folder . In our particular case this involved the setting of aliases to the shared folder . • The provision of a conferencing facility requiring a machine running a conference server and client programs installed in each user ' s machine . • The setting up of an appropriate conference and a set of users with access rights to this conference . These user definitions should - where possible - conform to those used by the shared folder . • The provision of a shared folder with given permissions and enough storage space to allow an archive of previous reports and templates for future reports to be kept . The provision of these facilities required some investment in time and energy by those responsible for managing the Network . From the perspective of others this effort was often invisible and it was seldom included in any consideration of the overall effort involved in the " electronic " production of monthly reports . After two or three months of usage , the Branch Head reported limited gains in the production of monthly reports . They were still taking him about two days to do . Part of the problem was that he was unaware of when contributions were being deposited in the drop folders and had to search periodically ' on the off - chance ' . It was suggested that to improve this users should make use of the facilities provided by electronic mail . The incorporation of electronic mail to support this simple task necessitated : • The installation of electronic mail facilities on each user machine and the setting up of a mail server . • The setting up of user accounts and addresses within the mail program and ensuring that these conformed to the two existing definitions of users within the conferencing system and the shared file facilities . • The debugging of the Network problems caused by the mail program . • The purchase and maintenance of a separate machine as a mail server . Thus in seeking to encourage the use of the cooperative facilities by a simple extension of functionality the Branch Head set out a significant technical challenge in managing the Network . In our case , this required a considerable overhead in learning the principles in installing and administering each of the applications . Applications were purchased purely on the facilities provided to support the work of the branch , little consideration was given to the ease of management or the application structure used . Consequently the Network quickly became populated by a set of applications exploiting diverse administration styles and protocols which proved impossible to manage in any integrated manner . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 19 6 . 2 Modeling the CSCW Network The core of describing this arrangement on the Network is the set of PCL entities shown in figure 2 . Collectively these entities allow us to record the various software and hardware on the Network . For example , DAN’s machine would be represented by creating a particular network entity ( figure 3 ) . FAMILY Mac - Workstation CLASSIFICATION Workstation ATTRIBUTES Model : STRING ID : STRING PARTS MonitorKeyboardFilesystem END FAMILY Filesystem CLASSIFICATION Store ATTRIBUTES Name : STRING CurrentSpace : INTEGER PARTS Filestore _ users Folder ( 1 : N ) END FAMILY Folder CLASSIFICATION Store ATTRIBUTES Name : STRING Status : ( Public , Private ) PARTS Mac - workstation File ( 1 : N ) if Status = Shared then Share _ Configuration endif END FAMILY Conference _ application CLASSIFICATION Software _ application ATTRIBUTES Name : STRING Licence : STRING Version : STRING PARTS Conference _ server Application _ Client ( 1 : N ) END FAMILY Application _ Client CLASSIFICATION Software _ application ATTRIBUTES Serial _ no : STRING PARTS Configuration _ file END FAMILY Conference _ Server CLASSIFICATION Software _ application ATTRIBUTES Licence : STRING Serial _ no : INTEGER PARTS Configuration _ file Conference _ file ( 1 : N ) END Figure 2 : Some PCL Entities associated with the CSCW Network INSTANCE DAN _ Machine REFINES Mac - Workstation CLASSIFICATION Workstation ATTRIBUTES Model : STRING : = ‘Q UADRA 610’ ID : STRING : = ‘ CGO ASSET NO 3453445’ PARTS Monitor = > DAN _ Monitor Keyboard = > DAN _ Keyboard Filesystem = > DAN _ Filestore END Figure 3 : The PCL for DAN ' s Machine This entity is linked to three other PCL entities ( DAN _ Monitor , DAN _ Keyboard and DAN _ Filestore ) which are instantiated in a similar manner . The conferencing software as in the case of the network hardware is also instantiated in PCL ( figure 4 ) . INSTANCE Inforum REFINES Conference _ application CLASSIFICATION Software _ application ATTRIBUTES Name : STRING : = ‘ I NFORUM ’ Licence : STRING : = ‘ N O ZX23406745’ Version : STRING : = ‘V 1 . 3’ PARTS Application _ Server = > Inforum _ server , Application _ Client = > ( DAN _ Inforum , LC _ Inforum , NIC _ inforum ) END Figure 4 : PCL for the conferencing software COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 20 The PCL model of the Network also records the various dependencies between these components as relationships . Relationship in PCL are defined in terms of the entities they connect . The general structure for of relations in PCL is shown in figure 5 . RELATION < name > DOMAIN < classification + > RANGE < classification + > END Figure 5 : The structure of PCL relations RELATION has - access DOMAIN workstation RANGE filestore , mac - workstation END RELATION installed _ on DOMAIN software _ application , RANGE workstation END RELATION communicates DOMAIN software _ application RANGE software _ application END RELATION stores _ info DOMAIN software _ application RANGE filestore END Figure 6 : PCL Relations in the Network In our case a number of different relationships are important in linking entities in the model . A selection of these are listed in figure 6 . We can represent the dependencies across the Network in terms of these relationships . For example , in our scenario the server portion of the conferencing application may only run on a particular machine . This is expressed in PCL as a relationship of type installed _ on linking the server application to the particular machine . The use of PCL allows us to construct a model of the network which makes visible to users and administrators alike the complex relationships involved in the network . This model allows users to consider the currently hidden complexity associated with the installation and use of software . In addition it allows those responsible for maintaining software to record the current set - up of the network for future use . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 21 7 . The Management Editor Users and administrators seldom need to directly write PCL in order to construct a model of the network . Rather an editor is provided which supports both the graphical visualisation and construction of the network . The editor provides structured editing facilities for PCL descriptions and has several advantages over normal textual editors : • mechanisms to view descriptions from different structural viewpoints are provided • many of the errors associated with creating descriptions are eliminated • the ability to browse descriptions at various levels of granularity • navigation facilities can be provided to follow different relations . • variability in descriptions can be highlighted • a series of private annotation facilities can be used to associated personal notes with the shared network model . The most straight forward view of the network is to represent the network topology ( figure 7a ) . An equally valid alternative view of the network is to show the software connections between clients and servers supporting the conferencing application ( figure 7b ) . Figure 7a : Network Connectivity COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 22 Figure 7b : Connectivity of Inforum Software A major advantage of the use of a shared network model is the ability it offers to promote the recording of amendments to the network . As a final example , consider the addition of electronic mail software within our scenario of use . The addition of the following PCL definition allows us to represent this form of application which can then be connected to the network using our set of relationships . FAMILY Mail _ application CLASSIFICATION Software _ application ATTRIBUTES Licence : STRING PARTS Application _ Server Application _ Client ( 1 : N ) END To aid this form of development in the model the editor provides a set of template editors which allows the graphical construction of PCL entities . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 23 8 . Summary and Conclusions As current CSCW research prototypes mature into commercial products future CSCW users will face an increasing array of commercial products offering different cooperative facilities . In this paper we have considered the experiences of installing and using a diverse collection of CSCW products on a local area network . Our examination has focused on the problems of managing this diverse set of applications . Network management is seldom considered within the development of CSCW systems yet our examination highlighted a number of key issues : • the invisible and uncosted nature of network administration • the need for users to visualise the network • the lack of facilities to record configuration and version information • the incompatible nature of many products . It is vital that these issues are taken seriously by CSCW researchers and developers alike . Many of the issues involved in network management are organisational in nature and centre on the need to recognise the cost of management in the installation and use of IT . It is equally important that developers of future CSCW products considers strategies and techniques to allow effective integration . Network management is also a cooperative activity open to computer support in the same way as other forms of cooperative work . We have used the results of our field study to influence an ongoing development of management facilities . Our approach to network management has two main components : • the recording and sharing of network configuration information using a modelling language called PCL • the graphical presentation of alternative views of the network through an editor . Our network tools are research prototypes intended to illustrate the lessons which can be drawn from our study . However , as part of an ongoing ESPRIT project we intend to use our network management facilities within a large engineering company . COMIC - MAN - 1 - 6 RUNNING THE NETWORK COMIC project Page 24 9 . References 1 . Grudin , J . “Why CSCW applications fail : Problems in the design and evaluation of organizational interfaces” , in Proceedings of the Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 88 ) . 1988 . Portland , Oregon : ACM Press . 2 . Markus , M . L . , Connolly , T “Why CSCW Applications Fail : Problems in the Adoption of Interdependent Work Tools” , in Proceedings of ACM CSCW ' 90 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work . 1990 , p . 371 - 380 . 3 . Orlikowski , W . J . , “Learning from Notes : Organizational Issues in Groupware Implementation” , in Proceedings of ACM CSCW ' 92 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work . 1992 , p . 362 - 369 . 4 . Bowers , J . M . , " The Work to Make a Network Work : Studying CSCW in Action " , submitted to this conference . 5 . Langsford , A . , Moffett , J . D , Distributed Systems Management , Addison - Wesley , 1993 . 6 . IEEE First International Workshop on Systems Management . University of California , Los Angeles , California , April 14 - 16 , 1993 , IEEE Press 7 . Sloman , M . , Moffett , J . M . , “Domain management for distributed systems” , in Proceedings of the IFIP Sym . on Integrated Network Management , Boston , MA , May 1989 . 8 . Esprit Projects Deliverable SysMan MA2 V2 / IDSM D6 , Domain and Policy Service Specification , Imperial College , London . 9 . Moller , M . " DOMAINS The Principles " , Project document D2aV1 . 0 , DOMAINS Esprit Project No . 6165 . May 1992 . 10 . Marshall , L . , “Representing Management Policy using Contract Objects” , in Proceedings of IEEE First International Workshop on Systems Management . University of California , Los Angeles , California , April 14 - 16 , 1993 , IEEE Press 11 . OSI , “OSI - Systems Management Overview” , DP 10040 ( ISO / JTC1 / SC21 N4865 ) , June , 1990 . 12 . ISO / IEC 7498 - 4 . Information Technology - Open Systems Interconnections - Part 4 : Management Framework . 13 PROTEUS Consortium , “PCL - V2 Reference Manual ' , PROTEUS Deliverable D3 . 4 . D . 1 . 1 , Document number P - DEL - 3 . 4 . D - 1 . 2 , Computing Department Lancaster University , Lancaster LA1 4YR . 14 . DeRemer , F . , Kron , H . H . , " Programming - in - the - large versus Programming - in - the - small " , IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , Vol . SE - 2 , No . 2 , June 1976 . 15 . Tichy , W . F . , " Software Development Control Base on System Structure Description " , PhD Thesis , Department of Computer Science , Carnegie - Mellon University , 1980 . 16 . Sommerville , I . and Thomson , R . , “An Approach to the Support of Software Evolution” , The Computer Journal , Vol . 32 , No . 5 , 1989 .