> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER ( DOUBLE - CLICK HERE TO EDIT ) < 1 Abstract — Contributions : The Chinese University of Hong Kong ( CUHK ) - Jockey Club AI for the Future Project ( AI4Future ) co - created an AI curriculum for pre - tertiary education and evaluated its efficacy . While AI is conventionally taught in tertiary level education , our co - creation process successfully developed the curriculum that has been used in secondary school teaching in Hong Kong and received positive feedback . Background : AI4Future is a cross - sector project that engages five major partners – CUHK’s Faculty of Engineering and Faculty of Education , Hong Kong’s secondary schools , the government and the AI industry . A team of 14 professors with expertise in engineering and education collaborated with 17 principals and teachers from 6 secondary schools to co - create the curriculum . This team formation bridges the gap between researchers in engineering and education , together with practitioners in education context . Research Questions : What are the main features of the curriculum content developed through the co - creation process ? Would the curriculum significantly improve the students’ perceived competence in , as well as attitude and motivation towards AI ? What are the teachers’ perceptions of the co - creation process that aims to accommodate and foster teacher autonomy ? Methodology : This study adopted a mix of quantitative and qualitative methods and involved 335 student participants . Findings : 1 ) two main features of learning resources , 2 ) the students perceived greater competence , and developed more positive attitude to learn AI , and 3 ) the co - creation process generated a variety of resources which enhanced the teachers’ knowledge in AI , as well as fostered teachers’ autonomy in bringing the subject matter into their classrooms . Index Terms —Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) Education , pre - tertiary education , curriculum design , co - creation process , teacher education I . I NTRODUCTION HE explosive growth of Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) is increasingly transforming the way we live , learn and work . To inspire more students to pursue AI in their studies and careers , we need to develop relevant and attractive curriculum at an early age and then following through . [ 1 ] . Therefore , teaching AI topics is an important global strategic initiative in educating the next generation [ 2 ] . However , AI topics have conventionally been taught in tertiary - level curricula . Naturally , there is a lack of studies about AI curriculum design and development for pre - tertiary education [ 3 ] . AI education engages students in exploring how machines can simulate human intelligence , such as to sense , perceive , decide , act , interpret , think , learn and create , as reflected in the proposed curriculum framework in this study . The first idea of teaching children AI was to explore through LOGO . programming and the Turtle robot [ 4 ] , which was designed as learning activities , rather than a curriculum . To date , very few studies have been conducted in formal AI curriculum design for pre - tertiary education [ 3 ] . In 2018 , A technology company SenseTime published the first textbook series for high schools – Fundamentals of Artificial Intelligenc e [ 5 ] , which focuses on technical content and is designed for students with stronger engineering background . More recently , Massachusetts Institute of Technology [ 6 ] examined different hands - on robot learning activities for kindergarten children learning and emphasized the student learning process . There is still the lack of a complete curriculum for AI in pre - tertiary education , because curriculum design necessarily involves the additional elements of pedagogy and assessment . A “curriculum” refers to all experiences which are planned and guided by teachers , and learned by students , whether it is implemented inside or outside the classroom [ 7 ] . It is also a description of what , why , how and when students should learn . How the curriculum is perceived and organized influences the process of teaching and learning [ 2 ] , [ 7 ] . Moreover , teacher autonomy , i . e . , the capacity to take control of one’s own teaching , is crucial to the teacher’s motivation and commitment in providing effective learning opportunities for students on the topic matter [ 8 ] . Accordingly , a curriculum that supports teacher autonomy can better optimize learning , especially through the teacher’s support of the interests and the needs of the students [ 8 - 9 ] . To actualize a pre - tertiary AI curriculum , a project named AI for the Future ( AI4Future ) was launched at The Chinese University of Hong Kong ( CUHK ) to create the first secondary school AI curriculum in Hong Kong . Leveraging the experiences in launching the first AI undergraduate degree program in Hong Kong in 2018 , AI4Future is a collaborative project that engages five parties – CUHK’s Faculty of Engineering and Faculty of Education , local secondary schools ( to which we refer as “pioneering schools” ) , the local government ( HKSARG Education Bureau ) and the local AI industry . This project began at the junior secondary level ( i . e . , Grade 7 – 9 ) and placed special importance in establishing a collaborative group which involves the team of 14 professors ( who are active researchers with expertise covering various branches of AI ) together with some 15 postdoctoral fellows , research assistants and undergraduate student helpers , working closely with 17 principals and teachers from 6 pioneering schools in the curriculum’s co - creation process . The schools were purposefully selected from different districts of Hong Kong with varied social and economic characteristics ; including girls’ , boys’ and coeducational schools with different Creation and Evaluation of a Pre - tertiary Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) Curriculum Thomas K . F . Chiu , Helen Meng , Ching - Sing Chai , Irwin King , Savio Wong , Yeung Yam T > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER ( DOUBLE - CLICK HERE TO EDIT ) < 2 school banding ( that is reflective of overall academic standards ) – this aims to address the diverse learning needs of Hong Kong’s secondary students . The selected schools have demonstrated that they have placed high emphasis in STEM education and also expressed that they have placed pre - tertiary AI education in high priority for their students . Our special collaborative team formation is intended to support a special co - creation process for the AI curriculum . The main objective is to generate AI curriculum content that draws on the faculty members’ expertise spanning AI’s fundamentals , state of the art , to the ethics and societal impact ; but adopting a content presentation that the teachers consider palatable and inspirational for junior secondary students . As the co - creation process took form and moved forward , three key observations were noted . First , regular meetings with content presentations and discussions among functional groups and sub - groups began to facilitate teacher professional training for pre - tertiary AI education within the team . Second , iterative refinement of the curriculum content on per - topic and per - module bases involves revisions that span weeks . The revisions tightly integrate efforts from members working across secondary and tertiary education , and aim to provide abundant options for teachers’ selection and adaptation as the curriculum enters their classrooms . Such a practice supports teacher autonomy and places the needs of the students at the center of curriculum design . Third , over time , our team forms the foundation of an ecosystem for pre - tertiary AI education . Expansion of this ecosystem is imminent as this project expands with an additional thirty some participating schools in the next phase of the project . The pioneering school teachers have also committed to sharing their experiences and practices in a secondary education context with participating school teachers in the process of expansion . II . D RAWING REFERENCE TO K - 12 E NGINEERING E DUCATION Since the subject matter of AI is often subsumed under the engineering and computer science curricula in university education , the curriculum in AI4Future draws reference to K - 12 Engineering Education when designing a pre - tertiary AI curriculum . Literature suggests that key content for K - 12 engineering programs should : 1 ) be interdisciplinary in its content , 2 ) include impact and ethical considerations , and 3 ) foster technical communication skills , engineering thinking , and techniques [ 10 - 13 ] . These are elaborated in the following . Interdisciplinary nature . A well - designed engineering program at the K - 12 level should emphasize its interdisciplinary nature to address the absence of interdisciplinary connections in school formal curriculum [ 11 - 12 ] . For example , the program should provide students with opportunities to apply developmentally appropriate mathematics in the context of solving engineering problems . One possible strategy is to allow students to study mathematical concepts through engineering [ 10 ] . Impact and ethics . The program must expose students to contemporary societal problems that are increasingly complex and interdisciplinary in nature . Students should understand how their proposed solutions to the problems impact life and society locally , globally , economically , environmentally , etc . , and also consider the possible ethical issues that could be raised . They have the responsibility to consider the safety and potential effect of the solutions on individual and public [ 10 ] . Technical communication skills . The program should foster students’ communication skills about technical matters . Students should be able to use technical language to explain the processes and output of tools or solutions , and also be able to communicate their technical ideas in everyday language for those without a technological background [ 10 ] , [ 13 ] . Engineering thinking . In the K - 12 setting , students should be empowered to believe that they can design and troubleshoot solutions to problems and develop new knowledge on their own [ 10 ] . They can learn from experience and failure , and suggest improvements over existing solutions . In other words , students should be able to use informed judgment to make decisions about their solutions [ 12 ] . Engineering techniques . Students should learn and implement various techniques , processes and skills in the program [ 10 ] , [ 13 ] . Techniques refer to step - by - step procedures for specific tasks ; processes refer to a series of actions taken to complete a final product ; and skills are defined as the ability to perform specific tasks . Therefore , the program should provide students with tools throughout the process of building up their techniques and skills [ 10 ] . This project considers the above references informative and some elements are adaptable for our design of a pre - tertiary AI curriculum . Given the boundary - less nature of AI technologies , and pre - tertiary AI education is a brand - new initiative ( at least in Hong Kong ) , our work faces three unique challenges – the first is creation of an AI curriculum that is foundational and specific , to enable a concrete grasp of the topic matter , while opening up broad intellectual horizons for the young ( pre - tertiary ) students who have yet to decide on their interests and directions for long - term development . Every child is different . Not all are academically gifted ; some will do better in one field than in another ; but all children should be supported and encouraged to achieve his or her potential . The second challenge lies in translation of this new initiative into practice with available manpower and resources , and there is scarcity of AI talents in all sectors . The third challenge is that the needs in pre - tertiary AI education will vary from one school to another and our work must strive to fulfill all such needs . To address these challenges , this project aims to design a clear curriculum structure that is modular and reconfigurable , to support flexible learning pathways as needed by various schools . Therefore , an AI curriculum for pre - tertiary education should make space for teachers to recognize each student’s personal and cognitive capacities , and to adapt the curriculum to suit the students in their classes [ 3 , 8 ] . The curriculum should respect differences in ways that different children can best learn , therefore , should provide teachers with the flexibility to ensure that their treatment of the content is appropriate for their student’s needs and capabilities . In other words , the curriculum should foster teacher autonomy in designing their own classroom activities / school - based curriculum in leading , > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER ( DOUBLE - CLICK HERE TO EDIT ) < 3 assisting and encouraging each student . Teacher autonomy is an important aspect of the teaching profession [ 8 ] that is positively related to perceived self - efficacy and job satisfaction [ 14 - 15 ] . These factors are crucial to teacher motivation , engagement and commitment to fostering effective learning environments for students [ 16 ] . This autonomy concerns the relations between the teachers’ scope of action and the curriculum’s role in providing directions , resources and rules that constrain or extend the learning environment [ 8 ] . III . C URRICULUM O VERVIEW The project has designed a curriculum framework with 12 chapters and five levels of depth address the pedagogy introduced as illustrated in Table I . The first column lists the various topics , organized as chapters , ranging from the introduction and fundamental concepts ( chapters 1 - 2 ) , various branches of AI e . g . , computer vision , speech and language processing ( chapters 3 - 9 ) , as well as societal impact , ethical use and transformation of the future of work ( chapters 10 - 12 ) . These chapters aim to capture breadth and comprehensiveness , and allow teachers to pick and choose appropriate content that fits their teaching objective ( s ) . For example , a teacher may only cover chapters on introduction and society , and perhaps chapters on selected ( but not all ) branches of AI ( e . g . , computer vision and machine reasoning , only chapter 3 and 7 ) , yet the curriculum remains coherent and self - contained . Furthermore , each chapter is organized into five modules : Awareness , Knowledge , Interaction , Empowerment , and Ethics ( AKIEE ) , as elaborated in Table II . These modules can be categorized into the Beginner , Intermediate and Advanced levels , as color - coded in Table II with green , yellow and purple respectively . This module - based , level - up design not only allows flexibility in content selection for the classroom , but also caters for capacity building by offering a clear path to development student AI techniques and skills . In addition , the 5 modules are intended to cover the key elements referred in K - 12 Engineering Education mentioned in Section II . Figure 1 is an infographic that encapsulates the overall curriculum structure . The project began at the core of the illustration , with the introduction of AI and the key drivers of its recent , rapid advancements - - namely , Big Data , Machine Learning and Cloud Computing . Another core emphasis is on ethical considerations in the use of AI applications , as well as related societal impact . The middle circle in pink illustrates our coverage of various branches in AI , including perceptual machine intelligence such as " see " and " hear " , human language technologies such as " speak " , " read and write " , machine reasoning , use of simulation for problem solving , and how machines can generate content " creatively " . The outer circle in green shows various possible applications that are supported by AI , many of which carry important societal implications , especially for the future of work . IV . C URRENT S TUDY AND R ESEARCH D ESIGN A . Research Questions As mentioned above , this study is the first of its kind in the development of pre - tertiary AI curriculum . Therefore , it poses three research questions that address whether the curriculum can improve the student’s perceived competence , attitude and motivation toward AI learning . Accordingly , the research questions ( RQ ) are : RQ1 : What are the main features of the curriculum content developed through the co - creation process ? RQ2 : Would the curriculum significantly improve the student perceived competence , attitude and motivation toward AI learning ? RQ3 : What are the teachers’ perceptions of the co - creation process that foster teacher autonomy ? TABLE I C URRICULUM FRAMEWORK TABLE II E LABORATION ON C URRICULUM M ODULES . Chapters Descriptions Awareness Awareness of the history , background and development of various types of AI technologies ( corresponding to different subsets of intelligence : machine perception , understanding , reasoning , etc . ) Knowledge Identification of key concepts and the impact of AI through eye - catching , illustrative applications , especially usage contexts of local relevance . Interaction Experimentation of AI technologies in AI Lab Empowerment Acquisition of the abilities to design , develop and integrate component AI technologies into end - to - end systems . Ethics & Impact Exploration of AI topics and case studies to promote social good , illustrate transformative effects to the future of work , and reflect on ethical use of AI . Fig . 1 An infographic providing an overview of the new AI curriculum . > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER ( DOUBLE - CLICK HERE TO EDIT ) < 4 B . Research Method There are two stages : ( 1 ) curriculum development and ( 2 ) implementation . In the curriculum development stage , a multilevel co - creation process was adopted – professors from the two faculties authored the technical content based on their research specialization , and then worked with the 17 teachers in AI4future to refine the learning outcomes and pedagogize the content in the year - long regular meetings ( biweekly on Monday and Friday afternoons ) . In the implementation stage , the teachers considered their school culture , environments and resources , and selected and fine - tuned the relevant content to create learning activities related to the AI technologies , in ways that are most fitting for their students’ needs and interests . Due to the COVID - 19 pandemic , teachers taught the AI topics in blended environments – both online and face - to - face modes . Moreover , institutional ethical clearance was followed by participant consent . Three hundred and thirty - five students in total , aged 12 - 16 , and 8 teachers from the pioneering schools are involved to evaluate the current the curriculum and its co - creation process . The students completed the online pre - and post - questionnaires ; and the teachers participated in individual semi - structured interviews to express how they perceived the co - creation process . C . Measures Apart from demographic data , the questionnaire included 5 variables to measure student perceived competence the students’ perceived competence , attitude and motivation toward AI . They are perceived competence - perceived AI knowledge ( AIKG ) , AI readiness ( AIRD ) , attitude - AI confidence ( AICF ) , AI relevance ( AIRE ) and motivation - Intrinsic motivation to learn AI ( AIIM ) . Each variable is measured with a 6 - point Likert scale , adapted from previous studies with acceptable reliability and validity [ 17 - 19 ] , see Appendix . The items were also checked by three experience educational researchers to make sure that the wording and language were understandable . The following elaborates on the 5 variables : Perceived AI knowledge ( AIKG ) – this is newly proposed especially , based on the content design of the project’s AI curriculum . This variable measures the student’s self - perception of the level of basic knowledge they have acquired for AI . The variable has 4 items , and an example is , “I have general knowledge about how AI are used today . ” . AI readiness ( AIRD ) . This variable is adopted from a previous study [ 17 ] . It measures the student’s perception of the level of comfort in everyday use of various forms of AI technologies . Stronger perception indicates that students hold a favorable viewpoint regarding the adoption of AI in applications . It has 6 items with the original reliability α = . 88 , and an example is item is “AI technology gives people more control over their own lives . ” AI confidence ( AICF ) [ 17 ] . This variable measures the students’ perceived confidence in learning the content of AI . The scale has 5 items with the adequate reliability α = . 88 . An example is “I’m certain that I can succeed if I work hard enough in this AI class . ” AI relevance ( AIRE ) . This variable is adopted from a previous study [ 18 ] . It measures the students’ perception of the relevance of learning AI . It has 6 items with the reliability α = . 91 , and an example is “The things that I am learning in this AI class will be useful for me . ” . Intrinsic motivation to learn AI ( AIIM ) . This variable is adapted from the Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire [ 19 ] . The variable has 4 items , with the reliability α = . 74 , and an example is “In this AI class , I prefer AI topics that arouse my curiosity , even if it is difficult to learn . ” In sum , these measures prove to be significant and relevant to measure the learning outcomes as shown in our experimental section V . R ESULTS AND F INDINGS A . Research Question 1 – Main Features The first research question targets the analyses of learning resources for each chapter co - created by the professors and teachers that is composed of theory learning , interactive demonstrations , hands - on activities , individual tasks and group discussion , resulting in two main features of the curriculum . The following presents a summary of the main features : 1 ) Offer flexible learning pathways Flexibility is very important for pre - tertiary education to cater for the diverse needs of the schools and their students . This curriculum aims to offer maximum flexibility for school teachers in adaptation based on their school environments and their students’ interests and competencies . Other than the modular and level - up design of the framework , a variety of examples / case studies were also created for the same task or discussion . For example , in the task “Explain why AI technologies may not always work” – three examples , including failure in facial recognition , failure in a chatbot and failure in the prediction of World Cup results are used as illustrations . Moreover , various tools such as Jupyter Notebooks , Blockly , WebAPPs and technologies from industry ( e . g . , cognitive services , and Google teachable machine ) are included for hands - on activities . The project team has also developed a hardware toolkit from scratch – the CUHKiCar ( see Fig . 2 ) is a robotic car with six built - in AI functions , and offers interactive AI experiences to the students . Two AI experiments , namely face - tracking and line following , have been designed and incorporated into the CUHKiCar . They offer introductory experiences in interacting with AI to the students . Furthermore , the CUHKiCar is versatile and can be completely re - programmed with totally new functions in other project work for the students . Overall , this project offers a flexible curriculum with diverse options to match with the students’ learning interests and the schools’ teaching needs . 2 ) Foster local and global understanding Student relevance is very important in learning AI . The classroom activities were created such that the tasks enable learning “from local explanations to global understanding” . This establishes connections between AI and the students’ everyday experiences , i . e . , establishes student relevance . In this way , students can gain a better understanding of the societal and personal impacts of AI by combining many high - quality local > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER ( DOUBLE - CLICK HERE TO EDIT ) < 5 examples ( e . g . , KKbox [ 20 ] , the local subway system’s chatbots [ 21 ] , which are applications of local relevance ) that can be extended to understand examples in a global context ( e . g . , Spotify [ 22 ] , which is an application found abroad ) . These examples engage student in a context within which they can develop . Fig . 2 CUHKiCar . B . Research Question 2 – Student Enhancement Paired t - tests were adopted to answer RQ2 ; analyses of covariance ( ANCOVA ) were used to assess the differences in the post - questionnaire scores after accounting for pre - questionnaire scores [ 23 ] to answer RQ2 . Table III below presents the descriptive statistics . All the variables with Cronbach alpha coefficients , ranged from 0 . 88 to 0 . 92 ( > 0 . 70 ) were considered internally reliable [ 24 ] . Moreover , all the variables met the assumption of homogeneity of variance , with all p values > 0 . 05 in Levene’s tests . The results of paired t - tests were statistically significant , and showed that the students attained higher improvements in all the variables – AIKG , AIRD , AICF , AIRE and AIIM – with t ( 335 ) = 8 . 01 ( p < 0 . 001 ) , t ( 335 ) = 3 . 45 ( p < 0 . 001 ) , t ( 335 ) = 4 . 43 ( p < 0 . 001 ) , t ( 335 ) = 2 . 30 ( p = 0 . 003 ) and t ( 335 ) = 2 . 82 ( p = 0 . 005 ) , respectively . Therefore , learning with the project’s new AI curriculum has effectively enhanced students perceived AI knowledge , AI readiness , AI confidence , AI relevance and intrinsic motivation to learn AI . TABLE III D ESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS Student ( N = 358 ) Pre - questionnaire Post - questionnaire Variables Mean SD Cronbach alpha Mean SD Cronbach alpha AIKG 4 . 25 0 . 92 0 . 91 4 . 69 0 . 72 0 . 91 AIRD 4 . 37 0 . 84 0 . 89 4 . 54 0 . 76 0 . 90 AICF 4 . 17 0 . 91 0 . 91 4 . 40 0 . 83 0 . 91 AIRE 4 . 52 0 . 86 0 . 90 4 . 67 0 . 71 0 . 88 AIIM 4 . 37 0 . 96 0 . 92 4 . 51 0 . 78 0 . 89 C . Research Question 3 – teacher perception This study used teacher training and curriculum features as the framework to analyze 8 teacher interview data to see how the co - creation process foster teacher autonomy , see the following results . 1 ) Teacher training – The analysis revealed that all the participating teachers did not receive formal AI training , and they were able to learn more AI knowledge for curriculum design from the co - creation process . They felt more qualified and confident to teach AI . The following are supporting excerpts from their feedback : • ‘I learned more AI knowledge in the co - design process , which helped me design my AI teaching’ ( Teacher A ) • ‘In the co - design process , I had chances to try different tools , and discussed with others to learn more AI knowledge . It was fun . ’ ( Teacher M ) 2 ) Curriculum features The analysis showed that all the teachers agreed that the modular and level - up curriculum design allowed them to adapt the contents to their own effective school - based teaching , through selecting appropriate examples , case studies , tools and modules . This promoted the teachers’ sense of autonomy . The following are supporting excerpts from their feedback : • ‘I chose Chapter 1 – awareness , knowledge and ethic and Chapter 7 . ’ ( Teacher Ｅ ) • ‘I combined the modules from Chapter 1 , 11 and 12 to teach my students . ’ ( Teacher C ) • ‘I chose some tools to let student experience what AI is . ’ ( Teacher T ) VI . D ISCUSSIONS AND C ONCLUSION This article presented three major empirical findings and discussed how this project contributes to pre - tertiary AI education . A . Major Empirical Findings The first finding shows that the co - creation process effectively connects the AI and education experts in the university with secondary school teachers . The co - created resources for the curriculum framework result in two main features – offering flexible learning pathways and fostering local and global understanding . Therefore , the process has impact on the development of the resources for classroom practice [ 25 ] . The second finding is the proposed curriculum had significant effects on enhancing perceived competence ( AIKG , AIRD ) , for , attitude toward ( AICF , AIRE ) , and intrinsic motivation towards AI ( AIIM ) , see RQ2 . This result supports those of related studies that suggests how to design K - 12 engineering curriculum , such as those by Delaine et al . , [ 5 ] , Moore et al . , [ 10 ] , and Locke [ 26 ] , which indicate what key content should be included in effective engineering curricula for schools . This finding further confirms the key content is appropriate for school students , and covers what students should master for AI technologies . The AIKKE curriculum framework is more likely to offer a holistic and comprehensive view of AI , which foster students’ knowledge , readiness , confidence , motivation and perceived relevance of AI . The final finding is that the co - creation process has been shown to be an empowering and enabling process for teachers in supporting their efforts to bring AI into their classrooms . This is accomplished by enhancing the teachers’ AI competencies , which in turn , brings out teacher autonomy in shaping the co - created curriculum for their classrooms . The co - creation process not only served as a co - authoring but also offered a contemporary teacher professional development program [ 27 - 28 ] . > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER ( DOUBLE - CLICK HERE TO EDIT ) < 6 B . Contributions of the AI4Future project This study demonstrated that in the AI4Future project , the co - creation process is able to successfully transform the subject matter of AI , which is traditionally taught at the tertiary level , into pre - tertiary , junior secondary classrooms . Figure 4 illustrates the team formation and workflow of the co - creation process . It is worthwhile to note that the co - creation process can : ( 1 ) actualize the developing AI curriculum framework by redesigning and pedagogizing content into various classroom learning resources ; and ( 2 ) enhance the teachers’ knowledge AI by offering a sustained professional development process . The various co - created resources also empower the teachers and foster teacher autonomy [ 29 ] . Accordingly , this study indicates that this project has guided teachers to inspire students to strive to become future - ready , through facilitating student perceived competence , attitude and motivation towards AI . Fig . 4 . Team formation and workflow organization of the co - creation process that brings the AI4Future project’s new curriculum into junior secondary classrooms . VII . F UTURE O PPORTUNITIES This paper presents our first step in the creation of a pre - tertiary AI curriculum for Hong Kong , and suggests two main features . The co - creation process enhanced the teachers’ knowledge in AI , as well as fostered teachers’ autonomy in bringing the subject matter into their classrooms . The students perceived greater competence , and developed more positive attitude to learn AI . Our curriculum has thus far entered its second year of pilot teaching in local pioneering schools . This project is also poised for the next phase and expand to over thirty participating schools . Several valuable opportunities avail to set the stage for our future work . First , as the curriculum enters an increasing number of classrooms , it will be of interest to track with the teachers how content selection and adaptation is done in face of what kinds of students and interests . This will inform further development of learning trajectories for the curriculum . Second , due to the pandemic , pilot teaching as adopted both face - to - face , online and hybrid modes of instruction . Hence , it will be of great interest to see how the curriculum can be optimally adapted to each mode of teaching . Third , the pioneering schools selected for collaboration collectively captures demographic variations , which is well positioned for further research in diversity and inclusion for pre - tertiary AI education [ 30 - 31 ] . Fourth , since AI4Future is a multi - year project , aiming to reach out to the maximum number of secondary schools in Hong Kong , longitudinal research design to track teaching and learning activities will capture valuable data to support learning analytics and inform future pedagogical development . A PPENDIX Pre - and Post - Questionnaire Survey for Students AIIKG1 : I have general knowledge about how AI is used today . AIIKG2 : I have general knowledge about AI capabilities . AIIKG3 : I have general knowledge about AI . AIIKG4 : I have general knowledge of how AI are created . About how AI is created ? ? ? AIRD1 : AI technologies give people more control over their own lives . AIRD2 : Products and services that use the latest AI technologies are much more convenient to use . AIRD3 : I prefer to use the most advanced AI technologies . AIRD4 : I like AI technologies that allow me to tailor applications to fit my needs . AIRD5 : I find new AI technologies to be mentally stimulating . AIRD6 : I am confident that AI technologies will follow my instructions . AIRE1 : I am aware that AI technology will change the world AIRE2 : The things that I am learning in this AI class will be useful for me . AIRE3 : I should learn the basic knowledge of AI . AIRE4 : It is clear to me how the content of this AI class is related to my future . AIRE5 : The content of this AI class is relevant to my interests . AIRE6 : I could relate the content this AI class to things that I have seen , done or thought in my own life . AICF1 : I feel confident that I will have a good grade in this AI class . ] AICF2 : I am certain that I can succeed if I work hard enough in this AI class . AICF3 : I am certain that I can understand the most difficult material presented in this AI class . AICF4 : I am certain that I can learn the basic concepts taught in this AI class . ] AICF5 : I am certain that I can understand the most complex material presented by teacher in this AI class . AIIM1 : In this AI class , I prefer AI topics that arouse my curiosity , even if they are difficult to learn . AIIM2 : In this AI class , I prefer the materials that really challenge me so that I can learn new things . AIIM3 : The most satisfying thing for me in this AI class is trying to understand the content as thoroughly as possible . AIIM4 : I like studying in this AI class . A CKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank the students and the teachers from Diocesan Girls ' School , HKSKH Bishop Hall Secondary School , Man Kwan Pak Kau College , Munsang College , The Chinese Foundation Secondary School and Ying Wa College for their involvement in this project AI for future . Special thanks to the principals for their cooperation . > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER ( DOUBLE - CLICK HERE TO EDIT ) < 7 This research is supported ( in part ) by the Hong Kong Jockey Club Charities Trust . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] D . A . Delaine , R . . Tull , R . Sigamoney , R . and D . N . Williams , “Global diversity and inclusion in engineering education : Developing platforms toward global alignment , ” International Journal of Engineering Pedagogy , vol . 6 , no . 1 , pp . 56 - 71 , 2016 . [ 2 ] D . Touretzky , C . Gardner - McCune , F . Martin , and D . Seehorn , “Envisioning AI for K - 12 : What should every child know about AI ? , ” In Proc AAAI , Honolulu , Hawaii , 2019 , pp . 9795 - 9799 . [ 3 ] T . K . F . Chiu and C . S . Chai . “Sustainable Curriculum Planning for Artificial Intelligence Education : A Self - Determination Theory Perspective , " Sustainability , vol . 12 , no . 14 , pp 5569 , 2020 . [ 4 ] S . Papert and C . Solomon , " Twenty things to do with a computer " , Artificial Intelligence Memo 248 MIT AI Laboratory , Cambridge : MA , 1971 . [ 5 ] Sensetime , “Fundamentals of Artificial Intelligence . ” East China Normal University , China , 2018 . [ 6 ] R . Williams , H . W . Park , C . A . and C . Breazeal . “A is for Artificial Intelligence : The Impact of Artificial Intelligence Activities on Young Children ' s Perceptions of Robots , ” in Proc SIGCHI , Glasgow , Scotland , 2019 , pp . 1 - 11 . [ 7 ] A . V . Kelly , “The curriculum : Theory and practice 6th ed . , ” London : Sage , 2009 . [ 8 ] A . L . Lennert da Silva , and C . E . Mølstad , “Teacher autonomy and teacher agency : a comparative study in Brazilian and Norwegian lower secondary education , ” The Curriculum Journal , vol . 31 , no . 1 , pp . 115 - 131 , 2020 . [ 9 ] M . Standage , J . L . Duda , and N . Ntoumanis , “A test of self‐determination theory in school physical education , ” British Journal of Educational Psychology , vol . 75 , no . 3 , pp . 411 - 433 , 2005 . [ 10 ] T . J . Moore , , A . W . Glancy , K . M . Tank , J . A . Kersten , K . A . Smith , and M . S . Stohlmann , “A framework for quality K - 12 engineering education : Research and development , ” Journal of pre - college engineering education research ( J - PEER ) , vol . 4 , no . 1 , 2014 . [ 11 ] J . L . Riskowski , C . D . Todd , B . Wee , M . Dark , and J . Harbor , “Exploring the effectiveness of an interdisciplinary water resources engineering module in an eighth grade science course , ” International Journal of Engineering Education , vol . 25 , no . 1 , pp . 181 - 195 , 2009 . [ 12 ] G . H . Roehrig , T . J . Moore , H . H . Wang , and M . S . Park , “Is adding the E enough ? Investigating the impact of K‐12 engineering standards on the implementation of STEM integration , ” School Science and Mathematics , vol . 112 , no . 1 , pp . 31 - 44 , 2012 . [ 13 ] R . K . Carr , L . D . Bennett IV , and J . Strobel , “Engineering in the K‐12 STEM standards of the 50 US states : An analysis of presence and extent , ” Journal of Engineering Education , vol . 101 , no . 3 , pp . 539 - 564 , 2012 . [ 14 ] W . Wermke , S . Olason Rick , and M . Salokangas , “Decision - making and control : Perceived autonomy of teachers in Germany and Sweden , ” Journal of Curriculum Studies , vol . 51 , no . 3 , pp . 306 - 325 , 2019 . [ 15 ] T . K . F . Chiu , “Introducing electronic textbooks as daily - use technology in schools : A top - down adoption process , ” British Journal of Educational Technology , vol . 48 , pp . 524 - 537 , 2017 . [ 16 ] A . Cribb and G . Sharon , “Unpacking autonomy and control in education : Some conceptual and normative groundwork for a comparative analysis . ” European Educational Research Journal , vol . 6 , no . 3 , pp . 203 - 213 , 2007 . [ 17 ] C . S . Chai , P . Y . Lin , M . S . Y . Jong , Y . Dai , T . K . F . Chiu , and J . Qin , “Perceptions of and behavioral intentions towards learning artificial intelligence in primary school students , ” Educational Technology & Society , in press [ 18 ] Y . Dai , C . S . Chai , P . Y . Lin , M . S . Y . Jong , Y . Guo , and J . Qin , “Promoting students’ well - being by developing their readiness for the artificial intelligence age , ” Sustainability , vol . 12 , no . 16 , pp . 6597 , 2020 . [ 19 ] T . G . Duncan and W . J . McKeachie , “The making of the motivated strategies for learning questionnaire , ” Educational Psychologist , vol . 40 , no . 2 , pp . 117 – 128 , 2005 . [ 20 ] kkbox . com , ' MTR “KKbox front page ' , 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . kkbox . com / hk / en / . [ Accessed : 16 - Nov - 2020 ] . [ 21 ] mtr . com . hk , ' MTR “Chatbot” Function ' , 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . mtr . com . hk / chatbot / land _ page . html ? lang = en & params = chatbot . [ Accessed : 16 - Nov - 2020 ] . [ 22 ] sportfy . com , ' Sportify front page ' , 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . spotify . com / hk - en / . [ Accessed : 16 - Nov - 2020 ] . [ 23 ] P . L . Bonate , “Analysis of pretest - posttest designs , ” CRC Press , 2000 . [ 24 ] L . J . Cronbach , “Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests , ” Psychometrika , vol . 16 , no . 3 , pp . 297 - 334 , 1951 . [ 25 ] T K . F . Chiu , and D . Churchill . “Exploring the characteristics of an optimal design of digital materials for concept learning in mathematics : Multimedia learning and variation theory , ” Computers & Education , Vol . 82 pp . 280 - 291 , 2015 . [ 26 ] E . Locke , “Proposed model for a streamlined , cohesive , and optimized K - 12 STEM curriculum with a focus on engineering , ” Journal of Technology Studies , vol . 35 , no . 2 , pp . 23 - 35 , 2009 . [ 27 ] L . Darling - Hammond . “Teacher education around the world : What can we learn from international practice ? ” European Journal of Teacher Education , vol . 40 , no . 3 , pp . 291 - 309 , 2017 . [ 28 ] T K . F . Chiu , and D . Churchill . “Adoption of mobile devices in teaching : changes in teacher beliefs , attitudes and anxiety , ” Interactive Learning Environments , vol . 24 , no . 23 , pp . 317 - 327 , 2016 . [ 29 ] A . Assor , K . Haya , and R . Guy , “Choice is good , but relevance is excellent : Autonomy‐enhancing and suppressing teacher behaviours predicting students ' engagement in schoolwork , " British Journal of Educational Psychology , vol . 72 , no . 2 , pp . 261 - 278 , 2002 . [ 30 ] N . A . Ibe et al . , " Reflections of a diversity equity and inclusion working group based on data from a national CS education program " , In Proc SIGCSE Baltimore , MD , 2018 , pp . 711 - 716 . [ 31 ] C . B . Rogers , W . Kristen and F . Jacob , “A review of the NAE report , engineering in K - 12 education , " Journal of Engineering Education , vol . 99 , no . 2 , pp . 179 - 181 , 2010 . Thomas K . F . Chiu received the BSc degree in Mathematics and Computer Sciences from The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology , and MSc degree in Software Engineering from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University , and PGDE in Technology education and PhD degrees in Information Technology in Education from The University of Hong Kong . He was a software engineer and database trainer in Hong Kong , and the School - University Partnership director in The University of Hong Kong . Currently , He is an assistant professor with Faculty of Education , The Chinese University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong where he is the associate director of Centre for Learning Sciences and Technologies . His research interest includes multimedia learning , technology enhanced learning and STEM education . Helen Meng ( F’13 ) received the S . B . , S . M . , and Ph . D . degrees in electrical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA , USA . She is currently a Chair Professor at the Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management , The Chinese University of Hong Kong ( CUHK ) . She heads the Curriculum Design Team of the AI4Future Project , which aims to design and develop a pre - tertiary AI curriculum for Hong Kong . Helen ' s research interests include human – computer interaction via multimodal and multilingual spoken language systems , speech retrieval technologies , and computer - aided pronunciation training . She was awarded the first HKSAR Government Research Grants Council ' s Theme - based Research Scheme Project in the thematic topic of AI in 2019 . She has previously served as the Editor - in - Chief of the IEEE Transactions on Audio , Speech and Language Processing , as well as an Elected Member of the IEEE Signal Processing Society Board of Governors . She is a Fellow of the HKCS , HKIE , ISCA and IEEE . Ching - Sing Chai received his B . A . from the National Taiwan University ; PGDE and MA from Nanyang Technological University ; and his Ed D from the University of Leicester . He served as a secondary Chinese language teacher and head of department , and as an associate professor in Nanyang Technological University . He is currently a professor in the Chinese University of Hong Kong . He has published more than 100 SSCI papers . His research interests include technological pedagogical content knowledge , language learning , STEM education , and teacher professional development . Irwin King is the Chair and Professor of Computer Science & Engineering at The Chinese University of Hong Kong . His research interests include machine learning , social computing , AI , web intelligence , data mining , and multimedia information processing . In these research areas , he has over 300 technical publications in journals and conferences . He is an Associate Editor of the Journal of Neural Networks ( NN ) and ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data ( ACM TKDD ) . He is President of the International Neural Network Society ( INNS ) , an IEEE Fellow , and an ACM Distinguished Member . He has won the ACM CIKM2019 Test of Time Award and also the ACM SIGIR 2020 Test of Time Award for work done in Social Computing . In early 2010 while on leave with AT & T Labs Research , San Francisco , he taught classes as a Visiting Professor at UC Berkeley . He received his B . Sc . degree in > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER ( DOUBLE - CLICK HERE TO EDIT ) < 8 Engineering and Applied Science from California Institute of Technology ( Caltech ) and his M . Sc . and Ph . D . degree in Computer Science from the University of Southern California ( USC ) . Recently , Prof . King has been an evangelist in the use of education technologies in eLearning for the betterment of teaching and learning through the creation of the Knowledge and Education Exchange Platform ( KEEP ) . Savio Wong is an Associate Professor at the Department of Educational Psychology and Director of the Laboratory for Brain and Education at The Chinese University of Hong Kong ( CUHK ) . He received his Bachelor in Cognitive Science and Ph . D . in Psychology from the University of Hong Kong . He was a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Western Ontario and the University of Southern California . He was appointed as Visiting Associate Professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 2018 . He has been studying the neural mechanism of impulsivity and decision - making in adolescents with functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) techniques and developing psychophysiological markers of emotion with wearable sensors . Yeung Yam is the Principal Investigator of the CUHK Jockey Club Al for the Future Project . He received his B . Sc . degree in Physics from CUHK , and his M . S . and Sc . D . degrees in Aeronautics and Astronautics from MIT . He is the Director of the CUHK Shenzhen Research Institute and a Research Professor at the Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering . He is also the Associate Master of the Lee Woo Sing College of CUHK . Professor Yam served as the Chairman of the Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering from 2004 to 2011 , and the Interim Dean of the Faculty of Engineering of CUHK in 2018 . He is currently serving as the Founding Director of the Intelligent Control Systems Laboratory . His research interests include intelligent systems , human skill acquisition for dexterous manipulations , endoscopic - based surgical robots , computational method for controller design , bio - system modelling and analysis , and technology development for industrial applications . He is a Fellow of the IMechE and a Fellow of HKIE . He has published over 200 technical papers in his fields of interest .