The interstitial space comprises about one - sixth of the body volume and mediates the exchange of oxygen , nutrients and waste products between the vascular sys - tem and cells . Water and molecules transported through convection flow out of capillaries , through the interstitial space , and into the lymphatic system or the venous side of the vascular system . The transcapillary flow , which is of crucial importance for the homeostasis of tissues , is determined by the hydrostatic and COLLOID OSMOTIC PRESSURES in capillaries and in the interstitium , together with the HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY and the plasma PROTEIN REFLECTION COEFFICIENT ( FIG . 1 ) . The resulting transcapillary pressure gradients are slightly negative in normal inter - stitium , which results in outward transcapillary flow . By contrast , both the osmotic and hydrostatic interstitial fluid pressures are often increased in solid tumours . Young et al . had already reported by 1950 that the hydrostatic pressure of tumours is often increased 1 . In 1987 , Jain hypothesized that the osmotic pressure in tumours must be high and that the high tumour inter - stitial fluid pressure ( IFP ) is a barrier for efficient drug delivery 2 , 3 . It is now well established that the IFP of most solid tumours is increased . This has been shown in breast carcinoma 4 , 5 , metastatic melanoma 6 , 7 , head and neck carcinoma 8 , and colorectal carcinoma 4 ( for reviews , see REFS 9 , 10 ) . Values as high as 60 mm Hg have been recorded in some tumours . The tumour IFP is uniform throughout the centre of the tumour and drops steeply in its periphery 11 , 12 . The mechanisms that determine the increased tumour IFP are not fully understood , but probably involve blood - vessel leaki - ness , lymph - vessel abnormalities , interstitial fibrosis and a contraction of the interstitial space mediated by stromal fibroblasts . Many drugs used for treatment of patients with can - cer — high - molecular - weight compounds in particular — are transported from the circulatory system through the interstitial space by convection rather than by diffu - sion . Large molecules , such as soluble proteins , are mainly transported in the interstitium by convection ; that is , they are carried by streaming of a flowing fluid 13 . Low - molecular - weight compounds , such as glucose or oxygen , are mainly transported by diffusion ; that is , they move from an area of high concentration to an area of low concentration . Increased IFP contributes to a decreased transcapillary transport in tumours , so it is an obstacle to the treatment , as it leads to a decreased uptake of drugs or therapeutic antibodies into the tumour . Cancer cells are therefore exposed to a lower effective concentration of therapeutic agent than normal cells , lowering the therapeutic efficiency . Several studies indicate that high IFP in the tumour is correlated with poor prognosis . In a study of patients with melanoma or lymphoma , the patients that responded best to chemotherapy showed a progressive lowering of the tumour IFP , whereas the tumour IFP of patients that did not respond increased during treatment 6 . Moreover , high IFP in the tumour correlated HIGH INTERSTITIAL FLUID PRESSURE — AN OBSTACLE IN CANCER THERAPY Carl - Henrik Heldin * , Kristofer Rubin ‡ , Kristian Pietras § and Arne Östman | | Abstract | Many solid tumours show an increased interstitial fluid pressure ( IFP ) , which forms a barrier to transcapillary transport . This barrier is an obstacle in tumour treatment , as it results in inefficient uptake of therapeutic agents . There are a number of factors that contribute to increased IFP in the tumour , such as vessel abnormalities , fibrosis and contraction of the interstitial matrix . Lowering the tumour IFP with specific signal - transduction antagonists might be a useful approach to improving anticancer drug efficacy . * Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research , Box595 , SE - 75124Uppsala , Sweden . ‡ Department ofMedical Biochemistry and Microbiology , Uppsala University , BMC , Box582 , SE - 75123 Uppsala , Sweden . § University ofCalifornia , San Francisco , 513ParnassusAvenue , HSW1090 - Box0534 , SanFrancisco , California94143 , USA . | | Cancer Center Karolinska , R8 : 03 , Department of Pathology - Oncology , Karolinska Institute , SE - 17176Stockholm , Sweden . Correspondence to C . - H . H . e - mail : C - H . Heldin @ licr . uu . se doi : 10 . 1038 / nrc1456 806 | OCTOBER 2004 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER VOLUME 4 | OCTOBER 2004 | 807 R E V I E W S COLLOID OSMOTIC PRESSURE A pressure built up by the tendency ofwater to diffuse through a semipermeable membrane into a compartment with higher concentration of high - molecular - weight molecules , like proteins , that are unable to pass through the membrane . HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY A measure ofthe permeability of the vessel wall for water . PROTEIN REFLEXION COEFFICIENT A measure ofthe impermeability ofthe capillary vessel wall for proteins . STARLING’S FORCES Starling’s hypothesis describes the transcapillary fluid flux , J v , as J v = L p × S ×∆ P , where L p is the hydraulic conductivity ofthe capillary membrane and S is the surface area for exchange . ∆ P is the net pressure difference determined by ∆ P = ( P CAP – P IF ) – σ ( COP CAP – COP IF ) , where P CAP and P IF are the hydrostatic pressures in capillaries and interstitium , respectively ; COP CAP and COP IF are the colloid osmotic pressures of capillaries and interstitium , respectively ; and σ is the plasmaprotein reflexion coefficient for proteins . INTEGRINS Transmembrane receptors , consisting ofdifferent combinations of α - and β - subunits . Many bind different extracellular - matrix proteins , such as collagen , fibronectin and laminin . STARLING’S FORCES 16 . In human capillaries , the osmotic pressure is about 28 mm Hg , which tends to keep fluid in the capillaries . The forces that tend to move fluid out from the capillaries are the capillary hydrostatic pressure ( estimated to about 20 mm Hg ) , the interstitial - fluid osmotic pressure ( about 8 mm Hg ) and the interstitial - fluid hydrostatic pressure , which is normally negative ( – 1 to – 3 mm Hg ) . So there is normally a net outward filtration pressure from the capillaries into surrounding tissues of 1 – 3 mm Hg ( FIG . 1a ) . This outward pressure assures a flow of fluid out from the vessels and through the interstitium , and contributes to transport of mole - cules to and from cells . There is , however , significant variation in the interstitial fluid velocities 17 . IFP can be determined by wick - in - needle or micro - puncture techniques 16 ( BOX1 ) . During certain pathologi - cal conditions , such as in patients with inflammation or burn injuries , the IFP can drop markedly , causing an increase in the net filtration pressure . This is compen - sated for by outflow of fluid from the vessels and the development of oedema 18 — an excesive accumulation of fluid in the interstitium . Regulation of IFP in normal tissues IFP is actively controlled in loose interstitial connective tissues that surround all peripheral blood vessels involved in exchange of solutes between plasma and the tissues 16 . Transcapillary filtration pressure gradients can therefore be actively regulated by IFP changes in tissues , and are not merely a reflection of microvascular or col - loid osmotic pressures 19 . We have proposed a model for how the IFP of loose connective tissues is controlled 20 . According to this model , fibroblasts exert a tension on the collagen microfibrillar network of the extracellular matrix through collagen - binding INTEGRINS . The collagen microfibrillar network in turn restrains the intrinsic with a high recurrence rate and a poor prognosis for patients with cervical cancer who received radiation therapy 14 , 15 . So it is an interesting possibility that drug delivery , safety and efficacy can be improved by lowering tumour IFP . Relation between transcapillary transport and IFP Before discussing the mechanisms that cause high IFP in tumours , it is important to consider the relation between transcapillary transport and IFP , as well as the regulation of IFP in normal tissues . The forces that determine the net filtration pressure across the capillary wall — the hydrostatic and colloid osmotic pressures of capillaries and the interstitium — are referred to as Summary • Transcapillary flow , which is important for tissue homeostasis , is influenced by the hydrostatic and colloid osmotic pressures of capillaries and interstitium . • The interstitial fluid pressure ( IFP ) of normal tissues is actively regulated through interactions between stromal cells and the extracellular - matrix molecules . • Most solid tumours have increased IFP . • The reasons for increased tumour IFP include blood - vessel leakiness , lymph - vessel abnormalities , interstitial fibrosis and a contraction of the interstitial matrix mediated by stromal fibroblasts . • Increased tumour IFP causes inefficient uptake of therapeutic agents . • Lowering of tumour IFP — for example , by certain cytokine antagonists — can improve drug uptake and thereby improve treatment efficiency . Blood vessel Net outward filtration pressure 1 – 3mm Hg COP CAP 28mm Hg COP IF 8 mm Hg P CAP 20mm Hg P IF – 1 to – 3 mm Hg a Normal tissue Net inward or outward pressure ( – 18 – 2 mm Hg ) COP CAP 28mm Hg COP IF 20 mm Hg P CAP 20mm Hg P IF 10 – 30 mm Hg b Tumour tissue Figure 1 | Forces that regulate transcapillary transport in tissues . The figure shows the hydrostatic and colloid osmotic pressures in capillaries ( P CAP and COP CAP , respectively ) and the surrounding interstitium ( P IF and COP IF , respectively ) in normal tissues ( a ) and tumour tissues ( b ) . It should be noted that values are approximate . a | In normal human capillaries , the COP CAP is about 28mmHg , which tends to keep fluid in the capillaries . The forces that tend to move fluid out from the capillaries are the P CAP ( about 20mmHg ) , the COP IF ( about 8mmHg ) and the P IF , which is normally negative ( – 1 to – 3mmHg ) . So there is normally a net outward filtration pressure from the capillaries in tissues of 1 – 3mmHg . This outward pressure assures a flow of fluid out from the vessels and through the interstitium , and contributes to transport of molecules to and from cells . b | In tumour tissues , the COP IF is increased to about 20 mm Hg and the P IF is increased to 10 – 30 mm Hg , resulting in some tumours in a net outward pressure of about 2 mm Hg ( which is similar to that of normal tissues ) , but in other tumours in a net inward pressure of up to 18 mm Hg . 808 | OCTOBER 2004 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer R E V I E W S with connective - tissue fibroblasts together with the contractility of these cells . Mechanisms for increased IFP in tumours The reasons that IFP is increased in tumours have not been completely elucidated , but they probably involve defective blood and lymph vessels , as well as increased contractility through fibroblast - like cells of the stroma ( FIG . 2 ) . The stroma that surrounds tumour cells differs from that of normal tissues . It is characterized by a modified composition of the extracellular matrix , increased microvessel density , the presence of fibroblasts with an ‘activated’ phenotype and an infiltration of inflammatory cells . The tumour stroma is therefore fre - quently referred to as ‘reactive stroma’ . A consequence of the infiltration of macrophages and other cell types of the immune system is that various cytokines are released in the tumour tissue . Several of these , such as PDGF , TGF β and vascular endothelial cell growth factor ( VEGF ) as well as other angiogenic factors , can act on different cell types in the tumour and affect the IFP . The ability to attract blood vessels is a prerequisite for tumour growth , although the vessels of tumours are abnormal . Tumour vessels are irregular , saccular , convo - luted and leaky , and have defects in PERICYTE coverage and function 33 – 36 ( FIG . 2 ) . This is due to an imbalance in the elaborate collaboration between the factors involved in different stages of the angiogenic process leading to the formation of normal , well - functioning blood ves - sels . The abnormality of the vessels makes the blood flow in tumours inefficient . Furthermore , the growing tumour cells might compress the vessels , and so further reduce flow 37 , 38 . Tumour hypoxia , however , does not seem to contribute to increased tumour IFP 39 . The leakiness of tumour vessels might be due to pro - duction ofVEGF by tumour cells , which has been shown to increase vascular permeability 40 . This causes an increased outflow of proteins and other molecules from the vessels , and thereby a concomitant rise in the colloid osmotic pressure of the interstitium . Direct measure - ment of the colloid osmotic pressure in the tumour interstitium revealed values approaching that of the col - loid osmotic pressure in the capillaries 41 , which is nor - mally higher ( FIG . 1 ) . Moreover , lymphatic vessels are absent or non - functional in tumours 42 – 44 , which also contributes to inefficient drainage of fluid and interstitial proteins from the tumour tissue . Although accurate measurements of the hydrostatic microvascular pressure are difficult to perform , there are indications that an increased tumour IFP is accompanied by an increased microvascular pressure 45 . Taken together , the deficiencies in blood - and lymph - vessel function contribute to the increased IFP of tumours ( FIG . 2 ) . The fibroblasts of tumour stroma often show signs of differentiation towards smooth - muscle cells with contractile properties 46 . There are several observations to indicate that fibroblasts of tumour stroma gain con - tractile function that contributes to the increased IFP ( see below ) ; this is analogous to the role of fibroblasts in the control of the IFP of normal tissues ( FIG . 2 ) . Normally , large changes in IFP of loose connective tissue swelling pressure of HYALURONAN and proteoglycans in the matrix 21 . In this way , fibroblasts are able to actively mod - ulate IFP by regulating the tension applied to the extracellular matrix . Some initial insights into the mechanisms involved have come from in vitro cell - culture experiments . If fibroblasts are grown in a colla - gen gel in a cell - culture dish , they will contract the gel within a 24 - hour period ; this contraction process is increased by serum 22 and the growth - regulatory factors platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) 23 , 24 and trans - forming growth factor - β ( TGF β ) 25 , and is suppressed by neutralizing antibodies against collagen - binding β 1 - integrins 24 , 26 . These observations support the idea that cell - mediated collagen - gel contraction is regulated by growth - factor - induced contraction of fibroblasts . These in vitro observations could have relevance to the in vivo regulation of IFP , as specific blockage of β 1 - integrins in rat skin significantly reduces the IFP by releasing the tension in the network of matrix mole - cules 27 . Moreover , if an allergic reaction is provoked in the skin of a rat , which lowers the IFP , injection of the B - chain homodimeric isoform of PDGF restores the IFP 28 . This restoration was not observed in animals in which the normal PDGF receptor - β ( PDGFR β ) was replaced with a mutant receptor that was unable to activate phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) 29 , indi - cating that the PI3K signalling pathway , which lies downstream of PDGFR activation , is an important regulator of IFP . The PI3K pathway has been impli - cated in regulation of actin reorganization and motil - ity of cells 30 . There have been other indications that the contractile apparatus of the cells is important for the regulation of the IFP of normal tissues , including the finding that treatment with the microfilament - disrupting agent cytochalasin D induces oedema in rat skin 31 . Furthermore , the pro - inflammatory factor prostaglandin E 1 ( PGE 1 ) has been found to inhibit collagen - gel contraction by fibroblasts in vitro , and to lower the IFP and induce oedema in rat skin in vivo 32 . The mechanism might involve a PGE 1 - induced increase in the cAMP level of stromal fibroblasts , inhibiting the cellular contractile system . So , it seems that the IFP of normal skin is actively regulated by the integrin - mediated interactions of matrix molecules HYALURONAN A large linear polysaccharide of repeating disaccharide units . It crosslinks proteoglycans and so contributes to the elasticity of tissues . PERICYTES Mural cells present in capillaries and venules that are embedded in the basal lamina and also form close contact with endothelial cells . Pericytes are recruited to blood vessels by PDGF - BB produced by endothelial cells . Box 1 | Techniques used to study interstitial fluid pressure Micropuncture technique A sharpened glass capillary , usually 3 – 10 µ m in diameter can be used for measurements of fluid pressures in tissues . The capillary is often connected to a counter - pressure system . The micropuncture technique yields more reliable estimates of fluid pressures than the wick - in - needle technique , as it is less traumatic and records IFP in a smaller volume . The method does not , however , allow for measurements in deep tissues ; recordings can only usually be made down to about 1 mm from the surface . Wick - in - needle technique This procedure uses a fine steel needle filled with a wick ( usually nylon thread , though cotton was used in the past ) to measure fluid pressures in tissues . The needle is filled with isotone fluid and connected to a pressure - measuring device . As the needle is so thin , this method can be used to measure pressures deep in tissues , such as the more central parts of a tumour mass . NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER VOLUME 4 | OCTOBER 2004 | 809 R E V I E W S are compensated by changes in the volume of the tissue , such as by formation of oedema . It seems that volume changes of tumour tissue are more restricted , probably because of the denser network of connective - tissue mol - ecules that characterizes tumour stroma ( FIG . 2 ) ; this is likely to contribute to the persistence of the increased IFP of some tumours . Lowering of tumour IFP in tumour therapy The fact that the increased tumour IFP prevents the effi - cient uptake of therapeutic agents makes it important to find ways to increase the transvascular transport in tumours . In animal models , it has been shown that this can be done by periodically increasing the systemic blood pressure , such as by infusion of ANGIOTENSIN II , which leads to an increase in the hydrostatic pressure in capillaries and , therefore , a transiently increased gradi - ent compared with the interstitium 47 . However , in patients it would be more desirable to selectively lower the IFP of the tumour . Several types of treatment have been shown to decrease tumour IFP in animal models and patients ( TABLE 1 ) . VEGF inhibitors . Treatment of immunocompromized mice bearing xenografts of human glioblastoma or ade - nocarcinoma tumours with a monoclonal antibody against VEGF was found to cause a greater than 70 % reduction of tumour IFP 48 . Recently , studies have shown that the IFP reduction induced by VEGF - receptor inhi - bition leads to an improved transvascular pressure gradient 49 . Moreover , VEGF blockage in animals with adenocarcinoma was found to lead to an increase in the uptake of the chemotherapeutic drug CPT - 11 ( REF . 50 ) . Recent studies also revealed that anti - VEGF treatment of patients with rectal carcinomas led to a significant reduction of tumour IFP 51 . Concomitant with the low - ering of tumour IFP , the number of tumour endothelial cells were decreased and the vessels were pruned — abnormal formations , such as sacs and dead ends , dis - appeared and the vessels obtained a more normal shape . The normalization of tumour vessels probably led to a decreased vessel permeability , and thereby a lowered tumour IFP . Interestingly , treatment of islet - cell tumours of RIP - Tag2 transgenic mice with an antibody against VEGF led to decreased fenestration of endothe - lial cells , consistent with a decreased vessel permeabil - ity 52 . Combined , the recent experiments with VEGF inhibitors support the concept that increased vascular permeability is an important contributor to increased tumour IFP . PDGF inhibitors . PDGF antagonists have also been shown to normalize the IFP of tumours . A selective low - molecular - weight inhibitor of the PDGFR kinases , imatinib ( Glivec ) , and a DNA APTAMER that specifically inhibits PDGF B - chain were found to lower the IFP of the KAT - 4 thyroid carcinoma grown in immunocom - promized mice and of the PROb colon carcinoma grown in syngenic rats 53 . The lowering of the tumour IFP was accompanied by an increased uptake of chemotherapeutic drugs , and an increased treatment Blood vessel Collagen fibres Fibroblast Lymphvessel Macrophage b Tumour tissue a Normal tissue Endothelial cell Pericyte Figure 2 | Structural differences between normal and tumour tissues that affect interstitial fluid pressure . a | Normal tissues contain linear blood vessels lined by a smooth layer of endothelial cells with pericytes maintaining the integrity of the vessel on its outside . The extracellular matrix consists of a loose network of collagen and other fibres , and contains a few fibroblasts and macrophages . Lymph vessels are also present in normal tissues . b | Tumour tissues contain defective blood vessels that are leaky and irregularly shaped , with many sac - like formations , dead - ends and highly activated endothelia . Blood flow is therefore inefficient . These blood vessels are also covered by fewer pericytes than in normal tissues , resulting in decreased vessel stability . Furthermore , many tumours lack lymph vessels , so interstitial fluid and soluble proteins are inefficiently removed . The extracellular matrix of tumours contains a much denser network of collagen fibres , which are thicker than in normal tissues . Therefore , the tumour tissue is more rigid than normal loose connective tissue . Tumours also contain an increased number of fibroblasts , which bind to the collagen fibres in an integrin - dependent manner and exert an increased tension between the fibres , as well as an increased number of macrophages and other inflammatory cells ; these cells release cytokines and growth factors that act on cells of blood vessels and stroma fibroblasts to increase interstitial fluid pressure . 810 | OCTOBER 2004 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer R E V I E W S tumour tissue . The lowering of IFP by the TGF β inhibitor was not accompanied by oedema formation , indicating that the transvascular hydrostatic pressure gradients remained constant 61 . Moreover , a decrease in HYDROXYPROLINE content was noted , indicating that the amount of collagen in the tumour tissue had decreased , although no change in hyaluronan content was observed 62 . This observation is consistent with the well - established role of TGF β in promoting extracellu - lar - matrix formation . Support for the idea that the structure of the collagen - fibre network can affect IFP comes from the recent observation of an increased transcapillary gradient and an improved uptake of monoclonal antibodies into human osteosarcoma xenografts after treatment with collagenase 63 . So TGF β antagonists might cause a decrease in tumour IFP by reducing the relative fibrosis in tumours and / or normalizing tumour blood vessels . TNF α . Tail - vein injection of the cytokine tumour - necrosis factor - α ( TNF α ) in melanoma - bearing mice was found to cause a 50 – 70 % decrease in tumour IFP 64 . The effect was seen 5 hours after injection , but not after 1 hour , and the tumour IFP was restored 24 hours after injection . A possible mechanism for the effect of TNF α on the IFP , which is consistent with the timing of this effect , was indicated by the observation that the lowering of tumour IFP was accompanied by a reduction in the mean arterial blood pressure . It effect 54 – 56 . As PDGF controls the IFP of normal connec - tive tissue by promoting interactions between integrins of stromal fibroblasts with extracellular - matrix mole - cules and by stimulating contraction of these cells , it is likely that the ability of PDGF antagonists to block these effects will lower the IFP in tumours . A role for PDGF in pericyte recruitment to normal vessels is well established 57 . Recent studies have indi - cated a role for PDGF in recruitment of pericytes to tumour vessels that improve vessel stability 58 – 60 . PDGF antagonists would therefore not be expected to con - tribute to vessel normalization . No obvious effect on the morphology of vessels was observed in tumour models that displayed an IFP reduction after treatment with PDGF antagonists 54 . So the effects of PDGF antagonists on tumour IFP seem to be mediated primarily through their effects on the stromal fibroblasts , rather than effects on the tumour vessels , although additional effects on vessels cannot be excluded . TGF β inhibitors . Using a soluble extracellular domain of the type II TGF β receptor that efficiently binds and neutralizes two of the three TGF β isoforms , Lammerts et al . 61 observed a decreased IFP of the KAT - 4 thyroid carcinoma in mice . The effect was concentration - dependent and was seen 5 – 10 days after administration of the TGF β inhibitor , but no effect on tumour IFP was seen after only one day , indicating that the effect on IFP is the result of a long - term reorganization of the ANGIOTENSIN II A short peptide that , after cleavage from its precursor , binds to a G - protein - coupled receptor present on vascular smooth muscle cells and increases the blood pressure . DNA APTAMER A DNA molecule of20 – 40 nucleotides , obtained by a repeated selection procedure , which specifically binds other molecules with high affinity . HYDROXYPROLINE A post - translationally modified amino acid , hydroxylated proline , often detected in collagen . Table 1 | Compounds known to lower tumour interstitial fluid pressure Compound Possible mechanism Model systems In vivo verification of References of action increased drug uptake ? VEGF antagonist Normalization of blood vessels , Patients with rectal cancer ; human Yes 48 , 51 leading to improved blood flow colon carcinomas ( HT29 ) , murine mammary and decreased permeability carcinomas ( MCaIV ) , human small - cell carcinomas ( 54A ) , human gliomas ( U87 ) and human adenocarcinomas ( LS174T ) grown in immunocompromized mice PDGF antagonist Decreased contraction of stromal Rat syngenic colorectal PROb tumours ; Yes 54 , 55 fibroblasts and decreased human thyroid carcinomas ( KAT - 4 ) interactions between these cells grown in immunocompromized mice and the extracellular matrix TGF β antagonist Decreased amount of Human thyroid carcinomas ( KAT - 4 ) grown Not yet 61 extracellular - matrix molecules in immunocompromized mice TNF α Unclear Human melanomas ( S - MEL , P - MEL Yes 65 , 75 and MeWo ) grown in immunocompromized mice Hyaluronidase Degradation of hyaluronan Human osteosarcomas ( OHS ) grown in Not yet 66 – 68 immunocompromized mice Dexamethasone Reduced microvascular Human colon adenocarcinomas ( LS174T ) Not yet 69 permeability and decreased grown in immunocompromized mice amounts of extracellular - matrix molecules Bradykinin agonist Improved blood flow Rat ascites mammary carcinomas Yes 70 ( MATB - III ) grown in rats Nicotinamide Decreased microvascular FSaII tumours grown in Not yet 71 pressure immunocompromized mice PGE 1 Decreased contractility of stromal Rat syngenic colorectal tumours ; Yes 72 , 73 fibroblasts chemically induced mammary rat carcinomas PDGF , platelet - derived growth factor ; PGE 1 , prostaglandin E 1 ; TGF β , transforming growth factor - β ; TNF α , tumour - necrosis factor - α ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor . NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER VOLUME 4 | OCTOBER 2004 | 811 R E V I E W S PGE 1 . The pro - inflammatory factor PGE 1 causes swelling of normal tissues . Application of PGE 1 to the subcutaneous tissue close to transplanted PROb tumours in immunocompetent BDIX rats led to a rapid decrease of tumour IFP by 30 % 72 . The decrease was accompanied by a 40 % increase in transcapillary transport of 51 Cr - EDTA , as quantified by MICRODIALYSIS . An even larger effect was observed in rats with chemically induced orthotopic mammary carcinomas . PGE 1 also increased the antitumour effect of 5 - fluorouracil , but only when this drug was administered during the time IFP was lowered 73 . Notably , the effect of PGE 1 was more rapid than the effects of VEGF , PDGF or TGF β inhibitors . The IFP - lowering effect of PGE 1 was transient and resulted in the formation of interstitial oedema within PROb tumours 72 . It took about 1 hour for tumour IFP levels to return to the levels they were at before PGE 1 was applied . This time period is longer than that required to compensate for lowered IFP in normal loose connective tissue after inflammation - induced lowering of IFP 16 . This is likely to reflect impaired blood flow and convection of fluid in tumours com - pared with normal tissues . The increased transport of 51 Cr - EDTA and increased effects of 5 - fluorouracil during the time period when IFP is lowered , and the fact that oedema is formed , indicate that transport through convection is also an important determinant of transport for low - molecular - weight components . Again , inhibition of stromal fibroblast contraction , as occurs in normal tissues , might help mediate these effects of PGE 1 . Although an effect of PGE 1 on the blood vessels has not been excluded , it seems less likely , as neither blood flow , determined by radiola - belled microspheres , nor extravasations of serum albumin were affected by PGE 1 ( REF . 73 ) . Future directions Traditionally , cancer treatment has focused on targeting the tumour cells directly . It has , however , become clear that tumour cells interact with and are dependent on sur - rounding normal cell types in the tumour . So targeting of non - malignant cell types , in parallel to the tumour cells , can potentially increase the treatment efficiency . In this context , the possibility of improving therapy of solid tumours by increasing the tumour uptake of chemothera - peutic agents or other therapeutics by lowering tumour IFP deserves further exploration . It is , however , not possible to say which approach has the best clinical potential . Some of the IFP - lowering treatments act very rapidly , such as PGE 1 . This agent lowers tumour IFP within minutes , presumably by immediately decreasing the contractility of stromal fibroblast - like cells . Other types of treatments , including VEGF and PDGF antagonists , take longer , requiring anywhere from 1 to 3 days . In these cases , the effects involve pruning and normalization of blood vessels , decreased interaction between stromal fibroblasts and matrix molecules , and decreased con - traction of these cells . TGF β antagonists also take several days to lower tumour IFP , possibly by altering remains to be determined , however , whether TNF α causes an increased pressure gradient across the vessel wall , and thereby affects the fluid transport . An increased uptake of doxorubicin after delivery of TNF α to tumour vessels has been demonstrated 65 . Hyaluronidase . Hyaluronan is a high - molecular - weight polysaccharide that is an important constituent of the extracellular matrix , where it forms large networks with proteoglycans . This molecule attracts water to cause tis - sue swelling . Injection of the hyaluronan - degrading enzyme hyaluronidase into human osteosarcoma xenografts reduced tumour IFP by 20 – 40 % within 1 hour after injection ; the IFP was restored to normal levels after 48 hours 66 – 68 . The degradation of hyaluronan is likely to alter the configuration of the extracellular matrix , reducing the swelling pressure . Dexamethasone . Intraperitoneal administration of the anti - inflammatory corticosteroid dexamethasone into immunodeficient mice that carry the human colon car - cinoma tumour LSI74T was found to lower tumour IFP . The effect was seen after 4 days of treatment and was reversible , as it disappeared within 3 days after treat - ment was stopped 69 . Possible mechanisms for the effect of dexamethasone include a decrease in microvascular permeability and reduction of matrix molecule content . Bradykinin agonists . Bradykinin is a peptide that causes vasodilatation and increased vascular permeability . Stimulation of the G - protein - coupled bradykinin B 2 receptor by the synthetic ligand Cereport ( labradimil ) was reported to increase the uptake of certain chemother - apeutics , such as [ 14 C ] carboplatin 70 . The increased uptake was rapid and was ascribed to a decreased IFP . The authors also observed an increase in vascular surface area , an increase in vascular pore size , decreases in systemic blood pressure and tumour blood flow , and an increase in areas of hypoperfusion within the tumour . Some of these effects would be expected to reduce drug uptake . However , when the anticancer agent is given before Cereport is administered , the net effect is an increase in drug uptake . The molecular mechanism involves activa - tion of two signalling pathways — nitric oxide and phospholipase A 2 — the latter of which leads to an increase in the production of prostaglandin E 2 . Blocking of nitric - oxide synthase inhibited the effect of Cereport completely , and blocking of phospholipase A 2 reduced the effects of this agent . These two pathways apparently act synergistically to modify the tumour vasculature , resulting in an increased uptake of therapeutic agents . Nicotinamide . Nicotinamide is the amide form of vita - min B 3 and is known to sensitize tumours to radiother - apy , possibly through an increased oxygenation of tissues . Nicotinamide treatment was the first treatment found to lower tumour IFP ; intraperitoneal injections of nicoti - namide into mice bearing FSaII tumours lowered tumour IFP by about 40 % within 1 hour . It was proposed that the lowering of IFP was secondary to a lowering of the vascular resistance 71 . 51 Cr - EDTA A low - molecular - weight compound that is widely used as a tracer for extracellular fluid . It is not taken up by cells and distributes freely between blood and interstitial fluids . MICRODIALYSIS A method to determine transport oflow - molecular - weight compounds from blood to tissues . A small dialysis probe , usually about 0 . 3 × 5 mm is inserted in the tissue and connected to a pump . The concentration ofthe low - molecular - weight compound in the dialysate is determined and related to the concentration in blood . 812 | OCTOBER 2004 | VOLUME 4 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer R E V I E W S Many studies have provided experimental support for the concept that a reduction in IFP is associated with improved tumour uptake of low - molecular - weight drugs like paclitaxel ( Taxol ) or 5 - fluorouracil . It should be noted , however , that transvascular transport of low - molecular - weight substances is traditionally believed to be driven by diffusion , whereas IFP predominantly regu - lates convection - driven transport . So how does lowering IFP promote tumour uptake of these drugs ? It could be that the effects of convection - driven transport on low - molecular - weight compounds have been underestimated in tumours , or that reducing IFP leads to other tissue changes that promote diffusion . Also , in many of the studies the pharmacological agents have several effects on tumour physiology , including changes in structural and functional properties of the tumour microvasculature . The causal relationships between these effects , the IFP reduction and the improved transvascular transport have still not been elucidated . There is much to do to fully understand the mecha - nisms behind the increased IFP of solid tumours and to find ways to lower tumour IFP . Most importantly , the concept that lowering tumour IFP can improve the therapeutic efficiency in patients with solid tumours who are treated with chemotherapy or other types of targeted therapies needs to be validated in the clinic . the extracellular - matrix composition . In developing clinical approaches to lower IFP , it will be a challenge to reduce the IFP of tumours without affecting nor - mal tissues , which is necessary to avoid oedema for - mation as well as other side effects . Lowering of tumour IFP by TNF α treatment is therefore a less attractive approach , as TNF α treatment is known to result in severe toxic effects . On the other hand , sys - temic treatment with antagonists of VEGF or PDGF , or local treatment with PGE 1 , can be done without serious side effects — these are therefore interesting alterna - tives for further exploration . Given that increased vas - cular permeability is an important contributor to increased tumour IFP , treatment with the angiogenic factor ANG1 is also worth investigating ; ANG1 pro - motes vessel maturation and has been shown to protect from VEGF - induced vascular leakage 74 . What would be the effect on tumour growth if tumour IFP was lowered in the absence of a therapeutic agent that targets the tumour cells directly ? Although the exact answer to this question is unknown , it is not likely that lowering of tumour IFP alone would be a beneficial approach to antitumour therapy . Rather , it could improve interstitial fluid transport and thereby increase the flow of nutrients to the tumour , promoting tumour growth . 1 . Young , J . S . et al . The significance of the tissue pressure of normal testicular and of neoplastic ( Brown – Pearce carcinoma ) tissue in the rabbit . J . Pathol . Bacteriol . 62 , 313 – 333 ( 1950 ) . 2 . Jain , R . K . Transport of molecules across tumor vasculature . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 6 , 559 – 593 ( 1987 ) . 3 . Jain , R . K . Transport of molecules in the tumor interstitium : a review . Cancer Res . 47 , 3039 – 3051 ( 1987 ) . References 2 and 3 were the first to propose that the increased IFP of some tumours is a barrier to drug delivery . 4 . Less , J . R . et al . Interstitial hypertension in human breast and colorectal tumors . Cancer Res . 52 , 6371 – 6374 ( 1992 ) . 5 . Nathanson , S . D . et al . Interstitial fluid pressure in breast cancer , benign breast conditions , and breast parenchyma . Ann . Surg . Oncol . 1 , 333 – 338 ( 1994 ) . 6 . Curti , B . D . et al . Interstitial pressure of subcutaneous nodules in melanoma and lymphoma patients : changes during treatment . Cancer Res . 53 , 2204 – 2207 ( 1993 ) . 7 . Boucher , Y . et al . Interstitial hypertension in superficial metastatic melanomas in humans . Cancer Res . 51 , 6691 – 6694 ( 1991 ) . 8 . Gutmann , R . et al . Interstitial hypertension in head and neck tumors in patients : correlation with tumor size . Cancer Res . 52 , 1993 – 1995 ( 1992 ) . 9 . Jain , R . K . The next frontier of molecular medicine : delivery of therapeutics . Nature Med . 4 , 655 – 657 ( 1998 ) . 10 . Jain , R . K . Barriers to drug delivery in solid tumors . Sci . Am . 271 , 58 – 65 ( 1994 ) . 11 . Boucher , Y . et al . Interstitial pressure gradients in tissue - isolated and subcutaneous tumors : implications for therapy . Cancer Res . 50 , 4478 – 4484 ( 1990 ) . 12 . DiResta , G . R . et al . Characterization of neuroblastoma xenograft in rat flank . I . Growth , interstitial fluid pressure , and interstitial fluid velocity distribution profiles . Microvasc . Res . 46 , 158 – 177 ( 1993 ) . 13 . Rippe , B . et al . Transport of macromolecules across microvascular walls : the two - pore theory . Physiol . Rev . 74 , 163 – 219 ( 1994 ) . 14 . Roh , H . D . et al . Interstitial hypertension in carcinoma of uterine cervix in patients : possible correlation with tumor oxygenation and radiation response . Cancer Res . 51 , 6695 – 6698 ( 1991 ) . 15 . Milosevic , M . et al . Interstitial fluid pressure predicts survival in patients with cervix cancer independent of clinical prognostic factors and tumor oxygen measurements . Cancer Res . 61 , 6400 – 6405 ( 2001 ) . 16 . Aukland , K . et al . Interstitial - lymphatic mechanisms in the control of extracellular fluid volume . Physiol . Rev . 73 , 1 – 78 ( 1993 ) . A thorough and complete review of the mechanisms that control extracellular fluid flow and interstitial fluid pressure . 17 . Chary , S . R . et al . Direct measurement of interstitial convection and diffusion of albumin in normal and neoplastic tissues by fluorescence photobleaching . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 86 , 5385 – 5389 ( 1989 ) . 18 . Lund , T . et al . Acute postburn edema : role of strongly negative interstitial fluid pressure . Am . J . Physiol . 255 , H1069 – H1074 ( 1988 ) . 19 . Wiig , H . et al . New and active role of the interstitium in control of interstitial fluid pressure : potential therapeutic consequences . Acta Anaesthesiol . Scand . 47 , 111 – 121 ( 2003 ) . 20 . Reed , R . K . et al . Control of interstitial fluid pressure : role of β 1 - integrins . Semin . Nephrol . 21 , 222 – 230 ( 2001 ) . 21 . Meyer , F . A . Macromolecular basis of globular protein exclusion and of swelling pressure in loose connective tissue ( umbilical cord ) . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 755 , 388 – 399 ( 1983 ) . 22 . Steinberg , B . M . et al . Establishment and transformation diminish the ability of fibroblasts to contract a native collagen gel . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 304 – 308 ( 1980 ) . 23 . Clark , R . A . F . et al . Platelet isoforms of platelet - derived growth factor stimulate fibroblasts to contract collagen matrices . J . Clin . Invest . 84 , 1036 – 1040 ( 1989 ) . 24 . Gullberg , D . et al . β 1 Integrin - mediated collagen gel contraction is stimulated by PDGF . Exp . Cell Res . 186 , 264 – 272 ( 1990 ) . 25 . Montesano , R . et al . Transforming growth factor β stimulates collagen - matrix contraction by fibroblasts : implications for wound healing . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 85 , 4894 – 4897 ( 1988 ) . 26 . Grundstrom , G . et al . Integrin α v β 3 mediates platelet - derived growth factor - BB - stimulated collagen gel contraction in cells expressing signaling deficient integrin α 2 β 1 . Exp . Cell Res . 291 , 463 – 473 ( 2003 ) . 27 . Reed , R . K . et al . Blockade of β 1 - integrins in skin causes edema through lowering of interstitial fluid pressure . Circ . Res . 71 , 978 – 983 ( 1992 ) . 28 . Rodt , S . Å . et al . A novel physiological function for platelet - derived growth factor - BB in rat dermis . J . Physiol . 495 , 193 – 200 ( 1996 ) . Demonstration that PDGF - BB controls the IFP of normal tissue . 29 . Heuchel , R . et al . Platelet - derived growth factor β receptor regulates interstitial fluid homeostasis through phosphatidylinositol - 3 ′ kinase signaling . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 11410 – 11415 ( 1999 ) . 30 . Wennström , S . et al . Membrane ruffling and chemotaxis transduced by the PDGF β - receptor require the binding site for phosphatidylinositol 3 ′ kinase . Oncogene 9 , 651 – 660 ( 1994 ) . 31 . Berg , A . et al . Cytochalasin D induces edema formation and lowering of interstitial fluid pressure in rat dermis . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 281 , H7 – H13 ( 2001 ) . 32 . Berg , A . et al . Effect of PGE 1 , PGI 2 , and PGF 2 α analogs on collagen gel compaction in vitro and interstitial pressure in vivo . Am . J . Physiol . 274 , H663 - H671 ( 1998 ) . 33 . Jain , R . K . Delivery of molecular and cellular medicine to solid tumors . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 46 , 149 – 168 ( 2001 ) . An authoritative review of the effect on drug uptake of high IFP in tumours . 34 . Baluk , P . et al . Abnormalities of basement membrane on blood vessels and endothelial sprouts in tumors . Am . J . Pathol . 163 , 1801 – 1815 ( 2003 ) . 35 . Abramsson , A . et al . Analysis of mural cell recruitment to tumor vessels . Circulation 105 , 112 – 117 ( 2002 ) . 36 . Morikawa , S . et al . Abnormalities in pericytes on blood vessels and endothelial sprouts in tumors . Am . J . Pathol . 160 , 985 – 1000 ( 2002 ) . 37 . Griffon - Etienne , G . et al . Taxane - induced apoptosis decompresses blood vessels and lowers interstitial fluid pressure in solid tumors : clinical implications . Cancer Res . 59 , 3776 – 3782 ( 1999 ) . 38 . Padera , T . P . et al . Pathology : cancer cells compress intratumour vessels . Nature 427 , 695 ( 2004 ) . 39 . Boucher , Y . et al . Lack of general correlation between interstitial fluid pressure and oxygen partial pressure in solid tumors . Microvasc . Res . 50 , 175 – 182 ( 1995 ) . 40 . Dvorak , H . F . et al . Vascular permeability factor / vascular endothelial growth factor , microvascular hyperpermeability , and angiogenesis . Am . J . Pathol . 146 , 1029 – 1039 ( 1995 ) . 41 . Stohrer , M . et al . Oncotic pressure in solid tumors is elevated . Cancer Res . 60 , 4251 – 4255 ( 2000 ) . 42 . Alitalo , K . et al . Molecular mechanisms of lymphangiogenesis in health and disease . Cancer Cell 1 , 219 – 227 ( 2002 ) . 43 . Padera , T . P . et al . Lymphatic metastasis in the absence of functional intratumor lymphatics . Science 296 , 1883 – 1886 ( 2002 ) . NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER VOLUME 4 | OCTOBER 2004 | 813 R E V I E W S 44 . Leu , A . J . et al . Absence of functional lymphatics within a murine sarcoma : a molecular and functional evaluation . Cancer Res . 60 , 4324 – 4327 ( 2000 ) . 45 . Boucher , Y . et al . Microvascular pressure is the principal driving force for interstitial hypertension in solid tumors : implications for vascular collapse . Cancer Res . 52 , 5110 – 5114 ( 1992 ) . 46 . Gabbiani , G . The myofibroblast in wound healing and fibrocontractive diseases . J . Pathol . 200 , 500 – 503 ( 2003 ) . 47 . Netti , P . A . et al . Enhancement of fluid filtration across tumor vessels : implication for delivery of macromolecules . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3137 – 3142 ( 1999 ) . 48 . Lee , C . G . et al . Anti - vascular endothelial growth factor treatment augments tumor radiation response under normoxic or hypoxic conditions . Cancer Res . 60 , 5565 – 5570 ( 2000 ) . 49 . Tong , R . T . et al . Vascular normalization by vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 blockade induces a pressure gradient across the vasculature and improves drug penetration in tumors . Cancer Res . 64 , 3731 – 3736 ( 2004 ) . Reports that vessel normalization after VEGF - antagonist treatment induces favourable transvascular hydrostatic pressure gradient in tumours . 50 . Wildiers , H . et al . Effect of antivascular endothelial growth factor treatment on the intratumoral uptake of CPT - 11 . Br . J . Cancer 88 , 1979 – 1986 ( 2003 ) . 51 . Willett , C . G . et al . Direct evidence that the VEGF - specific antibody bevacizumab has antivascular effects in human rectal cancer . Nature Med . 10 , 145 – 147 ( 2004 ) . Describes the first analysis of the effect of a VEGF antagonist on tumour vasculature and IFP in patients . 52 . Inai , T . et al . Inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) signaling in cancer causes loss of endothelial fenestrations , regression of tumor vessels , and appearance of basement membrane ghosts . Am . J . Pathol . 165 , 35 – 52 ( 2004 ) . 53 . Pietras , K . et al . Inhibition of platelet - derived growth factor receptors reduces interstitial hypertension and increases transcapillary transport in tumors . Cancer Res . 61 , 2929 – 2934 ( 2001 ) . 54 . Pietras , K . et al . Inhibition of PDGF receptor signaling in tumor stroma enhances antitumor effect of chemotherapy . Cancer Res . 62 , 5476 – 5484 ( 2002 ) . Demonstrates that PDGF antagonists lower tumour IFP , as well as increase drug uptake and treatment efficiency in preclinical models . 55 . Pietras , K . et al . STI571 enhances the therapeutic index of epothilone B by a tumor - selective increase of drug uptake . Clin . Cancer Res . 9 , 3779 – 3787 ( 2003 ) . 56 . Pietras , K . Increasing tumor uptake of drugs with imatinib . Semin . Oncol . 31 , 18 – 23 ( 2004 ) . 57 . Lindahl , P . et al . Pericyte loss and microaneurysm formation in PDGF - B - deficient mice . Science 277 , 242 – 245 ( 1997 ) . 58 . Abramsson , A . et al . Endothelial and nonendothelial sources of PDGF - B regulate pericyte recruitment and influence vascular pattern formation in tumors . J . Clin . Invest . 112 , 1142 – 11451 ( 2003 ) . 59 . Guo , P . et al . Platelet - derived growth factor - B enhances glioma angiogenesis by stimulating vascular endothelial growth factor expression in tumor endothelia and by promoting pericyte recruitment . Am . J . Pathol . 162 , 1083 – 1093 ( 2003 ) . 60 . Furuhashi , M . et al . Platelet - derived growth factor production by B16 melanoma cells leads to increased pericyte abundance in tumors and an associated increase in tumor growth rate . Cancer Res . 64 , 2725 – 2733 ( 2004 ) . 61 . Lammerts , E . et al . Interference with TGF - β 1 and - β 3 in tumor stroma lowers tumor interstitial fluid pressure independently of growth in experimental carcinoma . Int . J . Cancer 102 , 453 – 462 ( 2002 ) . 62 . Jacobson , A . et al . Hyaluronan content in experimental carcinoma is not correlated to interstitial fluid pressure . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 305 , 1017 – 1023 ( 2003 ) . 63 . Eikenes , L . et al . Collagenase increases the transcapillary pressure gradient and improves the uptake and distribution of monoclonal antibodies in human osteosarcoma xenografts . Cancer Res . 64 , 4768 – 4773 ( 2004 ) . 64 . Kristensen , C . A . et al . Reduction of interstitial fluid pressure after TNF - α treatment of three human melanoma xenografts . Br . J . Cancer 74 , 533 – 536 ( 1996 ) . 65 . Curnis , F . et al . Improving chemotherapeutic drug penetration in tumors by vascular targeting and barrier alteration . J . Clin . Invest . 110 , 475 – 482 ( 2002 ) . 66 . Brekken , C . et al . Hyaluronidase - induced periodic modulation of the interstitial fluid pressure increases selective antibody uptake in human osteosarcoma xenografts . Anticancer Res . 20 , 3513 – 3519 ( 2000 ) . 67 . Brekken , C . et al . Interstitial fluid pressure in human osteosarcoma xenografts : significance of implantation site and the response to intratumoral injection of hyaluronidase . Anticancer Res . 20 , 3503 – 3512 ( 2000 ) . 68 . Brekken , C . et al . Hyaluronidase reduces the interstitial fluid pressure in solid tumours in a non - linear concentration - dependent manner . Cancer Lett . 131 , 65 – 70 ( 1998 ) . 69 . Kristjansen , P . E . G . et al . Dexamethasone reduces the interstitial fluid pressure in a human colon adenocarcinoma xenograft . Cancer Res . 53 , 4764 – 4766 ( 1993 ) . 70 . Emerich , D . F . et al . Bradykinin modulation of tumor vasculature : II . activation of nitric oxide and phospholipase A2 / prostaglandin signaling pathways synergistically modifies vascular physiology and morphology to enhance delivery of chemotherapeutic agents to tumors . J . Pharmacol . Exp . Ther . 296 , 632 – 641 ( 2001 ) . 71 . Lee , I . et al . Nicotinamide can lower tumor interstitial fluid pressure : mechanistic and therapeutic implications . Cancer Res . 52 , 3237 – 3240 ( 1992 ) . 72 . Rubin , K . et al . Lowering of tumoral interstitial fluid pressure by prostaglandin E 1 is paralleled by an increased uptake of 51 Cr – EDTA . Int . J . Cancer 86 , 636 – 643 ( 2000 ) . 73 . Salnikov , A . V . et al . Lowering of tumor interstitial fluid pressure specifically augments efficacy of chemotherapy . FASEB J . 17 , 1756 – 1758 ( 2003 ) . Demonstration that prostaglandin E 1 lowers tumour IFP and increases treatment efficiency in preclinical models . 74 . Thurston , G . et al . Angiopoietin - 1 protects the adult vasculature against plasma leakage . Nature Med . 6 , 460 – 463 ( 2000 ) . 75 . Kristensen , C . A . et al . Reduction of interstitial fluid pressure after TNF - α treatment of three human melanoma xenografts . Br . J . Cancer 74 , 533 – 536 ( 1996 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank I . Schiller for skilful help in the preparation of this manuscript . Work in the authors laboratories were , in part , sup - ported by funds from the Swedish Cancer Society . The authors also thank editors and anonymous reviewers for valuable suggestions . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . Online links DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Cancer . gov : http : / / cancer . gov / breast cancer | cervical cancer | colorectal cancer | head and neck cancer | melanoma Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene ANG1 | PDGF | PDGFR β | TGF β | TNF α | VEGF FURTHER INFORMATION Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Uppsala Branch : http : / / www . licr . uu . se / Access to this interactive links box is free online .