Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 Do Mediated Contexts Differ in Information Richness ? A Comparison of Collocated and Dispersed Meetings Kelly Burke Laku Chidambaram Universify of Hawaii Idaho State University Abstract This study examines the question of whether or not media difSer in the perceptions they generate among users with respect to social presence , communication effectiveness and communication interface . The study observes these factors over a four - session period among thirty three groups performing a co llaborative writing task . Groups were assigned to one of three treatments , face - to - face , distributed synchronous and distributed asynchronous . No significant differences were observed between distributed and face - to - face conditions in their patterns of change over time . Results do indicate , however , that mediated contexts differed in terms of perceived social presence , communication effectiveness and communication interface when considered on a session - by - session basis . Introduction Technology is altering communication in organizations . For instance , relatively simple technologies like e - mail increase the opportunity for communication . The growing availability of sophisticated electronic meeting systems ( EMSs ) , ’ which facilitate various communication , meeting and task activities , promises to change the very nature of organizational meetings . Moreover , where flatter organizational structures are implemented and continuous improvement has become a primary objective , horizontal information exchange among co - workers ( e . g . , quality circles ) is likely to be cmphasized over traditional vextical interaction ( e . g . , chain of command reporting ) . The collaborative organizational model provides a context for the use of new media , channels and methods for facilitating communication and meetings [ 12 ] . The current study aims to extend our understanding of factors relevant to the use of technology in group interaction . This study examines the perceptions of work groups using EMSs and asks the following : do media differ in terms of their perceived communication richness and ’ In this paper , EMSs refer to systems which support various aspects of group interaction and include e - mail , group decision support systems ( GDSSs ) and computer mediated communication ( CMC ) systems . effectiveness ? Given the increasing globalization of business , we are particularly concerned with interaction in three conditions ; face - to - face , distributed synchronous ( same time - different place ) and distributed asynchronous ( different time - different place ) . The next section outlines the theoretical context for the present study followed by a discussion of prior research pertaining to media factors in group interaction . After that , the hypotheses which determined the study and the experimental design employed to test the hypotheses are presented . Finally , the paper describes the results and discusses their implications for both managers and researchers . Relevant theory Social Presence Theory Social presence is the extent to which one feels the presence and salience of a person with whom one is interacting . Short et al . ( 1976 ) argued that some media convey greater social presence than others and by implication are therefore more efficient for relational communication . On the other hand , other media may be better suited for non - relational - - e . g . , task focused - - communication , depending on the degree to which the media exhibit and the task requires social presence . For purposes of this study , relational interaction is that which involves sociWpersonal issues and thoughts as opposed to task related issues . Specifically , Short et al . assert that face - to - face interaction is most effective with respect to socio - emotional communication requirements presumably because of the extensive capacity of the medium to transmit proximal , facial and other nonverbal cues relative to other more mediated environments . In contrast , computerized media such as electronic bulletin boards permit the transmission of fewer types of visual and non - verbal cues . Therefore , non face - to - face media are presumed to be less effective for interpersonal communication . Implicit in social presence theory is the notion that the capacity of a medium to transmit the various types of non - verbal cues is measurable , i . e . , the relative social presence of a medium can be quantified and evaluated . Rational communicators are , therefore , likely to choose a medium 92 1060 - 3425196 $ 5 . 00 0 1996 IEEE Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 depending on the perceived fit between the relative capacitia of the media available and the transmission requirements of the intended message . Consequently , in a task Setting which requires relational interaction ( e . g . , conflict laden or long term projects ) , performance is likely to suffii if the environment mediating the interaction lacks in social presence . Moreover , social presence theory suggests that those aspects of group development which require relational communication - - i . e . , more than the mere exchange of data - - are likely to be retarded in meeting environments which exhibit less capacity for social presence . For instance , while groups engaged in distributed interaction via a computer conference can exchange factual information ( e . g . , product design specifications ) , the medium will restrict the exchange of socicx”onal information ( e . g . , personal confidence in specification reliability ) . Such resbiction can result in the attenuation of distributed group members’ perceptions with respect to other members’ true feelings . Because cohesion arises partly from perceptions of similarity among members , groups using computer confaencing - - a low social presence medium - - would be expected to develop less cohesion than those using faceto - face dialog , a high social presence medium . By extension , in highly complex tasks , a low social presence environment might therefore be expected to inhibit performance relative to a high social presence environment . Media Richness Theory Interaction can be seen as the exchange of symbols which represent jointly understood meanings , in ordex to clarib issues not yet agreed upon by the participants . Information equivocality - - i . e . , the potential for having more than one interpretation - - is inherent in most social interaction and needs to be minimized for mutual understanding to OCCUT . While more information is not always better , restricting channel capacity decreases the flow of various types of information - - e . g . , back - channel messaging - which is vital to the reduction of equivocality . Hence , reducing equivocality is expected to be positively correlated with the capacity to exchange more kinds of information . Daft and Lengel [ 2 ] describe two types of information requirement . Uncertainty exists when data , which provides answers to explicit questions , is missing . For instance , it is usually necessary to project revenues prior to making budgetary decisions . A manager who does not have access to revenue projections is in a situation of uncertainty with respect to - - i . e . , ignorant of - - budget information . On the other hand , equivocality is a state of ambiguity about a situation . In projecting revenues , managers often gather information about the environment , e . g . , aggregated industry wide income and expenses . The difficulty is in interpreting that data . Many possible circumstances may be responsible for any given set of economic conditions . Thus , managers are faced with confusion concerning such environmental information and , therefore , need to interpret and understand the context of the information for that data to be useful in decision making . Daft and Lengel [ 2 ] and Trevino et al . [ 16 ] argue that media vary in the amount and types of information they can deliver . Therefme , media can be characterized by their capacity to permit information delivery . Greater capacity allows the exchange of information which clarifies ambiguity . For instance , the statement “he’ll probably make the wrong decision” may be interprw as a critical remark on the basis of the verbal content alone . When the comment is accompanied by a smile or wink , however , a very Merent meaning may be intended . Delivery of the intended meaning may be impeded with media which filter out the nonverbal smile or wink . Those media with greater communication capacity - - which , therefore , reduce equivocality and facilitate shared understanding - - are considered rich media , e . g . , facemhce interaction . Those which are more restrictive are lean media , e . g . , written letters . Daft and Lengel [ 2 ] further proposed that the use of a communication medium will be effective only to the extent to which the richness of the medium fits the information requirements of the users . A medium’s richness is determined by four factors [ 2 ] including feedback immediacy , cue transmission capacity , use of natural language and personal focus ( i . e . , the extent to which the medium allows the inclusion of personal information like emotions ) . For example , faceto - face communication allows instant feedback , has the capacity to transmit many types of verbal and nonverbal cues , allows the use of natural language and accommodates highly personal communication foci ( e . g . , happiness can be conveyed by a smile ) . Thus , faceto - face interaction is very rich . Leaner media , such as email , written memos , flyers , etc . , differ from face - to - face and among themselves along all fout dimensions of information richness . For instance , written memos are limited in the types of cues they can carry ( e . g . , text , exclamation points , signatures , etc . ) and lack immediacy relative to facemface interaction . Media richness theory explicitly postulates that different environments will be suitable for different purposes . From such a perspective , we can conclude that a group which has no history - - and , therefore , minimal shared understanding - - and is working on a task which requires substantia1 clarification is likely to experience less social presence in a lean environment than in a rich one . Moreover , in a complex and ambiguous task context , a leaner communication environment can be expected to lead to less effective communication resulting in poorer performance Social presence and media richness theories lead to similar conclusions about the role of technical structures in human interaction . Both theories presume that the process and , consequently , the outcome of an interaction is determined by the interaction environment’s technical characteristics . In doing so , they attribute cause and effect primarily to the environment’s technical structure ( i . e . , its communication capacity or “bandwidth” ) in a 93 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 1 94 technologically deterministic fashion . This is done without explicit regard to either the intentionality of the agents acting in the environment or the social context within which such interaction occurs . Media richness theory differs from social presence theory primarily in its argument that media choice and , implicitly , consequent performance depend on the appropriateness of the match between media characteristics , including capacity and information requirements of the task . Nevertheless , the perceived social presence of a medium appears logically related to the medium’s richness . While some research has uncovered evidence consistent with a media richness perspective [ 17 ] [ 20 ] , other studies indicate that technology adoption does not always exhibit the static and rational pattems of use predicted by such theories [ 9 ] [ lo ] . For instance , Fulk et al . [ 5 ] conclude from the results of several studies that many factors in addition to media characteristics affect media perceptions and use . The authors argue that people’s media related perceptions and behaviors are significantly impacted by the social influence of colleagues , peers and co - workers . In other words , evidence suggests that users develop attitudes about various media in the context of what others around them say about the media . It follows then that attraction of members to the group should correlate with perceptions of the media . That is , the more one feels part of the workgroup , the greater the impact of other members’ feelings and opinions on one’s own . Presumably , various other factors must also be involved in the extent to which a user invests in the opinions expressed by others . For instance , we might expect that hearing the attitudes of a technically experienced person may carry more influence than hearing those of a technophobe . Similarly , perceptions of another person’s power or authority probably impact one’s capacity to be influenced by that person . In summary , there is considerable disagreement among researchers about the relationship of media characteristics to media perceptions and use . The purpose of the present study is to extend prior research to determine under what circumstances the theories discussed herein may or may not be applicable . The next section discusses some recent research which is relevant to this study . Relevant research Media Characteristics Only recently have EMS researchers begun to empirically examine social presence and media richness in depth . Sproull and Kiesler [ 15 ] determined that face - to - face groups reported greater social presence than distributed computer mediated communication ( CMC , i . e . , a specific type of EMS ) ) supported groups . Chidambaram and Jones [ l ] found that adding computer support decreased social presence for face - to - face groups but did not change perceptions of social presence in distributed asynchronous groups that were already using audio conferencing . A possible interpretation of these results is that the EMS may have been a distraction from face - to - face interaction but not for distributed interaction . In a longitudinal study , Dufner et al . [ 3 ] examined effects due to level of EMS support . All groups used an EMS but differed in the level of support they received from it . Generally , the groups using higher level tools - e . g . , being able to link related sequences of dialogue - perceived the system as more pexsonal , capable of greater feedback and richer ? These three studies suggest that computer mediated interaction can indeed impact perceived social presence of the interaction environment . The effect , however , appears to depend on the particular combination of system capabilities . Nonetheless , we may tentatively conclude that , faceto - face afFads greater social presence than only EMS mediated interaction but that , perhaps , EMSs can enhance less interactive environments . Kinney and Dennis [ 9 ] tested both explicit and implicit propositions of social presence and media richness theories by comparing dyads engaged in decision making tasks with two levels of equivocality . Some met face - to - face while others met via synchronous or asynchronous CMC . The study determined that face - to - face groups perceived greater media richness than both distributed conditions : further , synchronous groups reported richer media than asynchronous groups . Social presence was perceived higher in face - to - face groups than distributed groups , although distributed synchronous interaction surprisingly exhibited no more social presence than asynchronous communication . The results indicate that there were differences in perceived richness and social presence between face - to - face and EMS , however , there may not be any practical differences since satisfaction and performance did not differ . Further , since media richness theory implies that performance will differ relative to task - media fit , the results do not support media richness theory per se . Valacich et al . [ 17 ] , however , did find support for media richness theory when face - to - face dyads reported greater media richness and social presence and exhibited better performance results than the CMC groups . The existence of conflicting results highlights the need for further study to delineate specific contextual contingencies and to sort out the practical and theoretical implications of technologically mediated group interaction . Two other recent studies are particularly noteworthy in the present context . Zack [ 20 ] presents a slight twist on traditional media richness theory . He argues that media are differentiated by their capacity for inteructivity , a construct similar to richness . Some media are more interactive , and These latter findings highlight the significance of system and tool differences as a component of experimental variability - - a potential confound which many researchers have failed to consider when designing studies . Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 therefore , more appropriate for those situations where mutual understanding of background information ( Zack calls this concept - shared interpretive context ) is critical . When interactants need to define terms for each other in order to build a shared context , a more interactive environment is desirable . In contrast , once context has been established , less interactivity is required to use the information . In a multi - case study , Zack [ 20 ] found that news editors typically used face - to - face conversation ( i . e . , most interactive ) for building shared context with reporters - - e . g . , sharing important background information about a feature story assignment . Later , however , editors tended to resort to electronic messaging ( i . e . , less interactive ) for following up on story or assignment particulars . When interpreting these results , however , one must bear in mind that it is difficult to imagine a more deadline oriented environment than a newspaper’s . The omnipresence of time as a critical constraint may be a significant factor in determining choice of media . In a typical organization , where time constraints may be relatively more relaxed , media selection may follow very different contingencies than capacity . For example , convenience may be a much more important criterion in choosing a media under non time - critical circumstances . Nonetheless , Zack’s results indicate that , at least in some contexts media are indeed selected on the basis of users’ perceptions of their interactivity . This suggests that perceptions of media invariance may account for some patterns of usage . From a different perspective , Lee [ lo ] maintains that richness and other media characteristics are more emergent than inherent properties . Through a careful interpretation of a sequence of e - mail exchanges , Lee points out that social reality ( e . g . , organizational context ) provides a rich context for the mutual construction of meaning and understanding , even when doing so via called lean medium like e - mail . Moreover , innovative appropriation can extend the utility of a technology to include unanticipated applications . Lee [ lo ] describes an example in one organization where a virtual meeting was held when a series of messages were forwarded , with comments appended , from one to another among a group of people concerned with the same issue . The systematic forwarding became a mosaic of e - mail exchange creating a rich document comprised of the groups’ contributions . Thus , through a somewhat novel and spontaneous use of a lean facility , users , in a sense , extended the medium’s typical capacity . Consequently , they were able to develop a communication context much richer than would be thought characteristic of e - mail . Lee‘s research highlights several significant issues . First , media features may not be the only - - or even the most important - - determinant in either choice or use . Other factors - - e . g . , convenience , cost , time , etc . - - may also impact such media use and should be examined . Thus , researchers need to understand the importance of the broader context in media usage . Second , creative appropriation of media may lead to usage and performance enhancements which vary depending on the specific style of appropriation . Finally , properties of interaction environments are not necessarily invariant . In fact , to the extent that users possess the motivation and vision to expand the old boundaries through creative use , media characteristics may be better described as dynamic . Prior research concerning social presence and media richness indicates that media do indeed differ ; the important issue for managers and researchers is how and under what conditions they differ . A limitation of past research is that , much of it has examined EMS versus non - EMS conditions while few have looked at communication richness issues concerning distributed EMSs . This study specifically investigates differential effects expected to emerge when using EMSs in distributed environments . Communication Effectiveness Because communication effectiveness is critical to group interaction and performance [ 4 ] , the capacity of the environment to facilitate effective communication - - including both communication quality and quantity - is another structural factor which bears significantly on group processes . This may be especially important in the context of distributed interaction where communication behaviors may follow very different patterns than in face - to - face interaction . Chidambaram and Jones [ l ] found that an EMS improved perceptions of communication effectiveness in dispersed groups using audio conferencing but did not change perceived communication quality in face - to - face groups . In fact , the EMS may have distracted users from verbal interaction , reducing their perceptions of communication effectiveness . Dufner et al . 131 reported that adding more EMS tools for support increased groups’ perceptions of the usefulness and quality of the environment for communication but Kinney and Dennis [ 9 ] found no differences between face - to - face and distributed groups ( both synchronous and asynchronous ) in overall communication satisfaction . As pointed out earlier , quantity does not necessarily result in communication quality or effectiveness . However , to the extent that an environment inhibits or impedes communication , we would argue that it is likely to be less effective for complex and equivocal tasks where communication requirements are high . With respect to quantity , some studies report that distributed EMS groups engaged in less communication than face - to - face groups 151 [ 6 ] [ 14 ] . Watson [ 19 ] also reported less communication in computer supported than non - supported groups while Jarvenpaa et al . [ 7 ] detected no differences between them . Overall , results support the notion that EMS supported groups can communicate , though perhaps not to the same 95 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences - 1996 extent nor with the same effectiveness as face - to - face groups . One problem for research is to determine under what conditions EMS do support effective communication and to explore the causal relationships . As part of the broader effort to ferret out the effects of media differences , this study also examines communication effectiveness . Hypotheses Social Presence As stated earlier , social presence theory [ 13 ] and media richness theory ( e . g . , [ 2 ] , [ 16 ] ) assert that media vary in the amount and type of information which they are capable of processing . Relatively lean communication environments like written memos have less capacity than richer media such as full motion video for reducing ambiguity because they allow few if any nonverbal cues and generally result in less perceived social presence . Leaner media may be preferred , however , for transmitting large quantities of information which may be critical in reducing uncertainty . Moreover , we would expect that richer media permit fuller interaction thus allowing group member attractions to one another to develop more effectively . As Fulk et al . [ 5 ] point out , these between - member attractions and influences shape one’s perceptions . Thus , we expect that perceptions of media will be stronger in those groups with the capacity for developing greater attraction , i . e . , the face - to - face groups . In light of the observations discussed in this paper , face - to - face meetings supported with EMS are expected to elicit perceptions of greater social presence than either of the distributed conditions - - i . e . , synchronous EMS or asynchronous EMS . Furthermore , spatial proximity constrains both quantity and type of nonverbal communication while temporal proximity influences interactivity and reciprocity . For example , increasing either spatial or temporal distance ( time lapse ) between communication acts may lead to a reduced perception of the salience and , perhaps , the importance of the message . Hence , distributed synchronous groups are expected to perceive greater social presence than asynchronous groups . Results from Lee [ lo ] lead us to believe that perceptions may also change as experience with a medium progresses and people experiment with its capabilities . However , in light of the considerable differences among the treatments in terms of communication capacity , there is no reason to expect uniform patterns of change across conditions . Because we expect that structural constraints play such a significant role in determining the extent and nature of user’s adaptation to their environment , we expect that more severely impeded environments ( e . g . , the distributed ones ) are likely to require longer to adjust to than less problematic environments . Hence , perceived social presence is expected to change differently among the treatments . This hypothesis is stated as follows : H1 : Profiles of perceived social presence Will differ across treatments over time . Communication Effectiveness Because communication is the crux of group interaction . groups which cannot exchange all the information they need when they need it will have more difficulty establishing shared understanding and norms . Moreover , coordinating activities , surfacing assumptions , exploring altematives and evaluating solutions - activities required for a complex task such as the one used in this study - - depend on effective communication . Both social presence and media richness theories suggest that effective performance of such activities will depend on the capacity of the medium employed . Because face - to - face environments exhibit considerably more capacity for interaction and more timely interaction than distributed conditions , the face - to - face groups will have a decided advantage in accomplishing the activities required for the task . Hence , face - to - face groups are expected to report greater communication effectiveness than distributed groups . This hypothesis is stated as follows : H2 : Profiles of perceived communication effectiveness will differ across treatments over time . Communication Zntetface Various characteristics of the environment within which the participants interact comprise the communication interface . Issues like the simplicity , accessibility and ease of interaction afforded by the environment are likely to determine usage and , therefore , satisfaction with the interaction . For example , if communicating requires learning how to use a complex technology , participants may be likely to prefer and to use a more familiar medium instead , even though it may be less appropriate for the task . Since turning to talk to someone is easier and simpler than conversing via computer , face - to - face groups are expected to rate their interface more satisfactory than distributed groups that are limited to computer mediated interaction . Asynchronous groups face the additional problem of delayed interaction : consequently , we expect them to rate their interface lower than either face - to - face or dispersed synchronous groups . The hypothesis is as follows : H3 : Profiles of perceived communication interface will differ across treatments over time . Performance Because communication is essential for effective performance [ 111 , those conditions which provide the greatest channel capacity and the greatest opportunity for effective and immediate interaction can be expected to result in better task performance than more restrictive environments . When the task requires relational 96 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 I 97 Treatment by social presence Social presence interaction - - e . g . , a value - laden task - - social presence and communication effectiveness become more critical . Moreover , if such communication effects result primarily from invariant media differences , we would expect distributed groups to experience increasing information deficits as time passes and tasks which take longer should result in more noticeable differences in performance . Since the current task requires value related interaction and takes four sessions to accomplish , face - to - face groups are expected to significantly outperform distributed groups . 0 . 277 6 58 , 946 0 . 83 t 3 28 . 488 H4 : Face - to - face groups will perform better than distributed groups . Sess Effect * Hyp df Error df 1 % > S > A 2 30 2 FS , A 2 30 Experimental design F - value P - value 54 . 591 * . OOO 24 . 318 * . OOO The study employed a repeated measures design , capturing data from each of four one - hour meetings over a four week period . All groups met at the same time each week . Asynchronous participants were each assigned a specific hour of the week ( for all four weeks ) during which they worked on the task . A panel of instructors from the Business School and Communication department evaluated group performance based on the final document . A single factor with three levels was manipulated face - to - face with EMS , distributed - synchronous with EMS and distributed - asynchronous with EMS . The study used 127 subjects comprising 33 groups of junior and senior Business and Travel Industry Management students . Participants were randomly assigned to groups and groups were randomly assigned to meeting environments . The EMS used ( called GroupLink ) is a networked , distributed system designed by Ventana Corporation . Subjects were trained on and used only the Groupwriter co - authoring tool for all activities pertaining to the task . The task was a complex project development case which required all groups to create a policy manual for a multinational f i i . Groups were required to write their document using the Groupwriter which functioned identically for all teams . However , all of the distributed groups’ interaction was EMS mediated while face - to - face groups could also talk . Results Data Analysis In order to assess the hypotheses with regard to differences in the patterns of change over time , a MANOVA procedure ( using SPSSx on a VAX system ) was employed to determine profile differences . Thus , if perceptions changed over time and if they changed differently among treatments , then their slopes would differ and the MANOVA should detect the differences . With respect to the prediction of differences in perceptions among environments , regardless of session , one - way ANOVAs were performed to detect differences with follow - up Duncan’s range tests used to determine the location of any observed differences . Social Presence Social presence was the first of three socio - technical structures examined and was expected to differ among conditions when measured over the four sessions . The reliability of the seven item social presence scale was 0 . 86 ( Cronbach’s alpha ) in this study . Table 1 displays MANOVA results ( F - value = 0 . 276 , P - value = . 946 ) which were non - significant at alpha = . 05 , indicating no differences over time with regard to social presence . Thus , profiles of social presence did not differ across treatments over the four sessions and hypothesis H1 was not fully supported . However , Table 2 shows that face - to - face groups felt their environments conveyed greater levels of social presence than did groups in either of the distributed conditions during the first session . The F - value was 54 . 591 which was significant at aIpha = . 05 . Moreover , as the graph in Figure 1 and the results displayed in Table 2 attest , face - to - face groups continued to report greater social presence than did distributed groups throughout all four sessions . Duncan’s range test showed no significant tendency for the conditions to converge . Table 1 : MANOVA Results For Social Presence I Effect I F - value I Hypdf I Errordf I P - value Table 2 : Social Presence Differences By Session 3 [ DS , A I 2 1 30 I 18 . 828 * I . OOO 4 I DS . A I 2 1 30 I 20 . 477 * I . OW * Duncan’s range test - significantly different pairs at a = . 05 * significant at a = . 05 . F = face - to - face . S = synchronous distributed . A = asynchronous distributed , ( e . g . , F > S means face - to - face groups reported higher levels of the variable than synchrmous groups ) Communication Eflectiveness An eight item , seven point scale ( one being low and seven being high ) with a Cronbach’s alpha of 0 . 90 measured the perceived communication effectiveness of the environment . As the MANOVA results in Table 3 show , the F - value ( 0 . 30 ) was not significant at alpha = . 05 . Thus , when the profiles are compared over all four sessions , environment did not significantly impact communication effectiveness . Therefore , hypothesis H2 , predicting differences in the profiles across environments , was not fully supported . Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - I996 2 - * Consistent with the notion of media richness , however , the results shown in Table 4 indicate that communication effectiveness means in the first session were significantly different ( F - value = 10 . 793 ) at alpha = . OS . Thus , face - to - face groups reported more communication effectiveness than distributed groups in the first session , showing some support for our position that the meeting contexts differ . Furthermore , face - to - face groups continued to report significantly greater communication effectiveness than asynchronous groups throughout all four sessions and more than synchronous groups for the first three sessions . Hence , 1tFt . F . . . . - - ” - & hypothesis H2 was partially supported . Effect Treatment by communication F - value Hyp df Error df P - value 0 . 300 6 58 . 935 session1 session2 session3 sEssion4 Figure 1 : Social Presence effectiveness Communication effectiveness 2 . 363 3 28 . 093 I I I Table 4 : Communication Effectiveness Differences By Session 4 . 473 * I . 020 * Duncan’s range test - significantly different pairs at a = . 05 * significant at CL = . OS Fig . 2 graphically represents the profiles of the three environments . The graph shows that , although synchronous groups began to converge with face - to - face groups in their perceptions of communication effectiveness as sessions progressed , nonetheless , differences between face - to - face and asynchronous groups persisted throughout . I I I session1 session2 on3 Figure 2 : Communication Effectiveness Communication Intetface For purposes of this study , communication interface refers to issues such as perceived simplicity and ease of use of an environment relevant to group interaction . The scale , which had a Cronbach’s alpha level of 0 . 80 in this study , consisted of four items using a seven point semantic differential scale with higher scores indicating positive attitudes . Table 5 : MANOVA Results For Communication Interface MANOVA results displayed in Table 5 indicate that the profile pattems of treatment means did not differ significantly over time ( F = 0 . 367 , P = . 897 ) and hypothesis H3 was not fully supported . On the other hand , evidence that conditions exhibited different characteristics is indicated in Table 6 where face - to - face groups reported their communication interface was significantly better than distributed groups in the first session . As Table 6 and Figure 3 show , face - to - face groups continued to preferred the communication interface throughout the entire exercise . Thus , our results indicate that in all sessions , face - to - face groups were more satisfied with their communication interface than were distributed groups . Table 6 : Communication Interface Differences Bv Session * Duncan’s range test - significantly different pairs at a = . 05 * significant at a = . 05 98 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1996 ' 1 6 3t Sessiionl sessiion2 session3 S€ & ion4 Figure 3 : Communication Interface Performance Table 7 shows the evaluation means for each treatment along with the one - way ANOVA and Duncan ' s range test results . Evaluations consisted of the average of 25 items ( five scores for each of five different parts of the document ) scored by three different judges . Judges were selected from among College of Business and other faculty . The scoring range for each item was one ( lowest ) to five ( highest ) with respect to factors such as creativity , practicality , tone , and comprehensiveness of the document . Results indicate that face - to - face scores did not average higher than distributed scores and , therefore , hypothesis H4 was not supported . Rather surprisingly , the synchronous groups performed significantly better than groups in both other conditions and asynchronous groups tended to outperform - - though not significantly - - the face - to - face groups . Thus , interaction advantages which collocated groups perceived they experienced were not reflected in task performance . Table 7 : Performance social presence than will groups meeting in face - to - face conditions . Further , because the synchronous and asynchronous environments are so structurally different than face - to - face meetings and structural constraints largely determine environmental adaptation , this study predicted that groups would experience differing patterns of change in their perceptions over time , depending on their meeting environment . With respect to our expectation that treatment would affect rate of change , our hypotheses were unsupported across all three variables ( i . e . , social presence , communication effectiveness and communication interface ) . In other words , we observed no significant differences in the profiles over time of perceptions for any of the dimensions measured in this study . Perceived social presence and communication effectiveness did tend to increase slightly more over time for the distributed groups than for the face - to - face groups . However , these differences were non - significant in the four sessions we measured . Of course it may be that all treatments change similarly over time because environmental structures play no role in determining the rate of adaptation . This conclusion , however , is somewhat suspect logically . It seems absurd to expect structures which differ so drastically to be adapted equally . Another explanation may be that the structures just don ' t change at all . To the extent that they reflect inherent properties of the communication equipment , structural characteristics , may be static and resistant to change . However , some studies indicate that environmental properties are not static but rather exhibit dynamic and emergent tendencies ( e . g . , [ 5 ] [ lo ] ) . Thus , a more reasonable explanation for our failure to observe significant differences in rates of change may be due to the length of the experiment . Our results indicate slight tendencies to change , especially in the later stages of the exercise . Had the experiment required more sessions , perhaps we would have witnessed continuing change . Moreover , once change began occurring , if we ' d had the opportunity to observe Means Effect + Hyp . df Error df F - value P - value more sessions , we might have seen greater differences among those patterns of change . This possibility highlights the need to conduct longitudinal studies of longer duration . Our study yielded very interesting results with respect to the predictions of bandwidth type theories - - e . g . , social t : Duncan ' s range test - significantly different pairs at a = presence and media richness . In every session for every variable measured , we detected differences between face - to - . os face and computer mediated groups . Thus , our predictions * ANOVA results significant at a = . 05 Discussion of media effects were at least partially supported with regard to differences among environments on a session - by - session basis . As expected , face - to - face groups reported expect that POUPS engaging in distributed interaction via significantly greater social presence , communication computer mediated communication will encounter greater effectiveness and satisfaction with the communication impediments to communication . Therefore they will likely interface than did disuibuted goups as a whole . In other perceive their interchange to be neither as immediate nor as words , bandwidth does make a difference : richer interaction rich as with face - to - face interaction and will report less environments elicit perceptions of greater social presence ' p F 2 . 424 social Presence and media richness theories lead US to 99 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences - 1996 and communication effectiveness than more restrictive environments . The real question , however , is : do perceptual differences make any practical differences ? That is , does more or less perceived social presence or communication effectiveness really matter in a task context . Our performance results suggest that , at least in some contexts and for some tasks , richer media may not be productive . In fact , in the present study , performance appears to have suffered in the face - to - face settings . Perhaps , the richer interaction impeded task focus . To the extent that the richer environment allowed members to focus on relational issues , in a time constrained context they were precluded from concentrating on task issues . Thus , in some instances , less interaction bandwidth may be better . These results indicate support for media richness theory but point to the critical need to understand the precise fit between task requirements and environmental characteristics . While the work of Fulk and colleagues [ SI illustrates ( as we have tried to ) the need for thinking of media use in terms other than as results of invariant characteristics , it also raises some serious research issues . For instance , in the context of their theory and evidence , one area of concem for experimental research like ours relates to the extent to which factors in addition to group attraction , such as expertise , authority and power , are understood or develop in groups which have been formed for the specific purpose of the experiment . Consequently , results from the present study must be interpreted in light of such concems . Certainly future research needs to look at methods of accounting for such variables in experimental settings . Conclusions Results from this study indicate that distributed groups can perform well in time constrained situations despite the relatively diminished capacity of computer mediated communication . We may be facing the need to change our meeting paradigm . Is face - to - face really the " ideal " meeting mode ? It may be that distributed meetings are not only more convenient sometimes ; perhaps they are also more productive from several perspectives . Clearly , travel cost and time reduction is a benefit of distributed sessions relative to face - to - face meetings . Moreover , distributed media may permit less unnecessary - - and perhaps distracting - - social interaction , resulting in improved task focus . By no means do our results resolve these issues . However , they do illuminate some management concems and indicate that firms may be wise to encourage more distributed meetings . Of course , other factors need to be understood better before organizations can benefit fully from distributed meeting support technology . For instance , it is not clear how motivation , task and time impact distributed interaction and performance . Will distributed groups encounter more potentially distracting social issues when engaged in longer term interaction ? Will more highly motivated face - to - face groups perform better in light of their richer environment ? These and other questions must be answered . Thus , while our results improve our understanding of distributed interaction , they also point to the need for further research , especially in more real world organizational study contexts . References [ l ] Chidambaram , L . and Jones , B . ( 1994 ) " Impact of Communication Medium and Computer Support on Group perceptions , " MIS Quarterly , Vol . 17 , No . 4 , pp . 465491 . [ 21 Daft , RL . and Lengel , R . H . ( 1986 ) " Organizational Information Requirements , Media Richness , and Structural Design , " Management Science , Vol . 32 , [ 31 Dufner , D . K . , Hiltz , S . R . , and Turoff , M . ( 1994 ) " Distributed Group Support : A Preliminary Analysis of the Effects of Voting Tools and Sequential Procedures , " Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii Internutwnd Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . W . , pp . 114122 . E41 Fisher , B . A and Ellis , D . G . ( 1990 ) Small Group Decision Making : Communication and the Group . Process , 3rd ed . , New York , Ny : McGraw Hill Publishing Company . [ 51 F ' ulk , J . , Schmitz , J and Steinfield , C . W . " A Social Influence Model of Technology , " in J . Fulk and C . Steinfield , eds . , Organizations and Communication Technology , Sage Publications : Newbury Park , CA , [ 61 Hiltz , S . R . , Johnson K , and Turoff , M . ( 1986 ) " Experiments in Group Decision Making : Communication Process and Outcome in Face - to - Face Versus Computerized Conferences , " Human Communication Research , Vol . 13 , No . 2 , pp . 225 - 252 . [ 71 Jarvenpaa , S . L . , Rao , V . S . , and Huber , G . P . ( 1988 ) " Computer Support for Meetings of Groups Working on Unstructured Problems : A Field Experiment , " MIS Quarterly , pp . 645 - 665 . E81 Kiesler , S . , Siege ] , J . and McGuire , T . W . ( 1984 ) " Social Psychological Aspects of Computer - Mediated Communication , " American Psychologist , E91 Kinney , S . and Dennis , A . ( 1994 ) " Re - evaluating Media Richness : Cues , Feedback , and Task , " Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii Internutwnd Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . IV . , pp . 21 - 30 . NO . 5 , pp . 554 - 571 . pp . 117 - 140 . Vol . 39 , NO . lo . , pp . 1123 - 1134 . 100 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences - 1996 [ IO ] Lee , A . S . ( 1994 ) ' Elecuonic Mail as a Medium for Rich Communication : An Empirical Investigation Using Hermeneutic Interpretation , " MIS Quarterly , Vol . 18 , No . McGrath , J . E . ( 1984 ) Groups : Interaction and Performance , Englewood Cliffs , N J Prentice Hall , Inc . 1123 Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . , Briggs , RO . , and Romano , N . C . Jr . ( 1993 ) " Meeting Environments of the Future , " Groupware ' 93 Proceedings , San Mateo , CA : Morgan Kaufman Publishers , pp . 125 - 144 . [ 13 ] Short , J . , Williams , E . , and Christie , B . ( 1976 ) The Social Psychology of Telecommunications , London : John Wiley and Sons . [ 141 Smith , J . , and Vanecek , M . T . ( 1989 ) " A Nonsimultaneous Computer Conference as a Component of Group Decision support Systems , " Proceedings of the Twenty - Second Hawaii Internutionul Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . III . , pp . 370 - 377 . [ E l Spmull , L . and Kialer , S . ( 1986 ) ' Reducing Social Context Cues : Electronic Mail in Organizational Communication . " Management Science , Vol . 32 , No . 11 , Cl61 ' hevino , L . K , DaR , R , and Lengel , R . H . ( 1990 ) " Understanding Managers ' Media Choices : A 2 , p ~ . 143 - 157 . E111 1492 - 15 12 . symbolic Interactionist Perspective , " in J . Fulk and C . Steinfield ( Eds . ) , Organizations and Communication Technology , Newbury Park , CA Sage Publications , pp . 71 - 94 . E171 Valacich , J . S . , Mennecke , B . E . , Wachter , R . , and Wheeler , B . C . ( 1994 ) " Extensions to Media Richness Theory : A Test of the Task - Media Fit Hypothesis , " Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society Press , Vol . TV . , pp . 11 - 20 . [ 181 Walther , J . B . ( 1992 ) " Interpersonal Effects in Computer Mediated Communication : A Relational Perspective , " Communication Research , Vol . 19 , 191 Watson , R . T . , DeSanctis , G . L . and Poole , M . S . ( 1988 ) % sing a GDSS to Facilitate Group Consensus : Some Intended and Unintended Consequences , " MIS Quarterly , Vol . 12 , No . 3 , pp . 463 - 480 . 201 Zack , M . H . ( 1993 ) " Interactivity and Communication Mode Choice in Ongoing Management Groups , " Information Systems Research , Vol . 4 , No . 3 . , pp , 207 - 239 . NO . 1 , pp . 52 - 90 . 101