Journal of Applied Psychology 1973 , Vol . 57 , No . 3 , 195 - 203 THE CHARACTERISTICS OF SUBJECT MATTER IN DIFFERENT ACADEMIC AREAS 1 ANTHONY BIGLAN a University of Washington Multidimensional scaling was performed on scholars ' judgments about the simi - larities of the subject matter of different academic areas . One hundred sixty - eight scholars at the University of Illinois made judgments about 36 areas , and 54 scholars at a small western college judged similarities among 30 areas . The method of sorting ( Miller , 1969 ) was used in collecting data . Three dimensions were common to the solutions of both samples : ( a ) existence of a paradigm , ( b ) concern with application , and ( c ) concern with life systems . It appears that these dimensions are general to the subject matter of most academic institutions . One of the most easily overlooked facts about university organization is that academic departments are organized according to subject matter . Typically , each field of specialization has its own department , and the department in which there is more than one discipline is the exception . Presumably this system arises from the peculiar requirements that each area has for the organization of its research , teaching , and administrative activities . While the organ - ization of university departments has received increasing attention from social scientists ( Menzel , 1962 ; Oncken , 1971 ; Pelz & Andrews , 1966 ) , the way in which subject matter characteristics may require particular forms of department organization has not been examined . The chief reason for this is probably that there has not been a systematic analysis of subject matter characteristics that could serve as a framework for such a study . It is obvious that such fields as physics and psychology differ in subject matter , but what is the nature of these differences ? This article presents a multidimensional analysis of this problem . A subsequent article to be presented in this journal ( Biglan , 1973 ) uses the analysis of this study to examine relationships between subject matter characteristics and department organization . 1 Research for this article was supported in part by the Office of the Executive Vice President and Provost , University of Illinois , Urbana , Illinois , and by the Department of Health , Education , and Welfare , Office of Education , Grant 0 - 70 - 3347 ( Fred E . Fiedler , principal investigator ) . 2 Request for reprints should be sent to Anthony Biglan , Department of Psychiatry , University of Wisconsin , 427 Lorch Street , Madison , Wisconsin 53706 . How can we get at the " important " char - acteristics or dimensions of academic subject matter ? In this study it was assumed that scholars in the various areas are the best source of information about the characteristics of different areas ; whatever dimensions they use in thinking about academic areas are considered to be important and worthy of further investigation . Nonmetric multidimen - sional scaling ( Kruskal , 1964a , 1964b ; Shepard , 1962 ) provides an ideal method for determining these dimensions . The method employs sub - jects ' judgments about the similarities ( or differences ) among a set of stimulus objects . From this ordinal data , a map or array of the stimulus points is developed in a metric multidimensional space that " best fits " the original data about the similarity of stimuli . In this way the technique provides metric scaling of the stimuli and , at the same time , indicates the dimensions that underlie subjects ' perceptions of them . The technique allows comparison among all academic areas within the same framework but does not restrict the analysis to the oversimplification associated with a single dimension . At least two dimensions are likely to be used by scholars when they think about academic subject matter . First , Kuhn has argued that the physical sciences are character - ized by the existence of paradigms that specify the appropriate problems for study and the appropriate methods to be used . It appears that the social sciences and nonscience areas such as history do not have such clearly delineated paradigms . If this is true , we should find a dimension that distinguishes paradig - 195 196 ANTHONY BIGLAN matic and nonparadigmatic fields . A second way in which scholars may perceive an area is in terms of its requirements for practical application . Thus , areas such as engineering and education are likely to be distinguished from areas such as English and chemistry . METHOD Multidimensional scaling of subject matter character - istics was first performed on data obtained from scholars at the University of Illinois . Since the dimen - sions obtained in this setting could simply reflect the way areas are organized at large , state - supported universities , the scaling was replicated at a small , denominational liberal arts college in the State of Wash - ington . If the same dimensions are used by scholars at both of these institutions , then we can be more certain that we are getting at characteristics of academic areas that are general and important . In addition , semantic differential ratings of each area on each of six attributes were obtained from scholars at the small college as an aid to interpreting the scaling results . Scaling technique . Kruskal ' s ( 1964a , 1964b ) technique for nonmetric multidimensional scaling was used in the present study . Nonmetric multidimensional scaling employs ordinal data about the similarity among a set of stimulus objects and generates a configuration of points in an w - dimensional metric space , such that the distances among points in the metric space maximally correspond 1 to the ordinal similarity data . The number of dimensions , n , is specified by the user . The scaling begins with a random « - dimensional configuration . In an iterative procedure this configuration is changed in small steps in order to maximize its fit with the simi - larity data . Kruskal ' s measure of fit is called " stress . " It ranges from 0 to 100 % . Typically , solutions are generated for different values of n , and one solution is chosen as " best " on the basis of its stress value and the interpretability of its dimensions . The areas . Thirty - six areas were included in the Illinois scaling . Included were such areas as Agricultural Engineering , Physics , and Philosophy . The areas were chosen to include as diverse a sample as possible . The availability of structure and output data was also considered in choosing areas . In the small college replication , all of the areas in which the college offered courses were included for scaling . In addition , four areas that had been used in the Illinois scaling were also used in the replication in order to allow comparison of the results of the two analyses . Judges . One hundred and sixty - eight faculty members at the University of Illinois served as judges of area similarity . They were distributed over the 36 areas of interest with no more than five and no less than three judges in any area . Whenever possible , judges within an area were distributed over academic rank and subdisciplines . Only six faculty members refused to participate in the study when asked . All of the approximately 70 faculty members at the small liberal ai ts college were asked to make judgments about the similarity of academic areas . They were contacted through the Dean of the College , who wrote letters supporting the project . After one telephone follow - up by the Dean ' s office , 56 faculty members had returned completed judgments of which 54 were usable . Procedure Most methods of collecting similarities data require judges to rate or rank the similarity of all pairs of stimuli . In the case of the Illinois scaling , such methods would require 36 ( 35 ) / 2 or 630 responses from each judge . Since it did not appear that university faculty could be prevailed upon to this extent , a procedure requiring fewer responses of each judge was needed . Such a procedure has been proposed by Miller ( 1969 ) and was used in the present study . The method of sorting required judges to put areas into categories on the basis of their similarity . No limit was placed on the number of categories . The judgements of one subject about the similarities among areas may be represented in an N X N matrix whose rows and columns corre - spond to the academic areas of interest . Ones are placed in the cells of this matrix corresponding to the pairs of areas that were placed in the same category . Zeroes in cells indicate areas that were not placed in the same category . Summing over all judges ' matrices provides a matrix whose cells indicate the number of judges who placed the pair of areas in the same category . Rao and Katz ( 1970 ) simulated the collection of similarities data using the sorting method . They compared the configuration obtained by scaling these similarities data with the known configuration they had started with . The correlation between the interpoint distances of the known configuration and the interpoint distance of the configuration obtained through the method of sorting was . 81 . This result compared favorably with the ability of other more common methods of collecting similarities data to recover the known configuration . Richards ( in press ) used real subjects in comparing the sorting method with a more common method of collecting similarities data . Canon - ical correlations between five - dimensional solutions for each method were . 98 , . 96 , . 90 , . 60 , and . 46 . In collecting data at the University of Illinois , scholars were provided with 36 3 X 5 cards , each of which contained the name of one academic area . They were instructed to sort the cards into categories or piles on the basis of the similarity of the subject matter of each area . Data was typically collected in the scholar ' s office . Data from the small college replication were collected through the mails , using essentially the same procedure . In this case , the names of areas were presented on thirty slips of paper , and judges were asked to staple together the slips which they placed in the same category . Only one respondent appeared not to have understood these instructions . Upon completing the sorting task , scholars at the small college were asked to rate each area they had judged on the following bipolar adjectives : ( a ) pure - applied , ( b ) physical - nonphysical , ( c ) biological - nonbiological , ( d ) of interest to me personally - of little or no interest to me personally , ( e ) traditional - nontraditional , and ( / ) life science - nonlife science . Forms for these ratings were provided in a separate sealed envelope that judges were asked to leave sealed until they had completed the sorting task . CHARACTERISTICS OF SUBJECT MATTER IN DIFFERENT ACADEMIC AREAS 197 RESULTS Scaling of the Illinois Data Kruskal ' s ( 1964b ) MDSCAL program ( Ver - sion 4M ) was used to scale the area simi - larity data obtained from both samples . For the Illinois sample , solutions were obtained in six , five , four , three , and two dimensions . Kruskal ' s index of goodness of fit between the similarity data and the multidimensional solution is called stress . The stress values for these solutions were . 078 , . 101 , . 127 , . 226 , and . 311 , respectively . Each solution was rotated to principal axes in order to aid interpretation . The three - dimensional solution was chosen as the " best " solution , since all three of its dimensions were interpretable and its stress value was . 23 . Kruskal ' s suggested verbal evaluation for this stress value is " fair . " He adds , however , that " where data values are heavily replicated , this evaluation is pessi - mistic , and larger stress values are acceptable [ p . 9 ] . " 3 Since there were 168 replications in the Illinois scaling , Kruskal ' s comment appears applicable . The reliability of this configuration was evaluated by splitting the sample of judges into halves , obtaining a separate configuration for each half , and comparing these configura - tions . The judgments of all scholars who were in the first eighteen areas on an alphabetical list were placed in the first sample , and the remaining judgments comprised the second sample . A three - dimensional solution was obtained from the similarity judgments of each sample . The two configurations were compared by correlating the distances among each possible pair of stimuli in one configura - tion with the corresponding distances in the other configuration . This correlation was . 88 ( N = 630 ) . Thus , it appears that in the present circumstances the sorting method of data collection yielded stable results . There is a second way in which the method of data collection used in the present study may yield unreliable configurations . Stimuli 3 J . B . Kruskal , How to use M - D - SCAL , a program to do multidimensional scaling and multidimensional ' unfolding , March 1968 . This paper and the accompany - ing computer program can be obtained by writing to J . B . Kruskal , Bell Telephone Laboratory , Murray Hill , New Jersey 07974 . may cluster rather than be evenly dispersed along the dimensions . This is not bad in itself , but with the data collection method used here the distances between points in different clusters may be less reliable than the distances between points in the same cluster . Visual inspection of the final three - dimensional solu - tion from the Illinois sample did reveal cluster - ing of areas . The areas could be grouped into eight clusters on the basis of their interpoint distances and visual inspection of the con - figuration . In order to test the reliability of intercluster distances , the two three - dimen - sional configurations described in the preceding paragraph were used . In both configurations , centroids were computed for each of the eight clusters of areas . The distances among the centroids in each configuration were then obtained . If intercluster distances are reliable , then there should be a high ' correlation between corresponding distances in the two configura - tions . This was , in fact , the case ; the correla - tion was . 88 ( N = 28 ) . Thus , although cluster - ing of stimuli occurred , it appears that the intercluster distances are reliable . A third problem associated with the method of sorting is that individual differences in the perceptions of areas cannot be evaluated in the usual ways ( cf . Carroll & Chang , 1969 ) . Since the areas were clustered in eight sets in the accepted solution , one method of evaluating agreement among judges would be to compare the eight separate three - dimensional solutions that could be obtained from judgments of scholars in each of the eight clusters . These solutions were obtained and interpoint dis - tances in each solution were correlated with the distances in every other solution . The correla - tions ranged from . 61 to . 84 . The average was . 75 . No configuration stood out as different from the rest . These results suggest that faculty members in our sample perceive the relationships among areas in substantially the same way , regardless of their own area . Figures 1 , 2 , and 3 present plots of the three - dimensional solution . Each dimension is plotted against the other two so that there are three two - dimensional plots . In Figure 1 , dimension one is plotted along the horizontal dimension , and dimension two appears vertically . On the first dimension , physical science and engineering areas are at the extreme negative 198 ANTHONY BIGLAN . . MechEng r - • CivEng NuclEng • Dairy Sci Hortic • Agrono CompuSci •10 - 9 - 8 - 7 - 6 - 5 - 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 Astrono • . . . Physics . r «T ' C ' ? ) ; 0l09y ' > , Geol * Enlomo . . . Chem »Zool • • Math • Physio Botany 1 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 1 - 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - 5 - 6 - 7 - 8 - 9 - 10 VocTcch EdAdm SecEd Accoun SpecEd • Finance AgrEc Commun 2 3 4 5 6 7 89 10 Econ Sociol Psychol * PoliSci Anthro Engl . • Hisl Russ •»Germ * Philos FIG . 1 . Dimension I appears horizontally , and Dimension II appears vertically . end , while humanities and education areas are at the extreme positive end . Biological areas are on the negative side , though closer to the origin than are the humanities . We thus have " hard " or science - oriented areas at one end of the dimension , social sciences toward the middle , and humanities at the other end of the dimension . The second dimension ( Figures 1 and 2 ) is a pure - applied dimension . At the extreme positive end are education areas . Accountancy , finance , and engineering areas are also at the positive end . On the negative end are phys - ical sciences , mathematics , social sciences , languages , history , and philosophy . Unlike areas at the negative end of this dimension , those at the positive end are concerned with practical application of their subject matter . The third dimension ( Figures 2 and 3 ) appears to reflect the areas ' concern with living or organic objects of study . Areas at the positive end all study such subject matter , while areas at the negative end do not . Thus , agricultural , biological , social science , and education areas are high on the dimension . The first two of these groups involve study of all living systems , while the latter two groups are concerned primarily with the study of man . On the negative end of this dimension are all of the areas that do not study living things . These areas do not seem to be widely dispersed , and it appears that the only characteristics they have in common is the - absence of biological objects of study . Scaling of Small College Data For the small college sample , solutions in six , five , four , and three dimensions were obtained , and each was rotated to principal axes to aid interpretation . Stress values for these solutions were . 054 , . 087 , . 124 , and . 184 for the six - through three - dimensional solu - tions , respectively . The four - dimensional solu - tion was chosen as the " best " solution because all four of its dimensions were interpretable , and its stress value was " good " ( . 124 ) ac - cording to Kruskal ' s suggested evaluations . CHARACTERISTICS OF SUBJECT MATTER IN DIFFERENT ACADEMIC AREAS 199 Ill • 10 9 8 7 6 Entomo e • Botany • ^ . Zool * •MicroBio ^ Physio fiociol - • 3 * PoliSci Anthro _ V , Psychol 2 • 1 History - 10 - 9 - 8 9 - 7 - 6 - 5 - 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 Philos - 1 • Geology _ j Chemistry Physics • • " 3 Astrono • English " * | German » Russian Economics ' 5 Math - 6 - 7 - 8 - 9 Hortic . ' . Dairysci Agronomy AarEcQn ^ EdAdmin • VocTech 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 89 10 • ommun Accoun CivEng / Finance . . . . . • " •• MecEng . NuclEn a CeramEng ComputSci •10 FIG . 2 . Dimension II appears horizontally , and Dimension III appears vertically . We may first ask if any of the dimensions of this solution are comparable to dimensions of the Illinois three - dimensional solution . Since 18 areas were common to both solutions , this question can be examined by correlating the positions of these areas on each dimension of the Illinois solution with their position on each dimension of the small college solution . Table 1 presents these correlations . The first dimension of the Illinois solution is virtually identical ( r = . 96 ) to the first dimension of the small college solution . The dimension distin - guishes hard sciences from social sciences and humanities . The second dimension of the Il - linois solution is highly correlated ( r = — . 81 ) with the third dimension of the small college solution . ( The negative relationship is due to the inflection of the dimension on one solution and is of no consequence for interpreting the dimensions . ) This dimension was interpreted in the Illinois solution as " concern with application . " Visual inspection of the third dimension of the small college solution sug - gested the same interpretation . On the third Illinois dimension , areas with biological or social objects of study are distinguished from other areas . This dimension is highly related to the fourth dimension of the small college solution ( r = . 89 ) . Thus , it appears that a dimension involving concern of areas with TABLE 1 CORRELATIONS BETWEEN THE THREE DIMENSIONS or THE ILLINOIS SOLUTION AND THE FOUR DIMENSIONS OF THE SMALL COLLEGE SOLUTION FOR 18 AREAS COMMON TO BOTH SAMPLES Small college Illinois dimension dimension ( I ) ( 11 ) ( III ) ( IV ) I . 96 - . 47 - . 13 . 09 II - . 35 . 16 - . 81 . 07 III - . 03 - . 36 - . 20 . 89 200 ANTHONY BIGLAN HI Hortic Entomology A Mic°r n o°bTo y ^ Z ' oo ^ fphys ' iology - 10 - 9 - 8 - 7 - 6 - 5 - 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 • Geology Chemistry Physics * • Astronom y Mech Nucl Eng - CivEnq Eng • •» " CeramEngComRutSciMath 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 1 - 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - 5 - 6 - 7 - 8 - 9 - 10 * A9rECOn Spe * ° Ed SecEd - • EdAdm Anthro • VocTech •• Psychol vociecn • Po | jSc [ History • 2 3 4 5 6 » 7 8 9 iO Philosophy Commun Accoun• - English Finance * » ^ German Econ Russian FIG . 3 . Dimension I appears horizontally , and Dimension III appears vertically . Physical Education Geology Chemistry ^ Engineering «t« Astronomy * Mathematics • Horticulture • Agronomy Home Economics - 10 - 9 - 8 - 7 «6 - 5 - 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 •B 10 logy Com P " ler Science Psychology - 5 " " • Business - 7 - 8 . • History Q • Sociology 3 Economics - 10 • Political Science FIG . 4 . Dimensions I and II of the small college solutions ; Dimension I is the horizontal dimension . • Art • Music Speech & Drama Modern Languages * * • Greek • Library English • Journalism * 1 2 3 4 5 * 6 7 89 10 1 Philosophy ' Religion • Business Education CHARACTERISTICS OF SUBJECT MATTER IN DIFFERENT ACADEMIC AREAS 201 biological or social processes is common to both solutions . The second dimension of the small college solution is not strongly related to any of the Illinois dimensions . Figure 4 shows this dimension plotted against the first dimension of the small college solution . Art , music , speech and drama , and modern languages are at the positive end of this dimension , while social sciences such as political science , economics , and sociology are at the negative end . All of the areas that are a substantial distance from the origin are commonly found in liberal arts curriculae . Those at the positive end emphasize creative approaches to their subject matter , while those at the negative end emphasize empirical approaches . We may , therefore , tentatively label this dimension creative versus empirical liberal arts . It is also useful to inquire about the overall similarity between the Illinois and small college solutions . This problem was examined by computing canonical correlations between the two solutions for the eighteen areas common to both . The three canonical correla - tions are . 99 , . 92 , and . 88 , indicating that the two solutions are highly similar . Attribute Analysis Interpretation of these dimensions becomes more clear when they are related to ratings of each area ' s attributes . Scholars at the small college rated each area on six bipolar adjectives . These ratings were averaged over all raters , and the average for each area was correlated with its position on each of the four dimensions obtained from the replication scaling . There were , thus , six attributes correlated with each of four dimensions . Table 2 presents these correlations . Dimension I is correlated ( . 73 ) with the physical - nonphysical rating , indicating that the areas arrayed along this dimension differ in the extent to which they study physical objects . Two other attributes , biological - nonbiological and interesting - of no interest , were substantially related to the first dimen - sion , but neither is so highly related to the dimension as to suggest a straightforward interpretation . Dimension II is not strongly related to any of the attributes . It was suggested above that TABLE 2 CORRELATIONS BETWEEN DIMENSIONS OF ACADEMIC AREA SCALING ( SMALL COLLEGE SAMPLE ) AND ATTRIBUTE RATINGS ( TV = 30 ) Attribute rating Pure - Applied Physical - Nonphysical Biological - Nonbiological Interesting - Of no interest Traditional - Nontraditional Life science - Nonlife science Academic area dimension I - . 01 . 73 - . 52 . 50 - . 22 - . 44 II . 04 - . 26 - . 03 - . 16 - . 15 - . 25 III - . 82 . 40 - . 15 . 26 - . 51 - . 10 IV - . 09 - . 26 . 66 . 36 - . 00 . 68 this dimension involves creative versus empir - ical approaches to liberal arts . Dimension III was interpreted above as involving concern with application . This interpretation is sup - ported by the correlation ( r = — . 82 ) between this dimension and the pure - applied attribute . Dimension IV distinguishes biological and social fields from other areas . The fourth column of Table 2 shows that both the biolog - ical - nonbiological and life science - nonlife sci - ence ratings are correlated with dimension IV . However , neither correlation is high enough to justify labeling the dimension according to either attribute . The problem is that neither attribute deals with the extent to which the area is concerned with social processes . Perhaps the best name for this dimension is " concern with life systems . " DISCUSSION Three characteristics of academic subject matter are perceived by scholars in both a university and a small college setting . The most prominent dimension ( in terms of the variance it accounts for ) distinguishes hard sciences , engineering , and agriculture from social sciences , education , and humanities . A good shorthand label for the dimension is " hard - soft . " The dimension appears to provide one kind of empirical support for Kuhn ' s ( 1962 ) analysis of the paradigm . By " para - digm " Kuhn refers to a body of theory which is subscribed to by all members of the field . The paradigm serves an important organizing 202 ANTHONY BIGLAN function ; it provides a consistent account of most of the phenomena of interest in the area and , at the same time , serves to define those problems which require further research . Thus , fields that have a single paradigm will be characterized by greater consensus about content and method than will fields lacking a paradigm . Kuhn specifically designates physical and biological sciences as paradigmatic . He does not discuss agricultural and engineering areas , but they may also be considered to be paradigmatic , since they are grounded in their related pure fields . The areas at the extreme positive end—the humanities and education areas—are not paradigmatic . Rather , content and method in these areas tend to be idio - syncratic . The social sciences and business areas are also on the positive end of this di - mension , but closer to the origin . These are fields that strive for a paradigm ; but have yet to achieve one . A second dimension underlying the way scholars view academic areas is the concern of the area with application to practical problems . Education , engineering , and agri - cultural areas are distinguished from hard sciences , social sciences , and humanities . The interpretation of this dimension is sup - ported by its correlation with ratings of the areas on a pure - applied attribute dimension ( r = - . 82 , N = 30 ) . This dimension also appears to be used by scholars regardless of the kind of institution they are associated with . Scholars also distinguish biological and social areas from those that deal with inanimate objects . This dimension also appears to be general to scholars in diverse institutions , since it was used by those at the University of Illinois and at a small liberal arts college . It is labeled " concern with life systems . " The one dimension that was not used by scholars at both institutions distinguished creative and empirical liberal arts areas . It is possible that this dimension did not appear in the Illinois solution because the areas that define the positive end of the dimension ( art , music , and speech and drama ) were not in - cluded in the Illinois judgment task . It is also possible that this dimension merely reflects the way that areas are grouped at the liberal arts college where we collected data . This study has significance for at least two aspects of the scientific investigation of scholarly endeavors . First , investigations of the role of social structure in scholarly work tend to be restricted to a single or a few academic areas ( Gouldner , 1970 ; Menzel , 1962 ; Pelz & Andrews , 1966 ) . The subject matter differences that have been described here show why it may be unwise to generalize such studies to other academic areas . A subsequent article ( Biglan , 1973 ) is addressed to this problem . Relationships are examined between the subject matter characteristics identified in this study and the structure and output of university departments . Second , the analysis is relevant to the study of the cognitive processes of different areas . Increasing emphasis is being given to the way in which both the content and methods of a field are linked to the cognitive and perceptual processes of its members . Kuhn ( 1962 ) has shown how changes in scientific theory can be understood as a process of cogni - tive reorganization on the part of people in the field . Consistent with this , Piaget ( 1971 ) draws parallels between the conceptual systems of science and basic aspects of cognitive development . The present analysis provides a systematic framework for exploring the role of cognitive processes in academic fields . Specifically , it suggests that the three most important dimensions for characterizing the " cognitive style " of an area concern its use of a paradigm , its attention to practical application , and its concern with life systems . Moreover , the analysis presented here suggests the degree to which styles are similar in different areas . In summary , three dimensions appear to characterize the subject matter of academic areas in most institutions . The dimensions involve ( a ) the degree to which a paradigm exists , ( 6 ) the degree of concern with applica - tion , and ( c ) concern with life systems . These characteristics may have an important effect on the type of structure and output that a department has . Moreover , these dimensions may provide a useful framework for studying the cognitive style of scholars in different areas . REFERENCES BIGLAN , A . Relationships between subject matter characteristics and the structure and output of CHARACTERISTICS OF SUBJECT MATTER IN DIFFERENT ACADEMIC AREAS 203 university departments . Journal of Applied Psy - chology , 1973 , 58 , 204 - 213 . CARROLL , J . D . , & CHANG , J . J . Analysis of individual differences in multidimensional scaling via an Jf - way generalization of ' Eckart - Young ' decomposition . Murray Hills , N . J . : Bell Telephone Laboratories , 1969 . ( Mimeo ) GOULDNER , A . The coming crisis in western sociology . New York : Basic Books , 1970 . KRUSKAL , J . B . Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness of fit to a nonmetric hypothesis . Psychome - trika , 1964 , 29 , 1 - 27 . ( a ) KRUSKAL , J . B . Nonmetric multidimensional scaling : A numerical method . Psychometrika , 1964 , 29 , 28 - 42 . ( b ) KUHN , T . S . The structure of scientific revolutions . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1962 . MENZEL , H . Planned and unplanned scientific com - munication . In B . Barber & W . Hirsch ( Eds . ) , The sociology of science . New York : The Free Press , 1962 . MILLER , G . A . A psychological method to investigate verbal concepts . Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 1969 , 6 , 169 - 191 . ONCKEN , G . Organizational control in university depart - ments . ( Tech . Rep . No . 71 - 20 ) Seattle , Wash . : Organizational Research Group , University of Washington , June 1971 . PELZ , D . C . , & ANDREWS , F . M . Scientists in organiza - tions . New York : Wiley , 1966 . PIAGET , J . Psychology and epistemology . New York : Grossman , 1971 . RAO , V . R . , & KATZ , R . An empirical evaluation of alternative methods for the multidimensional scaling of large stimulus sets . Unpublished manuscript , Cornell University and University of Pennsylvania , 1970 . RICHARDS , L . G . A multidimensional scaling analysis of judged similarity of complex forms from two task situations . Perception and Psychophysics , in press . SHEPARD , R . N . The analysis of proximities : Multi - dimensional scaling with an unknown distance function , Parts I and II . Psychometrika , 1962 27 , 125 - 140 , 219 - 246 . ( Received December 28 , 1971 )