International Journal of Management Reviews Special Issue The Management and Organisation of Philanthropy : New Directions and Contested Undercurrents Submission deadline 25 August 2019 Publication aim on - line and in - print July 2021 The steadily maturing academic scholarship on philanthropy and philanthropic institutions ( cf . Jung , Phillips and Harrow , 2016 ; Wiepking and Handy , 2015 ; Ma and Konrath , 2018 ) is the focus of this Special Issue . As philanthropic endeavours take on global problems or fill social spaces of public provision , many vacated or unattended by governments , philanthropy’s organisational and managerial dimensions become increasingly important ( Anheier and Daly , 2006 ; Hammack and Heydemann , 2009 ; Sulek , 2010 ) . Normative , prescriptive and instrumental definitions of philanthropy thread throughout the literature . They project perspectives that range from hypercritical rejection ( e . g . McGoey and Thiel , 2018 ; Eikenberry and Mirabella 2018 ; Thompson , 2018 ) to world - saving welcome ( Bornstein , 2007 ; Brown and Green , 2010 ; Perry and Mazany , 2010 ; Saura , 2017 ) . Contestation of philanthropy’s meanings and rationales ( Daly , 2012 ; Moran and Branigan , 2016 ) also illustrate the variety of historical and cultural trends in societies which differing philanthropic choices and actions exemplify . Scholars are thereby challenged to explore whether or how the balance of advantage and disadvantage presented by philanthropic action can be theorised and empirically assessed . Meanwhile growing attention to managerial and organisational considerations in philanthropy is found in other disciplinary discourses , including anthropology , biology , demography , economics , geography , history , political and policy sciences , and sociology ( for example , Farley , Goss and Smith , 2017 ; Pill , 2017 ; Pollard , Datta , James and Akli , 2016 ; Scocpol , 2016 ; Scaife and Williamson , 2014 ) . We consider that the applied disciplinary perspective of Management and Organisation studies provides valuable insights into philanthropy’s engagement in societies , its levels and forms of delivery , its ambitions and its results . This is especially so if philanthropy from organisational perspectives is considered a coalition concept , comprising the components of gift , promise and task , all of which have organisational and managerial questions at their heart . For example , the tasks of philanthropy ( seemingly less heroic than promising or giving ) , requires scrutiny through managerial and organisational study lenses . Those tasks include philanthropy’s collaboration choices , organisation life planning , mergers , leadership and people management models , asset planning from investment to disbursement , and risk and reputation management ( Maclean , Harvey , Gordon and Shaw , 2015 ) . Although inter - disciplinarity seems valued as a philanthropy studies characteristic ( Katz , 1999 ; Nickel , 2018 ) it seems sparse in execution ; while Drezner ( 2017 ) sees it as both a benefit and a hindrance to philanthropy scholars and practitioners . This Special Issue aims to : • provide an informed understanding of the importance of the study of management and organisation in philanthropic institutions ; • articulate and critique the directions in which management and organisational research perspectives on philanthropy in its institutional settings are heading and • explore the implications of organisation and management literatures for philanthropy’s developing and future roles and conceptualisations in societies and communities , whether as resources benefactor , bridge or barrier . ‘Philanthropic institutions’ are those whose primary purpose is as a provider of resources – ‘treasure , time , talent’ - for public benefit , acting privately for public purposes . These are predominantly understood by scholars as trusts and foundations ( Scherer , 2017 ) . For this Special Issue they also include those entrepreneurially – driven and functioning , those operating as Donor - Advised Funds within private investment firms ( Colinvaux , 2017 ) , and smaller entities within commercial firms . Also more specialised structural forms , such as the waqf , longstanding and new forms of endowed institutions in Muslim societies ( Moumtaz , 2018 ) , and the Australian privately operating Trustee Companies ( Cham , 2016 ) . By considering philanthropic institutions as resource providers and enablers , we are excluding a primary focus on resource - seeking non - profit organisations . A series of broad themes and literature directions enable a range of understandings on which developments in philanthropic institutions’ management and organisation are embedded and mainstream and which developments remain as undercurrents , whether experimental , fringe , gaining credence or facing rejection . These themes include power relations among stakeholders , from prominent global donors ( Partzsch , 2017 ) to advocacy , and workforce challenges when seeking consensus building among unequal actors ( Maclean and Harvey , 2016 ; Kohl - Arenas , 2017 ) . Relative power imbalances affect institutions’ strategizing ( Patrizi and Thompson , 2010 ) ; and assessment of successes or failures ( see for example Anheier and Leat’s 2019 identification of foundations’ ‘benign fallibility’ ) . Illegitimate actors and organisations also seek legitimacy from philanthropic institutional involvement ( Cederström and Fleming , 2016 ; Kuldova , 2017 ) . The literature’s emphasis on elite philanthropists and executives ( Saunders - Hastings , 2017 ; Mandler and Cesarini , 2017 ) , and their institutional ambitions ( Glass and Pole , 2017 ) raises questions concerning the contributions of middle managers , staff and volunteers , their characteristics such as race and gender ( Liddell , 2007 ) and relative power . Meanwhile , assumptions and practices regarding ‘efficient donors and meritorious receivers’ ( Roohi , 2018 ) make and re - make the philanthropic task , more as professionalising , impactful and streamlined rather than as a messy , risky set of activities . Paradoxically , given philanthropy’s expression as ‘love of mankind’ ( Sulek , 2010 ) , it is unclear whether philanthropic institutions themselves exemplify love in their intra - and inter - organisational actions and processes , for example , sustaining trustworthy relationships and offering compassionate leadership ( Tasselli , 2018 ) . Notwithstanding argument that foundations are themselves institutional entrepreneurs ( Quinn , Tompkins - Stange and Meyerson , 2014 ) , separate categorisation of entrepreneurial philanthropy denotes or suggests institutional progression . Here , wealthy entrepreneurs devise and implement innovative solutions to pressing needs , rather than respond passively to causes which others designate ( Gordon , Harvey , Shaw and Maclean , 2016 ) . Philanthropy’s attraction to ‘grand challenges’ , with its accompanying inter - organisational paradoxes ( Jarzabkowski , Bednarek , and Cacciatori , 2018 ) , is especially marked here ; where , in the complex mix of business and philanthropic endeavour , the world - making nature of such entrepreneurs emerges ( Harvey et al , 2011 ) . Further themes for consideration include philanthropic institutions’ identity development , and the progression of institutional hybridity , visible in the emergence of social enterprises ( cf . Mair , Mayer and Lutz , 2015 ) . Typological studies inter - relate with institutions’ chosen identities ; also suggesting structures more or less helpful for completing particular philanthropic tasks ( Jung , Harrow and Leat , 2018 ) . Philanthropic institutions may be less subject to the identity pressures placed generally on non - profits ( Johansen and Neilsen , 2016 ) , while allying to other civil society areas , and being variously embedded in different governmental regimes ( Wijkström and Einarsson , 2018 ) . In state and government organisations especially , changing relations with philanthropic institutions heighten demands for cross – sectoral collaboration ( Healy and Donnelly - Cox , 2016 ) ; allied to calls for enhancing philanthropic institutions’ adaptive capacities in rapidly changing circumstances , such as conflict and post - conflict contexts ( Cannon and Donnelly - Cox , 2015 ) . Finally , academic interaction with philanthropic ( especially institutional ) practice , through research , is growing . Understood as engaged scholarship , collaborative academic - practice inquiry , to generate useful organisational knowledge ( Barge and Shockley - Zalabak 2008 ) , its contributions to managerial and organisational development and change remain elusive . Questions for exploration in the management and organisation literatures that could be addressed by contributors to this Special Issue include but are not limited to • What is the importance of leadership , people management and / or organisational design in achieving philanthropic institutions’ purposes ? • Why , to what extent and how has strategic management thinking and practice affected philanthropic institutions , with special regard to their effectiveness , knowledge management , impact and legitimacy ? • Where , why and how has philanthropic institutions’ growth in professionalisation occurred ; and with what effects on theory and on institutions’ accomplishments ? • To what extent is organisational hybridity invigorating to philanthropic institutions ? • Why , how and with what effects on collaboration theory and practice is inter - organisational collaboration a growing feature among philanthropic institutions ? • How is organisational success and failure in philanthropic institutions theorised ? • How , why and to what degree has engaged scholarship and research enhanced management and organisation understanding and change in philanthropic institutions ? Paper Submission Information Manuscripts should follow the Author Guidelines set out by the International Journal of Management Reviews available at : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / page / journal / 14682370 / homepage / ForAuthors . html Additionally see also : Jones O . & Gatrell C . ( 2014 ) . Editorial : The Future of Writing and Reviewing for IJMR . International Journal of Management Reviews , 16 , pp . 249 - 264 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / ijmr . 12038 Gatrell C . & Breslin D . ( 2017 ) . Editors’ Statement . International Journal of Management Reviews , 19 , p . 3 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / ijmr . 12133 Manuscripts should be submitted online at https : / / mc . manuscriptcentral . com / ijmr highlighting that you wish to be considered for the Special Issue ‘Philanthropy’ . Guest Editors Dr Gemma Donnelly - Cox , Trinity College Dublin , Dublin , Ireland , gdnnllyc @ tcd . ie Professor Jenny Harrow , City , University of London , London , UK , j . harrow @ city . ac . uk Dr John Healy , Genio , Dublin , Ireland , john . healy @ genio . ie Dr Filip Wijkström , Stockholm School of Economics , Stockholm , Sweden , Filip . Wijkstrom @ hhs . se Associate Editor From the International Journal of Management Reviews Editorial Board Dr Marian Iszatt - White , Lancaster University Management School , Lancaster , UK . m . iszattwhite @ lancaster . ac . uk Consulting Editor From the International Journal of Management Reviews Editorial Board Professor Charles Harvey , Newcastle University Business School , Newcastle - upon - Tyne , UK , charles . harvey @ ncl . ac . uk Biographies Dr Gemma Donnelly - Cox co - leads the Centre for Innovation , in the School of Business , Trinity College Dublin , researching and supporting social enterprise , innovation and social engagement ; and is Assistant Professor in Trinity School of Business . With her research focus on civil society organisation and management , institutionalisation and organisational hybridity , Gemma plays a leading role in international research collaborations ; contributing to the Global Philanthropy Report ( Kennedy School , Harvard ) , 2018 , and serving as a member on the European Commission’s Expert Group on Foundations , Venture Philanthropy and Social Investment , 2017 - 2018 . A Co - ordinating Member of the EGOS Standing Working Group for Civil Society 2018 - 2022 , she is a co - editor of the Nomos book series on European Civil Society , and a Senior Editorial Board member for NonProfit Policy Forum . Professor Jenny Harrow is Professor of Management , Cass Business School , at City , University of London . As Co - Director of the Centre for Charitable Giving and Philanthropy at Cass ( ESRC Research Centre funded , 2008 - 2015 ) , she contributes to CGAP’s study of philanthropy in its changing institutional forms and settings and philanthropy - governmental relations . Recent and current research focuses on philanthropic funding of journalism , for the European Journalism Centre ( 2017 ) and foundation knowledge sharing , working collaboratively with the World Congress of Muslim Philanthropists’ Academy of Philanthropy , and funded by the UK government’s Global Challenges Research Fund ( 2018 - 19 ) . With extensive experience in supervising and supporting doctoral research and committed to scholarly engagement with philanthropy practice , and a longstanding contributing membership of ARNOVA and ISTR , Jenny is co - editor of The Routledge Companion to Philanthropy , published in 2016 . Dr John Healy is Deputy Executive Director of Genio in Ireland . He oversees programmes to improve social services in disability , mental health , dementia and homelessness and leads the organisation’s work in Ireland in the Service Reform Fund , a €45m public / private collaboration . He is an adjunct assistant professor at the School of Business at Trinity College Dublin , where he researches social innovation , philanthropy and the implementation of reforms in complex social service systems He has professional experience of advising large , philanthropic grant - making programmes promoting social innovation , human rights and public health across the US , Europe , Asia and Africa . Dr Filip Wijkström is Director of the Stockholm Centre for Civil Society Studies , ( SCCSS ) , and Associate Professor in Business Administration , Department for Management and Organization , Stockholm School of Economics , SSE . ( Handelshögskolan i Stockholm ) . Filip’s primary research interests are the role of civil society , nonprofits , philanthropy and social movements in society , and the governance and different modes or organisations in this sphere . Contributing prominently to doctoral programmes , he currently holds two national grants for research on the nonprofit governance of welfare and the study of transnational governance of the global university field . A Co - ordinating Member of the Standing Working Group of EGOS , ‘ Organizing in and through Civil Society’ , Filip is a co - editor of the Nomos book series on international civil society , on the International Advisory Board for Voluntary Sector Review , and on the Senior Editorial Board for Nonprofit Policy Forum . Dr Marian Iszatt - White . After a successful career in financial risk management , latterly as Group Treasurer of Top 100 plc Enterprise Oil , Marian undertook her PhD research at Lancaster University’s Centre for Excellence in Leadership , conducting an ethnomethodologically - informed ethnography of leadership in the learning and skills sector . She is now a Lecturer in the Department of Entrepreneurship and Strategy , and Director of the School Doctoral Programmes . Her primary research interests relate to the practice turn within leadership , and particularly the discourses and identity work through which leaders ‘square the circle’ between the demand to perform emotional labour and the need to appear ( and feel ) authentic . Marian has previously guest edited a number of SIs on leadership topics and regularly reviews for key journals in the field , including Leadership , Management Learning and IJMR . Professor Charles Harvey . Charles Harvey is Professor of Business History and Management at Newcastle University Business School and Director of the Centre for Research on Entrepreneurship , Wealth and Philanthropy ( REWP ) . He holds a PhD in International Business from the University of Bristol . He is author of numerous books and articles in the fields of strategy , leadership and management . His research focuses upon the historical processes that inform contemporary business practice , entrepreneurial philanthropy , and the exercise of power by elite groups in society . He has drawn on and developed the theoretical position of Pierre Bourdieu in his research on business elites , networks and philanthropy conducted with Mairi Maclean and others . Recent publications are in the Academy of Management Review , Business History Review , Human Relations , Organization Studies , Organizational Research Methods , and Theory , Culture and Society . References Anheier , H . K . and Leat , D . ( 2019 ) . Performance Measurement in Philanthropic Foundations : The Ambiguity of Success and Failure . Abingdon : Routledge . Barge , J . K . and Shockley - Zalabak , P . ( 2008 ) . Engaged Scholarship and the Creation of Useful Organizational Knowledge . Journal of Applied Communication Research , 36 , pp . 251 - 265 . Bishop , M . and Green , M . ( 2008 ) . Philanthrocapitalism : How Giving Can Save the World . London : Bloomsbury Press . Bishop , M . and Green , M . ( 2015 ) . Philanthrocapitalism Rising . Society , 52 , pp . 541 - 548 . Bornstein , D . ( 2007 ) . How to Change the World : Social Entrepreneurs and the Power of New Ideas . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Cham , E . ( 2016 ) . Trustee Companies : their role in Australian Philanthropy , Doctoral Thesis , University of Technology , Sydney , Australia . UTS Digital Theses Collection , https : / / opus . lib . uts . edu . au / handle / 10453 / 43411 . Colinvaux , R . ( 2017 ) . Donor Advised Funds : charitable spending vehicles for 21 st century philanthropy . Washington Law Review , 92 , pp . 39 - 85 . Cannon , S . M . and Donnelly - Cox , G . ( 2015 ) . Surviving the Peace : Organizational Responses to Deinstitutionalization of Irish Peacebuilding . Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly , 44 , pp . 360 - 378 . Cederström , C . and Fleming , P . ( 2016 ) . On Bandit Organizations and Their ( IL ) Legitimacy : Concept Development and Illustration . Organization Studies , 37 , pp . 1575 – 1594 . Daly , S . ( 2012 ) . Philanthropy as an Essentially Contested Concept . VOLUNTAS : International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations , 23 , pp . 535 – 557 . Drezner , N . D . ( 2017 ) . Philanthropy & Education : Setting the Mission and Vision for a New Journal within the Landscape of Our Field . Philanthropy and Education , 1 , pp . v - xii . Eikenberry , A . and Mirabella , R . M . ( 2018 ) . Extreme Philanthropy : Philanthrocapitalism , Effective Altruism , and the Discourse of Neoliberalism . PS : Political Science and Politics , 51 , pp . 43 - 47 . Farley , K . E . W , Goss , K . A . and Smith , S . R . ( 2017 ) . Advancing Philanthropic Scholarship : the Implications of Transformation . PS : Political Science and Politics , 59 , pp . 39 - 42 . Glass , J . and Pole , N . ( 2017 ) . Collaboration Between Canadian Grantmaking Foundations : The Expression of an Increasingly Ambitious and Strategic Philanthropic Sector ? Canadian Journal of Nonprofit and Social Economy , 8 , pp . 57 - 79 . Gordon , J , Harvey , C . , Shaw , E . and Maclean , M . ( 2016 ) . Entrepreneurial philanthropy , in Jung , T . , Phillips , S . D . and Harrow , J . ( Eds ) . The Routledge Companion to Philanthropy . Abingdon , Routledge , pp . 334 - 347 . Hammack , D . C . and Heydemann , S . ( Eds . ) . ( 2009 ) . Globalization , Philanthropy and Civil Society : Projecting Institutional Logics Abroad . Bloomington IN : Indiana University Press . Harvey , C . , Maclean , M . , Gordon , J . and Shaw , E . ( 2011 ) . Andrew Carnegie and the foundations of contemporary entrepreneurial philanthropy , Business History , 53 , pp . 425 - 459 . Healy , J . and Donnelly - Cox , G . ( 2016 ) . The evolving state , in Jung , T . , Phillips , S . D . and Harrow , J . ( Eds ) . The Routledge Companion to Philanthropy . Abingdon , Routledge , pp . 200 - 212 . Jarzabkowski , P . , Bednarek , R . , Chalkias , K . , & Cacciatori , E . ( 2018 ) . Exploring inter - organizational paradoxes : Methodological lessons from a study of a grand challenge . Strategic Organization . Published online 16 October 2018 . Johansen , T . S . and Nielsen , A . E . ( 2016 ) . Constructing non - profit identity in the midst of stakeholder complexity . International Studies of Management and Organisation , 46 , pp . 216 - 227 . Jung , T . , Phillips , S . D . and Harrow , J . ( Eds ) . ( 2016 ) . The Routledge Companion to Philanthropy . Abingdon : Routledge . Jung , T , Harrow , J . and Leat , D . ( 2018 ) . Mapping philanthropic foundations’ characteristics : towards an international integrative framework of foundation types . Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly , 47 , pp . 893 - 917 . Katz , S . N . ( 1999 ) . Where Did the Serious Study of Philanthropy Come From , Anyway ? Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 28 , pp . 74 – 82 . Kohl - Arenas , E . ( 2017 ) . The Presentation of Self in Philanthropic Life : The Political Negotiations of the Foundation Program Officer . Antipode , 49 , pp . 677 - 700 . Kuldova , T . ( 2018 ) . When elites and outlaws do philanthropy : on the limits of private vices for public benefit . Trends in Organised Crime , 21 , pp . 295 - 309 . Liddell , T . N . ( 2007 ) . Learning and leading : Approaches to leadership self - development among women executives of philanthropic organizations . PhD thesis , Florida Atlantic University , ProQuest Dissertations Publishing . Ma , J . and Konrath , S . ( 2018 ) . A Century of Nonprofit Studies : Scaling the Knowledge of the Field . VOLUNTAS : International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations , published online 5 November 2018 . Maclean , M . & Harvey , C . ( 2016 ) . ‘Give it back , George’ : Network dynamics in the philanthropic field . Organization Studies , 37 pp . 399 - 423 . Maclean , M . , Harvey , C . , Gordon , J . & Shaw , E . ( 2015 ) . Identity , storytelling and the philanthropic journey . Human Relations , 68 , pp . 1623 - 1652 . Mair , J . , Mayer , J . And Lutz , E . ( 2015 ) . Navigating Institutional Plurality : Organizational Governance in Hybrid Organizations . Organization Studies , 36 , pp . 713 – 739 . Mandler , P . and Cesarini , D . ( Eds . ) . ( 2017 ) . Great Philanthropists : Wealth and Charity in the Modern World , 1815 – 1945 . Portland , OR : Vallentine Mitchell . McGoey , L . and Thiel , D . ( 2018 ) . Charismatic violence and the sanctification of the super - rich . Economy and Society , 47 , pp . 111 - 134 . Moran , M . and Branigan , E . ( 2016 ) . The contested terrain of corporate philanthropy and social responsibility , in Jung , T . , Phillips , S . D . and Harrow , J . ( Eds ) ( 2016 ) . The Routledge Companion to Philanthropy , Abingdon : Routledge , 375 - 390 . Moumtaz , N . ( 2018 ) . Theme Issue : A Third Wave of Waqf Studies . Islamic Law and Society , 25 , pp . 1 - 10 . Nickel , P . M . ( 2018 ) . Philanthropy and the Politics of Well - Being . PS : Political Science & Politics , 51 , pp . 61 - 66 . Partzsch , L . ( 2017 ) . Powerful individuals in a globalised world . Global Policy , 8 , pp . 5 - 13 . Perry , D . C . and Mazany , T . ( 2015 ) . Here for Good : Community Foundations and the Challenges of the 21st Century , M . E . Sharpe , Armonk , New York . Pill , M . C . ( 2017 ) . Embedding in the city ? Locating civil society in the philanthropy of place . Community Development Journal , published online 16 June 2017 . Pollard , J . , Datta , K . , James . A . and Akli , Q . ( 2016 ) . Islamic charitable infrastructure and giving in East London : Everyday economic - development geographies in practice . Journal of Economic Geography , 16 , pp . 871 – 896 . Quinn , R . , Tompkins - Stange , M . and Meyerson , D . ( 2014 ) . Beyond Grantmaking : Philanthropic Foundations as Agents of Change and Institutional Entrepreneurs . Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly , 43 , pp . 950 – 968 . Roohi , S . ( 2018 ) . Efficient Donors , Meritorious Receivers : Professionalizing transnational philanthropy in coastal Andhra . Modern Asian Studies , Special Issue , Charity and Philanthropy in South Asia , 52 , pp . 214 - 237 . Saunders - Hastings , E . ( 2018 ) . Plutocratic Philanthropy . The Journal of Politics , 80 , pp . 149 - 161 . Saura , G . ( 2017 ) . Saving the world through neoliberalism : philanthropic policy networks in the context of Spanish education . Critical Studies in Education , 59 , pp . 279 - 296 . Scaife , W . and Williamson , A . ( 2014 ) . Philanthropy and sociology : a logical pairing . NEXUS , Queensland University of Technology , Brisbane , http : / / eprints . qut . edu . au / 68137 / . Scherer , S . ( 2017 ) . Organizational Identity and Philanthropic Institutions , Patterns of Strategy , Structure , and Grantmaking Practices . Nonprofit Management and Leadership , 28 , pp . 105 - 123 . Skocpol , T . ( 2016 ) . Why Political Scientists Should Study Organized Philanthropy . PS : Political Science & Politics , 49 , pp . 433 – 6 . Sulek , M . ( 2010 ) . On the modern meaning of philanthropy . Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly , 39 , pp . 197 – 198 . Tasselli , S . ( 2018 ) . Love and Organization Studies : Moving beyond the Perspective of Avoidance . Organization Studies , published online 23 January 2018 . Thompson , C . ( 2018 ) . Philanthrocapitalism : rendering the public domain obsolete ? Third World Quarterly , 39 , pp . 51 - 67 . Wiepking , P . And Handy , F . ( Eds . ) . ( 2015 ) . The Palgrave Handbook of Global Philanthropy , London : Palgrave MacMillan . Wijkström , F . and Einarsson , S . ( 2018 ) . Swedish Foundations in Comparison : A Carefully Negotiated Space of Existence American Behavioral Scientist , 62 , pp . 1889 - 1918 .