www . hbr . org How Strategists Really Think Tapping the Power of Analogy by Giovanni Gavetti and Jan W . Rivkin Much of the time , executives use analogies to make strategic choices . The best strategists know both the power and peril of such comparisons . Reprint R0504C How Strategists Really Think Tapping the Power of Analogy by Giovanni Gavetti and Jan W . Rivkin harvard business review • april 2005 page 1 C O P Y R I G H T © 2005 H A R V A R D B U S I N E SS S C H OO L P U B L I S H I N G C O R P O R A T I O N . A LL R I G H T S R E S E R V E D . Much of the time , executives use analogies to make strategic choices . The best strategists know both the power and peril of such comparisons . Strategy is about choice . The heart of a com - pany’s strategy is what it chooses to do and not do . The quality of the thinking that goes into such choices is a key driver of the quality and success of a company’s strategy . Most of the time , leaders are so immersed in the speciﬁcs of strategy—the ideas , the numbers , the plans—that they don’t step back and examine how they think about strategic choices . But ex - ecutives can gain a great deal from under - standing their own reasoning processes . In particular , reasoning by analogy plays a role in strategic decision making that is large but largely overlooked . Faced with an unfamiliar problem or opportunity , senior managers often think back to some similar situation they have seen or heard about , draw lessons from it , and apply those lessons to the current situa - tion . Yet managers rarely realize that they’re reasoning by analogy . As a result , they are un - able to make use of insights that psychologists , cognitive scientists , and political scientists have generated about the power and the pit - falls of analogy . Managers who pay attention to their own analogical thinking will make better strategic decisions and fewer mistakes . When Analogies Are Powerful We’ve explained the notion of analogical rea - soning to executives responsible for strategy in a variety of industries , and virtually every one of them , after reﬂecting , could point to times when he or she relied heavily on analogies . A few well - known examples reﬂect how com - mon analogical reasoning is : • Throughout the mid - 1990s , Intel had re - sisted providing cheap microprocessors for in - expensive PCs . During a 1997 training seminar , however , Intel’s top management team learned a lesson about the steel industry from Harvard Business School professor Clayton Christensen : In the 1970s , upstart minimills established themselves in the steel business by making cheap concrete - reinforcing bars known as re - bar . Established players like U . S . Steel ceded the low end of the business to them , but deeply re - gretted that decision when the minimills crept into higher - end products . Intel’s CEO at the How Strategists Really Think harvard business review • april 2005 page 2 Giovanni Gavetti ( ggavetti @ hbs . edu ) is an assistant professor and Jan W . Rivkin ( jrivkin @ hbs . edu ) is an associate professor in the Strategy Unit of Harvard Business School in Boston . time , Andy Grove , seized on the steel analogy , referring to cheap PCs as “digital rebar . ” The lesson was clear , Grove argued : “If we lose the low end today , we could lose the high end to - morrow . ” Intel soon began to promote its low - end Celeron processor more aggressively to makers and buyers of inexpensive PCs . • Starting in the 1970s , Circuit City thrived by selling consumer electronics in superstores . A wide selection , professional sales help , and a policy of not haggling with customers distin - guished the stores . In 1993 , Circuit City sur - prised investors by announcing that it would open CarMax , a chain of used - car outlets . The company argued that the used - car industry of the 1990s bore a close resemblance to the elec - tronics retailing environment of the 1970s . Mom - and - pop dealers with questionable repu - tations dominated the industry , leaving con - sumers nervous when they purchased and ﬁ - nanced complex , big - ticket , durable goods . Circuit City’s managers felt that its success for - mula from electronics retailing would work well in an apparently analogous setting . • The supermarket , a retail format pio - neered during the 1930s , has served as an ana - logical source many times over . Charlie Mer - rill relied heavily on his experience as a supermarket executive as he developed the ﬁ - nancial supermarket of Merrill Lynch . Like - wise , Charles Lazarus was inspired by the su - permarket when he founded Toys R Us in the 1950s . Thomas Stemberg , the founder of Sta - ples and a former supermarket executive , re - ports in his autobiography that Staples began with an analogical question : “Could we be the Toys R Us of ofﬁce supplies ? ” Each of these instances displays the core ele - ments of analogical reasoning : a novel prob - lem that has to be solved or a new opportunity that begs to be tapped ; a speciﬁc prior setting that managers deem to be similar in its essen - tials ; and a solution that managers can transfer from its original setting to the unfamiliar con - text . When managers face a problem , sense “Ah , I’ve seen this one before , ” and reach back to an earlier experience for a solution , they are using analogy . Strategy makers use analogical reasoning more often than they know . Commonly , credit for a strategic decision goes to one of two other approaches : deduction and the pro - cess of trial and error . When managers use de - duction , they apply general administrative and economic principles to a speciﬁc business situation , weigh alternatives , and make a ra - tional choice . They choose the alternative that , according to their analysis , would lead to the best outcome . Trial and error , on the other hand , involves learning after the fact rather than thinking in advance . Both deduction and trial and error play im - portant roles in strategy , but each is effective only in speciﬁc circumstances . Deduction typ - ically requires a lot of data and is therefore at its most powerful only in information - rich settings—for instance , mature and stable in - dustries . Even where information is available , processing a great deal of raw data is very challenging , particularly if there are many in - tertwined choices that span functional and product boundaries . The mental demands of deduction can easily outstrip the bounds on human reasoning that psychologists have identiﬁed in numerous experiments . For this reason , deduction works best for modular problems that can be broken down and tack - led piece by piece . Trial and error is a relatively effective way to make strategic decisions in settings so am - biguous , novel , or complex that any cogni - tively intensive effort is doomed to fail . In al - together new situations , such as launching a radically new product , there may be no good substitute for trying something out and learn - ing from experience . Many , perhaps most , strategic problems are neither so novel and complex that they require trial and error nor so familiar and modular that they permit deduction . Much of the time , managers have only enough cues to see a re - semblance to a past experience . They can see how an industry they’re thinking about enter - ing looks like one they already understand , for example . It is in this large middle ground that analogical reasoning has its greatest power . Analogical reasoning makes enormously ef - ﬁcient use of the information and the mental processing power that strategy makers have . When reasoning by analogy , managers need not understand every aspect of the problem at hand . Rather , they pay attention to select fea - tures of it and use them to apply the patterns of the past to the problems of the present . Imagine , for instance , the challenge facing Charles Lazarus in the fast - changing , complex toy industry of the 1950s . Had he sat down and analyzed all of the interdependent conﬁgura - How Strategists Really Think harvard business review • april 2005 page 3 tions of choices in toy retailing—from market - ing to operations , from human resource man - agement to logistics—it is unlikely he would have come up with a strategy as coherent and effective as the one Toys R Us adopted . The analogy he drew to supermarkets was extraor - dinarily efﬁcient from an informational and cognitive point of view . In one stroke , it gave Lazarus an integrated bundle of choices : ex - haustive selection , relatively low prices , rapid replenishment of stock , deep investment in in - formation technology , self - service , shopping carts , and so forth . Analogical reasoning can also be a source of remarkable insight . Analogies lie at the root of some of the most compelling and creative thinking in business as a whole , not just in dis - cussions of strategy . For instance , Taiichi Ohno , the foremost pioneer of Toyota’s famed pro - duction system , supposedly invented the kan - ban system for replenishing inventory after he watched shelf - stocking procedures at U . S . su - permarkets , and he devised the andon cord to halt a faulty production line after seeing how bus passengers signaled a driver to stop by pulling a cord that rang a bell . Reasoning by analogy is prevalent among strategy makers because of a series of close matches : between the amount of information available in many strategic situations and the amount required to draw analogies ; between the wealth of managerial experience and the need for that experience in analogical reason - ing ; and between the need for creative strate - gies and analogy’s ability to spark creativity . Reﬂecting these matches , business schools typ - ically teach strategy by means of case studies , which provide an abundance of analogies from which the students can draw . ( See the sidebar “Strategic Decision Making and the Case Method . ” ) Similarly , some of the foremost strategy consultants are famed for their ability to draw lessons from one industry and apply them to another . Thus we have ample reason to believe that analogical reasoning is a key im - plement in the toolbox of the typical real - world strategist . How Analogies Fail Though analogical reasoning is a powerful and prevalent tool , it is extremely easy to rea - son poorly through analogies , and strategists rarely consider how to use them well . Indeed , analogies’ very potency requires that they be used wisely . To understand the potential pit - falls , consider for a moment the anatomy of analogy . Cognitive scientists paint a simple picture of analogical reasoning . An individual starts with a situation to be handled—the tar - get problem ( for Intel , the competition from makers of low - end microprocessors ) . The per - son then considers other settings that she knows well from direct or vicarious experience and , through a process of similarity mapping , identiﬁes a setting that , she believes , displays similar characteristics . This setting is the Strategic Decision Making and the Case Method The case method in business education has often been criticized , most recently by Henry Mintzberg , because it depicts management as an abstract theoretical exercise removed from the reality of managerial work . We be - lieve this criticism misses the cognitive un - derpinnings of managerial decision making . In their role as strategists , managers often face situations in which thinking by analogy or by case has more power than other forms of reasoning . Thus , teaching managers with cases , and to reason from cases , is an appro - priate and powerful approach . In fact , the case method has extraordinary potential to enable managers to draw better analogies , for two reasons . First , the case method creates a large rep - ertoire of secondhand experiences from which students can reason . During their managerial careers , former business students will seldom , if ever , encounter a situation ex - actly like one they discussed in the class - room . But having studied and debated hun - dreds of cases from diverse settings , managers can draw upon a large set of vicari - ous experiences as they make choices . Second , the case method gives students ex - tensive experience in deciding what is and what isn’t important in a given business situ - ation . This skill is crucial to analogical rea - soning . The difference between a superﬁcial and a deep similarity mapping is relevance . A superﬁcial mapping focuses on irrelevant similarity ( such as the home state of the pres - ident in the experiment described in the main text ) ; a deep one emphasizes similarity along dimensions that truly drive business performance . It is probably not surprising that two pro - fessors at Harvard , the bastion of the case method , would defend it . Yet our support comes with important reservations . Too of - ten , students and managers alike reason loosely and fail to assess whether there is a clear causal mapping of their solution onto the problem . Students who are taught by the case method should be trained in the careful use of analogy—and that , we fear , occurs too rarely . Indeed , that fear was one of the factors that fueled our interest in analogical reasoning . How Strategists Really Think harvard business review • april 2005 page 4 source problem ( the steel industry ) . From the source emerges a candidate solution that was or should have been adopted for the source problem ( a vigorous defense of the low end ) . The candidate solution is then applied to the target problem . In a variant of this picture , the solution seeking a problem , an individual starts with a source problem and a candidate solution , then uses similarity mapping to ﬁnd a target prob - lem where the solution would work well . Cir - cuit City’s managers , for instance , had an effec - tive solution in consumer electronics retailing . They then found a new setting , used - car retail - ing , to which they believed their solution could be applied with success . Dangers arise when strategists draw an anal - ogy on the basis of superﬁcial similarity , not deep causal traits . Take Ford , for instance . In overhauling its supply chain , the automaker looked carefully at Dell’s key strategic princi - ple of “virtual integration” with its suppliers as a possible source for an analogy . On the sur - face , computer and auto production resemble one another . Both involve the assembly of a vast variety of models from a set of fairly stan - dardized components . It is easy , however , to pinpoint differences between the two indus - tries . In the PC business , for example , prices of inputs decline by as much as 1 % per week— much , much faster than in the auto industry . To the extent that rapidly falling input prices play a role in Dell’s success formula , overlook - ing this underlying difference could seriously undermine the usefulness of the analogy . For - tunately , Ford executives thought carefully about the differences between the auto indus - try and the PC business , as well as the difﬁculty of changing their existing supply chain , as they used the analogy . The experience of Enron shows how a se - ductive but bad analogy can lead to ﬂawed de - cisions . Many factors contributed to Enron’s startling collapse , but headlong diversiﬁcation based on loose analogies played an important role . After apparently achieving success in trad - ing natural gas and electric power , Enron exec - utives moved rapidly to enter or create mar - kets for other goods ranging from coal , steel , and pulp and paper to weather derivatives and broadband telecom capacity . In a classic exam - ple of a solution seeking problems , executives looked for markets with certain characteristics reminiscent of the features of the gas and elec - tricity markets . The characteristics included fragmented demand , rapid change due to de - regulation or technological progress , complex and capital - intensive distribution systems , lengthy sales cycles , opaque pricing , and mis - matches between long - term supply contracts and short - term ﬂuctuations in customer de - mand . In such markets , managers were conﬁ - dent that Enron’s market - creation and trading skills would allow the company to make hefty proﬁts . On the broadband opportunity , for in - stance , Enron Chairman Kenneth Lay told Gas Daily , “ [ Broadband ] ’s going to start off as a very inefﬁcient market . It’s going to settle down to a business model that looks very much like our business model on [ gas and electricity ] wholesale , which obviously has been very proﬁtable with rapid growth . ” But Enron’s executives failed to appreciate impor - tant , deeper differences between the markets for natural gas and bandwidth . The broad - band market was based on unproven technol - ogy and was dominated by telecom compa - nies that resented Enron’s encroachment . The underlying good—bandwidth—did not lend itself to the kinds of standard contracts that made efﬁcient trading possible in gas and electricity . Perhaps worst , in broadband trad - ing , Enron had to deliver capacity the “last mile” to a customer’s site—an expensive chal - lenge that gas wholesalers didn’t face . The danger of focusing on superﬁcial simi - larity is very real , for two reasons . First , distin - guishing between a target problem’s deep , structural features and its superﬁcial character - istics is difﬁcult , especially when the problem is new and largely unknown . In the earliest days of the Internet portal industry , for in - stance , it was far from clear what structure would emerge in the business . Players in the market adopted analogies that reﬂected idio - syncrasies of the management teams rather than deep traits of the evolving industry . The tech - savvy founders of Lycos , for instance , saw themselves competing on a high - tech battle - ﬁeld and assumed that the company with the best search technology would win . Magellan’s founders , the twin daughters of publishing magnate Robert Maxwell , aimed to build “the Michelin guide to the Web” and developed edi - torial abilities . The pioneers of Yahoo , seeing the portal industry as a media business , in - vested in the company’s brand and the look It is extremely easy to reason poorly through analogies , and strategists rarely consider how to use them well . How Strategists Really Think harvard business review • april 2005 page 5 and feel of its sites . But this is only part of the picture . Not only is it difﬁcult to distinguish deep similarities from surface resemblances in some contexts , but people typically make little effort to draw such distinctions . In laboratory experiments conducted by psychologists , subjects—even well - educated subjects—are readily seduced by similarities they should know to be superﬁcial . In a study by psychologist Thomas Gilovich , students of international conﬂict at Stanford were told of a hypothetical foreign - policy cri - sis : A small , democratic nation was being threatened by an aggressive , totalitarian neigh - bor . Each student was asked to play the role of a State Department ofﬁcial and recommend a course of action . The descriptions of the situa - tion were manipulated slightly . Some of the students heard versions with cues that were in - tended to make them think of events that pre - ceded World War II . The president at the time , they were told , was “from New York , the same state as Franklin Roosevelt , ” refugees were ﬂee - ing in boxcars , and the brieﬁng was held in Winston Churchill Hall . Other students heard versions that might have reminded them of Vietnam . The president was “from Texas , the same state as Lyndon Johnson , ” refugees were escaping in small boats , and the brieﬁng took place in Dean Rusk Hall . Clearly , there is little reason that the president’s home state , the ref - ugees’ vehicles , or the name of a brieﬁng room should inﬂuence a recommendation on foreign policy . Yet subjects in the ﬁrst group were sig - niﬁcantly more likely to apply the lessons of World War II—that aggression must be met with force—than were participants in the sec - ond group , who veered toward a hands - off pol - icy inspired by Vietnam . Not only were the stu - dents swayed by superﬁcial likenesses , they were not even aware that they had been swayed . The implications are unsettling . Thanks to his or her particular history and education , each manager carries around an idiosyncratic tool kit of possible sources of analogies . In choosing among tools or identifying new prob - lems for old tools , the manager may be guided by something other than a careful look at the similarity between the source and the target . The tendency to rely on surface similarity is made even worse by two other common ﬂaws in how people reach judgments : Anchoring . Once an analogy or other idea anchors itself in a management team , it is no - toriously hard to dislodge . Psychologists have shown that this is true even when decision makers obviously have no reason to believe the initial idea . In a demonstration of this ef - fect , Nobel Prize winner Daniel Kahneman and his coauthor Amos Tversky told experi - mental subjects they would be asked to esti - mate the percentage of African countries in the membership of the United Nations . A rou - lette wheel with numbers from zero to 100 was spun , and after it had stopped , the sub - jects were asked whether the actual percent - age was greater or less than the number show - ing on the wheel . They were then asked to estimate the correct percentage . Surprisingly , the roulette wheel had a strong impact on ﬁnal estimates . For instance , subjects who saw 10 % on the wheel estimated the real percent - age at 25 % , on average , while those who saw 65 % gave an average estimate of 45 % . The rou - lette wheel knew nothing about the composi - tion of the United Nations , obviously , yet it had a powerful inﬂuence on people’s judg - ment . ( The current answer : African nations make up 24 % of the U . N . ’s membership . ) The anchoring effect suggests that early analogies in a company , even if they have taken root casually , can have a lasting inﬂu - ence . This is especially true if decision makers become emotionally attached to their analo - gies . For years , Sun Microsystems has focused on delivering entire systems of hardware and software even as the computer industry has grown less and less integrated . CEO Scott Mc - Nealy often justiﬁes his contrarian position by highlighting an analogy to the automotive in - dustry . “You guys are all focusing on piston rings , ” he once told reporters . “Go and ask Ford about its strategy in piston rings . And carbure - tors . You don’t . You talk about the whole car . ” Though Sun has suffered ﬁnancially , McNealy has been reluctant to shift strategy , and , in - deed , he continues to use the auto analogy . Perhaps that is inevitable for an individual whose father worked in the auto industry and whose sons are named after vehicle models— Maverick , Scout , Colt , and Dakota . Conﬁrmation Bias . The anchoring effect is reinforced by another problem : decision mak - ers’ tendency to seek out information that conﬁrms their beliefs and to ignore contradic - tory data . To some degree , this tendency arises simply because managers like to be right— Strategists will seek evidence that their analogy is legitimate , not evidence that it is invalid . As a result , a company may continue to act on a superficial analogy for a long time . How Strategists Really Think harvard business review • april 2005 page 6 and like to be seen as right . But there is evi - dence from psychology that people are better equipped to conﬁrm beliefs than to challenge them , even when they have no vested interest in the beliefs . Consider an illustration . Experimental sub - jects in Israel were asked during the 1970s , “Which pair of countries is more similar , West Germany and East Germany , or Sri Lanka and Nepal ? ” Most people answered , “West Ger - many and East Germany . ” A second set of sub - jects was asked , “Which pair of countries is more different , West Germany and East Ger - many , or Sri Lanka and Nepal ? ” Again , most people answered , “West Germany and East Germany . ” How can we reconcile the two sets of results ? The accepted interpretation starts with the fact that the typical Israeli knew more about the Germanys than about Sri Lanka and Nepal . When asked to test a hypothesis of sim - ilarity , subjects sought evidence of similarity and found more between the Germanys than between Sri Lanka and Nepal . When asked to test a hypothesis of difference , they sought dif - ferences and found more of them between the Germanys . Subjects search for the attribute they are prompted to seek—similarity or dif - ference—and do not look for evidence of the contrary attribute . Together , anchoring and the conﬁrmation bias suggest real problems for strategists who rely on analogies . Having adopted an analogy , perhaps a superﬁcial one , strategy makers will seek out evidence that it is legitimate , not evi - dence that it is invalid . Intel’s managers will tend to look for reasons that microprocessors really are like steel ; Circuit City will try to con - ﬁrm that consumer electronics and used cars truly are alike . Given the variety of informa - tion available in most business situations , any - one who looks for conﬁrming data will doubt - less ﬁnd something that supports his or her beliefs . Thanks to the anchoring effect , any contradictory information may well be disre - garded . As a result , a company may continue to act on a superﬁcial analogy for a long time . How to Avoid Superﬁcial Analogies Reasoning by analogy , then , poses a dilemma for senior managers . On the one hand , it is a powerful tool , well suited to the challenges of making strategy in novel , complex settings . It can spark breakthrough thinking and fuel suc - cesses like those of Toys R Us and Intel . On the other , it raises the specter of superﬁciality . Can managers tap the power of analogy but side - step its pitfalls ? The bad news is that it is im - possible to make analogies 100 % safe . Manag - ers are especially likely to rely on analogical reasoning in unfamiliar , ambiguous environ - ments where other forms of thinking , like de - duction , break down . In those settings , it’s Recognize the analogy and identify its purpose . SourceProblem TargetProblem TargetProblem TargetProblem 1 Understand the source . Apparently similar problem from another context Your company’s problem Actively search for differences between the source and the target . Similarity Mapping Application 2 Assess similarity . 3 SourceProblem CandidateSolution CandidateSolution CandidateSolution Your Solution Adjust the solution for glaring differences . Fine - tune the solution using market feedback . TargetProblem Translate , decide , and adapt . 4 SourceProblem SourceProblem Avoiding Superﬁcial Analogies It’s often difﬁcult to tell whether similarities between a familiar and an unfamiliar problem are deep or superﬁcial . Managers facing strategic choices can improve their odds of using analogies well by following these four steps . C o p y r i g h t © 20 05 H a r v a r d B u s i n e ss S c h oo l P u b l i s h i n g C o r p o r a t i o n . A ll r i g h t s r e s e r v e d . How Strategists Really Think harvard business review • april 2005 page 7 hard to distinguish the deep traits from the su - perﬁcial . The good news is that four straight - forward steps can improve a management team’s odds of using analogies skillfully . ( See the exhibit “Avoiding Superﬁcial Analogies . ” ) Before laying out these steps , we must ac - knowledge our debt to political scientists , espe - cially Harvard’s Ernest May and Richard Neus - tadt , who found that analogical reasoning often leads policy makers astray . The ap - proaches they developed to train such people to make better use of history have informed our thinking . Recognize the analogy and identify its pur - pose . To defend against ﬂawed analogies , a management team ﬁrst must recognize the analogies it is using . Sometimes they are obvi - ous . It is hard to forget that “digital rebar” is a reference to the steel industry , for instance . In other cases , inﬂuential analogies remain hid - den . They often come from executives’ back - grounds . Though Merrill Lynch’s distinctive approach to retail brokerage owed much to the years that Charlie Merrill spent in the su - permarket business , only occasionally did Merrill confess that “although I am supposed to be an investment banker , I think I am really and truly a grocery man at heart . ” It’s also important to identify how a com - pany is using any analogies it recognizes . Man - agers use analogies for a variety of purposes , after all—to brainstorm , to communicate com - plexity , and to motivate employees , for exam - ple . ( For thoughts on the uses of analogies , see the sidebar “A Versatile Tool . ” ) Often , analogies are used to spark ideas and emotions . In such cases , creativity and impact may be more im - portant than strict validity . But when a com - pany moves from brainstorming to deciding , and when resources are at stake , managers need to ask tough , objective questions about whether the analogy is more than superﬁcial . To answer these questions well , strategists must analyze chains of cause and effect . It is useful to break this task into three further steps . Understand the source . Begin by examin - ing why the strategy worked in the industry from which the analogy was drawn . The clas - sic tools of strategy analysis are extremely use - ful here . Indeed , the key is to lay out in - depth analyses that are familiar to strategists , partic - ularly analyses of the source environment , the solution or strategy that worked well ( or that failed ) in the original context , and the link be - tween the source environment and the win - ning ( or losing ) strategy . Consider Circuit City’s effort to apply its re - tailing solution to the used - car business , and start by analyzing the source environment . When the company began its rise to promi - nence in the 1970s , the consumer electronics industry was dominated by mom - and - pop re - tailers of varying quality and efﬁciency . Bur - geoning demand kept the retailers aﬂoat , de - spite three negatives : Consumers were more committed to the national brands than to the retailers , the cost to switch from one retailer to another was low , and customers often feared that retailers were preying on their ignorance of high - tech products . The environment was marked by untapped efﬁciencies ( for example , few economies of scale were exploited ) and unmet customer needs ( each store carried a limited selection of brands , and products were often out of stock ) . Circuit City devised a highly effective strat - egy that took advantage of the opportunities and neutralized the threats in this setting . Key to the strategy was a series of ﬁxed invest - ments : large stores that could stock an exhaus - tive selection of consumer electronics , infor - mation technology that could track sales A Versatile Tool This article focuses on the use of anal - ogy as a tool for choosing among possi - ble solutions to strategic problems , but managers also use analogies for other purposes . Most important , analogies can be catalysts for generating creative options . Seeking outside - the - box ways to speed customers through gas stations , for instance , Mobil executives looked far aﬁeld—at the operations of race - car pit crews . And to improve service , they ex - amined the world - class operations of the Ritz - Carlton hotel chain . Similarly , a management team might choose a com - pany it deeply admires in a distant busi - ness and ask itself , “What would it mean to be the Wal - Mart or GE or Dell of our industry ? ” We see little danger in using analogies this way—as long as manag - ers test any analogy carefully when they move from generating options to choos - ing among them . Analogies are also powerful tools for communicating complex messages quickly . When the executives turning around Ducati began to speak of the leg - endary Italian motorcycle maker as an entertainment company comparable to Disney , they made it clear , to insiders and outsiders , that they planned to in - vest more in the experiential aspects of the brand and less in the physical prod - uct . Chosen well , analogies have an emotional impact that can rally a man - agement team . By referring to cheap PCs as “digital rebar , ” Andy Grove sharp - ened his colleagues’ fears that Intel could go the way of U . S . Steel . Sports and military analogies are often used in this way , to motivate teams . How Strategists Really Think harvard business review • april 2005 page 8 patterns closely , automated distribution cen - ters that were tied to the sales - tracking tech - nology , and brand - building efforts . The com - pany differentiated itself from competitors on the basis of selection , availability , and con - sumer trust . It simultaneously drove down costs . Circuit City’s low prices and its other strengths led to extraordinarily large sales vol - umes , which reduced unit costs . Those cost re - ductions permitted lower prices , which drove even greater volume , and so on in a virtuous cycle . Note how well this strategy matched the de - mands of the external environment . By meet - ing consumer needs and by building a brand that shoppers valued , Circuit City made it less attractive for customers to switch from store to store . As Circuit City’s brand rose to promi - nence , as sales volume grew , and as customers came to rely on the recommendations of Cir - cuit City’s salespeople , the company became far more powerful in negotiations with suppli - ers . Investments in branding , distribution , in - formation technology , and large stores raised new barriers to entry . And scale - driven cost ad - vantages gave the company a powerful way to overcome smaller rivals . The preceding three paragraphs lay out a chain of cause and effect that explains why Cir - cuit City’s original strategy worked in the con - sumer electronics environment . The strate - gist’s goal is to ﬁgure out whether the causal logic holds up in the target environment . In preparing to make that analysis , the strategy maker will ﬁnd it useful to compile two lists of industry features : those that play a crucial role in the causal logic and those that don’t . In the Circuit City example , the list of crucial ele - ments includes the following features of the pre – Circuit City electronics retailing industry : • unsatisﬁed customer needs , especially for product selection , product availability , and trustworthy retailers ; • untapped economies of scale and latent , but largely unrealized , barriers to entry ; • a fragmented base of rivals , many of them weak ; • unexploited opportunities to apply infor - mation and distribution technologies for better inventory management ; • branded , powerful , reliable suppliers ; • modest switching costs among consumers ; and • an absence of goods that are close substi - tutes at the high end of the market . At least one notable feature of the industry appears not to have played a major role in the causal logic , according to our analysis . Demand for consumer electronics was growing rapidly when Circuit City became a success , but the in - dustry growth rate does not loom large in the causal story . The sheer size of the industry plays a role—without a critical mass of de - mand , economies of scale cannot be tapped— but the growth rate does not seem critical . Assess similarity . The strategist now maps similarities between the source and the target and determines whether the resemblance is more than superﬁcial . The understanding of the source that he or she has built up is crucial in this step . Rather than wrestling with the en - tire target problem , which is much less famil - iar than the source , the strategist can focus on the key features of the causal logic . The ques - tion is whether the source and the target are similar or different along these features . Similarities usually spring to mind quickly . But the team must also search actively for differ - ences , seeking evidence that each essential fea - ture of the source problem is absent in the tar - get . This process rarely comes naturally—it is often thwarted by the conﬁrmation bias . The team should also do something else that doesn’t come naturally : ask whether the similar - ities are largely superﬁcial . The list of industry features that are not crucial in the causal logic Background of the Work Field research sparked our interest in analogical reasoning . While exploring the origins of strategies in the Internet portal industry , we were struck by the prevalence of analogies . Discussions with managers and academic col - leagues , along with personal reﬂections , led us to recognize the broader signiﬁ - cance of analogical reasoning in strategy making . This recognition fueled a series of efforts , including a review of the liter - ature on analogy in psychology , cogni - tive science , political science , and lin - guistics ; an initiative to examine and improve the use of analogical reasoning in the MBA classroom ; and develop - ment , with Wharton’s Daniel Levinthal , of a simulation in which computer - mod - eled “managers” use analogical reason - ing to solve strategic problems . Perhaps the crucial ingredient in the research is that we—the authors of this article— come from very different academic back - grounds . One of us was raised within Wharton’s behavioral approach to man - agement , which emphasizes the limits on human reasoning , and the other comes from Harvard’s strategy tradition , which stresses the power of rational eco - nomic choice . Analogical reasoning lies in the middle ground between the two of us . It is a form of reasoning that is po - tent because it makes the most of bounded cognitive abilities . How Strategists Really Think harvard business review • april 2005 page 9 is very useful in this step . If many of the simi - larities are on this list rather than the list of crucial correspondences , the management team should sound an alarm . The analogy may be based on superﬁcial similarity . Circuit City’s entry into the used - car market illustrates the process of assessing similarity . In many ways , the target industry in the 1990s re - sembled the consumer electronics retailing in - dustry of the 1970s : • Many customers were unsatisﬁed with , and distrustful of , current retailers . • Economies of scale and barriers to entry were limited . • The industry was fragmented . • Information and distribution technologies remained fairly primitive , even though the in - ventory was highly diverse . • Consumers incurred few costs if they switched from one retailer to another . Note that all of these similarities match cru - cial elements of the causal logic in electronics re - tailing . This bodes well for the analogy . On the other hand , there were important differences : • In consumer electronics , Circuit City could rely on a large base of dependable , reputable suppliers . In contrast , most used - car dealers bought their autos from individual sellers or from wholesalers , some reliable and some not . • The inventory of used cars was even more diverse than that of consumer electronics . It would be difﬁcult to keep a predictable range of products in stock . This might make it hard for CarMax to detect sales trends quickly and adjust its inventory to meet demand . More - over , the distribution expertise Circuit City had developed might not be useful in the used - car industry . • It was not clear whether economies of scale existed or barriers to entry could be built in auto retailing . • The used - car retailing market had an im - portant substitute at the high end of the mar - ket : new - car dealers . Translate , decide , and adapt . The ﬁnal step is to decide whether the original strategy , properly translated , will work in the target in - dustry . This step requires , ﬁrst , that the man - agement team say clearly what the strategy would look like in the new setting . Precisely what would it take to be the Circuit City of the used - car industry or the supermarket of toys ? This requires some adjustment . Even the best analogies involve some differences between the source and the target settings . By now , ex - ecutives have a sense of the most important differences , and , in translating the strategy , they try to make adjustments that deal with them . After the translation comes a go - no - go decision on whether to pursue the analogy in the marketplace . This involves a clearheaded assessment of whether the translated strategy is likely to fare well in the new context . If exec - utives opt to pursue the analogy , they face an - other round of adjustment—adapting in the marketplace in response to feedback from cus - tomers , rivals , suppliers , and others . It is here , in the market , that managers truly learn how good their analogies are . Circuit City’s translated strategy bore a close resemblance to the company’s electron - ics retailing operation . On lots of up to 14 acres , each CarMax superstore offered an un - usually broad inventory of 200 to 550 vehi - cles . CarMax went to special lengths to foster customers’ trust . It sold cars at ﬁxed , posted prices , with no haggling . It hired salespeople with retailing experience , but not auto retail - ing experience , and gave them extensive train - ing . CarMax compensated salespeople with a ﬂat fee per vehicle sold rather than a fraction of the revenue they generated . The company also put in place a sophisticated inventory tracking system that mirrored the electronics retailing system , and it offered money - back guarantees and warranties that resembled those in Circuit City stores . At the same time , CarMax adjusted the Cir - cuit City formula to reﬂect the differences be - tween the two settings . This required , for in - stance , that the company ﬁnd reliable sources of used cars . Toward this end , CarMax placed well - trained buyers in each of its stores and of - fered to buy used cars directly from consumers , even those who did not intend to buy a vehicle from CarMax . The company started to sell new cars at some sites , in part to generate used cars from trade - ins . By 2002 , individual consumers were CarMax’s single largest source of used cars . Regardless of source , all CarMax used cars were thoroughly inspected and reconditioned before they were resold . The diverse inventory of used cars pre - sented a new challenge . No single used - car lot could show the full array of vehicles in Car - Max’s inventory . So CarMax developed a com - puter system that allowed consumers to peruse the company’s full inventory . The system told How Strategists Really Think harvard business review • april 2005 page 10 customers what was available nationwide and what it would cost to transfer a desired car to the customer’s locale . CarMax was neither an immediate nor an unmixed success . It took Circuit City most of a decade to tailor its formula to the used - car market . The company built some stores that were too large and adopted an overly ambi - tious rollout plan , and price wars in the new - car market and expansion by other used - car superstores occasionally hurt its stock price . Nonetheless , the effort to reproduce Circuit City’s success in the used - car industry has produced a viable company with revenue of $ 4 . 6 billion in ﬁscal year 2004 , a return on sales of 2 % to 3 % , a multibillion - dollar mar - ket capitalization , and equity whose returns have roughly matched the S & P 500’s since the IPO in 1997 . This positive outcome re - ﬂects the close resemblance between the electronics retailing industry and the used - car industry , especially in features pertinent to the causal logic of the original success . It also reﬂects the company’s careful attention to the essential differences between the in - dustries—or at least the company’s ability to adapt to those differences . A critical question in this ﬁnal step is how much a company should translate the candi - date solution , on the basis of forethought alone , before launching it in the marketplace . In studying the transfer of best practices within companies , say from one bank branch to an - other , Insead’s Gabriel Szulanski and Whar - ton’s Sidney Winter have found that managers overestimate how well they understand cause and effect relationships and , accordingly , ad - just too much on the basis of forethought . This lesson applies to analogies , too . It makes sense to adjust a candidate solution beforehand to account for glaring differences between the target and the source . But in novel , uncertain environments , where strategists rely the most on analogies , it is often wise to hold off on ﬁne - tuning the solution until the market can give its guidance . Toward Better Strategic Choices Analogies lie on a spectrum . At one end lie perfect analogies , where the source and target are truly alike on the dimensions that drive economic performance . The toy retailing in - dustry of the 1950s deeply resembled the gro - cery business , much to the beneﬁt of Toys R Us , and the demands on Toyota’s kanban sys - tem closely mirrored those related to super - market reshelving . At the opposite end of the spectrum are profoundly problematic analo - gies , such as Enron’s comparison of broadband and natural gas trading , that are based on su - perﬁcial similarities yet plagued by underlying differences . The vast majority of analogies fall somewhere in between—they’re imperfect but useful . The challenge is to get the most out of them . In our experience , the best users of analogy harness deduction and trial and error to test and improve the analogies that lie in the middle of the spectrum . Intel’s analogy involving the steel industry , for instance , was supported by a deductive theory of cause and effect—Clayton Christensen’s ideas about dis - ruptive technologies . It also drew strength from trial - and - error experiments that gradu - ally reﬁned Intel’s approach to the low end of the microprocessor market , much as Circuit City’s adjustments served to ﬁne - tune Car - Max’s strategy . Managers who wish to tap the great power of analogy and sidestep its pitfalls must master multiple modes of thought . Reprint R0504C Harvard Business Review OnPoint 9661 To order , see the next page or call 800 - 988 - 0886 or 617 - 783 - 7500 or go to www . hbr . org Further Reading To Order For reprints , Harvard Business Review OnPoint orders , and subscriptions to Harvard Business Review : Call 800 - 988 - 0886 or 617 - 783 - 7500 . Go to www . hbr . org For customized and quantity orders of reprints and Harvard Business Review OnPoint products : Call Frank Tamoshunas at 617 - 783 - 7626 , or e - mail him at ftamoshunas @ hbsp . harvard . edu Harvard Business Review OnPoint articles enhance the full - text article with a summary of its key points and a selection of its company examples to help you quickly absorb and apply the concepts . Harvard Business Review OnPoint collections include three OnPoint articles and an overview comparing the various perspectives on a specific topic . page 11 How Strategists Really Think is also part of the Harvard Business Review OnPoint collection Why Bad Decisions Happen to Good Managers , Product no . 9653 , which includes these additional articles : The Hidden Traps in Decision Making John S . Hammond III , Ralph L . Keeney , and Howard Raiffa Harvard Business Review November – December 2000 Product no . 5408 Delusions of Success : How Optimism Undermines Executives’ Decisions Dan Lovallo and Daniel Kahneman Harvard Business Review July 2003 Product no . 4279