Using Hypertext for Textual Genetics , or , What is Suitable in a Hypertext System for an Information Gardening Application Corinne Chuat ITEM Institut des Textes et ManuscriptsModemes , CNRS , UPR7 AOO07 , France , 61 rue Richelieu , 75084 Paris Cedex 02 Voice ( 33 ) 142963094 , Fax : ( 33 ) 147038940 , E - mail : lebrave @ msh - paris . fr ABSTRACT This paper describes how the methodology of genetic criticism can interact with spatial hypertext and information gardening techniques in the construction of a genetic hyper - text that fits the needs of textual geneticists as well as it opens an interesting application domain to hypertext . KEYWORDS Information gardening , versioning , spatial hypertext , genetic criticism ‘“Textual Genetics” is the science which studies the process through which texts are produced . For instance , it analyzes the drafts of a novel in order to discover how the author has proceeded to write it . Textual genetics is to texts what X - Ray techniques are to painting : they make the steps of the “work in progress” visible . More generally , it is part of “genetic criticism” , a critical approach developed in France since the seventies , which was first applied to literary texts ( Proust , Flaubert , Joyce , . . . ) . but is also more and more used for studying the creative process by philosophers ( e . g . Nietzsche ) , artists ( e . g . Delacroix ) and scientists ( e . g . Pasteur ) . In terms of electronic documents , textual genetics is concerned with problems similar to those of versioning . But , in the present case , most of the work consists in gathering and organizing information in order to elicit some hidden structures and make the versioning structure emerge . Thus , “information gardening” , as developed by M . Bernstein [ 1 ] , is the style of the work . Hypertext techniques are very useful to textual genetics . Similarly , textual genetics is an interesting application domain exemplifying the interest of information gardening techniques and of spatial hypertext . This short paper describes how I have used the Nanard’s MacWeb system [ 3 ] to analyze and represent the genesis of Celine’s novel called ‘F66rie pour une autre fois’ , the elaboration of which spans over 8 years . Celine’s manuscripts have been collected and kept , already during his lifetime , either tiy individuals or by libraries . They consist of sets of sheets , often written both sides and with Pamiaaion to make digitallmrd copies of all or part of this material for praorral or classroom use is granted without fee provided that the copies are not msde or distributed for profit or consmer cial advantage , tbe copy - right notice , the title of the publication aod its date appear , and notice is given that mpyrigbt is by punsission of k ACM , Inc . To copy otbemvisc , to republi ~ , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires specific permission & or fee . Hyp’text 97 , Southampton UK @ 1997 ACM 0 - 8979 ] - 866 - 5 . . . $ 3 . 50 cross - out , additions and deletions . Unfortunately , the semantic continuity of these sheets is disturbed by several factors . First , since famous manuscripts are valuable goods , they are sold , exchanged , sometimes even arbitrarily split up and grouped by their owners who are sometimes more interested in the commercial transaction than in the contents of the sold sheets . But the confusion results also of Celine’s writing activity itself quite often , the back of a sheet has been reused later when sketching a new draft . Furthermore , certain sheets have been rearranged within a new textual version of the same novel . Therefore , the writing process has first to be reconstructed in its chronological ordering so as to make the study of versioning structures possible . Then , the work consists in linking together the pieces of information carried by these sheets and connect them to parts of the published novel . The role of the links is to exhibit several kinds of relationships between these data . For instance , as a “textual geneticist” , I elicit the sequencing in the writing of the draft , which is different from the narrative order of the published version . I exhibit versioning relation - ships : some parts of the story have been written several times , some have never been used in the published version , some have migrated inside the story . I reorganize a consistent physical order of the drafts : this sheet , found currently in this folder really belongs to this other one , and should be placed between those two sheets , and so on . The result of the genetic work is the mapping of a semantically consistent ordering over the set of drafts ; this structure can be conveniently represented as a hypertext network reflecting the versioning within the author’s work . The Nanard’s MacWeb system fits particularly well to this construction of a “genetic hypertext” . Currently , 10000 pages of Celine’s drafts have been identified and 2000 have found their place into an organized structure . We now depict the hypertext features which are important for our information gardening work . First of all , the use of typed links is necessary to handle the various notions introduced by our work as a single structure . Hypertext approach is helpful for a textual - genetics researcher since links allow to access very quickly to and thus observe in vicinity pieces of information that are supposed to be close . For instance , when the text on a sheet appears to be the continuation of the text on another one , a ‘narrative sequence’ link is set between them . It then enables continuous reading of the part of the story , regardless of the actual location of information . We use the hypertext in a way very representative of what M . Bernstein calls “information gardening” [ 1 ] . A highly interactive authoring environment is necessary since the research work itself consists in making a structure emerge . As a consequence , creating links as hypotheses , examining the consequences of the links either by browsing , either by reasoning , deleting inadequate hypotheses , reorganizing structure , etc . , are the basic interaction between the scientist and the machine . The result of the work is the hypertext structure itself . Visual clues are important . Spatial hypertext [ 2 ] and freely editable hypertext maps are the most helpful features once the visual semiotics of the original manuscript have been identified and interpreted by the geneticist . Geometrical arrangement in hypertext maps helps perceive structures and makes reasoning more intuitive . So , spatial arrangement of nodes makes some structural properties become perceptible at f ~ st sight and easier to interpret . For instance , I deduced that a given set of sheets had been used first to write a story , then it had been thrown away and the empty back of pages had been reused later as a whole as a paper block when writing another part of the story : the exhibited ‘narrative sequence’ links between iterns located on the one side of sheets are connected in the reverse order of those on the other side of this very peculiar “deck of cards” ! Only turning over the set of pages as a whole made it possible : the last on one side becomes the first on the other . Geometrical arrangements and interactive manipulation of hypertext maps helps discover and represent episodes of the actual life cycle of information along the writing process , as it is a very powerful tool for testing hypotheses emerging from the genetic research itself . Customizable hypertext maps also are important and suitable features . Hiding or showing links of a given type on the hypertext map allows to make specific structures more visible and clear . It extracts the observed structure from the noisy background of a rich but highly complex hypertext network . Using typed and hi - directional links in the hypertext structure enables simple but automatic reasoning which helps the scientist . For instance , when observing two drafts , the textual - genetics researcher makes a hypothesis about their chronological ordering ] and wants to evaluate it . Computing the transitive closure of such links exhibits ‘ In exile in Germany , and later Denmark , after World War II , Celine works in a way that makes cochcologicrd inforrnations cruciat for retrieving the sequence of pages . They provide time marks for the relative as well as for the absolute ordering . For instance , batl - pen writing cannot be ahead of the invention of batl - pens . Many drafts contain autobiographical and historical inforrnations which can be linked to easily datable events , which . help elaborating the chronological links between information pieces . Hypertext links are used to describe such relationships . inconsistencies , if any , thus helping the scientist step toward more accurate results . Each type of node of the hypertext contains a specific kind of information structure . For instance , the ‘diplomatic transcription’ ( i . e . reproducing as precisely as possible the topographic disposition of the original page ) of a manuscript is kept in ASCII form making its contents readable . In the case of Celine , very few manu - scripts can be kept as images , since most of them still are under copyright . Properties about the kind of paper , the kind of ink , the graphic style of the writing , etc are kept as node attributes . For instance , selecting a set of nodes that share a given set of attributes helps retrieve candidates to fill mis - sing pages within sequences . The expert has just to browse from the last page of a sequence to any page sharing the same attributes ( same paper kind , same ink , same style ) , in order to check if the current story goes on one of them . Using a hypertext as a tool for working on these information pieces is highly efficient since it enables to work on virtual structures making closer information which are disseminated on separated sheets often distributed in many collections all over the world . As in library work it is necessary to link the hypertext virtual structure to the actual document set . To do this , an original technique I have used consists in using a very precise protocol for building the names of the nodes that stand for the paper sheets . The identifier reflects the collection name , the location in the collection , Celine’s own draft - paging , if any , and the fwst and last words ( incipit - coda ) information of the page . The redundancy between the location representation and the incipit - coda allows to get rid of possible moving of paper pages due to commercial transactions . It also allows to locate easily most of the physical pages directly from their names . This anchors the hypertext structure within the reality of the manuscript collections . Though we use a hypertext system for information gardening , data is saved in a database to keep it independent in the long term . As a conclusion , hypertext is not simply a tool for presenting information . It also is a tool for working on information and for flexibly handling structures while they emerge . The main requirement for systems supporting information gardening is the simplicity and the flexibility of the authoring interface , since most of the user’s work consists in building and updating structures . Textual genetics is an exciting domain which exemplifies the interest of information gardening . REFERENCES 1 . 2 . 3 . BERNSTEIN , M . Enactment in Information Farming , Proc . Hypertext’93 , 242 - 249 , Seattle , ACM Press 1993 . C . C . MARSHALL , F . M . SHIPMAN , “Searching for the Missing Link : Discovering the Implicit Structure in Spatial Hypertext” , Proc . Hypertext’93 , Seattle , ACM Press , Nov . 1993 , 217 - 230 . J . NANARD , M . NANARD , ‘Using Types to Incorporate Knowledge in Hypertext , ’ Hypertext’91 Proc . , ACM Press , San Antonio , 329 - 344 , Dec . 1991 .