Kent Academic Repository Full text document ( pdf ) Copyright & reuse Content in the Kent Academic Repository is made available for research purposes . Unless otherwise stated all content is protected by copyright and in the absence of an open licence ( eg Creative Commons ) , permissions for further reuse of content should be sought from the publisher , author or other copyright holder . Versions of research The version in the Kent Academic Repository may differ from the final published version . Users are advised to check http : / / kar . kent . ac . uk for the status of the paper . Users should always cite the published version of record . Enquiries For any further enquiries regarding the licence status of this document , please contact : researchsupport @ kent . ac . uk If you believe this document infringes copyright then please contact the KAR admin team with the take - down information provided at http : / / kar . kent . ac . uk / contact . html Citation for published version Jordanous , Anna ( 2016 ) Four PPPPerspectives on Computational Creativity in theory and in practice . Connection Science , 28 ( 2 ) . pp . 194 - 216 . ISSN 0954 - 0091 . DOI https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09540091 . 2016 . 1151860 Link to record in KAR http : / / kar . kent . ac . uk / 53851 / Document Version Author ' s Accepted Manuscript Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http : / / www . tandfonline . com / action / journalInformation ? journalCode = ccos20 Download by : [ University of Kent ] Date : 10 March 2016 , At : 02 : 49 Connection Science ISSN : 0954 - 0091 ( Print ) 1360 - 0494 ( Online ) Journal homepage : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / ccos20 Four PPPPerspectives on computational creativity in theory and in practice Anna Jordanous To cite this article : Anna Jordanous ( 2016 ) : Four PPPPerspectives on computational creativity in theory and in practice , Connection Science , DOI : 10 . 1080 / 09540091 . 2016 . 1151860 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09540091 . 2016 . 1151860 Published online : 09 Mar 2016 . Submit your article to this journal View related articles View Crossmark data CONNECTIONSCIENCE , 2016 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09540091 . 2016 . 1151860 Four PPPPerspectives on computational creativity in theory and in practice Anna Jordanous School of Computing , University of Kent , Medway Building , Chatham Maritime , Kent , UK ABSTRACT Computational creativity is the modelling , simulating or replicating of creativity computationally . In examining and learning from these “creative systems” , from what perspective should the creativity of a system be considered ? Are we interested in the creativity of the sys - tem’s output ? Or of its creative processes ? Features of the system ? Or how it operates within its environment ? Traditionally computational creativity has focused more on creative systems’ products or pro - cesses , though this focus has widened recently . Creativity research offers the Four Ps of creativity : Person / Producer , Product , Process and Press / Environment . This paper presents the Four Ps , explaining each in the context of creativity research and how it relates to com - putational creativity . To illustrate the usefulness of the Four Ps in taking broader perspectives on creativity in its computational treat - ment , the concepts of novelty and value are explored using the Four Ps , highlighting aspects of novelty and value that may otherwise be overlooked . Analysis of recent research in computational creativity finds that although each of the Four Ps appears in the body of com - putational creativity work , individual pieces of work often do not acknowledge all Four Ps , missing opportunities to widen their work’s relevance . We can see , though , that high - status computational cre - ativity papers do typically address all Four Ps . This paper argues that the broader views of creativity afforded by the Four Ps is vital in guiding us towards more comprehensively useful computational investigations of creativity . ARTICLEHISTORY Received 25 August 2015 Accepted 27 January 2016 KEYWORDS Four Ps ; creativity ; computational creativity ; creativity modelling 1 . Introduction A practical issue arises when considering the evaluation of a computational creativity system : from what perspective should creativity of a system be considered ? Are we inter - ested in the creativity of the system’s output ? Or of its creative processes ? Creativity as measured by internal features or by external interactions ? The computational creativity community has traditionally considered creativity from the perspective of the creative output produced by a system , or the processes employed within creative systems ( with notable exceptions , such as Saunders , 2012 ) . The call for the key international conference in this area ( ICCC ) invites papers addressing the “Process vs . product : addressing the issue of evaluating / estimating creativity ( or progress towards CONTACT Anna Jordanous a . k . jordanous @ kent . ac . uk ©2016Taylor & Francis D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 2 A . JORDANOUS it ) in computational systems through study of what they produce , what they do and combinations thereof” . This paper argues that to consider process and product is not enough ; computational creativityshouldbeconsideredandexploredfromfourdifferentperspectives , knownasthe Four Ps : the creative Person , 1 Product , Process and Press ( or environment ) ( MacKinnon , 1970 ; Rhodes , 1961 ) . The Four Ps have long been prevalent in creativity research relating to humans 2 and enable a more inclusive and encompassing approach to the study of creativity and accom - modating multiple relevant perspectives . Here the Four Ps are presented and considered in the light of how they help computational creativity researchers in their overarching goal 3 to model , simulate or replicate creativity computationally . The computational creativity research community is already , as a whole , covering all the Four Ps ; however many individ - ual projects within this research field do not address all four perspectives . This paper argues that individual projects that carefully address all Four Ps provide a wider contribution to computational creativity research than those projects which only address , for example , one or two Ps . Therefore if we highlight and raise awareness of each of the Four Ps within computational creativity research , drawing upon similar research on human creativity , the Four Ps framework can guide individual research projects to increase the contribution to knowledge that their work is capable of . 2 . The Four Ps of creativity One major approach in creativity research is to break down creativity into four perspec - tives , commonly referred to as the Four Ps ( MacKinnon , 1970 ; Mooney , 1963 ; Odena and Welch , 2009 ; Rhodes , 1961 ; Simonton , 1988 ; Stein , 1963 ; Tardif and Sternberg , 1988 ) : (cid:129) Person : The individual agent that is creative . I propose in this paper that the term Pro - ducer is more appropriate as it allows us consider the Four Ps in the contexts of both human and computational creativity . (cid:129) Process : What the creative individual does to be creative . (cid:129) Product : What is produced as a result of the creative process . (cid:129) Press / Environment : The environment in which the creativity is situated . In1961 , Rhodes ( 1961 ) identifiedtheFourPperspectives . Rhodescollected40definitions of creativity and 16 definitions of imagination . On analysis of these definitions , the ‘ Four Ps ’ of creativity emerged . It appears ( from lack of referencing citations to each other’s work ) that several people independently identified these Four Ps of creativity ( MacKinnon , 1970 ; Mooney , 1963 ; Stein , 1963 ) . This pattern of ( seemingly ) independent discovery helps sup - port the credibility of the Four Ps , especially at a time when Guilford’s highly influential paper on the study of creativity ( Guilford , 1950 ) strongly encouraged a focus on personal characteristics of creative people , rather than a broader study . 4 Plucker , Beghetto , and Dow ( 2004 ) conducted a literature survey investigating the use ( or absence ) of creativity definitions in creativity research . As part of this review , Plucker et al . used their analysis to derive their own definition by identifying reoccurring themes and forming these into an inclusive definition which ( perhaps unintentionally ) accounts for each of the Four Ps : D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 CONNECTION SCIENCE 3 Creativity is the interaction among aptitude , process , and environment by which an individual or group produces a perceptible product that is both novel and useful as defined within a social context . ( Plucker et al . , 2004 , p . 90 ) In reviewing Four Ps research , Kaufman ( 2009 ) described addendums that have been suggested for the Four Ps : persuasion ( Simonton , 1988 ) and potential ( Runco , 2003 ) . In gen - eral , however , the Four Ps have been adopted as they were originally conceived by various researchers ( MacKinnon , 1970 ; Mooney , 1963 ; Rhodes , 1961 ; Stein , 1963 ) . 2 . 1 . The Four Ps : Person / Producer This perspective addresses human characteristics associated with creative individuals or groups of people . Encouraged by Guilford’s influential call in 1950 for studying the cre - ative person , an abundance of different personal characteristics have been associated with creativity ( Koestler , 1964 ; Odena and Welch , 2009 ; Rhodes , 1961 ; Stein , 1963 ; Tardif and Sternberg , 1988 ) , ranging from personality traits , attitudes , intelligence and temperament , to habits and behaviours such as curiosity , persistence , independence and openness . Some of these are closely related ; others are contradictory . Rhodes mentioned the relevance to creativity of people’s personality traits , attitudes and habits , physique and intelligence and the identifiable features of creative people , as well as referring to people’s temperament , habits , self - concept , value systems , defence mechanisms and behaviour ( Rhodes , 1961 , p . 307 ) . Empirical studies up until 1968 were summarised by Stein ( 1968 ) into a list of 18 distinct personality characteristics of a creative person , including aspects such as curiosity , persis - tence , independence and openness . Stein used these characteristics to identify creative individuals for study . Stein’s method is prone to some circularity , as creative individuals were identified using pre - defined creative characteristics / criteria , but Stein’s study involves empirically examination of those characteristics and criteria . Stein’s work has not stood the test of time , with few current citations . Several researchers subdivide the ‘Person’ category into finer - grained groups . Three sub categories of the ‘pupil’ perspective emerged during Odena and Welch’s work ( Odena and Welch , 2009 ) : personal characteristics of the pupil ; their individual learning style ( either adapting to new information or deriving new information themselves ) ; and the influence of the pupil’s background . Koestler ( 1964 ) described three types of creative person : the Artist ; the Sage and the Jester . Through Tardif and Sternberg’s review of definitions of creativity ( Tardif and Sternberg , 1988 ) , three main categories were identified with which to describe creative people : cognitive attributes ; personality attributes / motivation ; and developmen - tal influences . From their categorisation , Tardif and Sternberg suggested three resultant modes of study of human creativity : cognitive psychology ; psychometric testing and study of human development . The different subdivisions described above do not neatly align alongside each other . TardifandSternberg’sreviewshowedthatasof1988 , differentauthorshighlightedavariety of characteristics , with no general consensus and no characteristics common to all reports ( Tardif and Sternberg , 1988 , Table 17 . 1 , p . 434 ) . The sheer quantity of attributes collectively places an obstacle in the way of compiling a definitive list of attributes of a creative person and instead provoke disagreements on exactly which cognitive characteristics should be attributed to creative people . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 4 A . JORDANOUS 2 . 1 . 1 . The Producer ( Person ) in computational creativity . Given that we expand our discussion of creativity to include the discussion of computa - tional creativity , I propose here that it is more appropriate to refer to the creative Producer , rather than the creative Person . The creative Producer could be analogous to the computer , or perhaps more accurately , to a computer program , software , robot or a creative agent within a multi - agent system . Here the machine is the hardware hosting the creative agent : more generally the imple - mentation and / or embodiment of the algorithm in a particular computational system , 5 much as we might distinguish between physical and functional characteristics of a ‘Person’ . Some interesting work has been done on modelling creative agents , for example by Saunders ( 2012 ) . Sosa and Gero distinguish between creative individuals and the creative brain in their investigation of multiple perspectives on creativity ( Sosa and Gero , 2015 ) . Generally , though , the emphasis in computational creativity software has tended to be on product generation and to some extent , process modelling ( Cardoso , Veale , and Wig - gins , 2009 ; Colton and Wiggins , 2012 ) ; computational creativity systems tend to be oriented towards a particular goal , domain or task . Relatively little work has directly focused on modelling a creative entity as a collection of various personal characteristics or abilities ( at least , not independently of some creative application of those characteristics to a task ) . As argued in Jordanous ( 2012 ) , different types of creativity require domain - specific skills to some extent , so domain - specific computational creativity systems tend to be built around the most prominent necessary skills for that domain . In the task of categorising computer systems as creative , Colton’s Creative Tripod ( Colton , 2008 ) emphasised the need for systems to demonstrate skill , imagination and appreciation before they can be considered as a candidate creative system – all three of which are allusions to personal characteristics . Features , traits and aspects of the creative system Producer can be studied , and it would be fascinating to explore how general creative personal characteristics could be specifically modelled within creative systems ( see the Process section , next ) . This line of thought has been taken up by researchers within computational creativity to some extent , for example the aforementioned Creative tripod ( Colton , 2008 ) as well as others ( Grace and Maher , 2015 ; Maher , Merrick , and Saunders , 2008 ; Saunders , 2002 ; Wiggins , 2006 ) . Computational mod - elling of characteristics that encourage creativity could help us progress our systems to be able to be creative in more than one system which they were originally designed for ; this would be significant progress in our pursuit of modelling creativity as a phenomenon which transcends different types of creative activity . The Producer could also include the individual ( s ) interacting with a creativity support system or co - creative system which interacts with people ( Kantosalo , Toivanen , Toivonen , and Xiao , 2014 ; Maher , 2012 ) . Another possible interpretation of the producer in com - putational creativity would be to acknowledge the role of the programmer ( s ) , tester ( s ) , researcher ( s ) and peers involved in shaping the project . 2 . 2 . The Four Ps : Process The creative process has been broken down into a series of sequential or cyclic stages occurring over time ( Poincaré , 1929 ; Wallas , 1945 ) or subtasks ( Odena and Welch , 2009 ) . In their work on student creativity in school music lessons , Odena and Welch ( 2009 ) broke D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 CONNECTION SCIENCE 5 down the creative process into subtasks , identifying various types of process ( e . g . different activities , group process , the structuredness or otherwise of a process and composition by improvisation ) rather than tracing a linear progression of subprocesses . It is often stressed that creativity is not just the first flash of inspiration , but is also the activity that validates , develops , and refines that first idea ; rather than occurring at one point in time , creativity develops over a period of time ( Poincaré , 1929 ; Tardif and Sternberg , 1988 ; Wallas , 1945 ) . Tardif and Sternberg ( 1988 ) remind us that while creative processes can be those employed by individual creative agents , we can also consider creative processes where more than one agent participates . 2 . 2 . 1 . The process in computational creativity . In computational creativity , the creative process might be the algorithms employed by a singlepieceofsoftware , orinteractionsbetweenmultiplemachinesorprograms , orinterac - tions between machine and human users , or between a machine and the environment it is embodied in . As described above , the computational creativity community has given some attention to the concept of creative processes employed within computational creativity , with growing attention paid to this aspect in recent years . For example , the FlowR frame - work ( Charnley , Colton , and Llano , 2014 ) is designed to facilitate creative computational workflows by chaining together processes in a linear pattern ; from personal communica - tions with members of the project team , there are plans to consider nonlinear chains of processes as well . The work by Misztal and Indurkhya on poetry generation ( Misztal and Indurkhya , 2014 ) is another example of the various projects that specifically focuses on various processes required for creativity . Genetic programming is another way in which the process itself can be generated computationally ( Koza , Streeter , Mydlowec , Yu , and Lanza , 2003 ; Sims , 1994 , for example ) . The generate - and - test ( McGraw and Hofstadter , 1993 ; Pease , Guhe , and Smaill , 2010 , for example ) or engagement - reflection approach ( Pérez y Pérez , Aguilar , and Negrete , 2010 ) specifically models the creative process as a cycle of generating artefacts then amend - ing the generation process via evaluating the generation phase . This is an approach which deserves broader adoption within computational creativity ; evaluation is a critical part of the creative process ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1988 ; Poincaré , 1929 ) . In terms of post - implementation evaluation , the FACE model for evaluation of creative systems ( Colton , Charnley , and Pease , 2011 ) places importance on computational systems being able to report on the creative process . 6 There are multiple theories about how human creativity processes are structured , see , for example ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1988 ; Hennessey and Amabile , 2010 ; Kaufman , 2009 ; Poincaré , 1929 ) . Computational creativity research can provide a test - bed for these psy - chological theories and allow us to explore if implementing the theories result in creative behaviour . For example , useful work has been done by Thornton ( 2008 ) , Wiggins ( 2006 ) and Ritchie ( 2006 ) on Boden’s creativity model ( Boden , 2004 ) . Similarly , Csikszentmiha - lyi’s Domain - Individual - Field - Interaction ( DIFI ) framework has recently been implemented within computational creativity research ( Chordia and Rae , 2010 ; de Silva Garza and Gero , 2010 ; Saunders , Gemeinboeck , Lombard , Bourke , and Kocaballi , 2010 ) . Conferences such as the Creativity and Cognition series showcase work that links between theory and practice to some extent ; further activity along these lines would help emphasise the validity D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 6 A . JORDANOUS of computational creativity research , and help findings flow better between computational creativity and human creativity research . 2 . 3 . The Four Ps : Product Many authors advocate that proof of creativity is necessary to be considered creative ( Kagan , 1967 ; Plucker et al . , 2004 ; Ritchie , 2001 ; Tardif and Sternberg , 1988 ) . The product - centric view adopted by computational creativity researchers such as Ritchie ( 2007 ) , that creative products are both necessary and sufficient for creativity , was present in earlier human creativity research ( Kagan , 1967 ) . But , inspired by Guilford’s seminal 1950 address on creativity research , emphasis in human creativity research shifted from identifying cre - ative individuals post - production of creative work , to predicting future potential for creativ - ity in individuals . This change in emphasis is illustrated in the proliferation of psychometric tests ( Jordanous , 2012 ; Kaufman , 2009 ) within creativity research . Tardif and Sternberg ( 1988 ) considered the creative product more briefly than the other three ‘Ps’ in their review , deciding that while a creative product is essential for creativity , it is not enough merely to generate a product ; the product should also be considered in a domain - specific context . Computational creativity research has long acknowledged the importance of the out - put or artefacts generated by creative systems , as described above . To borrow a metaphor from human creativity research , it has been common ( until recently ) for computational creativity to follow the product - centric approach to creativity as advocated by Kagan : “ Cre - ativity refers to a product , and if made by a man , we give him the honor of the adjective ” . ( Kagan , 1967 , p . viii ) 2 . 3 . 1 . The product in computational creativity . Generating creative products has been an area of significant success for computational creativity . To see examples , one just needs to consult any year’s proceedings of the Inter - national Conference on Computational Creativity where there are multiple examples to be found of systems which are reported in terms of the products they generate ( Besold and Plaza , 2015 ; Harmon , 2015 ; Misztal and Indurkhya , 2014 ; Monteith , Francisco , Martinez , Gervás , and Ventura , 2011 ; Sims , 1994 , to cite just a selection of these many examples ) . The success of systems is often reported in terms of what kind of artefacts they generate , as noted in Jordanous ( 2011 ) . Some systems have been evaluated using Graeme Ritchie’s empirical criteria ( Ritchie , 2001 , 2007 ) , which exclusively focuses on evaluating the products of computational systems without considering any of the other three Ps . 7 2 . 4 . The Four Ps : Press / Environment The Press perspective encompasses a bidirectional perspective between the environment which influences the creator and receives the creative work , and the creator who publicises their work and is given feedback on what they produce . Tardif and Sternberg ( 1988 ) con - sidered both creative domains themselves and the social environments in which creative people are influenced as they employ creative process , advertise their creative products and receive feedback . Rhodes ( 1961 ) concentrated on the role that the environment plays on a person during the creative process , rather than how the creative produce is judged by D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 CONNECTION SCIENCE 7 the external world after being created . Rhodes reflected on how everyone is different , so everyone perceives the world in a unique way and processes ideas according to their own contexts . Of the Four Ps , this is the perspective that is often neglected when one takes an indi - vidualistic view of creativity . In general creativity theorists do however acknowledge the influence of the environment in which creativity is situated ( Hennessey and Amabile , 1988 ; Simonton , 1988 ) . If one concentrates on an individual’s creativity , however , the Press per - spective is often neglected , even if unintentionally . For example , although stating that “ [ t ] o be appreciated as creative . a work of art or a scientific theory has to be understood in a specific relation to what preceded it” ( Boden , 2004 , p . 74 ) , Boden’s treatment of cre - ativity mainly focused on different cognitive processes of creativity , rather than a detailed examination of social or environmental influences . 2 . 4 . 1 . The Press in computational creativity . Some computational creativity researchers are starting to highlight the importance of the environment in which a creative system is situated ( Jennings , 2010 ; Pease and Colton , 2011 ; Saunders , 2012 ; Sosa , Gero , and Jennings , 2009 ) , with some of this work influenced by the DIFI ( Domain - Individual - Field - Interaction ) framework ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1988 ) men - tioned above . The role of the audience in interpreting creative content has been acknowl - edged ( Gervás and León , 2014 ; Veale and Li , 2015 ) . Sosa and Gero ( 2015 ) identify different sub - perspectives of Press in their multi - dimensional creativity framework : MDC - C ( cul - tural dimensions at an epistemological level ) , MDC - S ( societal implications ) and MDC - G ( creativity at the scale of individual groups or teams ) . Social interaction between creative agents and their audience is an area which had been neglected till recently : for example nearly 75 % of papers in the 2014 International Con - ference on Computational Creativity failed to make any reference to social or interactive aspects of creativity . But creativity cannot exist in a vacuum . A recent increase in develop - ment of the interactivity of creative systems 8 ( especially where this affects the way these systems works ) has been highlighted as a positive advance ( Colton and Wiggins , 2012 ) . At the AISB workshop on computational creativity in 2015 , a panel discussion on social creativ - ityanditsimplicationsforcomputationalcreativityunderlinedthewayinwhichresearchers within the field are aware of the dangers of a “silo” - like approach to modelling or simulating creativity . This discussion also explored the breadth of meaning behind the term “social cre - ativity” in computational creativity ; similar considerations have also recently been explored ( separately ) and published by Saunders and Bown ( 2015 ) . There is a separate point to acknowledge regarding Press in computational creativity . As computational creativity researchers , we should stay aware of any potential biases that may be introduced , should an audience be aware that the creative agent of interest is computational rather than human ( Jordanous , 2012 ; Moffat and Kelly , 2006 ) . 9 2 . 5 . Interaction between the Four Ps The mysterious impression often associated with creativity ( Boden , 2004 ; Kaufman , 2009 ; Williams , 1976 ) can be explained to some extent when one or more of the Four Ps are not accounted for : D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 8 A . JORDANOUS Each strand [ of the Four Ps ] has unique identity academically , but only in unity do the four strands operate functionally . It is this very fact of synthesis that causes fog in talk about creativity and this may be the basis for the semblance of a “cult” . ( Rhodes , 1961 , p . 307 ) Simonton ( 1988 ) saw discrepancies between combining the Four Ps in theory and in practice : Now , in an ideal state of affairs , it should not matter which one of the four p’s our investigations target , for they all will converge on the same underlying phenomenon . . . . But reality is not so simple , needless to say . The creative process need not arrive at a creative product , nor must all creative products ensue from the same process or personality type ; and others may ignore the process , discredit the product , or reject the personality when making attributions about creativity . ( Simonton , 1988 , p . 387 ) From this , one conclusion which seems to follow naturally is that an accurate and com - prehensive definition of creativity must account for the ( potential ) presence of all four aspects , in order to be complete . Simonton , however , concluded that “ [ i ] f we cannot assume that all four aspects cohesively hang together , then it may be best to select one single definition and subordinate the others to that orientation” ( Simonton , 1988 , p . 387 ) , with his natural research inclination leading him to focus his work on persuasion , his term for the effect that the creative individual has on their environment . Rhodes argued that creativity research should follow a specific path : “from product to person and thence to process and to press” . ( Rhodes , 1961 , p . 309 ) Objective investigation into the nature of the creative process can proceed in only one direc - tion , i . e . from product to person and thence to process and to press . ( Rhodes , 1961 , p . 309 ) Such a statement makes Rhodes’s contribution less useful . For example , the Press ( envi - ronment ) in which one is creative has some influence on the creative Process , so one may prefer to study how Press and Producer interact before looking at Process issues . Simon - ton viewed creativity as how a person’s ideas emerge as influential when that person , by chance , has new ideas and promotes them to influence others . Creative people would not be equivalent to lucky people , by this interpretation , but chance would intervene in their success . Simonton refers to this as the “chance - configuration theory” that “outlines the general conditions that favor creativity” ( Simonton , 1988 , p . 422 ) . Tardif and Sternberg ( 1988 ) treated each of the Four Ps individually , “as these really are separate levels of analysis , and it is from comparisons within levels that coherent state - ments about our knowledge of creativity can be made” ( Tardif and Sternberg , 1988 , p . 429 ) . Tardif and Sternberg’s summary is weakened somewhat by this as it does not make com - parisons across the Four Ps , despite highlighting Simonton’s emphasis on the interactions andrelationsbetweenthesefourviews ( Simonton , 1988 ) . IncontrastMooney ( 1963 ) argued that the four approaches should be integrated in a model of creativity , proposing a model that “puts together the four approaches by showing them to be aspects of one unifying idea” ( Mooney , 1963 , p . 333 ) . While Mooney’s claims become rather grandiose at points , Mooney’s more specific contributions on creativity match neatly with the Four Ps approach identified elsewhere at that date ( Rhodes , 1961 ; Stein , 1963 ) . 2 . 5 . 1 . Interaction between Four Ps in computational creativity . Sosa and Gero ( 2015 ) advocate that creativity is a construct containing multiple levels of information ; therefore it is most appropriate to take a multi - dimensional approach to D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 CONNECTION SCIENCE 9 the study of creativity ( which , they argue , is reasonably well afforded by computational approaches ) . In a similar vein , this paper argues that we can make significant progress in computational creativity by considering all Four Ps in our computational creativity work . 10 Generation of creative products is only a quarter of the full picture of creativity , only one of the Four “Ps” . Granted , we have achieved much success in product generation , as exem - plified by exhibitions , concerts and other demonstrations of creative products reported in various papers on computational creativity systems ( Jordanous , 2011 ) . However , the more mature work and exciting potential comes from the incorporation of the other three Ps , at least to some extent , such as in Saunders ( 2012 ) , Gervás and León ( 2014 ) , Misztal and Indurkhya ( 2014 ) . Saunders’ work ( Saunders , 2012 ) looks at models of creative Producers as autonomous agents that employ a Process of interacting with their Press ( via an agent - basedsystem ) toproducecreativeProducts . MisztalandIndurkhyahavewritten“empathic” software : acomputationalProducerofpoetrythatcanbeaffectedbyandcanexpressdiffer - ent moods and emotions in its poetry Products ( Misztal and Indurkhya , 2014 ) . The Processes employed by the system are based on cognitive models of consciousness , with a Press of several “experts” interacting together using a “Blackboard” architecture to pass information between each other . The ICTIVS model ( Gervás and León , 2014 ) is an example of more theo - retical work that considers how Products ( in this paper the S in ICTIVS stands for stories ) can be generated by the multi stage Process model of ICTIVS : individual Producers employing stages of Invention and Composition to generate stories , then within a Press , employing stages of Transmission for the stories to be subject to Interpretation and Validation . 3 . Four Ps and computational creativity in practice 3 . 1 . The product / process debate in computational creativity evaluation As a research community , we have largely focused on assessment of creativity via assessment of the artefacts produced . ( Colton , 2008 , p . 1 ) As illustrated by the ICCC 2014 call for papers , one important debate in computational cre - ativity is about whether evaluation of a creative system should focus exclusively on the output produced by the system , or whether the processes built into the system should also be taken into account . Should both product and process be included in evaluation ( Colton , 2008 ; Jordanous , 2012 ; Pease , Winterstein , and Colton , 2001 ) , or should evalua - tion concentrate solely on the product of systems ( Ritchie , 2007 ) ? Ritchie ( 2007 ) stated that examining the process is unimportant for creativity , arguing that humans normally judge the creativity of others by what they produce , because one cannot easily observe the underlying process of human creativity . Ritchie therefore advocated a black - box test - ing approach , where the inner program workings are treated as unknown and evaluation concentrates on the system’s results . Later , however , Ritchie ( 2008 ) conceded that it can be important to consider a system’s “mechanisms” in the case of “more theoretical research” ( Ritchie , 2008 , p . 147 ) . While it is true that we can only use the material we have available to form an evalua - tion , evaluationexperiments ( Jordanous , 2012 ; PearceandWiggins , 2001 ) showthatpeople often make assumptions about process in their judgements on product . As Hofstadter pointed out , “ covert mechanisms can be deeply probed and eventually revealed merely by D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 10 A . JORDANOUS means of watching overt behaviour . . . [ this approach ] lies at the very heart of modern sci - ence” . ( Hofstadter , 1994 , quoted in p . 10 , Pease et al . , 2001 ) . Pearce and Wiggins ( 2001 ) discussed how our interpretation of how something was produced is important , even if the actual method is unknown , and that such an interpretation can be derived if people are repeatedly exposed to the compositional systems ( human or computational ) that they are evaluating . Collins ( 2008 ) discussed how making reasonable assumptions can assist the reverse - engineering 11 of program code from output , in scenarios where white - box testing ( evaluation with access to the program code ) is not possible . Colton ( 2008 ) acknowledged Ritchie’s arguments but quotes examples from art to demonstrate that process is as important as the end product when evaluating creativity , at least in the artistic domain . As evidence , Colton cites conceptual art for details on con - ceptual art in the context of this debate , where the concepts and motivations behind the artistic process are a significant contribution of the artwork . Sol LeWitt defined Concep - tual Art ( LeWitt , 1967 ) as an art form where “the idea or concept is the most important aspect of the work . . . . The idea becomes a machine that makes the art” . Jordanous ( 2012 ) makes similar arguments for creativity in musical improvisation , finding that the process of improvisation is often seen as more relevant for creativity than the end result . If assessing how creative a piece of conceptual art or a musical improvisation is , solely by evaluating the product , then there are two negative consequences : ( 1 ) A key aspect of the intentions of the artist / musician is overlooked ( the evaluator’s focus is on the end result rather than how the creative work is made ) . ( 2 ) The level of creativity presented could be misjudged , especially if the creative process results in producing something that might seem commonplace outside the context of that art installation / musical performance . Colton ( 2008 ) also posed a thought experiment that considers two near - identical paint - ings presented at an exhibition . In the first painting , the dots are placed randomly , whereas in the second , the dots’ locations represent the artist’s friendships with various people . Colton argued that the second painting would be more appealing to purchase than the first , though the end product is very similar , due to the process by which it was cre - ated . Colton’s thought experiment illustrates how process can impact on our judgement of creative artefacts ( as well as highlighting the role of the Press in attributing creativ - ity ) , though one could question if the experiment explores perception of creativity , or of quality / appeal . The thought experiment described by Ventura ( 2008 ) gives further evidence ( perhaps unintentionally ) on how knowledge of the creative process affects how we evaluate creativ - ity . Two creative systems , the RASTER and iRASTER systems , were designed by Ventura to be decidedly non - creative . If these systems were implemented and their generated images were given to people to evaluate without telling the evaluators how they were produced , the evaluators may well rate the creativity of the system highly . Supplying the evaluators with details of how a program works , though , could have a detrimental impact on the subsequent evaluations ( Colton , 2008 ; Cope , 2005 ) . One issue with creativity is analogous to the adage that a magician never reveals their secrets . This adage is based on the observation that tricks do not appear so impressive once D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 CONNECTION SCIENCE 11 you have found out how the magician performed the trick . Similarly things can appear to be less creative when you know how they were produced : 12 it is not unknown for critics of AI to refuse to accept programs as creative ( or intelligent ) once the mundane mechanistic nature of the inner workings are revealed . ( Ritchie , 2001 , p . 4 ) Colton ( 2008 ) intentionally sidestepped this issue by reporting on his artistic system in high - level terms only , rather than giving details of the program ( Colton , 2008 , p . 8 ) . Until recently , computational creativity evaluation methodologies mainly looked solely at a system’s products ( Ritchie , 2007 , for example ) or at a combination of the products and the process ( Pease et al . , 2001 ) . Recently it has been acknowledged that there is more to cre - ativity than process and product , with the Creative Tripod ( Colton , 2008 ) , whose evaluative framework is influenced by how an audience perceives the creativity of a system , SPECS ( Jordanous , 2012 ) which requires the researcher to investigate what creativity means in the context of their system , and the FACE / IDEA models ( Colton et al . , 2011 ) which consider various aesthetic features and interactions between audience and system . Work on com - putationally creative societies has also developed in the last few years ( Saunders , 2012 , is a significant example ) . Along a similar broadening of perspectives , the next section brings in work from the wider creativity research community , examining further viewpoints – the creative per - son operating in a press / environment – and relating these viewpoints to a computational creativity standpoint . 3 . 2 . Reviewing the Four Ps in recent computational creativity research To what extent are the Four Ps implemented in current computational creativity work in practice ? To answer this question , we can examine the work presented in the most recent International Conference on Computational Creativity , the key annual conference in this area of research and “the only scientific conference that focuses on computational creativity and also covers all aspects of it” ( Toivonen , Colton , Cook , and Ventura , 2015 , p . ii ) . The 2015 edition of this conference was held in Park City , Utah , US 13 and 41 14 papers were presented , covering five categories : ‘‘ ( 1 ) technical papers advancing the state of art in research , ( 2 ) system and resource description papers , ( 3 ) study papers presenting enlightening novel perspectives , ( 4 ) cultural application papers presenting the usage of creative software , and ( 5 ) position papers arguing for an opinion” . ( Toivonen et al . , 2015 , p . ii ) Each of the papers in ICCC’15 were reviewed to determine if they considered each of the Four Ps . As shown in Figure 2 , all Four Ps were mentioned in the set of ICCC papers fairly evenly . (cid:129) 21 papers ( 51 % ) considered the Producer in computational creativity by some angle , for example , characteristics that a system should implement in order to be creative . (cid:129) 26 papers ( 63 % ) gave details of the creative Process ( es ) being used in the work being reported . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 12 A . JORDANOUS Figure 1 . A simpliﬁed view of how the Four Ps ﬁt together in creativity . Figure 2 . Coverage of the Four Ps in papers presented at ICCC’15 . (cid:129) 26 papers ( 63 % ) focused some attention on the creative Products being generated computationally . (cid:129) 27 papers ( 66 % ) mentioned how computational creativity systems were influenced by external environments to some degree . All Four Ps were covered by ICCC papers in 2015 to some degree ; however , Figure 2 illustrates that we are not yet at the level where all papers consider all Four Ps . 15 The papers receiving best paper awards / recognitions at ICCC’15 16 each covered at least 3 of the Four Ps : (cid:129) Best Paper : Besold and Plaza ( 2015 ) focused on using conceptual blending ( Fauconnier and Turner , 2002 ) as the basis for the creative Process , considering how Producers require abilities to combine concepts and to reason over such combinations . They exemplified their arguments with Products in the form of case study results . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 CONNECTION SCIENCE 13 (cid:129) Best Student Paper ( and Runner - Up for Best Paper ) : Harmon ( 2015 ) presented the cre - ative system FIGURE8 which produced similes as its Products which related to contex - tual information ( Press ) and individual authorial style ( Producer ) . The Processes behind FIGURE8 were presented as a computational model and architecture . (cid:129) Runner - up for Best Student Paper : Kantosalo , Toivanen , and Toivonen ( 2015 ) took unusual perspectives on many of the Four Ps . They looked at the Process of evaluation in computational creativity , using interaction design ( i . e . the use of Press ) as a framework for evaluation which would give formative feedback ( Product ) which could feed back into the creative Process of systems . The Producers they highlighted were computa - tional creativity researchers who could use these evaluative results in work with creative systems . As this present analysis looks at papers which were presented a few months before the time of writing this paper , it is less helpful to use additionally measures such as citation analysis to identify which papers will potentially have longer term impact . Using a more personal reflection of my own impression of the overall general contributions made by ICCC’15 papers , Grace and Maher’s paper on “specific curiosity” ( Grace and Maher , 2015 ) and Bown’s paper on attributing creative agency ( Bown , 2015 ) stood out for me as being very well received and useful . Both these papers aroused much constructive discussion at the conference . It is intriguing to find that the content of both of these papers includes discussion of all Four Ps : (cid:129) Grace and Maher ( 2015 ) consider the intent of autonomous Producers to transform cre - ative domains ( Process ) via exploration of the contextual Press , giving example Products to illustrate their arguments . (cid:129) Bown ( 2015 ) discussed how creative agency can be attributed to Producers interact - ing in networks ( Press ) to contribute to the existence of some artefact ( s ) ( Product ) , and considered a formal framework for creative authorship ( Process ) . Specific sessions at ICCC’15 showed that the computational creativity research com - munity is collectively considering each of the Four Ps in its own right , with none being neglected . The Creative autonomy and Imagination and curiosity sessions investigated dif - ferent aspects of the creative Producer , while sessions on Creative mechanisms and Con - ceptual blending covered Process aspects in creativity . Sessions on Co - creativity , Musical interaction and Creativity support and interaction reflected recent work on the role of Press in computational creativity , while the Visual arts and Language sessions included various computational creativity Products . We can look back at papers which have been highlighted in previous years as use - ful contributions , either through being currently most highly cited papers on “com - putational creativity” 17 or through winning “best paper” awards in recent years at conference : 18 (cid:129) ICCC’12 : Best Student Paper Baydin et al . ’s paper on evolutionary generation of analo - gies ( Baydin , DeMantaras , and Ontanon , 2012 ) considered the Products ( analogies ) of a Producer algorithm with encoded “common - sense knowledge” and knowledge of memes drawn from a cultural Press including different domains of knowledge , that uses D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 14 A . JORDANOUS this knowledge within an evolutionary Process of genetic algorithms to generate new analogies . (cid:129) ICCC’11 : Best Student Paper Carlson , Schiphorst , and Pasquier ( 2011 ) reported “Scuddle” , a Producer with knowledge of physical bodily movement which also uses an evolu - tionary Process of genetic algorithms to generate Products in the form of “catalysts” : selected constraints to be imposed on what choreographic decisions are available to choreographers , Scuddle’s Press . 19 (cid:129) Machado and Cardoso ( 2002 , # citations = 66 ) reports NEvAr , an artistic Producer system which has the ability to critically evaluate its results , and generate image Products using a Process of genetic algorithms . In terms of Press , it can run several instantiations of the genetic algorithm at one time , and individuals from each population ( each instantiation of the genetic algorithm ) can be swopped between each other , affecting the operation of NEvAr by introducing new “genetic material” for evolution of the next population . (cid:129) Ritchie ( 2007 , # citations = 51 ) presents Ritchie’s empirical criteria for assessing the cre - ativity of computational creativity software ; it concentrates on the creative Products produced by creative systems and how they sit within a Press ( how typical and valuable those Products are perceived to be ) . To some extent it considers Producers , via creative systems’ knowledge of inspiring sets of examples : artefacts in a particular domain which the system is aware of and which it is “inspired by” in its Process . Ritchie’s work has been criticised ( Colton , 2008 ; Jordanous and Keller , 2012 , e . g . ) for neglecting to take into account the creative Process during evaluation . (cid:129) Wiggins ( 2006 , # citations = 40 ) considers a theoretical framework for creative Producers with a key ability : being able to search a conceptual space for new creative possibilities . The environmental Press in this case is a set of acceptable artefacts within a creative domain ( in this case , “acceptable” is determined by various rules that govern how that Press is defined ) . Wiggins cites a model of creative Producers that can search this Press , with a set of rules and a vocabulary for expressing both the rules and the artefacts which the Producer can generate . Process is modelled in Wiggins’ framework as a function generator . 20 (cid:129) Gervás ( 2009 , # citations = 29 ) summarises progress to date 21 in computational gen - eration of stories . This paper addresses all Four Ps from the start : with a discussion of the creative Process in different systems , which includes reference to “explicit action by some agent that we shall refer to as the creator” ( Gervás , 2009 , p . 49 ) – suggesting the Producer ; the output of these systems – the Products ; and the audience whose points of view are relevant in perceiving and evaluating the results – the Press . 4 . Applying the Four Ps : examples of novelty and value Novelty ( originality , newness ) and value ( usefulness , appropriateness ) form key parts of creativity ( Boden , 2004 ; Jordanous , 2012 ; Mayer , 1999 ; Ritchie , 2007 ) , often being identi - fied as the two main aspects of computational creativity ( Brown , Boden , D’Inverno , and McCormack , 2009 , Pease et al . , 2001 ; Ritchie , 2007 , for example ) . 22 Work in computa - tional creativity illustrates both novelty and utility from each of the Four P perspectives , although some perspectives are represented more plentifully within computational cre - ativity than others . To illustrate the discussions above , we can discuss novelty and value in D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 CONNECTION SCIENCE 15 computational creativity from each of the Four P perspectives . Considering novelty from each of the Four Ps : Product Novelty is well associated with system outputs and products : how novel are the generated artefact ( s ) ? The novelty of artefacts generated by computational creativ - ity systems is a key consideration in Ritchie’s empirical criteria for evaluating creative systems ( Ritchie , 2007 ) . Process A creative process can take a novel approach or be implemented in a novel way , perhaps employing new algorithms or techniques or different approaches . Efforts at trying new processes and combinations thereof are being encouraged by systems such as the FlowR framework ( Charnley et al . , 2014 ) , which focuses specifically on enabling us to chain different processes together for creative purposes . Producer Incorporating new personal traits into computational creativity systems gives scope for new research results . More broadly , as is often encountered in computational creativity work , implementing or running a creative system on new hardware or in new software implementations may also impact upon the system’s performance and may have unexpected results . 23 The number of new systems presented each year at the International Conference on Computational Creativity exemplifies how novel creative entities continually arise in computational creativity research . 24 Press The creativity demonstrated by a system can be noted as being novel in a partic - ular environment , even though it may be commonplace in other environments . The system may also exploit the surrounding press in previously unexplored ways . This was demonstrated neatly by the combination of two systems in Monteith et al . ( 2011 ) , where a textual annotation system interacted with a system that generates emotion - driven music . The two systems essentially acted as part of each other’s Press with one system affecting the environment the other was working in . The combination resulted in novel interpretations of fairy tales ; such results would not have arisen were the systems operating in isolation . Considering value from each of the Four P perspectives : Product Value is also well associated with system outputs and products : how valuable or good are the generated artefact ( s ) ? This is a highly current area of concern within computational creativity , with much evaluation concentrating on the quality of output ( Jordanous , 2011 ) . Process The creative processes being incorporated within creativity can be useful in themselves for learning or studying how certain approaches and techniques work or for cross - application to new areas . Systems with an emphasis on modelling process , such as Misztal and Indurkhya’s poetry generator ( Misztal and Indurkhya , 2014 ) bring added utility by what they reveal about the processes being modelled . Producer Some creators become more valuable than others as a contributor in their field , based on their personal characteristics , experience and influence . 25 The same can be noted for creative systems to some extent ; some are cited more often than others . For example in a Scopus 26 search of the most highly cited papers on “computational creativity” ( where the primary emphasis is on a single system ) , we see that the papers currently with the highest numberofcitations cover ( at least to some extent ) all FourPs : D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 16 A . JORDANOUS (cid:129) NEvAr ( Machado and Cardoso , 2002 , # citations = 66 ) – as seen earlier , this system discusses all four Ps (cid:129) The Knowledge - Intensive Interactive Digital Storytelling ( KIIDS ) system ( Peinado and Gervás , 2006 , # citations = 22 ) is a Producer with knowledge of multiple domains encoded into it , to generate folk tales as its Products . The system knows details about its environment ( its Press ) through the encoded knowledge ( in the form of Semantic Web ontologies , machine - readable categorisations of knowledge about particular domains ) . Though KIIDS cannot interact with its Press , it can pick up new information if the ontology it uses to populate its knowledge is updated with the new information . KIIDS uses a Process of case - based reasoning to generate tales by extrapolating from previous examples using its encoded knowledge . (cid:129) EvoEco ( Kowaliw , Dorin , and McCormack , 2012 , # citations = 17 ) is an “ecosystemic” Producer art system which has knowledge of – and the ability to judge – what is aesthetics pleasing in terms of images . It uses a Process of genetic algorithms to generate image Products . Its knowledge of aesthetics has been harnessed through an online survey , gathering information from its Press ( respondents ) . (cid:129) al - Rifaie et al’s work ( Rifaie , Bishop , and Caines , 2012 , # citations = 14 ) uses swarm intelligence algorithms as its Process for generating artistic image Products . By definition , swarm intelligence involves Press as it simulates the collective behaviour of multiple members of a population ( mimicing the behaviour of flocks of birds or groups of foraging ants ) . One can interpret the Producer as being the system as a whole , or as the individual members of the population which each have knowledge of specific rules that govern the swarm behaviour ( in this case rules governing how the individuals can collectively search regions of an image canvas ) . (cid:129) The Painting Fool ( Colton , 2012 , # citations = 9 ) is advocated by Colton as a Producer which is a “creative artist in its own right” ( Colton , 2012 , p . 3 ) . It learns from interact - ing with its Press through processing various cultural sources such as news stories , to generate artwork Products which have been presented back to its Press in the form of exhibitions “where the effect of software which might be deemed as cre - ative is tested in the art world and the wider public” ( Colton , 2012 , p . 3 ) . It employs a collection of various algorithms as part of its creative Processes . Press If creative activities benefit the external world in some way , then they have value to the press . As an example , Harold Cohen’s AARON colouring system has received much external attention , from media discussions ( McCorduck , 1991 , as example ) and other publicity 27 through to being the inspiration behind a screensaver for personal computers , with the AARON system “productized by Kurzweil CyberArt Technologies , Inc . ” ( http : / / www . kurzweilcyberart . com ) . 5 . Discussion The above treatments of novelty and value are brief , and are not intended to be a full and conclusive portrait of novelty and value within computational creativity . What the above illustrates is the ease with which different viewpoints that can be uncov - ered using the Four Ps as signposts with which to guide our thinking around computa - tional creativity . The breadth of issues mentioned above shows aspects of novelty and value within computational creativity which may not always be accounted for if taking D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 CONNECTION SCIENCE 17 a product / process - oriented viewpoint ; however it is argued here that those perhaps - overlooked aspects give computational creativity researchers a closer rendition of cre - ativity , guiding us away from incomplete viewpoints of creativity in the context of our computational work . Analysis of papers recognised for their contributions to computational creativity reveals the common trend of including discussion from all Four Ps . While it is naive to say that all good papers cover all Four Ps , and papers that do not are in some way “bad” , it would not be controversial to remark that a good breadth of discussion in a computational creativ - ity paper makes the general content of the paper potentially more relevant across a diverse audience . Computational creativity research indeed covers a diverse range of areas and dis - ciplines ( Sosa and Gero , 2015 ) as can be seen by the breadth of sessions at ICCC’15 , ranging in content from theoretical investigations of conceptual blending through to games and language applications . Papers covering all Four Ps will by definition include discussions from all four perspectives covered by the Four Ps ; there is therefore an increased potential to make broader contributions to computational creativity research . Computational cre - ativity researchers can use the Four Ps as a guide or “checklist” to think about their work from different perspectives , potentially uncovering further contributions their work makes which had previously been overlooked . 28 As the field of computational creativity matures as a research discipline , it is pleasing to see wider consideration of the Four Ps at research events . For example , we see that in the most recent computational creativity international conference ( ICCC’15 ) , 66 % of papers mentioned Press elements of computational creativity . This is significantly more than in the previous year , when nearly 75 % of papers had not mentioned social / environmental - related aspects of the system in any way . As reported above , even though many papers did not cover all Four Ps at ICCC’15 , the conference included an even balance of sessions across the Four Ps , which is pleasing to see . 6 . Conclusion The difficulty of understanding what creativity is should not discourage us in our attempts to do so ( Colton , 2008 ; Plucker et al . , 2004 ; Rhodes , 1961 ) , either to understand human cre - ativity or to work with computational creativity . In creativity research , the Four Ps construct ensures we pay attention to four key aspects of creativity : the creative Producer , the gen - erated Products , the creative Process and the Press / Environment hosting and influencing the creativity . This framework helps us to consider creativity more broadly , and is a useful framework to guide computational creativity researchers in their work modelling , simulat - ing or replicating creativity . For example , if viewing novelty and value from the perspectives of product , process , producer and press , we uncover various interpretations of these two key concepts within computational creativity which may otherwise have been overlooked . The Four Ps framework helps to highlight different perspectives on creativity , to portray creativity in a fuller context . We can see from analysis of current computational creativ - ity work that the research community is collectively acknowledging the usefulness of all Four Ps ; however , individual papers might only address a subset of the Four Ps , not all Four ( as seen by the analysis of the latest international research conference papers above ) . We have seen that papers acknowledged to be particularly useful contributions ( e . g . through attracting prizes or numerous citations ) typically address issues across all Four Ps . This D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 18 A . JORDANOUS paper argues that the Four Ps can be used by computational creativity researchers to help them maximise the potential of their work : to make broader contributions across multiple perspectives across the computational creativity community . To conclude , it is worth repeating a point originally made by Rhodes over 50 years ago : Each strand [ of the Four Ps ] has unique identity academically , but only in unity do the four strands operate functionally . ( Rhodes , 1961 , p . 307 ) Notes 1 . As will be described in this paper , I shall revise Person slightly to Producer for the purposes of relating the Four Ps to computational as well as human agents . My thanks to one of this paper’s reviewers for helping me settle on this revised term . 2 . Variants of these Ps also arise in slightly different guises in non - related areas , such as software project management ( Jacobson , Booch , Rumbaugh , Rumbaugh , and Booch , 1999 ) or education ( Biggs , 2003 ) . 3 . As stated by the Association for Computational Creativity at http : / / computationalcreat - ivity . net ( last accessed January 2016 ) . 4 . Interestingly , as Rhodes’ work was published in a relatively unknown journal , some later advo - cates of a “Four Ps” - style approach to creativity also seem unaware of Rhodes’ contribution ( e . g . Odena confirmed this in personal communications in 2009 ) , failing to cite Rhodes’ 1961 paper . 5 . Suggestions from one of the review of this paper helped shape this generalised view . 6 . This report is referred to in the FACE framework as a Frame ) . 7 . Recentlyproposedevaluationmethodssuchas ( Colton , 2008 ; Coltonetal . , 2011 ; Jordanous , 2012 ) place more emphasis on the other three “Ps” . 8 . For example , see Section 3 . 9 . Many thanks to the reviewer of an earlier version of this paper , who raised this point . 10 . A tagline originally devised by Tony Veale for ICCC conference materials in 2012 and 2015 sums up this shift in attitude : computational creativity research is now “scoffing at mere generation [ of products ] ” . 11 . Reverse - engineering is the process of identifying and perhaps replicating how a product is made , through analysis of that product . 12 . If the inner workings of a program are very impressive , complex or novel , then we may still be impressed by the program , but this is a different perspective to whether or not we think the program is creative . 13 . Proceedings ( Toivonen et al . , 2015 ) are available via the conference website at http : / / computati - onalcreativity . net / iccc2015 / . 14 . Including 13 papers which were accepted conditionally with required revisions . 15 . This might be expected to some extent because of the focused nature of conference papers on specific research projects , which may not be reporting fully completed work ; however we should remember that peer - reviewed conference papers often occupy a similar status to that of jour - nal articles in computer science , more so than in most other disciplines . This has been the case for recent computational creativity papers , where there is as yet no dedicated journal for com - putational creativity and papers at the key international conference ICCC undergo detailed peer review . 16 . See http : / / computationalcreativity . net / iccc2015 / ? page _ id = 348 . 17 . Citation data are as measured by Scopus ( http : / / www . scopus . com ) , which allows search results to be ordered by descending number of citations and which includes conference publications in its results . 18 . Best paper prize information is taken from what is listed in the Association for Computational Creativity webpages at http : / / www . computationalcreativity . net . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 CONNECTION SCIENCE 19 19 . There is intention for interaction between Scuddle and its Press to become two - way via the addi - tion of machine learning of choreographers’ preferences within Scuddle , though this work has not appeared in paper form yet to the best of this author’s knowledge . 20 . Details of each of these model aspects are left abstract , as the paper presents a theoretical framework rather than a practical implementation of a creative system . 21 . That is , progress up till 2009 , the date of this paper . 22 . It should be clarified that for this author , creativity consists of considerably more than novelty and value , though these are two key components of creativity , see Jordanous ( 2012 ) . 23 . The novelty of unexpected results is often unintentionally exemplified when live demos of these systems are attempted in unfamiliar computing setups ( the new hardware setup can be interpreted as a new Producer ) . 24 . See http : / / www . computationalcreativity . net / conferences . 25 . This has been found , for example , in the recent Valuing Electronic Music project http : / / valu - ingelectronicmusic . org ( Allington , Dueck , and Jordanous , 2015 ) , where some people’s endorse - ments can have a greater influence on the perceived value of an electronic musician and their work . 26 . http : / / www . scopus . com . 27 . See http : / / www . aaronshome . com / for an extensive list of talks and publications . 28 . Certainly this author can report having experienced this positive effect of uncovering previously overlooked aspects , for example when considering novelty and value in computational creativity from the Four P perspectives . Acknowledgments Many thanks to Carly Lassig for originally making me aware of the Four Ps and pointing me towards Rhodes ( 1961 ) . Conversations with Joe Corneli have helped me develop the ideas in this paper . At the AISB 2015 workshop on computational creativity , several researchers provided excellent discus - sion points over these ideas , particularly Pablo Gervás and Jeremy Gow . A panel discussion on social creativity involving myself , Tony Veale and Joe Corneli was illuminating for considering the “Press” aspect of computational creativity . Thanks also to various computational creativity researchers who provided feedback on earlier versions of these thoughts while in development , and the anonymous reviewers of this paper . Disclosure statement No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author . ORCID A . Jordanous http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0003 - 2076 - 8642 References Allington D . , Dueck B . , & Jordanous A . ( 2015 ) . Networks of value in electronic dance music : Sound - Cloud , London , and the importance of place . Baydin A . G . , DeMantaras R . L . , & Ontanon S . ( 2012 ) . Automated generation of cross - domain analo - gies via evolutionary computation . Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on computer creativity , Dublin , Ireland . Besold T . R . , & Plaza E . ( 2015 ) . Generalizeandblend : Conceptblendingbasedongeneralization , analogy , and amalgams . Proceedings of the 6th international conference on computational creativity , Park City , UT . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 20 A . JORDANOUS Biggs J . B . ( 2003 ) . Constructing learning by aligning teaching : Constructive alignment . In J . B . Biggs ( Ed . ) , Teachingforqualitylearningatuniversity : whatthestudentdoes ( pp . 11 – 33 ) . Buckingham : SRHE & Open University Press . Boden M . A . ( 2004 ) . The creative mind : Myths and mechanisms ( 2nd edn ) . London : Routledge . Bown O . ( 2015 ) . Attributing creative agency : Are we doing it right ? Proceedings of the 6th international conference on computational creativity , Park City , UT . Brown D . , Boden M . , D’Inverno M . , & McCormack J . ( 2009 ) . Computational artistic creativity and its evaluation . In M . Boden , M . D’Inverno , & J . McCormack ( Eds . ) , Computational creativity : An inter - disciplinary approach , number 09291 in Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings ( pp . 1 – 8 ) . Dagstuhl : Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz - Zentrum fuer Informatik . Cardoso A . , Veale T . , & Wiggins G . A . ( 2009 ) . Converging on the divergent : The history ( and future ) of the international joint workshops in computational creativity . AI Magazine , 30 ( 3 ) , 15 – 22 . Carlson K . , Schiphorst T . , & Pasquier P . ( 2011 ) . Scuddle : Generating movement catalysts for computer - aided choreography . Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on computational creativity , Mexico City , Mexico . Charnley J . , Colton S . , & Llano M . T . ( 2014 ) . The FloWr framework : Automated flowchart construction , optimisationandalterationforcreativesystems . Proceedings of the 5th international conference on computational creativity , Ljubljana , Slovenia . Chordia P . , & Rae A . ( 2010 ) . Tabla Gyan : An artificial tabla improviser . In D . Ventura , A . Pease , R . Pérez , G . Ritchie , & T . Veale ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the international conference on computational creativity ( pp . 155 – 164 ) . Lisbon , Portugal : Department of Informatics Engineering , University of Coimbra . Collins N . ( 2008 ) . The analysis of generative music programs . Organised Sound , 13 ( 3 ) , 237 – 248 . Colton S . ( 2008 ) . Creativity versus the perception of creativity in computational systems . Proceedings of AAAI symposium on creative systems ( pp . 14 – 20 ) , Stanford , California , USA . Colton S . ( 2012 ) . The painting fool : Stories from building an automated painter . In J . McCormack & Mark D’Inverno ( Eds . ) , Computers and creativity ( pp . 3 – 38 ) . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . Colton S . , Charnley J . , & Pease A . ( 2011 ) . Computational creativity theory : The FACE and IDEA descriptive models . Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on computational creativity ( pp . 90 – 95 ) . Mexico City , Mexico . ColtonS . , & WigginsG . A . ( 2012 ) . Computationalcreativity : Thefinalfrontier ? InL . deRaedt , C . Bessiere , D . Dubois , & P . Doherty ( Eds . ) , Proceedingsof20theuropeanconferenceonartificialintelligence ( ECAI ) ( pp . 21 – 26 ) . Amsterdam : IOS Press . Cope D . ( 2005 ) . Computer models of musical creativity . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Csikszentmihalyi M . ( 1988 ) . Society , culture , and person : A systems view of creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Thenatureofcreativity , chapter 13 ( pp . 325 – 339 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . de Silva Garza A . G . , & Gero J . ( 2010 ) . Elementary social interactions and their effects on creativity : A computational simulation . In D . Ventura , A . Pease , R . Pérez , G . Ritchie , & Tony Veale ( Eds . ) , Pro - ceedingsoftheinternationalconferenceoncomputationalcreativity ( pp . 110 – 119 ) . Lisbon , Portugal : Department of Informatics Engineering , University of Coimbra . Fauconnier G . , & Turner M . ( 2002 ) . The way we think : Conceptual blending and the mind’s hidden complexities ( 1st edn ) . New York : Basic Books , Inc . Gervás P . ( 2009 ) . Computational approaches to storytelling and creativity . AI Magazine , 30 ( 3 ) , 49 – 62 . Gervás P . , & León C . ( 2014 ) . Readingandwritingasacreativecycle : Theneedforacomputationalmodel . Proceedings of the fifth international conference on computational creativity , Ljubljana , Slovenia . Grace K . , & Maher M . L . ( 2015 ) . Specific curiosity as a cause and consequence of transformational cre - ativity . Proceedings of the 6th international conference on computational creativity , Park City , UT . Guilford J . P . ( 1950 ) . Creativity . American Psychologist , 5 , 444 – 454 . Harmon S . ( 2015 ) . FIGURE8 : A novel system for generating and evaluating figurative language . Proceed - ings of the 6th international conference on computational creativity , Park City , UT . Hennessey B . A . , & Amabile T . M . ( 1988 ) . The conditions of creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Thenature of creativity , Chapter 1 ( pp . 11 – 38 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Hennessey B . A . , & Amabile T . M . ( 2010 ) . Creativity . Annual Review of Psychology , 61 , 569 – 598 . Hofstadter D . ( 1994 ) . Creativity , brain mechanisms and the Turing test . In D . Hofstadter ( Ed . ) , Fluid concepts and creative analogies ( pp . 467 – 491 ) . New York , NY : Harper Collins . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 CONNECTION SCIENCE 21 Jacobson I . , Booch G . , Rumbaugh J . , Rumbaugh J . , & Booch G . ( 1999 ) . Theunifiedsoftwaredevelopment process , Vol . 1 . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Jennings K . E . ( 2010 ) . Developing creativity : Artificial barriers in artificial intelligence . Minds and Machines , 20 ( 4 ) , 489 – 501 . Jordanous A . ( 2011 ) . Evaluatingevaluation : Assessingprogressincomputationalcreativityresearch . Pro - ceedings of the second international conference on computational creativity ( ICCC - 11 ) , Mexico City , Mexico . Jordanous A . ( 2012 ) . A standardised procedure for evaluating creative systems : Computational cre - ativity evaluation based on what it is to be creative . Cognitive Computation , 4 ( 3 ) , 246 – 279 . Jordanous A . ( 2012 ) . Evaluating computational creativity : A standardised procedure for evaluating cre - ative systems and its application ( Ph . D . dissertation ) . University of Sussex , Brighton , UK . Jordanous A . , & Keller B . ( 2012 ) . Weaving creativity into the Semantic Web : A language - processing approach . In M . L . Maher , K . Hammond , A . Pease , R . Pérez , D . Ventura , & G . Wiggins ( Eds . ) , Interna - tional conference on computational creativity ( pp . 216 – 220 ) . Dublin , Ireland . Kagan J . ed . ( 1967 ) . Creativity and learning . Boston , MA : Beacon Press Press . Kantosalo A . , Toivanen J . M . , & Toivonen H . ( 2015 ) . Interaction evaluation for human – computer co - creativity : Acasestudy . Proceedingsofthe6thinternationalconferenceoncomputationalcreativity , Park City , UT . Kantosalo A . , Toivanen J . , Toivonen H . , & Xiao P . ( 2014 ) . From isolation to involvement : Adapting machine creativity software to support human – computer co - creation . Proceedings of 5th interna - tional conference on computational creativity , ICCC , Ljubljana , Slovenia . Kaufman J . C . ( 2009 ) . Creativity 101 , The Psych 101 series , New York , NY : Springer . Koestler A . ( 1964 ) . The act of creation . New York , NY : Danube Books . Kowaliw T . , Dorin A . , & McCormack J . ( 2012 ) . Promoting creative design in interactive evolutionary computation . IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , 16 ( 4 ) , 523 – 536 . Koza J . R . , Streeter M . , Mydlowec W . , Yu J . , & Lanza G . ( 2003 ) . Genetic programming IV : Routine human - competitive machine intelligence . Boston , MA : Kluwer Academic . LeWitt S . ( 1967 ) . Paragraphs on conceptual art . Artforum international magazine , June 1967 . Machado P . , & Cardoso A . ( 2002 ) . All the truth about NEvAr . Applied Intelligence , 16 ( 2 ) , 101 – 118 . MacKinnon D . W . ( 1970 ) . Creativity : A multi - faceted phenomenon . In J . D . Roslansky ( Ed . ) , Creativity : A discussion at the nobel conference ( pp . 17 – 32 ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland Publishing Company . Maher M . L . ( 2012 ) . Computational and collective creativity : Who’s being creative ? In Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on computer creativity , Dublin , Ireland . MaherM . L . , MerrickK . E . , & SaundersR . ( March2008 ) . Achievingcreativebehaviorusingcuriouslearn - ing agents . In D . Ventura , M . L . Maher , & S . Colton ( Eds . ) , AAAI spring symposium : Creative intelligent systems’08 , Technical Report SS - 08 - 03 ( pp . 40 – 46 ) . Stanford , California : AAAI . Mayer R . E . ( 1999 ) . Fifty Years of Creativity Research . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity , Chapter 22 ( pp . 449 – 460 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . McCorduck P . ( 1991 ) . Aaron’s code : Meta - art , artificial intelligence , and the work of Harold Cohen . New York , NY : WH Freeman . McGraw G . , & Hofstadter D . ( 1993 ) . Perception and creation of diverse alphabetic styles . AISBQ , 85 , 42 – 49 . Misztal J . , & Indurkhya B . ( 2014 ) . Poetry generation system with an emotional personality . Proceedings of 5th international conference on computational creativity , ICCC , Ljubljana , Slovenia . Moffat D . C . D . C . , & Kelly M . ( 2006 ) . An investigation into people’s bias against computational creativity in music composition . The third joint workshop on computational creativity , Riva del Garda , Italy . Monteith K . , Francisco V . , Martinez T . , Gervás P . , & Ventura D . ( 2011 ) . Automatic generation of emotionally - targeted soundtracks . In D . Ventura , P . Gervás , F . D . Harrell , M . L . Maher , A . Pease , & G . Wiggins ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on computational creativity ( pp . 60 – 62 ) . Mexico City , Mexico . Mooney R . L . ( 1963 ) . A conceptual model for integrating four approaches to the identification of cre - ative talent . In C . W . Taylor & F . Barron ( Eds . ) , Scientific creativity : Its recognition and development , chapter 27 ( pp . 331 – 340 ) . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Odena O . , & Welch G . ( 2009 ) . A generative model of teachers’ thinking on musical creativity . Psychol - ogy of Music , 37 ( 4 ) , 416 – 442 . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 22 A . JORDANOUS Pearce M . , & Wiggins G . ( 2001 ) . Towards a framework for the evaluation of machine composition . Proceedings of the AISB’01 symposium on AI and creativity in arts and science , York , UK . Pease A . , & Colton S . ( 2011 ) . On impact and evaluation in Computational Creativity : A discussion of the turing test and an alternative proposal . In Proceedings of the AISB’11 convention , York , UK : AISB . Pease A . , Guhe M . , & Smaill A . ( 2010 ) . ‘Some Aspects of Analogical Reasoning in Mathematical Creativ - ity’ , in Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Creativity , pp . 60 – 64 , Lisbon , Portugal . Pease A . , Winterstein D . , & Colton S . ( 2001 ) . Evaluating machine creativity . In Workshop on creative systems , 4th international conference on case based reasoning ( pp . 129 – 137 ) . Peinado F . , & Gervás P . ( 2006 ) . Evaluation of automatic generation of basic stories . New Generation Computing , 24 ( 3 ) , 289 – 302 . Pérez y Pérez R . , Aguilar A . , & Negrete S . ( 2010 ) . The ERI - designer : A computer model for the arrange - ment of furniture . Minds and Machines , 20 ( 4 ) , 533 – 564 . PluckerJ . A . , BeghettoR . A . , & DowG . T . ( 2004 ) . Whyisn’tcreativitymoreimportanttoeducationalpsy - chologists ? Potentials , pitfalls , and future directions in creativity research . EducationalPsychologist , 39 ( 2 ) , 83 – 96 . Poincaré H . ( 1929 ) . Mathematical creation . Thefoundationsofscience : Scienceandhypothesis , thevalue of science , science and method , chapter III . ( pp . 383 – 394 ) . New York : The Science Press . Rhodes M . ( 1961 ) . An analysis of creativity . Phi Delta Kappan , 42 ( 7 ) , 305 – 310 . al - RifaieM . M . , BishopJ . M . , & CainesS . ( 2012 ) . Creativityandautonomyinswarmintelligencesystems . Cognitive Computation , 4 ( 3 ) , 320 – 331 . Ritchie G . ( 2001 ) . Assessing creativity . In G . A . Wiggins ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the AISB symposium on AI and creativity in arts and science ( pp . 3 – 11 ) . York : The Society for the Study of Artificial Intelligence and Simulation of Behaviour . Ritchie G . ( 2006 ) . The transformational creativity hypothesis . New Generation Computing , 24 ( 3 ) , 241 – 266 . Ritchie G . ( 2007 ) . Some empirical criteria for attributing creativity to a computer program . Minds and Machines , 17 , 67 – 99 . Ritchie G . ( 2008 ) . Uninformed resource creation for humour simulation . In P . Gervás , R . Pérez y Pérez , & T . Veale ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 5th international joint workshop on computational creativity ( pp . 147 – 150 ) . Madrid , Spain : Departamento de Ingeniera del Software e Inteligencia Artificial , Universidad Complutense de Madrid . Runco M . A . ( 2003 ) . Creativity , cognition , and their educational implications . In J . Houtz ( Ed . ) , The educational psychology of creativity ( pp . 25 – 56 ) . New York , NY : Hampton Press . Saunders R . ( 2002 ) . Curious design agents and artificial creativity ( Ph . D . dissertation ) . University of Sydney . Saunders R . ( 2012 ) . Towards autonomous creative systems : A computational approach . Cognitive Computation , 4 ( 3 ) , 216 – 225 . Saunders R . , & Bown O . ( 2015 ) . Computational social creativity . Artificial Life , 21 ( 3 ) , 366 – 378 . Saunders R . , Gemeinboeck P . , Lombard A . , Bourke D . , & Kocaballi B . ( 2010 ) . Curious whispers : An embodied artificial creative system . In D . Ventura , A . Pease , R . Pérez , G . Ritchie , & T . Veale ( Eds . ) , Pro - ceedingsoftheinternationalconferenceoncomputationalcreativity ( pp . 100 – 109 ) . Lisbon , Portugal : Department of Informatics Engineering , University of Coimbra , Coimbra , Portugal . SimontonD . K . ( 1988 ) . Creativity , leadership , andchance . InR . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Thenatureofcreativity , Chapter 16 ( pp . 386 – 426 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . SimsK . ( July1994 ) . Evolvingvirtualcreatures . InD . Schweitzer , A . Glassner , & M . Keeler ( Eds . ) , Computer graphics ( SIGGRAPH ’94 proceedings ) ( pp . 15 – 22 ) . New York , NY : ACM . Sosa R . , & Gero J . S . ( 2015 ) . Multi - dimensional creativity : a computational perspective . International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation , 4 ( 1 ) , 1 – 25 . Sosa R . , Gero J . S . , & Jennings K . ( 2009 ) . Growing and destroying the worth of ideas . October ( pp . 295 – 304 ) . Stein M . I . ( 1963 ) . A transactional approach to creativity . In C . W . Taylor & F . Barron , ( Eds . ) , Scientific creativity : Its recognition and development , Chapter 18 ( pp . 217 – 227 ) . New York , NY : Wiley . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016 CONNECTION SCIENCE 23 Stein M . I . ( 1968 ) . Creativity . In E . F . Borgotta & W . W . Lambert ( Eds . ) , Handbook of personality theory and research ( pp . 900 – 942 ) . Chicago , IL : Rand McNally . Tardif T . Z . , & Sternberg R . J . ( 1988 ) . What do we know about creativity ? In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity , Chapter 17 ( pp . 429 – 440 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Thornton C . ( 2008 ) . Analogy as exploration . In P . Gervás , R . P . y Pérez , & T . Veale ( Eds . ) , Proceed - ings of the 5th international joint workshop on computational creativity ( pp . 81 – 90 ) . Madrid , Spain : Departamento de Ingeniera del Software e Inteligencia Artificial , Universidad Complutense de Madrid . ToivonenH . , ColtonS . , CookM . , & VenturaD . ( 2015 ) . Proceedingsofthesixthinternationalconference on computational creativity . In H . Toivonen , S . Colton , M . Cook , & D . Ventura ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the sixth international conference on computational creativity , Park City , UT . Veale T . , & Li G . ( 2015 ) . Distributed divergent creativity : Computational creative agents at web scale . Cognitive Computation . Ventura D . ( 2008 ) . A reductio ad absurdum experiment in sufficiency for evaluating ( computational ) creative systems . In P . Gervás , R . P . y Pérez , & T . Veale ( Eds . ) , Proceedingsofthe5thinternationaljoint workshop on computational creativity ( pp . 11 – 19 ) . Madrid , Spain : Departamento de Ingeniera del Software e Inteligencia Artificial , Universidad Complutense de Madrid . Wallas G . ( 1945 ) . The art of thought ( abridged edn ) . London , UK : C . A . Watts & Co . Wiggins G . A . ( 2006 ) . A preliminary framework for description , analysis and comparison of creative systems . Knowledge - Based Systems , 19 ( 7 ) , 449 – 458 . Wiggins G . A . ( 2006 ) . Searching for computational creativity . New Generation Computing , 24 ( 3 ) , 209 – 222 . Williams R . ( 1976 ) . Keywords : A vocabulary of culture and society . Glasgow : Fontana / Croom Helm . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f K e n t ] a t 02 : 49 10 M a r c h 2016