Publishing while female Are women held to higher standards ? Evidence from peer review . (cid:3) Erin Hengel y August 2019 This paper uses readability scores to test if women’s writing is held to higher standards in academic peer review . I ﬁnd : ( i ) female - authored papers are 1 – 6 percent better written than equivalent papers by men ; ( ii ) the gap widens during peer review ; ( iii ) women improve their writing as they publish more papers but men do not . Using a subjective expected utility framework , I show that tougher editorial standards are most likely consistent with authors’ observed choices . A conservative estimate derived from the model suggests higher writing standards cause senior female economists to write at least 7 percent more clearly than they otherwise would . Moreover , the cost to men of publishing a paper appears to be much lower than the cost to women—women’s papers spend 3 – 6 months longer in peer review compared to observably equivalent papers by men ( data from Econometrica and the Review of Economic Studies ) —indicating a female advantage in writing well does not compensate for some other advantage common to male - authored papers . As a ﬁnal exercise , I document suggestive evidence that feedback eﬀects are present : women learn to anticipate higher writing standards in peer review by writing more readably before it . (cid:3) This paper is a revised version of the third chapter of my dissertation ( University of Cambridge , September 2015 ) . I am grateful to my supervisor Christopher Harris for ( a ) excellent guidance and ( b ) thinking this was a good idea . I am similarly indebted to Jeremy Edwards and my examination committee ( Leonardo Felli and Hamish Low ) for considerable input and advice . I also thank Miguel Almunia , Carolina Alves , Oriana Bandiera , Anne Boring , Cheryl Carleton , Gary Cook , Dominique Demougin , Harris Dellas , Carola Frege , Claudia Goldin , Olga Gorelkina , Jane Hunt , Ali Ismail , Adam Jaﬀe , Katya Kartashova , John Leahy , Brendan McCabe , Reshef Meir , Imran Rasul , Lu - dovic Renou , Kevin Schnepel , Joel Sobel , Heidi Williams , Jarrod Zhang , 14 ( and counting ! ) anonymous referees , audience members at the Econometric Society European Winter Meeting , the Eastern Economic Association Con - ference , the Royal Economic Society Annual Conference , the European Meeting of the Econometric Society , the American Economic Association Annual Meeting , the PEERE International Conference on Peer Review , the Re - view of Economics and Statistics Centenary Conference , the COSME Gender Economics Workshop , the Bank of England Conference on Gender and Career Progression , the NBER Summer Institute Innovation Workshop , the DIW Gender Economics Workshop and seminar participants at the University of Liverpool , University of Cardiﬀ , CEPII , Federal Reserve Board of Chicago , the NYU Center for Data Science , SOFI ( Stockholm University ) , the University of Reading , the University of Sussex , London Business School , Diversifying Economics Network ( Uni - versity of Manchester ) , CRASSH ( Cambridge University ) and WERISE ( Boston University ) . This paper could not have been written without substantial , careful research assistance by Michael Hengel ( my dad ) , Eileen Hengel ( my sister ) and Lunna Ai ( my actual research assistant ) . All errors , of course , are mine . y University of Liverpool , Department of Economics ; email : erin . hengel @ liverpool . ac . uk . 1 1 Introduction Ladies , our papers aren’t published that often in “top - four” economics journals . In 2015 , the av - erage share of female authors per paper was 15 percent . Only eight percent were majority female - authored . 1 Just four percent were written entirely by women . The Quarterly Journal of Economics did not publish a single exclusively female - authored paper between 2015 – 2017 ( inclusive ) . In several recent years , Econometrica and the Journal of Political Economy have not either . These statistics are uncomfortable , but their causes are myriad : lower publishing rates , ca - reer choices , motherhood and , possibly , bias . In lab and ﬁeld experiments women are subject to tougher standards . Their qualiﬁcations and ability are underestimated ( Foschi , 1996 ; Grunspan et al . , 2016 ; Moss - Racusin et al . , 2012 ; Reuben et al . , 2014 ) . Female - authored manuscripts are evaluated more critically ( Goldberg , 1968 ; Krawczyk and Smyk , 2016 ; Paludi and Bauer , 1983 ) ; when collaborating with men , women are given less credit ( Heilman and Haynes , 2005 ; Sarsons , 2019 ) . This paper asks whether referees consistently apply identical standards in how they scrutinise and evaluate male - vs . female - authored work . For , if women are stereotypically assumed less capable at math , logic and reasoning than men and generally need more evidence to rate as equally competent , some well - intentioned referees might nevertheless inspect their papers more closely , demand more revisions and have less patience deciphering their complicated , dense writing . Complicated , dense writing is my focus . In the English language , more clearly written prose is better prose , all things equal . Thoughtful word choice and simple sentence structure make text easier to understand , more interesting to read and expose inconsistencies long - winded writing often hides . Journal editors tend to agree . Econometrica asks authors to write “crisply but clearly” and to take “the extra eﬀort involved in revising and reworking the manuscript until it will be clear to most if not all of our readers” ( Econometrica submission guidelines , June 2016 ) . 2 To test whether journals hold female - and male - authored papers to identical writing stan - dards , I rely on a relationship familiar to linguists and educators : simple vocabulary and short sentences are easier to understand and straightforward to quantify . Using the ﬁve most widely used , studied and reliable formulas to exploit this , I analyse 9 , 122 article abstracts published in the American Economic Review ( AER ) , Econometrica ( ECA ) , Journal of Political Economy ( JPE ) and Quarterly Journal of Economics ( QJE ) . Female - authored abstracts are 1 – 6 percent more readable than those by men . Women write better despite controls for editor , journal , year and primary and tertiary JEL classiﬁcation ; that remains unchanged when proxying for article quality with citations and accounting for author prominence , seniority , English ﬂuency and their individual ﬁxed eﬀects . This means the read - ability gap probably wasn’t ( i ) a response to speciﬁc policies in earlier eras ; ( ii ) caused by women writing on topics that are easier to explain ; ( iii ) due to a lopsided concentration of ( non - ) native English speakers ; nor ( iv ) generated by factors correlated with gender but really related to knowl - edge , intelligence and creativity . Additionally , at least 40 percent of the gender readability gap forms in peer review . To es - tablish this result , I compare National Bureau of Economic Research ( NBER ) working papers to their ﬁnal , published versions . 3 While both papers are exposed to many factors that impact readability , only published articles are subject to peer review . By comparing the two , inﬂuences 1 For comparison , 28 , 26 and 13 percent of assistant , associate and full professors , respectively , are women ( Lundberg , 2017 ) . “Majority female - authored” refers to papers with a ratio of female authors strictly above 50 percent . 2 The American Economic Review rejected Robert Lucas’s paper “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” for insuf - ﬁcient readability ; one referee wrote “If it has a clear result , it is hidden by the exposition” ( Gans and Shepherd , 1994 , p . 172 ) . I additionally analysed 721 posts on Shit My Reviewers Say . A quarter deal with writing quality , document structure or word choice / tone . ( Data and analysis available on request . ) 3 Many thanks to Kevin Schnepel for suggesting this idea . 2 unrelated to immediate peer review are isolated from those that are ; assuming the former do not partially correlate with the latter’s timing , a widening gap suggests a causal link . 4 Two explanations could account for these ﬁndings . Either women voluntarily write better papers— e . g . , because they’re more sensitive to referee criticism—or better written papers are women’s response to external circumstances they do not control . Both explanations imply women spend too much time rewriting old papers and not enough time writing new papers . 5 The appropriate policy response , however , depends on the cause . To distinguish between them , I model an author’s decision - making process . Reviewers are as - sumed to accept papers only when their readabilities surpass author - speciﬁc minimum thresholds . Thresholds depend on non - readability aspects of papers— e . g . , more novel research is subject to lower thresholds—as well as referees’ and editors’ objectives , idiosyncratic preferences and biases and relative weight in determining outcomes . Authors then choose the actual readability of each of their papers in order to maximise a subjective expected utility that ﬁxes intrinsic preference pa - rameters over time but allows the cost of writing to decline with experience and permits authors to form misspeciﬁed beliefs about the relative importance of writing well . The model suggests that if women improve their writing over time and are not commensu - rately rewarded with higher acceptance rates , then a gender readability gap between equivalent , experienced authors is the result of holding women to higher standards . The intuition is sim - ple . Assuming intrinsic preferences are ﬁxed over time , authors improve their own writing only when they believe better writing leads to higher acceptance rates . Although poor information and / or oversensitivity may cause mistaken beliefs and mistaken beliefs can initially lead to sub - optimal readability choices , authors correct such mistakes as they gain experience in peer review . Thus , an experienced author writes more clearly than her inexperienced self only when writing clearly really does improve the probability her paper is accepted . If she also writes more clearly than an equivalent , experienced male author whose papers are accepted at rates no lower than hers , then discrimination—in the form of asymmetric editorial standards and / or biased referee assignment—explains the diﬀerence ( Theorem 1 ) . Theorem 1 establishes suﬃcient conditions to demonstrate double standards are present in academic peer review : ( 1 ) experienced women write better than equivalent men ; ( 2 ) women improve their writing over time ; ( 3 ) female - authored papers are accepted no more often than equivalent male - authored papers . Estimates from pooled subsamples at ﬁxed publication counts suggest ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) hold . On average , women’s writing gradually gets better but men’s does not ; between authors’ ﬁrst and third published articles , the readability gap increases by up to 12 per - cent . Although my data do not identify probability of acceptance , conclusions from extensive study elsewhere are clear : “there are no sex diﬀerences in acceptance rates . ” ( Ceci et al . , 2014 , p . 111 ) . 6 To interpret the relationship as causal , however , technically requires that Theorem 1’s condi - tions hold for the same author in two diﬀerent situations—before and after gaining experience and when compared to an equivalent , experienced author of the opposite gender . To account for this , I match proliﬁc female authors to similarly productive male authors on characteristics that predict the topic , novelty , and quality of research . 4 Although the causal link I establish at this step is only with peer review—and not with editor and / or referee bias—I also ﬁnd no evidence of a gender readability gap in the ( small ) sample of NBER working paper – published article pairs subjected to double - blind review pre - internet ( Section 4 . 2 . 3 ) . This result suggests editorial / refereeing bias does indeed play a role . 5 Alternatively , men spend too much time writing new papers and not enough time rewriting old papers . 6 Most studies concluding “no gender bias” ﬁnd ( marginally ) insigniﬁcant gender gaps in peer review outcomes favour - ing men . ( I am aware of very few studies ﬁnding eﬀects in the opposite direction . ) For further discussion , see Section 4 . 3 . 2 . 3 Conditions ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) were satisﬁed in 68 percent of matched pairs . In almost three - quarters of those , the member discriminated against was female . A conservative estimate derived from the model suggests higher standards cause senior female economists to write at least seven percent more clearly than they otherwise would . 7 As discussed in Section 4 . 3 . 2 and Section 5 , causal interpretation crucially depends on ap - propriately accounting for diﬀerences in the non - readability qualities of experienced men’s and women’s papers— e . g . , novelty , importance , methodological rigour , etc . I achieve this by matching authors on , inter alia , citations and ﬁeld . For robustness , I conﬁrm results hold using a variety of speciﬁcations ; to encourage careful scrutiny , Appendix N . 2 names economists within each pair . Nevertheless , better writing by senior female economists could compensate for some other advantage present in their male counterparts’ papers— i . e . , women could have a comparative ad - vantage in writing well . 8 Assuming men and women are equally capable researchers , however , the cost to both genders of implementing their respective strategies must be equal—otherwise , women could reduce the cost of producing a paper by adopting a strategy marginally closer to men’s ( or visa versa ) . I investigate this hypothesis using submit - accept times from Econometrica and the Review of Economic Studies ( REStud ) . The cost to men of producing a paper appears to be lower than the cost to women : female - authored papers spend three to six months longer in peer review . The eﬀect persists across a range of speciﬁcations and accounts for , among other things , author seniority , motherhood , childbirth , citations and ﬁeld . This paper concludes by showing suggestive evidence that higher standards aﬀect women’s behaviour and their productivity . To tease out the direct eﬀect of higher standards—readability changes made in peer review—from its “feedback” eﬀect—readability changes made before peer review in anticipation of those higher standards , I compare papers pre - and post - review over increasing publication counts . In authors’ earliest papers , the direct eﬀect dominates . In fact , there is no signiﬁcant gender diﬀerence between draft readabilities in men’s and women’s ﬁrst top publications ; it emerges entirely in peer review . In later papers , however , women write well upfront ; the gap chieﬂy materialises before peer review ( feedback eﬀect ) . These ﬁnal results suggest women do not initially anticipate higher standards . Instead , they learn about them over time and adapt their ex ante writing style accordingly . Consequently , pa - pers by junior female economists likely experience the toughest review . 9 Consistent with this hypothesis , I ﬁnd a signiﬁcantly smaller—albeit still positive—gender gap in peer review times for senior women . In economics , theoretical and empirical research on discrimination tends to focus on stereo - type formation and belief structures motivating discriminatory actions ( e . g . , Arrow , 1973 ; Becker , 1957 ; Bordalo et al . , 2016 ; Coate and Loury , 1993 ; Phelps , 1972 ) . The present paper , in contrast , exclusively explores discrimination’s impact on the behaviour and choices of people discriminated against . This perspective has two advantages . First , it oﬀers an alternative framework for studying the phenomenon . Discrimination is typically identiﬁed from the actions ( e . g . , Bertrand and Mul - lainathan , 2004 ; Neumark et al . , 1996 ) and / or learning processes ( e . g . , Altonji and Pierret , 2001 ; 7 This estimate averages results over all ﬁve scores and assumes women are accepted in a subset of states in which men are accepted and within pair diﬀerences are zero for the 30 – 40 percent of matched pairs that fail to satisfy Conditions ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) . Alternative estimates based on weaker assumptions are shown in Table 7 and Appendix N . 4 ( Table N . 7 ) . 8 See Breda and Napp ( 2019 ) for evidence that 15 - year - old girls score higher on reading comprehension than 15 - year - old boys . Female workers on Mechanical Turk have also been found to score higher on a test of grammar ( Sarsons , 2019 ) . 9 Tougher peer review probably manifests itself in a variety of additional ways , e . g . , higher ( desk ) rejection rates ( see Section 4 . 4 for further discussion ) . 4 Fryer et al . , 2013 ) of those who discriminate . As I demonstrate here , however , a traditional “out - come test” combined with repeatedly observing authors choices also reveals bias by editors and / or referees . Outcome tests provide powerful evidence of discriminatory treatment ( Ayres , 2001 ) —but only if they credibly isolate group diﬀerences in the observed equilibrium from those that would have occurred in the non - discriminatory counterfactual equilibrium . 10 Because it is generally as - sumed that men and women possess diﬀerent preferences , knowledge about underlying processes and / or personality traits exacerbated by imperfect information , assuming no gender diﬀerence in the counterfactual equilibrium is diﬃcult to justify . Instead , I use information revealed by authors’ repeated readability choices to reconstruct it : assuming preferences are ﬁxed over time , earlier choices provide an upper bound on the impact intrinsic preferences play in gender readability gaps ; assuming authors update beliefs about the relationship between readability and acceptance rates means later choices are made with accurate beliefs . The second advantage of analysing discrimination from the perspective of people discrimi - nated against is that it forces us to think more deeply about its impact on , inter alia , occupa - tional choice , worker motivation , human capital investment and , especially , productivity mea - surement . 11 This paper joins a small , emerging empirical literature examining these eﬀects ( e . g . , Glover et al . , 2017 ; Lavy and Sand , 2015 ; Parsons et al . , 2011 ) . 12 Higher standards cause collateral damage to women’s productivity . Unequal time spent mak - ing revisions leads to unequal time conducting new research ; as a result , women write fewer pa - pers . 13 Fewer papers justiﬁes fewer promotions . 14 If women seek fairer employment elsewhere— or quit the labour force entirely—it feeds a “Leaky Pipeline” . 15 I also ﬁnd evidence that female authors internalise tougher standards with strategies that disguise the underlying discrimination as voluntary choice . Women increasingly submit better written papers ex ante to oﬀset biased evaluation ex post , meaning the readability gap between senior economists largely forms prior to—therefore appearing independent of—peer review . This pattern of behaviour obscures the line between personal preferences and external constraints and hints that academia overlooks other biases within its ranks . Although analysed in a speciﬁc context—academia—higher standards impose a quantity vs . quality trade - oﬀ that characterises many instances of female output . According to raw numerical counts , women produce less than men . Female reporters write fewer front - page bylines ( Klos , 10 This idea is conceptually related to the infra - marginality problem . See Anwar and Fang ( 2006 ) , Anwar and Fang ( 2015 ) , and Knowles et al . ( 2001 ) for discussions in the context of racial discrimination . 11 This was a major theme in earlier theoretical work . Lundberg ( 1991 ) and Lundberg and Startz ( 1983 ) show that discrimination can lead to suboptimal human capital investment when ﬁrms more reliably assess the productivity of members in one group relative to another . Occupational segregation by gender is one potential outcome in Goldin ( 2014b ) ’s “pollution” theory of discrimination— e . g . , male economists resist the entry of female economists ( because their presence “pollutes” the profession’s prestige ) , so women sort ( or are pushed ) into “feminised” research ﬁelds . 12 A parallel research thread examines the broader impact of external signals ( discriminatory or not ) on women’s be - haviour ( Kugler et al . , 2017 ) . 13 A similar idea was also recently proposed in the philosophy literature ( see Bright , 2017 ; Lee , 2016 ) . 14 Evidence on whether female academics are hired and promoted at lower rates is mixed . One study suggests so - called STEM ( science , technology , engineering , mathematics ) ﬁelds actually prefer hiring women—although male economists continue to show a slight ( but not signiﬁcant ) preference for men ( Williams et al . , 2015 ) . Other studies ﬁnd male candidates are preferred in postdoctoral research and laboratory management positions ( Moss - Racusin et al . , 2012 ; Sheltzer and Smith , 2014 ) . Men are also more likely granted tenure when compared to women with an identical publication history ( Weisshaar , 2017 ) or for co - authored work ( Sarsons , 2019 ) . A study speciﬁc to the London School of Economics found female academics earn 12 % less than men with identical experience and research productivity ( Bandiera , 2016 ) . 15 It may also manifest itself in more indirect ways , e . g . , by impacting the types of research women conduct , the eﬀort they put into their work or the amount and extent of service to the profession they choose to undertake . 5 2014 ) ; female real estate agents list fewer homes ( Seagraves and Gallimore , 2013 ) ; female physi - cians see fewer patients ( Bloor et al . , 2008 ) 16 and submit fewer grant proposals ( Gordon et al . , 2009 ) ; female pharmacists and lawyers work and bill fewer hours , respectively ( Azmat and Ferrer , 2017 ; Goldin and Katz , 2016 ) . When ranked by narrowly deﬁned outcome measures , however , women often outperform . Female students earn better grades ( Funk and Perrone , 2017 ; Voyer and Voyer , 2014 ) ; female auditors are more accurate and eﬃcient ( Chung and Monroe , 2001 ; Ittonen et al . , 2013 ; Niskanen et al . , 2011 ; O’Donnell and Johnson , 2001 ) ; congresswomen secure more federal funding for their districts , sponsor more legislation and score higher on a composite measure of legislative eﬀectiveness ( Anzia and Berry , 2011 ; Volden et al . , 2013 ) ; houses listed by female real estate agents sell for higher prices ( Salter et al . , 2012 ; Seagraves and Gallimore , 2013 ) ; 17 patients treated by female physicians are less likely to die or be readmitted to hospital ( Tsugawa et al . , 2017 ) ; female pilots are involved in fewer fatal accidents ( Bazargan and Guzhva , 2011 ; Vail and Ekman , 1986 ) ; 18 female economists write more clearly . Additionally , if—like senior female economists—women internalise higher standards in some - what roundabout ways , they could contribute to other labour market phenomena : sectoral and occupational concentration ( Blau and Kahn , 2017 ; Cortés and Pan , 2016 ; Pertold - Gebicka et al . , 2016 ) ; women’s tendency to under negotiate pay ( Babcock and Laschever , 2003 ) 19 and ap - ply only to jobs they feel fully qualiﬁed for ( Mohr , 2014 ) . They may likewise reinforce work habits— e . g . , conscientiousness , tenacity and diligence—that correlate with quality and connote “femininity” : female physicians consult longer with patients ( Roter and Hall , 2004 ) ; female politi - cians fundraise more intensely ( Jenkins , 2007 ) ; female faculty commit fewer instances of aca - demic misconduct ( Fang et al . , 2013 ) ; female lawyers make fewer ethical violations ( Hatamyar and Simmons , 2004 ) ; female pharmacists are less likely to face performance - related disciplinary action ( Schafheutle et al . , 2011 ) . 20 Higher standards therefore oﬀer another perspective to the gender gap in labour market out - comes . Traditional hypotheses focus on obvious discrimination ( Goldin and Rouse , 2000 ) , moth - erhood ( Bertrand et al . , 2010 ) and diﬀerences in behaviour ( e . g . , Niederle and Vesterlund , 2010 ) . Contemporary theories stress inﬂexible working conditions ( Goldin , 2014a ; Goldin and Katz , 2016 ) , preferences ( for a review , see , e . g . , Blau and Kahn , 2017 ) and policy design ( Antecol et al . , 2018 ) . Still other research—which this paper joins—target more subtle forms of discrimina - tion ( e . g . , Sarsons , 2019 ; Wu , 2017 ) . The gap probably emerges from all of these factors—and 16 Bloor et al . ( 2008 ) ’s analysis considers only full - time ( or maximum part - time ) , salaried physicians in the U . K . Similar results are found in Canada and the U . S . , where physicians are paid on a per - service basis ( Benedetti et al . , 2004 ; Canadian Institute for Health Information , 2005 ) . 17 Seagraves and Gallimore ( 2013 ) ﬁnd that normal houses ( i . e . homes not sold under special sales conditions , such as foreclosures , ﬁxer - uppers , corporate - owned properties , transfers and estate sales ) sell at a signiﬁcantly higher price when listed by a female real estate agent . The authors also ﬁnd buyers pay less if they are represented by a male agent—although the eﬀect is only present for homes sold under special sales conditions . An earlier study did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant gender diﬀerence in selling performance for listing and selling agents ( Turnbull and Dombrow , 2007 ) . 18 The evidence on general accident rates ( including non - fatal accidents ) is mixed . McFadden ( 1996 ) found no diﬀer - ence in female vs . male accident rates after adjusting for pilot experience and age . Walton and Politano ( 2016 ) found female accident rates were higher than male accident rates among inexperienced pilots but lower among experienced pilots . 19 A more recent study suggests women do ask for higher pay—they just don’t get it ( Artz et al . , 2018 ) . 20 Evidence in several countries suggests female pharmacists are less likely to commit criminal oﬀenses ( prescription fraud , drug traﬃcking , etc . ) and minor professional misdemeanours ( inadequate written records , stock , etc . ) ( Payne and Dabney , 1997 ; Tullett et al . , 2003 ) . Self - reported survey evidence does not suggest female pharmacists make fewer dispensing errors ( Szeinbach et al . , 2007 ) ; evidence from a laboratory experiment indicates the opposite ( Fam - ily et al . , 2013 ) . Similar gender trends have been found for physicians , dentists and other medical professionals ( for a review of studies and discussion , see Firth - Cozens , 2008 ) . 6 possibly many that are not yet identiﬁed . Equality means levelling the playing ﬁeld in every single one . Furthermore , my results advocate using caution when employing performance indicators in equations relating earnings ( or other labour market outcomes ) to gender . Higher standards raise quality at the expense of quantity . Performance indicators that weight the latter’s fall more heavily than the former’s rise will appear artiﬁcially low . If used to interpret gender wage gaps , they will undervalue women’s work and confound estimates of labour market discrimination . A similar argument was recently made in a study of racial preferences in Major League Baseball . Parsons et al . ( 2011 ) ﬁnd that race aﬀects umpire calls , umpire calls inﬂuence players’ behaviour and players’ behaviour impacts performance metrics . As a result , common baseball statistics underestimate the talent of disadvantaged ( usually minority ) pitchers and overestimate the talent of advantaged ( usually white ) pitchers . An important contribution of my paper is to conﬁrm this general point— as well as the presence of feedback eﬀects—both in the context of gender discrimination and within a highly educated , professional working environment . 21 This paper makes two ﬁnal contributions . To the best of my knowledge , I am the ﬁrst to suggest and document empirical evidence that women are held to higher standards in the peer review process . As a result , their manuscripts are subject to greater scrutiny , spend longer under review and women in turn respond by conforming to those standards . This study does however build on ( or join ) extensive contemporary and parallel research studying editorial patterns ( Card and DellaVigna , 2013 ; Casnici et al . , 2016 ; Clain and Leppel , 2018 ; Ellison , 2002 ) , bias in editorial decisions ( Abrevaya and Hamermesh , 2012 ; Bransch and Kvasnicka , 2017 ; Card and DellaVigna , 2017 ) and female academics’ lagging productivity and underrepresentation ( Bayer and Rouse , 2016 ; Ductor et al . , 2018 ; Ginther and Kahn , 2004 ; Teele and Thelen , 2017 ) . Second , my ﬁndings emphasise the importance of transparency and monitoring . The least intrusive antidote to implicit bias is simple awareness and constant supervision . Both factors foster accountability and encourage neutrality ( Foschi , 1996 ) . Monitoring referee reports is diﬃcult , but it isn’t impossible—especially if peer review were open . As discussed in Section 5 , several science and medical journals not only reveal referees’ identities , they also post reports online . Quality does not decline ( it may actually increase ) , referees still referee ( even those who initially refuse ) and , given what’s at stake , an extra 25 – 50 minutes spent reviewing seems tolerable ( van Rooyen et al . , 2010 ; van Rooyen et al . , 1999 ; Walsh et al . , 2000 ) . The remainder of the paper proceeds in the following order . Section 2 discusses readability scores . Section 3 describes the data and the gender representation of articles published in top economics journals . Analyses and results are presented in Section 4 . I close with a summary , discussion ( Section 5 ) and conclusions ( Section 6 ) . 2 Readability scores Advanced vocabulary and complicated sentences are two strong predictors of text diﬃculty ( Chall and Dale , 1995 ) . Hundreds of formulas exploit this relationship to measure so - called “readabil - ity” . I concentrate on the most widely used , tested and reliable formulas for adult reading material : 21 Another recent study might also illustrate this point . Glover et al . ( 2017 ) ﬁnd that obvious productivity measures decline when minority grocery store workers are overseen by biased managers . If due to demotivation or inattention by managers—as the authors propose—their behaviour reinforces statistical discrimination . On the other hand , slower checkout times , less overtime work and seeing fewer customers could result from biased managers being more critical of minorities’ work ( e . g . , minority workers are more likely to be punished for an incorrect amount of money in the till , not immediately clocking out at the end of a shift or accidentally scanning a single item multiple times ) . 7 Score Formula Flesch Reading Ease 206 : 84 (cid:0) 1 : 02 (cid:2) words sentences (cid:0) 84 : 60 (cid:2) syllableswords Flesch - Kincaid (cid:0) 15 : 59 + 0 : 39 (cid:2) words sentences + 11 : 80 (cid:2) syllableswords Gunning Fog 0 : 40 (cid:2) ( words sentences + 100 (cid:2) polysyllabic words words ) SMOG 3 : 13 + 5 : 71 (cid:2) √ polysyllabic words sentences Dale - Chall 3 : 64 + 0 : 05 (cid:2) words sentences + 15 : 79 (cid:2) diﬃcult words words Figure  : Calculating and interpreting readability scores Notes . Left - hand table displays formulas used to calculate readability scores . Polysyllabic words refer to words with three or more syllables ; diﬃcult words are those not found on a list of 3 , 000 words understood by 80 percent of fourth - grade readers ( aged 9 – 10 ) ( Chall and Dale , 1995 ) . The graphic on the right provides a rough guide for interpreting the scores ( adapted from Flesch , 1949 ) . Flesch Reading Ease , Flesch - Kincaid , Gunning Fog , SMOG ( Simple Measure of Gobblede - gook ) and Dale - Chall ( DuBay , 2004 ) . 22 Each are listed in Figure 1 . The Flesch Reading Ease formula ranks passages of text in ascending order— i . e . , more read - able passages earn higher scores . The other four formulas generate grade levels estimating the minimum years of schooling necessary to conﬁdently understand an evaluated text—and so more readable passages earn lower scores . To minimise confusion , I multiply the four grade - level scores by negative one . Thus , higher numbers universally correspond to clearer writing throughout this paper . The constants in each formula vary widely as do the components used to rank vocabulary . Because of these diﬀerences , grade - level scores rarely generate identical ﬁgures ; nevertheless , all ﬁve scores produce similar rankings . The yellow box plot in Figure 2 summarises 169 inter - score correlations found in 26 published studies . 23 The median is 0 . 87 . Readability scores correlate with ( i ) oral reading ﬂuency , 24 ( ii ) human judgement , ( iii ) reading comprehension tests and ( iv ) the cloze procedure . 25 The dark blue box plots in Figure 2 summarise 167 correlations in 38 published cross - validation studies . Other studies have validated readability scores against surrogate measures of reading com - prehension . More readable high school and college - level correspondence courses have higher completion rates ( Klare and Smart , 1973 ) . More readable academic journals enjoy larger reader - ships ( Richardson , 1977 ; Swanson , 1948 ) ; their most readable articles win more awards ( Sawyer et al . , 2008 ) , are downloaded more often ( Guerini et al . , 2012 ) 26 and cited more frequently ( see Dowling et al . ( 2018 ) and Figure 2 ) . 27 Thanks to high predictive power and ease of use , readability formulas are widely employed in education , business and government . The U . S . Securities and Exchange Commission encour - 22 A sixth commonly used measure is the Lexile Framework . Because its formula and software are proprietary , I do not include it in the analysis . 23 Included in this sample are between - score correlations found in two non - published studies—the present paper ( cor - relations range from 0 . 53 to 0 . 97 ) and Benoit et al . ( 2017 ) . 24 Oral reading ﬂuency is generally measured as the number of words read aloud correctly per minute . 25 The cloze procedure ranks passages of text according to average readers’ ability to correctly guess randomly deleted words . 26 In a blog post , Lukas Püttmann compares abstract readability to page views of VoxEU . org columns : more readable columns are viewed three percent more often ( Püttmann , 2017 ) . 27 Evidence from other studies linking readability and citations is weaker . Lei and Yan ( 2016 ) ﬁnd a positive yet non - signiﬁcant relationship between readability and citations in information journals . In ﬁnance journals , Berninger et al . ( 2017 ) show citations positively correlate with abstract readability but negatively correlate with readability in the body of a paper . Laband and Taylor ( 1992 ) did not ﬁnd any relationship between the two . In my own data , there is a positive relationship in papers published after 1990—and particularly those published post – 2000—but no relationship before that ( Figure 2 ) . 8 N = 27 4 studies N = 24 15 studies N = 62 12 studies N = 54 15 studies N = 169 26 studies 0 . 2 . 4 . 6 . 8 1 Oral reading ﬂuency Comprehension tests Human judgement † Cloze procedure Readability scores Correlation 4 4 . 1 4 . 2 4 . 3 4 . 4 C it a ti on c oun t ( a s i nh ) 10 20 30 40 50 60 Flesch Reading Ease Papers published before 1990 4 4 . 1 4 . 2 4 . 3 4 . 4 4 . 5 C it a ti on c oun t ( a s i nh ) 10 20 30 40 50 60 Flesch Reading Ease Papers published after 2000 Figure  : Readability score validity Notes . Top ﬁgure displays box plots of correlations between alternative measures of text diﬃculty and the Flesch Reading Ease , Flesch - Kincaid , Gunning Fog , SMOG and Dale - Chall readability scores . It includes 336 correlations found in 55 mostly peer reviewed papers . ( See Appendix A for the list of included studies and information on how they were selected . ) Bottom ﬁgures plot abstracts’ Flesch Reading Ease scores against their articles’ citation counts ( inverse hyperbolic sine ( asinh ) transformation ) for the samples of top - four ( excluding AER Papers & Proceedings ) articles published before 1990 ( left ; 3 , 732 articles ) and post - 2000 ( right ; 3 , 410 articles ) . Each point represents the mean ( in both dimensions ) of roughly 170 – 180 observations . y Includes two studies which assessed readability using the Readability Assessment INstrument ( RAIN ) , a comprehensive framework based on 14 variables , e . g . , coeherence , writing style , illustrations and typography . ages clearer ﬁnancial disclosure forms benchmarked against the Gunning Fog , Flesch - Kincaid and Flesch Reading Ease scores ( Cox , 2007 ) . The formulas have also guided readability assess - ments of , inter alia , standardised test questions ( Chall et al . , 1983 ; Chall et al . , 1977 ) , medical inserts ( e . g . , Wallace et al . , 2008 ) , technical manuals ( e . g . , Hussin et al . , 2012 ; Klare and Smart , 1973 ) , health pamphlets ( e . g . , Foster and Rhoney , 2002 ; Meade and Byrd , 1989 ) and data security policies ( Alkhurayyif and Weir , 2017 ) . In research , readability scores are considered objective proxies for “complexity” . Enke ( 2018 ) controls for language sophistication using the Flesch Reading Ease formula in a study of moral values in U . S . presidential elections . Spirling ( 2016 ) employs the same score to show that British parliamentarians simpliﬁed speeches to appeal to less educated voters in the in the wake of the Great Reform Act . Legal research has found that judges are more reliant on legislative history when interpreting complex legal statutes , as measured by the Flesch - Kincaid formula ( Law and Zaring , 2010 ) . 28 In ﬁnance , the scores have linked clarity of ﬁnancial communication to better ﬁrm and market ﬁnancial health ( Biddle et al . , 2009 ; Jansen , 2011 ; Li , 2008 ) , larger investment and trading volume ( De Franco et al . , 2015 ; Lawrence , 2013 ; Miller , 2010 ; Thörnqvist , 2015 ) and lower demand for—albeit higher reliability of—outside research by sell - side analysts ( Lehavy 28 Long and Christensen ( 2011 ) investigate whether a legal brief’s readability score correlates with its success on appeal ( it does not ) . 9 et al . , 2011 ) . 29 2 . 1 Measurement error Readability scores fail to capture many elements relevant to reading comprehension , including grammar— e . g . , active vs . passive tense ( Coleman , 1964 ; Coleman , 1965 ) —legibility— e . g . , type - face or layout—and content— e . g . , coherence , organisation and general appeal ( Armbruster , 1984 ; Kemper , 1983 ; Kintsch and Miller , 1984 ; Meyer , 1982 ) . Nevertheless , “long sentences generally correspond to complex syntactic structures , infrequent words generally refer to complex concepts , and hard texts will generally lead to harder questions about their content” ( Kintsch and Miller , 1984 , p . 222 ) . 30 Still , readability scores’ low causal power raises legitimate concerns about measurement error . As long as this error does not partially correlate with the variable of interest ( gender ) , the analytical results I present in this paper attenuate toward zero ( classical measurement error ) . Unfortunately , they are systematically biased in an unknown direction if it does ( non - classical measurement er - ror ) . Sources of non - classical measurement error are threefold : ( a ) grammatical , spelling and tran - scription errors in the textual input ; ( b ) errors in the estimates of vocabulary complexity and sentence length introduced by automating their calculation ; or ( c ) embodied in the jump from using these two variables to infer readability . Conditional on accurate calculation , readability scores combine very precise estimates of vo - cabulary complexity with almost perfect measures of sentence length ( for a discussion , see Chall and Dale , 1995 ) . 31 The weighted average of these two variables is informative in much the same way that inferences about readability are . Thus , measurement error related to ( c ) should only shift superﬁcial interpretation of observed gender diﬀerences—from “women are better writers” to “women use simpler words and write shorter sentences” 32 —but leave conclusions deduced from them intact . Nevertheless , I try to minimise measurement error from ( c ) by using abstracts as textual input . Abstracts are self - contained , universally summarise the research and are the ﬁrst and most fre - quently read part of an article ( King et al . , 2006 ) . Additionally , they follow a more standardised layout compared to other parts of a manuscript : they are generally surrounded by ample whites - pace and most editorial management systems anyway reproduce them in pre - formatted cover pages . These factors suggest a relatively homogenous degree of review across journals and subject matter and limit the impact that physical layout , ﬁgures and surrounding text have on readability . Moreover , prior research suggests authors write in a stylistically consistent manner across the abstract , introduction and discussion sections of a paper . According to an analysis of published education and psychology articles , within - manuscript correlations of Flesch Reading Ease scores range from 0 . 64 ( abstracts vs . introductions ) to 0 . 74 ( abstracts vs . discussions ) ( Hartley et al . , 2003b ) . Plavén - Sigray et al . ( 2017 ) also found a strong positive correlation using full text articles from several scientiﬁc journals . Figure 3 plots abstract readability against the readability of a passage from the introduction for 339 NBER Working Papers eventually published in a top - four journal . It suggests a similarly positive relationship holds in economics , as well . 29 See Loughran and Mcdonald ( 2016 ) for a review of ﬁnance and accounting research using readability measures . 30 Combining readability scores with measures that capture these features does not , however , increase their predictive power ( see , e . g . , Kemper , 1983 ) . 31 The relationship may even be causal : words become shorter when used more frequently ( Zipf , 1935 ) . For example , “television” was shortened to “TV” and “telly” in American and British English , respectively ( example from Chall and Dale , 1995 ) . 32 Or even “women write shorter sentences and use words with fewer syllables , fewer polysyllabic word and more words on the Dale - Chall list of easy words” . 10 β = 0 . 50 ( 0 . 09 ) 12 14 16 18 20 A r ti c l e r ea d a b ilit y 10 15 20 25 Abstract readability Flesch - Kincaid β = 0 . 43 ( 0 . 07 ) 16 18 20 22 24 A r ti c l e r ea d a b ilit y 15 20 25 30 Abstract readability Gunning Fog Figure  : Abstract vs . article readability Notes . Figures plot abstract readability against the readability of a 150 – 200 word passage of text from the introduction of the same paper . (cid:12) is the slope of the regression line ( robust standard errors in parentheses ) . Sample only includes NBER Working Papers eventually published in a top - four economics journal with a heading explicitly titled “Introduction” ( 339 abstract - article pairs ) . Data are grouped into roughly 20 equal - sized bins ; each point represents the mean ( in both dimensions ) of about 16 – 17 observations . Non - abstract text kindly provided by Henrik Kleven and Dana Scott ( Kleven , 2018 ) . Readability scores calculated using the R readability package . In my opinion , non - classical measurement error from ( a ) and ( b ) poses a bigger concern to the identiﬁcation mapped out in this paper . I have taken several steps to reduce it . First , abstract text is also ideal for calculating readability : 100 – 200 words containing few score - distorting fea - tures of academic writing— e . g . , citations , abbreviations and equations ( Dale and Chall , 1948 ) . Additionally , most abstracts have been previously converted to accurate machine - readable text by digital libraries and bibliographic databases , curbing errors in transcription . Second , I carefully proofread the text in order to identify ( and ﬁx ) remaining transcription errors , 33 eliminate non - sentence - ending full stops , 34 and replace typesetting code—typically used to render equations 35 —with equivalent unicode characters . 36 Readability scores were determined using the modiﬁed text . Finally , some programs that calculate scores rely on unclear , inconsistent and possibly inaccu - rate algorithms to count words and syllables , identify sentence terminations and check whether a word is on Dale - Chall’s easy word list ( for a discussion , see Sirico , 2007 ) . To transparently han - dle these issues and eliminate ambiguity in how the scores were calculated , I wrote the Python module Textatistic . Its code and documentation are available on GitHub ; a brief description is provided in Appendix B . For added robustness , I re - calculate scores and replicate most results us - ing the R readability package ( Appendix J ) . Coeﬃcients are very similar to—and ( to my chagrin ) standard errors universally smaller than—those presented in the body of the paper . 3 Data The data include every English article published in AER , Econometrica , JPE and QJE between January 1950 and December 2015 ( inclusive ) . The largest sample is from Econometrica which consistently published abstracts with its articles prior to 1950 . JPE added them in the 1960s and QJE in 1980 . AER came last in 1986 . 37 Table 1 displays data coverage by journal and 33 E . g . , words in transcribed text are often inappropriately hyphenated—typically because the word was divided at the end of the line in the original text . 34 I manually replaced common abbreviations , such as “ i . e . ” and “U . K . ” with their abbreviated versions , sans full stops . Abbreviations which do not include full stops are not altered . 35 Equations in abstracts generally only occur in Econometrica articles published before 1980 . 36 When no exact replacement existed , characters were chosen that mimicked as much as possible the equation’s original intent while maintaining the same character and word counts . 37 Unless otherwise mentioned , observations exclude the May issue of AER ( Papers & Proceedings ) . 11 Table  : Article count , by journal and decade Decade AER ECA JPE QJE Total 1950 – 59 120 120 1960 – 69 343 184 527 1970 – 79 660 633 1 1 ; 294 1980 – 89 180 648 562 401 1 ; 791 1990 – 99 476 443 478 409 1 ; 806 2000 – 09 695 520 408 413 2 ; 036 2010 – 15 732 384 181 251 1 ; 548 Total 2 ; 083 3 ; 118 2 ; 446 1 ; 475 9 ; 122 Notes . Included is every article published between January 1950 and Decem - ber 2015 for which an English abstract was found ( i ) on journal websites or websitesofthirdpartydigitallibrariesor ( ii ) printedinthearticleitself . Papers published in the May issue of AER ( Papers & Proceedings ) are excluded . Final row and column display total article counts by journal and decade , respectively . decade . Figure 4 breaks down the sample’s abstract readability by publication year and primary JEL classiﬁcation . The analysis in Section 4 . 2 matches published articles with NBER working papers . Matches were ﬁrst attempted using citation data from RePEc and then by searching NBER’s database di - rectly for unmatched papers authored by NBER family members . 1 , 986 published articles were eventually matched to 1 , 988 NBER working papers—approximately one - ﬁfth of the data . 38 Bib - liographic information and abstract text were scraped from www . nber . org . Descriptive statistics are provided in Section 4 . 2 . 1 . The analysis in Section 4 . 5 compiles submit - accept times at Econometrica —the only journal of the four to make disaggregated data on its revision process publicly available—and REStud , a ﬁfth highly respected economics journal . 39 I obtained the data from journals’ online archives or extracted it from digitised articles using the open source command utility pdftotext . Section 4 . 5 displays and discusses basic summary statistics . Other variables used in the analysis include , inter alia , editor ﬁxed eﬀects , institution ﬁxed eﬀects , 40 primary and tertiary JEL ﬁxed eﬀects , author prominence ﬁxed eﬀects ( total lifetime top - ﬁve articles for the most proliﬁc co - author ) , an author seniority control ( total top - ﬁve arti - cles at time of publication for the most - proliﬁc co - author ) , English ﬂuency dummies , citation counts , 41 and controls for motherhood and childbirth ( Section 4 . 5 , only ) . See Appendix C for further information on how each was calculated . 3 . 1 Gender Authors were assigned a gender using GenderChecker . com’s database of male and female names . Authors with unisex ﬁrst names , ﬁrst names not in the database or those identiﬁed only by ini - tial ( s ) were assigned a gender either by me , a research assistant or at least three separate Mechan - ical Turk workers based on a visual inspection of photos on faculty websites , Wikipedia articles , 38 Because a small number of NBER working papers were eventually published as multiple articles or combined into a single paper , the mapping is not one - for - one . 39 Printed at the end of every Econometrica article published on or after March 1970 that was not originally presented as an Econometric Society lecture is the date it was ﬁrst submitted and the date ﬁnal revisions were received . In REStud , submit - accept times are printed at the beginning or end of most papers published since 1976 . 40 Institution controls are coded dynamically ( see Appendix C for details on how they are calculated ) . Earlier versions of this paper ( available on my website ) report results using static controls . 41 Unless otherwise noted , I control for citations using the inverse hyperbolic sine of citation count ( asinh ) . The De - cember 2017 version of this paper ( available on my website ) uses raw counts . 12 - 11 . 1 - 11 . 05 - 11 - 10 . 95 - 10 . 9 - 10 . 85 - 1 ⨉ D a l e - C h a ll 39 . 5 40 40 . 5 41 F l e s c h R ea d i n g Ea s e 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 Flesch Reading Ease Dale - Chall 0 10 20 30 40 Flesch Reading Ease Z Special topics R Regional , transport Q Agri . , environment P Economic systems O Development N Economic history M Marketing / acct . L Industrial org . K Law and econ . J Labour I Health , welfare , edu . H Public G Finance F International E Macroeconomics D Microeconomics C Quant . methods B Methodology A General Figure  : Readability by year and JEL code Notes . Figure on the left displays ﬁve - year moving averages of abstracts’ Flesch Reading Ease ( left axis ) and (cid:0) 1 (cid:2) Dale - Chall ( right axis ) readability scores . Sample restricted to the years 1987 – 2015 ( 6 , 176 articles ) . Figure on the right displays abstracts’ Flesch Reading Ease scores averaged over primary JEL classiﬁcations . Data only available after 1990 ( 5 , 216 articles ) . etc . or personal pronouns used in text written about the individual . In situations where the author could not be found but several people with the same ﬁrst and last name were and all shared the same gender , the author was also assigned that gender . For the remaining cases , I emailed or telephoned colleagues and institutions associated with the author . Determining the “gender” of a paper is not nearly as straightforward . For solo - authored manuscripts—of which there are 4 , 016 in the sample—gender corresponds to the sex of the author . Unfortunately , top economics journals have collectively published just 266 by women . Only a slightly larger number were written entirely— or even mostly —by women ( Figure 5 ) . 42 Proportions are similar when the sample is restricted to later years : QJE did not publish a single exclusively female - authored paper between 2015 – 2017 ( inclusive ) ; in eight of the last ﬁfteen years covered by the data ( 2001 – 2015 ) , Econometrica , JPE or both did not either . A greater number of papers ( 1 , 172 ) are authored by at least one woman . To take advantage of the information contained in this larger sample , Blank ( 1991 ) classiﬁed all such papers as “female” . I opt instead for a less inclusive and continuous measure of gender : the proportion of female authors . 43 This approach assumes a linear relationship between a paper’s readability and its gender com - position . 44 For robustness , I repeat most analyses ( a ) comparing papers with a senior female co - author to entirely male - authored papers ; ( b ) on the subset of papers authored by a single gen - der ; ( c ) using a binary variable equal to one if at least one author is female ; and ( d ) using a binary variable equal to one if at least half of all authors are female . Standard errors from ( b ) tend to be 42 312 papers in the sample were authored entirely by women . Women made up more than 50 percent of all authors in another 47 . In 35 observations , a woman was the lead author— i . e . , the ﬁrst author was female in a paper with authors listed non - alphabetically or in which contributions were explicitly noted . 43 A gender readability gap—if it exists—is presumably a function of ( i ) the probability a passage of text was written and / or revised by a female co - author ; and ( ii ) referees’ beliefs about female authors’ contributions to the writing and / or revision of a co - authored paper . I assume the intersection of ( i ) and ( ii ) is positively related to the ratio of female authors on a paper based on prior research suggesting that co - authors—regardless of seniority—share responsibility for writing and ( especially ) revising collaborative work ( Hart , 2000 ; Kumar and Ratnavelu , 2016 ) . 44 The analysis in Appendix F suggests the relationship is increasing and convex . 13 0 . 05 . 1 . 15 . 2 % female authors ( per paper ) Z Special topics R Regional , transport Q Agri . , environment P Economic systems O Development N Economic history M Marketing / acct . L Industrial org . K Law and econ . J Labour I Health , welfare , edu . H Public G Finance F International E Macroeconomics D Microeconomics C Quant . methods B Methodology A General 5 % 10 % 15 % 20 % 25 % 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015 At least one female - author ( % papers ) % female authors ( per paper ) Majority female - authored ( % papers ) 100 % female - authored ( % papers ) 100 % female - authored ( % single - gender papers ) Figure  : The representation of women in top economics journals Notes . Graphs illustrate the representation of female authors in articles published in a top - four economics journal . Figure on the left is the average share of female authors per paper broken down by primary JEL category ( 5 , 216 articles ) ; ﬁgure on the right displays ﬁve year moving averages of various indicators over the period 1987 – 2015 ( 6 , 176 articles ) . larger ; those from ( a ) , ( c ) and ( d ) usually smaller . In general , however , results do not meaningfully change ( Appendix K ) . 4 Analyses and results There are three steps to my empirical strategy . First , I establish a gap does exist and rule out obvious confounding factors— e . g . , women writing on easier topics , editorial policies in earlier eras , etc . ( Section 4 . 1 ) . Second , I causally link a portion of the gap to the peer review process ( Section 4 . 2 ) . To do this , I match published articles—which have gone through peer review—to earlier , draft versions of the same papers—which have not—and compare the change in the gender readability gap between versions . My results suggest that the peer review process causes about 40 percent of the gap in readability between men and women . The ﬁnal step of my identiﬁcation strategy suggests the gender readability gap is caused by referees and / or editors applying higher standards to female - authored work ( Section 4 . 3 ) . Women write more readably in peer review due to factors that are either ( i ) within their control— e . g . , sen - sitivity to criticism—or ( ii ) outside their control— i . e . , gender bias by referees and / or editors . To distinguish between ( i ) and ( ii ) , I develop a dynamic model of an author’s decision - making pro - cess ( Section 4 . 3 . 1 ) . Based on the model , I ﬁnd ( ii ) is predominantly behind women’s readability choices . I estimate that it causes senior female economists to write at least seven percent more clearly than they otherwise would ( Section 4 . 3 . 2 ) . I conclude Section 4 by documenting suggestive evidence that discrimination aﬀects behaviour and lowers productivity . In Section 4 . 4 , I investigate how women react as they update beliefs about referees’ expectations . in Section 4 . 5 , I test one observable repercussion from subjecting female authors to higher standards—prolonged peer review . 14 Table  : Textual characteristics per sentence , by gender Men Women Diﬀerence No . characters 134 : 72 130 : 35 4 : 37 * * * ( 0 : 43 ) ( 1 : 46 ) ( 1 : 57 ) No . words 24 : 16 23 : 08 1 : 08 * * * ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 27 ) ( 0 : 29 ) No . syllables 40 : 65 38 : 67 1 : 98 * * * ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 45 ) ( 0 : 48 ) No . polysyllabic words 4 : 69 4 : 31 0 : 38 * * * ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 08 ) No . diﬃcult words 9 : 38 8 : 92 0 : 47 * * * ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 13 ) Notes . Sample 9 , 119 articles . Figures from an OLS regression of female ratio on each char - acteristic divided by sentence count . Male eﬀects estimated at a ratio of zero ; female eﬀects estimated at a ratio of one . Robust standard errors in parentheses . * * * , * * and * diﬀerence statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 4 . 1 Gender diﬀerences in readability Table 2 displays each gender’s average per sentence number of characters , words , syllables , poly - syllabic words and diﬃcult words . Women write shorter , simpler sentences—they contain fewer characters , fewer syllables , fewer words and fewer “hard” words . Diﬀerences are highly statisti - cally signiﬁcant . Table 3 presents coeﬃcients from 40 separate ordinary least squares ( OLS ) regressions of readability scores on the ratio of female authors . Controls are as follows . Column ( 1 ) includes journal and editor ﬁxed eﬀect . Column ( 2 ) includes 63 year dummies . 45 Column ( 3 ) adds another 182 journal and year interaction dummies . Column ( 4 ) introduces controls for paper j ‘s number of co - authors ( N j ) and the 15 dynamic institution eﬀects described in Appendix C . Column ( 5 ) adds a dummy variable capturing English ﬂuency . 46 It also includes controls to account for article quality , co - authors’ overall prominence in the profession and their seniority at the time of publication . I proxy for article quality using the inverse hyperbolic sine ( asinh ) of citations . To account for author prominence , I include 37 ﬁxed eﬀects for the total lifetime top - ﬁve publication count of each article’s most proliﬁc co - author ( max . T 5 ) . Author seniority is controlled for using the maximum number of top - ﬁve papers across all co - authors at the time of publication ( max . t 5 ) . Columns ( 7 ) and ( 8 ) control for JEL classiﬁcation . ( 7 ) includes 19 ﬁxed eﬀects for primary JEL categories ; ( 8 ) includes 731 eﬀects for tertiary categories . Since only post – 1990 JEL classiﬁcations are used , estimates in both columns exclude over 40 percent of the data . ( Due to small sample sizes , ( 8 ) includes 561 articles from AER Papers & Proceedings . ) 47 Column ( 6 ) excludes ﬁeld 45 The coeﬃcients on the journal dummies in ( 2 ) are presented in Appendix L . They compare AER ’s readability to the readability of Econometrica , JPE and QJE , providing a useful check on the reliability of readability formulas in the context of economic writing . As intuitively expected , all ﬁve scores agree that Econometrica is harder to read ; four out of ﬁve scores suggest JPE is , too , while QJE is easier . 46 In Hengel ( 2016 , p . 44 and p . 46 ) , I include controls for the order an article appears in an issue—another measure of a paper’s quality . Results are similar to those in Table 3 . In addition to the control from English ﬂuency presented here , see Hengel ( 2016 , pp . 35 – 36 ) for further evidence that the female authors in my data are no more or less likely to be native English speakers . 47 AER Papers & Proceedings is coded as a separate journal . Papers are selected and edited by the American Economic Association’s president - elect with the help of a Program Committee ( see www . aeaweb . org for more details ) . It does not publish abstracts in its print version ; only select years ( 2003 and 2011 – 2015 ) and papers were available online when I collected the data ( ﬁrst in early 2015 and then updated in early 2016 ) . Excluding these articles does not impact results or conclusions—coeﬃcients are similar to those in column ( 8 ) , but standard errors are somewhat higher . Similarly , standard errors are somewhat smaller when these articles are included in columns ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) . 15 Table  : Gender diﬀerences in readability , article - level analysis 1950 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) Flesch Reading Ease 0 : 89 * 0 : 86 * 0 : 82 0 : 88 * 1 : 13 * * 0 : 79 0 : 79 0 : 97 ( 0 : 49 ) ( 0 : 48 ) ( 0 : 50 ) ( 0 : 51 ) ( 0 : 50 ) ( 0 : 55 ) ( 0 : 56 ) ( 0 : 70 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 17 0 : 17 0 : 17 0 : 18 0 : 21 * 0 : 24 * 0 : 26 * * 0 : 26 * ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 14 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 31 * * 0 : 30 * * 0 : 31 * * 0 : 33 * * 0 : 36 * * * 0 : 39 * * 0 : 38 * * * 0 : 37 * * ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 16 ) SMOG 0 : 20 * * 0 : 20 * * 0 : 20 * * 0 : 21 * * 0 : 24 * * 0 : 24 * * 0 : 22 * * 0 : 23 * ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 12 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 10 * * 0 : 10 * * 0 : 09 * * 0 : 10 * * 0 : 12 * * 0 : 13 * * 0 : 12 * * 0 : 15 * * ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 06 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 JEL ( tertiary ) eﬀects 3 Notes . Sample 9 , 119 articles in ( 1 ) – ( 5 ) ; 5 , 213 articles in ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) ; 5 , 774 articles—including 561 from AERPapers & Proceedings ( see Footnote 47 ) — in ( 8 ) . Coeﬃcients in ( 6 ) are estimated using the controls in ( 5 ) but on the sample from ( 7 ) . Figures represent coeﬃcients from 40 separate OLS regressions of readability scores on the ratio of female authors . Quality controls denoted by 3 1 include citation count ( asinh ) , max . T 5 ﬁxed eﬀects ( author prominence ) and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) . Standard errors clustered on editor in parentheses . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . dummies but is estimated using the same restricted sample from ( 7 ) . Results in Table 3 suggest that abstracts written only by women score about one point higher on the Flesch Reading Ease scale ; according to the four grade - level measures , they take about 2 – 3 fewer months of schooling to understand . 48 Percentage - wise , women write about 1 – 2 percent better than men . 49 Appendix E explores ﬁeld in more detail . Conditional on other explanatory variables , how - ever , I ﬁnd little evidence that it drives the gender readability gap observed in Table 3 . Appendix F scrutinises readability at the author - level in order to account for author - speciﬁc heterogeneity . It ﬁnds a gender readability gap of about 2 – 6 percent . 4 . 2 Comparing abstracts pre - and post - review . In this section , I show that peer review causes the gender readability gap . To do this , I match published articles—which have gone through peer review—to earlier , draft versions of the same ( Analyses not shown , but are available on request . ) 48 Coeﬃcients from regressions on Flesch - Kincaid , Gunning Fog , SMOG and Dale - Chall scores represent the marginal eﬀect in years of schooling . Monthly ﬁgures found by multiplying each coeﬃcient by 12 . To account for error correlation by editorial policy , observations are grouped by journal editor / editorial board and standard errors are adjusted accordingly . Standard errors are very similar when clustering at the volume - , issue - or paper - level ( see Hengel , 2016 , p . 39 – 41 ) . 49 Quotient of the coeﬃcient on female ratio divided by the eﬀect for men ( ratio of zero ) estimated at other co - variates’ observed values . 16 papers—which have not . I then compare the change in the gender readability gap between ver - sions . Section 4 . 2 . 1 describes the data used in the analysis and presents basic summary statistics . The identiﬁcation strategy is discussed in Section 4 . 2 . 2 . Results are shown in Section 4 . 2 . 3 and are followed by a discussion of their robustness ( Section 4 . 2 . 4 ) . 4 . 2 . 1 Data and summary statistics . As discussed in Section 3 , drafts were collected from NBER Technical and Working Paper Series . NBER series were used as the exclusive data source for two reasons . First , approximately one - ﬁfth of articles in my data were originally part of an NBER series , making it the largest single source of draft papers . Second , authors release their NBER working papers at about the same time they submit them for peer review ( see Figure 6 ) . 50 Table 4 compares textual characteristics between a paper’s draft and ﬁnal versions . Means in the ﬁrst three columns are of majority male - authored papers ( female ratio strictly below 50 percent ) ; the ﬁnal three columns are majority female - authored papers ( female ratio at or above 50 percent ) . Evidence from other ﬁelds indicates abstract text is altered during peer review ( Hopewell et al . , 2014 ) . 51 Table 4 suggests this is similarly true in economics . The ﬁrst panel displays raw counts . Draft abstracts are longer—more characters , words and sentences—and denser—more syllables , polysyllabic words and diﬃcult words . The biggest changes are made to female - authored papers : ﬁgures in column six are 20 – 30 percent higher ( in absolute value ) than those in column three . Peer review’s impact on readability , however , is unclear . Readability scores are weighted av - erages of the ratios of ( i ) total word and “hard” word to sentence count and ( ii ) hard word to word count . Between working paper and published versions , ( i ) decreases and ( ii ) increases ( Table 4 , second panel ) . 52 ( i ) Peer review shortens sentences and reduces hard words per sentence : in male - authored papers , sentences are 5 percent shorter and contain 26 percent fewer polysyllabic words ; in female - authored papers , they are 7 percent shorter and contain 30 percent fewer polysyllabic words . ( ii ) As a fraction of total word count , however , syllables , polysyllabic words and diﬃcult words rise . Although hard and total word counts both decline , the latter falls proportionately more ; their ratios increase : between 1 – 3 percent for men and 1 – 2 percent for women . According to the majority of scores , peer review improves readability ( Table 4 , third panel ) , a ﬁnding consistent with similar investigations at medical journals ( Biddle and Aker , 1996 ; Hay - den , 2008 ; Roberts and Nolen - Hoeksema , 1994 ) . 53 Thanks to fewer hard words per sentence , SMOG scores are higher in published articles regardless of gender . In female - authored papers , the net eﬀect for remaining scores is similarly positive . In male - authored papers , however , only the Gunning Fog and Flesch - Kincaid scores indicate a positive net eﬀect ; for the Flesch Reading 50 NBER working papers are released two to three years before publication ( mean 2 . 1 years ) —precisely the length of time spent in peer review ( Ellison , 2002 ; Goldberg , 2015 ) . 51 Hopewell et al . ( 2014 ) compared 93 originally submitted manuscripts to their ﬁnal versions published in BMC - series medical journals . Abstracts were altered in 16 percent of papers , generally because referees asked authors to tone down conclusions . I also collected 721 comments from ShitMyReviewer . com , a website dedicated to posting mean things written in referee reports . 180 ( 25 percent ) deal with writing quality , document structure or word choice / tone . ( Data and analysis available on request . ) 52 A greater decline in total word count relative to hard word count may be speciﬁc to abstracts , which are edited for length as well as readability . In an analysis of abstracts , introductions and discussions , abstract sentences were shorter but contained more hard words ; overall , they had the lowest Flesch Reading Ease scores ( Hartley et al . , 2003a ) . 53 Hayden ( 2008 ) found no signiﬁcant change in the Flesch Reading Ease score during peer review itself ( submission vs . acceptance ) , but a signiﬁcant positive eﬀect from post - acceptance editing by the journal editor and a copy - editor . Compared to economics journals , however , medical journals ask for fewer revisions ( Ellison , 2002 ; Hayden , 2008 ) and enjoy substantially shorter review times ( see , e . g . , Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Editorial Board , 2015 ) , suggesting pre - acceptance readability edits are less common . 17 Table  : Textual characteristics , published papers vs . drafts Men Women Workingpaper Publishedarticle Diﬀerence Workingpaper Publishedarticle Diﬀerence No . sentences 6 : 47 5 : 10 (cid:0) 1 : 375 * * * 6 : 77 5 : 06 (cid:0) 1 : 711 * * * ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 054 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 139 ) No . characters 862 : 45 649 : 68 (cid:0) 212 : 767 * * * 907 : 36 635 : 97 (cid:0) 271 : 385 * * * ( 7 : 19 ) ( 4 : 67 ) ( 7 : 160 ) ( 18 : 53 ) ( 10 : 31 ) ( 18 : 439 ) No . words 155 : 70 115 : 70 (cid:0) 40 : 004 * * * 164 : 45 113 : 63 (cid:0) 50 : 813 * * * ( 1 : 32 ) ( 0 : 85 ) ( 1 : 323 ) ( 3 : 42 ) ( 1 : 91 ) ( 3 : 428 ) No . syllables 257 : 01 193 : 36 (cid:0) 63 : 653 * * * 269 : 02 187 : 78 (cid:0) 81 : 242 * * * ( 2 : 15 ) ( 1 : 40 ) ( 2 : 135 ) ( 5 : 54 ) ( 3 : 08 ) ( 5 : 504 ) No . polysyllabic words 28 : 36 21 : 81 (cid:0) 6 : 545 * * * 28 : 93 20 : 63 (cid:0) 8 : 308 * * * ( 0 : 28 ) ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 245 ) ( 0 : 71 ) ( 0 : 41 ) ( 0 : 627 ) No . diﬃcult words 58 : 51 44 : 61 (cid:0) 13 : 892 * * * 60 : 32 42 : 37 (cid:0) 17 : 949 * * * ( 0 : 51 ) ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 482 ) ( 1 : 30 ) ( 0 : 74 ) ( 1 : 204 ) No . words / sentence count 24 : 74 23 : 58 (cid:0) 1 : 166 * * * 24 : 98 23 : 16 (cid:0) 1 : 820 * * * ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 124 ) ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 27 ) ( 0 : 302 ) No . polysyllabic words / sentence count 6 : 03 4 : 45 (cid:0) 1 : 576 * * * 6 : 05 4 : 23 (cid:0) 1 : 819 * * * ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 060 ) ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 155 ) No . syllables / word count 1 : 66 1 : 68 0 : 018 * * * 1 : 64 1 : 66 0 : 015 * * * ( 0 : 00 ) ( 0 : 00 ) ( 0 : 002 ) ( 0 : 01 ) ( 0 : 00 ) ( 0 : 004 ) No . polysyllabic words / word count 0 : 18 0 : 19 0 : 006 * * * 0 : 18 0 : 18 0 : 005 * * ( 0 : 00 ) ( 0 : 00 ) ( 0 : 001 ) ( 0 : 00 ) ( 0 : 00 ) ( 0 : 002 ) No . diﬃcult words / word count 0 : 38 0 : 39 0 : 009 * * * 0 : 37 0 : 37 0 : 006 * * ( 0 : 00 ) ( 0 : 00 ) ( 0 : 001 ) ( 0 : 00 ) ( 0 : 00 ) ( 0 : 002 ) Flesch Reading Ease 41 : 46 41 : 13 (cid:0) 0 : 332 * 42 : 51 43 : 08 0 : 564 ( 0 : 26 ) ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 185 ) ( 0 : 66 ) ( 0 : 43 ) ( 0 : 452 ) Flesch - Kincaid (cid:0) 13 : 62 (cid:0) 13 : 38 0 : 243 * * * (cid:0) 13 : 53 (cid:0) 13 : 00 0 : 531 * * * ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 050 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 122 ) Gunning Fog (cid:0) 17 : 28 (cid:0) 17 : 04 0 : 242 * * * (cid:0) 17 : 13 (cid:0) 16 : 58 0 : 547 * * * ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 055 ) ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 140 ) SMOG (cid:0) 15 : 14 (cid:0) 15 : 00 0 : 135 * * * (cid:0) 15 : 02 (cid:0) 14 : 70 0 : 327 * * * ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 035 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 095 ) Dale - Chall (cid:0) 10 : 85 (cid:0) 10 : 93 (cid:0) 0 : 084 * * * (cid:0) 10 : 71 (cid:0) 10 : 70 0 : 003 ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 016 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 037 ) Notes . Sample 1 , 714 published articles authored by more than 50 percent men ( 1 , 715 NBER working papers ) ; 272 published articles authored by at least 50 percent women ( 273 NBER working papers ) . Figures are means of textual characteristics by sex for NBER working papersandpublishedarticles . Lastcolumnsineach panelsubtractworkingpaper ﬁguresfrompublishedarticleﬁguresformen ( ﬁrstpanel ) and women ( second panel ) . Standard errors in parentheses . * * * , * * and * diﬀerence statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 18 Ease and Dale - Chall scores , it is negative . In any case , women’s papers endure comparatively greater cuts in hard words relative to total words and larger falls in words per sentence ; their abstracts always become more readable during peer review than do those by men . 4 . 2 . 2 Identiﬁcation . The data pre - and post - review make it possible to isolate gender diﬀer - ences in readability pre - existing peer review from those incurred during it—and therefore identify gender’s contemporaneous eﬀect on peer review scrutiny . The key equation connects published articles to earlier versions of the same paper : scores depend on draft readability as well as factors that aﬀect writing clarity any time after being released as working papers . Equation ( 1 ) is the OLS representation of this relationship . R jP = R jW + (cid:12) 0 P + (cid:12) 1 P female ratio j + (cid:18) P X jP + (cid:22) jP + " jP ; ( 1 ) where R jP and R jW are readability scores for working ( W ) and published ( P ) versions of pa - per j , respectively . (cid:12) 0 P is a constant speciﬁc to version P ; (cid:12) 1 P is the coeﬃcient of interest and reﬂects the particular impact female ratio j has in peer review . X jP and (cid:22) jP are P - speciﬁc observ - able ( editor , journal , journal - year interactions , N j ( paper j ’s co - author count ) , English language dummies and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) ) and unobservable components , respectively . 54 " jP is P ’s error term . P - speciﬁc variables may be correlated with R jW . Even if (cid:22) jP and female ratio j remain in - dependent , positive correlation between R jW and female ratio j still biases OLS estimates of (cid:12) 1 P in a direction opposite to the bias on R jW . Equation ( 2 ) eliminates the distortion by subtracting R jW from both sides of Equation ( 1 ) : R jP (cid:0) R jW = (cid:12) 0 P + (cid:12) 1 P female ratio j + (cid:18) P X jP + (cid:22) jP + " jP : ( 2 ) Assuming zero partial correlation between female ratio j and (cid:22) jP , OLS generates an unbiased estimate of (cid:12) 1 P . An alternative strategy based on Ashenfelter and Krueger ( 1994 ) separately estimates NBER working paper and published article readability using generalised least squares ( GLS ) ; (cid:12) 1 P is identiﬁed post - estimation by diﬀerencing coeﬃcients . The set - up combines Equation ( 1 ) with a relationship deﬁning readability scores before external evaluators demand edits ( Equation ( 3 ) ) . R jW = (cid:12) 0 W + (cid:12) 1 W female ratio j + (cid:18) W X jW + (cid:22) jW + " jW ; ( 3 ) where (cid:12) 0 W is a constant speciﬁc to version W and (cid:12) 1 W reﬂects female ratio j ’s impact on readabil - ity prior to peer review . X jW and (cid:22) jW are version - invariant observable ( publication year , citation count , JEL eﬀects and max . T j ) and unobservable components , respectively . 55 " jW is version W ’s error term . OLS estimates of Equation ( 3 ) may be biased by arbitrary correlation between (cid:22) jW and the explanatory variables . Equation ( 4 ) deﬁnes a general structure for that correlation . (cid:22) jW = (cid:13) + (cid:17) female ratio j + (cid:14) W X jW + (cid:14) P X jP + ! j ; ( 4 ) 54 max . t 5 is the number of prior papers published in any of the top ﬁve economics journals by article j ‘s most proliﬁc co - author . It and the English language dummy are considered P - speciﬁc because they may inﬂuence the degree to which editors and / or referees scrutinise the paper . Because all papers in both samples share the same highest - ranked institution ( NBER ) , authors’ institutions—which presumably have a similar eﬀect—are omitted . Finally , Equation ( 2 ) implicitly controls for all factors that aﬀect readability before peer review , e . g . , research ﬁeld . Although certain ﬁelds may involve concepts that are easier to explain , their eﬀect on readability is already present in the draft version of a manuscript ; diﬀerencing scores eliminates it . 55 I assume the duration between a paper’s NBER release and its publication is too short to inﬂuence aggregate time trends ; publication year dummies are applied to both working paper and published versions . 19 where ! j is uncorrelated with female ratio j , X jW and X jP . Substituting Equation ( 4 ) into Equa - tion ( 3 ) generates the following reduced form representation of R jW : R jW = e (cid:12) 0 W + e (cid:12) 1 W female ratio j + e (cid:18) W X jW + (cid:14) P X jP + e " jW ; ( 5 ) where e (cid:12) 0 W = (cid:12) 0 W + (cid:13) , e (cid:12) 1 W = (cid:12) 1 W + (cid:17) , e (cid:18) W = (cid:18) W + (cid:14) W and e " jW = " jW + ! j . Similarly , obtain R jP ’s reduced form by substituting Equation ( 5 ) into Equation ( 1 ) : R jP = ( e (cid:12) 0 W + (cid:12) 0 P ) + ( e (cid:12) 1 W + (cid:12) 1 P ) female ratio j + e (cid:18) W X jW + e (cid:18) P X jP + (cid:22) jP + e " jP ; ( 6 ) where e (cid:18) P = (cid:18) P + (cid:14) P and e " jP = e " jW + " jP . Equation ( 5 ) and Equation ( 6 ) are explicitly esti - mated via feasible GLS ( FGLS ) . (cid:12) 1 P is identiﬁable post - estimation by subtracting reduced form coeﬃcients ; assuming zero partial correlation between (cid:22) jP and female ratio j , it is unbiased . 56 Both OLS estimation of Equation ( 2 ) and FGLS estimation of Equation ( 5 ) and Equation ( 6 ) require zero partial correlation between (cid:22) jP and female ratio j to obtain a valid (cid:12) 1 P . 57 Roughly restated , this implies that non - peer review factors are either independent of its timing ( and there - fore subsumed in version - invariant ﬁxed eﬀects ) or unrelated to gender . 58 Section 4 . 2 . 4 evaluates this assumption . 4 . 2 . 3 Results . Table 5 presents results from OLS estimation of Equation ( 1 ) and Equation ( 2 ) and FGLS estimation of Equation ( 5 ) and Equation ( 6 ) . Since gender bias is possible only when authors’ identities are known or can be reasonably inferred , samples exclude 279 articles subjected to double - blind review before the internet ; the following section considers their impact . 59 In an eﬀort to maximise sample sizes , estimates in the ﬁrst three columns omit ﬁeld controls . Including them slightly increases standard errors ; they otherwise make little diﬀerence ( see Appendix M . 2 ) . Estimates in the ﬁnal column implicitly account for ﬁeld already ( see Footnote 54 ) . The readability gap grew precisely while papers were being reviewed . Table 5’s ﬁrst column displays (cid:12) 1 P from OLS estimation of Equation ( 1 ) . According to all ﬁve scores , women’s readabil - ity gains outpace men’s between versions . Estimates additionally conﬁrm published readability is correlated with draft readability : coeﬃcients on R jW ( shown in Appendix M . 1 ) are positive and signiﬁcant—but only about 0 . 8 . A less than unit value suggests (cid:22) jP exerts downward pressure on R jW ’s coeﬃcient , thereby artiﬁcially inﬂating ﬁrst column ﬁgures . Table 5’s remaining columns present results from both strategies meant to deal with this bias . Columns two to four display FGLS estimates . Coeﬃcients on female ratio j from Equation ( 5 ) ( e (cid:12) 1 W ) and Equation ( 6 ) ( e (cid:12) 1 W + (cid:12) 1 P ) are shown in columns two and three , respectively . Female - authored working papers and published articles are both better written—but the readability gap is substantially larger in the latter . Flesch - Kincaid , Gunning Fog and SMOG scores imply im - mediate peer review accounts for 40 – 60 percent of the total ( biased ) eﬀect of female ratio in Equation ( 6 ) ; Flesch Reading Ease and Dale - Chall scores indicate a smaller proportion ( 30 per - cent ) . 60 Column four displays their diﬀerence ( (cid:12) 1 P ) ; it is positive and signiﬁcant for four out of ﬁve scores . 56 (cid:22) jP may be correlated with e " jW via ! j and / or " jW without biasing the FGLS estimate of (cid:12) 1 P because both are uncorrelated with the explanatory variables in Equation ( 3 ) ( by assumption ) and Equation ( 5 ) ( by deﬁnition ) . 57 Unbiased estimation of (cid:12) 1 P in Equation ( 6 ) requires zero partial correlation between (cid:22) jP and female ratio j after controlling for X jW and X jP ; Equation ( 2 ) requires zero partial correlation after controlling for X jP , only . 58 This phrasing is slightly inaccurate but convenient for exposition . Zero correlation between female ratio j and (cid:22) jP does not preclude biased estimates of (cid:12) 1 P when (cid:22) jP is correlated with other explanatory variables that are , in turn , correlated with female ratio j by some factor independent of (cid:22) jP . Unbiasedness instead requires zero partial corre - lation between (cid:22) jP and female ratio j . 59 Excluding these observations does not noticeably impact results or conclusions ( for estimates based on the full sample , see Hengel , 2016 , p . 18 ) . 60 FGLS diﬀerence ( (cid:12) 1 P , column four ) divided by the eﬀect in published articles ( e (cid:12) 1 W + (cid:12) 1 P , column three ) . 20 Table  : The impact of peer review on the gender readability gap OLS FGLS OLS Publishedarticle Workingpaper Publishedarticle Diﬀerence Changeinscore Flesch Reading Ease 1 : 31 * * 2 : 21 * * 3 : 15 * * * 0 : 94 0 : 91 ( 0 : 58 ) ( 0 : 98 ) ( 1 : 21 ) ( 0 : 59 ) ( 0 : 60 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 51 * * * 0 : 32 0 : 76 * * * 0 : 44 * * 0 : 43 * * ( 0 : 17 ) ( 0 : 22 ) ( 0 : 28 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 19 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 51 * * * 0 : 44 * 0 : 85 * * * 0 : 41 * * 0 : 41 * * ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 30 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 20 ) SMOG 0 : 30 * * 0 : 32 * * 0 : 56 * * * 0 : 24 * * 0 : 23 * ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 12 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 18 * * * 0 : 32 * * * 0 : 44 * * * 0 : 13 * * 0 : 12 * * ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 05 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 3 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 1 , 709 NBER working papers ; 1 , 707 published articles . Estimates exclude 279 pre - internet double - blind reviewedarticles ( seeFootnote59 ) . Columnonedisplayscoeﬃcientsonfemaleratio ( (cid:12) 1 P ) fromestimatingEquation ( 1 ) directlyviaOLS ( seeAppendixM . 1forcoeﬃcientson R jW ) ; standarderrorsclusteredbyeditorinparentheses . Columns two and three display e (cid:12) 1 W and e (cid:12) 1 W + (cid:12) 1 P from FGLS estimation of Equation ( 5 ) and Equation ( 6 ) , respectively ; standard errors clusterd by year and robust to cross - model correlation in parentheses . Their diﬀerence ( (cid:12) 1 P ) is shown in column four . Column ﬁve displays (cid:12) 1 P from OLS estimation of Equation ( 2 ) ; standard errors clustered by year in parentheses . Quality controls denoted by 3 2 include citation count ( asinh ) , max . T 5 ( author prominence ) and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) ; 3 3 includes max . t 5 , only ( see Footnote 54 ) . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . OLS estimates of (cid:12) 1 P from Equation ( 2 ) are shown in Table 5’s ﬁnal column . Their magni - tudes and standard errors almost perfectly mirror FGLS estimates . Consistent with evidence from Section 4 . 1 , omitting ﬁeld controls does not bias results . Ta - ble 5’s ﬁnal column implicitly accounts for any factor—including ﬁeld—that aﬀects readability before peer review ( see Footnote 54 ) . Although FGLS estimates could be biased by leaving JEL eﬀects out , their resemblance to ﬁgures in the ﬁnal column suggests not . Nevertheless , Ap - pendix M . 2 repeats the analysis with JEL eﬀects . Results are similar to those presented here . Double - blind review . Two journals— QJE and AER —employed double - blind review at some point during the time period covered by the data . AER ‘s spell began 1 July , 1989 and ended 1 July , 2011 . 61 QJE used double - blind procedures until 1 June , 2005 . Econometrica and JPE have never blinded referees to authors’ identities . To analyse the impact of double - blind review pre - internet , I re - estimate Equation ( 2 ) includ - ing Blind j —a dummy variable equal to 1 if an article was subjected to double - blind review before 61 From 1 May 1987 to 31 May 1989 , half of the papers submitted to AER were evaluated by single - blind review ; the remaining half were subjected to double - blind review ( for details on the trial , see Blank , 1991 ) . Referees correctly identiﬁed at least one author in 45 . 6 percent of double - blind reviewed papers—indicating that only about a quarter of the manuscripts were truly double - blind reviewed . I therefore classify every paper published during the trial as having undergone single - bind review . Excluding these observations from the analysis , however , has very little impact ; estimated coeﬃcients and standard errors are similar to those presented in Table 6 ( results available on request ) . 21 Table  : The impact of blind peer review FleschReadingEase Flesch - Kincaid GunningFog SMOG Dale - Chall Non - blind 0 : 91 0 : 43 * * 0 : 40 * * 0 : 23 * 0 : 12 * * ( 0 : 59 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 20 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 05 ) Blind (cid:0) 1 : 54 (cid:0) 0 : 57 (cid:0) 0 : 55 (cid:0) 0 : 37 (cid:0) 0 : 13 ( 2 : 95 ) ( 0 : 68 ) ( 0 : 79 ) ( 0 : 57 ) ( 0 : 17 ) Diﬀerence 2 : 45 1 : 00 0 : 95 0 : 60 0 : 25 ( 3 : 03 ) ( 0 : 72 ) ( 0 : 84 ) ( 0 : 59 ) ( 0 : 17 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 1 , 988 NBER working papers ; 1 , 986 published articles . Columns displays the marginal eﬀect on female ratio for papers undergoing non - blind ( (cid:12) 1 P ) and blind ( (cid:12) 1 P + (cid:12) 3 P ) review from OLS estimation of Equation ( 7 ) . Standard errors clustered by year in parentheses . Quality controls denoted by 3 3 include max . t 5 ( author seniority ) , only ( see Footnote 54 ) . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . Google incorporated in 1998—and its interaction with female ratio j ( Equation ( 7 ) ) . 62 R jP (cid:0) R jW = (cid:12) 0 P + (cid:12) 1 P female ratio j + (cid:12) 2 P Blind j + (cid:12) 3 P female ratio j (cid:2) Blind j + (cid:18) P X jP + (cid:22) jP + " jP : ( 7 ) Table 6’s ﬁrst two rows display marginal eﬀects of female ratio under non - blind ( (cid:12) 1 P ) and blind ( (cid:12) 1 P + (cid:12) 3 P ) review from OLS estimation of Equation ( 7 ) . They suggest a smaller—possibly negative—gap under blinded peer review . 63 Marginal eﬀects in single - blind reviewed papers ( or those subjected to double - blind review post - internet ) are identical to ﬁgures in Table 5 . Table 6‘s ﬁnal row reports diﬀerences between eﬀects ( (cid:12) 3 P ) . Their consistent positive direc - tion provides some ( weak ) evidence that masking authors’ identities reduces peer review’s impact on the gender readability gap . Nevertheless , ( i ) standard errors are large ; and ( ii ) samples are small—only 43 manuscripts in the blinded sample are authored by at least one woman ; just 10 are exclusively female - authored . In any case , whatever anti - bias eﬀect double - blind review may have had before the internet disappeared after it . In Appendix G , I analyse the policy’s post - internet impact . Gender dif - ferences are positive regardless of a journal’s oﬃcial review policy , suggesting that double - blind review is eﬀective only as long as authors are not identiﬁable by other means . 64 62 Blind j is equal to 1 for articles published during an oﬃcial policy of double - blind review . A ﬁnal publication date , however , may substantially lag the actual review date ( for an illustration and discussion , see Blank , 1991 ) . Because results are unchanged when including only AER articles published post May 1989 ( see Footnote 61 ) and all QJE articles published before June 2005 were evaluated under double - blind review , misclassiﬁcation errors are unlikely to substantially bias estimates presented in Table 6 . 63 In a preliminary version of this paper ( Hengel , 2015 ) , I estimated the impact of double - blind review on the gender readability gap in the sample of published papers , only . ( It did not compare readability between versions as is done here . ) It found that double - blind review corresponded to a higher readability gap . As shown in Appendix G , however , this conclusion is not robust to including the full set of publication year ﬁxed eﬀects . 64 In particular , double - blind review may be diﬃcult to implement in academic ﬁelds with a culture of widely presenting , disseminating and publicising working paper results ( e . g . , economics ) . Success is probably more likely in ﬁelds where pre - prints are private and review times are fast ( e . g . , the physical sciences ) . 22 Figure  : Distribution of months between NBER release and journal submission Notes . Sample 228 articles published in Econometrica . Pink represents papers with at least one female co - author ( 41 articles ) ; blue are papers with no female co - authors ( 187 articles ) . Figure shows the distribution of the time diﬀerence ( in months ) between a paper’s release as an NBER Working Paper and its submission to Econometrica ( where it is eventually published ) . Observations on the right - hand - side of the y - axis were submitted to peer review ﬁrst and released as working papers second ; observations on the left - hand - side of the y - axis were released as working papers ﬁrst and submitted to peer review second . 4 . 2 . 4 Robustness . Timing independence is the principle assumption required to causally link the readability gap to the peer review process . It is arguably only violated during the narrow timeframe after a manuscript is released as an NBER Working Paper but before it is submitted to a top - four journal . 65 Just a small proportion of papers are exposed to this window . Figure 6 displays a histogram of the length of time between a working paper’s release and submission to Econometrica . Most manuscripts are submitted to peer review at the same time or before they are released as NBER Working Papers . This is especially true of female - authored manuscripts . 66 Assuming similar submission - release patterns at AER , JPE and QJE , timing independence appears to be violated in only a small number of predominately male - authored papers . 67 Finally , NBER Working Papers have no abstract word limit ; two journals in my sample do : Econometrica and AER restrict abstracts to 150 and 100 words , respectively . Gender diﬀerences in how authors conform to these limits may bias results in Table 5 . To consider the possibility , I exclude the 642 observations—about 40 percent of the sample—with NBER abstracts longer than the oﬃcial word limit of the journals in which they were eventually published . Results are presented in Appendix H . Coeﬃcient magnitudes are similar to those in Table 5 ; standard errors are somewhat larger . 65 That is , post - submission manuscript changes are probably only made inside peer review—either because referees actually request them or authors believe ( possibly mistakenly—see Section 4 . 3 ) that they will be requested in a future revision . 66 Only 15 and 21 percent of female - and male - authored papers , respectively , were submitted to Econometrica after previously being released as an NBER Working Paper . 67 Additionally , most drafts have already been widely circulated prior to NBER Working Paper release . Average acknowledgment length in NBER Working Papers is 133 words . Most authors thank at least one person for comments—indeed , the vast majority thank several—and mention having previously presented the research in con - ferences and seminars . Combined with evidence from Figure 6 , this suggests that gender diﬀerences in one’s propen - sity to receive non - peer - review feedback only aﬀects working paper readability and thus should not bias the results presented in Table 5 . 23 4 . 3 Investigating readability over authors’ lifetimes The wider gap post - peer review conﬁrms a causal link with peer review . It does not assure causality with referee scrutiny . In this section , I evaluate the alternatives : women write more clearly because of gender diﬀerences in ( i ) biology / behaviour— e . g . , they’re more sensitive to referee criticism—or ( ii ) knowledge about referee expectations— e . g . , by overestimating the importance of writing well . In a dynamic model of authors’ decision - making processes , I show that any gap caused exclu - sively by ( i ) or ( ii ) declines with experience . Yet the gap does not decline . It widens . Estimates from pooled subsamples and matching indicate women write more clearly as their publication count increases ; men , possibly less so . This pattern of behaviour suggests discrimination—either directly in the form of biased referee scrutiny or indirectly from biased referee assignment ( The - orem 1 ) . 4 . 3 . 1 Theoretical framework . To organise the analysis , I develop a simple dynamic model of an author’s decision making process . It follows an author—denoted by i —who publishes several articles in prestigious academic journals over the course of his career . Each article is roughly equivalent in terms of topic , novelty and quality , but may vary on readability . At stage 0 , author i drafts his t th paper and submits it for peer review . Upon receipt , the jour - nal’s editorial oﬃce assigns the manuscript to a group of referees . The ( ﬁnite ) set of all potential review groups is represented by (cid:6) ; (cid:22) i is the set of strictly positive probability measures on (cid:6) . (cid:6) and (cid:22) i are known to i . e r s 0 i is the readability threshold below which review group s 2 (cid:6) rejects any paper by author i . I assume it depends on other qualities of i ’s papers— e . g . , methodological rigor , data , originality , policy relevance , etc . If i ‘s papers are strong in these characteristics , e r s 0 i will be low ( and vice versa ) . e r s 0 i may also reﬂect reviewers’ objectives , idiosyncratic preferences and relative weight in determining outcomes . For example , an editor who does not care about readability and is willing to override the opinion of referees will implement a lower e r s 0 i ( all else equal ) . Conditional on non - readability characteristics such as topic , novelty and overall quality , s rejects i ’s paper at stage 0 if r 0 it < e r s 0 i ; where r 0 it is manuscript t ’s non - negative draft readability . i is otherwise granted a “revise and resubmit” ( R & R ) , yet could still be rejected at stage 1 if the readability of his revised manuscript , R it = r 0 it + r 1 it , does not meet a second threshold , R it < e R si ; where e R s i = e r s 0 i + e r s 1 i . All rejections and acceptances are ﬁnal . e R s i ̸ = e r s 0 i to account for diﬀerent standards at diﬀerent stages of peer review . r 1 it , e r s 0 i and e r s 1 i are non - negative ; the latter two are independent . To aid the revision process , s writes a referee report from which i forms expectations about e R si by assigning subjective probabilities (cid:25) s 1 it ( R ) to all R . Unfortunately , the concept of readability is complex , some referees write insuﬃciently detailed reports and inattentive or hypersensitive authors misconstrue even perfectly clear advice . This renders i ’s interpretation of the report im - precise and his subsequent expectations about e R si inexact and possibly specious . Conditional on r 0 it , I assume referee reports by s for i are the same for all t and that each is distinctive enough for i to distinguish s in (cid:6) . 68 Consequently , author i ’s stage 1 choice of R it 68 Should s review a future paper by i , i would recognise it as the same group that reviewed his earlier paper . This does not imply that the report reveals individual referees’ identities . 24 maximises his ( immediate ) subjective expected utility given s , (cid:5) s 1 it ( R it ) u i + ϕ i j r 0 it ( r 1 it ) (cid:0) c it j r 0 it ( r 1 it ) : ( 8 ) (cid:5) s 1 it ( R it ) is the cumulative sum of (cid:25) s 1 it ( R ) for all R (cid:20) R it ; u i is the utility of having a paper accepted in a prestigious journal . 69 ϕ i j r 0 it ( r 1 it ) = ϕ i ( R it ) (cid:0) ϕ i ( r 0 it ) and c it j r 0 it ( r 1 it ) = c it ( R it ) (cid:0) c it ( r 0 it ) are the satisfaction and cost , respectively , i derives from making changes r 1 it at time t given the paper’s initial readability r 0 it . ϕ i is increasing and concave in its arguments , c it increasing and convex—marginally higher R it generates proportionally less satisfaction but needs more eﬀort when the paper is already well written . Because the cost of writing clearly may fall over time— e . g . , from “learning - by - doing”— d c it / d t (cid:20) 0 . I assume , however , that c it converges uniformly to the limiting function c i — i . e . , learning is “smooth” over t . To simplify proofs , c it ( 0 ) and ϕ i ( 0 ) are 0 . Authors’ decisions at stage 0 are myopic ; i ’s choice of r 0 it maximises his initial subjective expected utility for the current paper , ∫ (cid:6) (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) v s 1 it d (cid:22) i + ϕ i ( r 0 it ) (cid:0) c it ( r 0 it ) ; ( 9 ) where (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) is the cumulative sum for all r (cid:20) r 0 it of author i ’s subjective probabilities (cid:25) s 0 it ( r ) about e r s 0 i ; v s 1 it is Equation ( 8 ) evaluated at the optimal r 1 it . Authors update subjective probabilities ( i ) using relevant information from their own expe - rience in peer review ; and ( ii ) by observing others’ readability choices and publication outcomes . When evidence from ( i ) contradicts evidence from ( ii ) , ( i ) takes precedence . These assumptions imply , at a minimum , that i updates (cid:5) s 0 it and (cid:5) s 1 it based on conclusive evidence derived from the choices and outcomes of equivalent peers ( Deﬁnition 1 ) 70 and knowledge acquired during his own prior experience in peer review . 71 Deﬁnition 1 . Equivalent authors write identical papers in terms of topic , novelty and quality . Equation ( 8 ) and Equation ( 9 ) incorporate a variety of factors that potentially aﬀect authors’ readability choices—editorial standards that are conditional on other qualities in the paper ( e r s 0 i and e R si ) ; ambition ( u i ) ; the cost of drafting and revising manuscripts ( c it ) ; an otherwise unex - plained intrinsic satisfaction from writing readable papers ( ϕ i ) . Poor information , overconﬁdence and sensitivity to criticism are not explicitly included , on the assumption that people do not want to be poorly informed , overconﬁdent or excessively sensitive . These factors nevertheless enter Equation ( 8 ) and Equation ( 9 ) —and hence inﬂuence choices— via the subjective expectations authors form about e r s 0 i and e R si . A single R it cannot , therefore , establish if and to what extent i ’s choices are motivated by ( a ) preferences and costs speciﬁc to him ( u i , ϕ i , c it ) , ( b ) conditional editorial standards and / or referee assignment outside his control ( e r s 0 i , e R si , (cid:22) i ) or ( c ) miscellaneous confounding factors mopped up by (cid:5) s 0 it and (cid:5) s 1 it . Since i ’s preferences and limiting cost function ( c i ) are time independent , 69 Authors probably care about getting their papers accepted and they may care about writing well , but their marginal utility from the intersection of the two events— i . e . , higher utility from writing well only because the paper is pub - lished in a top - four journal ( as opposed to a top ﬁeld journal or second - tier general interest journal ) —is assumed to be negligible . 70 Speciﬁcally , if i observes with probability 1 that in state s an equivalent author k receives an R & R at r 0 k , then (cid:5) s 0 it ( r ) = 1 for all r (cid:21) r 0 k . Similarly , if i observes with probability 1 that in state s , k is accepted at R k , then (cid:5) s 1 it ( R ) = 1 for all R (cid:21) R k . 71 If i is accepted at stage 1 in time t ′ for review group s , then (cid:5) s 1 it ( R ) = 1 for all t > t ′ and R (cid:21) R it ′ ; otherwise , (cid:5) s 1 it ( R ) = 0 for all t > t ′ and R (cid:20) R it ′ . Similarly , if i receives an R & R at stage 0 in time t ′ for review group s , then (cid:5) s 0 it ( r ) = 1 for all t > t ′ and r (cid:21) r 0 it ′ ; otherwise , (cid:5) sit ( r ) (cid:20) (cid:5) sit ′ ( r ) for all t > t ′ , r (cid:20) r 0 it ′ and s 2 (cid:6) . 25 however , observing an increase in his choice of readability at two separate t distinguishes ( a ) from the combined impact of ( b ) and ( c ) . 72 i may be more sensitive to criticism and he might prefer writing more clearly ; nevertheless , he improves readability today relative to yesterday only when he believes it boosts his chances of publishing . Moreover , because ( c ) does not reﬂect activities or states the author enjoys , its impact on choices declines with experience . Authors may miscalculate referee expectations and misconstrue their reports , but with experience they correct their mistakes . Having ruled out ( a ) and holding acceptance rates constant , this implies that a persistent readability gap between equivalent peers is caused by ( b ) — i . e . , editorial standards and / or referee assignment beyond authors’ control . I capture this idea in Theorem 1 , where 1 s 0 i ( r ) and 1 s 1 i ( R ) are indicator functions equal to 1 if r (cid:21) e r s 0 i and R (cid:21) e R si , respectively , and (cid:6) A it is the collection of s 2 (cid:6) for which 1 s 0 i ( r 0 it ) 1 s 1 i ( R it ) = 1 . Theorem 1 is proved in Appendix D . Theorem 1 . Consider two equivalent authors , i and k , that satisfy the following three conditions . Condition 1 . ( r 0 kt ; R kt ) (cid:20) ( r 0 it ; R it ) for all s 2 (cid:6) A it and t > t ′ and there exists K ′ > 0 such that for at least one s 2 (cid:6) A it and no t > t ′ , jj ( r 0 it ; R it ) (cid:0) ( r 0 kt ; R kt ) jj < K ′ . Condition 2 . For at least one t ′′ < t ′ , ( r 0 it ′′ ; R it ′′ ) < ( r 0 it ′ ; R it ′ ) and there exists K ′′ > 0 such that for no t > t ′ , jj ( r 0 it ; R it ) (cid:0) ( r 0 it ′′ ; R it ′′ ) jj < K ′′ . Condition 3 . ∫ (cid:6) 1 s 0 i ( r 0 it ) 1 s 1 i ( R it ) d (cid:22) i (cid:20) ∫ (cid:6) 1 s 0 k ( r 0 kt ) 1 s 1 k ( R kt ) d (cid:22) k for all t > t ′ . Then , almost surely , referee assignment is biased in favour of k , ∫ (cid:6) 1 s 0 i ( r 0 kt ) 1 s 1 i ( R kt ) d (cid:22) i < ∫ (cid:6) 1 s 0 i ( r 0 kt ) 1 s 1 i ( R kt ) d (cid:22) k ; or referee scrutiny is biased against i , ∫ (cid:6) 1 s 0 i ( r 0 kt ) 1 s 1 i ( R kt ) d (cid:22) i < ∫ (cid:6) 1 s 0 k ( r 0 kt ) 1 s 1 k ( R kt ) d (cid:22) i ; or both . Theorem 1‘s three conditions are suﬃcient to verify discrimination is present in academic publishing : when female authors’ unconditional probability of acceptance is no higher than men’s ( Condition 3 ) , their current papers are more readable than their past papers ( Condition 2 ) and also persistently more readable than men’s papers ( Condition 1 ) then either editors assign women “tougher” referees— i . e . , those with higher e r s 0 i and / or e R s i —or referees apply higher standards to women’s writing— i . e . , e r s 0 k < e r s 0 i and / or e R sk < e R si for at least one s 2 (cid:6) . Measuring higher standards . Theorem 1’s three conditions conﬁrm the presence of discrimi - nation . They principally rely on two identifying assumptions : ( i ) i and k are equivalent ; ( ii ) t ′ is suﬃciently large— i . e . , any errors in i ’s beliefs about e r 0 i and e R i are on a path converging to zero . By assuming a more speciﬁc belief structure at t ′ , Corollary 1 proposes a conservative measure of discrimination’s impact on readability choices . When making revisions , authors choose R it to maximise Equation ( 8 ) . As shown in Ap - pendix D , R ⋆i (cid:20) r 0 it where R ⋆i is the R that solves ϕ ′ i ( R ) = c ′ i ( R ) . Since R ⋆i is i ’s optimal read - ability in the absence of peer review and R ⋆i (cid:20) r 0 it , i prefers R it > r 0 it only if r 0 it < e R si + e s 1 it , 72 The analysis in Section 4 . 2 similarly establishes that ( b ) and / or ( c ) are signiﬁcant factors driving the choice of R it . It cannot , however , distinguish between ( b ) and ( c ) . 26 where e s 1 it is his time t error in beliefs about e R si . So i revises only when required—and even then , no more than a comfortable minimum to placate referees . A similar logic governs i ’s choice of r 0 it —now picked to maximise Equation ( 9 ) . i opts for r 0 it > R ⋆i only if R ⋆i < e r s 0 i + e s 0 it for at least one s in (cid:6) A it , where e s 0 it is the time t error in i ’s beliefs about e r s 0 i . Thus r 0 it = max { R ⋆i ; e r s 0 i + e s 0 it } and R it = max { r 0 it ; e R si + e s 1 it } ; ( 10 ) where s is the review group in (cid:6) A it for which i believes e r s 0 i is highest— i . e . , s 2 (cid:6) A it satisﬁes e r s 0 i + e s 0 it (cid:20) e r s 0 i + e s 0 it for all s 2 (cid:6) A it . 73 Deﬁne (cid:14) s 0 ik and (cid:14) s 1 ik as the diﬀerence in readability standards applied to authors i and k by review group s in time t at stage 0 and 1 , respectively : (cid:14) s 0 ik (cid:17) e r s 0 i (cid:0) e r s 0 k and (cid:14) s 1 ik (cid:17) e R si (cid:0) e R sk : When (cid:14) s 0 ik ̸ = 0 and / or (cid:14) s 1 ik ̸ = 0 , s employs asymmetric evaluation criteria to i and k ’s work . 74 Dissimilar authors may call for asymmetric benchmarks—but if i and k are equivalent , they’re a form of discrimination . Unfortunately , e r s 0 i and e R si are not known to the researcher and R it inconsistently estimates them ( Equation ( 10 ) ) . As Corollary 1 shows , however , R it (cid:0) R kt is smaller in magnitude than the true value of stage 1 discrimination by s or stage 0 discrimination by s . Corollary 1 . Fix s and t > t ′ and let i and k be equivalent authors such that i satisﬁes Conditions 1 – 3 ( Theorem 1 ) relative to k . If ( i ) e snit = e snkt for stages n = 0 ; 1 and ( ii ) (cid:6) A it (cid:26) (cid:6) A kt , then R it (cid:0) R kt (cid:20) D ik ; ( 11 ) where D ik = { (cid:14) s 1 ik if r 0 it < R it (cid:14) s 0 ik otherwise : Corollary 1 identiﬁes a conservative measure of discrimination’s impact on i ’s readability . It also exposes the toxic denouement of one biased s . i ’s time t readability choice depends on dis - crimination at stage 1 by the group of referees that actually reviewed his paper ( s ) as well as discrimination at stage 0 by another review group that ( probably ) didn’t ( s ) . Such is the ﬁrst externality from even one rotten apple . From i ’s perspective , s spoils the bunch . Bias from s destabilises s ’s attempt to treat i and k fairly . Either i is rejected when assigned to s or discrimination by s aﬀects i ’s readability even when i is reviewed by referees who do not discriminate . Moreover , oﬀsetting unfairness with fairness only works when everyone is fair . Asymmetry from one upsets symmetric criteria applied everywhere else , creating endless imbalance when some people just will not be fair . If culture and / or behaviour predicate bias against i and restrain comparable bias against k then , sans intervention , we permanently and unjustly take from i and give to k . 75 73 As shown in Theorem 1’s proof ( Appendix D ) , i ’s beliefs about e r s 0 i and e R si converge from above . Coupled with Jensen’s inequality , this means e r s 0 i + e 0 it and e R si + e s 1 it may exceed i ’s time t expectations of e r s 0 i and e R si , respectively . At the limit , however , e s 0 it and e s 1 it converge to 0—so as t increases , this “comfort buﬀer” declines . 74 The asymmetry’s direction is captured in the sign : positive if s is tougher on i ; negative otherwise . 75 That is , if cultural and / or behavioural factors mean that (cid:14) snik > 0 for at least one s 2 (cid:6) , and there is no comparable oﬀsetting bias against k and education and / or time cannot eliminate (cid:14) snik , then i is at a permanent disadvantage relative to k . 27 Corollary 1 adds two stronger conditions to Theorem 1 . According to the ﬁrst , i and k must be comparably experienced by time t . Corollary 1 actually applies under the weaker e snit (cid:20) e snkt , n = 0 ; 1 ( see its proof in Appendix D ) , but R it (cid:0) R kt may overestimate D ik if e snkt < e snit for all t > t ′ . Nevertheless , e snit (cid:0) e snkt converges to 0 as t tends to inﬁnity , so R it (cid:0) R kt consistently predicts the direction of D ik for large enough t . 76 The second condition precludes s ′ such that s ′ is in (cid:6) A it but not in (cid:6) A kt — e . g . , because i ’s utility of acceptance exceeds that of k ’s . Of course , i ’s unconditional acceptance rate is not higher than k ’s ( Condition 3 ) , so s ′ necessarily oﬀsets some other s ′′ such that—because s ′′ discrimi - nates against i — s ′′ is in (cid:6) A kt but not in (cid:6) A it . But R it (cid:0) R kt may not fully counteract the ﬁrst eﬀect ; Equation ( 12 ) does—providing a conservative estimate of D ik under Theorem 1’s weaker Condition 3 . 77 R it (cid:0) max f R it ′′ ; R kt g (cid:20) D ik : ( 12 ) 4 . 3 . 2 Empirical evidence . If topic , novelty and quality are appropriately controlled for , then discrimination is present when Theorem 1’s three conditions hold at large enough t . Consider ﬁrst Condition 3—female - authored papers are accepted no more often than male - authored papers . The articles I evaluate have already been published , precluding gender analysis of acceptance rates . Nevertheless , the topic has been extensively studied elsewhere . Blank ( 1991 ) found that 12 . 7 and 10 . 6 percent of male - and female - authored papers were accepted at the AER , respectively . 78 A study of JAMA ’s editorial process indicated that 44 . 8 percent of referees accept male - authored papers as is or if suitably revised ; 29 . 6 percent summarily reject them . Corre - sponding ﬁgures for female - authored papers were 38 . 3 and 33 . 3 percent , respectively ( Gilbert et al . , 1994 ) . 79 Studies from other disciplines ﬁnd female authored papers subjected to single - blind peer review are accepted less often than would be expected by chance ( Handley et al . , 2015 ; McGillivray and De Ranieri , 2018 ) . There appear to be no gender diﬀerences in acceptance rates to NBER’s Summer Institute ( Chari and Goldsmith - Pinkham , 2017 ) . 80 Desk rejection rates may actually be higher for female - authored papers submitted to the ﬁeld journal Energy Economics ( Alexander et al . , 2018 ; Tol , 2018 ) . Ceci et al . ( 2014 ) provide a more comprehensive research review on the subject . Their conclusion : “When it comes to actual manuscripts submit - ted to actual journals , the evidence for gender fairness is unequivocal : there are no sex diﬀerences in acceptance rates . ” ( Ceci et al . , 2014 , p . 111 ) . My data more cleanly identify Conditions 1 and 2 . As their careers advance , women write more clearly : their average readability scores are 1 – 5 percent higher than the readability of their ﬁrst papers , their latest papers 1 – 7 percent higher ; for a man , however , his average and last paper are more poorly written than his ﬁrst ( Appendix I , Table I . 1 ) . Figure 7 suggests a similar story . It plots an author’s Flesch Reading Ease score against t 4 , where t 4 = 1 for his ﬁrst top - four publication , t 4 = 2 for his second , etc . As t 4 increases , men’s and women’s readability diverges . Table I . 2 and Table I . 3 test the signiﬁcance of that divergence , 76 See also the discussion in Footnote 73 and Section 4 . 3 . 2 . 77 Although Equation ( 12 ) counteracts the impact of any s ′ such that s ′ is in (cid:6) A it but not in (cid:6) A kt , it comes at a cost : Equation ( 12 ) ’s attenuation bias is much larger than the one generated by Equation ( 11 ) . 78 Women’s double - blind acceptance rate was 10 percent ( 11 percent for men ) ; their single - blind acceptance rate was 11 . 2 percent ( versus 15 percent for men ) . 79 These ﬁgures aggregate responses in Tables 3 and 4 from Gilbert et al . ( 1994 , p . 141 ) . They average all individ - ual referee recommendations , of which papers usually received several . The authors found no gender diﬀerence in ﬁnal manuscript acceptance rates—although they did ﬁnd that manuscripts with male corresponding authors were summarily rejected more often ( 41 . 7 percent as opposed to 37 . 4 percent for women ) . 80 No gender diﬀerence was found in the pooled sample , but male - authored papers submitted to ﬁnance workshops were two percent more likely to be accepted ; the eﬀect is weakly signiﬁcant . NBER’s annual Summer Institute Programme is a selective three week economics conference . 28 38 40 42 44 46 F l e s c h R ea d i n g Ea s e 0 5 10 15 20 t ₄ th article Male Female Figure  : Readability of authors’ t 4 th top - four publication Notes . Figure is a binned scatter plot of abstract readability for authors’ ﬁrst , second , … , t 4 th , … top - four publication . Sample 1 , 306 female observations ( 767 disctinct female authors ) and 14 , 759 male observations ( 6 , 109 distinct male authors ) . conditioning on numerous confounders . Once again , women write better ; the magnitude of the diﬀerence increases as t 4 increases . Estimation strategy . Yet the set of women to satisfy one condition is conceivably orthogonal to sets that satisfy others ; for Theorem 1 to apply , they must overlap . To address this concern , I match female to male authors on characteristics that predict the topic , novelty and quality of research . In addition to explicitly accounting for author equivalence—the primary conditional independence assumption behind Theorem 1—matched pair comparisons : ( i ) identify the gender most likely to satisfy all conditions simultaneously ; and ( ii ) generate ( conservative ) estimates of the eﬀect of higher standards on authors’ readability ( Corollary 1 ) . Holding acceptance rates constant , Theorem 1 rules out confounding factors— e . g . , sensitiv - ity to criticism and individual preferences—by comparing readability between equivalent authors experienced in peer review ( Condition 1 ) and within authors before and after gaining that ex - perience ( Condition 2 ) . I consider authors “experienced” by t 4 = 3 . Authors with one or two top - four publications are probably tenured and well - established in their ﬁelds . By publication three , all frequently referee ( and some edit ) prestigious economics journals . I assume this accu - mulated experience means equivalent authors are equally accurate about e r 0 i 3 and e R i 3 ; remaining errors are no longer gender speciﬁc : e sni 3 = e snk 3 , n = 0 ; 1 ( Corollary 1 ) . 81 To account for equivalence , I match every female author with three or more publications ( 121 ) to her closest male counterpart ( 1 , 554 ) . Matches were made using a Mahalanobis procedure with the following co - variates : 82 ( 1 ) maximum citation count over t 4 ; 83 ( 2 ) institutional rank at 81 Recall that e snit (cid:0) e snkt converges to 0 , so for large enough t Equation ( 11 ) and / or Equation ( 12 ) predict the direction of D ik even when errors remain gender - speciﬁc . 82 Matches were generated in Stata using psmatch2 ( Leuven and Sianesi , 2003 ) . 83 I eschew mean , median or minimum citation count in favour of the maximum on the assumption that an author’s 29 t 4 = 1 ; 84 ( 3 ) fraction of papers published per decade ; ( 4 ) fraction of papers published by each journal ; and ( 5 ) number of articles per primary JEL category . 85 Co - variate balance pre - and post - match are shown in Appendix N . 1 . Appendix N . 2 lists each matched pair . See Hengel ( 2018 , pp . 30 – 33 ) for propensity score matches from a probit model performed with replacement and using a wider array of co - variates ; results from alternative matching algorithms are available on request . 86 Under ideal circumstances , R i 3 (cid:0) R i 1 is the impact experience has on readability condi - tional on gender ; R i 3 (cid:0) R k 3 measures gender’s impact conditional on experience . Because of co - authoring , however , article gender is neither ﬁxed over t 4 conditional on i , nor is its diﬀerence constant between i and k , conditional on t 4 . To account for this , I create a counterfactual b R it that captures i ’s t 4 th paper readability had it only been co - authored with members of i ’s same sex . It is reconstructed at female ratio equal to 1 for women and 0 for men using errors and coeﬃ - cients from OLS estimation of Equation ( 13 ) in the gender and time appropriate subsample of authors : 87 R it = (cid:11) tg i + (cid:12) tg i female ratio it + " it ; ( 13 ) where g i = m or g i = f if i is male or female , respectively . Regression output is shown in Appendix N . 3 . To adjust for the degrees of freedom lost when generating b R it , I inﬂate relevant standard errors by 1 . 05 . As long as individual authors’ papers are roughly equivalent for all t 4 , well - matched pairs account for remaining diﬀerences between i and k . They don’t account for subtle variations over t 4 conditional on i . Omitting factors exogenous to an author’s long - term decision - making process— e . g . , year of publication or referee stereotypes about authors’ institutions—potentially biases any estimate of D ik . 88 But including t 4 - varying factors under i ’s control— e . g . , journal , ﬁeld and co - author characteristics—could too : the journals one submits to , the ﬁelds one gravitates toward and the people with whom one chooses to co - author are all endogenously determined by an author’s experience . Higher standards may be met by manipulating any of these variables . In spite of this , I don’t actually ﬁnd any evidence that observable t 4 - varying factors—exogenous or not—drive women’s increasing readability . For that reason , I opt for a parsimonious Equa - tion ( 13 ) . The robustness and validity of this approach are addressed in a following section . Results . Table 7 tests if Conditions 1 and 2 are both satisﬁed within each matched pair . Its ﬁrst and second panels display the mean ( ﬁrst column ) and standard deviation ( second column ) of D ik —Equation ( 11 ) ’s conservative estimate of D ik ( Corollary 1 ) —and observation counts ( third column ) from the set of matched pairs in which one member satisﬁes both conditions . In the ﬁrst panel , the female member does—suggesting discrimination against women—in the second , “quality” is principally a function of his best paper . 84 Most people are at top ranked institutions by t 4 = 3 . By matching on t 4 = 1 institution , I try to pair authors with similar career paths . In an earlier version of this paper , matches were based on highest institutional rank across all t 4 ; results are similar to those presented here ( see Hengel , 2018 , pp . 30 – 33 ) . 85 Results and conclusions are similar when matches are based on the fraction of articles per primary JEL category . ( Analysis available on request . ) 86 In the August 2018 version of this paper , I also matched on T 4 , authors’ lifetime number of top - four publications . Matches and results were similar to those presented here . 87 More speciﬁcally , I separately estimate Equation ( 13 ) in the following four subsamples : ( i ) female authors at t 4 = 1 ; ( ii ) male authors at t 4 = 1 ; ( iii ) female authors at t 4 = 3 ; ( iv ) male authors at t 4 = 3 . I then generate b R it using the appropriate coeﬃcients and errors for each author : ( i ) b R i 1 = (cid:11) 1 f + (cid:12) 1 f + " i 1 for a female i at t 4 = 1 ; ( ii ) b R i 1 = (cid:11) 1 m + " i 1 for a male i at t 4 = 1 ; etc . 88 Although , if referees harbour stereotypes about author’s institutions in a way that is partially correlated with gender— e . g . , by holding institutions with more women to higher standards—then unconstrained women should adapt by moving to non - stereotyped institutions . 30 Table  : D ik , Equation ( 11 ) Discrimination against women ( D ik > 0 ) Discrimination against men ( D ik < 0 ) Mean , all observations Mean S . D . N Mean S . D . N ( 1 ) ( 2 ) Flesch Reading Ease 13 : 46 11 : 06 60 (cid:0) 8 : 37 8 : 70 20 5 : 03 * * * 3 : 99 * * * ( 1 : 14 ) ( 1 : 23 ) Flesch Kincaid 2 : 87 2 : 18 65 (cid:0) 2 : 66 2 : 46 19 1 : 15 * * * 1 : 00 * * * ( 0 : 26 ) ( 0 : 27 ) Gunning Fog 3 : 50 2 : 76 62 (cid:0) 2 : 61 2 : 89 21 1 : 37 * * * 1 : 18 * * * ( 0 : 31 ) ( 0 : 33 ) SMOG 2 : 73 1 : 96 54 (cid:0) 1 : 40 1 : 94 24 0 : 87 * * * 0 : 71 * * * ( 0 : 22 ) ( 0 : 23 ) Dale - Chall 1 : 38 0 : 93 62 (cid:0) 0 : 94 0 : 69 22 0 : 53 * * * 0 : 43 * * * ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 12 ) Notes . Sample 121 matched pairs ( 109 and 121 distinct men and women , respectively ) . First and second panels display conditional means , standarddeviationsandobservationcountsof D ik ( Equation ( 11 ) ) fromsubpopulationsofmatchedpairsinwhichthewoman or man , respectively , satisﬁes Conditions 1 and 2 . Third panel displays mean D ik over all observations . To account for the 30 – 40 percent of pairs for which Theorem 1 is inconclusive , ( 1 ) sets D ik = 0 , while ( 2 ) sets D ik = b R i 3 (cid:0) b R k 3 if b R i 3 < b R k 3 ( i female , k male ) and zero , otherwise . Male scores are subtracted from female scores ; D ik is positive in panel one and negative in panel two . D ik weighted by frequency observations are used in a match ; degrees - of - freedom corrected standard errors in parentheses ( panel three , only ) . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . it’s the male member—indicating discrimination against men . 89 Male scores are subtracted from female scores , so D ik is positive in panel one and negative in panel two . Evidence of discrimination was present in 68 percent of matched pairs . In almost three - quarters of those , the member discriminated against was female . 90 Moreover , D ik is ( on average ) 1 . 5 times as large ( in absolute value ) when discrimination is against women . Figure 8 displays D ik ’s distribution across the ﬁve scores . Pink bars correspond to matched pairs in which D ik is positive ( discrimination against women ) ; blue bars reﬂect those for which D ik is negative ( discrimination against men ) . In the absence of systemic discrimination against women ( or men ) , D ik would symmetrically distribute around zero . It does not . When men are discriminated against , D ik clusters closer to zero . When women are discriminated against , D ik is more spread out . Furthermore , instances of obvious discrimination are predominately against women : D ik is ﬁve times more likely to be one standard deviation above zero than below it . Table 7’s ﬁnal panel averages D ik over all observations . To account for the 30 – 40 percent of pairs for which Theorem 1 is inconclusive , ( 1 ) sets D ik = 0 , while ( 2 ) sets D ik = b R i 3 (cid:0) b R k 3 if b R i 3 < b R k 3 ( i female , k male ) and zero , otherwise . 91 Mean D ik is positive and signiﬁcant in both columns for all ﬁve scores . First column ﬁgures suggest that higher standards cause senior female economists to write ( at least ) seven percent more clearly than they otherwise would . 92 Appendix N . 4 replicates Table 7 using Equation ( 12 ) to estimate D ik . By deﬁnition , ﬁgures are smaller . Conclusions , however , are unchanged . 89 The co - variates used to generate a match remain relatively balanced when the sample of observations is restricted to D ik ̸ = 0 ( see Appendix N . 1 and the next section for a discussion ) . 90 For 30 – 40 percent of pairs , neither member satisﬁed both Conditions 1 and 2 , rendering Theorem 1’s test for dis - crimination inconclusive . 91 That is , if the experienced man writes more readably than the experienced woman , then the eﬀect is always attributed to discrimination against men ; if the experienced woman writes more readably than the experienced man , however , the eﬀect is attributed to discrimination against women only if Condition 2 is likewise satisﬁed . 92 Table 7 , column ( 1 ) divided by the mean male b R k 3 . 31 0 . 000 0 . 010 0 . 020 0 . 030 0 . 040 - 40 - 20 0 20 40 Flesch Reading Ease 0 . 000 0 . 050 0 . 100 0 . 150 0 . 200 - 10 - 5 0 5 10 Flesch Kincaid 0 . 000 0 . 050 0 . 100 0 . 150 - 10 0 10 20 Gunning Fog 0 . 000 0 . 050 0 . 100 0 . 150 0 . 200 - 10 - 5 0 5 10 SMOG 0 . 000 0 . 100 0 . 200 0 . 300 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 Dale - Chall Pairs suggesting discrimination against : Men Women Notes . Blue bars represent ( unweighted ) matched pairs in which the man satisﬁes Conditions 1 and 2 ; pink bars are pairs in which the woman does . Estimated density functions drawn in grey , weighted by frequency observations are used in a match . Conditional means , standard deviations and sample sizes shown in the ﬁrst two panels of Table 8 . Figure  : Distributions of D ik , Equation ( 11 ) Robustness . Conclusions drawn from Table 7 are principally predicated on three assumptions : ( 1 ) i and k are equivalent ; ( 2 ) t 4 is suﬃciently large— i . e . , t 4 > t ′ ( e snit is on the convergence path to zero for n = 0 ; 1 ) and any errors in i ’s beliefs about e r 0 i and e R i are suﬃciently small ; 93 ( 3 ) experience is the only t 4 - varying factor driving within i changes in readability , conditional on a paper’s share of female authors . 94 If any is violated , discrimination against women cannot be inferred from an overrepresentation of matched pairs with D ik > 0 . Assumption ( 1 ) depends on match accuracy . Post - match co - variates are well balanced ( Ap - pendix N . 1 ) . They remain well balanced—and similar to the matched population—when re - stricted to pairs satisfying D ik ̸ = 0 . To facilitate further scrutiny , Appendix N . 2 lists the names of economists in each pair . Matches are sensitive to the choice and construction of variables and the model and method used to generate them . Outcomes , however , are not . After controlling for decade , journal and JEL code , matches using alternative variables ( e . g . , minimum citation counts and mean institutional rank ) and speciﬁcations ( e . g . , propensity score matching ) generate similar ﬁgures and conclusions ( available on request ) . 95 Assumption ( 2 ) demands a “suﬃciently large” t 4 . For diagnosing discrimination , “suﬃciently large” means t ′ < 3 and the diﬀerence in i and k ’s error in beliefs at t 4 = 3 is smaller than D ik . Fifty percent of women with three or more top publications satisfy Conditions 1 and 2 when com - pared to equivalent men . 96 Among them , D ik is far from zero : these women write , on average , 93 I use “error” and “mistake” to refer to anything that would cause authors to write more ( or less ) clearly than they would if e r s 0 i and e R si were known . This includes actual mistakes in judgement as well as character components— e . g . , conscientiousness or risk aversion—that impact beliefs and / or the optimal choice set under uncertainty . 94 More speciﬁcally , we require that , in the case of a solo - authored paper , condition on an author’s initial choice in readability , their future readability choices are solely motivated by a desire to increase acceptance rates and the person’s experience in peer review determines her ability to use readability ( versus other strategies at her disposal ) to … 95 In an earlier version of this paper , I matched authors using propensity scores from a probit model with replacement . See Hengel ( 2018 , Section 3 . 4 . 3 , pp . 30 – 34 ) for results . 96 Women are the better writers in 72 percent of matched pairs . In 30 percent of those , however , the woman did not 32 21 percent more clearly than equivalent men with identical experience . It is unlikely that half of all female economists with three top publications—plus many more second - tier publications and substantial experience refereeing and editing themselves—make mistakes of this magnitude . Interpreting D ik as a causal , conservative estimate of discrimination’s impact on readability requires the stronger assumption that e sni 3 = e snk 3 . 97 When violated , I can no longer conclude that D ik conservatively estimates D ik . 98 Nevertheless , e snit (cid:0) e snkt is converging to zero and likely very small at t 4 = 3 . Any upward bias from e snkt < e snit — i . e . , from senior female economists still making more mistakes about reviewers’ thresholds than equivalent men even after previously publishing two top papers—is probably small and arguably oﬀset by the downward bias already baked into D ik . 99 As for assumption ( 3 ) , I ﬁnd no evidence that factors exogenous or endogenous to an author’s decision - making process drive women’s increasing readability . 100 Appendix I and additional anal - yses in a 2016 version of this paper ( Hengel , 2016 , pp . 23 – 24 ) show an identical pattern despite controlling for a large array of potential confounders . In a 2017 version , I reconstructed b R it us - ing several t 4 - varying factors ( number of co - authors , institutional rank , institutional rank of the highest ranked co - author , t 4 for the most experienced co - author , publication year and dummies for each journal ) ( Hengel , 2018 , pp . 30 , 61 ) ; Appendix N . 5 adds JEL classiﬁcation codes to Equation ( 13 ) . In Table K . 24 ( Appendix K . 4 ) I restrict Table I . 2’s analysis to solo - authored pa - pers or those co - authored by members of the same sex . 101 In all instances , women’s readability is consistently shown to increase with t 4 ; when comparable results are estimated , they are similar to those presented in Table 7 and Figure 8 . 102 Finally , causal interpretation technically requires that three additional criteria are also met . Assuming discrimination against i : ( i ) i ’s acceptance rate is no more than k ’s ; ( ii ) r 0 k 3 (cid:20) r 0 i 3 — i . e . , i ’s draft readability is at least as high as k ’s ; and ( iii ) r 0 i 1 (cid:20) r 0 i 3 — i . e . , i ’s draft readability at t 4 = 3 is at least as high as his draft readability at t 4 = 1 . As already discussed , ( i ) rules out the possibility that i is appropriately rewarded ( relative to k ) for writing more clearly . ( ii ) and ( iii ) eliminate situations in which women write more clearly during peer review to compensate for poorer writing—and consequently higher desk rejection rates—before peer review . 103 improve her writing between t 4 = 1 and t 4 = 3 ( Condition 2 ) , thus rendering Theorem 1’s test for discrimination inconclusive . 97 D ik actually remains a causal , conservative estimate of the impact of discrimination under the weaker assumption e sni 3 (cid:20) e snk 3 , n = 0 ; 1 ( i female , k male ) . See the proof of Corollary 1 in Appendix D . 98 Speciﬁcally , this assumption is violated if at t 4 = 3 the women listed in Appendix N . 2 make more ( positive ) mistakes about e r s 0 i and / or e R si than the men they are matched to . For D ik to remain a conservative estimate of D ik , women’s mistakes must be no greater than men’s mistakes at t 4 = 3 . 99 For a description of this downward bias , see the discussion on Corollary 1 in Section 4 . 3 . 1 and its proof in Ap - pendix D . 100 Note that I assume that , conditional on their initial choice in readability , women’s future choice of readability is solely motivated by a desire to increase her acceptance rates and the degree to which she successfully is able to use readability to increase her acceptance rates ( rather than to , instead , focus on another task more important to editors and which takes less eﬀort ) depends on the information they have about peer review and that is earned through experience . 101 To test whether co - author characteristics—regardless of exogeneity—are behind women’s increasing readability , I would ideally repeat the analysis on the subset of matched pairs in which the woman’s t 4 = 1 and t 4 = 3 papers are solo - or exclusively female - authored . This criteria is satisﬁed in only 16 matched pairs . Nevertheless , a roughly similar proportion satisfy D ik ̸ = 0 ; in most of those , D ik > 0 , suggesting discrimination against the female member . In 20 matched pairs , the woman’s t 4 = 1 and t 4 = 3 papers are majority female - authored ; in 76 , they’re at least 50 percent female - authored . In both restricted samples , D ik ̸ = 0 in about 70 – 75 percent of matched pairs ; most of those ( 70 percent ) indicate discrimination against the female member . Discrimination’s average impact across all ﬁve scores is also about 7 percent . 102 See also Footnote 140 for evidence suggesting women are not more likely to co - author with other women as t increases . 103 That is , women’s papers are desk rejected at higher rates because their drafts are more poorly written . This does 33 Unfortunately , my data do not perfectly identify acceptance rates nor do I have t 4 = 1 and t 4 = 3 draft readability scores for every matched pair . Nevertheless , the data I do have and prior research strongly suggest ( i ) – ( iii ) not only hold on average , but do not exert upward bias on my estimate of D ik , more generally . First , I reviewed the literature on gender neutrality in journals’ acceptance rates earlier in this section . To recap , women are not accepted more often than men . In Appendix N . 4 , I attempt to control for acceptance rates explicitly by adding the requirement T 5 i (cid:20) T 5 k or T 5 k (cid:20) T 5 i to categorise matched pairs as discrimination against i or k , respectively . Results are similar ; conclusions unchanged . As shown in Section 4 . 2 , women’s draft papers are indeed more readable than men’s . Section 4 . 4 provides further conﬁrmation . Figure 9 plots the readability of women’s and men’s draft and published papers over increasing t 4 . Women’s drafts are more readable than men’s drafts at t 4 = 3 and more readable than their own earlier drafts at t 4 = 1 . 4 . 4 Direct vs . feedback eﬀect of higher standards Women can respond to higher standards in peer review immediately ( direct eﬀect ) or pre - emptively ( “feedback” eﬀect ) . A bank - of - the - envelope calculation based on analyses in Section 4 . 2 and Section 4 . 3 . 2 suggests the direct eﬀect is roughly responsible for a ﬁfth to a fourth of the gender readability gap caused by discrimination . 104 Yet the weight of each eﬀect likely depends on authors’ information about—hence experience with—the peer review process . To illustrate the evolution of their relative importance , Figure 9 compares papers pre - and post - review as authors’ top - four publication counts ( t 4 ) rise . Hollow circles denote NBER draft readability ; solid diamonds reﬂect readability in the ﬁnal , published versions of those same papers ; dashed lines trace readability as papers undergo peer review . Num - bers derived from FGLS estimation of Equation ( 14 ) : R j it m = (cid:12) 0 + (cid:12) 1 female ratio j + (cid:12) 2 female ratio j (cid:2) t 4 i + (cid:12) 3 t 4 i + (cid:18) X j + " j ; ( 14 ) where m = W ; P for working papers and published articles , respectively , and X j is a vector of observable controls : editor , journal , year , journal and year interactions , N j ( paper j ’s co - author count ) , English ﬂuency dummies and quality controls—citation count ( asinh ) , max . T 5 ( author prominence ) and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) . Since t 4 i is author - speciﬁc , I disaggregate the data by duplicating each article N j times ; to account for duplicate articles , regressions are weighted by 1 / N j ( see Appendix F ) . 105 The ﬁrst panel of Table 8 displays the magnitude and standard errors of the contemporaneous marginal eﬀect of peer review ( R jP (cid:0) R jW ) for men and women over increasing t 4 ; estimates correspond to the lengths of the dotted lines in Figure 9 . Panel two shows the marginal eﬀect of female ratio ( (cid:12) 2 ) for each version of a manuscript . Diﬀerences are shown in the ﬁnal row ; they correspond gender diﬀerences in the direct eﬀect . 106 Direct eﬀect diﬀerences start oﬀ large , positive and signiﬁcant , but as t 4 increases , they grad - ually go away . For the feedback eﬀect , however , the pattern is reversed : although the readability not preclude situations in which women’s drafts are more likely desk rejected despite being better ( or equally well ) written . 104 Results in Table 5 , columns four and ﬁve ( direct eﬀect ) divided by those in Table 7 , columns ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) ( sum total of direct and indirect / feedback eﬀects ) , averaged over scores . 105 Results and conclusions based on unweighted regressions—or by replacing t 4 i with max . t 4 j and not duplicating articles—are very similar or identical to those presented here . Regression output from alternative speciﬁcations available on request . 106 The diﬀerence between the diﬀerence at t 4 = 1 and the diﬀerence at t 4 = 3 is weakly statistically signiﬁcant ( 1 . 13 , standard error 0 . 66 ) . 34 Draft Final Draft Final 40 42 44 46 1 2 3 4 - 5 6 + t ₄ th article Male Female Flesch Reading Ease Figure  : Readability of authors’ t 4 th top - four publication ( draft and ﬁnal ) Notes . Sample 4 , 289 observations ; 1 , 988 and 1 , 986 distinct NBER working papers and published articles , respectively ; 1 , 840 distinct authors . Flesch Reading Ease marginal mean scores for authors’ t 4 = 1 , t 4 = 2 , t 4 = 3 , t 4 = 4 – 5 and t 4 = 6 + top - four publications . Hollow circles denote estimated readability of NBER working papers from FGLS estimation of Equation ( 14 ) ; solid diamonds show the estimated readability in published versions of the same papers . Pink represents women co - authoring only with other women ; blue are men co - authoring only with other men . Controls are : editor , journal , year , journal and year interactions , N j ( paper j ’s number of co - authors ) , English ﬂuency dummies and quality controls—citation count ( asinh ) , max . T 5 ( author prominence ) and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) . Regression weighted by 1 / N j . Point estimates and standard errors shown in Table 8 . gap in the published article is statistically signiﬁcant and relatively stable at every t 4 , it increas - ingly forms before submission . Draft readability contributes nothing to the gap at t 4 = 1 . That rises to 40 percent at t 4 = 2 and 70 percent at t 4 = 3 . By t 4 = 4 – 5 and t 4 = 6 + , men and women mostly address referee concerns before peer review . A number of tentative conjectures relevant to the gender readability gap are apparent from Figure 9 and Table 8 . First , the direct eﬀect dominates when women have less experience ; the feedback eﬀect dominates when women have more experience . This pattern of behaviour implies that women initially underestimate referees’ thresholds but learn about them over time and adapt their ex ante writing style accordingly . Second , inexperienced men and women seem to make similar choices in draft readability . 107 This suggests identical initial preferences for and beliefs about the importance of writing well . In one important sense , however , men are still better informed—the standards they believe apply actually do ; junior women appear to mistakenly assume similar standards apply to them , too . Third , experienced men and women sacriﬁce time upfront to increase acceptance rates and / or speed up review . All things equal , economists who anticipate referees’ demands are rejected less often and / or peer reviewed faster . The cost is spending more time revising a manuscript before submitting it . Assuming choices by senior economists express optimal trade - oﬀs with full information , Figure 9 and Table 8 imply little—if any—gender diﬀerence in these preferences . Finally , accepted papers by inexperienced female economists appear to sustain the toughest 107 Point estimates are almost indistinguishable , but the standard error of their diﬀerence is relatively large ( see Table 8 ) ; please interpret this result with caution . 35 Table  : Readability of authors’ t 4 th top - four publication ( draft and ﬁnal ) t 4 = 1 t 4 = 2 t 4 = 3 t 4 = 4 – 5 t 4 (cid:21) 6 Predicted R jP (cid:0) R jW Women 1 : 51 * * 1 : 06 * 0 : 63 (cid:0) 0 : 14 (cid:0) 0 : 66 ( 0 : 64 ) ( 0 : 61 ) ( 0 : 71 ) ( 0 : 91 ) ( 1 : 19 ) Men (cid:0) 0 : 30 (cid:0) 0 : 18 * (cid:0) 0 : 05 (cid:0) 0 : 26 (cid:0) 0 : 20 ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 19 ) Marginal eﬀect of female ratio Published article 1 : 80 * 2 : 27 * * * 2 : 74 * * * 3 : 21 * * * 3 : 67 * * ( 1 : 02 ) ( 0 : 74 ) ( 0 : 76 ) ( 1 : 07 ) ( 1 : 50 ) Draft paper (cid:0) 0 : 01 1 : 02 2 : 06 * * 3 : 09 * * * 4 : 13 * * * ( 1 : 22 ) ( 0 : 94 ) ( 0 : 84 ) ( 0 : 97 ) ( 1 : 26 ) Diﬀerence 1 : 81 * * * 1 : 25 * 0 : 68 0 : 11 (cid:0) 0 : 45 ( 0 : 70 ) ( 0 : 67 ) ( 0 : 79 ) ( 1 : 01 ) ( 1 : 28 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 4 , 289 observations ; 1 , 988 and 1 , 986 distinct NBER working papers and published articles , respectively ; 1 , 839 distinct authors . Panel one displays magnitude of predicted R jP (cid:0) R jW ( the direct eﬀect of peer review ) for women and men over increasing publication count ( t 4 ) . Panel two estimates the marginal eﬀectofanarticle’sfemaleratio ( (cid:12) 1 + (cid:12) 2 (cid:2) t 4 ) , separatelyfordraftpapersandpublishedarticles . Figuresfrom FGLS estimation of Equation ( 14 ) . Quality controls denoted by 3 2 include citation count ( asinh ) , max . T 5 ( author prominence ) and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) . Standard errors clustered by editor and robust to cross - model correlation in parentheses . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . review . Assuming the same is true of rejected manuscripts , Figure 9 and Table 8 indicate higher ( desk ) rejection rates for junior women’s work . 108 This seems to be true at the ﬁeld journal Energy Economics ( Alexander et al . , 2018 ; Tol , 2018 ) . 109 Unfortunately , I cannot test this hypothesis with the data I have collected . In Section 4 . 5 , however , I investigate the former claim , i . e . , that accepted manuscripts by junior women undergo the toughest—hence longest—review . 4 . 5 Duration of peer review “Writing simply and directly only looks easy” ( Kimble , 1994 , p . 53 ) . Good writing takes time ( Hartvigsen , 1981 ; Kroll , 1990 ) . Skilled writers spend longer con - templating a writing assignment , brainstorming and editing . They also write fewer words per minute and produce more drafts ( Faigley and Witte , 1981 ; Stallard , 1974 ) . As a consequence , higher writing standards—and perhaps higher standards applied more generally—could cause female authors to take longer in peer review . To investigate , I analyse gender diﬀerences in submit - accept times at Econometrica ( 1970 – 2015 ) and REStud . ( 1976 – 108 Higher desk rejection rates and tougher review are substitutes . Tougher review probably dominates when editors ( or even referees ) monitor and implement a policy of gender neutral acceptance rates . Otherwise , placing higher standards on female - authored work likely results in higher desk rejection rates ( or some combination of both ) . 109 Alexander et al . ( 2018 ) also ﬁnds that accepted papers with a female corresponding author spend 27 – 29 days longer in peer review , go through more revision rounds and receive more referee reports . 36 Figure  : Distribution of review times at Econometrica and REStud Notes . Histograms of review times ( months between ﬁrst submission and ﬁnal acceptance ) for papers published in Econometrica ( left ) and REStud ( right ) . Blue bars represent papers written only by men ( 2 , 398 for Econometrica ; 1 , 580 for REStud ) . Pink bars are papers written only by women ( 48 for Econometrica ; 64 for REStud ) . Source : Econometrica and REStud . 2015 ) . 110 Figure 10 displays histograms of time ( in months ) between dates papers are ﬁrst sub - mitted to and their ﬁnal revisions received by each journal’s editorial oﬃce . Between 1970 – 2015 , Econometrica published 48 papers authored entirely by women ; from 1976 – 2015 REStud published 64 . 111 Women’s review times disproportionately cluster above the mean ( Figure 10 ) : their articles are ﬁve times more likely to experience delays above the 75th per - centile than they are to enjoy speedy revisions below the 25th . Of the four articles at Econometrica with the longest review times , three are authored by at least one woman . 112 Among REStud ’s top four lengthiest reviews , one paper is 100 percent female - authored , another 50 percent . For articles in the top quartile of revision length and published post – 2005 , the average female ratio is 0 . 15 . The corresponding ﬁgure across all quartiles for that timeframe is 0 . 11 . For more precision on gender diﬀerences in review times , I build on a model by Ellison ( 2002 , Table 6 , p . 963 ) and estimate Equation ( 15 ) : revision duration j = (cid:12) 0 + (cid:12) 1 female ratio j + (cid:12) 2 mother j + (cid:12) 3 birth j + (cid:12) 4 max t 5 j + (cid:12) 5 no . pages j + (cid:12) 6 N j + (cid:12) 7 order j + (cid:12) 8 no . citations j + (cid:18) X j + " j ; ( 15 ) where mother j and birth j are binary variables equal to 1 if article j ’s authors were all mothers to children younger than ﬁve and gave birth , respectively , at some point during peer review , 113 max t 5 j is the number of prior papers published in a top - ﬁve economics journals by article j ’s most proliﬁc co - author , no . pages j refers to the page length of the published article , order j is the order in which article j appeared in an issue and no . citations j are the number of subsequent papers citing j . 114 110 AER , JPE and QJE do not make disaggregated data on the revision process publicly available . 111 Mixed gender co - authored papers are not included in Figure 10 ( 180 at Econometrica and 174 at REStud ) . They are included in the samples used to estimate Table 9 and Table 10 . 112 The only one published before 2010 is “Dynamic Aspects of Earning Mobility” by Lee A . Lillard and Robert J . Willis ( both men ) . It was submitted in October 1967 , accepted in April 1977 and published in September 1978 . 113 If one co - author goes on maternity leave or has young children , I assume another co - author manages the revision process unless she , too , faces similar family commitments . 114 I control for all signiﬁcant factors identiﬁed by Ellison ( 2002 ) . His work evaluates whether author compositional eﬀects contributed to higher mean - accept times at AER , Econometrica , JPE , QJE and REStud . The coeﬃcient on female ratio does not change if authors’ English ﬂuency is controlled for , but is excluded from Table 9 because it is insigniﬁcant in Ellison ( 2002 ) ( results available on request ) . 37 Table  : Revision duration at Econometrica , full control set 1970 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) Female ratio 5 : 330 * * * 6 : 880 * * * 6 : 846 * * * 5 : 755 * * * 6 : 873 * * * 9 : 602 * * * 9 : 587 * * * ( 1 : 743 ) ( 2 : 072 ) ( 2 : 073 ) ( 2 : 020 ) ( 2 : 069 ) ( 2 : 554 ) ( 2 : 559 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 132 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 134 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 132 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 133 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 131 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 128 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 136 * * * ( 0 : 038 ) ( 0 : 038 ) ( 0 : 038 ) ( 0 : 038 ) ( 0 : 038 ) ( 0 : 044 ) ( 0 : 044 ) No . pages 0 : 197 * * * 0 : 195 * * * 0 : 195 * * * 0 : 196 * * * 0 : 195 * * * 0 : 236 * * * 0 : 222 * * * ( 0 : 027 ) ( 0 : 027 ) ( 0 : 027 ) ( 0 : 027 ) ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 040 ) ( 0 : 043 ) N j 1 : 156 * * * 1 : 109 * * * 1 : 097 * * * 1 : 135 * * * 1 : 105 * * * 1 : 435 * * * 1 : 300 * * * ( 0 : 297 ) ( 0 : 290 ) ( 0 : 294 ) ( 0 : 288 ) ( 0 : 292 ) ( 0 : 398 ) ( 0 : 414 ) Order 0 : 215 * * * 0 : 211 * * * 0 : 209 * * * 0 : 213 * * * 0 : 209 * * * 0 : 481 * * * 0 : 482 * * * ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 142 ) ( 0 : 140 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 395 * (cid:0) 0 : 419 * * (cid:0) 0 : 407 * * (cid:0) 0 : 393 * (cid:0) 0 : 419 * * (cid:0) 0 : 641 (cid:0) 0 : 639 ( 0 : 197 ) ( 0 : 196 ) ( 0 : 196 ) ( 0 : 197 ) ( 0 : 196 ) ( 0 : 397 ) ( 0 : 386 ) Mother (cid:0) 7 : 896 * * (cid:0) 12 : 427 * * * (cid:0) 22 : 614 * * * (cid:0) 22 : 702 * * * ( 3 : 504 ) ( 3 : 642 ) ( 5 : 919 ) ( 6 : 279 ) Birth (cid:0) 3 : 795 7 : 526 16 : 440 * * 16 : 125 * * ( 4 : 633 ) ( 4 : 917 ) ( 6 : 430 ) ( 6 : 652 ) Constant 13 : 138 * * * 13 : 333 * * * 13 : 342 * * * 13 : 182 * * * 13 : 372 * * * 14 : 792 * * * 15 : 503 * * * ( 1 : 171 ) ( 1 : 174 ) ( 1 : 175 ) ( 1 : 173 ) ( 1 : 170 ) ( 2 : 061 ) ( 2 : 002 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 No . observations 2 , 622 2 , 607 2 , 622 2 , 622 2 , 622 1 , 278 1 , 278 Notes . Coeﬃcients from OLS estimation of Equation ( 15 ) ; ( 2 ) excludes papers authored only by women who gave birth ( 9 articles ) and / or had a child younger than ﬁve ( 15 articles ) at some point during peer review ; ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) exclude papers published before 1990 . Year ﬁxed eﬀects refer to the year an article was accepted . Standard errors clustered by submission year in parentheses . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . I ﬁrst estimate Equation ( 15 ) on data from Econometrica . I then re - estimate it excluding institution , motherhood and childbirth controls—which I do not have for papers published in REStud —on the entire sample and each journal separately . Table 9 displays results for Econometrica across a range of speciﬁcations . All models include editor , acceptance year and institution ﬁxed eﬀects ; see Appendix O . 1 for results using years of submission and publication , instead . Column ( 1 ) does not control for motherhood or childbirth ; ( 2 ) drops papers authored entirely by women who had children younger than ﬁve and / or gave birth during peer review ; ( 3 ) controls for motherhood but not childbirth ; ( 4 ) controls for childbirth but not motherhood ; ( 5 ) controls for both childbirth and motherhood ; ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) restrict the sample to papers published after 1990 ; ( 7 ) includes ﬁxed eﬀects for primary JEL categories . 115 Every paper published in Econometrica undergoes extensive review , but the consistently large and highly signiﬁcant coeﬃcient on female ratio suggests women bear the worst of it . 116 The average male - authored paper takes about 18 . 5 months to complete all revisions ; papers by women need almost seven months longer . 117 115 JEL classiﬁcations are only available for papers published after 1990 ( see Section 3 ) ; Table 9’s column ( 7 ) estimates Equation ( 15 ) on about half of the data . Column ( 6 ) is likewise estimated on the truncated sample but excludes JEL eﬀects . 116 This conclusion is robust to altering the age - threshold on mother j ( see Appendix O . 2 ) . 117 Based on results in ( 5 ) . Male eﬀect estimated with zero female co - authors . When submission year ﬁxed eﬀects are 38 Why ? Well , it’s not motherhood . Yes , giving birth slows down review—responding to referees is apparently put on hold for the ﬁrst 6 – 12 months of a newborn’s life—but having a young child has the opposite eﬀect . A pause for childbirth is expected ; a productivity boost from pre - schoolers is not . Perhaps wanting to spend time with the kids motivates women to get organised ? Or , maybe the most organised women are the only ones having children ? 118 The former suggests motherhood is not the productivity killer it’s rumoured to be—at least among highly educated women . The latter implies only superstar women feel academic careers and motherhood are simultaneously manageable . 119 Both interpretations are provocative , but should be made with caution given ( i ) counter - intuitive results , ( ii ) obtaining an unbiased estimate of (cid:12) 2 was not this study’s objective and ( iii ) mother j equals one for only 15 articles in the sample . 120 Results pooling data from both journals and on each alone without institution , motherhood and childbirth controls are shown in Table 10 . Estimates from Econometrica ( columns one and four ) coincide with those shown in Table 9 . Women take 2 – 3 months longer in review at REStud ( columns two and ﬁve ) . When observations are pooled , female - authored papers take , on average , 3 – 5 months longer in peer review ( columns three and six ) . Remaining coeﬃcients in Table 9 and Table 10 largely correspond to earlier estimates by Ellison ( 2002 ) . Longer papers take more time to review , as do papers with more co - authors and ( generally ) those that appear earlier in an issue . Authors with an established publication history and highly cited papers enjoy faster reviews . 121 Appendix O . 3 re - estimates column ( 5 ) of Table 9 and the third column of Table 10 using a quantile regression model in order to account for the obvious rightward - skew in review times ( Figure 10 ) . The gender gap does not appear to be driven by outliers : the coeﬃcient on female ratio is positive and signiﬁcant across the entire distribution . 4 . 5 . 1 Junior women undergo the longest review . Figure 11 tests Section 4 . 4’s ﬁnding that ju - nior women undergo the toughest peer review . Blue dots are coeﬃcients on female ratio from FGLS estimation of Equation ( 15 ) using data from both journals—and therefore omitting family commitment and institution controls 122 —on sub - samples of junior ( t 5 i = 1 ) and senior ( t 5 i > 1 ) authors ; 123 the yellow dot is their diﬀerence . To eliminate confounding by more senior co - authors , I restrict the sample to authors satisfying max . t 5 j = t 5 i . 124 Since t 5 i is author - speciﬁc , I disaggregate the data by duplicating each article N j times ; to account for duplicate articles , replaced with publication or acceptance year ﬁxed eﬀects , female - authored papers spend 6 – 9 months longer in peer review ( see Appendix O . 1 ) . 118 Ginther and Kahn ( 2004 ) ﬁnd evidence of this hypothesis in a survey of doctoral recipients ten years after receiving their Ph . D . They ﬁnd that women with children are more productive than all men and women without children ( although the diﬀerence is not signiﬁcant ) . They suggest that less productive women may decide not to have children . 119 A third hypothesis is that referees ( possibly responding to editors ) demand fewer revisions when women have young children . Because reviewers are unlikely to have this information—based on my own experience , it is remarkably diﬃcult to ﬁnd—I ( perhaps unfairly ) give this interpretation less weight . 120 The count increases to 16 and 18 articles when mother j ’s threshold is deﬁned as children younger than ten and 18 , respectively ( see Appendix O . 2 ) . 121 Ellison ( 2002 ) ’s analysis includes a dummy variable for female authorship ; it is positive post – 1990 but not signiﬁcant ( it is negative and insigniﬁcant before that ) . His paper does not discuss the ﬁnding . 122 In the August 2018 version of this paper ( available on my website ) , estimates were based on data from Econometrica alone and included these controls . Results and conclusions are similar to those presented here . 123 In Section 4 . 3 . 2 , I deﬁne “experienced” as t 4 = 3 . However , most female - authored papers published in Econometrica and REStud are by women with no ( or only one ) previous top publication ; only 24 have two or more previous papers and were the most senior co - author on a t 4 > 3 paper . 124 Including these observations does not substantially impact results or conclusions : the review time gap for junior women is somewhat smaller ; standard errors are slightly larger ( output available on request ) . 39 Table  : Revision duration at Econometrica and REStud , restricted control set 1970 – 2015 1990 – 2015 Econometrica REStud Econometrica + REStud Econometrica REStud Econometrica + REStud Female ratio 5 : 12 * * * 1 : 62 3 : 24 * * * 7 : 60 * * * 3 : 39 * * 5 : 24 * * * ( 1 : 76 ) ( 1 : 16 ) ( 1 : 01 ) ( 2 : 29 ) ( 1 : 52 ) ( 1 : 28 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 12 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 11 * (cid:0) 0 : 12 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 13 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 06 (cid:0) 0 : 10 * * ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 04 ) No . pages 0 : 20 * * * 0 : 14 * * 0 : 18 * * * 0 : 22 * * * 0 : 06 0 : 17 * * * ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 03 ) N j 1 : 15 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 10 0 : 71 * * 1 : 29 * * * 0 : 18 0 : 99 * * ( 0 : 30 ) ( 0 : 49 ) ( 0 : 27 ) ( 0 : 41 ) ( 0 : 66 ) ( 0 : 37 ) Order 0 : 20 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 08 0 : 08 0 : 47 * * * 0 : 03 0 : 21 * ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 12 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 30 (cid:0) 0 : 64 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 43 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 43 (cid:0) 1 : 20 * * (cid:0) 0 : 84 * * * ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 44 ) ( 0 : 30 ) Constant 12 : 74 * * * 23 : 93 * * * 16 : 96 * * * 14 : 82 * * * 30 : 81 * * * 21 : 64 * * * ( 1 : 16 ) ( 1 : 81 ) ( 0 : 90 ) ( 2 : 02 ) ( 3 : 03 ) ( 1 : 47 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 3 3 No . observations 2 , 622 1 , 812 4 , 434 1 , 278 1 , 068 2 , 347 Notes . Coeﬃcients from OLS estimation of Equation ( 15 ) . Third and sixth column estimates pool data from Econometrica and REStud ; the other four columns were separately estimated on data from each journal . Last three columns include ﬁeld ﬁxed eﬀects , which are only available for papers published after 1990 . Standard errors clustered by submission year in parentheses . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . regressions are weighted by 1 / N j ( see Appendix F for details ) . 125 Figure 11 suggests papers by junior women take longer in review . When combined with evidence from Section 4 . 4 , it supports the hypothesis that senior women have an easier time in peer review only because they address higher standards before it . In the present paper , I do not explore the particular relationship between review time and read - ability . Superﬁcial correlations between the two are almost certainly confounded by unobserved heterogeneity in submission quality . For example , if “referees feel the need to demonstrate their intelligence or industriousness to editors by identifying problems in [ otherwise perfectly ﬁne ] pa - pers” , they may “inﬂate minor blemishes”— e . g . , readability—“to the status of major ﬂaws” ( Berk et al . , 2017 , p . 231 ) . It is undoubtedly easier to remedy most issues surrounding readability than it is to ﬁx actual , major ﬂaws . Thus , the unbiased relationship between readability and review time is impossible to obtain without controlling for submission quality or placing signiﬁcant structure on the data generating process . This is beyond the scope of the present paper . 126 125 Results and conclusions based on unweighted regressions are very similar to those presented here ( output available on request ) . 126 Unobserved heterogeneity in submission quality should not bias conclusions elsewhere in the paper as long as it does not partially correlate with the share of female authors on a manuscript . If women are held to higher standards , however , this assumption is violated when controlling for review time and estimating the impact gender has on readability ( or visa versa ) . ( Conditioning on one when estimating the other opens up a backdoor channel to the unobserved heterogeneity . ) Although controlling for citations introduces a similar concern , Figure 2 and Table 9 suggest correlations are weak ( and hence bias low ) . Hengel ( 2016 ) presents most analyses without citation controls ; results are very similar to those shown here . 40 0 2 4 6 8 10 Junior women Senior women Difference Review length Figure  : Coeﬃcient on female ratio , junior vs . senior women Notes . Sample 5 , 019 observations satisfying max . t 5 j = t 5 i ; 4 , 436 distinct articles and 2 , 429 distinct authors ( 166 female ) . Blue dots are the coeﬃcients on female ratio corresponding to separate FGLS estimations of Equation ( 12 ) on authors for whom t 5 i = 1 ( junior ) and t 5 i > 1 ( senior ) , respectively . The yellow dot is their diﬀerence . Vertical grey lines correspond to 90 percent conﬁdence intervals . Regressions weighted by 1 / N j . 5 Summary and discussion Using ﬁve well - known readability scores , I analyse every article abstract published in a top four economics journal since 1950 . Abstracts written by women are 1 – 6 percent more readable . A comparison of published papers to their pre - reviewed drafts suggests the immediate impact of peer review directly explains at least forty percent of this gap . Why ? Either women voluntarily improve their writing during peer review— e . g . , because they’re more sensitive to criticism—or better written papers are women’s response to higher stan - dards imposed by referees and / or editors . To theoretically distinguish between hypotheses , I construct a simple dynamic model of an au - thor’s decision - making process . Its intuition is straightforward . Assuming preferences are ﬁxed over time , authors improve readability today relative to yesterday only when they believe more readable papers are more often accepted . And while oversensitivity and / or poor information may distort their beliefs—and in turn aﬀect readability—with experience , they correct those mistakes . Thus , when an experienced author writes more clearly than her inexperienced self , the change im - proves her acceptance rate . If that same experienced author writes more clearly than an equivalent , experienced author of the opposite gender , yet her papers are no more likely to be accepted , then asymmetric editorial standards and / or biased referee assignment— i . e . , discrimination—explains the diﬀerence . The model establishes three conditions suﬃcient to demonstrate higher standards are present in academic review : ( i ) experienced women write better than equivalent men ; ( ii ) women improve their writing over time ; and ( iii ) female - authored papers are accepted no more often than equiva - lent male - authored papers . I empirically test ( i ) and ( ii ) by matching experienced , well - published female economists to similarly productive men on observables determining the topic , novelty and quality of their research . The resulting estimate suggests discrimination causes experienced women to write at least seven percent more clearly than they otherwise would . 127 127 This conclusion assumes male - authored papers are accepted at least as often as female - authored papers , which cannot be tested using the data I have collected . See Section 4 . 3 . 2 for prior research justifying this claim . 41 5 . 1 Evaluating alternative explanations A gender readability gap exists . It’s still there after including editor , journal and year eﬀects— meaning it’s hard blame speciﬁc policies or attitudes in the ﬁfties , long since overcome . The gap is unaﬀected by ﬁeld controls— i . e . , it unlikely results from women researching topics that are easier to explain . Nor does it appear to be caused by factors correlated with gender but actually linked to authors’ ( or co - authors’ ) competence as economists and ﬂuency in English—if so , institution , native speaker and citation controls would reduce it . They do not . 128 The gap grows between ﬁrst draft and ﬁnal publication and over the course of women’s careers , precluding inborn advantage and one - oﬀ improvements in response to external circumstances unrelated to peer review . This likewise rules out gender diﬀerences in ( i ) biology / behaviour— e . g . , sensitivity to referee criticism 129 —or ( ii ) knowledge about referee expectations . If diligently addressing every referee concern has no apparent upside—acceptance rates are unaﬀected—and a very clear downside—constant redrafting takes time—even the most oversensitive , ill - informed woman would eventually re - examine initial beliefs and start acting like a man . 130 Yet this is not what we observe . The largest investments in writing well are made by female economists with greatest exposure to peer review— i . e . , those with the best opportunity to update their priors . Women’s papers are more likely assigned female referees ( Abrevaya and Hamermesh , 2012 ; Gilbert et al . , 1994 ) . 131 If women are more demanding critics , clearer writing could reﬂect their tougher reviews . 132 Women concentrate in particular ﬁelds , so it’s natural female referees more often review female - authored papers . Nevertheless , for the readability gap to exist only because of specialisation , controlling for JEL classiﬁcation should explain it . 133 It does not : including 20 primary or 731 tertiary JEL category dummies has little eﬀect . So if referee assignment is causing the gap , it’s only because journals disproportionately refer female - authored papers to the toughest critics . 134 Meaning it isn’t referees who are biased—it’s editors . 135 128 I also conducted a primitive surname analysis ( see Hengel , 2016 , pp . 35 – 36 ) . It suggests that the female authors in my data are no more or less likely to be native English speakers . 129 While women do appear more internally responsive to feedback—criticism has a bigger impact on their self - esteem—available evidence suggests they aren’t any more externally responsive to it , i . e . , women and men are equally likely to change behaviour and alter performance after receiving feedback ( Johnson and Helgeson , 2002 ; Roberts and Nolen - Hoeksema , 1989 ) . 130 This statement is especially relevant if the opportunity cost to women for “wasting” time on needless tasks is higher— e . g . , because of family responsibilities . 131 Note that women are only a fraction of all referees—8 percent in 1986 ( Blank , 1991 ) , 10 percent in 1994 ( Hamer - mesh , 1994 ) and 14 percent in 2013 ( Torgler and Piatti , 2013 ) . Abrevaya and Hamermesh ( 2012 ) report female - authored papers were only slightly more likely to be assigned a female referee between 1986 – 1994 ; matching in - creases between 2000 – 2008 . 132 It’s not clear whether women’s reports are more critical . A study speciﬁc to post - graduate biologists suggests yes ( Borsuk et al . , 2009 ) ; another analysing past reviews in an economics ﬁeld journal does not ( Abrevaya and Hamermesh , 2012 ) . 133 Speciﬁcally , men and women publishing in the same ﬁeld face the same pool of referees . Controlling for that pool would account for gender diﬀerences in readability . 134 Relatedly , perhaps female - authored research is more provocative and therefore warrants more scrutiny . Yet if this explained the gap , controlling for JEL classiﬁcation should reduce ( or eliminate ) it—unless women’s work is system - atically more provocative even among researchers in very narrow ﬁelds . There is some evidence for this hypothesis— provocative work is ( presumably ) highly cited work and recent female - authored papers published in top economics journals are cited more ( Hengel , 2019 ) . Yet more provocative , cited research would probably be published at higher rates—and there is no evidence women’s paper’s are more frequently accepted ( Ceci et al . , 2014 ) . In any case , women respond to incentives just like men ; if we could get boring papers published , we’d write them . 135 This is a form of biased referee assignment identiﬁed in Theorem 1 . It would also apply if the readability gap reﬂects referees’ apathy for women’s work . Readability is particularly relevant when interest in—and knowledge about—the topic is low ( Fass and Schumacher , 1978 ; Klare , 1976 ) . Thus , a gap could emerge if editors fail to assign interested and knowledgable referees to female - authored papers . 42 Section 4 . 2 directly links an increase in the gender readability gap to peer review ; Section 4 . 3 establishes that factors outside women’s control—assumed , at this point , entirely peer - review - related—drive it . Yet oversensitivity and / or poor information could create the former gap while another gender bias unconnected to peer review generates the latter . One in particular comes to mind : the feedback women receive in conferences and seminars . Perhaps experienced female economists tighten prose ( before or after submission ) in response to audience member remarks . Anecdotal evidence suggests female speakers are given a harder time , although I could ﬁnd no scientiﬁc analysis to support ( or refute ) this claim . Nevertheless , sensible , experienced econ - omists should ignore random suggestions that won’t actually improve a manuscript’s probability of acceptance . Do well - published female economists really lack this sensibility ? In any case , most conference and seminar participants are also current ( or future ) journal referees . Neutral peer review feedback is inconsistent with non - neutral conference / seminar feedback when originating from the same group—especially since gender neutrality is emphasised in both environments . Perhaps women focus on writing at the expense of some other aspect of a paper due to a comparative advantage ? Not likely . Women’s chosen publication strategy results in similar ( or lower ) acceptance rates and longer review times compared to the one employed by men . But if men and women are equally capable researchers then writing well cannot be a comparative advantage and at the same time be strictly dominated by another strategy . 136 In the universe of straightforward alternatives , this leaves us with one : female economists are less capable researchers . As mentioned earlier , factors correlated with gender but actually related to competency should decline when appropriate proxies are included . The sample itself is one such proxy—these are , after all , only articles published in the top four economics journals . Adding other controls—author seniority , institution , total article count , citations and published order in an issue—has no eﬀect . 137 The gap is widest for the most productive economists and even exists among articles originally released as NBER working papers—both presumably very clear signals of merit . Indeed , contemporary female - authored papers published in a top - four economics journal are , in fact , cited more than male - authored papers ( Hengel , 2019 ) . Yet I cannot rule out the possibility that women’s work is systematically worse than men’s in a way that is somehow not full captured by citations , proxies for author prominence and seniority or author - speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀects—or that the female and male authors in Section 4 . 3 . 2 are not really equivalent . ( To decide for yourself , see Appendix N . 2 . ) And if this is true , editors and referees should select and peruse our papers more carefully—a byproduct of which could be better written papers after - the - fact or more attractive prose compensating for structural weaknesses before it . “Quality” is subjective ; measurement , not easy . Nevertheless , attempts using citation counts and journal acceptance rates do not indicate that men’s research is any better : as discussed in Section 4 . 3 . 1 , gender has very little impact on the latter ; 138 a review of past studies on male vs . female citations ﬁnd four in which women’s papers received fewer , six where they were cited more and eight with no signiﬁcant diﬀerence ( Ceci et al . , 2014 ) . Recent research speciﬁc to economics suggests female - authored papers get cited more ( Grossbard et al . , 2018 ; Hengel , 2019 ) . More complicated , multi - factor explanations could resolve inconsistencies present when each is analysed in isolation . Perhaps female economists are perfectionists , and it gets stronger with age ? 139 Maybe women actually enjoy being poorly informed , overconﬁdent and sensitive to 136 Assuming men and women are equally capable researchers , women would only emphasise a particular aspect of a paper at the expense of others if doing so achieved a similar outcome / eﬀort trade - oﬀ as the one employed by men . The outcome / eﬀort combination women currently experience , however , is strictly worse than men’s . 137 Published order in an issue was introduced as a set of indicator variables in an earlier version of this paper ( Hengel , 2016 , pp . 42 and 44 ) . 138 Journals may have a policy of publishing female - authored research over equal ( or even better ) male work . If so , acceptance rates are not an unbiased indicator of quality . 139 While women score higher on maintaining order ( Feingold , 1994 ) —a trait including organisation and 43 criticism—or ( more likely ) I could have otherwise misspeciﬁed the author’s objective function in Section 4 . 3 . 1 . Meanwhile , a preference for writing well coupled with unaccounted for ex - ogenously determined co - author characteristics could combine to cause women’s more readable papers and their increasing readability 140 —although restricting the analysis to solo - authored pa - pers , those co - authored by members of the same sex or with a senior female co - author results in similar ﬁgures and identical conclusions ( see Appendix K . 4 , Table K . 24 and the robustness discus - sion in Section 4 . 3 . 2 ) . 141 Alternatively , measurement error and / or co - variate controls could have interacted with gender in ways I did not anticipate . 142 And of course , the statistically signiﬁcant relationships this paper documents may simply be unfortunate ( particularly for me ! ) ﬂukes . 143 Still , no explanation matches the simplicity and believability of biased referees and / or editors . Coherence and economy do not establish fact , but they are useful guides . This single explanation neatly accounts for all observed patterns . If reviewers apply higher standards to female - authored papers , they will be rejected more often and / or subject to tougher review . Added scrutiny should improve exposition but prolong publication . The rewards from clearer writing are presumably internalised , explaining gradual increases in women’s readability . Moreover , several studies document a gender diﬀerence in critical feedback of similar form— employee performance reviews and student evaluations . Ongoing research suggests female work - ers are held to higher standards in job assessments . They are acknowledged less for creativity and technical expertise , their contributions are infrequently connected to business outcomes ; guidance or praise supervisors do oﬀer is vague ( Correll and Simard , 2016 ) . 144 Students display a similar bias . Data from Rate My Professors suggest female lecturers should be “helpful” , “clear” , “organised” and “friendly” . Men , instead , are praised ( and criticised ) for be - ing “smart” , “humble” or “cool” ( Schmidt , 2015 ) . 145 A study of teaching evaluations similarly ﬁnds students value preparation , organisation and clarity in female instructors ; their male coun - terparts are considered more knowledgable , praised for their “animation” and “leadership” and given more credit for contributing to students’ intellectual development ( Boring , 2017 ) . 5 . 2 Open review Academia’s female productivity gap is as stubborn as the business world’s pay gap ; yet , if every paper a woman writes needs three to six more months to ﬁnish review , our “Publishing Paradox” seems much less paradoxical . 146 perfectionism—signiﬁcant diﬀerences are not universally present in all cultures ( Costa et al . , 2001 ) ; diﬀerences that are present decline—or even reverse—as people age ( Weisberg et al . , 2011 ) . 140 This might occur if senior women are excluded from male networks as t increases ; consequently , they are more likely to co - author with other women than junior female economists . As I show in an earlier version of this paper , however , the reverse is true : as t increases , women are more likely to co - author with men , while men are more likely to co - author with women ( Hengel , 2016 , Table 12 , p . 25 ) . 141 Relatedly , women may have preferred to have written their t 4 = 1 publication more clearly , but senior male co - authors held them back ; at t 4 = 3 , they enjoy more freedom to achieve their desired ( higher ) readability by writing on their own or with other women . This runs counter to the observation in Footnote 140 , however . Moreover , women are more likely to co - author with more senior men at t 4 = 3 than they were at t 4 = 1 . 142 Section 2 . 1 outlines principle sources of measurement error as well as steps I have taken to minimise their impact . Meanwhile , coeﬃcient magnitude and standard errors remain relatively stable when gradually introducing controls ( Table 3 ) , reducing the likelihood of “collider” bias ( see Footnote 58 ) . 143 This is a form of “ﬁle drawer bias”—other studies showing no eﬀect weren’t published . Nevertheless , at least one recent paper found similar results : the readability of disclosure documents in audit reports is positively correlated with the proportion of women and underrepresented minorities on an audit committee ( Velte , 2018 ) . 144 A similar phenomenon exists in online fora . The Guardian commissioned researchers to study 70 million comments on its website . It found female and black writers attract disproportionately abusive threads ( Gardiner et al . , 2016 ) . 145 These conclusions are based on my own observational account of the data . 146 Virtually every study on gender diﬀerences in scientiﬁc publishing rates ﬁnd men more productive than women ( for a list , see Ceci et al . , 2014 ) . It’s no diﬀerent in my data : women published on average 1 . 7 articles ; men managed 44 Is the answer double - blind review ? Probably not . Double - blind review cannot stop refer - ees from guessing authors’ identities—which they did with surprising accuracy before the inter - net ( Blank , 1991 ) , and presumably perfect accuracy after it . 147 Instead , eliminate single - blind review , too . A randomised controlled trial at the British Jour - nal of Psychiatry suggests referee reports are better quality and less abusive when identities are known ( Walsh et al . , 2000 ) . Posting them online—as the British Medical Journal does—virtually guarantees continuous , independent audits by outside researchers . 148 Worries that reviews are less critical and / or relationships are strained are either unfounded or alleviated by the deep pool of referees common to general interest journals ( van Rooyen et al . , 2010 ; van Rooyen et al . , 1999 ) . Open review does incur costs—some people refuse to participate and those that don’t spend marginally more time drafting reports ( van Rooyen et al . , 1999 ; Walsh et al . , 2000 ) 149 —but if more accountability promotes fairer outcomes , ethical arguments in its favour should outweigh minor practical concerns . 150 6 Conclusion Female - authored articles published in top economics journals are better written than similar pa - pers by men . A large part of this gap originates in peer review . To identify the causal mechanism , I derive an empirical test from a subjective expected utility model of an author’s decision - making process . The resulting estimate suggests higher standards in peer review cause senior female econ - omists to write at least seven percent more clearly than they otherwise would . I also document evidence that sheds more light on the impact higher standards have on women’s choices and their productivity measurement : ( i ) female - authored papers spend more time under review ; ( ii ) women appear to quickly adapt to higher standards in peer review by adjusting their behaviour before it . The latter emphasises that observational data almost always capture discrimination in equilibrium ; to identify it , one must determine where the equilibrium would have been had discrimination not occurred . The former suggests higher standards could play a role in academia’s “Publishing Paradox” . If higher standards apply elsewhere in the economy they may also rationalise many instances of lower female output : work that is evaluated more critically at any point in the production pro - cess will be systematically better ( holding prices ﬁxed ) or systematically cheaper ( holding quality 2 . 4—and with far more concentration in the distribution’s right tail ( for example , 56 men have published 16 or more times in the data , but no woman ) . Women produce fewer papers even when they don’t have any children ( Ceci et al . , 2014 ) . Appropriate controls for teaching and service do not account for it ( Xie and Shauman , 2005 ) , and it isn’t a question of time , since female academics work just as many hours as men ( Ceci et al . , 2014 ; Ecklund and Lincoln , 2011 ) . 147 I ﬁnd weak evidence suggesting the policy may have been eﬀective before the late 1990s ( Section 4 . 2 ) but not afterwards ( Appendix G ) . 148 The BMJ posts reviewers’ signed reports , authors’ responses and the original manuscript on its website . No docu - mentation is posted for rejected papers , but doing so may be beneﬁcial : ( i ) A very public review implies a very public rejection ; concern for one’s reputation could reduce the number of low quality submissions . ( ii ) The onus of discov - ering mistakes would be shared with the wider economics community . ( iii ) Other journals can make publication decisions based on posted reviews—possibly reducing time spent refereeing for the discipline , as a whole . Women may receive greater scrutiny online—as they do at the Guardian ( Gardiner et al . , 2016 ) —but the diﬀerence can be mitigated if comments are non - anonymous , made only by veriﬁed members of an appropriate professional society and continuously ( and publicly ) audited for bias in quantity and quality of feedback . 149 Each study employed a diﬀerent research design ; nevertheless , both estimate roughly 12 percent of reviewers decline to participate because they oppose open peer review while signing reports increases time spent on the review by 25 minutes . When referees were told their signed reviews might be posted online , time rose by an additional half hour and refusal rates were much higher ( 55 percent ) ( van Rooyen et al . , 2010 ) . 150 A decision like this should be carefully considered based on a body of evidence and ideally extensively tested before oﬃcially rolling out . 45 ﬁxed ) . This reduces women’s wages—for example , if judges require better writing in female - authored briefs , female attorneys must charge lower fees and / or under - report hours to compete with men—and distorts measurement of female productivity—billable hours and client revenue decline ; female lawyers appear less productive than they truly are . Finally , this study exploits publicly available data to identify and evaluate discrimination’s im - pact on those who are discriminated against . But it is narrowly focused and—because it doesn’t study the bias’s source—proposes few solutions . More research is needed to better understand how and where higher standards for female authors emerge in peer review . Future studies could apply a similar theoretical framework and more holistic measure of research quality— e . g . , citations—to these and other economics journals . Readability scores analysed using a similar setup could also evaluate asymmetry anywhere ideas are communicated orally or in writing and large amounts of source material are easily obtainable—journalism , speeches , student essays , business plans , Kick - starter campaigns , etc . But to answer the deeper questions this paper raises requires conﬁdential data on the editorial process—including access to referee reports . I hope journals are challenged to be candid about bias and willing to support the access and research needed to better understand it . References Abrevaya , J . and D . S . Hamermesh ( 2012 ) . “Charity and Favoritism in the Field : Are Female Economists Nicer ( to Each Other ) ? ” Review of Economics and Statistics 94 ( 1 ) , pp . 202 – 207 . Alexander , D . , O . Gorelkina , and E . Hengel ( 2018 ) . “A reply to Tol , 2018” . Mimeo . Alkhurayyif , Y . and G . R . S . Weir ( 2017 ) . “Readability as a Basis for Information Security Policy Assessment” . In : Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Technologies . Canter - bury , pp . 114 – 121 . Altonji , J . G . and C . R . Pierret ( 2001 ) . “Employer Learning and Statistical Discrimination” . Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 ( 1 ) , pp . 313 – 350 . Antecol , H . , K . Bedard , and J . Stearns ( Sept . 2018 ) . “Equal but Inequitable : Who Beneﬁts from Gender - Neutral Tenure Clock Stopping Policies ? ” American Economic Review 108 ( 9 ) , pp . 2420 – 2441 . Anwar , S . and H . Fang ( 2006 ) . “An Alternative Test of Racial Prejudice in Motor Vehicle Searches : Theory and Evidence” . American Economic Review 96 ( 1 ) , pp . 127 – 151 . — ( 2015 ) . “Testing for Racial Prejudice in the Parole Board Release Process : Theory and Evi - dence” . The Journal of Legal Studies 44 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 37 . Anzia , S . F . and C . R . Berry ( 2011 ) . “The Jackie ( and Jill ) Robinson Eﬀect : Why Do Congress - women Outperform Congressmen ? ” American Journal of Political Science 55 ( 3 ) , pp . 478 – 493 . Armbruster , B . B . ( 1984 ) . “The Problem of Inconsiderate Text” . In : Comprehension Instruction : Perspectives and Suggestions . Ed . by G . G . Duﬀy , L . R . Roehler , and J . Mason . New York , New York : Longman , pp . 202 – 217 . Arrow , K . ( 1973 ) . “The Theory of Discrimination” . In : Discrimination in Labor Markets . Ed . by O . Ashenfelter and A . Rees . Princeton , New Jersey : Princeton University Press . Chap . 1 , pp . 16 – 195 . Artz , B . , A . H . Goodall , and A . J . Oswald ( 2018 ) . “Do Women Ask ? ” Industrial Relations : A Journal of Economy and Society 57 ( 4 ) , pp . 611 – 636 . Ashenfelter , O . and A . Krueger ( 1994 ) . “Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling from a New Sample of Twins” . American Economic Review 84 ( 5 ) , pp . 1157 – 1173 . Ayres , I . ( 2001 ) . Pervasive Prejudice ? Unconventional Evidence of Race and Gender Discrimination . Chicago , Illinois : University of Chicago Press . 46 Azmat , G . and R . Ferrer ( 2017 ) . “Gender Gaps in Performance : Evidence from Young Lawyers” . Journal of Political Economy 125 ( 5 ) , pp . 1306 – 1355 . Babcock , L . and S . Laschever ( 2003 ) . Women Don’t Ask : Negotiation and the Gender Divide . Prince - ton , New Jersey : Princeton University Press . Bandiera , O . ( 2016 ) . The Gender and Ethnicity Earnings Gap at LSE . Tech . rep . September . Lon - don School of Economics . Bayer , A . and C . E . Rouse ( 2016 ) . “Diversity in the Economics Profession : A New Attack on an Old Problem” . Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 ( 4 ) , pp . 221 – 242 . Bazargan , M . and V . S . Guzhva ( 2011 ) . “Impact of Gender , Age and Experience of Pilots on General Aviation Accidents” . Accident Analysis and Prevention 43 ( 3 ) , pp . 962 – 970 . Becker , G . S . ( 1957 ) . The Economics of Discrimination . 2nd ed . Chicago , Illinois : University of Chicago Press . Benedetti , T . J . et al . ( 2004 ) . “The Productivity of Washington State’s Obstetrician – Gynecologist Workforce : Does Gender Make a Diﬀerence ? ” Obstetrics and Gynecology 103 ( 3 ) , pp . 499 – 505 . Benoit , K . , K . Munger , and A . Spirling ( 2017 ) . “Measuring and Explaining Political Sophistica - tion through Textual Complexity” . Mimeo . Berk , J . B . , C . R . Harvey , and D . Hirshleifer ( 2017 ) . “How to Write an Eﬀective Referee Report and Improve the Scientiﬁc Review Process” . Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 ( 1 ) , pp . 231 – 244 . Berninger , M . et al . ( 2017 ) . “Confused but Convinced : Article Complexity and the Number of Citations” . Mimeo . Bertrand , M . , C . Goldin , and L . F . Katz ( 2010 ) . “Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young Profes - sionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors” . American Economic Journal : Applied Economics 2 ( 3 ) , pp . 228 – 255 . Bertrand , M . and S . Mullainathan ( 2004 ) . “Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal ? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination” . American Economic Review 94 ( 4 ) , pp . 991 – 1013 . Biddle , C . and J . Aker ( 1996 ) . “How Does the Peer Review Process Inﬂuence AANA Journal Article Readability ? ” AANA Journal 64 ( 1 ) , pp . 65 – 68 . Biddle , G . C . , G . Hilary , and R . S . Verdi ( 2009 ) . “How Does Financial Reporting Quality Relate to Investment Eﬃciency ? ” Journal of Accounting and Economics 48 ( 2 - 3 ) , pp . 112 – 131 . Blank , R . M . ( 1991 ) . “The Eﬀects of Double - blind versus Single - blind Reviewing : Experimental Evidence from the American Economic Review” . American Economic Review 81 ( 5 ) , pp . 1041 – 1067 . Blau , F . D . and L . M . Kahn ( 2017 ) . “The Gender Wage Gap : Extent , Trends , and Explanations” . Journal of Economic Literature 55 ( 3 ) , pp . 789 – 865 . Bloor , K . , N . Freemantle , and A . Maynard ( 2008 ) . “Gender and Variation in Activity Rates of Hospital Consultants” . Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 101 ( 1 ) , pp . 27 – 33 . Bordalo , P . et al . ( 2016 ) . “Stereotypes” . Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 ( 4 ) , pp . 1753 – 1794 . Boring , A . ( 2017 ) . “Gender Biases in Student Evaluations of Teaching” . Journal of Public Eco - nomics 145 ( Supplement C ) , pp . 27 – 41 . Borsuk , R . M . et al . ( 2009 ) . “To Name or Not to Name : The Eﬀect of Changing Author Gender on Peer Review” . BioScience 59 ( 11 ) , pp . 985 – 989 . Bransch , F . and M . Kvasnicka ( 2017 ) . “Male Gatekeepers Gender Bias in the Publishing Pro - cess ? ” IZA Discussion Paper Series , No . 11089 . Breda , T . and C . Napp ( July 2019 ) . “Girls’ comparative advantage in reading can largely ex - plain the gender gap in math - related ﬁelds” . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , p . 201905779 . 47 Bright , L . K . ( 2017 ) . “Decision Theoretic Model of the Productivity Gap” . Erkenntnis 82 ( 2 ) , pp . 421 – 442 . Canadian Institute for Health Information ( 2005 ) . Canada’s Health Care Providers . https : / / secure . cihi . ca / free _ products / HCP _ Chartbook05 _ e . pdf . Accessed : 2017 - 01 - 10 . Card , D . and S . DellaVigna ( 2013 ) . “Nine Facts about Top Journals in Economics” . Journal of Economic Literature 51 ( 1 ) , pp . 144 – 161 . — ( 2017 ) . “What do Editors Maximize ? Evidence from Four Leading Economics Journals” . NBER Working Paper Series , No . 23282 . Casnici , N . et al . ( 2016 ) . “Assessing peer review by guaging the fate of rejected manuscripts . The case of Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation Why looking at the fate of unpublished manuscripts ? ” PEERE Meeting : Vaxjo 2016 ( September ) . Ceci , S . J . et al . ( 2014 ) . “Women in Academic Science : A Changing Landscape” . Psychological Science in the Public Interest 15 ( 3 ) , pp . 75 – 141 . Chall , J . S . , A . Freeman , and B . Levy ( 1983 ) . “Minimum Competency Testing of Reading : An Analysis of Eight Tests Designed for Grade 11” . In : The Courts , Validity , and Minimum Com - petency Testing . Ed . by G . F . Madaus . Boston , Massachussetts : Kluwer - Nijhoﬀ . Chap . 10 , pp . 197 – 208 . Chall , J . S . , S . S . Conard , and S . H . Harris ( 1977 ) . An Analysis of Textbooks in Relation to Declining SAT Scores . Tech . rep . Prepared fo the Advisory Panel on on the Scholastic Aptitude Test Score Decline . Princeton , New Jersey . Chall , J . S . and E . Dale ( 1995 ) . Readability Revisited : The New Dale - Chall Readability Formula . Cambridge , Massachusetts : Brookline Books . Chari , A . and P . Goldsmith - Pinkham ( 2017 ) . “Gender Representation in Economics Across Topics and Time : Evidence from the NBER Summer Institute” . NBER Working Paper Se - ries , No . 23953 . Chung , J . and G . S . Monroe ( 2001 ) . “A Research Note on the Eﬀects of Gender and Task Com - plexity on an Audit Judgment” . Behavioral Research in Accounting 13 ( 1 ) , pp . 111 – 125 . Clain , S . H . and K . Leppel ( 2018 ) . “Patterns in Economics Journal Acceptances and Rejections” . American Economist 63 ( 1 ) , pp . 94 – 109 . Coate , S . and G . C . Loury ( 1993 ) . “Will Aﬃrmative - Action Policies Eliminate Negative Stereo - types ? ” American Economic Review 83 ( 5 ) , pp . 1220 – 1240 . Coleman , E . B . ( 1964 ) . “The Comprehensibility of Several Grammatical Transformations” . Jour - nal of Applied Psychology 48 ( 3 ) , pp . 186 – 190 . — ( 1965 ) . “Learning of Prose Written in Four Grammatical Transformations” . Journal of Applied Psychology 49 ( 5 ) , pp . 332 – 341 . Correll , S . and C . Simard ( 2016 ) . “Vague Feedback Is Holding Women Back” . Harvard Business Review . https : / / hbr . org / 2016 / 04 / research - vague - feedback - is - holding - women - back . Accessed : 2016 - 10 - 04 . Cortés , P . and J . Pan ( 2016 ) . “Prevalence of Long Hours and Women’s Job Choices : Evidence across Countries and within the U . S . ” IZA Discussion Paper Series , No . 10225 . Costa , P . T . , A . Terracciano , and R . R . McCrae ( 2001 ) . “Gender Diﬀerences in Personality Traits Across Cultures : Robust and Surprising Findings” . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 81 ( 2 ) , pp . 322 – 331 . Cox , C . ( 2007 ) . Closing Remarks to the Second Annual Corporate Governance Summit . Delivered at USC Marshall School of Business , Los Angeles , California , 23 March . Dale , E . and J . S . Chall ( 1948 ) . “A Formula for Predicting Readability” . Educational Research Bulletin 27 ( 1 ) , pp . 11 – 20 . De Franco , G . et al . ( 2015 ) . “Analyst Report Readability” . Contemporary Accounting Research 32 ( 1 ) , pp . 76 – 104 . 48 Dowling , M . , H . Hammami , and O . Zreik ( 2018 ) . “Easy to Read , Easy to Cite ? ” Economics Letters 173 , pp . 100 – 103 . DuBay , W . H . ( 2004 ) . The Principles of Readability . Costa Mesa , California : Impact Information . Ductor , L . , S . Goyal , and A . Prummer ( 2018 ) . “Gender and Collaboration” . Mimeo . Cambridge . Ecklund , E . H . and A . E . Lincoln ( 2011 ) . “Scientists Want More Children” . PLoS ONE 6 ( 8 ) , pp . 1 – 4 . Ellison , G . ( 2002 ) . “The Slowdown of the Economics Publishing Process” . Journal of Political Economy 110 ( 5 ) , pp . 947 – 993 . Enke , B . ( 2018 ) . “Moral Values and Voting : Trump and Beyond” . NBER Working Paper Series , No . 24268 . Faigley , L . and S . P . Witte ( 1981 ) . “Analyzing Revision” . College Composition and Communication 32 ( 4 ) , pp . 400 – 414 . Family , H . , M . Weiss , and J . Sutton ( 2013 ) . The Eﬀects of Mental Workload on Community Phar - macists’ Ability to Detect Dispensing Errors . Tech . rep . Pharmacy Research UK . Fang , F . C . , J . W . Bennett , and A . Casadevall ( 2013 ) . “Males Are Overrepresented among Life Science Researchers Committing Scientiﬁc Misconduct” . mBio 4 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 3 . Fass , W . and G . M . Schumacher ( 1978 ) . “Eﬀects of Motivation , Subject Activity , and Readability on the Retention of Prose Materials” . Journal of Educational Psychology 70 ( 5 ) , pp . 803 – 807 . Feingold , A . ( 1994 ) . “Gender Diﬀerences in Personality : A Meta - analysis” . Psychological Bulletin 116 ( 3 ) , pp . 429 – 456 . Firth - Cozens , J . ( 2008 ) . “Doctors with Diﬃculties : Why So Few Women ? ” Postgraduate Medical Journal 84 ( 992 ) , pp . 318 – 320 . Flesch , R . ( 1949 ) . The Art of Readable Writing . New York , New York : Harper and Brothers Pub - lishers . Foschi , M . ( 1996 ) . “Double Standards in the Evaluation of Men and Women” . Social Psychology Quarterly 59 ( 3 ) , pp . 237 – 254 . Foster , D . R . and D . H . Rhoney ( 2002 ) . “Readability of Printed Patient Information for Epileptic Patients” . Annals of Pharmacotherapy 36 ( 12 ) , pp . 1856 – 1861 . Fryer , R . G . , D . Pager , and J . L . Spenkuch ( 2013 ) . “Racial Disparities in Job Finding and Oﬀered Wages” . Journal of Law and Economics 56 ( 3 ) , pp . 633 – 689 . Funk , P . and H . Perrone ( 2017 ) . “Gender Diﬀerences in Academic Performance : The Role of Personality Traits” . Mimeo . Gans , J . S . and G . B . Shepherd ( 1994 ) . “How Are the Mighty Fallen : Rejected Classic Articles by Leading Economists” . Journal of Economic Perspectives 8 ( 1 ) , pp . 165 – 179 . Gardiner , B . et al . ( 2016 ) . “The Dark Side of Guardian Comments” . Guardian . https : / / www . theguardian . com / technology / 2016 / apr / 12 / the - dark - side - of - guardian - comments . Accessed : 2016 - 10 - 04 . Gilbert , J . R . , E . S . Williams , and G . D . Lundberg ( 1994 ) . “Is There Gender Bias in JAMA’s Peer Review Process ? ” Journal of the American Medical Association 272 ( 2 ) , pp . 139 – 142 . Ginther , D . K . and S . Kahn ( 2004 ) . “Women in Economics : Moving Up or Falling Oﬀ the Academic Career Ladder ? ” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18 ( 3 ) , pp . 193 – 214 . Glover , D . , A . Pallais , and W . Pariente ( 2017 ) . “Discrimination as a Self - Fulﬁlling Prophecy : Evidence from French Grocery Stores” . Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 ( 3 ) , pp . 1219 – 1260 . Goldberg , P . ( 1968 ) . “Are Women Prejudiced against Women ? ” Trans - action 5 ( 5 ) , pp . 28 – 30 . Goldberg , P . K . ( 2015 ) . “Report of the Editor : American Economic Review” . American Economic Review 105 ( 5 ) , pp . 698 – 710 . Goldin , C . ( 2014a ) . “A Grand Gender Convergence : Its Last Chapter” . American Economic Re - view 104 ( 4 ) , pp . 1091 – 1119 . 49 — ( 2014b ) . “A Pollution Theory of Discrimination : Male and Female Diﬀerences in Occupations and Earnings” . In : Human Capital in History : The American Record . Ed . by L . P . Boustan , C . Frydman , and R . A . Margo . Cambridge , Massachusetts : National Bureau of Economic Research , pp . 313 – 348 . Goldin , C . and L . F . Katz ( 2016 ) . “A Most Egalitarian Profession : Pharmacy and the Evolution of a Family - Friendly Occupation” . Journal of Labor Economics 34 ( 3 ) , pp . 705 – 746 . Goldin , C . and C . Rouse ( 2000 ) . “Orchestrating Impartiality : The Impact of ‘Blind’ Auditions on Female Musicians” . American Economic Review 90 ( 4 ) , pp . 715 – 741 . Gordon , M . B . et al . ( 2009 ) . “Gender Diﬀerences in Research Grant Applications for Pediatric Residents” . Pediatrics 124 ( 2 ) , e355 – 61 . Grossbard , S . , T . Yilmazer , and L . Zhang ( 2018 ) . “The Gender Gap in Citations of Economics Articles : Lessons from Economics of the Household” . Mimeo . Grunspan , D . Z . et al . ( 2016 ) . “Males Under - estimate Academic Performance of Their Female Peers in Undergraduate Biology Classrooms” . PLOS ONE 11 ( 2 ) , pp . 1 – 16 . Guerini , M . , A . Pepe , and B . Lepri ( 2012 ) . “Do Linguistic Style and Readability of Scientiﬁc Abstracts Aﬀect their Virality ? ” In : Proceedings of the Sixth Interntaional AAAI Conference of Weblogs and Social Media . Dublin , pp . 475 – 478 . Hamermesh , D . S . ( 1994 ) . “Facts and Myths about Refereeing” . Journal of Economic Perspectives 8 ( 1 ) , pp . 153 – 163 . Handley , G . et al . ( 2015 ) . “An Examination of Gender Diﬀerences in the American Fisheries Society Peer - Review Process” . Fisheries Magazine 40 ( 9 ) , pp . 442 – 451 . Hart , R . L . ( 2000 ) . “Co - authorship in the Academic Library Literature : A Survey of Attitudes and Behaviors” . Journal of Academic Librarianship 26 ( 5 ) , pp . 339 – 345 . Hartley , J . , J . W . Pennebaker , and C . Fox ( 2003a ) . “Abstracts , Introductions and Discussions : How Far Do They Diﬀer in Style ? ” Scientometrics 57 ( 3 ) , pp . 389 – 398 . — ( 2003b ) . “Using New Technology to Assess the Academic Writing Styles of Male and Female Pairs and Individuals” . Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 33 ( 3 ) , pp . 243 – 261 . Hartvigsen , M . K . ( 1981 ) . “A Comparative Study of Quality and Syntactic Maturity between In - class and Out - of - class Writing Samples of Freshmen at Washington State University” . PhD thesis . Washington State University . Hatamyar , P . W . and K . M . Simmons ( 2004 ) . “Are Women More Ethical Lawyers ? An Empirical Study” . Florida State University Law Review 31 ( 4 ) , pp . 785 – 858 . Hayden , J . D . ( 2008 ) . “Readability in the British Journal of Surgery” . British Journal of Surgery 95 ( 1 ) , pp . 119 – 124 . Heilman , M . E . and M . C . Haynes ( 2005 ) . “No Credit Where Credit Is Due : Attributional Rationalization of Women’s Success in Male - female Teams” . Journal of Applied Psychology 90 ( 5 ) , pp . 905 – 916 . Hengel , E . ( 2015 ) . “Two Essays on Bankruptcy and One Essay on Gender Diﬀerences in Aca - demic Publishing” . PhD thesis . University of Cambridge . — ( 2016 ) . “Publishing while Female : Gender Diﬀerences in Peer Review Scrutiny” . Mimeo . — ( 2018 ) . “Publishing while Female : Are Women Held to Higher Standards ? Evidence From Peer Review . ” Mimeo . — ( 2019 ) . “Gender Diﬀerences in Citations at Top Economics Journals” . Mimeo . Hopewell , S . et al . ( 2014 ) . “Impact of Peer Review on Reports of Randomised Trials Published in Open Peer Review Journals : Retrospective Before and After Study” . British Medical Journal 349 , g4145 – g4145 . Hussin , M . F . et al . ( 2012 ) . “The Readability of Transmission Line Characteristics Lab Manual” . In : IEEE Control and System Graduate Research Colloquium . Shah Alam , Selangor , pp . 398 – 401 . 50 Ittonen , K . , E . Vähämaa , and S . Vähämaa ( 2013 ) . “Female Auditors and Accruals Quality” . Ac - counting Horizons 27 ( 2 ) , pp . 205 – 228 . Jansen , D . J . ( 2011 ) . “Does the Clarity of Central Bank Communication Aﬀect Volatility in Fi - nancial Markets ? Evidence from Humphrey - Hawkins Testimonies” . Contemporary Economic Policy 29 ( 4 ) , pp . 494 – 509 . Jenkins , S . ( 2007 ) . “A Woman’s Work Is Never Done ? Fund - Raising Perception and Eﬀort among Female State Legislative Candidates” . Political Research Quarterly 60 ( 2 ) , pp . 230 – 239 . Johnson , M . and V . S . Helgeson ( 2002 ) . “Sex Diﬀerences in Response to Evaluative Feedback : A Field Study” . Psychology of Women Quarterly 26 ( 3 ) , pp . 242 – 251 . Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Editorial Board ( 2015 ) . Editorial Report : Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery . http : / / journals . lww . com / jtrauma / Documents / Editorial % 20Board % 20Reports / 2015 % 200909 % 20AAST % 20Ed % 20Board % 20print % 20report . pdf . Accessed : 2016 - 10 - 04 . Kemper , S . ( 1983 ) . “Measuring the Inference Load of a Text” . Journal of Educational Psychology 75 ( 3 ) , pp . 391 – 401 . Kimble , J . ( 1994 ) . “Answering the Critics of Plain Language” . Scribes Journal of Legal Writing 51 ( 1994 - 1995 ) , pp . 51 – 85 . King , D . W . , C . Tenopir , and M . Clarke ( 2006 ) . “Measuring Total Reading of Journal Articles” . D - Lib Magazine 12 ( 10 ) , pp . 1082 – 9873 . Kintsch , W . and J . R . Miller ( 1984 ) . “Readability : A View from Cognitive Psychology” . In : Un - derstanding Reading Comprehension . Ed . by J . Flood . Newark , Delaware : International Read - ing Association , pp . 220 – 232 . Klare , G . R . ( 1976 ) . “Judging Readability” . Instructional Science 5 ( 1 ) , pp . 55 – 61 . Klare , G . R . and K . L . Smart ( 1973 ) . “Analysis of the Readability Level of Selected USAFI Instructional Materials” . Journal of Educational Research 67 ( 4 ) , p . 176 . Kleven , H . J . ( 2018 ) . Language Trends in Public Economics . https : / / www . henrikkleven . com / uploads / 3 / 7 / 3 / 1 / 37310663 / languagetrends _ slides _ kleven . pdf . Accessed : 2018 - 12 - 02 . Klos , D . M . ( 2014 ) . The Status of Women in the U . S . Media 2013 . Tech . rep . Women’s Media Center . Knowles , J . , N . Persico , and P . Todd ( 2001 ) . “Racial Bias in Motor Vehicle Searches : Theory and Evidence” . Journal of Political Economy 109 ( 1 ) , pp . 203 – 229 . Krawczyk , M . and M . Smyk ( 2016 ) . “Author’s Gender Aﬀects Rating of Academic Articles : Evidence from an Incentivized , Deception - free Laboratory Experiment” . European Economic Review 90 , pp . 326 – 335 . Kroll , B . ( 1990 ) . “What Does Time Buy ? ESL Student Performance on Home versus Class Com - positions” . In : Second Language Writing . Ed . by B . Kroll . Cambridge , U . K . : Cambridge Uni - versity Press . Chap . 9 , pp . 140 – 154 . Kugler , A . , C . Tinsley , and O . Ukhaneva ( 2017 ) . “Choice of Majors : Are Women Really Diﬀerent from Men ? ” NBER Working Paper Series , No . 23735 . Kumar , S . and K . Ratnavelu ( 2016 ) . “Perceptions of Scholars in the Field of Economics on Co - authorship Associations : Evidence from an International Survey” . PLoS ONE 11 ( 6 ) , pp . 1 – 18 . Laband , D . N . and C . N . Taylor ( 1992 ) . “The Impact of Bad Writing in Economics” . Economic Inquiry 30 ( 4 ) , pp . 673 – 688 . Lavy , V . and E . Sand ( 2015 ) . “On The Origins of Gender Human Capital Gaps : Short and Long Term Consequences of Teachers’ Stereotypical Biases” . NBER Working Paper Series , No . 20909 . Law , D . S . and D . Zaring ( 2010 ) . “Law versus Ideology : the Supreme Court and the Use of Legislative History” . William and Mary Law Review 51 ( 5 ) , pp . 1653 – 1747 . 51 Lawrence , A . ( 2013 ) . “Individual Investors and Financial Disclosure” . Journal of Accounting and Economics 56 ( 1 ) , pp . 130 – 147 . Lee , C . J . ( 2016 ) . “Revisiting Current Causes of Women’s Underrepresentation in Science” . In : Metaphysics and Epistemology . Ed . by M . Brownstein and J . Saul . Vol . 1 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Chap . 2 . 5 , pp . 265 – 283 . Lehavy , R . , F . Li , and K . Merkley ( 2011 ) . “The Eﬀect of Annual Report Readability on An - alyst Following and the Properties of Their Earnings Forecasts” . Accounting Review 86 ( 3 ) , pp . 1087 – 1115 . Lei , L . and S . Yan ( 2016 ) . “Readability and Citations in Information Science : Evidence from Abstracts and Articles of Four Journals ( 2003 – 2012 ) ” . Scientometrics 108 ( 3 ) , pp . 1155 – 1169 . Leuven , E . and B . Sianesi ( 2003 ) . PSMATCH2 : Stata Module to Perform Full Mahalanobis and Propensity Score Matching , Common Support Graphing , and Covariate Imbalance Testing . http : / / ideas . repec . org / c / boc / bocode / s432001 . html . Accessed : 2018 - 03 - 20 . Li , F . ( 2008 ) . “Annual Report Readability , Current Earnings , and Earnings Persistence” . Journal of Accounting and Economics 45 ( 2 - 3 ) , pp . 221 – 247 . Long , L . N . and W . F . Christensen ( 2011 ) . “Does the Readability of Your Brief Aﬀect Your Chance of Winning an Appeal ? ” Journal of Appellate Practice and Process 12 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 14 . Loughran , T . and B . Mcdonald ( 2016 ) . “Textual Analysis in Accounting and Finance : A Survey” . Journal of Accounting Research 54 ( 4 ) , pp . 1187 – 1230 . Lundberg , S . J . ( 1991 ) . “The Enforcement of Equal Opportunity Laws Under Imperfect Infor - mation : Aﬃrmative Action and Alternatives” . Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 ( 1 ) , pp . 309 – 326 . Lundberg , S . J . ( 2017 ) . “Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession ( CSWEP ) ” . American Economic Review 107 ( 5 ) , pp . 759 – 776 . Lundberg , S . J . and R . Startz ( 1983 ) . “Private Discrimination and Social Intervention in Com - petitive Labor Markets” . American Economic Review 73 ( 3 ) , pp . 340 – 347 . McFadden , K . L . ( 1996 ) . “Comparing Pilot - error Accident Rates of Male and Female Airline Pilots” . Omega 24 ( 4 ) , pp . 443 – 450 . McGillivray , B . and E . De Ranieri ( 2018 ) . “Uptake and Outcome of Manuscripts in Nature Journals by Review Model and Author Characteristics” . Mimeo . Meade , C . D . and J . C . Byrd ( 1989 ) . “Patient Literacy and the Readability of Smoking Education Literature” . American Journal of Public Health 79 ( 2 ) , pp . 204 – 206 . Meyer , B . J . F . ( 1982 ) . “Reading Research and the Composition Teacher : The Importance of Plans” . College Composition and Communication 33 ( 1 ) , pp . 37 – 49 . Miller , B . P . ( 2010 ) . “The Eﬀects of Reporting Complexity on Small and Large Investor Trading” . Accounting Review 85 ( 6 ) , pp . 2107 – 2143 . Mohr , T . S . ( 2014 ) . “Why Women Don’t Apply for Jobs Unless They’re 100 % Qualiﬁed” . Harvard Business Review . https : / / hbr . org / 2014 / 08 / why - women - dont - apply - for - jobs - unless - theyre - 100 - qualified . Accessed : 2017 - 11 - 16 . Moss - Racusin , C . A . et al . ( 2012 ) . “Science Faculty’s Subtle Gender Biases Favor Male Students” . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 ( 41 ) , pp . 16474 – 16479 . Neumark , D . , R . J . Bank , and K . D . Van Nort ( 1996 ) . “Sex Discrimination in Restaurant Hiring : An Audit Study” . Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 ( 3 ) , pp . 915 – 941 . Niederle , M . and L . Vesterlund ( 2010 ) . “Explaining the Gender Gap in Math Test Scores : The Role of Competition” . Journal of Economic Perspectives 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 129 – 144 . Niskanen , J . et al . ( 2011 ) . “Auditor Gender and Corporate Earnings Management Behavior in Private Finnish Firms” . Managerial Auditing Journal 26 ( 9 ) , pp . 778 – 793 . O’Donnell , E . and E . N . Johnson ( 2001 ) . “The Eﬀects of Auditor Gender and Task Complexity on Information Processing Eﬃciency” . International Journal of Auditing 5 ( 2 ) , pp . 91 – 105 . 52 Paludi , M . A . and W . D . Bauer ( 1983 ) . “Goldberg Revisited : What’s in an Author’s Name” . Sex Roles 9 ( 3 ) , pp . 387 – 390 . Parsons , C . A . et al . ( 2011 ) . “Strike Three : Discrimination , Incentives , and Evaluation” . American Economic Review 101 ( 4 ) , pp . 1410 – 1435 . Payne , B . K . and D . Dabney ( 1997 ) . “Prescription Fraud : Characteristics , Consequences , and Inﬂuences” . Journal of Drug Issues 27 ( 4 ) , pp . 807 – 820 . Pertold - Gebicka , B . , F . Pertold , and N . D . Gupta ( 2016 ) . “Employment Adjustments around Childbirth” . IZA Discussion Paper Series , No . 9685 . Phelps , E . S . ( 1972 ) . “The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism” . American Economic Review 62 ( 4 ) , pp . 659 – 661 . Plavén - Sigray , P . et al . ( 2017 ) . “The Readability of Scientiﬁc Texts is Decreasing over Time” . eLife 6 ( e27725 ) , pp . 1 – 14 . Püttmann , L . ( 2017 ) . VoxEU Gobbledygook . http : / / lukaspuettmann . com / 2017 / 12 / 09 / voxeu - gobbledygook / . Accessed : 2018 - 05 - 19 . Reuben , E . , P . Sapienza , and L . Zingales ( 2014 ) . “How Stereotypes Impair Women’s Careers in Science . ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 ( 12 ) , pp . 4403 – 4408 . Richardson , J . V . ( 1977 ) . “Readability and Readership of Journals in Library Science” . Journal of Academic Librianship 3 ( 1 ) , pp . 20 – 22 . Roberts , T . - A . and S . Nolen - Hoeksema ( 1989 ) . “Sex Diﬀerences in Reactions to Evaluative Feedback” . Sex Roles 21 ( 11 - 12 ) , pp . 725 – 747 . — ( 1994 ) . “Gender Comparisons in Responsiveness to Others’ Evaluations in Achievement Set - tings” . Psychology of Women Quarterly 18 , pp . 221 – 240 . Roter , D . L . and J . A . Hall ( 2004 ) . “Physician Gender and Patient - centered Communication : A Critical Review of Empirical Research” . Annual Review of Public Health 25 ( May ) , pp . 497 – 519 . Salter , S . P . et al . ( 2012 ) . “Broker Beauty and Boon : A Study of Physical Attractiveness and Its Eﬀect on Real Estate Brokers’ Income and Productivity” . Applied Financial Economics 22 ( 10 ) , pp . 811 – 825 . Sarsons , H . ( 2019 ) . “Gender Diﬀerences in Recognition for Group Work” . Journa of Political Economy ( forthcoming ) . Sawyer , A . G . , J . Laran , and J . Xu ( 2008 ) . “The Readability of Marketing Journals : Are Award - Winning Articles Better Written ? ” Journal of Marketing 72 ( 1 ) , pp . 108 – 117 . Schafheutle , E . I . , E . M . Seston , and K . Hassell ( 2011 ) . “Factors Inﬂuencing Pharmacist Perfor - mance : A Review of the Peer - Reviewed Literature” . Health Policy 102 ( 2 – 3 ) , pp . 178 – 192 . Schmidt , B . ( 2015 ) . “Gender Bias Exists in Professor Evaluations” . New York Times . http : / / www . nytimes . com / roomfordebate / 2015 / 12 / 16 / is - it - fair - to - rate - professors - online / gender - bias - exists - in - professor - evaluations . Accessed : 2016 - 10 - 04 . Seagraves , P . and P . Gallimore ( 2013 ) . “The Gender Gap in Real Estate Sales : Negotiation Skill or Agent Selection ? ” Real Estate Economics 41 ( 3 ) , pp . 600 – 631 . Sheltzer , J . M . and J . C . Smith ( 2014 ) . “Elite Male Faculty in the Life Sciences Employ Fewer Women” . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 ( 28 ) , pp . 10107 – 10112 . Sirico , L . J . ( 2007 ) . “Readability Studies : How Technocentrism Can Compromise Research and Legal Determinations” . Quinnipiac Law Review 26 ( 1 ) , pp . 147 – 172 . Spirling , A . ( 2016 ) . “Democratization and Linguistic Complexity : The Eﬀect of Franchise Ex - tension on Parliamentary Discourse , 1832 – 1915” . Journal of Politics 78 ( 1 ) , pp . 120 – 136 . Stallard , C . K . ( 1974 ) . “An Analysis of the Writing Behavior of Good Student Writers” . Research in the Teaching of English 8 ( 2 ) , pp . 206 – 218 . Swanson , C . E . ( 1948 ) . “Readability and Readership : A Controlled Experiment” . Journalism Bul - letin 25 ( 4 ) , pp . 339 – 343 . 53 Szeinbach , S . et al . ( 2007 ) . “Dispensing Errors in Community Pharmacy : Perceived Inﬂuence of Sociotechnical Factors” . International Journal for Quality in Health Care 19 ( 4 ) , pp . 203 – 209 . Teele , D . L . and K . Thelen ( 2017 ) . “Gender in the Journals : Publication Patterns in Political Science” . PS - Political Science and Politics 50 ( 2 ) , pp . 433 – 447 . Thörnqvist , T . ( 2015 ) . “Sophistication , News and Individual Investor Trading” . Mimeo . mimeo . Tol , R . S . ( 2018 ) . “Gender at Energy Economics” . Energy Economics 72 , pp . 558 – 559 . Torgler , B . and M . Piatti ( 2013 ) . A Century of American Economic Review . New York , New York : Palgrave Macmillan . Tsugawa , Y . et al . ( 2017 ) . “Comparison of Hospital Mortality and Readmission Rates for Medi - care Patients Treated by Male vs Female Physicians” . JAMA Internal Medicine 177 ( 2 ) , pp . 206 – 213 . Tullett , J . , P . Rutter , and D . Brown ( 2003 ) . “A Longitudinal Study of United Kingdom Phar - macists’ Misdemeanours—Trials , Tribulations and Trends” . Pharmacy World & Science 25 ( 2 ) , pp . 43 – 51 . Turnbull , G . K . and J . Dombrow ( 2007 ) . “Individual Agents , Firms , and the Real Estate Broker - age Process” . Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 35 ( 1 ) , pp . 57 – 76 . Vail , G . J . and L . G . Ekman ( 1986 ) . “Pilot - error Accidents : Male vs . Female” . Applied Ergonomics 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 297 – 303 . Van Rooyen , S . , T . Delamothe , and S . J . W . Evans ( 2010 ) . “Eﬀect on Peer Review of Telling Reviewers that Their Signed Reviews Might Be Posted on the Web : Randomised Controlled Trial” . British Medical Journal 341 ( c5729 ) . Van Rooyen , S . et al . ( 1999 ) . “Eﬀect of Open Peer Review on Quality of Reviews and on Review - ers’ Recommendations : A Randomised Trial” . British Medical Journal 318 ( 7175 ) , pp . 23 – 27 . Velte , P . ( 2018 ) . “Does gender diversity in the audit committee inﬂuence key audit matters’ read - ability in the audit report ? UK evidence” . Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management 25 ( 5 ) , pp . 748 – 755 . Volden , C . , A . E . Wiseman , and D . E . Wittmer ( 2013 ) . “When Are Women More Eﬀective Lawmakers Than Men ? ” American Journal of Political Science 57 ( 2 ) , pp . 326 – 341 . Voyer , D . and S . D . Voyer ( 2014 ) . “Gender Diﬀerences in Scholastic Achievement : A Meta - Analysis” . Psychological Bulletin 140 ( 4 ) , pp . 1174 – 1204 . Wallace , L . S . et al . ( 2008 ) . “Suitability and Readability of Consumer Medical Information Ac - companying Prescription Medication Samples” . Patient Education and Counseling 70 ( 3 ) , pp . 420 – 425 . Walsh , E . et al . ( 2000 ) . “Open Peer Review : A Randomised Controlled Trial” . British Journal of Psychiatry 176 ( 1 ) , pp . 47 – 51 . Walton , R . O . and P . M . Politano ( 2016 ) . “Characteristics of General Aviation Accidents Involv - ing Male and Female Pilots” . Aviation Psychology and Applied Human Factors 6 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 44 . Weisberg , Y . J . , C . G . De Young , and J . B . Hirsh ( 2011 ) . “Gender Diﬀerences in Personality across the Ten Aspects of the Big Five” . Frontiers in Psychology 2 ( 178 ) . Weisshaar , K . ( 2017 ) . “Publish and Perish ? An Assessment of Gender Gaps in Promotion to Tenure in Academia” . Social Forces 96 ( 2 ) , pp . 529 – 560 . Williams , J . C . , K . W . Phillips , and E . V . Hall ( 2015 ) . Double Jeopardy ? Gender Bias against Women of Color in Science . Tech . rep . University of California , Hastings College of the Law . Wu , A . H . ( 2017 ) . “Gender Stereotyping in Academia : Evidence from Economics Job Market Rumors Forum” . Mimeo . Xie , Y . and K . A . Shauman ( 2005 ) . Women in Science : Career Processes and Outcomes . Cambridge , Massachusetts : Harvard University Press . 54 Zipf , G . Z . ( 1935 ) . The Psycho - Biology of Language : an Introduction to Dynamic Philology . Boston , Massachusetts : MIT Press . 55 Appendices A Research assessing readability score validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 B Calculating readability scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 C Description of control variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 D Proofs for Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 E Gender and readability , by JEL code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 F Author - level analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 G Double - and semi - blind review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 H Abstract word limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 I Evaluating Theorem 1 using the entire sample of authors . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 J Alternative program for calculating readability scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 K Alternative proxies for article gender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 K . 1 Senior female author . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 K . 2 Majority female - authored . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 K . 3 At least one female author . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 K . 4 Exclusively female - authored . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 L Section 4 . 1 , suplemental output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 M Section 4 . 2 , suplemental output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 M . 1 Table 5 ( ﬁrst column ) , full output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 M . 2 Table 5 , accounting for ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52 N Section 4 . 3 , supplemental output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 N . 1 Co - variate balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 N . 2 List of authors in each matched pair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58 N . 3 b R it regression output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60 N . 4 Table 7 , Equation ( 12 ) and Condition 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61 N . 5 b R it , controlling for JEL category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62 O Section 4 . 5 , supplemental output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 O . 1 Table 9 , alternative year ﬁxed eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 O . 2 Table 9 , alternative thresholds for mother j . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 O . 3 Quantile regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 A Research assessing readability score validity Below are the studies included in the analysis from Figure 2 , which summarises correlations be - tween readability scores and alternative measures of reading comprehension found in other re - search . A few notes on the criteria for inclusion and how some correlations were determined : • I include only documents produced for the U . S . government or published peer reviewed studies—with the exception of the present paper , Benoit et al . ( 2017 ) and results from dissertations that were presented and discussed in a peer reviewed manuscript . • I include a small number of studies with correlations between alternative readability mea - sures and the number of words not listed on the Dale - Chall word list . In all other cases , however , correlations with only parts of a score ( e . g . , syllables per words ) are omitted . • A few earlier studies calculated and listed various readability measures for many passages of text , but did not report coeﬃcients of correlation between them . I manually calculated these correlations myself . Figure 2 should convincingly convey the message that the readability scores I use in this paper positively correlate with other—arguably more reliable—measures of text diﬃculty . Although I have made every eﬀort to include all relevant research ( subject to the restrictions above ) , I do not promise that the studies listed below represent a completely comprehensive review . Studies included in Figure 2 Ardoin , S . P . et al . ( 2005 ) . “Accuracy of Readability Estimates’ Predictions of CBM Performance . ” School Psychology Quarterly 20 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 22 . Benoit , K . , K . Munger , and A . Spirling ( 2017 ) . “Measuring and Explaining Political Sophistica - tion through Textual Complexity” . Mimeo . Bormuth , J . R . ( 1966 ) . “Readability : A New Approach” . Reading Research Quarterly 1 ( 3 ) , pp . 79 – 132 . Brown , J . D . ( 1998 ) . “An EFL Readability Index” . JALT Journal 20 ( 2 ) , pp . 7 – 36 . Carver , R . P . ( 1974 ) . Improving Reading Comprehension . Tech . rep . Washington , D . C . : American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences . Caylor , J . S . et al . ( 1973 ) . Methodologies for Determining Reading Requirements of Military Occupa - tional Specialties . Tech . rep . Alexandria , Virginia : Human Resources Research Organization . Chall , J . S . and E . Dale ( 1995 ) . Readability Revisited : The New Dale - Chall Readability Formula . Cambridge , Massachusetts : Brookline Books . Clauson , K . A . , Q . Zeng - Treitler , and S . Kandula ( 2010 ) . “Readability of Patient and Health Care Professional Targeted Dietary Supplement Leaﬂets Used for Diabetes and Chronic Fatigue Syndrome” . Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine 16 ( 1 ) , pp . 119 – 124 . Compton , D . L . , A . C . Appleton , and M . K . Hosp ( 2004 ) . “Exploring the Relationship Between Text - Leveling Systems and Reading Accuracy and Fluency in Second - Grade Students Who Are Average and Poor Decoders” . Learning Disabilities Research and Practice 19 ( 3 ) , pp . 176 – 184 . Crossley , S . A . et al . ( 2017 ) . “Predicting Text Comprehension , Processing , and Familiarity in Adult Readers : New Approaches to Readability Formulas” . Discourse Processes 54 ( 5 - 6 ) , pp . 340 – 359 . Crossley , S . A . , J . Greenﬁeld , and D . S . McNamara ( 2008 ) . “Assessing Text Readability Using Cognitively Based Indices” . TESOL Quarterly 42 ( 3 ) , pp . 475 – 493 . 1 Cunningham , J . W . , E . H . Hiebert , and H . A . Mesmer ( 2018 ) . “Investigating the Validity of Two Widely Used Quantitative Text Tools” . Reading and Writing 31 ( 4 ) , pp . 813 – 833 . Dale , E . and J . S . Chall ( 1948 ) . “A Formula for Predicting Readability” . Educational Research Bulletin 27 ( 1 ) , pp . 11 – 20 . Dale , E . and R . W . Tyler ( 1934 ) . “A Study of the Factors Inﬂuencing the Diﬃculty of Reading Materials for Adults of Limited Reading Ability” . Library Quarterly : Information , Community , Policy 4 ( 3 ) , pp . 384 – 412 . Entin , E . B . and G . R . Klare ( 1978 ) . “Some Inter - relationships of Readability , Cloze and Mul - tiple Choice Scores on a Reading Comprehension Test” . Journal of Literacy Research 10 ( 4 ) , pp . 417 – 436 . Flesch , R . ( 1948 ) . “A New Readability Yardstick” . Journal of Applied Psychology 32 ( 3 ) , pp . 221 – 233 . Froese , V . ( 1971 ) . Cloze Readability versus the Dale - Chall Formula . Tech . rep . Winnipeg , Mani - toba : University of Manitoba . Fulcher , G . ( 1997 ) . “Text Diﬃculty and Accessibility : Reading Formulae and Expert Judgement” . System 25 ( 4 ) , pp . 497 – 513 . Gray , W . W . and B . E . Leary ( 1935 ) . What Makes a Book Readable . Chicago , Illinois : University of Chicago Press . Greenﬁeld , J . ( 1999 ) . “Classic Readability Formulas in an EFL Context : Are They Valid for Japanese Speakers ? ” PhD thesis . Temple University . — ( 2004 ) . “Readability Formulas for EFL” . JALT Journal 26 ( 1 ) , pp . 5 – 24 . Guthrie , J . T . ( 1972 ) . “Learnability versus Readability of Texts” . Journal of Educational Research 65 ( 6 ) , pp . 273 – 280 . Harris , A . J . and M . D . Jacobson ( 1976 ) . “Predicting Twelfth Graders’ Comprehension Scores” . Journal of Reading 20 ( 1 ) , pp . 43 – 46 . Harwell , M . R . et al . ( 1996 ) . “Evaluating Statistics Texts Used in Education” . Journal of Educa - tional and Behavioral Statistics 21 ( 1 ) , pp . 3 – 34 . Hayes , D . P . , L . T . Wolfer , and M . F . Wolfe ( 1996 ) . “Schoolbook Simpliﬁcation and Its Relation to the Decline in SAT - Verbal Scores” . American Educational Research Journal 33 ( 2 ) , pp . 489 – 508 . Hengel , E . ( 2018 ) . “Publishing while Female : Are Women Held to Higher Standards ? Evidence From Peer Review . ” Mimeo . Hull , L . C . ( 1979 ) . “Beyond Readability : Measuring the Diﬃculty of Technical Writing” . PhD thesis . Renesselaer Polytechnic Institute . Janan , D . and D . Wray ( 2014 ) . “Reassessing the Accuracy and Use of Readability Formulae” . Malaysian Journal of Learning and Instruction 11 ( 1 ) , pp . 127 – 145 . Jongsma , E . A . ( 1972 ) . “The Diﬃculty of Children’s Books : Librarians’ Judgments vs . Formula Estimates” . Elementary English 49 ( 1 ) , pp . 20 – 26 . Kanouse , D . E . et al . ( 1981 ) . Informing Patients about Drugs : Summary Report on Alternative De - signs for Prescription Drug Leaﬂets . Tech . rep . Santa Monica , California : Rand Corporation . Kemper , S . ( 1983 ) . “Measuring the Inference Load of a Text” . Journal of Educational Psychology 75 ( 3 ) , pp . 391 – 401 . Kincaid , J . P . et al . ( 1975 ) . Derivation of New Readability Formulas ( Automated Readability Index , Fog Count and Flesch Reading Ease Formula ) for Navy Enlisted Personnel . Tech . rep . Memphis , Tennessee : Naval Technical Training Command . King , M . M . , A . S . W . Winton , and A . D . Adkins ( 2003 ) . “Assessing the Readability of Mental Health Internet Brochures for Children and Adolescents” . Journal of Child and Family Studies 12 ( 1 ) , pp . 91 – 99 . 2 Klare , G . R . ( 1952 ) . “Measures of the Readability of Written Communication : An Evaluation” . Journal of Educational Psychology 43 ( 7 ) , pp . 385 – 399 . Klingbeil , C . , M . W . Speece , and H . Schubiner ( 1995 ) . “Readability of Pediatric Patient Educa - tion Materials . Current Perspectives on an Old Problem . ” Clinical Pediatrics 34 ( 2 ) , pp . 96 – 102 . Lee , W . D . and B . R . Belden ( 1966 ) . “A Cross - Validation Readability Study of General Psy - chology Textbook Material and the Dale - Chall Readability Formula” . Journal of Educational Research 59 ( 8 ) , pp . 369 – 373 . Lenzner , T . ( 2014 ) . “Are Readability Formulas Valid Tools for Assessing Survey Question Dif - ﬁculty ? ” Sociological Methods and Research 43 ( 4 ) , pp . 677 – 698 . Ley , P . and T . Florio ( 1996 ) . “The Use of Readability formulas in Health Care” . Psychology , Health and Medicine 1 ( 1 ) , pp . 7 – 28 . Lorge , I . ( 1948 ) . “The Lorge and Flesch Readability Formulas : A Correction” . School & Society 67 , pp . 141 – 142 . McLaughlin , G . ( 1969 ) . “SMOG Grading : A New Readability Formula” . Journal of Reading 12 ( 8 ) , pp . 639 – 646 . Meade , C . D . and J . C . Byrd ( 1989 ) . “Patient Literacy and the Readability of Smoking Education Literature” . American Journal of Public Health 79 ( 2 ) , pp . 204 – 206 . Meade , C . D . and C . F . Smith ( 1991 ) . “Readability Formulas : Cautions and Criteria” . Patient Education and Counseling 17 ( 2 ) , pp . 153 – 158 . Miller , L . R . ( 1974 ) . “Predictive Powers of the Flesch and Bormuth Readability Formulas” . In - ternational Journal of Business Communication 11 ( 2 ) , pp . 21 – 30 . Morris , L . A . , A . Myers , and D . G . Thilman ( 1980 ) . “Application of the Readability Concept to Patient - Oriented Drug Information” . American Journal of Health - System Pharmacy 37 ( 11 ) , pp . 1504 – 1509 . Powell - Smith , K . A . and K . L . Bradley - Klug ( 2001 ) . “Another Look at the ‘C’ in CBM : Does It Really Matter if Curriculum - based Measurement Reading Probes Are Curriculum - based ? ” Psychology in the Schools 38 ( 4 ) , pp . 299 – 312 . Powers , R . D . , W . A . Sumner , and B . E . Kearl ( 1958 ) . “A Recalculation of Four Readability Formulas” . Journal of Educational Psychology 49 ( 2 ) , pp . 99 – 105 . Russell , D . H . and H . R . Fea ( 1951 ) . “Validity of Six Readability Formulas as Measures of Juvenile Fiction” . Elementary School Journal 52 ( 3 ) , pp . 136 – 144 . Singer , H . ( 1975 ) . “The Seer Technique : A Non - Computational Procedure for Quickly Estimat - ing Readability Level” . Journal of Reading Behavior 7 ( 3 ) , pp . 255 – 267 . Singh , J . ( 2003 ) . “Reading Grade Level and Readability of Printed Cancer Education Materials” . Oncology Nursing Forum 30 ( 5 ) , pp . 867 – 870 . Štajner , S . et al . ( 2012 ) . “What Can Readability Measures Really Tell Us About Text Complex - ity ? ” In : Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Improving Textual Accessibility , pp . 14 – 21 . Sullivan , R . J . ( 1976 ) . “A Comparison of Results Obtained Using the Cloze Procedure with Read - ability Levels Using the Dale - Chall Formula on Selected University Textbooks” . In : 26th Annual Meeting of the National Reading Conference . Atlanta , Georgia . Van Oosten , P . , D . Tanghe , and V . Hoste ( 2010 ) . “Towards an Improved Methodology for Auto - mated Readability Prediction” . In : Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Lan - guage Resources and Evaluation , pp . 775 – 782 . Wells , J . A . ( 1994 ) . “Readability of HIV / AIDS Educational Materials : The Role of the Medium of Communication , Target Audience , and Producer Characteristics” . Patient Education and Counseling 24 ( 3 ) , pp . 249 – 259 . 3 Woods , B . , G . Moscardo , and T . Greenwood ( 1998 ) . “A Critical Review of Readability and Comprehensibility Tests” . Journal of Tourism Studies 9 ( 2 ) , pp . 49 – 61 . Zheng , J . and H . Yu ( 2017 ) . “Readability Formulas and User Perceptions of Electronic Health Records Diﬃculty : A Corpus Study” . Journal of Medical Internet Research 19 ( 3 ) , pp . 1 – 15 . 4 B Calculating readability scores As discussed in Section 2 . 1 , I wrote the Python module Textatistic to transparently calculate the readability scores in this study . The code and documentation are available on GitHub ; I provide a brief description here . To determine sentence count , the program replaces common abbreviations with their full text , 1 decimals with a zero and deletes question and exclamation marks used in an obvious , mid - sentence rhetorical manner . 2 The remaining full stops , exclamation and question marks are as - sumed to end a sentence and counted . Next , hyphens are deleted from commonly hyphenated single words such as “co - author” and the rest are replaced with spaces , remaining punctuation is removed and words are split into an array based on whitespace . Word count is the length of that array . 3 An attempt is made to match each word to one on an expanded Dale - Chall list . The count of diﬃcult words is the number that are not found . This expanded list , available on GitHub , consists of 8 , 490 words . It is based on the original 3 , 000 words , but also includes verb tenses , comparative and superlative adjective forms , plural nouns , etc . It was created by ﬁrst adding to the Dale - Chall list every conceivable alternate form of each word using Python’s Pattern library . To eliminate nonsense words , the text of 94 English novels published online with Project Gutenberg were matched with words on the expanded list . Words not found in any of the novels were deleted . Syllable counts are based on the C library libhyphen , an implementation of the hyphenation algorithm from Liang ( 1983 ) . Liang ( 1983 ) ’s algorithm is used by TEX’s typesetting system . libhyphen is employed by most open source text processing software , including OpenOﬃce . 1 Abbreviations which do not include full - stops are not altered . I manually replaced common abbreviations , such as “ i . e . ” and “U . S . ” with their abbreviated versions , sans full stops . 2 For example , “ ? ) . ” is replaced with “ ) . ” . 3 Per Chall and Dale ( 1995 ) , hyphenated words count as two ( or more ) words . 5 C Description of control variables Institutions . For every article I recorded authors’ institutional aﬃliations . Individual univer - sities in U . S . State University Systems were coded separately ( e . g . , UCLA and UC Berkeley ) but think tanks and research organisations operating under the umbrella of a single university were grouped together with that university ( e . g . , the Cowles Foundation and Yale University ) . Insti - tutions linked to multiple universities are coded as separate entities ( e . g . , École des hautes études en sciences sociales ) . In total , 1 , 039 diﬀerent institutions were identiﬁed . For each institution , I count the number of articles in which it was listed as an aﬃliation in a given year and smooth the average over a ﬁve - year period . 4 Institutions are ranked on an annual basis using this ﬁgure and then grouped to create ﬁfteen dynamic dummy variables . Institutions ranked in positions 1 – 9 are assigned individual dummy variables . Those in positions 10 – 59 are grouped in bins of 10 to form six dummy variables . Institutions ranked 60 or above were collectively grouped to form a ﬁnal dummy variable . 5 When multiple institutions are associated with an observation , only the dummy variable with the highest rank is used , i . e . , the highest - ranked institution per author when data is analysed at the author - level and the highest - ranked institution for all authors when data is analysed at the article - level . Citations . I use article citations from Web of Science . Unless otherwise mentioned , citation counts are transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine function ( asinh ) . Author prominence . I generate 37 dummy variables that group authors by their career - total top - ﬁve journal ( AER , Econometrica , JPE , QJE and REStud ) publications as of December 2015 ( denoted by max . T 5 ) . For example , Jean Tirole forms one group ( 59 articles ) ; James Heckman and Gene Grossman form another ( 34 articles ) . 6 Author seniority . To account for author seniority , I control for an author’s number of top - ﬁve ( AER , Econometrica , JPE , QJE and REStud ) publications at the time a paper was published ( denoted by max . t 5 ) . For co - authored articles , only the data corresponding to the most proliﬁc author is used . 7 English ﬂuency . To account for English ﬂuency , most regressions include a dummy variable equal to one if an article is co - authored by at least one native ( or almost native ) English speaker . I assume an author is “native” if he : ( i ) was raised in an English - speaking country ; ( ii ) obtained all post - secondary eduction from English speaking institutions ; 8 or ( iii ) spoke with no discernible ( to me ) non - native accent . This information was almost always found—by me or a research 4 Blank ( 1991 ) ranks institutions by National Academy of Science departmental rankings . Those and similar oﬃcial rankings are based largely on the number of papers published in the journals analysed here . 5 In a December 2017 versions of this paper ( see my website ) , I construct a more comprehensive—but static—set of institutional controls . Results are very similar to those presented here . ( See also Hengel ( 2016 ) . ) 6 This quality / productivity control has several limitations : ( i ) it relies on publication counts—not necessarily an ac - curate measure of “quality” ; ( ii ) it discounts current junior economists’ productivity ; and ( iii ) it generates somewhat inconsistent groupings—for example , two authors have published 34 articles , but only one author has published 29 ( Joseph Stiglitz ) . 7 In Hengel ( 2016 , p . 42 and p . 44 ) , I experiment with another measure of quality—the order an article appeared in an issue . It has no noticeable impact on the coeﬃcient of interest or its standard error . 8 Non - native speakers who meet this criteria have been continuously exposed to spoken and written English since age 18 . This continuous exposure likely means they write as well as native English speakers . To qualify as an English speaking institution , all courses—not just the course studied by an author—must be primarily taught in English . E . g . , McGill University is classiﬁed as English - speaking ; University of Bonn is not ( although most of its graduate economics instruction is in English ) . 6 assistant—in authors’ CVs , websites , Wikipedia articles , faculty bios or obituaries . In the few in - stances where the criteria were ambiguously satisﬁed—or no information was available—I asked friends and colleagues of the author or inferred English ﬂuency from the author’s ﬁrst name , country of residence or surname ( in that order ) . 9 Field . I create dummy variables corresponding to the 20 primary and over 700 tertiary JEL categories to control for subject matter . The JEL system was signiﬁcantly revised in 1990 ; because exact mapping from one system to another is not possible , I collected these data only for articles published post - reform—about 60 percent of the dataset . Codes were recorded whenever found in the text of an article or on the websites where bibliographic information was scraped . Remaining articles were classiﬁed using codes from the American Economic Association’s Econlit database . Editorial policy . To control for editorial policy , I recorded editor / editorial board member names from issue mastheads . AER and Econometrica employ an individual to oversee policy . JPE and QJE do not generally name one lead editor and instead rely on boards composed of four to ﬁve faculty members at the University of Chicago and Harvard , respectively . 10 REStud is also headed by an editorial board , the size of which has been gradually increasing—from two members in the 1970s to 7 – 8 members today . Members are also located all over the world . Editor controls are based on distinct lead editor / editorial boards— i . e . , they diﬀer by at least one member . Among top four journals , 74 groups are formed in this manner . REStud adds another 34 . 11 Family commitments . To control for motherhood’s impact on revision times , I recorded chil - dren’s birth years for women with at least one entirely female - authored paper in Econometrica . I personally ( and , I apologise , rather unsettlingly ) gleaned this information from published proﬁles , CVs , acknowledgements , Wikipedia , personal websites , Facebook pages , background checks and local school district / popular extra - curricular activity websites . 12 Exact years were recorded when - ever found ; otherwise , they were approximated by subtracting a child’s actual or estimated age from the date the source material was posted online . In several instances , I obtained this infor - mation from acquaintances , friends and colleagues or by asking the woman directly . If an exhaustive search turned up no reference to children , I assumed the woman in question did not have any . 13 9 I also conducted a primitive surname analysis ( see Hengel , 2016 , pp . 35 – 36 ) . It suggests that the female authors in my data are no more or less likely to be native English speakers . 10 In recent years , JPE has been published under the aegis of a lead editor . 11 Given the size of Restud ’s editorial board and the fact that members serve ﬁxed 3 – 4 full - year terms , editorial controls are highly correlated with year ﬁxed eﬀects . Moreover , unlike at JPE and QJE , editors are not located at the same institution . Thus , editor ﬁxed eﬀects may be less informative about editorial policy at REStud than they are for the other four journals . 12 While the information I found was publicly available , I apologise for the obvious intrusion . 13 Given its sensitive nature , children’s birth years are not currently available on my website ( unlike most of the other data in this paper ) . 7 D Proofs for Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 The proof of Theorem 1 follows directly from Lemma 5 , at the end of this section . The proof of Lemma 5 relies on a series of additional lemmas stated and proved below . It is followed by a proof of Corollary 1 . Throughout , • f ( r 0 it ; R it ) g represents the sequence of readability choices made by author i for all t ; • R ⋆i is deﬁned as the R that solves ϕ ′ i ( R ) = c ′ i ( R ) ; • t > t where t is large enough that (cid:12)(cid:12) c it ( r ) (cid:0) c i ( r ) (cid:12)(cid:12) is inconsequential for all r 2 R ; 14 • Review group s is referred to as “state s ” . Lemma 1 . f ( r 0 it ; R it ) g is bounded . Proof . Consider the sequence of initial readability choices , f r 0 it g . I ﬁrst show that R ⋆i (cid:20) r 0 it for all t . Recall r 0 it is chosen to maximise the author’s subjective expected utility in Equation ( 9 ) . It satisﬁes the following ﬁrst order condition ∫ (cid:6) ( (cid:25) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) v s 1 it + (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) @ v s 1 it @ r 0 it ) d (cid:22) i + ϕ ′ i ( r 0 it ) (cid:0) c ′ i ( r 0 it ) = 0 ; ( D . 1 ) where v s 1 it represents Equation ( 9 ) evaluated at the optimal r 1 it . ϕ i j r 0 it ( r 1 it ) = ϕ i ( R it ) (cid:0) ϕ i ( r 1 it ) and c i j r 0 it ( r 1 it ) = c i ( R it ) (cid:0) c i ( r 0 it ) . Thus , @ v s 1 it @ r 0 it = (cid:25) s 1 it ( R it ) u i + ϕ ′ i ( R it ) (cid:0) c ′ i ( R it ) (cid:0) ϕ ′ i ( r 0 it ) + c ′ i ( r 0 it ) = @ v s 1 it @ r 1 it + c ′ i ( r 0 it ) (cid:0) ϕ ′ i ( r 0 it ) : ( D . 2 ) Since ϕ ′ i ( R ⋆i ) = c ′ i ( R ⋆i ) , @ v s 1 it / @ r 0 it = @ v s 1 it / @ r 1 it when evaluated at r 0 it = R ⋆i . The left hand side of Equation ( D . 1 ) evaluated at r 0 it = R ⋆i is correspondingly equivalent to ∫ (cid:6) ( (cid:25) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) v s 1 it + (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) @ v s 1 it @ r 1 it ) d (cid:22) i : ( D . 3 ) v s 1 it is non - negative ; 15 optimising behaviour at stage 1 implies @ v s 1 it / @ r 1 it (cid:21) 0 : either an r 1 it exists that satisﬁes @ v s 1 it / @ r 1 it = 0 , or the author chooses r 1 it = 0 and @ v s 1 it / @ r 1 it = (cid:25) s 1 it ( R it ) u i is non - negative . Thus , Equation ( D . 3 ) is non - negative . Since c ′ i ( r ) < ϕ ′ i ( r ) for all r < R ⋆i , the left - hand side of Equation ( D . 1 ) is strictly positive for all r < R ⋆i , so r 0 it must be at least as large as R ⋆i . I now show that f r 0 it g is bounded from above . As r 0 tends to inﬁnity , authors choose not to make any changes at stage 1 . Thus , lim r 0 ! 1 (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 ) v s 1 it = (cid:5) s 0 it (cid:5) s 1 it u i ; ( D . 4 ) where (cid:5) s 0 it and (cid:5) s 1 it are some upper bounds on the author’s subjective probability of receiving an R & R and then being accepted in state s at time t . Since both are no more than 1 , u i is ﬁnite and ϕ i ( r ) (cid:0) c i ( r ) is strictly decreasing for all r > R ⋆i , lim r 0 ! 1 { ∫ (cid:6) (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 ) v s 1 it d (cid:22) i + ϕ i ( r 0 ) (cid:0) c i ( r 0 ) } = (cid:0)1 : ( D . 5 ) 14 That is , I assume throughout the proof that t is large enough for c i to be a suﬃciently close approximation of c it . This simpliﬁes ( very slightly ) the proofs , but otherwise has no meaningful impact . 15 Equation ( 8 ) evaluated at r 1 it = 0 is non - negative . Since r 1 it maximises Equation ( 8 ) , v s 1 it is likewise non - negative . 8 Similarly , because (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) (cid:5) s 1 it ( R it ) (cid:20) 1 for all s and ϕ i ( r ) and c i ( r ) are ﬁnite at all r < 1 , Equation ( 9 ) is likewise ﬁnite for all r < 1 . Thus , sup { argmax r 0 it ∫ (cid:6) (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) v s 1 it d (cid:22) i + ϕ i ( r 0 it ) (cid:0) c i ( r 0 it ) } < 1 ; so f r 0 it g is bounded . It remains to show that f R it g is likewise bounded . Since r 1 it (cid:21) 0 and R it = r 0 it + r 1 it , R it is bounded below by r 0 it , which , as just shown , is itself bounded . Additionally , the author opts for r 1 it = 0 if Equation ( 8 ) is less than 0 for all r 1 it > 0 . Since R ⋆i (cid:20) r 0 it and (cid:5) s 1 it ( R it ) (cid:20) 1 (cid:5) s 1 it ( R it ) u i + ϕ i ( R it ) (cid:0) ϕ i ( r 0 it ) (cid:0) c i ( R it ) + c i ( r 0 it ) (cid:20) u i + ϕ i ( R it ) (cid:0) c i ( R it ) : ( D . 6 ) Equation ( D . 6 ) is strictly decreasing in R for all R (cid:21) R ⋆i . The author will not choose any R strictly greater than the one that equates Equation ( D . 6 ) to 0 . Thus , f R it g is bounded from above . Because f r 0 it g and f R it g are bounded , the sequence f ( r 0 it ; R it ) g in R 2 is likewise bounded . Thus , all is proved . Lemma 2 . r 0 i (cid:20) r 0 it and R si (cid:20) R sit for all t > t ′′ . Proof . Bounded inﬁnite sequences have at least one cluster point and at least one subsequence that converges to each cluster point ( Bolzano - Weierstrass ) . Let f ( r 0 it ; R q ⋆ it ) g denote the complete subsequence of f ( r 0 it ; R it ) g in which state q is reached . Thus , { ( r 0 it ; R s ⋆ it ) } ∩ s ⋆ ̸ = q ⋆ { ( r 0 it ; R q ⋆ it ) } = ∅ and ∪ q ⋆ 2 (cid:6) { ( r 0 it ; R q ⋆ it ) } = f ( r 0 it ; R it ) g : Fix state s . Because (cid:6) is ﬁnite , f ( r 0 it ; R s ⋆ it ) g likewise forms a bounded inﬁnite sequence and therefore converges to at least one cluster point . Fix one such cluster point , ( r 0 i ; R si ) , and let f ( r 0 it ; R sit ) g denote the subsequence of f ( r 0 it ; R s ⋆ it ) g that converges to it . Consider ﬁrst the proposition that R si (cid:20) R sit for all t > t ′′ . By way of a contradiction , assume R sit < R si for all t > t ′′ and some ﬁxed r s 0 it . Thus , r s 1 it < r s 1 it + 1 for all t > t ′′ . A positive r s 1 it implies that R sit satisﬁes (cid:25) s 1 it ( R sit ) = 1 u i ( c ′ i ( R sit ) (cid:0) ϕ ′ i ( R sit ) ) : ( D . 7 ) Let (cid:25) s 1 i denote the terminal value of (cid:25) s 1 it as t tends to 1 . (cid:25) s 1 i is ﬁnite ; thus , f (cid:25) s 1 it g itself converges : if e R si < R si , then (cid:25) s 1 it ( R sit ) = 0 for all t > t ′′ , where t ′′ has been redeﬁned to assure e R s i (cid:20) R s it ; if R s i (cid:20) e R s i and (cid:25) s 1 i ( R s i ) = 1 , then (cid:25) s 1 i ( R ) = 0 for all R > R s i , a contradiction ( see Footnote 71 ) . Convergence by f (cid:25) s 1 it g and f R sit g means lim t ! 1 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:25) s 1 it + 1 ( R sit + 1 ) (cid:0) (cid:25) sit ( R sit ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) = 0 : Yet Equation ( D . 7 ) implies lim t ! 1 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:25) s 1 it + 1 ( R sit + 1 ) (cid:0) (cid:25) sit ( R sit ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) = lim " ! 0 1 u i ( [ c ′ i ( R sit + " ) (cid:0) c ′ i ( R sit ) ] (cid:0) [ ϕ ′ i ( R sit + " ) (cid:0) ϕ ′ i ( R sit ) ] ) = 1 u i ( c ′′ i ( R si ) (cid:0) ϕ ′′ i ( R si ) ) ; ( D . 8 ) 9 where R sit ! R si guarantees that for all ( suﬃciently small ) " > 0 there exists R sit + 1 = R sit + " . u i > 0 , c ′′ i ( R ) > 0 and ϕ ′′ i ( R ) < 0 by assumption ; thus , Equation ( D . 8 ) is strictly positive . According to Equation ( D . 8 ) , f (cid:25) s 1 it g does not converge , a contradiction . Consider now the proposition that r 0 i (cid:20) r 0 it for all t past some t ′′ . As before , I proceed with a contradiction . Suppose r 0 it < r 0 i for all t > t ′ , where t ′ is large enough that e r q 0 i ̸2 ( r 0 it ′ ; r 0 i ) for all q ̸ = s and r s 1 it + 1 (cid:20) r s 1 it for all s 2 (cid:6) . At time t , the author chooses r 0 it . This choice is governed by the ﬁrst - order condition in Equation ( D . 1 ) : K + (cid:22) si ( (cid:25) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) v s 1 it + (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) @ v s 1 it @ r 0 it ) = c ′ i ( r 0 it ) (cid:0) ϕ ′ i ( r 0 it ) ( D . 9 ) where (cid:22) si is the probability of drawing state s and K = ∫ (cid:6) n s ( (cid:25) q 0 it ( r 0 it ) v q 1 it + (cid:5) q 0 it ( r 0 it ) @ v q 1 it @ r 0 it ) d (cid:22) i is the marginal change in expected stage 1 subjective utility in all states q ̸ = s . If r s 1 it + 1 > 0 then r s 1 it > 0 . Thus @ v s 1 it / @ r 1 it = 0 ; from Equation ( D . 2 ) , Equation ( D . 9 ) is equivalent to K + (cid:22) si (cid:25) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) v s 1 it = ( 1 (cid:0) (cid:22) si (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) ) ( c ′ i ( r 0 it ) (cid:0) ϕ ′ i ( r 0 it ) ) : ( D . 10 ) If r s 1 it = 0 then r s 1 it + 1 = 0 , and @ v s 1 it / @ r 1 it = (cid:25) s 1 it ( R sit ) u i . 16 In this case , Equation ( D . 9 ) is equivalent to K + (cid:22) si ( (cid:25) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) v s 1 it + (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) (cid:25) s 1 it ( R sit ) u i ) = c ′ i ( r 0 it ) (cid:0) ϕ ′ i ( r 0 it ) : ( D . 11 ) By the monotone convergence theorem , f v s 1 it g and f (cid:5) s 0 it g converge . 17 If e r s 0 i < r 0 i , then (cid:25) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) = 0 for all t > t ′ , where t ′ has been redeﬁned to assure e r s 0 i (cid:20) r 0 it ; if r 0 i (cid:20) e r s 0 i , then lim t ! 1 (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) = lim t ! 1 ∑ r 2 Ω t (cid:25) s 0 it ( r ) = (cid:25) s 0 i ( r 0 i ) ; ( D . 12 ) where Ω t = ( r 0 it (cid:0) 1 ; r 0 it ] . (cid:25) s 0 i ( r 0 i ) = 1 implies lim (cid:5) s 0 it = 1 , which is impossible given (cid:5) s 0 it , by deﬁnition , is a bounded function . Hence , f (cid:25) s 0 it g is likewise convergent , so lim t ! 1 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:22) si ( (cid:25) s 0 it + 1 ( r 0 it + 1 ) v s 1 it + 1 (cid:0) (cid:25) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) v s 1 it ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) = (cid:22) s i ( lim t ! 1 (cid:25) s 0 it + 1 ( r 0 it + 1 ) lim t ! 1 v s 1 it + 1 (cid:0) lim t ! 1 (cid:25) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) lim t ! 1 v s 1 it ) = 0 and lim t ! 1 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:22) si u i ( (cid:5) s 0 it + 1 ( r 0 it + 1 ) (cid:25) s 1 it + 1 ( R sit + 1 ) (cid:0) (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) (cid:25) s 1 it ( R sit ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) = (cid:22) si u i ( lim t ! 1 (cid:5) s 0 it + 1 ( r 0 it + 1 ) lim t ! 1 (cid:25) s 1 it + 1 ( R sit + 1 ) (cid:0) lim t ! 1 (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) lim t ! 1 (cid:25) s 1 it ( R sit ) ) = 0 : 16 If r s 1 it > 0 and r s 1 it + 1 = 0 , redeﬁne t ′ as t ′ + 1 . r s 1 it + 1 (cid:20) r s 1 it + 1 for all t > t ′ precludes r s 1 it = 0 and r s 1 it + 1 > 0 . 17 @ v s 1 it / @ r 0 it (cid:21) 0 and v s 1 it is bounded below by zero and above by u i + max f ϕ i ( R ⋆i ) (cid:0) c i ( R ⋆i ) ; 0 g . (cid:25) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) (cid:21) 0 since r 0 it < r 0 it + 1 ( by assumption ) and (cid:5) s 0 it is bounded by 0 and 1 ( by deﬁnition ) . 10 For the moment , assume there exists t ′′ such that for all r 2 ( r 0 it ′′ ; r 0 i ) , K is constant . 18 Thus , changes over time to the left - hand sides of Equation ( D . 10 ) and Equation ( D . 11 ) converge to 0 . Yet the right - hand sides of Equation ( D . 10 ) and Equation ( D . 11 ) do not , since lim t ! 1 (cid:22) si (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) = (cid:22) si (cid:5) s 0 i ( r 0 i ) is strictly less than 1 , where (cid:5) s 0 i is the ﬁnite limit of f (cid:5) s 0 it g , while lim t ! 1 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ( c ′ i ( r 0 it + 1 ) (cid:0) c ′ i ( r 0 it ) ) (cid:0) ( ϕ ′ i ( r 0 it + 1 ) (cid:0) ϕ ′ i ( r 0 it ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) = lim " ! 0 ( c ′ i ( r 0 it + " ) (cid:0) c ′ i ( r 0 it ) ) (cid:0) ( ϕ ′ i ( r 0 it + " ) (cid:0) ϕ ′ i ( r 0 it ) ) = c ′′ i ( r 0 i ) (cid:0) ϕ ′′ i ( r 0 i ) is strictly greater than 0 , where convergence of f r 0 it g guarantees that for all ( suﬃciently small ) " > 0 there exists r 0 it + 1 = r 0 it + " . 19 Thus , a contradiction . Although the contradiction depends on the existence of t ′′ , the ﬁnite sum of convergent se - quences is also convergent . Thus , for any ﬁnite number of states in which (cid:25) q 0 it ̸ = 0 changes to the left - hand sides of Equation ( D . 10 ) and Equation ( D . 11 ) converge to 0 while changes to their right - hand sides do not . Because the number of states is ﬁnite by assumption , this establishes the general contradiction . Lemma 3 . (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) ! 1 s 0 i ( r 0 i ) and (cid:5) s 1 it ( R sit ) ! 1 s 1 i ( R si ) . Proof . As established in Lemma 2 , R si (cid:20) R sit for all t > t ′′ . If R si < e R si then R sit < e R si for all t > t ′′ where t ′′ has been redeﬁned to satisfy the latter inequality . Thus , the paper is rejected for all t > t ′′ and (cid:5) s 1 it ( R ) = 0 for all R (cid:20) R sit ′′ and t > t ′′ . If e R si (cid:20) R si , then e R si (cid:20) R sit for all t > t ′′ ( again t ′′ redeﬁned to satisfy this inequality ) . Thus , the paper is accepted for all t > t ′′ . (cid:5) s 1 it + 1 ( R ) = 1 for all R (cid:21) R sit and t > t ′′ ; (cid:5) s 1 it ( R sit ) converges to 1 at the limit . Also from Lemma 2 , r 0 i (cid:20) r 0 it for all t > t ′ . If r 0 i < e r s 0 i , then the paper is rejected at stage 0 for all t > t ′ , where t ′ is deﬁned so that r 0 it < e r s 0 i for all t > t ′ . Deﬁne t ′′ > t ′ such that for all t > t ′′ , the probability of having reached state s is 1 ; thus , (cid:5) sit ( r 0 it ) = 0 for all t > t ′′ . If e r s 0 i (cid:20) r 0 i , then redeﬁne t ′′ so that e r s 0 i (cid:20) r 0 it for all t > t ′′ . The paper is accepted , s is revealed and (cid:5) s 0 it + 1 ( r ) = 1 for all r (cid:21) r 0 it and t > t ′′ ; (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 i ) converges to 1 at the limit . Thus , all is proved . Lemma 4 . There exists a unique cluster point of f ( r 0 it ; R s ⋆ it ) g for every s ⋆ 2 (cid:6) . Proof . Suppose f ( r 0 it ; R s ⋆ it ) g has two cluster points : ( r ′ 0 i ; R s ′ i ) and ( r ′′ 0 i ; R s ′′ i ) . Denote their re - spective convergent subsequences by f ( r ′ 0 it ; R s ′ it ) g and f ( r ′′ 0 it ; R s ′′ it ) g . Given the concavity of ϕ i and convexity of c i , a unique readability at each stage maximises Equation ( 8 ) and Equation ( 9 ) for ﬁxed (cid:5) s 0 it and (cid:5) s 1 it . Thus , r ′ 0 i 0 = r ′′ 0 i 0 and R s ′ i 0 = R s ′′ i 0 at time 0 . Assume at time t the author has chosen r ′ 0 il = r ′′ 0 il and R s ′ il = R s ′′ il for all l < t ; thus , (cid:5) s ′ 0 it ( r ) = (cid:5) s ′′ 0 it ( r ) and (cid:5) s ′ 1 it ( R ) = (cid:5) s ′′ 1 it ( R ) for all r and R , so the author chooses r ′ 0 it = r ′′ 0 it and R s ′ it = R s ′′ it at time t as well . By the axiom of induction , f ( r ′ 0 it ; R s ′ it ) g = f ( r ′′ 0 it ; R s ′′ it ) g for all t so ( r 0 i ; R si ) is unique . 20 Since the choice of s was arbitrary , there exists a unique cluster point of f ( r 0 it ; R s ⋆ it ) g for every s ⋆ 2 (cid:6) . 18 Eﬀectively , this assumes (cid:25) q 0 it ( r ) = 0 for all r 2 ( r 0 it ′′ ; r 0 i ) and q ̸ = s and ( i ) (cid:5) q 0 it ( r ) = 0 for all q in which r 0 i < e r q 0 i ; ( ii ) (cid:5) q 0 it ( r ) = 1 and (cid:25) q 1 it ( R qit ) = 0 for all q in which e r q 0 i < r 0 i ; and ( iii ) e r q 0 i ̸ = r 0 i for any q . Collectively , these assumptions imply convergence of f (cid:25) q 0 it g , f R qit g and f (cid:25) q 1 it g in every state q ̸ = s and no change to the author’s marginal stage 1 objective function given a small increase in r in any state but s . 19 Although the change in 1 (cid:0) (cid:22) si (cid:5) s 0 it ( r 0 it ) between time t and t + 1 converges to 0 , it cannot converge faster than c ′ i ( r 0 it ) (cid:0) ϕ ′ i ( r 0 it ) unless (cid:25) s 0 it ( r 0 i ) = 1 , which Equation ( D . 12 ) shows is not possible . 20 Note that r 0 it is chosen before s is realised , meaning r 0 i is the unique cluster point of f r 0 it g regardless of s . 11 Lemma 5 . Consider two equivalent authors , i and k , such that 1 . for at least one t ′′ < t ′ , ( r 0 it ′′ ; R it ′′ ) < ( r 0 it ′ ; R it ′ ) and there exists K ′′ > 0 such that for no t > t ′ , jj ( r 0 it ; R it ) (cid:0) ( r 0 it ′′ ; R it ′′ ) jj < K ′′ ; and 2 . ( r 0 kt ; R kt ) (cid:20) ( r 0 it ; R it ) for all s 2 (cid:6) A it and t > t ′ and there exists K ′ > 0 such that for at least one s 2 (cid:6) A it and no t > t ′ , jj ( r 0 it ; R it ) (cid:0) ( r 0 kt ; R kt ) jj < K ′ . If e r s 0 i = e r s 0 k , e R si = e R sk and (cid:22) si = (cid:22) sk for all s 2 (cid:6) , then ∫ (cid:6) 1 s 0 k ( r 0 kt ) 1 s 1 k ( R kt ) d (cid:22) k < ∫ (cid:6) 1 s 0 i ( r 0 it ) 1 s 1 it ( R it ) d (cid:22) i : ( D . 13 ) Proof . Suppose for the moment that (cid:6) A it contains only state q and assume r 0 kt = r 0 it . Since q is the only state in (cid:6) A it , R qkt < R qit . As a result , 1 s 0 k ( r 0 kt ) 1 s 1 k ( R skt ) = 1 s 0 i ( r 0 it ) 1 s 1 i ( R sit ) = 0 for all s ̸ = q ; and 1 s 0 k ( r 0 kt ) 1 s 1 k ( R skt ) (cid:20) 1 s 0 i ( r 0 it ) 1 s 1 i ( R sit ) = 1 for s = q : ( D . 14 ) If I show that the inequality in Equation ( D . 14 ) is strict , then Equation ( D . 13 ) is true . By way of a contradiction , assume it holds as an equality . Thus , e R qi (cid:20) R qk < R qi , where R qkt ! R qk and R qit ! R qi ( Lemma 4 ) . Together with R ⋆i (cid:20) r 0 it ′′ < R qi , this implies lim " ! 0 (cid:0) (cid:5) q 1 i ( R qi + " ) < 1 : 21 ( D . 15 ) Meanwhile , author i observes author k ’s prior readability choices , publication history and paper count . From this , he discovers lim N k ! 1 N A k N k = (cid:22) qi ; ( D . 16 ) where N A k and N k are author k ’s accepted and total paper counts , respectively . Because i up - dates (cid:5) s 1 it when he observes with probability 1 that in state s , k is accepted at some R ̸ = R si ( see Footnote 70 ) , Equation ( D . 16 ) necessarily implies lim " ! 0 (cid:0) (cid:5) s 1 i ( R si + " ) = 1 ; a contradiction . Similar proofs by contradiction show that the inequality in Equation ( D . 14 ) must also be strict when R q kt = R q it and r 0 kt < r 0 it in state q and when (cid:6) A it contains more than one state . Proof of Corollary 1 . I ﬁrst show that Equation ( 11 ) conservatively estimates D ik when (cid:6) A it (cid:26) (cid:6) A kt . Let r 0 it < R it . From Equation ( 10 ) and the deﬁnition of (cid:14) s 1 ik , R it (cid:0) R kt = e R si + e 1 it (cid:0) max { R ⋆k ; e r s k 0 k + e 0 kt ; e R sk + e 1 kt } (cid:20) e R si (cid:0) e R sk + e 1 it (cid:0) e 1 kt = (cid:14) s 1 ik + e 1 it (cid:0) e 1 kt : ( D . 17 ) 21 That is , (cid:5) q 0 i ( R ) = 1 for all R (cid:21) R qi . Because he chose R ⋆i (cid:20) R it ′′ < R qi at some earlier date , the author’s marginal beneﬁt from a higher R is decreasing when the probability of acceptance remains constant . Thus , if he optimally chooses R qi > max f R it ′′ ; R qk g , it must be because there is no smaller R that satisﬁes Equation ( D . 7 ) . This is only possible if there is a jump discontinuity in (cid:5) q 0 i at R qi , as illustrated in Equation ( D . 15 ) . 12 where s k is the review group in (cid:6) A kt for which e r s 0 k is highest . When R it = r 0 it , however , Equa - tion ( 10 ) and the deﬁnition of (cid:14) s 0 ik instead imply : R it (cid:0) R kt = max { R ⋆i ; e r s i 0 i + e 0 it } (cid:0) max { R ⋆k ; e r s k 0 k + e 0 kt ; e R sk + e 1 kt } (cid:20) max { R ⋆i ; e r s i 0 i + e 0 it } (cid:0) e r s k 0 k (cid:0) e 0 kt ; ( D . 18 ) where s i is the review group in (cid:6) A it for which e r s 0 i is highest . From Theorem 1’s second condition , R it ′′ < R it for some t ′′ < t . Thus , R it ′′ < r 0 it . Because R ⋆i is a lower bound on r 0 it for all s and t ( Lemma 1 ) , R ⋆i < r 0 it ; Equation ( D . 18 ) is equivalent to R it (cid:0) R kt (cid:20) e r s i 0 i (cid:0) e r s k 0 k + e 0 it (cid:0) e 0 kt = (cid:14) s i 0 ik + e r s i 0 k (cid:0) e r s k 0 k + e 0 it (cid:0) e 0 kt : ( D . 19 ) e 0 it = e 0 kt and e 1 it = e 1 kt ( by assumption ) . Because (cid:6) A it (cid:26) (cid:6) A kt , e r s i 0 k (cid:20) e r s k 0 k ( by deﬁni - tion ) ; Equation ( D . 19 ) implies R it (cid:0) R kt (cid:20) (cid:14) s i 0 ik if R it = r 0 it . Meanwhile , Equation ( D . 17 ) implies R it (cid:0) R kt (cid:20) (cid:14) s 1 ik if r 0 it < R it . It remains to show that Equation ( 11 ) conservatively estimates D ik under Theorem 1’s weaker Condition 3 . Let R it ′′ (cid:20) R kt . Diﬀerences in i and k ’s preferences might inﬂuence readability— but only up to R it ′′ . R it ′′ < R it is motivated by i ’s desire to increase his acceptance rate . Since i ’s unconditional acceptance rate is identical to k ’s , any s ′ in (cid:6) A it but not in (cid:6) A kt — e . g . , because i ’s utility of acceptance is higher or cost of writing lower—is perfectly oﬀset by some other s ′′ such that—because s ′′ discriminates against i — s ′′ is in (cid:6) A kt but not in (cid:6) A it . Thus , R it (cid:0) R kt remains a conservative estimate D ik . Now let R kt < R it ′′ . Since i ’s unconditional acceptance rate at R it is identical to k ’s at R kt , k ’s acceptance rate at R it ′′ must be at least as high as i ’s at R it . Without loss of generality , assume they are identical . Preferences are time independent , so holding acceptance rates constant , i prefers R it ′′ to R it . A time t choice of R it over R it ′′ reveals a higher probability of acceptance for the former—and a necessarily lower probability of acceptance for i than k at R it ′′ . Given i and k are equivalent , this diﬀerence is due to (cid:14) s i 0 ik or (cid:14) s 1 ik . R it (cid:0) R it ′′ is a conservative estimate of R ik . Thus , all is proved . 13 E Gender and readability , by JEL code Figure E . 1 displays results from an ordinary least squares regression on the Dale - Chall score ; regressors are : ( i ) ratio of female co - authors ; ( ii ) dummies for each primary JEL code ; ( iii ) in - teractions from ( i ) and ( ii ) ; ( iv ) controls for editor , journal , year , institution and English ﬂuency ; and ( v ) quality controls—citation count , max . T 5 ﬁxed eﬀects ( author prominence ) and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) . 22 Due to small samples—particularly of female authors—Figure E . 1 includes 561 articles from AER Papers & Proceedings . 23 H Public O Development L Industrial org . C Quant . methods E Macroeconomics R Regional , transport F International K Law and econ . I Health , welfare , edu . D Microeconomics J Labour G Finance Z Special topics N Economic history Q Agri . , environment - . 5 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 - . 5 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 Female ratio , by JEL Female ratio × JEL Figure E .  : Gender diﬀerences in readability , by JEL classiﬁcation Notes . Sample 5 , 777 articles , including 561 from AER Papers & Proceedings ( see Footnote 47 ) . Codes A , B , M and P dropped due to small sample sizes of female - authored papers ( see Footnote 22 ) . Estimates from an OLS regression of : R j = (cid:12) 0 + (cid:12) 1 female ratio j + (cid:12) 2 J j + (cid:12) 3 female ratio j (cid:2) J j + (cid:18) X j + " j ; where R j is the readability score for article j ; female ratio j is paper j ’s ratio of female authors to total authors ; J j is a 15 (cid:2) 1 column vector with k th entry a binary variable equal to one if article j is classiﬁed as the k th JEL code ; X j is a vector of editor , journal , year , institution and English language dummies , N j ( number of co - authors on paper j ) and quality controls ( citation count ( asinh ) , max . T 5 ﬁxed eﬀects ( author prominence ) and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) ) ; " j is the error term . Left - hand graph shows marginal eﬀects of female ratio for each JEL code ( (cid:12) 1 + (cid:12) k 3 ) . The mean eﬀect at observed JEL codes is 0 . 15 ( standard error 0 . 049 ) . Right - hand graph displays interaction terms ( (cid:12) k 3 ) . Horizontal lines represent 90 percent conﬁdence intervals from standard errors adjusted for clustering on editor . Points reﬂect marginal eﬀects across JEL classiﬁcation ; bars represent 90 percent conﬁdence intervals from standard errors clustered by editor . The mean eﬀect at observed JEL codes is 0 . 15 ( standard error 0 . 049 ) . This estimate coincides with results in Table F . 1—women’s papers require six fewer weeks of schooling to understand—and is highly signiﬁcant . Women earn higher marks for clarity in 11 out of 15 categories ; only four are at least weakly signiﬁcant : Q ( Agricultural and Natural Resource Economics ; Environmental and Ecological Economics ) , N ( Economic History ) , J ( Labour Economics ) and D ( Microeconomics ) . Men may be better writers in C ( Mathematical and Quantitative Methods ) , L ( Industrial Organisation ) , O ( Economic Development , Innovation , Technological Change , and Growth ) and H ( Public Economics ) ; none , however , are statistically diﬀerent from zero . Figure E . 1’s right - hand graph displays coeﬃcients from interacting the ratio of female co - authors with each JEL code . Q and N are ( weakly ) signiﬁcantly above the mean , H signiﬁcantly below it . Remaining categories are not statistically diﬀerent from the mean eﬀect . In general , sample sizes are small and estimates imprecise—only Labour Economics and Mi - croeconomics contain more than 100 papers written only by women ( the others average 35 ) . 22 Codes A , B , M and P are dropped due to insuﬃcient number of female - authored papers : each had fewer than 10 papers authored only by women . No paper is classiﬁed under category Y . 23 See Hengel ( 2016 , pp . 42 – 43 ) for a version of Figure E . 1 excluding AER Papers & Proceedings articles . 14 Nevertheless , Figure E . 1 suggests two things . First , the mostly insigniﬁcant interaction terms in - dicate outlier ﬁelds are probably not driving journals’ gender readability gap—nor is any speciﬁc ﬁeld bucking the trend . Second , the number of women in a ﬁeld appears to have little eﬀect on the size of the gap : Agriculture / Environment has one of the lowest concentrations of female - authored papers—but Economic History has one of the highest ( Labour Economics falls between the two ) . Of course , Economic History papers are still overwhelmingly—as in 74 percent—penned just by men . But given the readability gap is present in subﬁelds with both above - and below - average rates of sole female authorship , women may need to be better writers even where more of them publish . 15 F Author - level analysis In this appendix , I analyse readability at the author - level . To disaggregate the data , each article is duplicated N j times , where N j is article j ’s number of co - authors ; observation j k 2 f 1 ; : : : ; N j g is assigned article j ’s k th author . I then estimate the dynamic panel model in Equation ( F . 1 ) : R j it = (cid:12) 0 R it (cid:0) 1 + (cid:12) 1 female ratio j + (cid:12) 2 female ratio j (cid:2) male i + (cid:18) X j + (cid:11) i + " it : ( F . 1 ) R j it is the readability score for article j —author i ’s t th top - four publication ; R it (cid:0) 1 is the corre - sponding value of author i ’s t (cid:0) 1 th top - four paper . Gender enters twice—the binary variable male i and female ratio j —to account for author i ’s sex and the sex of his co - authors , respectively . X j is a vector of observable controls . It includes : editor , journal , year , journal (cid:2) year , institu - tion , English ﬂuency dummies and quality controls—citation count ( asinh ) , max . T 5 ﬁxed eﬀects ( author prominence ) and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) . I also include N j to control for author i ’s proportional contribution to paper j . (cid:11) i are author - speciﬁc eﬀects and " it is an idiosyncratic error . (cid:11) i are eliminated by ﬁrst - diﬀerencing . For each time period , endogeneity in the lagged dependant variable is instrumented with up to ﬁve earlier lags ( Arellano and Bover , 1995 ; Blundell and Bond , 1998 ) . 24 To account for duplicate articles , the regression is weighted by 1 / N j . 25 Standard errors are adjusted for two - way clustering on editor and author . Table F . 1 displays results . Rows one and two present contemporaneous marginal eﬀects on co - authoring with women for female ( (cid:12) 1 ) and male ( (cid:12) 1 + (cid:12) 2 ) authors , respectively . Both estimates are positive—everyone writes more clearly when collaborating with women—although statistically signiﬁcant only for female authors . Marginal eﬀects for women are twice as large as those shown in Table 3 ; they suggest women write 2 – 6 percent better than men . 26 Men and women co - authoring together experience an identical rise ( or fall ) in readability , so the eﬀect for one should mirror the other . Yet , Table F . 1 suggests they don’t . While the interaction terms ( (cid:12) 2 ) are insigniﬁcant , the presence of a diﬀerence could indicate an increasing , convex relationship between female ratio and readability . 27 Thus , men’s smaller eﬀect potentially reﬂects their disproportionate tendency to co - author exclusively with other men— i . e . , precisely where the marginal impact of an additional woman is low . 28 Coeﬃcients on the lagged dependant variables are small , suggesting readability is mostly de - termined contemporaneously . Nevertheless , their uniform positivity and signiﬁcance indicate modest persistence . Table F . 1’s ﬁnal two rows test for serial correlation ; they indicate no model misspeciﬁcation . 24 Results are robust when instrumenting only with one up to all earlier lags ( available on request ) . 25 Assigning equal weight to all observations results in quantitatively and qualitatively similar results ( see Hengel , 2016 , pp . 44 – 45 ) . 26 Quotient of (cid:12) 1 divided by the total eﬀect for men co - authoring with no women ( female ratio of zero ) estimated at other co - variates’ observed values . 27 I re - estimated Equation ( F . 1 ) replacing female ratio j (cid:2) male i with female ratio 2 j . The results—which are available on request—tentatively support this conclusion . 28 On average , the female ratio for men is 0 . 04 ( 0 . 05 excluding solo - authored papers ) . When excluding articles written entirely by men , their average ratio is still only 0 . 39 . By default , women always author with at least one woman— themselves ; the average female ratio of their papers is 0 . 6 ( 0 . 46 and 0 . 53 excluding articles written entirely by women and solo - authored papers , respectively ) . 16 Table F .  : Gender diﬀerences in readability , author - level analysis FleschReadingEase Flesch - Kincaid GunningFog SMOG Dale - Chall Female ratio for women ( (cid:12) 1 ) 2 : 70 * * * 0 : 39 * * 0 : 66 * * * 0 : 49 * * 0 : 27 * * * ( 0 : 98 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 10 ) Female ratio for men ( (cid:12) 1 + (cid:12) 2 ) 0 : 65 0 : 13 0 : 17 0 : 11 0 : 11 ( 1 : 37 ) ( 0 : 25 ) ( 0 : 29 ) ( 0 : 21 ) ( 0 : 11 ) Female ratio (cid:2) male ( (cid:12) 2 ) (cid:0) 2 : 05 (cid:0) 0 : 26 (cid:0) 0 : 49 (cid:0) 0 : 38 (cid:0) 0 : 16 ( 1 : 47 ) ( 0 : 30 ) ( 0 : 36 ) ( 0 : 25 ) ( 0 : 13 ) Lagged score ( (cid:12) 0 ) 0 : 03 * 0 : 04 * * * 0 : 03 * 0 : 02 0 : 03 * ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 01 ) ( 0 : 01 ) z - test for no serial correlation Order 1 (cid:0) 19 : 84 (cid:0) 15 : 67 (cid:0) 17 : 26 (cid:0) 20 : 27 (cid:0) 21 : 03 Order 2 0 : 58 (cid:0) 0 : 18 0 : 17 0 : 33 (cid:0) 0 : 58 Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 9 , 183 observations ( 2 , 826 authors , 121 female ) . Figures from ﬁrst - diﬀerenced , IV estimation of Equa - tion ( F . 1 ) ( Arellano and Bover , 1995 ; Blundell and Bond , 1998 ) using up to ﬁve lags of the dependent variable ( see Footnote Footnote 24 ) . Female ratio ( women ) : contemporaneous marginal eﬀect of a paper’s female co - author ratio for female authors ( (cid:12) 1 ) ; female ratio ( men ) : analogous eﬀect for male authors ( (cid:12) 1 + (cid:12) 2 ) . z - statistics for ﬁrst - and second - orderautocorrelationintheﬁrst - diﬀerencederrors ( ArellanoandBond , 1991 ) ; nullhypothesisnoautocorrelation . Quality controls denoted by 3 1 include citation count ( asinh ) , max . T 5 ﬁxed eﬀects ( author prominence ) and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) ; standard errors adjusted for two - way clustering on editor and author ( in parentheses ) . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 17 G Double - and semi - blind review In an earlier version of this paper ( Hengel , 2015 ) , I compared readability gaps in published ar - ticles subjected to blind review— i . e . , double - blind review before the internet—and non - blind review— i . e . , single - blind review or double - blind review after the internet . Blind review appeared to exacerbate the gender readability gap . These ﬁndings , however , were not robust to including ﬁxed eﬀects for year of publication . Table G . 1 repeats the analysis from Hengel ( 2015 , Table 3 . 9 ( ﬁrst panel ) , p . 65 ) including them . Figures represent the marginal eﬀect of female ratio in non - blind ( (cid:12) 1 P ) and blind ( (cid:12) 1 P + (cid:12) 3 P ) review from OLS estimation of Equation ( G . 1 ) : R jP = (cid:12) 0 P + (cid:12) 1 P female ratio j + (cid:12) 2 P Blind j + (cid:12) 3 P female ratio j (cid:2) Blind j + (cid:18) P X jP + (cid:22) jP + " jP : ( G . 1 ) The gender readability gap is positive and signiﬁcant in non - blind review ; when papers are blindly evaluated , however , the gap is generally smaller and never signiﬁcant . Diﬀerence - in - diﬀerence estimates ( Table G . 1 , third row ) are mostly positive , indicating—in contrast to results in Hengel ( 2015 ) but consistent with results in Table 6—that the readability gap was smaller under blinded peer review . 29 Nevertheless , standard errors are large relative to the size of the eﬀect ; please interpret these results with caution . Table G .  : The impact of double - blind review in all published articles FleschReadingEase Flesch - Kincaid GunningFog SMOG Dale - Chall Non - blind 1 : 12 * 0 : 20 0 : 33 * * 0 : 23 * * 0 : 10 * * ( 0 : 59 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 05 ) Blind 0 : 94 0 : 14 0 : 31 0 : 13 0 : 20 * * * ( 1 : 04 ) ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 32 ) ( 0 : 22 ) ( 0 : 07 ) Diﬀerence 0 : 17 0 : 06 0 : 02 0 : 10 (cid:0) 0 : 10 ( 1 : 11 ) ( 0 : 26 ) ( 0 : 34 ) ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 09 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 9 , 119 articles . Columns display the marginal eﬀect on female ratio for papers undergoing non - blind review ( (cid:12) 1 P ) and blind review ( (cid:12) 1 P + (cid:12) 3 P ) from OLS estimation of Equation ( G . 1 ) . Quality controls denoted by 3 1 include citation count ( asinh ) , max . T 5 ﬁxed eﬀects ( author prominence ) and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) . Standard errors clustered on year in parentheses . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . Table 6 and Table G . 1 suggest double - blind review may have successfully reduced peer re - view’s impact on the gender readability gap before the internet . Unfortunately , it has been less eﬀective after the internet . I dropped NBER – published article pairs published pre - internet ( i . e . , before Google’s incorporation in 1998 ) and replicated Table 6 with Blind j equal to 1 if article j was subjected to an oﬃcial policy of double - blind review after the internet . The results , pre - sented in Table G . 2 , suggests a positive gender readability gap in both samples . If anything , 29 Recall that Table 6 suggests the change in the gender readability gap that occurs in peer review was actually negative in the double - blind sample— i . e . , the gender readability gap reverses . 18 Table G .  : The impact of double - blind review after the internet FleschReadingEase Flesch - Kincaid GunningFog SMOG Dale - Chall Non - blind 0 : 71 0 : 27 0 : 21 0 : 07 0 : 14 * * ( 0 : 94 ) ( 0 : 30 ) ( 0 : 32 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 07 ) Blind post - internet 1 : 12 0 : 61 * * 0 : 59 * 0 : 41 * 0 : 01 ( 1 : 12 ) ( 0 : 30 ) ( 0 : 35 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 14 ) Diﬀerence (cid:0) 0 : 41 (cid:0) 0 : 33 (cid:0) 0 : 38 (cid:0) 0 : 34 0 : 13 ( 1 : 58 ) ( 0 : 44 ) ( 0 : 52 ) ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 17 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 1 , 380 NBER working papers ; 1 , 378 published articles . Table replicates Table 6 with Blind j equal to 1 if article j was subjected to an oﬃcial policy of double - blind review after the internet . ( NBER – published article pairs published pre - internet are dropped . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . blinded peer review coupled with an easy alternative for determining authors’ identities seems to exacerbate gender diﬀerences . Editors knew submitting authors’ identities—and therefore genders—both before and after the internet as well as under single - and double - blind review . Thus , the reversed gap in double - blind review pre - internet ( Table 6 ) and positive gap post - internet ( Table G . 2 ) suggest bias from referees—as opposed to editors—may drive observed gender diﬀerences in readability . 30 Nev - ertheless , this conclusion is based on noisy ( often insigniﬁcant ) estimates . Please make it with caution . 30 Many thanks to an anonymous referee for suggested this idea . 19 H Abstract word limits I attribute the change in readability between draft and ﬁnal versions of a paper to the peer review process . 31 Yet NBER working paper abstracts can be of any length while abstracts published in Econometrica and AER cannot—they are restricted to 150 and 100 words , respectively . Observed readability gaps could consequently result from gender diﬀerences in how authors conform to these limits . To test this hypothesis , I replicated the analysis described Section 4 . 2 . 3 ( and shown in Table 5 ) on the subset of articles with draft abstracts below the oﬃcial minimum word limit of the journals in which they were eventually published . Results are shown in Table H . 1 . Despite dropping about 40 percent of observations , coeﬃcient magnitudes are similar to those reported in Table 5 ; standard errors are somewhat larger . 32 Table H .  : Table 5 , draft abstracts below oﬃcial word limits OLS FGLS OLS Publishedarticle Workingpaper Publishedarticle Diﬀerence Changeinscore Flesch Reading Ease 0 : 82 2 : 32 2 : 77 * 0 : 45 0 : 48 ( 0 : 86 ) ( 1 : 47 ) ( 1 : 56 ) ( 0 : 83 ) ( 0 : 87 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 53 * * 0 : 07 0 : 59 * 0 : 52 * 0 : 53 * ( 0 : 26 ) ( 0 : 34 ) ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 27 ) ( 0 : 29 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 55 * * 0 : 23 0 : 73 * * 0 : 50 * 0 : 51 * ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 34 ) ( 0 : 26 ) ( 0 : 28 ) SMOG 0 : 27 * 0 : 23 0 : 45 * * 0 : 22 0 : 23 ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 26 ) ( 0 : 22 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 17 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 23 * * * 0 : 33 * * * 0 : 50 * * * 0 : 17 * * 0 : 17 * * ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 08 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 3 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 1 , 067 NBER working papers ; 1 , 065 published articles . Estimates are identical to those in Table 5 , except that the sample includes only papers with an NBER abstract below the oﬃcial minimum word limit of the journal in which it was eventually published . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 31 See Section 4 . 2 . 4 for a more detailed discussion and justiﬁcation of the assumptions underpinning this claim . 32 Results are similar if I also include a control for the number of words in the working paper version of the abstract ( available on request ) . 20 I Evaluating Theorem 1 using the entire sample of authors If topic , novelty and quality are appropriately controlled for , then discrimination is present when Theorem 1’s three conditions hold at large enough t . In this section , I evaluate whether each condition holds , on average , using the entire sample of authors . Table I .  : Average ﬁrst , mean and ﬁnal top - four paper scores FleschReadingEase Flesch - Kincaid GunningFog SMOG Dale - Chall Average ﬁrst paper score Women 39 : 20 (cid:0) 13 : 81 (cid:0) 17 : 36 (cid:0) 15 : 18 (cid:0) 11 : 00 ( 1 : 15 ) ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 29 ) ( 0 : 21 ) ( 0 : 10 ) Men 39 : 38 (cid:0) 13 : 77 (cid:0) 17 : 54 (cid:0) 15 : 35 (cid:0) 10 : 99 ( 0 : 31 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 03 ) Average mean score Women 41 : 20 (cid:0) 13 : 36 (cid:0) 16 : 92 (cid:0) 14 : 92 (cid:0) 10 : 91 ( 0 : 72 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 07 ) Men 39 : 59 (cid:0) 13 : 69 (cid:0) 17 : 41 (cid:0) 15 : 26 (cid:0) 11 : 02 ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 02 ) Average ﬁnal paper score Women 41 : 99 (cid:0) 13 : 10 (cid:0) 16 : 58 (cid:0) 14 : 66 (cid:0) 10 : 90 ( 1 : 06 ) ( 0 : 21 ) ( 0 : 25 ) ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 11 ) Men 39 : 52 (cid:0) 13 : 71 (cid:0) 17 : 41 (cid:0) 15 : 24 (cid:0) 11 : 08 ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 03 ) Notes . Sample 1 , 676 authors ; includes only authors with three or more publications . Figures are average readability scores for authors’ ﬁrst , mean and last published articles . Grade - level scores have been multiplied by negative one ( see Section 2 ) . Standard errors in parentheses . Table I . 1 displays authors’ average readability scores for their ﬁrst , mean and ﬁnal top - four papers . Grade - level scores ( Flesch - Kincaid , Gunning Fog , SMOG and Dale - Chall ) have been multiplied by negative one ( see Section 2 ) . Sample excludes authors with fewer than three pub - lications . As their careers advance , women do write more clearly : their average readability scores are 1 – 5 percent higher than the readability of their ﬁrst papers ; their latest papers 1 – 7 percent . For a man , however , his average and last paper may be more poorly written than the ﬁrst . Figure 7 plots mean Flesch Reading Ease scores grouped by authors’ t 4 th article ; as the count increases , men and women diverge . 33 Table I . 2 tests signiﬁcance of that divergence by FGLS estimation of Equation ( F . 1 ) ( omitting R it (cid:0) 1 ) on subsamples corresponding to authors’ ﬁrst ( t 4 = 1 ) , second ( t 4 = 2 ) , third ( t 4 = 3 ) , fourth and ﬁfth ( t 4 = 4 – 5 ) and sixth and up ( t 4 (cid:21) 6 ) top - four publications . Only marginal eﬀects on co - authoring with women for female authors are shown ( (cid:12) 1 ) . Final column is a population - averaged estimate on the pooled sample . Regressions in columns ( t 4 = 1 ) to ( t 4 (cid:21) 6 ) are weighted by 1 / N j ( see Appendix F ) , standard errors adjusted for two - way clustering on editor and author and corrected for cross - model correlation . Final column estimates are unweighted , error correlations are speciﬁed by an auto - regressive process of order one and standard errors are clustered on author . 33 In an earlier version of this paper , I estimated the mean additional contribution each paper makes to an author’s readability ( Hengel , 2016 , pp . 23 – 24 ) . This analysis included the full set of controls used in Appendix F . The results and conclusions were similar to those presented here . 21 Table I .  : Gender gap in readability at increasing t 4 t 4 = 1 t 4 = 2 t 4 = 3 t 4 = 4 – 5 t 4 (cid:21) 6 All Flesch Reading Ease 0 : 51 1 : 85 * * 5 : 07 * * * 2 : 54 2 : 71 1 : 89 * * ( 0 : 68 ) ( 0 : 86 ) ( 1 : 21 ) ( 1 : 94 ) ( 2 : 16 ) ( 0 : 74 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 10 0 : 18 0 : 87 * * * 0 : 54 0 : 40 0 : 23 ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 21 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 40 ) ( 0 : 37 ) ( 0 : 15 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 24 0 : 37 1 : 12 * * * 0 : 80 * 0 : 60 0 : 45 * * ( 0 : 17 ) ( 0 : 25 ) ( 0 : 28 ) ( 0 : 44 ) ( 0 : 45 ) ( 0 : 19 ) SMOG 0 : 16 0 : 27 0 : 75 * * * 0 : 62 * 0 : 46 0 : 35 * * * ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 17 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 35 ) ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 13 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 09 0 : 13 * 0 : 43 * * * 0 : 29 * 0 : 41 * 0 : 19 * * * ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 07 ) No . observations 6 , 875 2 , 826 1 , 676 1 , 907 2 , 774 12 , 009 Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . (cid:12) 1 from FGLS estimation of Equation ( F . 1 ) without lagged dependent variable . First column restricts sample to authors’ ﬁrst top - four publication ( t 4 = 1 ) , second column to their second ( t 4 = 2 ) , etc . Regressions weighted by 1 / N j ( see Section F ) . Standard errors ( in parentheses ) adjusted for two - way clustering ( editor and author ) and cross - model corre - lation . Final column estimates from an unweighted population - averaged regression ; error correlations speciﬁed by an auto - regressiveprocessoforderoneandstandarderrors ( inparentheses ) adjustedforone - wayclusteringonauthor . Qualitycontrols denoted by 3 1 include citation count ( asinh ) , max . T 5 ﬁxed eﬀects ( author prominence ) and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) ; 3 4 includes citation count ( asinh ) and max . t 5 , only . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . All ﬁgures agree—women write better—but the magnitude and signiﬁcance of that diﬀerence increases as t 4 increases . Between columns ( t 4 = 1 ) and ( t 4 = 2 ) , the gap marginally widens but is not signiﬁcant ; after that , it triples ( at least ) ; the increase is signiﬁcant ( p < 0 : 05 ) for all ﬁve scores ( Table I . 3 ) . 34 At higher publication counts , estimates are somewhat smaller than column ( t 4 = 3 ) —but still larger than columns ( t 4 = 1 ) and ( t 4 = 2 ) —although ﬁgures are only weakly signiﬁcant and suﬀer from very small samples of female authors . 35 First - time publications are not driving the observed readability gap . Figure 7 suggests little or no gender diﬀerence when t 4 = 1 ; Table I . 2 backs this up . Coeﬃcients in column ( t 4 = 1 ) are imprecise , roughly half the size of those from a pooled regression ( last column ) and a fraction the size of estimates in columns ( t 4 = 3 ) , ( t 4 = 4 – 5 ) and ( t 4 (cid:21) 6 ) . Wald tests ( Table I . 3 ) reject equality of (cid:12) 1 in the ﬁrst and third models at p < 0 : 01 for the Flesch Reading Ease , Flesch - Kincaid and SMOG scores and p < 0 : 05 for the Gunning Fog and Dale - Chall scores . 34 Figures in columns ( t 4 = 2 ) and ( t 4 = 3 ) of Table I . 2 are roughly in line with third column estimates in Table 5—on average , t 4 = 2 : 7 for female - authored articles released ﬁrst as NBER working papers . 35 Only 40 female authors have 4 – 5 publications in the data ; 28 have six or more . ( 512 men have 4 – 5 publications ; 545 have more than that . ) 22 Table I .  : Table I . 3 , equality test statistics t 4 = 1 vs . 2 1 vs . 3 1 vs . 4 – 5 1 vs . (cid:21) 6 2 vs . 3 Flesch Reading Ease 1 : 965 10 : 049 1 : 094 0 : 951 5 : 319 Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 140 8 : 667 0 : 995 0 : 436 6 : 530 Gunning Fog 0 : 251 7 : 242 1 : 213 0 : 481 5 : 268 SMOG 0 : 431 7 : 033 1 : 435 0 : 774 4 : 614 Dale - Chall 0 : 211 5 : 084 1 : 649 1 : 833 3 : 860 Notes . (cid:31) 2 test statistics from Wald tests of (cid:12) 1 ( Equation ( F . 1 ) ) equality across estimation results in Table I . 2 . 23 J Alternative program for calculating readability scores In this section , I replicate Table 3 , Table 5 , Table F . 1 and Table I . 2 using readability scores gener - ated by the R readability package , an alternative program for calculating Flesch - Kincaid , Gun - ning Fog and SMOG readability scores . 36 Replications for other tables and ﬁgures presented in the paper are not shown , but will be made available on request . Textatistic and readability employ diﬀerent strategies to adapt the scores to automated calculation— e . g . , readability counts semi - colons and dashes as sentence - ending terminations ; Textatistic does not . 37 Results appear robust to these ( and other ) small discrepancies : coeﬃ - cients are similar to those presented in the body of the paper ; standard errors are usually smaller . Table J .  : Table 3 , alternative program for calculating readability 1950 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 19 * 0 : 18 * 0 : 18 0 : 20 * 0 : 22 * 0 : 25 * 0 : 27 * * 0 : 27 * ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 14 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 33 * * * 0 : 32 * * * 0 : 33 * * * 0 : 36 * * * 0 : 38 * * * 0 : 37 * * * 0 : 36 * * * 0 : 32 * ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 16 ) SMOG 0 : 21 * * 0 : 21 * * 0 : 21 * * 0 : 23 * * 0 : 25 * * * 0 : 24 * * 0 : 23 * * 0 : 21 * ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 12 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 JEL ( tertiary ) eﬀects 3 Notes . 9 , 119 articles in ( 1 ) – ( 5 ) ; 5 , 213 articles in ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) ; 5 , 774 articles—including 561 from AER Papers & Proceedings ( see Footnote 47 ) —in ( 8 ) . Figures are identical to those in Table 3 , except readability scores were calculated using the R readability program . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 36 The program does not calculate the Flesch Reading Ease or Dale - Chall scores . 37 Readability scores were originally developed to be calculated by hand . Automating their calculation requires slightly adapting the algorithms . For example , all ﬁve scores deﬁne sentences as grammatically independent units of thoughts— e . g . , two independent clauses connected by a dash or semi - colon count as two separate sentences . Unfor - tunately , semi - colons and dashes are frequently used in other ways and it is diﬃcult to programmatically distinguish between contexts . 24 Table J .  : Table 5 , alternative program for calculating readability OLS FGLS OLS Publishedarticle Workingpaper Publishedarticle Diﬀerence Changeinscore Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 51 * * * 0 : 48 * * 0 : 87 * * * 0 : 40 * * 0 : 39 * * ( 0 : 17 ) ( 0 : 22 ) ( 0 : 29 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 19 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 51 * * * 0 : 63 * * 1 : 00 * * * 0 : 38 * * 0 : 37 * ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 25 ) ( 0 : 28 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 19 ) SMOG 0 : 37 * * 0 : 42 * * * 0 : 69 * * * 0 : 27 * * 0 : 27 * * ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 14 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 3 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 1 , 709 NBER working papers ; 1 , 707 published articles . Figures are identical to those in Table 5 , except readability scores were calculated using the R readability program . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 25 Table J .  : Table F . 1 , alternative program for calculating readability Flesch - Kincaid GunningFog SMOG Female ratio for women ( (cid:12) 1 ) 0 : 42 * * 0 : 64 * * * 0 : 41 * * ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 17 ) Female ratio for men ( (cid:12) 1 + (cid:12) 2 ) 0 : 16 0 : 31 0 : 21 ( 0 : 26 ) ( 0 : 29 ) ( 0 : 20 ) Female ratio (cid:2) male ( (cid:12) 2 ) (cid:0) 0 : 26 (cid:0) 0 : 33 (cid:0) 0 : 20 ( 0 : 32 ) ( 0 : 36 ) ( 0 : 24 ) Lagged score ( (cid:12) 0 ) 0 : 04 * * * 0 : 04 * * 0 : 03 * * ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) z - test for no serial correlation Order 1 (cid:0) 14 : 16 (cid:0) 15 : 20 (cid:0) 18 : 86 Order 2 0 : 32 0 : 47 0 : 21 Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 Notes . Sample9 , 183observations ( 2 , 826authors , 121female ) . Figuresareidenticaltothose in Table F . 1 , except readability scores were calculated using the R readability program . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 26 Table J .  : Table I . 2 , alternative program for calculating readability t 4 = 1 t 4 = 2 t 4 = 3 t 4 = 4 – 5 t 4 (cid:21) 6 All Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 14 0 : 22 0 : 83 * * * 0 : 43 0 : 47 0 : 22 ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 27 ) ( 0 : 42 ) ( 0 : 37 ) ( 0 : 16 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 33 * * 0 : 34 1 : 06 * * * 0 : 63 0 : 64 0 : 44 * * ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 25 ) ( 0 : 36 ) ( 0 : 50 ) ( 0 : 48 ) ( 0 : 19 ) SMOG 0 : 22 * 0 : 23 0 : 67 * * * 0 : 44 0 : 46 0 : 30 * * ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 36 ) ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 13 ) No . observations 6 , 875 2 , 826 1 , 676 1 , 907 2 , 774 12 , 009 Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Figures are identical to those in Table I . 2 , except readability scores were calculated using the R readability program . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 27 K Alternative proxies for article gender The following sections replicate Table 3 , Table 5 , Table 9 , Table 10 , Table F . 1 and Table I . 2 using alternative proxies for article gender . Replications using additional proxies are available on request ( subject to feasibility ) . 38 • In Appendix K . 1 , article gender is represented by a binary variable equal to one if the author with the ( weakly ) greatest number of top - ﬁve papers at the time of publication is female ; mixed - gendered articles without a senior female co - author are excluded . 39 • In Appendix K . 2 , article gender is represented by a binary variable equal to one if at least half of all authors are female ; mixed - gendered articles below this threshold are excluded . 40 • In Appendix K . 3 , a paper is considered “female” if at least one author is female . • In Appendix K . 4 , papers authored entirely by women are compared to papers authored entirely by men . Co - authored articles are excluded . 41 The estimation strategy in Section 4 . 3 relies on within - author diﬀerences in readability scores at two speciﬁc t 4 ( t 4 = 1 and t 4 = 3 ) . Because only a small number of women have majority and exclusively female - authored papers for both t 4 , I reproduce instead results from Table I . 2 using the alternative proxies for article gender . 42 In general , standard errors are smaller and coeﬃcients larger in Appendix K . 1 , Appendix K . 2 and Appendix K . 3 ; the reverse is usually—but not always—true for Appendix K . 4 ( which includes a much smaller number of female - authored papers ) . 38 Estimates based on the sample of “junior” authors— i . e . , those with publication counts below a certain threshold—or controlling for years since completing one’s Ph . D . ( only collected for solo - authored papers published after 2000 in Econometrica ) are not shown but support conclusions drawn elsewhere in the paper . 39 In order to generate within - author variation , co - authored articles with a senior male author are included—but not considered “female”—when estimating Table F . 1 . 40 Co - authored articles below this threshold are included—but not considered “female”—when estimating Table F . 1 ( see Footnote 39 ) . 41 Mixed - sex articles are included as “male” when estimating Table F . 1 . ( See Footnote 39 . ) 42 See Footnote 101 for further discussion and results from a rough attempt to replicate the analysis in Section 4 . 3 . 2 on subsets of articles satisfying alternative gender conditions . 28 K . 1 Senior female author Table K .  : Table 3 , senior female author 1950 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) Flesch Reading Ease 0 : 84 * 0 : 79 0 : 73 0 : 82 1 : 04 * * 0 : 83 0 : 82 0 : 79 ( 0 : 50 ) ( 0 : 50 ) ( 0 : 51 ) ( 0 : 52 ) ( 0 : 52 ) ( 0 : 55 ) ( 0 : 57 ) ( 0 : 64 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 17 * 0 : 16 0 : 16 0 : 18 * 0 : 20 * 0 : 24 * * 0 : 25 * * 0 : 21 ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 13 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 29 * * 0 : 29 * * * 0 : 29 * * 0 : 33 * * * 0 : 35 * * * 0 : 41 * * * 0 : 38 * * * 0 : 32 * * ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 14 ) SMOG 0 : 19 * * 0 : 19 * * 0 : 19 * * 0 : 21 * * 0 : 23 * * 0 : 26 * * 0 : 23 * * 0 : 20 * ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 10 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 06 0 : 06 0 : 05 0 : 06 0 : 08 0 : 10 * 0 : 10 * 0 : 11 * ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 06 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 JEL ( tertiary ) eﬀects 3 Notes . 8 , 918 articles in ( 1 ) – ( 5 ) ; 5 , 046 articles in ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) ; 5 , 556 articles—including 510 from AER Papers & Proceedings ( see Footnote 47 ) —in ( 8 ) . Estimates are identical to those in Table 3 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if a female author had at least as many top - ﬁve papers as her co - authors at the time the paper was published . ( Mixed - gendered papers with a senior male co - author are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 29 Table K .  : Table 5 , senior female author OLS FGLS OLS Publishedarticle Workingpaper Publishedarticle Diﬀerence Changeinscore Flesch Reading Ease 1 : 62 * * * 1 : 81 * * 3 : 12 * * * 1 : 31 * * 1 : 31 * * ( 0 : 62 ) ( 0 : 78 ) ( 0 : 95 ) ( 0 : 64 ) ( 0 : 65 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 53 * * * 0 : 29 * * 0 : 75 * * * 0 : 46 * * 0 : 46 * * ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 22 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 19 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 57 * * * 0 : 41 * * * 0 : 89 * * * 0 : 48 * * 0 : 48 * * ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 20 ) ( 0 : 20 ) SMOG 0 : 34 * * * 0 : 32 * * * 0 : 59 * * * 0 : 27 * * 0 : 27 * * ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 12 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 10 0 : 23 * * 0 : 30 * * * 0 : 06 0 : 06 ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 06 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 3 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 1 , 655 NBER working papers ; 1 , 653 published articles ( 119 female - authored ) . Columns display estimates identicaltothoseinTable5 , exceptthatfemaleratiohasbeenreplacedwithadummyvariableequalto1ifafemaleauthor had at least as many top - ﬁve papers as her co - authors at the time the paper was published . ( Mixed - gendered papers with a senior male co - author are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 30 Table K .  : Table 9 ( dependent variable : revision duration ) , senior female author 1970 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) Senior female 4 : 983 * * 6 : 822 * * 6 : 817 * * 5 : 507 * * 6 : 836 * * 8 : 472 * * 8 : 538 * * ( 2 : 316 ) ( 2 : 883 ) ( 2 : 866 ) ( 2 : 689 ) ( 2 : 868 ) ( 3 : 567 ) ( 3 : 494 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 130 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 130 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 128 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 130 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 127 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 125 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 131 * * * ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 045 ) ( 0 : 046 ) No . pages 0 : 195 * * * 0 : 193 * * * 0 : 192 * * * 0 : 194 * * * 0 : 192 * * * 0 : 233 * * * 0 : 219 * * * ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 041 ) ( 0 : 043 ) N j 1 : 282 * * * 1 : 273 * * * 1 : 261 * * * 1 : 272 * * * 1 : 270 * * * 1 : 671 * * * 1 : 535 * * * ( 0 : 311 ) ( 0 : 306 ) ( 0 : 311 ) ( 0 : 306 ) ( 0 : 308 ) ( 0 : 420 ) ( 0 : 446 ) Order 0 : 218 * * * 0 : 216 * * * 0 : 214 * * * 0 : 217 * * * 0 : 214 * * * 0 : 497 * * * 0 : 484 * * * ( 0 : 065 ) ( 0 : 065 ) ( 0 : 065 ) ( 0 : 065 ) ( 0 : 065 ) ( 0 : 145 ) ( 0 : 142 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 366 * (cid:0) 0 : 385 * (cid:0) 0 : 374 * (cid:0) 0 : 363 * (cid:0) 0 : 385 * (cid:0) 0 : 539 (cid:0) 0 : 527 ( 0 : 199 ) ( 0 : 198 ) ( 0 : 199 ) ( 0 : 199 ) ( 0 : 199 ) ( 0 : 404 ) ( 0 : 393 ) Mother (cid:0) 8 : 010 * * (cid:0) 12 : 246 * * * (cid:0) 21 : 432 * * * (cid:0) 21 : 592 * * * ( 3 : 799 ) ( 3 : 962 ) ( 6 : 450 ) ( 6 : 887 ) Birth (cid:0) 3 : 883 7 : 050 15 : 831 * * 15 : 547 * * ( 4 : 792 ) ( 4 : 857 ) ( 6 : 357 ) ( 6 : 563 ) Constant 12 : 937 * * * 13 : 063 * * * 13 : 076 * * * 12 : 963 * * * 13 : 103 * * * 14 : 285 * * * 15 : 014 * * * ( 1 : 212 ) ( 1 : 215 ) ( 1 : 216 ) ( 1 : 214 ) ( 1 : 212 ) ( 2 : 174 ) ( 2 : 120 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 No . observations 2 , 587 2 , 572 2 , 587 2 , 587 2 , 587 1 , 252 1 , 252 Notes . Dependent variable is the number of months spent in peer review ( see Section 4 . 5 ) . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table 9 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if a female author had at least as many top - ﬁve papers as her co - authors at the time the paper was published . ( Mixed - gendered papers with a senior male co - author are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 31 Table K .  : Table 10 ( dependent variable : revision duration ) , senior female author 1970 – 2015 1990 – 2015 Econometrica REStud Econometrica + REStud Econometrica REStud Econometrica + REStud Senior female 4 : 86 * * 1 : 58 3 : 08 * * * 6 : 40 * * 3 : 08 4 : 34 * * * ( 2 : 34 ) ( 1 : 54 ) ( 1 : 11 ) ( 3 : 04 ) ( 2 : 08 ) ( 1 : 48 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 12 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 10 (cid:0) 0 : 12 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 13 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 05 (cid:0) 0 : 09 * * ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 04 ) No . pages 0 : 20 * * * 0 : 13 * * 0 : 18 * * * 0 : 21 * * * 0 : 05 0 : 17 * * * ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 04 ) N j 1 : 29 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 07 0 : 80 * * * 1 : 47 * * * 0 : 27 1 : 12 * * * ( 0 : 32 ) ( 0 : 51 ) ( 0 : 28 ) ( 0 : 45 ) ( 0 : 68 ) ( 0 : 37 ) Order 0 : 20 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 06 0 : 09 * 0 : 47 * * * 0 : 06 0 : 23 * * ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 11 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 27 (cid:0) 0 : 60 * * (cid:0) 0 : 39 * * (cid:0) 0 : 32 (cid:0) 1 : 20 * * (cid:0) 0 : 78 * * ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 39 ) ( 0 : 45 ) ( 0 : 31 ) Constant 12 : 51 * * * 23 : 51 * * * 16 : 67 * * * 14 : 41 * * * 30 : 52 * * * 21 : 28 * * * ( 1 : 20 ) ( 1 : 85 ) ( 0 : 95 ) ( 2 : 11 ) ( 3 : 15 ) ( 1 : 57 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 3 3 No . observations 2 , 587 1 , 778 4 , 365 1 , 252 1 , 040 2 , 293 Notes . Dependent variable is the number of months spent in peer review ( see Section 4 . 5 ) . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table 10 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if a female author had at least as many top - ﬁve papers as her co - authors at the time the paper was published . ( Mixed - gendered papers with a senior male co - author are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 32 Table K .  : Table F . 1 , senior female author FleschReadingEase Flesch - Kincaid GunningFog SMOG Dale - Chall Female ratio for women ( (cid:12) 1 ) 2 : 34 * * 0 : 44 * * 0 : 71 * * * 0 : 49 * * * 0 : 17 ( 0 : 95 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 22 ) ( 0 : 17 ) ( 0 : 10 ) Female ratio for men ( (cid:12) 1 + (cid:12) 2 ) 2 : 30 0 : 43 0 : 47 0 : 32 0 : 06 ( 1 : 83 ) ( 0 : 40 ) ( 0 : 43 ) ( 0 : 30 ) ( 0 : 16 ) Female ratio (cid:2) male ( (cid:12) 2 ) (cid:0) 0 : 04 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 24 (cid:0) 0 : 17 (cid:0) 0 : 11 ( 1 : 75 ) ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 40 ) ( 0 : 28 ) ( 0 : 14 ) Lagged score ( (cid:12) 0 ) 0 : 03 * 0 : 04 * * * 0 : 03 * 0 : 02 0 : 03 * ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 01 ) ( 0 : 01 ) z - test for no serial correlation Order 1 (cid:0) 19 : 84 (cid:0) 15 : 67 (cid:0) 17 : 25 (cid:0) 20 : 28 (cid:0) 21 : 10 Order 2 0 : 58 (cid:0) 0 : 17 0 : 18 0 : 34 (cid:0) 0 : 61 Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 9 , 183 observations ( 2 , 826 authors , 121 female ) . Estimates identical to those in Table F . 1 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if a female author had at least as many top - ﬁve papers as her co - authors at the time the paper was published . Otherwise , it is 0 . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 33 Table K .  : Table I . 2 , senior female author t 4 = 1 t 4 = 2 t 4 = 3 t 4 = 4 – 5 t 4 (cid:21) 6 All Flesch Reading Ease 0 : 11 1 : 55 * 2 : 89 * * 2 : 95 * * 2 : 02 1 : 57 * * ( 0 : 80 ) ( 0 : 84 ) ( 1 : 22 ) ( 1 : 43 ) ( 1 : 65 ) ( 0 : 74 ) Flesch - Kincaid (cid:0) 0 : 01 0 : 25 0 : 52 * 0 : 51 0 : 30 0 : 23 ( 0 : 17 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 28 ) ( 0 : 31 ) ( 0 : 35 ) ( 0 : 15 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 09 0 : 46 * * 0 : 73 * 0 : 88 * * * 0 : 39 0 : 49 * * * ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 37 ) ( 0 : 34 ) ( 0 : 41 ) ( 0 : 19 ) SMOG 0 : 06 0 : 30 * * 0 : 49 * 0 : 71 * * * 0 : 27 0 : 36 * * * ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 26 ) ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 31 ) ( 0 : 14 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 02 0 : 14 0 : 25 * 0 : 22 0 : 26 0 : 14 * ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 08 ) No . observations 6 , 537 2 , 749 1 , 647 1 , 872 2 , 767 11 , 475 Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table I . 2 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variableequalto1ifafemaleauthorhadatleastasmanytop - ﬁvepapersasherco - authorsatthetimethepaperwaspublished . ( Mixed - gendered papers with a senior male co - author are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 34 K . 2 Majority female - authored Table K .  : Table 3 , majority female - authored 1950 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) Flesch Reading Ease 0 : 91 * * * 0 : 90 * * * 0 : 88 * * * 0 : 91 * * * 1 : 08 * * * 0 : 90 * * 0 : 94 * * 1 : 12 * * ( 0 : 32 ) ( 0 : 32 ) ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 35 ) ( 0 : 36 ) ( 0 : 45 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 16 * 0 : 16 * 0 : 16 * 0 : 17 * * 0 : 19 * * 0 : 23 * * 0 : 26 * * * 0 : 25 * * ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 10 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 26 * * * 0 : 26 * * * 0 : 27 * * * 0 : 28 * * * 0 : 30 * * * 0 : 32 * * * 0 : 33 * * * 0 : 33 * * * ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 12 ) SMOG 0 : 17 * * 0 : 17 * * 0 : 17 * * 0 : 18 * * 0 : 19 * * * 0 : 20 * * 0 : 19 * * * 0 : 22 * * ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 09 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 08 * * 0 : 08 * * 0 : 08 * * 0 : 08 * * 0 : 09 * * 0 : 09 * * 0 : 08 * 0 : 11 * * ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 05 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 JEL ( tertiary ) eﬀects 3 Notes . 8 , 802 articles in ( 1 ) – ( 5 ) ; 4 , 915 articles in ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) ; 5 , 403 articles—including 488 from AER Papers & Proceedings ( see Footnote 47 ) —in ( 8 ) . Estimates are identical to those in Table 3 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if a weak majority ( 50 % or more ) of authors are female . ( Papers with a minority—but positive—number of female authors are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 35 Table K .  : Table 5 , majority female - authored OLS FGLS OLS Publishedarticle Workingpaper Publishedarticle Diﬀerence Changeinscore Flesch Reading Ease 1 : 34 * * * 1 : 30 * * 2 : 42 * * * 1 : 12 * * * 1 : 09 * * * ( 0 : 43 ) ( 0 : 66 ) ( 0 : 72 ) ( 0 : 41 ) ( 0 : 42 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 44 * * * 0 : 16 0 : 56 * * * 0 : 40 * * * 0 : 40 * * * ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 12 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 46 * * * 0 : 21 0 : 62 * * * 0 : 41 * * * 0 : 40 * * * ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 14 ) SMOG 0 : 28 * * 0 : 14 0 : 40 * * * 0 : 25 * * * 0 : 25 * * * ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 14 * * * 0 : 16 * * * 0 : 27 * * * 0 : 12 * * * 0 : 11 * * * ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 03 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 3 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 1 , 567 NBER working papers ; 1 , 565 published articles ( 235 female - authored ) . Columns display estimates identicaltothoseinTable5 , exceptthatfemaleratiohasbeenreplacedwithadummyvariableequalto1ifaweakmajority ( 50 % or more ) of authors are female . ( Papers with a minority—but positive—number of female authors are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 36 Table K .  : Table 9 ( dependent variable : revision duration ) , majority female - authored 1970 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) Majority female 3 : 273 * * * 3 : 721 * * * 3 : 707 * * * 3 : 335 * * 3 : 723 * * * 5 : 728 * * * 5 : 696 * * * ( 1 : 141 ) ( 1 : 279 ) ( 1 : 277 ) ( 1 : 255 ) ( 1 : 275 ) ( 1 : 643 ) ( 1 : 702 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 169 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 172 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 171 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 169 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 169 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 175 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 171 * * * ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 038 ) ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 046 ) ( 0 : 046 ) No . pages 0 : 202 * * * 0 : 202 * * * 0 : 201 * * * 0 : 202 * * * 0 : 201 * * * 0 : 245 * * * 0 : 230 * * * ( 0 : 030 ) ( 0 : 030 ) ( 0 : 030 ) ( 0 : 030 ) ( 0 : 030 ) ( 0 : 043 ) ( 0 : 046 ) N j 1 : 191 * * * 1 : 177 * * * 1 : 162 * * * 1 : 185 * * * 1 : 171 * * * 1 : 572 * * * 1 : 380 * * * ( 0 : 323 ) ( 0 : 316 ) ( 0 : 320 ) ( 0 : 314 ) ( 0 : 317 ) ( 0 : 425 ) ( 0 : 440 ) Order 0 : 202 * * * 0 : 201 * * * 0 : 199 * * * 0 : 202 * * * 0 : 199 * * * 0 : 460 * * * 0 : 454 * * * ( 0 : 062 ) ( 0 : 062 ) ( 0 : 062 ) ( 0 : 062 ) ( 0 : 062 ) ( 0 : 141 ) ( 0 : 139 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 411 * * (cid:0) 0 : 430 * * (cid:0) 0 : 417 * * (cid:0) 0 : 411 * * (cid:0) 0 : 428 * * (cid:0) 0 : 696 (cid:0) 0 : 647 ( 0 : 199 ) ( 0 : 199 ) ( 0 : 199 ) ( 0 : 200 ) ( 0 : 199 ) ( 0 : 412 ) ( 0 : 405 ) Mother (cid:0) 4 : 377 (cid:0) 8 : 711 * * * (cid:0) 16 : 735 * * * (cid:0) 16 : 963 * * * ( 2 : 943 ) ( 2 : 854 ) ( 4 : 166 ) ( 4 : 848 ) Birth (cid:0) 1 : 088 7 : 219 14 : 757 * * * 15 : 196 * * * ( 4 : 111 ) ( 4 : 443 ) ( 5 : 142 ) ( 5 : 449 ) Constant 13 : 261 * * * 13 : 367 * * * 13 : 382 * * * 13 : 275 * * * 13 : 410 * * * 15 : 131 * * * 15 : 707 * * * ( 1 : 182 ) ( 1 : 194 ) ( 1 : 194 ) ( 1 : 185 ) ( 1 : 190 ) ( 2 : 153 ) ( 2 : 055 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 No . observations 2 , 543 2 , 528 2 , 543 2 , 543 2 , 543 1 , 211 1 , 211 Notes . Dependent variable is the number of months spent in peer review ( see Section 4 . 5 ) . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table 9 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if a weak majority ( 50 % or more ) of authors are female . ( Papers with a minority—but positive—number of female authors are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 37 Table K .  : Table 10 ( dependent variable : revision duration ) , majority female - authored 1970 – 2015 1990 – 2015 Econometrica REStud Econometrica + REStud Econometrica REStud Econometrica + REStud Majority female 3 : 15 * * * 0 : 89 1 : 95 * * 5 : 02 * * * 2 : 14 * * 3 : 46 * * * ( 1 : 16 ) ( 0 : 83 ) ( 0 : 74 ) ( 1 : 56 ) ( 0 : 99 ) ( 0 : 89 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 16 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 10 (cid:0) 0 : 14 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 16 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 05 (cid:0) 0 : 11 * * ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 04 ) No . pages 0 : 21 * * * 0 : 13 * 0 : 18 * * * 0 : 23 * * * 0 : 04 0 : 17 * * * ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 04 ) N j 1 : 22 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 18 0 : 71 * * 1 : 34 * * * 0 : 20 1 : 03 * * ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 48 ) ( 0 : 29 ) ( 0 : 45 ) ( 0 : 67 ) ( 0 : 37 ) Order 0 : 18 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 07 0 : 08 0 : 44 * * * 0 : 05 0 : 21 * ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 12 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 32 * (cid:0) 0 : 62 * * (cid:0) 0 : 43 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 44 (cid:0) 1 : 23 * * (cid:0) 0 : 84 * * ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 39 ) ( 0 : 46 ) ( 0 : 31 ) Constant 12 : 80 * * * 23 : 97 * * * 16 : 96 * * * 15 : 01 * * * 31 : 11 * * * 21 : 68 * * * ( 1 : 18 ) ( 1 : 84 ) ( 0 : 92 ) ( 2 : 04 ) ( 3 : 11 ) ( 1 : 54 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 3 3 No . observations 2 , 543 1 , 745 4 , 288 1 , 211 1 , 002 2 , 214 Notes . Dependent variable is the number of months spent in peer review ( see Section 4 . 5 ) . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table 10 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if a weak majority ( 50 % or more ) of authors are female . ( Papers with a minority—but positive—number of female authors are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 38 Table K .  : Table F . 1 , majority female - authored FleschReadingEase Flesch - Kincaid GunningFog SMOG Dale - Chall Female ratio for women ( (cid:12) 1 ) 1 : 97 * * 0 : 31 * * 0 : 42 * * 0 : 28 * * 0 : 12 ( 0 : 75 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 08 ) Female ratio for men ( (cid:12) 1 + (cid:12) 2 ) 0 : 60 0 : 13 0 : 11 0 : 05 0 : 02 ( 0 : 65 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 05 ) Female ratio (cid:2) male ( (cid:12) 2 ) (cid:0) 1 : 37 (cid:0) 0 : 19 (cid:0) 0 : 31 (cid:0) 0 : 23 (cid:0) 0 : 10 ( 1 : 03 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 17 ) ( 0 : 09 ) Lagged score ( (cid:12) 0 ) 0 : 03 * 0 : 04 * * * 0 : 03 * 0 : 02 0 : 03 * ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 01 ) ( 0 : 01 ) z - test for no serial correlation Order 1 (cid:0) 19 : 85 (cid:0) 15 : 67 (cid:0) 17 : 25 (cid:0) 20 : 26 (cid:0) 21 : 10 Order 2 0 : 59 (cid:0) 0 : 16 0 : 17 0 : 32 (cid:0) 0 : 62 Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample9 , 183observations ( 2 , 826authors , 121female ) . ColumnsdisplayestimatesidenticaltothoseinTableF . 1 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if a weak majority ( 50 % or more ) of authors are female . Otherwise , it is 0 . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 39 Table K .  : Table I . 2 , majority female - authored t 4 = 1 t 4 = 2 t 4 = 3 t 4 = 4 – 5 t 4 (cid:21) 6 All Flesch Reading Ease 0 : 63 1 : 71 * * * 3 : 73 * * * 1 : 50 2 : 41 * 2 : 02 * * * ( 0 : 50 ) ( 0 : 60 ) ( 1 : 00 ) ( 1 : 40 ) ( 1 : 33 ) ( 0 : 65 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 09 0 : 20 0 : 66 * * * 0 : 43 * 0 : 32 0 : 32 * * ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 30 ) ( 0 : 14 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 23 * 0 : 31 * 0 : 81 * * * 0 : 53 * 0 : 44 0 : 45 * * * ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 21 ) ( 0 : 29 ) ( 0 : 36 ) ( 0 : 17 ) SMOG 0 : 16 * 0 : 23 * 0 : 51 * * * 0 : 37 * 0 : 32 0 : 31 * * * ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 22 ) ( 0 : 26 ) ( 0 : 12 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 09 * 0 : 09 0 : 25 * * 0 : 16 0 : 27 0 : 15 * * ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 06 ) No . observations 6 , 402 2 , 679 1 , 558 1 , 778 2 , 578 9 , 589 Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table I . 2 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if a weak majority ( 50 % or more ) of authors are female . ( Papers with a minority—but positive—number of female authors are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 40 K . 3 At least one female author Table K .  : Table 3 , at least one female author 1950 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) Flesch Reading Ease 0 : 49 0 : 49 0 : 48 0 : 50 0 : 63 * 0 : 38 0 : 36 0 : 34 ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 39 ) ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 36 ) ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 44 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 11 0 : 11 0 : 11 0 : 11 0 : 12 * 0 : 13 0 : 14 * 0 : 10 ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 08 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 19 * * 0 : 19 * * 0 : 20 * * 0 : 20 * * 0 : 21 * * 0 : 20 * * 0 : 19 * * 0 : 14 ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 10 ) SMOG 0 : 12 * 0 : 12 * 0 : 13 * 0 : 13 * 0 : 14 * * 0 : 12 * 0 : 11 0 : 09 ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 07 * * 0 : 07 * * 0 : 07 * * 0 : 07 * * 0 : 08 * * 0 : 08 * 0 : 07 * 0 : 07 ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 04 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 JEL ( tertiary ) eﬀects 3 Notes . 9 , 119 articles in ( 1 ) – ( 5 ) ; 5 , 213 articles in ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) ; 5 , 774 articles—including 561 from AER Papers & Proceedings ( see Footnote 47 ) —in ( 8 ) . Estimates are identical to those in Table 3 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one author on a paper is female . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 41 Table K .  : Table 5 , at least one female author OLS FGLS OLS Published article Working paper Published article Diﬀerence Change in score Flesch Reading Ease 0 : 63 * 1 : 35 * * 1 : 76 * * * 0 : 41 0 : 39 ( 0 : 34 ) ( 0 : 58 ) ( 0 : 67 ) ( 0 : 27 ) ( 0 : 28 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 26 * * 0 : 27 * * 0 : 46 * * * 0 : 20 * * 0 : 19 * * ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 24 * * 0 : 33 * * 0 : 50 * * * 0 : 17 * 0 : 17 * ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 17 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 10 ) SMOG 0 : 16 * * 0 : 21 * * 0 : 33 * * * 0 : 11 * 0 : 11 * ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 06 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 10 * * * 0 : 18 * * * 0 : 25 * * * 0 : 07 * * * 0 : 07 * * * ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 3 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 1 , 709 NBER working papers ; 1 , 707 published articles ( 377 female - authored ) . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table 5 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one author on a paper is female . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 42 Table K .  : Table 9 ( dependent variable : revision duration ) , at least one female author 1970 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) 1 + female 2 : 692 * * * 3 : 001 * * * 2 : 991 * * * 2 : 731 * * * 3 : 004 * * * 4 : 313 * * * 4 : 315 * * * ( 0 : 923 ) ( 0 : 990 ) ( 0 : 991 ) ( 0 : 991 ) ( 0 : 990 ) ( 1 : 146 ) ( 1 : 124 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 139 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 142 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 141 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 139 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 139 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 140 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 147 * * * ( 0 : 037 ) ( 0 : 037 ) ( 0 : 037 ) ( 0 : 037 ) ( 0 : 037 ) ( 0 : 043 ) ( 0 : 043 ) No . pages 0 : 198 * * * 0 : 198 * * * 0 : 197 * * * 0 : 198 * * * 0 : 197 * * * 0 : 240 * * * 0 : 226 * * * ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 040 ) ( 0 : 043 ) N j 1 : 013 * * * 0 : 977 * * * 0 : 966 * * * 1 : 005 * * * 0 : 973 * * * 1 : 160 * * * 1 : 038 * * ( 0 : 304 ) ( 0 : 298 ) ( 0 : 300 ) ( 0 : 294 ) ( 0 : 298 ) ( 0 : 404 ) ( 0 : 428 ) Order 0 : 214 * * * 0 : 213 * * * 0 : 211 * * * 0 : 214 * * * 0 : 211 * * * 0 : 486 * * * 0 : 483 * * * ( 0 : 063 ) ( 0 : 063 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 063 ) ( 0 : 141 ) ( 0 : 140 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 393 * (cid:0) 0 : 410 * * (cid:0) 0 : 398 * * (cid:0) 0 : 392 * (cid:0) 0 : 409 * * (cid:0) 0 : 617 (cid:0) 0 : 620 ( 0 : 197 ) ( 0 : 196 ) ( 0 : 197 ) ( 0 : 197 ) ( 0 : 196 ) ( 0 : 402 ) ( 0 : 390 ) Mother (cid:0) 4 : 198 (cid:0) 8 : 625 * * * (cid:0) 17 : 602 * * * (cid:0) 17 : 601 * * * ( 2 : 838 ) ( 3 : 139 ) ( 5 : 131 ) ( 5 : 304 ) Birth (cid:0) 0 : 949 7 : 377 16 : 284 * * 15 : 955 * * ( 4 : 060 ) ( 4 : 924 ) ( 6 : 324 ) ( 6 : 514 ) Constant 13 : 405 * * * 13 : 539 * * * 13 : 547 * * * 13 : 420 * * * 13 : 577 * * * 15 : 230 * * * 15 : 944 * * * ( 1 : 164 ) ( 1 : 176 ) ( 1 : 177 ) ( 1 : 169 ) ( 1 : 173 ) ( 2 : 084 ) ( 2 : 036 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 No . observations 2 , 622 2 , 607 2 , 622 2 , 622 2 , 622 1 , 278 1 , 278 Notes . Dependent variable is the number of months spent in peer review ( see Section 4 . 5 ) . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table 9 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one author on a paper is female . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 43 Table K .  : Table 10 ( dependent variable : revision duration ) , at least one female author 1970 – 2015 1990 – 2015 Econometrica REStud Econometrica + REStud Econometrica REStud Econometrica + REStud 1 + female 2 : 49 * * 0 : 77 1 : 62 * * * 3 : 72 * * * 1 : 55 * 2 : 62 * * * ( 0 : 96 ) ( 0 : 72 ) ( 0 : 59 ) ( 1 : 13 ) ( 0 : 85 ) ( 0 : 69 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 13 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 12 * (cid:0) 0 : 13 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 14 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 07 (cid:0) 0 : 11 * * ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 04 ) No . pages 0 : 20 * * * 0 : 14 * * 0 : 18 * * * 0 : 22 * * * 0 : 06 0 : 17 * * * ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 03 ) N j 1 : 02 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 16 0 : 61 * * 1 : 04 * * 0 : 02 0 : 77 * ( 0 : 31 ) ( 0 : 49 ) ( 0 : 28 ) ( 0 : 44 ) ( 0 : 66 ) ( 0 : 38 ) Order 0 : 19 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 07 0 : 08 0 : 46 * * * 0 : 04 0 : 22 * ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 12 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 30 (cid:0) 0 : 64 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 42 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 42 (cid:0) 1 : 20 * * (cid:0) 0 : 83 * * * ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 44 ) ( 0 : 30 ) Constant 12 : 97 * * * 24 : 01 * * * 17 : 12 * * * 15 : 31 * * * 31 : 07 * * * 22 : 00 * * * ( 1 : 16 ) ( 1 : 81 ) ( 0 : 91 ) ( 2 : 02 ) ( 3 : 01 ) ( 1 : 45 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 3 3 No . observations 2 , 622 1 , 812 4 , 434 1 , 278 1 , 068 2 , 347 Notes . Dependent variable is the number of months spent in peer review ( see Section 4 . 5 ) . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table 10 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one author on a paper is female . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 44 Table K .  : Table F . 1 , at least one female author FleschReadingEase Flesch - Kincaid GunningFog SMOG Dale - Chall Female ratio for women ( (cid:12) 1 ) 1 : 35 * 0 : 21 * 0 : 30 * 0 : 21 * 0 : 12 * ( 0 : 68 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 07 ) Female ratio for men ( (cid:12) 1 + (cid:12) 2 ) 0 : 08 0 : 03 0 : 05 0 : 04 0 : 06 ( 0 : 65 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 05 ) Female ratio (cid:2) male ( (cid:12) 2 ) (cid:0) 1 : 27 * * (cid:0) 0 : 19 (cid:0) 0 : 25 (cid:0) 0 : 17 (cid:0) 0 : 06 ( 0 : 63 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 17 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 07 ) Lagged score ( (cid:12) 0 ) 0 : 03 * 0 : 04 * * * 0 : 03 * 0 : 02 0 : 02 * ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 01 ) ( 0 : 01 ) z - test for no serial correlation Order 1 (cid:0) 19 : 86 (cid:0) 15 : 67 (cid:0) 17 : 25 (cid:0) 20 : 27 (cid:0) 21 : 08 Order 2 0 : 55 (cid:0) 0 : 20 0 : 14 0 : 30 (cid:0) 0 : 60 Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample9 , 183observations ( 2 , 826authors , 121female ) . ColumnsdisplayestimatesidenticaltothoseinTableF . 1 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one author on a paper is female . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 45 Table K .  : Table I . 2 , at least one female author t 4 = 1 t 4 = 2 t 4 = 3 t 4 = 4 – 5 t 4 (cid:21) 6 All Flesch Reading Ease 0 : 43 0 : 73 3 : 47 * * * 1 : 50 1 : 17 0 : 90 ( 0 : 45 ) ( 0 : 58 ) ( 0 : 92 ) ( 1 : 17 ) ( 1 : 44 ) ( 0 : 56 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 09 (cid:0) 0 : 04 0 : 60 * * * 0 : 44 * 0 : 17 0 : 10 ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 30 ) ( 0 : 12 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 21 * 0 : 06 0 : 71 * * * 0 : 56 * * 0 : 25 0 : 21 ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 20 ) ( 0 : 27 ) ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 14 ) SMOG 0 : 14 * 0 : 06 0 : 47 * * * 0 : 39 * 0 : 22 0 : 17 ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 21 ) ( 0 : 27 ) ( 0 : 10 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 09 * * 0 : 05 0 : 28 * * * 0 : 14 0 : 16 0 : 10 * * ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 05 ) No . observations 6 , 875 2 , 826 1 , 676 1 , 907 2 , 774 12 , 009 Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table I . 2 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variableequalto1ifatleastoneauthoronapaperisfemale . * * * , * * and * statisticallysigniﬁcantat1 % , 5 % and10 % , respectively . 46 K . 4 Exclusively female - authored Table K .  : Table 3 , 100 % female - authored 1950 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) Flesch Reading Ease 0 : 49 0 : 42 0 : 34 0 : 52 0 : 80 0 : 53 0 : 62 0 : 72 ( 0 : 57 ) ( 0 : 56 ) ( 0 : 57 ) ( 0 : 60 ) ( 0 : 60 ) ( 0 : 66 ) ( 0 : 71 ) ( 0 : 90 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 11 0 : 09 0 : 08 0 : 13 0 : 16 0 : 21 0 : 24 0 : 20 ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 18 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 22 0 : 21 0 : 20 0 : 27 * 0 : 31 * 0 : 41 * * 0 : 42 * * 0 : 35 * ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 17 ) ( 0 : 17 ) ( 0 : 20 ) SMOG 0 : 15 0 : 14 0 : 14 0 : 18 0 : 21 * 0 : 25 * * 0 : 25 * * 0 : 22 ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 15 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 06 0 : 06 0 : 05 0 : 06 0 : 08 0 : 13 * * 0 : 13 * 0 : 15 * ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 07 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 JEL ( tertiary ) eﬀects 3 Notes . 8 , 261 articles in ( 1 ) – ( 5 ) ; 4 , 456 articles in ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) ; 4 , 839 articles—including 383 from AER Papers & Proceedings ( see Footnote 47 ) —in ( 8 ) . Estimates are identical to those in Table 3 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if all authors on a paper are female . ( Papers written by authors of both genders are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 47 Table K .  : Table 5 , 100 % female - authored OLS FGLS OLS Publishedarticle Workingpaper Publishedarticle Diﬀerence Changeinscore Flesch Reading Ease 0 : 44 1 : 97 2 : 09 0 : 12 0 : 13 ( 0 : 95 ) ( 1 : 38 ) ( 1 : 70 ) ( 0 : 97 ) ( 1 : 02 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 37 0 : 18 0 : 51 0 : 33 0 : 34 ( 0 : 28 ) ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 30 ) ( 0 : 32 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 41 0 : 33 0 : 67 * 0 : 34 0 : 35 ( 0 : 27 ) ( 0 : 29 ) ( 0 : 39 ) ( 0 : 31 ) ( 0 : 32 ) SMOG 0 : 19 0 : 33 0 : 45 * 0 : 12 0 : 13 ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 26 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 19 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 11 0 : 34 * * 0 : 40 * * * 0 : 06 0 : 06 ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 09 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 3 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 1 , 386 NBER working papers ; 1 , 384 published articles ( 54 female - authored ) . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table 5 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if all authors on a paper are female . ( Papers written by authors of both genders are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 48 Table K .  : Table 9 ( dependent variable : revision duration ) , 100 % female - authored 1970 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) Exclusively female 6 : 368 * * 9 : 630 * * 9 : 558 * * 7 : 274 * * 9 : 592 * * 11 : 876 * * 12 : 247 * * ( 2 : 641 ) ( 3 : 616 ) ( 3 : 618 ) ( 3 : 196 ) ( 3 : 618 ) ( 4 : 988 ) ( 4 : 972 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 175 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 175 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 173 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 176 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 171 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 175 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 172 * * * ( 0 : 045 ) ( 0 : 045 ) ( 0 : 045 ) ( 0 : 045 ) ( 0 : 045 ) ( 0 : 056 ) ( 0 : 057 ) No . pages 0 : 210 * * * 0 : 209 * * * 0 : 207 * * * 0 : 209 * * * 0 : 207 * * * 0 : 254 * * * 0 : 242 * * * ( 0 : 027 ) ( 0 : 026 ) ( 0 : 026 ) ( 0 : 026 ) ( 0 : 026 ) ( 0 : 038 ) ( 0 : 038 ) N j 1 : 262 * * * 1 : 290 * * * 1 : 271 * * * 1 : 259 * * * 1 : 281 * * * 1 : 629 * * * 1 : 438 * * * ( 0 : 318 ) ( 0 : 316 ) ( 0 : 321 ) ( 0 : 317 ) ( 0 : 318 ) ( 0 : 439 ) ( 0 : 431 ) Order 0 : 184 * * * 0 : 181 * * * 0 : 179 * * * 0 : 183 * * * 0 : 179 * * * 0 : 435 * * * 0 : 422 * * ( 0 : 065 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 065 ) ( 0 : 065 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 154 ) ( 0 : 157 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 429 * * (cid:0) 0 : 454 * * (cid:0) 0 : 440 * * (cid:0) 0 : 425 * * (cid:0) 0 : 452 * * (cid:0) 0 : 759 * (cid:0) 0 : 675 ( 0 : 194 ) ( 0 : 193 ) ( 0 : 194 ) ( 0 : 195 ) ( 0 : 193 ) ( 0 : 418 ) ( 0 : 417 ) Mother (cid:0) 10 : 188 * * (cid:0) 14 : 703 * * * (cid:0) 23 : 447 * * * (cid:0) 24 : 428 * * * ( 4 : 456 ) ( 4 : 537 ) ( 6 : 483 ) ( 7 : 314 ) Birth (cid:0) 4 : 923 7 : 495 15 : 654 * * * 16 : 388 * * * ( 5 : 078 ) ( 4 : 584 ) ( 5 : 402 ) ( 5 : 590 ) Constant 13 : 099 * * * 13 : 194 * * * 13 : 213 * * * 13 : 112 * * * 13 : 244 * * * 15 : 206 * * * 15 : 591 * * * ( 1 : 294 ) ( 1 : 288 ) ( 1 : 288 ) ( 1 : 295 ) ( 1 : 285 ) ( 2 : 636 ) ( 2 : 537 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 No . observations 2 , 442 2 , 427 2 , 442 2 , 442 2 , 442 1 , 139 1 , 139 Notes . Dependent variable is the number of months spent in peer review ( see Section 4 . 5 ) . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table 9 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if all authors on a paper are female . ( Papers written by authors of both genders are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 49 Table K .  : Table 10 ( dependent variable : revision duration ) , 100 % female - authored 1970 – 2015 1990 – 2015 Econometrica REStud Econometrica + REStud Econometrica REStud Econometrica + REStud Exclusively female 6 : 42 * * 2 : 46 4 : 22 * * * 9 : 03 * * 4 : 61 * 6 : 27 * * * ( 2 : 62 ) ( 1 : 58 ) ( 1 : 36 ) ( 3 : 75 ) ( 2 : 40 ) ( 1 : 93 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 17 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 12 * (cid:0) 0 : 15 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 16 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 07 (cid:0) 0 : 13 * * * ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 05 ) No . pages 0 : 21 * * * 0 : 13 * 0 : 19 * * * 0 : 24 * * * 0 : 03 0 : 19 * * * ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 03 ) N j 1 : 31 * * * 0 : 07 0 : 87 * * * 1 : 38 * * * 0 : 65 1 : 19 * * * ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 50 ) ( 0 : 29 ) ( 0 : 44 ) ( 0 : 69 ) ( 0 : 37 ) Order 0 : 17 * * (cid:0) 0 : 03 0 : 09 0 : 41 * * 0 : 14 0 : 25 * * ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 12 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 34 * (cid:0) 0 : 45 * (cid:0) 0 : 38 * * (cid:0) 0 : 47 (cid:0) 0 : 95 * (cid:0) 0 : 76 * * ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 39 ) ( 0 : 47 ) ( 0 : 33 ) Constant 12 : 58 * * * 22 : 38 * * * 16 : 20 * * * 14 : 86 * * * 28 : 93 * * * 20 : 58 * * * ( 1 : 28 ) ( 1 : 77 ) ( 0 : 99 ) ( 2 : 50 ) ( 3 : 10 ) ( 1 : 80 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 3 3 No . observations 2 , 442 1 , 636 4 , 078 1 , 139 914 2 , 054 Notes . Dependent variable is the number of months spent in peer review ( see Section 4 . 5 ) . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table 10 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if all authors on a paper are female . ( Papers written by authors of both genders are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 50 Table K .  : Table F . 1 , 100 % female - authored FleschReading Ease Flesch - Kincaid Gunning Fog SMOG Dale - Chall Female ratio for women ( (cid:12) 1 ) 2 : 14 * * 0 : 25 0 : 60 * * 0 : 48 * * 0 : 32 * * * ( 0 : 98 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 27 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 08 ) Lagged score ( (cid:12) 0 ) 0 : 03 * 0 : 04 * * * 0 : 03 * 0 : 02 0 : 03 * ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 01 ) ( 0 : 01 ) z - test for no serial correlation Order 1 (cid:0) 19 : 85 (cid:0) 15 : 68 (cid:0) 17 : 27 (cid:0) 20 : 33 (cid:0) 21 : 04 Order 2 0 : 57 (cid:0) 0 : 19 0 : 16 0 : 32 (cid:0) 0 : 61 Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 9 , 183 observations ( 2 , 826 authors , 121 female ) . Estimates identical to those in Table F . 1 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if all authors on a paper are female . Otherwise , it is 0 . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 51 Table K .  : Table I . 2 , 100 % female - authored t 4 = 1 t 4 = 2 t 4 = 3 t 4 = 4 – 5 t 4 (cid:21) 6 All Flesch Reading Ease (cid:0) 0 : 02 2 : 03 * 4 : 63 * * * 2 : 47 1 : 83 3 : 09 * * * ( 0 : 79 ) ( 1 : 08 ) ( 1 : 36 ) ( 2 : 46 ) ( 3 : 25 ) ( 1 : 19 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 02 0 : 32 0 : 77 * * 0 : 16 0 : 26 0 : 47 * ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 24 ) ( 0 : 33 ) ( 0 : 56 ) ( 0 : 49 ) ( 0 : 28 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 10 0 : 54 * 1 : 20 * * * 0 : 50 0 : 64 0 : 72 * * ( 0 : 21 ) ( 0 : 27 ) ( 0 : 44 ) ( 0 : 61 ) ( 0 : 47 ) ( 0 : 34 ) SMOG 0 : 05 0 : 38 * 0 : 85 * * * 0 : 55 0 : 47 * 0 : 51 * * ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 20 ) ( 0 : 30 ) ( 0 : 48 ) ( 0 : 28 ) ( 0 : 23 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 00 0 : 21 * * 0 : 47 * * * 0 : 51 * * 0 : 59 * * * 0 : 24 * * ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 14 ) ( 0 : 26 ) ( 0 : 22 ) ( 0 : 12 ) No . observations 5 , 878 2 , 449 1 , 454 1 , 643 2 , 385 8 , 081 Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 N j 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 1 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table I . 2 , except that female ratio has been replaced with a dummy variable equal to 1 if all authors on a paper are female . ( Papers written by authors of both genders are excluded . ) * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 52 L Section 4 . 1 , suplemental output Table L . 1 shows the coeﬃcients on the journal dummies in column ( 2 ) , Table 3 . They compare AER ’s readability to the readability of Econometrica , JPE and QJE . Table L .  : Journal readability , comparisons to AER FleschReadingEase Flesch - Kincaid GunningFog SMOG Dale - Chall Econometrica (cid:0) 12 : 42 * * * (cid:0) 4 : 42 * * * (cid:0) 4 : 25 * * * (cid:0) 2 : 62 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 66 * * * ( 1 : 92 ) ( 0 : 41 ) ( 0 : 47 ) ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 16 ) JPE (cid:0) 5 : 63 * * * (cid:0) 3 : 99 * * * (cid:0) 3 : 41 * * * (cid:0) 1 : 83 * * * 0 : 18 ( 1 : 92 ) ( 0 : 41 ) ( 0 : 47 ) ( 0 : 38 ) ( 0 : 16 ) QJE 1 : 53 * * (cid:0) 0 : 02 0 : 30 * * * 0 : 21 * * * 0 : 27 * * * ( 0 : 61 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 06 ) ( 0 : 05 ) Notes . Figures are the estimated coeﬃcients on the journal dummy variables from ( 2 ) in Table 3 . Each contrasts the readability of the journals in the left - hand column with the readability of AER . Standard errors clustered on editor in parentheses . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 53 M Section 4 . 2 , suplemental output M . 1 Table 5 ( ﬁrst column ) , full output Table M . 1 displays coeﬃcients from estimating Equation ( 1 ) using OLS . The ﬁrst row displays coeﬃcients on working paper score ( R jW ) ; the second row shows the coeﬃcient on female ratio ( (cid:12) 1 P ) , which is also shown in the ﬁrst column of Table 5 . Remaining rows present estimated coeﬃcients on the other ( non - ﬁxed eﬀects ) control variables : max . t 5 ( author seniority ) , max . T 5 ( author prominence ) , number of citations ( asinh ) and a dummy variable equal to one if article j is authored by at least one native English speaker . 43 Table M .  : Table 5 ( ﬁrst column ) , full output FleschReadingEase Flesch - Kincaid GunningFog SMOG Dale - Chall R jW 0 : 834 * * * 0 : 756 * * * 0 : 774 * * * 0 : 791 * * * 0 : 841 * * * ( 0 : 022 ) ( 0 : 037 ) ( 0 : 036 ) ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 016 ) Female ratio 1 : 307 * * 0 : 515 * * * 0 : 513 * * * 0 : 304 * * 0 : 177 * * * ( 0 : 575 ) ( 0 : 174 ) ( 0 : 185 ) ( 0 : 128 ) ( 0 : 052 ) N j 0 : 204 0 : 084 0 : 110 0 : 073 * 0 : 007 ( 0 : 175 ) ( 0 : 063 ) ( 0 : 070 ) ( 0 : 043 ) ( 0 : 013 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 006 0 : 001 0 : 004 0 : 002 (cid:0) 0 : 005 ( 0 : 058 ) ( 0 : 014 ) ( 0 : 015 ) ( 0 : 009 ) ( 0 : 003 ) Max . T 5 0 : 011 0 : 001 0 : 000 0 : 000 0 : 003 ( 0 : 045 ) ( 0 : 010 ) ( 0 : 011 ) ( 0 : 007 ) ( 0 : 002 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 334 * (cid:0) 0 : 066 * (cid:0) 0 : 070 (cid:0) 0 : 057 * (cid:0) 0 : 007 ( 0 : 180 ) ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 046 ) ( 0 : 030 ) ( 0 : 015 ) Native speaker (cid:0) 0 : 238 0 : 000 0 : 011 (cid:0) 0 : 021 (cid:0) 0 : 039 ( 0 : 422 ) ( 0 : 141 ) ( 0 : 185 ) ( 0 : 113 ) ( 0 : 028 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Year (cid:2) Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 1 , 709 NBER working papers ; 1 , 707 published articles . Estimates exclude 279 pre - internet double - blind reviewed articles ( see Footnote 59 ) . Coeﬃcients from OLS regression of Equation ( 1 ) . First row is the coeﬃcient on R jW ; second row is (cid:12) 1 P , and corresponds to results presented in the ﬁrst column of Table 5 . Coeﬃcients on quality controls ( citation counts ( asinh ) , max . T 5 ( author prominence ) and max . t 5 ( author seniority ) ) also shown . Standard errors clustered on editor ( in parentheses ) . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 43 The coeﬃcients on No . citations in Table M . 1 are negative and marginally signiﬁcant only when controlling for R jW — i . e . , conditional on the readability of a paper’s NBER abstract , the readability of the published article is negatively correlated with citations . Unconditionally ( i . e . , without controlling for draft abstract readability ) citations and readability either correlate positively or there is no ( signiﬁcant ) relationship ( see Section 2 ) . 54 M . 2 Table 5 , accounting for ﬁeld As argued in Section 4 . 2 ( see Footnote 54 ) using the change in score as the dependent variable washes out any impact ﬁeld may have on readability . 44 Moreover , these results—reported in the ﬁnal column of Table 5—are almost identical to FGLS estimates—shown in the penultimate column—suggesting the latter are not biased by excluding them , either . For added robustness , however , I include them here . Table M . 2 replicates the analysis in - cluding dummy variables for each primary JEL category . As expected , ﬁgures are similar to—but standard errors somewhat higher than—those presented in Table 5 . Table M .  : Table 5 , FGLS estimates controlling for JEL category OLS FGLS OLS Publishedarticle Workingpaper Publishedarticle Diﬀerence Changeinscore Flesch Reading Ease 1 : 27 * * 2 : 74 * * * 3 : 58 * * * 0 : 84 0 : 82 ( 0 : 57 ) ( 1 : 03 ) ( 1 : 17 ) ( 0 : 59 ) ( 0 : 59 ) Flesch - Kincaid 0 : 54 * * * 0 : 46 * * 0 : 88 * * * 0 : 42 * * 0 : 42 * * ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 30 ) ( 0 : 20 ) ( 0 : 20 ) Gunning Fog 0 : 49 * * * 0 : 53 * * 0 : 90 * * * 0 : 37 * 0 : 36 * ( 0 : 17 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 32 ) ( 0 : 22 ) ( 0 : 22 ) SMOG 0 : 28 * * 0 : 38 * * * 0 : 58 * * * 0 : 20 0 : 20 ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 13 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 14 * * * 0 : 32 * * * 0 : 41 * * * 0 : 10 * 0 : 09 * ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 05 ) ( 0 : 05 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 N j 3 3 3 3 Quality controls 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 3 Native speaker 3 3 3 3 Notes . Sample 1 , 505 NBER working papers ; 1 , 503 published articles . Estimates exclude 198 pre - internet double - blind reviewed articles ( see Footnote 59 ) . Columns display estimates identical to those in Table 5 , except that ﬁxed eﬀects for primary JEL categories are included in all speciﬁcations . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 44 As long as ﬁeld only impacts the readability of a paper when it is ﬁrst drafted— e . g . , if concepts in certain areas are easier to explain—then the change in readability between versions is independent of it . 55 N Section 4 . 3 , supplemental output N . 1 Co - variate balance Table N . 1 compares co - variate balance pre - and post - match . The ﬁrst column displays averages for the 121 female authors with at least three publications in the data . The ﬁrst column of the ﬁrst panel ( “Pre - match means” ) displays corresponding averages for the 1 , 554 male authors with three or more publications . The ﬁrst column of the second panel ( “Post - match means” ) displays ( weighted ) averages for the 110 male authors matched with a female author . Table N . 2 , Table N . 3 and Table N . 4 compare co - variate balance when restricted to matched pairs with D ik ̸ = 0 . Gender diﬀerences are smaller post - match ; t - statistics are likewise closer to zero . More - over , co - variates remain well balanced—and resemble averages in the matched sample—in both D ik > 0 ( discrimination against women ) and D ik < 0 ( discrimination against men ) samples ( not shown ) . 56 Table N .  : Pre - and post - matching summary statistics Pre - match means Post - match means Women Men Diﬀerence t Men Diﬀerence t t = 1 inst . rank 15 : 23 18 : 49 (cid:0) 3 : 26 (cid:0) 1 : 88 17 : 15 (cid:0) 1 : 92 (cid:0) 0 : 80 Max . citations 267 : 07 406 : 15 (cid:0) 139 : 09 (cid:0) 1 : 78 193 : 55 73 : 52 2 : 00 Fraction of articles per decade 1950 – 59 0 : 00 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 1 : 57 0 : 00 0 : 00 1960 – 69 0 : 00 0 : 04 (cid:0) 0 : 04 (cid:0) 2 : 87 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 12 1970 – 79 0 : 01 0 : 11 (cid:0) 0 : 09 (cid:0) 4 : 72 0 : 01 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 10 1980 – 89 0 : 08 0 : 18 (cid:0) 0 : 10 (cid:0) 4 : 36 0 : 09 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 55 1990 – 99 0 : 19 0 : 21 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 99 0 : 18 0 : 00 0 : 07 2000 – 09 0 : 41 0 : 26 0 : 15 5 : 88 0 : 40 0 : 01 0 : 22 2010 – 15 0 : 31 0 : 20 0 : 11 4 : 20 0 : 31 0 : 00 0 : 09 Fraction of articles per journal AER 0 : 39 0 : 25 0 : 14 5 : 53 0 : 38 0 : 01 0 : 29 Econometrica 0 : 17 0 : 34 (cid:0) 0 : 17 (cid:0) 5 : 12 0 : 24 (cid:0) 0 : 07 (cid:0) 1 : 77 JPE 0 : 18 0 : 24 (cid:0) 0 : 07 (cid:0) 2 : 62 0 : 17 0 : 00 0 : 10 QJE 0 : 27 0 : 17 0 : 10 4 : 79 0 : 21 0 : 06 1 : 85 Number of articles per JEL code A General 0 : 04 0 : 02 0 : 02 1 : 59 0 : 04 0 : 00 0 : 00 B Methodology 0 : 00 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 1 : 44 0 : 00 0 : 00 C Quant . methods 0 : 64 0 : 81 (cid:0) 0 : 17 (cid:0) 1 : 02 0 : 57 0 : 07 0 : 44 D Microeconomics 1 : 64 1 : 79 (cid:0) 0 : 15 (cid:0) 0 : 68 1 : 60 0 : 03 0 : 15 E Macroeconomics 0 : 58 0 : 62 (cid:0) 0 : 05 (cid:0) 0 : 36 0 : 50 0 : 07 0 : 55 F International 0 : 39 0 : 31 0 : 08 0 : 82 0 : 30 0 : 09 0 : 75 G Finance 0 : 60 0 : 52 0 : 07 0 : 67 0 : 46 0 : 13 0 : 90 H Public 0 : 45 0 : 36 0 : 10 1 : 09 0 : 28 0 : 17 2 : 08 I Health , welfare , edu 0 : 88 0 : 34 0 : 53 5 : 36 0 : 52 0 : 36 2 : 01 J Labour 1 : 26 0 : 76 0 : 49 3 : 40 0 : 84 0 : 41 2 : 18 K Law and econ 0 : 20 0 : 14 0 : 06 1 : 14 0 : 13 0 : 07 1 : 03 L Industrial org 0 : 73 0 : 57 0 : 16 1 : 47 0 : 50 0 : 23 1 : 78 M Marketing / acct 0 : 17 0 : 13 0 : 04 0 : 93 0 : 12 0 : 04 0 : 65 N Economic history 0 : 29 0 : 14 0 : 15 2 : 74 0 : 20 0 : 09 0 : 97 O Development 0 : 86 0 : 52 0 : 34 2 : 59 0 : 50 0 : 36 2 : 21 P Economic systems 0 : 08 0 : 09 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 22 0 : 06 0 : 02 0 : 57 Q Agri . , environment 0 : 18 0 : 12 0 : 06 1 : 21 0 : 09 0 : 09 1 : 51 R Regional , transport 0 : 17 0 : 16 0 : 01 0 : 16 0 : 06 0 : 12 2 : 67 Z Special topics 0 : 16 0 : 10 0 : 06 1 : 50 0 : 15 0 : 01 0 : 14 Notes . Samplerestrictedtoauthorswiththreeormorepublications . Firstpanelshowspre - matchsummarystatistics ( 121femaleauthors , 1 , 555 male authors ) . Second panel shows post - match summary statistics ( 109 male authors ) . t - values for diﬀerences reported in each panel’s ﬁnal column . 57 Table N .  : Co - variate post - match balance when D ik ̸ = 0 Flesch Reading Ease Flesch Kincaid Discrimination Discrimination Againstwomen Againstmen Diﬀerence t Againstwomen Againstmen Diﬀerence t t = 1 inst . rank 15 : 54 17 : 00 (cid:0) 1 : 46 (cid:0) 0 : 52 16 : 64 15 : 95 0 : 68 0 : 24 Max . citations 204 : 72 232 : 66 (cid:0) 27 : 94 (cid:0) 0 : 89 210 : 06 266 : 92 (cid:0) 56 : 86 (cid:0) 1 : 31 Fraction of articles per decade 1950 – 59 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 1960 – 69 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 18 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 20 1970 – 79 0 : 02 0 : 02 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 01 0 : 01 0 : 01 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 08 1980 – 89 0 : 07 0 : 08 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 26 0 : 09 0 : 09 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 01 1990 – 99 0 : 18 0 : 20 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 50 0 : 17 0 : 18 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 31 2000 – 09 0 : 43 0 : 43 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 12 0 : 41 0 : 40 0 : 00 0 : 11 2010 – 15 0 : 30 0 : 27 0 : 03 0 : 72 0 : 32 0 : 31 0 : 01 0 : 20 Fraction of articles per journal AER 0 : 38 0 : 39 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 34 0 : 40 0 : 40 0 : 00 0 : 01 Econometrica 0 : 23 0 : 16 0 : 07 1 : 47 0 : 24 0 : 19 0 : 05 0 : 98 JPE 0 : 16 0 : 19 (cid:0) 0 : 03 (cid:0) 0 : 95 0 : 14 0 : 17 (cid:0) 0 : 03 (cid:0) 1 : 02 QJE 0 : 23 0 : 26 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 61 0 : 22 0 : 24 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 43 Fraction of articles per JEL code A General 0 : 04 0 : 05 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 12 0 : 02 0 : 02 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 11 B Methodology 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 C Quant . methods 0 : 49 0 : 41 0 : 08 0 : 46 0 : 53 0 : 55 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 10 D Microeconomics 1 : 54 1 : 55 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 07 1 : 60 1 : 59 0 : 01 0 : 05 E Macroeconomics 0 : 43 0 : 49 (cid:0) 0 : 06 (cid:0) 0 : 44 0 : 42 0 : 48 (cid:0) 0 : 06 (cid:0) 0 : 42 F International 0 : 26 0 : 38 (cid:0) 0 : 12 (cid:0) 0 : 81 0 : 26 0 : 33 (cid:0) 0 : 07 (cid:0) 0 : 48 G Finance 0 : 45 0 : 49 (cid:0) 0 : 04 (cid:0) 0 : 23 0 : 47 0 : 60 (cid:0) 0 : 14 (cid:0) 0 : 75 H Public 0 : 31 0 : 39 (cid:0) 0 : 08 (cid:0) 0 : 83 0 : 36 0 : 40 (cid:0) 0 : 03 (cid:0) 0 : 30 I Health , welfare , edu 0 : 70 0 : 88 (cid:0) 0 : 18 (cid:0) 0 : 80 0 : 77 0 : 81 (cid:0) 0 : 04 (cid:0) 0 : 19 J Labour 0 : 84 1 : 08 (cid:0) 0 : 24 (cid:0) 1 : 14 0 : 87 1 : 09 (cid:0) 0 : 22 (cid:0) 1 : 03 K Law and econ 0 : 12 0 : 16 (cid:0) 0 : 05 (cid:0) 0 : 67 0 : 12 0 : 21 (cid:0) 0 : 08 (cid:0) 1 : 07 L Industrial org 0 : 58 0 : 66 (cid:0) 0 : 08 (cid:0) 0 : 49 0 : 55 0 : 72 (cid:0) 0 : 17 (cid:0) 1 : 08 M Marketing / acct 0 : 12 0 : 13 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 16 0 : 11 0 : 13 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 20 N Economic history 0 : 22 0 : 36 (cid:0) 0 : 15 (cid:0) 1 : 18 0 : 19 0 : 29 (cid:0) 0 : 10 (cid:0) 0 : 89 O Development 0 : 40 0 : 62 (cid:0) 0 : 23 (cid:0) 1 : 64 0 : 40 0 : 62 (cid:0) 0 : 22 (cid:0) 1 : 59 P Economic systems 0 : 05 0 : 09 (cid:0) 0 : 04 (cid:0) 0 : 76 0 : 06 0 : 10 (cid:0) 0 : 04 (cid:0) 0 : 75 Q Agri . , environment 0 : 06 0 : 14 (cid:0) 0 : 08 (cid:0) 1 : 37 0 : 04 0 : 09 (cid:0) 0 : 05 (cid:0) 1 : 23 R Regional , transport 0 : 06 0 : 12 (cid:0) 0 : 05 (cid:0) 1 : 10 0 : 07 0 : 16 (cid:0) 0 : 09 (cid:0) 1 : 73 Z Special topics 0 : 17 0 : 18 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 06 0 : 15 0 : 17 (cid:0) 0 : 03 (cid:0) 0 : 42 Notes . Sample restricted to authors with three or more publications . Panels show post - match summary statistics for pairs in which D ik ̸ = 0 . t - values for diﬀerences reported in each panel’s ﬁnal column . 58 Table N .  : Co - variate post - match balance when D ik ̸ = 0 Gunning Fog SMOG Discrimination Discrimination Againstwomen Againstmen Diﬀerence t Againstwomen Againstmen Diﬀerence t t = 1 inst . rank 16 : 37 18 : 09 (cid:0) 1 : 72 (cid:0) 0 : 59 14 : 84 16 : 91 (cid:0) 2 : 07 (cid:0) 0 : 70 Max . citations 193 : 79 245 : 42 (cid:0) 51 : 62 (cid:0) 1 : 55 198 : 31 240 : 97 (cid:0) 42 : 66 (cid:0) 1 : 23 Fraction of articles per decade 1950 – 59 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 1960 – 69 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 20 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 13 1970 – 79 0 : 02 0 : 02 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 18 0 : 02 0 : 02 0 : 00 0 : 08 1980 – 89 0 : 10 0 : 09 0 : 00 0 : 07 0 : 09 0 : 08 0 : 01 0 : 39 1990 – 99 0 : 16 0 : 17 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 26 0 : 16 0 : 18 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 55 2000 – 09 0 : 40 0 : 39 0 : 00 0 : 05 0 : 40 0 : 42 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 38 2010 – 15 0 : 32 0 : 31 0 : 01 0 : 17 0 : 33 0 : 31 0 : 02 0 : 48 Fraction of articles per journal AER 0 : 40 0 : 38 0 : 01 0 : 25 0 : 39 0 : 40 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 19 Econometrica 0 : 22 0 : 21 0 : 02 0 : 31 0 : 21 0 : 17 0 : 04 0 : 88 JPE 0 : 15 0 : 18 (cid:0) 0 : 03 (cid:0) 0 : 79 0 : 16 0 : 20 (cid:0) 0 : 04 (cid:0) 1 : 19 QJE 0 : 23 0 : 23 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 01 0 : 24 0 : 23 0 : 01 0 : 25 Fraction of articles per JEL code A General 0 : 02 0 : 02 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 12 0 : 03 0 : 03 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 01 B Methodology 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 C Quant . methods 0 : 46 0 : 51 (cid:0) 0 : 05 (cid:0) 0 : 31 0 : 44 0 : 45 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 04 D Microeconomics 1 : 43 1 : 45 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 09 1 : 43 1 : 52 (cid:0) 0 : 09 (cid:0) 0 : 37 E Macroeconomics 0 : 49 0 : 45 0 : 04 0 : 28 0 : 52 0 : 45 0 : 07 0 : 48 F International 0 : 29 0 : 26 0 : 03 0 : 28 0 : 27 0 : 23 0 : 04 0 : 36 G Finance 0 : 42 0 : 52 (cid:0) 0 : 10 (cid:0) 0 : 58 0 : 48 0 : 48 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 03 H Public 0 : 40 0 : 42 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 16 0 : 41 0 : 40 0 : 01 0 : 06 I Health , welfare , edu 0 : 70 0 : 85 (cid:0) 0 : 15 (cid:0) 0 : 66 0 : 61 1 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 41 (cid:0) 1 : 76 J Labour 0 : 93 1 : 14 (cid:0) 0 : 21 (cid:0) 0 : 99 0 : 99 1 : 10 (cid:0) 0 : 11 (cid:0) 0 : 51 K Law and econ 0 : 09 0 : 16 (cid:0) 0 : 07 (cid:0) 1 : 15 0 : 11 0 : 16 (cid:0) 0 : 05 (cid:0) 0 : 73 L Industrial org 0 : 42 0 : 56 (cid:0) 0 : 14 (cid:0) 0 : 97 0 : 56 0 : 51 0 : 05 0 : 35 M Marketing / acct 0 : 09 0 : 09 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 10 0 : 09 0 : 01 0 : 20 N Economic history 0 : 28 0 : 41 (cid:0) 0 : 13 (cid:0) 1 : 01 0 : 30 0 : 41 (cid:0) 0 : 12 (cid:0) 0 : 88 O Development 0 : 40 0 : 59 (cid:0) 0 : 19 (cid:0) 1 : 48 0 : 50 0 : 49 0 : 01 0 : 04 P Economic systems 0 : 06 0 : 09 (cid:0) 0 : 03 (cid:0) 0 : 56 0 : 05 0 : 08 (cid:0) 0 : 04 (cid:0) 0 : 71 Q Agri . , environment 0 : 06 0 : 10 (cid:0) 0 : 04 (cid:0) 0 : 83 0 : 07 0 : 10 (cid:0) 0 : 04 (cid:0) 0 : 65 R Regional , transport 0 : 05 0 : 14 (cid:0) 0 : 09 (cid:0) 1 : 96 0 : 09 0 : 13 (cid:0) 0 : 04 (cid:0) 0 : 71 Z Special topics 0 : 13 0 : 14 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 08 0 : 15 0 : 15 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 02 Notes . Sample restricted to authors with three or more publications . Panels show post - match summary statistics for pairs in which D ik ̸ = 0 . t - values for diﬀerences reported in each panel’s ﬁnal column . 59 Table N .  : Co - variate post - match balance when D ik ̸ = 0 Dale - Chall Discrimination Againstwomen Againstmen Diﬀerence t t = 1 inst . rank 14 : 52 16 : 70 (cid:0) 2 : 19 (cid:0) 0 : 84 Max . citations 214 : 67 278 : 53 (cid:0) 63 : 85 (cid:0) 1 : 41 Fraction of articles per decade 1950 – 59 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 1960 – 69 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 15 1970 – 79 0 : 02 0 : 02 0 : 00 0 : 04 1980 – 89 0 : 08 0 : 09 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 08 1990 – 99 0 : 16 0 : 19 (cid:0) 0 : 03 (cid:0) 0 : 79 2000 – 09 0 : 42 0 : 43 (cid:0) 0 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 25 2010 – 15 0 : 31 0 : 27 0 : 04 0 : 95 Fraction of articles per journal AER 0 : 38 0 : 38 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 06 Econometrica 0 : 22 0 : 16 0 : 07 1 : 47 JPE 0 : 18 0 : 20 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 61 QJE 0 : 22 0 : 26 (cid:0) 0 : 04 (cid:0) 1 : 13 Fraction of articles per JEL code A General 0 : 04 0 : 04 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 06 B Methodology 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 00 C Quant . methods 0 : 45 0 : 36 0 : 09 0 : 72 D Microeconomics 1 : 74 1 : 57 0 : 17 0 : 68 E Macroeconomics 0 : 64 0 : 55 0 : 09 0 : 54 F International 0 : 29 0 : 30 0 : 00 (cid:0) 0 : 01 G Finance 0 : 51 0 : 54 (cid:0) 0 : 03 (cid:0) 0 : 18 H Public 0 : 42 0 : 35 0 : 07 0 : 67 I Health , welfare , edu 0 : 51 0 : 97 (cid:0) 0 : 46 (cid:0) 2 : 15 J Labour 0 : 95 1 : 22 (cid:0) 0 : 27 (cid:0) 1 : 15 K Law and econ 0 : 19 0 : 22 (cid:0) 0 : 03 (cid:0) 0 : 36 L Industrial org 0 : 64 0 : 57 0 : 07 0 : 47 M Marketing / acct 0 : 13 0 : 14 (cid:0) 0 : 02 (cid:0) 0 : 24 N Economic history 0 : 27 0 : 35 (cid:0) 0 : 08 (cid:0) 0 : 63 O Development 0 : 58 0 : 75 (cid:0) 0 : 17 (cid:0) 0 : 91 P Economic systems 0 : 07 0 : 11 (cid:0) 0 : 04 (cid:0) 0 : 63 Q Agri . , environment 0 : 08 0 : 14 (cid:0) 0 : 06 (cid:0) 0 : 88 R Regional , transport 0 : 13 0 : 12 0 : 01 0 : 10 Z Special topics 0 : 16 0 : 19 (cid:0) 0 : 03 (cid:0) 0 : 42 Notes . Sample restricted to authors with three or more publications . Panels show post - match summary statistics for pairs in which D ik ̸ = 0 . t - values for diﬀerences reported in each panel’s ﬁnal column . 60 N . 2 List of authors in each matched pair Table N .  : Matched pairs Matched pairs Matched pairs Female Male Female Male Abraham , Katharine G . Kahn , Charles M . Kuziemko , Ilyana Deming , David J . Admati , Anat R . Huang , Chi - Fu La Ferrara , Eliana Krebs , Tom Amiti , Mary Broda , Christian Landes , Elisabeth M . Carlton , Dennis W . Anderson , Siwan Baland , Jean - Marie Levy , Gilat Razin , Ronny Ashraf , Nava Avery , Christopher N . Lewis , Karen K . Backus , David K . Athey , Susan Haile , Philip A . Li , Wei Roland , Gérard Baicker , Katherine Shaﬁr , Eldar Lleras - Muney , Adriana Kessler , Daniel P . Bailey , Martha J . Paserman , M . Daniele Løken , Katrine Vellesen Mogstad , Magne Bandiera , Oriana Rasul , Imran Madrian , Brigitte C . Lee , David S . Barwick , Panle Jia Winston , Cliﬀord Maestas , Nicole Bettinger , Eric P . Baxter , Marianne Backus , David K . Malmendier , Ulrike Agarwal , Sumit Bedard , Kelly Lefgren , Lars Matzkin , Rosa L . Hahn , Jinyong Bertrand , Marianne Mullainathan , Sendhil McConnell , Sheena LaLonde , Robert J . Black , Sandra E . Kessler , Daniel P . McGrattan , Ellen R . Williams , Noah Blank , Rebecca M . Laband , David N . Meyer , Margaret A . Holtz - Eakin , Douglas Boustan , Leah Platt Abramitzky , Ran Molinari , Francesca Hansen , Peter Reinhard Brown , Jennifer Vogel , Jonathan Moser , Petra Sunde , Uwe Busse , Meghan R . Zettelmeyer , Florian Nakamura , Emi Steinsson , Jón Case , Anne C . Scholz , John Karl Ng , Serena Muller , Ulrich K . Casella , Alessandra Snyder , James M . ( Jr . ) Niederle , Muriel Wolfers , Justin Chen , Xiaohong Hahn , Jinyong Oster , Emily Fang , Hanming Chen , Yan Lange , Andreas Pande , Rohini Dean , Mark Chevalier , Judith A . Lamont , Owen A . Paxson , Christina H . Boldrin , Michele Chichilnisky , Graciela Engers , Maxim Perrigne , Isabelle Schmedders , Karl Correia , Isabel Leeper , Eric M . Piazzesi , Monika Schneider , Martin Costa , Dora L . Kahn , Matthew E . Qian , Nancy Ok , Efe A . Cropper , Maureen L . Halvorsen , Robert Quinzii , Martine Magill , Michael J . P . Currie , Janet Lavy , Victor Ramey , Valerie A . Salanié , Bernard Dafny , Leemore S . Kolstad , Jonathan T . Reinganum , Jennifer F . Daughety , Andrew F . De Nardi , Mariacristina Silverman , Dan Reinhart , Carmen M . Taylor , Alan M . Demange , Gabrielle Anderson , Robert M . Rey , Hélène Jeanne , Olivier Duﬂo , Esther Burgess , Robin Romer , Christina D . Williams , John C . Dupas , Pascaline Urquiola , Miguel Rose - Ackerman , Susan Miyazaki , Hajime Dynan , Karen E . Ljungqvist , Lars Rose , Nancy L . Snyder , James M . ( Jr . ) Eberly , Janice C . Sunder , Shyam Rosenblat , Tanya S . Möbius , Markus M . Eckel , Catherine C . Dufwenberg , Martin Rouse , Cecilia Elena Fishman , Arthur Edlund , Lena Smith , Jeﬀrey Sapienza , Paola Wacziarg , Romain Eyigungor , Burcu Kaboski , Joseph P . Schennach , Susanne M . Guggenberger , Patrik Fan , Yanqin Rahbek , Anders Schmitt - Grohé , Stephanie Leeper , Eric M . Fernández , Raquel Spolaore , Enrico Schwartz , Nancy L . Kuga , Kiyoshi Field , Erica Donald , Stephen G . Shannon , Chris Safra , Zvi Finkelstein , Amy Einav , Liran Shaw , Kathryn L . Anderson , Simon P . Flavin , Marjorie A . Garber , Peter M . Spier , Kathryn E . Ausubel , Lawrence M . Forges , Françoise Hong , Chew Soo Stokey , Nancy L . Smith , Bruce D . Fortin , Nicole M . Hyslop , Dean R . Tenreyro , Silvana Lloyd - Ellis , Huw Freund , Caroline Rose , Andrew K . Tertilt , Michèle Doepke , Matthias Fuchs - Schündeln , Nicola Woodruﬀ , Christopher Tesar , Linda L . Blonigen , Bruce A . Garﬁnkel , Michelle R . Bertola , Giuseppe Thomas , Julia K . Khan , Aubhik Goldberg , Pinelopi Koujianou Levinsohn , James A . Todd , Petra E . Flinn , Christopher J . Goldin , Claudia D . Abramitzky , Ran Vissing - Jørgensen , Annette Veronesi , Pietro Gopinath , Gita Itskhoki , Oleg Voena , Alessandra Sunde , Uwe Griﬃth , Rachel Broda , Christian Washington , Ebonya L . Paserman , M . Daniele Guerrieri , Veronica Khan , Aubhik White , Lucy Yılmaz , Bilge Hanna , Rema Foster , Andrew D . Whited , Toni M . Sun , Ning 61 Table N . 5 ( continued ) Matched pairs Matched pairs Female Male Female Male Hastings , Justine S . Pope , Devin G . Williams , Heidi L . Budish , Eric Ho , Katherine Kremer , Ilan Wooders , Myrna Holtz Gallant , A . Ronald Hoxby , Caroline Minter Kessler , Daniel P . Yariv , Leeat Lange , Andreas İmrohoroğlu , Ayşe Casari , Marco Yellen , Janet L . Freeman , Richard B . Jayachandran , Seema Pop - Eleches , Cristian Zeiler , Kathryn van Soest , Arthur Kowalski , Amanda E . Schrimpf , Paul Zhuravskaya , Ekaterina Kuhn , Peter Kranton , Rachel E . Kosfeld , Michael Notes . Table lists the names of the matched pairs from Section 4 . 3 . 2 . In each panel , female members are listed ﬁrst ; male members second . See Section 4 . 3 . 2 for details on the matching process . 62 N . 3 b R it regression output Table N . 6 displays output from time - and gender - speciﬁc regressions used to generate b R it ( Equa - tion ( 13 ) ) . Table N .  : Regression output generating b R it ( Equation ( 13 ) ) Women Men t 4 = 1 t 4 = 3 t 4 = 1 t 4 = 3 Flesch Reading Ease Female ratio 1 : 36 2 : 99 (cid:0) 6 : 02 6 : 34 ( 4 : 16 ) ( 3 : 88 ) ( 8 : 54 ) ( 5 : 80 ) Constant 38 : 24 * * * 41 : 17 * * * 37 : 57 * * * 38 : 02 * * * ( 3 : 15 ) ( 2 : 47 ) ( 1 : 15 ) ( 1 : 22 ) Flesch Kincaid Female ratio (cid:0) 0 : 13 0 : 48 0 : 34 2 : 41 * ( 0 : 86 ) ( 0 : 78 ) ( 1 : 90 ) ( 1 : 26 ) Constant (cid:0) 13 : 72 * * * (cid:0) 13 : 33 * * * (cid:0) 14 : 14 * * * (cid:0) 14 : 36 * * * ( 0 : 65 ) ( 0 : 50 ) ( 0 : 25 ) ( 0 : 26 ) Gunning Fog Female ratio (cid:0) 0 : 30 1 : 01 (cid:0) 0 : 88 2 : 51 ( 1 : 04 ) ( 0 : 97 ) ( 2 : 11 ) ( 1 : 52 ) Constant (cid:0) 17 : 15 * * * (cid:0) 17 : 22 * * * (cid:0) 17 : 97 * * * (cid:0) 18 : 00 * * * ( 0 : 79 ) ( 0 : 62 ) ( 0 : 28 ) ( 0 : 32 ) SMOG Female ratio (cid:0) 0 : 15 0 : 74 (cid:0) 0 : 45 1 : 56 ( 0 : 76 ) ( 0 : 72 ) ( 1 : 46 ) ( 1 : 10 ) Constant (cid:0) 15 : 07 * * * (cid:0) 15 : 19 * * * (cid:0) 15 : 72 * * * (cid:0) 15 : 63 * * * ( 0 : 57 ) ( 0 : 46 ) ( 0 : 20 ) ( 0 : 23 ) Dale - Chall Female ratio (cid:0) 0 : 06 0 : 48 (cid:0) 2 : 02 * * 0 : 37 ( 0 : 35 ) ( 0 : 39 ) ( 0 : 82 ) ( 0 : 42 ) Constant (cid:0) 10 : 96 * * * (cid:0) 11 : 11 * * * (cid:0) 11 : 11 * * * (cid:0) 11 : 16 * * * ( 0 : 26 ) ( 0 : 25 ) ( 0 : 11 ) ( 0 : 09 ) Notes . Sample 121 female authors ; 109 male authors . Sample restricted to matched authors . See Sec - tion 4 . 3 . 2 for details on how matches were made . Regressions weighted by the frequency observations are used in a match . Standard errors in parentheses . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 63 N . 4 Table 7 , Equation ( 12 ) and Condition 3 Table N . 7 estimates D ik with Equation ( 12 ) . Table N . 8 estimates D ik with a rough attempt to control for acceptance rates—it requires T 5 i (cid:20) T 5 k or T 5 k (cid:20) T 5 i before categorising matched pairs as discrimination against i or k , respectively . Conclusions from both tables are are similar to those presented in Section 4 . 3 . 2 . Table N .  : D ik , Equation ( 12 ) Discrimination against women ( D ik > 0 ) Discrimination against men ( D ik < 0 ) Mean , all observations Mean S . D . N Mean S . D . N ( 1 ) ( 2 ) Flesch Reading Ease 9 : 01 7 : 44 60 (cid:0) 5 : 80 5 : 85 20 3 : 38 * * * 2 : 34 * * * ( 0 : 77 ) ( 0 : 89 ) Flesch Kincaid 1 : 76 1 : 29 65 (cid:0) 1 : 52 1 : 49 19 0 : 75 * * * 0 : 61 * * * ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 17 ) Gunning Fog 2 : 32 1 : 82 62 (cid:0) 1 : 60 1 : 80 21 0 : 95 * * * 0 : 76 * * * ( 0 : 20 ) ( 0 : 23 ) SMOG 1 : 82 1 : 38 54 (cid:0) 0 : 94 1 : 16 24 0 : 61 * * * 0 : 46 * * * ( 0 : 15 ) ( 0 : 17 ) Dale - Chall 0 : 88 0 : 65 62 (cid:0) 0 : 68 0 : 48 22 0 : 32 * * * 0 : 23 * * * ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 09 ) Notes . Table displays estimates identical to those in Table 7 , except that D ik is determined by Equation ( 12 ) . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . Table N .  : D ik , proxying for acceptance rates ( Condition 3 ) Discrimination against women ( D ik > 0 ) Discrimination against men ( D ik < 0 ) Mean , all observations Mean S . D . N Mean S . D . N ( 1 ) ( 2 ) Flesch Reading Ease 13 : 64 10 : 99 35 (cid:0) 7 : 90 7 : 22 14 3 : 63 * * * 2 : 21 * ( 1 : 18 ) ( 1 : 32 ) Flesch Kincaid 2 : 77 2 : 30 39 (cid:0) 2 : 33 2 : 19 16 0 : 74 * * * 0 : 55 * ( 0 : 27 ) ( 0 : 28 ) Gunning Fog 3 : 25 2 : 99 40 (cid:0) 2 : 44 2 : 86 16 0 : 91 * * * 0 : 66 * ( 0 : 32 ) ( 0 : 35 ) SMOG 2 : 73 2 : 14 33 (cid:0) 1 : 45 2 : 07 16 0 : 63 * * * 0 : 42 * ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 25 ) Dale - Chall 1 : 35 0 : 98 35 (cid:0) 1 : 01 0 : 77 16 0 : 35 * * * 0 : 21 ( 0 : 13 ) ( 0 : 14 ) Notes . Table displays estimates identical to those in Table 7 , except that a matched pair is categorised as discrimination against i ( k ) only if T 5 i (cid:20) T 5 k ( T 5 k (cid:20) T 5 i ) holds as well . Otherwise , Theorem 1 is inconclusive . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 64 N . 5 b R it , controlling for JEL category Table N . 9 and Figure N . 1 replicate the analysis in Section 4 . 3 . 2 but Equation ( 13 ) controls for primary JEL category . b R it was reconstructed at female ratio equal to 1 for women , 0 for men and for a paper classiﬁed in JEL categories D ( microeconomics ) and J ( labour and demographic economics ) . Table N .  : D ik , controlling for JEL category Discrimination against women ( D ik > 0 ) Discrimination against men ( D ik < 0 ) Mean , all observations Mean S . D . N Mean S . D . N ( 1 ) ( 2 ) Flesch Reading Ease 18 : 27 11 : 92 50 (cid:0) 7 : 59 7 : 96 6 9 : 75 * * * 9 : 13 * * * ( 2 : 57 ) ( 2 : 72 ) Flesch Kincaid 3 : 87 2 : 71 45 (cid:0) 1 : 46 1 : 05 8 1 : 84 * * * 1 : 65 * * * ( 0 : 54 ) ( 0 : 59 ) Gunning Fog 4 : 49 2 : 98 40 (cid:0) 2 : 14 2 : 45 13 1 : 76 * * * 1 : 51 * * ( 0 : 63 ) ( 0 : 68 ) SMOG 3 : 22 2 : 19 41 (cid:0) 1 : 81 1 : 87 11 1 : 30 * * * 1 : 15 * * ( 0 : 46 ) ( 0 : 49 ) Dale - Chall 1 : 80 1 : 11 32 (cid:0) 1 : 09 0 : 76 5 0 : 61 * * * 0 : 53 * * ( 0 : 22 ) ( 0 : 23 ) Notes . Sample 88 matched pairs ( 79 and 88 distinct men and women , respectively ) . Table displays estimates identical to those in Table 7 , except that Equation ( 13 ) includes primary JEL classiﬁcation dummies ; b R it was reconstructed at female ratio equal to 1 for women , 0 for men and a paper classiﬁed in JEL categories D and J . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 0 . 000 0 . 010 0 . 020 0 . 030 - 50 0 50 Flesch Reading Ease 0 . 000 0 . 050 0 . 100 0 . 150 - 10 - 5 0 5 10 Flesch Kincaid 0 . 000 0 . 020 0 . 040 0 . 060 0 . 080 0 . 100 - 10 - 5 0 5 10 15 Gunning Fog 0 . 000 0 . 050 0 . 100 0 . 150 - 10 - 5 0 5 10 SMOG 0 . 000 0 . 100 0 . 200 0 . 300 - 5 0 5 Dale - Chall Pairs suggesting discrimination against : Men Women Notes . Estimates identical to those in Figure 8 , except that Equation ( 14 ) includes primary JEL dummies . Figure N .  : Distributions of D ik , controlling for JEL category 65 O Section 4 . 5 , supplemental output O . 1 Table 9 , alternative year ﬁxed eﬀects Table O . 1 and Table O . 2 replicate Table 9 , replacing acceptance year ﬁxed eﬀects with ﬁxed eﬀects for submission and publication years , respectively . Table O .  : Table 9 ( dependent variable : revision duration ) , submission year eﬀects 1970 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) Female ratio 2 : 669 * * 4 : 054 * * * 4 : 081 * * * 3 : 110 * * 4 : 096 * * * 4 : 721 * * 4 : 603 * * ( 1 : 281 ) ( 1 : 402 ) ( 1 : 402 ) ( 1 : 414 ) ( 1 : 400 ) ( 1 : 713 ) ( 1 : 773 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 097 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 099 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 098 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 098 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 097 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 099 * * (cid:0) 0 : 100 * * ( 0 : 033 ) ( 0 : 033 ) ( 0 : 033 ) ( 0 : 033 ) ( 0 : 033 ) ( 0 : 037 ) ( 0 : 038 ) No . pages 0 : 159 * * * 0 : 157 * * * 0 : 157 * * * 0 : 158 * * * 0 : 157 * * * 0 : 161 * * * 0 : 154 * * * ( 0 : 020 ) ( 0 : 020 ) ( 0 : 020 ) ( 0 : 020 ) ( 0 : 020 ) ( 0 : 024 ) ( 0 : 027 ) N j 1 : 009 * * * 0 : 956 * * * 0 : 952 * * * 0 : 987 * * * 0 : 959 * * * 0 : 890 * * * 0 : 803 * * ( 0 : 244 ) ( 0 : 239 ) ( 0 : 242 ) ( 0 : 240 ) ( 0 : 240 ) ( 0 : 288 ) ( 0 : 308 ) Order 0 : 134 * * 0 : 128 * * 0 : 128 * * 0 : 132 * * 0 : 128 * * 0 : 118 0 : 141 ( 0 : 061 ) ( 0 : 061 ) ( 0 : 061 ) ( 0 : 061 ) ( 0 : 061 ) ( 0 : 116 ) ( 0 : 125 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 471 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 485 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 481 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 469 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 490 * * * (cid:0) 1 : 242 * * * (cid:0) 1 : 265 * * * ( 0 : 163 ) ( 0 : 164 ) ( 0 : 163 ) ( 0 : 163 ) ( 0 : 164 ) ( 0 : 278 ) ( 0 : 267 ) Mother (cid:0) 7 : 298 * * * (cid:0) 10 : 930 * * * (cid:0) 20 : 634 * * * (cid:0) 20 : 594 * * * ( 2 : 197 ) ( 3 : 066 ) ( 2 : 220 ) ( 2 : 737 ) Birth (cid:0) 3 : 898 6 : 070 16 : 953 * * * 16 : 908 * * * ( 3 : 111 ) ( 4 : 070 ) ( 2 : 983 ) ( 2 : 974 ) Constant 15 : 001 * * * 15 : 188 * * * 15 : 201 * * * 15 : 053 * * * 15 : 220 * * * 22 : 702 * * * 23 : 086 * * * ( 0 : 964 ) ( 0 : 984 ) ( 0 : 990 ) ( 0 : 974 ) ( 0 : 991 ) ( 1 : 769 ) ( 1 : 762 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 No . observations 2 , 620 2 , 605 2 , 620 2 , 620 2 , 620 1 , 278 1 , 278 Notes . Dependent variable is the number of months spent in peer review ( see Section 4 . 5 ) . Estimates are identical to those in Table 9 except that submission year eﬀects are used instead of acceptance year eﬀects . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 66 Table O .  : Table 9 ( dependent variable : revision duration ) , publication year eﬀects 1970 – 2015 1990 – 2015 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) Female ratio 5 : 366 * * * 6 : 745 * * * 6 : 741 * * * 5 : 747 * * * 6 : 761 * * * 9 : 032 * * * 9 : 069 * * * ( 1 : 565 ) ( 1 : 913 ) ( 1 : 915 ) ( 1 : 832 ) ( 1 : 912 ) ( 2 : 361 ) ( 2 : 430 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 138 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 141 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 139 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 139 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 138 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 137 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 144 * * * ( 0 : 040 ) ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 039 ) ( 0 : 046 ) ( 0 : 045 ) No . pages 0 : 195 * * * 0 : 195 * * * 0 : 194 * * * 0 : 195 * * * 0 : 194 * * * 0 : 231 * * * 0 : 217 * * * ( 0 : 026 ) ( 0 : 026 ) ( 0 : 026 ) ( 0 : 026 ) ( 0 : 026 ) ( 0 : 038 ) ( 0 : 041 ) N j 1 : 145 * * * 1 : 101 * * * 1 : 092 * * * 1 : 126 * * * 1 : 099 * * * 1 : 422 * * * 1 : 305 * * * ( 0 : 310 ) ( 0 : 307 ) ( 0 : 311 ) ( 0 : 305 ) ( 0 : 309 ) ( 0 : 426 ) ( 0 : 435 ) Order 0 : 220 * * * 0 : 217 * * * 0 : 214 * * * 0 : 218 * * * 0 : 215 * * * 0 : 479 * * * 0 : 467 * * * ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 146 ) ( 0 : 146 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 334 * (cid:0) 0 : 358 * (cid:0) 0 : 346 * (cid:0) 0 : 332 * (cid:0) 0 : 356 * (cid:0) 0 : 536 (cid:0) 0 : 552 ( 0 : 195 ) ( 0 : 193 ) ( 0 : 194 ) ( 0 : 196 ) ( 0 : 194 ) ( 0 : 428 ) ( 0 : 412 ) Mother (cid:0) 7 : 127 * * (cid:0) 11 : 244 * * * (cid:0) 19 : 500 * * * (cid:0) 19 : 493 * * * ( 3 : 230 ) ( 3 : 273 ) ( 5 : 133 ) ( 5 : 404 ) Birth (cid:0) 3 : 388 6 : 875 * 13 : 981 * * 13 : 683 * * ( 4 : 004 ) ( 4 : 077 ) ( 5 : 229 ) ( 5 : 422 ) Constant 12 : 924 * * * 13 : 114 * * * 13 : 114 * * * 12 : 964 * * * 13 : 142 * * * 14 : 630 * * * 15 : 452 * * * ( 1 : 212 ) ( 1 : 214 ) ( 1 : 215 ) ( 1 : 213 ) ( 1 : 212 ) ( 2 : 353 ) ( 2 : 266 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Sub . year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 JEL ( primary ) eﬀects 3 No . observations 2 , 622 2 , 607 2 , 622 2 , 622 2 , 622 1 , 278 1 , 278 Notes . Dependent variable is the number of months spent in peer review ( see Section 4 . 5 ) . Estimates are identical to those in Table 9 except that publication year eﬀects are used instead of acceptance year eﬀects . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 67 O . 2 Table 9 , alternative thresholds for mother j Table O . 3 repeats the regression presented in Table 9 column ( 5 ) , using alternative age thresholds to deﬁne motherhood : mother j equals 1 if paper j ’s co - authors are all mothers to children younger than three ( ﬁrst column ) , four ( second column ) , etc . Changing this threshold has little eﬀect on female ratio’s coeﬃcient . The coeﬃcients on mother j and birth j are persistently negative and positive ( respectively ) , although magnitudes and standard errors vary . Remaining coeﬃcients are unaﬀected . Table O .  : Table 9 ( dependent variable : revision duration ) , alternative thresholds for mother j Age < 3 Age < 4 Age < 5 Age < 10 Age < 18 Female ratio 5 : 910 * * * 6 : 232 * * * 6 : 873 * * * 6 : 739 * * * 6 : 448 * * * ( 2 : 085 ) ( 2 : 065 ) ( 2 : 069 ) ( 2 : 105 ) ( 2 : 204 ) Mother (cid:0) 5 : 035 * (cid:0) 10 : 549 * (cid:0) 12 : 427 * * * (cid:0) 9 : 436 * * (cid:0) 5 : 189 ( 2 : 675 ) ( 5 : 299 ) ( 3 : 642 ) ( 3 : 886 ) ( 3 : 685 ) Birth 1 : 095 6 : 241 7 : 526 4 : 666 0 : 699 ( 3 : 836 ) ( 6 : 126 ) ( 4 : 917 ) ( 5 : 310 ) ( 4 : 683 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 132 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 132 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 131 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 131 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 132 * * * ( 0 : 038 ) ( 0 : 038 ) ( 0 : 038 ) ( 0 : 038 ) ( 0 : 038 ) No . pages 0 : 196 * * * 0 : 195 * * * 0 : 195 * * * 0 : 195 * * * 0 : 196 * * * ( 0 : 027 ) ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 028 ) ( 0 : 027 ) ( 0 : 027 ) N j 1 : 132 * * * 1 : 127 * * * 1 : 105 * * * 1 : 105 * * * 1 : 111 * * * ( 0 : 288 ) ( 0 : 288 ) ( 0 : 292 ) ( 0 : 291 ) ( 0 : 292 ) Order 0 : 213 * * * 0 : 211 * * * 0 : 209 * * * 0 : 208 * * * 0 : 210 * * * ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) ( 0 : 064 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 396 * * (cid:0) 0 : 401 * * (cid:0) 0 : 419 * * (cid:0) 0 : 413 * * (cid:0) 0 : 405 * * ( 0 : 197 ) ( 0 : 197 ) ( 0 : 196 ) ( 0 : 196 ) ( 0 : 197 ) Constant 13 : 208 * * * 13 : 257 * * * 13 : 372 * * * 13 : 351 * * * 13 : 279 * * * ( 1 : 171 ) ( 1 : 167 ) ( 1 : 170 ) ( 1 : 170 ) ( 1 : 171 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 Notes . Dependent variable is the number of monthsspentin peer review . Sample 2 , 622 articles . Coeﬃcients fromOLS estimationof Equa - tion ( 15 ) at diﬀerentagethresholdsfor mother j . In column one , mother j equals onefor papers authoredexclusively bywomen with children younger than three ; in column two , the age threshold is four ; etc . Column three corresponds to results presented in Table 9 . Standard errors clustered by year in parentheses . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 68 O . 3 Quantile regression The distribution of review times appears right - skewed ( Figure 10 ) . To account for this , I re - estimate gender diﬀerences in time spent under review using a quantile regression model . Results are shown in Table O . 4 : the ﬁrst panel replicates Table 9 , column ( 5 ) at the 25th , median and 75th percentiles of review times ; the second panel similarly replicates the third column of Table 10 . The coeﬃcient on female ratio is positive and signiﬁcant across all three percentiles , indicating that the results presented in Section 4 . 5 are not driven by outliers . Its magnitude is greatest in right - tail of Econometrica ’s distribution but is similarly sized across all percentiles when estimated using observations from both Econometrica and REStud . Table O .  : Revision duration at Econometrica and REStud , quantile regression Econometrica Econometrica + REStud 25th pc . Median 75th pc . 25th pc . Median 75th pc . Female ratio 3 : 04 * * 4 : 51 * * * 6 : 98 * * * 2 : 37 * * * 2 : 28 * * * 2 : 43 * * ( 1 : 19 ) ( 1 : 42 ) ( 1 : 56 ) ( 0 : 46 ) ( 0 : 49 ) ( 1 : 21 ) Max . t 5 (cid:0) 0 : 14 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 16 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 10 (cid:0) 0 : 13 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 17 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 13 * * ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 01 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 06 ) No . pages 0 : 14 * * * 0 : 20 * * * 0 : 27 * * * 0 : 13 * * * 0 : 21 * * * 0 : 26 * * * ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 01 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 02 ) N j 0 : 63 * * * 0 : 88 * * * 0 : 74 * * 0 : 47 * * * 0 : 68 * * * 0 : 81 * * * ( 0 : 19 ) ( 0 : 23 ) ( 0 : 35 ) ( 0 : 12 ) ( 0 : 16 ) ( 0 : 21 ) Order 0 : 14 * * * 0 : 18 * * * 0 : 20 * * * 0 : 01 0 : 08 * * 0 : 06 ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 07 ) ( 0 : 02 ) ( 0 : 03 ) ( 0 : 04 ) No . citations ( asinh ) (cid:0) 0 : 34 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 46 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 60 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 38 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 34 * * * (cid:0) 0 : 42 * * * ( 0 : 09 ) ( 0 : 10 ) ( 0 : 18 ) ( 0 : 04 ) ( 0 : 08 ) ( 0 : 13 ) Mother (cid:0) 5 : 54 * * * (cid:0) 11 : 24 (cid:0) 10 : 80 * * * ( 1 : 81 ) ( 11 : 23 ) ( 3 : 15 ) Birth 5 : 94 * 7 : 05 13 : 12 * * * ( 3 : 07 ) ( 14 : 57 ) ( 3 : 97 ) Constant 42 : 44 * * * 40 : 62 * * 39 : 89 41 : 06 * * * 37 : 67 * 35 : 58 * * * ( 12 : 49 ) ( 19 : 20 ) ( 26 : 32 ) ( 6 : 84 ) ( 21 : 63 ) ( 6 : 59 ) Editor eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal eﬀects 3 3 3 Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 3 3 3 3 Journal (cid:2) Accepted year eﬀects 3 3 3 Institution eﬀects 3 3 3 No . observations 2 , 623 2 , 623 2 , 623 4 , 435 4 , 435 4 , 435 Notes . Dependent variable is the number of months spent in peer review ( see Section 4 . 5 ) . First panel replicates results shown in Table 9 , column ( 5 ) across diﬀerent percentiles of the distribution using quantile regressions ; second panel similarly replicates results shown in Table 10 , third column . Robust standard errors in parentheses . * * * , * * and * statistically signiﬁcant at 1 % , 5 % and 10 % , respectively . 69 References Arellano , M . and S . Bond ( 1991 ) . “Some Tests of Speciﬁcation for Panel Data : Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations” . Review of Economic Studies 58 ( 2 ) , pp . 277 – 297 . Arellano , M . and O . Bover ( 1995 ) . “Another Look at the Instrumental Variable Estimation of Error - components Models” . Journal of Econometrics 68 ( 1 ) , pp . 29 – 51 . Benoit , K . , K . Munger , and A . Spirling ( 2017 ) . “Measuring and Explaining Political Sophistica - tion through Textual Complexity” . Mimeo . Blank , R . M . ( 1991 ) . “The Eﬀects of Double - blind versus Single - blind Reviewing : Experimental Evidence from the American Economic Review” . American Economic Review 81 ( 5 ) , pp . 1041 – 1067 . Blundell , R . and S . Bond ( 1998 ) . “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in Dynamic Panel Data Models” . Journal of Econometrics 87 ( 1 ) , pp . 115 – 143 . Chall , J . S . and E . Dale ( 1995 ) . Readability Revisited : The New Dale - Chall Readability Formula . Cambridge , Massachusetts : Brookline Books . Hengel , E . ( 2015 ) . “Two Essays on Bankruptcy and One Essay on Gender Diﬀerences in Aca - demic Publishing” . PhD thesis . University of Cambridge . — ( 2016 ) . “Publishing while Female : Gender Diﬀerences in Peer Review Scrutiny” . Mimeo . Liang , F . M . ( 1983 ) . “Word Hy - phen - a - tion by Com - put - er” . PhD thesis . Stanford University . 70