Co - creating Interactive Obstacles and DIY Skateboarding Spaces Oskar Galewicz Department of Informatics University of Oslo Oslo , Norway oskargalewicz @ gmail . com Alma Leora Culén Department of Informatics University of Oslo Oslo , Norway almira @ ifi . uio . no ABSTRACT In this paper , we use research through design approach to introduce the skateboarding community to the maker ' s culture . Our goal was to provide an opportunity for skaters to experience sketching with technology , sharing ideas on making obstacles embedded with technology , executing one of the ideas and participating in envisioning co - created DIY ( Do - It - Yourself ) urban skateboarding spaces . In total , twenty - eight skateboarders were actively involved in the process of sketching , ideation , and subsequently making and evaluating a sound - based interactive skateboarding obstacle . The contributions of this paper include the framework for supporting maker activities for and with skateboarders , the artefact itself and the knowledge that emerged from its use in the appropriate urban environment . Finally , the highlights from interviews with twelve highly skilled skaters are provided . The analysis of the interviews resulted in the improvement of the initial framework that was based on the five key principles of creativity in everyday life . Furthermore , the skaters shared their reflections on the use of the obstacle , the making process , and speculated around the emergence of participatory maker culture within the community and possibilities to create urban environments that include creative DIY projects , such as the described one . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) → Interaction paradigms ; Collaborative interaction • Interaction techniques → Auditory feedback . KEYWORDS DIY , maker spaces , participatory cultures , sound interactions , creativity , skateboarding , empowerment . ACM Reference format : O . Galewicz and A . L . Culén . 2017 . In Proceedings of ACM CHItaly conference , Cagli ari , Italy , July 2017 , 10 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3125571 . 3125595 1 INTRODUCTION As participants in a large scale Creative Europe project “The People’s Smart sculpture” that focuses on the experimental design of tools and technologies for participative and collaborative smart development of urban environments [ 3 ] , [ 14 ] , we were motivated to engage in the exploration of the emergence of subcultures within a culture that could participate in such endeavors . We chose a skateboarding community ( to which one of the authors had access , being a long - time skateboarder himself ) to work with , and DIY making as a way of exploring the potential for emergence of the maker’s subculture and making of DIY urban environments for skateboarding . Studying the relationship between technologies and social life has proved to be somewhat elusive [ 21 ] , [ 22 ] . Recently , co - creation of technologies with the social order perspectives such as those introduced by Haraway and Latour in [ 12 ] and [ 16 ] respectively , tend to balance deterministic views . In line with this more balanced perspective , rather than just engaging in the participatory making of an interactive obstacle , we wanted to learn about the synergies that exist , or could arise , between interaction design , maker’s culture , urban skateboarding spaces and the community itself . Twenty - eight highly experienced and internationally recognized skaters were directly engaged in this project in one of the three ways : workshops , in - depth interviews , and the event that we call The Master Jam . The jam was organized on the occasion of the launching of the co - created obstacle . Some of the skaters engaged in multiple ways ( attended one or both workshops , participated in The Master Jam , and / or were interviewed ) . The design of the sound - based obstacle used at The Master Jam , was instrumental for exploration of above mentioned synergies . The Master Jam involved additional skaters , i . e . , ones that did not participate in the workshops or had otherwise previous contact with the project . The diversity of their skateboarding skills was desirable for the event , in order to see how the obstacle might stimulate creative performance . The exact number of skaters directly or indirectly engaged with the obstacle during The Master Jam , which lasted several hours on one lovely Saturday afternoon , is hard to pin precisely . People came and left , but we can safely say that more than 40 skaters Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHItaly ' 17 , September 18 – 20 , 2017 , Cagliari , Italy © 2017 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5237 - 6 / 17 / 09… $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3125571 . 3125595 CHItaly ' 17 , September 18 – 20 , 2017 , Cagliari , Italy O . Galewicz and A . L . Culén participated . Besides , friends and families , passersby and neighbors , engaged in the event , bringing the total number of attendees close to eighty . In - depth interviews were also conducted with non - skateboarders . This group of interviewees were people who are engaged in the urban development , such as two architects , an artist working with audio design and urban sounds , and a co - founder of the Urban Sports Square Foundation . These interviews were done in preparation for the work with the skateboarding community . For this paper , it suffices to say that the expertise of interviewees supported various stages of the project , but they were not directly involved in creative activities , leaving those for skateboarders only . However , the initial information and advice on how to use the city as a canvas for participatory arts and sports , as well as concrete recommendations relevant for the later phases of this work , e . g . , implementing The Master Jam event , was very valuable . It was insightful and inspiring to hear about their previous and ongoing projects . Their work showed a broad range of perspectives on pursuing the engagement with city spaces – from the projects approved by diverse official instances , to “guerilla” ways of just putting stuff “out there” and design activism [ 6 ] . This project was of the latter kind . A broader scope of this project is presented in [ 7 ] . As described , we started the work by trying to understand a larger perspective on urban development and skateboarding . This understanding is highly culture - dependent . The relationship between the skateboarding community and the city of Oslo , where the project took place , has been a somewhat contentious one . There were times of peace and building environments for skaters , such as the Skatehall in Oslo , and times less peaceful that sometimes involved calling the authorities and using persuasion , even force , to make skateboarders stop performing and leave places at which they were not welcome . One of the findings through this research was that making the relationship between the society and the skateboarding community better , motivated expert skateboarders highly to participate in the project . Additional motivational factors were related to the perception that making is creative . Learning to sketch with technology was motivational for some , scary for others at first . For the latter group , overcoming fear was very gratifying . Social aspects of participation were deemed to be very significant for the process , mainly by being inspirational and fun . The skating obstacle made was novel and interesting , and importantly , not easy to skate . Its physical characteristics ( shape , angles , height ) allowed for learning and self - improvement , even for advanced skateboarders . At the same time , skating the obstacle opened up for speculations on how similar making activities could be accomplished in the future , and how urban spaces with multiple DIY interactive obstacles , such as the one presented here , could be made . The paper is structured as follows : the next section provides a short literature review and review of projects similar to the one described in this paper . In Section 3 , we address the methodology , research through design , and how it was used in this project . In Section 4 , we describe the making process and in Section 5 , The Master Jam event . The discussion Section 6 , is divided into two parts : findings from the making of the artefact and findings from its use during the jam . Finally , conclusions and acknowledgments end the paper . 2 BACKGROUND A number of research projects that focused on skateboarding have been carried out within the field of the human - computer interaction ( HCI ) and published at conferences such as CHI [ 18 ] , [ 20 ] or NordiCHI [ 28 ] . For example , Ghosh et al . , in MusiSkate [ 10 ] , attempt to encourage the intrinsic drive to skateboard by adding a musical feedback to the skating experience . MusiSkate inspired our participatory approach to experimentation and exploration during The Master Jam . However , none of the work within the field that we could find was concerned with co - creating skating spaces through DIY activities . The work that we found to be the closest to the theme of creating and appropriating urban spaces was Borden’s book “Skateboarding , Space and the City” [ 1 ] . In the book , Borden looks into the skateboarding subculture , spaces that are found ( by skaters ) and spaces that are constructed ( for skaters ) . The city is considered as an urban composition ( of hardware , architecture , rhythm and performance ) . The latter is understood as performing the city’s hardware and architecture , sometimes also the cultural heritage , see [ 23 ] . Borden states that “The tactics of appropriation , colonization and identity formation helped skaters to redefine both the city and themselves” [ 1 , p . 53 ] . Participatory creativity , the term suggested by Borden , refers to the role that skateboarding played as an activity , and how creativity of its users resulted in repurposing existing architectural elements . In this work , the space of different kind was of interest , the space envisioned and made by skateboarders themselves . We apply the same term participatory creativity to making activities , in addition to creative uses of the obstacle that closely resemble Borden’s use of the term . The idea to look into how DIY participatory design , based on being creative together , allows for making interactive spaces that could influence the skating culture emerged as extension of Borden’s found and constructed spaces for skating . Recently , the expanding scope of DIY projects in HCI community has contributed to developing new tools that have significantly lowered the threshold of becoming a “maker” [ 27 ] . Growing popularity , affordability , availability and accessibility of technologies like 3D printing , laser cutting , prototyping platforms like Arduino , Raspberry Pi and Makers’ fairs across the globe , created a domino effect . The community of “makers” grows , extending an opportunity to all makers at heart engage in making , contribute to their community , or express themselves through the artifacts made . The literature in HCI reflects the rise of the makers’ culture , e . g . , [ 4 ] , [ 11 ] , [ 15 ] and [ 27 ] . However , engagement of communities with technology , and scaffolding creative expression through participatory design exploring its potential to produce critical engagements with technology and opportunities for people to use technology to produce creative expressions around issues of concern “as kind of political action through computing” [ 4 , p . 49 ] , was of direct interest to this work . Pursuing the literature within HCI with focus on creativity , in particular group creativity , and making , we searched for examples that highlight the value of DIY as a collaborative and Co - Creating Interactive Obstacles and DIY Skateboarding Spaces CHItaly ' 17 , September 18 – 20 , 2017 , Cagliari , Italy creative way of expression , and that provide new design opportunities for HCI , such as work on democratizing technology as it relates to pleasure , utility and expressiveness [ 27 ] . We were also interested in the empowerment through making [ 11 ] , [ 15 ] . Furthermore , from the literature that directly addresses creativity , we single out Gauntlett’s work [ 8 ] . We could embrace the Five Key Principles of Everyday Creativity presented in [ 8 ] , and use them to think about , and then translate these principles to concrete actions through which we can explore the ways in which skaters’ everyday creativity can be embraced in order to understand their individual and social experiences . The Gauntlett’s five principles are : 1 ) An understanding of creativity as process , emotion , and presence ( highlighting the importance of the process and emotions that it evokes , not outcomes alone ) 2 ) The drive to make and share ( underlines how people get involved in activities based on their eagerness to actively participate in shaping the world around them , communicate and create also with others ) 3 ) Happiness through creativity and community ( suggests that creativity and social engagement are the key to heightening the enjoyment in life , i . e . communication , exchange , and collaboration are means that could support the production and creativity in everyday life ) . 4 ) A middle layer of creativity as social glue ( relates to the desire for creating and making things oneself - the productive engagement . It serves as a common link , connecting people involved in creative activities “in unexpected , unplanned , and perhaps rather anarchic ways” [ 8 , p . 224 ] . 5 ) Making your mark , and marking the world you own ( giving people an opportunity to shape their environments and communities is the basis of this principle . Providing right tools and devices is vital for facilitating “ever - present possibility and potential of unpredictable and unplanned creativity” [ 8 , p . 225 ] . Throughout the work on a project , we could easily relate activities and interests of the participants to these five principles of everyday creativity . It was also interesting to see after the interviews were conducted , that skateboarders themselves , highlighted these same principles . Inspiration was also found in practical and designerly projects related to skateboarding . Among many projects that we reviewed , the following three have been the most relevant for this work . In Kapow [ 24 ] , projection based mapping was used to create a new kind of experience for skaters and spectators . Projections enabled changes in the appearance of the skateboarding surfaces . Figure 1 : An obstacle from the project Paving spaces [ 19 ] ( left ) , and projection - based mapping onto the obstacle from KAPOW project [ 24 ] ( image on the right ) . Paving space [ 19 ] and 20syl’s work [ 30 ] addressed even more explicitly the spacial geometry of obstacles , and the character of spaces they were placed at . These examples underline how geometry , as a dimension , creates opportunity of posing new challenges and opportunities of various motions in skateboarding , see Fig . 1 . This review is not exhaustive . It contains work that has directly inspired and contributed to the project described in this paper . 3 RESEARCH THROUGH DESIGN Research through Design ( RtD ) is an emerging approach in HCI that emphasizes the use of methods , practices , and processes of design as a generative mode of inquiry [ 29 ] . It is a forward - looking and constructive proposal that seeks to expose alternative futures and explore possibilities for their emergence through design . As such , RtD matched our aim to explore the fit between interaction design and making of DIY obstacles and the possibility of such activities to gain traction within the skateboarding community . Schön , as well as Sangers et al . [ 25 ] , [ 26 ] , describe the designers’ method as that of a ‘reflective practitioner’ , where knowledge generation is an ongoing process brought about through reflection on hands - on engagement with the emerging artifact . Ingold [ 13 ] , on the other hand , addressed material engagement as the ‘art of inquiry’ and described it as an essential means of widening the designer’s perception of the context , something that was in line with what we desired to achieve through this work . In his paper [ 5 ] , Fallman proposed the design triangle model for RtD , consisting of design studies , design exploration and design practice . The model was made as a practical tool that enables articulation and communication . For this project , especially since participants had different backgrounds , the triangle was helpful in moving fluidly between reflection , recognition and articulation of different actions , including the act of making and discussion of the emergent knowledge . Brandt and Binder introduced the notion of design interventions as “the way the research can be observed to intervene ( or interact ) with the subject matter” [ 2 , p . 12 ] . Thus , we consider The Master Jam , to be a design intervention . Alternatively , we could frame this work as the showroom strand of RtD , see [ 29 ] . Having the obstacle exposed to others , to view and interact with , enabled the skateboarding community to speculate on how it , and ( future ) similar ones , could support the rise of a maker subculture and DIY urban spaces for skating . 4 THE MAKING OF THE OBSTACLE The making started by considering design studies , ways of designing and working together , starting from deciding on the form of participation , i . e . , if it will be a participatory design approach or a co - design and deciding what is the difference in the situation where highly skilled skateboarders were participants in the design process . The skaters had embodied knowledge of the skating , obstacles , skateboards and skateboarding spaces . They were also very conscious of why they skate and why are they members of the community . They CHItaly ' 17 , September 18 – 20 , 2017 , Cagliari , Italy O . Galewicz and A . L . Culén were experts in many questions that we were interested in exploring . On the other hand , very few skateboarders had previous experience with interaction design , technology or making . We thus started with hands - on work , by organizing two workshops and introduced everyone to making and sketching with technology . The first workshop was organized with 14 participants , all skateboarders . After briefly introducing the field of interaction design , DIY movement and what opportunities these open , diverse techniques for ideation were used . The goal was to envision how technology could support skateboarding . This was a very open brief that required semi - structured ideation processes , individually and at groups . The result was a collection of over 50 ideas , which were then rapidly evaluated . After analysis of results , it was clear that 1 ) the skateboard itself was not to be touched 2 ) novelty and enjoyment were the most important attributes for majority of participants . We have tried to keep the ideation broad , by keeping focus on the multi - sensory character to skateboarding . A number of inspirational pictures were shared . Fig . 2 shows the mood - board composed based on the ideas generated during the workshop and preferred ways of performing the city , at the stage reflecting the preference for multipurpose structures , such as benches . Figure 2 : The first mood - board – a collection of images suggesting qualities desired in design : robustness , multi - purpose and affordances for skating . The second workshop introduced sketching with materials . Sixteen skateboarders participated this time , some new and some repeated attendees . The goal was to consider possible interactions with obstacles , make a series of rapid prototypes , evaluate and synthesize ideas . The artefacts that were brought to the workshop were : clay , straws , wooden blocks , previously developed low - fi prototypes described in the previous section , LEDs and littleBits to support rapid sketching with technology . In addition , several exemplars of the city map were brought in , to discuss possible placements of obstacles . During the second workshop , prototypes were made that included technology , see Fig . 3 . Figure 3 : Selection of prototypes made after the first workshop . They were used to illustrates possibilities and stimulate rapid prototyping ( top images ) , the prototypes made by the participants during the second workshop ( bottom images ) . Integrating the knowledge gained from both workshops , the second mood - board was made , see Fig . 4 . It shows shapes and the feel of obstacles favored by the participants . From the second workshop , from the delivered results of individual and group work , as well as the observations made during the workshop , two categories of the inquiry emerged : the obstacle itself and its possible location within the city . In terms of the latter and the physicality of the space , participants articulated the preference for flat , green areas that are also fun for non - skaters . The concerns around the obstacle itself were materials , its form , modes of interaction and opportunities and challenges they offered , primarily in terms of new skateboarding experiences . In terms of materials , they needed to be robust and durable , subsequently leading to the decision to make the obstacle out of the wood and iron . The shape chosen was a pyramid . The size of the pyramid , its height and angles were all thought of carefully , and discussed . The form itself needed to present some new and challenging elements , even for the advanced skaters . The interaction mode chosen was audio , simply because there were no examples of this that were seen in practice – it was new for the local skaters . At this point , the prototyping and making of the actual obstacle could start . Many paper sketches and prototypes were made , as shown at top images of Fig . 5 . Then a series of mockups was made , both of the obstacle and the technology that enables sound interactions . The technology part , that was to be hidden under the obstacle was first sketched using littleBits . Co - Creating Interactive Obstacles and DIY Skateboarding Spaces CHItaly ' 17 , September 18 – 20 , 2017 , Cagliari , Italy Figure 4 : The second mood - board showing the forms of obstacles and the sources of inspiration . The pyramid shape , was chosen . The skateboarding community supported the entire process of constructing the obstacle . They helped with variety of tasks , from transporting the wood , and later the prototype , to gathering tools and helping with cutting and other precision carpentry work . Precision and good carpentry were particularly important , as the obstacle had to be robust and solid . When the obstacle was finished , the conductive paint was used to create a soundscape on the wooden surface . Because of the size of the obstacle , the technology prototypes previously made to test the interaction , could not be used in the real settings . Instead , a large car battery , two 6 , 5 inches , 110W Wall speakers , an amplifier , sound card and a set of necessary wires were used to support sound interactions . 5 THE MASTER JAM ( EVENT ) Whole afternoon event on a beautiful Saturday afternoon took place at a site that was perfect in relation also to the vision after the second workshop : it was a combination of green grass and asphalt for skating on , flat , large and allowed non - skaters to observe , see Fig . 6 . The event turned out to be a great way of evaluating the prototype , allowing for observation in action . We could see no signs of people behaving differently because it was part of a research project . It was , without a doubt , seen as a highly inclusive and social event . It also attracted people from neighboring houses , and many passersby stopped to watch and see what was going on . Figure 5 : The making : top part of the image shows paper prototypes and mockups . The lower part shows the carpentry work and the work with technology . Figure 6 : The Master Jam . From the top left : placing the obstacle at the chosen location . Place as discussed at the second workshop : green , flat and loved by all , not just skaters . Together , fixing the sound components under the obstacle . Finally , skating ! Post event , 12 interviews were conducted . All twelve interviewees expressed that they enjoyed themselves and commented on the large number of people that showed up . Asked about why they came to the event , they gave diverse answers . Some were a part of the previous stages of the design process and were interested in seeing how the prototype turned out , but many of the attendees liked the fact that something new and exciting was happening in the community . They liked the fact that the event was not involving skateboarders only , and that everyone was welcome . Some of CHItaly ' 17 , September 18 – 20 , 2017 , Cagliari , Italy O . Galewicz and A . L . Culén the interviewees mentioned that it was exciting for the skaters , as well as for the spectators . H : “The milieu that showed up around this project – a lot of skaters , skaters’ friends , girls , boys , children that played around . It is very… like if you live in this area and you see that there is a lot of activity going on at that place – you go out . There was a couple , three people from the apartments around that joined . ” The majority was there also to become familiar with , and support , the project . They also named that they were there to skate , meet others and have fun . Some skaters joined without knowing about the event in advance . They said that it was fun to skate along with many others at an otherwise empty city location . Overall , the responses were very positive and constructive . We have chosen a few responses addressing the themes that emerged , such as the experience of the event itself , risk taking in skating , surroundings , aesthetics of the obstacle , skating surface etc . M : “It was lovely . People who didn’t skate just sat there and drank some beers and listened to the music . Football on the side… It was just a hangout – good vibes . ” H : “I feel like it fits the best in a setting like it was at the event . Cause it then becomes a very show - like element . ” They defined the character of the event as informal and open for everyone . Another thing that was mentioned by multiple interviewees was the fact that the place where the event took place is usually rather empty and that it was a positive thing to activate the spot by organizing the event . K : “I noticed that everyone enjoyed themselves and it was a very smart place to arrange the event at , because there are some possibilities of making some DIY elements , and it is a piece of asphalt that otherwise stands there quite empty . So , in that case I feel like it can be a little spark to it . ” The respondents had some comments regarding the physical characteristics of the place . For example , the gravel remaining at some places was seen as a minor disadvantage . One interviewee also commented on the quality of the asphalt at the spot . H : “It could’ve been a good idea to place it on a nicer flat , just so that there would be less noise when you approach it . Cause , if it would be a concrete surface , the sound would be way more audible when you hit the sensors . ” The respondents were concerned with the fact that the prototype could become a subject to vandalism or that the technological parts could get stolen . Some interviewees suggested alternative places and spaces that could house the prototype . Aesthetics of the prototype led to a comment that other obstacles looked shabby in contrast to the prototype . H : “… [ the obstacle ] could stand in nicer surroundings . The elements that are there are quite shabby , so if it would stand , like , at Vulkan Mathallen [ a popular area with a dance theater and a large food court in Oslo ] , in the middle of the concrete there , it could also be like a sculpture out in the cityscape . ” P : “I am thinking like : it is going to stand there… it is a nice obstacle and it stands there with these trashy , soggy , rotten curbs . ” Interview subjects mentioned putting the obstacles into the skate park too , or even an art gallery . F : “I think that it could almost be an art installation . It would have been freaking awesome to present it that way . You know like a “White Cube” gallery . ” Some of the skaters also mentioned that it could be fun to place the prototype at a random public space in the city to see if it would attract people that do not skate . L : “If you would have an obstacle like that some random place in the city , it could not only be a skater that would approach it . Ordinary people would have approached it , touched the thingies that make sounds , you can combine it . ” M : “If it would be out in public , with completely ordinary people that have no clue about it , they would be fascinated . Just as you know… like piano at the shopping mall type of thing . They could possibly use it completely differently . ” M2 : “It has to be like that with this type of obstacles anyways… that people explore . People always skate gnarlier [ riskier ] on similar types of jam - settings though . ” 6 FINDINGS 6 . 1 The artefact The obstacle was to allow for experimentation around possible ways of embedding the technology in a ‘skateable’ element , in order to bring a new dimension , sound , to skating . Conductive paint , as a material of choice to implement the sound interactions , was a great help in coupling sounds with particular areas of the obstacle . The areas covered by the conductive paint , and the rail on the top of the obstacle , triggered the audio interaction . These couplings functioned as proximity sensors , and the interaction was achieved by skating on the top of the rail or on any of the painted fields . The skater would trigger diverse sounds , depending on which areas of the obstacle he would choose to skate on . The obstacle was to allow for experimentation with both skating and making music , or both at the same time . It is important to underline that the sound - based interaction in itself is not novel . There are plenty of examples using the sound to achieve enhanced experiences , e . g . , [ 10 ] . However , activating the skateboarding obstacle such as the one presented in this paper , by adding a sound dimension to the obstacle itself , is novel . This novelty aspect won over other concerns that will be discussed in the next section , for example , the fact that skating is often considered as noisy , and our solution was not bound to contribute to change this view . However , our inquiry was of exploratory character rather than geared towards making something useful or permanent . Its purpose was to investigate participation in making , motivation of participants to join the process and seeing if similar activities have the power to influence the usual behavioral patterns of skaters . By usual behavior we mean performing the previously mastered tricks in a new setting and finding out how to use the obstacle in novel ways . The participants , being experienced skaters , also had to experience a certain level of difficulty in mastering the obstacle . The size of it , the shape , the height , i . e . , the form of the obstacle had to be just right in order to work well for this group . In addition , the sound locations had to be distributed so that diverse skating patterns could be tried . It was important for us to observe how experienced skaters use their extreme bodily control to produce different sounds . This focus on ‘sound print’ was adding a new dimension to the usual behavior patterns . The visual dimension of the skateboarding tricks could now be complemented by the audio dimension . To achieve the optimal experience at skating the obstacle , the embodied knowledge of an experienced skater was needed . Co - Creating Interactive Obstacles and DIY Skateboarding Spaces CHItaly ' 17 , September 18 – 20 , 2017 , Cagliari , Italy That being said , a secondary objective was to make the obstacle aesthetically pleasing , as well as accessible to everyone else ( who is not a skater ) . It had to be able to serve as a sort of interactive sculpture in the urban city landscape , a sculpture that could be “played” also without the skateboard . One participant pointed out : M : “I never thought about it , but it would be f * * * * * g awesome if one would do tricks in a different way just because one wants to make sounds come out . If you knew that if you hit it with the wheel there , or with a truck there , you would hear specific sounds . ” The main lessons learned through design had to do with willingness to learn to do things themselves , together , among the community members . This come out very clearly from interviews conducted after the event . By ways of concluding this section , we could say that important outcome of the design process was the increased interest in technology expressed by the skaters , as well as the interest in the concept of interactivity and modes of achieving it . Showing different prototype platforms like Arduino , LittleBits or Bare Conductive Touch Board and explaining how they work was met with excitement and enthusiasm . New ideas were popping up immediately after the participants understood how things worked . The technology was made more available and more accessible to many of the participants involved with this research . Skateboarders attitude towards the technological components went from seeing it as costly and difficult to implement , to ideas that would include projectors , sound systems and electric wheels – “because it is possible , right ? ” As the process evolved , the enthusiasm grew , hand in hand with the participation . 6 . 2 A culture of making together ? A large portion of the interviews were focused on the following questions : What motivates skateboarders to engage in a participatory process of designing and making for skating purposes ? What are the opportunities and challenges for engaging members of a skateboarding community in design interventions like the one described in this thesis ? Does co - creating interactive DIY skate spaces support emergence of a participatory culture , or subculture , within the skateboarding community ? We have found out that answers were very much focused on creativity in one form or the other , and social aspects of the process , Doing It Together . Gauntlett’s five principles have served as a departure point for categorizing the observations we made during workshops , making process and The Master Jam . However , we found out that making , when using technology , is a different kind of creativity and it initially required some learning . According to our interviewees , the fact that learning took place in an informal arena ( workshops ) and with friends , made it fun and worth trying again . This is in line with the 4 th principle of creativity as a social glue , but we decided to make a more precise formulation that includes the means through which they were creative , formulating the principle as : 6 ) Co - creating with technology . Finally , the 5 th principle turned out to be very important for the participants . They felt that the creativity , and DIY were linked to the possibility of empowerment and improvement of relationships between the community and others . Thus , we felt that the empowerment aspect should be brought in as a separate principle . 7 ) Empowerment through creativity . These seven principles together , we felt , were a good framework for exploring the making within the skateboarding culture . The first principle of understanding creativity as process , emotion and presence applied very directly to the process we carried out : making together in a playful way . The Master Jam also represented the same qualities , not just in literarily having to be creative when skating the new obstacle with the new interaction form , but also in terms of emotion and presence . V : “It was awesome ! Good that there is something new to skate at Torshovdalen and that you had music under the obstacle . That you gathered everyone and that everyone had a good time . ” Some of the skaters attending were also involved in earlier stages of the project and had comments on the process . G : “I came because I think that the project seemed very , very cool . I attended two previous parts too , so I felt that I have to be there for the big deal . ” F2 : “It is fun to turn an idea into reality , skate it afterwards , try it out . You can try stuff that you wouldn’t be able to without creating that obstacle . So , it was very fun . ” The second principle related to the drive to make and share came out clearly from answers . P2 : “To explore possibilities and come up with ideas , basically to have a project like that and use it both to come up with something and implement it . ” F : “… instead of bunch of junkies that sit in the park there on a Saturday and drink . It was like a happening there . ” The design intervention inspired some of the skateboarders and some thought that the social aspect was the big deal : P : “There are many people that built more stuff than me . I was never really interested in that kind of stuff . But I could gladly try together with others . I don’t think that I would do it completely on my own , but if it would be a crew , it could be exciting . ” M : “I went there to check out what you have made , but also because everyone else was going there . It is fun . It becomes more like a social thing . Just hang out with friends , and you build and you look forward to skate it . ” M2 : “I came to help out and to hang out with all the boys . So , it was a good mix of happening that was also productive . ” These answers are also tightly related to the third principle , the one connecting happiness in life through creativity and community . Some explicit connections have been made by the participants : L : “ [ DIY ] makes people more creative . You have to put all the possible ideas together and it is a very cool thing . You create a lot of weird ideas . ” According to some , the event reflected the engagement among the members of the skateboarding community and their wish to support other skaters , in this case , also the first author of this paper and the member of the community : M2 : “It was packed ! A lot of skaters . It shows how good the solidarity is and how easy it is to gather and do stuff . ” L : “That it was something cool going on , something new , something that seemed exciting . Plus , that others that I knew were going there . And that I wanted to support you . Community - bunch of buddies . ” G : “I would assume that skaters become more united . Like , if they are standing together about one thing… it unites the community . ” H : “It is a very strong feeling of fellowship , the feeling of mastering something . I think that it inspires a lot and that it is very important CHItaly ' 17 , September 18 – 20 , 2017 , Cagliari , Italy O . Galewicz and A . L . Culén that you feel that one develops the culture that one is a part of in a right direction . ” The fourth principle addressing the creativity as a social glue is already present in the comments above , but even more explicit in the opposition to the dominant patterns of consumerism , in particular in the community of extremely good skaters . This context of design intervention is not the in line with consumerists lifestyle . In fact , the respondents connect DIY with empowerment and freedom . L : “It is always attractive to involve skaters . To make people choose themselves is better then give them finished design . ” S : “DIY can contribute so that they ( skaters ) try to build things themselves . Because often , not always , there are a lot of mistakes when the officials step in and implement something on the skateboarding front . It is often a lot of complaining when officials or local authorities are building something for skating . ” Another point made was that if the local authorities decide to involve skaters , they should listen to their opinions , not just include them for the sake of it : V : “I mean look at the Skatehall , which is not DIY . There was a lot of people that didn’t have that much to do with skating , and even though they got some guidance from people we know , famous skaters , they still f * * * * d up some stuff . DIY is awesome cause skaters themselves do what they want and try it and see . And make a lot of mistakes , but in the end , I feel like skaters are best to build stuff for skating . ” When it comes to the fifth principle , making your mark and marking the world , instead of passively waiting for things to happen , skaters like the feeling of taking things in their own hands . F2 : “It is really cool that things are made by users themselves . It makes it a bit more… it gives them more space to be a bit more original . We have so much expertise in that kind of stuff . ” M2 : “There are not that many sports , if you can call it like that . Yeah , no one goes and… or at least not in Norway… that goes and build a football pitch… So , it is a very cool thing that we are so engaged in what we are doing , that we choose to go and create a space for it . ” K : “It is f * * * * * g awesome though . It is like the funniest thing about skateboarding . Just to see an opportunity . Look here… there is nothing going on , and then you just do it yourself . And you suddenly have a spot…or you just suddenly have f * * * * * g lots of movement at the spot that was completely dead before . There should obviously be a more opportunities to do that . ” A value brought by designing , shaping and skating own spaces was seen as something unique and was described by one of the respondents as follows : G : “When one was involved in making something , it has a special place in one’s heart . ” The learning , with others , was considered as an experience in itself . The interesting remark came from F , who did not participate in the workshops , and who said : F : “It would be exciting to learn how to use different materials and to use them to build , even though I am not a natural talent . ” We interpreted this remark as F being inspired by what he had seen and that he would like to try it on the next occasion . The interviewees that had participated in workshops have expressed satisfaction and feeling positive about what they learned : K : “It is always how it begins . You just see someone do something , and you think… damn , that was f * * * * g cool , next time we do this and then we do that . It is actually not more than that . ” Also , some of the comments had to do with a different type of learning : V : “If we want DIY to exist , skaters have to learn respect . The locations can be anywhere , but only if skaters would learn to consider others and not pollute , throw cigarette butts . We are adults , at least most of us . We should care more . If we want others to reach out , we have to be grown enough to receive their hand . ” The empowerment issues came up in most interviews explicitly . It became clear that the interviewees had a wish to change the existing stereotypes around skateboarding and community values . During the interviews , skaters expressed disappointment and frustration with the existing ways of tackling attempts to create skating spots . From the experience of the interviewees , skaters’ created spaces were always demolished by the local authorities . Every one of the interviewees mentioned another project , the Cuba park project , where many hours of work were put in , only to be found destroyed by the Municipality of Oslo . Previous attempts of creating a dialogue between skaters and local authorities were characterized as a one - way communication . The hope with technology based obstacles was that the Municipality will see them as more valuable and interesting , kind of innovation . As can be seen from the above , creativity in everyday life was the main source of motivation to participate in this , and similar ( even without involvement of technology ) projects . The important driver is precisely the embodied knowledge , as our interviewees felt that they can be better designers of skating obstacles than the professionals hired byt the Municipality . Other sources of the motivation to participate were inspiring others , empowerment , making obstacles that have the right level of difficulty for the level of ability , rather than generic obstacles for all . This project represented , for interviewees , a way a counteract the passivity and to seek new ways of engagement , and communication with the Municipality and non - skaters . Finding new impulses and initiating various projects might ignite a spark that would set things in motion toward more creative , innovative solutions for urban skaters , and increase their power to communicate . A growing popularity of skateboarding as a leisure activity has significantly accelerated the process of creating new venues and skate parks in the local and the global context . It is undoubtedly a positive change when it comes to recruitment of new members to the community and practicing the skateboarding skills . However , the possible consequences of this development might result in lowering the engagement in DIY activities among skaters . Thus , the engaged members , initiators and motivators , that will keep these traditions alive were seen as important . All of the interviewed skateboarders wish to be a part of a vibrant , active and creative community . In particular , they wish for DIY activities to be appreciated , not neglected and condemned . They should be about empowerment to change status quo . However , seeing things from a “neighbors” perspective , interviewees acknowledge that skating can be intrusive , noisy , and dangerous . It is understandable that authorities and neighbors are not thrilled about the urban spaces that could be used for skating . Thus , the time for initial ideas ( that were not implemented ) shown in Fig . 2 has not quite come yet , they admit . At the same time , destroying things that skaters build , and chasing them out , seem like drastic and unnecessary ways of handling things . This project has not fully responded to the challenge of building bridges between the society and Municipality on one Co - Creating Interactive Obstacles and DIY Skateboarding Spaces CHItaly ' 17 , September 18 – 20 , 2017 , Cagliari , Italy side , and skateboarders on the other , but perhaps it can be seen as a possible start . Demonstrating innovativeness through DIY may be a way for the community to make their mark , while also improving relations , sharing and caring . It remains to be seen if the community will organize similar projects in the future on their own initiative . In closing , the obstacle made is still actively used at the location where it was placed . Some skating halls expressed the desire to acquire it . However , the skaters like it where it is , and still consider it to be a good , and aesthetically pleasing , option for the location . They even reported when it got fresh graffiti , some months into the use , see Fig . 7 . As it was not designed for permanence , at least with the interaction based on the conductive paint , we thought that the graffiti was a good addition . Figure 7 : The obstacle , conductive paint mostly gone , covered with graffiti . It now looks , and is used as , an ordinary skating obstacle . 7 CONCLUSIONS As this paper shows , the eagerness and motivation for joining this and future DIY projects is present in the skateboarding community . This DIY project has gathered a large number of people and received a lot of interest from within community . It showed that the skaters enjoyed learning new things and appreciated everyday creativity to the high enough extent to be willing to engage in such projects also in the future . They used their minds and their hands to help make the artefact . They placed it into the urban landscape . An invitation to join the design process was seen as a fun and enjoyable . The learning was rich and a good way of trying something new , most participants reported . Through engaging with technologies and showing the convenience of activating objects , skaters have also understood how well - known obstacles can be turned into something novel . The potential is in place for grooming the participatory maker culture . It remains to be seen if it will be fulfilled . The social and empowerment aspects were seen as strong motivators for the project and show that skaters are capable of making by Doing It Together . They have confirmed the relevance of all seven principles of everyday creativity in the interviews . We also considered the participants willingness to learn and engage in sketching with technology as an important part for DIY interactive design and also as an opportunity for the HCI to add new dimensions to skateboarding experiences . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This project was , in part , financed by the EU Creative Europe project “The People’s Smart Sculpture” , under the grant number EC - EACEA 2014 - 2330 . Immense gratitude is also due to all the participants in this work , it would not have been possible without your engagement . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Iain Borden . 2001 . Skateboarding , Space and the City : Architecture and the Body , 1 st edition . Oxford England ; New York : Bloomsbury Academic . [ 2 ] Eva Brandt and Thomas Binder . 2007 . Experimental design research : genealogy , intervention , argument . In Proceedings of the International Association of Societies of Design Research , Hong Kong . [ 3 ] Alma L . Culén , Hani Murad , and Dagny Stuedahl . 2016 . Temporalities and Spaces for Youth Engagement in Co - Creative Activities . In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction , NordiCHI ' 16 . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4763 - 1 . [ 4 ] Carl DiSalvo , Illah Nourbakhsh , David Holstius , Ayça Akin , and Marti Louw . 2008 . The Neighborhood Networks Project : A Case Study of Critical Engagement and Creative Expression Through Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design , Indianapolis , USA , 41 – 50 . [ 5 ] Daniel Fallman . 2008 . The Interaction Design Research Triangle of Design Practice , Design Studies , and Design Exploration . Design Issues , vol . 24 , no . 3 , 4 – 18 . [ 6 ] Alastair Fuad - Luke . 2013 . Design Activism : Beautiful Strangeness for a Sustainable World . Routledge . [ 7 ] Oskar Galewicz . 2017 . Do It Yourself or Do It Together ? Emergence of Participatory Culture through Co - creating interactive DIY skateboarding spaces , Master’s thesis . University of Oslo ( UiO ) , Oslo , Norway . [ 8 ] David Gauntlett . 2011 . Making is Connecting : The Social Meaning of Creativity , from DIY and Knitting to YouTube and Web 2 . 0 , 1 edition . Cambridge , UK , Malden , MA : Polity Press . [ 9 ] David Gauntlett . 2007 . Creative Explorations : New Approaches to Identities and Audiences , 1 st edition . London , New York : Routledge . [ 10 ] Sarthak Ghosh , Pratik Shah , Lorina Navarro , Xiaowei Chen . 2016 . MusiSkate : Enhancing the Skateboarding Experience Through Musical Feedback . In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services Adjunct . New York , USA , 753 – 759 . [ 11 ] Shannon Grimme , Jeffrey Bardzell , and Shaowen Bardzell . 2014 . ‘We’Ve Conquered Dark’ : Shedding Light on Empowerment in Critical Making . In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Fun , Fast , Foundational , New York , USA , 431 – 440 . [ 12 ] Donna Haraway . 2013 . Simians , cyborgs , and women : The reinvention of nature . Routledge [ 13 ] Tim Ingold . 2013 . Making : Anthropology , Archaeology , Art and Architecture , 1 st edition . London ; New York : Routledge . [ 14 ] Martin Koplin , Stephan Seigert , Aura Neuvonen , Kari Salo , Kevin Kerney , Carl Skelton , Alma L . Culén , Igor Nedelkovski , Anastasia Stratigea , Elias Kyriakides , and Nicolaides Chrysses . 2017 . The Smart City as Shared Design Space , in Smart Cities in the Mediterranean , A . Stratigea , E . Kyriakides , and C . Nicolaides , Eds . Springer International Publishing , 153 – 174 . [ 15 ] Stacey Kuznetsov and Eric Paulos . 2010 . Rise of the Expert Amateur : DIY Projects , Communities , and Cultures . In Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Extending Boundaries , New York , USA , 295 – 304 . [ 16 ] Bruno Latour and Catherine Porter . 1996 . Aramis , or , The love of technology , vol . 1996 . Harvard University Press Cambridge , MA . [ 17 ] Kara - Jane Lombard . 2015 . Skateboarding : Subcultures , Sites and Shifts . Routledge . [ 18 ] Stina Nylander , Jakob Tholander , Florian Mueller , and Joe Marshall . 2014 . HCI and Sports , In CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , New York , USA , 115 – 118 . [ 19 ] “Paving Space , ” Lodown Magazine , 17 - Nov - 2016 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / lodownmagazine . com / pulse / paving - space . [ Accessed : 07 - July - 2017 ] . [ 20 ] Sebastian Pijnappel and Florian Mueller . 2013 . 4 Design Themes for Skateboarding . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , New York , USA , 1271 – 1274 . [ 21 ] Matt Ratto . 2011 . Critical making : Conceptual and material studies in technology and social life . The Information Society , vol . 27 , no . 4 , 252 – 260 . [ 22 ] Matt Ratto , Sara Ann Wylie , and Kirk Jalbert . 2014 . Introduction to the special forum on critical making as research program . The information society , vol . 30 , no . 2 , 85 – 95 . [ 23 ] RIDE Channel , SKATE Rio de Janeiro with Sergio Santoro . 2016 . https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = VidNToYiOUI [ Accessed : 07 - July - 2017 ] . [ 24 ] “Rideon filmfestival | KAPOW – KAPOW IS NOW – OBJEKT . ” 2016 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / vimeo . com / 187642588 . [ Accessed : 07 - July - 2017 ] . [ 25 ] Phoebe Sengers , Kirsten Boehner , Shay David , and Joseph “Jofish” Kaye . CHItaly ' 17 , September 18 – 20 , 2017 , Cagliari , Italy O . Galewicz and A . L . Culén 2005 . Reflective Design . In Proceedings of the 4th Decennial Conference on Critical Computing : Between Sense and Sensibility , New York , USA , 49 – 58 . [ 26 ] Donald A . Schön . 1984 . Problems , frames and perspectives on designing . Design Studies , vol . 5 , no . 3 , 132 – 136 . [ 27 ] Joshua G . Tanenbaum , Amanda M . Williams , Audrey Desjardins , and Karen Tanenbaum . 2013 . Democratizing Technology : Pleasure , Utility and Expressiveness in DIY and Maker Practice . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , New York , USA , 2603 – 2612 . [ 28 ] Jakob Tholander and Carolina Johansson . 2010 . Design Qualities for Whole Body Interaction : Learning from Golf , Skateboarding and BodyBugging . In Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Extending Boundaries , New York , USA , 493 – 502 . [ 29 ] John Zimmerman and Jodi Forlizzi . 2014 . Research Through Design in HCI . In Ways of Knowing in HCI , J . S . Olson and W . A . Kellogg , Eds . Springer New York , 167 – 189 . [ 30 ] 20syl , LE U - Interactive Skateboarding Ramp . 20syl . 2015 . [ Online ] . http : / / www . onandon - records . com / leU / US / . [ Accessed : 07 - July - 2017 ] .