Journal of Pereonality and Social Psychology 1985 , Vol . 48 , No . 6 , 1467 - 1478 Copyright 1985 by the Ai Psychological Association , Inc . 0022 - 3514 / 85 / 500 . 75 Pooling of Unshared Information in Group Decision Making : Biased Information Sampling During Discussion Garold Stasser Miami University William Titus Briar Cliff College Decision - making groups can potentially benefit from pooling members ' informa - tion , particularly when members individually have partial and biased information but collectively can compose an unbiased characterization of the decision alter - natives . The proposed biased sampling model of group discussion , however , suggests that group members often fail to effectively pool their information because discussion tends to be dominated by ( a ) information that members hold in common before discussion and ( b ) information that supports members ' existent preferences . In a political caucus simulation , group members individually read candidate descriptions that contained partial information biased against the most favorable candidate and then discussed the candidates as a group . Even though groups could have produced unbiased composites of the candidates through discussion , they decided in favor of the candidate initially preferred by a plurality rather than the most favorable candidate . Group members ' pre - and postdiscussion recall of candidate attributes indicated that discussion tended to perpetuate , not to correct , members ' distorted pictures of the candidates . Decision - making groups must often choose from a set of specified alternatives ( e . g . , guilty and not guilty for a jury , a set of applicants for a selection committee ) , and this choice is typically preceded by discussion of the merits of each alternative . One goal of discussion is to achieve a consensus among the group ' s members . Another goal is to pool members ' expertise and knowledge . In principle , pooling information permits a group decision that is more informed than the decisions of members acting individually . In particular , discussion can perform a corrective function when members individually have incomplete and biased information but collectively can piece together an unbiased picture of the relative merits of the decision alternatives . Notwith - standing the potential of discussion to serve such a corrective function , group discussion may often fall short of its potential . Discussion Portions of this study were reported at the 91st annual meeting of the American Psychological Association , An - aheim , California , 1983 . We thank Alison Karas , Jerry Kasai , Scott Snell , and Amelia Tynan for assisting in data collection and analysis . We also thank James Davis and Norbert Kerr for reading and commenting on an earlier draft of this article . Requests for reprints should be sent to Garold Stasser , Department of Psychology , Miami University , Oxford , Ohio 45056 . is rarely a systematic and balanced exploration of the relevant issues . On the contrary , it is often thematic and consensus confirming ; that is , discussion tends to focus on particular issues and to support an existing or emergent consensus ( cf . Fisher , 1980 ) . Such patterns may counter effective pooling of information and may perpetuate biases that members bring to the group . In this article , we explore the dynamics of discussion within the framework of an infor - mation sampling model . This model high - lights the role of the pregroup information distribution , a summary of which group members are exposed to what information before discussion . The distribution of infor - mation among group members may give rise to several types of bias . Informational bias occurs when individual group members are given partial sets of information that do not reflect the balance of available supporting arguments for the various decision alterna - tives . Such biased sets of information may , in turn , result in preferential bias : individual members ' preferring alternatives at the onset of discussion that they would not prefer if they had complete information . Finally , the sampling model suggests that the pregroup biases in information and preference may act to bias the content of subsequent discussion . 1467 1468 GAROLD STASSER AND WILLIAM TITUS Thus the content of discussion tends to reflect but not to correct biases introduced by the distribution of information over group mem - bers before discussion . Pregroup Information Distributions For many topics of group discussion and decision , we can think of a set of relevant information and arguments ( cf . Burnstein & Vinokur , 1977 ) . Members are usually aware of some subset of these arguments before the group convenes and , on the basis of this subset , have a tentative preference for one of the alternatives . During group discussion , members exchange arguments and reevaluate their initial preferences . The information and arguments that members collectively bring to the group guide the emergence of a consensus in two ways . On the one hand , such infor - mation shapes the initial preferences of the group members ; these initial preferences de - fine the degree of consensus that exists at the onset of discussion . On the other hand , the content of discussion is drawn from the ex - isting pool of information and arguments , and the balance of arguments favoring one position relative to another partly determines which preferences are likely to be strengthened or changed during the course of discussion . It is important to consider not only how much supporting information exists for each alternative but also how this information is distributed across a group ' s members before their discussion . In the extreme , there are two kinds of pregroup information distribu - tions : shared information is familiar to all group members , whereas unshared informa - tion is held by only one of the group ' s members . ( Of course , there are degrees be - tween these two extremes in that an argument or fact may be shared by several but not all members ; for our purposes , we shall only consider these two extreme cases . ) Burnstein and Vinokur ( 1977 ) made a similar distinc - tion in their persuasive arguments theory of group polarization . We will use an example suggested by their analysis to illustrate the distinction between shared and unshared in - formation distributions . Consider a simple case in which a three - person group must decide between two alter - natives , A and B . Suppose that there exist seven items of information favoring A ( de - noted as a , , 82 , . . • , 36 , and a 7 ) and four items of information favoring B ( denoted as bi , b 2 , bj , and b 4 ) . For ease of discussion , we assume that these 11 items of information are equally convincing . In Table 1 we present four ways in which this information could be distributed across the group members before discussion . In Case 1 , all information is shared ; that is , every member is aware of the seven pro - A and four pro - B pieces of infor - mation . In this case , we would expect that each member would prefer A before discus - sion and thus an initial unanimous consensus would occur . Group discussion would serve primarily to reassure the members that they were aware of all the critical information . This reassurance might increase members ' confidence in their preferences , but discussion would provide little impetus for modifying initial preferences . In Case 2 , some information about both A and B is unshared . We refer to this case as an unbiased distribution of unshared infor - mation because each individual possesses a ratio of pro - A to pro - B that is nearly identical to the ratio in the total information pool . Members bring three pro - A and two pro - B items to the group and , if information ex - change is exhaustive , would leave the group with seven pro - A and four pro - B items . Thus members should prefer A both before and after group discussion . In Case 3 , three of the pro - A items of information ( viz . , a 5 , a ^ and a 7 ) are unshared , but all of the pro - B information is shared . Each group member still has more pro - A than pro - B information ; however , from each member ' s perspective , the advantage to A appears proportionately less than if they were aware of all of the available information . Thus members would be likely to bring a relatively weak preference for A to the group ' s discussion , but discussion could strengthen these initial preferences because each member could inform the others of a pro - A argument of which they were previously unaware . As suggested by Burnstein and Vinokur ( 1977 ) , pregroup distributions of information similar to those in Cases 2 and 3 would probably result in group polarization ( cf . Myers & Lamm , 1976 ) ; that is , group discussion should UNSHARED INFORMATION AND GROUP DECISION MAKING 1469 Table 1 Some Possible Pregroup Distributions of Seven Pro - A ( a f ) and Four Pro - B ( b - , ) hems of Information Over Three Group Members Itemposition Pro - A Pro - B Pro - ASharedUnshared Pro - B SharedUnshared Pro - ASharedUnshared Pro - B " Group member X Y Z Case 1 : All information shared ai , a 2 , a 3 , 34 , a s , 36 , 3 7 ai , a 2 , 3 3 , 34 , as , 3 & , 37 3 ] , 3 2 , 33 , 34 , 3 $ , 3 & , 3 T b , , b 2 , b , , b . b , , b 2 , b 3 , b 4 bi , b 2 , bj . b * Case 2 : Unbiased distribution a , a , a , a 2 , a 3 34 , 3s ae , a 7 b , b , b , b , b 3 b . Case 3 : Mildly bissed distribution 3 ] , 3 2 , 33 , 34 3 | , 3 2 , 33 , 34 3 | , 3 2 , ^ 3 , 34 a , 36 3 7 b . ^ . bj , b 4 b , , b 2 , b , , b . b , , b 2 , b 3 , b4 Pro - ASharedUnshared Pro - B " Case 4 : Severely biased distribution b , , b 2 , bj , I 36 , 37 b , , b 2 , b , , ' All shared . enhance the initial predispositions of the members to select A . Case 4 in Table 1 is a more extreme version of Case 3 . In this version , only one pro - A item of information ( viz . , a , ) is shared and the other six are unshared ; thus group members should tend to prefer B rather than A at the onset of discussion because they each possess only three pro - A pieces of in - formation . When pregroup distributions of information are sufficiently biased to shift pregroup preferences in this way , we refer to them as severely biased ( as opposed to mildly biased distributions that tend to weaken but not change initial preferences ) . An extension of the logic of Burnstein and Vinokur ' s ( 1977 ) persuasive arguments theory suggests that group discussion could counter this initial bias in favor of B . By exchanging information , each group member can gain several items of new pro - A information but no new pro - B information . Ideally , even a group having a pregroup distribution of information severely biased against A could conclude discussion favoring A . Thus in all cases presented in Table 1 , exhaustive information exchange could result in members ' preferring A after discussion and in the group ' s choosing A as its decision . Nonetheless , Case 4 presents the most chal - lenging situation . In this case , for the group to eventually choose the best alternative ( best in terms of the total available information 1 ) , 1 In this article , we use term best in a very restricted way . The best alternative , in our sense , is the alternative that is supported by the preponderance of the information that is collectively av3il3ble to the group . We do not me3n that this alternative is correct . Indeed , criteria of correctness are usually undefined or unavailable for the kinds of decision tssks that we sre considering ( viz . , judgmental tasks ; cf . Laughlin , 1980 ) . Furthermore , we recognize that in practice the information that is collec - tively available to a particular group may be incomplete , and thus the best alternative , relative to the informational resources of that group , may not be the best alternative in view of a more complete set of information . 1470 GAROLD STASSER AND WILLIAM TITUS the initial preferences of the members must be changed , whereas in the other cases a group would choose the best alternative by simply acting on the initial predispositions of the members . As a result , group discussion is critical to effective decision making when pregroup distributions of information are se - verely biased against the best alternative . Case 4 also illustrates a situation in which a group ' s decision should be better than the decisions of individuals acting alone . A po - tential advantage of group versus individual decision making is that groups can pool information and thus make a more informed decision . In practice , groups are often com - posed of members who are believed to have unshared information ( e . g . , experts or repre - sentatives of special - interest populations ) . This strategy would have the greatest potential benefit when the total information pool favors one alternative but individuals have infor - mation that is severely biased in favor of another alternative . However , the following biased sampling model of group discussion suggests that this potential advantage of group decision making may often be unrealized . Biased Sampling Model of Group Discussion The biased sampling model identifies sev - eral sources of bias in unstructured , face - to - face discussion when a group is confronted with a consensus requirement . Moreover , we are concerned primarily with decision tasks for which there is no commonly accepted system of logic that would lead to an unam - biguously correct decision . In Laughlin ' s ( 1980 ) terms , we are restricting our attention to judgmental rather than intellective decision tasks . For such tasks , according to the model , the content of discussion is biased in two ways . First , discussion is biased in favor of shared information : An item of information is more likely to enter discussion if it is shared rather than unshared . Second , discus - sion is biased in favor of the current prefer - ences of group members : An item of infor - mation is more likely to enter discussion if it favors rather than opposes the existent pref - erences of group members . According to the biased sampling model , group members rarely exhaust their store of information during discussion but sample a subset of the information to contribute to discussion . At the level of the individual member , sampling is biased by the member ' s current preference . Preference consistent in - formation is more salient and thus more likely to be recalled during discussion ( cf . Fishbein & Ajzen , 1975 . ) Furthermore , the contribution of recalled information to dis - cussion is probably governed by a norm of advocacy : a social expectation that group members will actively advocate their preferred alternative during debate . At the level of the group , sampling is biased by the number of members who are cognizant of a given piece of information . The more members there are who have been exposed to an item of infor - mation , the more likely it is that at least one of them will recall and mention it . If sampling of the content of discussion is biased in these ways , then it is also the case that the amount of discussion favoring an alternative depends on the number of members who prefer that alternative . Regarding the severely biased pregroup information distribution that is illustrated by Case 4 in Table 1 , the biased sampling model predicts that group discussion will be biased in favor of alternative B even though there exists more information , in total , favoring A over B . This bias in discussion is expected for two reasons . First , group members will tend to prefer B initially and , as a result , will be predisposed to argue in favor of B . Second , shared information favors B even though the total set of information favors A . In summary , Case 4 illustrates a situation in which the collective decision of a group could be better ( i . e . , more consistent with the implications of all the available information ) than the decision of any member acting alone . How - ever , the biased sampling model suggests that groups will often fail to realize their potential , especially when pregroup distributions are biased sufficiently to shift initial preferences away from the best alternative , as in Case 4 . The role of initial consensus in determining the outcome of group discussion and decision is emphasized by the biased sampling model . This emphasis is not new in the group deci - sion - making literature ( cf . Davis , 1973 ; Stas - ser , Kerr , & Davis , 1980 ) but deserves some elaboration in the context of our study . In UNSHARED INFORMATION AND GROUP DECISION MAKING 1471 terms of the initial consensus , Case 4 illus - trates the worst of all possible cases : Group members possess sets of information that are not only biased against the best alternative but are also consistently biased in favor of another alternative . Thus we expect an initial consensus that favors an alternative other than the best one . Limiting our example to two alternatives precluded illustrating another possibility . If more than two decision alter - natives exist , it is possible for pregroup dis - tributions of information to be biased against the best alternative but not consistently , across members , biased in favor of another alterna - tive . In other words , none of the group mem - bers may support the best alternative but , at the same time , they may not agree on any one of the remaining alternatives . Such a lack of an initial consensus may avoid dis - cussion that uniformly supports one alterna - tive and promote more extensive and exhaus - tive sampling of the total available informa - tion . In this way , initial disagreement or conflict may actually encourage more effective information exchange . Others have noted the apparent value of conflict in group decision making ( e . g . , Fisher , 1980 ; Janis , 1972 ) . We designed our study to examine two implications of the biased sampling model of group discussion . First , when pregroup dis - tributions of information are severely biased against one alternative , group discussion tends to enhance rather than erode this initial bias . Second , discussion is more likely to counter an initial bias when there is disagreement that is due to conflicting patterns of infor - mation across group members than when pregroup information is consistently biased in favor of one alternative . We examined these predictions by comparing the distribu - tions of pregroup preferences with the distri - butions of group decisions and postgroup individual preferences . Method Overview University students read descriptions of three hypo - thetical candidates for student body president and then met in 4 - person groups to decide which candidate was best suited for the position . The profile of Candidate A contained more positive and fewer neutral attributes than the profiles of Candidates B and C . The valences ( positive , neutral , or negative ) of profile attributes were determined via pre - experimental ratings . Thus Candidate A was the best candidate in the sense that his profile contained more of the consensually valued attributes of a student body president . We denned three experimental conditions according to how the information about the candidates was distributed over the 4 group members before discus - sion . In the shared condition , participants read descrip - tions that contained all of the profile information about each candidate . Two unshared conditions were used ; in both , a participant was given only partial information about each candidate . However , the distribution of infor - mation across a group ' s members was designed so that a group , collectively , had all of the information and poten - tially could recreate the complete candidate profiles during discussion . In the unshared / consensus condition , positive information about A and negative information about B were unshared ( i . e . , given to only one member ) before discussion in order to bias initial preferences against A and for B . In the unshared / conflict condition , the same strategy for distributing positive information about A was used ; however , negative information about both B and C was unshared with the intent of shifting pregroup preferences away from A but , at the same time , avoiding a strong initial consensus for either B or C . Subjects Miami University students participated in order to partly fulfill a research experience requirement of intro - ductory psychology courses . Assignment to experimental conditions and to decision - making groups within condi - tions was random . There were 72 subjects in the shared and unshared / conflict conditions and 84 in the unshared / consensus condition . Materials The candidate profiles contained 16 items of infor - mation about each of the three candidates . This infor - mation consisted of biographical data ( e . g . , extracurricular activities and hobbies , academic classification and major , grade point average ) and positions on local and university issues such as dorm policies ( e . g . , visitation hours , dorm assignments ) , academic policies ( e . g . , class evaluations , course scheduling ) , and student social life ( e . g . , program board activities , local drinking ordinances ) . On the basis of an independent sample ' s pre - experimental ratings of candidate characteristics and policy statements , we con - structed the profiles to include a specific number of positive , negative , and neutral items of information . Positive items are those that were rated , on the average , as both desirable and important attributes for a candidate by pretest participants , whereas negative items were rated as both moderately undesirable and important . ( In order to avoid unrealistic profiles , extremely undesirable attri - butes were not used . ) Neutral items either were judged unimportant or received neutral desirability ratings . The profile for Candidate A contained eight positive , four neutral , and four negative items , whereas the profiles for Candidates B and C contained four positive , eight neutral , and four negative items . The descriptions that were read by participants before group discussion were based on the overall profiles and included a summary of biographical information followed 1472 OAROLD STASSER AND WILLIAM TITUS Table 2 Number of hems af Information About Each Candidate Received by Group Members Before Discussion Condition and information valence SharedPositiveNeutralNegativeUnshared / consensus PositiveNeutralNegative Unshared / conflict PositiveNeutralNegative A 84 4 2 4 4 2 4 4 Candidate B 4 8 4 4 5 1 4 [ 4 ] 6 [ 4 ] 0 [ 2 ] C 4 84 1 8 1 4 [ 4 ] 4 [ 6 ] 2 [ 0 ] Note . In the unshared / conflict condition , 2 members of a 4 - person group received configurations of information about Candidates B and C given by the numbers without brackets , whereas the other 2 members received config - urations given by the numbers in brackets . by interview excerpts stating the candidate ' s position on various local issues . In Table 2 we summarize the ways in which positive , neutral , and negative items were distributed in the descriptions read by a group ' s members . In order to be consistent with our earlier definition , shared information was included in all of the descriptions , whereas unshared information appeared in only one of the members ' descriptions . The scheme for distributing information in the shared condition is straightforward because all information was shared . Every group member received identical descrip - tions containing all of the information in each candidate profile . In the unshared conditions , only eight items of information about each candidate were shared . For the eight unshared items , the description read by the first group member contained two of the unshared items , the description read by the second member contained another two of the unshared items , and so forth . In other words , each member read a description that contained one fourth of the unshared information . This method of distributing unshared information ensured that every item of information was contained in at least one of the descriptions read by a group ' s members . The actual items of information to be unshared were selected to bias individual members ' pregroup preferences in the unshared conditions . In the unshared / consensus condition , a given description of Candidate A contained only two of the eight positive items but all four of the negative items . In contrast , a given description of candidate B contained all four of B ' s positive attributes but only one of his negative attributes . The descriptions of can - didate C remained relatively balanced because both positive and negative items about C were unshared . Thus each group member in this condition read descriptions that were biased against A and in favor of B , A similar effect was obtained in the unshared / conflict condition except that 2 members of a 4 - person group read descriptions that were biased in favor of Candidate B over Candidate C { nonbracketed configurations in Table 2 ) and the other 2 members read descriptions that were biased in favor of Candidate C over Candidate B ( bracketed configurations in Table 2 ) . The intent was to split pregroup support between B and C . We emphasize that even though the descriptions read by participants were biased in the unshared conditions , the total pool of information received by a group ' s members still favored Candidate A . For example , if each member of a group were to mention his or her two items of positive information about A during discussion , then all the members of the group would be informed of all eight pro - A items . Procedures The procedures for all experimental conditions were identical except for the aforementioned differences in the descriptions that were read by participants before group discussion . Participants met in a classroom at the begin - ning of an experimental session and were seated at random in locations that determined their experimental condition and discussion group assignment . Exceptions to random assignment were made in order to obtain the maximum number of 4 - person groups , given the number of participants attending any one session . Participants remaining after the maximum number of groups were formed were given a different experimental task , and their data are excluded from this report . Preliminary instructions stated that the research was concerned with group decision making and briefly de - scribed the role of a caucus in political elections . Partic - ipants were told that they would be reading descriptions of three hypothetical candidates for student body president and then meeting as a " political caucus " to decide which candidate was best suited for the position . We noted that members of a real political caucus rarely have identical information about candidates and , therefore , the infor - mation given to each member before discussion might not be entirely identical to the information received by their fellow group members . Thus in this study , partici - pants in all conditions were alerted to the possibility that the descriptions might not be complete and their fellow group members might have information of which they were unaware . Participants studied the candidate descriptions and then indicated their initial preferences on a private questionnaire . After collection of the candidate descrip - tions , participants completed a free recall task by listing as much information as they could remember about each candidate . Our intent for this task was to assess the salient information that participants retained before group discussion . Participants then adjourned to nearby " caucus " rooms to , as a group , discuss the candidates and decide which one was the best candidate for student body president . After reaching a decision , group members privately com - pleted a final questionnaire . In addition to assessing their postdiscussion preferences , this questionnaire repeated the free recall task . UNSHARED INFORMATION AND GROUP DECISION MAKING 1473 Results Pre - and Postgroup Individual Preferences The distributions of pregroup preferences , given in Table 3 , are significantly different among the experimental conditions , x 2 ( 4 , N = 228 ) = 51 . 44 , p < . 001 . In the shared con - dition , Candidate A was the popular choice as expected . By comparison , Candidate A was significantly less popular in the unshared conditions , x 2 U , N = 228 ) = 51 . 63 , p < . 001 , and Candidate B was more popular , X 2 ( l , N = 228 ) = 27 . 95 , p < . 001 . Thus the method of distributing unshared information had the intended effect of reducing pregroup support for A and increasing support for B . Furthermore , Candidate C was more popular in the unshared / conflict condition than in the unshared / consensus condition , x 2 0 , JV = 156 ) = 7 . 91 , p < . 005 . In summary , pregroup support shifted from A to B in the unshared / consensus condition , whereas in the unshared / conflict condition , both B and C gained support at the expense of A . One can assess the effects of group discus - sion on individual preferences by comparing pregroup with postgroup preference distri - butions . The biased sampling model suggests that candidates having the predominance of support before discussion will maintain or even gain support during discussion . This expectation follows because the content of discussion is presumed to reflect the initial allegiances of group members . If , however , groups do effectively pool members ' infor - mation , group discussion should substantially increase support for Candidate A in the unshared conditions . The distributions of postgroup preferences , given in Table 3 , are consistent with the biased sampling model predictions . The dif - ferences among the experimental conditions observed in the pregroup preferences are enhanced rather than mitigated in the post - group preferences . For example , in the shared condition , the proportion of participants pre - ferring A increased from . 67 to . 85 , and in the unshared / consensus condition the pro - portion preferring B increased from . 61 to . 75 . Overall , the distributions of postgroup preferences are significantly different , \ 2 ( 4 , N = 227 ) = 122 . 00 , p < . 001 . Again , A was chosen more frequently in the shared condi - Table 3 Relative Frequencies of Pregroup and Postgroup Preferences and Group Decisions Candidate Condition B C . 67 . 17 . 17 72 . 25 . 61 . 14 84 . 21 . 46 . 33 72 . 04 72 Pregroup preferences Shared info . Unshared info . / consensus Unshared info . / conflict Postgroup preferences Shared info . . 85 Unshared info . / consensus . 20 . 75 . 05 83 " Unshared info . / conflict . 17 . 47 . 36 72 Group decisions Shared info . . 83 . 11 . 06 18 Unshared info . / consensus . 24 . 71 . 05 21 Unshared info . / conflict . 12 . 53 . 35 17 " • One participant failed to report a postgroup preference . b One group failed to reach a decision . tion than in the unshared conditions , x 2 ( ! > TV = 227 ) = 89 . 51 , p < . 001 , and B was chosen more frequently in the unshared conditions than in the shared conditions , x 2 ( 1 , N = 227 ) = 51 . 17 , p < . 001 . Finally , C was more popular in the unshared / conflict condition than in the unshared / consensus condition , X 2 ( l , N = 155 ) = 24 . 17 , p < . 001 . In sum , the patterns of differences obtained for pregroup preferences tend to be exagger - ated in the postgroup data . Our expectation was that conflicting patterns of pregroup in - formation would increase the likelihood of discussion shifting preferences toward A when information was unshared ; this expectation was not supported . The postgroup support for A is not significantly different between the unshared / consensus and unshared / conflict conditions . Group Decisions The distributions of group decisions in Table 3 parallel closely the distributions of postgroup preferences . Overall , the distribu - tions of decisions are significantly different 1474 GAROLD STASSER AND WILLIAM TITUS among the experimental conditions , x 2 ( 4 , N = 56 ) = 28 . 81 , p < . 001 . In the shared condition , 83 % of the 18 groups chose Can - didate A whereas only 18 % of the 38 groups in the unshared conditions chose A , x 2 0 , N = 56 ) = 21 . 59 , p < . 001 . Candidate B was chosen more often in both of the unshared conditions than in the shared condition , x 2 ( l , N = 56 ) = 13 . 31 , p < . 001 , and Candidate C was chosen more often in the unshared / conflict condition than in the unshared / con - sensus condition , x 2 0 , N = 38 ) = 5 . 83 , p < . 025 . Again , there was no support for the notion that conflicting patterns of pregroup information would increase the likelihood that sentiment would shift toward Candidate A during discussion when pro - A information was unshared . In fact , groups in the unshared / conflict condition tended to choose A less frequently than did groups in the unshared / consensus condition ; however , this difference is not significant . Davis ( 1973 ) suggested that group process can be represented as a rule ( social decision scheme ) relating the group decisions to the configuration of members ' preferences at the onset of discussion . In Table 4 , we represent the initial preference configuration of a group by ( r \ , r 2 , r 3 ) , whereby r , is the number of members in a fraction such that r , > r 2 > r 3 , and r \ + r 3 + / - 3 = r , group size . In the present case , r = 4 , and the possible initial configurations of preference are as follows : ( 4 , 0 , 0 ) = initial unanimity ; ( 3 , 1 , 0 ) = initial majority ; ( 2 , 1 , 1 ) = initial plurality ; and ( 2 , 2 , 0 ) = initial nonplurality . In Table 4 , the decision of a group is classified as the candi - date initially supported by the largest faction ( plurality supported ) , by a minority faction ( minority supported ) , or by no members of the group ( unsupported ) . Note that for some initial configurations , one of the classifications for decisions does not exist . In particular , the distinction between plurality supported and minority supported does not exist for the ( 2 , 2 , 0 ) case . Thus for the ( 2 , 2 , 0 ) configu - ration , decisions are simply tabulated as un - supported or plurality supported . Candidates with initial unanimity or ma - jority support won with one exception : the unsupported candidate chosen by a group with an initial ( 3 , 1 , 0 ) configuration . Can - didates with only plurality support in the Table 4 Group Decisions as a Function of Initial Support Within the Group Supported Initial consensus By plurality By minority Unsupported ( 4 , 0 , 0 ) ( 3 , 1 , 0 ) ( 2 , 1 , 1 ) ( 2 , 2 , 0 ) 6 24 13 9 _ 0 3 — 01 —0 Note . Dashes indicate outcomes that are not denned for an initial consensus configuration . ( 2 , 1 , 1 ) configuration won very frequently ( 81 % ) over the minority - supported candi - dates . Given the nonplurality configuration ( 2 , 2 , 0 ) , one of the two supported candidates always won over the unsupported candidate . Thus a " plurality - supported wins " rule ac - counts for most of the group decisions ; that is , a candidate with at least a plurality of initial support was likely to be the group ' s decision . Such a process suggests that discus - sion rarely erodes even a minimal consensus . This finding is consistent with Laughlin and Barley ' s ( 1982 ) conclusion that groups decid - ing issues of judgment or social preference seem to follow a majority rules process . However , the dominance of the initial plurality in our groups is particularly noteworthy be - cause the distributions of unshared informa - tion provided ample opportunity for discus - sion to counter the initial consensus in the unshared conditions . Furthermore , it is worth noting that the seven groups that chose Candidate A in the unshared conditions were , by chance , assigned at least two members who favored A at the onset of discussion . Thus it was not the lack of a consensus for B or C that resulted in groups ' discovering the merits of A ( the in - tended effect in the unshared / conflict condi - tion ) ; rather , it was the presence of at least two members who supported A . Information Recall Even though group discussion may often fail to correct the bias in information that members bring to the group , the biased sam - pling model suggests that the content of discussion is nonetheless instrumental in pro - UNSHARED INFORMATION AND GROUP DECISION MAKING 1475 ducing shifts of preference . The point is that shifts of preference occur in the direction of the initial consensus because members tend to recall and contribute arguments and facts that support their existent preferences . The content of discussion serves not only to give members new information but also to change the salience of old information . If shifts of preference and the emergence of a group decision are dependent on the content of discussion , there should be a concomitant increase in the salience of information that supports the winning candidate from pre - to postdiscussion . Thus information that sup - ports the winning candidate should be more likely to be recalled after than before discus - sion . The numbers of positive and negative items recalled before and after discussion were tab - ulated separately for the winning and losing candidates . Because Candidate A had more positive attributes than B and C , and because there was always more total information about the two losing candidates than about the one winning candidate , we analyzed the percent - age of information recalled rather than the absolute frequency . Also , because of a possible dependency of postdiscussion recall among a group ' s members , we averaged the recall scores of the four members of each group and conducted an analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) , using these group means ( following a method of analysis suggested by Myers , DiCecco , & Lorch , 1981 ) . Figure 1 contains the average pre - and postdiscussion recall of positive and negative information about the winning and losing candidates for each experimental condition . Although we are primarily interested in the changes of recall from pre - to postdiscussion , it is important to note that the prediscussion recall of positive attributes of the winning candidate is noticeably higher in the unshared conditions than in the shared condition . This inflated recall reflects the biasedness of the sets of information given to members before discussion in the unshared conditions ; that is , the percentage of unshared information recalled before discussion in the unshared conditions is necessarily low because each member received only one fourth of the unshared information . The winning candidate in these conditions was typically ( except for the few groups who chose A ) the one for whom members were given all of the positive information before discussion . Unshared in - formation , in these conditions , was typically ( a ) negative information about the winning candidate and ( b ) positive and negative infor - mation about one or both of the losing can - didates . Thus if group discussion had cor - rected the bias introduced by the patterns of shared and unshared information in the un - shared conditions , this disproportionate recall of positive - winning information should have been reduced in postdiscussion recall . How - ever , visual inspection of Figures Ic and le suggests that this bias in recall increased from pre - to postdiscussion . A 3 X 2 X 2 X2 ( Experimental Condi - tion X Winning vs . Losing Candidate X Pos - itive vs . Negative Valence X Prediscussion vs . Postdiscussion ) ANOVA of the recall scores 5 30 tr£ 20 0 POSITIVE • NEGATIVE SHARED CONDITION < 10 ill 3 POSITIVE NEGATIVE UNSHARED / CONSENSUS CONDITION - J BU < 0 50 IT t - 40 Z O 30 cc £ 20 5 " > 5 ^ ^ 0 ^ ' _ ( e ) 0 POSITIVE • NEGATIVE W PRE POST PRE POST WINNING CANDIDATE LOSING CANDIDATE UNSHARED / CONFLICT CONDITION Figure L Mean percentage of pre - and postdiscussion recall of positive and negative information about the winning and losing candidate for each of the experimental conditions . 1476 GAROLD STASSER AND WILLIAM TITUS was conducted . Two three - way interactions are of primary interest : the Condition X Candidate X Time interaction , F ( l , 53 ) = 5 . 43 , p < . 01 , and the Candidate X Infor - mation Valence X Time interaction , / • " ( ! , 53 ) = 8 . 98 , p < . 01 . Post hoc analyses sug - gested that both of these three - way interac - tions are due primarily to three simple main effects of time . In the shared condition there is a significant decrease in the recall of neg - ative information about the winning candi - date , F ( \ , 53 ) = 12 . 05 , p < . 01 ( see Figure la ) . In contrast , there is a significant increase in the recall of positive information about the winning candidate in both the unshared / consensus and the unshared / conflict condi - tions , F ( l , 53 ) = 16 . 38 , p < . 01 , and F ( \ , 53 ) = 8 . 43 , p < . 01 , respectively ( see Figure Ic and le ) . All other simple main effects of time are not significant . Thus the results for the unshared conditions support the predictions of the biased sampling model . Effective information exchange during discussion should have resulted in a substan - tial gain of negative information about the winning candidate in these conditions because group members could give each other new information that opposed the winning can - didate . Clearly , discussion did not serve this corrective function but tended to increase the salience of information supporting the win - ning candidate even though members of most groups had been exposed to this information before discussion . The results for the shared condition are somewhat more puzzling although they are not necessarily inconsistent with the biased sampling model . It seems that when group members had received all of the information before discussion , the discussion maintained the salience of information favoring the ini - tially preferred ( and ultimately winning ) can - didate , whereas information opposing this candidate was less likely to be recalled after discussion . One interpretation of this finding is that giving members all of the information before discussion resulted in information overload . Discussion then served to reduce this overload by focusing on information that supported the initially popular candidate and ignoring other information . The net effect of this focus , coupled with information overload , would be to reduce the recall of nonsupport - ing information . Discussion Several theoretical perspectives emphasize the role of information exchange in guiding the emergence of a consensus and modifying members ' preferences during group discussion ( e . g . , Anderson & Graesser , 1976 ; Hoffman & Maier , 1964 ; Kaplan , 1977 ; Stasscr & Davis , 1981 ) . Burnstein and Vinokur ' s ( 1977 ) persuasive arguments theory suggests that shifts of preference are due to the number of persuasive and unique arguments that are introduced into discussion . Unique arguments are considered particularly instrumental in producing preference shifts . Viewed in this way , information that is unshared before discussion should be more likely than shared information to affect members ' preferences during discussion . However , Burnstein and Vinokur ( 1977 ) are primarily concerned with the group polarization phenomenon , and in their analysis they assumed that the prepon - derance of unshared arguments tends to favor the initially most popular position for tasks used in this research tradition . They thus concluded that unique arguments exchanged during discussion tend to bolster the initially popular sentiment within a group . We are primarily concerned with a situation in which the balance of unshared information opposes the initially most popular position . In this case , according to the biased sampling model , the unshared information will tend to be omitted from discussion and , therefore , will have little effect on members ' preferences during group discussion . Our results confirm this notion . Group decisions and postgroup preferences reflected the initial preferences of group members even when the exchange of unshared information should have resulted in substantial shifts of opinion . Furthermore , discussion did not increase the recall of un - shared information . On the contrary , discus - sion tended to increase the recall of infor - mation that supported the initially most pop - ular ( and ultimately winning ) candidate even though this information was primarily shared before discussion . The unshared conditions in this study sim - ulated a situation in which the quality of the group ' s decision was potentially better than the quality of its members ' pregroup choices . The pregroup choices were based on biased sets of information , but if members had UNSHARED INFORMATION AND GROUP DECISION MAKING 1477 effectively exchanged information during dis - cussion , the collective choice would have been based on less biased information . Extending Steiner ' s ( 1972 ) process - loss model of group productivity , Shiflett ( 1979 ) proposed a general model that analyzes group performance in terms of resources , trans - formers , and outputs . Resources include knowledge and abilities that are relevant to performing a task . Transformers are variables that mediate the ways in which member resources are combined or weighted to yield the group output ( e . g . , a solution to a problem , a judgment , or a decision ) . For our decision - making groups , the information in the can - didate profiles can be viewed as resources , and the collective choice of the best - qualified candidate as the group output . Transformers would include variables that affect the likeli - hood that information is introduced into discussion and thus is reflected in a group ' s decision . Shiflett ( 1979 ) also distinguished unique resources ( resources held by one member ) from redundant resources ( resources held by all members ) . In our case , unique resources are items of information unshared before discussion , and shared information constitutes redundant resources . We suggest that one criterion of group productivity in a judgmental task could be the extent to which unique resources are considered in a group ' s final judgment . Viewed in this way , the de - cisions of groups in the shared conditions are a standard against which to judge the decisions of groups in the unshared conditions . If unique and redundant informational re - sources were weighted equally , there should be no difference in the distributions of group decisions between the shared and unshared conditions . However , our results suggest that unique or unshared information had little impact on groups ' decisions . The biased sampling model of group dis - cussion identifies several possible mechanisms that may result in commonly held information receiving more weight than uniquely held information in a group ' s decision . One pos - sibility follows directly from Shiflett ' s ( 1979 ) distinction between unique and redundant resources : The more members there are who are exposed to an item of information , the more likely it is that at least one of them will recall and mention it during discussion . In Shiflett ' s ( 1979 ) words , " The fact that two or more individuals possess the same resource does not increase the total set of available resources but does increase the probability of that resource being used " ( p . 72 ) . Further - more , according to the biased sampling model , members ' initial preferences are a transformer variable in Shiflett ' s formulation . Initial preferences may mediate the contri - bution of information to discussion in either of two ways . First , members ' recall may be biased because preference - consistent infor - mation is more salient than preference - incon - sistent information . Second , members may tend to advocate or defend their initial pref - erence and thus bias their contributions to discussion even if their recall is not biased . In sum , initial preferences may act as trans - former variables by introducing selective recall or selective contribution of information dur - ing discussion . In many contexts , a desirable goal may be to increase the weight of uniquely held infor - mation in the determination of a group ' s judgment . One suspects that unshared infor - mation may often be just as important , or even more important , than commonly held information in arriving at a collective choice . For example , if a group is composed of members who have differing areas of exper - tise , consideration of unshared information may be very critical to the quality of the group ' s final decision . Similarly , groups whose members represent disparate points of view or special - interest populations may err by focusing on their shared perspectives and thereby negating any advantage that accrues from multiple sources of diverse input . Our results suggest that unstructured discussion in the face of a consensus requirement may often fail as a means of combining unique informational resources . Ironically , our anal - ysis also suggests that this failure to consider unique information is most likely when the unique information counters the prevailing sentiment in the group and could change its final decision . References Anderson , N . H . , & Graesser , C . ( 1976 ) . An information integration analysis of attitude change in group discus - sion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 34 , 210 - 222 . Burnstcin , E . , & Vinokur , A . ( 1977 ) . Persuasive argu - mentation and social comparison as determinants of 1478 GAROLD STASSER AND WILLIAM TITUS attitude polarization . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 13 , 315 - 332 . Davis , J . H . ( 1973 ) . Group decisions and social interaction : A theory of social decision schemes . Psychological Review , 80 , 97 - 125 . Fishbein , M . , & Ajzen , I . ( 1975 ) . Belief , attitude , intention and behavior : An introduction to theory and research . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Fisher , B . A . ( 1980 ) . Small group decision making : Communication and the group process ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Hoffman , L . R . , & Maier , N . R . F . ( 1964 ) . Valence in the adoption of solutions by problem - solving groups : Concept , method , and results . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 69 , 264 - 271 . Janis , I . L . ( i 972 ) . Victims ofgroupthink . Boston : Hough - ton Mifllin . Kaplan , M . F . ( 1977 ) . Discussion polarization effects in a modified jury paradigm : Informational influences . Sociometry , 40 . 261 - 271 . Laughlin , P . R . ( 1980 ) . Social combination processes of cooperative problem - solving groups on verbal intellec - tive tasks . In M . Fishbein ( Ed . ) , Progress in social psychology ( Vol . 1 , pp . 127 - 155 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erl - baum . laughlin , P . R . , & Earley , P . C . ( 1982 ) . Social combination models , persuasive arguments theory , social comparison theory , and choice shift . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 42 , 273 - 280 . Myers , D . G . , & Lamm , H . ( 1976 ) . The group polarization phenomenon . Psychological Bulletin , 83 , 602 - 627 . Myers , J . L . , DiCecco , J . V . , & Lorch , R . F . , Jr . ( 1981 ) . Group dynamics and individual performances : Pseu - dogroup and quasi - / 7 analyses . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 40 , 86 - 98 . Shiflett , S . C . ( 1979 ) . Toward a general model of small group productivity . Psychological Bulletin , 86 , 67 - 79 . Stasser , G . , & Davis , J . H . ( 1981 ) . Group decision making and social influence : A social interaction sequence model . Psychological Review . 88 , 523 - 551 . Stasser , G . , Kerr , N . L . , & Davis , J . H . ( 1980 ) . Influence processes in decision - making groups : A modeling ap - proach . In P . Paulus ( Ed - ) , Psychology oj group influence ( pp . 431 - 477 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Steiner , I . D . ( 1972 ) . Group process and productivity . New York : Academic Press . Received February 1 , 1984 Revision received July 6 , 1984