Extra - Ordinary Human – Machine Interaction : What can be Learned from People with Disabilities ? A . F . Newell and P . Gregor Department of Applied Computing , University of Dundee , Scotland Abstract : When specifying , designing and implementing technology for work , it is very important to consider the whole of the potential user group , and not to forget that this might include people with disabilities . Obvious reasons for this are demography , disabled people forming a signiﬁcant and growing proportion of the workforce , and legal obligations caused by equal opportunities legislation . There are more subtle reasons , however , which link so - called ‘disabled people’ with the rest of the population . The paper notes that most people have some disabilities , sometimes temporarily due to accident , or permanently due to ageing and other processes . In addition it notes that even otherwise fully functioning people can be seriously handicapped by hostile environments , and a parallel is drawn between the human interface needs of disabled people operating in ordinary situations and able - bodied people operating in high workload and stress situations . The paper concludes by suggesting a research agenda for the ﬁeld on the basis of these considerations . Keywords : Disability ; Human - machine interaction ; Ordinary & extra - ordinary interaction ; Technology for work ; Universal access 1 . DEMOGRAPHY OF THE HUMAN RACE The human race is extremely diverse in terms of physical , sensory and cognitive functionalities , as well as skills and abilities , education and cultural mores . There are obvious differences between children , adults and elderly people , and signiﬁcant differences exist between the different gender and racial groups . In addition , however , certain people are considered sufﬁciently far from the ‘norm’ to be classiﬁed as ‘disabled’ . Many such people , who are physically , senso - rially or cognitively impaired , are either in the workplace or , if appropriate modiﬁcations could be made to the environment , could partake in gainful employment . Demographic data concerning disabilities can vary because of the exact deﬁnitions used , but the data in Table 1 , from US and European sources ( UNESCO Statistical Yearbook , 1996 , at http : / / www . unesco . org / genera ; / emg / stats / index . html ) , provide useful guidelines . It can be seen that the numbers of people with disabilities are signiﬁcant and these ﬁgures are increasing . The World Bank estimates that , by the year 2000 , 20 % of the population in countries with market economies will be over 60 years of age , and many of these could still make a valuable contribution to the workforce . Improved medical care is also increasing the numbers of younger disabled people , who would beneﬁt from employment . People with disabilities are thus very diverse , and due to improved life expectancy and medical care there is likely to be an increase in both the severity and diversity of disabilities in the workplace . The report ‘Enabling America : Assessing the Role of Rehabilitation Science and Engineering’ , published by the National Academy Press ( 2101 Constitution Ave . , NW Box 285 Washington , DC 20055 ) comments that ‘The emerging ﬁeld of rehabilitation science and engineering could improve the lives of many of the 49 million Americans who have disabling conditions , and is ready to assume a prominent position in America’s health research agenda . ’ It points out that almost 10 million Americans ( about 4 % of the nation’s population ) have a disabling condition so severe that they are unable to carry out fundamental activities of life , such as attending school , working or providing for their own care . An additional 6 % are limited in their ability to engage in such activities , and another 4 % are limited in social , recreational or other pursuits . Medical expenditures for disabilities and the indirect costs from lost productivity exceed $ 300 billion each year , or more than 4 % of the gross domestic product . When considering Technology & Work , it is thus essential that the needs , wants and characteristics of those Cognition , Technology & Work ( 1999 ) 1 : 78 – 85 # 1999 Springer - Verlag London Limited C ognition T echnology & W ork with disabilities are considered as well as those of ‘ordinary people’ . In addition , however , a full understanding of this subject can lead to a much better understanding of how technology can be designed to be optimum for everyone in the workplace . 2 . TECHNOLOGY AND HUMAN DIVERSITY When designing or specifying technology for use in the work environment , it is important to be concerned with the characteristics of all potential users and this includes those with disabilities . Not all disabilities directly affect the choice of technology necessary to support the work environment , but visual , dexterity and intellectual impair - ments and dyslexia usually do . There is also growing evidence that age and gender have a signiﬁcant effect on the way people interact with technology , but this is not fully reﬂected in the current research agenda . Worden et al ( 1997 ) commented that ‘It is known that , as people age , their cognitive perceptual and motor abilities decline with negative effects on their ability to perform many tasks . Computers can play an increasingly important role in helping older adults function well in society . Despite this little research has focused on computer use of older adults . ’ Ben Shneiderman ( 1992 ) has made similar pleas , including the comment that ‘Just as environmental designers are adapting to the ageing of the population with larger street signs , brighter trafﬁc lights , and better night time lighting , so must computer designers create systems that will facilitate access by the elderly . ’ Muller et al ( 1997 ) commented that ‘The ﬁelds that together constitute Computer Human Interaction have maintained a long tradition of concern for access to computer systems by persons with disabilities . However , in practice , much of the ﬁeld’s progress in this area has been slow . More often than not the ﬁeld’s attention to this area has been an afterthought : Design and access has been based primarily on able - bodied populations rather than users who are disabled . ’ This is reﬂected in the papers presented at major conferences , where very few papers consider people with disabilities as potential users . A review of the papers in the proceedings of the previous few years of Computer – Human Interaction ( CHI ) confer - ences reveals that , in the vast majority of cases , what is meant by ‘people’ is not clearly deﬁned , and the diversity of the human race is more or less ignored . If there is any description of what the authors mean by ‘people’ it is usually given in terms of occupation , users being described in terms such as ‘school teacher’ , ‘doctor’ and ‘nurse’ . Very few of the papers give the detail provided by Grisedale et al ( 1997 ) , whose users were described as ‘female auxiliary Nurse Midwifes in Rural India , whose native language was Hindi’ . The paper helpfully included not only details of the activities of the user , and the cultural mores within which they worked , but also a brief description of a day in the life of the user . Hofmeester et al ( 1996 ) designed an interface speciﬁcally for women between 18 and 30 , but this was very unusual in deﬁning both the gender and age of the users . A small number of papers speciﬁed the users as children , and an even smaller number were concerned with elderly users . Very few papers described or appeared to take into account the physical and cognitive functionality of the user . Fukumoto and Tonomura ( 1997 ) , for example , considered right - and left - handedness , and Hinckley et al ( 1997 ) the differences caused by users being ‘expert users of musical keyboards’ . Other than those papers , however , little regard has been paid to the dexterity of users . It is not without signiﬁcance that researchers who did consider the needs of users with disabilities often showed a better developed sense of the diversity of the potential user group . Ogozalec ( 1997 ) , for example , pointed out that , if current trends continue in the USA , by 2030 one - ﬁfth of the population will be over 65 years of age and comments that ‘It is difﬁcult to categorise and draw conclusions about ‘‘the elderly’’ since they comprise such a diverse and heterogeneous population . ’ This diversity applies to all people and there are signiﬁcant advantages to be derived from researchers taking this into account . The importance of research and development taking into account the full diversity of the potential user population was addressed by Newell in his keynote address to InterCHI ’93 , where the concept of ‘Ordinary and Extra - Ordinary Human Computer Interaction’ was developed . ( Newell 1993 , 1995 ; Newell and Cairns 1993 ; Newell and Gregor 1997 ) . Market share is clearly an important consideration and this has been given impetus , not only Table 1 . Disability and demographic statistics USA ﬁgures : Illiteracy Blind and low vision Deaf and hard of hearing 65 and over 3 % 3 % 8 % 13 % European ﬁgures : Blind Low vision Speech Language Deaf Hard of hearing Dextrous Mobility Intellect Dyslexia Over 65 0 . 2 % 2 . 0 % 0 . 4 % 0 . 9 % 0 . 2 % 14 . 9 % 6 . 5 % 8 . 9 % 5 . 6 % 4 . 7 % 14 . 8 % These numbers sometimes cover the same person . Extra - Ordinary Human – Machine Interaction 79 by demographic trends but also by recent legislation in the USA and other countries , on accessibility of computer systems for people with disabilities . In terms of the workplace , both the Americans with Disabilities Act and the ( UK ) Disability Discrimination Act put signiﬁcant requirements on employers to ensure that people with disabilities are able to be employed within companies and to provide appropriate technology so that such employees have full access to the equipment and information necessary for their employment . Increasingly there is political pressure to increase this access , and more and more requirements for improved access by disabled people are being enshrined in legislation . It should be remem - bered , however , that ‘access’ does not just mean that people with wheelchairs can manoeuvre round buildings ; it also means that there needs to be provision for people with manual , sensory and cognitive disabilities to be able to operate computers and other equipment which is essential to the workplace . There is some evidence that awareness of people with disabilities is rising within the computer industry . IBM has had a long commitment to assisting people with disabilities , but , more recently , other major manufacturers such as Sun and Microsoft have introduced ‘accessibility’ programs . Microsoft Corp . has introduced ‘Active Accessibility’ , which enables applications to include accessibility aids such as screen magniﬁers , voice boxes and keyboard shortcuts . In addition , to encourage developers to design their applications for use by people who are blind , deaf or mobility - impaired , they now require vendors who partici - pate in the Windows NT and Windows 95 logo program to meet certain accessibility design requirements , and have made available a software developer’s kit ( see Microsoft accessibility material at http : / / www . microsoft . com / enable / ) . Sun Microsystems related this change directly to their work for people with disabilities when they announced their Enabling Technologies Program , with the comment that it is ‘driven by the belief that design to meet the needs of users with disabilities can improve the productivity of ALL users’ ( see Sun accessibility material at http : / / www . sun . - com / tech / access ) . Legislation is forcing employers to provide more accessible workplaces for people with disabilities , but this can be seen as very expensive and having only a very limited pay - back . With the exception of wheelchair access to some older buildings , however , appropriate technical provision for most people with disabilities does not require a great deal of extra expenditure , particularly if set against the normal running costs of provision of support for an able - bodied employee . The provision of information technology which is accessible to people with disabilities in particular need not be expensive , particularly if accessibility is considered at an early stage of the design , rather than as an add - on extra . An example of this is found in web page design . Guidelines are being developed for accessible web pages ( www . w3 . org ) and further details of guidelines for web design , accessible computer - aided learning material , and other information related to disability and information systems can be found on the UK DISinHE web site ( www . disinhe . ac . uk ) . In these ﬁelds , as in most software design situations , it can be clearly shown that it is relatively easy to produce designs which incorporate accessibility options , but it can be very difﬁcult to take a ﬁnished software product and make it accessible . An important additional factor in the value for money equation is that design which takes into account the needs of people with disabilities can produce better design for everyone . The cassette tape recorder is probably the most ubiquitous example of this effect . The English company which was producing talking books for the blind were concerned that their customers found it very difﬁcult to operate reel - to - reel tape recorders , and they thus invented the ﬁrst manifestation of the cassette tape recorder . It proved very successful for blind users , but at the time engineers claimed that it would not become generally popular because of the poorer quality of the sound . It is interesting to note the low priority which was given to ease of use in those days . More recent examples of the problems that the majority of users have had with video tape recorders , however , indicate that many engineers still do not put ease of use very high in their priorities , although advertisements for domestic goods are increas - ingly highlighting ease of use as an important selling point . There are many other examples which also relate directly to human – machine interfaces ( Newell , 1993 ) . These include the typewriter , which was originally devel - oped in 1880 to enable the blind Countess Carolina Fantoni da Fivizzono to write legibly , and television captions for deaf people which were found to help normally hearing people in a number of ways : enabling them , for example , to enjoy a programme without disturbing others in the room , in a noisy environment , and to watch a programme in two languages ( S . Jacobs , NCR , personal communication , 1997 ) . It is also signiﬁcant that predictive and adaptive interfaces to computer systems were being developed for people with disabilities in the late 1960s , whereas their use in software packages designed for non - disabled people is a much more recent innovation . More recently , web pages which have been designed to be read by people with poor eyesight or literacy skills are often easier for everyone to read . Web pages which have been made accessible to blind people by replacing graphics with text , which can be converted into synthesised speech , are also usually accessible to a wider range of web browsers , and download very much faster than those pages with more , and more complex , graphics than are necessary to convey the information on the page . A . F . Newell and P . Gregor 80 3 . WHAT ARE THE CHARACTERISTICS OF A ‘DISABLED PERSON’ ? Although statistics such as those in Table 1 are useful as an indication of prevalence of disability , they are very dependent upon deﬁnitions . There is clearly no such thing as an average person , but societies have some concept of how far it is necessary to be away from a hypothetical average to constitute having a ‘disability’ , and in many countries one can be registered as a ‘person with disabilities’ on the basis of certain measures of functional character - istics . The term ‘disabled’ , however , can be very emotive so that , for example , many people with relatively severe hearing loss do not consider themselves to be disabled . Similarly people who have a visual impairment which can be corrected by spectacles are not considered disabled , even if without their spectacles their functional eyesight may be as poor as someone who clearly is ‘visually disabled’ . The normal reduction in speed of motor response , mental agility , memory or stamina which occurs naturally with ageing ( Worden et al 1997 ) is not considered to be a disability , but the functional abilities of a 20 - year - old employee will nevertheless be substantially different by the time he or she is 60 years old . Employees may also become suddenly temporarily or permanently disabled by accident , or even by normal functioning within their employment , and permanent dysfunction caused by technology is leading to increasing litigation . A great deal has been known for some time , for example , about the effects of exposure to loud noise , and vibration white ﬁnger , but the use of keyboards and associated input devices is increasingly being blamed for long - term or permanent dysfunctions such as repetitive strain injury ( RSI ) . Evidence is beginning to emerge that the use of mice has a part to play in injuries of this kind and there is also the possibility that voice disorders can be caused by overuse of speech input devices . In addition , however , the functional characteristics of people can change signiﬁcantly over very short timescales . This is particularly noticeable in cognitive functioning : short - term changes in cognitive ability occur with all employees during their working day caused by fatigue , noise levels , blood sugar ﬂuctuations , stress or a combination of such factors . Alcohol and drugs can also induce serious changes in cognitive and physical functioning , but hopefully not often in the workplace . Thus most employees , at one time or another , will exhibit functional characteristics which are signiﬁcantly outside the normal range . Although neither they , nor their employers , would consider these people disabled , their ability to operate standard equipment may well be signiﬁcantly reduced . Thus questions which designers need to consider include : . Does the equipment which I provide comply with the legislation concerning use by disabled employers ? . To what extent do designers need to take into account the needs of employees who are not considered ‘disabled’ , but have signiﬁcant temporary or permanent dysfunction , and should features be available in equip - ment design to allow employees to return to work as soon as possible after an accident ? ( For example , design for effective and efﬁcient one - handed operation of equipment would enable a hand - or arm - injured employee to return to effective working more quickly than if they had to use standard equip - ment . ) . Should designers make speciﬁc accommodation for the known reductions in abilities which occur as employees get older ? ( For example , larger or clearer displays , louder sound output , pointing devices which cope with slight tremor , less requirement for short - term memory , or the need to learn new operating procedures . ) . What are the speciﬁc obligations designers and employ - ers have to provide systems which can be operated by employees who have been disabled by the technology they have had to use ? ( For example , the effects of RSI . ) . Is it reasonable for system designers to assume that equipment will always be used by someone in full possession of their faculties and , if not , how should this be taken into account when designing technology for the workplace ? ( For example , should it be possible to vary the level of awareness of speed of response required to cope with periods of fatigue ? ) The argument is thus that it would be unusual for anyone to go through their working life without at some stage , or many stages , being signiﬁcantly disabled . If equipment designers took this into account , it is probable that the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the workforce could be maintained at a higher level than would be the case if the design of the equipment was based on an idealistic model of the characteristics of the user . 4 . THE DISABLING ENVIRONMENT In addition to the user having characteristics which can be considered ‘disabled’ , however , it is also possible for employees to be disabled by the environments within which they have to operate . Newell and Cairns ( 1993 ) made the point that the human – machine interaction problems of an able - bodied ( ordinary ) person operating in an high - workload , high - stress or extreme ( i . e . , extra - ordinary ) environment had very close parallels with a Extra - Ordinary Human – Machine Interaction 81 disabled ( ‘extra - ordinary’ ) person , operating in an ‘ordinary’ situation ( e . g . , an ofﬁce ) . For example , a noisy environment creates a similar situation to hearing or speech impairment , and commu - nication systems which are designed for deaf or speech - impaired people ( Newell et al 1995 ) may be appropriate for use in these environments . There is a very great range of jobs where the noise level is very high , and a wider understanding of the permanent effects of this on long - term hearing has caused a wider use of hearing protectors . This protects the workforce from long - term damage , but also makes them less sensitive to acoustic signals . Sometimes the workforce create their own solutions . For example , in the jute mills of Dundee an informal sign language developed to cope with the high level of noise ; however , it might have been more effective if employers in the jute industry had realised that they were effectively creating a deaf community , and therefore taught their workforce a sign language system . The effects of darkness or smoke are similar to visual impairment , and the possibility of using technology designed to provide access for people with visual impair - ments should be considered in such situations . Computer access technology for blind and visually impaired people has tended to have a higher priority than other access technologies ( Newell 1998a , 1998b ) , and thus there is a relatively wide range of possible techniques of coping with lack of visual contact with computer screens , including products from both Microsoft and Sun and many products from specialised manufacturers . Such techniques could be a valuable addition to a workplace where darkness and / or smoke were a permanent feature . System designers need also to consider the effects of emergencies . How do plant room operators or pilots cope when their workplace is full of smoke ? Should they be provided with alternative non - visual ways of obtaining essential information from their instruments , and , if so , what is the most effective and efﬁcient way of providing this ? Many industrial situations require the wearing of protective clothing which reduces sensory input as well as manual dexterity . This obviously applies to ﬁremen and other emergency services , as well as people who have to operate under water . Norwegian Telecom developed a large - key telephone keyboard speciﬁcally for people with poor manual dexterity , but found that it was very useful in outdoor locations where users tended to wear gloves . An extreme example is when people have to operate in space . Engineers who try to repair space stations , although apparently healthy individuals at the peak of their physical and mental ﬁtness , are effectively extremely disabled . Not only are they visually and auditorily disabled owing to the space suits , but the manual dexterity is extremely curtailed , and the stress and fatigue caused by working within such environments means that their performance is similar to that which could be achieved by a very disabled person operating in a more normal environment . It is not always clear that the equipment they have to operate has been designed with this view of the user in mind . Situations where people are using standard equipment , but not in standard locations , effectively disable the user . If a laptop or palmtop computer has to be operated while the user is standing and cannot rest the system on a ledge , then effectively the user is one - handed . Special keyboards have been designed for one - handed use by people with disabilities , and some access software has ‘sticky keys’ so that two keys do not have to be pressed at the same time , but these solutions are seldom offered to mainstream users . Similarly , word prediction software developed for people with poor manual dexterity can be useful for single - ﬁngered typing , or for situations where long , complex words have to be entered into systems ( Alm et al 1992 ) . Such software has also been found particularly beneﬁcial for people who have poor spelling and dyslexia of the type which is too extreme for standard spelling checkers to be effective , but again this is rarely found within mainstream software ( Newell et al 1992 ) . A major effect of environment is on the cognitive functioning of human beings . High workloads , and the stress levels to which this can lead , often reduce the cognitive performance of the human operator . A fairly extreme case is the dealing room of ﬁnancial houses , where the stress level is very high and is often accompanied by high noise levels . A signiﬁcant advance may be made if the software which was to be used in these houses were to be designed on the assumption that the users would be hearing - impaired and have a relatively low cognitive performance . It is interesting to speculate as to whether such systems would produce higher productivity , better decision making and less stress on the operators . 5 . ORDINARY AND EXTRA - ORDINARY HUMAN – MACHINE INTERACTION AND SYSTEM DESIGNERS There are a number of ways in which the concept of ordinary and extra - ordinary human – machine interaction can illuminate our research and development of technology to support the working environment . For many situations , the bandwidth of the information channels between the machine and the user is more than adequate , but in certain cases it can be the dominating factor in constraining the performance of the human – machine system . For example , the pilots of high - performance low - ﬂying aircraft are restricted in the amount of information they can receive from the plane’s systems , and there are certain situations in which their ﬂying would be improved if they could send more control signals to the aircraft . A similar situation may occur in a ﬁnancial dealing room where the dealers cannot A . F . Newell and P . Gregor 82 see enough data concerning the movements of the markets , and it would be preferable if they could conduct deals more quickly , rather than being constrained by the rate at which they can interact with either their machines or other dealers . Other situations where this applies include emergency situations in a complex power or chemical plant . In human – machine bandwidth terms these situations are identical to the problems of visually and dextrously impaired word processor operators who are constrained because they can only ‘see’ a small number of words at any one time , and they cannot type fast enough to be an efﬁcient user of the system . Recognising that this parallel exists can lead to new interface ideas . For example , the predictive and adaptive interfaces which have been used for many years by engineers developing systems for disabled people have been shown to apply equally to environments where there are skilled non - disabled operators , and ‘ARCHIE’ , a joint industry / university European funded project , showed that a central core software system was equally applicable to a disabled ofﬁce worker as to the pilot of an aircraft and an air trafﬁc controller ( Devnani et al 1993 ) . 6 . DESIGN MODELS AND USER - CENTRED DESIGN User - centred design encourages designers to get to know their users and their particular characteristics ( Preece 1993 ) . Although the use of user - centred design techniques is becoming more widespread and texts on usability engineering are popular ( e . g . , Nielsen 1993 ; Lindgaard 1994 ) , it can be difﬁcult to persuade engineers that the potential users of the equipment have very different characteristics to those of themselves and their colleagues . This was highlighted by Negroponte ( 1997 ) in a recent speech : ‘Microsoft and Apple have paid no attention whatsoever to the ease of use for the man in the street . It has been literally one geek making a computer program for another geek . Nobody’s been making stuff for the man in the street . ’ There is certainly some business software which can be threatening to many of the people who have to use it , and seems to have been designed as toys to play with by people who are obsessed by technology , rather than tools to use by people who only want to get the job done . Telling designers that some of their users may be disabled can encourage user - centred design because the designers then ‘know’ that the users are very dissimilar to themselves . Thus it would be helpful formally to specify to designers , before they begin their design , that some of the potential users of their systems will have various disabilities and demand that they ﬁnd out what are the characteristics and functionality of their users ( including those with disabilities ) , and how these can vary with time and circumstances . Many of the systems which people are expected to use in the workplace are a triumph of functionality over usability . Designers tend to believe that the more functionality a system has , the better it will be appreciated . This is often not the case , and excessive functionality can make it more difﬁcult to learn and operate the limited amount of functionality which is actually needed for a speciﬁc job . Severely disabled people can ﬁnd it very difﬁcult to achieve even the simplest tasks , and thus such people have a keener sense of what functionality is important . Again , telling the designer that some potential users are disabled , and thus only want the minimum functionality , may encourage them to prioritise the features of a system in a way which they would not if they assumed that all their users were able - bodied and thus found everything easy to do . 7 . USING THE SPECIAL SKILLS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES People with disabilities often develop special skills to enable them to operate successfully and this can be a major contribution to their success in the workplace . Many of these people are experts at coping with the sorts of situations which only occur in emergency situations for able - bodied operators . Such knowledge is potentially very useful for a wide range of research and application areas . Many blind people , for example , have a deep understanding of the auditory environment , and have developed ways of operating with non - visual information . The question could be asked and experiments conducted on what techniques a visually impaired person would use to cope with particular environments . Similar experiments could be conducted with hearing - impaired people with respect to noisy environments , and people with less cognitive function than real potential users could help to assess human – machine interfaces which may have to be used in environments where high stress may occur . An additional consideration is that much of our knowledge of the functioning of the human being is based on medical researchers obtaining information from extremes , or from situations where there has been a breakdown . The same methodology could be used in research into the interface between technology and users . A person who cannot use a piece of equipment because of some disability – physical , sensory or cognitive – can provide researchers with valuable information about what are the major problems with the system , and experiments with such users can suggest ways and means of improving the overall system so that all users can operate the equipment more effectively and efﬁciently . It is ironic that much standard human – computer technology actually assumes a severely disabled operator . The operation of a standard personal computer only requires hand and wrist movement , tunnel vision and Extra - Ordinary Human – Machine Interaction 83 residual hearing . No other input / output abilities are required . Even a straightforward human interface like that of a motor car requires at least one foot , arm movements , and much greater visual acuity and ﬁeld of view than that presented by a computer screen . Video conferencing provides a sensory input similar to that which would be achieved by a person with tunnel vision and a hearing impairment . Email is a very effective communication mechanism , but it makes no use of the speech or hearing capabilities of the users . An understanding of the commu - nication problems of those with visual , speech and hearing dysfunction can give designers useful clues about how to improve the use of both technologies , and what extra functionality is needed to cope with the technologically induced dysfunction in the users . 8 . A RESEARCH AGENDA TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE DIVERSITY OF PEOPLE In order to design and specify better technology for the workplace interfaces , it is important to realise fully the diversity of the human population . It is no longer adequate to talk about users as ‘people’ , with the implication that this gives a sufﬁcient description of their characteristics . Including people with obvious disabilities makes this point very forcefully , and should also lead to designers considering less diverse cases as different and to which it is worth giving attention . Mainstream engineers can learn about such techniques via a number of conferences which are speciﬁcally focused on the needs of people with disabilities . These include ASSETS , the International ACM / SIGCAPH Conference on Assistive Technologies sponsored by the ACM’s Special Interest Group on Computers and the Physically Handicapped . In Europe the TIDE and ICCHP conferences both address these issues , but , as Newell ( 1998a , 1998b ) pointed out , the range of papers in these conferences does not reﬂect demographic statistics , and some important areas of not well represented . An awareness of the needs of people with disabilities is growing , and , within the USA , this has been particularly in relationship to access to information via the National Information Infrastructure . The National Science Founda - tion has mounted two workshops with the themes of ‘Every citizen interfaces to the national information infrastructure : towards an every - citizen interface to the national informa - tion infrastructure’ ( Biermann 1997 ) and ‘Expanded interactions : broadening the notion of human - centered computing’ ( NSF Workshop , University of Delaware , 21 – 23 May 1997 ; a report of this workshop is to be published by the National Academy Press ) . These workshops laid out a research strategy for the Science and Engineering Community in the USA . The themes included were : . Creative interfaces capable of understanding the full spectrum of user diversity in motivation and interests , abilities , knowledge and experiences . . Understanding and representing user diversity . What really are the functional characteristics of all potential users ? . Common dimensions on which users can be classiﬁed ( e . g . , perceptual and motor abilities , educational , cog - nitive maturation , literacy ) . . Dynamic ( rather than static ) characterisation of users . . Flexible interfaces and universal design . . The development of technology that adapts to the user’s requirements rather than the user having to adapt to the technology , including self - adapting and - learning inter - faces and interfaces which predict user behaviour . . What kind of information is each modality more suited to expressing , and can / should / how do we perform effect - ive inter - modality transformation ? . How do people with disabilities ( particularly sensory ones ) perceive particular types of information ? . How can we present information in different modalities without changing its meaning ( e . g . , subtitles ) ? . How do we translate information across modalities ? . How best do we present information most effectively to people with disabilities in the various modalities ( e . g . , slow / fast speech ) and what does this tell us about improving our presentational techniques for ordinary people ? . Universal representations of data to give appropriate ‘hooks’ for those situations where one modality is not appropriate ( e . g . , auditory versions of icons and pictures , when the users are visually impaired or their eyes are busy ) . . How to design interfaces which do not require good memory and language abilities . . How to design cognitive prostheses – this is an immensely difﬁcult problem , and one for which there is a very great need . As the world gets more complex , and more reliant on vast amounts of data , we will all need good cognitive prostheses , not just the elderly . The research agenda of the NSF workshops could be part of the agenda of any researcher interested in Cognition , Technology & Work . It is interesting , however , that this agenda arose out of discussions about how to provide universal access , rather than how to improve current human – machine interface design . 9 . CONCLUSIONS True universal access is a radical concept , which is difﬁcult to achieve and is different and alien to most interface A . F . Newell and P . Gregor 84 designers . It can provide a real challenge to them and encourage them to strive to produce really novel systems which could well provide substantial improvements over current technology in the workplace . This paper recom - mends that researchers in this ﬁeld , who have not yet done so , expand their research agenda to include all potential users , able - bodied ones , disabled ones , and those who are temporarily or permanently disabled by the environment in which they have to work . Such an approach has the potential of providing a new and radical approach to the ﬁeld , leading to a greater understanding of the human – machine system , the bottlenecks within it , and ideas about how to solve or circumvent them . References Alm N , Arnott JL , Newell AF ( 1992 ) . Prediction and conversational momentum in an augmentative communication system . Communica - tions of the ACM 2 ; 35 ( 5 ) : 46 – 57 Beirmann AW ( 1997 ) . More than screen deep : towards an every - citizen interface to the national information infrastructure . Computer Science and Telecommunications Board , National Research Council , National Academy Press , Washington , DC Devnani N , Cobley AE , Cairns AY et al ( 1993 ) . A reliable computer - —human interaction environment ( ARCHIE ) In Proceedings of the fourth international conference on human— - machine interaction and artiﬁcial intelligence in aerospace ( HMI—AI—AS ’93 ) , Toulouse , France , 28 - —30 September 1993 . European Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Engineering , pp 93 - —95 Fukumoto M , Tonomura Y ( 1997 ) . Body coupled FingeRing Wireless Wearable Keyboard . In Proceedings of CHI ’97 , Atlanta , GA . ACM Press , New York , pp 147 – 154 Grisedale S , Graves M , Grunsteidl A ( 1997 ) . Designing a graphical user interface for healthcare workers in rural India . In Proceedings of CHI ’97 , Atlanta , GA . ACM Press , New York , pp 471 – 478 Hinckley K , Pausch R , Profﬁtt D , Patten J , Kassel N ( 1997 ) . Cooperative bimanual action . In Proceedings of CHI ’97 , Atlanta , GA . ACM Press , New York , pp 27 – 34 Hofmeester GH , Kemp JAM , Blankendaal ACM ( 1996 ) . Sensuality in product design : a structured approach . In Proceedings of CHI ’96 , Vancouver , BC . ACM Press , New York , pp 428 – 435 Lindgaard G ( 1994 ) . Usability testing and system evaluation . Chapman & Hall , London Muller MJ , Wharton C , McIver WJ , Laux L ( 1997 ) . Toward an HCI research and practice agenda based on human needs and social responsibility . In Proceedings of CHI ’97 , Atlanta , GA . ACM Press , New York , pp 155 – 161 Negroponte N ( 1997 ) . Interactive learning conference , Heriot Watt University , Edinburgh ( reported in The Scotsman newspaper , 27 August 1997 ) Newell AF ( 1993 ) . Interfaces for the ordinary and beyond . IEEE Software 10 ( 5 ) : 76 – 78 Newell AF ( 1995 ) . Extra - ordinary human computer operation . In Edwards ADN ( ed ) . Extra - ordinary human – computer interaction : interfaces for users with disabilities . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , pp 3 – 18 Newell AF ( 1998a ) . Assistive technology : the older people’s perspective . Keynote speech in Proceedings of 3rd TIDE congress : improving the quality of life for the European citizen , 4 June 1998 , pp xlviii – liii Newell AF ( 1998b ) . Universal support , opportunities and challenges . Keynote speech in ICCHP ’98 Proceeding of XV IFIP world computer conference and 6th international conference on computers helping people with special needs , Vienna / Budapest , 31 August – 4 September 1998 Newell AF , Cairns AY ( 1993 ) . Designing for extra - ordinary users . Ergonomics in Design Oct : 10 – 16 Newell AF , Gregor P ( 1997 ) . Human computer interfaces for people with disabilities . In Helander M , Landauer TK , Prabhu P ( eds ) . Handbook of human – computer interaction . Elsevier , Amsterdam , pp 813 – 824 Newell AF , Booth L , Arnott JL , Beattie W ( 1992 ) . Increasing literacy levels through the use of linguistic prediction . Child Language Teaching and Therapy 8 ( 2 ) : 138 – 187 Newell AF , Arnott JL , Cairns AY , Ricketts IW , Gregor P ( 1995 ) . Intelligent systems for speech and language impaired people : a portfolio of research . In Edwards ADN ( ed ) . Extra—ordinary human - —computer interaction : interfaces for users with disabilities . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , pp 83 – 102 Nielsen J . ( 1993 ) . Usability engineering . AP Professional , Cambridge , MA Ogozalec VZ ( 1997 ) . A comparison of the use of text and multimedia interfaces to provide information to the elderly . In Proceedings of CHI ’97 , Atlanta , GA . ACM Press , New York , pp 65 – 71 Preece J ( 1993 ) . A guide to usability : human factors in computing . Addison - Wesley / Open University , Wokingham , England , p 42 Shneiderman B ( 1992 ) . Designing the user interface : strategies for effective human – computer interaction . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA Worden A , Walker N , Bharat K , Hudson S ( 1997 ) . Making computers easier for older adults to use . In Proceedings of CHI ’97 , Atlanta , GA . ACM Press , New York , pp 266 – 271 Correspondence and offprint requests to : A . F . Newell , Department of Applied Computing , University of Dundee , Scotland DD1 4HN . Telephone + 44 1382 344144 ; Fax + 44 1382 345509 ; email afn @ compu - ting . dundee . ac . uk or pgregor @ computing . dundee . ac . uk Extra - Ordinary Human – Machine Interaction 85