Neuron Review Reactive Gliosis and the Multicellular Response to CNS Damage and Disease Joshua E . Burda 1 and Michael V . Sofroniew 1 , * 1 Department of Neurobiology and Brain Research Institute , University of California Los Angeles , Los Angeles , CA 90095 - 1763 , USA * Correspondence : sofroniew @ mednet . ucla . edu http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2013 . 12 . 034 The CNS is prone to heterogeneous insults of diverse etiologies that elicit multifaceted responses . Acute and focal injuries trigger wound repair with tissue replacement . Diffuse and chronic diseases provoke gradually escalating tissue changes . The responses to CNS insults involve complex interactions among cells of numerous lineages and functions , including CNS intrinsic neural cells , CNS intrinsic nonneural cells , and CNS extrinsic cells that enter from the circulation . The contributions of diverse nonneuronal cell types to outcome after acute injury , or to the progression of chronic disease , are of increasing interest as the push toward understanding and ameliorating CNS afﬂictions accelerates . In some cases , considerable information is available , in others , comparatively little , as examined and reviewed here . Introduction A major goal of contemporary neuroscience is to understand and ameliorate a wide range of CNS disorders . Toward this end , there is increasing interest in cellular and molecular mechanisms of CNS responses to damage , disease , and repair . Neurons are the principal cells executing neural functions and have long dominated investigations into mechanisms underlying CNS dis - orders . Nevertheless , mounting evidence indicates that treating all types of CNS disorders will require a deeper understanding of how multicellular responses to injury and disease are triggered , evolve , resolve ( or not ) , and impact on neuronal function . The ability to repair tissue damaged by injury is fundamental to vertebrate biology and central to survival . Evolutionary pressure is likely to have forged certain fundamental cellular and molecu - lar responses to damage that are common across different tis - sues . The wound or injury response in skin has long served as a model system for dissecting mechanisms of tissue repair after acute focal tissue damage and has provided insight into core cellular and molecular interactions ( Greaves et al . , 2013 ; Gurtner et al . , 2008 ; Singer and Clark , 1999 ) . In addition , organ - speciﬁc features exist . Organ - intrinsic cells that are specialized in inﬂam - matory regulation and tissue repair are emerging as critical elements in organ - speciﬁc responses to insults . Organ - speciﬁc features apply particularly in the CNS , where glial cells , which maintain the cytoarchitecture and homeostatic regulation without which neurons could not function normally in healthy tis - sue , are also principal responders to CNS insults . Changes in glial cell function during responses to insults have the potential to impact markedly on neuronal interactions and CNS functions . CNS insults are caused by diverse etiologies that can elicit a wide range of responses . For example , acute and focal injuries trigger wound repair with tissue replacement , whereas diffuse and chronic diseases can trigger gradually escalating tissue changes . Analysis of similarities and differences in such re - sponses can provide valuable insights . Cellular responses to CNS insults involve complex interactions among cells of numerous lineages and functions , including CNS intrinsic neural cells , CNS intrinsic nonneural cells , and CNS extrinsic cells that enter from the circulation . The biology of cell types that partici - pate in CNS responses to injury and disease models has gener - ally been studied in isolation . There is increasing need to study interplay of different cells to understand mechanisms . This Re - view examines and reviews the multiple cell types involved in , and contributing to , different types of CNS insults . In some cases , extensive information is available , in others , compara - tively little . Terminology Various terms used in discussions of CNS injury and disease can be subject to different interpretations . In this Review , we will deﬁne and use certain speciﬁc terms as follows . ‘‘Reactive gliosis’’ will refer not only to microglia and astroglia , but also to glial cells that have come to be known as NG2 - positive oligoden - drocyte progenitor cells ( NG2 - OPCs ) . Glial cells in healthy CNS tissue will not be referred to as ‘‘resting’’ or ‘‘quiescent . ’’ This is an antiquated concept . Glia are highly active in healthy CNS and dynamically exert complex functions that play critical roles in normal CNS functions ( Barres , 2008 ; Sofroniew and Vinters , 2010 ) . For example , astrocytes exhibit physiological activation in the form of transient , ligand - evoked elevations in intracellular calcium ( [ Ca 2 + ] i ) that represent a type of astrocyte excitability , which is under intense investigation as a potential means of mediating dynamic astrocyte functions , including interactions with synapses and regulation of blood ﬂow ( Attwell et al . , 2010 ; Halassa and Haydon , 2010 ; Tong et al . , 2013 ; Verkhratsky et al . , 1998 ) . Microglia perform essential roles in synapse devel - opment and turnover ( Stephan et al . , 2012 ; Stevens et al . , 2007 ) . The term ‘‘activated’’ is often used in a binary all - or - none fashion to deﬁne glial cells that have responded to insults . We feel that use of the term in this manner is inaccurate in two ways . First , it does not recognize that glia are continually being ‘‘activated’’ in physiological contexts . Second , as discussed throughout this Review , glial cell responses to CNS insults are not binary and are highly diverse and speciﬁcally regulated . To differentiate physiological activation of glial cells in healthy contexts from re - sponses associated with injury or disease , we will use the term ‘‘reactive , ’’ which is also meant denote a broad spectrum of Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 229 potential responses of glial cells to CNS insults . Lastly , we will avoid use of the term ‘‘scar’’ on its own and will instead distin - guish between ‘‘astrocyte scars’’ that form compact borders around tissue lesions and ‘‘ﬁbrotic scars’’ that are formed by multiple nonneural cell types and extracellular matrix within lesion cores ( as discussed in detail below ) . We will equate ‘‘glial scar’’ with ‘‘astrocyte scar . ’’ Multicellular Response to CNS Insults Before discussing the different types of responses to CNS dam - age and disease , it is useful brieﬂy to introduce different cell types involved in these responses . For ease of consideration , we have grouped cells according to lineages as ( 1 ) neural and nonneural cells intrinsic to CNS and ( 2 ) blood - borne nonneural cells that derive primarily from bone marrow ( Table 1 ) . Some of these cell types have been studied extensively in CNS disorders , others comparatively little . Most often they have been studied in isolation . In subsequent sections , we will endeavor to examine their interactions . CNS Intrinsic Neural Cells The principal neural - lineage cells in the CNS , neurons , oligoden - drocytes and astrocytes , have been studied and reviewed exten - sively as regards their individual responses to CNS injury and disease ( Barres , 2008 ; Franklin and Ffrench - Constant , 2008 ; Mattson , 2000 ; Sofroniew and Vinters , 2010 ) . Less well studied are glial cells that have come to be known as NG2 - positive oligo - dendrocyte progenitor cells ( NG2 - OPCs ) . Like other glia , NG2 - OPC tile the CNS and respond to CNS insults ( Nishiyama et al . , 2009 ) . Features of the NG2 - OPC response include migra - tion toward injury and cell proliferation ( Franklin and Ffrench - Constant , 2008 ; Hughes et al . , 2013 ) . Besides replacing lost oligodendrocytes ( Sun et al . , 2010 ) , other roles of NG2 - OPC in CNS injury and disease await future study and elucidation . In addition , the adult CNS harbors neural stem cells ( NSCs ) of different potencies that reside in the periependymal regions along the ventricles and central canal in adult brain and spinal cord ( Garcia et al . , 2004 ; Kriegstein and Alvarez - Buylla , 2009 ) . These adult NSCs can also respond to CNS injury and generate progenitors and cells of different types that migrate to sites of injury ( Benner et al . , 2013 ; Lagace , 2012 ; Meletis et al . , 2008 ; Ohab and Carmichael , 2008 ) . CNS Intrinsic Nonneural Cells Various nonneural - lineage cells intrinsic to CNS play critical roles in CNS damage and disease ( Table 1 ) . Microglia are well docu - mented as highly sensitive early responders that stimulate and recruit other cells , as well phagocytose debris ( Hanisch and Kettenmann , 2007 ; Kreutzberg , 1996 ; Nimmerjahn et al . , 2005 ; Ransohoff and Perry , 2009 ) . Fibroblast - related cells , including perivascular ﬁbroblasts , meningeal ﬁbroblasts , and pericytes , contribute to tissue replacement by forming ﬁbrotic scar tissue after severe damage ( Go¨ritz et al . , 2011 ; Klapka and Mu¨ller , 2006 ; Logan and Berry , 2002 ; Soderblom et al . , 2013 ; Winkler et al . , 2011 ) . Endothelia and endothelial progenitors are promi - nent during tissue replacement after CNS injury ( Loy et al . , 2002 ; Oudega , 2012 ) and are of increasing interest in CNS repair in light of their emerging roles as trophic support cells in CNS development ( Dugas et al . , 2008 ) and their ability to produce and present laminin ( Davis and Senger , 2005 ) , a preferred growth substrate for many migrating cells and axons . Blood - Borne Nonneural Cells Blood - borne immune and inﬂammatory cells of different kinds ( Table 1 ) play prominent roles in CNS responses to damage and disease and have been studied and reviewed ( Perry , 2010 ; Popovich and Longbrake , 2008 ) . In addition to well - known roles in phagocytosis and removal of debris , there is also now increasing evidence that subtypes of leukocytes play active roles in tissue repair ( Derecki et al . , 2012 ; London et al . , 2013 ; Popo - vich and Longbrake , 2008 ) . Platelets aggregate rapidly after damage for clot formation and haemostasis . Other blood - borne , bone marrow - derived cell types that home in to tissue injury , including in CNS , include ﬁbrocytes ( Aldrich and Kielian , 2011 ; Reilkoff et al . , 2011 ) and bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells ( Askari et al . , 2003 ; Bianco et al . , 2001 ; Jaerve et al . , 2012 ) , but their functions are not well understood . Extracellular Matrix Extracellular matrix ( ECM ) generated by different cells plays crit - ical roles in tissue repair and replacement after acute insults , as well as in chronic tissue remodeling during chronic disease ( Mid - wood et al . , 2004 ) . Molecules that modify ECM matrix , such as metaloproteases ( MMPs ) , are also important in this regard ( Mid - wood et al . , 2004 ) . In the CNS , ECM generated by different cell types responding to damage or disease can include a wide vari - ety of molecules such as laminin , collagens , and glycoproteins such as chondroitin or heparan sulfate proteoglycans ( CSPGs or HSPGs ) that are implicated both in supporting tissue repair as well as in contributing to the failure of axonal regeneration ( Davis and Senger , 2005 ; Klapka and Mu¨ller , 2006 ; Logan and Berry , 2002 ; Silver and Miller , 2004 ) . Response to Focal Insults Two principal types of acute focal insults in the CNS are focal traumatic injury and ischemic stroke . In addition to being major clinical problems , they have for decades served as prototypical experimental models with which to study CNS mechanisms of response to damage and repair . In this section , we will examine basic features of CNS multicellular responses to acute focal Table 1 . Diverse Cell Types in CNS Responses to Damage and Disease CNS Intrinsic Cells Blood - Borne Nonneural Cells CNS Intrinsic Neural Cells Leukocytes Neurons Monocyte / macrophage Oligodendrocytes Neutrophils Astrocytes Eosinophils NG2 - OPC NK cells Neural stem / progenitor cells T cells Ependyma B cells CNS Intrinsic Nonneural Cells Other Bone Marrow - Derived Cells Microglia Platelets ( thrombocytes ) Perivascular ﬁbroblasts Fibrocytes Pericytes Mesenchymal ( bone marrow stromal ) stem cells Endothelia and progenitors 230 Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review injuries and how these change over time , using information from response to trauma or stroke as models . In this regard , it is note - worthy that acute focal trauma caused by contusion or crush re - sults in severe vascular damage and therefore exhibits many sequelae similar to stroke . We will make comparisons with the acute wound response in skin as a model system for cellular and molecular mechanisms of wound repair ( Greaves et al . , 2013 ; Gurtner et al . , 2008 ; Shechter and Schwartz , 2013 ; Singer and Clark , 1999 ) . As in skin repair , CNS responses to acute focal damage can also be divided broadly into three overlapping but distinct phases : ( 1 ) cell death and inﬂammation , ( 2 ) cell prolifer - ation for tissue replacement , and ( 3 ) tissue remodeling ( Figure 1 ) . We will ﬁrst examine CNS responses in a context in which the acute insults remain uninfected and resolve . Below , we will also brieﬂy consider more chronic focal CNS insults , including focal infections with abscess formation , primary and secondary tumors , and chronic focal autoimmune lesions , such as multiple sclerosis plaques , which exhibit various features and cellular re - sponses similar to traumatic and ischemic injury . In order to pre - sent succinct summaries of cellular responses and interactions , discussion of information about underling molecular signals is deferred to a later section below . It deserves mention that the time courses given for response phases and events are general - ized approximations ( Figure 1 ) , and there is much potential for Figure 1 . Phases and Time Course of Multicellular Responses to Acute Focal CNS Damage During periods of cell death ( A ) , cell replacement ( B ) , and tissue remodeling ( C ) , numerous overlapping events occur ( D ) that involve interactions among CNS intrinsic neural cells , CNS intrinsic nonneural cells , and cells inﬁltrating from the circulation . Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 231 Neuron Review overlap of events as well as variations in duration or timing in speciﬁc situations . Phase I : Cell Death and Inﬂammation After focal CNS tissue damage from insults such as trauma or ischemia that cause acute local cell death , the ﬁrst phase of response in the injury center or core includes both very rapid events that occur over timescales of seconds to hours and more gradually progressing events that develop over days ( Fig - ures 1A and 1D ) . Very rapid events include haemostasis with coagulation cascade , platelet aggregation , and clot formation . These rapid events are followed by overlapping sequences of re - sponses of tissue intrinsic cells , recruitment of inﬂammatory and immunecells , subacute deathof parenchymalcells , and initiation ofdebrisremoval ( Figures1Aand1D ) . InhealthyCNStissue , large and polar molecules in the circulation are excluded from diffusion into CNS parenchyma by the blood - brain barrier ( BBB ) ( Abbott et al . , 2006 ; Zlokovic , 2008 ) . After focal insults with BBB damage , blood - borne molecules normally excluded from the CNS inﬂux and signal to local cells , as discussed in more detail below in the section on molecular signaling . Platelets inﬂux and rapidly form aggregates for haemostasis and also signal to local cells . Fibrin and collagen matrices begin to form over a period from hours to days , which serve as a scaffold for neutrophil and then macrophage and other leukocyte inﬁltration . Leukocytes then inﬁltrate heavily to monitor for pathogens , remove debris , and providemolecularsignalsinvolvedinwoundrepairoveravariable numberofdaysorlongerdependingonseverityoftissuedamage or presence of exacerbating factors ( Figures 1A and 1D ) ( Perry , 2010 ; Popovich and Longbrake , 2008 ) . Endogenous mesen - chymal stem cells may also enter the lesion core , but their roles are not well understood ( Askari et al . , 2003 ; Bianco et al . , 2001 ; Jaerve et al . , 2012 ) . These basic cellular events reﬂect classic wound responses as found in other tissues ( Greaves et al . , 2013 ; Gurtner et al . , 2008 ; Singer and Clark , 1999 ) . Certain CNS intrinsic cells also respond rapidly to CNS tissue damage or BBB leak . Live imaging studies in CNS in vivo show that microglia and NG2 - OPC immediately migrate to sites of tis - sue damage and BBB leak ( Hughes et al . , 2013 ; Nimmerjahn Figure 2 . Lesions Exhibit Tissue Compartments and Signaling Gradients ( A and B ) Focal damage gives rise to lesions with distinct tissue compartments in the form of nonneural lesion cores ( LC ) , newly proliferated compact astrocyte scars ( AS ) , and perilesion pe - rimeters ( PLP ) that exhibit diminishing gradients of reactive gliosis that transition gradually to healthy tissue ( HT ) . AS abruptly demarcate the transition between nonneural LC and PLP with viable neural cells . Size of the lesion core and the location of AS , and this transition , are regulated by opposing molecular signals . Gradients of molecular signals emanating from LC impact on cells in PLP . et al . , 2005 ) . Astrocytes , in contrast , remain in situ and do not migrate either to or away from injury sites but can swell osmotically and , depending on the severity of injury or ischemia , can die in the center of severe lesions or can become reactive and hypertrophy and in some cases proliferate ( Bardehle et al . , 2013 ; Zheng et al . , 2010 ) . Different aspects of this ﬁrst phase of response occur in overlapping sequences dur - ing the ﬁrst few days and then begin gradually diminishing ( Figure 1D ) , provided that the insult is a single acute event not complicated by bony compression , infection , or other exacerba - tions that might prolong the damaging insult . As acute responses diminish , there is overlap with the onset of different types of cell proliferation associated with the next phase of responses ( Fig - ures 1B and 1D ) . Phase II : Cell Proliferation and Tissue Replacement The second phase of response to acute CNS tissue damage oc - curs from about 2 to 10 days after the insult and is characterized by the proliferation and local migration of cells that implement tis - sue repair and replacement . These cells include endothelial pro - genitors , ﬁbroblast - lineage cells , different types of inﬂammatory cells , andvarioustypesofgliaandneural - lineageprogenitorcells , including scar - forming astrocytes and their progenitors ( Figures 1B and 1D ) . Some of these cellular proliferative phenomena , such as proliferation of endothelia for neovascularization ( Casella et al . , 2002 ) orproliferationof certainﬁbroblast - lineage cells or in - ﬂammatory cells , reﬂect classic wound responses ( Gurtner et al . , 2008 ; Singer and Clark , 1999 ) , while others , such as proliferation of scar - forming astrocytes , are speciﬁc and unique to CNS . This phase is also characterized throughout its duration by the absence of a BBB in the lesion core during the period in which damaged blood vessels are replaced by new ones ( Figure 1D ) . As a consequence , endogenous ( as well as exogenous ) proteins and other charged molecules can freely diffuse into the surround - ing neural parenchyma ( Bush et al . , 1999 ) . These molecules can include serum proteins ( e . g . , thrombin , albumin ) that signal to local cells , immunoglobulins , or pathogen - associated molecules , as discussed below . This leaky BBB creates the potential for the lesion core to serve as source of circulating molecules that generate gradients of molecular signaling that can extend for considerable distances into neural tissue around the lesion until the BBB is repaired ( Figures 1B , 1D , 2A , and 2B ) . This signaling may contribute to the perimeter of tapering gradient of reactive 232 Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review gliosis and other changes observed in tissue around mature lesions as discussed below . During the proliferative phase , cellular elements are generated that will in mature lesions form two of the three major tissue com - partments of the mature lesion , ( 1 ) the central lesion core of non - neural tissue and ( 2 ) the compact astrocyte scar that surrounds the lesion core ( Figures 1B and 1D ) . Major cellular components of the nonneural lesion core derive from expansion of CNS intrinsic perivascular ﬁbroblasts and pericytes ( Go¨ritz et al . , 2011 ; Soderblom et al . , 2013 ) and from proliferating endothelial progenitors . The compact astrocyte scar is formed primarily from newly proliferated elongated astrocytes generated by local astroglial progenitors that gather around the edges of severely damaged tissue containing inﬂammatory and ﬁbroblast - lineage cells ( Figures 1B and 1D ) ( Faulkner et al . , 2004 ; Sofroniew and Vinters , 2010 ; Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . It is noteworthy that during this proliferative period , the location of compact astrocyte scar borders is being determined . In mature lesions , these astrocyte scar borders will precisely demarcate and separate persisting areas of nonfunctional , nonneural lesion core tissue from imme - diately surrounding and potentially functional neural tissue ( Fig - ures 1B , 2A , and 2B ) . Cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie the determination of precisely where such astrocyte scar borders are formed are incompletely understood but are likely to involve a complex interplay and balance of molecular signals that on the one hand foster phagocytosis and debris clearance and signals that on the other hand foster protection and preservation of healthy self ( Figure 2B ) , as discussed in more detail below in the section on molecular signals of cell damage and death . Several decades of experimental studies on ischemic infarcts show that ﬁnal lesion size can be inﬂuenced by subacute metabolic events that continue for hours to days within penumbral zones around the lesions ( Astrup et al . , 1981 ; Dirnagl et al . , 1999 ; Lo , 2008 ) . In addition , astrocyte intrinsic signaling cascades have been identiﬁed that play critical roles ( Herrmann et al . , 2008 ; Okada et al . , 2006 ; Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . A better understanding of the multicellular and molecular interactions that determine the location of astrocyte scar borders around areas of compromised tissue may lead to novel thera - peutic strategies for reducing lesion size ( Figure 2B ) . These events occur over a time frame of days after the insult ( Figure 1D ) , during which intervention is a realistic possibility . Recent ﬁndings also indicate that during the proliferative phase after acute CNS damage in the forebrain , neural stem cells in periventricular germinal zones give rise to considerable numbers of neural progenitors that migrate to the injury sites in cortex or striatum ( Carmichael , 2006 ; Kokaia et al . , 2012 ; Lagace , 2012 ; Lindvall and Kokaia , 2006 ) . These cells form part of the mix of cells in perilesion perimeters ( Figures 1B and 1C ) . There are various lines of evidence suggesting that these cells may contribute beneﬁcially to tissue remodeling in perile - sion tissue , but the nature of the contributions made by these cells remains nebulous . Under normal , unmanipulated circum - stances , very few newly generated neurons mature and survive , and other potential contributions by these intriguing , migrating progenitor cells , such as contributions to immune regulation , are still in the process of being deﬁned ( Kokaia et al . , 2012 ; Lagace , 2012 ) . Phase III : Tissue Remodeling The third phase of response to acute tissue damage generally begins toward the end of the ﬁrst week after the insult and is distinguished by tissue remodeling that includes events that are completed within weeks , such as BBB repair and scar orga - nization , as well as chronic events that can continue over many months ( Figures 1C and 1D ) . BBB repair or restoration along newly formed blood vessels in the lesion vicinity is generally completed within several weeks after acute uncomplicated in - sults and requires the presence of functional astrocytes ( Bush et al . , 1999 ) and pericytes ( Daneman et al . , 2010 ; Winkler et al . , 2011 ) . The lesion core of nonneural tissue becomes surrounded by a well - organized , interdigitating compact astrocyte scar by 2 – 3 weeks after acute insults not exacerbated by ongoing tissue damage ( Figures 1C and 1D ) ( Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . These scar - forming astrocytes appear actively to corral and surround inﬂam - matory and ﬁbroblast - lineage cells during tissue remodeling and scar formation ( Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . This compact astrocyte scar forms a structural and functional border between nonneural tissue in the central lesion core and the immediately adjacent and surrounding neural tissue that contains viable cells of all three neural - lineage cell types , astrocytes , oligodendrocytes , and neurons ( Figures 1C and 2 ) ( Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . This astro - cyte scar border serves as a protective barrier that restricts the migration of inﬂammatory cells from the nonneural lesion core into surrounding viable neural tissue . Disruption of astrocyte scar formation in different kinds of transgenic loss - of - function models leads to increased lesion size , increased death of local neurons , increased demyelination , and decreased recovery of function after traumatic or ischemic focal insults ( Bush et al . , 1999 ; Faulkner et al . , 2004 ; Herrmann et al . , 2008 ; Li et al . , 2008 ; Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . After compact astrocyte scar forma - tion , the second period of tissue remodeling is long lasting , with gradual remodeling of lesion core , astrocyte scar border , and surrounding perimeter regions ( Figures 1D and 2 ) . For example , with time there is gradual contraction of lesion cores and astro - cyte scars . As transected axons continue to die back away from lesions , oligodendrocyte death can continue , leading to local tis - sue responses and remodeling . There is long - term remodeling of ECM in the lesion core , with modulation of collagen and glyco - protein components ( Klapka and Mu¨ller , 2006 ; Logan and Berry , 2002 ; Silver and Miller , 2004 ) . In addition , there is gradual and chronically ongoing tissue remodeling in reactive perimeter regions that surround mature lesions , as discussed next . Mature Lesions Exhibit Three Tissue Compartments Astrocyte scar formation around central lesion cores is essen - tially complete by 2 – 4 weeks after acute insults that are not complicated by prolonged tissue damage , and the lesion can at this time be considered mature and entering its chronic stage ( Figures 1 and 2 ) . In mature lesions , it is useful to recognize three very distinct lesion compartments : ( 1 ) the central lesion core of nonneural tissue comprised of locally derived ﬁbroblast - lineage cells , blood vessels , inﬁltrating ﬁbrocytes and inﬂammatory cells , and extracellular matrix ; ( 2 ) the compact astrocyte scar that immediately surrounds the lesion core and consists of densely packed astrocytes with few if any neurons or oligoden - drocytes ; and ( 3 ) the perilesion perimeter of viable neural tissue that is adjacent to the compact astrocyte scar and contains all Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 233 Neuron Review three types of neural - lineage cells ( neurons , oligodendrocytes , and astrocytes ) and exhibits a tapering reactive gliosis that grad - ually transitions to healthy tissue ( Figure 2 ) . All of these compart - ments will exhibit further tissue remodeling for weeks to months . Some of this remodeling has the potential to impact on functional outcome and may provide targets for therapeutic interventions , particularly in the perimeter of neural tissue that exhibits diffuse reactive gliosis ( Figures 1D and 2 ) . It is useful to consider separately these compartments and their impact on functional outcome . Lesion Core . Tissue in the mature lesion core contains few or no neural - lineage cells and is nonfunctional in neurological terms . Initially , the main cell types in mature lesion cores include ﬁbroblast - lineage cells , endothelia , ﬁbrocytes , and inﬂammatory cells ( Figure 2A ) . With time and remodeling , and in the absence of exacerbating damage or infection , inﬂammatory elements will gradually withdraw , although some may persist for long times . Elements of lesion core will persist permanently as ﬁbrotic scar containing various nonneural cells and ECM . In some areas of lesion core , cells and ECM will recede to leave ﬂuid - ﬁlled cysts of quite variable size ( Figure 2A ) ( Tuszynski and Steward , 2012 ) . Functionally , cells and ECM of lesion core serve as substrates for rapid wound repair and tissue replacement . The rapidity of wound closure allowed by ﬁbrotic replacement as compared with parenchymal renewal has been suggested to afford advan - tages in other tissues ( Greaves et al . , 2013 ; Gurtner et al . , 2008 ; Singer and Clark , 1999 ) . Nevertheless , this mechanism can come with the cost of lost tissue functions . In CNS , lesion core tissue has since the 19 th century been thought to have a negative long - term functional impact as an impediment to axon regener - ation , conﬁrmed by recent studies as well ( Zukor et al . , 2013 ) . Molecular evaluations show that lesion core ECM contains colla - gens and proteoglycans that poorly support or overtly inhibit regrowth of damaged axons ( Hermanns et al . , 2006 ; Kimura - Kur - oda et al . , 2010 ; Klapka and Mu¨ller , 2006 ; Yoshioka et al . , 2010 ) . Compact Astrocyte Scars ( Glial Scars ) . Mature astrocyte scars consist of relatively narrow zones of newly generated astrocytes with elongated processes that intermingle and intertwine exten - sively and that immediately abut and surround on all sides re - gions of lesion core tissue ( Figure 2A ) ( Sofroniew and Vinters , 2010 ; Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . These narrow zones of densely inter - twined elongated scar - forming astrocytes are generally not more than a millimeter across and are generally devoid of other neural - lineage cells ( neurons or oligodendrocytes ) ( Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . These scar - forming astrocytes are newly proliferated in response to the insult and the packing density of astrocyte cell bodies in astrocyte scars is up to double that in healthy tissue ( Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . The densely packed elongated scar - form - ing astrocytes transition seamlessly and rapidly to less densely packed and less densely intertwined hypertrophic reactive as - trocytes that are intermingled with viable neurons and other elements of neural tissue in the surrounding perimeter of reactive neural tissue discussed below ( Figure 2A ) ( Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . Transgenic loss - of - function studies show that newly proliferated compact astrocyte scars exert essential neuroprotective func - tions by restricting the spread of inﬂammatory cells away from tissue lesions caused by trauma , stroke , and autoimmune inﬂammation . When astrocyte scar formation is experimentally prevented or attenuated in vivo , inﬂammation spreads , lesion size increases , neuronal loss and demyelination are exacer - bated , and functional recovery is diminished ( Bush et al . , 1999 ; Dro¨gemu¨ller et al . , 2008 ; Faulkner et al . , 2004 ; Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . Scar - forming astrocytes are also widely regarded as a , if not the , major impediment to axon regeneration after CNS injury , based in part on in vitro studies showing astrocyte pro - duction of certain proteoglycans that can inhibit elongation ( Silver et al . , 1993 ) . Nevertheless , other studies show that axon regeneration in vivo occurs along astrocyte bridges and that , in the absence of such bridges , axon regeneration does not occur and seems more to be impeded by confrontation with nonneural lesion core tissue ( Kawaja and Gage , 1991 ; Williams et al . , 2013 ; Zukor et al . , 2013 ) . Transgenic loss - of - function studies conduct - ed in vivo may help to clarify the precise nature and scale of effects exerted by scar - forming astrocytes on axon regrowth after injury . Perilesion Perimeters . All mature lesion cores and astrocyte scars are surrounded by perimeters of viable neural tissue that exhibits a gradient of tapering reactive gliosis that gradually tran - sitions to healthy tissue ( Figure 2A ) ( Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . The tissue in these perimeter zones contains all neural - lineage cell types including neurons and oligodendrocytes , and these cells are intermingled with reactive gliosis that can extend for consid - erable distances ( Figure 2A ) . Reactive perimeter tissue begins immediately adjacent to compact astrocyte scars , where the elongated cell processes of scar - forming astrocytes overlap with hypertrophic reactive astrocytes and reactive microglia that are intermingled with surviving viable neurons and other elements of neural tissue ( Figure 2A ) . It is somewhat remarkable that viable neurons can be present within a few hundred micro - meters of compact astrocyte scars and the lesion core tissue ﬁlled with potentially cytotoxic inﬂammatory elements just beyond ( Bush et al . , 1999 ; Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . The reactive glio - sis in perimeters includes hypertrophic reactive astrocytes and microglia ( Figure 2A ) . Both the cause and functions of perimeters of tapering reactive gliosis are not clear . Regarding cause , it is possible that gradients of signaling molecules diffusing out from the lesion core , either entering during the period of BBB leak or produced there by inﬁltrating and proliferating cells , may trigger such a gradient of gradually tapering responses among local glia ( Figures 2A and 2B ) . From a functional perspec - tive , the degree to which speciﬁc aspects of this reactive gliosis are beneﬁcial or harmful ( or some mixture of both ) remains to be determined . Reactive perimeter areas around lesion cores in brain and spi - nal cord are likely to exhibit long - term , and potentially intense , tissue remodeling , with new synapse formation and the potential for formation of new relay circuits ( Bareyre et al . , 2004 ; Carmi - chael , 2006 ; Clarkson et al . , 2010 ; Courtine et al . , 2008 ; Li et al . , 2010 ; Overman et al . , 2012 ) . Numerous factors have the potential to impact on this synapse and circuit remodeling , including extracellular matrix molecules such as proteoglycans in the perineuronal ( Garcı ´a - Alı´as et al . , 2009 ) . Reactive glia may play important roles in this remodeling , but this topic is under - studied . In the healthy CNS , astrocytes interact with neurons on multiple spatial and temporal scales that can inﬂuence or modulate neural function in various ways ( Halassa and Haydon , 234 Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review 2010 ) . Both astrocytes and microglia have the potential to play fundamental roles in the synapse remodeling in the perilesion perimeter ( Stephan et al . , 2012 ; Stevens et al . , 2007 ) and the impact of reactive gliosis on such remodeling is not yet under - stood . Such perilesion perimeter areas are likely to provide fertile ground for investing new strategies for interventions that may inﬂuence neural plasticity and relay circuit formation , which in combination with appropriate rehabilitative training ( van den Brand et al . , 2012 ) have the potential to beneﬁcially inﬂuence functional outcome . Chronic Focal Insults In addition to acute focal trauma and stroke , which often serve as models to study mechanisms of CNS damage as just discussed , other more chronic forms of damage warrant consideration . Important chronic insults include focal infections with abscess formation , tumors , and autoimmune lesions . All of these condi - tions invoke reactive gliosis and multicellular responses that have strong similarities with those that occur after acute focal damage . This multicellular response plays critical roles in pro - gression , severity , and resolution ( or not ) of the insults . Infection . Focal infections or abscesses can form when traumatic wounds become infected or can be seeded spontane - ously , particularly in immune - compromised individuals . Such infections elicit reactive gliosis with astrocyte scar formation similar to that after acute focal trauma ( Sofroniew and Vinters , 2010 ) . The time course of lesion persistence and tissue remodel - ing is protracted and dependent on resolution of the infection . Transgenic loss - of - function studies show that astrocyte scar formation is critical to focal containment of the infection . When astrocyte scars are disrupted , infection and inﬂammation spread rapidly through adjacent neural tissue with devastating effects ( Dro¨gemu¨ller et al . , 2008 ) . Cancer . Both primary and metastatic tumors elicit reactive gliosis and multicellular responses that have similarities to other forms of focal tissue damage . Interactions of tumor cells with CNS glia and inﬁltrating inﬂammatory cells are complex and heavily dependent on tumor cell type . Noninvasive tumors are surrounded by reactive gliosis and encapsulating scar similar to that seen around traumatic tissue damage . Aggressively inva - sive tumors are not encapsulated or surrounded by well - deﬁned astrocyte scars but evoke other forms of reactive gliosis and multicellular responses . Successful inﬁltration and spread of certain tumor cell types is thought to be associated with their ability to create an environment for growth , vascularization , and spread , which may include successfully neutralizing bar - rier - forming functions of local CNS cells and co - opting programs for creating proliferative niches ( Louis , 2006 ; Silver et al . , 2013 ; Watkins and Sontheimer , 2012 ) . Autoimmune Disease . Focal autoimmune lesions are inter - esting to consider from the perspective of being a response to CNS damage . Although CNS autoimmune disease is often viewed as diffuse , chronic , and caused primarily by dysfunctions of the peripheral immune system , individual autoimmune lesions bear many similarities to acute focal traumatic wounds . For example , active multiple sclerosis plaques are ﬁlled with inﬂam - matory cells and chronic plaques exhibit central lesion cores that are devoid of all neural - lineage cell types ( no neurons , oligoden - drocytes , or astrocytes ) surrounded by astrocyte scars that separate nonneural tissue from perimeters of reactive gliosis in tissue with all three neural cell types ( Frohman et al . , 2006 ; Luc - chinetti et al . , 1996 ) in manners similar to tissue damage caused by trauma or ischemia ( Figures 1 and 2 ) . Neuromyelitis optic ( NMO ) is an autoimmune inﬂammatory disease in which causal autoantibodies are directed against aquaporin - 4 on the astro - cyte cell membrane , and NMO lesions are associated with com - plement - mediated , lytic destruction of astrocytes ( Lennon et al . , 2005 ; Popescu and Lucchinetti , 2012 ) . There is remarkable congruence between clinical evidence from NMO and experi - mental loss - of - function studies demonstrating that transgeni - cally mediated ablation or attenuation of scar - forming astrocytes results in severe exacerbation of autoimmune CNS inﬂammation ( Haroon et al . , 2011 ; Voskuhl et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , both clinical and experimental evidence implicate critical roles for scar - forming astrocytes in limiting the spread of autoimmune CNS inﬂamma - tion . These observations strongly suggest that dysfunction of CNS intrinsic cells such as astrocytes may contribute causally to the onset or progression of CNS autoimmune conditions in ways not generally considered by research focused only on trying to identify causal mechanisms of the peripheral immune system . This notion may be further supported by suggestions that a subgroup of patients with multiple sclerosis have dis - ease - related autoantibodies against the potassium channel Kir4 . 1 , which in the CNS is located on astrocyte membranes ( Sri - vastava et al . , 2012 ) . It will be interesting to determine the extent to which gain or loss of astrocyte functions contributes to the pathophysiology of CNS autoimmune conditions . Response to Diffuse Insults Diffuse insults to CNS tissue can be associated with neurode - generative diseases , certain seizure disorders , or mild traumatic brain injury . Diffuse insults tend initially to be less intense than acute focal damage caused by trauma or stroke and may not initially cause overt tissue damage but instead accumulate grad - ually over chronic periods of time . As the tissue damage be - comes more severe , small individual lesions form , each of which invokes reactive gliosis and multicellular responses similar to those caused by acute tissue damage with breakdown of the BBB , inﬂammation , and recruitment of leukocytes ( Figures 1 and 2 ) but on a smaller scale . Over time , the diffuse damage comes to resemble a diffuse collection of many small focal lesions that are intermingled and can be dispersed over large areas ( Figure 3A ) . Each of these small lesions gives rise to its own perilesion perimeter zones of tapering reactive gliosis , with the consequence that overlapping zones of severe hyper - trophic reactive gliosis and multicellular responses can be distributed over large areas of tissue ( Figure 3A ) . It is important to realize that these many small lesions are interspersed among viable neurons and neural circuitry , which become enveloped by these overlapping perilesion perimeters of reactive gliosis ( Fig - ures 3A and 3B ) . As discussed above , there is now substantive evidence for the participation of astrocytes and microglia in normal neural circuit function , but the impact of reactive gliosis on such functions is not known . In the context of diffuse CNS insults , large areas of functioning neural tissue may be exposed to intense reactive gliosis that is likely to impact on synaptic in - teractions and neural circuit functions ( Figure 3B ) . A better Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 235 Neuron Review understanding of such effects may open inroads to new thera - peutic strategies . Neurodegenerative Disease Reactive gliosis and multicellular responses are triggered in different and selective ways in different neurodegenerative dis - eases . In some cases , the trigger can be accumulation of extra - cellular toxins , such as b - amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease ( AD ) ( Prokop et al . , 2013 ; Zlokovic , 2011 ) , which can accumulate and cause many small areas of focal tissue damage that trigger gliosis with many similarities to other forms of diffuse insults ( Figure 3A ) . In other cases , the trigger can be neuronal or synap - tic damage or death secondary to neuronal intrinsic changes . Some conditions , such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) or Huntington’s disease , cause intrinsic cellular changes in both neurons and glia that can perturb cellular functions and in - teractions , which can serve as triggers ( Boille´e et al . , 2006 ; Mar - agakis and Rothstein , 2006 ) . Neurodegenerative insults can also lead to disturbance of the neurovascular unit , resulting in BBB leak , which can serve as a further trigger for reactive gliosis and also signal to recruit blood - borne inﬂammatory cells ( Zlo - kovic , 2008 , 2011 ) . In many cases , reactive gliosis and multicel - lular responses may not be apparent at onset or in early stages of the neurodegenerative conditions but appear later and may then become involved in disease progression . Reactive gliosis trig - gered in various ways , by accumulation of abnormal proteins , ischemic or traumatic cellular damage , or microbes , can also lead to BBB leak via speciﬁc molecular signaling cascades as discussed below , with resultant inﬂammation that may con - tribute to disease progression . The contributions of glial cells and reactive gliosis to neurode - generative conditions are complex and only beginning to be understood . Glia not only become reactive in response to degen - erative cues as just mentioned , but can also participate in trying to combat them . For example , both microglia and astrocytes are thought to contribute to clearing b - amyloid ( Prokop et al . , 2013 ; Wyss - Coray et al . , 2003 ) , and attenuation of reactive astrogliosis can increase b - amyloid load in a transgenic mouse model of AD ( Kraft et al . , 2013 ) . In addition , glia may be affected by the dis - ease - causing molecular defects and become dysfunctional , further complicating efforts to understand the roles of reactive gliosis in the disease process . For example , in ALS , glial cell dysfunction is causally implicated in mediating neuronal degen - eration ( Yamanaka et al . , 2008 ) , and ongoing reactive gliosis and inﬂammation are also thought to contribute to disease progres - sion ( Maragakis and Rothstein , 2006 ) . Distinctions between disease - induced dysfunctions of glial cells and the reactive re - sponses that are triggered in glial cells by cell and tissue damage are sometimes blurred or equated but should not be . Under - standing these different phenomena and the ways in which they interact is likely to have important consequences for under - standing the mechanisms that underlie cellular pathophysiology and drive disease progression . It is important to remember that although some aspects of glial reactivity may contribute to dis - ease progression , others are likely to be protective . Deﬁning the molecular basis of such differences may help to identify novel therapeutic strategies . In the context of neurodegenerative disease , it is also inter - esting brieﬂy to consider the potential for non - cell - autonomous neuronal degeneration precipitated by dysfunction of glia or other nonneural cells . Loss - or gain - of - function genetic muta - tions in microglia ( Derecki et al . , 2012 ) or astrocytes ( Brenner et al . , 2001 ; Rothstein , 2009 ; Tao et al . , 2011 ) have the potential to cause non - cell - autonomous degeneration of different types of neurons in different human diseases and animal experimental models . Such observations indicate that glial cell dysfunction may be the primary causal event in certain neurological condi - tions . Such observations also raise the possibility that dysfunc - tion of speciﬁc aspects of reactive gliosis during responses to Figure 3 . Diffuse Tissue Damage Leads to Extended Regions of Reactive Gliosis ( A ) Small chronic insults can lead to diffuse tissue damage with formation of dispersed small lesion cores ( LC ) , astrocyte scars ( AS ) , and perilesion perimeters ( PLP ) that can overlap and coalesce into regions of contiguous reactive gliosis that can extend over large areas . ( B ) Reactive astrocytes and reactive microglia in PLP can impact on synapses and neuronal functions in various ways . 236 Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review CNS insults may exacerbate damage or lead to worse tissue repair and worse outcome . The potential for genetic polymor - phisms to impact on glial cell functions and responses to CNS injury is an as yet untapped area that may reveal causal factors underlying differences in the responses of different individuals to seemingly similar types and severities of CNS insults . Epilepsy Astrocytes and microglia can be involved in epilepsy in multiple ways . Astrocytes play multiple critical roles in regulating synapse activity and neuronal excitability and astrocytes may play critical roles in the generation of seizure activity ( Devinsky et al . , 2013 ; Jabs et al . , 2008 ; Wetherington et al . , 2008 ) . In addition , reactive gliosis of both microglia and astrocytes is a prominent feature of chronically epileptic neural tissue , which can also exhibit BBB breakdown and multicellular inﬂammation ( Devinsky et al . , 2013 ; Jabs et al . , 2008 ; Wetherington et al . , 2008 ) . With increasing loss of neurons , tissue sclerosis sets in , which has similarities with severe diffuse astrogliosis due to other causes as discussed above , with many smaller tissue lesions sur - rounded by a continuum of perilesion tissue with a mix of surviv - ing neurons and increasingly severe hypertrophic gliosis ( Figure 3A ) . The impact of reactive gliosis and the multicellular response to tissue damage on the surviving neurons in the peril - esion perimeter regions is not well understood ( Figure 3B ) but may contribute to reduced seizure thresholds . Selective experi - mental induction of astrocyte reactivity is associated with a reduction of inhibition in local hippocampal neurons ( Ortinski et al . , 2010 ) . More work in this area is warranted . Diffuse Traumatic Brain Injury Large focal lesions caused by severe focal traumatic brain injury ( TBI ) ( contusion or crush ) have been discussed above . Neverthe - less , clinically relevant TBI is often diffuse and widely distributed . The cellular and molecular mechanisms of diffuse TBI that cause functional disturbances without large focal lesions are incom - pletely understood . Diffuse TBI is generally characterized by small foci of vascular breakdown and tissue damage that can be diffusely distributed over large areas of CNS ( DeKosky et al . , 2013 ; McIntosh et al . , 1989 ) . It is interesting to consider that each of these small areas of tissue or cellular damage may represent a small focal injury with compartments equivalent to core , astrocyte scar , and perimeter , which may be spread over large areas without an obvious single large focal region ( Figure 3A ) . As discussed above , the interspersed viable neural tissue in the many overlapping perilesion perimeter regions will be exposed to intense hypertrophic reactive gliosis and inﬂam - mation , which can impact on neural functions ( Figure 3B ) . Spe - ciﬁc cellular and molecular mechanisms of reactive gliosis and multicellular responses triggered by mild or moderate diffuse TBI are only beginning to be characterized . Newly proliferated reactive astrocytes exert protective functions essential for neuronal survival ( Myer et al . , 2006 ) . Microglia can exert a broad range of effects depending on speciﬁc molecular stimuli , which either protect or exacerbate tissue loss ( Hanisch and Ketten - mann , 2007 ) . Understanding and manipulating the reactive glio - sis and multicellular sequelae triggered by mild to moderate TBI has enormous potential to identify new therapeutic targets in a ﬁeld of high incidence and importance . Emerging molecular mechanisms are discussed in the next section . Molecular Signaling and Multicellular Interactions Molecular signaling among the different cell types that respond to CNS insults is complex , combinatorial , and densely inter - woven . Different cells have the capacity to produce and respond to similar sets of molecules , and there are hints that some mole - cules may coordinate multicellular responses . Many intercellular signaling molecules have been identiﬁed , but we are in the early stages of determining how these multiple signals regulate multicellular interactions and the temporal progression from one phase to another during responses to speciﬁc CNS insults . Here we provide a general overview of molecular functional classes ( Figure 4A ) and a few representative examples of the many speciﬁc molecules that regulate or inﬂuence CNS cellular responses to insults ( Table 2 ) . Cell Damage and Death Cells that are dead , dying , or temporarily damaged but recover - able release or express molecules that signal damage . These molecules fall into many categories including neurotransmitters , cytokines , chemokines , neuroimmune - regulators ( NI - Regs ) , and danger - associated molecular patterns ( DAMPs ) that stimulate reactive gliosis and other cellular responses including debris clearance by immune cells ( Figures 4B and 4C ) ( Table 2 ) . Insults of different types and severities release different combinations of these molecules , which in turn trigger different responses . For example , mild cellular insults can subtly elevate extracellular concentrations of glutamate or ATP that attract microglial cell processes without initially unleashing full - blown inﬂammation ( Figure 4B ) ( Davalos et al . , 2005 ; Liu et al . , 2009 ) . ATP can also elicit calcium responses in astrocytes and cause con - nexin - dependent ATP release that increases extracellular ATP levels and amplify this ‘‘danger’’ signal ( Figure 4B ) . More severe cell damage or death will release additional DAMPs and alarmins in the form of cytosolic and nuclear contents such as K + , heat shock proteins such as ab - crystallin , S100 family cal - cium - binding proteins , DNA - binding high mobility group box 1 ( HMGB1 ) , as well of DNA and RNA . All of these molecules can serve as ‘‘danger’’ signals to alert innate immune cells to tissue injury and promote clearance of ‘‘altered self’’ cellular debris via activation of pattern recognition receptors ( PRRs ) on phagocytic innate immune cells ( Figure 4C ) ( Chan et al . , 2012 ; Grifﬁths et al . , 2010 ; Kono and Rock , 2008 ) . Molecules such as beta - amyloid ( A b ) produced during neurodegenerative disorders can also act as alarmins ( Figure 4C ) . A single type of alarmin may bind multiple classes of PPRs . For example , HMBG1 elicits proinﬂammatory signaling through activation of multiple TLRs , receptor for advanced glycation end products ( RAGE ) , and macrophage antigen complex - 1 ( MAC1 ) ( Chan et al . , 2012 ; Gao et al . , 2011 ) , and S100 activates multiple TLRs and RAGE ( Chan et al . , 2012 ) . Healthy neurons and glia near CNS insults express neuroim - mune regulatory molecules ( NI - Regs ) and self - defense proteins that signal ‘‘healthy self’’ and serve to conﬁne potentially noxious proinﬂammatory signaling and prevent phagocytosis of viable cells ( Figure 4C ) ( Table 2 ) ( Grifﬁths et al . , 2010 ) . These ‘‘healthy self’’ molecular signals include both membrane - bound and soluble NI - Reg molecules . For example , sialic acids ( SAs ) in membranes of healthy cells interact with SA receptors ( SARs ) , including Siglecs , on innate immune cells and serve as ‘‘don’t Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 237 Neuron Review eat me’’ signals ( Figure 4C ) ( Varki and Gagneux , 2012 ) . CD200 and CD47 similarly act through receptors CD200R and SIRP - a on inﬂammatory cells to prevent phagocytic attack ( Figure 4C ) ( Grifﬁths et al . , 2010 ) . Complement regulatory proteins ( CRPs ) can reduce complement activation ( Figure 4C ) ( Grifﬁths et al . , 2010 ) . Thrombomodulin ( CD141 ) binds and sequesters Figure 4 . Multimolecular Regulation and Graded Responses to Damage ( A ) ResponsestoCNSdamageareregulatedandinﬂuencedbydiversecategoriesofmolecularsignalsderivedfrommanytypesofCNSintrinsicandextrinsiccells . ( B ) Low levels of ATP released by cells during mild CNS insults can act through ( 1 ) P2X receptors to induce rapid chemotaxis of microglial processes and ( 2 ) P2Y receptors on local astrocytes to evoke calcium signaling and connexin - dependent ATP release , which can increase extracellular ATP levels and thereby amplify this ‘‘danger’’ signal . ( C ) After severe injury , signaling molecules from ‘‘altered self’’ and ‘‘healthy self’’ vie to balance debris clearance and preservation of viable tissue . Severely damaged or dead cells release a number of hydrophobic intracellular molecules ( left ) , or ‘‘alarmins , ’’ which express damage - associated molecular patterns ( DAMPs ) . These‘‘danger’’signalsalertCNSinnateimmunecellstotissueinjuryandpromoteclearanceofdebrisviaactivationofpatternrecognitionreceptorson phagocyticimmunecells ( center ) . ViableCNSintrinsiccellsatlesionborders ( right ) expressmembrane - boundandsolubleneuroimmuneregulatorymoleculesto prevent attack and phagocytosis by immune cells . 238 Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review HMGB1 , thereby reducing alarmin bioavailability ( Figure 4C ) ( Abeyama et al . , 2005 ) . Thus , speciﬁc receptor - mediated signals that indicate ‘‘altered self’’ or ‘‘healthy self’’ can tailor the nature of the reactive gliosis and multicellular responses to the type and severity of cellular damage or death ( Figures 4B and 4C ) . It is important to note that the ﬁnal level of cellular damage inﬂicted by insults of all kinds is determined in part by prolonged periods of different types of secondary events ( Figure 1D ) , including a balancing act among innate immune mechanisms that regulate the clear - ance of ‘‘altered - self’’ debris and ‘‘non - self’’ pathogens , while preserving ‘‘healthy self’’ ( Figure 4C ) ( Grifﬁths et al . , 2010 ) . These events will impact on ﬁnal size , location of glial scar , and signaling to perlesion perimeters ( Figure 2 ) . Reactive Gliosis Reactive gliosis is regulated by a large array of different extracel - lular signals generated after CNS insults . This array includes not only molecules released by damaged or dead cells as just described , but also molecules entering via leaky BBB , molecules released by inﬁltrating leukocytes , and molecules released by local cells including reactive glia themselves ( Figure 5A ) ( Sofroniew , 2009 ) . In response to these many different and often combinatorial molecular signals , reactive glia alter their gene expression , structure , and function in selective and speciﬁc ways , depending on the type and severity of the insults and de - pending on the speciﬁc combinations of molecular signals that are impinging on them . It is important to emphasize that glia do not exist in simple all - or - none ‘‘quiescent’’ or ‘‘activated’’ states and that there is no single program of ‘‘reactive gliosis’’ that is triggered in an all - or - none fashion and is similar in all situations . Instead , reactive glia can exhibit a vast range of re - sponses as determined by combinations of speciﬁc signaling events . For example , exposure to PAMPs such as lipopolysac - charide ( LPS ) can markedly skew the transcriptome of reactive astrocytes toward chemokines , cytotoxicity , and inﬂammation ( Hamby et al . , 2012 ; Zamanian et al . , 2012 ) . It is also noteworthy Table 2 . Major Classes and a Few Speciﬁc Examples of Intercellular Signaling Molecules that Regulate Cellular Responses to CNS Damage Molecule Source Lesion Compartment Phase Targets and Effects Class : Protease and Related Thrombin S LC , AS I Clot formation ; astrocyte proliferation MMP - 9 M , O , S LC , AS , PLP I - III OPC proliferation , remyelination ; BBB leak ; neovascular remodeling Kallikreins A , M , N , S LC , AS , PLP I - III Proinﬂammatory ; demyelination Serpins A , M , O LC , PLP I - III Inhibit deleterious protease Class : NTs ATP , Glutamate N , O , A LC , AS , PLP I Microglia chemotaxis ; reactive astrogliosis Class : DAMPs Alarmins : HMGB1 , S100s , DNA Damaged Cells LC , PLP I . II ‘‘Altered self’’ signals ; proinﬂammatory ; increase phagocytosis PAMPs : LPS Microbes LC , PLP I . II ‘‘Nonself invader’’ signals ; proinﬂammatory ; increase phagocytosis Class : Growth Factors , Morphogens FGF A , N , E , LC , AS , PLP I - III Fibrotic scar ; ECM ; neovascular remodeling ; reactive astrogliosis VEGF E , P , F , A LC , AS I - III BBB permeability ; neovascular remodeling PDGF - B PDGF - A E , A LS , PLP I - III Neovascular remodeling Remyelination ; OPC Proliferation Endothelin , EGF , BMP N , A , O LC , AS II , III Astrocyte proliferation , glial scar formation Class : Cytokines , Chemokines TGF b A , M , L AS , PLP I - III Fibrotic scar formation ; ECM production ; astrocyte proliferation IL - 1 b , TNF a , INF g A , M , L LC , AS , I , II Proinﬂammatory regulation IL - 6 , CCL2 A , M , L LC , AS I , II Leukocyte instruction , astrocyte scar formation Class : NIRegs CD141 A , O , E LC , AS I - III Protection of healthy self ; resolution of inﬂammation CD200 , CD47 N LC , AS , PLP I , II Protection of healthy self Class : Neural Remodeling Neurotrophins , BDNF , etc . N , A PLP III Synapse remodeling Perineuronal net A , OPC PLP III Restrict terminal sprouting Thmbs , C1q A , M PLP III Synapse formation and pruning A , astrocyte ; E , endothelia ; F , ﬁbroblast ; L , leukocyte ; M , microglia ; N , neuron ; NTs , neurotransmitters ; O , oligodendrocyte ; OPC , O progenitor cell ; S , serum ; Thmbs , thrombospondin . Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 239 Neuron Review that different combinations of stimulatory factors can lead to synergistic changes in molecular expression that could not be predicted from individual effects ( Hamby et al . , 2012 ) . Information about the effects mediated by reactive glia in response to speciﬁc signals is also steadily increasing and it is clear that many aspects of reactive gliosis are part of coordi - nated multicellular innate and adaptive immune responses to CNS insults . It is interesting to consider that certain molecules are emerging as potential coordinators of multicellular re - sponses . One interesting set of converging data implicates IL - 1 b as a key trigger that stimulates different types of glial cells to modulate BBB permeability to serum proteins and leukocytes during reactive gliosis in response to CNS insults ( Figure 5B ) . Numerous DAMPs and PAMPs generated by CNS insults will stimulate IL - 1 b release from microglia , and this IL - 1 b will stimu - Figure 5 . Multicellular and Multimolecular Regulation of Reactive Gliosis and BBB ( A ) Reactive gliosis can be induced , regulated , and inﬂuenced by a wide variety of molecular signals that can derive from many types of CNS intrinsic and extrinsic sources . ( B ) BBB permeability can be regulated by spe - ciﬁc molecular signaling cascades involving in - teractionsamongdifferentcelltypesthatconvergeonendothelialtightjunctions ( Argaw et al . , 2009 , 2012 ; Seo et al . , 2013 ) . late ( 1 ) local reactive astrocytes to release VEGF and ( 2 ) local NG2 - OPCs to release MMP - 9 , which in turn inﬂuence tight junc - tions and barrier properties of local endo - thelial cells and allow entry of serum proteins ( including IgGs and signaling proteins such as thrombin , albumin , pro - teases , etc . ) and leukocytes into local CNS parenchyma ( Figure 5B ) ( Argaw et al . , 2009 , 2012 ; Seo et al . , 2013 ) . Entering leukocytes have the potential to generate more IL - 1 b and sustain local BBB permeability , creating the potential for a feedforward loop under adverse cir - cumstances . Understanding the molecu - lar mechanisms whereby such signaling is downregulated and the BBB reseals may help to reveal rational therapeutic in - terventions for certain conditions . Repair of the BBB after an uncomplicated acute injury generally occurs within several weeks ( Figure 1D ) . Astrocyte Scar Formation Formation of compact astrocyte scars is a specialized aspect of reactive astrogliosis that occurs in response to severe tissue damage and leukocyte inﬁltration and involves phases of cell proliferation and cell organization ( Figure 1 ) ( Sofroniew and Vinters , 2010 ; Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . Molecular signals that regulate astrocyte proliferation signals after CNS damage can derive from serum proteins or local cells and include thrombin , endothelin , FGF2 , ATP , bone morphogenic proteins ( BMPs ) , sonic hedge hog ( SHH ) , and others ( Table 2 ) ( Gadea et al . , 2008 ; Neary et al . , 2003 ; Sahni et al . , 2010 ; Shirakawa et al . , 2010 ; Sirko et al . , 2013 ) . The location of astrocyte scar borders around lesions can be inﬂuenced by interactions among proliferating or newly proliferated scar - forming astroglia , ﬁbroblast - linage cells , and inﬂammatory cells ( Wanner et al . , 2013 ) and can be modulated by transgenic manipulation of astrocyte intrinsic signaling cas - cades involving STAT3 , SOCS3 , or NF k B , which can increase or decrease lesion sizes ( Brambilla et al . , 2005 ; Herrmann et al . , 2008 ; Okada et al . , 2006 ; Wanner et al . , 2013 ) , providing targets for potential intervention . Signals for organization of newly proliferated astrocytes into compact scars include the 240 Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review IL - 6 receptor - STAT3 signaling system , which critically regulates astrocyte scar formation after trauma , infection , and autoim - mune inﬂammation ( Dro¨gemu¨ller et al . , 2008 ; Haroon et al . , 2011 ; Herrmann et al . , 2008 ; Wanner et al . , 2013 ) . Neural Remodeling in Perilesion Perimeters Reactive gliosis is not only important in responses to very local CNS damage , but also is likely to play important roles in the neu - ral remodeling that continues for prolonged times in perilesion perimeters after acute focal insults such as stroke and trauma ( Figures 1 and 2 ) , as well as in chronic diffuse CNS insults ( Figures 3 ) including neurodegenerative conditions such as Alz - heimer’s disease . Such perilesion perimeter regions can extend for considerable distances away from large focal lesions ( Figures 1 and 2 ) or can cover large areas of diffuse tissue damage ( Fig - ures 3 ) . In such cases , the associated reactive gliosis has the po - tential to impact on substantial territories of functioning neural tissue . There is mounting evidence that the diverse changes in molecular signaling associated with this diffuse reactive gliosis ( Table 2 ) will impact on the ongoing neural remodeling and changes in neural function . Astrocytes interact with neurons on multiple spatial and temporal scales that can inﬂuence or modu - late neural function in various direct and indirect ways , including by modulation of the extracellular balance of ions , transmitters , and water critical for neural function , as well as direct inﬂuences on synaptic activity directly via release of ‘‘gliotransmitters’’ ( Halassa and Haydon , 2010 ; Hamilton and Attwell , 2010 ; Henne - berger et al . , 2010 ; Volterra and Meldolesi , 2005 ) . Microglia are also implicated in participating in the regulation of synaptic turn - over ( Stephan et al . , 2012 ) . Perineuronal net molecules such as chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans generated by astrocytes and NG2 - OPC inﬂuence synaptic plasticity ( Table 2 ) ( Wang and Faw - cett , 2012 ) . The effects of reactive gliosis on such functions is only beginning to be understood , but reactive astrogliosis has been reported to impact on neural functions in various ways , including ( 1 ) by downregulation of astrocyte glutamine synthase that is associated with reduced inhibitory synaptic currents in local neurons ( Ortinski et al . , 2010 ) , ( 2 ) increased expression of xCT ( Slc7a11 ) , a cysteine - glutamate transporter associated with increased glutamate signaling , seizures , and excitotoxicity ( Buckingham et al . , 2011 ; Jackman et al . , 2010 ) , and ( 3 ) changes in the expression of multiple GPCRs and G proteins and calcium signaling evoked by their ligands that have the potential to alter astrocyte - neuron interactions ( Hamby et al . , 2012 ) . There is also a growing body of evidence that in response to inﬂammatory mediators and cytokines , reactive astrocytes can modulate their expression of multiple molecules such as transmitter and ion transporters , neuromodulators such as nitric oxide and prosta - glandins , growth factors , and synapse regulatory proteins , which can impact on synaptic and neuronal functions including com - plex behaviors such as sickness behavior , pain , appetite , sleep , and mood , as reviewed in more detail elsewhere ( Sofroniew , 2013 ) . Taken together , such ﬁndings provide evidence that different molecular mediators and signaling mechanisms associ - ated with reactive gliosis can modulate functions of reactive as - trocytes and microglia in different ways that have the potential to impact on synaptic and other neuronal functions in perilesion perimeters . Such signaling mechanisms are likely to have effects on the efﬁcacy of training and functional rehabilitation after acute damage such as trauma or stroke , as well as effectors to mitigate functional deterioration during degenerative conditions . Under - standing and manipulating the signaling mechanisms and effects of reactive gliosis in perilesion perimeter tissue has the potential to reveal novel therapeutic strategies ( Gleichman and Carmichael , 2013 ) . Blood - Brain Barrier The blood - brain barrier ( BBB ) is generated and regulated by a complex multicellular neurovascular unit that involves critical interactions among endothelia , pericytes , astrocytes , and other cells ( Abbott et al . , 2006 ; Zlokovic , 2008 ) . Compromise of the BBB can occur in various manners and to various degrees , ranging from speciﬁc molecular signaling events that open BBB permeability during certain types of reactive gliosis as dis - cussed above ( Figure 5B ) , to severe breakdown of the BBB caused by traumatic or ischemic endothelial destruction result - ing in the need for neovascularization ( Figure 1 ) . In addition to overt trauma and ischemia , considerable evidence implicates a central role for BBB dysfunction in aging and various neurode - generative disorders . For example , both transgenically induced and aging - related pericyte deﬁciencies result in BBB breakdown that precedes neuronal degeneration ( Bell et al . , 2010 ) . Pericyte deﬁciency is also apparent in postmortem amyotrophic lateral sclerosis tissue ( Winkler et al . , 2013 ) and BBB dysfunction pre - cedes neurodegeneration in a murine model ( Zhong et al . , 2008 ) . Polymorphisms in APOE isoforms are implicated in increased vulnerability to BBB breakdown in neurodegenerative disorders and traumatic injury ( Bell et al . , 2012 ) . Regardless of triggering events , BBB leaks lead immediately to CNS parenchymal entry of serum proteins such as thrombin , albumin , immunoglobulins , and proteases ( Figure 5B ) that can have a wide range of direct and indirect effects . Thrombin can signal directly via protease - activated receptors on various CNS cells including microglia and astrocytes ( Shigetomi et al . , 2008 ; Suo et al . , 2002 ) . Immunoglobulins contribute to clearing of path - ogens but may contribute to autoimmune dysfunctions . Platelets can enter and form aggregates for clotting and release PDGFs , important for neovascular remodeling as well as for signaling to pericytes and NG2 cells . Metaloproteases act on multiple pro - teins and contribute to extracellular matrix and tissue remodeling ( Table 2 ) . Serum kallikrein proteases activate inﬂammation . Tis - sue kallikreins , which can interact with serum proteases as part of larger proteolytic cascades , are implicated in oligodendrocyte pathology , demyelination , axonopathy , and neuronal degenera - tion ( Burda et al . , 2013 ; Radulovic et al . , 2013 ) . Serpins inhibit and balance protease effects ( Table 2 ) . In response to signals associated with BBB leak , local glial cells produce cytokines and chemokines that attract leukocytes , which on arrival produce additional cytokines and chemokines . The result is a rich extracellular mixture of molecular signals that can instruct or inﬂuence multiple cell types in lesion cores and can also diffuse away into surrounding CNS parenchyma and inﬂuence neural cells that may not have been involved in the initial insult ( Figure 2 ) . These molecular gradients may inﬂu - ence or take part in shaping cellular events in the perilesion pe - rimeters such as the long - lasting gradient of reactive gliosis and the long - lasting neural remodeling that occurs in perimeter tis - sue . The mix of molecular signals generated in lesion cores Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 241 Neuron Review changes over time as the injury response progresses through different phases and the BBB leak is repaired and different cell types occupy this area and produce different effector molecules ( Figure 1D ; Table 2 ) . Depending on the severity of the insult , lesion cores exhibit a BBB leak for at least several days up to 2 weeks throughout the initial period ( Phase I ) of damage response ( Figure 1D ) . BBB repair requires the presence of func - tional astrocytes ( Bush et al . , 1999 ) . Release of the protein HMGB1 by reactive astrocytes promotes endothelial cell neo - vascular remodeling , whereas blockade of HMGB1 release by reactive astrocytes prevents neovascular remodeling and worsens neurological deﬁcits ( Hayakawa et al . , 2012 ) . In com - plex , chronic , or diffuse insults , BBB leaks may persist and have long - lasting effects on extended areas of neural tissue in perilesion perimeters ( Figure 3 ) , and late BBB disruption may lead to secondary tissue injury ( Zlokovic , 2008 ) . Even when BBB leaks are repaired , lesion cores continue to contain collec - tions of nonneural cells within the BBB that have the potential to continue producing high levels of many different signaling mole - cules for prolonged periods . Thus , lesion core tissue has the po - tential to generate diffusion gradients of many potent molecules that spread into neighboring tissue parenchyma and form gradi - ents of molecular signals that inﬂuence host cells ( Figure 2 ) . It is also noteworthy that while the BBB is open , there is also the potential for entry of various pathogen - associated molecular patterns ( PAMPs ) ( Table 2 ) that are generated by microbial infections in the periphery and that can substantively alter the response of local cells to CNS damage , even when there is no local infection , as discussed below . Inﬁltrating Leukocytes Leukocytes that inﬁltrate from the circulation provide a major source of molecular signaling during responses to CNS damage . These molecular signals include a diverse mix of cytokines , chemokines , and growth factors ( Table 2 ) that can instruct and modify the functions of local reactive glia ( Figure 5A ) and other intrinsic CNS cells as well as other local leukocytes . It is likely that the molecular signals produced by leukocytes , and their functional effects , will vary during different phases of response to acute or chronic insults ( Figure 1 ) and range from those mediating classical inﬂammatory responses with cytotoxic and phagocytic activities , to those inﬂuencing tissue repair and remodeling . Although temporal changes during wound responses are not yet well studied , different functional roles for different leukocyte subtypes are gradually coming into focus . For example , in response to stimulation by different cytokines , monocytes generate macrophages with distinct functional phenotypes that produce different effector molecules ( Mosser and Edwards , 2008 ) . In response to INF g , classically activated macrophages generate cytotoxic antimi - crobial molecules and phagocytose dead cells and debris ( Figure 4C ) , whereas in response to stimulation with IL - 4 or IL - 10 , macrophages take part in wound healing and anti - inﬂam - matory activities ( Mosser and Edwards , 2008 ) . Similarly , T cells stimulated by different cytokines become polarized toward different activities , such as T H 1 , T Reg , and T H 17 cells , which can exert very different effects ranging from cell killing to participation in tissue repair ( MacIver et al . , 2013 ; Mills , 2011 ; Walsh and Kipnis , 2011 ) . Impact of Peripheral Infections on Responses to CNS Insults Many of the cell types responding to CNS damage are exqui - sitely sensitive to molecular cues associated with microbial infection . This is not surprising because limiting infection spread is likely to have shaped the evolution of injury responses in all tis - sues including CNS . Various features of the response to infection such as production of cytotoxins and certain types of inﬂamma - tion can damage host cells as well as microbes . Triggering such responses in the absence of overt infection has the potential to cause or exacerbate tissue damage . Thus , certain responses that may be beneﬁcial in microbial infection may be detrimental if triggered during sterile ( uninfected ) tissue damage after trauma , stroke , degenerative disease , or autoimmune attack . In this regard , it is important to recognize that reactive glia , both microglia and astrocytes , that are responding to a sterile primary CNS insult can be inﬂuenced by peripheral infections that generate high levels of circulating cytokines and other inﬂammatory mediators such as LPS and other PAMPs . This signaling can occur through blood - borne cytokines or LPS released at the site of peripheral infection and entering through the leaky BBB in the injury core during phase I of the damage response after focal insults or through BBB leaks triggered by neurodegenerative or autoimmune processes ( Figures 1A and 5A ) . LPS and cytokines have powerful effects both on reactive microglia ( Perry , 2010 ; Perry et al . , 2007 ) and on reactive astro - cytes ( Hamby et al . , 2012 ; Zamanian et al . , 2012 ) that can drive transcriptome proﬁles and wound response toward proinﬂam - matory and potentially cytotoxic phenotypes over prolonged times in ways that would not normally be implemented in sterile CNS insults and that can exacerbate tissue damage . Congruent with such experimental observations is clinical epidemiological evidence indicating that peripheral infections have a negative impact on neurological outcome after spinal cord injury ( Failli et al . , 2012 ) . Common Features , Differences , and Building Models Given the large number of potential CNS insults and the consid - erable amount of variation among the multicellular responses they elicit , looking for common features and clear differences may provide valuable insights regarding shared fundamental mechanisms . Understanding basic factors that drive responses to one type of insult may inform ideas regarding responses to another . In this regard , it is interesting to consider that evolu - tionary pressures shaping responses to CNS damage are likely to have favored rapid responses to small CNS injuries that were not functionally incapacitating and that kept such injuries small and uninfected or that kept small infections from spreading . One efﬁcient means of doing so would be to isolate small focal injuries or small infections with cellular barriers that effectively wall off these lesions , allowing a robust inﬂammatory ( and antimicrobial ) responses in lesion cores , while preserving as much adjacent neural tissue as possible ( Sofroniew , 2005 ) . In this Review , based on available information , we present a basic model of multicellular responses to different types of focal CNS tissue damage that is compatible with this notion ( Figures 1 , 2 , and 3 ) . Certain common features in this model of cellular re - sponses to CNS damage could be interpreted as serving the 242 Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review basic primitive function of preventing or limiting the spread of focal infection . Viewing certain cellular responses to other CNS insults in this light may provide insights regarding basic mecha - nisms and how to understand and eventually manipulate re - sponses safely to improve outcomes . We of course recognize that not all responses will be determined or inﬂuenced in this manner . Nevertheless , the powerful and fundamental role of response to infection is likely to be ancestral to all responses to CNS damage and therefore has the potential to inﬂuence all types of responses that evolved subsequently . This point is un - derscored by the growing recognition of the role of inﬂammatory mechanisms in different neurodegenerative diseases , and the potential for molecules released by peripheral infections to inﬂu - ence far - distant reactive gliosis as discussed above . It is impor - tant to realize that the multicellular responses to diffuse CNS insults are likely to have been shaped by adapting already exist - ing responses to focal traumatic damage or focal infection . This notion is likely to apply not only to degenerative diseases , but also to autoimmune - mediated damage , where the CNS response to such damage bears striking similarities to responses to other forms of CNS tissue damage . This discussion is meant to highlight the usefulness of constructing models of how multiple cells interact and how multiple molecules drive these interac - tions during the responses to different types of CNS damage . The models we have presented here are compatible with basic evidence currently available but no doubt will require modiﬁca - tion as information accrues . We hope that they are ﬂexible enough to accommodate modiﬁcations and can serve as useful frameworks . Manipulating CNS Wound Responses to Promote Repair As the cell biology and molecular signaling that underlie re - sponses to CNS damage become deﬁned , there is increasing potential for identifying ways to manipulate these responses to improve outcome . Manipulations under intense investigation include not only traditional approaches such as development of drug candidates for parenteral pharmacological delivery , but also lifestyle modiﬁcations such as reduced energy consumption and implementation of exercise strategies intended to reduce inﬂammatory responses , cellular degeneration , and functional decline after stroke and traumatic injury ( Arumugam et al . , 2010 ; Mattson , 2012 ; Piao et al . , 2013 ) . In addition , novel inter - ventional strategies in the form of biomaterial implants as molecular depots for local molecular delivery , as well as tissue regenerative approaches based on transplantation of progenitor or stem cells , are showing considerable promise for future appli - cation in neural repair and regeneration . The nonneural lesion cores of focal lesions may represent particularly useful targets for such approaches ( Figure 6 ) . For example , biomaterial im - plants , particularly in the form of injectable hydrogels , have po - tential to serve both as scaffolds and depots that can inﬂuence tissue remodeling and cellular functions ( Pakulska et al . , 2012 ) . Large lesion cores of nonneural tissue after stroke or severe focal trauma may represent useful sites for placement of biomaterial depots that release gradients of molecules to inﬂuence locally surrounding neural tissue without inﬂicting additional damage ( Figure 6A ) . For example , injectable hydrogel depots can provide sustained delivery of different kinds of bioactive molecules , including growth factors or small hydrophobic molecules to inﬂu - ence gene expression and function of local cells over prolonged subacute times , after which they are degraded without substan - tive tissue damage ( Pakulska et al . , 2012 ; Song et al . , 2012 ; Yang et al . , 2009 ; Zhang et al . , 2014 ) . Such molecular delivery has the potential to inﬂuence not only the ongoing repair in the subacute period after injury such as scar formation , but also can inﬂuence cells in the large perimeter zone around CNS lesions that Figure 6 . Lesions as Targets for Therapeutic Strategies Nonneurallesioncores ( LC ) representtargetsforbiomaterialdepots ( A ) orgraftsofexogenousneuralstem / progenitorcells ( B ) , ormesenchymalstemcells ( C ) as potentialtherapeuticstrategies . Moleculesdeliveredbybiomaterialdepots ( A ) orcertaincellgrafts ( C ) havepotentialtosupportandattractaxongrowth ( arrowa ) , modulate cells in perilesion perimeter ( PLP ) ( arrow b ) , modulate cells in LC ( arrow c ) , or modulateastrocyte scar ( AS ) ( arrow d ) . New neurons generated by stem / progenitor cell grafts can receive and send neural connects in PLP and beyond and may be able to form new , functional relay circuits ( B ) . Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 243 Neuron Review undergoes continual tissue remodeling for prolonged periods after tissue damage ( Figure 6A ) . Delivery of molecules via depots placed into lesion cores have the potential to inﬂuence the neural plasticity and tissue remodeling in this perimeter region ( Clark - son et al . , 2010 ) . Various cellular regenerative approaches may have potential for CNS repair ( Bliss et al . , 2007 ; Martino and Pluchino , 2006 ; Snyder and Teng , 2012 ) . Delivery of neural - lineage progenitor or stem cells into lesion cores ( Figure 6B ) can lead to the gener - ation of local neurons that form afferent and efferent connections with host and have the potential to form functionally integrated circuits ( Abematsu et al . , 2010 ; Lu et al . , 2012 ) . Stromal or mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone marrow or umbilical cord , delivered by peripheral ( intravascular ) or CNS injection , can home to injury sites ( Figure 6C ) , where they can release growth factors , cytokines , and other factors that may inﬂuence the response to damage and repair process ( Bliss et al . , 2007 ; Kokaia et al . , 2012 ; Lemmens and Steinberg , 2013 ) . Such grafting studies are being intensely pursued but are still in the early stages of development . Beneﬁcial effects are reported on cellular events such as immunomodulation , survival of CNS intrinsic cells including neurons , and growth of axons ; however , limited information is as yet available on overall functional efﬁcacy . Concluding Remarks The study of cellular responses to CNS injury has progressed enormously in the last two decades , as have ideas about their functions and mechanisms . It is now clear that reactive gliosis and multicellular responses to CNS damage are a complex mixture of events that balance clearance of dead cells , patho - gens , and debris with maximal preservation of adjacent local tis - sue . These events are regulated by a vast number of molecular signals that control speciﬁc cellular functions as dictated by spe - ciﬁc situations . Reactive gliosis is not all - or - none or stereotypic ; instead , it is highly variable and context speciﬁc . Loss - of - function studies show that reactive gliosis and multicellular re - sponses to CNS damage exert essential beneﬁcial functions without which tissue damage ( and function ) would increase and tissue repair would not occur . Nevertheless , over activity of certain functions may in some cases exacerbate tissue dam - age . Interventions to block such activities will need to target spe - ciﬁc molecular events rather than attempt to block the process of gliosis per se . Understanding the ways in which dysfunction of reactive glio - sis and multicellular responses to CNS damage can occur , for example , through genetic mutations or polymorphisms , has the potential to identify new mechanisms that may underlie speciﬁc CNS disorders or that may underlie population vari - ability in responses to similar insults such as stroke or trauma . There is a compelling need to deepen our understanding of speciﬁc cellular interactions during responses to CNS insults , and how these change over time and are governed by complex molecular signaling mechanisms . Such information is funda - mental to understanding most CNS disorders and for devel - oping rationally targeted therapeutic strategies that can safely manipulate or modify cellular responses to CNS insults in ways that improve outcome . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS TheauthorsaresupportedbytheNIH ( NINDS ) , TheDr . Miriam andSheldonG . Adelson Medical Foundation , and Wings for Life . REFERENCES Abbott , N . J . , Ro¨nnba¨ck , L . , and Hansson , E . ( 2006 ) . Astrocyte - endothelial interactions at the blood - brain barrier . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 7 , 41 – 53 . Abematsu , M . , Tsujimura , K . , Yamano , M . , Saito , M . , Kohno , K . , Kohyama , J . , Namihira , M . , Komiya , S . , and Nakashima , K . ( 2010 ) . Neurons derived from transplanted neural stem cells restore disrupted neuronal circuitry in a mouse model of spinal cord injury . J . Clin . Invest . 120 , 3255 – 3266 . Abeyama , K . , Stern , D . M . , Ito , Y . , Kawahara , K . , Yoshimoto , Y . , Tanaka , M . , Uchimura , T . , Ida , N . , Yamazaki , Y . , Yamada , S . , et al . ( 2005 ) . The N - terminal domain of thrombomodulin sequesters high - mobility group - B1 protein , a novel antiinﬂammatory mechanism . J . Clin . Invest . 115 , 1267 – 1274 . Aldrich , A . , andKielian , T . ( 2011 ) . Centralnervoussystemﬁbrosisisassociated with ﬁbrocyte - like inﬁltrates . Am . J . Pathol . 179 , 2952 – 2962 . Argaw , A . T . , Gurfein , B . T . , Zhang , Y . , Zameer , A . , and John , G . R . ( 2009 ) . VEGF - mediated disruption of endothelial CLN - 5 promotes blood - brain barrier breakdown . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 1977 – 1982 . Argaw , A . T . , Asp , L . , Zhang , J . , Navrazhina , K . , Pham , T . , Mariani , J . N . , Ma - hase , S . , Dutta , D . J . , Seto , J . , Kramer , E . G . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Astrocyte - derived VEGF - A drives blood - brain barrier disruption in CNS inﬂammatory disease . J . Clin . Invest . 122 , 2454 – 2468 . Arumugam , T . V . , Phillips , T . M . , Cheng , A . , Morrell , C . H . , Mattson , M . P . , and Wan , R . ( 2010 ) . Age and energy intake interact to modify cell stress pathways and stroke outcome . Ann . Neurol . 67 , 41 – 52 . Askari , A . T . , Unzek , S . , Popovic , Z . B . , Goldman , C . K . , Forudi , F . , Kiedrowski , M . , Rovner , A . , Ellis , S . G . , Thomas , J . D . , DiCorleto , P . E . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Effect of stromal - cell - derived factor 1 on stem - cell homing and tissue regeneration in ischaemic cardiomyopathy . Lancet 362 , 697 – 703 . Astrup , J . , Siesjo¨ , B . K . , and Symon , L . ( 1981 ) . Thresholds in cerebral ischemia - the ischemic penumbra . Stroke 12 , 723 – 725 . Attwell , D . , Buchan , A . M . , Charpak , S . , Lauritzen , M . , Macvicar , B . A . , and Newman , E . A . ( 2010 ) . Glial and neuronal control of brain blood ﬂow . Nature 468 , 232 – 243 . Bardehle , S . , Kru¨ger , M . , Buggenthin , F . , Schwausch , J . , Ninkovic , J . , Clevers , H . , Snippert , H . J . , Theis , F . J . , Meyer - Luehmann , M . , Bechmann , I . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Live imaging of astrocyte responses to acute injury reveals selective juxtavascular proliferation . Nat . Neurosci . 16 , 580 – 586 . Bareyre , F . M . , Kerschensteiner , M . , Raineteau , O . , Mettenleiter , T . C . , Wein - mann , O . , and Schwab , M . E . ( 2004 ) . The injured spinal cord spontaneously forms a new intraspinal circuit in adult rats . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 269 – 277 . Barres , B . A . ( 2008 ) . Themystery and magic ofglia : aperspective on theirroles in health and disease . Neuron 60 , 430 – 440 . Bell , R . D . , Winkler , E . A . , Sagare , A . P . , Singh , I . , LaRue , B . , Deane , R . , and Zlo - kovic , B . V . ( 2010 ) . Pericytes control key neurovascular functions and neuronal phenotype in the adult brain and during brain aging . Neuron 68 , 409 – 427 . Bell , R . D . , Winkler , E . A . , Singh , I . , Sagare , A . P . , Deane , R . , Wu , Z . , Holtzman , D . M . , Betsholtz , C . , Armulik , A . , Sallstrom , J . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Apolipoprotein E controls cerebrovascular integrity via cyclophilin A . Nature 485 , 512 – 516 . Benner , E . J . , Luciano , D . , Jo , R . , Abdi , K . , Paez - Gonzalez , P . , Sheng , H . , Warner , D . S . , Liu , C . , Eroglu , C . , and Kuo , C . T . ( 2013 ) . Protective astrogenesis from theSVZ nicheafter injuryis controlled by Notch modulatorThbs4 . Nature 497 , 369 – 373 . Bianco , P . , Riminucci , M . , Gronthos , S . , and Robey , P . G . ( 2001 ) . Bonemarrow stromal stem cells : nature , biology , and potential applications . Stem Cells 19 , 180 – 192 . Bliss , T . , Guzman , R . , Daadi , M . , and Steinberg , G . K . ( 2007 ) . Cell transplanta - tion therapy for stroke . Stroke Suppl . 38 , 817 – 826 . 244 Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review Boille´e , S . , Vande Velde , C . , and Cleveland , D . W . ( 2006 ) . ALS : a disease of motor neurons and their nonneuronal neighbors . Neuron 52 , 39 – 59 . Brambilla , R . , Bracchi - Ricard , V . , Hu , W . H . , Frydel , B . , Bramwell , A . , Karmally , S . , Green , E . J . , and Bethea , J . R . ( 2005 ) . Inhibition of astroglial nuclear factor kappaB reduces inﬂammation and improves functional recovery after spinal cord injury . J . Exp . Med . 202 , 145 – 156 . Brenner , M . , Johnson , A . B . , Boespﬂug - Tanguy , O . , Rodriguez , D . , Goldman , J . E . , and Messing , A . ( 2001 ) . Mutations in GFAP , encoding glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein , are associated with Alexander disease . Nat . Genet . 27 , 117 – 120 . Buckingham , S . C . , Campbell , S . L . , Haas , B . R . , Montana , V . , Robel , S . , Ogun - rinu , T . , and Sontheimer , H . ( 2011 ) . Glutamate release by primary brain tumors induces epileptic activity . Nat . Med . 17 , 1269 – 1274 . Burda , J . E . , Radulovic , M . , Yoon , H . , and Scarisbrick , I . A . ( 2013 ) . Critical role for PAR1 in kallikrein 6 - mediated oligodendrogliopathy . Glia 61 , 1456 – 1470 . Bush , T . G . , Puvanachandra , N . , Horner , C . H . , Polito , A . , Ostenfeld , T . , Svend - sen , C . N . , Mucke , L . , Johnson , M . H . , and Sofroniew , M . V . ( 1999 ) . Leukocyte inﬁltration , neuronal degeneration , and neurite outgrowth after ablation of scar - forming , reactive astrocytes in adult transgenic mice . Neuron 23 , 297 – 308 . Carmichael , S . T . ( 2006 ) . Cellular and molecular mechanisms of neural repair after stroke : making waves . Ann . Neurol . 59 , 735 – 742 . Casella , G . T . , Marcillo , A . , Bunge , M . B . , and Wood , P . M . ( 2002 ) . New vascular tissue rapidly replaces neural parenchyma and vessels destroyed by a contu - sion injury to the rat spinal cord . Exp . Neurol . 173 , 63 – 76 . Chan , J . K . , Roth , J . , Oppenheim , J . J . , Tracey , K . J . , Vogl , T . , Feldmann , M . , Horwood , N . , and Nanchahal , J . ( 2012 ) . Alarmins : awaiting aclinical response . J . Clin . Invest . 122 , 2711 – 2719 . Clarkson , A . N . , Huang , B . S . , Macisaac , S . E . , Mody , I . , and Carmichael , S . T . ( 2010 ) . Reducing excessive GABA - mediated tonic inhibition promotes func - tional recovery after stroke . Nature 468 , 305 – 309 . Courtine , G . , Song , B . , Roy , R . R . , Zhong , H . , Herrmann , J . E . , Ao , Y . , Qi , J . , Edgerton , V . R . , and Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2008 ) . Recovery of supraspinal control ofsteppingvia indirect propriospinal relay connectionsafter spinal cord injury . Nat . Med . 14 , 69 – 74 . Daneman , R . , Zhou , L . , Kebede , A . A . , and Barres , B . A . ( 2010 ) . Pericytes are required for blood - brain barrier integrity during embryogenesis . Nature 468 , 562 – 566 . Davalos , D . , Grutzendler , J . , Yang , G . , Kim , J . V . , Zuo , Y . , Jung , S . , Littman , D . R . , Dustin , M . L . , and Gan , W . B . ( 2005 ) . ATP mediates rapid microglial response to local brain injury in vivo . Nat . Neurosci . 8 , 752 – 758 . Davis , G . E . , and Senger , D . R . ( 2005 ) . Endothelial extracellular matrix : biosynthesis , remodeling , and functions during vascular morphogenesis and neovessel stabilization . Circ . Res . 97 , 1093 – 1107 . DeKosky , S . T . , Blennow , K . , Ikonomovic , M . D . , and Gandy , S . ( 2013 ) . Acute and chronic traumatic encephalopathies : pathogenesis and biomarkers . Nat . Rev . Neurol . 9 , 192 – 200 . Derecki , N . C . , Cronk , J . C . , Lu , Z . , Xu , E . , Abbott , S . B . , Guyenet , P . G . , and Kipnis , J . ( 2012 ) . Wild - type microglia arrest pathology in a mouse model of Rett syndrome . Nature 484 , 105 – 109 . Devinsky , O . , Vezzani , A . , Najjar , S . , De Lanerolle , N . C . , and Rogawski , M . A . ( 2013 ) . Glia and epilepsy : excitability and inﬂammation . Trends Neurosci . 36 , 174 – 184 . Dirnagl , U . , Iadecola , C . , and Moskowitz , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Pathobiology of ischae - mic stroke : an integrated view . Trends Neurosci . 22 , 391 – 397 . Dro¨gemu¨ller , K . , Helmuth , U . , Brunn , A . , Sakowicz - Burkiewicz , M . , Gutmann , D . H . , Mueller , W . , Deckert , M . , and Schlu¨ter , D . ( 2008 ) . Astrocyte gp130 expression is critical for the control of Toxoplasma encephalitis . J . Immunol . 181 , 2683 – 2693 . Dugas , J . C . , Mandemakers , W . , Rogers , M . , Ibrahim , A . , Daneman , R . , and Barres , B . A . ( 2008 ) . A novel puriﬁcation method for CNS projection neurons leads to the identiﬁcation of brain vascular cells as a source of trophic support for corticospinal motor neurons . J . Neurosci . 28 , 8294 – 8305 . Failli , V . , Kopp , M . A . , Gericke , C . , Martus , P . , Klingbeil , S . , Brommer , B . , Lagi - nha , I . , Chen , Y . , DeVivo , M . J . , Dirnagl , U . , and Schwab , J . M . ( 2012 ) . Func - tional neurological recovery after spinal cord injury is impaired in patients with infections . Brain 135 , 3238 – 3250 . Faulkner , J . R . , Herrmann , J . E . , Woo , M . J . , Tansey , K . E . , Doan , N . B . , and Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2004 ) . Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and preserve func - tion after spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 24 , 2143 – 2155 . Franklin , R . J . , and Ffrench - Constant , C . ( 2008 ) . Remyelination in the CNS : from biology to therapy . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 9 , 839 – 855 . Frohman , E . M . , Racke , M . K . , and Raine , C . S . ( 2006 ) . Multiple sclerosis—the plaque and its pathogenesis . N . Engl . J . Med . 354 , 942 – 955 . Gadea , A . , Schinelli , S . , and Gallo , V . ( 2008 ) . Endothelin - 1 regulates astrocyte proliferation and reactive gliosis via a JNK / c - Jun signaling pathway . J . Neurosci . 28 , 2394 – 2408 . Gao , H . M . , Zhou , H . , Zhang , F . , Wilson , B . C . , Kam , W . , and Hong , J . S . ( 2011 ) . HMGB1 acts on microglia Mac1 to mediate chronic neuroinﬂammation that drives progressive neurodegeneration . J . Neurosci . 31 , 1081 – 1092 . Garcia , A . D . R . , Doan , N . B . , Imura , T . , Bush , T . G . , and Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2004 ) . GFAP - expressing progenitors are the principal source of constitutive neuro - genesis in adult mouse forebrain . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 1233 – 1241 . Garcı´a - Alı´as , G . , Barkhuysen , S . , Buckle , M . , and Fawcett , J . W . ( 2009 ) . Chon - droitinase ABC treatment opens a window of opportunity for task - speciﬁc rehabilitation . Nat . Neurosci . 12 , 1145 – 1151 . Gleichman , A . J . , andCarmichael , S . T . ( 2013 ) . Astrocytictherapiesforneuronal repair in stroke . Neurosci . Lett . Published online October 31 , 2013 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neulet . 2013 . 10 . 055 . Go¨ritz , C . , Dias , D . O . , Tomilin , N . , Barbacid , M . , Shupliakov , O . , and Frise´n , J . ( 2011 ) . A pericyte origin of spinal cord scar tissue . Science 333 , 238 – 242 . Greaves , N . S . , Ashcroft , K . J . , Baguneid , M . , and Bayat , A . ( 2013 ) . Current understanding of molecular and cellular mechanisms in ﬁbroplasia and angio - genesis during acute wound healing . J . Dermatol . Sci . 72 , 206 – 217 . Grifﬁths , M . R . , Gasque , P . , and Neal , J . W . ( 2010 ) . The regulation of the CNS innate immune response is vital for the restoration of tissue homeostasis ( repair ) after acute brain injury : a brief review . Int . J . Inﬂamm . 2010 , 151097 . Gurtner , G . C . , Werner , S . , Barrandon , Y . , and Longaker , M . T . ( 2008 ) . Wound repair and regeneration . Nature 453 , 314 – 321 . Halassa , M . M . , and Haydon , P . G . ( 2010 ) . Integrated brain circuits : astrocytic networks modulate neuronal activity and behavior . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 72 , 335 – 355 . Hamby , M . E . , Coppola , G . , Ao , Y . , Geschwind , D . H . , Khakh , B . S . , and Sofro - niew , M . V . ( 2012 ) . Inﬂammatory mediators alter the astrocyte transcriptome and calcium signaling elicited by multiple G - protein - coupled receptors . J . Neurosci . 32 , 14489 – 14510 . Hamilton , N . B . , and Attwell , D . ( 2010 ) . Do astrocytes really exocytose neuro - transmitters ? Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 11 , 227 – 238 . Hanisch , U . K . , and Kettenmann , H . ( 2007 ) . Microglia : active sensor and versatile effector cells in the normal and pathologic brain . Nat . Neurosci . 10 , 1387 – 1394 . Haroon , F . , Dro¨gemu¨ller , K . , Ha¨ndel , U . , Brunn , A . , Reinhold , D . , Nishanth , G . , Mueller , W . , Trautwein , C . , Ernst , M . , Deckert , M . , and Schlu¨ter , D . ( 2011 ) . Gp130 - dependent astrocytic survival is critical for the control of autoimmune central nervous system inﬂammation . J . Immunol . 186 , 6521 – 6531 . Hayakawa , K . , Pham , L . D . , Katusic , Z . S . , Arai , K . , and Lo , E . H . ( 2012 ) . Astro - cytichigh - mobilitygroupbox1promotes endothelialprogenitorcell - mediated neurovascular remodeling during stroke recovery . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 7505 – 7510 . Henneberger , C . , Papouin , T . , Oliet , S . H . , and Rusakov , D . A . ( 2010 ) . Long - term potentiation depends on release of D - serine from astrocytes . Nature 463 , 232 – 236 . Hermanns , S . , Klapka , N . , Gasis , M . , andMu¨ller , H . W . ( 2006 ) . Thecollagenous woundhealingscarintheinjuredcentralnervoussysteminhibitsaxonalregen - eration . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 557 , 177 – 190 . Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 245 Neuron Review Herrmann , J . E . , Imura , T . , Song , B . , Qi , J . , Ao , Y . , Nguyen , T . K . , Korsak , R . A . , Takeda , K . , Akira , S . , and Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2008 ) . STAT3 is a critical regulator of astrogliosis and scar formation after spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 28 , 7231 – 7243 . Hughes , E . G . , Kang , S . H . , Fukaya , M . , and Bergles , D . E . ( 2013 ) . Oligodendro - cyte progenitors balance growth with self - repulsion to achieve homeostasis in the adult brain . Nat . Neurosci . 16 , 668 – 676 . Jabs , R . , Seifert , G . , and Steinha¨user , C . ( 2008 ) . Astrocytic function and its alteration in the epileptic brain . Epilepsia 49 ( Suppl 2 ) , 3 – 12 . Jackman , N . A . , Uliasz , T . F . , Hewett , J . A . , and Hewett , S . J . ( 2010 ) . Regulation of system x ( c ) ( - ) activity and expression in astrocytes by interleukin - 1 b : impli - cations for hypoxic neuronal injury . Glia 58 , 1806 – 1815 . Jaerve , A . , Bosse , F . , andMu¨ller , H . W . ( 2012 ) . SDF - 1 / CXCL12 : itsroleinspinal cord injury . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 44 , 452 – 456 . Kawaja , M . D . , and Gage , F . H . ( 1991 ) . Reactive astrocytes are substrates for the growth of adult CNS axons in the presence of elevated levels of nerve growth factor . Neuron 7 , 1019 – 1030 . Kimura - Kuroda , J . , Teng , X . , Komuta , Y . , Yoshioka , N . , Sango , K . , Kawamura , K . , Raisman , G . , and Kawano , H . ( 2010 ) . An in vitro model of the inhibition of axon growth in the lesion scar formed after central nervous system injury . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 43 , 177 – 187 . Klapka , N . , and Mu¨ller , H . W . ( 2006 ) . Collagen matrix in spinal cord injury . J . Neurotrauma 23 , 422 – 435 . Kokaia , Z . , Martino , G . , Schwartz , M . , and Lindvall , O . ( 2012 ) . Cross - talk between neural stem cells and immune cells : the key to better brain repair ? Nat . Neurosci . 15 , 1078 – 1087 . Kono , H . , and Rock , K . L . ( 2008 ) . How dying cells alert the immune system to danger . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 8 , 279 – 289 . Kraft , A . W . , Hu , X . , Yoon , H . , Yan , P . , Xiao , Q . , Wang , Y . , Gil , S . C . , Brown , J . , Wilhelmsson , U . , Restivo , J . L . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Attenuating astrocyte activation accelerates plaque pathogenesis in APP / PS1 mice . FASEB J . 27 , 187 – 198 . Kreutzberg , G . W . ( 1996 ) . Microglia : a sensor for pathological events in the CNS . Trends Neurosci . 19 , 312 – 318 . Kriegstein , A . , and Alvarez - Buylla , A . ( 2009 ) . The glial nature of embryonic and adult neural stem cells . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 32 , 149 – 184 . Lagace , D . C . ( 2012 ) . Does the endogenous neurogenic response alter behav - ioral recovery following stroke ? Behav . Brain Res . 227 , 426 – 432 . Lemmens , R . , and Steinberg , G . K . ( 2013 ) . Stem cell therapy for acute cerebral injury : what do we know and what will the future bring ? Curr . Opin . Neurol . 26 , 617 – 625 . Lennon , V . A . , Kryzer , T . J . , Pittock , S . J . , Verkman , A . S . , and Hinson , S . R . ( 2005 ) . IgG marker of optic - spinal multiple sclerosis binds to the aquaporin - 4 water channel . J . Exp . Med . 202 , 473 – 477 . Li , L . , Lundkvist , A . , Andersson , D . , Wilhelmsson , U . , Nagai , N . , Pardo , A . C . , Nodin , C . , Sta˚hlberg , A . , Aprico , K . , Larsson , K . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Protective role of reactive astrocytes in brain ischemia . J . Cereb . Blood Flow Metab . 28 , 468 – 481 . Li , S . , Overman , J . J . , Katsman , D . , Kozlov , S . V . , Donnelly , C . J . , Twiss , J . L . , Giger , R . J . , Coppola , G . , Geschwind , D . H . , and Carmichael , S . T . ( 2010 ) . An age - related sprouting transcriptome provides molecular control of axonal sprouting after stroke . Nat . Neurosci . 13 , 1496 – 1504 . Lindvall , O . , and Kokaia , Z . ( 2006 ) . Stem cells for the treatment of neurological disorders . Nature 441 , 1094 – 1096 . Liu , G . J . , Nagarajah , R . , Banati , R . B . , and Bennett , M . R . ( 2009 ) . Glutamate induces directed chemotaxis of microglia . Eur . J . Neurosci . 29 , 1108 – 1118 . Lo , E . H . ( 2008 ) . A new penumbra : transitioning from injury into repair after stroke . Nat . Med . 14 , 497 – 500 . Logan , A . , and Berry , M . ( 2002 ) . Cellular and molecular determinants of glial scar formation . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 513 , 115 – 158 . London , A . , Cohen , M . , and Schwartz , M . ( 2013 ) . Microglia and monocyte - derived macrophages : functionally distinct populations that act in concert in CNS plasticity and repair . Front . Cell . Neurosci . 7 , 34 . Louis , D . N . ( 2006 ) . Molecular pathology of malignant gliomas . Annu . Rev . Pathol . 1 , 97 – 117 . Loy , D . N . , Crawford , C . H . , Darnall , J . B . , Burke , D . A . , Onifer , S . M . , and Whitte - more , S . R . ( 2002 ) . Temporal progression of angiogenesis and basal lamina deposition after contusive spinal cord injury in the adult rat . J . Comp . Neurol . 445 , 308 – 324 . Lu , P . , Wang , Y . , Graham , L . , McHale , K . , Gao , M . , Wu , D . , Brock , J . , Blesch , A . , Rosenzweig , E . S . , Havton , L . A . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Long - distance growth and connectivity of neural stem cells after severe spinal cord injury . Cell 150 , 1264 – 1273 . Lucchinetti , C . F . , Bru¨ck , W . , Rodriguez , M . , and Lassmann , H . ( 1996 ) . Distinct patterns of multiple sclerosis pathology indicates heterogeneity on pathogen - esis . Brain Pathol . 6 , 259 – 274 . MacIver , N . J . , Michalek , R . D . , and Rathmell , J . C . ( 2013 ) . Metabolic regulation of T lymphocytes . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 31 , 259 – 283 . Maragakis , N . J . , and Rothstein , J . D . ( 2006 ) . Mechanisms of Disease : astro - cytes in neurodegenerative disease . Nat . Clin . Pract . Neurol . 2 , 679 – 689 . Martino , G . , and Pluchino , S . ( 2006 ) . The therapeutic potential of neural stem cells . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 7 , 395 – 406 . Mattson , M . P . ( 2000 ) . Apoptosis in neurodegenerative disorders . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 120 – 129 . Mattson , M . P . ( 2012 ) . Energy intake and exercise as determinants of brain health and vulnerability to injury and disease . Cell Metab . 16 , 706 – 722 . McIntosh , T . K . , Vink , R . , Noble , L . , Yamakami , I . , Fernyak , S . , Soares , H . , and Faden , A . L . ( 1989 ) . Traumaticbraininjuryintherat : characterizationofalateral ﬂuid - percussion model . Neuroscience 28 , 233 – 244 . Meletis , K . , Barnabe´ - Heider , F . , Carle´n , M . , Evergren , E . , Tomilin , N . , Shuplia - kov , O . , and Frise´n , J . ( 2008 ) . Spinal cord injury reveals multilineage differen - tiation of ependymal cells . PLoS Biol . 6 , e182 . Midwood , K . S . , Williams , L . V . , and Schwarzbauer , J . E . ( 2004 ) . Tissue repair and the dynamics of the extracellular matrix . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 36 , 1031 – 1037 . Mills , K . H . ( 2011 ) . TLR - dependent T cell activation in autoimmunity . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 11 , 807 – 822 . Mosser , D . M . , and Edwards , J . P . ( 2008 ) . Exploring thefull spectrum ofmacro - phage activation . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 8 , 958 – 969 . Myer , D . J . , Gurkoff , G . G . , Lee , S . M . , Hovda , D . A . , and Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2006 ) . Essential protective roles of reactive astrocytes in traumatic brain injury . Brain 129 , 2761 – 2772 . Neary , J . T . , Kang , Y . , Willoughby , K . A . , and Ellis , E . F . ( 2003 ) . Activation of extracellular signal - regulated kinase by stretch - induced injury in astrocytes involves extracellular ATP and P2 purinergic receptors . J . Neurosci . 23 , 2348 – 2356 . Nimmerjahn , A . , Kirchhoff , F . , andHelmchen , F . ( 2005 ) . Restingmicroglialcells are highly dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo . Science 308 , 1314 – 1318 . Nishiyama , A . , Komitova , M . , Suzuki , R . , and Zhu , X . ( 2009 ) . Polydendrocytes ( NG2cells ) : multifunctionalcells withlineageplasticity . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 10 , 9 – 22 . Ohab , J . J . , and Carmichael , S . T . ( 2008 ) . Poststroke neurogenesis : emerging principles of migration and localization of immature neurons . Neuroscientist 14 , 369 – 380 . Okada , S . , Nakamura , M . , Katoh , H . , Miyao , T . , Shimazaki , T . , Ishii , K . , Yamane , J . , Yoshimura , A . , Iwamoto , Y . , Toyama , Y . , and Okano , H . ( 2006 ) . Conditional ablation of Stat3 or Socs3 discloses a dual role for reactive astro - cytes after spinal cord injury . Nat . Med . 12 , 829 – 834 . 246 Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review Ortinski , P . I . , Dong , J . , Mungenast , A . , Yue , C . , Takano , H . , Watson , D . J . , Hay - don , P . G . , and Coulter , D . A . ( 2010 ) . Selective induction of astrocytic gliosis generates deﬁcits in neuronal inhibition . Nat . Neurosci . 13 , 584 – 591 . Oudega , M . ( 2012 ) . Molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the role of blood vessels in spinal cord injury and repair . Cell Tissue Res . 349 , 269 – 288 . Overman , J . J . , Clarkson , A . N . , Wanner , I . B . , Overman , W . T . , Eckstein , I . , Maguire , J . L . , Dinov , I . D . , Toga , A . W . , and Carmichael , S . T . ( 2012 ) . A role for ephrin - A5inaxonalsprouting , recovery , andactivity - dependentplasticityafter stroke . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , E2230 – E2239 . Pakulska , M . M . , Ballios , B . G . , and Shoichet , M . S . ( 2012 ) . Injectable hydrogels for central nervous system therapy . Biomed . Mater . 7 , 024101 . Perry , V . H . ( 2010 ) . Contribution of systemic inﬂammation to chronic neurode - generation . Acta Neuropathol . 120 , 277 – 286 . Perry , V . H . , Cunningham , C . , and Holmes , C . ( 2007 ) . Systemic infections and inﬂammation affect chronic neurodegeneration . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 7 , 161 – 167 . Piao , C . S . , Stoica , B . A . , Wu , J . , Sabirzhanov , B . , Zhao , Z . , Cabatbat , R . , Loane , D . J . , and Faden , A . I . ( 2013 ) . Late exercise reduces neuroinﬂammation and cognitive dysfunction after traumatic brain injury . Neurobiol . Dis . 54 , 252 – 263 . Popescu , B . F . , and Lucchinetti , C . F . ( 2012 ) . Pathology of demyelinating diseases . Annu . Rev . Pathol . 7 , 185 – 217 . Popovich , P . G . , and Longbrake , E . E . ( 2008 ) . Can the immune system be harnessed to repair the CNS ? Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 9 , 481 – 493 . Prokop , S . , Miller , K . R . , and Heppner , F . L . ( 2013 ) . Microglia actions in Alzheimer’s disease . Acta Neuropathol . 126 , 461 – 477 . Radulovic , M . , Yoon , H . , Larson , N . , Wu , J . , Linbo , R . , Burda , J . E . , Diamandis , E . P . , Blaber , S . I . , Blaber , M . , Fehlings , M . G . , and Scarisbrick , I . A . ( 2013 ) . Kallikrein cascades in traumatic spinal cord injury : in vitro evidence for roles in axonopathy and neuron degeneration . J . Neuropathol . Exp . Neurol . 72 , 1072 – 1089 . Ransohoff , R . M . , and Perry , V . H . ( 2009 ) . Microglial physiology : unique stimuli , specialized responses . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 27 , 119 – 145 . Reilkoff , R . A . , Bucala , R . , and Herzog , E . L . ( 2011 ) . Fibrocytes : emerging effector cells in chronic inﬂammation . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 11 , 427 – 435 . Rothstein , J . D . ( 2009 ) . Current hypothesesfor the underlying biology of amyo - trophic lateral sclerosis . Ann . Neurol . 65 ( Suppl 1 ) , S3 – S9 . Sahni , V . , Mukhopadhyay , A . , Tysseling , V . , Hebert , A . , Birch , D . , Mcguire , T . L . , Stupp , S . I . , and Kessler , J . A . ( 2010 ) . BMPR1a and BMPR1b signaling exert opposing effects on gliosis after spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 30 , 1839 – 1855 . Seo , J . H . , Miyamoto , N . , Hayakawa , K . , Pham , L . D . , Maki , T . , Ayata , C . , Kim , K . W . , Lo , E . H . , and Arai , K . ( 2013 ) . Oligodendrocyte precursors induce early blood - brain barrier opening after white matter injury . J . Clin . Invest . 123 , 782 – 786 . Shechter , R . , and Schwartz , M . ( 2013 ) . CNS sterile injury : just another wound healing ? Trends Mol . Med . 19 , 135 – 143 . Shigetomi , E . , Bowser , D . N . , Sofroniew , M . V . , and Khakh , B . S . ( 2008 ) . Two forms of astrocyte calcium excitability have distinct effects on NMDA recep - tor - mediated slow inward currents in pyramidal neurons . J . Neurosci . 28 , 6659 – 6663 . Shirakawa , H . , Sakimoto , S . , Nakao , K . , Sugishita , A . , Konno , M . , Iida , S . , Kusano , A . , Hashimoto , E . , Nakagawa , T . , and Kaneko , S . ( 2010 ) . Transient receptor potential canonical 3 ( TRPC3 ) mediates thrombin - induced astrocyte activation and upregulates its own expression in cortical astrocytes . J . Neurosci . 30 , 13116 – 13129 . Silver , J . , and Miller , J . H . ( 2004 ) . Regeneration beyond the glial scar . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 5 , 146 – 156 . Silver , J . , Edwards , M . A . , and Levitt , P . ( 1993 ) . Immunocytochemical demon - strationofearlyappearingastroglialstructuresthatformboundariesandpath - ways along axon tracts in the fetal brain . J . Comp . Neurol . 328 , 415 – 436 . Silver , D . J . , Siebzehnrubl , F . A . , Schildts , M . J . , Yachnis , A . T . , Smith , G . M . , Smith , A . A . , Schefﬂer , B . , Reynolds , B . A . , Silver , J . , and Steindler , D . A . ( 2013 ) . Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans potently inhibit invasion and serve as a central organizer of the brain tumor microenvironment . J . Neurosci . 33 , 15603 – 15617 . Singer , A . J . , andClark , R . A . ( 1999 ) . Cutaneouswoundhealing . N . Engl . J . Med . 341 , 738 – 746 . Sirko , S . , Behrendt , G . , Johansson , P . A . , Tripathi , P . , Costa , M . , Bek , S . , Hein - rich , C . , Tiedt , S . , Colak , D . , Dichgans , M . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Reactive glia in the injured brain acquire stem cell properties in response to sonic hedgehog . [ corrected ] . Cell Stem Cell 12 , 426 – 439 . Snyder , E . Y . , and Teng , Y . D . ( 2012 ) . Stem cells and spinal cordrepair . N . Engl . J . Med . 366 , 1940 – 1942 . Soderblom , C . , Luo , X . , Blumenthal , E . , Bray , E . , Lyapichev , K . , Ramos , J . , Krishnan , V . , Lai - Hsu , C . , Park , K . K . , Tsoulfas , P . , and Lee , J . K . ( 2013 ) . Peri - vascular ﬁbroblasts form the ﬁbrotic scar after contusive spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 33 , 13882 – 13887 . Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2005 ) . Reactive astrocytes in neural repair and protection . Neuroscientist 11 , 400 – 407 . Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2009 ) . Molecular dissection of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation . Trends Neurosci . 32 , 638 – 647 . Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2013 ) . Multiple roles for astrocytes as effectors of cytokines and inﬂammatory mediators . Neuroscientist . Published online October 8 , 2013 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1073858413504466 . Sofroniew , M . V . , and Vinters , H . V . ( 2010 ) . Astrocytes : biology and pathology . Acta Neuropathol . 119 , 7 – 35 . Song , B . , Song , J . , Zhang , S . , Anderson , M . A . , Ao , Y . , Yang , C . Y . , Deming , T . J . , and Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2012 ) . Sustained local delivery of bioactive nerve growth factor in the central nervous system via tunable diblock copolypeptide hydrogel depots . Biomaterials 33 , 9105 – 9116 . Srivastava , R . , Aslam , M . , Kalluri , S . R . , Schirmer , L . , Buck , D . , Tackenberg , B . , Rothhammer , V . , Chan , A . , Gold , R . , Berthele , A . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Potassium channel KIR4 . 1 as an immune target in multiple sclerosis . N . Engl . J . Med . 367 , 115 – 123 . Stephan , A . H . , Barres , B . A . , and Stevens , B . ( 2012 ) . The complement system : an unexpected role in synaptic pruning during development and disease . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 35 , 369 – 389 . Stevens , B . , Allen , N . J . , Vazquez , L . E . , Howell , G . R . , Christopherson , K . S . , Nouri , N . , Micheva , K . D . , Mehalow , A . K . , Huberman , A . D . , Stafford , B . , et al . ( 2007 ) . The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse elimina - tion . Cell 131 , 1164 – 1178 . Sun , F . , Lin , C . L . , McTigue , D . , Shan , X . , Tovar , C . A . , Bresnahan , J . C . , and Beattie , M . S . ( 2010 ) . Effects of axon degeneration on oligodendrocyte lineage cells : dorsal rhizotomy evokes a repair response while axon degeneration rostral to spinal contusion induces both repair and apoptosis . Glia 58 , 1304 – 1319 . Suo , Z . , Wu , M . , Ameenuddin , S . , Anderson , H . E . , Zoloty , J . E . , Citron , B . A . , Andrade - Gordon , P . , and Festoff , B . W . ( 2002 ) . Participation of protease - acti - vated receptor - 1 in thrombin - induced microglial activation . J . Neurochem . 80 , 655 – 666 . Tao , J . , Wu , H . , Lin , Q . , Wei , W . , Lu , X . H . , Cantle , J . P . , Ao , Y . , Olsen , R . W . , Yang , X . W . , Mody , I . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Deletion of astroglial Dicer causes non - cell - autonomous neuronal dysfunction and degeneration . J . Neurosci . 31 , 8306 – 8319 . Tong , X . , Shigetomi , E . , Looger , L . L . , and Khakh , B . S . ( 2013 ) . Genetically encoded calcium indicators and astrocyte calcium microdomains . Neurosci - entist 19 , 274 – 291 . Tuszynski , M . H . , and Steward , O . ( 2012 ) . Concepts and methods for the study of axonal regeneration in the CNS . Neuron 74 , 777 – 791 . van den Brand , R . , Heutschi , J . , Barraud , Q . , DiGiovanna , J . , Bartholdi , K . , Huerlimann , M . , Friedli , L . , Vollenweider , I . , Moraud , E . M . , Duis , S . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Restoring voluntary control of locomotion after paralyzing spinal cord injury . Science 336 , 1182 – 1185 . Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 247 Neuron Review Varki , A . , and Gagneux , P . ( 2012 ) . Multifarious roles of sialic acids in immunity . Ann . N Y Acad . Sci . 1253 , 16 – 36 . Verkhratsky , A . , Orkand , R . K . , and Kettenmann , H . ( 1998 ) . Glial calcium : homeostasis and signaling function . Physiol . Rev . 78 , 99 – 141 . Volterra , A . , and Meldolesi , J . ( 2005 ) . Astrocytes , from brain glue to communi - cation elements : the revolution continues . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 6 , 626 – 640 . Voskuhl , R . R . , Peterson , R . S . , Song , B . , Ao , Y . , Morales , L . B . , Tiwari - Wood - ruff , S . , and Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2009 ) . Reactive astrocytes form scar - like peri - vascular barriers to leukocytes during adaptive immune inﬂammation of the CNS . J . Neurosci . 29 , 11511 – 11522 . Walsh , J . T . , and Kipnis , J . ( 2011 ) . Regulatory T cells in CNS injury : the simple , the complex and the confused . Trends Mol . Med . 17 , 541 – 547 . Wang , D . , and Fawcett , J . ( 2012 ) . The perineuronal net and the control of CNS plasticity . Cell Tissue Res . 349 , 147 – 160 . Wanner , I . B . , Anderson , M . A . , Song , B . , Levine , J . , Fernandez , A . , Gray - Thompson , Z . , Ao , Y . , and Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2013 ) . Glial scar borders are formed by newly proliferated , elongated astrocytes that interact to corral inﬂammatory and ﬁbrotic cells via STAT3 - dependent mechanisms after spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 33 , 12870 – 12886 . Watkins , S . , and Sontheimer , H . ( 2012 ) . Unique biology of gliomas : challenges and opportunities . Trends Neurosci . 35 , 546 – 556 . Wetherington , J . , Serrano , G . , and Dingledine , R . ( 2008 ) . Astrocytes in the epileptic brain . Neuron 58 , 168 – 178 . Williams , R . R . , Henao , M . , Pearse , D . D . , and Bunge , M . B . ( 2013 ) . Permissive Schwann Cell Graft / Spinal Cord Interfaces for Axon Regeneration . Cell Trans - plant . Published online October 22 , 2013 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3727 / 096368913X674657 . Winkler , E . A . , Bell , R . D . , and Zlokovic , B . V . ( 2011 ) . Central nervous system pericytes in health and disease . Nat . Neurosci . 14 , 1398 – 1405 . Winkler , E . A . , Sengillo , J . D . , Sullivan , J . S . , Henkel , J . S . , Appel , S . H . , and Zlokovic , B . V . ( 2013 ) . Blood - spinal cord barrier breakdown and pericyte reductions in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . Acta Neuropathol . 125 , 111 – 120 . Wyss - Coray , T . , Loike , J . D . , Brionne , T . C . , Lu , E . , Anankov , R . , Yan , F . , Silver - stein , S . C . , and Husemann , J . ( 2003 ) . Adult mouse astrocytes degrade amy - loid - beta in vitro and in situ . Nat . Med . 9 , 453 – 457 . Yamanaka , K . , Chun , S . J . , Boillee , S . , Fujimori - Tonou , N . , Yamashita , H . , Gut - mann , D . H . , Takahashi , R . , Misawa , H . , and Cleveland , D . W . ( 2008 ) . Astro - cytes as determinants of disease progression in inherited amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . Nat . Neurosci . 11 , 251 – 253 . Yang , C . Y . , Song , B . , Ao , Y . , Nowak , A . P . , Abelowitz , R . B . , Korsak , R . A . , Havton , L . A . , Deming , T . J . , and Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2009 ) . Biocompatibility of amphiphilic diblock copolypeptide hydrogels in the central nervous system . Biomaterials 30 , 2881 – 2898 . Yoshioka , N . , Hisanaga , S . , and Kawano , H . ( 2010 ) . Suppression of ﬁbrotic scar formation promotes axonal regeneration without disturbing blood - brain barrier repair and withdrawal of leukocytes after traumatic brain injury . J . Comp . Neurol . 518 , 3867 – 3881 . Zamanian , J . L . , Xu , L . , Foo , L . C . , Nouri , N . , Zhou , L . , Giffard , R . G . , and Barres , B . A . ( 2012 ) . Genomic analysis of reactive astrogliosis . J . Neurosci . 32 , 6391 – 6410 . Zhang , S . , Anderson , M . A . , Ao , Y . , Khakh , B . S . , Fan , J . , Deming , T . J . , and Sofroniew , M . V . ( 2014 ) . Tunable diblock copolypeptide hydrogel depots for local delivery of hydrophobic molecules in healthy and injured central nervous system . Biomaterials 35 , 1989 – 2000 . Zheng , W . , Watts , L . T . , Holstein , D . M . , Prajapati , S . I . , Keller , C . , Grass , E . H . , Walter , C . A . , and Lechleiter , J . D . ( 2010 ) . Purinergic receptor stimulation reduces cytotoxic edema and brain infarcts inmouseinduced by photothrom - bosis by energizing glial mitochondria . PLoS ONE 5 , e14401 . Zhong , Z . , Deane , R . , Ali , Z . , Parisi , M . , Shapovalov , Y . , O’Banion , M . K . , Sto - janovic , K . , Sagare , A . , Boillee , S . , Cleveland , D . W . , and Zlokovic , B . V . ( 2008 ) . ALS - causing SOD1 mutants generate vascular changes prior to motor neuron degeneration . Nat . Neurosci . 11 , 420 – 422 . Zlokovic , B . V . ( 2008 ) . The blood - brain barrier in health and chronic neurode - generative disorders . Neuron 57 , 178 – 201 . Zlokovic , B . V . ( 2011 ) . Neurovascular pathways to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and other disorders . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 12 , 723 – 738 . Zukor , K . , Belin , S . , Wang , C . , Keelan , N . , Wang , X . , and He , Z . ( 2013 ) . Short hairpinRNAagainstPTENenhancesregenerativegrowthofcorticospinaltractaxonsafterspinalcordinjury . J . Neurosci . 33 , 15350 – 15361 . 248 Neuron 81 , January 22 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review