JCB JCB : Article 701 The Rockefeller University Press J . Cell Biol . Vol . 217 No . 2 701 – 714 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201705160 Introduction The actin cytoskeleton is involved in almost all aspects of cell behavior , but most clearly cell migration , endocytosis , adhesion , and cell division ( Insall and Machesky , 2009 ) . Each depends on formation of multiple actin - based structures through the coordi - nated activity of various actin regulatory proteins . How differ - ent combinations of these proteins are brought together at the right time and place within the cell to promote the formation of a particular actin - based structure is still poorly understood . Cell migration is further complicated by the fact that cells can use a wide repertoire of actin regulators to form several different types of protrusion with different dynamics . The Arp2 / 3 complex generates thick meshes of branched F - actin ( Pollard , 2007 ) that support the formation of broad cel - lular protrusions known as pseudopods or lamellipods . Con - versely , formins form unbranched actin filaments ( Pollard , 2007 ) , which are used in several different cellular processes . Filopods—narrow cellular projections made of bundled actin filaments—may be made from formin - or Arp2 / 3 - generated actin . Cells can also extend their edges using blebs , which form when actin fills an area of plasma membrane that has detached and bulged outward from the cell ( Paluch and Raz , 2013 ) . Neither the Arp2 / 3 complex nor formins are enriched at sites where blebs occur , although the actin that polymerizes behind blebs after they have formed contains some Arp2 / 3 complex ( Tyson et al . , 2014 ) . Contractility driven by actin and the motor protein myosin II ( collectively actomyosin ) is es - sential for the initial separation of the plasma membrane from the underlying actin cortex ( Diz - Muñoz et al . , 2010 ) , but the regulators that catalyze the actin polymerization observed as blebs are filled are unknown . Pseudopods , filopods , and blebs can be used individually or in different combinations to promote cell motility . This is perhaps most evident in the highly motile Dictyostelium dis - coideum , which is widely used for studies of actin regulation and cell migration . Dictyostelium normally migrates by extend - ing a mixture of both pseudopods and blebs ( Tyson et al . , 2014 ) . However , cell migration can be driven to favor pseudopods or blebs using genetics or pharmacology or by physical means . For instance , inhibition of actomyosin contractility inhibits blebbing ( Yoshida and Soldati , 2006 ; Ibo et al . , 2016 ) , whereas subjecting cells to increased compression favors blebbing over pseudopod formation ( Zatulovskiy and Kay , 2016 ) . In all eukaryotic cells , the subcellular localization and activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex are controlled by members of the WASP family ( Derivery and Gautreau , 2010 ) . Mammalian WASP nomenclature is confusing : WASP itself ( named after the gene mutated in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ) is restricted to blood cells and has an unusual role , whereas N - WASP ( origi - nally , but incorrectly named neural WASP ) , is ubiquitously ex - pressed . Other members of the WASP family include SCAR / WAVE and WASH ( Derivery and Gautreau , 2010 ) . Dictyos - telium possesses a single , well - conserved member of each of the WASP ( Myers et al . , 2005 ) , SCAR ( Bear et al . , 1998 ) , and WASH ( Carnell et al . , 2011 ) families . This simplicity makes it an ideal organism to separate and understand the roles of WASP , SCAR / WAVE , and WASH . Actin pseudopods induced by SCAR / WAVE drive normal migration and chemotaxis in eukaryotic cells . Cells can also migrate using blebs , in which the edge is driven forward by hydrostatic pressure instead of actin . In Dictyostelium dis - coideum , loss of SCAR is compensated by WASP moving to the leading edge to generate morphologically normal pseudopods . Here we use an inducible double knockout to show that cells lacking both SCAR and WASP are unable to grow , make pseudopods or , unexpectedly , migrate using blebs . Remarkably , amounts and dynamics of actin polymer - ization are normal . Pseudopods are replaced in double SCAR / WASP mutants by aberrant filopods , induced by the formin dDia2 . Further disruption of the gene for dDia2 restores cells’ ability to initiate blebs and thus migrate , though pseudopods are still lost . Triple knockout cells still contain near - normal F - actin levels . This work shows that SCAR , WASP , and dDia2 compete for actin . Loss of SCAR and WASP causes excessive dDia2 activity , maintaining F - actin levels but blocking pseudopod and bleb formation and migration . WASP family proteins and formins compete in pseudopod - and bleb - based migration Andrew J . Davidson , Clelia Amato , Peter A . Thomason , and Robert H . Insall Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute , Glasgow , Scotland , UK © 2018 Davidson et al . This article is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution 4 . 0 International , as described at https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . Correspondence to Robert Insall : robert . insall @ glasgow . ac . uk A . J . Davidson’s present address is Cellular and Molecular Medicine , University of Bristol , Bristol , England , UK . J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • Volume 217 • NumBer 2 • 2018 702 Like WASPs from other organisms , Dictyostelium WASP colocalizes with clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) , coinciding with actin - driven vesicle internalization ( Veltman and Insall , 2010 ) . Its localization contrasts with that of SCAR , which is normally found at the tips of growing pseudopods during migration . A study from several years ago asserted a fundamental role for WASP in pseudopod extension and cell viability ( Myers et al . , 2005 ) , but there has been little supporting evidence for this view . We recently found that WASP is able to substitute for SCAR and appears to be responsible for the residual pseudopods ex - tended by Dictyostelium scar knockout cells ( Veltman et al . , 2012 ) ; this was unexpected as the two are typically thought to be regulated by different upstream pathways , but has since been confirmed in Caenorhabditis elegans ( Zhu et al . , 2016 ) . De - spite the remarkable ability of Dictyostelium WASP to change its behavior to compensate for the loss of SCAR , it is not suf - ficient to maintain a normal rate of pseudopod formation , and migrating cells without scar make blebs at an increased rate . Therefore , cell motility is maintained in scar - null Dictyostelium through a combination of WASP - driven pseudopods and Arp2 / 3 complex – independent blebbing ( Veltman et al . , 2012 ) . Whether SCAR and , in the absence SCAR , WASP are the only proteins capable of promoting pseudopod extension is so far unknown . Furthermore , it is not understood how blebbing is regulated , nor what makes blebbing increase in the absence of SCAR , though it clearly maintains efficient motility . Current signal - based models of motility suggest that the formation of different protrusions is achieved solely by different upstream signals—for example , Rac1 specifically activating the Arp2 / 3 complex to extend a pseudopod , and RhoA / B / C regulating Diaphanous - related formins to create a filopod . The existence of cross talk between these pathways is accepted , but it is fre - quently presumed that any given protrusion is initiated by a single upstream pathway . The ability to switch between pseudo - pod - and bleb - based motility in the short term requires a degree of cytoskeletal plasticity that is not explained by such models . Recently , competition between different actin regulators for actin monomers has been shown to influence the form of an actin - based structure that is assembled ( Burke et al . , 2014 ; Rotty and Bear , 2014 ; Lomakin et al . , 2015 ) . The possibility of competition between regulators remains to be fully explored . However , it offers an attractive explanation for how the activity of a diverse set of actin regulators can be integrated and rapidly modulated to help drive dynamic behavior such as cell motility ( Davidson and Wood , 2016 ) . Here we describe a Dictyostelium mutant lacking WASP and show that it is unexpectedly both viable and able to make normal pseudopods . However , when SCAR / WAVE is also lost , pseudopods are entirely abolished , demonstrating that only WASP can substitute for SCAR during pseudopod - based mi - gration . Surprisingly , cells deficient in both SCAR and WASP are unable to switch to bleb - based motility , rendering them essentially immobile . These cells instead form an excessive number of filopods , with the Diaphanous - related formin dDia2 ( Junemann et al . , 2016 ) at their tips . When filopod formation was suppressed by the additional mutation of ddia 2 , bleb - based motility was restored . Our data therefore show that the activity of dDia2 is counterbalanced by that of the Arp2 / 3 complex . In the absence of Arp2 / 3 complex , unconstrained dDia2 activity overwhelms the cytoskeleton and blocks cell movement . Based on these findings , we concluded that Dictyostelium cell migra - tion is a product of a dynamic competition between different actin regulators . We also propose that competition is a general principle underlying regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . Results WASP is not required for Dictyostelium cell growth or chemotaxis An earlier study ( Myers et al . , 2005 ) concluded that Dictyos - telium WASP’s principal role was in pseudopod generation and maintenance , and was therefore essential for cell viability . However , this now seems surprising as mammalian cells sur - vive comfortably without N - WASP , and Dictyostelium WASP is found in clathrin pits , not normally at pseudopods ( Veltman et al . , 2012 ) . We therefore tested WASP’s roles with no threat of lethality or genetic suppression by generating a WASP - in - ducible knockout ( WIKO ) in which the genomic copy of WASP is fully disrupted and replaced by an expression construct in which GFP - tagged WASP is controlled by a tet promoter ( Fig . S1 A ) . In these cells , the expression of WASP depends on dox - ycycline ( DOX ) in the medium ; no WASP at all is detectable without it ( Fig . S1 B ) . Surprisingly , WIKO cells grew normally when WASP production was completely suppressed , showing that WASP is in fact dispensable for cell viability . We confirmed this observation by disrupting the gene for WASP , was A , in a normal axenic background to create a simple knockout ( was A − ; Fig . S1 B ) . Again , the loss of was A had no adverse affect on cell growth in liquid medium ( Fig . S1 C ) , though the mutant cells grew very poorly on bacteria ( Fig . S1 D ) , suggesting that phagocytic uptake is more seriously affected than macropinocy - tosis . Mutant cells also usually failed to aggregate ( Fig . S1 E ) or express the cAMP receptor ( Fig . S1 F ) when starved , though the completeness of this phenotype was variable . We have therefore used folate , rather than cAMP , as a chemoattractant in chemo - taxis and motility assays . We found was A − cells extended morphologically normal pseudopods , of normal sizes , and migrated robustly ( Fig . 1 , A and B ; and Video 1 ) . Quantitative assessment of pseudopod dy - namics while cells chemotaxed under agar ( Blagg et al . , 2003 ) toward folate showed that knockout cells form pseudopods at a normal rate ( Fig . 1 C ; was A − mutant 5 . 93 ± 0 . 18 pseudopods / min , GFP - WASP / was A − controls 5 . 94 ± 0 . 18 pseudopods / min , mean ± SEM ) . Detailed analysis of the cell tracks revealed a slight but statistically significant ∼ 30 % decrease in cell speed ( Fig . 1 D , P < 0 . 0001 ) in was A − cells , implying that WASP does not contribute to pseudopods in normal cells , but does affect migration through a different mechanism . Although was A mutant cells had normal pseudopods , they struggled to retract their trailing tails efficiently , explain - ing their reduced migratory speed ( Video 2 ) . Given N - WASP’s established roles in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Merrifield et al . , 2004 ) , and because Dictyostelium clathrin ( chc A ) mutant cells also have uropod defects ( Damer and O’Halloran , 2000 ; Wessels et al . , 2000 ) , we explored CCP uptake in was A − cells . When visualized by total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy , GFP - WASP colocalizes with a subset of mRFP - tagged clathrin light chain ( CLC - mRFP ; Fig . 2 A ) puncta . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is a brief and tightly regulated event in control cells , lasting 44 ± 2 ( mean ± SEM ) seconds in our hands , similar to the previous result of 39 s ( Brady et al . , 2010 ) . As shown by kymographs and intensity plots ( Fig . 2 B ) , clathrin in puncta accumulates over tens of seconds until a short WASPs and formins compete in pseudopod dynamics • Davidson et al . 703 ( 3 - 4 - s ) burst of WASP is recruited ( Video 3 ) , which induces CCP internalization and loss from TIRF images . Thus at any given time only a small proportion of coated pits have associ - ated WASP , but nearly all pits eventually recruit WASP . The clathrin puncta of was A − cells were consistently trapped on the basal membrane for fivefold longer ( 198 ± 23 s ; Fig . 2 C ) than in controls . Even this is an underestimate , as many of the CCPs in the was A − mutant had a lifetime greater than the length of the time - lapse videos . To observe recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex to CCPs , we coexpressed CLC - mRFP and GFP - ArpC4 . Just as with WASP , the Arp2 / 3 complex is normally recruited immediately before CCP internalization ( Fig . 2 D ) . In contrast , many clathrin puncta in the was A − cells persisted on the plasma membrane for hundreds of seconds , with no discernible recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Fig . 2 E ) . Additional similarities between WASP and clathrin mu - tants included a growth defect when introduced to shaking cul - ture ( Fig . S2 A ) . As with c hc A − mutants ( Wessels et al . , 2000 ) , was A − mutant cells became multinucleate when grown in sus - pension ( Fig . S2 , B and C ) . Although was A − cells grow normally when provided with a substrate to adhere to ( Fig . S1 B ) , they exhibited cleavage furrow abnormalities and took longer to di - vide than wild - type cells ( Fig . S2 D ) . This is a “classic” pheno - type , epitomized by the myosin II ( mhc A ) mutant ( De Lozanne and Spudich , 1987 ; Knecht and Loomis , 1987 ) , whereby mitotic cells can overcome cytokinesis defects by pulling themselves apart in an adhesion - dependent manner . As has been shown for the chc A mutant , was A − cells fail to robustly recruit myosin II to the cleavage furrow during cell division ( Fig . S2 E ) . Similarly , the localization of myosin II to the trailing tail of chemotaxing was A − cells was also perturbed ( Video 4 and Fig . S2 F ) . We conclude that WASP’s principal role is to promote clathrin - mediated endocytosis , and it is not normally required for pseudopod formation . The tail retraction defect , which sub - tly impairs efficient cell migration , appears more related to en - docytosis than pseudopod dynamics . Generation of a double scar / wasp mutant WASP is not necessary for pseudopods in normal cells , but it becomes localized to pseudopods in scar mutants ( Veltman et al . , Figure 1 . WASP is not required for chemo - taxis or pseudopod formation . ( A ) Normal pseudopods in WASP knockout cells . was A − cells ± GFP - WASP were allowed to chemotax to folate under agarose and examined by DIC microscopy . A representative cell is shown . See also Video 1 . Cells are shown at 20 - s intervals . Bar , 5 µm . ( B ) Robust chemotaxis in WASP knockout cells . Cells ( as in A ) were tracked showing equivalent , strong bias in the direction of the chemoattractant ( > 20 cells / line from three independent assays ; triangles indicate direction of the folate gradient ; scale is in micrometers ) . ( C ) Rate of pseudopod for - mation . GFP - WASP / was A − control and the was A − mutant showed identical rates of pseu - dopod formation ( 5 . 94 vs . 5 . 93 pseudopods / min , respectively ) . ( D ) Diminished speed in WASP knockout cells . Speeds were derived from tracks in B , showing a decrease in wasA − cells compared with the GFP - WASP / was A − control knockout ( 7 . 88 ± 0 . 20 vs . 11 . 20 ± 0 . 31 µm / min , mean ± SEM ; P < 0 . 0001 , un - paired Student’s t test ) . JCB • Volume 217 • NumBer 2 • 2018 704 2012 ) . We therefore tested whether WASP is truly responsible for the remaining protrusions of scar − cells , and to determine what other proteins ( WASP family or otherwise ) can take on SCAR’s role in pseudopods . To achieve this , we set about creating cells devoid of both SCAR and WASP . We were unable to knock out WASP in a scar - null background , implying the combination is lethal . We therefore adopted an inducible approach , where the expression of at least one of these proteins could be maintained or repressed . We started with the scar - inducible knockout ( SIKO ) , in which scar is expressed from a tet promoter in scar - null cells ( King et al . , 2010 ) , giving cells whose SCAR expression is con - trolled by DOX . Fig . 3 A shows that both SCAR and WASP are located as expected in this strain—SCAR - GFP was found at the tips of pseudopods , whereas GFP - WASP was confined to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis when SCAR was present and re - placed SCAR at the tips of pseudopods when scar was repressed . To create an inducible SCAR / WASP double mutant , was A was disrupted in the SIKO background . Clones were maintained in the presence of DOX , so growing cells were scar + ; DOX was removed only shortly before screening . The successful isolation and validation of a double mutant is demonstrated in Fig . 3 B . As in the SIKO parent , SCAR expression was maximally suppressed 48 h after DOX removal , yielding cells deficient in both SCAR and WASP . A low level of SCAR remained after 48 h ( Fig . 3 C ) , but plainly not enough to support growth . It was immediately apparent that the loss of both SCAR and WASP severely impaired cell growth , explaining why WASP could not be knocked out in a scar − background ( Fig . 3 D ) . Whereas the loss of SCAR or WASP alone had no effect on growth , the growth of the SIKO / wasp − mutant com - pletely arrested 48 – 60 h after removal of DOX . Because full repression of SCAR took a minimum of 48 h without DOX , this demonstrates the absolute requirement for at least one of SCAR or WASP for Dictyostelium growth . Despite this dramatic arrest of growth , cell death was not observed , with cells lacking both SCAR and WASP remaining adherent and capable of readhering if suspended . However , macropinocytosis was completely lost in these cells ( Fig . S3 A ) —thus one of either SCAR or WASP is needed for macropinocytosis , presumably for forming of func - tional macropinocytic cups , which are actin - and Arp2 / 3 com - plex – based structures ( Insall et al . , 2001 ; Veltman et al . , 2016 ) . WASP family members are required for pseudopod - and bleb - based migration We tested whether cell motility could survive the loss of both SCAR and WASP . By including or excluding DOX from the me - dium 48 h before any given experiment , we could compare the loss of all combinations of SCAR and WASP—control ( SIKO + DOX ) , scar − ( SIKO − DOX ) , wasp − ( SIKO / wasp − + DOX ) , and scar − / wasp − ( SIKO / wasp − − DOX ) . We followed growing cells chemotaxing toward folate ( Laevsky and Knecht , 2003 ) , because the developmental defects of mutants without WASP made cAMP chemotaxis unreliable . Tracking cell movement yielded the directional plots shown in Fig . 4 A . Cell migration Figure 2 . Defects in clathrin - mediated en - docytosis . ( A ) Colocalization of WASP and clathrin pits . was A − cells were transfected with CLC - mRFP ( clathrin ) and GFP - WASP ( giving a wild - type WASP phenotype ) and imaged by TIRF . WASP colocalizes with a subset of clath - rin pits at any time ( white arrows ) . Bar , 10 µm . ( B ) Colocalization of clathrin and WASP at puncta . Wild - type cells were transfected with CLC - mRFP ( clathrin ) and GFP - WASP , and clath - rin - mediated endocytosis was visualized using TIRF microscopy . Kymograph and fluorescence intensity plot demonstrate the dynamic local - ization of clathrin and WASP at clathrin pits ( representative of > 50 puncta from > 20 cells ) . ( C ) Vesicle internalization during clathrin - me - diated endocytosis . was A − cells were trans - fected with CLC - mRFP alone or CLC - mRFP and GFP - WASP and visualized by TIRF . Clathrin punctum lifetime ( time between appearance and disappearance from TIRF field of view ) was measured from 50 pits / cell line over two independent experiments . Clathrin puncta in WASP knockout cells were far longer lived than in GFP - WASP / was A − controls ( 197 . 5 ± 22 . 8 vs . 44 . 2 ± 1 . 7 s , mean ± SEM ) ; P < 0 . 0001 , unpaired Student’s t test ) . ( D and E ) Recruitment of Arp2 / 3 complex . Cells were transfected with CLC - mRFP ( clathrin ) and GFP - ArpC4 ( Arp2 / 3 complex ) , and clathrin - me - diated endocytosis was visualized using TIRF microscopy . Kymographs and accompanying fluorescence intensity plots demonstrate the dy - namic localization of clathrin and the Arp2 / 3 complex at clathrin pits ( representative of > 50 puncta from > 20 cells ) . ( D ) In wild - type cells , recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex to clathrin pits coincides with internalization . ( E ) In the was A − mutant , many clathrin pits fail to recruit the Arp2 / 3 complex and persist on the plasma membrane for hundreds of seconds . WASPs and formins compete in pseudopod dynamics • Davidson et al . 705 and chemotaxis are clearly robust in control , scar − , and wasp − cells , but the extremely stunted tracks of the scar − / wasp − cells indicate a severe migration defect ( Video 5 ) . During chemotaxis , Dictyostelium cells migrate using pseudopods or blebs or a combination of both , depending on local conditions . Although SCAR knockout cells migrate ef - ficiently , they show a reduced rate of pseudopod formation , which is compensated for by increased blebbing ( Veltman et al . , 2012 ) . We therefore quantified the number of pseudo - pods and blebs extended by each genotype during chemotaxis . Control cells primarily migrated using pseudopods , and formed blebs infrequently ( Fig . 4 , B and C ) . As expected , scar − cells extended significantly fewer pseudopods ( Fig . 4 B ) and more blebs ( Fig . 4 C ) . Together these were sufficient to maintain cell motility , albeit at a significantly reduced speed ( Fig . 4 D ) . wasp − cells were also slightly but significantly slower than con - trol cells ( Fig . 4 D ) . Because wasp − cells extended pseudopods at a wild - type rate , it was unsurprising that they formed blebs at normal rates ( Fig . 4 C ) . However , the scar − / wasp − cells extended virtually no pseudopods ( Fig . 4 B ) . This confirms that the residual pseu - dopods of scar − cells depend on WASP ( Veltman et al . , 2012 ) . Based on the compensatory blebbing observed after the loss of SCAR alone , we expected scar − / wasp − cells to switch entirely to bleb - based motility . However , to our great surprise , scar − / wasp − cells were also unable to form blebs , rendering them es - sentially immobile ( Video 5 and Fig . 4 , C and D ) . We examined the mechanism that catalyzed actin polym - erization in the absence of SCAR and WASP . In contrast to con - trol , scar − , and wasp − cells , the F - actin protrusions in scar − / wasp − cells contained essentially no Arp2 / 3 complex ( Fig . 4 E ) . Instead , scar − / wasp − cells extended excessive numbers of aber - rant F - actin spikes that resembled filopods , with VASP ( Fig . S3 B ) and the Diaphanous - related formin , dDia2 ( Schirenbeck et al . , 2005 ) , at their tips ( Fig . 4 F ) . We conclude that at least one of SCAR and WASP is es - sential for pseudopods in Dictyostelium . Only WASP is capable of substituting for SCAR , and in the absence of both , cells are unable to recruit the Arp2 / 3 complex to create F - actin protru - sions . Remarkably , although loss of Arp2 / 3 localization made cells much slower , the direction of such migration as remained could be accurately steered by chemoattractants . This conflicts with many theories of chemotaxis , though it agrees with the recent demonstration of chemotaxis in cells that lack the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Wu et al . , 2012 ) . In a pseudopod - centered view ( In - sall , 2010 ) , this result is unsurprising—anything that provides a bias to actin - based motility , whether a local change in growth rate or retraction ( Bosgraaf and Van Haastert , 2009 ) , is suffi - cient to steer cells if protrusions are randomly generated . However , the unexpected finding that WASP family mem - bers are also required for blebbing , which is not thought to in - volve the Arp2 / 3 complex , remained unexplained . We therefore investigated the role of SCAR and WASP in bleb formation . Normal F - actin levels in scar / wasp - deficient cells Because SCAR and WASP are potent promoters of actin po - lymerization , we tested the possibility that scar − / wasp − cells had a generally compromised cytoskeleton rather than a spe - cific defect in bleb formation . We first investigated whether the inability of scar − / wasp − cells to form blebs was a result of reduced overall F - actin content . Control , scar − , wasp − , and scar − / wasp − cells were fixed and costained for F - and G - actin . Again , scar − / wasp − cells formed excessive filopods ( Fig . 5 A ) . Relative F - / G - actin ratios were calculated using phalloidin and DNaseI binding ( Bear et al . , 1998 ) , and surprisingly , no signif - icant difference was found between control , scar − , wasp − , or even scar − / wasp − cells ( Fig . 5 B ) . This contrasts with the re - duced F - actin levels seen in cells briefly treated with the actin - depolymerizing drug latrunculin A . Although scar − / wasp − cells retained normal levels of F - actin , it remained possible that this actin lacked the dynamic Figure 3 . Generation of a double scar / wasp mutant . ( A ) SCAR and WASP localize as expected in SIKO cells . Top : GFP - SCAR localizes to pseudopods ( arrows ) , whereas GFP - WASP is not found at leading edges in the presence of SCAR , and is restricted to puncta at the center and rear . Bottom : When SCAR is repressed , GFP - WASP relocalizes to pseudopods but not blebs ( arrowheads ; green : GFP - SCAR and GFP - WASP ; red : RFP - LifeAct ) . Bar , 5 µm . ( B and C ) Loss of both SCAR and WASP from SIKO / wasp − cells verified by Western blotting with anti - SCAR and anti - WASP an - tibodies . In each case , substantial repression of SCAR is seen between 48 and 60 h . SIKO / wasp − cells are completely deleted for WASP ; only SCAR is inducible . MCCC1 is the loading control ( Davidson et al . , 2013a ) . ( C ) Quantitation of several repeats normalized to the corresponding MCCC1 band , then to SIKO + DOX scar levels ( n = 3 blots , one - way ANO VA , difference between SIKO and SIKO / wasA − at 48 h not signif - icant , P = 0 . 7135 ) . ( D ) Loss of both SCAR and WASP causes growth ar - rest . Cells were grown in plates in axenic medium and counted every 12 h . SIKO / wasp − cells were starved of DOX at time = 0 h . Around 60 h later , when SCAR expression is lost , growth completely ceases in SIKO / wasp − cells but not controls lacking either scar or wasp alone ( n = 3 ) . JCB • Volume 217 • NumBer 2 • 2018 706 behavior of the actin of wild - type cells . To test whether a loss of actin dynamics caused the defect in bleb formation , we expressed GFP - actin and measured the turnover of the actin cortex using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) . Fluores - cence recovery at the actin cortex ( and therefore actin turnover ) was evident in both control and scar − / wasp − cells ( Fig . 5 C ) . When the results of many such experiments were plotted , little difference in FRAP was observed between control and scar − / wasp − cells ( Fig . 5 D ) . Also , scar − / wasp − cells were not resistant to latrunculin A , which sequesters G - actin but does not actively depolymerize F - actin ( Coué et al . , 1987 ) , and were capable of rapidly repolymerizing their cytoskeletons once they were re - moved from latrunculin A ( Video 6 ) . Together , these data demon - strate that scar − / wasp − cells retain a normally dynamic actin cytoskeleton , and actin can be rapidly repolymerized next to the membrane without Arp2 / 3 complex regulators at the cortex . We tested other aspects of the cytoskeleton in scar − / wasp − cells including myosin II localization and functionality . Myosin II is found at the rear of migrating cells , where it drives retraction of the trailing tail of the cell . Actomyo - sin - based contractility is also essential for bleb - based motility ( Yoshida and Soldati , 2006 ; Lämmermann and Sixt , 2009 ) . GFP – myosin II localized to the rear of half of cells during control pseudopod - based motility and scar − bleb - based mo - tility ( Fig . 5 E ) . As shown earlier , loss of WASP perturbs tail retraction and myosin II organization . Despite this , scar − / wasp − cells were still capable of recruiting myosin II to the cell cortex , albeit sometimes patchily and without strong front – rear polarity ( Fig . 5 E ) . Furthermore , scar − / wasp − cells were found to retain robust actomyosin - based contractility as provoked by the ATP - depleting poison sodium azide ( Fig . S3 C ) , a well - established test of Dictyostelium myosin II function ( Patterson and Spudich , 1995 ) . Together these data demonstrate that scar − / wasp − cells possess a robust and dynamic actin cytoskeleton , so the defect in bleb formation must have another cause . Figure 4 . Cells lacking SCAR and WASP cannot migrate or make pseudopods . ( A ) The indicated cells were allowed to chemotax to folate ( right ) under agarose , followed by phase - contrast microscopy , and tracked as in Fig . 1 B ( > 20 cells / line from three indepen - dent assays ; folate gradient oriented toward right ; scale is in micrometers ) . ( B ) Rate of pseu - dopod formation . Pseudopods were counted from high - magnification DIC videos ( 60× oil immersion NA = 1 . 4 ) . Pseudopod production is nearly abolished in double mutant ( 0 . 59 ± 0 . 058 vs . 4 . 68 ± 0 . 20 pseudopods / min , mean ± SEM , n > 20 ; P < 0 . 0001 , one - way ANO VA ) . ( C ) Rate of bleb formation , showing that scar / wasp knockout cells lose the blebs that replace pseudopods in scar knockouts ( 0 . 29 ± 0 . 14 vs . 11 . 0 ± 1 . 2 blebs / min , mean ± SEM , n = 12 ; P < 0 . 0001 , one - way ANO VA ; control vs . scar / wasp not significant ) . ( D ) Diminished speed in scar / wasp knockout cells compared with control or single mu - tants . Speeds were derived from tracks in A , showing a decrease in double knockout cells compared with others ( 7 . 91 ± 0 . 22 vs . 6 . 51 ± 0 . 16 vs . 7 . 70 ± 0 . 17 vs . 1 . 21 ± 0 . 096 µm / min , mean± SEM ; all values significantly different , one - way ANO VA , Tukey’s multiple comparison ; scar / wasp vs . scar P < 0 . 0001 , unpaired Student’s t test ; n > 40 ) . ( E ) Loss of re - cruitment of Arp2 / 3 complex , but not F - actin , to the edges of scar / wasp double mutant cells . Cells as indicated expressing LifeAct - mRFP ( red ) and GFP - ArpC4 ( green ) were imaged by spinning disc microscopy ( Andor Revolu - tion XD ) or wide - field DIC . Bar , 5 µm . ( F ) The F - actin spikes in double scar / wasp mutant cells are organized by dDia2 . Cells expressing Life - Act mRFP ( red ) and GFP - dDia2 ( green ) were imaged by spinning disc microscopy ( Andor Revolution XD ) . Bar , 5 µm . WASPs and formins compete in pseudopod dynamics • Davidson et al . 707 scar − / wasp − cells are physically competent to form blebs WASP family members are not recruited to the sites of bleb formation , and blebs do not normally appear to require either SCAR or WASP , or to use the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Fig . 3 A ) . Therefore , we tested whether scar − / wasp − cells were physically capable of forming blebs . Our under - agarose chemotaxis assay strongly favors pseudopod - based migration , with blebbing evi - dent only in scar − cells , where pseudopods are reduced ( Fig . 4 , B and C ) . We modified conditions to increase compression , which favors bleb - based motility at the expense of pseudopods ( Zatulovskiy et al . , 2014 ) . Under these conditions , control , scar − , and wasp − cells expressing GFP - labeled Arp2 / 3 complex and LifeAct - mRFP switched to bleb - based motility ( Fig . 6 A ) . Again , there was no recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex to the site of nascent blebs . Because scar − / wasp − cells were incapable of dragging themselves under a slab of agarose , we compressed stationary cells by placing an agarose sheet directly on them ( King et al . , 2011 ) . Surprisingly , this induced robust blebbing around the entire periphery of the scar − / wasp − cells ( Fig . 6 B ) . We also directly induced blebbing in scar − / wasp − cells . Localized laser ablation of the actin cortex has been used to induce the formation of blebs in mouse fibroblasts ( Tinevez et al . , 2009 ) . We optimized this technique for use with Dictyoste - lium and found we could reproducibly promote bleb formation in uncompressed cells . Laser treatment induced new blebs in all cell types , including scar − / wasp − cells ( Fig . 6 C ) , confirm - ing that the double mutants were still competent to form blebs . Quantification of many such experiments demonstrated that scar − / wasp − cells extend blebs less often than in other cells , after around 20 % of laser pulses ( Fig . 6 D ) , perhaps because of a combination of the cells’ thick cortex and lower cortical ten - sion because of slower migration , but those blebs that form are clearly morphologically and behaviorally normal . Finally , throughout the course of all the experiments out - lined in this paper , scar − / wasp − cells were sometimes observed Figure 5 . Dynamic but mislocalized actin in scar / wasp mutant cells . ( A and B ) F - actin content in scar / wasp mutant cells . Cells were fixed and stained with phalloidin ( F - actin , red ) , Dnase I ( G - actin , green ) and DAPI ( DNA , blue ) and imaged using wide - field microscopy . ( A ) Control and scar / wasp mutant cells fixed and stained with these dyes . Bar , 10 µm . ( B ) F - / G - actin ratios were calculated from many images like those shown in A ( n = 75 ) and normalized to the control mean . None of the mutants differed significantly in mean F - ac - tin content compared with the control ( one - way ANO VA , Tukey’s multiple comparison ) . Latrun - culin A treatment of control cells significantly reduced mean F - actin content compared with untreated controls ( one - way ANO VA , Tukey’s multiple comparison ; P < 0 . 05 ) . C , D . Cortical actin turnover in scar / wasp mutants measured by FRAP . ( C ) GFP - actin was expressed in con - trol and scar / wasp mutant cells , and FRAP of cortical regions was performed ( Andor mosaic FRA PPA unit ) . White boxes highlight cortical re - gions measured in ( D ) ( region 1 = unbleached control area , region 2 = photo - bleached area ) . Images represent 1 s before , 0 s , and 30 s after photo - bleach . Bar , 10 µm . ( D ) FRAP curves derived from many cells as shown in B ( n = 16 ) , with mean fluorescence intensity of regions normalized to initial value ; bars = SEM . ( E ) Cortical actomyosin in scar / wasp double mutants . Indicated cells expressing LifeAct - mRFP ( red ) and GFP - MHC ( green ) were imaged by spinning disc microscopy ( Andor Revolution XD ) . White arrows indicate blebs ; lat . A . , latrunculin A . Bar , 10 µm . JCB • Volume 217 • NumBer 2 • 2018 708 spontaneously blebbing ( e . g . , in Fig . 5 E ) . We concluded that WASP family members are not directly required for bleb forma - tion . Instead , scar − / wasp − cells must be indirectly blocked from initiating bleb - based motility . Blebs are restored and migration improved in scar − / wasp − cells when dDia2 is also disrupted Because scar − / wasp − cells are capable of forming blebs but seem unable to use them to migrate , we hypothesized that the ex - cessive filopod - like spikes extended by scar − / wasp − cells were obstructing motility . To test this hypothesis , we additionally disrupted ddia 2 in both the SIKO and the SIKO / wasp − back - ground . This yielded mutants where SCAR expression could be suppressed in the absence of dDia2 ( scar − / ddia 2 − cells ) or both dDia2 and WASP ( scar − / wasp − / ddia 2 − cells ) . These mutants were verified by Western blotting after 48 h in the absence of DOX , which was again able to strongly suppress SCAR expres - sion in all genetic backgrounds ( Fig . 7 A ) . We then examined how the loss of ddia 2 affected un - der - agarose chemotaxis in these cells . Loss of ddia 2 had little effect on cell migration in the presence of SCAR and WASP , and the additional loss of ddia 2 did not greatly affect the mo - tility of scar − or wasp − single mutants . However , strikingly , the loss of ddia 2 in the scar − / wasp − background partially restored cell motility ( Fig . 7 B ) , yielding substantially longer cell tracks than the scar − / wasp − cells , though chemoattractant - induced actin assembly at the cortex was still completely lost ( Fig . S3 D ) ; as with the simple scar − / wasp − mutants , the migration was efficiently steered by chemoattractant ( Fig . 7 C ) . Quantitative analysis confirms that ddia 2 − / scar − / wasp − cells chemotaxed significantly faster than scar − / wasp − cells ( Fig . 7 D ) . Inter - estingly , the mean migratory speed of both control and scar − cells was also slightly increased after ddia 2 loss . However , this was not true for ddia2 − / wasp − cells , which migrated at the same speed as wasp − cells . We next examined the restored motility of ddia 2 − / scar − / wasp − cells in detail using high - magnification differnetial in - terference contrast ( DIC ) microscopy , allowing the pseudopods and blebs to be quantified . The ddia 2 − / scar − / wasp − cells tol - erated LifeAct expression poorly , with few expressing cells . Rates of bleb formation were therefore compared using DIC videos . Compared with the controls , ddia 2 − cells extended pseudopods slightly more rapidly , which likely accounts for their increased speed ( Fig . 7 E ) . However , pseudopods were no more evident in ddia 2 − / scar − / wasp − cells than scar − / wasp − cells , consistent with WASP family members having an essen - tial role in pseudopod formation . Because loss of ddia 2 alone Figure 6 . scar / wasp mutant cells retain the ability to make blebs . ( A ) Cells of indicated genotype expressing LifeAct - mRFP ( red ) and GFP - ArpC4 ( green ) were imaged by spinning disc microscopy ( Andor Revolution XD ) during chemotaxis while highly compressed . White arrows highlight blebs . Bar , 10 µm . ( B ) Highly compressed scar / wasp mutant cell expressing LifeAct - mRFP ( red ) and GFP - ArpC4 ( green ) , imaged using spinning disc microscopy ( Andor Revolution XD ) . White arrows indicate blebs . Bar , 10 µm . ( C and D ) Laser ablation of actin cortex induced blebbing in uncompressed cells . ( C ) Indicated cells expressing LifeAct - mRFP shown before , 0 s , 10 s and 90 s after laser ablation . White dot indicates site of ablation . White box in preablation image enlarged in subsequent post - ablation images . Bars , 10 µm ( left showing whole cells ) ; 4 µm ( insets ) . ( D ) Percentage of cells for each genotype that blebbed in response to laser ablation of the cortex ( n = 30 ) . Only scar / wasp double mutants significantly differed from the controls ( chi - square test , P < 0 . 0001 ) but still induced blebbing ∼ 20 % of the time . WASPs and formins compete in pseudopod dynamics • Davidson et al . 709 stimulated pseudopod formation , it was not surprising to find that ddia 2 − cells blebbed infrequently ( Fig . 7 F ) . However , in contrast to scar − / wasp − cells , ddia 2 − / scar − / wasp − cells were able to generate new blebs , and thus regained significant cell migration ( Fig . 7 F ) . The improvement in migration in scar − / wasp − cells after ddia 2 was also knocked out corresponded with a clear return in cell polarity ( Fig . 8 A ) and myosin II localization ( Fig . 8 B and Video 7 ) ; although the ddia 2 − / scar − / wasp − cells are by no means normal , they lack the frozen appearance of the double scar − / wasp − cells . The myosin II localization appears to follow the position of the blebs , rather than an - ticipating it ( Video 7 ) , implying that myosin does not deter - mine the blebs’ position . Most surprisingly , the relative amount of F - actin was not substantially diminished ( Fig . 8 C ) —although the cells grew unevenly and variation between experiments became substan - tial ( and poor LifeAct expression suggests their cytoskeletons were too damaged to tolerate another actin - binding protein ) , the trend was for the F - actin level to remain constant , or even grow slightly . Thus , remarkably , cells can maintain their G - actin / F - actin ratio even when three main nucleation regulators are lost . Figure 7 . Loss of a formin , as well as SCAR and WASP , restores movement . ( A ) Loss of dDia2 , SCAR , and WASP from SIKO / wasp − / ddia2 − triple mutant cells verified by Western blotting with anti - dDia2 , anti - SCAR , and anti - WASP antibodies . Expression of SCAR was suppressed after 48 h in absence of DOX . Biotin conjugates were used to probe for MCCC1 to demonstrate equal loading . ( B – E ) Motility of scar / wasp / ddia2 knockouts is improved compared with scar / wasp knockouts . The effect of ddia2 loss in different genetic backgrounds ( blue ) plotted alongside data from Fig . 4 ( A – D ) ( red ) for comparison . ( B ) The indicated cells were allowed to chemotax to folate ( right , indicated by triangle ) under agarose , imaged by phase - contrast microscopy , and tracked as in Fig . 1 B ( n > 30 cells / line , three independent experiments ) . Track length of scar / wasp / ddia2 knockouts were increased compared with scar / wasp ; scale is in micrometers . ( C ) Forward migration index ( FMI ) of tracks from B . All cells were positively chemotactic . ( D ) Speeds were derived from tracks in B . Loss of ddia2 alone , in a scar − background or a scar − / wasp − background , significantly increased speed compared with control ( 12 . 20 ± 0 . 25 vs . 10 . 24 ± 0 . 22 ) , scar − ( 8 . 98 ± 0 . 17 vs . 6 . 51 ± 0 . 16 ) , or scar − / wasp − cells ( 3 . 03 ± 0 . 16 vs . 1 . 21 ± 0 . 10 ) , respectively ( all speeds μ m / min , mean ± SEM ; all values significantly different , one - way ANO VA , Tukey’s multiple comparison , P < 0 . 05 ) . ( E and F ) Improved motility of scar / wasp / ddia2 knockouts as a result of increased blebbing as opposed to pseudopod extension . Cells were imaged while chemotaxing under agarose toward folate by DIC . ( E ) Rate of pseudopod formation . DIC videos were analyzed and pseudopods counted . Pseudopod formation was significantly increased in ddia2 − cells compared with controls ( 5 . 65 ± 0 . 23 vs . 4 . 68 ± 0 . 20 ) , but no difference was detected between scar / wasp / ddia2 and scar / wasp knockouts ( 0 . 93 ± 0 . 09 vs . 0 . 59 ± 0 . 06 ; all rates pseudopods / min , mean ± SEM , one - way ANO VA , Tukey’s multiple comparison , P < 0 . 05 ) . ( F ) Rate of bleb formation . DIC videos were analyzed and blebs were counted . The rate of blebbing was significantly increased in scar / wasp / ddia2 knockouts compared with controls ( 5 . 88 ± 0 . 60 vs . 1 . 57 ± 0 . 20 ) , ddia 2 − cells ( 1 . 19 ± 0 . 13 ) and scar − / wasp − cells ( 0 . 60 ± 0 . 14 ; all rates pseudopods / min , mean ± SEM , one - way ANO VA , Tukey’s multiple comparison , P < 0 . 05 ) . JCB • Volume 217 • NumBer 2 • 2018 710 We conclude that WASP family members and the Arp2 / 3 complex normally compete with dDia2 and other formins to induce new actin polymerization at the cortex . This dynamic competition acts to maintain a plastic actin cytoskeleton . How - ever , unconstrained activity of dDia2 in the absence of compe - tition from SCAR and WASP results in excessive actin spike formation , which is incompatible with blebbing in particular and cell motility in general . Discussion We currently have a growing appreciation of how subsets of actin regulators come together to form individual actin - based structures . However , complex cell behavior such as cell motility and chemotaxis requires cells to deploy highly choreographed combinations of different actin - based structures . Exactly how cells spatially and temporally coordinate the activities of these different actin - assembly factors remains poorly understood . Re - cently , competition for actin monomers has emerged as a means by which different actin nucleators can influence each other’s activities and therefore the type of structures generated ( Rotty and Bear , 2014 ; Lomakin et al . , 2015 ; Davidson and Wood , 2016 ; Suarez and Kovar , 2016 ) . Here we have built upon these findings and have demonstrated an important role for cytoskel - etal competition in cell motility . WASP family proteins are essential for pseudopod formation We generated mutants devoid of WASP . We clearly show that WASP is not required for pseudopod formation , or for macropi - nocytic growth in liquid medium . On bacteria , the cells lacking WASP grew very poorly . We have not found whether this re - flects a defect in phagocytic engulfment of particles , or a failure to sort the enzymes needed to digest the more complex food source as seen with mutants in WASH complex genes ( Buckley et al . , 2016 ) , but because WASP localizes to phagocytic cups , it seems more likely the issue is with engulfment . We also generated cells lacking both SCAR and WASP , confirming that WASP is the only nucleation promoting factor making the residual pseudopods extended by the Dictyoste - lium scar null . Importantly , no other proteins are capable of recruiting the Arp2 / 3 complex to the cortex of cells to pro - mote pseudopod formation . Replacement of SCAR / WAVEs by WASPs is seen to different degrees in other organisms . In nematodes it is clear ( Zhu et al . , 2016 ) ; in mammalian cells , N - WASP is required for the invasion of mammalian cells through a 3D matrix ( Tang et al . , 2013 ) , but it is difficult to disentangle whether this is because it has a role in normal 3D pseudopods , or because it is required for clathrin - mediated endocytosis and normal secretion of matrix metalloprotein - ase , which are required for migration through complex en - vironments . Importantly , the excessive filopods extended by the Dictyostelium scar / wasp mutant resemble the phenotype observed when SCAR or the Arp2 / 3 complex is disrupted in other organisms ( Kunda et al . , 2003 ; Zhu et al . , 2016 ) , which supports the hypothesis that competition between Arp2 / 3 reg - ulators and formins is conserved . Unlike in previous studies ( Suraneni et al . , 2012 ; Wu et al . , 2012 ; Rotty and Bear , 2014 ) , here the Arp2 / 3 complex was not globally inhibited or lost , but instead could not be recruited to the cortex in the absence of SCAR or WASP . The actin - assembly factors underlying the increase in actin bundles ob - served after Arp2 / 3 complex disruption vary depending on the organism studied . Here , we have found that they are the prod - uct of the Diaphanous - related formin , dDia2 , consistent with its established role in normal Dictyostelium filopod formation ( Schirenbeck et al . , 2005 ) . Although cell growth was very quickly arrested in the ab - sence of both SCAR and WASP , these mutants retained a sur - prisingly robust cytoskeleton . This was most evident in their Figure 8 . Actin and myosin II in scar − / wasp − cells with and without ddia2 . ( A ) scar / wasp / ddia2 knockouts chemotax through bona fide blebs . Cells expressing LifeAct - GFP were imaged chemotaxing under agarose by spinning disc microscopy ( Andor Revolution XD ) . Compared with the pseudopods of chemotaxing controls and the filopods extended by immo - bile scar / wasp knockouts , the motility of scar / wasp / ddia2 is supported by blebbing . Bar , 10 µm . ( B ) Myosin II in scar / wasp and scar / wasp / ddia2 mutants . Cells were transfected with GFP – myosin II heavy chain and RFP - Li - feAct , and imaged by confocal . Myosin II is clearly localized at the rear , with blebs at the front of scar / wasp / ddia2 mutant cells . Bar , 5 µm . ( C ) F - ac - tin content in scar / wasp / ddia2 mutant cells ( labeled S , W , and D ) . Cells were fixed and stained with Texas red phalloidin ( F - actin ) and Alexa Fluor 488 DNase I ( G - actin ) and imaged using confocal microscopy . Summed projections were made and the ratios of F - / G - actin calculated from many images ( n = 75 ) and normalized to the control mean . None of the mutants differed significantly in mean F - actin content compared with the control ( one - way ANO VA , Tukey’s multiple comparison ) . WASPs and formins compete in pseudopod dynamics • Davidson et al . 711 ability to completely reform their actin cytoskeleton when released from latrunculin inhibition . scar / wasp mutant cells were fully capable of reconstituting their cytoskeleton despite their inability to use the Arp2 / 3 complex . They are also able to orient themselves , despite their serious defects in actin , in agreement with Wu et al . ( 2012 ) , who found that the Arp2 / 3 complex was not essential for chemotaxis . We imagine that multiple pathways robustly use different mechanisms converg - ing on chemotactic steering ( Insall , 2013 ) . Thus loss of any one player , even one that is centrally important for normal move - ment like Arp2 / 3 complex – driven pseudopod formation , is un - able to block all steering . Surprisingly , but consistently with competition between ac - tin - assembly factors for a finite pool of G - actin , F - actin levels re - mained constant between the different mutants . In the scar / wasp mutant , G - actin normally used by the Arp2 / 3 complex to form dendritic networks is now available to dDia2 . This would fuel increased dDia2 activity , resulting in excessive filopod formation and ultimately no net change in F - actin levels . Although scar / wasp mutants’ mean F - actin content was not greatly changed , the range of values between cells was relatively small . This was con - sistent with the static morphology seen during live cell imaging of the scar / wasp mutants . However , our FRAP data imply that the actin of scar / wasp mutants turns over normally ; the low variance in F - actin levels does not reflect nondynamic actin , but the loss of cycles of extension and retraction of pseudopods . The morphol - ogy of scar / wasp mutants appeared trapped in a paralyzed con - figuration , caused by sustained and unchanging dDia2 activity . A balance of Arp2 / 3 complex and dDia2 activity is required for bleb - based motility WASP can only partially compensate for loss of SCAR in Dic - tyostelium , and the residual pseudopods of scar - deficient cells are supplemented with blebs . SCAR , WASP , and the Arp2 / 3 complex do not localize to the sites of bleb formation , and we had expected that scar / wasp mutants would chemotax through the use of blebs alone . However , scar / wasp mutants failed to make blebs to maintain motility , making them essentially im - mobile . Crucially , scar / wasp mutants were physically capable of blebbing either when compressed or when the cellular cortex was laser - ablated . Only after dDia2 was additionally disrupted in the scar / wasp mutant was bleb - ( but not pseudopod - ) based migration restored . This confirms that neither the Arp2 / 3 com - plex nor dDia2 is required for the reformation of the actin cor - tex that occurs during blebbing . The partial suppression of Arp2 / 3 complex activity found in the scar mutant or via specific Arp2 / 3 complex mutants in - creases blebbing . However , the total loss of the Arp2 / 3 complex from the actin cortex also results in excessive dDia2 activity , which overwhelms the actin cytoskeleton and inhibits blebbing . Consistent with previous studies , we also found that disruption of ddia 2 alone significantly increases speed , suggesting that Diaphanous - related formins also constrain the activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex . These data imply that the cytoskeletal plas - ticity evident in Dictyostelium and all cells exists when the competing activities of actin - assembly factors are balanced . The mutants studied here represent extreme , global skewing of this competition . However , if cells were capable of influencing this cytoskeletal competition on a subcellular scale , it would allow them to coordinate their actin regulators as a collective , rapidly induce dynamic rearrangements in their actin cytoskele - tons , and ultimately promote seamless changes in cell behavior . Materials and methods Cell culture Dictyostelium Ax3 cells were cultured on petri dishes in HL5 ( Forme - dium T ) . For transfection , cells were washed of HL5 and suspended in E - buffer ( 10 mM KNaPO 4 , pH 6 . 1 , and 50 mM sucrose ) , incubated with DNA , and electroporated at 500 V using an ECM 399 Electropo - ration System ( BTX Harvard Apparatus ) . Cells were then immediately returned to petri dishes containing HL5 . Selection and maintenance of extrachromosomal plasmids was achieved through addition of 50 µg / ml hygromycin to the media . Cell growth was measured in the presence of a substratum on petri dishes or in suspension in shaking flasks . Cell counts were performed every 12 h with a CASY Cell Counter + Analyser sys - tem Model TT ( Innovates AG ) . For development , cells were washed in development buffer ( 10 mM KNaPO 4 , 2 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM CaCl 2 , pH 6 . 5 ) and left to starve on 1 % agar at high confluency . Lysates were prepared or images captured every 2 h over the course of development . Restriction enzyme – mediated integration ( REMI ) and knockout generation To generate the WIKO , gfp - was A was cloned into a DOX - inducible expression vector ( Veltman et al . , 2009 ) . This construct was stably in - troduced into the Dictyostelium genome by REMI ( Kuspa and Loomis , 1992 ; Insall et al . , 1994 ) . Selection was performed using 50 µg / ml hygromycin . The inducibility of the isolated clones was verified by treating the cells with or without 10 µg / ml DOX , and GFP - WASP ex - pression was detected by Western blot ( antibody was a gift from T . Sol - dati , University of Geneva , Geneva , Switzerland ) . The was A and ddia 2 loci were disrupted by homologous recombination using knockout vec - tors generated by PCR . Clones were screened based on resistance to 20 µg / ml blasticidin ( was A knockout ) or 30 µg / ml nourseothricin ( ddia 2 knockout ) and verified by Western blot ( anti - dDia2 antibody was a gift from J . Faix , Medizinische Hochschule Hannover , Hannover , Ger - many ) . The inducible expression of WASP or SCAR was maintained with 10 µg / ml DOX where appropriate . Immunoblotting Western blotting was performed as previously described ( Davidson et al . , 2013b ) . In brief , equal numbers of cells were pelleted and imme - diately lysed with 70°C 1× NuPAGE LDS sample buffer ( Life Tech - nologies ) containing 50 mM DTT reducing agent . The lysates were then separated using 10 % Bis / Tris NuPAGE polyacrylamide gels ( Life Technologies ) . After SDS - PAGE , proteins were transferred onto ni - trocellulose membranes ( Hybond - C - extra ; Amersham Biosciences ) in a BioRad transfer tank filled with 1× SDS - transfer buffer at 100 V for 1 h . The membranes were then blocked with a solution contain - ing 5 % nonfat dried skimmed milk dissolved in TBS , after which they were probed with primary antibodies ( 1 : 1 , 000 dilution ) overnight at 4°C . Detection was achieved through the use of HRP or fluorescently conjugated secondary antibodies combined with chemiluminescence ( Immobilon Western chemiluminescent HRP substrate ; Millipore ) or an Odyssey IR imaging system ( LIC OR Biosciences ) . Coomassie staining or probing for MCCC1 with Alexa Fluor 680 – conjugated streptavidin ( Davidson et al . , 2013a ) was used to confirm equal loading . Chemotaxis assays Cell motility was studied through the use of an under - agarose folate chemotaxis assay ( Laevsky and Knecht , 2003 ) . Agarose ( SeaKem GTG ) was melted in SIH medium ( Lu et al . , 2004 ) to yield a 0 . 4 % gel , 5 mL of which was cast in a 50 - mm glass - bottomed dish ( MatTek ) that had been pretreated with 10 mg / ml BSA . Once the agarose had set , two 5 × 20 - mm wells were cut 5 mm apart in the center of the gel JCB • Volume 217 • NumBer 2 • 2018 712 using a scalpel . This left a central “bridge , ” which was gently wrig - gled loose . Vegetative cells were harvested , pelleted by centrifugation ( 3 min at 380 g ) , and resuspended in SIH medium at 0 . 5 – 1 × 10 6 cells / ml . One well of the assay was filled with cell suspension , whereas the other was filled with 0 . 01 mM folic acid diluted in SIH medium . A coverslip was then carefully lowered on top of the agarose to cover the majority of the wells and prevent evaporation . The chemotaxis of the vegetative cells under the agarose bridge was monitored , and wild - type cells were found to reach migratory speeds of > 10 µm / min . To promote migration through blebs rather than through pseudopods , the concentration of agarose was increased to 1 . 5 % and was cast in untreated glass - bottomed dishes . The severe compression of immobile cells was performed as described ( King et al . , 2010 ) . In brief , cells were washed in SIH medium and plated in 30 - mm glass - bottomed dishes ( MatTek ) . The cells were then compressed under a slab of 1 % agarose gel ( SeaKem GTG ) using an array of metal discs . For global folate stimulation and assessment of cortical F - actin levels , cells expressing LifeAct - GFP were placed into 8 - well chamber slides ( thickness 1 . 5 ; Lab - Tek ) in LoFlo buffer for 90 min , at 10 5 cells / well . Airyscan imaging was performed , focusing on the actin cortex midway through the cell . Images were acquired at 1 - s intervals . After a few frames , folate was added to a final concentration of 1 mM . Images were captured for another 20 – 30 s . For analysis , an ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health ) macro was written to segment the cell into plasma membrane and cytosol regions : a mask was made to outline the cell and another to encompass the cytosol . Intensities of each region were assessed before and after folate stimulation . Manual analysis showed that the automated macro was accurate . Cell fixation and staining Cells were seeded at low density on glass coverslips and then fixed for 5 min ( 6 % formaldehyde [ wt / vol ] , 15 % picric acid [ vol / vol ] , and 10 mM Pipes , pH 6 . 5 ) . The cells were washed with PBS before perme - abilization with 70 % ethanol for 2 min . The fixed cells were washed repeatedly with PBS and then stained for 30 min with 33 nM Texas red phalloidin ( Life Technologies ) for F - actin . For ratiometric stain - ing , this was combined with 161 nM Alexa Fluor 488 DNaseI ( Life Technologies ) . The coverslips were washed with PBS and dH 2 O before being mounted on glass slides with antifade reagent containing DAPI ( Prolong Gold ; Life Technologies ) . For the quantification of multinu - clearity , the number of nuclei per cell was counted for 100 s of cells / cell line over multiple experiments . For ratiometric quantification of F - actin levels , 75 cells / cell line over three experiments were outlined using ImageJ software , and the mean intensity of both the F - actin and G - actin staining within the area of the cell was determined . A F - / G - actin ratio was calculated for each cell , and all the values were the normalized to the mean F - / G - actin ratio of the wild - type control . As a control , wild - type cells were also submaximally ( 5 min ) treated with 5 µM latrunculin A . Actomyosin contractility test Myosin II function was tested by treating cells with sodium azide ( Pat - terson and Spudich , 1995 ; Xu et al . , 2001 ) . Cells were treated with 5 mM sodium azide for 15 min , after which a cell count was performed using a CASY Cell Counter + Analyser system Model TT . The mean proportion of detached cells was calculated for each cell line over four independent experiments . Microscopy Phase contrast and DIC images were acquired through the use of an Eclipse TE2000 - E inverted microscope ( Nikon ) equipped with a mono - chrome Retiga Exi cooled CCD camera . Phase - contrast microscopy was performed using either a 10× / 0 . 3 NA or a 20× / 0 . 45 NA Nikon Plan Fluo objective . DIC microscopy was performed using either a 60× / 1 . 4 NA or a 100× 1 . 4 NA Nikon Plan Apo objective and oil immersion . Dictyostelium was imaged at 22°C . Images of fixed and stained cells were acquired through the use of an inverted wide - field microscope ( IX81 ; Olympus ) with a 60× 1 . 42 NA Plan Apochromat objective . This microscope was equipped with a Photometrics Coolsnap HQ camera . TIRF microscopy was adopted for the imaging of the basal sur - face of cells and was advantageous for visualizing clathrin - mediated endocytosis in live cells . Dual - color TIRF microscopy was performed simultaneously on a modified Eclipse TE 2000 - U microscope in con - junction with a 100× / 1 . 45 NA TIRF objective ( Nikon ) , a photometrics Evolve 512 camera , and a DualView DV2 emission splitter . Images were recorded every second . Spinning disc confocal microscopy was performed with an Andor Revolution XD spinning disc system ( Ti - E inverted microscope [ Nikon ] with a CSU - X spinning disc confocal unit [ Yokogawa ] and a high - resolution Neo sCMOS camera [ Andor ] ) . This system was used in combination with a 60× / 1 . 4 NA or a 100× / 1 . 4 NA objective . Im - ages were acquired every 2 s . Photobleaching was performed using an Andor mosaic FRA PPA unit . Macropinocytosis was measured exactly as in Thomason et al . ( 2017 ) . Cortical ablation was performed using the FRAP unit of a Fluoview FV1000 ( Olympus ) with a planApo N60× / 1 . 4 oil objective . A single point on the cell cortex was ablated for 8 s with a 405 - nm laser , after which images were acquired every 2 s . Airyscan imaging was performed on a Zeiss 880 inverted con - focal microscope using the Super Resolution setting , with either a 40× / 1 . 3 NA or a 63× / 1 . 4 NA objective . Airyscan processing used de - fault settings of deconvolution at strength 6 . Image processing and statistical analysis All images acquired by microscopy were exported as TIFFs and im - ported into ImageJ . Noise was reduced in these images through the use of the despeckle tool in ImageJ . Otherwise the images were cropped and resized and their contrast / brightness was altered . Image analysis was always performed on the raw , unprocessed TIFFs . Often , cells or regions of interest were outlined , and the mean fluorescence intensity was measured within such defined areas . Kymographs were constructed through the reslice tool in ImageJ . The majority of data were generated by analyzing image stacks frame by frame for the appearance of dif - ferent cellular structures , e . g . , pseudopods were identified in DIC im - ages as translucent cellular protrusions extended over multiple frames . The colocalization of the Arp2 / 3 complex and F - actin was additionally used with confocal images . Blebs were identified in DIC time lapses as near instantaneous bulges of the cell membrane and as lacking Arp2 / 3 complex localization in confocal images . Unpaired Student’s t tests or one - way ANO VA with a Tukey’s multiple comparisons test were used to test statistical significance and generate P values . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows generation , growth , and development of WASP knockout cell lines . Fig . S2 shows that the WASP knockout has a cytokinesis de - fect . Fig . S3 shows cytoskeletal function in scar − / wasp − cells . Video 1 shows pseudopod formation in chemotaxing GFP - WASP / was A and was A − cells . Video 2 shows actomyosin dynamics in chemotaxing wild - type and wasA − cells . Video 3 shows WASP recruitment at the sites of clathrin pit internalization . Video 4 shows exaggerated tails at the rears of wasA − cells . Video 5 shows lack of movement in scar / wasp double mutants . Video 6 shows actin dynamics in scar / wasp double mutants . Video 7 shows myosin II localization in triple mutants . WASPs and formins compete in pseudopod dynamics • Davidson et al . 713 Acknowledgments We thank Dr . Jan Faix for the gift of anti - Ddia2 antiserum , Dr . Peter Devreotes for the anti - cAR1 antiserum , Dr . Luke Tweedy for help with data analysis , and Dr . Thierry Soldati for the anti - WASP . Sequences were provided through Dictybase . We are very grateful to Prof . Laura Machesky for comments on the text . We are grateful to Cancer Research UK for funding ( grants A15672 and A20017 ) . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Author contributions : A . Davidson conceived the work ( with R . Insall ) , initiated the project , performed the majority of the experi - ments , and drafted the paper with R . Insall . C . Amato performed sev - eral follow - up experiments , including repeats of WASP , clathrin , and Arp2 / 3 imaging and Dictyostelium development . P . Thomason per - formed several follow - up experiments , including macropinocytosis , Airyscan imaging , and actin accumulation . R . Insall conceived the work ( with A . Davidson ) , edited and wrote the final version of the manuscript , and supervised the work . Submitted : 24 May 2017 Revised : 3 October 2017 Accepted : 6 November 2017 References Bear , J . E . , J . F . Rawls , and C . L . Saxe III . 1998 . SCAR , a WASP - related protein , isolated as a suppressor of receptor defects in late Dictyostelium development . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 1325 – 1335 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 142 . 5 . 1325 Blagg , S . L . , M . Stewart , C . Sambles , and R . H . Insall . 2003 . PIR121 regulates pseudopod dynamics and SCAR activity in Dictyostelium . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1480 – 1487 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 03 ) 00580 - 3 Bosgraaf , L . , and P . J . Van Haastert . 2009 . Navigation of chemotactic cells by parallel signaling to pseudopod persistence and orientation . PLoS One . 4 : e6842 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0006842 Brady , R . J . , C . K . Damer , J . E . Heuser , and T . J . O’Halloran . 2010 . Regulation of Hip1r by epsin controls the temporal and spatial coupling of actin filaments to clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 3652 – 3661 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 066852 Buckley , C . M . , N . Gopaldass , C . Bosmani , S . A . Johnston , T . Soldati , R . H . Insall , and J . S . King . 2016 . WASH drives early recycling from macropinosomes and phagosomes to maintain surface phagocytic receptors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 113 : E5906 – E5915 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1524532113 Burke , T . A . , J . R . Christensen , E . Barone , C . Suarez , V . Sirotkin , and D . R . Kovar . 2014 . Homeostatic actin cytoskeleton networks are regulated by assembly factor competition for monomers . Curr . Biol . 24 : 579 – 585 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 01 . 072 Carnell , M . , T . Zech , S . D . Calaminus , S . Ura , M . Hagedorn , S . A . Johnston , R . C . May , T . Soldati , L . M . Machesky , and R . H . Insall . 2011 . Actin polymerization driven by WASH causes V - ATPase retrieval and vesicle neutralization before exocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 193 : 831 – 839 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201009119 Coué , M . , S . L . Brenner , I . Spector , and E . D . Korn . 1987 . Inhibition of actin polymerization by latrunculin A . FEBS Lett . 213 : 316 – 318 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 5793 ( 87 ) 81513 - 2 Damer , C . K . , and T . J . O’Halloran . 2000 . Spatially regulated recruitment of clathrin to the plasma membrane during capping and cell translocation . Mol . Biol . Cell . 11 : 2151 – 2159 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . 11 . 6 . 2151 Davidson , A . J . , and W . Wood . 2016 . Unravelling the Actin Cytoskeleton : A New Competitive Edge ? Trends Cell Biol . 26 : 569 – 576 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2016 . 04 . 001 Davidson , A . J . , J . S . King , and R . H . Insall . 2013a . The use of streptavidin conjugates as immunoblot loading controls and mitochondrial markers for use with Dictyostelium discoideum . Biotechniques . 55 : 39 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2144 / 000114054 Davidson , A . J . , S . Ura , P . A . Thomason , G . Kalna , and R . H . Insall . 2013b . Abi is required for modulation and stability but not localization or activation of the SCAR / WAVE complex . Eukaryot . Cell . 12 : 1509 – 1516 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / EC . 00116 - 13 De Lozanne , A . , and J . A . Spudich . 1987 . Disruption of the Dictyostelium myosin heavy chain gene by homologous recombination . Science . 236 : 1086 – 1091 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 3576222 Derivery , E . , and A . Gautreau . 2010 . Generation of branched actin networks : assembly and regulation of the N - WASP and WAVE molecular machines . BioEssays . 32 : 119 – 131 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bies . 200900123 Diz - Muñoz , A . , M . Krieg , M . Bergert , I . Ibarlucea - Benitez , D . J . Muller , E . Paluch , and C . P . Heisenberg . 2010 . Control of directed cell migration in vivo by membrane - to - cortex attachment . PLoS Biol . 8 : e1000544 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000544 Ibo , M . , V . Srivastava , D . N . Robinson , and Z . R . Gagnon . 2016 . Cell Blebbing in Confined Microfluidic Environments . PLoS One . 11 : e0163866 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0163866 Insall , R . H . 2010 . Understanding eukaryotic chemotaxis : a pseudopod - centred view . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 : 453 – 458 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2905 Insall , R . 2013 . The interaction between pseudopods and extracellular signalling during chemotaxis and directed migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 25 : 526 – 531 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2013 . 04 . 009 Insall , R . H . , and L . M . Machesky . 2009 . Actin dynamics at the leading edge : from simple machinery to complex networks . Dev . Cell . 17 : 310 – 322 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 08 . 012 Insall , R . , A . Kuspa , P . J . Lilly , G . Shaulsky , L . R . Levin , W . F . Loomis , and P . Devreotes . 1994 . CRAC , a cytosolic protein containing a pleckstrin homology domain , is required for receptor and G protein – mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Biol . 126 : 1537 – 1545 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 126 . 6 . 1537 Insall , R . , A . Müller - Taubenberger , L . Machesky , J . Köhler , E . Simmeth , S . J . Atkinson , I . Weber , and G . Gerisch . 2001 . Dynamics of the Dictyostelium Arp2 / 3 complex in endocytosis , cytokinesis , and chemotaxis . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 50 : 115 – 128 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cm . 10005 Junemann , A . , V . Fili ć , M . Winterhoff , B . Nordholz , C . Litschko , H . Schwellenbach , T . Stephan , I . Weber , and J . Faix . 2016 . A Diaphanous - related formin links Ras signaling directly to actin assembly in macropinocytosis and phagocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 113 : E7464 – E7473 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1611024113 King , J . S . , D . M . Veltman , M . Georgiou , B . Baum , and R . H . Insall . 2010 . SCAR / WAVE is activated at mitosis and drives myosin - independent cytokinesis . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 2246 – 2255 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 063735 King , J . S . , D . M . Veltman , and R . H . Insall . 2011 . The induction of autophagy by mechanical stress . Autophagy . 7 : 1490 – 1499 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4161 / auto . 7 . 12 . 17924 Knecht , D . A . , and W . F . Loomis . 1987 . Antisense RNA inactivation of myosin heavy chain gene expression in Dictyostelium discoideum . Science . 236 : 1081 – 1086 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 3576221 Kunda , P . , G . Craig , V . Dominguez , and B . Baum . 2003 . Abi , Sra1 , and Kette control the stability and localization of SCAR / WAVE to regulate the formation of actin - based protrusions . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1867 – 1875 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2003 . 10 . 005 Kuspa , A . , and W . F . Loomis . 1992 . Tagging developmental genes in Dictyostelium by restriction enzyme - mediated integration of plasmid DNA . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 89 : 8803 – 8807 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 89 . 18 . 8803 Laevsky , G . , and D . A . Knecht . 2003 . Cross - linking of actin filaments by myosin II is a major contributor to cortical integrity and cell motility in restrictive environments . J . Cell Sci . 116 : 3761 – 3770 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00684 Lämmermann , T . , and M . Sixt . 2009 . Mechanical modes of ‘amoeboid’ cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 : 636 – 644 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2009 . 05 . 003 Lomakin , A . J . , K . C . Lee , S . J . Han , D . A . Bui , M . Davidson , A . Mogilner , and G . Danuser . 2015 . Competition for actin between two distinct F - actin networks defines a bistable switch for cell polarization . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 : 1435 – 1445 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3246 Lu , Y . , J . C . Knol , M . H . Linskens , K . Friehs , P . J . Van Haastert , and E . Flaschel . 2004 . Production of the soluble human Fas ligand by Dictyostelium discoideum cultivated on a synthetic medium . J . Biotechnol . 108 : 243 – 251 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbiotec . 2003 . 12 . 006 Merrifield , C . J . , B . Qualmann , M . M . Kessels , and W . Almers . 2004 . Neural Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex are recruited to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in cultured fibroblasts . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 83 : 13 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1078 / 0171 - 9335 - 00356 Myers , S . A . , J . W . Han , Y . Lee , R . A . Firtel , and C . Y . Chung . 2005 . A Dictyostelium homologue of WASP is required for polarized F - actin JCB • Volume 217 • NumBer 2 • 2018 714 assembly during chemotaxis . Mol . Biol . Cell . 16 : 2191 – 2206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 09 - 0844 Paluch , E . K . , and E . Raz . 2013 . The role and regulation of blebs in cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 25 : 582 – 590 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2013 . 05 . 005 Patterson , B . , and J . A . Spudich . 1995 . A novel positive selection for identi - fying cold - sensitive myosin II mutants in Dictyostelium . Genetics . 140 : 505 – 515 . Pollard , T . D . 2007 . Regulation of actin filament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 : 451 – 477 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 35 . 040405 . 101936 Rotty , J . D . , and J . E . Bear . 2014 . Competition and collaboration between different actin assembly pathways allows for homeostatic control of the actin cytoskeleton . Bioarchitecture . 5 : 27 – 34 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 19490992 . 2015 . 1090670 Schirenbeck , A . , T . Bretschneider , R . Arasada , M . Schleicher , and J . Faix . 2005 . The Diaphanous - related formin dDia2 is required for the formation and maintenance of filopodia . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 619 – 625 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1266 Suarez , C . , and D . R . Kovar . 2016 . Internetwork competition for monomers governs actin cytoskeleton organization . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 : 799 – 810 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2016 . 106 Suraneni , P . , B . Rubinstein , J . R . Unruh , M . Durnin , D . Hanein , and R . Li . 2012 . The Arp2 / 3 complex is required for lamellipodia extension and directional fibroblast cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 197 : 239 – 251 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201112113 Tang , H . , A . Li , J . Bi , D . M . Veltman , T . Zech , H . J . Spence , X . Yu , P . Timpson , R . H . Insall , M . C . Frame , and L . M . Machesky . 2013 . Loss of Scar / WAVE complex promotes N - WASP - and FAK - dependent invasion . Curr . Biol . 23 : 107 – 117 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2012 . 11 . 059 Thomason , P . A . , J . S . King , and R . H . Insall . 2017 . Mroh1 , a lysosomal regulator localized by WASH - generated actin . J . Cell Sci . 130 : 1785 – 1795 . Tinevez , J . Y . , U . Schulze , G . Salbreux , J . Roensch , J . F . Joanny , and E . Paluch . 2009 . Role of cortical tension in bleb growth . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 106 : 18581 – 18586 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0903353106 Tyson , R . A . , E . Zatulovskiy , R . R . Kay , and T . Bretschneider . 2014 . How blebs and pseudopods cooperate during chemotaxis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 111 : 11703 – 11708 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1322291111 Veltman , D . M . , and R . H . Insall . 2010 . WASP family proteins : their evolution and its physiological implications . Mol . Biol . Cell . 21 : 2880 – 2893 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E10 - 04 - 0372 Veltman , D . M . , I . Keizer - Gunnink , and P . J . Haastert . 2009 . An extrachromosomal , inducible expression system for Dictyostelium discoideum . Plasmid . 61 : 119 – 125 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . plasmid . 2008 . 11 . 002 Veltman , D . M . , J . S . King , L . M . Machesky , and R . H . Insall . 2012 . SCAR knockouts in Dictyostelium : WASP assumes SCAR’s position and upstream regulators in pseudopods . J . Cell Biol . 198 : 501 – 508 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201205058 Veltman , D . M . , T . D . Williams , G . Bloomfield , B . C . Chen , E . Betzig , R . H . Insall , and R . R . Kay . 2016 . A plasma membrane template for macropinocytic cups . eLife . 5 : e20085 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 20085 Wessels , D . , J . Reynolds , O . Johnson , E . Voss , R . Burns , K . Daniels , E . Garrard , T . J . O’Halloran , and D . R . Soll . 2000 . Clathrin plays a novel role in the regulation of cell polarity , pseudopod formation , uropod stability and mo - tility in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 21 – 36 . Wu , C . , S . B . Asokan , M . E . Berginski , E . M . Haynes , N . E . Sharpless , J . D . Griffith , S . M . Gomez , and J . E . Bear . 2012 . Arp2 / 3 is critical for lamellipodia and response to extracellular matrix cues but is dispensable for chemotaxis . Cell . 148 : 973 – 987 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 12 . 034 Xu , X . S . , E . Lee , T . Chen , E . Kuczmarski , R . L . Chisholm , and D . A . Knecht . 2001 . During multicellular migration , myosin ii serves a structural role independent of its motor function . Dev . Biol . 232 : 255 – 264 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1006 / dbio . 2000 . 0132 Yoshida , K . , and T . Soldati . 2006 . Dissection of amoeboid movement into two mechanically distinct modes . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 3833 – 3844 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 03152 Zatulovskiy , E . , and R . R . Kay . 2016 . Chemotactic Blebbing in Dictyostelium Cells . Methods Mol . Biol . 1407 : 97 – 105 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 3480 - 5 _ 7 Zatulovskiy , E . , R . Tyson , T . Bretschneider , and R . R . Kay . 2014 . Bleb - driven chemotaxis of Dictyostelium cells . J . Cell Biol . 204 : 1027 – 1044 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201306147 Zhu , Z . , Y . Chai , Y . Jiang , W . Li , H . Hu , W . Li , J . W . Wu , Z . X . Wang , S . Huang , and G . Ou . 2016 . Functional Coordination of WAVE and WASP in C . elegans Neuroblast Migration . Dev . Cell . 39 : 224 – 238 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2016 . 09 . 029