Open Access . © 2019 Natasha Randall et al . , published by De Gruyter . This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attri - bution alone 4 . 0 License . Paladyn , J . Behav . Robot . 2019 ; 10 : 237 – 255 Research Article Open Access Natasha Randall * , Casey C . Bennett , Selma Šabanović , Shinichi Nagata , Lori Eldridge , Sawyer Collins , and Jennifer A . Piatt More than just friends : in - home use and design recommendations for sensing socially assistive robots ( SARs ) by older adults with depression https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / pjbr - 2019 - 0020 Received February 28 , 2018 ; accepted May 15 , 2019 Abstract : As healthcare turns its focus to preventative community - based interventions , there is increasing inter - est in using in - home technology to support this goal . This study evaluates the design and use of socially assistive robots ( SARs ) and sensors as in - home therapeutic support for older adults with depression . The seal - like SAR Paro , along with onboard and wearable sensors , was placed in the homes of 10 older adults diagnosed with clinical depression for one month . Design workshops were con - ducted before and after the in - home implementation with participating older adults and clinical care staff members . Workshops showed older adults and clinicians saw several potential uses for robots and sensors to support in - home depression care . Long - term in - home use of the robot al - lowed researchers and participants to situate desired robot features in specific practices and experiences of daily life , and some user requests for functionality changed due to extended use . Sensor data showed that participants’ atti - tudes toward and intention to use the robot were strongly correlated with particular Circadian patterns ( afternoon and evening ) of robot use . Sensor data also showed that those without pets interacted with Paro significantly more than those with pets , and survey data showed they had more positive attitudes toward the SAR . Companionship , while a desired capability , emerged as insufficient to en - gage many older adults in long - term use of SARs in their home . Keywords : socially assistive robotics , home and social robot design , embedded sensors , depression management and therapy in older adults , human - robot interaction * Corresponding Author : Natasha Randall : Indiana University Bloomington , USA ; E - mail : nprandal @ iu . edu Casey C . Bennett : College of Computing and Digital Media DePaul University , USA 1 Introduction Deployment of physically and socially assistive robots in healthcare is increasing . Previous work has focused on de - signing such robots to improve the health , functioning , and quality - of - life ( QOL ) of people with chronic and tem - porary health issues and to support healthcare personnel in providing care [ 1 – 3 ] . While the context of use for these robots has often been limited to institutionalized care set - tings ( e . g . , nursing homes , hospitals ) , spurring many eval - uation studies in these environments as well as the lab , researchers have recently begun to explore the use of as - sistive robots in single family homes to provide daily ther - apeutic support and preventative assistance to patients and caregivers . Initial implementations of assistive robots in homes show promising health benefits , such as ad - dressing loneliness and social isolation using companion robots [ 4 – 7 ] , providing medication and event reminders [ 5 , 8 ] , andmonitoringandpredictingusers’healthstatuswith sensors accompanying the robot [ 4 , 5 , 8 ] . Increasing interest in developing robots for use in homes as well as institutions parallels a broader trend in healthcare towards patient - and community - centered care [ 9 ] . As healthcare shifts away from the traditional med - ical model centered on diagnosis and treatment of dis - ease , community - based interventions are becoming more common , with research showing they improve clinical out - comes and reduce health care costs associated with long term institutionalization [ 10 – 12 ] . This shift underscores Selma Šabanović : School of Informatics , Computing , and Engi - neering Indiana University , USA Shinichi Nagata : School of Health Science and Wellness Northwest Missouri State University , USA Lori Eldridge , Jennifer A . Piatt : School of Public Heath Indiana University , USA Sawyer Collins : School of Informatics , Computing , and Engineer - ing Indiana University , USA 238 | Natasha Randall et al . the potential for socially assistive robots ( SARs ) as a health intervention tool within the current healthcare landscape . The use of robots in home care brings up new ques - tions for the fields of SARs and human - robot interaction ( HRI ) , including whether older adults will accept SARs in their homes , whether and how they will use SARs without clinical supervision , and whether SARs that were benefi - cial in institutions will have similar effects in homes . In this paper , we seek to understand how SARs might be used in homes to support the care and therapy of older adults with depression . We focus on older adults with depression because of its high incidence rate among older adults [ 13 ] , and its correlation with higher rates of institutionalization [ 14 ] . Preliminary data suggests that SARs may have thera - peutic benefits in this area [ 2 , 3 ] , including reducing lone - liness [ 15 ] , improving mood [ 16 ] , increasing socialization [ 17 ] , and relieving caregiver burden [ 18 ] . There are , how - ever , still many open questions regarding the design char - acteristics and ways of incorporating SARs into home care that would be most useful for assisting older adults with depression . To address these open questions , we conducted fo - cus groups with older adults diagnosed with major depres - sivedisorder ( MDD ) andwithcliniciansandcaremanagers who work with this population , as well as a month - long in - home intervention with these same older adults , to un - derstand their evaluations of existing SAR technologies in use and gather design ideas for future SARs they could use in daily care and therapeutic practice . We particularly focused on the subcategory of companion SARs , as those were most relevant to the concerns older adults with de - pression had mentioned in previous participatory design studies [ 19 , 20 ] . Along with appropriate functions of the robot and the robot’s fit in people’s homes , we also wanted to know how sensors accompanying the robot might be used to support personal and clinical care for older adults with depression . Previous work showed that one of the challenges for potential users participating in robot design activities is their lack of experience with these emerging technologies [ 21 ] . To address this issue , we provided older adults with depression with the zoomorphic SAR Paro ( Fig - ure 1 ) – a robotic seal often used in eldercare – to use in their homes for one month between initial and final fo - cus groups as a way of providing them with hands - on and contextually situated experience with SARs that could in - form their evaluations . Having Paro in the homes of po - tential users allowed us to learn about emergent practices and interactions people had with companion - type robots . It also gave participants enough long - term experience with the robot to provide additional insights in the final focus group on what they found desirable and what they wanted Figure 1 : Paro : a socially assistive , seal - like robot . to amend . Additionally , we gauged people’s perceptions of having data about their interactions collected via sensors onboard the robot and made available to them and oth - ers ( e . g . , therapists , family ) as an additional intervention mechanism and explored the potential use of such sensors in the course of depression care and therapy . The first contribution of our work is in executing a long - term , real - world study that uses a healthcare robot in the home environment , suggesting that use of such agents for preventative in - home healthcare may be possible . Sec - ond , there have been no studies of in - home use with indi - viduals who have MDD ( depression ) as their primary diag - nosis , and our paper illustrates the ways in which the de - sign and use of SARs for this population should be situated in their daily concerns . Third , while there has been a lot written on the use of sensors for healthcare , our work pro - vides insights into how data from sensors onboard SARs correspondtoself - reporteduse , andhowsensorscoulden - able SAR behavior adaptation in a clinically meaningful manner [ 7 ] . Our study shows the value of extended expe - rience with emerging technologies like SARs for informing user contributions to the design of robots , as some design preferences and suggestions changed after in - home use , and both researchers and participants had a clearer idea of how requested robot functionality might be implemented after the study . Lastly , we believe a novel empirical contri - bution is in determining that , while companionship may be sufficient to inspire continued intention to use SARs for those with mental health issues in institutions , it is not always sufficient to inspire intentions for long - term home use in this population . More than just friends | 239 Our results are organized as follows : Section 4 . 1 and 4 . 2 discuss attitudes toward the robot and SAR design ideas presented by older adults and staff pre - intervention ( 4 . 1 ) and post - intervention ( 4 . 2 ) . Section 4 . 3 connects de - sign ideas to the lived experiences of participants during the intervention . Section 4 . 4 presents our robot perception survey results and connection with pet ownership , and section 4 . 5 presents robot use based on sensor data and correlations with intention to use and patterns of interac - tion . 2 Background literature 2 . 1 Depression in older adults Depression has a high incidence rate ( 15 - 20 % ) among older adults [ 13 ] , and commonly precipitates deteriora - tion in individuals’ physical and mental health . People with depression are three times less likely to adhere to treatment regimens , and more likely to be readmitted to the hospital than other patients [ 22 ] . Per - person cost of healthcare for older adults with depression is accordingly 47 - 200 % higher than their counterparts without depres - sion [ 23 ] . 47 . 5 % of older adults with depression are also diagnosed with anxiety [ 24 ] . A major component of de - pression in older adults is the lack of social interaction , combined with chronic loneliness [ 25 ] . Pet ownership has been associated with decreased depression among women and single individuals [ 26 ] . Treatment for depression is commonly performed through clinical visits and medica - tion , but can also include supplemental treatments such as animal - assisted therapy , which has been found to de - crease symptoms of depression in institutions [ 27 ] . 2 . 2 Use of SARs with individuals with depression There is limited research examining the effects of SARs on depression . Our mental health survey results from this re - search project , reported in Bennett et al . [ 4 ] , showed a re - duction in depression in older adults , but failed to find an improvement in loneliness or functioning . Where other re - search is available , it has looked at therapeutic effects on depression in individuals with dementia . Wada [ 17 ] found improved overall mood and lowered depression scores , as measured by the Geriatric Depression Scale ( GDS ) , after a one - year deployment of Paro at a care facility . In a 12 - week study at a retirement home , Robinson , et al . [ 15 ] found no significant differences in GDS scores between intervention and control groups after adjusting for baseline scores , but did find that individuals’ loneliness was significantly re - duced in the intervention group when compared to con - trol . There is some evidence that SARs do decrease lone - liness and improve social connections , mood , and health among older adults [ 2 , 28 ] . Paro has been one of the main robots used in studies showing these positive effects . Prior work on designing robots for older adults with mental health issues suggests that it may be appropriate to use robot companions in lieu of pet therapy [ 29 , 30 ] . Pet therapy has had success as a treatment for older adults with depression [ 31 , 32 ] , but pets require a high level of care that mental and physical issues sometimes prevent . In prior participatory design studies with older adults with depression , several participants lost access to their pets during the study due to deteriorating health [ 15 ] . Money needed to care for pets may also make it difficult , if not im - possible , for low income individuals to own animals . Ad - ditionally , not all residences allow pets , and there may be allergy concerns . Though counselling services are often available for in - dividuals with depression , meetings with clinical staff typ - icallyoccureveryoneormoreweeks , leavingampleoppor - tunities for supplemental intervention . Also , though med - ication is efficacious for many adults , there is often ad - ditional benefit from receiving concurrent treatments [ 33 , 34 ] . This makes the use of robots and accompanying sen - sors to monitor and provide appropriate personalized in - teractions for older adults potentially advantageous . 2 . 3 SARs in the homes of older adults Several studies on the therapeutic use of SARs have eval - uated their effects on the mental and physical health of older adults in institutions [ 35 , 36 ] , but few have focused on SARs in single family homes . This is an important dis - tinction , however , as people have more freedom to inter - act as they like with personal robots in the home than they would in institutional contexts . They may also form tighter bonds with robots in their home , seeing the robot as their companion rather than a shared artifact . One of the few studies of long - term in - home SAR use by older adults was by Liang et al . [ 37 ] . They con - ducted a six - week in - home intervention with Paro , cou - pled with institutional use , for dementia patients . Partici - pants who had less severe dementia symptoms benefitted the most from Paro’s use in this case . Additional studies have probed how other robots might support the health of older adults in the home . Coradeschi et al . [ 38 ] used Giraff - Plus , a telepresence robot , to facilitate in - home commu - nications between patients and care providers . As a sup - porting feature , they allowed friends and family members 240 | Natasha Randall et al . to interact with older adults through the GiraffPlus system . Another robot , Care - O - Bot II , was used to provide physical assistance , as it supported walking and item handling by older adults [ 39 ] . Therefore , both socially and physically assistive robots have found their way into the home . With older adults’ desire to “age in place” , more stud - ies are necessary to determine how to accomplish this goal , including using new technologies . The present study is the first to use SARs in the homes of persons with clinical depression as a primary diagnosis , with special emphasis on how robots should be designed to maximize utility for this population . 2 . 4 Sensors in in - home healthcare There is extensive literature on the use of environmental and wearable sensors to track the health status and be - havior of older adults [ 40 – 42 ] . In the case of older adults with depression , for example , motion density maps based on passive infrared sensors placed in users’ homes have been shown to correlate with health assessment scores [ 43 ] . Sensors that can alert caregivers to distress ( such as a sudden blood pressure drop or changes in behavioral patterns via activity monitoring ) have also been placed in the homes of independently living older adults [ 44 ] . Activ - ity monitoring in this case was done via infrared sensors around the home , allowing older adults to maintain some independence and privacy , with caregivers getting alerts only when necessary . There is less knowledge on how sen - sors onboard SARs can be used to collect clinically useful data , or how environmental and wearable sensors can en - able SAR behavior adaptation in a clinically meaningful manner [ 5 , 8 , 45 ] . The use of social robots in the home brings about unique concerns over user privacy and questions about data sharing , as robots may have many sensors that are re - quired for their functioning and collect information about people’s behaviors in an intimate space . People who have developed privacy - enhancing behaviors in the presence of more overt sensors may be less aware of or concerned about possible privacy infractions by technologies de - signed as social entities , whose social presence may ob - scure the identity of the people receiving the data [ 46 ] . On theotherhand , thisfactmightmakesensorsonboardSARs particularly useful , as patients might not attempt to ac - tively obscure their behavior . 3 Methods 3 . 1 Participants Participant recruitment took place in a midwestern city in collaboration with a local outpatient mental health clinic . The recruitment criteria for older adults specified partici - pants should be over 55 , live independently in their own homes , have an active depressive disorder diagnosis , and present with a co - occurring physical illness . We recruited participants who were over 55 , instead of 65 , as people with depression show cognitive signs of aging earlier than those without depression [ 47 ] . Those who had also been diagnosed with psychosis ( e . g . , schizophrenia ) or demen - tia were not eligible for the study . In total , 10 older adults were recruited . They ranged from 56 to 67 years old , with an average age of 62 . 8 years . While recruitment of both male and female participants was attempted , no males volunteered for this study ; there - fore , all participants were female . This might be due to the larger overall incidence of depression in the female popu - lation [ 48 , 49 ] , or to females’ greater willingness to interact with companion robots [ 50 ] . The lifestyles of older adult participants were diverse ( see Table 1 ) . Several lived alone , while others lived with significant others , roommates , or children . Some had pets . Their access to social support also varied widely . They had different secondary diagnoses , including anxiety and physical ailments . All older adults were low - income , per - haps due to the location or method of recruitment , and all but one ( P10 ) were unemployed . Additionally , 4 male and 4 female clinicians were re - cruited from the same local outpatient mental health facil - ity . They worked in diverse healthcare roles , including care coordinator , therapist , and crisis worker . All had worked with our target population of older adults over 55 years of age , who were living independently and had been di - agnosed with MDD . 3 . 2 Study design The study consisted of initial focus groups with older adults and staff , a SAR in - home deployment , and conclud - ing focus groups . More than just friends | 241 Table 1 : Older adult participant demographics . 5 Participants were instructed on how to turn the robot on and off and use it safely , but were free to choose how and when to interact , except they were asked not to sleep with it ( for safety reasons ) and to not take it out of the home ( to help prevent loss and damage ) . At the commencement and conclusion of the study , researchers administered self - report surveys to gauge participants’ mental health and wellbeing ( i . e . , PHQ - 9 5 , WHOQOL - BREF ( WHO , 2004 ) 6 , UCLA loneliness scale 7 , OQ - 45 ) as well as two robot perception surveys ( i . e . , Almere , Godspeed ) [ 51 , 52 ] . We used a slightly modified version of the Almere by removingfour questions ( e . g . , pertaining to the robot being human - like ) that did not make sense in the context of our study . Three of these questionnaires were also administered weekly ( PHQ - 9 , WHO , UCLA loneliness scale ) . These provided data on participants’ changing mental and physical health status , their interactions with the robot , and their experience using SARs . Our aggregate mental health questionnaire results presented in Bennett et al showed that Paro may alleviate symptoms of depression as measured by the PHQ - 9 when used as a supplement to existing treatment [ 4 ] . Weekly semi - structured in - home interviews were also conducted to learn more about participants’ activities . A daily five - minute phone call with participants was attempted to note changes in their mental and physical health , and interactions with Paro ( though participants did not always take the call ) . Data from sensors in Paro’s collar ( ambient light and sound , accelerometer ) tracked participants’ interactions with and around the robot , while Jawbone activity trackers collected data on their sleep and physical activity levels for the duration of the in - home study . Sensor data results , also reported in Bennett et al [ 4 ] , showed that changes in depression status could be predicted with 74 % 5 http : / / www . phqscreeners . com / sites / g / files / g10016261 / f / 201412 / PHQ - 9 _ English . pdf 6 http : / / www . who . int / substance _ abuse / research _ tools / en / english _ whoqol . pdf Following Paro’s removal from their homes , participants were invited to a final focus group to discuss their experience , thoughts on SARs usefulness in their life , Paro’s form and features , further design ideasthat might extend beyondParo’s capabilities , how the sensor data might be useful to them , and any privacy concerns related to having sensors in the home or sharingthecollected data . Focus groups were conducted with two to three participants in each . Seven of the ten participants who completed the in - home study attended a session . Of the three participants who did not attend , one had scheduling conflicts , and the other two were unresponsive to our repeated attempts to reach them . Based on our experience recruiting for this project , speaking with clinicians , and working with depressed older adults more generally , it is not uncommon for members of this population to experience fluctuations in depression and become unreachable when their depression worsens . 3 . 2 . 2 Clinical care staff Pre - intervention focus groups with staff The focus groups were conducted in two sessions , one with 6 staff members and the other with 2 . Participants were introduced to Paro through video 3 and in person . They were also shown various sensor cards , depicting sensors that could be used in robots and briefly describing their function [ 53 ] . Researchers asked staff if they foresaw any benefits or issues with its use by older adults with depression , questioned them as to whether and how they would incorporate Paro into their practice , and facilitated discussions about sensors and their potential use in treatment . 7 http : / / fetzer . org / sites / default / files / images / stories / pdf / selfmeasures / Self _ Measures _ fo r _ Loneliness _ and _ Interpersonal _ Problems _ UCLA _ LONELINESS . pdf Participant Age Cohabitants Pets Social support Anxiety - related disorders P1 65 Grandson Dog Daughters live nearby and stop by frequently . Grandkids in home . Both positive and negative ( stressful ) interactions with family . Panic disorder , PTSD P2 62 None Dog Daughter lives in town , and they frequently get together . PTSD P3 67 Husband , Son Dog Loving relationship with husband and son . Speaks regularly with other son who lives out of state and his children visit once a year . Attends church services weekly . PTSD P4 67 None Dog Has a great relationship with daughter who lives nearby . They frequently interact . PTSD P5 62 None None Sister calls to chat sometimes but the two do not live near one another , so they don’t see each other . Her neighbor checks on her periodically . Panic disorder , PTSD P6 67 None None Very little support . Not close to family and had no close friends . None P7 60 None None Her father and sister live in the area , and they all frequently get together . None P8 61 None None Almost no social support . No one , besides her aids , who visits or calls . None P9 56 Grandson Cat Has a boyfriend . Daughter lives in the area , though their relationship is often fraught . PTSD P10 61 Roommate Dog Has a roommate and is supported by family and friends . Panic disorder 3 . 2 . 1 Older adults Pre - intervention focus groups The two initial focus groups were conducted with three to six older adults participating in each . The purpose of the first focus group was to introduce participants to several SARs ( Mabu¹ , Jibo² , Paro³ and Buddy⁴ ) through videos and to get their initial feedback on such robots through group discussion . Participants discussed various features of the SARs and whether and how they thought SARs could be useful in their lives . Additionally , they were able to inter - act with Paro in person during the workshop . Participants were asked to comment on how they thought Paro worked ( e . g . , which sensors it had and how it responded ) and were encouraged to share their thoughts on what it might be like to have Paro in their homes . The second focus group was conducted to gauge participants’ reactions to sensors that would be used with Paro during the study . These included sensors embedded in a 3D printed collar worn by Paro and a Jawbone activity tracker worn by participants . The sensor collar was designed to collect data on ambient light , ambient sound , and interaction with the robot , while the Jawbone collected sleep and activity data . We used a sensor collar as opposed to embedded sensors within the robot , as sensor data collected directly by Paro is proprietary . Participants were given the sensors to ex - amine and were shown visualizations of the types of data the sensors could collect . Researchers asked partic - ipants how comfortable they were having these in their home . They also inquired as to whether the information that would be collected by the sensors would be useful 1 https : / / vimeo . com / 138783051 2 https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = 3N1Q8oFpX1Y 3 https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = V - WTCm7kOP0 4 https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = 51yGC3iytbY to them , and what they thought about giving others ac - cess to this information ( e . g . , therapists , family members ) . In - home intervention After completion of both focus groups , participants were given the Paro robot to use in their homes for four consecutive weeks . We chose Paro as the companion SAR because there is previous evidence that it can help alleviate loneliness and improve mood among older adults [ 15 ] , it is FDA approved as a biomedical feedback device , and it is a commercial device that is easy to use and technically robust , making breakdowns less likely . Older adults with depression in previous participatory design studies also showed a clear preference for using Paro in their homes [ 20 ] . Participants were instructed on how to turn the robot on and off and use it safely , but were free to choose how and when to interact , except they were asked not to sleep with it ( for safety reasons ) and to not take it out of the home ( to help prevent loss and damage ) . At the commencement and conclusion of the study , researchers administered self - report surveys to gauge participants’ mental health and wellbeing ( i . e . , PHQ - 9⁵ , WHOQOL - BREF ( WHO , 2004 ) ⁶ , UCLA loneliness scale⁷ , OQ - 45 ) as well as two robot perception surveys ( i . e . , Almere , Godspeed ) [ 51 , 52 ] . We used a slightly modified version of the Almere by removing four questions ( e . g . , pertaining to the robot being human - like ) that did not make sense in the context of our study . Three of these questionnaires were also administered weekly ( PHQ - 9 , 5 http : / / www . phqscreeners . com / sites / g / files / g10016261 / f / 201412 / PHQ - 9 _ English . pdf 6 http : / / www . who . int / substance _ abuse / research _ tools / en / english _ whoqol . pdf 7 http : / / fetzer . org / sites / default / files / images / stories / pdf / selfmeasures / Self _ Measures _ for _ Loneliness _ and _ Interpersonal _ Problems _ UCLA _ LONELINESS . pdf 242 | Natasha Randall et al . WHO , UCLA loneliness scale ) . These provided data on participants’ changing mental and physical health status , their interactions with the robot , and their experience using SARs . Our aggregate mental health questionnaire results presented in Bennett et al showed that Paro may alleviate symptoms of depression as measured by the PHQ - 9 when used as a supplement to existing treatment [ 4 ] . Weekly semi - structured in - home interviews were also conducted to learn more about participants’ activities . A daily five - minute phone call with participants was attempted to note changes in their mental and physical health , and interactions with Paro ( though participants did not always take the call ) . Data from sensors in Paro’s collar ( ambient light and sound , accelerometer ) tracked participants’ interactions with and around the robot , while Jawbone activity trackers collected data on their sleep and physical activity levels for the duration of the in - home study . Sensor data results , also reported in Ben - nett et al [ 4 ] , showed that changes in depression status could be predicted with ~ 74 % accuracy . Participants continued their previously prescribed treatments during the intervention . Post - intervention focus group with older adults Following Paro’s removal from their homes , participants were invited to a final focus group to discuss their expe - rience , thoughts on SARs usefulness in their life , Paro’s form and features , further design ideas that might extend beyond Paro’s capabilities , how the sensor data might be useful to them , and any privacy concerns related to having sensors in the home or sharing the collected data . Focus groups were conducted with two to three participants in each . Seven of the ten participants who completed the in - home study attended a session . Of the three participants who did not attend , one had scheduling conflicts , and the other two were unresponsive to our repeated attempts to reach them . Based on our experience recruiting for this project , speaking with clinicians , and working with de - pressed older adults more generally , it is not uncommon for members of this population to experience fluctuations in depression and become unreachable when their depres - sion worsens . 3 . 2 . 2 Clinical care staff Pre - intervention focus groups with staff The focus groups were conducted in two sessions , one with 6 staff members and the other with 2 . Participants were introduced to Paro through video [ ? ] and in person . They were also shown various sensor cards , depicting sensors that could be used in robots and briefly describing their function [ 53 ] . Researchers asked staff if they foresaw any benefits or issues with its use by older adults with depression , questioned them as to whether and how they would incorporate Paro into their practice , and facilitated discussions about sensors and their potential use in treatment . Post - intervention focus groups with staff After the final focus group with older adults , a conclud - ing focus group was conducted with five out of the original eight staff members . This served as a debriefing of what happened when older adults had Paro in the home . There - fore , anonymized sensor data from the collar and activ - ity tracker were shared as well as ways in which partici - pants engaged with Paro . Staff commented on how they might want to see and use this information to support pa - tient care , both as information to discuss during therapy sessions and by using the sensor data to have SARs adapt their behavior to the patient’s conditions and needs . Infor - mation on additional sensor data staff wanted to have was also collected , in addition to capabilities they would want to see in a SAR for older adults with depression . 3 . 3 Data analysis 3 . 3 . 1 Focus group data Aninductiveapproachtothematicanalysiswasperformed in order to code the data and identify emergent themes . For focus groups with older adults , a total of 443 codes were created after line - by - line coding of the data . These included codes pertaining to what participants liked and wanted to change about Paro , what they wanted in a so - cial robot more generally and their feelings post - study , whether they wanted access to sensor data and what they would like to use it for , and their feelings on sensor data sharing . 15 % of this data was randomly selected and coded by a second researcher . The pooled kappa was 0 . 70 . For staff , a total of 646 codes were applied after line - by - line coding . They were then categorized into 92 different code types and divided into 9 themes . The three most common themes were : a ) using sensors to enable the robot to re - spond based on older adults’ health , b ) using sensor data to monitor mental health and inform therapy , and c ) using sensors for more general health monitoring , such as sleep and smoke detection . More than just friends | 243 3 . 3 . 2 In - home interview data Deductive and inductive approaches to coding were cou - pled to thematically analyze the data collected through telephone calls and interviews in participant homes . This allowed coding of concepts of pre - established importance as well as recurring themes that naturally arose from the data . In the end , 22 codes were created . This included codes for physical affection toward Paro , anthropomor - phization , positive and negative emotional changes ( due to Paro ) , and positive and negative interactions with other people . To check interrater reliability , 20 % of the data was randomly selected and coded by a second researcher . Dis - crepancies were discussed . Cohen’s kappa ranged from 0 . 74 - 1 . 0 for the 22 codes . 3 . 3 . 3 Sensor data Sensor data was modeled to test its utility for predicting participant attitude changes over time , as measured by the Almerescale . Thisdiffersfrompreviouswork , wherewefo - cused on using sensor data to predict changes in clinical scores [ 7 ] . Sensor data ( described in section 3 . 2 . 1 . 2 ) from the robot collar and the wearable Jawbone were utilized , along with baseline outcome measures ( to control for dif - ferences in participant functioning and symptom levels prior to intervention ) . The first step of this modelling entailed a sensor fu - sion process . Data was first thresholded using a low - pass filter to remove noise from the signal . For example , this ex - cluded small vibrations from the accelerometer ( motion ) data . Positive detection of various signal modalities ( mo - tion , light , sound ) was then calculated using the average across a 30 - frame moving window ( i . e . , approximately 3 - seconds ) to minimize false positives [ 54 , 55 ] . Next , inter - action activity was identified by the presence of multi - ple positive sensor modalities at any given timepoint . Fi - nally , the fused sensor data was aggregated temporally ( hourly , daily , weekly ) to look for circadian rhythm pat - terns of human - robot interaction . After the sensor fusion step , data was modeled in two ways . First , we ran a basic correlational analysis be - tween all the variables . Second , the data was run through a machine learning analysis via the Python Scikit package ( version 0 . 20 . 2 , https : / / scikit - learn . org ) and WEKA [ 56 ] , attempting to predict the change in the Almere attitude scores pre vs . post intervention . Modeling methods in - cluded Random Forests , Neural Networks , Gradient Boost - ing , and Support Vector Machines [ 57 ] , which were evalu - ated using 3 - fold cross validation ( given the limited sam - ple size ) . Feature selection was also conducted to identify features most highly related to attitude changes , using the Relief - F algorithm [ 58 ] . 4 Results 4 . 1 SARs and sensors – attitude and design ideas prior to home use 4 . 1 . 1 Older adults SARs Participants’ initial perceptions of Paro were captured dur - ing the first focus group , which was conducted prior to par - ticipants’ in - home use of the robot . Six out of ten partici - pants [ P1 , P2 , P6 , P8 , P9 , P10 ] immediatelytooktoParoand exhibited excitement to have it in their homes , as shown in the following quotes . “I have a little stuffed bear that I keep on my bed . And he doesn’t respond to me , so I was thinking that would be kind of nice to have that ! . . . I was thinking , if I could have oneofthoseIthinkIwouldprobablyliketohaveone ! ” ( P8 ) “I’d carry that thing everywhere . . . Oh , I think it’s awesome . I love it . . . . I’m excited . I am , I’m excited . . . I wouldn’t change a thing . Because it’s already doing most of what some people don’t even have . And you get some - thing like that and it’s new and that’s a friend forever . ” ( P1 ) “I’m looking forward to having one to take home with me too . We’re just really excited about getting our little seal . ” ( P6 ) The remaining four participants either expressed neg - ative [ P3 , P4 ] or neutral [ P5 , P7 ] sentiment toward using Paro . Specifically , P3and P4 did not see anypersonal value to using Paro , stating that it was not for them . “I still have dogs so I don’t know , it’d be quite a jump for me to go from a dog to a robot . ” ( P3 ) “Would I want one ? Not particularly . Maybe later , at some point . But right now , no . ” ( P4 ) Though only six participants saw Paro as potentially benefitting them , almost all participants ( 8 / 10 ) wanted a home robot of some sort . All eight mentioned they would want it to offer reminders – for example , for appointments , taking medication , and to eat and exercise . Using the robot to contact the hospital or a designated contact in medi - cal emergencies was requested second most often ( N = 6 ) , and participants wanted the robot to learn and change its behavior to suit their needs and the context ( N = 4 ) . 4 out of the 10 participants also spoke about their need for the 244 | Natasha Randall et al . robot to offer companionship . An ability to communicate ( verbally or nonverbally ) ( N = 4 ) , be versatile and customiz - able ( N = 6 ) , and function as a security system ( N = 5 ) were also in high demand . Participants did have concerns about using , or their ability to use , home robots . Their prime concerns included the robot being too technically challenging for them to use ( N = 3 ) , high cost ( N = 4 ) , privacy and hackability of the technology ( N = 6 ) , and competing desired usage be - tween users ( N = 4 ) . Concerns about Paro specifically were similar to those about home robots in general ( though they felt confident in their ability to use it ) . Though their discussions about Paro were mostly positive , they mentioned wanting to change its form to something more familiar ( cat , dog , or stuffed animal ) ( N = 2 ) and one person expressed worries about it being white , as it might get dirty . Sensors and sensor data Most of the older adults were willing to share sensor data with medical staff and family ( N = 7 ) . Fewer agreed with sharing data with a third party robot developer ( N = 2 ) . They wanted to be able to control who saw their data , but saw data sharing overall as a positive feature . They also wanted access to their own data , mainly to track their sleep , changes in their motivation , and calorie consump - tion . 4 . 1 . 2 Clinical care staff SARs Staff were positive about the potential for using Paro to as - sist in treatment and care of certain populations , mainly older adults and those with dementia , both in and out of nursing homes . They particularly saw it as beneficial for those with depression and other emotional issues , such as anxiety and PTSD ( N = 3 ) . “ [ A lot of our patients ] live where they can’t own a pet [ and they ] would really love to own [ one ] , so I’m like you could get a fish , but they want a dog or a cat . They just can’t where they’re at , and so I think that they would probably enjoy it . ” ( Staff 2 ) “Just the sensory deprivation that comes with isola - tion , being able to interact with something that kind of re - sembles another living creature . ” ( Staff 1 ) Staff’s suggestions for home robot features for older adults with depression focused on four areas : increasing interaction and socialization , user recognition and per - sonalization , sensor customization , and communication to an appropriate contact ( hospital , police , designated contact ) when individuals were in mental or physical dan - ger . They wanted sensors to be able to identify the user’s behavioral patterns and emotions , and to be customizable for each client . These ideas related to goals therapists had for clients , including increasing socialization , increasing hygiene and personal care during low periods , increasing exercise and movement , developing coping skills , estab - lishing a routine , and remembering to take medications . Though staff liked Paro overall , they saw several ways it could be improved for their patients . As previously men - tioned , they wanted to be able to customize the robot’s re - sponse and sensors based on patients’ needs ( N = 7 ) . Like older adults , they also wanted it to be a more familiar ani - mal , either a cat or a dog ( N = 3 ) . They wanted to be able to prompt older adults into interacting with the robot , and for the robot to prompt older adults into interacting with other people . They found it useful that the collar designed to accompany Paro sensed light , because individuals expe - riencing high levels of depression often keep their homes darker , and wondered if Paro could be solar powered , which would prompt users to go outside . Some wanted Paro to require care ( N = 2 ) , reasoning that it would give per - sons with depression a sense of purpose and be helpful in spurring people to action when they were emotionally low . Furthermore , since sleep is often jeopardized in this population , they thought it valuable if the robot could help patients sleep , potentially by playing white noise or help - ing them with relaxation techniques , and if sensor data could report to patients and therapists how well individ - uals slept . Like older adults , cost was staff’s top concern sur - rounding long - term use of robots , such as Paro , in the home . They also expressed organizational concerns if they were to adopt them into practice , worrying about liability issues for their center and individual therapists that might arise with its use as well as damage to the robot . Despite these potential drawbacks , they expressed a number of ways they could see incorporating robot home use into the care routine for older adults with depression , such as implementing a clinician - controlled check - out ( N = 2 ) , using it as a reward for patients making progress toward their goals ( N = 4 ) , using its accompanying sensors to check that patients are meeting their goals ( N = 5 ) , and using it as a tool to open a dialogue between the therapist and patient ( N = 4 ) . Sensors and sensor data Staff also discussed what kind of information they would want sensors to detect . For example , three staff members mentioned detecting the environment in some way , partic - More than just friends | 245 ularly dust , temperature , or humidity . Home control was also mentioned ( i . e . , managing temperature or light con - trol ) . They thought it would be useful if the robot could detect the area around it and offer alerts for emergencies ( fire , security ) or regular use ( someone at the door ) . These functions were thought to be useful for SARs to be used by their patient population more generally . More commonly , staff mentioned wanting the robot to be able to identify behavioral patterns ( N = 7 ) , along with speech patterns and emotions ( N = 5 ) via its sensors . They expected this to help with monitoring patients’ mental health status . It was noted that these sensors should be customizable for each patient . “Our whole focus here is to treat the individual as a unique set of goals , objectives , and problems . Paro would have to represent that in order for us to effectively use it” ( S4 ) . 4 . 2 SARs and sensors – attitude and design ideas after home use Below we present findings about participants’ perceptions of the robot and sensors from interviews with participants during the in - home intervention , post - intervention partic - ipant workshops , and post - intervention workshops with staff . 7 out of 10 of the original older adults and 5 out of 8 of the original staff attended the final workshops . 4 . 2 . 1 Older adults SARs Five out of ten participants remained constant in their original attitudes toward Paro during the course of the in - home intervention , as expressed in the initial focus groups . P2 , P6 , P9 , and P10 continued to display posi - tive feelings about Paro that grew during the course of the study . In contrast , P4 remained uninterested , believ - ing that Paro was not necessary for her and expressing at the final workshop , “I really didn’t miss him” . However , some participants’ attitudes toward the robot changed dramatically from their first encounter . P5 and P7 , who did not express specific attitudes toward Paro to begin with , both ended up becoming enamored with it . “I’m usually telling her what a good girl she is and what a pretty girl she is . And I tell her I love her . ” ( P5 ) P3 had a near immediate attitude change after Paro had been in her home for the first week . She began to display emotional attachment toward the robot , and dis - cussed early on that she would miss it when it was gone . She also said it comforted her in times of stress . During the final focus group , which occurred months after the inter - vention for this participant , she continued to exhibit at - tachment and iterated that she still missed Paro . Her at - titude about having Paro in her home before the study , which was quite negative , transformed once Paro became a member of her household . P1 was the opposite case , going from a positive to a predominantly negative view of having Paro in her home . “It’s like a dog . . . . I don’t really want to keep the dog , but I don’t want to take him to the pound and have him put down neither . So it’s a lot of responsibility . ” ( P1 ) P8’s attitude toward Paro also changed , but this change did not occur while Paro was in her home . It was only after Paro’s removal that she began to think Paro wasn’t that special – it was no different from her stuffed “talking” bear Koda ( which says “I’m Koda” , “I like climb - ing trees” , etc . when you press its ear ) that she had had for years . As far as the robot’s design , in the final workshop many participants still wanted Paro to be in the form of a dog or cat and for it not be white , as they had expressed in the initial focus groups . Other design ideas emerged only after in - home use of the robot . For example , two partici - pantswantedarobotwithamoreversatileform , soitcould either be set to sit or stand , and for it to be more moldable , so it could wrap around their body more comfortably . As opposed to participants’ initial desire to enable multi - person usage in the initial focus group , there was a shift to users viewing Paro as theirs . They wanted to main - tain control over whether others were allowed to interact with it . P10 stated , “when I shared him with my husband it was me sharing him . ” P3 echoed this sense of protec - tiveness and ownership over Paro . Both participants ( N = 5 ) and staff ( N = 4 ) had mentioned detecting dust , tempera - ture , humidity , pressure , and / or home management in the initial workshops , but after implementation these things became less important for both groups . This is probably because other functionality was seen as more important overall but also seemed to be more in - line with the features of a companion type robot . The ways in which the robot needed to be more cus - tomizable for participants also became apparent after they had experience using it in the home . For example , some loved the duration , pitch , and volume of its cries , while an - other found them too loud , frequent , and shrill . This was enough to eventually prevent one user from turning him on : “After a while I just couldn’t listen to him anymore . ” ( P8 ) Some found its behavior diverse enough to not get bored , but most wanted the robot to learn and change over 246 | Natasha Randall et al . time . This adaptation was seen as best in response to their idiosyncratic patterns . P3 even wanted the robot to sense her emotions in order to respond appropriately . Even par - ticipants who found Paro’s behaviors robust enough , still conceded they would probably prefer a robot with the abil - ity to adapt . While Paro was found to be responsive for the most part , older adults also wanted it to have a motion sensor so it would become active automatically when they en - tered the room , even if it was off ( N = 3 ) . This request was in part due to the fact that it only responded to sound and not motion , and in part due to Paro’s weak battery life , which meant they were likely to turn it off went not in use . Its battery only lasted for two hours before needing to be recharged , a problem mentioned multiple times by several participants ( N = 4 ) . They wanted it to last four hours at minimum , with a preference for longer . Having to plug it in constantly was a major impediment to its use , though many older adults still interacted with the SAR while it was charging . It is helpful that newer versions of Paro have a longer battery life of up to eight hours , which addresses this issue . In line with the particular issues associated with this user group , the companionship that Paro offered was of - ten cited as a favorite feature ( N = 4 ) . When we asked par - ticipants what affected them most during the study , they answered : “Not being alone . ” ( P9 ) “Yes - yes not being alone . Even though I have a room - mate but I felt PARO was more mine , you know ? ” ( P10 ) Beyond use as a socialization partner and mediator , users wanted a home robot to be able to offer other func - tionality ( such as contacting someone if they were unwell , use as a security system , and reminders ) , even if its pri - mary purpose was companionship ( N = 4 ) . “I think I wasn’t as fascinated with him as I was orig - inally . . . I just felt like he needed to have done something else . ” ( P8 ) “Can you imagine what [ Paro ] would need to do in or - der to keep you engaged for longer ? ” ( Researcher ) “I wished he could have reminded me of appoint - ments . ” ( P8 ) “So having some kind of functional use basically other than just being there . ” ( Researcher ) “Or some kind of alarm . ” ( P2 ) “Yeah” ( P8 ) They did not feel these features would interfere with its primary function as a companion . Companionship , therefore , may be a necessary but not sufficient function for a robot for long - term home use with many members of this population . Sensors and sensor data Only one participant reported being somewhat aware of the sensors in her home gathering data . The others either did not notice or did not care . This is likely in part be - cause the sensors were designed to detect low level infor - mation ( e . g . , if sound was present and at what level , as op - posed to recording what was said ) . The main time partic - ipants became cognizant of the sensors in the collar was when they had to swap the batteries , which they had dif - ficulty doing , as the device could be finicky and the bat - teries needed to be changed every few days . Three partic - ipants also had issues putting on and taking off the Jaw - bone fitness tracker , and participants often forgot to wear it . Therefore , we found that wearable sensors were not a good way to incorporate sensor technology long - term for thispopulation , andthatsensorsshouldeitherbeonboard the robot or located in their external environment , with minimal maintenance required by users . Participants ( N = 5 ) werewillingtosharetheirdatawith third party robot developers to improve their in - home ex - perience , though one person was opposed . This presents a shift from attitudes expressed at the initial focus groups , where most were uncomfortable with this idea . Three par - ticipants actually did not care who got the data , though the others talked about placing restrictions on it . Most wanted a designated contact ( e . g . , friend , family member ) to be able to see their data in an interpretable way . This also sup - ports staff’s desire to build a support system between older adults and other people . Four people wanted to share this informationwithfamily , andtwowereopposed . Thismade sense , as they were close to their families to varying de - grees . All participants present ( N = 7 ) were fine with their therapists and staff receiving this information . Five individuals also thought the data would allow them to meaningfully monitor their own habits . They were particularly interested in using sensors to obtain informa - tion on their sleeping habits ( N = 3 ) and to use it to motivate them to be more active ( N = 2 ) . Additionally , they were in - terested in sharing it with clinicians , and using it to help manage their addictions and show they correctly followed recommended use of the robot . 4 . 2 . 2 Clinical care staff SARs In the final staff workshop , one person wanted older adults to have to do something to actively care for the More than just friends | 247 robot , otherwise they might just be low together . Addi - tionally , the robot actively mirroring the participant was suggested as a way to make the patient more cognizant of their own emotions , given that they were told about this functionality in advance . This might cause them to seek help during particularly low moments or do something to regulate the robot’s ( and their ) emotions . This idea of using a companion robot as a mirroring tool seemed to be popular , with another staff member agreeing that it could even be used to prompt and discuss hygiene . For instance , they might be required to brush Paro before they brush their own hair . As well , therapists could tell how often Paro was groomed and this could lead them to segue into a discussion of participants’ own grooming habits while in session . “Sometimes [ poor personal hygiene and grooming ] is a warning sign . ” ( S3 Sensors and sensor data In addition to customizing the robot with patients , staff also wanted to be able to customize sensors for each pa - tient . Still , there were some features they saw as being useful for all patients , such as providing sleep data ( N = 3 ) and identifying behavioral patterns ( N = 2 ) . Being able to prompt older adults into interacting with the robot ( N = 1 ) and having the ability for others to communicate through the robot ( N = 1 ) were also mentioned . They saw this data , if it was presented in a visually and easily interpreted for - mat , as able to feed into therapy in two main ways . First , they thought having the information present would al - low them to open a dialogue with patients . “I think more data is good also because it gives clients more opportunity to participate in their treatment ; otherwise , they feel like they have to say what they think we want to hear or they just shut down often . ” ( S5 ) Second , they liked that they could observe changes in patient’s activity , prompting in - tervention or discussion . Related to this , they wanted to setbaselinepatterns ( e . g . , sleep , appetite ) , soanythingout of the ordinary would be easily brought to their attention . They felt that this could be used to demonstrate to the pa - tient objectively that they were improving as well . 4 . 3 Connecting design ideas to findings from the in - home intervention Below we discuss how functionalities requested by partic - ipants were relevant to different aspects of older adults’ daily lives . Suggestions are also offered for how to imple - ment features when designing home robots for this popu - lation . 4 . 3 . 1 Companionship During the in - home intervention , older adult participants described how important companionship was to them , and in many situations , said Paro was able to meet that need when it was lacking . All participants had many mo - ments where they felt lonely , sad , alone , or bored , and de - scribed that having Paro around alleviated the intensity of these feelings or made them dissipate altogether . “He’s always something that I can look at and feel good about myself and having him around . Cuz sometimes that helps with sadness . ” ( P2 ) “Yes . I love the robot . It keeps me company . I feel safe with it . ” ( P7 ) Participantswere likelyable toview Paro asa compan - ion because they endowed him with emotions and likened him to the people and pets around them . Eight of the ten participants named the robot something other than Paro , the name we called it in the focus groups . Having the robot in their homes , a more intimate space where it was viewed as belonging to them , seemed to foster the view of Paro as a friend or family member . Furthermore , several participants mentioned that Paro increased the frequency with which they interacted withotherpeople , asotherpeopleweredrawntoaskabout Paro or interact with it , starting a conversation . Partic - ipants nearly always enjoyed this ; however , P1 found it overwhelming at times , which is why she had no desire to take Paro outside her home . “Everyone wants you to con - stantly turn him on to see what he was doing . . . All that interaction would overwhelm me . ” ( P1 ) She found it man - ageable when one person approached her at a time but did not want multiple people approaching . Three participants did take Paro outside the home ( even though instructed not to ) and enjoyed the additional attention it brought . P1’s interpretation of Paro as animate actually seemed to undercut the relief Paro was meant to provide , as she saw it as a burden . “It’s like a dog , too much attention . . . To keep him alive , I have to interact with him . ” ( P1 ) She ex - pressed that her own dog was too much responsibility as well . For most participants however , viewing Paro as ani - mate , even though they logically knew it was just a robot , was beneficial . Participants often interacted with Paro to - gether with other people and / or their pets , enhancing the role Paro could play in increasing socialization . The activities people reported performing with Paro were fairly similar . All participants talked to Paro , engag - ing in small talk or sharing their deeper thoughts and concerns with it . Even participants who had a social net - work to turn to did this , as they didn’t always feel like 248 | Natasha Randall et al . they could talk to others about their issues , or members of their network where actually the source of their stress . For instance , P10 used Paro to comfort her when she was nervous about her pregnant daughter and her daughter’s boyfriend being at her house . Petting Paro ( done reflex - ively or in dealing with stress ) was also common . Other types of physical interaction , such as brushing and cud - dling it , also occurred but were mentioned to a lesser de - gree . Participants additionally spent a lot of time interact - ingwithParotogetherwithotherpeople ( N = 9 ) ortheirpets if they had them ( N = 4 ) , and also slept with the SAR ( N = 4 ) . Six participants watched TV with Paro . For some of these participants , thiswastheir primarywayofinteractingwith the SAR . Participants said the reasons for interacting with Paro were either their perceptions of Paro needing interaction or feeling that they themselves wanted to interact . P9 said , “it’s something to do , like babysitting” . Her reason for in - teracting was mainly due to boredom or desiring compan - ionship . On the other hand , P8 would interact often be - cause she felt guilty that Paro wasn’t getting enough at - tention . “ [ He ] looked lonely . ” In fact , several participants expressed a sense of guilt when they thought they did not engage enough with the robot . Designing a robot that is lifelike seems to be benefi - cial in increasing interaction for most older adults . Due to their needs for physical proximity , it is also important that they be able to interact physically with the robot in many ways ( e . g . , touching , cuddling , holding ) . This fosters their interpretation of robots as companions , something most older adults with depression are lacking in their lives . Even P1 , who was overwhelmed by Paro being in her home , ac - tually experienced a major decrease in depressive symp - toms during its use [ 4 ] . It is possible that having to care for something else pushed her to be more active , resulting in increased well - being , although it caused her to view the robot itself somewhat negatively . This call to care - taking was mentioned by therapists as being potentially advan - tageous for their depressive patients . Though companionship has been suggested in many studies to be important when designing robots for in - home use for older adults [ 20 , 59 ] , our month - long study also revealed that this was not sufficient for many older adults ( even depressive older adults , who are ostensibly more sensitive to the need of companionship ) to maintain high levels of interaction long - term ( see Figure 2 ) . Partic - ipants’ comments suggested that companionship should be combined with more utilitarian role ( s ) the robot can also serve . This represents divergence from results usually found from institutional use of Paro , where companion - ship works well when it is the only functionality present . Figure 2 : Weekly activity ( interaction ) percent per participant , as registered by sensors on the robot’s collar . The average across all participants is shown in the middle of the graph , in blue . Possible functions , in line with the needs of depressive older adults specifically , and as expressed in focus groups by older adults and clinical staff and reinforced through our in - home implementation , are elucidated below . 4 . 3 . 2 Call contact ( s ) when not well During the initial workshops , both older adults and clin - ical care staff mentioned wanting to enable the robot to contact a hospital or designated emergency contact if the owner was not well . Through the in - home study , we found this feature would be well aligned with the daily strug - gles of participants . Participants’ level of depression fluc - tuated throughout the study , with common slips back into moderate or major depression . While several participants reported that Paro helped them when they experienced symptoms of depression , it was also more difficult for them to voluntarily interact when they slipped into major de - pression . During these times , it would be good for pa - tients to have an easy lifeline to the outside world . This might be triggered by the patients themselves , or when sensors detect activity that is suggestive of a major depres - sive episode . Aside from mental health issues , participants fre - quently battled physical ailments , including constant and reoccurring issues such as afib , lymphatic system prob - lems , pain , and seizures and temporary sickness from mi - nor flu - like illness to violent illnesses that landed one par - ticipant in the emergency room . Allowing participants to easily contact the hospital or a designated contact ( possi - More than just friends | 249 bly via a button on the robot ) , or triggering a call based on concerning changes in sensor activity , could help ensure they get the help they need in a timely manner . 4 . 3 . 3 Reminders Older adults had a number of therapy and doctor’s ap - pointments . They took medication for their depression . Many also took medication for some physical issue . As older adults expressed they would benefit from a physical system providing reminders in the initial focus groups , re - minders might be an appropriate supplemental function for a home companion robot to provide to this population . This is something that has been found in previous studies with older adults [ 60 , 61 ] , and seems to be true for depres - siveolderadultsaswell . ParticipantskeptParointhesame room with them , so it is possible that a companion SAR could express these reminders verbally ( by using a distinct sound or cry ) or visually . 4 . 3 . 4 Security system Asparticipantswerelow - income , somelivedinmorecrime prone areas . This was a major reason why they wanted a security system . P6 even discussed someone having re - cently stolen things from her as part of the in - home inter - views during the intervention . Staff feedback from the fo - cus group echoed this concern , as they mentioned want - ing the robot to be able to issue alerts in response to secu - rity threats . However , due to older adults’ concerns about their own privacy , it is not clear that this should be au - tonomously implemented as part of a robot meant primar - ily for companionship , as this would most likely entail use of a camera . If older adults are able to use a button or some other mechanism on the robot to alert authorities in re - sponse to perceived danger , this may give them a greater senseofperceivedsecuritywhilealsorespectingtheirright to privacy . As participants often moved the robot to the same room they were in , this manual alert system is also in line with current use habits . In addition , the robot should potentially be enabled with location tracking , as this so - lution relates to participants’ worry about the robot’s cost and its theft . 4 . 3 . 5 Personalization to user Versatility and customizability of both the robot and sen - sors were mentioned repeatedly by both older adults and staff in the initial workshops . Due to participants’ di - verse circumstances , Paro might best support older adults’ home life if it could automatically respond to participants in unique ways . For example , about half of our partici - pants lived with other people , some of whom interacted with Paro regularly . This might make it more important for the robot to be able to recognize individuals and respond to them differently . As well , some participants ( P1 , P4 , P7 , and P10 ) inter - acted with Paro less throughout the course of the study ( see Figure 2 ) . They said this was because they started find - ing its interactions more predictable and less interesting . Since Paro seemed to be able to prevent participants from getting sad or help them from spiraling when they experi - ence negative emotions , a home robot meant for this popu - lationwouldneedtohavemorefunctionsordiversebehav - iors to keep interaction at moderate levels , or present new behaviors over time to maintain long - term interest and therapeutic benefit . At the conclusion of the focus groups , older adults expressed their willingness to share their data with third party developers for this purpose . P1 found Paro too demanding , thinking it overwhelm - ing at times , especially when she got “panicky” . For her , it may have been better to reduce Paro’s attention seeking behaviors , as they caused her anxiety . The ability to lower or turn off Paro’s volume would have also been helpful . Even a home robot attempting to spur interaction when it is low may be a function that therapists should have some control over , as this behavior may be helpful for some par - ticipants but overwhelming for others . Personalization may require additional or custom sen - sors to achieve , with implementation internal or external to the robot . The potential exists to use sensor data to bet - ter understand how to optimize the interaction with the user by modulating robotic behavior . This may take the form of increasing the expression of behaviors particu - larly associated with higher than baseline interaction or by introducing new behaviors when interaction starts to decline . 4 . 3 . 6 Sleep aid and tracking Six participants mentioned trouble sleeping at some point during the study . This is also supported by the number of sleep awakenings captured by our sensor data , with ap - proximately 5 awakenings per week for P5 and P8 . These participants also had high nighttime circadian activity , with activity levels at 94 . 1 % and 74 . 3 % , respectively ( see Table 3 ) . This is indicative of heavy nighttime interaction withParo ( fromthehoursof12amto6am ) fortheseindivid - 250 | Natasha Randall et al . Table 2 : The Almere measures attitude toward , and intention to use , a given robot . Higher scores represent more positive attitudes and greater intention to use . Each question is awarded 1 - 5 points , depending on respondent’s answers to a 5 - point Likert scale ( from “totally disagree” to “totally agree” , with a 3 representing a “don’t know” option ) . The maximum possible score in our modified version is 185 . 13 size may likely be a reason these results failed to reach significance . Final Godspeed scores for anthropomorphism , animacy , likeability , and perceived intelligence were higher for those without pets ( Figure 3 ) . Additionally , there was a significant difference between sensor - determined interaction related to pet ownership ( p = 0 . 014 , Hedges’ g = - 1 . 87 ) , based on sensor data results presented in the subsequent section , indicating that those without pets interacted with Paro more frequently . This result cannot be entirely explained by participants’ living status , as there was no difference in perception of Paro , or interaction time with Paro , based on whether participants lived alone , though we note that most participants who had pets also had cohabitants . This points to consistent or possibly increasing interaction and intention to use over time for users without pets . This may speak to Paro’s ability to play a similar role as a pet in individuals’ lives . “Pet speak” was very common in our study , comprising over 10 % of coded excerpts in workshops 1 and 3 . During the intervention , participants often likened Paro to a pet . One participant mentioned they had gotten a pet since the intervention ( due to the intervention ) , and another was looking . This suggests that Paro is viewed most frequently as a pet , so may influence those without them differently . 4 . 5 Sensor captured interaction patterns 4 . 5 . 1 Interaction time Participants interacted with Paro to varying degrees . As can be seen in Table 3 , P4 , P9 , and P10 had the lowest levels of interaction with Paro , according to sensor data . P1 , P3 , P6 and P8 had moderate levels of interaction . P5 and P7 interacted the most , interacting at consistently high levels throughout the day . As per section 3 . 3 . 3 , activity was determined based on the presence of multiple simultaneous sensor readings from Paro’s collar . Therefore , not all activity necessarily represents direct interaction with the robot . It is the percentage of the time in the given window that activity was registered . Due to sensor malfunction , P2’s interaction level could not be determined . Sensor determined interaction is in line with relative levels of self - reported interaction . There were three common patterns of self - reported interaction frequency . Low interaction represented less than 20 minutes per day or 1 hour per week ( P4 , P9 , and P10 ) . Medium interaction frequency occurred daily or nearly daily , for at least 30 minutes per day ( 1 - 2 hours most common ) ( P1 , P3 and P8 ) . High frequency of interaction occurred daily or nearly daily , for at least four hours a day ( P2 , P5 , P6 , and P7 ) . P2 , P5 , P6 , and P10 also reported occasionally sleeping with Paro , though they had been instructed not to do so for safety reasons . These patterns naturally emerged from the data and were therefore defined during analysis . During week 2 , P10’s reported interaction decreased from medium to low levels of interaction , and during week 4 , P1’s interaction exhibited the same decrease . These decreases are supported by sensor readings ( see Figure 2 ) . 4 . 5 . 2 Circadian patterns and intention to use Sensor data allowed us to determine when participants interacted with Paro during the course of their day . Across all participants , interaction was most common in the afternoon and evening , though the percentage of time participants interacted during all hours varied considerably . Overall interaction was strongly correlated with changes in the Almere scale ( Table 3 ) pre - post in - home intervention ( 0 . 73 ) , even though changes in the Almere scale themselves were not significant ( Table 2 ) . However , there Table 2 : The Almere measures attitude toward , and intention to use , a given robot . Higher scores represent more positive attitudes and greater intention to use . Each question is awarded 1 - 5 points , depending on respondent’s answers to a 5 - point Likert scale ( from “totally disagree” to “totally agree” , with a 3 representing a “don’t know” option ) . The maximum possible score in our modified version is 185 . Almere score pre - intervention Almere score post - intervention Almere Δ P1 124 125 1 P2 155 151 - 4 P3 145 153 8 P4 130 84 - 46 P5 125 138 13 P6 130 152 22 P7 160 154 - 6 P8 128 132 4 P9 118 115 - 3 P10 120 102 - 18 Mean 133 . 5 130 . 6 - 2 . 9 Median 129 135 - 1 Paired t - test p = . 636 Figure 3 : Average Godspeed scores for participants with and without pets . Scores range from 1 to 5 . 3 . 40 3 . 37 4 . 20 3 . 84 4 . 07 4 . 40 4 . 38 5 . 00 4 . 30 3 . 83 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 Anthroporophism Animacy Likeability PerceivedIntelligence Safety Has Pet No Pet uals . Many participants also reported sleeping more than usual when they were depressed . As well , 4 participants ( P2 , P5 , P6 , and P10 ) slept with Paro at night ; it is possi - ble that more participants would have done the same had they not been instructed not to . As Paro was often already in their bedrooms , using it as a sleep aid seems in line with current use habits . As mentioned by therapists , sleep can also go hand in hand with depression , so using it to aid in and track sleep could help in patient care . Potentially , the robot could even help in waking participants up and urging them to get out of bed during particularly low days . 4 . 3 . 7 Identify behavioral patterns Participants would often change their routine when they weren’t feeling well . As mentioned above , sleep was one area this affected , with participants sleeping longer or not getting out of bed when they were low . This also af - fected how much they wanted to interact with others and Paro , and led to changes in their regular hygiene habits . “I didn’t take care of myself yesterday even . I just had a really hardtimegettingupandmakingmyselflookpresentable . ” ( P10 ) This change in activity level could be a trigger for oth - ers to check in on these older adults or for therapists to have a better idea of their patients’ emotional states . Table 3 : Sensor captured interaction time and correlation with change in Almere score pre - post in - home deployment of Paro . Ac - tivity % is the total percent of time throughout the day our sensors flagged as interaction , based on the processing described in 3 . 3 . 3 . Morning % is from the hours of 6am to 12pm , afternoon % from 12pm to 6pm , evening from 6pm to 12am , and overnight from 12am to 6am . The activity % column was calculated by averaging daily activ - ity readings , while the other columns were calculated by averaging weekly readings . * P2 was excluded from analysis as she had incomplete sensor data due to sensor malfunction . 14 was an even stronger correlation between certain Circadian patterns of interaction and changes in the Almere scale . In particular , people who interacted with Paro more during the afternoon and evening hours had higher increases in Almere score , representing a greater increase in positive attitudes toward Paro and intention to use the robot ( see Table 3 ) . Additionally , we found that individuals with high levels of overnight use tended to be those with lower levels of baseline functioning as per the OQ45 ( correlation = 0 . 58 , p = . 094 ) . In addition to the correlational analysis between Circadian interaction and changes in Almere scores , we also attempted to build a machine learning model to predict changes in Almere scores using various features as described in section 3 . 3 . 3 . However , we had limited success , due to our small sample size . The RMSE of our predictions was not significantly different from the absolute standard deviation of changes in Almere scores , indicating that our model was performing at nearly chance levels . However , Circadian Rhythm interaction levels were the features identified as most important in this analysis ( using the Relief - F algorithm ) , which supports the results of the correlation analysis . 5 DISCUSSION 5 . 1 Designing SARs for in - home use There are not many long - term in - home SAR studies , likely due to the challenges of conducting them . However , people use technology in the home differently than they do in institutions or communities , where there may be checks as to whether use guidelines are adhered to . In the home , participants are likely to use technology in ways that are not expected , and even in ways that are proscribed against . In our study , this took the form of people sleeping with the robot and taking it outside the home . This suggests that either robots need to be designed to constrain this behavior when use occurs in home environments , or these behaviors should be observed and designed for , such that use in this way is safe , and that this additional use may present opportunities for therapy ( e . g . , sensors on the robot to collect sleep data , or use of the robot as a sleep aid ) . The reasons participants interact with robots may also be different than in institutions . For instance , many participants in our study reported interacting out of guilt , as they were solely responsible for Paro . This is not typical in institutions . This may be partially due to bonding that may occur more strongly than in institutions . For instance , 8 of 10 participants named Paro and often said it was their friend or family member . This likely arises because Paro is theirs alone and they also spend much more time with it than they would in institutions . Some participants spent over 6 hours a day with Paro , excluding sleeping with it . Additionally , personal robots in the home , as opposed to SARs in institutions , present more opportunities for one - on - one interaction , and therefore might need to have more diverse or complex behaviors , and present multiple functionalities . For many older adults , though companionship is highly valued , this function alone does not seem sufficient to spur them to incorporate the technology into their lives long - term . Companion robots need to have multiple functions for extended use in the home , and these abilities need to be situated in individuals’ daily concerns . These functions might include the robot serving as a security system or allowing participants to contact the hospital or a designated contact ( or automatic notification to therapists or a contact based on sensor data in some contexts ) . Even personalization needs to be designed in ways specific to the home and to this population , such that the robot spurring interaction automatically when it is low , which may be a trigger for some individuals , should be partially controlled by individual therapists . Identification of , and personalization to , unique behavioral patterns is also harder to do in institutions , where many participants may interact with the robot and each individual interacts less often than in homes . Understanding these differences by implementing emergent technologies in a situated environment is fundamental to ensuring safe and engaging interactions . This speaks to the importance of placing technology in context to help finalize design . While older adults and clinicians were good at verbalizing what they wanted and needed in the initial workshops , in - home implementation allowed us to see how these requests could be implemented more specifically in relation to participants’ everyday activities and experiences . It also revealed Activity % Morning % Afternoon % Evening % Overnight % P1 53 . 9 32 . 2 67 . 4 74 . 5 44 . 7 P3 67 . 2 48 . 3 78 . 3 82 . 3 22 . 5 P4 10 . 6 8 . 7 18 . 8 12 . 9 1 . 0 P5 90 . 8 87 . 6 89 . 1 92 . 1 94 . 1 P6 68 . 0 32 . 2 67 . 4 74 . 5 44 . 7 P7 87 . 0 85 . 5 92 . 1 94 . 9 40 . 3 P8 64 . 8 69 . 1 65 . 0 60 . 5 74 . 3 P9 20 . 9 19 . 6 35 . 7 29 . 9 1 . 0 P10 22 . 0 22 . 1 37 . 8 35 . 8 2 . 2 Corr . Almere Δ 0 . 73 ( p = . 026 ) 0 . 50 ( p = . 176 ) 0 . 73 ( p = . 026 ) 0 . 75 ( p = . 021 ) 0 . 63 ( p = . 071 ) Table 3 : Sensor captured interaction time and correlation with change in Almere score pre - post in - home deployment of Paro . Activity % is the total percent of time throughout the day our sensors flagged as interaction , based on the processing described in 3 . 3 . 3 . Morning % is from the hours of 6am to 12pm , afternoon % from 12pm to 6pm , evening from 6pm to 12am , and overnight from 12am to 6am . The activity % column was calculated by averaging daily activity readings , while the other columns were calculated by averaging weekly readings . * P2 was excluded from analysis as she had incomplete sensor data due to sensor malfunction . 4 . 4 Robot perception survey results 4 . 4 . 1 Aggregate level The Almere measures attitude toward , and intention to use , a given robot ( Paro in this case ) . There were no sig - nificant differences pre - post intervention in Almere scores for our participants ( see Table 2 ) . The Godspeed ques - tionnaire measures robot perception , looking at five dis - tinct categories : animacy , perceived intelligence , anthro - pomorphism , likeability , and perceived safety . As with the Almere , there was no significant pre - and post - intervention difference in scores on the Godspeed ques - tionnaire when using a paired t - test , ( p = . 776 ) . Further analyses , however , suggest robot perception may be af - fected by pet ownership . 4 . 4 . 2 Pet ownership and robot perception Since Paro was often likened to a pet , we analyzed whether there were differences in the association between pet own - ership and perception of the robot . While both groups had similar baseline measures , we found that those with pets had decreasing Almere scores , indicating waning positive attitudes toward Paro and intention to use the robot ( mean = - 8 . 25 ) . Alternatively , those without pets saw increasing scores ( mean = 10 . 33 ) . This was a large effect ( Hedges’ g = 1 . 10 , p = 0 . 099 ) . Those without pets also tended More than just friends | 251 to show stable or increasing Godspeed scores ( 4 / 4 ) , while those with pets sometimes had markedly reduced scores from their baseline ( 2 / 6 ) . This effect of pet ownership on change in Godspeed score was also large ( Hedges’ g = 0 . 86 , p = 0 . 191 ) . Our small sample size may likely be a reason these results failed to reach significance . Final Godspeed scores for anthropomorphism , animacy , likeability , and perceived intelligence were higher for those without pets ( Figure 3 ) . Additionally , there was a significant difference be - tween sensor - determined interaction related to pet own - ership ( p = 0 . 014 , Hedges’ g = - 1 . 87 ) , based on sensor data re - sults presented in the subsequent section , indicating that those without pets interacted with Paro more frequently . This result cannot be entirely explained by participants’ living status , as there was no difference in perception of Paro , or interaction time with Paro , based on whether par - ticipants lived alone , though we note that most partici - pants who had pets also had cohabitants . This points to consistent or possibly increasing interaction and intention to use over time for users without pets . This may speak to Paro’s ability to play a similar role as a pet in individuals’ lives . “Pet speak” was very common in our study , comprising over 10 % of coded excerpts in work - shops 1 and 3 . During the intervention , participants often likened Paro to a pet . One participant mentioned they had gotten a pet since the intervention ( due to the interven - tion ) , and another was looking . This suggests that Paro is viewed most frequently as a pet , so may influence those without them differently . 4 . 5 Sensor captured interaction patterns 4 . 5 . 1 Interaction time Participants interacted with Paro to varying degrees . As can be seen in Table 3 , P4 , P9 , and P10 had the lowest lev - Figure 3 : Average Godspeed scores for participants with and with - out pets . Scores range from 1 to 5 . els of interaction with Paro , according to sensor data . P1 , P3 , P6andP8hadmoderatelevelsofinteraction . P5andP7 interacted the most , interacting at consistently high levels throughout the day . As per section 3 . 3 . 3 , activity was de - termined based on the presence of multiple simultaneous sensor readings from Paro’s collar . Therefore , not all activ - ity necessarily represents direct interaction with the robot . It is the percentage of the time in the given window that ac - tivity was registered . Due to sensor malfunction , P2’s inter - action level could not be determined . Sensor determined interaction is in line with relative levels of self - reported interaction . There were three com - mon patterns of self - reported interaction frequency . Low interaction represented less than 20 minutes per day or 1 hour per week ( P4 , P9 , and P10 ) . Medium interaction fre - quency occurred daily or nearly daily , for at least 30 min - utes per day ( 1 - 2 hours most common ) ( P1 , P3 and P8 ) . High frequency of interaction occurred daily or nearly daily , for atleastfourhoursaday ( P2 , P5 , P6 , andP7 ) . P2 , P5 , P6 , and P10 also reported occasionally sleeping with Paro , though they had been instructed not to do so for safety reasons . These patterns naturally emerged from the data and were therefore defined during analysis . During week 2 , P10’s re - ported interaction decreased from medium to low levels of interaction , and during week 4 , P1’s interaction exhibited the same decrease . These decreases are supported by sen - sor readings ( see Figure 2 ) . 4 . 5 . 2 Circadian patterns and intention to use Sensor data allowed us to determine when participants in - teracted with Paro during the course of their day . Across all participants , interaction was most common in the af - ternoon and evening , though the percentage of time par - ticipants interacted during all hours varied considerably . Overall interaction was strongly correlated with changes in the Almere scale ( Table 3 ) pre - post in - home interven - tion ( 0 . 73 ) , even though changes in the Almere scale them - selveswerenotsignificant ( Table2 ) . However , therewasan even stronger correlation between certain Circadian pat - terns of interaction and changes in the Almere scale . In particular , people who interacted with Paro more during the afternoon and evening hours had higher increases in Almere score , representing a greater increase in positive attitudes toward Paro and intention to use the robot ( see Table 3 ) . Additionally , we found that individuals with high levels of overnight use tended to be those with lower lev - els of baseline functioning as per the OQ45 ( correlation = 0 . 58 , p = . 094 ) . 252 | Natasha Randall et al . In addition to the correlational analysis between Cir - cadian interaction and changes in Almere scores , we also attempted to build a machine learning model to predict changes in Almere scores using various features as de - scribed in section 3 . 3 . 3 . However , we had limited success , due to our small sample size . The RMSE of our predic - tionswasnotsignificantlydifferentfromtheabsolutestan - darddeviationofchangesinAlmerescores , indicatingthat our model was performing at nearly chance levels . How - ever , Circadian Rhythm interaction levels were the fea - tures identified as most important in this analysis ( using the Relief - F algorithm ) , which supports the results of the correlation analysis . 5 Discussion 5 . 1 Designing SARs for in - home use There are not many long - term in - home SAR studies , likely due to the challenges of conducting them . However , peo - ple use technology in the home differently than they do in institutions or communities , where there may be checks as to whether use guidelines are adhered to . In the home , par - ticipants are likely to use technology in ways that are not expected , and even in ways that are proscribed against . In our study , this took the form of people sleeping with the robot and taking it outside the home . This suggests that ei - ther robots need to be designed to constrain this behavior when use occurs in home environments , or these behav - iors should be observed and designed for , such that use in this way is safe , and that this additional use may present opportunities for therapy ( e . g . , sensors on the robot to col - lect sleep data , or use of the robot as a sleep aid ) . The reasons participants interact with robots may also be different than in institutions . For instance , many par - ticipants in our study reported interacting out of guilt , as they were solely responsible for Paro . This is not typical in institutions . This may be partially due to bonding that may occur more strongly than in institutions . For instance , 8 of 10 participants named Paro and often said it was their friend or family member . This likely arises because Paro is theirs alone and they also spend much more time with it than they would in institutions . Some participants spent over 6 hours a day with Paro , excluding sleeping with it . Additionally , personal robots in the home , as opposed to SARs in institutions , present more opportunities for one - on - one interaction , and therefore might need to have more diverse or complex behaviors , and present multiple functionalities . Formanyolderadults , thoughcompanion - ship is highly valued , this function alone does not seem sufficient to spur them to incorporate the technology into their lives long - term . Companion robots need to have mul - tiple functions for extended use in the home , and these abilities need to be situated in individuals’ daily concerns . These functions might include the robot serving as a se - curity system or allowing participants to contact the hos - pital or a designated contact ( or automatic notification to therapists or a contact based on sensor data in some con - texts ) . Even personalization needs to be designed in ways specific to the home and to this population , such that the robot spurring interaction automatically when it is low , which may be a trigger for some individuals , should be partially controlled by individual therapists . Identification of , and personalization to , unique behavioral patterns is also harder to do in institutions , where many participants may interact with the robot and each individual interacts less often than in homes . Understanding these differences by implementing emergent technologies in a situated en - vironment is fundamental to ensuring safe and engaging interactions . This speaks to the importance of placing technology in context to help finalize design . While older adults and clinicians were good at verbalizing what they wanted and needed in the initial workshops , in - home implementa - tion allowed us to see how these requests could be imple - mented more specifically in relation to participants’ every - day activities and experiences . It also revealed to partici - pants new insights about desired robot characteristics , al - lowing them to give more specific feedback on how their ideas could be implemented . Ultimately , this process can support co - design . As robots are typically time and cost intensive to pro - duce , our study suggests placing “surrogate” technology in the home , even if it lacks many of the features men - tioned as desirable , can help gain insight into which de - sign features are most important and how to realize them . This is common in some design fields ( known as technol - ogy probes ) [ 62 ] but has not been implemented widely in social robot design . For instance , placing Paro in the home as a representative of companion robots more broadly , even though it wasn’t equipped with all the features older adults deemed highly important , allowed us to see if these were really desirable during usage . While many requested features ultimately were , some were seen as less important ( environment detection and home control ) or undesired ( as in the case of multi - person usage ) after in - home im - plementation . Thissavesresourcesbeforeneedingtobuild a prototype more specific to the robot’s use . This practice also clarifies how to implement requested features ( for ex - ample , how to best utilize the robot as a security system ) , More than just friends | 253 as they can be situated in how users would best use them in their daily lives and how they can integrate cohesively alongside other features . 5 . 2 Sensor data and robotics As mentioned , though the information provided by wear - able sensors was valuable , this did not work well for our population . Older adults often forgot to put the wearable on , found it difficult to clasp around their wrist , and were forced to be more active in the sensor collection routine . This makes sensors onboard the robot particularly desir - able , as they can collect data passively and potentially use that data to update behaviorally . Sensors placed in the user’s external environment that require little mainte - nance are useful in collecting data where the robot cannot or as a triangulation method ( for example sleep and ac - tivity data ) . If this information can be fed to the robot di - rectly , or to clinicians , it can ultimately result in clinically helpful changes in the robot’s behavior , as desired by both clinicians and older adults . Of course , this data may also make the interaction more enjoyable for users by allowing the robot to learn and exhibit more complex and novel be - havior , possibly causing them to spend more time with the robot and receive full benefits of its use . 5 . 3 Limitations There are several limitations to our study . We had a low sample size , which limited the power of our statistical tests to detect significant effects . Participants also had addi - tional opportunities for social interaction through regu - lar contact with researchers , and our study did not have a control group to tease out the effect this had on feelings of loneliness and companionship versus the effects of the robot in particular . However , as participants specifically described ways in which they used Paro to alleviate feel - ings of loneliness and depressed mood , we believe our re - sults are suggestive that pursuing this avenue of research ispromising . Toprovidefurthersupportforourdesignsug - gestions , these changes would need to be made and the technology placed in users’ homes , to determine if this im - proves positive attitudes and use . Furthermore , all our par - ticipants were female , which leaves open the question of whether our findings and design suggestions would gen - eralize to male participants . 6 Conclusion Conductinganinitialseriesofworkshopswitholderadults and clinical care staff provided a good representation of how a companion SAR might be designed to be useful for older adults with depression . However , long - term in - home use of Paro allowed both researchers and participants to see how requested features might be implemented in the specific context of user homes , where requests for func - tionality changed after use . It also made clearer how ini - tially requested functionality by older adults and clinical care staff fit into the daily lives of older adults with de - pression . We found that companionship alone as a fea - ture , while crucial , may not be enough to engage many older adults in long - term use . It is best if more practical functionality ( e . g . ability to contact the hospital , offer ap - pointment reminders ) accompany the social companion - ship that the robot provides . Additionally , sensors embed - ded in the robot may present an easy and robust way to collect and relay information that is useful in clinical care to therapists , allow the robot to adapt , and allow individ - uals to be more active participants in their own health and behavior management . In our study , sensor - determined interaction levels were in line with relative levels of self - reported interaction , and sensor data allowed us to deter - mine precisely when interaction occurred for each indi - vidual . Afternoon and evening interaction had the high - est correlation with positive changes in attitude toward the robot and intention to use the technology . Additionally , we found that those without pets interacted with Paro signifi - cantly more than those with pets , and survey data showed they had more positive attitudes toward the SAR . This sug - gests that older adults with depression who do not have pets might be a particularly relevant population for further research on in - home use of pet - like SARs . Acknowledgement : This research was supported by Indi - ana University’s Faculty Research Support Program . We would like to thank all our participants for taking part in the study , and Centerstone Research Institute for their as - sistance with participant recruitment and use of their fa - cilities for conducting workshops . 254 | Natasha Randall et al . References [ 1 ] E . Broadbent , R . Stafford , B . MacDonald , Acceptance of health - care robots for the older population : Review and future direc - tions , International Journal of Social Robotics , 2009 , 1 ( 4 ) , 319 – 330 [ 2 ] J . Broekens , M . Heerink , H . Rosendal , Assistive social robots in elderly care : a review , Gerontechnology , 2009 , 8 ( 2 ) , 94 – 103 [ 3 ] A . Tapus , M . J . Mataric , B . Scassellati , Sociallyassistiverobotics [ grand challenges of robotics ] , IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine , 2007 , 14 ( 1 ) 35 – 42 [ 4 ] C . C . Bennett , S . Sabanovic , J . A . Piatt , S . Nagata , L . Eldridge , N . Randall , A robot a day keeps the blues away , In : 2017 IEEE InternationalConferenceonHealthcareInformatics ( ICHI ) , 2017 , 536 – 540 [ 5 ] H . - M . Gross et al . , Robot companion for domestic health assis - tance : Implementation , testandcasestudyundereverydaycon - ditions in private apartments , In : 2015 IEEE / RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems ( IROS ) , 2015 , 5992 – 5999 [ 6 ] Y . Kawaguchi , T . Shibata , K . Wada , The effects of robot therapy in the elderly facilities , Alzheimer’s & Dementia : The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association , 2010 , 6 ( 4 ) , S133 [ 7 ] E . Torta et al . , Evaluation of a small socially - assistive humanoid robot in intelligent homes for the care of the elderly , Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems , 2014 76 ( 1 ) , 57 – 71 [ 8 ] D . Fischinger et al . , Hobbit , a care robot supporting inde - pendent living at home : First prototype and lessons learned , Robotics and Autonomous Systems , 2016 , 75 , 60 – 78 [ 9 ] A . Coulourides Kogan , K . Wilber , L . Mosqueda , Moving toward implementation of person - centered care for older adults in community - basedmedicalandsocialservicesettings : ‘Youonly get things done when working in concert with clients , ’ Journal of the American Geriatrics Society , 2016 , 64 ( 1 ) , e8 – e14 [ 10 ] M . Dijkers , Community integration : conceptual issues and measurement approaches in rehabilitation research , Topics in Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation , 1998 , 4 ( 1 ) , 1 – 15 [ 11 ] S . A . Kolakowsky - Hayner , J . Wright , K . Shem , R . Medel , T . Duong , An effective community - based mentoring program for returntoworkandschoolafterbrainandspinalcordinjury , Neu - roRehabilitation , 2012 , 31 ( 1 ) , 63 – 73 [ 12 ] J . A . Piatt , M . Van Puymbroeck , M . Zahl , J . P . Rosenbluth , M . S . Wells , Examining how the perception of health can impact par - ticipation and autonomy among adults with spinal cord injury , TopicsinSpinalCordInjuryRehabilitation , 2016 , 22 ( 3 ) , 165 – 172 [ 13 ] P . Ciechanowski et al . , Community - integrated home - based de - pression treatment in older adults : a randomized controlled trial , Jama , 2004 , 291 ( 13 ) , 1569 – 1577 [ 14 ] M . C . F . Plati , P . Covre , K . Lukasova , E . C . de Macedo , Depres - sive symptoms and cognitive performance of the elderly : rela - tionshipbetweeninstitutionalizationandactivityprograms , Re - vista Brasileira de Psiquiatria , 2006 , 28 ( 2 ) , 118 – 121 [ 15 ] H . Robinson , B . MacDonald , N . Kerse , E . Broadbent , The psy - chosocial effects of a companion robot : a randomized con - trolled trial , Journal of the American Medical Directors Associ - ation , 2013 , 14 ( 9 ) 661 – 667 [ 16 ] A . Kristoffersson , A . M . Loutfi , S . Coradeschi , User - centered evaluation of robotic telepresence for an elderly population , In : 2nd International Workshop on Designing Robotic Artefacts with User - And Experience - Centered Perspectives , 2010 [ 17 ] K . Wada , T . Shibata , T . Saito , K . Sakamoto , K . Tanie , Psycholog - ical and social effects of one year robot assisted activity on el - derlypeopleatahealthservicefacilityfortheaged , In : Proceed - ings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation ( ICRA ) , 2005 , 2785 – 2790 [ 18 ] L . D . Riek , Healthcare robotics , Communications of the ACM , 2017 , 60 ( 11 ) , 68 – 78 [ 19 ] H . R . Lee et al . , Steps toward participatory design of social robots : mutual learning with older adults with depression , In : 2017 12th ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI ) , 2017 , 244 – 253 [ 20 ] S . Šabanović , W . - L . Chang , C . C . Bennett , J . A . Piatt , D . Hakken , A robot of my own : participatory design of socially assistive robots for independently living older adults diagnosed with de - pression , In : International Conference on Human Aspects of IT for the Aged Population , 2015 , 104 – 114 [ 21 ] N . Randall , S . Šabanović , W . Chang , Engaging older adults with depressionasco - designersofassistivein - homerobots , In : Pro - ceedings of the 12th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare , 2018 , 304 – 309 [ 22 ] M . R . DiMatteo , H . S . Lepper , T . W . Croghan , Depression is a risk factor for noncompliance with medical treatment : meta - analysis of the effects of anxiety and depression on patient ad - herence , Archives of Internal Medicine , 2000 , 160 ( 14 ) , 2101 – 2107 [ 23 ] S . J . Bartels , J . A . Naslund , The underside of the silver tsunami – older adults and mental health care , New England Journal of Medicine , 2013 , 368 ( 6 ) , 493 – 496 [ 24 ] A . T . Beekman , E . de Beurs , A . J . van Balkom , D . J . Deeg , R . van Dyck , W . van Tilburg , Anxiety and depression in later life : co - occurrence and communality of risk factors , American Journal of Psychiatry , 2000 , 157 ( 1 ) , 89 – 95 [ 25 ] K . B . Adams , S . Sanders , E . Auth , Loneliness and depression in independent living retirement communities : risk and resilience factors , Aging & Mental Health , 2004 , 8 ( 6 ) , 475 – 485 [ 26 ] K . M . Clark Cline , Psychological effects of dog ownership : Role strain , role enhancement , and depression , The Journal of Social Psychology , 2010 , 150 ( 2 ) , 117 – 131 [ 27 ] T . Majić , H . Gutzmann , A . Heinz , U . E . Lang , M . A . Rapp , Animal - assisted therapy and agitation and depression in nursing home residents with dementia : a matched case – control trial , The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry , 2013 , 21 ( 11 ) , 1052 – 1059 [ 28 ] S . M . Rabbitt , A . E . Kazdin , B . Scassellati , Integrating socially assistive robotics into mental healthcare interventions : Appli - cations and recommendations for expanded use , Clinical Psy - chology Review , 2015 , 35 , 35 – 46 [ 29 ] M . R . Banks , L . M . Willoughby , W . A . Banks , Animal - assisted therapy and loneliness in nursing homes : use of robotic versus living dogs , Journal of the American Medical Directors Associa - tion , 2008 , 9 ( 3 ) , 173 – 177 [ 30 ] S . C . Kramer , E . Friedmann , P . L . Bernstein , Comparison of the effectofhumaninteraction , animal - assistedtherapy , andAIBO - assisted therapy on long - term care residents with dementia , Anthrozoös , 2009 , 22 ( 1 ) , 43 – 57 [ 31 ] G . Colombo , M . D . Buono , K . Smania , R . Raviola , D . De Leo , Pet therapyandinstitutionalizedelderly : astudyon144cognitively unimpaired subjects , Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics , 2006 , 42 ( 2 ) , 207 – 216 More than just friends | 255 [ 32 ] M . C . Le Roux , R . Kemp , Effect of a companion dog on depres - sion and anxiety levels of elderly residents in a long - term care facility , Psychogeriatrics , 2009 , 9 ( 1 ) , 23 – 26 [ 33 ] S . D . Hollon , R . B . Jarrett , A . A . Nierenberg , M . E . Thase , M . Trivedi , A . J . Rush , Psychotherapy and medication in the treat - ment of adult and geriatric depression : which monotherapy or combined treatment ? , The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry , 2005 , 66 ( 4 ) , 455 – 468 [ 34 ] S . Pampallona , P . Bollini , G . Tibaldi , B . Kupelnick , C . Munizza , Combined pharmacotherapy and psychological treatment for depression : a systematic review , Archives of General Psychia - try , 2004 , 61 ( 7 ) , 714 – 719 [ 35 ] H . - M . Gross et al . , Progress in developing a socially assistive mobile home robot companion for the elderly with mild cogni - tive impairment , In : 2011 , IEEE / RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems ( IROS ) , 2011 , 2430 – 2437 [ 36 ] K . Wada , T . Shibata , T . Asada , T . Musha , Robot therapy for pre - vention of dementia at home , Journal of Robotics and Mecha - tronics , 2007 , 19 ( 6 ) , 691 – 697 [ 37 ] A . Liang et al . , A pilot randomized trial of a companion robot for people with dementia living in the community , Journal of the American Medical Directors Association , 2017 , 18 ( 10 ) , 871 – 878 [ 38 ] S . Coradeschi et al . , Giraffplus : Combining social interaction and long term monitoring for promoting independent living , In : 2013 6th International Conference on Human System Interac - tions ( HSI ) , 2013 , 578 – 585 [ 39 ] B . Graf , M . Hans , R . D . Schraft , Care - O - bot II—Development of a next generation robotic home assistant , Autonomous Robots , 2004 , 16 ( 2 ) , 193 – 205 [ 40 ] A . M . Adami , M . Pavel , T . L . Hayes , C . M . Singer , Detection of movement in bed using unobtrusive load cell sensors , IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine , 2010 , 14 ( 2 ) , 481 – 490 [ 41 ] H . Aghajan , J . C . Augusto , C . Wu , P . McCullagh , J . - A . Walkden , Distributed vision - based accident management for assisted liv - ing , In : International Conference on Smart Homes and Health Telematics , 2007 , 196 – 205 [ 42 ] M . R . Song , Y . - S . Lee , J . - D . Baek , M . Miller , Physical activity sta - tus in adults with depression in the National Health and Nu - trition Examination Survey , 2005 – 2006 , Public Health Nursing , 2012 , 29 ( 3 ) , 208 – 217 [ 43 ] C . Galambos , M . Skubic , S . Wang , M . Rantz , Management of de - mentia and depression utilizing in - home passive sensor data , Gerontechnology : International Journal on the Fundamental As - pects of Technology to Serve the Ageing Society , 2013 , 11 ( 3 ) , 457 – 468 [ 44 ] K . Wild , L . Boise , J . Lundell , A . Foucek , Unobtrusive in - home monitoring of cognitive and physical health : Reactions and per - ceptions of older adults , Journal of Applied Gerontology , 2008 , 27 ( 2 ) , 181 – 200 [ 45 ] M . E . Pollacketal . , Autominder : Anintelligentcognitiveorthotic system for people with memory impairment , Robotics and Au - tonomous Systems , 2003 , 44 ( 3 - 4 ) , 273 – 282 [ 46 ] K . Caine , S . Šabanovic , M . Carter , The effect of monitoring by camerasandrobotsontheprivacyenhancingbehaviorsofolder adults , In : Proceedings of the Seventh Annual ACM / IEEE Inter - national Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI ) , 2012 , 343 – 350 [ 47 ] C . T . Gualtieri , L . G . Johnson , Age - related cognitive de - cline in patients with mood disorders , Progress in Neuro - Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry , 2008 , 32 ( 4 ) , 962 – 967 [ 48 ] R . C . Kessler , K . A . McGonagle , M . Swartz , D . G . Blazer , C . B . Nel - son , Sex and depression in the National Comorbidity Survey I : Lifetime prevalence , chronicity and recurrence , Journal of Affec - tive Disorders , 1993 , 29 ( 2 ) , 85 – 96 [ 49 ] M . M . Weissman , G . L . Klerman , Sex differences and the epi - demiology of depression , Archives of General Psychiatry , 1977 , 34 ( 1 ) , 98 – 111 [ 50 ] W . - L . Chang , S . Šabanović , Interaction expands function : Social shaping of the therapeutic robot PARO in a nursing home , In : Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM / IEEE International Con - ference on Human - Robot Interaction , 2015 , 343 – 350 [ 51 ] C . Bartneck , D . Kulić , E . Croft , S . Zoghbi , Measurement in - struments for the anthropomorphism , animacy , likeability , per - ceived intelligence , and perceived safety of robots , Interna - tional Journal of Social Robotics , 2009 , 1 ( 1 ) , 71 – 81 [ 52 ] M . Heerink , B . Kröse , V . Evers , B . Wielinga , Assessing accep - tance of assistive social agent technology by older adults : the Almere model , International Journal of Social Robotics , 2010 , 2 ( 4 ) , 361 – 375 [ 53 ] H . R . Lee , CollaborativeDesignforIntelligentTechnologies , PhD Thesis , Indiana University , 2017 [ 54 ] J . Guiry , P . Van de Ven , J . Nelson , Multi - sensor fusion for en - hanced contextual awareness of everyday activities with ubiq - uitous devices , Sensors , 2014 , 14 ( 3 ) , 5687 – 5701 [ 55 ] K . Lee , M . - P . Kwan , Physical activity classification in free - living conditions using smartphone accelerometer data and explo - ration of predicted results , Computers , Environment and Urban Systems , 2018 , 67 , 124 – 131 [ 56 ] I . H . Witten , E . Frank , M . A . Hall , C . J . Pal , Data Mining : Practi - calMachineLearningToolsandTechniques , MorganKaufmann , 2016 [ 57 ] C . Bennett , T . Doub , Data mining and electronic health records : Selecting optimal clinical treatments in practice , DMNI , 2010 [ 58 ] I . Kononenko , Estimating attributes : analysis and extensions of RELIEF , In : European Conference on Machine Learning , 1994 , 171 – 182 [ 59 ] H . Robinson , B . MacDonald , E . Broadbent , Theroleofhealthcare robots for older people at home : A review , International Journal of Social Robotics , 2014 , 6 ( 4 ) , 575 – 591 [ 60 ] N . Randall , S . Šabanović , W . Chang , Engaging older adults with depressionasco - designersofassistivein - homerobots , In : Pro - ceedings of the 12th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare , 2018 , 304 – 309 [ 61 ] C . - A . Smarr , A . Prakash , J . M . Beer , T . L . Mitzner , C . C . Kemp , W . A . Rogers , Olderadults’preferencesforandacceptanceofrobot assistance for everyday living tasks , In : Proceedings of the Hu - man Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting , 2012 , 56 , 153 – 157 [ 62 ] H . Hutchinson et al . , Technology probes : inspiring design for and with families , In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2003 , 17 – 24