cscw Workshop Papers Bridging CSCW and Organizational Learning : A Multi - agent Model of intellectual Activities in Organizations Hiroshi Hatakama Takao Terano Fujitsu Limited Graduate School of Systems Management , hatakama @ sysrap . cs . fujitsu . co . jp University of Tsukuba terano @ gssm . otsuka . tsukuba . ac . jp Abstract In this paper , we study the relationship between CSCW and organizational learning , by modeling intellectual activities in an organization and examining methods for augmenting organizational intelligence systematically . We propose multi - agent model of organizational intellectual activities that represents embedded knowledge - sharing or knowledge - supplementation . The model shall provide a new perspective on research in knowledge management , and enable us to pursue the methods for augmenting organizational intelligence . 1 . Background and Motivation Today , it is critical to assist knowledge workers cooperate effectively . In the fields of CSCW and organizational learning , considerable efforts to find out methods for augmenting organizational intelligence have been made . In both fields , a model explaining how we supplement knowledge in organization is required . A communications model that describes the dynamics of knowledge in organizations is indispensable to augment intelligent activities in organizations . Although a number of models have been proposed to CSCW , there are few models that can explain knowledge - supplementation in an organization . Many theories of organizational learning have been proposed . However , we have not yet had any clear explanation as to why these theories of organizational learning are required . We put the emphasis on intellectual activities brought about by lateral communications , because cooperative work between both enterprises and individuals who communicate by networking has become important recently . 2 . A Multi - agent Model to Represent Organizational Intellectual Activities We propose a simple multi - agent model to represent organizational intellectual activities that repeat decision making and learning [ 4 , 5 ] , based on the organizational model of Distributed Artificial Intelligence ( DAI ) [ 3 ] . In this model , each agent has disparate knowledge , and using the knowledge , reasons , makes decision and learns simultaneously on each viewpoint . Each agent has an individual learning mechanism to become more effective . In the concept " composite decision " by Simon [ 8 ] , the decision premise plays an important role . We pay attention here to the reasoning ( interpretation ) of others that can be found in meetings or informal conversations as premises of the decision . For simplicity , we assume two - step decision by individuals . When they are given an example to solve , they first reason by themselves and they put their reasoning results on blackboard to communicate . Then they decide by themselves using other ' s reasoning results , and according to specific meta - rules their decisions are unified into the whole . Next , depending on whether success or failure , feedback - learning is made . The model has mechanisms to learn premises from others , has two types of learning , i . e . , learning from success and learning from failure , and lets individuals learn simultaneously on each viewpoint . 3 . Two Simulation Models To simulate intellectual behaviors in an organization , we develop two typical variations of our model , which we call them , the Specialists - Model and the Generalists - Model . The activities demonstrate that agents continue to supplement knowledge each other to solve problems that are given fi ' om environment [ 4 ] . We assume all agents in the Specialists - Model are specialists . We assume that their knowledge is independent by specialization and specializes further as they cooperate . The variation is similar to intellectual activities in a simple organization that consists of specialists or specialists - groups equipped with specialized knowledge , such as different departments whose activities linked circularly in an organization . We assume that their knowledge is not easily shared , because they are specialized too much . We assume all agents in the Generalists - Model are generalists . They are all equipped with a general knowledge that can be contradictory to each other . Knowledge ( not only the reasoning result of the goal but also that of subgoals ) can be supplemented using a common word , even if the meaning of the word is not accurately the same . In both simulations , adaptive learning by an organization as a whole is attempted in a variety of aspects , as agents reason and learn respectively . As for the accuracy of learning , the Generalists - Model can learn more accurately , 52 SIGOIS Bulletin , Vol . 17 , No . 3 ( December 1996 ) CSCW Workshop Papers because agents try to understand the knowledge of other agents deeply . 4 . On the Systematic Approach to Augment Organizational Intelligence Systematic approach is important for making clear the relation among various methods to augment organizational intelligence , and may suggest the effective ways of using information technology ( IT ) . These methods can be seen from three aspects , that is , the way of thinking ( organizational learning ) , the administration and the information technology ( CSCW , CMC ) . For each aspect , we divide these methods into fundamental ones and advanced ones , respectively . The multi - agent modeling and simulations offer important perspective about these methods and their relations . 4 . 1 Fundamental methods ( 1 ) The way of thinking We believe that the most important point of augmenting organizational intelligence is consciousness or cognition , because improvements in the other aspects become meaningless without proper consciousness . Senge points out that the attitude " I am my position " is one of learning disabilities and that it is important to be freed from being a " prisoner of the system " 7 . Argyris argues that defensive reasoning does not lead to effective learning and that learning is even inhibited by defensive routines 1 . The Specialists - Model represents such a situation . Thus , it is harmful for the activity of an organization to consider as only a part of the system and not to take account of the organization as a whole . Proper consciousness is also helpful in making people adopt interdependent CSCW systems 6 . ( 2 ) Administration As shown by the model , the way of learning when it fails is considerably different from the way when it successes . That is the reason why the right feedback is necessary to continuously augment organizational intelligence . In an organization , CMC systems are helpful in bringing the right feedback . ( 3 ) Information technology Interaction and exchange of information are important before understanding can be achieved . It is preferable to provide a mechanism for the exchange of information and conversation regularly . When such a mechanism is provided , each member in the organization will be able to learn from the relation to others even if he or she doesn ' t understand them completely . Others ' knowledge can be effectively used by communicating not only raw information but also the way that others are judging the information , as the Generalists - Model situation . Therefore , the existence of a media to interchange rich interpretation information becomes important . It is desirable that a CMC system is available for everyone in an organization . Senge says all participants must suspend their assumptions for dialogue . We regard this discussion by Senge as very important because such a dialogue allows participants to verify their assumptions and to learn more accurately . 4 . 2 Advanced methods ( 1 ) The way of thinking Garvin 2 suggests that experimentation brings about more accurate learning by allowing organization to not only know how but also know why . Senge stresses the importance of system thinking and generative learning 7 . Understanding the causal relations of the whole , or system thinking , makes organizational learning more accurate , because the partial view of causal relations does not bring accurate learning as the Specialist Model situation . ( 2 ) Administration As the model shown in section 2 , relationship in which knowledge is supplemented is far different from that in which commands are conveyed . Therefore , principles of the organization design for knowledge management must be pursued further . It is also important to concentrate the core knowledge in an organization , because it makes learning more accurate by narrowing the scope of knowledge supplementing . It is important for an organization to make the proper use of BPR ( for adjusting ) and such an embedded learning mechanism ( for adapting ) . ( 3 ) Information technology The model and simulation suggest effective CSCW functions . CSCW systems should provide the means to interchange rich interpreted information rather than raw information . CSCW systems should be customizable as the environment changes . Otherwise , defensive routines might increase in the organization . CSCW systems should allow for different ways of display information and allow information to be reorganized , because the way of reasoning and viewpoint may be different fairly among individuals or departments in an organization . 5 . Conclusion We have proposed the multi - agent model that represents intellectual activities in an organization . Based on the model , this paper has discussed the relationship among the methods for augmenting organizational intelligence from three aspects , that is , the way of thinking ( organizational learning ) , the administration and the information technology ( CSCW , CMC ) . Since knowledge cannot be simply shared as shown in this paper , it is important to find out the effective methods for assisting knowledge supplementation , especially combinations of different SIGOIS Bulletin , Vol . 17 , No . 3 ( December 1996 ) 53 CSCW Workshop Papers methods . The proposed multi - agent model can give clues about effective combinations of them . References [ 1 ] Argyris , C . " Good Communication that Blocks Learning , " Harvard Business Review , Vol . 72 , No . 4 , 1994 . [ 2 ] Garvin , D . A . , " Building a Learning Organization , " Harvard Business Review , Vol . 71 , No . 4 , P . 78 - 9 t , 1993 . [ 3 ] Gasser , L . , " Social Knowledge and Social Action : Heterogeneity in Practice , " 13th Int . Joint . Conf . on AI , P . 751 - 757 , 1993 . [ 4 ] Hatakama , H . & T . Terano , " Knowledge Intensive Learning and Adaptation in a Multiagent System : An Organizational Science Approach , " ICMAS ' 96 Workshop on ' Learning , Interaction and Organizations in Multiagent Environments , ' December 1996 . [ 5 ] Hatakama , H . & T . Terano , " A Multi - agent Model of Intellectual Activities in Organizations for Knowledge Management " in pre - proceedings of Fourth International Symposium on the Management of Industrial and Corporate Knowledge ( ISMICK ) ' 96 , October 1996 . [ 6 ] Markus , M . L . et al . , " Why CSCW Applications Fail : Problems in the Adoption of Interdependent Work Tools , " CSCW ' 90 Proceedings , 1990 . [ 7 ] Senge , P . M . " The Fifth Discipline : The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization , " New York : Doubleday / Currency , 1990 . [ 8 ] Simon , H . A . " Administrative Behavior , 3rd ed . , " New York : Free Press Organizational Learning with Flexible Workflow Management Systems Thomas Herrmann , Katharina Just - Hahn University of Dortmund herrmann @ iug . informatik . u N - dortmund . de Introduction The research activities on which the following hypotheses are based are concerned with the social implications of workflow management systems ( wms ) and with the question of how the necessary extent of autonomy of workers can still be guaranteed under the conditions of wms [ Herrmann , 95 ] . We have learnt that the ability of workers for autonomy and improvisation cannot evolve if wms are not adaptable . If wms are adapted by workers , it might be sensible that the result of the adaptation is stored for further application . Consequently , the organization of business processes is changed if their workflow models are adapted . We understand that this is a specific version of organizational learning , because more than one member of an organization as well as the coordination between them is affected . The adaptation of a wms includes organizational learning under three perspectives : • before a suggested adaptation has reached a state of maturity and is accepted by the members of an organization , a process of learning is required • people must be trained to carry out their tasks in accordance with the adaptation - this requires another kind of learning • the experience with those two aspects above can be used to facilitate the next process of adaptation - this is a kind of organizational learning on a meta - level . We focus on the first perspective . Since nearly every adaptation affects other cooperators the necessity for negotiation between them is obvious . We realized that the course of negotiation can be understood as a process of organizational learning . Where as , the adapted workflow model can be considered as a kind of organizational memory . Workflow Models as Organizational Memories Meanwhile it is widely acknowledged that a fluid transition between wms and groupware should be possible [ Nastansky ; Hilpert , 94 ] . Our research activities on wms are based on the assumption that elements of groupware should be integrated into wms ( e . g . shared screens to discuss the appropriate completion of a form ) and that groupware can be employed to distribute wms - documents or to support feedback and discussion on workflow models [ Galler et . al . , 96 ] . On the other hand , we expect that elements of wms to be more and more integrated into groupware applications . Therefore the idea is obvious , that the users - e . g . in the case of joint editing - coordinate themselves spontaneously and in the end , when they have finished the document , the system can create a model showing their steps of task performing and help to make their coordination explicit . Now the users can discuss and 54 SIGOIS BulF ~ tlrt ~ Vol . 17 , No . 3 ( December 1996 )