Children adapt their questions to achieve efﬁcient search Azzurra Ruggeri a , b , ⇑ , Tania Lombrozo b a Max Planck Institute for Human Development , Berlin , Germany b Department of Psychology , University of California , Berkeley , United States a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 1 July 2014 Revised 8 July 2015 Accepted 9 July 2015 Available online 17 July 2015 Keywords : Information search Causal inference Hypothesis generation Hypothesis testing a b s t r a c t One way to learn about the world is by asking questions . We investigate how younger children ( 7 - to 8 - year - olds ) , older children ( 9 - to 11 - year - olds ) , and young adults ( 17 - to 18 - year - olds ) ask questions to identify the cause of an event . We ﬁnd a developmental shift in children’s reliance on hypothesis - scanning questions ( which test hypotheses directly ) versus constraint - seeking questions ( which reduce the space of hypotheses ) , but also that all age groups ask more constraint - seeking ques - tions when hypothesis - scanning questions are least likely to pay off : When the solution is one among equally likely alternatives ( Study 1 ) or when the problem is difﬁcult ( Studies 1 and 2 ) . These ﬁndings are the ﬁrst to demonstrate that even young children dynamically adapt their strategies for inquiry to increase the efﬁciency of information search . (cid:2) 2015 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction One way to learn about the world is by asking questions . We metaphorically ‘‘ask questions’’ when we perform experiments or make targeted observations , and we literally ask questions in the form of verbal inquiries to those around us . For children , who are often surrounded by more knowledgeable peers and adults , asking questions is especially important for testing and extending their developing understanding of the world ( Gopnik & Meltzoff , 1997 ; Gopnik , Meltzoff , & Kuhl , 1999 ; Gopnik & Wellman , 1994 ; Harris , 2012 ; Piaget , 1954 ; see also Graesser & McMahen , 1993 ; Graesser & Olde , 2003 ) . We know that young children ask domain - appropriate questions ( Callanan & Oakes , 1992 ; Greif , Kemler Nelson , Keil , & Guiterrez , 2006 ; Hickling & Wellman , 2001 ) , have reasonable expectations about which responses count as answers to their questions ( Frazier , Gelman , & Wellman , 2009 ) , and can use the answers they receive to solve problems ( Chouinard , 2007 ; Legare , Mills , Souza , Plummer , & Yasskin , 2013 ) . We also know that children’s questions are responsive to the statistics of their environment in that they preferentially ques - tion reliable informants ( Mills , Legare , Bills , & Mejias , 2010 ; Mills , Legare , Grant , & Landrum , 2011 ) and target informative cues ( see Nelson , Divjak , Gudmundsdottir , Martignon , & Meder , 2014 ) . In the present paper , we go beyond previous research on children’s strategies for inquiry by investigating whether and how children adapt their questions in response to evidence concerning the ‘‘information structure’’ of the task . Speciﬁcally , we investigate whether younger children ( 7 - to 8 - year - olds ) , older children ( 9 - to 11 - year - olds ) , and young adults ( 17 - to 18 - year - olds ) choose the kinds of questions that they ask in a way that is sensitive to their expected information gain—that is , to how efﬁciently those questions partition the space of candidate hypotheses . We also examine whether children can modify their strategies ‘‘on - line , ’’ as they receive feedback in the course of inquiry . Finally , we consider whether the ﬂexibility and efﬁciency of information search changes in the course of development . Investigating these issues is crucial not only for understanding the speciﬁc process of searching for information by asking questions , but also as a way to understand how children seek information and learn from others more generally . In order to address these issues , we consider information search in the context of a causal attribution task in which children ask questions to uncover the explanation for an anomalous event ( e . g . , a child arriving late to school ) . This task is appealing for two reasons : First , it allows us to present children with meaningful information search problems in which candidate solutions are or are not speciﬁed in advance , and second , anomalous events are a common real - world trigger for information search . In particular , we know that observations that conﬂict with prior expectations can trigger a search for explanations ( Khemlani & Johnson - Laird , 2011 ; Legare , Gelman , & Wellman , 2010 ; Lombrozo , 2006 , 2012 ) . Children could spontaneously generate hypotheses ( e . g . , perhaps the school bus encountered trafﬁc ) that can then be ‘‘tested’’ with appropriate questions ( e . g . , ‘‘Was there a lot of trafﬁc ? ’’ ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2015 . 07 . 004 0010 - 0277 / (cid:2) 2015 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . ⇑ Corresponding author at : Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition , Max Planck Institute for Human Development , Lentzeallee 94 , Berlin , Germany . E - mail address : ruggeri @ mpib - berlin . mpg . de ( A . Ruggeri ) . Cognition 143 ( 2015 ) 203 – 216 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Cognition journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / COGNIT