Diagramming Working Field Theories for Design in the HCI Classroom Bernd Ploderer Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor Diego Muñoz School of Computer Science , School of Computing , Australian Centre for Design Innovation , Queensland University of Technology National University , Swinburne University of Technology , ( QUT ) , Brisbane , Australia Canberra , Australia Melbourne , Australia b . ploderer @ qut . edu . au jennyfer . taylor @ anu . edu . au dmunoz @ swin . edu . au Filip Bircanin Margot Brereton School of Computer Science , School of Computer Science , Queensland University of Technology Queensland University of Technology ( QUT ) , Brisbane , Australia ( QUT ) , Brisbane , Australia f . bircanin @ qut . edu . au m . brereton @ qut . edu . au ABSTRACT HCI has historically provided little support for moving from feld - work insights or theories to design outcomes . Having witnessed many students struggle and then justify their designs with a form of marketing hype , we developed a supporting approach of “feld theories” . A feld theory is a working theory about salient inter - actions in a particular domain and sensitizing concepts in order to frame design investigations . It is presented visually in a feld theory diagram to support succinct communication and critique . Studying use of design prototypes that have been informed by a feld theory helps to refect upon and refne the theory . In this paper we present examples from our HCI classes and refections based on interviews with students . We discuss how feld theories ofer an orientation in the spirit of a ‘bricoleur’ who harnesses elements of theory and practice to produce deeper understandings and more ftting outcomes for the task at hand . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → HCI theory , concepts and mod - els . KEYWORDS HCI education , feldwork , sensitizing concept , visual thinking , de - sign research ACM Reference Format : Bernd Ploderer , Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Diego Muñoz , Filip Bircanin , and Margot Brereton . 2021 . Diagramming Working Field Theories for Design in the HCI Classroom . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445414 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . 1 INTRODUCTION A core endeavour of the feld of Human Computer Interaction re - search is to imagine and design new forms of interaction . Designers and researchers fashion our existing world and practices into new kinds of interaction by studying the existing and reconfguring it into new ways of doing and seeing [ 49 ] . However , there is no simple recipe or linear path to get from the existing to the new . Design , as described by Schön , is a refective conversation with materials of a design situation [ 43 ; 45 ] . In the case of interaction design , these materials are many and varied , ranging from physical materials , new technologies , old technologies , and software to con - ceptual materials such as feld research fndings , identifed needs , co - design discussions and workshops , interaction concepts and theories , fction , design practice , and emerging societal problems , to name a few . In the refective conversation , as the design evolves , so too does the understanding of the problem - opportunity space . This is important to note because it has been common to think of preliminary feldwork and user - centred approaches as somehow feeding in at the start of the design process with the results of these processes forming a set of requirements for design . In this paper we describe an approach , which we call “working feld theories” , that aims to keep both the design context , sensitiz - ing concepts and the design path in play . Field theories capture working knowledge about a particular feld of design inquiry and sensitizing concepts that highlight opportunities for the design of interactive technology . We developed feld theories especially for use in teaching , because we often see a discontinuity between studies of the design context , HCI theories and the design proposals of our students . Leaps to designs are made that seem to miss out on interesting subtleties and nuances of both interactions in the feld and less obvious possibilities of new technologies . Moreover , theoretical concepts are often overlooked because cannot be easily translated to the problem at hand . We have therefore sought an approach in teaching that entan - gles both studies of the design context , sensitizing concepts and design proposal making . Anderson cautioned that the purpose of ethnography has often been mistaken by designers as a form of CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan data collection , but , as Anderson argues , the deeper understandings © 2021 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . gleaned from ethnographic work can “enable designers to question ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8096 - 6 / 21 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445414 the assumptions embedded in the conventional problem - solution CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Bernd Ploderer et al . design framework” and serve as a powerful means to “open up the play of possibilities for design” [ 1 ] . We have therefore sought ways to keep the problem - opportunity space more explicitly in dialogue with the process of design . Our concerns relate to both interaction design practice and re - search through design . There is a sense in which all interaction design is a form of research as it produces new knowledge . The resulting knowledge may take the form of exemplar designs in re - sponse to a problem or context , possibly accompanied by a rationale , as is typical in interaction design practice . In addition , knowledge may be further synthesised by studying and refecting on use of the new design in diferent situations and conceptualising this in relation to prior research , as is more typical when doing research through design . While we appreciate traditional design school based approaches centred on the sketching and artefact prototyping [ 13 ; 23 ] , our own practice has a much more hybrid favor based in co - design , ethnographic data , sensitizing concepts , as well as in artefact pro - totyping and long - term studies of use in - situ . Moreover we teach students who come from a variety of diferent disciplines about interaction design and engage students in research through design . Typically they come from either technical disciplines ( computer science , information systems , games design ) , or from various social science disciplines ( psychology , anthropology ) , but relatively few are from design school backgrounds . As such we approach both undergraduate teaching and doctoral research through design work , through a combination of understanding HCI theories , undertaking feldwork and envisioning and prototyping designs . These activities are mutually informing . Although techniques derived from various design practices are often taught to HCI students , such as brainstorming , personas , sce - narios , journey maps , emotion maps , how - why diagrams , cultural probes , synectics , etc . , it is possible for students to approach these in a task oriented fashion , and to lack an appreciation of the gestalt of a design idea [ 44 ] . In this case the whole , in terms of design insight may be no more than the sum of some uninspired parts . And while many HCI research projects artfully transition from feldwork inspirations to interesting designs , the process of doing so often remains implicit . Given the interdisciplinary nature of HCI research , involving felds ranging from software engineering to psychology to design , and the variety of materials , concepts and feldwork insights in play , we believe there is a need to provide more explicit support for their integration . While there is no clear recipe for moving between these sources of inspiration and design [ 17 ; 22 ] , we present feld theories , which make explicit a working understanding of salient interactions in a particular domain and sensitizing concepts in order to frame design investigations , so that these understandings can be recognised , synthesised and challenged . 2 RELATED WORK Research on HCI education highlights that our concerns are not unique . In a survey of HCI educators , Wilcox et al . [ 54 ] identifed a divide between formal iterative design that is based on traditions of user - centred design and empirical research evidence , and creative design that is driven by ideation and design expertise in a studio - based tradition . Oguamanam et al . [ 38 ] found that addressing this divide by introducing a studio - based approach into HCI classes for computer science students leads to a cultural clash . Hence , with the feld theory we seek to ofer a blended approach for students with a technical background develop a sensitivity for empirical research and creative design . 2 . 1 Knowledge from the Field In terms of empirical research , feld theories have been inspired by user - centred design approaches like rapid ethnography [ 34 ] and contextual inquiry [ 3 ] . These approaches employ ethnographic techniques of spending time with people through observations and interviews , but with a limited scope and timeframe . They reveal in - sights into current practices and experiences in a particular setting , which can shape requirements for design . Design methods like cultural probes [ 24 ] and toolkits [ 42 ] ofer additional insights . Cultural probes invite people to refect on their experience in playful ways . Whilst they were conceived to provide “inspirational data” [ 24 ] , many HCI researchers now incorporate cultural probes into their interviews to generate a better under - standing of the design context [ 7 ; 48 ] . Toolkits used in co - design workshops tap into the creativity of participants , e . g . , by encour - aging participants to make a collage , map , or a rough prototype . These artefacts aid participants in recalling past experiences or in imagining future experiences [ 41 ; 42 ] . Analytically , HCI researchers often employ inductive qualitative data methods , like grounded theory [ 11 ] and thematic analysis [ 9 ] . Whilst these methods are diferent in terms of rigour and theo - retical foundation , researchers employing such methods generally construct descriptive insight by creating thick descriptions or by ab - stracting ( coding and identifying themes ) observations and conver - sations with study participants . Grounded theory asks researchers to constantly compare evidence between diferent participants and settings , to recruit participants purposefully to test or refne prelim - inary knowledge , and to refect on one’s interpretations through analytic memos . Sensitizing concepts [ 8 ] from existing theory can be incorporated into a grounded theory to create conceptual insight . Rigour is important in grounded theory and typically argued for in terms of the ft of the theory , its usefulness and applicability [ 11 ] . Diagrams play an important role to illustrate and label important insights about the design context and to communicate these insights in an accessible manner to participants and stakeholders . In UX design practice , common diagrams include personas [ 39 ] customer journey maps [ 27 ] , and rich pictures [ 35 ] . Such UX deliverables are not typically considered theories , i . e . , they are not generated with academic qualities in mind such as applicability or defensibility . However , they still ofer a rhetorical quality because they help researchers to describe things to themselves as well as to others [ 28 ] . Diagrams are also common to academic research , e . g . , through maps and scenes in ethnographic feld notes [ 17 ] , thematic maps in the analysis process [ 9 ] , and experience models [ 6 ] that represent observational data and patterns to inspire and guide the design of interactive technologies . There is no shortage of methods to create and visualise knowledge about the feld of design inquiry . What is missing from these methods , we contend , is an integration and testing through Diagramming Working Field Theories for Design in the HCI Classroom CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan creative design . We acknowledge that the above - mentioned methods involve testing . For example , grounded theories are teste and iterated through cycles of empirical research and analysis until a point of saturation is reached [ 11 ] . Similarly , user - centred design employs cycles of testing and iterating prototypes and requirements [ 46 ] . However , these tests are based on a priori assessments of good design [ 54 ] , rather than their ability to inspire designs that are creative and ftting to a design situation . 2 . 2 Knowledge from Design Design - oriented research in HCI typically creates new knowl - edge from designing innovative interactions and from evaluating them empirically through use studies [ 30 ] . Knowledge from design - oriented research is often referred to as intermediate - level knowl - edge , because it occupies a middle ground between concrete in - stances of design and generalizable theories [ 30 ] . Intermediate - level knowledge is generative , that is knowledge that enables designers to create or invent something new . A number of strategies have been proposed to document and visualise intermediate - level knowledge . For example , annotated portfolios [ 13 ; 23 ] make explicit a designer’s concerns and judge - ments across a collection of particular designs . According to Gaver [ 23 ] , the role of theory in annotated portfolios is not to generalize from particulars of design , its role is simply to provide inspiration and annotation . Strong concepts are interaction design knowledge ( interface elements and interaction practices ) abstracted from par - ticular instances of design [ 30 ] . These abstractions provide oppor - tunities for other designers to generate new instances of design . Through a process of vertical grounding , design researchers are asked to strengthen connections between a strong concept and other specifc instances , as well as to broader theories . While strong concepts emerge from an artefact , bridging concepts [ 14 ] are in - spired by exemplars of design and theoretical foundations . From these foundations , untried design opportunities are articulated and links to practical design exemplars are made . These strategies have in common that they take a particular design as a starting point . Knowledge is abstracted from a number of design instances , which in turn enables designers to create or invent something new . What is missing from such intermediate - level knowledge , are the insights about the feld of inquiry that have framed and inspired a design in the frst place . The lines of inquiry proposed by Desjardins and Key [ 16 ] account for the stories and insights by which designers arrive at a particular design . However , this approach also starts from the design , and then looks back at how the designers have arrived at a certain design and what other outcomes may have been possible . What is missing , we argue , is an intermediate - level knowledge where feldwork insights , theoretical concepts , and artefact design evolve in parallel and shape each other . 3 FIELD THEORIES 3 . 1 Introducing Field Theories A feld theory is a working theory that organises key characteristics about a particular feld of design inquiry that highlights opportuni - ties for the design of interactive technology . A theory , in general , is a system of interconnected ideas that condenses and organises knowledge [ 36 ] . The feld , from an HCI perspective , comprises diferent elements like people , interactions , practices , settings , tech - nology etc . that come together in a particular situation [ 40 ] . Field theories are hybrids that synthesise insights into the feld from feld research ( research for design ) with insights from designing and testing prototypes in the feld ( research through design ) . They provide intermediate - level knowledge from particular instances of interaction design research [ 30 ] . However , unlike other forms of intermediate - level knowledge [ 23 ; 30 ] , feld theories are not produced ( or abstracted from ) after an artefact has been designed . Instead , a feld theory constitutes the very knowledge that frames and enables the design of artefacts , and trialling the artefact is a means to test and refne the feld theory . Field theories are expressed as a diagram so that others can quickly get an understanding of key interactions and experiences that frame the design of new artefacts . The ultimate aim is for the diagram to work as a standalone summary of key insights . Figure 1 shows a diagram created by students based on feld research with physiotherapy patients . We use this example in class because it clearly illustrates key components of a feld theory diagram : the diagram usually flls one A4 page to give an overview of impor - tant problems and design opportunities , without overwhelming the reader . It includes a title and succinct defnition to frame the feld theory . This is followed by visual representation of empirical insights and related theoretical concepts that highlight problems and opportunities for designing new technologies . Whilst this ex - ample is presented as a journey from the perspective of a patient , we highlight to students that there is no fxed diagram structure for feld theory diagrams . Field theories are deliberately fexible in the way they can be visualised to ft a specifc feld of inquiry . Field theories are working theories for design in a particular context : a humble theory [ 22 ; 29 ] from a small set of participants that presents working knowledge for the design and trialling of artefacts , without making claims for substantive knowledge as in a generalizable theory . In this sense , feld theories are generative as defned by Höök and Löwgren [ 30 ] , because they present require - ments that play a direct role for the design of technology or for further investigation by revealing interesting gaps or perspectives to be pursued . Furthermore , feld theories are rhetorical as discussed by Halverson [ 28 ] , because they help us talk about the world by labelling and describing important insights into the feld . 3 . 2 Classroom Context and Positionality Our approach to feld theories has evolved through our interaction design course for computer science and engineering undergradu - ate students . This is an elective unit , taken by approximately 40 students each year . The course builds on prior courses on design thinking and user research . During the 13 weeks of the course , students work on a project that follows a typical design process , from understanding the problem domain , through to defning the problem , ideation , and prototype trials . Weekly workshops provide background information through mini - lectures , as well as ongoing support and feedback on the students’ project work . We have collaboratively taught feld theories since 2016 . Author 1 is an early - career academic in HCI with a background in informat - ics , with an afnity for traditional qualitative research methods like CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Bernd Ploderer et al . Figure 1 : Field theory diagram and accompanying VR design . The diagram provides insight into a patient’s experience with therapy instructions . Guided by feld research and theories of motivation [ 19 ] , it highlights four design opportunities : clear instructions , addressing boredom , highlighting benefts , and providing triggers to remember exercise . Students designed a VR prototype to test the assertion that clear instructions would indeed enhance the experience of patients , which allowed them to refne the feld theory . grounded theory [ 11 ] . Author 2 is an early career researcher with a dual background in anthropology and information technology , and has also applied the feld theory method in their own community - based co - design research [ 50 ] . Author 3 is an early career researcher with a background in computer science . Author 4 is a PhD student with a background in social work . Authors 2 , 3 , and 4 have worked hands on as tutors with many of our students . Author 5 is a senior academic in HCI well known for her work in engineering design and participatory design , who originally conceived the feld theory method . We all share a commitment to constructivist learning , where students construct knowledge through learning activities that are hands - on , that refect real - world design practice , and that allow students to build on what they already understand [ 4 ] . Field theories developed as a combination of our own qualitative , Diagramming Working Field Theories for Design in the HCI Classroom CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Figure 2 : Students construct feld theories iteratively : ( 1 ) an initial feld theory is constructed from discoveries from feld research , sensitizing concepts that frame research and date analysis , and inspiration from demo sessions with prototypes developed by our research team . ( 2 ) Students refne the feld theory through designing a prototype and evaluating the prototype in the feld . participatory , and design - led approaches , our commitment to constructivist learning , and our desire to help students develop a working knowledge across diferent design approaches . 3 . 3 Designing with Field Theories in the Classroom Field theories are constructed iteratively through a series of design research activities . Figure 2 provides an overview of the diferent ac - tivities and the order in which we teach them . From left to right , the diagram shows that students create an initial feld theory through feld research , followed by designing a prototype and evaluating it in the feld to test and refne the feld theory . The illustration is also inspired by diagrams of intermediate - level knowledge [ 30 ] , which occupy the space between particular design artefacts ( on bottom ) and broader theories ( on top ) . Hence , before delving into feld research , students interact with technology examples from our research lab , and we also introduce students to HCI theories to help them frame their research . These activities expose students to both abstract and particular knowledge , which they need to synthesise through their feld theory . The activities described above and in Figure 2 are fexible , and over the years we have tried diferent types of feld research , prototyping , etc . The specifcs of these activities described below are based on last course in 2020 , which started face - to - face and then changed to online learning due to COVID - 19 pandemic . In 2020 , feld theories were marked through 3 assignments : assignment 1 ( worth 35 % of the overall mark ) was presented as a report to describe the feld research , sensitizing concepts , technology examples , and the initial feld theory ( diagram and a textual description ) . Assignment 2 ( worth 40 % ) was a group presentation to demonstrate the prototype design and its relationship to the feld theory that inspired it . Assignment 3 ( worth 25 % ) was an individual assignment report of the feld trial and refned feld theory . Sensitizing Concepts : we start by introducing students to theories from HCI and related felds that ofer background ideas for their research ( also known as sensitizing concepts [ 8 ] ) . In week 1 students learn about the threads of experience [ 33 ] to frame their work around the notion of experience . Once feld research is under way , we provide a short introduction to theories that might alert students to important aspects of their feld of inquiry ( e . g . , illness work [ 12 ] ) or their design ( e . g . , afordances [ 37 ] ) . Example technologies : we bring several emerging technology prototypes to the workshop that have been designed and studied by our lab ( IoT , social robots , wearables ) . Students interact with these to refect on interactional concerns and to identify design opportunities . Field research : we provide students with broad topics based on our own interests ( e . g . , enhance the experience with health services ) . Students conduct interviews , participant observation , and cultural probes [ 24 ] with a small group of participants . Based on a thematic analysis [ 9 ] , students learn how to generate abstract knowledge ( codes and themes ) from their data . Synthesising the feld theory diagram : The feld theory is con - structed iteratively from insights from these activities to illustrate CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Bernd Ploderer et al . key characteristics of the feld and to highlight design opportunities . We start by sketching mind maps that describe key themes , inter - view quotes , surprising observations , and sensitizing concepts that resonate with observations . The process of sketching encourages a pragmatic pruning of insights . Instead of presenting everything they have learnt , students need to decide what is most interesting about the data and how they prioritize and illustrate insights . Field theories do not prescribe a specifc visual structure , because any structure that we propose would also prioritize a certain kind of insight . Instead , we want each student to develop a structure that they see ft to communicate insight and design opportunities . To support students in fnding an appropriate visual structure , we provide examples of various diagrams and we also invite students try diferent visual structures , e . g . , timeline , mind map , storyboard . Edward Tufte’s books , such as the Visual Display of Quantitative Information [ 51 ] and Visual Explanations [ 52 ] also provided in - spiration . A brief title and tag line are added to the feld theory diagram to guide the reader . The ultimate aim is for the diagram to work as a standalone representation of key insights , as illustrated in Figure 1 . It also serves as a basis for discussion with the teaching team who might highlight missing aspects , such as how exercises might ft into daily routines , be located , be made social , etc . Prototype design : this step is a group activity . Students discuss each other’s feld theories and select the most promising theory to generate ideas . The selected theory provides a set of require - ments , through which students identify potential touchpoints and generate at least 30 design ideas . These ideas get refned through peer feedback . One of the ideas is developed as a prototype . Due to COVID - 19 restrictions , students created video prototypes [ 32 ] that could be trialled over a distance . Field trial : students design a study of their prototype with at least 2 participants to learn about their experience , with the ultimate aim of testing , clarifying , or providing further insight into their feld theory . Based on the fndings , feld theories get refned , extended , revised , or at times disbanded and created from scratch . Again , the emphasis is on sketching a diagram and refning the theory . This encourages students not to over hype the presentation of their design idea in a marketing pitch , glossing over real use . Instead it encourages them to refect on how they can refne the theory ( as grades reward this ! ) . A written report provides background about the design process and empirical evidence . 4 STUDYING FIELD THEORIES Our aim in this paper is to refect on potential strengths and challenges for learning and teaching interaction design research through feld theories . Our refection is based on interviews with former students , student assignments , and our own personal obser - vations . This study received ethics clearance from our university . We conducted semi - structured interviews with 14 former stu - dents in our interaction design course . All students were enrolled in undergraduate degrees in computer science or information systems - none of them had any prior training in design . The students who volunteered for our interviews were largely students who did well in the course ( 12 out of the 14 participants received a high distinc - tion of 85 % or above ) . However , these students worked on diferent topics and had diferent experiences with feld theories because they studied in diferent years . Seven students ( P1 - P7 ) were interviewed face - to - face in mid - 2017 , after students had completed their course . A further seven students ( P8 - P14 ) were interviewed in mid - 2020 via video - conferencing . These students had their course disrupted by COVID - 19 midway through the semester . During the interviews we went through the student’s assignment to discuss their feld theory and their learning experience . We asked students to talk us through the diferent steps taken to create and refne their feld theory , and to refect on challenges and lessons learned . Interviews lasted between 30 and 60 minutes and were audio - recorded . To gain a better understanding of the learning experiences of all students , including students with lower marks , students in our 2020 course had to write a refection on their feld theory as part of their fnal assignment , which we incorporated into our data analysis . Students were asked to refect on their personal experience in de - signing with feld theories , lessons learned , impact on the prototype design , challenges experienced , and recommendations for improv - ing the course ofering . We acknowledge that these refections are limited , because they were marked and hence students may have been more positive in their refections . Finally , we included our own observations and personal notes from teaching feld theories over the last 5 years in our analysis . These data included personal notes kept electronically by the frst author : weekly meeting notes , feedback given on assignments , re - fections on assignment marking process , student feedback provided through university - administered surveys and student emails , and our responses to such feedback , and our rationale for changes to the course design over the years . Our analysis was inductive , iterative , and collaborative . The frst author immersed himself into the data by listening to inter - view recordings , followed by analysing interview transcripts and assignment refections in NVivo to establish common themes in the learning outcomes and challenges throughout the process of synthesising and testing a feld theory . Author 1 also refected on ob - servations throughout the last 5 years of teaching by going through assignment instructions and feedback given to students and gen - erated the initial paper draft . All authors discussed and edited the draft , with author 2 also bringing in their personal experience in constructing a feld theory for their thesis to refne the defnition of feld theories and the discussion . 5 FINDINGS 5 . 1 Sensitizing Concepts : Grasping Relevant Ideas A frst step for creating feld theories is to learn about existing theories and to identify sensitizing concepts that frame the research or highlight important ideas . This was a new and challenging activity for many students . They commented on the difculty of grasping the ideas and the relevance of HCI theories for their project : “this was pretty challenging as some of the existing theories could have a heavy language . . . and it was very difcult to connect it to our own case . “ ( P6 ) According to students , HCI theories that provide a concept that is intuitively graspable have been most helpful . Theories of motivation and behaviour change [ 19 ] were particularly popular with students , because they were easy to understand and they also Diagramming Working Field Theories for Design in the HCI Classroom CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan provide a lens that highlighted important aspects of the fndings ( i . e . , motivations and related challenges ) for the feld theory : “For example , Self - Determination Theory gave me some insight into why cyclists feel may feel more motivated during a ride than beforehand ( because they are experiencing competency ) , which I could then ask participants about to confrm if this was their experience . ” ( Assignment ) Similarly , the feld theory in Figure 1 highlighted moti - vational challenges , like boredom from repetitive exercises and lack of visible progress . Students also valued the concept of afordances [ 37 ] , which is easily graspable and provided them a new perspective on designing interactions . However , the assignments often only showed a partial or superfcial understanding of these theories , and motivational concepts rarely inspired strong design ideas . Based on our observations , theoretical concepts need to be gras - pable but also provide students with a layered framework to help them unpack specifcs of their research . The threads of experi - ence framework [ 33 ] has been useful , because it helped students to unpack how our senses and our perceptions of space and time contribute to an experience . Some students found the framework also useful to evaluate experiences in their feld trial : “Designing interactions was especially helpful with the ‘threads of experience’ content . This content allowed me to think of interactions diferently , allowing me to think deeper and better evaluate experiences . ” ( As - signment ) . Hence , in the last two years we made this framework mandatory for all students . 5 . 2 Technology Examples : Inspiration from Prototypes Technology examples expose students to current trends in interac - tion design , similar to how sensitizing concepts expose students to current theories . In week 2 we introduce students to technology prototypes ( IoT prototypes , social robots , and wearables ) designed or studied in our lab . Many students commented that interacting with these technologies was one of their highlights , and that it changed their view on design . “One thing that I loved about the unit was those emerging technologies . How the robot and then the emoji app and you know all that stuf really interact - ing with them and being able to see them in person and actually look at them and interact with them . . . . It really changes your whole perspective on it , be - cause you can read about it and look at all the theories and robots and machine learning and IoT and stuf like that . But really seeing it in person makes a big diference . ” ( P11 ) Based on the threads of experience [ 33 ] , students write a re - fection and create a diagram about their interaction . This helps students identify design opportunities . It also gets students started at making connections between concrete technology interactions and abstract concepts for their feld theory . 5 . 3 Field Research : Grappling with Qualitative Data and COVID - 19 Field research is essential to identify insights into relevant character - istics of the feld and design opportunities for the initial feld theory . According to their assignments , students enjoyed interviews , obser - vations , and cultural probes . Half of the students ( 16 / 31 ) refected in their assignment that data collection and analysis were key skills that they had learnt . “The lessons learnt from designing interactions and experiences with feld theory and throughout these assignments are that data collection is number one , without solid and thorough data to go of , the whole process is in trouble of failing . Also , that data analysis is also key , that being able to look at raw data and convert it into information that can be worked with is critical . ” ( Assignment ) Students commented on the challenge of qualitative data analysis . We introduced students to thematic analysis [ 9 ] to code the data and to identify salient themes . While abstract themes are helpful to organize the data , we recognize that themes in and of themselves are not particularly helpful to convey design opportunities . In our experience , designs are often inspired from knowing the specifcs of an experience and its context . Hence , students need to learn to keep connections between themes and specifc experiences observed in their research . Furthermore , the feld theory is not meant to be a summary of all insights from the feld . Students need to select fndings that present interesting design opportunities , which is challenging . “The biggest challenge faced during the run of this semester was the actual analysis of data . . . . trying to actually make sense of the gathered information and tying it all together into a coherent mass was challenging by virtue of just how much data there is to sort through at the end of the data collection stage . . . . Some of the data would also end up being classifed as non - relevant , only to be reclassifed as actually relevant later on , when other bits of information were analysed . ” ( Assignment ) COVID - 19 broke out in our city in the middle of the feld re - search . Hence , we changed our plans to conduct feld research safely over a distance . Interviews were conducted via video confer - encing tools and probe activities were designed so that participants could complete them via their mobile phone , note tools , and on - line whiteboards . Instead of participant observation , students relied on diaries and photos taken by participants to indirectly observe experiences in daily life . Some students alluded to how COVID - 19 afected them personally , through concerns about their studies , social isolation , mental health , and concerns about their future . However , P10 also stated that the feld research provided him with a legitimate reason to connect with others during the lock - down : “Talking to participants was interesting . I got to talk to my friends , especially during COVID - 19 . It’s an opportunity to talk to a person you like . ” 5 . 4 Drawing a Field Theory Diagram : Defning a Scope and Structure Qualitative data analysis and drawing the feld theory diagram usually go hand in hand . The thematic analysis helps to identify salient themes and provides an initial structure for the diagram ( e . g . , CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Bernd Ploderer et al . Figure 3 : Field theory of the ups and downs of living with type 1 diabetes . Structured around the concern of managing blood glucose levels , the diagram presents concrete experiences of counting carbohydrates , checking labels during grocery shopping , and the awkwardness of managing insulin when invited to a dinner party with little control over food . when presented as a hierarchical map ) : “the coding structure and then a thematic analysis on top of that , that really brought all of my ideas together and it really structured to those so that I could separate it into the separate parts of the feld theory . ” ( P11 ) Conversely , drawing a diagram helps to analyse data because it forces students to select relevant data and to make relations between diferent themes and concrete experiences explicit . Creating the diagram was often the frst thing students men - tioned during interviews . Students recognized that diagrams are powerful to analyse data from diferent perspectives , and to com - municate insight . However , they found it challenging to draw them , because at that stage in their projects it was not clear what a feld theory is and what its value may be : “You got to build the feld theory diagram without knowing what it was . ” ( P14 ) . The challenge is about scope ( what fndings to include ) as well as about the narrative ( how to tell a story that integrates the various fndings , presents a clear argument , and also ofers a rich under - standing of experiences ) . Students particularly commented on the lack of pre - defned structure for their feld theory diagram : “Step 4 [ drawing a feld theory diagram ] was challenging because we didn’t have any ‘recipe’ on how to do it . “ ( P7 ) We do not give students a template to fll in , because that would prioritize a certain kind of insight . Instead , we ask students to create the diagram in a way that they see ft to communicate key characteristics of the feld and design opportunities , and we support them by providing diagram examples and by encouraging them to try out diferent structures ( a mindmap , a network , a journey ) which we critique with them . From the assignments and interviews we identifed common tactics . Students typically imitate the structure of an example that we present to them , like the journey depicted in the rehabilitation feld theory in Figure 1 . Many students lay out their key themes , and if space permits , add specifc examples and quotes to illustrate themes . Some students use theories as a lens to flter what themes they include or exclude from their diagram , e . g . , by laying out the themes from self - determination theory ( competence , autonomy , relatedness ) . A few students produced excellent results by iden - tifying a central idea or challenge , which ties together several of their fndings . For example , the diagram presented in Figure 3 is structured around the challenge of managing blood glucose levels , which is central to the lives of people living with type 1 diabetes . Having to manage blood glucose levels afects not only what they eat , but also how they shop for groceries , work , exercise , etc . 5 . 5 Field Theory : Qualities of Working Insights for Design We have marked approximately 180 feld theories during the last 5 years . When we mark the frst iteration of a working feld theory , we assess the feld theory diagram and description based on the following qualities : ( 1 ) integration : the theory integrates insights from feld research with theory and technology examples ( which Diagramming Working Field Theories for Design in the HCI Classroom CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan are presented separately in the assignment report ) ; ( 2 ) clarity : the diagram is well structured and easy to comprehend ; ( 3 ) credibility : the insights are authentic and based on empirical data , ( 4 ) relevance : the theory highlights clear opportunities for design . Most students are able to create a feld theory that meets these qualities and pass the frst assignment . In our open - ended feedback to student assignments , three quali - ties have stood out over the years that make a feld theory highly relevant for design . The frst quality is experience over abstrac - tion . Strong assignments highlight experiences through quotes and anecdotes from the feld , including undesirable and desirable expe - riences . These feld theories illustrate the experience from the per - spective of participants , e . g . , in a frst person - view of a person with an injury ( Figure 1 ) or a person living with type 1 diabetes ( Figure 3 ) , rather than purely through abstract themes and concepts . They tend to indicate that the student has taken the feldwork seriously rather than simply construing ideas from their own preconceptions . The second quality is originality from specifcs . This is where the feld theory rings true and also presents something new that goes beyond the obvious and shows analytic insight . Originality often comes from presenting the specifcs of an experience , e . g . , Figure 3 illustrates the challenges for a person with type 1 diabetes to manage insulin when invited for dinner parties due to the lack of control over the timing and ingredients of food served . The threads of experience framework [ 33 ] was helpful for students to unpack details of an experience . These specifcs can reveal interests or gaps to investigate further . Finally , outstanding feld theories present a central concern that integrates empirical data , theory and design . Instead of presenting themes in the data and concepts side by side , these theories synthe - size the information and present a clear narrative and scope around a central concern . In fgure 1 , the integration is well done by high - lighting diferent motivational challenges . Figure 3 is structured around the challenge of managing blood glucose levels . The dia - gram uses the metaphor of a blood glucose charts to show ups and downs in living with type 1 diabetes across diferent experiences , e . g . , during shopping and preparing for meals , exercising , and at dinner parties and other social events where the ingredients and the timing of a meal cannot be controlled . 5 . 6 Prototype Design : A Response to the Field Theory and a Means to Test the Theory A main strength of a feld theory is its role in supporting the devel - opment prototype designs . More than half of the students ( 18 / 31 ) commented in their assignments that the feld theory provided a clear scope for their ideation and prototyping by displaying rele - vant characteristics of the feld and design opportunities . At this stage students start to recognize the value of a feld theory , and some students stated that they would not have been able to come up with their prototype design without their feld theory . “I really enjoyed just the design of the prototype . Be - cause it was , it was kind of that tangible reward or the or the combination of the research . For me I just really found that to be the most fulflling thing is that com - ing up with ideas and then executing those on . But I don’t think that would have been possible without the feld theory . As you know , a strong visualization of what the problem spaces actually were and commu - nicating that with the team to generate those design ideas . ” ( P8 , see also Figure 4 ) The prototype design is also a means to test the feld theory and refne it through new insights , which from a teaching perspective , has several benefts . We have seen a more refective approach to how students present their designs . The assignment emphasises insights into feld theories as the main outcome . Hence , instead of pitching the perceived novelty of their prototype design , which tends to pro - pel students into an uncritical and overly efusive marketing mode , students need to refect on how their design evolved from the initial feld theory and how it helped them gain further insight to refne their feld theory : “the prototype helped to create questions to ask par - ticipants - it was really an excuse for fnding meaningful data . ” ( P5 ) Field theories have also been useful to orient design ideas to - wards specifc experiences ( and away from trying to solve a broad , underspecifed problem ) . For example , for topics focussing on food and cooking , in our frst two years of teaching we have seen an abundance of ‘smart fridge’ and ‘smart kitchen’ ideas that automate tasks and make the human redundant . However , by emphasising actual experiences as requirements in the feld theory , we have been able to guide students towards designs that enhance a per - son’s experience and provide insight for the feld theory . For some students this has also been useful for their prototypes to consider how they can implement their ideas in a way that creates a new kind of experience , e . g . , through a Wizard of Oz approach . The most interesting designs have applied this to create experiences that connect people in new ways , as illustrated in Figure 5 We have found it difcult to strike a balance between the im - portance of the prototype design and the feld theory . In the frst few years we did not see many interesting prototype designs . In hindsight , we suspect that by emphasizing the feld theory as the main outcome of the assignment , we may have inadvertently given students the impressions that the prototype design is not impor - tant , as many prototypes were poorly implemented or merely a sketch . Many other designs were fairly generic implementations of social media or gamifed designs , with little consideration to the specifcs of their feld theory . Hence , in 2020 we made a number of changes which led to innovative and mature prototypes , without diminishing the quality of the fnal feld theory . We re - designed the assignment to give more weight to the prototype . We also made it a group assignment so students can select a feld theory with interesting gaps and design opportunities from amongst their team members , and collaborate on developing ideas and prototypes . Due to the COVID - 19 lockdown , we also changed from physical pro - totypes to video prototypes . Students had to create a video that introduces an opportunity highlighted by their feld theory . They also needed to roleplay and show how a person interacts with a prototype in a specifc context . This helped students to create de - signs that were specifc to their feld theory and design situation , as in the GrowBot design ( see fgure 4 ) . 5 . 7 Field Trial : Refne the Field Theory The fnal step in the assignment is a short feld trial of the prototype design to refne the insights from the feld theory . Participants are CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Bernd Ploderer et al . Figure 4 : The GrowBot video prototype design by P8 was aimed at people living in apartments who want to learn how to grow food . Inspired by practical challenges like fnding a suitable location and providing enough water , the GrowBot design explores how life - like expressions can guide growers and cultivate knowledge and care for plants . Figure 5 : Recipe Globe design and original cooking feld theory that inspired the design . The design seeks to enhance the cooking experience by allowing people to record and share recipes as well as the goods that they have baked . The student ( P6 ) used a Wizard of Oz approach to simulate voice interaction with the Recipe Globe by controlling a voice recorder in the kitchen , which also allowed her to observe the participants’ interactions and experiences . One participant in her study recorded a recipe during baking , and a second participant tried to follow the audio - recorded recipe to make cookies herself . invited to view a video prototype or to interact with a physical prototype , followed by an interview about their ( imagined ) experi - ence with the prototype design . Even with only two participants , students gain valuable insights : “There were a couple of things that I didn’t expect to be mentioned or to be pointed out , and I went , ah , those are some pain points . ” ( P14 ) The trial is an essential step of the feld theory because it brings the design research process back to the feld theory . We emphasise to students that the purpose of the trial is not to fnd out whether people like the design . The purpose is to see what the design would lead to , how it might change experiences , and what the design re - veals about the feld theory that inspired it . This helps to prevent stu - dents from pitching their perceived novelty of their design . Instead , they focus on refning the feld theory diagram for their fnal report . “Another challenge was how easy it was to get wrapped up in the excitement of designing something , that it was easy to lose sight of the role of the proto - type as a tool for primarily exploring the feld theory . I Diagramming Working Field Theories for Design in the HCI Classroom CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Figure 6 : Refned cooking feld theory . The fndings from trialling the Recipe Globe design ( depicted in fgure 5 ) led to a completely revised feld theory , which highlights experiences with cooking from memory ( teal ) , cookbooks ( orange ) , and shared recipes ( green ) . kept on having to re - centre and remind myself of what the goal of the research actually was – to understand people and experiences , not just design something cool . ” ( Assignment ) Most feld theory refnements are minor . Students typically ex - pand on existing sections of their feld theory based on their trial study fndings . Only very few students make major revisions to their feld theory . For example , Figure 6 shows a largely revised cooking feld theory based on trialling the Recipe Globe ( Figure 5 ) with two participants . One participant recorded a recipe with the Recipe Globe , and a second participant recreated the meal in their own kitchen . Like the original feld theory ( Figure 5 ) , the revised feld theory in Figure 6 centres around cooking from memory and cooking from recipes . However , P6 removed all other parts from the original feld theory and instead the fnal feld theory presents a more nuanced understanding of the experiences with cooking from memory and from recipes , as facilitated by the Recipe Globe design . 6 DISCUSSION In this paper we have presented working feld theories , which in - tegrate insights from feldwork more tightly with design research . Field theories occupy a unique position amongst design approaches in HCI . They visualise feldwork insights for design , similar to expe - rience models [ 6 ] , but feld theories also get evaluated and refned further through design research . In this regard , feld theories resem - ble a form intermediate - level knowledge [ 30 ] with new insights generated from artefact designs and use studies . Unlike other forms of intermediate - level knowledge , however , feld theories commu - nicate the very insights and assumptions that have led to a design CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Bernd Ploderer et al . in the frst place , and that allow others to generate new designs . In other words , feld theories make the connections between feld - work and artefact design more explicit . Students learn to move between feld research and design activities , and to co - evolve their feld theory and prototype design in parallel . Drawing a feld theory diagram is a key feature of our approach , because it requires that students synthesise insights for design from feldwork , technology examples , and sensitizing concepts . Students explore diferent visual structures to elaborate on their insights , and they also need to make decisions on what empirical insights and sensitizing concepts to include . Such visual thinking [ 2 ] is common to students trained in creative design [ 54 ] , but it is often a new skill that computer science students develop when they create a feld theory . Visual thinking skills are critical to the design process more broadly , to communicate design ideas and to make decisions on the design of products and services [ 10 ; 26 ] . The diagram is also important to discuss insights with students , similar to how designs get critiqued in studio - based approaches to design [ 53 ] . Testing the feld theory is important to connect design outcomes back to initial insights from feld research . Here , the feld theory integrates two forms of design knowledge in a unique way . On the one hand , a feld theory is a working theory for design that frames the inquiry and highlights design opportunities [ 55 ] . On the other hand , the feld theory is also a form of knowledge that is refned further through design by building and trialling a prototype [ 56 ] . Striking a balance between the importance of the prototype design and the feld theory is challenging for computer science students . However , we have seen that feld theories encourage a refective approach to presenting the novelty and signifcance of prototypes . It also focuses the scope of feld trials to inquire further into the concerns and desires expressed in the initial feld theory . The focus on the problem - opportunity space , rather than the design outcome , and the feedback from trial studies to refne the problem - opportunity space , set feld theories apart from research - through - design [ 23 ; 25 ; 30 ; 56 ] . 6 . 1 Implications for Learning and Teaching HCI We hope that feld theories will help HCI educators and students to bridge diferent ways of learning and teaching in computer science and design schools . For HCI educators in computer science , feld theories ofer a way of incorporating creative design principles of ideation , visual thinking , divergent thinking , and peer critique [ 53 ; 54 ] , with the iterative design approaches typically taught in computer science [ 54 ] . In making feld theories central to the de - sign process , educators can bring HCI theories to the process , and beyond that , students can synthesize their own working theories based on feldwork . Diagramming a feld theory provides a clear scope and direction for the ideation and prototype design activi - ties , which can otherwise be daunting for students not trained in ideation and divergent thinking . In framing the prototype design as a means to test the feld theory , students learn to be critical about their design and more attuned to the specifcs of a design situation . HCI educators in design schools may also fnd feld theories useful for their teaching to open up the ‘black box’ of creative design [ 18 ] . Instead of refecting on and abstracting from design instances post - hoc , feld theories provide a fexible format that students can incorporate into their portfolios to articulate relevant ideas , empirical insights , theories and personal preferences . Field theories keep the problem - opportunity space visible throughout the design process and allow for peers and educators to interrogate and critique them . For students interested in learning designing with feld theo - ries , we highlight that the approach presented in this paper is not meant to be a recipe with step - by - step instructions for producing a practical theory . Instead , we have found Levi - Strauss’ notion of a ‘bricoleur’ [ 31 ] to be a useful analogy . A bricoleur is “a Jack of all trades , or a kind of professional do - it - yourself person” [ 15 , p . 2 ] . Similarly , our aim with the feld theory has been to equip stu - dents with skills to employ design methods and theories to address the task at hand . Unlike a traditional HCI researcher , a bricoleur does not necessarily go into depth of a theory , or ground the feld theory by making connections to a wider set of theories . Instead the bricoleur is familiar enough with theory and practice across computer science and design ; someone who can move comfortably between these felds , look at diferent bits of a theory , empirical data , and design ideas , and re - purpose them to deliver practical outcomes . The notion of a ‘bricolage’ is also a useful analogy for HCI ed - ucators interested in teaching design through feld theories . Field theories are a fexible method that HCI educators can ‘cobble to - gether’ with their own research problems and their own pedagogical approaches . The creation of feld theories through diagramming is central to synthesize insights from empirical research ( includ - ing technology trials in the feld ) , and to incorporate theoretical concepts . However , HCI educators can apply feld theories to their preferred research methods , HCI theories , and technologies . In terms of methods , we have focused on experience - centered design [ 33 ] , but we can also see how feld theories could work well with design methods that foreground values [ 21 ] , participation [ 47 ] , or entanglements of humans and technology [ 20 ] . 6 . 2 Future Work Towards Academic Field Theories In revising feld theories over the years , we have also refected on how to balance between the needs of the HCI classroom and the rigor expected from academic theories . To further enhance the rigor of feld theories , e . g . , for graduate students wanting to incorporate feld theories into their research and into peer - reviewed publications , we can see how feld theories could beneft from the steps of horizontal and vertical grounding that are part of the process of constructing a strong concept [ 30 ] . In examining the horizontal grounding of feld theories , students would examine how their insights and design opportunities apply to other contexts , e . g . , by reviewing related work or by exploring their insights and designs in a related context . In vertical grounding , students might explore how their feld theory relates to other theories as well as to other technology designs . To further enhance the credibility , feld theories would beneft from deepening the relations with participants , e . g . , by checking the theory with the members that it seeks to represent , or through a participatory approach where participants and researchers co - construct the theory [ 5 ] . Diagramming Working Field Theories for Design in the HCI Classroom CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan For graduate students , a feld theory can be useful to develop a scope from initial feld research and concepts , and to document how central concerns and insights evolve throughout diferent re - search and design activities of their project . The fexible format of feld theories can also be helpful to synthesize insights from diverse methods and data , where traditional qualitative research methods like grounded theory [ 11 ] may not be appropriate . How - ever , more research is needed to explore how well feld theories scale up to projects that involve a large number of participants , run over multiple years , and lead to multiple iterations of a feld theory . To manage the large set of data , graduate students need to be more selective , and refective , about what fndings they include in their feld theory . They may also need to condense and abstract their em - pirical insights to a larger degree in order to enhance the clarity of the feld theory . However , based on our fndings , we caution against entirely abstract feld theories . Whilst contextual information can be abstracted , feld theories that include concrete experiences and specifc quotes tend to present a more interesting path for further design and research . 7 CONCLUSION Achieving mastery across feldwork , theory and technology design is certainly an art that requires practice and experience . The feld theories presented in this paper ofer a starting point for students with a technical background to develop a sensibility for feldwork , theory and design , and to integrate these skills by diagramming and trialling feld theories . In laying out the steps for constructing feld theories together with our assumptions and feedback from students , we ofer an approach that HCI educators and students can integrate into their own classrooms and design projects . The approach presented in this paper focussed on working theories . However , we have also laid out a path forward for enhancing the rigour of feld theories so that interaction design researchers can create feld theories that ofer original and signifcant academic contributions . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank all the students in our classes , our colleagues in the QUT CHI Writing Workshops , as well as the anonymous reviewers for their support . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Robert J . Anderson , 1994 . Representations and Requirements : The Value of Ethnography in System Design . Human – Computer Interaction 9 , 2 , 151 - 182 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327051hci0902 _ 1 [ 2 ] Rudolf Arnheim , 1997 . Visual thinking . Univ of California Press , Berkeley . [ 3 ] Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt , 1998 . Contextual Design : Defning Customer - centered Systems . Morgan Kaufmann , Waltham , MA . [ 4 ] John B Biggs and Catherine Tang , 2011 . Teaching for quality learning at university : What the student does . Open University Press , Berkshire , UK . [ 5 ] Linda Birt , Suzanne Scott , Debbie Cavers , Christine Campbell , and Fiona Walter , 2016 . Member Checking : A Tool to Enhance Trustworthiness or Merely a Nod to Validation ? Qualitative Health Research 26 , 13 , 1802 - 1811 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1049732316654870 [ 6 ] Jeanette Blomberg , Mark Burrel , and Greg Guest , 2003 . An ethnographic approach to design . In The Human - Computer Interaction Handbook , Julie A . Jacko and Andrew Sears Eds . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah , NJ , 964 - 986 . [ 7 ] Kirsten Boehner , Janet Vertesi , Phoebe Sengers , and Paul Dourish , 2007 . How HCI interprets the probes . In CHI 2007 , ACM , New York , 1077 - 1086 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240789 [ 8 ] Glenn A . Bowen , 2006 . Grounded theory and sensitizing concepts . International Journal of Qualitative Methods 5 , 3 , 1 - 9 . [ 9 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke , 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative research in psychology 3 , 2 , 77 - 101 . [ 10 ] Bill Buxton , 2007 . Sketching user experiences : getting the design right and the right design . Morgan Kaufmann , San Francisco . [ 11 ] Kathy Charmaz , 2007 . Constructing grounded theory : A practical guide through qualitative analysis . Sage , Los Angeles , CA . [ 12 ] Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss , 1985 . Managing chronic illness at home : three lines of work . Qualitative Sociology 8 , 3 , 224 - 247 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF00989485 [ 13 ] Alma Leora Culén , Jorun Børsting , and William Gaver , 2020 . Strategies for Anno - tating Portfolios : Mapping Designs for New Domains . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM on Designing Interactive Systems Conference , ACM , New York , 1633 – 1645 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395490 [ 14 ] Peter Dalsgaard and Christian Dindler , 2014 . Between theory and practice : bridging concepts in HCI research . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , New York , 1635 – 1644 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557342 [ 15 ] Norman K . Denzin and Yvonna S . Lincoln , 1994 . Handbook of qualitative research . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks . [ 16 ] Audrey Desjardins and Cayla Key , 2020 . Parallels , Tangents , and Loops : Refec - tions on the “Through” Part of RtD . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference , ACM , New York , 2133 – 2147 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395586 [ 17 ] Robert M . Emerson , R . I . Fretz , L . L . Shaw , and I . Thompson , 1996 . Writing ethnographic feldnotes . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . [ 18 ] Daniel Fallman , 2003 . Design - oriented human - computer interaction . In Proceed - ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , New York , 225 – 232 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 642611 . 642652 [ 19 ] Brian J Fogg , 2009 . A behavior model for persuasive design . In Persuasive 2009 ACM , 40 . [ 20 ] Christopher Frauenberger , 2019 . Entanglement HCI The Next Wave ? ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 27 , 1 , Article 2 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3364998 [ 21 ] Batya Friedman and David G Hendry , 2019 . Value sensitive design : Shaping tech - nology with moral imagination . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 22 ] William Gaver , 2006 . Learning from experience . CHI 2006 Workshop on Theory and Methods for Experience - Centered Design . [ 23 ] William Gaver , 2012 . What should we expect from research through design ? In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) , ACM , New York , 937 - 946 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208538 [ 24 ] William Gaver , A . Dunne , and E . Pacenti , 1999 . Cultural probes . interactions 6 , 1 , 21 - 29 . [ 25 ] Elisa Giaccardi , 2019 . Histories and Futures of Research through Design : From Prototypes to Connected Things . International Journal of Design 13 , 3 , 139 - 155 . [ 26 ] Saul Greenberg , Sheelagh Carpendale , Nicolai Marquardt , and Bill Buxton , 2011 . Sketching user experiences : The workbook . Morgan Kaufmann , Amsterdam . [ 27 ] Megan Grocki , 2014 . How to Create a Customer Journey Map UX Mastery . https : / / uxmastery . com / how - to - create - a - customer - journey - map / [ 28 ] Christine A . Halverson , 2002 . Activity Theory and Distributed Cognition : Or What Does CSCW Need to DO with Theories ? Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 11 , 1 , 243 - 267 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1023 / a : 1015298005381 [ 29 ] Steve Harrison , Deborah Tatar , and Phoebe Sengers , 2007 . The three paradigms of HCI . alt . chi . [ 30 ] Kristina Höök and Jonas Löwgren , 2012 . Strong concepts : Intermediate - level knowledge in interaction design research . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 19 , 3 , 1 - 18 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2362364 . 2362371 [ 31 ] Claude Levi - Strauss , 1966 . The Savage Mind . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . [ 32 ] Wendy E . Mackay , Anne V . Ratzer , and Paul Janecek , 2000 . Video artifacts for design : bridging the Gap between abstraction and detail . In Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing Interactive Systems , ACM , New York , 72 – 82 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 347642 . 347666 [ 33 ] John Mccarthy and Peter Wright , 2004 . Technology as experience . MIT Press , Cambridge . [ 34 ] David R . Millen , 2000 . Rapid ethnography : time deepening strategies for HCI feld research . In Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing Interactive Systems , ACM , New York , 280 – 286 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 347642 . 347763 [ 35 ] Andrew Monk and Steve Howard , 1998 . The rich picture : a tool for reasoning about work context . interactions 5 , 2 , 21 - 30 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 274430 . 274434 [ 36 ] William Lawrence Neuman , 2006 . Social research methods : Qualitative and quan - titative approaches . Allyn and Bacon , Boston , MA . [ 37 ] Donald A . Norman , 2013 . The Design of Everyday Things . Basic Books , New York . [ 38 ] Vanessa Oguamanam , Taneisha Lee , Tom Mcklin , Zane Cochran , Gregory Abowd , and Betsy Disalvo , 2020 . Cultural Clash : Exploring How Studio - Based Pedagogy Impacts Learning for Students in HCI Classrooms . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM on Designing Interactive Systems Conference , ACM , New York , 1131 – 1142 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395544 CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan [ 39 ] John Pruitt and Jonathan Grudin , 2003 . Personas : practice and theory . In Con - ference on Designing for User Experiences ( DUX ’03 ) , ACM , New York , 1 - 15 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 997078 . 997089 [ 40 ] Toni Robertson and Lian Loke , 2009 . Designing situations . In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Australian Computer - Human Interaction ( OZCHI ’09 ) , ACM , New York , 1 - 8 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1738826 . 1738828 [ 41 ] Elizabeth B - N Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers , 2012 . Convivial toolbox : Generative research for the front end of design . BIS , Amsterdam . [ 42 ] Elizabeth B . N . Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers , 2014 . Probes , toolkits and prototypes : three approaches to making in codesigning . CoDesign 10 , 1 , 5 - 14 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2014 . 888183 [ 43 ] Donald A Schön , 1984 . The refective practitioner : How professionals think in action . Basic books , New York . [ 44 ] Donald A Schön , 1990 . The design process . In Varieties of thinking : essays from Harvard’s Philosophy of Education Research Center , V . A . Howard Ed . Routledge , New York , 111 - 141 . [ 45 ] Donald A Schön , 1992 . Designing as refective conversation with the materials of a design situation . Knowledge - based systems 5 , 1 , 3 - 14 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0950 - 7051 ( 92 ) 90020 - G [ 46 ] Helen Sharp , Yvonne Rogers , and Jennifer Preece , 2019 . Interaction Design : Beyond Human - Computer Interaction . Wiley & Sons , Chichester , UK . [ 47 ] Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson , 2013 . Routledge international handbook of participatory design . Routledge , New York . [ 48 ] Alessandro Soro , Margot Brereton , Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Anita Lee Hong , and Paul Roe , 2016 . Cross - Cultural Dialogical Probes . In AfriCHI’16 : Proceedings of the First African Conference on Human Computer Interaction , ACM , New York , 114 - 125 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998581 . 2998591 Bernd Ploderer et al . [ 49 ] Alessandro Soro , Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , and Margot Brereton , 2019 . Design - ing the Past . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , New York , Paper alt10 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3310424 [ 50 ] Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , 2020 . Ngana Wubulku Junkurr - Jiku Balkaway - Ka : The intergenerational co - design of a tangible technology to keep active use of the Kuku Yalanji Aboriginal language strong . PhD thesis . Queensland University of Technology , Brisbane , Australia . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5204 / thesis . eprints . 206447 [ 51 ] Edward R Tufte , 1983 . The visual display of quantitative information . Graphics Press , Cheshire , Conn . [ 52 ] Edward R . Tufte , 1997 . Visual explanations : images and quantities , evidence and narrative . Graphics Press , Cheshire , Conn . [ 53 ] Mihaela Vorvoreanu , Colin M . Gray , Paul Parsons , and Nancy Rasche , 2017 . Advancing UX Education : A Model for Integrated Studio Pedagogy . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ‘17 ) , ACM , New York , 1441 – 1446 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025726 [ 54 ] Lauren Wilcox , Betsy Disalvo , Dick Henneman , and Qiaosi Wang , 2019 . Design in the HCI Classroom : Setting a Research Agenda . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’19 ) , ACM , New York , 871 – 883 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322381 [ 55 ] John Zimmerman and Jodi Forlizzi , 2014 . Research through design in HCI . In Ways of Knowing in HCI , Judith S Olson and Wendy A Kellogg Eds . Springer , New York , 167 - 189 . [ 56 ] John Zimmerman , Jodi Forlizzi , and Shelley Evenson , 2007 . Research through design as a method for interaction design research in HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , New York , 493 – 502 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240704