Int . J . Services Technology and Management , Vol . 19 , Nos . 1 / 2 / 3 , 2013 81 Copyright © 2013 Inderscience Enterprises Ltd . Microfinance in the South – from money processing to community building Muhammad Adeel * , Bernhard Nett and Volker Wulf Information Systems and New Media Faculty III , University of Siegen , Hoelderlinstr 3 , 57076 , Siegen , Germany E - mail : adeel . muhammad @ uni - siegen . de E - mail : bernhard . nett @ uni - siegen . de E - mail : volker . wulf @ uni - siegen . de * Corresponding author Abstract : This paper compares the results of two ethnographic studies on microfinance institutions ( MFIs ) of the South , the Grameen Bank ( GB ) , Bangladesh , and the Khushhali Bank ( KB ) , Pakistan . Information and communication technology ( ICT ) is considered to play a major supportive role for innovation in both MFIs which , nevertheless , approach them very differently . When discussing with KB management , GB was often mentioned as a best - practice example . Nevertheless , GB’s focus on the field level is not followed in innovation strategies . Restricting ‘microfinance technology’ to the automation of payment - data management falls behind GB’s understanding of microfinance as an ongoing recombination of financial , educational , community - building and empowering activities . The paper contributes to a better understanding of the specifics of work practices in MFI in developing countries – a domain which has not yet been thoroughly studied . The comparative analysis additionally reveals the impact of customer relationships on cooperative work and technological needs within banking organisations . Keywords : microfinance ; innovation ; community building ; learning ; ICT ; participatory design . Reference to this paper should be made as follows : Adeel , M . , Nett , B . and Wulf , V . ( 2013 ) ‘Microfinance in the South – from money processing to community building’ , Int . J . Services Technology and Management , Vol . 19 , Nos . 1 / 2 / 3 , pp . 81 – 98 . Biographical notes : Muhammad Adeel is PhD candidate at the Institute for Information Systems and New Media at the University of Siegen . He holds a Master in Information Technology . His research interests include ICT4D , CSCW and business ethnography . Bernhard Nett is a Researcher at the Institute for Information Systems and New Media at the University of Siegen . He received his PhD in Sociology at the RWTH , Aachen . His research interests include ICT4D , CSCW , CSCL , end - user development , business ethnography and social exclusion . Volker Wulf is a Professor of Information Systems at the University of Siegen . At Fraunhofer FIT , he heads the research group on user - centred software - engineering ( USE ) . His research interests include computer - supported cooperative work , human - computer interaction , 82 M . Adeel et al . computer - supported cooperative learning , participatory software - engineering , integrated organisation and technology development . Recently he developed a strong interest in the role of mobile ICT to support developmental processes . Microfinancing became a major field of his interests . 1 Introduction Microfinance is the supply of financial products ( loans , savings , insurance etc . ) and non - financial services ( education , community building etc . ) to the poor . In the microfinance context , the word ‘micro’ points to the size of the financial transactions , not the size of the microfinance institutions ( MFIs ) . Microcredit and microfinance are relatively new tools of development politics , although the conception had historical antecessors , e . g . credit unions of nineteenth century Europe which helped local farmers purchase livestock , seeds and equipment ( see Ivatury , 2006 ) or the Kaligram Krishi Bank in Patishar village in the Bangladesh district of Naogaon in 1905 ( see Nugroho and Milies , 2009 ) . This paper compares two recent cases of MFIs , the Grameen Bank ( GB ) , Bangladesh , and the Khushhali Bank ( KB ) , Pakistan . The authors conducted two ethnographic studies in these organisations to analyse their formal organisation , their coordination practices and their interaction with clients ( see Adeel et al . , 2010 ; Plogmann et al . , 2010 ) . This paper uses data from these studies to compare the institution’s understanding of microfinance and innovation . It shows that there has emerged a domain of collaborative practices within MFIs and among them and their customers , which challenges and may enrich CSCW research , and can benefit from CSCW research , at the same time . Access to education has been identified as crucial for sustainable poverty - reduction by researchers of microfinance ( Maldanado , 2005 ) . It is a major challenge for MFIs to align the interests of institutions in support of microfinance ( such as credit bureaus , microfinance trade associations , networks , third - party donors ) with the need for grass root innovations and learning among their clients . To introduce microfinance and to position its challenges within the CSCW discourse , the paper starts with a survey on the state of the art on microfinance , innovation and learning . After presenting the research focus , the empirical designs of the two studies on the Grameen and the KB are presented . The next chapter describes the two organisations in terms of processes and work practices . We elaborate the different understandings of microfinance and innovation , and the related different understanding of what ‘microfinance technology’ is about . In our conclusion we try to recapitulate what ICT and CSCW research could learn from microfinance , and what it could do in this field . 2 The state of the art The World Bank defines ‘microfinance’ as a financial service - provision to low - income clients ( Ledgerwood , 2000 ) . Microfinance is playing a role as a money - management strategy for the poor and as access for them to savings , borrowing , insurance and other basic financial activities ( Barnes , 2001 ; Rutherford , 2000 ) . Microfinance is related with Microfinance in the South 83 products such as credits and savings , which appear established and not unlike those of other banking . And , as good financial management involves “keeping a little money aside when it comes in , avoiding unnecessary expenditure and finding a safe place to store what is left over” ( Rutherford , 2000 ) , poor people seem to be like everyone else and microfinance like other banking . However , Rutherford ( 2000 ) point at the disadvantages of the poor , who lack access to financial services . Furthermore , they have little literacy in terms of reading and writing , but in terms of dealing with monetary investments , too . Accordingly , microfinance has to deal with this disadvantage of its clients , and to reduce it ( Diniz et al . , 2008 ) , too . This definitely goes further than what is expected from other banking . Ivatury ( 2006 ) noticed that banks would only go to the poor when they find them potential customers , this is : if they could somehow balance the low savings rate and transaction numbers of these customers by equally low operating costs . However , operating costs among the poor people may even exceed normal ones , as the poor generally do not have access to a good infrastructure . Tamagaki ( 2006 ) describes the related structural problem as ‘dual objectives of microfinance’ , a trade - off between sustainability - and outreach - oriented strategies : low outreach to the poor would result from sustainability - orientation , as high administrative cost , low revenues and very high risks would be related to broadened outreach . The sceptical positions doubting the simultaneous possibility to develop the outreach to the poor and sustainability are opposed by optimistic positions , which often draw upon information and communication technology as an appropriate means to develop microfinance . As experts plea for an increase of the volume of microfinance to relatively minimise the costs ( Counts , 2009 ) , others ( Claessens , 2006 ) derive that ICT could help and play a significant role in improving the access of the poor to financial services in rural and deprived areas , too ( Dahl , 1991 ) . But how could this work ? Parikh et al . ( 2006 ) argue for an outreach - oriented strategy : “In microfinance , where the cash value of individual transactions is very small , the only way to be profitable is to serve many clients efficiently” . When pointing at the technological challenge , Parikh et al . ( 2006 ) it is stated that “one of the biggest challenges facing microfinance service providers , particularly in rural areas of the developing world is implementing a Management Information System ( MIS ) that can interface with a large number of clients across a region with unreliable physical infrastructure ( communication , power , transport , etc . ) ” . In this reading technological innovation within MFIs is to substitute the poor technical environments . Poor infrastructure surely is an issue for microfinance . However , the above - mentioned point of view involves a reduction of design issues on merely technical problems . Suchlike perspectives have since long been criticised by socio - technical design . As a consequence of the reduction of innovation to technical issues , use problems such as the poor literacy of many customers are often not addressed when speaking about microfinance technology as an innovation challenge . To put it the other way : a socio - technical perspective could strongly improve the understanding of what is going on in microfinance and how it could be improved by ICT . Instead of discussing this core question , the challenge to design microfinance technology is often reduced to the establishment of non - microfinance banking into white spots on the map , where the poor are living . It has been noticed that ICT - based innovations allow banks to establish low cost electronic - banking media based on internet 84 M . Adeel et al . banking or automated teller machines ( ATMs ) ( Diniz et al . , 2008 ) . Such an ATM for illiterates could be different from ‘normal’ ones . But would ATMs be positive for microfinance , at all ? To answer such a question demands for considering more factors than only technical ones . The dissemination speed of mobile phones is indeed very fast in developing countries , and it is estimated that the number of mobile phone users has already surpassed that of banked people ( Porcaro , 2011 ) . Donner in 2008 explains this with the mobile phone being the only means of access to communications services . Lyman et al . ( 2008 ) claimed that in some areas of Africa and Asia , mobile - phone banking is taking off and has already become one of the new and fast developing fields of technology and financial service . But again , for mobile - phone banking as for microfinance , reducing design questions to technical problems is to miss a full understanding of what should be at stake when designing microfinance technology . Technology appropriation is strongly shaping ( and also shaped by ) local markets and established technologies impact on social experience . Therefore , social , lingual and literacy standards have to be taken into account when analysing technological situations ( De Angela et al . , 2003 ; Medhi et al . , 2009 ) . Within the field of microfinance technology , such issues are related to the user perspective , which is obviously yet too little studied and addressed within literature on microfinance technology . This is even the more surprising as use - related impacts of microfinance which appeared to be only side - effects often turned out as the crucial ones . For instance , combining the provision of credits with some information on sound investment opportunities might improve efficiency much more than the best management information system – if such information would not be mere advertisement , but , for instance , good - practice examples of what former clients did , explained in a way understandable for illiterates . Only from a narrow monetary point of view , impacts of microfinance such as learning or empowerment of customers can be regarded as secondary . Even under a short - term monetary focus , these could play a greater role than what is regarded as the core of microfinance by a large share of those who are interested in innovations of microfinance technology : the management of loan - giving and instalments - collecting on top - management level of the MFI , and its interaction with donor institutions . In contrast , to understand how microfinance technology could really improve MFI operation , one needs to study the latter in practice taking into account the user perspective . However , when looking for what microfinance means ( and might mean ) to customers studies , first of all , identified educational effects of microfinance programmes , and urged for incentives to clients to keep their children at school ( Medhi , 2007 ) . In 2003 , Gonzalez - Vega et al . highlighted the impact of education programmes provided by microfinance firms on business performance and overall education levels of clients . Sebstad and Cohen ( 2003 ) argue that financial education can help poor clients to choose wisely among a growing number of financial options and use microfinance services to their best advantage ( Spielman , 2005 ) . In contrast , some studies reveal that even pressures on clients are persistent and often strong . Olomola ( 2002 ) and Plogmann et al . ( 2010 ) unveiled the role of social capital in microfinance and advocated its further development during technological innovation . According to this view , the establishment of microfinance can to be seen as a learning process , in which neither financial sustainability need to be combined in challenging Microfinance in the South 85 environments , in which both the MFI and the clients need to be supported in their learning - by - doing . While socio - cultural factors may play an enormous and important role for the performance of microfinance activities , many MFIs only deal with performance in very general , monetary terms . Researchers state that “the difficulty and cost inherent in assessing social impacts are such that most MFIs do not try to assess social impacts ; nonetheless , donors and policymakers have a legitimate interest in assessing the social returns to their social investments” ( Brau and Woller , 2004 ) . While much research has been undertaken to underpin microfinance’s economic benefits ( Marino , 2005 ) and factors such as social mobilisation , empowerment , stabilisation , peace building , solidarity and social capital enhancement have also been studied , these issues remain widely unattended within literature on microfinance technology . Problems and opportunities for learning , for example , have not yet been studied in practices of technology appropriation and innovation in the field of microfinance technology . 3 The research gap : the innovation challenge of microfinance technology The market environment of microfinance is very fragile and versatile . MFIs always need to reconsider their products , services , markets , processes etc . , this is : innovation in all its ( possible ) effects . And indeed , MFIs and micro enterprises need to be creative organisations in the sense of Kimpeler and Georgieff ( 2009 ) : with institutional structures which display “national ( respectively , regional / local ) characteristics” and “a specific knowledge and technology base as well as organizational structures unique to themselves , enabling them and firms cooperating with them from other branches to carry out innovations” . However , if MFIs want to be that creative , they have to maintain learning about themselves and their environments , as Argyris et al . ( 1985 ) showed in their concept of double - loop learning . In this sense , double - loop learning is about identifying innovation opportunities . As the literature review has shown , there is a broad range of literature on influences and impacts of microfinance , but little literature on how these can be related to technological innovation . When differentiating ‘innovation in microfinance’ from ‘microfinance for innovation’ , the latter appears to have attracted little analysis ( Nugroho and Milies , 2009 ) . Obviously innovation strategies dedicated to MFI may easily become biased on innovation within MFIs instead of innovation through MFIs . Even more , innovation within MFIs is often related to the automation paradigm , which conceptualises microfinance technology only as a production technology developed by an MFI to produce a marketable product ( micro - credits ) for clients . If innovation is reduced in such a manner , other forms of innovation are not considered , for example , applied media that enable to discuss about what a marketable product should look like . Microfinance is then reduced to the formal models which are to be elaborated and implemented by the top management . Starting with the assumption that microfinance is already fully understood by these models , innovations are then nothing but a lowering of costs ceteris paribus . Buchenau ( 1999 ) goes further by categorising two types of innovations in financial services : 86 M . Adeel et al . 1 improvements or refinements in the procedures used to deliver the services , or to design contracts and to achieve their enforcement 2 completely new products which match the characteristics of intended users . As early as in 1999 , Agosin had already distinguished three types of financial innovations : 1 process innovation , the creation of new technologies for providing financial services 2 product innovation , the supply of new financial products 3 system innovation where new institutions tailored to deal with unmet needs are created or allowed to emerge . This shows that the very understanding of microfinance – and accordingly of what is seen as microfinance technology – may differ such as the understanding of the role of microfinance for and in innovation . Schumpeter ( 1950 ) deduced five possible forms of innovation from his innovation theory . Lariviere and Martin ( 1998 ) used empirical evidence to characterise innovations in microfinance by changes in the banking technology , the type of financial services offered , the strategic behaviour of the institution , the institutional arrangement or the structure of incentives that result in improved viability and / or outreach . Beyond these direct levels , all innovation have at least a potential , indirect relation to learning , as innovations can be related to a continuous process of developing new knowledge or contextualising knowledge in new local areas ( Hall et al . , 2003 ; Sebstad and Cohen , 2003 ) . Innovation processes may emerge among actors whose interactions , behaviour and patterns of learning are conditioned by institutions ( Freeman , 1987 ; Lundvall , 1992 ) . Innovation systems scholars ( Freeman , 1987 ; Lundvall , 1992 ) argued that it is necessary to understand how the differences in institutional settings impact on innovation . For instance , roles and habits affect learning and networking and play a central role in generating innovation and technological change ( Freeman , 1987 ; Lundvall , 1992 ) . It becomes apparent that looking upon technological innovation for microfinance only from a seemingly ‘natural’ perspective of a MFI’s top management may easily lead to a reduction of what has to be considered as microfinance technology . Yes , there are many well - defined standard processes in microfinance and these may play a positive role . However , innovating within MFIs by designing microfinance technologies cannot be constricted to well - defined organisational routines , as they become feasible in practice only by applying articulation work ( Rouncefield et al . , 1994 ) . Instead , integration is urgently needed of an empirically - based reconstruction of user perspectives including the analysis of articulation work ( Strauss , 1985 ) and work practices below the level of espoused local theories on organisational responsibilities . This paper , therefore , uses two case studies to compare two MFIs in order to differentiate communalities and differences within their innovation - in - action : how do they deal with change ? How does this impact their knowledge diffusion and technology innovation ? To answer these questions , the paper applies a comparative framework which will be elaborated in the following chapter . Microfinance in the South 87 4 The research method The empirical data presented in this paper are part of two ethnographic studies . Some of this data has been used in earlier papers ( Adeel et al . , 2010 ; Plogmann et al . , 2010 ) on the GB , Bangladesh , and the KB , Pakistan . In both studies various qualitative research methods have been combined in order to study situational innovation opportunities . These were to be mirrored back to the organisations after analysis , and expected to become a source of a potential joint innovation project between the banks and the research team . Further information was drawn from literature analysis ( microfinance literature , bank brochures etc . ) . The local situation was documented on field notes and on a few hundred photos , as well . Data about the local situation was mainly collected by means of interviews with staff and clients , participant observation , participation at operations , and artifact analyses . Talking to the borrowers themselves and getting an impression of the structure and hierarchy that expands between fieldwork and administrative work in the head quarter was a most important research experience . Further data was collected through the observation of focus groups of clients . Clients were observed and interviewed during meetings and field officer’s visits . Moreover , exchange of emails with staff members has provided additional empirical data . Audio conferences helped clarify and validate the data and to draw results . The focus of the studies was the formal organisation of the organisation , articulation work of the staff and practices of staff and clients , technology - appropriation practices being in the focus . The related insights were to identify technology use in the MFI and opportunities for technological innovation . To collect empirical data , semi - formal and informal interviews , discussions , hours of observations and participation at work were conducted with personnel of different hierarchal levels and geographical locations , among them the head offices and remote rural territories . Data regarding Grameen was collected via an internship by one of author of one of the above - mentioned earlier paper . In the study of the KB one of the authors of the actual paper , native to the target culture and language , spent six weeks in Pakistan to study microfinance practices . After having collected data about the organisations , Strauss and Corbin’s ( 1998 ) grounded theory was used to analyse the situation and related collected data . Coding was done under an articulation - work perspective : the formal working of the organisations and the factual work practices were differentiated . Due to the large geographical distances involved , feeding back results was not conducted personally on a common workshop , but by sending ( parts of ) the resulting papers to the MFI staff , who had functioned as a gate - opener for the research . 5 The comparative framework The studies helped to compare the way MFIs operate . This is not only interesting at the head quarter level , where the infrastructure is characterised by the situation in the capitals of the developing countries , in which the MFIs operate . It is of particular interest on the field level , where many poor clients are living . Here exist a lot of infrastructural problems such as lacking internet access , problematic ( or no ) supply with electricity , dangerous 88 M . Adeel et al . roads , etc . How do MFIs overcome such problems and which kind of technology is used ( in this sense , a stone indicating the road is a technology ) ? Another point of interest is what the MFI understand as microfinance : do they only offer micro - loans , or do they also offer micro - savings , insurance and other services , for example , education in terms of ( finance ) literacy ? How do they finance it ? Of course , it is important to see how such differences are related to the self - image , but also the organisational structure of the MFIs and the social strata reached . The above - mentioned points are related to how the MFI is positioning itself in its environment : in Argyris et al . ’s ( 1985 ) point of view the major challenge for organisational learning , which forms another basis for comparisons . How do the organisations learn about their impacts on the field level ? How is innovation organised , and what are the chances of innovation - in - action ? These are the foci for the following comparison of the cases . In a first step , some commonalities of the cases will be presented . Then specifics of the GB and the KB case , which have been identified , are displayed . In the following comparison , the differences are analysed under the focus this comparative framework in order to allow for some concluding remarks on what the findings mean for the design of microfinance technology . 6 The cases 6 . 1 Communalities The two cases considered here are the GB , Bangladesh , and the KB , Pakistan . Both have a headquarter in the capital and a network of branches ( called units in KB ) in rural areas , which are further differentiated into zonal offices ( called regional offices in KB ) and area offices ( called territory offices in KB ) . The latter is the lowest administration unit digitally connected to the headquarters . While in KB , the lacking digital integration into the rest organisation is due to missing network access ( computers etc . are existing ) , in GB there are no computers on the field level . KB and GB have centres on the local level , where field officers and ( potential ) customers may meet , but only in GB , the centres are systematically used for this purpose . Both GB and KB offer only a limited range of products . The core products are still the loans : There is , among other things , the basic loan . It can be disbursed to a borrower for her business . Moreover , there are different housing - , education - and micro - enterprise loans available , but loan products are based more or less on similar conditions . The loan products are issued to small groups to enable them to purchase equipment and other inputs and engage in micro enterprises of their choice . Both MFIs provide their products only to poor people . To secure this , KB is using the tax line : everybody below may apply . GB uses self - declarations within a complicated initiation process . Before disbursing a loan to an applicant , the field officer must in both cases verify that there is no hidden wealth in the hand of applicants . Both organisations have started additional activities , as well . The GB has , among others , outsourced information services and software development to Grameen Communication . The KB has started conventional banking in 10 branches by the end of 2009 . Microfinance in the South 89 6 . 2 Specifics of the GB In 1983 , Grameen was established in Bangladesh as a specialised bank with its own charter as a demonstrator showing that a special sort of banking works among the poor . In 1976 , Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus had conceptualised the GB as a ‘bank of the poor’ in Bangladesh . At the time of legalisation , the government controlled 60 % of the shares , while the borrowers held the other 40 % . But now the picture is opposite , the borrowers hold 94 % and their part is still increasing , as it is compulsory for new members to buy a share of the bank , which thus is some sort of cooperative . Since 2002 , GB ( not its subsidies ) is exempted from tax and other duties . This way GB is self - sufficient regarding funds . In GB the lending process always begins in a centre run by a branch . GB is based on the formation of small groups of five people to provide mutual , morally binding group - guarantees . There is no monetary collateral as required by conventional banks . Clients are initiated into the GB by explaining them how the organisation works and on which ethical principles it is built . In the application , the applicant identifies a micro - enterprise she / he wants to be financed , and the estimated amount of capital required . Set rules are available to judge a client by field officer . The proposal is discussed within the group at weekly centre meetings , which the field officer attends . The group , centre and field officers offer suggestions and encouragement and give advice on the appropriate amount of the loan . Field officers assist the member in filling the preliminary loan - application form . The application is forwarded to the branch manager in the end . Before gaining acceptance into the bank , each member even has to separately undergo an oral exam ( 85 % of rural women are illiterate ) , if any member fails then the group acceptance into the bank is stalled until exams are retaken . This does not only ensure that the most desperate qualify for loans , since the moderately well - offs will avoid such difficulties , but also encourages group participation and empowerment of women . Moreover this approach commits them to the GB before they could borrow , and it inter - relates the investments of the group members . Loans are first extended to only two group members , if they pay regularly for the next six weeks , then loans are granted to a further two members , the group leader receives her / his loan last . The diligent selection of borrowers and their micro enterprises by field staff , the powerful peer pressure exerted on borrowers by group members and the repayment scheme based upon a frequent - repayment method contribute to the operational viability to the rural banking system designed for the poorest of the poor . Women were initially given privileged access to the schemes , and proved to be not only reliable borrowers , but also successful entrepreneurs as well . Today 95 % of the borrowers are women . Therefore , usually a chair woman of the group collects the installments before the start of weekly meeting , and hands them over to the field officer . Then the field officer does the paper work . Paper - based technology is utilised to document both expected payments and unexpected non - payments . Account statements already documenting the expected payment may be handed out to the payer . In the rare cases of non - payments , the statement sheets are corrected by hand , not handed over to the client , but forwarded to the area manager , who then changes the digital data accordingly . Grameen supplies , in addition to loans , what it calls discipline ( Khandker et al . , 1995 ) . This is not only financial discipline to make repayments and deposits each week , but also physical self control : members must sit in straight rows , salute , chant , and 90 M . Adeel et al . sometimes do calisthenics ( Hashemi , 1997 ) . Resolutions praise small families , prohibit dowry and child marriage , promote gardens , extol education , and exhort members to drink clean water and to use latrines . Perhaps the most important non - financial service of Grameen is social intermediation ( Edgcomb and Barton , 1998 ) creating social capital as a by - product of meetings : women learn about the situation of other local women . Grameen meetings provide a socially accepted excuse to gather and to talk . The impacts are both psychological and economic ; not only do women feel less isolated , but they also strengthen their support networks ( Larance , 2001 ) . When the general credit programme takes momentum and the borrowers become familiar with credit discipline , other loan programmes are introduced to tackle local level social and economic development needs of borrowers . Apart from housing projects which are well established , such programmes may include installation of tube well , extol education , and exhort members to drink clean water and loan for building toilets . In early stages GB tried to digitalise all his branches but soon after they realised that ICT investment did not pay off for most of their field level branches . GB , nevertheless , could manage the loan process by using the meetings in the village centres and the individualised information sheets displaying the loan situation including the anticipated installment . Exchanged the sheets against the installment itself and only dealing with exceptional non - payments works well with the initiation and group process securing a repayment rate close to 100 % . GB has thus utilised its Social Capital and a paper - plus an ICT - based technology infrastructure . The interactive paper - based solution is not only inexpensive , but very transparent , at the same time . It uses the active collection of payments in the village centres , which is combined with coaching and community - building , at the same time . Normally this starts with the application form , which is read and explained to the applicants . Field staff furthermore transfers knowledge about their business , crops or expertise etc . Before opening a new branch , the bank sends a small team of two persons , made up of an experienced and trainee branch manager to live among the people and to undertake detailed consultations with the people . Only after about two months of grassroots contact , members are enrolled and trained . After a year the trainee manager is usually deployed elsewhere . The establishment of a branch office involves minimal costs since local government premises or school buildings are used , where ever they exist , otherwise unused land is cleared and a simple wood and tin structure is set up , together with the assistance of borrowers . Training programmes are also used for new staff members , which allows for some gradual decentralisation . Policy proposals are discussed at the grass root level , too . When implemented , changes of current model are tested in certain limited areas . This way innovating in a negotiated , evolutionary manner , GB was able to innovate : for instance , it developed product lines , non - financial products , etc . Key to success was to know one’s clients well . 6 . 3 Specifics of the KB The establishment of the Agricultural Development Bank of Pakistan ( now ZTBL ) in the early 1970s represented an early effort to extend credit to poor people . The KB , a retail microfinance bank established in August 2000 , was the first licensed microfinance bank Microfinance in the South 91 established under the Microfinance Sector Development Programme ( MSDP ) . Today , KB is the second - largest microfinance provider in Pakistan . KB has been established as a public - private joint venture with initial capital of Rs 1 . 7 billion subscribed by commercial banks from private sector , foreign banks and state - owned commercial banks . The Government of Pakistan signed an agreement with the Asian Development Bank ( ADB ) for a loan of US $ 150 million to support the operations of KB under ADB ' s MSDP designed to strengthen such activities in Pakistan . In 2009 , KB received licenses of full - service banking from the State Bank of Pakistan . However , due to the poor infrastructure , there is no attraction for non - poor customers . In contrast with the GB , the KB does not require any share purchase from applicants . Anybody who is fulfilling the basic criteria can use products of the KB . Financial costs have been differentiated from other costs in order to improve cost transparency . Some activities of social mobilisation are funded separately through interest revenues of an endowment fund created by the Government of Pakistan . KB implemented specially designed educational , skill - development projects in different rural parts of the country conducted through different donations and extra funds from different donor like USAID , the ADB etc . Mostly women underwent such capacity – building of vocational skills , education in business management , community development and leadership . The KB established mutual cooperation with local NGOs and capacity building organisations . Such groups were the focal points for the delivery of both social and financial services . Mobile units travelling on a regular schedule to villages and local communities serviced customers at their doorstep . Previously , all members mobilised by the KB through NGOs received training on social awareness , selection of economic activities , women empowerment , basic literacy and financial services and products , but currently KB limited these activities . According to the charter of KB , a 40 : 60 female / male ratio was to be observed both in regard of customers and staff . This decision was taken to develop the situation of women in the Pakistani society . In the mean time , the bank practically has given up gender preferences , as it only reaches a women quota of some 19 % . Similarly , the bank offers loans to both urban and rural areas without any preference . Currently some field officers provide informal education to their clients , often the only access of the poor to expert knowledge , market information etc . The organisation does not know or promote their initiatives . For instance , field officers provided information about market price of vegetables to his vegetable - growing clients . Similarly field officers were also found engaged in informal financial management education of clients . The field officers provided such education as a part of the bank’s operation before , while they did it now only as a private initiative . Branches are equipped with a basic ICT infrastructure including computer , fax , telephone , Internet etc . The KB has invested on in - house - developed IS , but unfortunately branches do not have any direct link with the central MIS . After getting the license for conventional banking , the KB has started in - house development of a new MIS both for microfinance and conventional banking operations . Moreover , the KB is dealing with third parties to hire network to establish real time data synchronisation . To serve rural areas , branches use vehicles for field visits . In urban areas , the bank lends motorbikes to field officers . KB is a highly hierarchically centralised organisation . All polices are implemented following instruction from ‘above’ . Field officers who pleaded for exceptions in special 92 M . Adeel et al . situations ( e . g . , a debtor , who became disabled and was no more able to repay his credit ) became frustrated , as their superiors did not answer to their proposals . KB is thus actually trying to foster the innovation processes mainly as formal process of loan - management and installment - collection . 7 Comparing the specifics of the two MFIs When one compares the operation of the GB and the KB , it becomes obvious that both deliver a small number of standardised products to their clients . Both have tried to concentrate upon their core business and outsource the rest . However , both organisations have outsourced very different activities : the GB outsourced , among others , the production of modern software into sustainable market - based subsidiaries and , as an MFI , concentrated upon poverty reduction . In contrast , the KB has outsourced nearly all service functions which had made it different from conventional banking before . Even when education turned out to be necessary for the very function of credit - giving to poor people , its provision was organised only privately by field officers without any acknowledgement of the bank as voluntary , additional work . We do not want to describe GB as ‘good’ and contrast it with a ‘bad’ KB . KB started as a bank and had less space of maneuver when compared to GB . Therefore , KB was subdued to more pressure for profitability , and it could not draw , for instance , upon the cultural capital of a Nobel price . When international donors started to push MFIs to more profitability , GB had already become nearly economically independent and enforced the self - organisational elements in its operation . Table 1 General differences between two institutions GB KB Impact Social capital Economic capital Operational form Education , empowerment Credit distribution Mix media integration Total data integration Innovation form Operative integration Towards digitalisation Innovation Bottom - UP approach Top - down methodology Banking Poverty alleviation Conventional style In contrast , KB defined its core business model according to conventional banking . This could only be done by reducing its products to merely monetary items by means of decontextualising them . When management theories describe integration as a major challenge for organisations , microfinance may be seen under different integration foci : on the one hand , one may integrate the top - management into the finance - market demands of the donors , on the other hand , one may look from a worm’s - eye perspective and see the integration of the inter - action between field officers and clients into the management of the MFI as the central point . In practice , the differences are neither that consistent nor that excluding as described above . However , from this point of view the outsourcing policy of KB shows another dimension : a top - instead of a bottom - bias . Those who know best about local specifics of sustainable microfinance are the field officers . GB carefully uses their fractal spare time to increase social capital , empower clients and test innovation opportunities on limited Microfinance in the South 93 scale . In contrast , KB is more following an automation paradigm , which is threatening the very existence of the field officer . As it draws upon steering effectiveness for the top - management even on the disadvantage of the field officers ( division of manual and intellectual work ) , on specialised mass - markets and on automation , KB can said to be actually oriented on a neo - Taylorist , centralist work organisation , while GB is oriented more on discourse - based , de - centralised self - organisation . One could argue that it does not make any difference for a client if he / she gets a credit from an MFI and some additional service from some other organisation , or receives both from the same organisation . However , this seems to be not true . We tend to see rich people as driven by scarce time resources , but it is especially the poor who have to allocate their scarce time resources cautiously . Therefore , it is much more likely that poor people may be reached by an integrated offer of resources , social - capital formation and empowerment than specialised offers . It is not by accident that GB has succeeded in getting female very poor clients . Even more , in contrast to large companies , poor clients do not have the possibility to draw on mass - markets when investing : they have to find niches which allow them some value creation . Of course , the related overall risk is lower in terms of value at stake , as it is micro credit . Nevertheless , in terms of probability of return on investment , these micro - businesses may be pretty risky . Separating large - scale financial activities from the individual loan - investments of the clients allows the MFI to secure its operation by means of mass market strategies , whereas the risk of applied innovation is externalised to the private credit - taker . Having compared GB and KB , it becomes obvious that the operation of KB is much more limited than that of GB , which also engages in educational and community - building efforts . The latter are needed , if microfinance really is to reduce poverty . As an example , MFI clients often have few experiences with bureaucratic institutions and finance and , therefore , the interaction with the MFI may itself be designed to support the learning of , for instance , ( financially ) illiterate clients : MFIs should include educational elements in their services . While MFIs sometimes hesitate to act as a consultancy for the clients , help for clients must not necessarily be consultancy : MFI should help to reduce hurdles which limit the success chances of the clients . This means that microfinance technology must be about more than automation , but include the design of cheap applications which mobilise innovation and cooperation at the field level . At the same time , these should help clients to get , manage and make productive use of their credits . Applications offered by an MFI should include learning opportunities and help - functionalities for the users . Their development may draw upon learning conceptions of CSCL ( see e . g . , Porcaro 2011 ) , but on empirical evidences about the concrete case at stake , as well . In particular , existing forms of disempowerment of the clients or hurdles for their businesses should be identified when necessary technological innovation is decided about . Design should make use of existing infrastructures and tools , and of technology - development and maintenance opportunities , as well . Design should be connected to community - building efforts at the field level , for which again supportive technology should be considered . Today’s educational theories point out that education should be practice - related , even practice - based . Learners should not be regarded as mere consumers , but tentatively integrated into common practice activities ( De Paula et al . , 1999 ) , because there is nothing comparable to learning by practice about practice ( see e . g . , Spiro et al . , 1992 ) . In 94 M . Adeel et al . this context , separating learning from practice is not the optimum for microfinance clients . There is still another dimension of learning which becomes problematic : it is the learning of the MFI about its operation within its environment . By de - contextualising microfinance as seemingly well - established routines ( credit - giving , installment - collecting ) , the local demands of sustainable microfinance become in transparent and the related risks left to the individual clients . 8 Conclusions Collaborative work in the finance industry has not yet been thoroughly investigated within the CSCW community . The few studies mainly looked at traditional banking practices in the developed North , e . g . see Harper et al ( 2000 ) . Obviously , microfinance practices are rather distinct , specifically in the South . The comparison between the GB and the KB has shown that there are different understandings of what microfinance means . If one understands microfinance , first of all , as a means to empower poor people and to reduce poverty , then learning support and community - building is per se part of the relevant activities . In contrast , an understanding of microfinance which is solely focused on monetary transactions would reduce technology support to systems which merely process customer data efficiently . However , ‘private’ activities of KB’s field officers in providing information for their clients even after the official stop of these services show that the very functioning of microfinance de facto requires integrated ( educational , networking and empowering ) activities , even when microfinance is officially considered to be unrelated to these issues . This implies that qualification , knowledge management and social - capital strategies needed to be seen as important elements of practice , irrespective of the official understanding of microfinance . Anyway , the chance to support comprehensive innovation seems to be much higher if the perspective of MFI’s management is not restricted to deliver purely monetary services . We see MFIs in the South as interesting application domain for the ICT research and design and CSCW community . ICT community could benefit from studying this challenging domain and microfinance could benefit from ICT and CSCW research , too . An example for ICT community to learn from Microfinance is the obvious emergence of new fields of cooperative activities , which run the risk of being victimised by under - complex innovation strategies and lack of empirical research , as elder forms of articulation did before . MFI institutions could learn from the technology community to analyse the practices of field officers more profoundly and get interested in the mundane and invisible aspects of their work . Ethnographic research may also document the client perspective in such cases and unveil the core role of the field level in microfinance . With regard to IT development for microfinance , methods of participatory design ( Kensing and Blomberg , 1998 ) could play a more prominent role . Collaborative Learning is of tremendous importance for microfinance , even if MFIs are not always aware of this . To promote suchlike awareness and to support learning ( or ‘creative’ ) organisations , e . g . , by means of integrated organisation and technology development ( see Wulf and Rohde , 1995 ) , has been a CSCW issue since long ( Hatakama Microfinance in the South 95 and Terano , 1996 ) . Collaborative tailoring ( Pipek and Kahler , 2006 ) and the use of local knowledge for design ( Rouncefield et al . , 1994 ) are also old CSCW research questions , which are now of importance when searching for microfinance technologies . Stahl in 1985 noticed that technologies need to be designed to mediate and encourage social interaction as a basis of practical learning . Information - provision to creditors about successful predecessors in other geographical areas ( mobile phone numbers , background data displayed in a manner that is understandable for the client , etc . ) could help clients not to have to reinvent the wheel . For community - based learning , small groups are seen as most ( Stahl et al . , 2006 ) . Kumar et al ( 2010 ) argued that stretching down ( mobile ) technology to the clients could help literate them . Other researcher ( e . g . , Moed et al . , 2009 ; Pawar et al . , 2007 ) noticed that in the field , multiple input devices could be used in groups as low cost solutions . Scott et al . ( 2003 ) described this as a challenge to develop suitable interaction styles that enable all individuals to read , access , manipulate and pass each other the necessary information . While these design cases take the context of developing countries well into account , these design approaches need to be rethought for the specifics of the interaction between MFI and its clients . Razavi and Iverson ( 2006 ) commented that when implementing such technologies , awareness must be raised to convince people that sharing their expertise and information is advantageous , which demands for mobilisation activities . In this context , illiteracy plays an enormous , but not a dichotomic role : even illiterates have different strategies to make sense of written information ( Medhi , 2007 ) and different levels of related competences . These strategies and competences need to be identified and supported by microfinance technologies . In this context , the comparison of the GB and the KB helped to identify another important point : field officers may play a catalytic role for collaboration among the clients , which could become motivated to exchange experiences with clients with similar businesses across physical proximity . The field officers could thus take over functions of ‘IT - gardeners’ ( Gantt and Nardi , 1992 ) , help tailor technology and provide metadata for finding local experts . The comparison of our cases furthermore shows that different business models lead to different technological requirements even in the same industry , and to different understanding of what ‘microfinance technology’ is . Technology community especially ICT / CSCW may be of specific benefit when much interactivity with the client is looked for , either because the client needs need to be understood and integrated , or because the organisation is looking for a more flexible , decentralised organisational form . CSCW research may also help to analyse tricky inter - dependencies empirically and thus avoid premature closures of the design space , as appears to be prevalent in too restricted innovation conceptions of microfinance . MFIs need to operate in a synergic manner on many issues , at the same time : they have to define products by understanding clients’ needs and habits , to manage operation and promote clients’ competences , and to provide an infrastructure to meet the challenges of market promotion . All these challenges are related to technology issues , and to the customers , as well . Therefore , an ongoing comprehensive and supportive role of designers of Microfinance Technologies is needed . In our point of view , this represents a promising challenge for technology research . 96 M . Adeel et al . References Adeel , M . , Nett , B . and Wulf , V . ( 2010 ) ‘Innovating the field level of microfinance , a Pakistan case study’ , Proceeding of the Forthcoming Conference on Information and Communication Technology for Development . Agosin , M . ( 1999 ) Private Finance for Development : Analytical Underpinnings and Policy Issues , Office of Development Studies , Bureau for Development Policy , UNDP ( 4 . 3 . 10 ) [ online ] http : / / www . sdc - employment - income . ch / resources / sharewebResource _ en _ 5156 . pdf ( accessed May 2012 ) . Argyris , Ch . , Putnam , R . , and Smith , D . M . ( 1985 ) Action Science , Jossey - Bass Publishers , San Francisco , London . Asian Development Bank ( 2000 ) Finance for the Poor : Microfinance Development Strategy , Manila : Asian Development Bank . Barnes , C . ( 2001 ) ‘Microfinance program clients and impact : an assessment of Zambuko trust , Zimbabwe’ , AIMS Paper , Management Systems International , Washington , DC . Brau , J . C . and Woller , G . M . ( 2004 ) ‘Microfinance : a comprehensive review of the existing literature’ , in Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance and Business Ventures , Vol . 9 , No . 1 , pp . 1 – 26 . Buchenau , J . ( 1999 ) ‘Innovative products and adaptations for rural finance’ , Paving the Way Forward for Rural Finance , Proceeding of an International Conference on Best Practices . Claessens , S . ( 2006 ) ‘Access to financial services : a review of the issues and public policy objectives’ , The World Bank Research Observer , Vol . 21 , No . 2 , pp . 207 – 240 . Counts , A . ( 2008 ) ‘Reimagining microfinance’ , Stanford Social Innovation Review , Stanford Graduate School of Business . Dahl , R . ( 1991 ) Democracy and Its Critics , Yale University Press , New Haven , CT . De Angela , A . , Athavankar , U . , Joshi , A . , Coventry , L . and Johnson , G . ( 2003 ) ‘Introducing ATMs in India : a contextual inquiry , inter - acting with computers’ , Special Issue Global Human - Computer Systems . De Paula , R . , Fischer , G . and Ostwald , J . ( 1999 ) ‘Courses as seeds : expectations and realities’ , Proceedings of CSCL 99 . Diniz , E . H . , Pozzebon , M . and Jayo , M . ( 2008 ) ‘The role of ICT in improving microcredit : the case of correspondent banking in Brazil’ , Proceedings of PICMET ' 08 – Portland International Conference on Management of Engineering & Technology , Theme : ‘Technology Management for a Sustainable Economy’ . Donner , J . ( 2008 ) ‘Research approaches to mobile use in the developing world : a review of the literature’ , The Information Society , Vol . 24 , No . 3 . Edgcomb , E . and Barton , L . ( 1998 ) ‘Social intermediation and microfinance programs : a literature review’ , Development Alternatives ( 5 . 3 . 10 ) [ online ] http : / / www . mip . org / pdfs / mbp / social . pdf ( accessed November 2011 ) . Freeman , C . ( 1987 ) Technology Policy and Economic Performance : Lessons from Japan , Pinter , London . Gantt , M . and Nardi , B . ( 1992 ) ‘Gardeners and gurus : patterns of collaboration among CAD users’ , Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computer Systems , pp . 107 – 117 . Gonzalez - Vega , C . , Maldanado , J . and Romero , V . ( 2003 ) ‘The influence of microfinance on human capital accumulation : evidence from Bolivia’ , Working paper , Ohio State University ( 2 . 3 . 10 ) [ online ] http : / / www . microfinanceopportunities . org / docs / Financial _ Education _ for _ the _ Poor % 20April % 202003 . pdf ( accessed March 2010 ) . Hall , A . , Clark , N . , Sulaiman , R . , Sivamohan , M . V . K . and Yoganand , B . ( 2003 ) ‘Measuring impact to learning institutional lessons : an innovation systems perspective on improving the management of international agricultural research’ , Agricultural Systems , Vol . 78 , pp . 213 – 241 . Microfinance in the South 97 Harper , R . , Randall , D . and Rouncefield , M . ( 2000 ) ‘Organizational change and retail finance’ , Routledge International Studies in Money and Banking , London , UK . Hashemi , S . M . ( 1997 ) ‘Building up capacity for banking with the poor : the Grameen Bank of Bangladesh’ , in H . Schneider ( Ed . ) : Microfinance for the Poor ? , pp . 109 – 28 , OECD , Paris . Hatakama , H . , and Terano , T . ( 1996 ) ‘Bridging CSCW and organizational learning’ , ACM SIGOIS Bulletin , Vol . 17 , No . 3 . Ivatury , G . ( 2006 ) ‘Using technology to build inclusive financial systems’ , CGAP Focus Notes n . 32 ( 4 . 3 . 10 ) [ online ] http : / / technology . cgap . org / 2006 / 04 / 15 / using - technology - to - build - inclusive - financial - systems / ( accessed March 2010 ) . Kensing , F . and Blomberg , J . ( 1998 ) ‘Participatory design . Issues and concerns’ , in Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , Springer , Vol . 7 , Nos . 3 – 4 , 1998 , pp . 167 – 185 . Khandker , S . R . , Khalily , B . and Khan , Z . ( 1995 ) Grameen Bank : Performance and Sustainability , Discussion Paper No . 306 . Washington D . C . World Bank . Kimpeler , S . and Georgieff , P . ( 2009 ) ‘The role of creative industries in regional innovation and knowledge transfer – the case of Austria’ , Joint study by Fraunhofer ISI and ZEW on behalf of Arge Creative Wirtschaft Austria in the Austrian Federal Economic Chamber [ online ] http : / / ftp . zew . de / pub / zew - docs / dp / dp08109 . pdf ( accessed October 2011 ) . Kumar , A . , Tewari , A . , Shroff , G . , Chittamuru , D . , Kam , M . and Canny , J . ( 2010 ) ‘An exploratory study of unsupervised mobile learning in rural India’ , Proceedings of ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) . Larance , L . Y . ( 2001 ) ‘Fostering social capital through NGO design : Grameen Bank membership in Bangladesh’ , International Social Work , Vol . 44 , No . 1 , pp . 7 – 18 . Lariviere , S . and Martin , F . ( 1998 ) ‘Innovations in rural microfinance : the challenge of sustainability and outreach’ , International Workshop on Innovations in Microfinance for the Rural Poor , pp . 9 – 13 . Ledgerwood , J . ( 2000 ) Microfinance Handbook : An Institutional and Financial Perspective , The World Bank , Washington DC . Lundvall , B . ( 1992 ) National Systems of Innovation : Towards a Theory of Innovation and Interactive Learning . Pinter Publ . Lyman , T . R . , Pickens , M . and Porteous , D . ( 2008 ) ‘Regulating transformational branchless banking : mobile phones and other technology to increase access to finance’ , CGAP Focus Notes n . 43 ( 4 . 3 . 10 ) [ online ] http : / / technology . cgap . org / 2008 / 01 / 31 / cgap - releases - focus - note - 43 - branchless - banking - innovations - create - opportunity - to - serve - the - poor / ( accessed March 2010 ) . Maldanado , J . H . ( 2005 ) The Influence of Microfinance on the Education Decisions of Rural Households : Evidence from Bolivia , Working paper , Ohio State University ( 3 . 5 . 10 ) [ online ] http : / / economia . uniandes . edu . co / publicaciones / d2005 - 46 . pdf ( accessed May 2010 ) . Marino , P . ( 2005 ) Beyond Economic Benefits : The Contribution of Microfinance to Post - conflict Recovery in Asia and the Pacific ( 4 . 5 . 10 ) [ online ] www . gdrc . org / icm / country / fdc - afgan . pdf . Medhi , I . ( 2007 ) ‘User - centered design for development’ , ACM interactions , July + August , Vol . 14 , No . 4 . Medhi , I . , Gautama , S . N . N . and Toyama , K . ( 2009 ) ‘A comparison of mobile money - transfer UIS for non - literate and semi literate user’ , Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems – CHI ' 09 , p . 1741 . Moed , A . , Otto , O . , Pal , J . , Pawar Singh , U . , Kam , M . and Toyama , K . ( 2009 ) ‘Reducing dominance in multiple - mouse learning activities’ , Proceedings of Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning ( CSCL ’09 ) . Nugroho , Y . and Milies , I . ( 2009 ) Microfinance & Innovation . Mini study : Global Review of Innovation Intelligence and Policy Studies ( 4 . 3 . 10 ) [ online ] http : / / grips - public . mediactive . fr / knowledge _ base / dl / 786 / orig _ doc _ file / ( accessed March 2010 ) . 98 M . Adeel et al . Olomola , A . S . ( 2002 ) Social Capital , Microfinance Group Performance and Poverty Implication in Nigeria , CSAE [ online ] http : / / www . csae . ox . ac . uk / conferences / 2002 . . . / Olomola - csae2002 . pdf ( accessed September 2011 ) . Parikh , T . , Javid , P . , Sasikumar K . and Ghosh , K . ( 2006 ) ‘Mobile phones and paper documents : evaluating a new approach for capturing microfinance data in rural India’ , Proceedings of the SIGCHI 2006 Conference on Human Factors in computing systems , ACM , New York , NY , pp . 551 – 560 . Parikh , T . S . ( 2006 ) ‘Rural microfinance service delivery : gaps , inefficiencies and emerging solutions’ , Proceeding of the Conference on Information and Communication Technology for Development ICTD 2006 ( 7 . 4 . 10 ) [ online ] http : / / www . ischool . berkeley . edu / ictd2006 / abstracts . html # CameraReady _ 152 ( accessed April 2010 ) . Pawar , U . , Pal , J . , Gupta , R . and Toyama , K . ( 2007 ) ‘Multiple mice for retention tasks in disadvantaged schools’ , Proceeding of ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Pipek , V . and Kahler , H . ( 2006 ) ‘Supporting collaborative tailoring’ , in H . Lieberman , F . Paterno and V . Wulf ( Eds . ) : End - User Development , Springer , Berlin , D , pp . 315 – 345 . Plogmann , S . , Adeel , M . , Nett , B . and Wulf , V . ( 2010 ) ‘The role of social capital and cooperation infrastructure with in microfinance’ , Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on the Design of Cooperative System ( COOP 2010 ) . Porcaro , D . ( 2011 ) ‘Reviewing the literature of computer - supported cooperative learning ( CSCL ) to determine its usefulness in Omani education development’ , in International Journal of Education and Development using Information and Communication Technology ( IJEDICT ) , Vol . 7 , No . 3 , pp . 102 – 120 . Razavi , M . N . and Iverson , L . ( 2006 ) ‘A grounded theory of information sharing behavior in a personal learning space’ , CSCW ‘06 : Proceedings of the 2006 20th Anniversary Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Rouncefield , M . , Hughes , J . , Rodden , T . and Viller , S . ( 1994 ) ‘Working with ‘constant interruption’ , Proceedings of CSCW’94 . Rutherford , S . ( 2000 ) The Poor and their Money , Oxford University Press , New Delhi . Schumpeter , J . A . ( 1950 ) Capitalism , Socialism and Democracy , 3rd ed . , Allen and Unwin , London . Scott , S . D . , Grant , K . D . and Mandryk , R . L . ( 2003 ) ‘System guidelines for co - located , collaborative work on a tabletop display’ , Proc . E - CSCW’03 , Kluwer , pp . 159 – 178 . Sebstad , J . and Cohen , M . ( 2003 ) Financial Education for the Poor , Working Paper , Microfinance Opportunities , Washington DC 20007 . Spielman , D . J . ( 2005 ) Innovation Systems Perspectives on Developing - Country Agriculture : A Critical Review , ISNAR Discussion Paper , International Food Policy Research Institute . Spiro , R . J . , Feltovich , P . , Jacobson , M . and Coulson , R . ( 1992 ) ‘Cognitive flexibility , constructivism and hypertext : random access instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill - structured domains’ , in Duffy , T . M . and Jonassen , D . H . ( Eds . ) : Constructivism and the Technology of Instruction : A Conversation , Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , pp . 57 – 75 . Stahl , G . , Koschmann , T . and Suthers , D . ( 2006 ) ‘Computer - supported collaborative learning : an historical perspective’ , in Sawyer , R . K . ( Ed . ) : Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences , Cambridge , UK , pp . 409 – 426 . Strauss , A . ( 1985 ) ‘Work and the division of labor’ , The Sociological Quarterly , Vol . 26 , pp . 1 – 19 . Strauss , A . and Corbin , J . ( 1998 ) Basics of Qualitative Research : Grounded Theory Procedures and Technique , 2nd ed . , Sage , Newbury Park , London . Tamagaki , K . ( 2006 ) Effectiveness of ICTs on the Dual Objectives of Microfinance ( 7 . 4 . 10 ) [ online ] http : / / www . waseda . jp / assoc - cioacademy / pdf / tamagaki . pdf ( accessed April 2010 ) . Wulf , V . and Rohde , M . ( 1995 ) ‘Towards an integrated organization and technology development’ , in Olson , G . M . and Shuon , S . ( Eds . ) : Conference Proceedings DIS ' 95 , Symposium on Designing Interactive Systems : Processes , Practices , Methods , and Techniques . Association of Computing Machinery , ACM - Publications , New York , pp . 55 – 65 .