Jointly published by Akadémiai Kiadó , Budapest Scientometrics , Vol . 72 , No . 1 ( 2007 ) 117 – 147 and Springer , Dordrecht DOI : 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 007 - 1700 - 5 Received November 16 , 2006 Address for correspondence : A LAN L . P ORTER Technology Policy and Assessment Center , Georgia Tech , Atlanta , GA ( USA ) E - mail : alan . porter @ isye . gatech . edu 0138 – 9130 / US $ 20 . 00 Copyright © 2007 Akadémiai Kiadó , Budapest All rights reserved Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity A LAN L . P ORTER , A LEX S . C OHEN , J . D AVID R OESSNER , M ARTY P ERREAULT * National Academies Keck Futures Initiative ( NAKFI ) , Irvine , CA ( USA ) We offer two metrics that together help gauge how interdisciplinary a body of research is . Both draw upon Web of Knowledge Subject Categories ( SCs ) as key units of analysis . We have assembled two substantial Web of Knowledge samples from which to determine how closely individual SCs relate to each other . “Integration” measures the extent to which a research article cites diverse SCs . “Specialization” considers the spread of SCs in which the body of research ( e . g . , the work of a given author in a specified time period ) is published . Pilot results for a sample of researchers show a surprising degree of interdisciplinarity . Background Research spirals inward ; science cascades outward . This dual image supports a vital realization – scientific advance requires knowledge transfer among researchers who may focus tightly on extremely circumscribed research issues . The typical research * Alan Porter is an Evaluation Consultant with the National Academies Keck Futures Initiative ( NAKFI ) , and he co - directs the Technology Policy and Assessment Center , Georgia Tech , and is Director of R & D , Search Technology . Alex Cohen , Evaluation Research Associate / Programmer , and Marty Perreault , Program Director , are staff with the U . S . NAKFI . David Roessner is the NAKFI Senior Evaluation Consultant , and also co - directs the Technology Policy and Assessment Center at Georgia Tech and is with SRI International as well . Address correspondence relating to the paper to Alan Porter : alan . porter @ isye . gatech . edu . ; correspondence pertaining to the NAKFI to Marty Perreault , the Program Director : MPerreault @ nas . edu . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 118 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) investigation burrows into detail , cumulating information , probing for nuances . Once completed , the challenge shifts abruptly to communicating the research findings . Research knowledge needs to be suitably conveyed to others working on the same immediate problem – and to a wider circle of colleagues working on related problems – and beyond , to those who may gain usable knowledge for different applications from the findings . Go back for a second to the time one of us ( Porter ) was working on his dissertation in Psychology ( 1970 – 1972 ) . Most scientists ( using the term inclusively to cover social scientists , engineers , and other researchers ) published in the same half - dozen or so journals that they regularly read . Publication processes might take a couple of years . The limited quantity of information that one could digest prompted keeping close track of developments only in one’s immediate research area . One didn’t keep up with the Psychology literature ; one followed developments in the study of memory , favoring particular organisms as subjects , for certain memory forms , affected by particular stimuli & conditions , etc . The notion of a “research trail , ” narrowly tracked , made sense . At its best , this efficiently directed researcher efforts to resolving the problem at hand . At its worst , this led to inbred patterns of research leading to no lasting value . 1 The inherently opposing tendencies – focus vs . outreach – now play out in a richer context than in earlier scientific eras . Wider and faster information access is the pivotal change force . Electronic databases , the internet , and networked computers , accessed daily by essentially every scientist in the world , provide dynamic research knowledge resources . Yet , scientific norms suited to earlier eras linger . The scientific disciplines that arose in the 19 th and 20 th centuries still dominate academic life ( somewhat less so for researchers in government or industry ) . One’s professional identity , institutional home ( department ) , and external peer group ( professional societies ) are discipline - centered . However , even in the early 1970’s , the Psychology Department at UCLA did not reflect a unified field . Rather , it was home for , among others , clinical psychologists and neuroscientists who did not share the same paradigm , subject matter , or research methods . The discrepancies between disciplinary roots and research realities loom large . In the 1970’s and 1980’s interest in interdisciplinary research processes picked up momentum . The notion was to identify and overcome barriers to more effective research knowledge transfer across domains . Good insights into issues , influences , and mechanisms emerged . 2 For whatever reasons ( especially decline of research funding ) , the study of interdisciplinary research processes waned just as funding of major interdisciplinary units expanded ( e . g . , U . S . National Science Foundation Engineering Research Centers and Science & Technology Research Centers programs ) . Moving to the present , we find explosive growth in emerging research arenas , including genetics & biotechnology , information science & technology , and advanced materials and nanotechnology . Obviously these research frontiers pay little heed to 19 th A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 119 century disciplinary boundaries . How can we expedite progress in research and development ? Various parties at interest see the lowering of disciplinary barriers as vital . This has triggered renewed interest in promoting interdisciplinary research and its counterpart , interdisciplinary teaching . In particular , our own efforts derive from the National Academies Keck Futures Initiative ( NAKFI ) – a $ 40 million , 15 - year program to boost interdisciplinary research in the U . S . [ www . keckfutures . org ] . NAKFI evaluators have dual interests in measuring interdisciplinarity . At the macro scale , we seek to estimate and track the extent of interdisciplinary research ( “IDR” ) in the U . S . At the micro scale , we want to evaluate whether NAKFI conferences and seed grant programs increase the interdisciplinarity of participants’ research ( and teaching ) . But as Morillo et al . note , “we do not have appropriate indicators to measure interdisciplinarity . ” 3 This paper presents our approach to measuring how inter - disciplinary a particular body of research is – whether that of one researcher , a group of researchers , or a research domain . Premises in measuring interdisciplinarity What is interdisciplinarity ? Terminology varies and definitions abound . We apply the following definition , based on a National Academies report : 4 Interdisciplinary research ( IDR ) is a mode of research by teams or individuals that integrates • perspectives / concepts / theories and / or • tools / techniques and / or • information / data from two or more bodies of specialized knowledge or research practice . Its purpose is to advance fundamental understanding or to solve problems whose solutions are beyond the scope of a single field of research practice . Examples of bodies of specialized knowledge or research practice include : low temperature physics , molecular biology , developmental psychology , toxicology , operations research , and fluid mechanics . As Morillo et al . state : 3 “we consider ‘multidisciplinarity’ as a basic situation in which elements from different disciplines are present , whilst ‘interdisciplinarity’ is a more advanced stage of the relationship between disciplines in which integration between them is attained . ” Integration is the key concept here – distinguishing the “seamless cloth” of IDR , from the “patchwork quilt” of multidisciplinary research , and the more restricted focus of disciplinary research . We don’t emphasize the creation of new “interdisciplines” per se – i . e . , transdisciplinary research . Elsewhere we review earlier findings on IDR , explore these distinctions , and consider the variety of related causes and effects . 2 , 5 A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 120 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) We focus first on the body of research of a given researcher . Specifically , we want to compare the outputs of Researcher A for a time period ( e . g . , 3 years ) just before participating in a NAKFI program to that of his / her work in a corresponding time period after . That said , the main exemplars of that body of research will usually be scientific papers . In most research arenas , journal articles and / or conference papers are important . In others , patents are the exemplary outputs . And in some arenas , various other forms reflect the essential outputs of research activity : reports ( sometimes confidential , sometimes in “gray literatures” ) , software , and process improvements ( perhaps kept as trade secrets ) . We acknowledge that research is not solely measured by its outputs . Interdisciplinarity can also be gauged in terms of : proposals ( e . g . , topical emphases , collaboration ) or projects ( e . g . , teaming arrangements , mixed funding sources ) . In addition , assessment may focus on other interdisciplinary professional facets : teaching ( e . g . , cross - departmental , co - teaching ) or affiliation ( e . g . , joint appointments in multiple departments , participation in organized research units ) . But for now , our attention is directed to research outputs in the form of sets of papers . We will draw heavily on citations ( referencing ) among papers ; this can be considered a form of research outcomes . Our strategy to measure interdisciplinarity ( elaborated in succeeding sections ) is based on the following premises : • Integration of knowledge not routinely found within a research field equates to greater interdisciplinarity . • Such integration can be measured by examining the spread of a paper’s references . • We devise measures by relating papers’ cited journals to their corresponding Subject Categories ( research fields , as assigned by Thomson Institute for Scientific Information – ISI – accessible through their Web of Knowledge – WoK – site ) . • The interdisciplinarity metrics take into account the inter - relatedness of Subject Categories . • Additional measures can be derived from the degree to which cited Subject Categories relate to that of the journal of the paper , and from the spread of publications across Subject Categories . Empirical aspects in measuring interdisciplinarity Many information resources are interesting candidates in gauging interdisciplinarity . We briefly note a few . Our focus on researchers leads us to begin with their CVs . Recent studies of science highlight the wealth of information to which CVs provide entrée . 6 On a pilot group of researchers from two research universities , we explored A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 121 whether some aspects , including educational background ( e . g . , whether cross - disciplinary or not ) and position , correlated with interdisciplinary publication . For example , educational background from B . S . to Doctorate to current position for 6 of the 17 researchers was cleanly disciplinary ( e . g . , all degrees and affiliation in the same field ) . For the other 11 , it was more diverse ( e . g . , degrees in Chemistry and Physics , current affiliation in Computer Science / Math department ) . Surprisingly , papers by those with relatively pure disciplinary backgrounds seemed at least as interdisciplinary . In addition , departmental affiliation aligns with the top ISI publication Subject Categories for only about 10 of 17 . So , for now , we set aside these “influence factors” as interest - ing in their own right , but not a strong indicator ( or predictor ) of IDR research output . Let’s turn to research papers . These are probably the most accessible , most clear - cut entities on which to gauge interdisciplinarity of the underlying research . Papers can be treated at various degrees of detail , including : • Bare essentials – # , co - authoring , where published ( journal ) • Key text – add information from titles , abstracts , keywords • Full text – add information from the entire paper We set aside co - authoring for now . Those who key on collaboration as the essence of IDR would likely avail themselves of co - authoring information as the primary measure . We key on integration , and note that this can be accomplished by a single author as well as by a team ; so , given our conceptualization of IDR , co - authoring becomes secondary . We considered trying to categorize papers based on their keywords or classification codes ( e . g . , as assigned by database indexers to identify what the paper addresses ) , as others have done to good effect . 7 In other applications , we have used such information to cluster papers , identify research themes inductively , define research domains , and track R & D advances . 8 , 9 We also have the capability to enrich available keyword sets by extracting noun phrases from titles and abstracts – an approach Kostoff and colleagues have used to locate papers . 10 We could also use keyword sets ( ontologies ) imported from outside sources . 11 Such approaches would offer advantages in assessment of papers and patents wherever they appear or are indexed . That said , we presently back off from these approaches because of their complexity and cost . Much work would be needed to devise a viable methodology to gauge the interdisciplinarity of sets of papers reflecting diverse research areas . In contrast , the approach we pursue is restricted to content indexed by one key information resource – ISI’s WoK . Our approach relies on the WoK , which includes the Science Citation Index , Social Science Citation Index , and the Arts and Humanities Citation Index . For a given researcher , one can search WoK in two ways : • general search – retrieves summary information on papers by that researcher , including co - authors , co - author affiliations , journal , subject A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 122 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) category , year , and references ( first author , year , journal , volume , first page ) • citation search – retrieves summary information on each paper that CITES papers authored or co - authored by our researcher , including authors , title , journal , subject category , year , keywords , and cited references Key limitations in using WoK include : • it does not generally include conference papers and does not include patents at all [ there is a separate ISI database containing conference papers ] • coverage varies considerably among research areas • keywords are not well controlled Our pilot assessment concluded that coverage was quite good , but not uniform across a wide range of science , engineering , and bio - medical domains . We compared publications between CVs and search results in WoK . This is not as exact as it might seem as CV inclusion is not always complete and variations in citation leave some ambiguity . We deemed coverage to be excellent or very good for 12 of 17 researchers in our pilot sample . We consider coverage “good” for 4 others ( WoK containing from 65 - 85 % of their CV’s journal papers ) . We assessed coverage as “bad” for 1 Sports Medicine specialist . Medical research was quite well - covered ( 2 judged “excellent” and 1 “good” ) . Engineering is not covered as extensively by WoK , but it is acceptable – 3 judged “very good” ( Chemical Engineering , Biomedical Engineering , Industrial Engineering ) and 2 “good” ( Electrical and Mechanical Engineering ) . These pilot results caution against cross - field comparisons without explicit checking of WoK coverage . We recognize that interdisciplinarity is not a unitary construct with a clear , single indicator . At one extreme , one can conceive of researchers who always publish in the same research field . Even among such scientists , we would like to differentiate those who integrate source materials from multiple fields from those who draw on a narrower range of sources . At the other extreme , imagine researchers who publish each of their papers in a different field . Again , we might deem some of them as more interdisciplinary than others . For instance , one of the 17 pilot researchers who kindly provided CV information to us publishes in several research fields ( Table 1 shows the Subject Categories represented ) . Perusal of these fields suggests strong common threads of this polymer chemistry work among materials science , chemistry , physics , and more or less related fields . Those other fields include : crystallography , which could reasonably reflect techniques being applied ; biomedical engineering , which could be an application domain ; education , which could dovetail with teaching of the principles being researched . Such empirical findings suggest the desirability of a metric to get at how closely the research fields represented are associated . Table 1 also includes information on the Subject Categories ( “SCs” ) cited ( referenced ) by this researcher’s 116 papers ( published from 1988 – 2004 ) and the 876 A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 123 articles citing these papers ( as of Jan . 14 , 2006 ) . Note the Sums . The Sum of SCs of the papers equals 122 % of the number of papers ; that is because many journals are associated with more than one SC . The 116 papers reference 2172 items – not all of which are journal articles covered by Web of Knowledge . However , the total number of cited SCs is a bit larger ( 2250 ) because some journals are associated with multiple SCs . Table 1 . Distribution of one researcher’s 116 papers across research fields Subject Category ( SC ) # of papers published in journals associated with this SC # of cites BY these papers to papers in journals associated with this SC # of cites TO these papers by papers in journals associated with this SC CHEMISTRY , MULTIDISCIPLINARY 56 369 138 POLYMER SCIENCE 26 451 127 CHEMISTRY , PHYSICAL 14 226 268 MATERIALS SCIENCE , MULTIDISCIPLINARY 13 193 117 PHYSICS , CONDENSED MATTER 6 123 45 CHEMISTRY , ORGANIC 5 142 70 EDUCATION , SCIENTIFIC DISCIPLINES 4 27 3 CHEMISTRY , MEDICINAL 3 26 11 CRYSTALLOGRAPHY 3 38 40 CELL BIOLOGY 2 44 3 ENGINEERING , BIOMEDICAL 2 59 27 MATERIALS SCIENCE , BIOMATERIALS 2 58 27 CHEMISTRY , ANALYTICAL 1 62 61 CHEMISTRY , APPLIED 1 4 8 ELECTROCHEMISTRY 1 75 53 ENGINEERING , CHEMICAL 1 30 10 MATERIALS SCIENCE , TEXTILES 1 0 3 PHYSICS , ATOMIC , MOLECULAR & CHEMICAL 1 26 6 MULTIDISCIPLINARY SCIENCES 0 57 7 MATERIALS SCIENCE , COATINGS & FILMS 0 33 5 PHARMACOLOGY & PHARMACY 0 32 7 BIOCHEMISTRY & MOLECULAR BIOLOGY 0 29 15 PHYSICS , APPLIED 0 24 27 CHEMISTRY , INORGANIC & NUCLEAR 0 18 15 PHYSICS , MULTIDISCIPLINARY 0 12 1 MEDICINE , RESEARCH & EXPERIMENTAL 0 11 0 NEUROSCIENCES 0 10 4 BIOTECHNOLOGY & APPLIED MICROBIOLOGY 0 9 6 BIOPHYSICS 0 2 14 PSYCHIATRY 0 3 6 Sum ( All occurrences for the 116 papers ) 142 2250 1124 A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 124 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) Notes to table : These do include self - citations ( by authors or co - authors to their own work ) . The last column shows the SCs associated with journals that cite the 116 papers . Again , one citing journal could be associated with more than one Subject Category ( hence the tally of citing SCs – 1124 – exceeds the 876 citing articles ) . Table 1 shows all the Subject Categories in which he publishes and all of the SCs that he cites more than 5 times , or that cite his work more than 5 times . Table 1 indicates that our researcher draws on research intelligence from much the same fields in which he publishes – note that the four dominant SCs are the same , although the order changes ( he mostly references Polymer Science but publishes mostly in Multidisciplinary Chemistry ) . His work , in turn , mainly is used by these same fields ; again the same four SCs dominate the “cites to , ” but the order shifts again , with Physical Chemistry the main user of his findings . Note some of the differences too . Other Subject Categories also show up with quite different emphases . He substantially references work in Organic Chemistry and Condensed Matter Physics in which he rarely publishes , but these same SCs also heavily cite his work . He draws upon Cell Biology and Multidisciplinary Sciences , but these rarely cite his work . [ Multidisciplinary Sciences is a quite special SC as it includes the leading cross - disciplinary outlets of Science , Nature , and Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ( PNAS ) . ] Biophysics is an SC that cites his research in which he has not published and rarely cites . We explored classifying specific Subject Categories into broader areas ( e . g . , Engineering , Life Sciences ) . There are many different area classifications . In this pilot work , we tried 13 broad research areas . Of those , this researcher published in 7 ( Chemistry & Materials Science ; Physics ; Education ; Medical , Health & Veterinary Sciences ; Technology ; Life , Bio & Agricultural Sciences ; Engineering & Energy ) . This gives us pause – does one coherent research stream that touches into 7 broad research areas reflect more or less interdisciplinarity than another which reflects dissociated interests ? The pilot findings suggest that it would be preferable to develop similarity measures among the Subject Categories rather than try to categorize SCs into broader areas . Based on our assessment of various approaches to measure interdisciplinarity , and these pilot results , we determined to pursue use of the ISI Subject Categories as basic units of analysis . The SCs are used by ISI to classify journals . The process entails a combination of 1 . empirical information on journal - to - journal citation patterns , with 2 . editorial judgment as to journal coverage . ISI’s WoK website , under Journal Citation Reports , provides descriptions of each SC , for instance : Cell Biology Category Description : Cell Biology includes resources on all aspects of the structure and function of eukaryotic cells . The principle characteristic of resources in this category is an emphasis A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 125 on the integration at the cellular level of biochemical , molecular , genetic , physiological , and pathological information . This category considers material on specific tissues , differentiated as well as embryonic . This SC contains 155 journals as of November , 2005 ; however the cumulative thesaurus we are using ( from ISI ) contains 189 journals that have been included in Cell Biology ( e . g . , journal names change ) . The SCs depict an ever - evolving set of research fields . These slowly change over time to reflect current research practices . ISI kindly provided us a thesaurus of 244 current and recent SCs , as of early 2005 . This thesaurus associates the journals included in WoK to particular SCs . The journal set also changes over time . Each journal is associated with between 1 and 6 SCs , distributed as follows for the 10 , 550 journals in this electronic thesaurus : • 6 SCs – 1 journal is associated with this many SCs • 5 SCs – 25 journals • 4 SCs – 198 journals • 3 SCs – 877 journals • 2 SCs – 3032 journals • 1 SC – 6417 journals So , some 39 % of journals included in WoK are associated with > 1 SC . Those studying scientific process have often used SCs to classify scientific activity . Cunningham profiled British science using ISI information . 12 His analyses warn that coverage of various research areas by SCs is not uniform ( see also Table 2 ) . Table 2 . Subject category file characteristics WoK VP Files India US US Temporal coverage 2004 publication year March 30 , 2005 , publication week March 30 , May 14 , & June 11 , 2005 , publication weeks fused Publications 20 , 558 8 , 484 23 , 381 SCs ( for those publications ) 194 203 239 Cited References 410 , 669 155 , 798 596 , 194 Cited Journals ( distinct sources , not all are journals per se ) 63 , 336 33 , 291 95 , 526 SCs cited ( of 244 total SCs ) 235 236 244 SCs cited in > = 300 records 94 34 122 SCs cited in > = 100 records 142 92 181 SCs cited in > = 30 records 179 174 220 SCs cited in > = 10 records 199 215 232 SC coverage favors research domains with well - established journal sets , especially in the physical and mathematical sciences . He notes that other categorizations ( namely that of SPRU , the Science Policy Research Unit at the University of Sussex , where he was A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 126 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) doing this research ) also cover fields unevenly . For our purposes , the SCs offer the best accessible coverage of which we are aware . Morillo and colleagues have mapped links among SCs based on shared journal assignments 3 and recently studied the relative interdisciplinarity of newly emerged versus older SCs . 13 New SCs had a greater percentage of journals assigned to multiple SCs , higher percentage of links outside their Broad Area ( they used 9 broad areas ) , stronger links , and more diverse links . Moya et al . used co - citation of SCs as the basis to map their interrelationships . 14 Boyack et al . work with journal inter - associations , using SC categorization as a validity check , in mapping science . 15 SCs hold appeal in their relative coherence . As illustrated by “Psychology , ” disciplines are not unitary . The granularity of the SCs is highly consistent with our definition of IDR with its illustrative “bodies of specialized knowledge or research practice . ” Of the 244 SCs with which we are dealing , 9 include the term , “multidisciplinary” and 3 include “interdisciplinary . ” Most of these , like “Chemistry , Multidisciplinary , ” seem to behave much like the other SCs . One special SC is “Multidisciplinary Sciences . ” Its 69 journals include Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , USA ; Science ; and Nature . These broad - scope journals include papers from multiple fields , but this does not imply that any given paper is inherently multi - or interdisciplinary . 5 In its interrelationships with other SCs , Multidisciplinary Sciences acts much like other high frequency biomedical SCs ( e . g . , Biochemistry ) . Here are ISI descriptions of two such multidisciplinary or interdisciplinary SCs : Mathematics , Interdisciplinary Applications [ # of journals in JCR , as of Nov . , 2005 = 52 ] Category Description : Mathematics , Interdisciplinary Applications includes resources concerned with mathematical methods whose primary focus is on a specific non - mathematics discipline such as biology , psychology , history , economics , etc . Resources that focus on specific mathematical topics such as differential equations , numerical analysis , nonlinearity , etc . , are covered in the Multidisciplinary Sciences [ # of journals in JCR , as of Nov . , 2005 = 45 ] Category Description : Multidisciplinary Sciences includes resources of a very broad or general character in the sciences . It covers the spectrum of major scientific disciplines such as Physics , Chemistry , Mathematics , Biology , etc . Nature and Science are the preeminent resources in this category and serve as typical examples . The Web site of the National Science Foundation is a good example of a web resource included in this category . Some specialized resources that have a wide range of applications in the sciences also may fall under this category . The journal Fractals – Complex Geometry Patterns and Scaling in Nature and Society would be an example of such a resource . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 127 We distinguish three different ways to consider Subject Category distribution pertinent to measuring interdisciplinarity : • Publication spread across SCs – How many different SCs are represented by the set of papers in question ? What is the frequency distribution across these SCs ? • References ( “citations by” ) spread across SCs – Either examined per paper or for the entire set of papers • Citations to the paper ( s ) spread across SCs – Either examined per paper or for the entire set of papers Reverting to our integrative definition for IDR , the distribution of references holds primacy . Diversity in publication certainly reflects diversification , but it may or may not indicate integration of intellectual content . Diversity of references cited by a paper logically seems the best gauge of intellectual integration . That is , for each given paper , examine the SCs that it references . Papers that cite more discrete SCs pertaining to some unspecified mix of substantive topics , methods , and / or concepts are presumed to be more interdisciplinary . We acknowledge that a wide spread of cited references does not unequivocally demonstrate intellectual integration . Eto notes that disciplinary scientists could collaborate , each bringing in purely disciplinary contributions . The sum of these , reflected in the spread of cited SCs could appear quite diverse , yet the collaborators may not have truly integrated this knowledge . 16 Nonetheless , we find “Integration” as reflected in diversity of cited SCs to be a compelling IDR metric . A counterbalancing perspective , to which we do not ascribe , is that IDR requires collaboration . On the other hand , we believe that much IDR does reflect cross - disciplinary collaboration . Generating a “Science Matrix” Our strategy to determine how closely SCs relate to each other is first to generate a large , representative sample of scientific publishing . We then ascertain the extent of co - citation of particular SCs [ as did Moya et al ] . 15 We have compiled three one - week samples of papers ( by searching the “most recent week” on WoK , as of March 30 , May 14 , and June 11 , 2005 , for papers with at least one U . S . author affiliation ) . We have compared results with a one - year sample of WoK papers with an author affiliation from India . For these samples we examine SCs cited within each given paper . We then calculate measures of association for the SCs across the respective sets of papers . We have explored Pearson correlation , but favor the closely related cosine measure . In text analyses , cosine generally fares slightly better than correlation . 17 Klavans and Boyack , working with co - citation measures ( for mapping of science generally ) , favor cosine adjusted for expected value based on frequencies . 18 Our resulting SCxSC cosine matrix A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 128 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) provides the values we use in all further analyses . The cosine can be calculated from observations ( counts ) x , y as : ( ) ∑ ∑ ∑ i i i i i i i y x y x 2 2 We believe these values of SC - SC interrelationship are reasonably robust . Table 2 shows selected U . S . and India sample characteristics . The rationale is that these are reasonably representative , large science samples . Indeed , since we are basing SC - SC relationship upon co - citation of Subject Categories within papers , the fact that the total sample is not perfectly representative should not pose major problems . We do need to think about attendant issues – e . g . , the one - week samples could have clumps – special issues or uneven indexing ( e . g . , handling multiple issues of certain sources as they come available to WoK ) . WoK does not generally cover conference proceedings , but we note some such materials . We also expect SC - SC associations to evolve , so any resulting “science map” would shift over time , requiring periodic updating . Some SCs are heavily represented , while others are very lightly or not covered . Of the 244 SCs , 50 % are cited 300 or more times , and 90 % are cited at least 30 times , in the 3 - week USA sample , upon which we base our calculations . Our interests reside mainly with research in the sciences , medicine , and engineering , with less interest presently in the social sciences and little in the humanities . Coverage in the India and U . S . datasets mirrors these emphases well ( i . e . , it is thinnest in the arts and humanities ) . For instance , in matching the USA and India results , we checked for SCs included in one but not the other . Present for India , but not the U . S . - March 30 , were : Architecture , Folklore , and American Literature . Present for the U . S . - March 30 , but not for India , were : Criminology , Industrial Relations , Medieval & Renaissance Studies , and Religion . The combination of U . S . for three weeks cited all the SCs . Our immediate focus is to assess the interdisciplinarity of U . S . authors , so we use the U . S . SCxSC cosine matrix for the three sample weeks combined . We compared a range of SC intercorrelations among the US and India samples , and these generally corresponded very well . We examined correlations and cosine values . Table 3 shows cosine values for 4 high frequency SCs to give a sense of how these range for U . S . and India samples . We selected 26 SCs representing a range of research areas . We aligned the SCxSC cosine matrices , calculated using for India and for the combined 2 - week ( Mar . 30 and May 14 ) U . S . samples . The correlations of these cosine values correspond well ( averaging 0 . 96 ) . For instance , the “Biochemical research methods” correlation of 0 . 98 is based on comparing the pairs of cosine values , U . S . and India , for this SC with each of the other 243 SCs . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 129 Effectiveness in associating journals with SCs depends on the development of our thesaurus . The initial thesaurus was provided by ISI in early 2005 . Its accuracy will drift over time as ISI changes its assignments of journals to Subject Categories and their set of SCs itself evolves . Our thesaurus can continue to improve as we discover additional journal - SC matches . There are over 16 , 000 journal entries ( the thesaurus includes journals as they evolve over time ) and the format of cited journal names differs somewhat from those in the thesaurus . Currently , we have worked it to the point of diminishing returns on the three U . S . week - long searches and the India 2004 search . Table 3 . Illustrative cosine values [ based on extent of papers co - citing SCs ] Table 3A . US ( combined 3 weeks ) # Records Selected Subject Categories Multidisciplinary Sciences Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Medicine , General & Internal 6523 Multidisciplinary Sciences 1 0 . 695 0 . 187 5086 Biochemistry & Molecular Biology 0 . 695 1 0 . 141 4117 Medicine , General & Internal 0 . 187 0 . 141 1 3922 Cell Biology 0 . 641 0 . 827 0 . 131 Table 3B . India 2004 # Records Selected Subject Categories Multidisciplinary Sciences Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Medicine , General & Internal 5293 Multidisciplinary Sciences 1 0 . 579 0 . 179 4345 Biochemistry & Molecular Biology 0 . 579 1 0 . 163 2061 Medicine , General & Internal 0 . 179 0 . 163 1 1969 Cell Biology 0 . 496 0 . 732 0 . 139 We have worked through multiple iterations : • Apply our current best “Find - Replace” ( F - R ) thesaurus in VantagePoint to the cited journals from a WoK search ; apply the F - R thesaurus also to the Journal - Subject Category ( J - SC ) thesaurus . The objective is to match journal nomenclature ( that is not consistent to begin ) . • Apply the J - SC thesaurus to the WoK search results ( journals ) . • Review the journals not assigned to an SC ; use this information to enhance the F - R and J - SC thesauri . For the combined file of 23 , 381 U . S . WoK publications for three weeks in 2005 ( March 30 , May 17 , and June 11 ) , we have 95 , 526 “cited journal” names ( after A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 130 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) cleaning ) . These include huge numbers of citations to articles in certain journals ( e . g . , PNAS , Nature , Science ) on down through single papers citing some 72 , 000 sources . It is a highly skewed distribution ! Most of the singly cited sources are not even journals . For instance , some singly cited items : • 000104 AIAA ( conference paper ) • 0092 USGS ( presumably a government report ) • 145 U Suss I Dev Stu ( possibly a thesis ) • Acta Crystallogr A 6 ( a variant on a recognized journal title ) • in press Infancy ( not yet published ) • Indian J Fisheries ( journal not included in WoK ) In general , unless there is a clear match between the “cited journal” name and a journal in our J - SC thesaurus , we leave it out . For NAKFI purposes , we have settled on use of the U . S . SCxSC interrelationships ( cosine matrix ) as we are focusing on U . S . - authored research publications . As noted above , the U . S . SCs correspond highly with those for India . We don’t think that American research is very different from research authored by others . The three weeks provide a sizeable sample to assure reasonable robustness . Table 2 gives some summary distribution characteristics for the 3 - week US sample ( 23 , 381 papers ) . For the Cited Journal SCs , all 12 with fewer than 10 occurrences fall in the Arts and Humanities . These do not pose serious concerns for NAKFI assessments . Publication SCs coverage is based on a smaller sample by a factor of 25 ( i . e . , the average U . S . journal paper cites 25 references ) . Nonetheless , the coverage is solid – 239 of 244 possible SCs are present . Of those , 222 appear in at least 10 records ; 191 in at least 30 records . Others map science in various ways , for various purposes . For instance , Klavans and Boyack are interested in an overarching map per se , to show how various fields piece together . 15 We seek to measure the degree of association among SCs , so have generated a particular form of “science map” – actually a 244 x 244 matrix of cosine values for the Subject Categories based on co - citation of SCs within papers ( Table 3a illustrates a small portion ) . The next section incorporates this SC similarity matrix in assessing interdisciplinarity . * Methods : Assessing the interdisciplinarity of sets of papers Setting out the steps in the calculations clarifies what is going on : 1 . The WoK abstract record for a given paper ( by one of the researchers under scrutiny ) lists each of its cited references . Most references are to journal articles and those are the only ones we are analyzing . * The matrix is available as a VantagePoint file for analyses . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 131 2 . For the paper itself , and for each of the paper’s references , we identify the journal in which it appeared . 3 . We then apply the dual thesauri introduced previously [ first , “Find and Replace” to match journal name abbreviation variations ; second , “Journal – SC , ” to associate journals to SCs ] . 4 . We use the combined U . S . SCxSC cosine matrix to gauge the degree of association among the resulting sets of SCs . 5 . We compute measures of interdisciplinarity based on a researcher’s set of papers . For each paper we compute interdisciplinarity measure ( s ) based on the distribution of SCs . We derive measures based on both the spread of SCs referenced , and on the SC ( or SCs ) for the journal in which the paper was published . We use the general U . S . SCxSC cosine values to measure the relatedness of the resulting SC sets . 6 . We compute measures for a given researcher based on the set of papers examined . The steps yield a set of SC instances for a given paper . Some references will generate no SCs , either because there is no journal ( e . g . , reference is to a thesis , report , or patent ) , the journal is not indexed by WoK , or the Journal - SC thesaurus has failed to capture a link that actually exists on WoK . We have extensively examined results on the U . S . and India samples to capture as many journals as feasible . Most of the remaining misses are attributable to journal name variants . We take a conservative approach , not assigning a journal to an SC unless we are quite sure that WoK does so . Note that this assignment of a reference is based on its journal . Alternative measures , in principle , could include examining its terms ( in its title , keywords , and / or abstract ) to assign its research field . This is not practical in that WoK does not provide any of that information for the “cited references . ” Note also that these data combine SC counts arising two ways : 1 ) one journal may be associated with multiple SCs , or 2 ) different SCs arise from different references . After considerable reflection , we elect not to distinguish these . Our rationale is that both mechanisms suggest inclusion of elements of the knowledge resident in that SC in the parent paper that is referencing them . Scaling issues arise . The average paper references on the order of 20 sources . Suppose one paper cites only 5 , while another cites 100 . Should we tally absolute SC instances or proportions ? A related issue concerns the form of the distributions observed . As with most bibliometrics , distributions tend to be highly skewed ( Table 1 is typical ) . One often sees very few high frequency entities and many low frequency ones . This can make categorization of “all” instances extremely costly . Our pilot findings suggest using proportions and not worrying about classifying all low frequency instances . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 132 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) Experimental samples To try out these new metrics , we generated 3 separate researcher samples – A , B , and C : A . Pilot Sample : We sampled faculty from one research university seeking to span the Physical Sciences , Biomedical Sciences , Engineering , Computer Science & Math . We obtained CV’s from 14 volunteers ; then searched Web of Knowledge ( WoK ) for their career publications . To include some Medical researchers , we added 3 faculty from a medical school , for a total of 17 . B . Applicants : Researchers who applied to attend interdisciplinary NAKFI conferences on signaling , nanoscience , or genomics – a total of 20 . C . AAU : To counterpoint possible institution - specific biases of A and the interdisciplinary inclinations and topical foci of B , we added another broad sample selected from the Association of American Universities . We again sought to span the Physical Sciences , Biomedical Sciences , Engineering , Computer Science & Math . We identified candidates deliberately ranging from Assistant to full Professor . We selected 2 faculty from Brandeis ; 3 each from Brown , Caltech , Carnegie Mellon , and Columbia ; and 1 from Cornell to give us 15 . Each is from a different department , and we favored people with less - common names to facilitate WoK searching , for those with at least 5 papers since 2001 . Our main target in developing IDR indicators is to assess whether NAKFI experiences ( special conferences , seed grants ) alter the participating researchers’ interdisciplinarity . We expect to focus on time periods of about 3 years pre - and post - . So , to determine whether the indicators are sensitive enough to pick up changes , we conducted these explorations on time - slices of the researchers’ publications . Some analyses using all the indicated time periods include as large a sample as reasonable , but other results presented here focus on the more comparable 3 - year periods : A . Pilot Sample : Focus on 2002 – 2004 ; additional analyses use results for the same researchers for 1999 – 2001 B . Applicants : 3 - year periods leading up to the NAKFI conference for which they applied : 5 Signaling Conference applicants ( 2001 – 2003 ) ; 4 Nano Conference applicants ( 2002 – 2004 ) ; 8 Genomics Conference applicants ( 2003 – 2005 ) C . AAU : Focus on 2002 – 2004 ; additional analyses use results for the entire 2001 – 2005 period . In additional calculations , for Sample A we also looked at papers published in the 1999 – 2001 period . This allowed us to see the extent of variation within individuals over successive 3 - year periods . In our “max” calculations , we combined 1999 – 2004 for a A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 133 6 - year span . For Sample B , we note that 2005 publications are somewhat shortchanged as the year was not complete . For Sample C , in our “max” version , we used their publications for 2001 – 2005 ( with 2005 not complete ) . Our indicator assessments are not sensitive to these variations in time period . We exclude individuals for whom we had fewer than 3 papers with at least 3 Cited SCs each . Our measures are inherently stochastic , so drawing conclusions on interdisciplinarity on tiny individual samples seemed inadvisable . For Sample A we required individuals to meet this test for both time periods ; only 11 of 17 did so . For the 20 Sample B researchers , 17 met the criteria . And for Sample C , where we screened for those with at least 5 papers ( 2001 – 2005 ) , only one failed the criteria for the 3 - year period ( 2002 – 2004 ) . We ran our analyses on each of the three sets separately , then combined . The results presented focus on the resulting composite set of 42 ( 11 + 17 + 14 ) researchers for the most comparable , 3 - year time periods . In “max” sample calculations we show 43 researchers ; this retains the one AAU person who has sufficient papers when we take the available 2001 – 2005 span . We apologize for this bit of complexity , but that one person turns out to be an outlier – the “Purist” profiled below . In studying our measures , sometimes we want to see the fullest range sensible ; other times we want the most comparable time slicing . Paper level metrics Our primary target as an IDR indicator is Integration ( “I” ) . To what extent does a paper indicate integration of distinct research knowledge in citing multiple Subject Categories ? As with much of this exploratory development , we have tried many variations on this and additional measures . This section will also address Reach ( “R” ) . The next section , which addresses measures at the Researcher level , introduces Specialization ( “S” ) . We introduce the “I” measure with a simple computational illustration . The Appendix gives formulas and notes ongoing experimentation with those . Here we describe how we arrive at the metrics . Suppose a paper cites 4 SCs to different degrees ( Table 4 ) . These are the same 4 SCs whose degree of association using the cosine measure appears in Table 3A . Our calculations follow the 6 steps listed under Methods . Recall that some journals are associated with more than one SC . So the results below could reflect 10 references , each to a journal linked to a sole SC . Or , they might reflect 1 reference to a journal that ISI classifies in all 4 SCs , plus an additional 2 references to a journal that is linked to both Biochemistry and to Cell Biology , plus 2 more references just to Biochemistry journals . Our rationale is to pick up discrete indications ( references ) to a given body of research knowledge ( citing a given Subject Category ) , so we tally both forms together . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 134 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) Table 4 . Illustration : Cited Subject Categories for calculation of integration score # of citations Cited Subject Categories ( SCs ) Multidisciplinary Sciences [ # = 1 ] Biochemistry & Molecular Biology [ # = 5 ] Medicine , General & Internal [ # = 1 ] Cell Biology [ # = 3 ] 1 Multidisciplinary Sciences 0 . 01 5 Biochemistry & Molecular Biology 0 . 05 0 . 25 1 Medicine , General & Internal 0 . 01 0 . 05 0 . 01 3 Cell Biology 0 . 03 0 . 15 0 . 03 0 . 09 10 Sum 0 . 10 0 . 45 0 . 04 0 . 09 We calculate Integration as follows : 1 . Weight cells by normalizing the frequency of citations . For instance , the Cell Biology × Biochemistry cell weight = ( 5 × 3 ) / 100 = 0 . 15 . 2 . We include the diagonal cells and the cells below the diagonal ( we do not include cells above the diagonal , to avoid double - weighting interactions among distinct cells ) . We will later adjust the normalization to reflect just the included cells ( sum = 0 . 68 ) . 3 . Multiply the cell weight by the respective cosine value ( Table 3A ) . For instance , any diagonal cell’s cosine value = 1 ( with itself ) . The cosine value for “Cell Biology” × “Biochemisty” = 0 . 827 ( based on the USA sample ) – indicating that these two Subject Categories are closely associated . The cosine value for “Cell Biology” × “Medicine , General and Internal” = 0 . 131 . [ In general , cosine values among our 244 SCs tend to be considerably closer to 0 than to 1 . ] 4 . Sum up the cells included ( 10 cells here ) ; divide by the sum of the included cell weights ( 0 . 68 ) to get the Disciplinary score . [ So if all the cited SCs were either one SC or had cosine values among themselves of 1 , this would be a purely disciplinary paper . ] 5 . Subtract this Disciplinary score from 1 to get the Integration score , “I . ” We explored using a threshold of requiring an SC to have more than a single citation , but decided it was preferable to include these as instances of knowledge being drawn in . Many papers in our sample had many single - citation SCs . Recognize that the use of the cosine measure weighting reflects our understanding that the disparity ( cognitive distance ) among SCs , not just the number of them , matters . We continue to experiment with formulations of Integration and Specialization ( see Appendix ) . We investigated an additional measure that we came to label “Reach . ” We considered combining this with Integration as a composite indicator , but decided to address it separately . We calculate Reach as follows : 1 . Identify the Publication SC ( assume this is singular , for the moment ) 2 . Identify all the Cited SCs , as above in calculating I . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 135 3 . For each Cited SC – multiply the number of times it appears by that SC’s cosine value to the Publication SC 4 . Sum those values for every Cited SC ; divide by the total number of Cited SC occurrences . 5 . Subtract this value from 1 . So , while “I” measures the extent of diversity among the Cited SCs , Reach ( “R” ) measures the degree of distinction between those Cited SCs and the Publication SC . We call it Reach as it taps into the relatedness of the cited references to the research domain of the publication journal . Is the researcher bringing in knowledge from outside that domain ? Calculating R is tricky when the Publication journal is categorized in more than one SC . As an illustration , the journal , Discrete Event Dynamic Systems—Theory and Applications , is part of the core journal set of three SCs : Automation & Control Systems ; Mathematics , Applied ; and Operations Research & Management . So we have 3 Publication SCs to match against the Cited SCs . We generated credible arguments for using : the “Furthest” reach , the “Shortest” reach , and the Average . Results were not very sensitive to the choice . More telling , the correlation between I and R within each of our 3 sample ( maximum data ) sets was 0 . 98 , 0 . 89 , and 0 . 52 . The 0 . 52 correlation increases to 0 . 76 if 1 outlier is removed ( the person with insufficient # of articles to be included in the 3 - year comparisons ) . Figure 1 plots I vs . R for the 42 researchers ( 3 - year time spans ) . The strong association between the two measures is apparent . For most purposes , this means one is largely redundant information . We prefer to focus on Integration ( I ) for its conceptual power – measuring the diversity of the referenced knowledge of a paper . We continue to explore R , particularly as a potential flag when it differs sharply from I ( e . g . , Researchers # 18 and # 20 in Figure 1 ) . The notion of drawing on research knowledge from certain Subject Categories in articles reporting to other SCs is intriguing . I ( and R ) are calculated at the Paper level . For each journal article covered by WoK that cites other journals covered by WoK , we can compute I ( and R ) . Examining the sensitivity of I values , we have decided to exclude articles for which we compute fewer than 3 Cited SC instances . We found that our coverage of the SCs is imperfect . Over time it should improve as our J - SC thesaurus gets better and better by checking which journals are missed and correcting this as experience builds . Were a given article to only reference a single journal ( linked to a single SC ) , one time , we could argue that this should be scored as purely disciplinary . In fact , that article might well reference additional intellectual resources that we do not capture . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 136 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) Figure 1 . Integration vs . reach for 11 researchers These could include cites of journals missed by our thesaurus , journals not covered by WoK , conference papers not covered by WoK , and miscellaneous other sources of knowledge ( e . g . , dissertations , reports , websites ) . We see far greater danger of erring by classifying articles based on 1 or 2 references than in excluding these . Note that we do include articles that cite only a single SC , so long as they do so at least 3 times . [ Such an article would score I = 0 . ] Researcher level metrics Given that a researcher has authored ( or co - authored ) a particular set of papers , say in a given time period , how should we compute I for him or her ? An obvious choice is to take the average of the I values for each included paper . And , indeed , that is what we have determined to do . Before deciding , we did investigate distributional facets . We calculated the Standard Deviation for I for each of our researchers – reflecting the variance in Integration among the papers included . This tended to be relatively consistent across researchers . We also investigated the alternative of focusing on the 50 % highest I values for the researcher . The rationale was that a researcher might well author both disciplinary and interdisciplinary papers . Even as NAKFI seeks to encourage IDR , it does not oppose disciplinary research . So , we might ignore the more disciplinary half of one’s work and assess how far the research extends into interdisciplinarity in the other half of that body of work . We calculated this for Sample A ; it correlated 0 . 95 with I . This high association , together with conceptual complexity , caused us to drop this alternative . So , one’s I value is the average of one’s papers’ I values . We had the opportunity to show two of our pilot sample of researchers their profiling , and they found it reasonable , noting an expectation of differences by discipline . Figure 2 provides another perspective on what Integration entails . Plots of the percentage of authored papers that cite each SC are shown for three researchers as A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 137 indicative case illustrations . The steepest drop - off is for our second least integrative of the 42 researchers ( I = 0 . 18 ) – 94 % of his papers cite something from Statistics & Probability . His 15 papers cite 17 different SCs , but the proportion drops steeply – e . g . , the second – fourth most cited SCs appear in only 44 % of his papers ; beyond the sixth most cited SC , the rest are referenced in only 1 of his 15 papers . In contrast , one of our most integrative ( I = 0 . 57 ) researchers shows the most gentle slope . His 26 papers cite 51 SCs ; 96 % cite Biochemistry & Molecular Biology ; 93 % cite Cell Biology ; 93 % , Respiratory System ; etc . His 23 rd most cited Subject Category appears in 7 of his 26 papers . He draws on a width swath of research knowledge ! Our middle slope is a researcher whose 57 papers cite 68 SCs in total ; 100 % cite something from Oncology , dropping to 74 % for the second most cited SC ( Medicine , General & Internal ) . As another benchmark , his 16 th most cited SC appears in 25 % of his papers . His I = 0 . 40 is slightly below average for our 42 researchers ( see Results just ahead ) . As this illustrates , the extent of cross - fertilization of research knowledge among Subject Categories is quite remarkable . This far exceeded our expectations . Figure 2 . Relative citation frequency for 3 researchers We also measure Specialization ( “S” ) . We were attracted to this concept by Erin Leahey’s work . 7 She considers Specialization as a researcher focusing tightly on one or a few subfields , rather than spanning many . She postulates that Specialization is a key characteristic affecting research productivity ( considering that too much Specialization , as well as too little , may hamper publication ) . As we thought about Specialization , we did not take it as the antithesis of Integration , but rather as a potentially orthogonal dimension . That is , one might integrate broad swaths of knowledge in writing to a relatively singular audience , or to multiple audiences . And , conversely , one might draw in research knowledge mainly from a single field , whether writing to one or multiple audiences . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 138 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) We set out to measure Specialization using WoK Subject Category information . This differs from Leahey’s data , but we adapt her formulation . We calculate S using the information on the SCs in which a researcher’s publications appear . Note that S does not use Cited SC information at all ; hence it is measured independently of I . Our formulation is : 1 . For the set of journal articles , count the number of publications in each SC . [ Again , we do not distinguish whether these derive from journals associated with single SCs vs . those associated with multiple SCs – although one might consider that as interesting data in its own right to get at IDR . ] 2 . Square the count for each SC ; then sum these . 3 . Divide that sum by the square of the sum of all the counts . For example , suppose we have 5 publications in SC1 ; 3 in SC2 ; 1 in SC3 ; and 1 in SC4 . The numerator is 25 + 9 + 1 + 1 = 36 . The denominator is ( 5 + 3 + 1 + 1 ) 2 = 100 . So , S = 0 . 36 . If all 10 publications were just in SC1 , then S = 1 . 0 . If all 10 were each in a unique SC , then S = 0 . 1 . Note that S only measures a set of papers , not individual papers . In our application , we take a researcher’s body of work for a time period ( e . g . , 3 years ) and use S to gauge the dispersion of those publications across ISI Subject Categories . [ See the Appendix for further explorations in measuring Specialization . ] Results The average levels of I and S are of interest . For the 43 researchers these are I = 0 . 43 ; S = 0 . 26 . [ If we eliminate the one researcher noted as an outlier , these shift by only 0 . 01 . ] The averages shown are based on researchers ( i . e . , we calculate each researcher’s S and I score , and take the mean of those ) . Obviously , some researchers publish far more than others . We can also calculate overall averages weighted by how many papers each authored , yielding similar results : I = 0 . 42 and S = 0 . 24 . The extent of Integration surprises us . Another measurement concern is variability . Using the maximum data sampling , the range for I is 0 . 10 to 0 . 65 across the 43 researchers ( the researcher whom we exclude in 3 - year comparisons has the I = 0 . 10 score ) . The range for S is 0 . 09 to 0 . 72 . The standard deviations are 0 . 12 for I and 0 . 13 for S . The Interquartile Range ( the middle 50 % of the values ) helps get a sense of the distribution – IQR for I is 0 . 34 to 0 . 54 ; for S , it is 0 . 18 to 0 . 31 . We can also calculate standard deviations for each individual . For example , the Integration standard deviations range from 0 . 05 to 0 . 29 . A high individual standard deviation suggests that one publishes both disciplinary and interdisciplinary ( highly integrated ) work . This might prove to be an informative measure in its own right . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 139 An intriguing question is how do Integration and Specialization relate ? As mentioned , we had hypothesized that they could well be orthogonal . We also thought in terms of a quad chart ( Table 5 ) . Figure 3 compiles the data from our three sets of researchers , using the maximum sampling , to give us 43 data points . We draw our quadrant boundaries at the mean values for S ( 0 . 26 ) and I ( 0 . 43 ) . Table 5 . Relationship between Specialization and Integration Specialization / Integration Lo Hi Hi Disciplinarian Single interdiscipline specialist Lo Grazer Renaissance integrator As Figure 3 shows , I and S are not independent ( orthogonal ) ; there is a substantial negative correlation ( - 0 . 51 ) . Researchers whose work integrates more diverse research knowledge ( high I ) tend to be less specialized , publishing in a wider span of Subject Categories ( low S ) . The Upper Left Quadrant corresponds to a “Disciplinarian” – a researcher with a sharply focused agenda . The Lower Right seems to be the locus for the interdisciplinary researcher . Note that the Upper Right Quadrant ( “Single Interdiscipline Specialist” ) is essentially empty . The Lower Left ( “Grazer” ) is reasonably populated . Figure 3 . Specialization vs . Integration A few individual examples give a sense of the interplay between Integration and Specialization . Here is a profile of one researcher with an I value right on the mean : • The “Non - Specialized , Average Integrator” – S = 0 . 19 ; I = 0 . 43 – 8 papers , all involving Physics subfields . But these 8 papers cite a total of 18 SCs ! Of those , 8 are Physics subfields ; others include Multidisciplinary Sciences ( 7 of the 8 papers ) , Physical Chemistry ( 6 of the papers ) , Materials Science , Optics , Statistics & Probability , and Math . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 140 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) A sampling of more extreme cases : • 2 Disciplinarians ( Upper Left Quad ) – The “Specialist” – S = 0 . 72 ; I = 0 . 35 ( the highest S score ; note that I is not so low ) – This reflects 7 papers , of which 6 are in Neurosciences ; 1 in Physiology and 1 in Multidisciplinary Sciences . But note that his “discipline” – Neurosciences , is inherently quite interdisciplinary in nature . – The “Purist” – S = 0 . 51 ; I = 0 . 1 ; ( Our lowest I score of anyone ; one of the AAU researchers whose publication count for the narrower 3 - year period falls below our minimum of 3 , so is missing in the “N = 42 researchers” analyses ) – Based on 7 papers ( for the 4 . 5 year period ) , all in Math ( 6 ) and / or Applied Math ( 2 ) , with 1 also in the Statistics & Probability SC . These 7 papers cite 150 references that appear in 95 different sources ( i . e . , journals , with a few other forms , such as books ) . For those 95 , we can associate journals ( and , of course , not all are WoK journals ) with only 3 different SCs : Mathematics ( 70 ) , Mathematics , Applied ( 11 ) , and Computer Science , Theory & Method ( 1 ) . This is our exemplar in this sample of a disciplinary researcher ! Table 6 . The renaissance integrator # Cited SC’3s / Papers A B C D E F G H I 9 Spectroscopy 2 3 3 3 1 6 1 1 3 9 Physics , Particles & Fields 2 4 4 3 1 6 1 1 3 9 Instruments & Instrumentation 2 3 3 3 1 6 1 1 3 9 Nuclear Science & Technology 2 3 3 4 3 8 2 1 5 5 Engineering , Electrical & Electronic 1 2 2 1 2 3 Astronomy & Astrophysics 1 1 2 2 Optics 1 3 2 Physics , Atomic , Molecular & Chemical 1 3 2 Physics , Multidisciplinary 1 1 2 Physics , Condensed Matter 1 1 2 Physics , Applied 1 1 1 Chemistry , Physical 1 1 Thermodynamics 1 1 Communication 1 • Grazer ( Lower Left Quad ) – S = 0 . 18 ; I = 0 . 27 ; This value is based on 34 papers , published in 9 SCs , citing 34 SCs . His I score is relatively low because his work concentrates heavily in Cell Biology ; Biochemistry & Molecular Biology ; and Multidisciplinary Sciences , which are heavily intercorrelated ( Table 3A ) . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 141 A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 142 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) • A Renaissance Integrator – S = 0 . 2 ; I = 0 . 63 ; reflecting 9 papers appearing in 6 different SCs ( with 19 occurrences – i . e . , each publication journal averages being in 2 SCs ) . The 9 papers combine for 88 references , consisting of 42 distinct sources ( journals or such ) . Each paper cites at least 4 different SCs , and very evenly . Table 6 shows the number of occurrences of each Cited SC ( row ) in each paper ( column ) . • The leading Integrator – S = 0 . 28 ; I = 0 . 65 ; 21 papers ( over a longer time period ) ; note the richness of the research sources drawn upon – Table 7 . This is a truncated listing showing only those Cited SC’s appearing in 9 or more of the papers . Another 20 SCs are cited , but in fewer of his papers . Our case illustration for the “Specialist” showed an I value of 0 . 35 , near the 25 th percentile level . This researcher’s 7 papers have 388 references to 73 distinct sources ( journals , etc . ) , associated with 20 different SCs . The leading recipients of citation are Neurosciences ( cited 250 times ) , Multidisciplinary Sciences ( 66 cites ) , Physiology ( 62 ) , Opthamology ( 22 ) , and Zoology ( 17 ) – all others receive 8 or fewer cites . So , this “low - Integration Specialist” really draws on quite distributed content . We also note that researchers with relatively few papers seem more apt to generate extreme I and S scores . We investigated how scores varied by major disciplinary area . In categorizing our 43 researchers , 9 of them warranted inclusion in 2 major disciplinary categories . Table 8 counts those 9 in each of these ( hence the # ’s sum to 43 + 9 ) . These are averaged over researchers ( not weighted by papers ) . The Computer Science and Math categories showed similar values , for tiny samples , so were combined . They are the one major disciplinary group that seems notably different from the others in evidencing less Integration and more Specialization . Table 8 . Breakout by major discipline ( for “Max” sample ) # Integr Spec Reach Phys Sci 7 0 . 42 0 . 22 0 . 55 Life Sci 13 0 . 42 0 . 29 0 . 50 Med Sci 11 0 . 47 0 . 25 0 . 58 CS / Math 5 0 . 29 0 . 33 0 . 43 Engr 16 0 . 46 0 . 23 0 . 59 Discussion We have derived three measures based on ISI Subject Category information for sets of research papers – Integration ( I ) , Reach ( R ) , and Specialization ( S ) . While conceptually appealing , Reach correlated so highly with Integration that we do not see it A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 143 as an independent descriptor . Integration and Specialization provide a rich , two - dimensional depiction of the nature of a body of research ( i . e . , one researcher’s publications over a given time span ) . The proposed metrics are a work in progress . We plan to continue to test them on varied and larger researcher samples . We also intend to continue comparing alternative formulations . We have examined additive models , but prefer the multiplicative ( row by column frequency ) approach presented here . We have tried exclusion of the diagonal ( self - cite ) cells , but found this conceptually unattractive . We will further compare a full matrix alternative on sets of researchers vs . our half - matrix ( Table 5 ) ; we anticipate highly correlated results , but possibly more intuitive scaling . We also plan to explore alternative ways to treat the multidisciplinary SCs . Perhaps the most remarkable finding of this exploration of new IDR metrics is the high level of interdisciplinarity indicated . Our expectations as to the degree of cross - SC citation and publication were greatly exceeded . These pilot results , for three distinct samples ( 43 researchers in total ) , show that researchers do extensively draw upon research knowledge from multiple domains . Such levels of Integration are really notable . We illustrated several profiles of individual researchers . One of those , near the relatively low , 25 th percentile of I scores ( 0 . 35 ) included 7 papers that drew upon ( cited ) research from 20 different ISI Subject Categories . Our leading Integrator ( I = 0 . 65 ) had 9 papers that drew upon research from 31 SCs . The higher I score reflects more citation of more SCs ( i . e . , a gentler slope , as illustrated for three other researchers in Figure 2 ) . The I score also incorporates use of the cosine measure to gauge how closely related such Subject Categories are , based on a good - sized national sample of articles . We aspire to compile Integration and Specialization data for reasonable samples across disciplines . Will we see notable differences across major field ( e . g . , engineering , physical science ) , discipline ( e . g . , civil vs . electrical engineering ) , and / or SC ? Having those data will benchmark research behavior . This is certainly necessary to assess “how interdisciplinary” Researcher A is . We hypothesize that different research norms , and coverage differences among SCs , will engender important differences , implying serious researcher by domain interaction effects . Also , compilation of research domain level data holds promise to track macro research behavior . Is a given research domain becoming more or less interdisciplinary over time ? Is science in general becoming more interdisciplinary ? ( The NAKFI mission concerns this . ) It would be very interesting to develop “knowledge flow” models for research areas . 19 For instance , one could look at the collective work of attendees at a NAKFI conference to discern from which SCs they draw ; where they publish ; and which SCs use their results . Application of measures based on ISI Subject Category distribution has the potential to generate highly informative tracking of cross - disciplinary knowledge flows . The sequence is A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 144 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) • Patterns of cited SCs indicate incorporation of knowledge drawn from multiple sources • Publication SC patterns reflect the research domains that the researchers are addressing • Patterns of SCs of the journals in which articles cite those publications indicate distribution of the interdisciplinary research knowledge generated . So , for a given paper , researcher , or body of research , we can profile from whence research knowledge is drawn , where the new knowledge is presented , and which research domains pick it up [ to pursue this intriguing issue , see Boyack et al . , Figure 5 15 ] . Studies of such knowledge flows should speak to whether our conventional wisdom is well - founded . Are certain research domains foundational ? For instance , can we demonstrate that Research “A” is drawn upon by ( contributes to ) Research “B” in another SC , which in turn is actively cited by Research “C” in other SCs ? Does basic science contribute to technological development ? Do certain research domains have higher cross - domain impact than others ? If a research domain speaks just to itself , this could well be an indication of minimal benefit to science and society . 1 Future extensions hold strong appeal . Kevin Boyack suggested exploring Integration’s sensitivity to scale and examining I calculated across , as compared to within , a researcher’s papers . Given the important , but ill - understood , role of co - authoring in IDR , it could be highly informative to examine this together with Integration and Specialization . Are co - authored works more likely to be highly IDR in terms of Integration ? For papers covered by WoK we can obtain author organizational affiliations . Those give at least rough indications of discipline . Figuring out how to associate those disciplinary indicators with SCs presents a challenge . Short of that , we can compare the levels of Integration and Specialization of single - authored vs . co - authored papers by a given cadre of researchers . For instance , one of our researchers has many papers , but only one published in a journal in the Cell Biology SC . He is a co - author on that , so we wonder how much knowledge of cell biology he has internalized ? One might separate papers on which our researcher is the first author ( whether sole or not ) to better understand his or her integrative stance . We considered just focusing on single - authored papers for certain analyses , but that sacrifices too much of the research data . We nominate many issues that these new measures can help address . These include • Do more interdisciplinary papers ( higher I ) have lower or higher impact ( examine journal impact factors ) ? • Do we see increased IDR just after receiving tenure ? One might hypothesize that I increases , and S decreases , over research careers . • As we differentiate more from less interdisciplinary researchers , one could then probe : A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 145 – Where do IDR researchers come from ? [ Informal , pilot - level characterization of the Pilot Sample backgrounds as relatively disciplinary ( e . g . , B . S . through PhD all in Chemistry ) to quite multi - disciplinary did not correlate with how interdisciplinary their publications are . ] – Which research areas feature IDR ? Why so ? [ Use of these measures to compare across research fields is somewhat precarious . All of the ISI Subject Categories are not equally fine - grained . SCs vary widely in how many journals they include and their coherence . 15 Citation norms differ greatly among fields as well . And a modest number of SCs constitute what Morillo and colleagues call “horizontal” disciplines . 3 We intend to explore these implications . ] – When we’ve identified highly IDR researchers , ask them what differentiates their work ? [ Tell them their papers are more IDR ; explore with them their “secrets” in making this happen . ] – What institutional parameters nurture IDR ? We expressly invite comments and suggestions on how to improve and extend the measurement of research interdisciplinarity . * We thank Kevin Boyack , Fernanda Morillo , and Ron Kostoff for reviewing an earlier version and providing very helpful feedback . References 1 . C HUBIN , D . E . , C ONNOLLY , T . ( 1982 ) , Research trails and science policies : local and extra - local negotiations of scientific work , In : N . E LIAS et al . ( Eds ) , Scientific Establishments and Hierarchies . Sociology of the Sciences , Yearbook , Vol . 6 , Dordrecht : D . Reidel , pp . 293 – 311 . 2 . K LEIN , J . T . , P ORTER , A . L . ( 1990 ) , Preconditions for interdisciplinary research , In : P . H . B IRNBAUM - M ORE , F . A . R OSSINI , D . R . B ALDWIN ( Eds ) , International Research Management , New York : Oxford University Press , pp . 11 – 19 . 3 . M ORILLO , F . , B ORDONS , M . , G OMEZ , I . ( 2001 ) , An approach to interdisciplinarity through bibliometric indicators , Scientometrics , 51 : 203 – 222 . 4 . C OMMITTEE ON F ACILITATING I NTERDISCIPLINARY R ESEARCH , OF THE C OMMITTEE ON S CIENCE , E NGINEERING , AND P UBLIC P OLICY ( 2005 ) , Facilitating Interdisciplinary Research , Washington , D . C . : National Academies Press . 5 . P ORTER , A . L . , R OESSNER , J . D . , C OHEN , A . S . , P ERREAULT , M . ( 2006 ) , Interdisciplinary research – meaning , metrics , and nurture , Research Evaluation , 15 ( 8 ) : 187 – 195 . 6 . D IETZ , J . S . , C OMPALOV , I . , B OZEMAN , B . , O’N EIL L ANE , E . , P ARK , J . ( 2000 ) , Using the curriculum vita to study the career paths of scientists and engineers : An exploratory assessment , Scientometrics , 49 : 419 – 442 . 7 . L EAHEY , E . ( 2006 ) , Gender differences in productivity – Research specialization as a missing link , Gender & Society , 20 ( 6 ) : 754 – 780 . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity 146 Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 8 . P ORTER , A . L . , C UNNINGHAM , S . W . ( 2005 ) , Tech Mining : Exploiting Technologies for Competitive Advantage , New York : Wiley . 9 . P ORTER , A . , K ONGTHON , A . , L U , J . ( 2002 ) , Research profiling : improving the literature review . Scientometrics , 53 : 351 – 370 . 10 . D EL R IO , J . A . , K OSTOFF , R . N . , G ARCIA , E . O . , R AMIREZ , A . M . , H UMENIK , J . A . ( 2001 ) , Citation mining : Integrating text mining and bibliometrics for reearch user profiling , Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 52 ( 13 ) : 1148 – 1156 . 11 . W ATTS , R . J . , P ORTER , A . L . ( 2005 ) , Mining conference proceedings for corporate technology knowledge management , Portland International Conference on Management of Engineering and Technology ( PICMET ) , Portland , OR . 12 . C UNNINGHAM , S . W . ( 1996 ) , The Content Evaluation of British Scientific Research , Ph . D . Thesis , University of Sussex : Science Policy Research Unit . 13 . M ORILLO , F . , B ORDONS , M . , G OMEZ , I . ( 2003 ) , Interdisciplinarity in science : A tentative typology of disciplines and research areas , Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 54 ( 13 ) : 1237 – 1249 . 14 . M OYA - A NEGON , F . , V ARGAS - Q UESADA , B . , H ERRERO - S OLANA , V . , C HINCHILLA - R ODRIGUEZ , Z . , C ORERA - A LVAREZ , E . , M UNOZ - F ERNANDEZ , F . J . ( 2004 ) , A new technique for building maps of large scientific domains based on the cocitation of classes and categories , Scientometrics , 61 : 129 – 145 . 15 . B OYACK , K . W . , K LAVANS , R . , B ORNER , K . ( 2005 ) , Mapping the backbone of science , Scientometrics , 64 : 351 – 374 . 16 . E TO , H . ( 2003 ) , Interdisciplinary information input and output of nano - technology project , Scientometrics , 58 : 5 – 33 . 17 . P ETERS , H . P . F . , B RAAM , R . R . , VAN R AAN , A . F . J . ( 1995 ) , Cognitive resemblance and citation relations in chemical engineering publications , Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 46 ( 1 ) : 9 – 21 . 18 . K LAVANS , R . , B OYACK , K . W . ( 2006 ) , Identifying a better measure of relatedness for mapping science , Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 57 ( 2 ) : 251 – 263 . 19 . P ORTER , A . L . , C HUBIN , D . E . ( 1985 ) , An indicator of interdisciplinary research , Scientometrics , 8 : 161 – 176 . A . L . P ORTER et al . : Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity Scientometrics 72 ( 2007 ) 147 Appendix : Formulas Specialization ( S ) : ( ) ( ) [ ] ( ) ( ) [ ] ∑ ∑ + + = 2 1 2 2 1 # # # # n n SC in published papers of SC in published papers of SC in published papers of SC in published papers of S K K Where the Subject Categories ( SCs 1 – n ) are those reflecting the journals in which the set of papers was published . Integration ( I ) : ( ) ( ) [ ] ( ) ⎥⎥⎦⎤ ⎢⎢⎣⎡ × − × × − = ∑ ∑ j i j i j i f f SC SC COS f f I 1 where i = row , j = column , f = frequency Where the Subject Categories ( SCs ) are those cited in a given paper . The summation is taken over the lower diagonal cells of this SC x SC matrix , inclusive of the diagonal . COS is the cosine measure of association between the two SCs , based on a national co - citation sample from Web of Science ( as described in the text ) . Reach ( R ) : ( ) ( ) [ ] ∑ − × − = p i i SC SC COS f R 1 Where f = frequency Where SC i is a given cited SC , and SC p is a publication’s SC . The summation is taken over each of the cited SCs for the given paper . COS is as above . Where a given publication is associated with multiple SCs , R is calculated for each . We explored using average R , smallest R , and largest R as the score for a given publication . We continue to experiment with alternative interdisciplinarity metrics . This is a work in progress , with some current directions as follows : • We have not actively pursued Reach due to its high correlation with Integration in these test samples . • We have modified Specialization to incorporate the cosine values among the respective SCs . Its formulation thus comes to resemble the I calculation above , except that it is calculated for a body of research , not an individual paper ; pertains to SCs instead of Cited SCs ; and is not subtracted from 1 . • We are exploring calculating I for a body of research ( set of papers ) . So , for instance , a researcher’s I value would be calculated over the entire set of Cited SCs in those papers , rather than as the average of the I values for each individual paper . • In calculating I , we are trying the full matrix , instead of the half - matrix form described here . [ This is largely for conceptual simplicity ; in our samples full - matrix I correlates extremely highly with half - matrix I ( e . g . , 0 . 99 ) . ] • We are considering whether to treat the ’horizontal’ SCs differently ; that is the dozen SCs that include ’interdisciplinary’ or ’multidisciplinary’ in their name . At this time , we don’t believe special treatment is warranted .