Contact dynamics during keratocyte motility Kurt I . Anderson and Rob Cross Background : Keratocytes are specialised , rapidly moving cells that generate substantial contractile force perpendicular to their direction of locomotion . Potential roles for contractile force in cell motility include cell - body transport , regulation of adhesion , and retraction of the cell’s trailing edge . Results : To investigate contact dynamics , we used simultaneous confocal fluorescence and interference reflection microscopy to image keratocytes injected with fluorescent vinculin . We found that contacts formed behind the leading edge and grew beneath both the lamellipodium and the cell body . Contacts in the middle of the cell remained stationary relative to the substrate and began to disassemble as the cell body passed over them . In contrast , contacts in the lobes of the cell grew continuously and more rapidly , incorporated more vinculin , and slid inwards towards the sides of the cell body . Contact sliding often led to merging of contacts before their removal from the substrate . Conclusions : We suggest a synthesis of two existing , apparently conflicting models for keratocyte motility , in which network contraction progressively reorients actin filaments using the contacts as pivots , forming bundles that then generate lateral tension by a sliding - filament mechanism . Contact dynamics vary between the middle of the cell and the lobes . We propose that laterally opposed contractile forces first enhance contact growth and stability , but escalating force eventually pulls contacts from the substrate at the back of the cell , without interfering with the cell’s forward progress . Background The process of cell motility is commonly dissected into separate processes of protrusion , adhesion and retraction . Protrusion , the process whereby the cell advances into new territory , is intimately linked with and may be driven by actin polymerisation [ 1 – 3 ] . Adhesion entails the forma - tion of molecular complexes responsible for maintaining contact with , and exerting force on , the cell’s environ - ment . Both protrusion and adhesion are regulated by the Rho family of small GTPases [ 4 ] and , in particular , the formation of adhesions in serum - starved Swiss 3T3 cells has been shown to depend on Rho - stimulated contractil - ity [ 5 ] . Retraction is a multi - layered process , which depends on structural elements generated during protrusion and adhesion . It encompasses forward transport of the cell body , release of adhesion , and retraction of the trailing cell edge , and generally has received less attention than either protrusion or adhesion [ 6 ] . Keratocyte motility is extremely efficient and charac - terised by unique steady state dynamics . Protrusion and retraction occur simultaneously at exactly the same rate , so that cells maintain a constant morphology with well - defined regions , while gliding over the substrate at rates of up to 30 m m / minute . Although protrusion and retrac - tion are closely coordinated , forcing a change in the rate of one does not directly influence the rate of the other [ 7 ] , implying an indirect linkage between the two . Moving keratocytes exert traction forces on the substrate through discrete adhesion sites . Two classes of adhesion sites were first identified [ 8 ] on the basis of the distance between a cell and its substrate measured using quanti - tative interference reflection microscopy ( IRM ) : focal contacts , representing a separation of 10 – 15 nm , and close contacts , representing a separation of ~ 30 nm . Since then , many structural and signalling components of cell – substrate contacts have been identified [ 9 ] , including vinculin , a structural protein highly concen - trated in focal adhesions . In conjunction with many other adhesion components this 116 kDa protein binds to filamentous actin , establishing the link through which contractile force from the actin cytoskeleton is applied to the extracellular matrix . Cells forming focal contacts exert between 10 and 100 times more force on the substrate than cells forming close con - tacts [ 10 ] . Interestingly , the strength of cell adhesion is inversely associated with the rate of cell progress [ 10 – 12 ] . Fast moving cells form weaker close contacts with the sub - strate , whereas slower moving cells form stronger focal adhe - sions , suggesting that the slower moving cells may be Address : Marie Curie Cancer Research Institute , The Chart , Oxted , Surrey RH8 0TL , UK . Correspondence : Rob Cross E - mail : r . cross @ mcri . ac . uk Received : 8 November 1999 Revised : 13 December 1999 Accepted : 26 January 2000 Published : 22 February 2000 Current Biology 2000 , 10 : 253 – 260 0960 - 9822 / 00 / $ – see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . Research Paper 253 bb10e33 . qxd 03 / 13 / 2000 01 : 56 Page 253 hindered by their strong contacts . Flexible substrates have been used to estimate the magnitudes of forces exerted by cells and to map their point of action beneath the cell and ori - entation relative to the direction of locomotion [ 10 ] . Here , a striking discrepancy appears : slow moving fibroblasts gener - ally exert large forces along their axis of progress [ 13 ] , whereas fast moving keratocytes exert smaller forces perpen - dicular to this axis [ 14 ] . In the keratocyte , these forces are exerted by bundles of acto - myosin stretching between the lobes of the cell and are responsible for the elongated spindle shape of the cell body [ 7 ] . Recently , these forces have been found to act on distinct regions at the sides of the cell [ 15 , 16 ] . We have now examined contact dynamics during kerato - cyte motility . We injected keratocytes with fluorescent vinculin in order to study steady - state contact dynamics during motility , and made simultaneous use of two optical techniques , interference reflection and fluorescence microscopy , to characterise both the location of vinculin sites within the cell and their closeness to the substrate . Confocal optical sectioning has also made possible the first observation of cytoskeletal dynamics beneath the kerato - cyte cell body , which have previously been obscured by high fluorescent background . The data prompt us to suggest a synthesis of two current and apparently conflict - ing models for force generation during keratocyte motility . Results Imaging and general characterisation About 100 injected cells were imaged in this study , of which approximately three - quarters retained the character - istic polarised morphology referred to as ‘canoe cells’ by Goodrich [ 17 ] . Confocal interference reflection images were comparable to 0 . 62 numerical aperture ( NA ) interfer - ence reflection images reported previously [ 18 , 19 ] . Simul - taneous fluorescence and interference reflection imaging allowed us to localise vinculin to discrete sites within the cell and , at the same time , visualise the closeness of the vinculin - containing site to the substrate ( Figure 1 ) . In this way , we were able to distinguish between adhesive sites capable of transmitting force to the substrate and sites that had been released from the substrate . Generally , the fastest moving , most symmetrically shaped cells were char - acterised by a homogenous distribution of small faint vin - culin - containing sites , similar to the immunofluorescent localisation reported by Lee and Jacobson [ 20 ] . Such small sites often did not register as discrete close contacts in the corresponding IRM image . In comparison , slower or errati - cally moving cells displayed more distinct sites of vinculin localisation , which generally corresponded to distinct regions of close contact in the corresponding IRM images . Sensitivity of the confocal microscope to low fluorescent signals was controlled by imaging the same vinculin - injected cells first with the confocal and then with a cooled charged coupled device ( CCD ) camera ( Figure 2 in [ 21 ] ) . The two techniques revealed a similar localisation of vin - culin - containing sites beneath the lamellipodium , where background due to the cell volume is low . Confocal optical sectioning also generated high - contrast images of fluores - cent contacts beneath the cell body , however . Contacts grow faster and bigger in the lobes of the cell Vinculin - containing contacts formed behind the leading edge , and increased in size and fluorescent intensity beneath the lamellipodium ( Figure 2 ) . Contacts in the middle of the cell continued to grow beneath the cell body , then began to decay ( see below ) . Because of the roughly oval cell shape , contacts in the middle of the cell had the longest lifetimes , but contacts in the lobes of the cell were brighter ( 1 . 6 ± 0 . 8 times brighter for 216 contacts in six cells ) , indicating that they incorporated more vin - culin and grew more quickly than contacts in the middle of the cell . Non - motile ( fried - egg shaped ) cells displayed large intensely fluorescent contacts beneath the lamel - lipodium , often right up to the cell margin , but were devoid of contacts beneath the cell body . Contacts are stationary beneath the middle of the cell , but slide inward beneath the lobes Contacts beneath central regions of the cell and cell body remained stationary relative to the substrate while the cell moved over them ( Figure 3 ) , whereas contacts beneath the lobes of the cell slid inwards towards the cell body ( Figure 4 ) . Table 1 summarises the distribution of station - ary and sliding contacts in canoe - shaped keratocytes . Sliding began when contacts were located beneath forward regions of the lobes of the cell , and became more rapid as the trailing edge of the cell approached ( Figure 5 ) . Sliding was always directed towards the cell body so that the direc - tion of sliding , relative to the substrate , changed for each contact as the cell body passed : contacts in the forward part of the lobes slid backwards relative to the substrate , whereas contacts in the back of the lobes slid forwards . In the course of sliding , small individual contacts often con - verged to form a single , larger contact ( Figure 4c ) . By com - paring paired IRM and fluorescent images , a correlation was established between substrate closeness and sliding velocity : vinculin sites in close contact with the substrate slid slowly ( 2 . 12 ± 1 . 28 m m / minute , n = 13 contacts in five cells ) whereas contacts released from the substrate slid approximately seven times faster ( 14 . 11 ± 3 . 99 m m / minute , n = 14 contacts in four cells ) . The maximum unloaded rate of contact sliding measured was 23 m m / minute . Centripetal contact sliding was generally associated with the stasis or retraction of the local cell margin , including cases where it was observed in central regions of the lamel - lipodium or at the rear margin of the cell body ( Table 1 ) . Vinculin sites were occasionally observed in close contact with the substrate even after the trailing edge of the cell had passed over them . Such lagging contacts were never 254 Current Biology Vol 10 No 5 bb10e33 . qxd 03 / 13 / 2000 01 : 56 Page 254 lost to the cell , but retracted abruptly from the substrate up into the cell body , in a manner suggesting elastic recoil . In a few cases , the cell failed to remove contacts at the back of the cell body and this often led to the protrusion of a new leading edge at the back of the cell and subsequent loss of cell polarity . Sliding was pronounced in the retracting lobes of turning cells , and in conjunction with the retraction of large regions of the cell . Contact sliding was also pro - nounced in tethered cells , such as those on the edge of an expanding monolayer . Contacts beneath the lamellae of sta - tionary , non - polarised ( fried - egg ) cells were generally sta - tionary ; however , centripetal flow of large , elongated close contacts was also observed , averaging 1 . 5 m m / minute . Central and lateral contacts follow different routes to disassembly After reaching their maximum intensity , contacts in the middle of the cell either maintained a constant intensity level or started to decay . Contacts that were not com - pletely disassembled , such as those in Figure 3 , generally remained in contact with the substrate until they were swept forward at the trailing edge of the cell ( see above ) . In comparison , contacts in the lobes of the cell grew con - tinuously ( Figure 2 ) . Additionally , most contacts in the lobes slid and fused with other contacts at the back of the cell before being pulled from the substrate and retracted into bright foci at the side of the cell body ( Figure 4 ) . The complete cycle of contact initiation , maturation , and removal was limited to about 2 minutes , the time required for the cell to translocate its own length . Research Paper Keratocyte contact dynamics Anderson and Cross 255 Figure 1 Paired confocal laser - scanning fluorescent ( top ) and interference reflection ( bottom ) images of a moving keratocyte microinjected with fluorescently conjugated vinculin . In the merged image ( middle ) , vinculin contact sites ( red ) can be seen localised to regions of close contact ( dark ) between the cell and the substrate . Inset , demonstration of contact colour in the composite image . The composite RGB image was formed with the IRM image in the blue and green channels and the fluorescent image in red . Right box , colocalisation of a fluorescent vinculin site with a dark region of close contact in the IRM image results in a red - coloured contact in the composite image . Left box , colocalisation of a fluorescent vinculin site with a bright region of distant contact in the IRM image results in a white contact . Figure 2 Life history of vinculin - containing contacts based on fluorescence intensity . The fluorescence intensity of each contact was calculated for each frame until the contact began to slide ( a ) inwards or ( b , c ) forwards at the back of the cell . The traces represent the average of two contacts ; time between frames is 15 sec . ( a ) Contacts in the lobe of the cell , which did not pass beneath the cell body ; ( b ) contacts that passed beneath the sides of the cell body ; ( c ) contacts that passed beneath the middle of the cell body . For traces ( a , b ) , frame 1 is the first frame in which the contacts were visible . For traces ( b , c ) , frame 6 is the first frame in which the contacts were located beneath the cell body . Although the lifetime in trace ( c ) is longest , because of the greater length of the cell in the middle , peak fluorescence in trace ( a ) is nearly three times higher , and achieved more quickly . Note that both contacts ( b ) and ( c ) begin to disassemble , but that ( a ) is removed from the substrate at peak intensity . bb10e33 . qxd 03 / 13 / 2000 01 : 56 Page 255 Discussion We have investigated the dynamics of keratocyte close contacts by simultaneously imaging the contact protein vinculin and the separation between the ventral cell surface and substrate using confocal laser - scanning microscopy . Our investigation has generated two types of data , on contact assembly / disassembly dynamics and on the distribution of stationary and sliding contacts . Both types of data have implications for the regulation of cell adhesion , and place new constraints on model mecha - nisms for keratocyte motility . Confocal microscopy has several advantages over conven - tional fluorescence and interference reflection optics . The first is optical sectioning of the sample , which has allowed us to visualise the dynamics of fluorescent protein analogues 256 Current Biology Vol 10 No 5 Figure 3 Time - lapse confocal fluorescent image showing localisation of microinjected TAMRA - conjugated vinculin in a locomoting keratocyte . The elapsed time in minutes is indicated at the upper right hand corner of each panel . The oval represents a stationary point on the substrate , and highlights contacts that remain stationary relative to the substrate while the cell body moves over them . Figure 4 Time - lapse images of a turning cell . ( a , c ) Fluorescence and IRM composite images ( coloured ) and fluorescent images ( monochrome ) ; ( b ) confocal fluorescence images . The panels in ( b ) are not IRM images : in order to enhance contrast , the grey scale has been inverted compared with Figure 3 . ( b ) Whole cell showing regions that are enlarged by one - third in ( a ) . ( a ) Enlarged region showing contact sliding in the lobes of the cell . At time 0 : 00 , contacts 1 – 8 are shown in their initial position ; at time 1 : 45 , red lines connect the positions of contacts at 15 sec intervals between 0 : 00 and 1 : 45 . Note that the rate of contact sliding is higher for contacts nearer the back of the lobe . Contacts 9 – 13 are shown in their initial positions . The black line indicates the cell outline at 0 : 00 . At time 3 : 30 , coloured lines connect the positions of contacts at 15 sec intervals from 1 : 45 to 3 : 30 , and black lines indicate cell outlines at 0 : 00 and 1 : 45 . Note that , by 3 : 30 , the paths of many contacts have merged into foci at the trailing edge of the cell body . ( c ) The arrowheads indicate three contacts that merge together by sliding relative to the substrate . bb10e33 . qxd 03 / 13 / 2000 01 : 56 Page 256 beneath the keratocyte cell body for the very first time . A second important advantage is that fluorescent and inter - ference images are generated by the same scanning laser beam , and therefore are perfectly in register and truly simultaneous . Dual images must otherwise be acquired sequentially , which can introduce a delay of 30 – 60 seconds between images [ 22 ] and problems with image registration caused by changing optical pathways . Although such a time delay is typically short in the scale of fibroblast motility , it is enough for a keratocyte to move half its own length . Contact assembly / disassembly dynamics vary spatially within the cell It has been shown previously [ 15 , 16 ] that keratocytes apply traction forces to the substrate beneath the lateral lobes of the lamellipodium , whereas little force is applied below the middle of the cell . We found that contact assembly and disassembly dynamics also varied between the lobes and the middle of the cell . Contacts in the lobes incorporated fluorescent vinculin more rapidly and achieved a higher final level of fluorescence compared with contacts beneath the middle of the cell . The data therefore suggest a link between contractile tension and the growth of adhesion sites . This could result through a positive feedback mechanism , in which increasing tension would generate larger contacts that , in turn , would allow more substantial traction forces to develop . Focal adhesion formation has been shown to depend on RhoA - stimulated contractility in fibroblasts [ 4 , 5 , 23 ] , pos - sibly through the contractile accumulation of actin - associ - ated contact components [ 5 ] in a manner reminiscent of that shown in Figure 4 . Two different paths to disassembly Contacts beneath the middle and lobes of the cell followed different paths to disassembly . Contacts that passed beneath the middle of the cell began to disassemble beneath the cell body , often doing so completely before reaching the trailing edge . In contrast , contacts beneath the lobes of the cell incorporated fluorescent vinculin continu - ously until they were retracted from the substrate into the cell body . This behaviour would be predicted by a tension - enhanced mechanism of contact growth , in which contact growth would only terminate once myosin - based forces were sufficient to pull the contacts from the substrate . In keratocytes , the development of lateral contractile force parallels the increase in myosin density [ 24 , 25 ] from the front of the cell to the back , and could therefore selectively remove close contacts at the back of the cell . In fibroblasts , focal contact disassembly has been associated with the tar - geting of individual contacts by microtubules [ 26 , 27 ] . Research Paper Keratocyte contact dynamics Anderson and Cross 257 Table 1 Relative distribution of stationary and sliding contacts in locomoting keratocytes . Lateral Central Cell lobes lamellipodium body Cells with distinct 66 % ( 46 ) 44 % ( 31 ) 39 % ( 27 ) contacts in this region ( n = 71 cells ) Cells with stationary 4 % ( 2 ) 77 % ( 24 ) 93 % ( 25 ) contacts in this region Cells with sliding 96 % ( 44 ) 26 % ( 8 ) 11 % ( 3 ) contacts in this region Relative fluorescence 164 ± 80 % 100 ± 48 % – intensity ( n = 6 cells ) Note that contacts can be both stationary and sliding within a given region . The fluorescence intensity of 216 contacts was measured in six cells ( contact fluorescence minus background level ) . Each cell was divided into thirds , and the values for the outer thirds ( lateral lobes and lateral region of cell body ) compared with the inner third ( central lamellipodium and central region of cell body ; right column ) . Both standard deviations are relative to the mean value in the central lamellipodium . Figure 5 Detailed analysis of the movement of contact 7 in Figure 4 . The black line indicates the distance from contact 7 to the back of the cell ; initial cell length is 20 m m . When the contact was approximately 15 m m from the back of the cell ( 5 m m from the front ) , it began to slide towards the cell body at the speed shown by the red line ; 30 sec later , the edge of the cell near the contact began to retract at the speed shown by the blue line . Units for red and blue are m m / min , units for black are m m . Sliding velocities of the contact and local trailing edge increased as the back of the cell approached them . Although contact sliding began before local edge retraction , the rate of edge retraction surpassed the rate of contact sliding , and peak velocities occurred at the same time . The large arrow indicates the direction of cell migration . The inset is a diagram of the cell with the distances and speeds represented by the appropriate colour . bb10e33 . qxd 03 / 13 / 2000 01 : 56 Page 257 With regard to de - adhesion , however , keratocytes differ from fibroblasts in three important ways . First , fibroblasts form focal contacts that are capable of resisting much greater contractile stress than close contacts . Second , fibroblasts lack the keratocyte’s front - to - back myosin gra - dient and arrangement of bundles for generating lateral tension . Third , in the absence of microtubules fibroblasts lose cell polarity and develop prominent focal adhesions , whereas keratocyte motility is not influenced by the absence of microtubules [ 28 ] . It is thus very possible that close contacts in keratocytes and focal contacts in fibro - blasts disassemble by different mechanisms . Contact sliding varies spatially and temporally within the cell Vinculin - containing contacts first appeared as stationary sites behind the leading edge . Contacts in the lobes of the lamellipodium later began to slide towards the approach - ing cell body , whereas contacts in the middle of the cell remained stationary as the cell body moved over them . The location , direction and magnitude of contact sliding in the lobes of the cell were similar to those reported for trac - tion forces in migrating keratocytes , which is to be expected because contacts represent the sites where force from acto - myosin is applied to the substrate . Cell - body transport requires that the cell pull on contacts in front of its centre of mass , but contact sliding and traction forces are maximal behind the lateral mid - line of the cell ( Figure 6 ) . The largest forces generated by keratocyte therefore cannot contribute to cell - body transport , and are likely to be used for other aspects of motility , such as de - adhesion ( see above ) and retraction of the trailing edge [ 16 ] . The ori - entation of these forces normal to the direction of cell progress suggests they are optimised for minimal interfer - ence with the cell’s forward progress . Contact dynamics and trailing - edge retraction Retraction of the trailing margin of the cell appeared loosely coupled to the sliding of local contacts ( Figure 5 ) . When contacts persisted , trailing - edge retraction was inhibited until such contacts had released ( whereupon the trailing edge of the cell immediately underwent elastic recoil ) or the cell lost polarity . Persistent contacts were never left behind the retracting cell margin on the substrate . Contact sliding and subsequent removal therefore appear to be early and necessary events in the process of edge retraction . Implications for the two models for keratocyte motility Two models of cell - body transport have been proposed in keratocytes , dynamic network contraction ( DNC ) [ 25 ] and cell - body contraction ( CBC ) [ 7 ] . The models differ both in their mechanisms of force generation and the manner in which force is applied from the substrate to the cell body . The DNC model is based on the build - up of isometric tension within the network of actin filaments forming the lamellipodium . As proposed , isometric tension results because actin filaments in the lamellipodium are too rigidly interconnected to be contracted by myosin [ 25 ] . As myosin accumulates towards the rear of the lamellipodium ( see above ) , it is thought to develop sufficient force to deform the network , creating a zone of contraction where filaments at the back of the network are pulled forward . Previous work using photoactivatable probes has deter - mined that actin filaments in the central region of the lamellipodium do remain stationary relative to the sub - strate [ 29 ] , whereas filaments in the lobes of the cell slide in toward the cell body [ 29 , 30 ] . We now demonstrate that contacts do the same . The behaviour of actin filaments in the transition zone at the back of the lamellipodium is less clear . Experiments using microinjected fluorescent ana - logues of actin [ 31 ] and myosin [ 25 ] have suggested that filaments slide forward at the back of the keratocyte lamellipodium , although observation near the cell body has been impaired by high background fluorescence [ 25 ] . We found that contacts were stationary beneath the rear of the lamellipodium and beneath the cell body . To be con - sistent with our data , the network contraction model should thus account for stationary substrate adhesions in a region where network collapse is thought to cause forward sliding of actin filaments . We suggest below that station - ary contacts can still be consistent with network contraction 258 Current Biology Vol 10 No 5 Figure 6 Model for cytoskeletal rearrangements during keratocyte motility . The cross represents a stationary point on the substrate . Red , actin filaments that are attached to contacts ; red circles , contacts ; yellow and green , unattached actin filaments ; green , areas that are formed after 0 sec ; blue , myosin ; stippled area , cell body . See text for details . bb10e33 . qxd 03 / 13 / 2000 01 : 56 Page 258 and bulk forward motion of actin filaments , provided that actin filaments in the network are attached to substrate adhesions by their plus ends and can pivot around these attachment points . Other arrangements , for example stitching an actin filament to several contacts along its length , would tend to prevent network contraction . The CBC model is based on connection of the cell body to the lateral lobes of the lamellipodium through bundles of acto - myosin . Contractile force generated through bundle contraction is proposed to maintain cell - body tension [ 7 ] and pull the cell body forwards from its sides . Lateral bundles were originally proposed to be derived from actin filaments feeding in from the lobes of the cell , but a possible contribution from network reorientation is now described below . The distribution of stationary and sliding contacts we observed is completely consistent with force generated according to this model , which could first serve to pull the cell body towards forward - lying contacts , but then be redirected to remove contacts and facilitate or drive trailing - edge retraction , once they pass the lateral mid - line of the cell . Conclusions Our data on contact dynamics are generally consistent with the structural dynamics predictions of both the DNC and CBC models , which have thus far been regarded as conflict - ing . We suggest that the two types of process described by these models may both occur in the life cycle of an actin fil - ament , but at different stages . Figure 6 illustrates this point . At t = 0 seconds , actin filaments are arranged orthogonally , as a consequence of T - junction - type nucleation of new fila - ments at the leading edge [ 32 ] . A fraction of these filaments ( shown in red ) is incorporated into incipient contacts ( open red circles ) . Another set of actin filaments ( yellow ) are not directly attached to the substrate , but are indirectly associ - ated with the substrate - bound filaments . As the cell moves forward ( t = 20 seconds ) , the yellow filaments treadmill , growing from their plus ends ( shown in green ) , shrinking from their minus ends , and producing in consequence a bulk sideways flow of actin filaments [ 33 ] . Myosin fila - ments ( blue ) link antiparallel actin filaments in both the red and yellow classes , exerting tensile force that is exerted on the substrate through the contacts . In this model , the sta - tionary contacts act as pivots around which the network pro - gressively re - orients as the cell moves forward , until actin filaments lie in a bundle at the lateral mid - line of the cell roughly perpendicular to the cell axis ( t = 40 seconds ) . The bundles then exert transverse contractile force across the cell body , retracting contacts ( t = 60 seconds ) and the opposing trailing margins of the cell . Materials and methods Cell culture and microinjection Fish epidermal keratocytes were cultured essentially as described pre - viously [ 34 ] . Explants were allowed 1 – 2 h at 20°C to attach to the bottom coverslip , then the top coverslip was removed and the bottom coverslip transferred under sterile conditions to a petri dish containing 2 ml of start medium [ 34 ] . Explants were kept at 4°C for at least 3 days , and no longer than one week , before microinjection . On the day of use , cells were transferred to keratocyte running buffer ( KRB : 103 mM NaCl , 1 . 8 mM KCl , 0 . 8 mM NaHCO 3 , 0 . 1 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 05 mM CaCl 2 , 2 . 2 mM glucose ) and incubated 3 – 4 h at 4°C to allow monolayers to disperse . Calcium was then added to KRB to a final concentration of 1 mM , causing individual cells to adhere to each other in small colonies of approximately 5 – 20 cells . Keratocytes were injected in colonies , allowed to recover briefly ( approximately 30 min ) , and returned to KRB for observation . Turkey gizzard vinculin labelled with carboxytetramethylrhodamine suc - cinimidyl ester ( TAMRA ) was the generous gift of Mario Gimona ( purifi - cation ) and Klemens Rottner ( labelling ) . Microinjection was performed using a Leitz Micromanipulator M , and Eppendorf Femtotip II needles coupled to a 60 ml syringe to regulate injection pressure . Keratocytes were injected using previously described chambers [ 34 ] . Injection and subsequent microscopic observation were performed at 16 – 18°C , using a water - cooled stage . Microscopy Time lapse , simultaneous interference reflection and fluorescent confo - cal microscopy was performed using a Bio - Rad MRC - 1024 MP scan - ning system with a Kr – Ar laser coupled to a Zeiss 135 TV inverted microscope , using a Zeiss 60 · , 1 . 2 NA water - immersion objective . The sensitivity of confocal detection to weak fluorescent signals was controlled by imaging the same cell with both the confocal microscope and a Hamamatsu C - 4880 - 80 cooled CCD camera using standard epifluorescence ( data not shown ) . TAMRA was excited using the 568 nm line of the Kr – Ar laser . Images were acquired using filter block T1 ( a triple band pass filter for red / green / blue imaging ) in the excita - tion pathway , and T2A ( a red / green splitter ) in the emission path . Emitted fluorescent signal passed through T2A and was filtered using a 598 / 40 band pass filter before being collected at the first photomul - tiplier tube ( PMT 1 ) . Simultaneous reflection imaging was performed using the small amount of 568 nm excitation light which bled through T1 , and was reflected by T2A to PMT 2 . Image analysis The fluorescent intensity of contacts and contact sliding were analysed using NIH Image ( developed at the US National Institutes of Health and available on the Internet at http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / nih - image / ) and IPLab Spectrum . Final figures were composed using Adobe Photoshop . Supplementary material Supplementary material consisting of the raw video sequences used to produce Figures 3 and 4 is available at http : / / current - biology . com / supmat / supmatin . htm . Acknowledgements We are grateful to Mario Gimona and Klemens Rottner for the gift of labelled vinculin ; to Brad Amos for introducing us to confocal IRM ; to The Carp Co . for a healthy supply of trout ; and especially to the referees for their extremely helpful comments . References 1 . Okabe S , Hirokawa N : I ncorporation and turnover of biotin - labeled actin microinjected into fibroblastic cells : an immunoelectron microscopic study . J Cell Biol 1989 , 109 : 1581 - 1595 . 2 . Mogilner A , Oster G : Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys J 1996 , 71 : 3030 - 3045 . 3 . Loisel TP , Boujemaa R , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF : Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 1999 , 401 : 613 - 616 . 4 . Ridley AJ , Hall A : The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress fibers in response to growth factors . Cell 1992 , 70 : 389 - 399 . 5 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka M , Burridge K : Rho - stimulated contractility drives the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions . J Cell Biol 1996 , 133 : 1403 - 1415 . Research Paper Keratocyte contact dynamics Anderson and Cross 259 bb10e33 . qxd 03 / 13 / 2000 01 : 56 Page 259 6 . Mitchison TJ , Cramer LP : Actin - based motility and cell locomotion . Cell 1996 , 84 : 371 - 379 . 7 . Anderson KI , Wang Y - L , Small JV : Coordination of protrusion and translocation of the keratocyte involves rolling of the cell body . J Cell Biol 1996 , 134 : 1209 - 1218 . 8 . Izzard CS , Lochner LR : Cell - to - substrate contacts in living fibroblasts : an interference reflexion study with an evaluation of the technique . J Cell Sci 1976 , 21 : 129 - 159 . 9 . Jockusch BM , Bubeck P , Giehl K , Kroemker M , Moschner J , Rothkegel M , et al . : The molecular architecture of focal adhesions . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1995 , 11 : 379 - 416 . 10 . Oliver T , Lee J , Jacobson K : Forces exerted by locomoting cells . Sem Cell Biol 1994 , 5 : 139 - 147 . 11 . Harris AK , Stopak D , Wild P : Fibroblast traction as a mechansim for collagen morphogenesis . Nature 1981 , 290 : 249 - 251 . 12 . Kolega J , Shure MS , Chen WT , Young ND : Rapid cellular translocation is related to close contacts formed between various cultured cells and their substrata . J Cell Sci 1982 , 54 : 23 - 34 . 13 . Dembo M , Wang YL : Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of fibroblasts . Biophys J 1999 , 76 : 2307 - 2316 . 14 . Lee J , Leonard M , Oliver T , Ishihara A , Jacobson K : Traction forces generated by locomoting keratocytes . J Cell Biol 1994 , 127 : 1957 - 1964 . 15 . Oliver T , Dembo M , Jacobson K : Separation of propulsive and adhesive traction stresses in locomoting keratocytes . J Cell Biol 1999 , 145 : 589 - 604 . 16 . Burton K , Park JH , Taylor DL : Keratocytes generate traction forces in two phases . Mol Biol Cell 1999 , 10 : 3745 - 3769 . 17 . Goodrich HB : Cell behavior in tissue cultures . Biol Bull 1924 , 46 : 252 - 262 . 18 . Bereiter - Hahn J , Strohmeier R , Kunzenbacher I , Beck K , Voth M : Locomotion of Xenopus epidermis cells in primary culture . J Cell Sci 1981 , 52 : 289 - 311 . 19 . Gingell D : The interpretation of interference - reflection images of spread cells : significant contributions from thin peripheral cytoplasm . J Cell Sci 1981 , 49 : 237 - 247 . 20 . Lee J , Jacobson K : The composition and dynamics of cell - substratum adhesions in locomoting fish keratocytes . J Cell Sci 1997 , 110 : 2833 - 2844 . 21 . Small JV , Rottner K , Kaverina I : Functional design in the actin cytoskeleton . Curr Opin Cell Biol 1999 , 11 : 54 - 60 . 22 . Smilenov LB , Mikhailov A , Pelham RJ , Marcantonio EE , Gundersen GG : Focal adhesion motility revealed in stationary fibroblasts . Science 1999 , 286 : 1172 - 1174 . 23 . Rottner K , Hall A , Small JV : Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr Biol 1999 , 9 : 640 - 648 . 24 . Small JV , Herzog M , Anderson K : Actin filament organization in the fish keratocyte lamellipodium . J Cell Biol 1995 , 129 : 1275 - 1286 . 25 . Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG : Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in fish epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J Cell Biol 1997 , 139 : 397 - 415 . 26 . Kaverina I , Rottner K , Small JV : Targeting , capture , and stabilization of microtubules at early focal adhesions . J Cell Biol 1998 , 142 : 181 - 190 . 27 . Kaverina I , Krylyshkina O , Small JV : Microtubule targeting of substrate contacts promotes their relaxation and dissociation . J Cell Biol 1999 , 146 : 1033 - 1044 . 28 . Euteneuer U , Schliwa M : Persistent , directional motility of cells and cytoplasmic fragments in the absence of microtubules . Nature 1984 , 310 : 58 - 61 . 29 . Theriot JA , Mitchison TJ : Actin microfilament dynamics in locomoting cells . Nature 1991 , 352 : 126 - 131 . 30 . Lee J , Ishihara A , Theriot JA , Jacobson K : Principles of locomotion for simple shaped cells . Nature 1993 , 362 : 167 - 171 . 31 . Verkhovsky AB , Svitkina TM , Borisy GG : Self - polarization and directional motility of cytoplasm . Curr Biol 1999 , 9 : 11 - 20 . 32 . Svitkina TM , Borisy GG : Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J Cell Biol 1999 , 145 : 1009 - 1026 . 33 . Small JV : Lamellipodial architecture : actin filament turnover and the lateral flow of actin filaments during motility . Sem Cell Biol 1994 , 5 : 157 - 163 . 34 . Anderson KI , Small JV : Preparation and fixation of fish keratocytes . In Cell Biology : A Laboratory Handbook . Edited by Celis JE . San Diego : Academic Press ; 1998 : 372 - 376 . 260 Current Biology Vol 10 No 5 Because Current Biology operates a ‘Continuous Publication System’ for Research Papers , this paper has been published on the internet before being printed . The paper can be accessed from http : / / biomednet . com / cbiology / cub — for further information , see the explanation on the contents page . bb10e33 . qxd 03 / 13 / 2000 01 : 56 Page 260