MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY 11111 Including Mechanisms in Our Models of Ascriptive Inequality Barbara F . Reskin University of Washington Sociologists’ principal contribution to our understanding of ascriptive inequality has been to document race and sex dis - parities . We have made little headway , however , in explaining these disparities because most research has sought to explain variation across ascriptive groups in more or less desirable outcomes in terms of allocators’ motives . This approach has been inconclusive because motive - based theories cannot be empirically tested . Our reliance on individual - level data and the balkanization of research on ascriptive inequality into separate specialties for groups defined by different ascriptive characteristics have contributed to our explana - tory stalemate . Explanation requires including mechanisms in our models—the spe - cific processes that link groups’ ascribed characteristics to variable outcomes such as earnings . I discuss mechanisms that contribute to variation in ascriptive inequality at four levels of analysis—intrapsychic , interpersonal , societal , and organizational . Redirecting our attention from motives to mechanisms is essential for understanding inequality and—equally important—for contributing meaningfully to social policies that will promote social equality . hand , testified that he had purchased the chloroform at Adelaide’s request . Thus , the evidence showed both motive for Adelaide— a younger and more desirable spouse—and means—death by chloroform . But the pros - ecution could not offer convincing evidence showing how the chloroform got into Bartlett’s stomach . It is all but impossible to swallow because it causes vomiting . And if chloroform had been poured down Edwin’s throat while he was unconscious , traces would have been found in his mouth , throat , and lungs—and none were . In view of the lack of evidence as to how the chloroform got in Edwin’s stomach , the jury acquitted Direct correspondence to Barbara Reskin , De - partment of Sociology , University of Washing - ton , Seattle , WA 98195 - 3340 ( reskin @ u . washington . edu ) . I thank Dorothy Friendly for superbly organizing my research materials and Beth Hirsh for research assistance . I am grateful to Edgar Kiser and Michael Hechter , whose dis - agreements with my thesis forced me clarify it . Marilyn Read provided the example with which American Sociological Review , 2003 , Vol . 68 ( February : 1 – 21 ) 1 n one of Britain’s most celebrated nineteenth century murder trials , Adelaide Bartlett was charged with killing her hus - band , Edwin . The post - mortem revealed the presence of chloroform , a corrosive poison , in his stomach . Reverend George Dyson , Adelaide’s intimate companion and Edwin Bartlett’s decreed successor for Adelaide’s I 2002 PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS this article begins . Finally , I am indebted to Charles Camic , Joan Huber , Rachel Kuller , Steve Pfaff , Franklin Wilson , and especially Lowell Hargens , whose comments on earlier versions helped me refine my argument . None of these colleagues bears any responsibility for any re - maining problems . This article is dedicated to the memory of Rachel Ann Rosenfeld ( 1948 – 2002 ) . For a quarter of a century , Rachel taught all of us through her ex - emplary research on ascriptive inequality . 22222 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW Adelaide . After the verdict , Sir James Paget , founder of modern pathology , appealed pub - licly for the truth : “In the interest of science , ” he implored , “she should tell us how she did it” ( Farrell 1994 ; Fordham 1951 ) . In this essay , I argue that although we have been studying ascriptive inequality in em - ployment for over 30 years with increasingly sophisticated techniques , we have made little headway in explaining it . 1 We have failed to progress because most of our research has focused on why ascriptively - defined groups vary on their access to societies’ rewards , rather than on how variation is produced in ascriptive groups’ access to opportunities . In other words , our stumbling block is the same one that confronted the jurors in Adelaide Bartlett’s murder trial : Until we determine how events occur or are prevented , we can - not satisfactorily explain them . Following Sir Paget , I appeal , in the interests of science and justice , for research on how people come to be stratified on the basis of their ascribed characteristics . In the social sciences , “why” explanations tend to attribute variation across ascriptive groups in more or less desirable outcomes to actors’ motives —the factors that prompt an individual to take a particular action ( Gar - ner 1999 : 727 ) . Conflict theories of ascrip - tive inequality , which contend that dominant groups use their monopoly over resources to maintain their privileges , exemplify motive - based explanations . “How” explanations for varying levels of inequality , in contrast , spell out the mechanisms that produce that varia - tion . By mechanisms , I mean specific pro - cesses that link individuals’ ascriptive char - acteristics to workplace outcomes . Mecha - nism - based theories , which tend to be less general than motive - based theories , specify the practices whose presence and implemen - tation influence the level of inequality in a work setting . Theories about the effects of formalization , transparency , and account - ability , which I discuss below , are mecha - nism - based theories . I argue below that deriving research ques - tions from motive - based theories without also investigating the mechanisms through which motives operate has precluded ad - vances in explaining ascriptive inequality , both because motive - based theories are all but impossible to test empirically and be - cause they ignore the proximate causes of variability in ascriptive inequality . There is , of course , nothing wrong with asking why ; our lack of progress lies in our failure to ask how . We can neither explain ascriptive stratification nor generate useful prescrip - tions for policies to reduce it until we un - cover the mechanisms that produce the wide variation in the social and economic fates of ascriptively defined groups . I first review explanations for ascriptive inequality that focus solely on motives and outlines their limitations . I then discuss theoretical and empirical research that fo - cuses on mechanisms . Although I draw ex - amples from research in labor markets and the world of work , my thesis holds more generally for ascriptive stratification in other domains such as education , criminal justice , and health care . For convenience , I call groups defined on the basis of an ascriptive characteristic “ascriptive groups . ” When I talk about inequality across ascriptive groups , I mean groups categorized by the same ascriptive characteristic , such as color . A final prefatory note : Although I am criti - cal of much of the research in stratification , I ask readers to bear in mind that I reached this critical stance primarily from reflecting on the shortcomings in my own work . MOTIVE - BASED EXPLANATIONS : EXPLAINING ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY BY ASKING “WHY” Motives—the purposes prompting our ac - tions—are often seen in the industrialized world as the cause of human behavior . As Tilly ( 1998 : 36 – 37 ) observed , our reliance on motives to explain behavior reflects a narra - tive mode in which people’s motives cause events . Thus , it is not surprising that many theories invoke motives to explain ascriptive inequality without addressing the mecha - nisms through which motives hypothetically operate . 2 1 Ascriptive inequality refers to inequality across groups defined by some ascriptive charac - teristic , such as sex , race , or age . 2 While working on this article , I had to fight the impulse to speculate on why sociologists are predisposed to ask “why” rather than “how . ” MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY 33333 Some Examples of Motive - Based Explanations The attention that researchers in ascriptive inequality give to “why” can be seen in theo - ries that view inequality as the result of separate individuals acting to advance their own interests . In these theories any aversion toward members of a different group might make intergroup contact psychically costly to prejudiced actors . This reasoning led Becker ( 1971 ) to formulate one of the first systematic theories of employment discrimi - nation . He claimed that the strength of em - ployers’ taste for race or sex discrimination is expressed in the above - market wages they pay whites or men to avoid having to em - ploy minorities or women . Likewise , cus - tomers’ prejudices motivate them to demand a discount for dealing with members of a group against whom they are prejudiced , and coworkers’ prejudices allegedly prompt them to insist on a bonus , thereby motivat - ing nonprejudiced employers to pay equally productive workers unequal wages ( F . Blau , Ferber , and Winkler 2001 : 219 – 21 ) . More generally , motive - based accounts of employment disparities across ascriptive groups derived from neoclassical economic theory make two important assumptions . First , the desire for maximal profits hypo - thetically prompts firms to employ the most productive workers available at the lowest possible wage . Second , firms that discrimi - nate suffer a competitive disadvantage that is a disincentive to discriminate . Given these assumed motives , any difference across ascriptive groups in job opportuni - ties or rewards must stem from group dif - ferences on productivity - related character - istics such as skills and turnover ( Haagsma 1998 ) . Economists also point to profit - moti - vated employers’ desire to minimize the costs of labor - market transactions , includ - ing information costs . Theoretically , em - ployers try to reduce the cost of information by using ascriptive group membership as a proxy for individuals’ likely productivity or employment costs . This profit motive should give rise to ascriptive inequality re - gardless of the accuracy of employers’ be - liefs about group differences on these char - acteristics ( F . Blau et al . 2001 : 227 – 28 ; En - gland 1994 ; Phelps 1972 ) . Sociological explanations of ascriptive in - equality also assign causal status to the mo - tives ( or needs ) of corporate entities that lead to ascriptive behavior by their agents . Consider , for instance , Kanter’s ( 1977 : 48 , 63 ) explanation for women’s absence from managerial positions before the 1980s . In filling jobs involving uncertainty , she ar - gued , corporate managers—virtually all white men—preferred “ease of communica - tion and hence social certainty over the strains of dealing with persons who are ‘dif - ferent’” ( pp . 49 , 58 ) . In short , Kanter theo - rized that managers’ desire for informal communication motivated them to exclude members of some ascriptively - defined groups . Conflict theory also often implicates mo - tives in explaining ascriptive inequality . For instance , Blalock ( 1956 ) theorized that when minority groups become large enough to threaten whites , whites respond by relegat - ing minorities to bad jobs . This thesis has spawned numerous studies on the impact of racial composition on black - white labor market inequality ( e . g . , Beggs , Villemez , and Arnold 1997 ; Burr , Galle , and Fossett 1991 ; Cassirer 1996 ; P . Cohen 1998 ; McCall 2001 ) . None of these researchers addressed the mechanisms through which whites’ hy - pothesized fears lower blacks’ relative earn - ings , however , so a half century after Blalock proposed this hypothesis , we still do not know how the racial composition of la - bor markets affects pay gaps between racial groups . More generally , the centrality of motives in conflict theory’s assumption that people seek to protect—if not to increase—their share of scarce resources obscures the im - portance of the mechanisms through which motives might operate ( e . g . , Collins 1975 : 232 ; Tilly 1998 : 11 ; Tomaskovic - Devey 1993 : 10 ) . In 1988 , for example , I argued that the basic cause of occupational sex segrega - tion was men’s desire to preserve their ad - vantages by maintaining sex differentiation in a variety of spheres , including the work - place . I claimed that men—like other privi - leged groups—protect their privileged status by making sure that the “rules” for distribut - ing rewards give them the lion’s share ( Reskin 1988 : 60 ) . While I still believe this is true , I wish I had spent more of the inter - 44444 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW vening 15 years investigating how specific workplace mechanisms favor members of dominant groups to varying degrees , and how extra - workplace factors lead organiza - tions to alter or maintain those rules . The causal model underlying the theoreti - cal approaches to stratification discussed above appears in Figure 1 . All these ap - proaches attribute ascriptive inequality 3 to the motives of “allocators”—those actors who distribute scarce goods or opportunities among competitors ; none specifies the mechanisms through which actors’ motives produce more or less ascriptive inequality . 4 Theoretical Limitations of Motive - Based Explanations Motive - based explanations for ascriptive in - equality are deficient primarily because they are immune to direct empirical verification . Five problems undermine motive - only ex - planations of inequality . First and foremost , researchers cannot observe the theoretical cause—allocators’ motives . Motives are mental states , and mental states can rarely be directly observed . Indeed , some cognitive psychologists question whether people can really know even their own motives ( Wilson and Brekke 1994 ) . 5 “The peculiar feature of the imputation of motives , ” as MacIver ( [ 1942 ] 1964 : 203 ) pointed out , “is that we are asserting a nexus between an overt ac - tion and a purely subjective factor that can - not be exposed to direct scrutiny and that is not as such manifest in the action . ” We can - not test , for example , whether corporate managers select subordinates who resemble them because they prefer social clones in certain posts , or whether blacks’ share of a metropolitan labor force affects how much ( if at all ) white pay - setters are threatened by their presence . Our inability to observe mo - tives means that we cannot know which ( if any ) motives preceded an outcome . This is an important problem given that disparate motives can produce the same result ( Schelling 1978 ; Wilson and Brekke 1994 ) . Second , ascribing motives to individuals based on their group membership assumes within - group homogeneity on the causal variable . Explanations that attribute motives to groups do not lend themselves to empiri - cal verification because they ignore varia - tion within the ascriptive group from which the allocators are drawn . Theories that as - sume group - based motives preclude the in - vestigation of within - group covariation in , for example , the preference for socially similar subordinates and specific hiring and promotion decisions , or in whites’ percep - tions of threat and the actions they might take to reduce blacks’ relative pay . Third , motive - based theories are limited in scope , applying only to ascriptive inequality stemming from the actions of entities that can engage in purposive behavior . These theories cannot address inequality stemming from the actions of allocators whose motives are directed toward entirely different goals or from practices implemented in the past that persist in the present . As I show below , both inequality and equality can result from neutral mechanisms or structures that have disparate or identical impacts on ascriptive groups ( Stryker 2001 ) . Given the staying power of existing organizational policies and practices ( Carroll and Hannan 2000 ; Stinch - combe 1965 ) , the effects of these practices may bear no relationship to the reasons they were originally implemented . Ascriptive inequality ( Observed ) Allocator’s motive ( Unobserved ) Something allocators do ( Unobserved ) Figure 1 . Causal Model Linking Allocator’s Motive to Ascriptive Inequality 3 Ascriptive inequality , the dependent variable in Figure 1 , refers to the strength of the associa - tion between an ascribed characteristic and some outcome . 4 Note that this discussion does not apply to motive - centered models that specify causal mechanisms , such as efficiency theory , which specifies the employment practices that contrib - ute to ascriptive inequality . 5 Even if we could be certain of allocators’ mo - tives , treating them as causal agents involves a large leap of faith given how seldom people achieve their explicit goals ( Tilly 1998 : 17 ) . MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY 55555 Fourth , the causal priority of motives over outcomes cannot be assumed . As Elster ( 1989 : 16 ) observed , the best way to change people’s minds may be to change their cir - cumstances ( also see Allport 1954 ) . Fifth and finally , disregarding the mecha - nisms through which motives operate leaves us in the dark as to the immediate causes of variability in ascriptive inequality . In failing to specify the intervening processes that give rise to varying levels of inequality , motive - based theories treat mechanisms as invisible hands . Lacking direct measures of theoreti - cally meaningful explanatory variables , we must treat disparities as evidence for both the hypothesized causal mechanism and its causal effect on the observed group differ - ence . As I argue below , this heavy load of inference is often balanced precariously on a single coefficient . Balkanization and Motive - Based Explanations of Inequality Reinforcing motive - based explanatory theo - ries is the division of stratification scholar - ship into largely separate specialties that are based on different ascribed characteristics ( Reskin and Charles 1999 ) . 6 This balkan - ization of scholarship on ascriptive inequal - ity reflects this country’s “metanarrative” of discrimination against specific groups ( Freshman 2000 : 428 ) . This metanarrative implies that different explanations hold for different types of ascriptive inequality . Bal - kanized theories tend to assume that varia - tion in some outcome across ascriptive groups is caused by something related to the particular characteristic that differentiates them . Balkanization helps preserve the assump - tion that different motives cause different types of ascriptive stratification . Sex in - equality at work , for example , has been at - tributed to men’s hope to maintain their privileged status or to employers’ desire to minimize turnover costs . Inequality based on sexual orientation theoretically stems from a different motive—homophobia , it - self hypothetically a product of heterosexu - als’ insecurity regarding their own sexual - ity . Among motive - based theories advanced to explain racial inequality are antipathy or fear by employers , their belief that white customers are reluctant to be served by people of color , or that minorities lack nec - essary skills ( Moss and Tilly 1996 ) . The ex - ploitation of undocumented immigrant workers hypothetically stems from the xe - nophobia or fear of competition by native workers ( Tilly 1998 : 16 ) . Because different specialties assume that different motives produce different in - equalities , different variables appear in analyses of the same outcome—earnings , for example . But if the lack of “soft skills” explains whites’ advantage over blacks ( Moss and Tilly 1996 ) , why not include soft skills in analyses of sex differences ? If em - ployers are compensating something cap - tured by AFQT scores , then why not in - clude this variable in all analyses of earn - ings ? Because we have constructed motive - based stories to account for these differ - ently based expressions of ascribed inequal - ity , and the stories tend to be group - spe - cific . This essentialism reduces the power of theoretical explanations by obscuring the possibility that differential outcomes for each ascriptive divide result from the same general stratification processes . Of course , we cannot dismiss the possibility that some ascriptive characteristics operate differently from others , but we cannot assess the im - portance of such differences in analyses that are specific to a single group . Individual - Level Data and Motive - Based Explanations Perpetuating the problem of motive - based theories is researchers’ heavy use of indi - vidual - level data to study ascriptive inequal - ity . 7 In such data , explanatory variables are limited to individuals’ characteristics ( and the individuals are those allocated to , not allocators , the actors whose motives are theoretically relevant in most motive - based 6 The structure of the American Sociological Association mirrors this balkanization . The ASA , which has no section on stratification , has six sections on various ascribed bases of inequality . 7 Although these data are usually analyzed for individuals , they may be aggregated spatially to metropolitan areas or states , or functionally to occupations or industries . 66666 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW theories ) . 8 As a result , data analysis typically begins by comparing the credentials and de - ficiencies of the ascriptive groups . Tilly ( 1998 ) summed up this state of affairs as “habit” : [ F ] aced with male / female differences in wages , investigators look for average hu - man - capital differences among the individu - als involved . Noticing that school perfor - mances of children correlate with the social positions of their parents , researchers at - tribute those differences in performance to “family background” rather than considering that teachers and school officials may shape those performances by their own categorical responses to parental social positions . En - countering racial differences in job assign - ments , researchers ask whether members of distinct racial categories are distributed dif - ferently by residential location . ( P . 30 ) While I agree with Tilly regarding our dis - position toward individual - level explana - tions , it is not simply a matter of habit . Indi - vidual - level explanations are the only expla - nations possible with individual - level data , and , like the gambler who keeps returning to a crooked casino because it’s the only game in town , many of us turn repeatedly to individual - level data , or direct our students to them , because they are almost the only readily available data . 9 In quantitative analyses of individual - level data , the conclusions we draw depend on whether or not the partial coefficient for some ascribed status is statistically signifi - cant . Although researchers often speak of whether an ascribed characteristic “affects” the dependent variable ( Sørensen 1998 : 250 ) , whether or not a regression coefficient for an ascriptive characteristic is statistically sig - nificant indicates only whether there is an association to be explained in a particular data set and given a particular specification of the model . If the partial regression coeffi - cient is significant , we tend to attribute its effect to some unobserved mental states , such as bias or threat , on the part of an allo - cator . If the partial coefficient is not statisti - cally significant , then we infer different ( and exonerating ) motives by the allocator—to maximize productivity or reduce turnover , for example . A case in point is a debate in the Ameri - can Sociological Review over whether the growing wage gap between black men and white men in the late 1970s and early 1980s reflected increasing wage discrimination . On the basis of an unexplained effect of race on earnings in 1985 , but not 1976 , Cancio , Evans , and Maume ( 1996 : 551 ) con - cluded that race discrimination played an increasing role in the wage gap . Farkas and Vicknair ( 1996 ) disputed Cancio and her colleagues’ conclusion by showing that in - cluding a measure of cognitive skill among the regressors wiped out the significant ef - fect of race on the pay gap . They inter - preted this result as indicating that employ - ers hired blacks for lower paying jobs than whites because whites had stronger cogni - tive skills , not because employers were bi - ased against blacks . 10 This intellectual skirmish over what be - longs on the right - hand side in a regression equation—and the longer - running fight over the role discrimination plays in ascrip - tive inequality—is inevitable when evi - dence for or against allocators’ hypoth - esized motives boils down to the statistical significance of the residual effect of an as - cribed characteristic . Bearing this in mind , consider a second example . Although male 8 Some readers may object that this assertion denies agency to workers . Certainly there are workers who can write their own ticket with re - spect to their occupation , employer , rank , hours , working conditions , benefits , and pay ; but they are they exception . 9 This is not the case for the employer data in the National Organizations Study ( Kalleberg et al . 1996 ) or the Multi - City Survey of Urban In - equality . These data sets have made possible im - portant mechanism - based research of ascriptive inequality in the workplace ( Baldi and McBrier 1997 ; Holzer 1996 ; Huffman and Velasco 1997 ; O’Connor , Tilly , and Bobo 2001 ; Reskin and McBrier 2000 ; Tomaskovic - Devey , Kalleberg , and Marsden 1996 ) . 10 In response , Maume , Cancio , and Evans ( 1996 ) challenged Farkas and Vicknair’s measure of cognitive skill , the Armed Forces Qualifying Test ( AFQT ) score , as racially biased and hence an improper control for racial differences in cog - nitive ability . For discussions of the validity of using AFQT scores to capture racial differences in cognitive skills , see Fischer et al . 1996 , Rodgers and Spriggs ( 1996 ) , Jencks and Phillips ( 1998 ) , and Raudenbush and Kasim ( 1998 ) . MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY 77777 applicants to a high - tech firm were offered significantly higher starting salaries than women were , Peterson , Saporta , and Seidel ( 2000 : 794 – 95 ) concluded that the firm had not discriminated against women because , net of age and education , the sex difference in starting pay disappeared . 11 The firm also made whites significantly higher final of - fers than they made Asians and they raised their first offer significantly more for whites than for nonwhites . These race dif - ferences disappeared when the researchers added two variables to the equation : where applicants were first interviewed ( at the firm or on campus ) , and how applicants had learned of the job ( through a classified ad , a headhunter , or a personal contact ) . Here too , researchers’ conclusions about the reasons for group differences depend on what variables they include on the right - hand side of the regression equation . Al - though segregation is an important cause of the female - male pay gap ( Jacobs 1999 ; Peterson and Morgan 1995 ) , and female and male hires were apparently dissimilarly dis - tributed across jobs ( Peterson et al . 2000 : 795 ) , Peterson and his colleagues did not in - clude in regressions any measure of the jobs applicants were offered . Meanwhile , they in - explicably included the site of the first inter - view as a determinant of starting pay . For re - gression analyses to explain group differ - ences in pay , the specifications of earnings regressions must capture the way allocators set pay . Ultimately , however , the problem in these papers , and in many others ( e . g . , Reskin and Ross 1992 ) , stems from attempts to explain race and sex inequality by workers’ personal characteristics . I am not arguing that indi - vidual - level analyses provide nothing to our understanding of ascriptive inequality . They reveal group differences that require expla - nation ( e . g . , Budig and England 2002 ; Waldfogel 1997 ) , and they can rule out indi - vidual - level explanations for these differ - ences . Without indicators of the causal mechanisms , however , we cannot discover the causal processes that lead levels of in - equality to vary , so the theoretical meaning of the results is inevitably a matter of debate . Instead of enhancing our understanding of how ascriptive groups’ outcomes come to be the same or different , we embark on a wild - goose chase in which we infer support for or against motive - based models based on whether ascriptive statuses have significant effects on some outcome , net of some set of individual - level control variables . Summary Most of the theories purporting to account for employment inequality emphasize allo - cators’ motives . This approach , I argue , has kept us from being able to explain variation in ascriptive inequality . Motive - based theo - ries cannot be empirically tested because we cannot observe people’s motives . Motives do not have an isomorphic relationship to out - comes . Motive - based theories attribute mo - tives wholesale to all members of an ascrip - tive group , precluding analyses that take ad - vantage of the explanatory power of varia - tion among allocators . And even if we could establish why allocators distribute rewards more or less equally , this knowledge would offer little guidance for modifying social policies . If we are serious about explaining inequality , our theories and our analytic models must include indicators of causal mechanisms . MECHANISM - BASED MODELS OF ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY Motive - based models of ascriptive inequal - ity consign the processes that convert actors’ motives into more or less disparate outcomes to a black box ( see Figure 1 ) . Inside that black box are mechanisms—the intervening variables that link ascribed characteristics to outcomes of varying desirability . Mecha - nisms are the processes that convert inputs ( or independent variables ) into outputs ( or dependent variables ) . Thus , a mechanism is “an account of what brings about change in some variable” ( Sørensen 1998 : 240 ) . The physical world provides hundreds of ex - amples of mechanisms : gears that convert power into speed and speed into power , cir - cuit breakers that interrupt the flow of elec - tricity , brake pads whose friction against 11 From this and two other studies , Peterson et al . concluded that “women probably face no dis - advantage in the hiring process in midsized and large U . S . organizations” ( p . 813 ) . 88888 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW wheels translates pressure on the brake pedal into deceleration . The social mechanisms I discuss here are social arrangements that link ascriptive group membership to opportunities and re - wards . 12 For example , the mechanism that converts workers’ hours of work per week into their weekly earnings might be a pre - negotiated agreement that stipulates an hourly wage , a minimum - wage law , or an informal arrangement in which wages are at the discretion of the employer . Many mecha - nisms can produce or prevent an association between workers’ race and their median an - nual earnings , including those practices gov - erning workers’ access to employment and to standard versus nonstandard jobs , and , within firms , access to specific job assign - ments , as well as the practices that set pay per job or unit of work . 13 Superficially , a mechanism - based causal model resembles the motive - based model ( compare Figures 1 and 2 ) . The important difference is that instead of an unobservable causal motive and an unspecified proximate cause ( “something allocators do” ) , in mechanism - based models the proximate cause of ascriptive inequality is specified and observable . Consider , for example , how employers identify prospective workers . Most often allocators—employers or their employees—draw on employees’ personal networks ( Marsden and Gorman 1998 ) . Be - cause people’s informal networks tend to be homophilous , network hiring links the race , ethnicity , and gender of possible workers to whether and for what job they are hired ( Elliott 2001 ; Fernandez and Weinberg 1997 ; Lin 2000 ) . Ethnographic research and case studies point to why employers hire through networks—recruiting through infor - mal networks is less costly , creates a richer pool of candidates , allows workers to hoard opportunities , and facilitates excluding workers from discounted groups ( Fernandez , Castilla , and Moore 2000 ; Fernandez and Weinberg 1997 ; Waters 1999 : 105 – 110 ) . But the difficulty of knowing which if any of these motives prompted a firm to recruit through networks prevents “why” scholar - ship from explaining variation in ascriptive inequality . Although a case can be made for giving top priority to identifying organizational - level mechanisms because they are the proxi - mate causes of levels of ascriptive inequality ( Reskin 2000 ) , we must also understand the role of mechanisms that operates indirectly through organizational - level mechanisms , as Figure 3 illustrates . Below I discuss mecha - nisms at the intrapsychic , interpersonal , so - cietal , and organizational levels . Intrapsychic Mechanisms Intrapsychic mechanisms , by definition , in - volve mental processes and hence are diffi - cult to observe . Nonetheless , social cognition research has experimentally implicated cer - tain intrapsychic mechanisms—automatic cognitive errors—in ascriptive inequality ( for summaries , see Brewer and Browne 12 In arguing that social mechanisms are ob - servable , I part company with rational - choice theorists , for whom social mechanisms are unob - served theoretical constructs whose high level of abstraction is necessary for broad explanatory power ( Hedström and Swedberg 1998 : 10 , 13 ; Kiser and Hechter 1991 ) . 13 The mechanisms that cause ascriptive in - equality to vary do not include abstract or global phenomena such as devaluation , discrimination , exclusion , exploitation , meritocracy , oppression , and social closure that describe but do not ex - plain patterns of inequality ( e . g . , Reskin 1988 ; Tomaskovic - Devey 1993 ; Weber [ 1922 ] 1968 ) . Ascriptive inequality ( Observed ) “Whatever” ( Unobserved ) Allocation mechanism ( Observed ) Figure 2 . Causal Model Linking Allocation Mechanism to Ascriptive Inequality Note : A variety of factors ( denoted as “whatever” ) influence what allocation mechanisms are operative : organizational decisions , economic constraints , or allocators’ conscious motives or automatic cognitive biases . Although the influence of these factors on mechanisms deserves study , we can explain the variation in ascriptive inequality without knowing why organizations or individuals implement particular allocation mechanisms . MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY 99999 1998 ; Fiske 1998 ) . The techniques through which researchers have observed these mechanisms permit investigation of their impact on workplace inequality , so I focus on them . 14 Social cognition theory assumes that our brains seek to minimize cognitive effort in part through automatic categorization and association . According to considerable ex - perimental evidence , we automatically cat - egorize people into ingroups ( people like us ) , to whom we attribute favorable traits , and outgroups ( people unlike us ) , with whom we associate less favorable traits . We prefer members of our ingroup whom we are predisposed to trust , cooperate with , and fa - vor in distributing opportunities ( Brewer and Browne 1998 ; Fiske 1998 : 362 ) . Consider an experiment in which subjects were in - structed to distribute rewards between an ingroup member and an outgroup member , either equally or based on performance . Sub - jects tended to reward the performers equally when the outgroup member did bet - ter ; when the ingroup member did better , they tended to base the reward on perfor - mance ( Ng 1984 ) . We also automatically link certain traits to social categories . In other words , we stereo - type people based on group membership . Moreover , we process information in ways that help to maintain our stereotypes ( Brown 1995 ; Fiske 1998 : 367 ) . Exposure to stereo - type - linked activities or traits can activate our stereotypes and thereby affect our be - havior ( Greenwald and Banaji 1995 ) . For in - stance , white subjects subliminally “primed” with ( i . e . , exposed to ) photographs of the faces of young black men became angrier about a rigged computer glitch than subjects primed with photographs of white men , and white subjects primed with pictures of black men displayed more hostility toward an un - seen partner in a cooperative task than sub - jects primed with pictures of white men ( Chen and Bargh 1997 ) . This and other re - search suggest that exposure to stimuli asso - ciated with members of a stereotyped group brings to mind the traits stereotypically linked to that group—in this case , the ste - reotype of young black men as hostile . Sociological theories about intrapsychic mechanisms lack the sophisticated measure - ment techniques that characterize psycho - logical approaches to cognitive bias . For example , Kanter ( 1977 ) and P . Blau ( 1977 : 78 – 83 ) each theorized that skewed group composition fostered ascriptive inequality because members of statistical minorities are particularly visible to majority - group members . Hypothetically , majorities’ per - ceptions of numerically conspicuous mi - norities are distorted , leading them to be - have in ways that disadvantage minority - group members . Status expectations research has also shown that intrapsychic mechanisms con - tribute to ascriptive inequality . Theoretically when persons from different status groups interact , members of both groups expect higher - status group members to outperform lower status - group members ( Berger , Cohen , and Zelditch 1972 ; Ridgeway 1997 ) . These expectations act as self - fulfilling prophecies , especially when the ascribed status that dif - ferentiates the groups is salient . For ex - ample , in mixed - sex interaction men have more opportunities to perform and others evaluate their performance more positively . Although this approach is better suited to an - swering “why ? ” than “how ? ” ( Ridgeway 1997 : 223 ) , its systematic theoretical exposi - Ascriptive inequality ( Observed ) Organizational mechanisms ( Observed ) Intrapsychic mechanisms ( Unobserved ) Interpersonal mechanisms ( Observed ) Societal mechanisms ( Observed ) Figure 3 . Causal Model Linking Distal and Proximate Allocation Mechanisms to Ascriptive Inequality 14 Readers can assess their own automatic race , sex , and age stereotypes by taking the Implicit Association Tests at http : / implicit / harvard . edu . 1010101010 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW tion provides a promising foundation for in - corporating observable mechanisms . Intrapsychic mechanisms , although the object of intriguing research , remain largely beyond observation . But sociologists’ grow - ing interest in cognitive processes should auger the development of techniques for ob - serving intrapsychic mechanisms that affect our reactions to others , and thereby contrib - ute to explaining variability in ascriptive in - equality . Interpersonal Mechanisms Interpersonal mechanisms can affect the amount of ascriptive inequality in the work - place by converting allocators’ mental states into differential behavior toward others de - pending on their ascriptive characteristics . If Kanter ( 1977 ) were correct in attributing women’s exclusion from managerial jobs to managers’ preferences for similar others , this effect was brought about through man - agers’ interaction with candidates for mana - gerial posts . The extent to which allocators base personnel decisions on an allocatees’ age , sex , color , accent , or perceived sexual orientation obviously contributes to ascrip - tive inequality in work settings . Innumerable examples of equal treatment and unequal treatment are available ; space permits just two . First , according to one of the few stud - ies of employment discrimination against homosexuals , research confederates who portrayed gay or lesbian applicants were treated more negatively during the interview than persons who presented themselves as straight , although they were as likely as straight applicants to get a job offer ( Helb et al . 2002 ) . Second , a race discrimination suit against Kansas City Power asserted that managers made special efforts on behalf of white , but not black , applicants for promo - tion , such as making inquiries when their ap - plication did not meet minimum require - ments ( Ross v . Kansas City Power and Light , 293 F . 3d 1041 [ 2002 ] ) . Importantly , allocators’ behavior toward persons from different groups can indirectly reduce their relative performance . Such ef - fects often occur in informal interaction . For instance , white experimental subjects who interviewed black job applicants tended to sit farther from them , made more speech er - rors , and ended the interviews sooner than those interviewing whites . White inter - viewees whose interviewers behaved toward them in ways that interviewers did with blacks were more nervous and less effective than those treated in ways white interview - ers treat white interviewees ( Word , Zanna , and Cooper 1974 ) . Thus , white allocators’ differential interaction with black and white interviewees precipitates poorer interview performance by blacks that presumably re - duces their evaluations relative to those of white interviewees . Allocators’ actions can elicit behavior in others that may culminate in more or less ascriptive inequality ( Bargh 1999 : 372 ) . In the experiment described above ( Chen and Bargh 1997 ) , for instance , both the experi - menters and the experimental subjects rated the task partners of the subjects who had been exposed to black faces as more hostile than they rated the partners of subjects who had been exposed to white faces . 15 In this case , the nonactivation or activation of ra - cial stereotypes by subliminal exposure to pictures of black or white males affected whether whites behaved with hostility to - ward their task partners ( an intrapsychic mechanism ) , and their hostility in turn pro - voked hostility in their partners ( an interper - sonal mechanism ) . In sum , intrapsychic and interpersonal mechanisms can affect levels of ascriptive inequality , depending on whether organiza - tional mechanisms intervene to blunt or eliminate their effects . Societal Mechanisms Whether organizations follow personnel practices that foster or discourage ascriptive inequality depends on external social and economic factors . Among others , these societal mechanisms include normative con - siderations within establishments’ institu - tional communities , the expectations of their clientele , collective bargaining agreements , public transportation routes , and laws and regulations . The impact of Title 7 of the 1964 Civil Rights Act illustrates how soci - etal mechanisms can indirectly affect ascrip - 15 All the interaction partners had been primed with pictures of white faces . MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY 1111111111 tive inequality within work settings by influ - encing what employers do . Title 7 and its amendments bar employ - ment discrimination based on race , national origin , religion , sex , pregnancy , age , and dis - ability . Of course , outlawing a behavior does not necessarily eliminate it . As Galanter ( 1974 : 149 ) observed , systems can accom - modate major changes in the rules without altering everyday practices or redistributing advantage . The impact of laws on workplace mechanisms depends on their implementa - tion . In the case of Title 7 , Congress charged the Equal Employment Opportunities Com - mission ( EEOC ) and the federal courts with implementation ( Blumrosen 1993 ; Burstein 1989 ; Burstein and Edwards 1994 ; Graham 1990 ) . The activities of enforcement agencies can affect employers’ behavior by challenging or condoning particular personnel actions , by permitting business as usual , or by requiring changes in employment structures . Initially , the EEOC had the authority to do just three things : investigate complaints , attempt to conciliate those it deemed valid , and issue regulations ( Graham 1990 ) . In practice , for much of its existence the EEOC has given a free hand to employers . In its handling of complaints the EEOC signals the business community what kinds of practices are per - missible , and after the 1970s , the message was that employers did not have much to fear ( but see Heckman and Payner 1989 ) . 16 Over the longer run , variation in the agency’s resources , political mandate , and specific actions demonstrates its capacity to affect employers’ compliance with Title 7 ( Blumrosen 1993 ) . For example , its require - ment that large firms report employment breakdowns across broad occupational cat - egories by race and sex compels employers to assemble records in a form in which they and the EEOC can discern inequality . Thus , the extent of enforcement of Title 7 by the EEOC has been an important mechanism , al - beit one that has often permitted ascription . Judicial interpretations of Title 7 have also shaped whether and how firms implement personnel practices that contribute to levels of ascriptive inequality . The direction of the impact of federal courts has varied substan - tially with shifts in its political makeup . In 1971 , the Supreme Court greatly extended Title 7’s reach by ruling that neutral employ - ment practices that have a disparate adverse impact on members of protected ascriptive groups are discriminatory , unless justified as a business necessity . By relieving plaintiffs of the near - insurmountable burden of prov - ing intentional discrimination , this decision encouraged employers to alter selection cri - teria or other practices that contributed to ascriptive inequality . Its effect during the 1970s was to reduce ascriptive inequality by prompting firms to modify employment practices . But what the courts giveth , the courts can take away . During the 1980s , federal courts chipped away at the disparate - impact doc - trine , making it increasingly difficult for plaintiffs to win disparate - impact lawsuits . By 1979 , for example , the Supreme Court allowed New York City Transit Authority to exclude participants in Methadone - treatment programs from all its jobs , despite the ban’s disparate impact on minorities and the Tran - sit Authority’s failure to show that a global ban was a business necessity ( Lye 1998 ) . Congress amended Title 7 in 1991 to explic - itly ban disparate - impact discrimination , but during the next decade federal courts rarely found practices with a disparate impact in violation of the law . The right of workers who believe they have experienced discrimination to sue their employers is a third mechanism through which Title 7 has affected employers’ prac - tices . But workers’ access to the courts has varied over time , as has the pressure on em - ployers to check practices linked to ascrip - tive inequality . Title 7 initially allowed com - plainants to sue their employers if the EEOC provided no remedy . Until 1992 , however , private attorneys lacked an economic incen - tive to take discrimination cases , given the low odds of winning ( Burstein 1989 ; Donohue and Siegelman 1991 ; Selmi 1996 , 1998 ) . In amending Title 7 in 1991 to give plaintiffs the right to compensatory and pu - nitive damages , Congress strengthened law - suits as a mechanism to challenge ascriptive inequality—a financial inducement for attor - neys to take on discrimination cases . In less 16 In the late 1990s , the EEOC has taken to court only a few of the approximately 80 , 000 complaints it receives annually ( Selmi 1998 ) . 1212121212 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW than a decade the annual number of lawsuits tripled from fewer than 7 , 000 to more than 21 , 000 . Although employers’ litigation victories far outnumber their losses , a few highly vis - ible multi - million - dollar judgments for plaintiffs have influenced employers’ prac - tices . Some have done so directly through consent decrees that involve major alter - ations in employers’ personnel practices . For instance , Home Depot revamped its human resources system to conform to a consent decree , developing minimum qualifications for each job and computerizing applications and thereby reducing network hiring ( Sturm 2001 ) . Often the impact of plaintiffs’ victo - ries has gone beyond their own employers . After Texaco paid $ 3 million to settle a sex bias case , a corporate interest group warned its members to carefully review their pay policies . Finally , corporations’ potential legal li - ability has drawn the attention of entrepre - neurs marketing products that may reduce employers’ risk of liability . For example , employers can reduce their liability through practices designed to signal nondiscrimina - tory intent ( Bisom - Rapp 2001 ) . Such “bullet proofing” includes training on diversity and sexual harassment . Discrimination - liability insurance is also being marketed ( Bielby and Bourgeois 2002 ) . The impact of these prod - ucts on the mechanisms organizations imple - ment that in turn affect levels of ascriptive inequality remains to be determined . In sum , Title 7’s restrictions on employ - ment discrimination created several extra - workplace mechanisms that in turn should influence firm - level mechanisms that affect levels of ascriptive inequality at work . Sys - tematic investigation of the impact of varia - tion in these and other societal - level mecha - nisms on organizational mechanisms will enhance our ability to explain ascriptive in - equality at work . Organizational Mechanisms At the organizational level , mechanisms that affect ascriptive inequality include the prac - tices through which employers and their agents somehow link workers’ ascriptive characteristics to work outcomes . Sometimes employers base opportunities and rewards on workers’ ascriptive statuses as a matter of policy , favoring some groups and ignoring or harming others . For example , Atlantic Com - pany refused to allow an African American manufacturing worker to wear “finger waves” because this hair style was “too dif - ferent , ” rejected her request to wear her hair braided , and then told her that her ponytail was “too drastic , ” although white coworkers wore ponytails ( Hollins v . Atlantic Co . , U . S . Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit 188 F . 3d 652 [ 1999 ] ) . More generally , employers might reserve jobs for co - religionists , give preference to heterosexuals , provide fewer medical benefits for one sex than the other , forbid workers from speaking any language but English while on the job , or use race or gender - conscious practices as part of court - ordered affirmative action . Variation in such policies mandating differential treatment af - fects levels of ascriptive inequality across firms ( e . g . , Konrad and Linnehan 1999 ; Reskin 1998 ; Watkins 1993 ) . 17 Moreover , some superficially neutral practices are de - signed to disadvantage particular groups . For example , the EEOC sued Alamo Car Rental for enacting a policy prohibiting female em - ployees from wearing head scarves and then firing a Muslim woman for wearing a head scarf during Ramadan ( http : / / www . eeoc . gov / press / 9 - 30 - 02f . html ) . Although personnel practices are unlikely to override organizational policies mandat - ing differential treatment , the personnel practices that organizations implement can check or permit the effects of intrapsychic and interpersonal mechanisms . And their or - ganizational practices are shaped by societal mechanisms . Thus , organizational practices are the immediate causes of variation in as - criptive inequality . One practice that strongly affects whether allocators act on their preference is whether organizations conceal or make known to de - 17 For example , employers have fired Navajo ( EEOC v . RD’s Drive - In 2002 , http : / / www / eeoc . gov / press / 9 - 30 - 02 - c / html ) and Hispanic workers ( EEOC v . Premier Operator Services , U . S . District court for the Northern District of Texas 113 F . Supp . 2d 1066 [ 2000 ] ) for speaking languages other than English while in the work - place . For additional examples of cases involv - ing differential treatment , see http : / / www . eeoc . gov / pr . html . MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY 1313131313 cision - makers allocatees’ ascriptive charac - teristics ( Wilson and Brekke 1994 ) . Varia - tion in civil service rules illustrate the im - pact of revealing or suppressing this infor - mation . For several decades in the twentieth century , applicants for Civil Service posi - tions were required to attach photographs to their applications : Ensuring that decision - makers knew applicants’ race and sex main - tained a white Civil Service for decades ( Rosenbloom 1977 : 51 – 58 ) . More recently , changes in the way that major symphony or - chestras selected musicians show the impact of evaluators’ exposure to allocatees’ as - cribed characteristics . The introduction of “blind auditions” during the 1970s and 1980s brought female musicians into major symphony orchestras ( Goldin and Rouse 2000 ) . Finally , whether applicants must ap - ply for jobs in person or can conceal their ascribed characteristics through computer - ized application processes influences ascrip - tive inequality in hiring through exposure control ( e . g . , Richtel 2000 ; Sturm 2001 ) . In many situations in which employers al - locate opportunities and rewards , evaluatees’ ascriptive characteristics cannot be con - cealed from allocators . Whether these char - acteristics influence allocators’ decisions de - pends on how effectively personnel practices check allocators’ discretionary behaviors ( Bisom - Rapp 2001 ; Sturm 2001 ) . Generally , the more bureaucratized personnel practices are , the less freedom managers have to act on their own stereotypes , biases , or impulses to favor ingroup members . The effects of bureaucratization operate through career lad - ders , job analysis and compensation sys - tems , collective bargaining agreements dic - tating working conditions , and the availabil - ity of family leave and flexible scheduling , among others ( Dobbin et al . 1993 ; Foddy and Smithson 1999 ) . Of course , to the ex - tent that allocators are bound by these poli - cies will condition their impact ( Edelman 1992 ; Flack 1999 ; Hochschild 1997 ; Nelson and Bridges 1999 ) . With respect to evaluation processes , the availability of relevant , objective informa - tion on evaluatees ; the specificity of evalua - tion criteria ; and the extent to which deci - sion - makers are required to use the criteria all matter for levels of ascriptive inequality . In contrast , the more that performance - re - lated information on allocatees is available to evaluators , the less their ascriptive bias ( Pugh and Wahrman 1983 ; Swim et al . 1989 : 421 ) . In addition , the vaguer and harder to operationalize the selection criteria are , the more likely that allocators’ discretion will affect their decisions ( Blalock 1991 ) . One mechanism affecting allocators’ dis - cretion is the extent to which employers hold allocators accountable for their decisions ( Salancik and Pfeffer 1978 ; Tetlock 1992 ) . Accountability exists when allocators antici - pate both having to communicate their deci - sions and having to defend those decisions ( Tetlock 1983 ) . Whether or not allocators anticipate being held accountable for their judgments affects how they mentally encode information , thereby influencing the likeli - hood of cognitive bias . Accountability is most likely to reduce ascriptive bias when allocators know they must communicate evaluations to candidates and justify them to their superiors ( Blalock 1991 : 103 ) . In other words , the transparency of allocation pro - cesses and their outcomes conditions the im - pact of accountability on ascriptive bias ( Blalock 1991 : 41 ) . Another broad group of mechanisms in - cludes those established to make ascriptive biases visible to employers , workers , and enforcement agencies . Particularly important is whether or not records of employment outcomes are collected and can be examined by ascriptive groups . 18 For example , re - search subjects examined hypothetical data in which the sexes were equally qualified on average , but men’s average pay exceeded women’s . When they reviewed one female - male pair at a time , subjects were signifi - cantly less likely to detect discrimination and judged any discrimination to be less se - rious than when they reviewed aggregated data for the hypothetical firm ( Clayton and Crosby 1992 : 73 – 79 ) . In addition , whether earnings were recorded by ascriptive group membership influenced whether allocatees noticed and objected to any ascriptive in - equality ( Major 1989 ) . 18 The Office for Federal Contract Compliance requires contractors to keep such records by race and sex in order to make it easier to employers as well as regulators to detect unequal treatment ( Cordova 1992 ) . 1414141414 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW The existence of sanctions exerts an im - portant effect on how firms’ personnel prac - tices influence ascriptive inequality . For in - stance , the California Personnel Board en - couraged state agencies to integrate all jobs , but threatened budget cuts for only those agencies that failed to increase women’s and minorities’ presence in specific targeted jobs . The targeted jobs became more inte - grated , but the nontargeted jobs became more segregated ( Baron , Mittman , and Newman 1991 ) . The amount of ascriptive inequality in an organization also depends on whether orga - nizational practices have a disparate impact on ascriptive groups . Disparate impact oc - curs when some neutral mechanism trans - lates group differences on position , experi - ence , or a credential into differential out - comes for ascriptive groups . For example , a nepotism requirement for membership in an all - white union local , although neutral on its face , excluded workers of color from the lo - cal ( Freshman 2000 , note 142 ) . Whether or not policies have a disparate impact on as - criptive groups depends both on the practice and on whether the groups’ members are dif - ferentially situated with respect to the prac - tice ( Hernes 1998 : 81 – 82 ) . Whether or not a practice has a disparate impact can depend on whether a firm employs ascriptive groups in different jobs and whether the risk of a layoff , the chance of a promotion , or access to some benefit depends on one’s organiza - tional location ( e . g . , Yamagata et al . 1997 ) . 19 Summary . The presence and form of or - ganizational practices that require , permit , or forestall differential treatment are the proxi - mate causes of varying levels of ascriptive inequality in places of work . They operate primarily by affecting allocators’ access to information about allocatees’ ascribed char - acteristics , controlling whether allocators can act on such information , and the extent to which they make differential outcomes visible . More generally , organizational - level mechanisms influence levels of ascriptive inequality by the extent to which they ex - plicitly treat members of different ascriptive groups differently ; the extent to which they mediate the effects of intrapsychic or inter - personal mechanisms by curtailing , allow - ing , or even encouraging allocators to use discretion in personnel decisions ; and the extent to which neutral organizational prac - tices have a different effect on members of different ascriptive groups . IDENTIFYING MECHANISMS FOR STUDY Here I suggest ways to identify mechanisms for investigation . A promising approach lies in exploring contextual and structural “ef - fects . ” Structure and context are fundamen - tal concepts in sociology because they high - light the importance of setting on social pro - cesses . Although structural and contextual effects are not themselves mechanisms ( Sørensen 1998 : 253 ) , they are proxies for mechanisms that vary across settings . Varia - tion in the association between cities’ racial composition and the earnings gap across re - gions illustrates this point : Racial pay gaps for women are low in midwestern cities with low immigration , high - wage manufacturing , and higher levels of unionization ( McCall 2001 : 538 ) . Researchers should pursue how collective bargaining and the typical pay of blue - collar jobs penalize minority women for their labor market share . Other promis - ing contextual or structural differences in - clude the smaller racial pay gap in govern - ment jobs than in the private sector ( Grodsky and Pager 2001 ) , the difference in white men’s promotion rates across work settings varying in their race and sex composition ( Baldi and McBrier 1997 ) , and men’s greater advantage in the chance to exert influence over female coworkers when the sexes work in the same rather than in separate establish - ments ( Mueller , Mulinge , and Glass 2002 : 176 ) . These and many other structural and contextual effects point to mechanisms for study . Theory and research also can suggest or - ganizational - level mechanisms for study . Research building on Weber’s ( [ 1922 ] 1968 ) recognition of bureaucracy’s constraining impact on managerial discretion has identi - fied several likely mechanisms that affect ascriptive inequality , foremost among them being formalization ( Bielby 2000 ; Nelson and Bridges 1999 ; Perry , Davis - Blake , and 19 The alternative to disparate impact—identi - cal impact—is likely to be taken for granted and hence is less obvious as a mechanism . MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY 1515151515 Kulik 1994 ; Reskin 2000 ) . Investigating the specific processes that link organizations’ sex composition to women’s share of top jobs can adjudicate among theoretical inter - pretation , like labor supply , institutional norms , and internal pressure groups ( Cohen , Broschak , and Haveman 1998 ; Konrad and Pfeffer 1991 ; Reskin and McBrier 2000 ; Tomaskovic - Devey et al . 1996 ) . Given the role of organizational inertia for maintaining inequality , Baron and Pfeffer ( 1994 : 205 ) called for research on its causes . Kim’s ( 1999 ) account of the effect on the pay gap in 1993 of a 1931 decision by the California Civil Service to pay workers in predomi - nantly female jobs less than comparably qualified workers in male jobs demonstrates this strategy’s potential payoff in illuminat - ing the mechanisms implicated in ascriptive inequality . If , as Cancio et al . ( 1996 ) specu - lated , the declining enforcement of EEO laws widened the racial pay gap , we need to investigate how this occurred . Finally , dem - onstrated disparities beg the question of mechanisms . Smith’s ( 2001 , 2002 ) report that African American workers are less likely than whites to have authority or con - trol over financial resources at work directs us to look for operative mechanisms . Case studies of firms offer a third source for identifying mechanisms for study . Fernandez’s ( 2001 ) detailed account of how technological change at a food - processing company increased race and sex wage in - equality is a case in point . Mechanisms ap - parently contributing to these increases in - cluded skill upgrading concomitant with computerizing the production process , whose effects fell particularly heavily on the firm’s black workers . Dampening the ascrip - tive effect of technological change were a no - layoff policy during retooling , a wage guarantee for workers in retooled jobs , and substantial retraining . Of course , case stud - ies do not permit conclusions about causal mechanisms unless they also consider events that did not occur ( e . g . , the firm declining to use upgrading as an opportunity to bust the union or to move to a right - to - work state , or failing to actively recruit minority and fe - male candidates for the new high - tech jobs ) . In addition , they typically lack the covari - ation needed for conclusions about causal mechanisms . Nonetheless , case studies are excellent sources for identifying possible causal mechanisms ( Cockburn 1991 ; Cohn 1985 ; Milkman 1987 ; Pierce 1998 ) . Studies of organizations’ attempts to reduce ascrip - tive inequality ( e . g . , Sturm 2001 ) are espe - cially likely to be useful . Discrimination lawsuits provide a fourth source of possible mechanisms for system - atic analysis . Because plaintiffs must assert exactly how employers have disadvantaged them , legal documents provide detailed ac - counts of employment practices from both sides . Nelson and Bridges’s ( 1999 ) analyses of four discrimination cases illustrate how litigation can reveal possible causal mecha - nisms in ascriptive inequality . They found , for example , that by benchmarking predomi - nantly - male and predominantly - female jobs to jobs in the private sector , public employ - ers exacerbated private - sector pay dispari - ties . They discovered too that unionization contributed to the earnings disparity between the sexes because men’s jobs were more likely to be unionized , and male - dominated locals were more influential than female - dominated locals in the state’s pay - setting bureaucracy . Law review articles also out - line mechanisms ( e . g . , Oppenheimer 1993 ; Schultz 1998 ; Schultz and Petterson 1992 ) , and published lawsuits provide considerable detail as to mechanisms ( e . g . , Wards Cove v . Atonio , U . S . Supreme Court 493 U . S . 802 ; 110 S . Ct . 38 [ 1989 ] ) . CONCLUSIONS Insofar as data exist , sociologists have thor - oughly documented sex and race disparities in work outcomes . 20 And there our achieve - ments end . Although researchers try to ex - plain observed inequality , theories about ac - tors’ motives guide the search for explana - tion , and it is all but impossible to know ac - tors’ motives . The product of this approach is not explanation , but never - ending and un - profitable debate over the role of unobserved motives . Although the most satisfying expla - nations address both why and how , as Whorf ( 1956 ) put it , “The WHY of understanding 20 Disparities across some racial categories , across ethnic groups , and by sexual orientation , disability , age , and religion are less well docu - mented . 1616161616 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW may remain for a long time mysterious but the HOW . . . of understanding . . . is dis - coverable” ( p . 239 , capitalization in origi - nal ) . Hedström and Swedberg ( 1998 : 10 ) concur that causal explanation must address how a relationship came about . If we are se - rious about explaining variation in inequal - ity , our theories and analytic models must include indicators of causal mechanisms . Two disciplinary practices reinforce our preoccupation with motive - based theories : the balkanization of research on ascriptive stratification and our reliance on individual - level data . The balkanization of research re - flects the popular notion that different types of ascriptive inequality have different causes . This parochialism conceals both their uniqueness and their fundamental simi - larities . All forms of ascriptive stratification involve long - standing relations of inequality within stable hierarchies that are similarly ordered across spheres . Only by breaking out of this parochialism can we find general explanations for ascriptive inequality and discover whether and how they must be modified for particular ascriptive character - istics . Certainly the mechanisms that affect levels of ascriptive inequality are not unique to specific ascriptive divisions . The formal - ization of Home Depot’s application and hir - ing procedures following a sex discrimina - tion lawsuit benefited men of color as well as women ( Sturm 2001 ) . Although interdis - ciplinary collaboration is in vogue , scholars interested in ascriptive inequality must be - gin with intra disciplinary dialogue and col - laboration . For this to happen , the desire to develop better explanations will not suffice ; we need mechanisms that foster intradisci - plinary dialogue . The second obstacle to identifying the mechanisms that cause ascriptive inequality is that most of the readily available data come from surveys of individuals . Data for individuals can address only the equality of individual - level inputs and outcomes . As a result , the only explanations for which most individual - level data are suited are group - linked “deficiencies” ( which are relevant be - cause of employers’ hypothesized motives ) or the unobserved motives of unobserved actors . In analyses based on standard data sets , explanations involving unobserved mo - tives are necessarily speculative because the data do not include allocators ( and even if they did , their motives are all - but impossible to know ) . Group - difference explanations are unsatisfying , both because they are founded on implicit assumptions about employers’ unmeasured motives and because they fail to indicate how group differences on indi - vidual - level independent variables give rise to group differences in outcomes . And both approaches ignore our discipline’s unique strength : the analysis of the operation of so - cial structures . To explain variation in levels of inequality across ascriptively - defined groups , across contexts , and over time , we must analyze data for organizational and in - dividual allocators that include allocation mechanisms . Intellectually , the solution is simple : con - centrate on allocation mechanisms . In ex - plaining social stratification , identifying mechanisms is particularly important be - cause—as the methods for distributing social goods—they are the engines of equality and inequality . As a practical matter , reorienting our search for explanations will require a major shift in the kinds of data in which our discipline invests . A large share of public funding for sociology goes to surveying in - dividuals . As a result , the burden of collect - ing data that include mechanisms has fallen on individual researchers . Publicly available data on employers would permit a broad shift to the study of mechanisms . Much of the mechanism - based explanatory research on ascriptive inequal - ity has come from just two data sets : the Na - tional Organizations Study ( NOS ) and the Multi - City Study of Urban Inequality ( MCSUI ) . Although the researchers who col - lected these data made them available to the research community , the dissemination of such data can take years . Collecting data like the NOS and MCSUI for public use will be expensive , but our continuing investment in surveying individuals is also costly in terms of the return in new knowledge . With respect to ascriptive inequality , increasingly sophis - ticated analyses of the same individual - level data usually tell us what we already know : that significant disparities exist . And they fail to reveal what we don’t know : the mechanisms that cause ascriptive inequality to vary in intensity across groups and set - tings . MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY 1717171717 In the absence of public data sets that in - clude indicators of mechanisms , our primary recourse is the systematic observation of how specific mechanisms in particular set - tings affect levels of ascriptive inequality . As we accumulate empirical knowledge , we can generalize to more abstract mechanisms whose explanatory power extends beyond the settings we have studied . My discussion of organizational - level mechanisms illus - trates how we can theoretically aggregate specific mechanisms into more general ones . For example , organizations use many mech - anisms to ensure that allocators know or are ignorant of the ascriptive characteristics of those they are evaluating ; each mechanism entails attaching or eliminating ascriptive identifiers . For example , by investigating which organizations do one , the other , or neither ; whether there are conditions under which the effect of attaching or eliminating ascriptive information is the opposite of those summarized above and similar ques - tions , we can build general theory . We stand to gain not only better research and better theory ; we stand to gain the op - portunity to meaningfully contribute to so - cial policy . Stratification scholarship is not simply a matter of academic interest . It can be consequential for the kinds of jobs people have , the education they can afford for their children , whether they have health insurance , and whether young people in poor neighbor - hoods have any basis to hope for a better fu - ture . We have done a stellar job of document - ing the disparities across ascriptively - defined groups . Increasingly researchers mention the policy implications of their findings . For ex - ample , in the debate discussed above , Cancio et al . ( 1996 ) concluded from their analyses that we need better enforcement of antidis - crimination laws , and Farkas and Vicknair ( 1996 ) called for policies to upgrade minori - ties’ cognitive skills . Both of these recom - mendations have merit , but neither of the analyses on which the recommendations were based provides persuasive support for the recommended policy . If our analyses can - not convince other sociologists , how can we hope to convince policymakers ? And analy - ses that do not address the causal mecha - nisms are not convincing . By pursuing the mechanisms responsible for varying levels of inequality , our scholar - ship can contribute to ameliorating these dis - parities . The division of labor in the social sciences especially qualifies sociologists to address policies related to ascriptive in - equality . In pursuing motive - based explana - tions and analyzing individual - level data , we have abdicated that role . Indeed , that abdi - cation inevitably follows from estimating models without mechanisms , because such models provide no guidance for developing social policies for a more just society . Pur - suing research that takes seriously how to reduce ascriptive inequality will advance scientific knowledge—and more important , it will produce scholarship that addresses the social inequality that drew many of us to so - ciology in the first place . Barbara Reskin is the S . Frank Miyamoto Pro - fessor of Sociology at the University of Washing - ton . Among her recent publications are “Rethink - ing Employment Discrimination” ( pp . 218 – 44 in The New Economic Sociology , Russell Sage , 2001 ) , “Discrimination and Its Remedies” ( pp . 567 – 600 in Sourcebook on Labor Market Re - search , Plenum , 2001 ) , and “Raising the Bar : A Social Science Critique of Recent Increases to Passing Scores on the Bar Exam” ( with Deborah Merritt and Lowell Hargens , Cincinnati Law Re - view , vol . 69 , pp . 929 – 68 ) . She has just finished an amicus brief for the American Sociological Association on behalf of the Student Intervenors in Grutter v . Bollinger , a lawsuit challenging the affirmative action program in the University of Michigan Law School . She continues to study ways to assess occupational segregation across multiple ascriptive groups and the institutional factors that contribute to racial and sex differ - ences in the careers of law faculty . REFERENCES Allport , Gordon . 1954 . The Nature of Prejudice . New York : Anchor Doubleday . Baldi , Stephane and Debra B . McBrier . 1997 . “Do the Determinants of Promotion Differ for Blacks and Whites ? ” Work and Occupations 24 : 478 – 97 . Bargh , John A . 1999 . “The Cognitive Monster : The Case against the Controllability of Auto - matic Stereotype Effects . ” Pp . 361 – 82 in Dual Process Theories in Social Psychology , edited by S . Chaiken and Y . Trope . New York : Guilford . Baron , James N . , Brian S . Mittman , and Andrew E . Newman . 1991 . “Targets of Opportunity : Organizational and Environmental Determi - nants of Gender Integration within the Califor - 1818181818 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW nia Civil Service , 1979 – 1985 . ” American Journal of Sociology 96 : 1362 – 1401 . Baron , James N . and Jeffrey Pfeffer . 1994 . “The Social Psychology of Organizations and In - equality . ” Social Psychology Quarterly 57 : 190 – 209 . Becker , Gary S . 1971 . The Economics of Dis - crimination . Chicago , IL : University of Chi - cago Press . Beggs , John J . , Wayne J . Villemez , and Ruth Arnold . 1997 . “Black Population Concentra - tion and Black - White Inequality . ” Social Forces 76 : 65 – 91 . Berger , Joseph , Bernard P . Cohen , and Morris Zelditch . 1972 . “Status Characteristics and So - cial Interaction . ” American Sociological Re - view 37 : 241 – 55 . Bielby , William T . 2000 . “Minimizing Work - place Gender and Racial Bias . ” Contemporary Sociology 29 : 120 – 29 . Bielby , William T . and Michael Bourgeois . 2002 . “Insuring Discrimination : Making a Market for Employment Practice Liability Insurance . ” Pa - per presented at the annual meeting of the American Sociological Association , August , Chicago , IL . Bisom - Rapp , Susan . 2001 . “An Ounce of Preven - tion Is a Poor Substitute for a Pound of Cure : Confronting the Developing Jurisprudence of Education and Prevention in Employment Dis - crimination Law . ” Berkeley Journal of Em - ployment and Labor Law 22 : 1 – 47 . Blalock , Hubert M . 1956 . “Economic Discrimi - nation and Negro Increase . ” American Socio - logical Review 21 : 584 – 8 . ——— . 1991 . Understanding Social Inequality : Modelling Allocation Processes . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Blau , Francine D . , Marianne A . Ferber , and Anne E . Winkler . 2001 . The Economics of Women , Men , and Work . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . Blau , Peter M . 1977 . Inequality and Heterogene - ity . New York : Free Press . Blumrosen , Alfred W . 1993 . Modern Law . Madi - son , WI : University of Wisconsin Press . Brewer , Marilynn B . and Rupert J . Brown . 1998 . “Intergroup Relations . ” Pp . 554 – 94 in Hand - book of Social Psychology , edited by D . T . Gil - bert , S . T . Fiske , and G . Lindzey . New York : McGraw - Hill . Brown , Rupert J . 1995 . Prejudice . Oxford , En - gland : Blackwell . Budig , Michelle J . and Paula England . 2001 . “The Wage Penalty for Motherhood . ” Ameri - can Sociological Review 66 : 204 – 25 . Burr , Jeffrey A . , Omer R . Galle , and Mark A . Fossett . 1991 . “Racial Occupational Inequality in Southern Metropolitan Areas , 1940 – 1980 . ” Social Forces 69 : 831 – 50 . Burstein , Paul . 1989 . “Attacking Sex Discrimi - nation in the Labor Market . ” Social Forces 67 : 641 – 65 . Burstein , Paul and Mark Evan Edwards . 1994 . “The Impact of Employment Discrimination Litigation on Racial Disparity in Earnings . ” Law and Society Review 28 : 79 – 111 . Cancio , A . Silvia , T . David Evans , and David J . Maume Jr . 1996 . “Reconsidering the Declin - ing Significance of Race . ” American Socio - logical Review 61 : 541 – 56 . Carroll , Glenn R . and Michael T . Hannan . 2000 . The Demography of Corporations and Indus - tries . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Cassirer , Naomi . 1996 . “Race Composition and Earnings : Effects by Race , Region , and Gen - der . ” Social Science Research 25 : 375 – 99 . Chen , Mark and John A . Bargh . 1997 . “Non - conscious Behavioral Confirmation Process . ” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 33 : 541 – 60 . Clayton , Susan D . and Faye J . Crosby . 1992 . Jus - tice , Gender , and Affirmative Action . Ann Ar - bor , MI : University of Michigan Press . Cockburn , Cynthia . 1991 . In the Way of Women : Men’s Resistance to Sex Equality in Organiza - tions . Ithaca , NY : Industrial Labor Relations Press . Cohen , Lisa E . , Joseph P . Broschak , and Heather A . Haveman . 1998 . “And Then There Were More ? The Effects of Organizational Sex Composition on Hiring and Promotion . ” American Sociological Review 63 : 711 – 27 . Cohen , Philip N . 1998 . “Black Concentration Ef - fects on Black - White and Gender Inequality . ” Social Forces 77 : 207 – 29 . Cohn , Sam . 1985 . The Process of Occupational Sex Typing . Philadelphia , PA : Temple Univer - sity Press . Collins , Randall . 1975 . Conflict Sociology . New York : Academic . Cordova , Diana I . 1992 . “Cognitive Limitations and Affirmative Action . ” Social Justice Re - search 5 : 319 – 33 . Dobbin , Frank , John R . Sutton , John W . Meyer , and W . Richard Scott . 1993 . “Equal Opportu - nity Law and the Construction of Internal La - bor Markets . ” American Journal of Sociology 99 : 396 – 427 . Donohue , John J . and Peter Siegelman . 1991 . “The Changing Nature of Employment Dis - crimination Litigation . ” Stanford Law Review 43 : 983 – 1033 . Edelman , Lauren B . 1992 . “Legal Ambiguity and Symbolic Structures . ” American Journal of Sociology 97 : 1531 – 76 . Elliott , James R . 2001 . “Referral Hiring and Eth - nically Homogeneous Jobs . ” Social Science Research 30 : 401 – 25 . MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY 1919191919 Elster , Jon . 1989 . Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences . New York : Cambridge University Press . England , Paula . 1994 . “Neoclassical Economists’ Theories of Discrimination . ” Pp . 59 – 69 in Equal Employment Opportunity , edited by P . Burstein . New York : Aldine De Gruyter . Farkas , George and Keven Vicknair . 1996 . “Ap - propriate Tests of Racial Wage Discrimination Require Controls for Cognitive Skill : Com - ment on Cancio , Evans , and Maume . ” Ameri - can Sociological Review 61 : 557 – 60 . Farrell , Michael . 1994 . “Adelaide Bartlett and the Pimlico Mystery . ” British Medical Journal 309 : 1720 – 23 . Retreived January 22 , 2003 ( http : / / www . bmj . com / cgi / content / full / 309 / 6970 / 1720 ) . Fernandez , Roberto . 2001 . “Skill - Biased Techno - logical Change and Wage Inequality . ” Ameri - can Journal of Sociology 107 : 273 – 320 . Fernandez , Roberto , Emilio J . Castilla , and Paul Moore . 2000 . “Social Capital at Work . ” Ameri - can Journal of Sociology 105 : 1288 – 1356 . Fernandez , Roberto and Nancy Weinberg . 1997 . “Sifting and Sorting : Personal Contacts and Hiring in a Retail Bank . ” American Sociologi - cal Review 62 : 883 – 902 . Fischer , Claude , Michael Hout , Martin Sanchez - Jankowski , Samuel R . Lucas , Ann Swidler , and Kim Voss . 1996 . Inequality by Design : Cracking the Bell Curve Myth . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Fiske , Susan T . 1998 . “Stereotyping , Prejudice , and Discrimination . ” Pp . 357 – 411 in The Handbook of Social Psychology , edited by D . T . Gilbert , S . T . Fiske , and G . Lindzey . Bos - ton , MA : McGraw - Hill . Flack , Meg . 1999 . “Working the Family In . ” Ph . D . dissertation , Department of Sociology , The Ohio State University , Columbus , OH . Foddy , Margaret and Michael Smithson . 1999 . “Can Gender Inequalities Be Eliminated ? ” So - cial Psychology Quarterly 62 : 307 – 24 . Fordham , Edward W . 1951 . Notable Cross - Ex - aminations . London , England : Constable . Freshman , Clark . 2000 . “Whatever Happened to Anti - Semitism ? ” Cornell Law Review 85 : 313 – 442 . Galanter , Marc . 1974 . “Why the Haves Come Out Ahead . ” Law and Society 9 : 95 – 160 . Garner , Bryan A . , ed . 1999 . Black’s Law Dictio - nary . St . Paul , MN : West Group . Goldin , Claudia and Cecilia Rouse . 2000 . “Or - chestrating Impartiality . ” American Economic Review 90 : 715 – 41 . Graham , Hugh Davis . 1990 . The Civil Rights Era . New York : Oxford University Press . Greenwald , Anthony G . and Mahzarin R . Banaji . 1995 . “Implicit Social Cognition . ” Psychologi - cal Review 102 : 1 – 27 . Grodsky , Eric and Devah Pager . 2001 . “The Structure of Disadvantage : Individual and Oc - cupational Determinants of the Black - White Wage Gap . ” American Sociological Review 66 : 542 – 67 . Haagsma , Rein . 1998 . “Statistical Discrimination in the Labour Market . ” The Economist 146 : 321 – 45 . Heckman , James J . and Brook S . Payner . 1989 . “Determining the Impact of Federal Antidis - crimination Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks . ” American Economic Review 79 : 138 – 77 . Hedström , Peter and Richard Swedberg , eds . 1998 . Social Mechanisms . Cambridge , En - gland : Cambridge University Press . Helb , Michelle R . , Jessica B . Foster , Laura M . Mannix , and John F . Dovidio . 2002 . “Formal and Interpersonal Discrimination . ” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 28 : 815 – 25 . Hernes , Gudmund . 1998 . “Real Virtuality . ” Pp . 74 – 101 in Social Mechanisms , edited by P . Hedström and R . Swedberg . Cambridge , En - gland : Cambridge University Press . Hochschild , Arlie Russell . 1997 . The Time Bind . New York : Metropolitan . Holzer , Harry H . 1996 . What Employers Want . New York : Russell Sage . Huffman , Matt L . and Steven C . Velasco . 1997 . “When More Is Less . ” Work and Occupations 24 : 214 – 44 . Jacobs , Jerry A . 1999 . “The Sex Segregation of Occupations . ” Pp . 125 – 41 in Handbook of Gender and Work , edited by G . N . Powell . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Jencks , Christopher and Michelle Phillips , eds . 1998 . The Black - White Test Score Gap . Wash - ington , DC : Brookings Institution . Kalleberg , Arne L . , David Knoke , Peter V . Marsden , and Joe L . Spaeth . 1996 . Organiza - tions in America . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Kanter , Rosabeth Moss . 1977 . Men and Women of the Corporation . New York : Basic . Kim , Marlene . 1999 . “Inertia and Discrimination in the California State Civil Service . ” Indus - trial Relations 38 : 46 – 68 . Kiser , Edgar and Michael Hechter . 1991 . “The Role of General Theory in Comparative - His - torical Sociology . ” American Journal of Soci - ology 97 : 1 – 30 . Konrad , Alison M . and Frank Linnehan . 1999 . “Affirmative Action . ” Pp . 429 – 52 in Hand - book of Gender and Work , edited by G . N . Powell . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Konrad , Alison M . and Jeffrey Pfeffer . 1991 . “Understanding the Hiring of Women and Mi - norities in Educational Institutions . ” Sociology of Education 64 : 141 – 57 . Lin , Nan . 2000 . “Inequality in Social Capital . ” Contemporary Sociology 29 : 785 – 95 . 2020202020 AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW AMERICAN SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW Lye , Linda Cheng Yee . 1998 . “Title VII’s Tangled Tale . ” Berkeley Journal of Employ - ment and Labor Law 19 : 315 – 61 . MacIver , Robert M . [ 1942 ] 1964 . Social Causa - tion . Reprint , New York : Harper Torchbooks . Major , Brenda . 1989 . “Gender Differences in Comparisons and Entitlement . ” Journal of So - cial Issues 45 : 99 – 115 . Marsden , Peter V . and Elizabeth H . Gorman . 1998 . “Social Capital in Internal Staffing Prac - tices . ” Pp . 167 – 83 in Corporate Social Capi - tal , edited by R . T . A . J . Leenders and S . Gabbay . Amsterdam , The Netherlands : Kluwer . Maume , David J . , A . Silvia Cancio , and T . David Evans . 1996 . “Cognitive Skills and Racial Wage Inequality . ” Reply to Farkas and Vicknair . American Sociological Review 61 : 561 – 64 . McCall , Leslie . 2001 . “Sources of Racial Wage Inequality in Metropolitan Labor Markets . ” American Sociological Review 66 : 520 – 41 . Milkman , Ruth . 1987 . Gender at Work . Urbana , IL : University of Illinois . Moss , Phillip and Chris Tilly . 1996 . “Soft Skills and Race : An Investigation of Black Men’s Employment Problems . ” Work and Occupa - tions 23 : 252 – 76 . Mueller , Charles W . , Munyae Mulinge , and Jen - nifer Glass . 2002 . “Interactional Processes and Gender Workplace Inequalities . ” Social Psy - chology Quarterly 65 : 163 – 85 . Nelson , Robert L . and William P . Bridges . 1999 . Legalizing Gender Inequality . New York : Cambridge University Press . Ng , Sik Hung . 1984 . “Equity and Social Catego - rization Effects on Intergroup Allocation of Rewards . ” British Journal of Social Psychol - ogy 23 : 165 . O’Connor , Alice , Chris Tilly , and Lawrence Bobo , eds . 2001 . Urban Inequality : Evidence from Four Cities . New York : Russell Sage Foundation . Oppenheimer , David B . 1993 . “Negligent Dis - crimination . ” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 141 : 899 – 972 . Perry , Elissa L . , Alison Davis - Blake , and Carol T . Kulik . 1994 . “Explaining Gender - Based Se - lection Decisions . ” Academy of Management Review 19 : 786 – 820 . Peterson , Trond and Laurie A . Morgan . 1995 . “Separate and Unequal : Occupation - Establish - ment Sex Segregation and the Gender Wage Gap . ” American Journal of Sociology 101 : 329 – 65 . Peterson , Trond , Ishak Saporta , and Marc - David L . Seidel . 2000 . “Offering a Job : Meritocracy and Social Networks . ” American Journal of Sociology 106 : 763 – 816 . Phelps , Edmund S . 1972 . “The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism . ” American Economic Review 62 : 659 – 61 . Pierce , Jennifer . 1998 . Gender Trials : Emotional Lives in a Contemporary Law Firm . Berkeley , CA : University of California Press . Pugh , Meredith . D . and Ralph Wahrman . 1983 . “Neutralizing Sexism in Mixed - Sex Groups . ” American Journal of Sociology 88 : 746 – 62 . Raudenbush , Stephen and Rafa Kasim . 1998 . “Cognitive Skill and Economic Inequality . ” Harvard Educational Review 68 : 33 – 79 . Reskin , Barbara F . 1988 . “Bringing the Men Back In . ” Gender and Society 2 : 58 – 81 . ——— . 1998 . The Realities of Affirmative Ac - tion . Washington , DC : American Sociological Association . ——— . 2000 . “The Proximate Causes of Dis - crimination . ” Contemporary Sociology 29 : 319 – 29 . Reskin , Barbara F . and Camille Z . Charles . 1999 . “Now You See ‘Em , Now You Don’t : Theo - retical Approaches to Race and Gender in La - bor Markets . ” Pp . 380 – 407 in Latinas and Af - rican American Women in the Labor Market , edited by I . Browne . New York : Russell Sage Foundation . Reskin , Barbara F . and Debra B . McBrier . 2000 . “Why Not Ascription ? Organizations’ Em - ployment of Male and Female Managers . ” American Sociological Review 65 : 210 – 33 . Reskin , Barbara F . and Catharine Ross . 1992 . “Jobs , Authority , and Earnings among Manag - ers : The Continuing Significance of Sex . ” Work and Occupations 19 : 342 – 65 . Richtel , Matt . 2000 . “Online Revolution’s Latest Twist : Computers Screening Job Seekers . ” New York Times , February 6 , sec . 1 , p . 1 . Ridgeway , Cecilia . 1997 . “Interaction and the Conservation of Gender Inequality . ” American Sociological Review 62 : 218 – 35 . Rodgers , William M . , III , and William E . Spriggs . 1996 . “What Does the AFQT Really Measure ? ” Review of Black Political Economy 24 : 13 – 46 . Rosenbloom , David H . 1977 . Federal Equal Em - ployment Opportunity : Politics and Public Personnel Administration . New York : Praeger . Salancik , Gerald R . and Jeffrey Pfeffer . 1978 . “Uncertainty , Secrecy , and the Choice of Simi - lar Others . ” Social Psychology 41 : 246 – 55 . Schelling , Thomas C . 1978 . Micromotives and Macrobehavior . New York : Norton . Schultz , Vicki . 1998 . “Reconceptualizing Sexual Harassment . ” Yale Law Journal 107 : 1683 – 1805 . Schultz , Vicki and Stephen Petterson . 1992 . “Race , Gender , Work , and Choice : An Empiri - cal Study of Lack of Interest Defense in Title VII Cases Challenging Job Segregation . ” Uni - versity of Chicago Law Review 59 : 1073 – 1181 . MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY MECHANISMS IN ASCRIPTIVE INEQUALITY 2121212121 Selmi , Michael . 1996 . “The Value of the EEOC . ” Ohio State Law Journal 57 : 1 – 64 . ——— . 1998 . “Public vs . Private Enforcement of Civil Rights . ” UCLA Law Review 45 : 1401 – 59 . Smith , Ryan A . 2001 . “Particularism in Control over Monetary Resources at Work . ” Work and Occupations 28 : 447 – 68 . ——— . 2002 . “Class , Gender , and Race in Au - thority Outcomes at Work . ” Annual Review of Sociology 28 : 509 – 42 . Sørensen , Aage B . 1998 . “Theoretical Mecha - nisms and the Empirical Study of Social Pro - cesses . ” Pp . 238 – 66 in Social Mechanisms , ed - ited by P . Hedström and R . Swedberg . New York : Cambridge University Press . Stinchcombe , Arthur . 1965 . “Social Structure and Organizations . ” Pp . 142 – 93 in Handbook of Organizations , edited by J . G . March . New York : Rand McNally . Stryker , Robin . 2001 . “Disparate Impact and the Quota Debates . ” Sociological Quarterly 42 : 13 – 46 . Sturm , Susan . 2001 . “Second Generation Em - ployment Discrimination . ” Columbia Law Re - view 101 : 458 – 568 . Swim , Janet , Eugene Borgida , Geoffrey Maruyama , and David G . Myers . 1989 . “Joan McKay versus John McKay : Do Gender Ste - reotypes Bias Evaluations ? ” Psychological Bulletin 105 : 409 – 42 . Tetlock , Philip E . 1983 . “Accountability and Complexity of Thought . ” Journal of Personal - ity and Social Psychology 45 : 47 – 83 . ——— . 1992 . “The Impact of Accountability on Judgment and Choice . ” Advances in Experi - mental Social Psychology 25 : 331 – 76 . Tilly , Charles . 1998 . Durable Inequality . Berke - ley , CA : University of California Press . Tomaskovic - Devey , Donald . 1993 . Gender and Racial Inequality at Work . Ithaca , NY : ILR . Tomaskovic - Devey , Donald , Arne L . Kalleberg , and Peter V . Marsden . 1996 . “Organizational Patterns of Gender Segregation . ” Pp . 276 – 301 in Organizations in America , edited by A . L . Kalleberg , D . Knoke , P . V . Marsden , and J . L . Spaeth . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Waldfogel , Jane . 1997 . “The Effect of Children on Women’s Wages . ” American Sociological Review 62 : 209 – 18 . Waters , Mary C . 1999 . Black Identities . New York : Russell Sage Foundation . Watkins , Steve . 1993 . “Racism du Jour at Shoney’s . ” The Nation 257 : 424 – 8 . Weber , Max . [ 1922 ] 1968 . Economy and Society . Edited by G . Roth and C . Wittich . Reprint , New York : Bedminster . Whorf , Benjamin L . [ 1941 ] 1956 . “Languages and Logic . ” Pp . 233 – 45 in Language , Thought , and Reality : Selected Writings , edited by J . B . Carroll . Reprint , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Wilson , Timothy D . and Nancy Brekke . 1994 . “Mental Contamination and Mental Correc - tion . ” Psychological Bulletin 116 : 117 – 42 . Word , Carl O . , Mark P . Zanna , and Joel Cooper . 1974 . “The Nonverbal Mediation of Self - Ful - filling Prophecies in Interracial Interaction . ” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 10 : 109 – 20 . Yamagata , Hirashi , Kuang S . Yeh , Shelby Stewman , and Hiroko Dodge . 1997 . “Sex Seg - regation and Glass Ceilings . ” American Jour - nal of Sociology 103 : 531 – 65 .