B ecause meaningful sentences are composed of meaningful words , any system that hopes to process natural languages as people do must have information about words and their meanings . This information is traditionally provided through dictionaries , and machine - readable dictionaries are now widely avail - able . But dictionary entries evolved for the conve - nience of human readers , not for machines . WordNet 1 provides a more effective combination of traditional lexicographic information and modern computing . WordNet is an online lex - ical database designed for use under program control . English nouns , verbs , adjectives , and adverbs are organized into sets of synonyms , each representing a lexicalized concept . Semantic relations link the synonym sets [ 4 ] . Language Definitions We define the vocabulary of a language as a set W of pairs ( f , s ) , where a form f is a string over a finite alphabet , and a sense s is an element from a given set of meanings . Forms can be utterances composed of a string of phonemes or inscriptions composed of a string of characters . Each form with a sense in a language is called a word in that language . A dictionary is an alphabetical list of words . A word that has more than one sense is polysemous ; two words that share at least one sense in common are said to be synonymous . A word’s usage is the set C of linguistic contexts in which the word can be used . The syntax of the language partitions C into syntactic categories . Words that occur in the subset N are nouns , words that occur in the subset V are verbs , and so on . Within each category of syntactic contexts are further cate - gories of semantic contexts—the set of contexts in which a particular f can be used to express a particular s . The morphology of the language is defined in terms of a set M of relations between word forms . For example , the morphology of English is partitioned into inflectional , derivational , and compound morphological relations . Finally , the lexical semantics of the language is defined in terms of a set S of relations between word senses . The semantic relations into which a word enters deter - mine the definition of that word . AI commonsense problems COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM November 1995 / Vol . 38 , No . 11 39 WordNet : A Lexical Database for English George A . Miller This database links English nouns , verbs , adjectives , and adverbs to sets of synonyms that are in turn linked through semantic relations that determine word definitions . 1 WordNet is a registered trademark of Princeton University , available by anonymous ftp from clarity . princeton . edu More Than 166 , 000 Word Form and Sense Pairs In WordNet , a form is represented by a string of ASCII characters , and a sense is represented by the set of ( one or more ) synonyms that have that sense . WordNet contains more than 118 , 000 different word forms and more than 90 , 000 different word senses , or more than 166 , 000 ( f , s ) pairs . Approximately 17 % of the words in WordNet are polysemous ; approximate - ly 40 % have one or more synonyms . WordNet respects the syntactic categories noun , verb , adjective , and adverb —the so - called open - class words ( see Table 1 ) . For example , word forms like “back , ’’ “right , ’’ or “well’’ are interpreted as nouns in some linguistic contexts , as verbs in other contexts , and as adjectives or adverbs in other contexts ; each is entered separately into WordNet . It is assumed that the closed - class categories of English—some 300 prepositions , pronouns , and determiners—play an important role in any parsing system ; they are given no semantic explication in WordNet . Inflectional morphology for each syntactic category is accommodated by the interface to the WordNet database . For example , if information is requested for “went , ” the system will return what it knows about the verb “go . ” On the other hand , derivational and compound morphology are entered into the data - base without explicit recognition of morphological relations . For example , “interpret , ” “interpreter , ’’ “misinterpret , ” “interpretation , ” “reinterpretation , ” “interpretive , ” “interpretative , ” and “interpretive dancing” are all distinct words in WordNet . A much larger variety of semantic relations can be defined between words and between word senses than are incorporated into WordNet . The semantic relations in WordNet [ 6 ] were chosen because they apply broad - ly throughout English and because they are familiar— a user need not have advanced training in linguistics to understand them . They are shown in Table 1 . WordNet includes the following semantic relations : • Synonymy is WordNet’s basic relation , because WordNet uses sets of synonyms ( synsets ) to repre - sent word senses . Synonymy ( syn same , onyma name ) is a symmetric relation between word forms . • Antonymy ( opposing - name ) is also a symmetric semantic relation between word forms , especially important in organizing the meanings of adjectives and adverbs . • Hyponymy ( sub - name ) and its inverse , hypernymy ( super - name ) , are transitive relations between synsets . Because there is usually only one hyper - nym , this semantic relation organizes the mean - ings of nouns into a hierarchical structure . • Meronymy ( part - name ) and its inverse , holonymy ( whole - name ) , are complex semantic relations . WordNet distinguishes component parts , substantive parts , and member parts . • Troponymy ( manner - name ) is for verbs what hyponymy is for nouns , although the resulting hierarchies are much shallower . • Entailment relations between verbs are also coded in WordNet . Each of these semantic relations is represented by pointers between word forms or between synsets . More than 116 , 000 pointers represent semantic relations between WordNet words and word senses . Relational theories of lexical semantics hold that any word can be defined in terms of the other words to which it is related . For example , a definition of the com - pound noun “sugar maple” might start with its hyper - nym , “A sugar maple is a maple that . . . , ” followed by a relative clause based on meronymy or other semantic relations that specify how sugar maples differ from other kinds of maples . However , not enough semantic relations are encoded into WordNet to support such constructions . Following standard lexicographic prac - tice , definitional glosses are included in most synsets along with the synonyms that represent the sense . An XWindows interface to WordNet allows a user to enter a word form and to choose a pull - down menu for the appropriate syntactic category . The menus provide access to the semantic relations that have been coded into WordNet for that word . For example , if “leaves” is entered , a noun menu for “leaf” and a verb menu for “leave” are available . The noun menu includes options for synonyms , hyponyms , hypernyms , sisters , meronyms , and holonyms for “leaf” ; no antonyms for “leaf” are available . If synonyms of the noun are requested , the window display three synsets , along with their immediate hypernyms : • Leaf , leafage , foliage—the main organ of photo - synthesis in higher plants ; plant organ—a func - 40 November 1995 / Vol . 38 , No . 11 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM Synonymy ( similar ) Antonymy ( opposite ) Hyponymy ( subordinate ) Meronymy ( part ) Troponomy ( manner ) Entailment pipe , tube rise , ascend sad , unhappy rapidly , speedily wet , dry powerful , powerless friendly , unfriendly rapidly , slowly sugar maple , maple maple , tree tree , plant brim , hat gin , martini ship , fleet march , walk whisper , speak drive , ride divorce , marry N , V , Aj , Av Aj , Av , ( N , V ) N N V V SemanticRelation SyntacticCategory Examples Note : N = Nouns Aj = Adjectives V = Verbs Av = Adverbs Table 1 . Semantic Relations in WordNet AI commonsense problems tional and structural unit of a plant • Leaf , folio—a sheet of written or printed matter ; sheet , piece of paper , sheet of paper used for writ - ing or printing • Leaf—hinged or detachable flat section , as of a table or door ; section , segment—one of several parts that fit with others to constitute an object Other choices from the menus would result in other displays of lexical information . A command line interface to the database is also available . Contextual Representations Polysemy is a major barrier for many systems that accept natural language input . For example , two dif - ferent senses of an English word form may translate into totally different words in another language . Therefore , systems for machine translation should be able to determine which sense the author had in mind . In information retrieval , a query intended to elicit material relevant to one sense of a polysemous word may elicit unwanted material relevant to other senses of that word . For example , in computer - assist - ed instruction , a student asking the meaning of a word should be given its meaning in that context , not a list of alternative senses from which to pick . WordNet lists the alternatives from which choices must be made . WordNet would be much more useful if it incorporated the means for determining appro - priate senses , allowing the program to evaluate the contexts in which words are used . This unmet requirement is a goal for further development . Choosing between alternative senses of a polyse - mous word is a matter of distinguishing between dif - ferent sets of linguistic contexts in which the word form can be used to express the word sense . People are quite skillful in making such distinctions [ 1 ] . For instance , people who are told , “He nailed the board across the window , ” do not notice that “board” is pol - ysemous . Only one sense of “board” ( or of “nail” ) reaches conscious awareness . How people make such distinctions is not well understood . An algorithm for sense identification must distin - guish sets of linguistic contexts , raising the question of how much context is required . The limits of a lin - guistic context can be defined arbitrarily , but we pre - fer to define it in terms of sentences . That is to say , two words co - occur in the same context if they occur in the same sentence . Given this definition , sense identification is a matter of distinguishing among sets of sentential contexts . Miller and Charles [ 5 ] pro - posed that a contextual representation associated with each sense characterizes sentential contexts in which a given word can be used to express that sense . Therefore , the empirical problem is to determine what contextual representations should look like . The usual way computational linguists have coped with polysemy has been to limit the domain of dis - course . For example , the noun “flight” has eight senses in WordNet , but when the domain of discourse is limit - ed to air travel , only one of the eight is likely to occur . Therefore , topical context ( the vocabulary used to discuss a well - defined topic ) provides some of the information needed for a contextual representation . However , results obtained by Leacock , Towell , and Voorhees [ 3 ] indicate that topical context can identify senses cor - rectly only about 80 % of the time . People seem to make more use of local context—the exact sequence of words immediately preceding and following the polysemous word . How best to characterize the contexts associated with word senses remains an open question . Semantic concordances are being prepared to pro - vide a basis for empirical studies of sense identification [ 7 ] . A semantic concordance is a textual corpus and a lexicon combined so that every substantive word in the text is linked to its appropriate sense in the lexicon . For example , words in passages from the Brown Cor - pus [ 2 ] are linked to their senses in WordNet , provid - ing a test bed for proposed sense - identification systems . However , this semantic concordance is still too small to provide representative samples of contexts indicative of the different senses of polysemous words . Supplementing WordNet with a textual database remains an ongoing project . Acknowledgments Preparation of this article was supported in part by grants from the Office of Naval Research , the Advanced Research Projects Agency ( Information and Technology Office ) , the Linguistic Data Consor - tium , and the James S . McDonnell Foundation . References1 . Charles , W . G . The categorization of sentential contexts . J . Psy - cholinguistic Res . 17 , 5 ( Sept . 1988 ) , 403 - - 411 . 2 . Francis , W . N . , and Kucera , H . Frequency Analysis of English Usage : Lexicon and Grammar . Houghton Mifflin , Boston , Mass . , 1982 . 3 . Leacock , C . , Towell , G . , and Voorhees , E . M . Towards building contextual representations of word senses using statistical mod - els . In Proceedings of the Workshop on the Acquisition of Lexical Knowledge from Text ( Columbus , Ohio , June 21 ) ACL / SIGLEX , 1993 , pp . 10 - - 20 . 4 . Miller , G . A . , Ed . WordNet : An on - line lexical database . Inter - national Journal of Lexicography 3 , 4 ( Winter 1990 ) , 235 - - 312 . 5 . Miller , G . A , . and Charles , W . G . Contextual correlates of semantic similarity . Language and Cognitive Processes 6 , 1 ( Feb . 1991 ) , 1 - - 28 . 6 . Miller , G . A . , and Fellbaum , C . Semantic networks of english . In B . Levin and , S . Pinker Eds . Lexical and Conceptual Semantics . Blackwell , Cambridge and Oxford , England , 1992 , pp . 197 - - 229 . 7 . Miller , G . A . , Leacock , C . , Tengi , R . , and Bunker , R . A semantic concordance . In Proceedings of the ARPA Human Language Technol - ogy Workshop ( Princeton , NJ , March 21 - - 23 ) . 1993 , pp . 303 - - 308 . About the Author : GEORGE A . MILLER is the James S . McDonnell Distinguished University Professor of Psychology Emeritus at the Cognitive Sci - ence Laboratory , Princeton University . He wrote The Science of Words , published in 1991 by the Scientific American Library . A book describing WordNet and its applications is scheduled for publication by The MIT Press in 1996 . Author’s Present Adress : Cognitive Science Laboratory , Prince - ton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 - 1010 ; email : geo @ clarity . princeton . edu © ACM 0002 - 0782 / 95 / 1100 $ 3 . 50 C COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM November 1995 / Vol . 38 , No . 11 41