Apoptotic contraction drives target cell release by cytotoxic T cells Elisa E . Sanchez 1 , Maria Tello - Lafoz 1 , Aixuan J . Guo 1 , Miguel de Jesus 1 , Benjamin Y . Winer 1 , Sadna Budhu 1 , Eric Chan 2 , Eric Rosiek 2 , Taisuke Kondo 3 , Justyn DuSold 3 , Naomi Taylor 3 , Gregoire Altan - Bonnet 3 , Michael F . Olson 4 , and Morgan Huse 1 * 1 Immunology Program , Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center , New York , USA 2 Molecular Cytology Core Facility , Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center , New York , USA 3 Center for Cancer Research , National Cancer Institute , Maryland , USA 4 Department of Chemistry and Biology , Toronto Metropolitan University , Toronto , Canada * Correspondence : husem @ mskcc . org 2 ABSTRACT Cytotoxic T lymphocytes ( CTLs ) use immune synapses to destroy infected or transformed target cells . Although the mechanisms governing synapse assembly have been studied extensively , little is known about how this interface dissociates , which is a critical step that both frees the CTL to search for additional prey and enables the phagocytosis of target corpses . Here , we applied time - lapse imaging to explore the basis for synapse dissolution and found that it occurred concomitantly with the cytoskeletal contraction of apoptotic targets . Genetic and pharmacological disruption of apoptotic contraction indicated that it was necessary for CTL dissociation . Furthermore , acute stimulation of contractile forces triggered the release of live targets , demonstrating that contraction is sufficient to drive the response . Finally , mechanically amplifying apoptotic contractility promoted faster CTL detachment and serial killing . Collectively , these results establish a biophysical basis for synapse dissolution and highlight the importance of mechanosensory feedback in the regulation of cell - cell interactions . 3 Introduction Cytotoxic T lymphocytes ( CTLs ) fight intracellular pathogens and cancer by destroying infected or transformed target cells 1 . Killing responses are typically triggered by the recognition of cognate peptide major - histocompatibility complex ( pMHC ) on the target cell by T cell antigen receptors ( TCRs ) on the CTL . This leads to the formation of a specialized cytolytic immune synapse ( IS ) between the two cells 2 , 3 , into which the CTL secretes a toxic mixture of the hydrophobic protein perforin and several granzyme proteases . Perforin forms oligomeric pores in the target cell plasma membrane that enable granzymes to access the cytoplasm 4 , where they induce apoptosis by cleaving caspase - 3 and several other substrates 5 . In recent years , CTL - mediated killing has emerged as a critical component of cancer immunotherapy , both in the context of checkpoint blockade 6 , which exploits endogenous TCR specificities , and chimeric antigen receptor ( CAR ) therapy 7 , which employs a synthetic receptor for a known tumor antigen . As such , there has been a great deal of interest in the mechanisms controlling the formation and maintenance of the cytotoxic IS . CTLs are highly efficient serial killers that are each capable of destroying ~ 20 target cells per day in vivo 8 , 9 . Serial killing demands not only the precise and expeditious formation of cytolytic synapses but also their timely dissolution so that CTLs can search for additional prey . Effective release of dead or dying target cells is also essential for the clearance of apoptotic debris by professional phagocytes , which minimizes the exposure of surrounding tissue to potentially inflammatory intracellular components 10 . Despite the obvious importance of IS termination for CTL function , the mechanisms that control it are poorly understood . It has been suggested that the release of perforin and granzyme ( also called degranulation ) is itself the trigger for dissociation 11 . This model , however , is inconsistent with data showing that granzyme and perforin deficient CTLs , which partially or completely lack killing capacity , remain attached to target cells despite degranulating 12 . Indeed , the importance of cytotoxic potential for CTL detachment implies that the process has a CTL - extrinsic trigger , namely damage or death of the target . How might the IS “sense” damage ? The most obvious answer is via recognition of biochemical features characteristic of cellular distress . Apoptosis , for instance , exposes the intracellular lipid phosphatidylserine 13 , which could , in principle , promote IS dissolution by engaging an inhibitory receptor . At present , however , there is no evidence for a mechanism of this kind . Alternatively , dying cells might decrease their expression of activating ligands , becoming less stimulatory to CTLs and thereby encouraging detachment . In support of this model , lymphocytic target cells have been shown to downregulate multiple activating ligands during natural killer ( NK ) cell - 4 induced apoptosis 14 . It remains unclear , however , if the timing of ligand downregulation matches that of target cell release , and perturbation experiments linking the former process to the latter have not been performed . Apoptotic cells undergo stereotyped architectural changes , as well , beginning with the rapid contraction of the F - actin cytoskeleton , followed by the formation of blebs and apoptotic bodies 15 . This morphological response represents an intriguing candidate for the induction of target cell release because cytotoxic lymphocytes are both physically dynamic and mechanosensitive 16 . Many critical activating receptors , including the TCR and the a L b 2 integrin LFA - 1 , require applied force to bind their ligands with high affinity and to transduce downstream signals 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 . This requirement is thought to place physical demands on the target surface , which must be rigid enough to counterbalance the mechanical load placed on receptor - ligand complexes 16 . Consistent with this idea , it has been shown that stiff stimulatory substrates or target cells induce stronger T cell activation than their softer counterparts 21 , 22 , 23 . Similarly , reducing the lateral mobility of activating ligands within the target membrane increases their stimulatory capacity 24 . Accordingly , it is conceivable that an acute change in the mechanical state of the target cell , independent of it chemical composition , would be sufficient to induce IS dissolution . In the present study , we employed time - lapse videomicroscopy to examine how CTLs release their targets . Our results reveal that cytoskeletal contraction of the target cell is both necessary and sufficient for IS dissolution , implying that CTLs sense and respond to the morphomechanical indices of programmed cell death . 5 Results CTL detachment occurs concomitantly with apoptotic contraction To investigate the determinants of target cell release , we imaged wild type and perforin knockout ( Prf1 - / - ) OT - 1 CTLs together with B16F10 melanoma cells loaded with ovalbumin 257 - 264 ( OVA ) , which is recognized by the OT - 1 TCR in the context of the mouse class I MHC H - 2K b . Propidium iodide ( PI ) , a DNA intercalator , was included to detect large scale disruption of the plasma membrane , a late stage marker of programmed cell death ( Fig . 1a ) . Wild type CTLs displayed robust killing activity in these cocultures ( Fig . 1a - b , supplementary movie 1 ) , forming synapses with target cells that were both lethal ( killing probability 88 % ) and transient ( mean duration 75 . 7 ± 8 . 3 min ) . By contrast , Prf1 - / - CTLs , which cannot kill B16F10 targets , formed hyperstable synapses , the majority of which persisted for more than 5 hours ( Fig . 1c - d , supplementary movie 2 ) . This result , which was in line with prior work 12 , strongly implicated target cell death in the CTL dissociation response . Consistent with this interpretation , we found that the small fraction of wild type CTLs that failed to kill resembled Prf1 - / - CTLs in that they remained attached to their targets for extended periods of time ( Fig . 1b ) . To explore the relationship between target cell death and IS dissolution more closely , we determined the temporal offset between CTL detachment and various steps in the apoptotic cascade . To enable these measurements , we imaged CTL - target cell cocultures in the presence of both PI and CellEvent Caspase - 3 / 7 Green , a probe for global effector caspase activation ( Fig . 2a ) . In B16F10 cells , CTL - mediated killing was characterized by a surge in cytoplasmic CellEvent Caspase - 3 / 7 fluorescence , followed by nuclear PI influx 57 . 1 ± 3 . 7 minutes later ( Fig . 2a , supplementary movie 3 ) . Before either of these events , however , dying B16F10 cells underwent dramatic contraction of the cell body , transforming from an extended , stellate configuration into a compact spheroid with multiple associated blebs . This contraction occurred rapidly ( duration of 15 . 6 ± 1 . 4 min ) , and it represented the first visible sign of target cell distress in the vast majority of cytotoxic conjugates . Based on its timing relative to the other apoptotic indices , we reasoned that this architectural change corresponded to largescale actomyosin - based contraction , an established early event in the apoptotic cascade 15 . Interestingly , contraction coincided with or slightly preceded CTL detachment in a majority of killing events , making it a better predictor of IS dissolution than either CellEvent Caspase - 3 / 7 fluorescence or PI influx , both of which occurred well after detachment in most cases ( Fig . 2b ) . To examine whether this correlation also applied in three dimensional ( 3D ) culture , we imaged mixtures of OT - 1 CTLs and antigen - loaded B16F10 targets that had been embedded in collagen - fibrin gels ( Supplementary figure 1a ) . As target cell 6 spreading was less obvious under these conditions , we could not pinpoint the moment of apoptotic contraction for all killing events . Nevertheless , in conjugates where contraction could be scored , it was a better predictor of dissociation than was PI influx ( Supplementary figure 1b - c , supplementary movie 4 ) . Hence , target cell contraction is closely associated with CTL release in both 2D and 3D environments . To assess the generality of these observations , we performed imaging studies using two other H - 2K b + targets , MB49 bladder cancer cells and C57BL / 6 cardiac endothelial cells . CTL detachment was best predicted by apoptotic contraction in each case ( supplementary fig . 2 ) , indicating that this correlation is not unique to the B16F10 system . We also examined CAR dependent killing by imaging CD19 + B16F10 cells together with OT - 1 CTLs expressing a second generation CD19 specific CAR ( Fig . 2c ) . Imaging runs were performed in both the presence and absence of OVA peptide and also using mock - transduced CTLs , enabling us to compare cytotoxic interactions induced by CAR engagement with those induced by the TCR or by the simultaneous engagement of both receptors . CTL detachment was tightly correlated with target cell contraction in all cases ( Fig . 2c ) , indicating that this dissociation mechanism applies to most , if not all , types of cytotoxic synapses . Consistent with this interpretation , we found that murine NK cells also release apoptotic B16F10 cells during the contraction phase ( supplementary fig . 3 ) . We next investigated whether the close association between contraction and detachment was intrinsic to the CTL responsible for killing . Antigen - loaded B16F10 cells were imaged together with both Prf1 + / + and Prf1 - / - CTLs , and ternary interactions containing one target , one Prf1 + / + CTL , and one Prf1 - / - CTL were compared to conjugates containing only one CTL and one target ( Fig . 2d ) . The dynamics of one - to - one conjugates recapitulated the results we obtained from cocultures containing only one type of CTL ; Prf1 - / - synapses were long - lived while Prf1 + / + contacts were transient , dissociating concomitantly with apoptotic contraction ( Fig . 2e - f ) . By comparison , in ternary complexes , target cell apoptosis , presumably driven by the Prf1 + / + CTL , was tightly correlated with the detachment of both the Prf1 + / + and the Prf1 - / - CTL ( Fig . 2d , supplementary movie 5 ) . This had the effect of dramatically shortening Prf1 - / - CTL contact times in ternary complexes containing Prf1 + / + CTLs ( Fig . 2e ) . Indeed , within ternary complexes , the time intervals between apoptotic contraction and the dissociation of Prf1 - / - CTLs were statistically indistinguishable from the corresponding Prf1 + / + CTL intervals ( Fig . 2f ) . These results indicate that apoptosis drives the dissolution of both cytolytic and non - cytolytic synapses and further implicate contraction as the trigger for the dissociation response . Cytoskeletal contraction is necessary for CTL dissociation 7 Canonical apoptotic contraction is driven by actomyosin - based contractility 15 , 25 , 26 . To assess the role of the target cell cytoskeleton in the CTL - induced response , we used confocal microscopy to image cocultures of CTLs and antigen - loaded MB49 cells expressing Tractin - RFP , a probe for filamentous - actin ( F - actin ) , and Myl12b - GFP , a probe for nonmuscle myosin II . Concomitant with the onset of contraction , we observed strong accumulation of both F - actin and myosin in cortical cables oriented parallel to the primary axis of morphologic change ( Fig . 3a , supplementary movie 6 ) . The fluorescence intensity of these cables increased as the cell contracted ( Fig . 3b , supplementary fig . 4a ) , consistent with the overlap and bundling of F - actin fibers . Interference reflection microscopy of individual killing events revealed that contracting MB49 cells detached completely from the substrate ( Supplementary fig . 4b ) , implying complete disassembly of underlying focal adhesions . To evaluate the importance of this cytoskeletal remodeling response for IS dissolution , we sought to decouple it from CTL - mediated killing . The sponge toxin Mycalolide B ( MycB ) induces near complete actin depolymerization at micromolar concentrations . Importantly , cells treated with MycB remain depleted of F - actin for hours after washout , making it possible to coculture them with CTLs without affecting the CTL cytoskeleton . MycB treatment dramatically altered the architecture of B16F10 cells , transforming them into collapsed , spherical blobs . Importantly , CTLs still formed functional cytotoxic synapses with these targets , inducing robust CellEvent Caspase - 3 / 7 fluorescence and PI influx ( Fig . 3c , supplementary movies 7 and 8 ) . Cell death , however , was not accompanied by cytoskeletal contraction , and in the absence of contraction , CTL detachment was markedly delayed . Indeed , most CTLs remained attached to their targets well after global cytoplasmic caspase activation and PI influx ( Fig . 3d ) . To further explore the role of target cell F - actin , we transfected B16F10 cells with Salmonella enterica SpvB ( also called DeAct ) , an ADP ribosyltransferase that drives dose dependent F - actin severing 27 . Similar to MycB treatment , overexpression of DeAct induced “preemptive” target cell collapse . This prevented normal apoptotic contraction and was associated with an obvious lag in CTL detachment ( Supplementary fig . 5a - b , supplementary movies 9 and 10 ) . DeAct expression levels , which we evaluated using a linked Cherry marker , were positively correlated with the duration of contacts ( Supplementary fig . 5c ) , indicating that the degree of cytoskeletal dysfunction dictated the degree of dissociation defect . We also documented an inverse relationship between the starting area of the target cell ( a measure of cell spreading ) and IS lifetime ( Supplementary fig . 5d ) , suggesting that the capacity of target cells to spread , and therefore to change shape during killing , determined their capacity to induce CTL detachment . 8 Apoptotic contraction depends in part on caspase - mediated cleavage of Rock1 15 , 25 , a serine threonine kinase that induces the activation of myosin II . Caspase processing removes the autoinhibitory C - terminal domain of Rock1 , generating a constitutively active protein that drives dysregulated contractility . To evaluate the importance of this pathway for IS dissolution , we first imaged CTL - target cell conjugates in the presence of zVAD - FMK ( zVAD ) , a broad specificity caspase inhibitor . zVAD slowed the apoptotic contraction of target cells ( supplementary fig . 5e ) , but did not prevent their killing ( Fig . 3e , supplementary movies 11 and 12 ) , in agreement with prior work showing that blocking caspase activity converts apoptosis into alternative forms of cell death 28 , 29 , 30 . IS lifetime increased markedly under these conditions ( Fig . 3f ) , corroborating the link between contraction and CTL detachment . We observed the same pattern of results in 3 - D collagen - fibrin gels ( supplementary fig . 1c ) , indicating that our results were not tied to specific culture conditions . To interrogate the relevance of Rock1 cleavage more directly , we employed a previously described Rock1 point mutant lacking the caspase recognition motif in its C - terminal tail 31 . Mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) containing this non - caspase - cleavable form of Rock1 ( Rock1nc ) knocked into the Rock1 locus 31 were OVA - loaded and imaged together with OT - 1 CTLs . Rock1nc MEFs contracted more slowly during killing interactions than did wild type MEFs derived from the same genetic background ( Fig . 3g , supplementary fig . 5f , supplementary movies 13 and 14 ) . This morphological phenotype was associated with a significant delay in CTL dissociation ( Fig . 3h ) , further supporting the idea that the rate of detachment depends on the strength of the contractile response . Cytoskeletal contraction is sufficient for CTL dissociation Although the studies described above indicate that target cell contraction is necessary for IS dissolution , they do not address whether it is sufficient . For this purpose , we turned to a conditionally activatable Rock construct containing the Rock2 kinase domain , which targets the same substrates as Rock1 , fused to the hormone binding domain of the estrogen receptor ( ER ) 32 ( Fig . 4a ) . The Rock2 - ER fusion dimerizes in the presence of 4 - hydroxytamoxifen ( 4 - OHT , an estrogen antagonist ) , leading to kinase activation and actomyosin contractility in the absence of cell death . Transient transfection of MB49 cells with GFP - Rock2 - ER yielded a range of morphological phenotypes at a single cell level . Many of the high expressors were constitutively rounded up , implying 4 - OHT independent Rock signaling . The lower expressors spread normally , however , and a substantial fraction of these cells ( 81 % ) exhibited contraction after 4 - OHT treatment , with a mean offset time of 69 minutes . MB49 cells expressing a control construct ( GFP - 9 ER ) did not respond to 4 - OHT in this way ( 10 % contraction over 12 h ) , validating the specificity of our approach . With these modified target cells in hand , we next performed imaging studies to determine whether Rock2 - ER dependent cytoskeletal remodeling affects IS stability . To minimize the incidence of apoptosis - induced contraction in these experiments , we employed only OT - 1 Prf1 - / - CTLs , which cannot kill MB49 cells , and we also treated cocultures with zVAD . 4 - OHT was typically added after 2 . 5 h of a 16 h time - lapse . For analysis , we focused on the CTLs that formed conjugates with GFP + target cells prior to the addition of 4 - OHT . In GFP - Rock2 - ER cultures , 69 % of these CTLs detached within 3 hours of 4 - OHT addition ( Fig . 4b - c , supplementary movie 15 ) . Interactions between CTLs and GFP - ER targets were much more stable by comparison , with 70 % persisting for longer than 8 hours post - treatment ( Fig . 4b - c , supplementary movie 16 ) . Closer examination of the GFP - Rock2 - ER conjugates revealed that the vast majority of dissociation events occurred in conjugates where target cell contraction actually occurred . Indeed , vehicle treated GFP - Rock2 - ER target cells , which did not contract , exhibited IS stability that was statistically indistinguishable from that of 4 - OHT treated GFP - ER controls ( Fig . 4c ) . These results strongly suggest that Rock dependent cytoskeletal contraction is , independently of cell death , sufficient to trigger IS dissolution . CTLs detect target cell contraction through the IS Apoptotic contraction could disrupt the IS directly by tearing the target cell away from the CTL . Alternatively , the CTL might sense structural change in the contracting target and then reduce its synaptic avidity to facilitate release ( Fig . 5a ) . To explore these two mechanisms , which are not mutually exclusive , we monitored intracellular calcium ( Ca 2 + ) , an index of T cell activation , during IS formation , target contraction , and release . Consistent with previous studies 33 , 34 , 35 , we observed that CTL Ca 2 + levels increased rapidly upon initial contact with a target cell and remained high prior to the onset of apoptosis ( Fig . 5b , supplementary movie 17 ) . Ca 2 + responses tended to decline , however , during the period between contraction and release , before falling even further after CTL detachment ( Fig . 5b - c , supplementary movie 17 ) . By graphing target cell area measurements with paired CTL Ca 2 + data from each IS as individual trajectories , we confirmed that target contraction ( visualized as smaller area measurements ) was indeed associated with reduced Ca 2 + signaling ( Fig . 5d ) . To further investigate whether these lower Ca 2 + levels were caused by contraction itself , or simply reflected a time dependent decline in Ca 2 + signaling , we compared wild type responses with those of Prf1 - / - CTLs , which do not induce B16F10 contraction or death . Prf1 - / - responses did not decline as soon or as steeply as their wild type counterparts , 10 indicating that a sharp fall - off in Ca 2 + levels is a characteristic property of bona fide cytolytic interactions . Notably , the separation between the wild type and Prf1 - / - response curves became statistically significant only after the majority of target cells in the wild type synapses had begun to contract ( indicated by the red CDF line in Fig . 5c ) . This observation lends further support to the idea that contraction attenuates activating signals in attached CTLs . We conclude that CTLs do indeed sense target cell contraction , implying that they play an active role in the dissociation response . Modulating target cell contraction to control CTL detachment and serial killing Given the importance of efficient IS turnover for serial killing , we speculated that it should be possible to boost CTL function by augmenting the contraction - induced dissociation response . To explore this idea , we employed the myocardin related transcription factors A and B ( MRTF - A and MRTF - B ) , which drive the production of actin , F - actin binding proteins , and other cytoskeletal regulators 36 . Cell lines overexpressing MRTFs contain copious F - actin stress fibers and exhibit increased cortical stiffness relative to unmodified controls 37 . We reasoned that this enhanced cytoskeletal state would effectively amplify the architectural change induced by apoptotic contraction , which would , in turn , drive a stronger dissociation response ( Fig . 6a ) . Consistent with this prediction , we observed a marked acceleration in the rate of CTL detachment from B16F10 - MRTF - A and B16F10 - MRTF - B cells relative to B16F10 controls ( Fig . 6a - b ) . Importantly , this increase in synaptic turnover was associated with improved serial killing ; in cocultures containing B16F10 - MRTF - A or B16F10 - MRTF - B cells , a substantially larger fraction of CTLs destroyed multiple targets ( Fig . 6c ) . Adherent cells are modulated continuously by cell - extrinsic biophysical signals . They are particularly responsive to the mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix , which influence the structure and rigidity of the cortical cytoskeleton 38 . Accordingly , it has been shown that cells grown in stiffer environments become stiffer themselves , whereas those in softer environments become more compliant 39 , 40 . Consistent with these prior results , we found that B16F10 cells cultured on very stiff fibronectin - coated glass ( 1000 megaPa Young’s modulus ) adopted a spread , stellate morphology containing visible F - actin stress fibers , while the same cells grown on soft hydrogels ( e . g . 4 kPa Young’s modulus ) were more rounded and exhibited less obvious cytoskeletal structures ( supplementary Fig . 6a - b ) . Stiffer hydrogels ( e . g . 50 kPa Young’s modulus ) elicited an intermediate phenotype characterized by pronounced extension along one axis . To determine whether these morphological differences affected killing dynamics , B16F10 cells cultured on glass or on hydrogels of varying stiffness were loaded with OVA and then imaged 11 together with OT - 1 CTLs . Target cell killing was observed on all substrates , indicating that the fundamental cytotoxic capacity of CTLs was unaffected by the substrate . The quality of apoptotic contraction , however , differed dramatically between conditions . Target cells on glass or stiff hydrogels contracted robustly , whereas cells on soft substrates exhibited a much less obvious response , presumably because their resting state was already somewhat collapsed ( Fig . 6d ) . Muted contraction on soft substrates was accompanied by a marked delay in IS dissolution , with CTLs often remaining attached to their targets well after PI influx ( Fig . 6d - e ; supplementary fig . 6c ) . CTLs on soft hydrogels also exhibited less serial killing than their counterparts in stiffer cultures ( Fig . 6f ) . Taken together with the MRTF experiments above , these results confirm the importance of apoptotic contraction for IS dissolution , and they demonstrate that timely target cell release is critical for effective serial killing . 12 Discussion Taken together , our results support a model in which apoptotic contraction , mediated by actomyosin forces downstream of Rock signaling , induces the release of dying target cells by CTLs ( Supplementary fig . 7 ) . This model , which is consistent with prior work implicating target cell death in IS dissolution 12 , implies that CTLs continuously monitor the health of their prey through the IS . From a design perspective , conditioning dissociation on target cell death rather than a CTL - intrinsic event , such as degranulation , is preferable because it enables the CTL to adapt in real time to hardier target cells that require multiple degranulation cycles for destruction . Furthermore , basing the death sensing mechanism on an architectural change common to all apoptotic cells , rather than a specific chemical event , ensures that target release is not tied to the formation or suppression of specific receptor - ligand interactions . As a result , the entire process becomes more generalizable . Indeed , contraction - induced dissociation appears to govern NK cells and CAR T cells , as well , indicating that it may be a universal feature of cellular cytotoxicity . The close correlation between target contraction and CAR T cell detachment is particularly notable considering that CARs bind much more tightly than TCRs to their cognate ligands . Thus , contraction - induced dissociation is robust enough to overcome the widespread engagement of activating receptors at the IS , even if those receptors bind with nanomolar affinity . Inhibiting caspase cleavage of Rock1 delayed CTL - induced contraction but did not prevent it entirely , implying the existence of compensatory mechanisms . Many cell types , including the MEFs used for our Rock1nc experiments , also express Rock2 , which lacks a consensus caspase recognition motif but can be cleaved and activated by granzyme B 41 . Accordingly , it is tempting to speculate that the residual apoptotic contraction of Rock1nc MEFs during CTL - mediated killing resulted from direct granzyme B targeting of Rock2 . This cleavage event could also explain the diminished , but nevertheless detectable B16F10 contraction response we observed in the presence of zVAD . That both caspase and granzyme dependent pathways have evolved to trigger contraction redundantly suggests that this process is critical for the proper function of cytotoxic lymphocytes . Our Ca 2 + imaging experiments indicate that target cell contraction attenuates CTL activation prior to detachment . This reduction in signaling likely reflects the mechanosensitive features of activating immunoreceptors , many of which respond both to the mobility of their cognate ligands in the plasma membrane and to the underlying stiffness of the ligand presenting surface 16 . The b 2 integrin LFA - 1 , for example , achieves optimal ligand binding and outside - in signaling only when it is placed under tension 19 , 42 , 43 . Dendritic cells exploit this property by restricting the lateral 13 diffusion of LFA - 1 ligands on their surface , thereby enhancing their capacity to trigger LFA - 1 mechanotransduction and T cell activation 24 . One could imagine apoptotic contraction having the opposite effect by rapidly collapsing the array of activating ligands on the target cell , leading in turn to an acute disruption of CTL mechanotransduction . A role for mechanotransduction in IS dissolution is consistent with the emerging conception of cellular cytotoxicity as a mechanically active process 16 . Cytotoxic lymphocytes use synaptic forces to establish strong receptor - ligand interactions 17 , 19 , 20 , position degranulation events within the IS 44 , and potentiate perforin pore formation 45 . Reciprocally , the biophysical disposition of target cells has been shown to dictate both their capacity to elicit lymphocyte activation as well as their sensitivity to perforin 23 , 24 , 37 , 45 . It is also becoming clear that mechanical properties such as cell stiffness respond not only to cell - intrinsic pathways but also to cell - extrinsic crosstalk with the microenvironment 38 , 39 , 40 . When viewed within this conceptual framework , our data demonstrating that substrate rigidity modulates CTL dissociation rate strongly suggests that microenvironmental mechanics can control the efficiency of cytotoxic interactions . It will be interesting to explore this idea further using biophysically diverse in vivo systems . Although our results clearly implicate biomechanical change as a trigger for CTL dissociation , they do not rule out a more biochemically - oriented mechanism in which cell death drives target release by altering the composition of activating and inhibitory ligands within the IS . Indeed , it has been shown that dying target cells downregulate certain activating ligands and adhesion molecules 14 , which would be expected to weaken interactions with cytotoxic lymphocytes . Whether ligand downregulation on targets occurs before or after IS dissolution has not been investigated , however , and as such a cause and effect relationship remains to be established for this model . Nevertheless , one can easily imagine scenarios in which both biophysical and biochemical mechanisms are involved in target release . We feel that apoptotic contraction is more likely to be the acute trigger because its kinetics match those of CTL detachment so well . In this regime , ligand downregulation would contribute later in the process by preventing the reengagement of dead targets . Contraction could also inhibit reengagement by reducing the accessible surface area of the apoptotic corpse , effectively making it more difficult to find . Apoptosis is generally presented as an “altruistic cell suicide” designed to minimize deleterious effects on surrounding tissue 46 . Thus , apoptotic cells assiduously degrade their potentially inflammatory nucleic acids , release anti - inflammatory mediators , and upregulate find - me and eat - me signals to promote phagocytic uptake . Apoptotic contraction , for its part , promotes tissue folding during development and is thought to maintain the barrier integrity of epithelial tissues by facilitating corpse extrusion 47 , 48 , 49 . Our finding that this morphological change also 14 triggers cytotoxic lymphocyte dissociation is entirely consistent with apoptotic altruism . By letting the killer cell know that its work is done , the target uses its final act to boost the overall efficiency of cellular immunity . 15 Methods Primary cells and retroviral transduction To generate CTLs , naïve Prf1 + / + or Prf1 - / - CD8 + T cells derived from transgenic mice expressing the OT - 1 αβTCR were mixed with splenocytes isolated from C57BL / 6 mice that had been pulsed with 100 nM OVA in RPMI medium containing 10 % FBS . 30 U / mL of IL - 2 was added to cells 24 h following T cell activation . Subsequently , cells were split as needed into RPMI + 10 % FBS containing 30 U / mL IL - 2 and used for functional assays 6 - 7 days later . Murine CD19 - CAR T cells were prepared by retroviral transduction of OT - 1 CTLs 48 h after initial stimulation with OVA . Retrovirus was generated by transient transfection of Phoenix E cells with an MSCV - based expression vector containing a second generation CD19 specific CAR with CD28 and CD3 z signaling motifs . Virus was collected 48 hours after transfection and used to infect OT - 1 CTL blasts via spinfection at 1400 × g in the presence of 4 µg / mL polybrene . Murine NK cells were isolated from C57BL / 6 splenocytes by negative selection using an NK cell isolation kit ( MACS ) followed by overnight incubation in 1000 U / ml IL - 2 . Cell lines B16F10 , MB49 , and C57BL / 6 cardiac endothelial cells were cultured in RPMI medium containing 10 % FBS . ROCK1nc knockin MEFs and wild type control MEFs were cultured in DMEM medium containing 10 % FBS . MB49 cells stably expressing Myl12b - GFP were prepared by retroviral transduction . Retrovirus was generated by transient transfection of Phoenix E cells with an MSCV - based expression vector encoding Myl12b - GFP and a puromycin resistance cassette . Following spinfection at 1400 × g in the presence of 4 µg / mL polybrene , transduced MB49 cells were selected by culturing in 2 . 5 µg / mL puromycin , followed by FACS . Tractin - mCherry was introduced into MB49 - Myl12b - GFP cells by transient transfection using lipofectamine 2000 ( ThermoFisher ) , following the manufacturer’s recommended protocol . Inducible MRTF - A and MRTF - B overexpression cell lines ( B16F10 - MRTF cells ) were prepared by sequential transduction with rTTA , TGL , and either control or MRTF overexpression vectors , followed by culture in G418 and hygromycin . MRTF expression was induced by treating cells in 500 ng / ml doxycycline hyclate ( Sigma ) 24 - 48 hours prior to the experiment . Cell lines expressing Cherry - DeAct or Cherry alone were prepared 48 hours before the experiment by transient transfection of the DeAct or Cherry control plasmids using lipofectamine 2000 . Lipofectamine 2000 was also used to prepared MB49 cells expressing GFP - Rock2 - ER or GFP - ER . 16 Pharmacological reagents For depolymerization of the F - actin cytoskeleton , B16F10 target cells were pretreated for 1 h with 100 nM MycB and then washed in RPMI + 10 % FBS prior to use . Caspase inhibition was achieved by pretreating B16F10 target cells with 100 µM zVAD for 30 minutes . Live imaging of 2D cultures In preparation for widefield imaging of CTL - mediated killing , target cells ( B16F10 , MB49 , MEF , or cardiac endothelial cells ) were cultured overnight on fibronectin - coated 8 - well chambered coverglass ( Lab - tek ) and then pulsed with 100 nM of OVA for 2 h . After washing , targets were mixed with CTV - labeled and / or CellVue Maroon - labeled OT - 1 CTLs in the presence of 2 µM Cell Event Caspase - 3 / 7 Green and / or 1 . 5 µM PI . Chambers containing cells of interest were imaged at 5 - 8 min intervals using a Zeiss Zen epifluorescence microscope at 10× magnification for 11 hours . IRM was performed on the same Zeiss Zen system fitted with a 50 / 50 Vis beam splitter and a 63× / 1 . 4 NA objective lens . For Rock2 - ER studies , 4 - OHT was added after 2 . 5 h of imaging to a final concentration of 100 µM . In certain experiments , targets were cultured , antigen - loaded , and mixed with CTLs in 96 - well glass plates containing fibronectin - coated polyacrylamide hydrogels of different stiffnesses ( Matrigen ) . For CAR T cell studies , B16F10 cells stably transduced with CD19 were used as targets . Widefield Ca 2 + imaging was performed using the same fibronectin - coated chambered coverglass approach . On the day of imaging , CTLs were loaded with 5 µg / ml Fura - 2AM and washed following one hour of staining . Fura - 2AM - loaded CTLs were then mixed with adhered OVA - loaded B16F10 targets and imaged with 340 nm and 380 nm excitation at 2 minute intervals for 2 hours , using a 20× objective lens ( Olympus ) . Confocal time lapse videos were acquired on a Leica Sp8 machine equipped with a white light excitation laser and a 40× objective lens . Images were taken every 3 minutes for 2 hours . 3D collagen culture Collagen cultures were formed by resuspending B16F10 - YFP target cells ( previously pulsed for 2 h in 1 µM OVA ) and CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs in a mixture of collagen ( 1 mg / mL ) , fibrinogen ( 1 mg / mL ) , and thrombin ( 20 U / mL ) in PBS . Gel mixtures were allowed to harden in 8 - well chambered coverglass ( Lab - tek ) for 20 min . Media containing 100 µM zVAD ( or DMSO vehicle ) and 1 . 5 µM PI was then added and the samples incubated for an additional 4 - 6 h . Subsequently , wells were imaged at 7 min intervals using a Zeiss Zen epifluorescence microscope at 10× magnification for 24 h . 17 Fixed imaging B16F10 cells were cultured overnight on fibronectin - coated hydrogels bound to a glass slide with a removable 8 well media chamber ( Matrigen Soft Slide ) . Cells were then fixed with 2 % PFA , permeabilized using 0 . 5 % Triton , stained with Phalloidin Alexa Fluor 568 , and imaged using a Zeiss Zen epifluorescence microscope fitted with a 20× / 0 . 4 NA objective . Image analysis To analyze killing kinetics , time intervals between IS formation , cytoskeletal contraction , caspase 3 / 7 flux , and PI flux were derived from videomicroscopy data . Cytoskeletal contraction was defined as a dramatic and irreversible decrease in cell area with complete loss of morphological asymmetry . Caspase 3 / 7 and PI responses were scored from the onset of detectable fluorescence . To assess serial killing , the number of targets killed per CTL was calculated . Note that all contacts made between one lymphocyte and one target cell were scored , excluding contacts formed within 30 min of the end of the time - lapse . To quantify DeAct and Cherry expression in target cells , the average fluorescence intensity within cell borders was established using ImageJ software . The same procedure was used to calculate the area of each target cell . Ca 2 + flux responses ( Fura - 2 ratios ) were quantified using SlideBook ( Intelligent Imaging Innovations ) and then analyzed in Microsoft Excel . To compare wild type and Prf1 - / - Ca 2 + responses ( Fig . 5c ) , we ran t - test at every time point for the null hypothesis that the 2 sets of cells ( wild type and Prf1 - / - ) had identical average ratios of Fura - 2 . We did not assume that the populations had identical variances . P - values were generated using the scipy . stats . ttest _ ind python library . Confocal videos of contracting target cells were analyzed in Imaris ( Oxford Instruments ) by first calculating the mean fluorescence intensities of Myl12b - GFP and Tractin - RFP within the cell envelope ( determined by intensity thresholding in the Myl12b - GFP channel ) and then referencing those values to target cell length along its major axis ( Fig . 3b and supplementary fig . 4a ) . 18 Acknowledgments We thank C . Jeronimo for technical support ; the MSKCC Molecular Cytology Core Facility for assistance with imaging ; M . Overholtzer , M . Baylies , and members of the M . H . laboratory for advice . Supported in part by the U . S . National Institutes of Health ( R01 - AI087644 to M . H . and E . E . S . , R21 - AI169847 to M . H . , and P30 - CA008748 to MSKCC ) , the Canadian Institutes of Health Research ( PJT - 169125 to M . F . O . ) , the Canada Research Chairs Program ( 950 - 231665 to M . F . O . ) , the Ludwig Foundation for Cancer Immunotherapy ( M . D . J . ) , the Schmidt Science Fellows Program ( B . Y . W . ) , the Cancer Research Institute ( B . Y . W . ) , and the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research ( M . T . - L . ) . Author contributions statement E . E . S . , M . T . - L . , M . D . J . , B . Y . W . , S . B . , and M . H . designed the experiments . E . E . S . , M . T . - L . , A . J . G . , E . C . , E . R . , and M . H . collected the data . E . E . S . , A . J . G . , G . A . - B . , and M . H . analyzed the data . S . B . , T . K . , J . D . , N . T . , G . A . - B . , and M . F . O . contributed key reagents and methods . E . E . S . and M . H . wrote the paper . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . 19 Figure 1 . CTL dissociation is triggered by target cell death . CTV - labeled Prf1 + / + and Prf1 - / - OT - 1 CTLs were imaged together with OVA - loaded , YFP + B16F10 cells in the presence of PI . ( a and c ) Representative time - lapse montages of Prf1 + / + ( a ) and Prf1 - / - ( c ) interactions are shown below , with schematic diagrams above . Magenta asterisks and magenta arrowheads denote IS formation and dissociation , respectively , while red asterisks indicate PI influx . Scale bars = 20 µm . ( b and d ) Histograms of IS duration comparing either lethal and nonlethal Prf1 + / + contacts ( b ) or Prf1 + / + and Prf1 - / - contacts ( d ) . N = 237 Prf1 + / + conjugates and 191 Prf1 - / - conjugates . 20 Figure 2 . CTL dissociation is temporally correlated with apoptotic contraction . ( a - b ) CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs were imaged together with OVA - loaded B16F10 cells in the presence of CellEvent Caspase - 3 / 7 and PI . ( a ) A time - lapse montage of a representative contact is shown below , with schematic diagrams above . Dissociation is indicated by the magenta arrowhead . Time in H : MM is shown in the top right corner of each image . ( b ) Quantification of offset time between contraction ( Contract . ) , CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 flux ( Casp . 3 / 7 ) , or PI flux and target cell release . Data points to the left of the origin denote detachment before the index of interest , whereas data points to the right of the origin denote detachment after . N = 195 . ( c ) CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs were transduced with either CD19 - CAR or empty vector . They were then CTV - labeled and imaged in the presence of CellEvent Caspase - 3 / 7 and PI together with CD19 expressing B16F10 target cells that had been either pulsed with OVA or left unpulsed . Left , a schematic diagram showing CAR and TCR engagement in each of the experimental groups . Right , quantification of the time delay between the onset of contraction and target cell release . ( d - f ) CTV - labeled Prf1 + / + OT - 1 CTLs and CellVue Maroon - labeled Prf1 - / - OT - 1 CTLs were imaged together with OVA - loaded , YFP + B16F10 in the presence of PI . ( d ) A time - lapse montage of a representative ternary 21 interaction is shown below , with schematic diagrams above . Dissociation and PI influx are indicated by the magenta arrowhead and red asterisk , respectively . Time in H : MM is shown in the top left corner of each image . ( e ) Quantification of IS duration for the indicated Prf1 + / + ( WT ) and Prf1 - / - CTLs . ( f ) Quantification of the time delay between the onset of contraction and target cell release , for both Prf1 + / + ( WT ) and Prf1 - / - CTLs involved in ternary complexes . All scale bars = 20 µm . In c , e , and f , sample size is shown in parentheses at the top of each column , and error bars denote SEM . All P - values were calculated by one - way ANOVA with Tukey correction . * , * * * * , and ns denote P ≤ 0 . 05 , P ≤ 0 . 0001 , and P > 0 . 05 , respectively . 22 Figure 3 . Cytoskeletal contraction is necessary for CTL dissociation . ( a - b ) CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs were imaged together with OVA - loaded MB49 cells expressing both Myl12b - GFP and Tractin - RFP . ( a ) Time - lapse montages showing a representative dissociation event . All three channels are shown in the top row , while RFP and GFP channels have been removed from the second and third rows , respectively . IS formation is indicated by the magenta asterisk , and dissociation by the magenta arrowhead . Yellow arrows highlight the accumulation of F - actin and myosin in longitudinal cables just prior to contraction . Time in MM : SS is shown in the top right corner of each image . Scale bars = 5 µm . Representative of 6 time - lapse videos . ( b ) Mean fluorescence intensity of Myl12b - GFP and Tractin - RFP in the target cell shown in a , graphed over 23 time together with the length of the cell along its major axis . ( c - d ) OVA - loaded B16F10 cells pretreated with MycB or vehicle control ( DMSO ) were imaged together with CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs in the presence of CellEvent Caspase - 3 / 7 and PI . ( c ) Time - lapse montages of representative contacts are shown to the right , with schematic diagrams to the left . Conjugate formation is indicated by magenta asterisks , dissociation by the magenta arrowhead , CellEvent Caspase - 3 / 7 flux by green asterisks , and PI influx by red asterisks . Time in H : MM is shown in the top right corner of each image . ( d ) Quantification of the time delays between CellEvent Caspase - 3 / 7 flux ( Casp . 3 / 7 ) and target cell release ( left ) , and between PI influx and target cell release ( right ) . ( e - f ) CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs were imaged together with OVA - loaded , YFP + B16F10 cells in the presence of PI and either 100 µm zVAD or vehicle control ( DMSO ) , as indicated . ( e ) Time - lapse montages of representative contacts are shown to the right , with schematic diagrams to the left . Conjugate formation is indicated by magenta asterisks , dissociation by the magenta arrowhead , and PI influx by red asterisks . Time in H : MM is shown in the top left corner of each image . ( f ) Quantification of the time delays between the onset of contraction and target cell release ( left ) , and between PI influx and target cell release ( right ) . ( g - h ) CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs were imaged together with OVA - loaded wild type ( WT ) or Rock1nc MEFs in the presence of PI . ( g ) Time - lapse montages of representative contacts are shown to the right , with schematic diagrams to the left . Conjugate formation is indicated by magenta asterisks , dissociation by the magenta arrowhead , and PI influx by red asterisks . Time in H : MM is shown in the top left corner of each image . ( h ) Quantification of the time delays between the onset of contraction and target cell release ( left ) , and between PI influx and target cell release ( right ) . Scale bars in c , e , and g = 20 µm . In d , f , and h , sample size is shown in parentheses at the top of each column , and error bars denote SEM . All P - values were calculated by unpaired , two - tailed Student’s t - test . 24 Figure 4 . Cytoskeletal contraction is sufficient for CTL dissociation . MB49 cells expressing GFP - Rock2 - ER or GFP - ER control were loaded with OVA and imaged together with CTV - labeled Prf1 - / - OT - 1 CTLs . ( a ) Treatment with 4 - OHT ( OHT ) induces the dimerization and activation of Rock2 - ER , which in turn promotes actomyosin contractility . ( b ) Time - lapse montages showing the effects of 4 - OHT on representative GFP - ER ( top ) and GFP - Rock2 - ER ( bottom ) target cells engaged with CTLs . “OHT” indicates the addition of 4 - OHT , and the magenta arrowhead denotes dissociation . Time in H : MM is shown in the top right corner of each image . Scale bars = 20 µm . ( c ) Quantification of the time delay between 4 - OHT treatment and target cell release . Sample size is shown in parentheses at the top of each column , and error bars denote SEM . P - values were calculated by one - way ANOVA with Tukey correction . ns = not significant . 25 Figure 5 . CTLs sense apoptotic contraction through the IS . ( a ) Schematic diagram comparing passive and active mechanisms of contraction - induced CTL release . Activating CTL signaling is indicated by the orange glow around the CTL . ( b - d ) OT - 1 CTLs were loaded with Fura - 2AM and imaged with OVA - loaded B16F10 cells . ( b ) Time - lapse montage of a representative interaction . Fura - 2 ratio is depicted in pseudocolor , with warmer colors indicating higher intracellular Ca 2 + concentration . Conjugate formation is indicated by the magenta asterisk and dissociation by the magenta arrowhead . Target cell contraction is accompanied by a decrease in intracellular Ca 2 + , denoted by the magenta arrow . Scale bars = 20 µm . ( c ) Mean Ca 2 + response curves derived from N = 18 wild type responses and N = 43 Prf1 - / - responses . The onset of target cell contraction and CTL dissociation in the wild type conjugates is indicated by the red and gray cumulative distribution functions , respectively . Error bars on Ca 2 + curves denote SEM . * , * * , * * * , and * * * * denote P ≤ 0 . 05 , P ≤ 0 . 01 , P ≤ 0 . 001 , and P ≤ 0 . 0001 , respectively , calculated by unpaired t - test . ( d ) Wild type Ca 2 + responses from c plotted as two dimensional trajectories of Fura - 2 ratio against target cell area . Values and the beginning and end of each contact are highlighted in blue and red , respectively . 26 Figure 6 . Morphological change during apoptotic contraction controls CTL dissociation and serial killing . ( a - c ) CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs were imaged in the presence of PI together with OVA - loaded control ( Ctrl ) B16F10 cells or B16F10 cells overexpressing the indicated MRTF isoforms . ( a ) Time - lapse montages of representative contacts are shown to the right , with schematic diagrams to the left . Conjugate formation is indicated by magenta asterisks , dissociation by magenta arrowheads , and PI influx by red asterisks . Time in H : MM is shown in the top left corner of each image . ( b ) Quantification of the time delay between the onset of 27 contraction and target cell release . ( c ) Cumulative bar graph showing the relative frequency of serial killing in cocultures containing the indicated target cells . ( d - f ) CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs were imaged in the presence of PI together with OVA - loaded B16F10 cells on hydrogels of varying stiffness or glass . ( d ) Time - lapse montages of representative contacts on 50 kPa and 8 kPa hydrogels are shown to the right , with schematic diagrams to the left . Conjugate formation is indicated by magenta asterisks , dissociation by magenta arrowheads , and PI influx by red asterisks . Time in H : MM is shown in the top right corner of each image . ( e ) Quantification of the time delay between the onset of contraction and target cell release . ( f ) Cumulative bar graph showing the relative frequency of serial killing in cocultures containing the indicated target cells . Scale bars in a and d = 20 µm . Sample size is shown in parentheses at the top of each column in b and e , and to the right of each bar in c and f . Error bars denote SEM . P - values were calculated by one - way ANOVA with Tukey correction . * , * * , and * * * * denote P ≤ 0 . 05 , P < 0 . 01 , and P < 0 . 0001 , respectively . 28 Supplementary figure 1 . Apoptotic contraction predicts CTL dissociation in 3D culture . Collagen gels containing CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs and OVA - loaded , YFP + B16F10 cells were imaged in the presence of PI together with either 100 µm zVAD or vehicle control ( DMSO ) , as indicated . ( a ) Diagram schematizing the approach . ( b ) Time - lapse montage of a representative contact , with conjugate formation indicated by the magenta asterisk , dissociation by the magenta arrowhead , and PI influx by the red asterisk . Time in H : MM is shown in the top left corner of each image . Scale bars = 20 µm . ( c ) Quantification of the time delay between the onset of contraction and target cell release ( left ) and between PI influx and target cell release ( right ) . Sample size is shown in parentheses at the top of each column , and error bars denote SEM . P - values were calculated by unpaired , two - tailed Student’s t test . 29 Supplementary figure 2 . Apoptotic contraction predicts CTL dissociation from multiple target cell types . CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs were imaged together with the indicated OVA - loaded target cells in the presence of both CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 and PI . Left , time - lapse montages of representative contacts . Conjugate formation is indicated by magenta asterisks , dissociation by magenta arrowheads , CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 flux by green asterisks , and PI influx by red asterisks . Time in H : MM is shown in the top left or right corner of each image . Scale bars = 20 µm . Right , quantification of offset time between contraction ( Contract . ) , CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 flux ( Casp . 3 / 7 ) , or PI flux and target cell release . Data points to the left of the origin denote detachment before the index of interest , whereas data points to the right of the origin denote detachment after . N = 52 MB49 conjugates , 51 endothelial cell conjugates , and 51 B16F10 conjugates . Error bars denote SEM . P - values were calculated by one - way ANOVA with Tukey correction . * * and * * * * denote P ≤ 0 . 01 and P ≤ 0 . 0001 , respectively . 30 Supplementary figure 3 . Apoptotic contraction correlates with NK cell dissociation . CTV - labelled , primary murine NK cells were imaged together with B16F10 target cells in the presence of both CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 and PI . ( a ) A time - lapse montage of a representative contact is shown below , with schematic diagrams above . Dissociation is indicated by the cyan arrowhead . Time in H : MM is shown in the top right corner of each image . Scale bars = 20 µm . ( b ) Quantification of offset time between contraction ( Contract . ) , CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 flux ( Casp . 3 / 7 ) , or PI flux and target cell release . Data points to the left of the origin denote detachment before the index of interest , whereas data points to the right of the origin denote detachment after . N = 71 . Error bars indicate SEM . P - values were calculated by one - way ANOVA with Tukey correction . * * * , * * * * , and ns denote P ≤ 0 . 01 , P ≤ 0 . 0001 , and P > 0 . 05 , respectively . 31 Supplementary figure 4 . Structural characterization of apoptotic contraction . ( a ) CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs were imaged together with OVA - loaded MB49 cells expressing both Myl12b - GFP and Tractin - RFP . Mean fluorescence intensity of Myl12b - GFP and Tractin - RFP in five representative target cells is shown , graphed over time together with the length of the cell along its major axis . ( b ) CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs were imaged with OVA - loaded MB49 cells . A time - lapse montage of a representative killing event is shown , with brightfield and fluorescence channels above and IRM below . Red arrows denote the footprint of the contracting target , which detaches completely from the substrate . Scale bars = 20 µm . 32 Supplementary figure 5 . Cytoskeletal contraction is necessary for CTL dissociation . ( a - d ) B16F10 cells expressing Cherry alone ( Ctrl ) or DeAct together with Cherry ( DeAct ) were loaded with OVA and imaged with CTV - labelled CTLs in the presence of CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 . ( a ) Time - lapse montages of representative contacts are shown to the right , with schematic diagrams to the left . Conjugate formation is indicated by magenta asterisks , dissociation by magenta arrowheads , and CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 flux by green asterisks . Time in H : MM is shown in the top left corner of each image . Scale bars = 20 µm . ( b ) Quantification of the time delay between CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 flux and target cell release . ( c ) 2D plot relating the mean Cherry fluorescence of DeAct expressing targets to the time interval between CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 flux and target cell release . ( d ) 2D plot relating the starting area of the indicated target cells to the time interval between CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 flux and target cell release . ( e ) The time interval between the start and end of contraction , measured in B16F10 cells engaged by OT - 1 CTLs in the presence of 100 µm zVAD - FMK ( zVAD ) or vehicle control ( DMSO ) . ( f ) The time interval between the start and end of contraction , measured for wild type ( WT ) and Rock1nc MEFs engaged by OT - 1 CTLs . Sample size is shown in parentheses at the top of each column in b , e , and f , with error bars denoting SEM . P - values were calculated by two - tailed unpaired Student’s t test . 33 Supplementary figure 6 . Substrate stiffness controls target cell morphology and CTL dissociation . B16F10 cells were cultured on hydrogels of varying stiffness ( 4 - 50 kPa ) or glass . ( a ) Representative images of phalloidin stained cells cultured on the indicated surfaces . Scale bars = 20 µm . ( b ) Quantification of target cell area on the indicated substrates . ( c ) Quantification of the time delay between PI influx and target cell release . Sample size is shown in parentheses at the top of each column in b and c , with error bars denoting SEM . P - values were calculated by one - way ANOVA with Tukey correction . * , * * , and * * * * denote P ≤ 0 . 05 , P < 0 . 01 , and P < 0 . 0001 , respectively . 34 Supplementary figure 7 . Model for CTL dissociation . Apoptotic contraction promotes CTL detachment by attenuating activating signals . Timely target cell release facilitates both serial killing by the CTL and corpse clearance by patrolling phagocytes . 35 Supplementary Movie Legends Supplementary movie 1 . Prf1 + / + CTLs kill and dissociate from target cells . CTV - labeled Prf1 + / + ( wild type ) OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) were imaged together with OVA - loaded YFP + B16F10 cells ( yellow ) in the presence of PI ( red ) . A representative 600× time - lapse movie is shown . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper left corner . Supplementary movie 2 . Prf1 - / - CTLs neither kill nor dissociate from target cells . CTV - labeled Prf1 - / - OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) were imaged together with OVA - loaded YFP + B16F10 cells ( yellow ) in the presence of PI . A representative 600× time - lapse movie is shown . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper left corner . Supplementary movie 3 . CTL dissociation is tightly correlated with apoptotic contraction . CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) were imaged together with OVA - loaded B16F10 cells in the presence of both CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 Green ( green ) and PI ( red ) . A representative 600× time - lapse movie is shown . Fluorescence signals have been overlaid onto the brightfield images . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper right corner . Supplementary movie 4 . CTL dissociation correlates with apoptotic contraction in 3D culture . CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) and OVA - loaded YFP + B16F10 cells ( yellow ) were embedded in collagen and then imaged in the presence of PI ( red ) . A representative 1500× time - lapse movie is shown . Fluorescence signals have been overlaid onto the brightfield images . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper left corner . Supplementary movie 5 . Contraction - induced dissociation is not specific to the lytic IS . CTV - labeled Prf1 + / + ( wild type ) OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) and CellVue Maroon - labeled Prf1 - / - OT - 1 CTLs ( white ) were mixed and then imaged together with OVA - loaded YFP + B16F10 cells ( yellow ) in the presence of PI ( red ) . A representative 600× time - lapse movie is shown . Time in HH : MM is shown in the lower left corner . Supplementary movie 6 . Actomyosin cables accumulate in contracting target cells . MB49 target cells expressing Myl12b - GFP ( green ) and Tractin - RFP ( red ) were OVA - loaded and then imaged by confocal microscopy together with CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) . A representative 308× time - lapse movie is shown . Time in H : MM : SS . SSS is shown in the lower right corner . 36 Supplementary movie 7 . CTL dissociation from targets under control conditions . OVA - loaded B16F10 cells were pretreated with vehicle ( DMSO ) and then imaged together with CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) in the presence of both CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 Green ( green ) and PI ( red ) . A representative 600× time - lapse movie is shown . Fluorescence signals have been overlaid onto the brightfield images . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper left corner . This control response is included for comparison with the MycB condition ( supplementary movie 8 ) . Supplementary movie 8 . Depletion of target cell F - actin inhibits CTL dissociation . OVA - loaded B16F10 cells were pretreated with MycB and then imaged together with CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) in the presence of both CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 Green ( green ) and PI ( red ) . A representative 600× time - lapse movie is shown . Fluorescence signals have been overlaid onto the brightfield images . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper left corner . Supplementary movie 9 . CTL dissociation from targets under control conditions . B16F10 cells expressing control Cherry vector ( red ) were OVA - loaded and then imaged together with CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) in the presence of CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 Green ( green ) . A representative 600× time - lapse movie is shown . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper left corner . This control response is included for comparison with the DeAct condition ( supplementary movie 10 ) . Supplementary movie 10 . Depletion of target cell F - actin inhibits CTL dissociation . B16F10 cells expressing DeAct and Cherry ( red ) were OVA - loaded and then imaged together with CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) in the presence of CellEvent Caspase 3 / 7 Green ( green ) . A representative 600× time - lapse movie is shown . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper left corner . Supplementary movie 11 . CTL dissociation from targets under control conditions . OVA - loaded YFP + B16F10 cells ( yellow ) were pretreated with vehicle ( DMSO ) and then imaged together with CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) in the presence PI ( red ) . A representative 960× time - lapse movie is shown . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper left corner . This control response is included for comparison with the zVAD condition ( supplementary movie 12 ) . Supplementary movie 12 . Caspase inhibition delays CTL dissociation . OVA - loaded YFP + B16F10 cells ( yellow ) were pretreated with zVAD and then imaged together with CTV - labeled OT - 37 1 CTLs ( cyan ) in the presence PI ( red ) . A representative 960× time - lapse movie is shown . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper left corner . Supplementary movie 13 . CTL dissociation from targets under control conditions . OVA - loaded MEFs were imaged together with CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) in the presence of PI ( red ) . A representative 1200× time - lapse movie is shown . Fluorescence signals have been overlaid onto the brightfield images . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper left corner . This control response is included for comparison with the Rock1nc condition ( supplementary movie 14 ) . Supplementary movie 14 . Rock1 cleavage promotes target cell contraction and CTL dissociation . OVA - loaded Rock1nc MEFs were imaged together with CTV - labeled OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) in the presence of PI ( red ) . A representative 1200× time - lapse movie is shown . Fluorescence signals have been overlaid onto the brightfield images . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper left corner . Supplementary movie 15 . Cytoskeletal contraction is sufficient to induce CTL dissociation . MB49 cells expressing GFP - Rock2 - ER ( green ) were OVA - loaded and then imaged together with CTV - labeled Prf1 - / - OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) . A representative 600× time - lapse movie is shown . Fluorescence signals have been overlaid onto the brightfield images . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper right corner . 4 - OHT was added to the cells at the 35 min time point to induce GFP - Rock2 - ER dimerization and activation . Supplementary movie 16 . GFP - ER induces neither target contraction nor CTL dissociation . MB49 cells expressing GFP - ER ( green ) were OVA - loaded and then imaged together with CTV - labeled Prf1 - / - OT - 1 CTLs ( cyan ) . A representative 600× time - lapse movie is shown . Fluorescence signals have been overlaid onto the brightfield images . Time in HH : MM is shown in the lower left corner . 4 - OHT was added to the cells at the 40 min time point to induce GFP - ER dimerization . Supplementary movie 16 . Reduced CTL Ca 2 + signaling precedes dissociation . OT - 1 CTLs were loaded with Fura - 2AM and then imaged together with OVA - loaded B16F10 cells . A representative 600× time - lapse movie is shown . Fura - 2 ratio is depicted in pseudocolor with cold and warm colors indicating low and high intracellular Ca 2 + , respectively . Fura - 2 signals have been overlaid onto the brightfield images . Time in HH : MM is shown in the upper left corner . 38 References 1 . Zhang , N . & Bevan , M . J . CD8 ( + ) T cells : foot soldiers of the immune system . Immunity 35 , 161 - 168 ( 2011 ) . 2 . Stinchcombe , J . C . & Griffiths , G . M . Secretory mechanisms in cell - mediated cytotoxicity . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 23 , 495 - 517 ( 2007 ) . 3 . Dustin , M . L . & Long , E . O . Cytotoxic immunological synapses . Immunol Rev 235 , 24 - 34 ( 2010 ) . 4 . Thiery , J . & Lieberman , J . Perforin : a key pore - forming protein for immune control of viruses and cancer . Subcell Biochem 80 , 197 - 220 ( 2014 ) . 5 . Chowdhury , D . & Lieberman , J . Death by a thousand cuts : granzyme pathways of programmed cell death . Annu Rev Immunol 26 , 389 - 420 ( 2008 ) . 6 . Wei , S . C . , Duffy , C . R . & Allison , J . P . Fundamental Mechanisms of Immune Checkpoint Blockade Therapy . Cancer Discov 8 , 1069 - 1086 ( 2018 ) . 7 . June , C . H . & Sadelain , M . Chimeric Antigen Receptor Therapy . N Engl J Med 379 , 64 - 73 ( 2018 ) . 8 . Ganusov , V . V . & De Boer , R . J . Estimating in vivo death rates of targets due to CD8 T - cell - mediated killing . J Virol 82 , 11749 - 11757 ( 2008 ) . 9 . Halle , S . et al . In Vivo Killing Capacity of Cytotoxic T Cells Is Limited and Involves Dynamic Interactions and T Cell Cooperativity . Immunity 44 , 233 - 245 ( 2016 ) . 10 . Nagata , S . , Hanayama , R . & Kawane , K . Autoimmunity and the clearance of dead cells . Cell 140 , 619 - 630 ( 2010 ) . 11 . Ritter , A . T . et al . Cortical actin recovery at the immunological synapse leads to termination of lytic granule secretion in cytotoxic T lymphocytes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114 , E6585 - E6594 ( 2017 ) . 12 . Jenkins , M . R . et al . Failed CTL / NK cell killing and cytokine hypersecretion are directly linked through prolonged synapse time . J Exp Med 212 , 307 - 317 ( 2015 ) . 13 . Leventis , P . A . & Grinstein , S . The distribution and function of phosphatidylserine in cellular membranes . Annu Rev Biophys 39 , 407 - 427 ( 2010 ) . 14 . Anft , M . et al . NK cell detachment from target cells is regulated by successful cytotoxicity and influences cytokine production . Cell Mol Immunol 17 , 347 - 355 ( 2020 ) . 15 . Wickman , G . , Julian , L . & Olson , M . F . How apoptotic cells aid in the removal of their own cold dead bodies . Cell Death Differ 19 , 735 - 742 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Huse , M . Mechanical forces in the immune system . Nat Rev Immunol 17 , 679 - 690 ( 2017 ) . 39 17 . Comrie , W . A . , Babich , A . & Burkhardt , J . K . F - actin flow drives affinity maturation and spatial organization of LFA - 1 at the immunological synapse . J Cell Biol 208 , 475 - 491 ( 2015 ) . 18 . Lee , M . S . et al . A Mechanical Switch Couples T Cell Receptor Triggering to the Cytoplasmic Juxtamembrane Regions of CD3zetazeta . Immunity 43 , 227 - 239 ( 2015 ) . 19 . Chen , W . , Lou , J . & Zhu , C . Forcing switch from short - to intermediate - and long - lived states of the alphaA domain generates LFA - 1 / ICAM - 1 catch bonds . J Biol Chem 285 , 35967 - 35978 ( 2010 ) . 20 . Liu , B . , Chen , W . , Evavold , B . D . & Zhu , C . Accumulation of dynamic catch bonds between TCR and agonist peptide - MHC triggers T cell signaling . Cell 157 , 357 - 368 ( 2014 ) . 21 . Judokusumo , E . , Tabdanov , E . , Kumari , S . , Dustin , M . L . & Kam , L . C . Mechanosensing in T lymphocyte activation . Biophys J 102 , L5 - 7 ( 2012 ) . 22 . Saitakis , M . et al . Different TCR - induced T lymphocyte responses are potentiated by stiffness with variable sensitivity . Elife 6 ( 2017 ) . 23 . Blumenthal , D . , Chandra , V . , Avery , L . & Burkhardt , J . K . Mouse T cell priming is enhanced by maturation - dependent stiffening of the dendritic cell cortex . Elife 9 ( 2020 ) . 24 . Comrie , W . A . , Li , S . , Boyle , S . & Burkhardt , J . K . The dendritic cell cytoskeleton promotes T cell adhesion and activation by constraining ICAM - 1 mobility . J Cell Biol 208 , 457 - 473 ( 2015 ) . 25 . Coleman , M . L . et al . Membrane blebbing during apoptosis results from caspase - mediated activation of ROCK I . Nat Cell Biol 3 , 339 - 345 ( 2001 ) . 26 . Croft , D . R . et al . Actin - myosin - based contraction is responsible for apoptotic nuclear disintegration . J Cell Biol 168 , 245 - 255 ( 2005 ) . 27 . Harterink , M . et al . DeActs : genetically encoded tools for perturbing the actin cytoskeleton in single cells . Nature Methods 14 , 479 - + ( 2017 ) . 28 . Vandenabeele , P . , Vanden Berghe , T . & Festjens , N . Caspase inhibitors promote alternative cell death pathways . Sci STKE 2006 , pe44 ( 2006 ) . 29 . Vercammen , D . et al . Inhibition of caspases increases the sensitivity of L929 cells to necrosis mediated by tumor necrosis factor . J Exp Med 187 , 1477 - 1485 ( 1998 ) . 30 . Lemaire , C . , Andreau , K . , Souvannavong , V . & Adam , A . Inhibition of caspase activity induces a switch from apoptosis to necrosis . FEBS Lett 425 , 266 - 270 ( 1998 ) . 31 . Julian , L . et al . Defective apoptotic cell contractility provokes sterile inflammation , leading to liver damage and tumour suppression . Elife 10 ( 2021 ) . 32 . Croft , D . R . & Olson , M . F . Conditional regulation of a ROCK - estrogen receptor fusion protein . Methods Enzymol 406 , 541 - 553 ( 2006 ) . 40 33 . Poenie , M . , Tsien , R . Y . & Schmitt - Verhulst , A . M . Sequential activation and lethal hit measured by [ Ca2 + ] i in individual cytolytic T cells and targets . EMBO J 6 , 2223 - 2232 ( 1987 ) . 34 . Zweifach , A . Target - cell contact activates a highly selective capacitative calcium entry pathway in cytotoxic T lymphocytes . J Cell Biol 148 , 603 - 614 ( 2000 ) . 35 . Zhou , X . et al . A calcium optimum for cytotoxic T lymphocyte and natural killer cell cytotoxicity . J Physiol 596 , 2681 - 2698 ( 2018 ) . 36 . Gau , D . & Roy , P . SRF ' ing and SAP ' ing - the role of MRTF proteins in cell migration . J Cell Sci 131 ( 2018 ) . 37 . Tello - Lafoz , M . et al . Cytotoxic lymphocytes target characteristic biophysical vulnerabilities in cancer . Immunity 54 , 1037 - 1054 e1037 ( 2021 ) . 38 . Paszek , M . J . & Weaver , V . M . The tension mounts : mechanics meets morphogenesis and malignancy . J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 9 , 325 - 342 ( 2004 ) . 39 . Byfield , F . J . , Reen , R . K . , Shentu , T . P . , Levitan , I . & Gooch , K . J . Endothelial actin and cell stiffness is modulated by substrate stiffness in 2D and 3D . J Biomech 42 , 1114 - 1119 ( 2009 ) . 40 . Tee , S . Y . , Fu , J . , Chen , C . S . & Janmey , P . A . Cell shape and substrate rigidity both regulate cell stiffness . Biophys J 100 , L25 - 27 ( 2011 ) . 41 . Sebbagh , M . , Hamelin , J . , Bertoglio , J . , Solary , E . & Breard , J . Direct cleavage of ROCK II by granzyme B induces target cell membrane blebbing in a caspase - independent manner . J Exp Med 201 , 465 - 471 ( 2005 ) . 42 . Woolf , E . et al . Lymph node chemokines promote sustained T lymphocyte motility without triggering stable integrin adhesiveness in the absence of shear forces . Nat Immunol 8 , 1076 - 1085 ( 2007 ) . 43 . Legate , K . R . , Wickstrom , S . A . & Fassler , R . Genetic and cell biological analysis of integrin outside - in signaling . Genes Dev 23 , 397 - 418 ( 2009 ) . 44 . Wang , M . S . et al . Mechanically active integrins target lytic secretion at the immune synapse to facilitate cellular cytotoxicity . Nat Commun 13 , 3222 ( 2022 ) . 45 . Basu , R . et al . Cytotoxic T Cells Use Mechanical Force to Potentiate Target Cell Killing . Cell 165 , 100 - 110 ( 2016 ) . 46 . Fogarty , C . E . & Bergmann , A . The Sound of Silence : Signaling by Apoptotic Cells . Curr Top Dev Biol 114 , 241 - 265 ( 2015 ) . 47 . Monier , B . et al . Apico - basal forces exerted by apoptotic cells drive epithelium folding . Nature 518 , 245 - 248 ( 2015 ) . 48 . Teng , X . & Toyama , Y . Apoptotic force : active mechanical function of cell death during morphogenesis . Dev Growth Differ 53 , 269 - 276 ( 2011 ) . 41 49 . Kuipers , D . et al . Epithelial repair is a two - stage process driven first by dying cells and then by their neighbours . J Cell Sci 127 , 1229 - 1241 ( 2014 ) .