1 Developmental Cell 15 Supplemental Data Clathrin - Mediated Internalization Is Essential for Sustained EGFR Signaling but Dispensable for Degradation Sara Sigismund , Elisabetta Argenzio , Daniela Tosoni , Elena Cavallaro , Simona Polo , and Pier Paolo Di Fiore SUPPLEMENTAL EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Chemicals and Antibodies EGF was from Intergen ; rhodamine - EGF , Alexa488 - Tf , Dil - LDL , and Alexa647 - BSA from Molecular Probes ; 125 I - EGF from Amersham Biosciences , 125 I - Tf from PerkinElmer ; BrdU from SIGMA . Antibodies ( biochemistry ) were : a polyclonal anti - EGFR ( directed against aa 1172 - 1186 of human EGFR ) , anti - vinculin ( hvin - 1 ) and anti - tubulin ( Santa Cruz ) , anti - phospho - JNK ( Tyr 183 - 185 , Biosource ) , anti - MAPK ( Sigma ) , anti - phospho - ERK ( p42 - 44 ) , anti - phospho - AKT ( Ser 473 ) , anti - phospho - SCH ( Tyr 239 - 240 ) , anti - AKT ( Cell Signaling ) , anti - clathrin heavy chain ( Becton Dickinson ) , anti - Dynamin ( Santa Cruz ) , anti - Intersectin1 ( polyclonal , home - made ) , anti - epsin1 / 2 ( monoclonal , home - made ) , anti - AP - 2 α ( SIGMA ) , anti - AP - 2 μ ( BD Transduction ) , anti - Grb2 ( Santa Cruz ) , anti - TfR ( Zymed ) , anti - eps15 ( monoclonal , home - made ) , anti - eps15R ( polyclonal , home - made ) , Hrs ( polyclonal , kindly provided by Sylvie Urbè ) , Rabex - 5 ( monoclonal , home - made ) . Antibodies ( immunofluorescence ) were : anti - EGFR ( Ab - 1 , Oncogene ; 13A9 , kindly provided by GENENTECH ) , anti - EAA - 1 ( N - 19 , Santa Cruz ) , anti - Lamp - 2 ( CD107b , BD Pharmingen ) , anti - clathrin heavy chain ( X22 , Affinity BioReagents ) , anti - BrdU 2 ( Becton Dickinson ) , secondary Ab conjugated to Cy3 ( Amersham ) , FITC ( Amersham ) or Alexa 488 ( Molecular Probes ) . Recycling Assays Recycling assays of 125 I - EGF were performed as described ( Kornilova et al . , 1996 ; Sorkin et al . , 1991a ) . In brief , cells were serum - starved and then incubated with 125 I - EGF ( 20 ng / ml ) for 15 min at 37 °C , followed by mild acid / salt treatment to remove bound EGF . Cells were then chased at 37 °C in a medium containing 4 μ g / ml EGF for the indicated times , to allow recycling . At the end of each chase time , the medium was collected and subjected to TCA precipitation to determine the amount of intact ( TCA precipitable ) and degraded ( TCA soluble ) 125 I - EGF present in it . Surface - bound 125 I - EGF was extracted by acid treatment ( 0 . 2 M acetic acid pH 2 . 8 , 0 . 5 M NaCl ) . Finally , cells were lysed in 1N NaOH to determine intracellular 125 I - EGF . Data are expressed as the fraction of intact 125 I - EGF in the medium with respect to the total ( total medium + total surface + total intracellular ) . Non - specific counts were measured for each time point in the presence of a 200 - fold excess of cold ligand , and were never > 3 - 10 % of the total counts . Alternatively , recycling was measured by a FACS - based method . Cells were serum - starved for 4 h , and then incubated with EGF ( 100 ng / ml ) for 1 h at 4 °C , followed by a 15 min shift at 37 °C to allow internalization ( pulse ) . After removal of bound EGF by mild acid / salt treatment , cells were chased at 37 °C for 10 and 20 min to allow recycling . At each time point , cells were fixed in 1 % formaldehyde . EGFR at the plasma membrane was labeled using an anti - EGFR antibody ( Ab - 1 ) , which recognizes the extracellular portion of the receptor , and FITC - conjugated secondary antibodies , and analyzed by flow cytometry . The relative surface level of EGFR at 3 each time point ( t ) was calculated from mean fluorescence intensities ( MFI ) with the formula [ MFI ( t ) - MFI ( pulse ) / MFI ( T0 ) - MFI ( pulse ) ] x100 . Degradation Assays Degradation of 125 I - EGF was measured essentially as described ( Sorkin et al . , 1991b ) . In brief , serum - starved cells were incubated with 125 I - EGF [ 1 . 5 ng / ml ( Low EGF ) or 20 ng / ml ( High EGF ) ] for 6 min at 37 °C , followed by mild acid / salt treatment to remove bound EGF . 125 I - EGF - loaded cells were then chased at 37 °C for the indicated time points , without adding cold EGF . At the end of each chase time , the medium was collected , the surface - bound 125 I - EGF was extracted by acid treatment ( 0 . 2 M acetic acid pH 2 . 8 , 0 . 5 M NaCl ) , and the cells were lysed in 1 mM NaOH . The medium , surface bound and intracellular lysate fractions were then TCA precipitated to separate intact from degraded 125 I - EGF . Non - specific counts were measured for each time point in the presence of a 200 - fold excess of cold ligand , and were never > 3 - 10 % of the total counts . Internalization Assays at the Single Cell Level At the single cell level , endocytosis of EGF and EGFR was monitored by treating cells at 37 °C with rhodamine - EGF ( 0 . 5 μ g / ml ) and anti - EGFR 13A9 Ab , which does not interfere with EGFR internalization ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ; Winkler et al . , 1989 ) ( 5 µg / ml ) , followed by fixation and treatment with Alexa 488 - conjugated secondary antibody . Fluid - phase endocytosis and endocytosis of LDL was monitored by treating cells at 37 °C with Alexa647 - BSA ( 10 μ g / ml ) and Dil - LDL ( 20 μ g / ml ) for 15 and 120 min , to allow their internalization and degradation . Reconstitution of Clathrin in Clathrin - KD HeLa Cells For reconstitution experiments , HeLa cells were transiently transfected with a plasmid that allowed the simultaneous expression of an shRNA ( targeting clathrin heavy 4 chain ) , under an H1 RNA promoter , and KD - proof GFP - clathrin heavy chain ( or GFP alone ) , under CMV promoter ( pBRAIN vectors , kindly provided by S . J . Royle ) ( Royle et al . , 2005 ) . The shRNA targeting sequence corresponds to RNAi Oligo1 ( see above ) . Cells were analyzed 72h after transfection . Functional Ablation of clathrin or AP - 2 The clathrin targeting oligos were : Oligo 1 : TCCAATTCGAAGACCAATT , ( Motley et al . , 2003 ) ; Oligo 2 : CCTGCGGTCTGGAGTCAAC , ( Hinrichsen et al . , 2003 ) ; Oligo 3 : GAAGAACTCTTTGCCCGGAAATTTA . For each silencing oligo a mismatched control was designed by introducing at least four mutations in the sequence . Sequences of the mismatched control oligos were : Oligo 1 control : TCGAATACGAACACCTAT Oligo 2 control : CCTCGGGCTTGAGGCTAAC Oligo 3 control : GAATCATTCCGTGCCAAGTAGATTA The AP - 2 targeting oligos were : Oligo 1 : GGCCAAGCUUCUGGGGGUU , targeting the α subunit ; Oligo 2 : UCAAGCGCAUGGCAGGCAU , targeting the μ subunit . Clathrin KD in NR6 Cells Silencing of clathrin heavy chain in NR6 cells was performed by transient transfection of the above - described siRNA Oligo 3 from Invitrogen ( since the human and mouse sequences are identical in the region corresponding to oligo ) , controlled by its mismatched oligo . 5 Caveolin - 1 KD Silencing of caveolin - 1 was performed by transient transfection of the siRNA oligo ( from Dharmacon ) : GGCCAGCUUCACCACCUUC ; the control mismatched oligo was : GCGCACGUUCCACACUCUC . BrdU Incorporation Studies HeLa cells , plated on coverslips at 50 % confluency , were serum starved for 24 hours and pre - treated with filipin ( 0 . 5 μ g / ml ) for 30 min at 37°C or mock treated . Cells were then incubated with EGF ( 1 . 5 or 100 ng / ml ) for 8h at 37°C , in the presence or absence of filipin , followed by the addition of BrdU ( 33 . 3 μ M ) for additional 30 min . After fixation in 4 % paraformadehyde , cells were permeabilized in 0 . 1 % Triton - X100 , 2 % BSA in PBS and incubated with anti - BrdU antibody ( Becton Dickinson ) in the presence of 3 mM MgCl 2 , DNAse ( Promega ) , 2 % BSA . Cells were then treated with Cy3 - conjugated secondary antibody and nuclei were stained with DAPI . Comparative immunofluorescence analyses were performed in parallel with identical acquisition parameters . About 300 cells , in duplicate , were screened for each condition . 6 Figure S1 . Additional Data and Controls for the Clathrin - KD Experiments For the experiments described in the main text , three different clathrin - interfering oligos were used . For each of the assays shown , at least two ( of three ) targeting oligos were used . In the figures of the main text , representative results obtained with one oligo ( oligo 1 ) are shown . Here we report representative results obtained with other oligos . A . The typical effects on clathrin levels , obtained with oligo 1 , are reported , 7 both at the biochemical ( top ) and morphological level ( bottom ; bar , 18 μ m ) . For each of the shown experiments , we checked the efficiency of the clathrin KD , with results comparable to those reported in this panel ( this panel refers to the cells used in the actual experiment shown in Fig . 3A ) . B . The effects of oligo 2 on EGF internalization are reported . HeLa cells were subjected to clathrin - KD ( oligo 2 ) or to transfection with control oligo ( mismatched control of oligo 2 ) . EGF internalization was measured in the presence of 125 I - EGF 1 . 5 ng / ml ( LOW EGF , left panel ) or 20 ng / ml ( HIGH EGF , one time point at 6 min , right panel ) . Results are the average of triplicate points ( s . e . m . < 8 % ) and representative of three independent experiments which yielded comparable results . K e are shown in the boxed panel , and were calculated from the internalization kinetics at low EGF . As shown , the results compare well with those obtained with oligo 1 , and shown in the main text . C . The effects of oligo 2 on EGF degradation , and EGF signaling are shown . HeLa cells were subjected to clathrin - KD ( oligo 2 ) or to transfection with control oligo ( mismatched control of oligo 2 ) . Cells were treated with EGF ( 100 ng / ml ) for the indicated times and total cell lysates were IB as shown . As shown , the results compare well with those obtained with oligo 1 , and shown in the main text . 8 Figure S2 . Re - Expression of Clathrin in Clathrin - KD Cells A . The effects of reconstitution of clathrin - KD cells , with a KD - proof GFP - clathrin heavy chain , on the internalization of Tf , are shown . HeLa cells were transiently transfected with a plasmid that allowed the simultaneous expression of a shRNA ( targeting the clathrin heavy chain , and corresponding to siRNA oligo 1 ) , under an H1 RNA promoter , and a KD - proof GFP - clathrin heavy chain , under CMV promoter ( Royle et al . , 2005 ) ( Clath KD + GFP - Clath siRNA proof ) . The control vector expressed the clathrin shRNA and GFP ( Royle et al . , 2005 ) ( Clath KD + GFP ) . 9 Seventy - two hours after transfection , cells were either processed for IF analysis to check the level of KD / reconstitution ( upper panel ) or incubated with rhodamine - Tf ( Molecular Probes , 50 μ g / ml ) for 30 minutes at 37°C ( lower panel ) to follow internalization . Upper panel : note that all transfected cells ( green ) did not display evident clathrin expression in the “Clath KD + GFP” samples , while they showed re - expression of clathrin in the “Clath KD + GFP - Clath siRNA proof” samples . Lower panel : note that transfected cells did not display internalization of Tf in the “Clath KD + GFP” samples , while they did so in the “Clath KD + GFP - Clath siRNA proof” samples . Shown panels were selected to display areas of the coverslips containing both transfected and untransfected cells , to highlight the differences . A quantitative estimate of these experiments is in panel B . Bar , 18 μ m ) . B . Left , quantitative assessment of the results of the upper panel of Suppl . Fig . 2A . Data are expressed as % of clathrin - KD cells ( as detected by anti - clathrin immunostaining ) / transfected GFP - positive cells ( detected by epifluorescence ) , in KD + GFP cells ( corresponding to the “Clath KD + GFP” samples of panel A ) and KD + reconst cells ( corresponding to the “Clath KD + GFP - Clath siRNA proof” samples of panel A ) . Note that nearly all cells in KD + GFP are clathrin negative , whereas nearly all cells in KD + reconst are clathrin positive . Right , quantitative assessment of the results of the lower panel of Suppl . Fig . 2A . Data are expressed as % of cells internalizing Tf ( as detected by rhodamine - Tf ) / transfected GFP - positive cells ( detected by epifluorescence ) , in KD + GFP cells ( corresponding to the “Clath KD + GFP” samples of panel A ) and KD + reconst cells ( corresponding to the “Clath KD + GFP - Clath siRNA proof” samples of panel A ) . Data were independently computed on randomly picked GFP - positive cells ( random GFP expression ) or cells displaying intermediate levels of GFP - expression ( medium GFP expression ) , to correct for putative artifacts due to overexpression of clathrin . In both cases , reconstituted cells display promptly detectable Tf internalization . In both panels , at least 100 cells / condition were scored , in duplicate . Data are expressed as the mean ± SD of three independent experiments . C . Experiments in this panel show that reconstitution of clathrin - KD cells restores the sustained phase of signaling ( compare these results to those shown in Fig . 6 of the main text ) . HeLa cells were either mock - transfected , or transfected with the vector expressing the clathrin shRNA and GFP ( Royle et al . , 2005 ) ( KD + GFP ) , or transfected with the vector expressing the clathrin shRNA and the KD - proof GFP - clathrin heavy chain ( Royle et al . , 2005 ) ( KD + reconst . ) . Cells were treated with EGF ( 100 ng / ml ) for the indicated times . Total cell lysates were immunoblotted as shown . Note that in KD + GFP , the long - term stimulation ( 30 - 180 min ) of AKT and MAPK ( but not of SHC ) is severely reduced , vs . mock - transfected cells , while the effect is rescued in KD + reconst cells . In the clathrin IB , arrows indicate the position of endogenous and RNAi resistant GFP - tagged clathrin . 10 Figure S3 . Comparison of Cholesterol - Interfering Drugs Studies of NCE necessarily rely on cholesterol - interfering drugs , among which β - cyclodextrin , nystatin , and filipin are the most widely used . In our present studies , we did not employ methyl - β - cyclodextrin for several reasons . First , methyl - β - cyclodextrin extracts cholesterol from the membrane ; thus its usage constitutes a much harsher treatment , with respect to cholesterol - blocking drugs ( such as nystatin and filipin ) . It is actually reported that methyl - β - cyclodextrin causes several secondary effects at the membrane ( Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . Second , it was previously reported that methyl - β - cyclodextrin increases binding of EGF to EGFR , enhances the EGFR kinase activity and triggers ligand - independent activation of EGFR ( Chen and Resh , 2002 ; Pike and Casey , 2002 ; Ringerike et al . , 2002 ; Roepstorff et al . , 2002 ) . 11 These properties severely hamper the interpretation of results regarding EGFR endocytosis . We also excluded nystatin , because it affects EGF binding to the EGFR , as also reported by others ( Kazazic et al . , 2006 ) ( panel A ) . While it is not clear whether this is due to reduced affinity of the EGF : EGFR interaction or to a reduction in the number of the EGF binding sites at the cell surface , it constitutes reason enough not to rely on this drug for quantitative studies of EGF internalization . On the other hand , filipin does not affect EGF binding to the EGFR ( panel A ) , or EGFR autophosphorylation ( panel B ) . We note that filipin and nystatin are both polyene antibiotics that bind membrane sterols , such as ergosterol ( particularly enriched in fungal membranes ) and cholesterol ( which is enriched in mammalian cell membranes ) . They are absorbed by the membrane and form aggregates with lipids , causing changes in membrane permeability . In mammalian cells , they are used to inhibit rafts and raft - mediated internalization , because they work as cholesterol - chelating drugs , without extracting sterols from the membrane . Despite these similarities , there are , however , several differences between the two drugs that can potentially explain the differences that we evidenced : 1 . They belong to two distinct chemical groups ; in particular , nystatin displays a larger lactone than filipin ( Kitajima et al . , 1976 ; Kotler - Brajtburg et al . , 1979 ) . 2 . They display a different binding affinity for sterols ; in particular , filipin has higher affinity for cholesterol , while nystatin has higher affinity for ergosterol ( Kitajima et al . , 1976 ; Zygmunt and Tavormina , 1966 ) . 3 . They form morphologically different types of aggregates on the fungal membrane ( larger complexes in the case of filipin ) , possibly due to differences in the mechanism of polyene - sterol interaction ( Kitajima et al . , 1976 ) . 4 . Importantly , in mammalian cells , it was reported that they have different effects on raft - based structures , such as caveolae , as revealed by freeze - drying electron microscopy ( Ros - Baro et al . , 2001 ) . In particular , nystatin severely flattened caveolae , leading to a strong reduction in their number . Filipin , on the other hand , displayed a more subtle effect , and it affected caveolar morphology without modifying the number of invaginated caveolae . We feel that possible caveats in the interpretation of the filipin data should be discussed . Firstly , the rationale for using filipin is because it is a cholesterol - blocking drug . Sterols , and in particular cholesterol ( Kitajima et al . , 1976 ; Zygmunt and Tavormina , 1966 ) , are the only known targets of filipin . However , it cannot be excluded that other targets exist . Therefore , the fact that the NCE pathways described here ( as also stressed in our operational definition , see the introductory paragraph of the main text ) is filipin - sensitive does not necessarily imply that it is cholesterol ( or raft ) - dependent , although this remains a plausible interpretation . Secondly , one could argue that since filipin is membrane permeable , it binds to all cellular cholesterol . Therefore its effects are not limited to the plasma membrane , which is the site where NCE occurs . While this is a reasonable assumption , we would like to stress that numerous controls in our study indicate that the reported effects of filipin are indeed due to the action of the drug on the NCE pathway at the plasma membrane . Indeed , filipin did not interfere with many aspects of intracellular trafficking , receptor activation or receptor fate , when these were linked to CME , but only when they were linked to NCE . In particular , the following specificity controls are reported in our study : 12 A . Specificity at EGFR activation level : 1 . Filipin does not alter the number of cell surface EGFRs ( Fig . 1B , Fig . S3A ) 2 . Filipin does not alter EGFR activation as measured by phosphoEGFR ( Fig . S3B ) . B . Specificity at the internalization step : 1 . At low doses of EGF , when CME is preponderant , filipin does not have any effect on the rate of internalization of EGF ( Fig . 1 ) . 2 . The internalization of transferrin , which occurs exclusively through CME , is not affected by filipin ( Fig . 1 ) . 3 . The internalization of the Y1045F mutant ( which is internalized exclusively through CME ) is insensitive to filipin at low doses of EGF ( as expected ) , but also at high doses of EGF ( at which the filipin - sensitivity of the internalization of the wt EGFR is readily detectable ) ( Figs . S6B and S6C ) C . Specificity at the recycling level : 1 . The recycling of the Y1045F mutant is not affected by filipin , under conditions in which the recycling of the wt EGFR is dramatically affected ( Figs . S6F and S6G ) . 2 . The recycling of the transferrin receptor is not affected by filipin ( Fig . S5B ) D . Specificity at the degradation level : 1 . At low EGF , when CME is preponderant , filipin does not affect the degradation of the EGFR , while its effect is apparent at high EGF , when both CME and NCE are operational ( Fig . 4C ) . 2 . The degradation of the Y1045F mutant is not affected by filipin both at low doses of EGF ( as expected ) and at high doses ( a condition under which the effect on the degradation of the wt EGFR is promptly scored ) ( Figs . S6D and S6E ) . 3 . The degradation of LDL and of the fluid phase marker BSA is not affected by filipin ( Fig . S4 ) . E . Specificity at the trafficking level : 1 . Filipin does not alter the correct routing of wt EGFR to early EEA1 - positive endosomes , at high doses of EGF ( Fig . S5C ) . Legend to the Figure A . HeLa cells were serum - starved for 4 h and treated either with filipin ( Sigma , 1 μ g / ml for 1 h ) or nystatin ( Sigma , 0 . 25 μ g / ml for 30 min ) or mock - treated . Then , EGF saturation binding was performed for 6 h at 4 °C in the presence of 125 I - EGF , and cpm were measured . EGF binding sites were calculated based on the specific activity of 125 I - EGF and cell number . B . HeLa cells were serum - starved for 4 h and then treated with EGF , at the indicated concentrations for 2 min . IP and IB were as indicated . Neither the overall pTyr levels , nor the levels of a representative site ( pY1045 ) were affected by treatment with the drug . 13 Figure S4 . Filipin Does Not Alter the Degradation of LDL or of BSA To provide further controls for the specificity of filipin , we analyzed its effects on the degradation of LDL , a cargo normally destined for degradation in the lysosomes after internalization , and of the fluid phase marker BSA . HeLa cells were treated for filipin ( 1 μ g / ml for 1 h ) of with chloroquine + filipin ( chloroquine 100 μ M for 3h , filipin was added in the last hour of treatment ) and then with fluorescent ligands : rhodamine - EGF ( 0 . 5 mg / ml ) , Dil - LDL ( 20 μ g / ml ) , or Alexa647 - BSA ( 10 μ g / ml ) . Treatment with ligands was in the continuous presence of filipin of chloroquine or both , as indicated . As shown , after 15 - 30 min of internalization , all ligands were efficiently internalized ( control panels , 15 - 30 min ) , and after 2 h their signals were noticeably reduced , due to degradation ( control panels , 2h ) . In the presence of filipin , while staining at 15 min was not significantly affected , important differences were evident at 2 h . In particular , while EGF degradation was severely reduced ( EGF , filipin panel , 2h ) , the degradation 14 of LDL or BSA was essentially unaltered vs . the control condition ( LDL or BSA panels , filipin , 2h ) . Treatment with chloroquine ( chloroquine of chloroquine + filipin panels ) demonstrated that the disappearance of ligand signals at 2 h was indeed due to lysosomal degradation . Bar , 18 μ m . 15 16 Figure S5 . Recycling and Trafficking of the EGFR in Filipin - Treated Cells A . As an additional approach to measure EGFR recycling , we employed a morphological assay , to explore the fate of EGF and EGFR simultaneously . HeLa cells , treated as indicated , were incubated with anti - EGFR ( green , 13A9 ) and rhodamine - EGF ( red ) . After 15 minutes of EGF treatment , ligand and receptor signals colocalized in endosomes . At 120 min , nearly all signals disappeared from control and clathrin - KD cells , suggesting degradation ; conversely , in filipin - treated cells , EGFR was recycled to the surface . Blue , DAPI . Bar , 18 μ m . B . Recycling of the TfR is not affected by filipin . HeLa cells were incubated for 1 h at 37°C in serum - free medium with 0 . 2 % BSA in the presence of filipin ( at the indicated concentrations ) , followed by incubation for 1 h at 16°C with 2 μ g / ml human 125 I - Tf ( in the continuous presence of filipin ) . Surface - bound Tf was removed by incubation for 15 min at 4°C in 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM CaCl2 , and 20 mM sodium acetate buffer ( pH 4 . 6 ) . Cells were then incubated in serum - free medium supplemented with 0 . 2 % BSA , 20 mM Hepes ( pH 7 . 4 ) , 100 μ g / ml cold human Tf , for 5 min at 4°C and then warmed to 37°C , for various times as indicated , to allow recycling of internalized Tf . The medium was collected ( medium ) , and surface - bound Tf was removed by stripping , for 5 min at 4°C , with 0 . 5 M NaCl , 0 . 5 M acetic acid ( pH 2 . 5 ) ( bound ) . Finally , cells were solubilized in 1 M NaOH ( internalized ) . For each time point Tf recycling is expressed as the ratio of medium + bound ( recycled ) / internalized + medium + bound ( total ) . C . HeLa cells ( transfected where indicated with Rab7 - GFP or Rab11 - GFP ) were treated with filipin or mock - treated . Cells were then incubated with rhodamine - EGF ( 0 . 5 μ g / ml , red ) for 10 min ( for the detection of colocalization with EEA1 ) or 30 min ( for the detection of colocalization with Rab7 , Rab11 , Lamp - 2 ) , and stained ( green ) for EEA - 1 or Lamp - 2 ; Rab7 and Rab11 were detected by epifluorescence . Merged channels are shown . Bar 18 μ m . Results are typical and representative of three experiments . The % of colocalization of rhodaminated - EGF with the various markers ( % intensities above threshold ) was calculated as in Methods ; * , p < 0 . 05 . 17 18 19 Figure S6 . Studies with the EGFR Mutant Y1045F Cbl is the E3 ligase that executes ubiquitination of the EGFR ( Levkowitz et al . , 1999 ) . It has been previously shown that phosphotyrosine 1045 , in the EGFR , constitutes one major binding site for Cbl . Accordingly , mutagenesis of Tyr 1045 to Phe dramatically reduces EGFR ubiquitination ( Levkowitz et al . , 1999 ) ( see also panel A ) . To study the EGFR Y1045F mutant , we had to select a cellular system that does not express endogenous EGFR ; thus we turned to NR6 fibroblasts ( Pruss and Herschman , 1977 ) , that are devoid of EGFR , and expressed in these cells either EGFR wt or the Y1045F mutant at comparable levels ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) ( panel B ) . In NR6 cells , EGFR internalization was comparably less efficient than in HeLa cells , resulting in reduced internalization rates at all tested doses ( B - C ) . However , similarly to HeLa cells , the clathrin pathway was preponderant for EGFR internalization at low doses of EGF , while both the clathrin and non - clathrin pathways were involved in the internalization of high does of ligand ( B - C ) . Again , similarly to HeLa cells , wt EGFR was almost exclusively internalized through CME , at low EGF , whereas , at high EGF ( 20 ng / ml ) ~ 60 % and ~ 40 % of the internalization events ( for wt EGFR ) were through CME and NCE , respectively ( see legend to panel B ) . The Y1045F mutant , conversely , was internalized only through the clathrin pathway , regardless of EGF dose , as shown by the lack of effect of filipin ( panels B and C ) . In NR6 cells , the wt EGFR was degraded , following exposure to EGF , with a T / 2 of ~ 65 min ( D - E ) . Treatment with filipin increased the half - life of the receptor considerably , similarly to what was observed in HeLa cells ( D - E ) . The Y1045F mutant , in non - treated cells , was degraded very slowly , with time kinetics comparable to that of the wt EGFR in filipin - treated cells ( D - E ) . In addition , treatment with filipin did not increase the half - life of the Y1045F mutant ( D - E ) . The Y1045F mutant was recycled to the cell surface more efficiently than the wt receptor ( at least 2 - fold , panel F ) . Again , treatment with filipin had no effect on the recycling of the Y1045F mutant ( F ) , while it increased the recycling of wt EGFR ( F ) , similarly to what was observed in HeLa cells and described in the main text . Importantly , the recycling of wt EGFR in the presence of filipin was very similar to that of the Y1045F mutant . The increased recycling of the Y1045F mutant could also be confirmed by a morphological assay , that allows the fate of EGF and EGFR to be explored simultaneously ( panel G ) . After 15 minutes of EGF treatment , ligand and receptor signals colocalized in endosomes ( G ) , both in the case of wt EGFR and of the Y1045F mutant . In the case of wt EGFR , at 120 min , nearly all signals disappeared from control cells , suggesting degradation ; conversely , in filipin - treated cells , wt EGFR was recycled to the surface ( G ) . In the case of the Y1045F mutant at 120 minutes , the receptor was recycled to the surface , both in control and filipin - treated cells . Legend to the Figure A . Lysates ( 2 mg ) from NR6 cells , expressing EGFRwt or EGFR - Y1045F , were IP and IB with the indicated antibodies . B . NR6 cells , stably expressing either wt EGFR or the Y1045F mutant ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) , were subjected to clathrin - KD ( oligo 3 , see Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) or to transfection with mismatched oligo ( control ) , and were either treated with filipin ( 0 . 5 μ g / ml ) for 1 h or mock treated . Internalization constants ( K e ) were measured , under the indicated conditions , from the internalization curves shown in panel C . Note that at high EGF , the kinetic parameter does not measure the actual endocytic rate constant , hence the definition of observed K e [ K e - obs , see also 20 ( Wiley and Cunningham , 1982 ) ] . However , K e - obs can be used to compare the internalization rates under various conditions ( clathrin KD and / or filipin treatment ) when using high EGF . The number of EGFRs per cell was also measured , in the transfected populations , by 125 I - EGF saturation binding . Note that , both at high and low EGF , ~ 25 % of the internalization events were insensitive to the combined clathrin - KD and filipin treatment ( as it was also observed in HeLa cells ) . This can be due to the existence of a pathway insensitive to these two conditions , or to an incomplete effect of the KD or of the drug treatment . We refer to this component operationally as “background internalization” ; in all our calculations , this background was subtracted , in order to obtain parameters unequivocally ascribable to CME and NCE . C . Reported in this panel are the experimental data used to obtain the K e values shown in panel B . EGF internalization was measured , as described in Methods , in the presence of 125 I - EGF 1 . 5 ng / ml ( LOW EGF ) , or 100 ng / ml ( HIGH EGF ) . Results are the average of triplicate points ( s . e . m . < 10 % ) and representative of three independent experiments . Note that in low EGF , the internalization kinetics of EGFRwt , Y1045F , EGFRwt + filipin , and Y1045F + filipin were virtually indistinguishable , thus the data from only one experiment ( that of EGFRwt ) are reported . The same consideration applies to the following groups of kinetics : i ) EGFRwt + clathrinKD , Y1045F + clathrinKD , EGFRwt + clathrinKD + filipin , Y1045F + clathrinKD + filipin in low EGF ( only the kinetics of EGFRwt + clathrinKD is reported ) , ii ) EGFRwt , Y1045F , Y1045F + filipin in high EGF ( only the kinetics of EGFRwt is reported ) , iii ) Y1045F + clathrinKD , EGFRwt + clathrinKD + filipin , Y1045F + clathrinKD + filipin in high EGF ( only the kinetics of Y1045F + clathrinKD is reported ) . D . NR6 cells , transfected with wt EGFR or the Y1045F mutant , were treated with filipin and EGF ( 100 ng / ml ) as indicated . Total cell lysates were IB as indicated . Results are typical and representative of at least three experiments . Blots are the same shown in Fig . 6E of the main text ( EGFR and Vinculin panels ) , since they were obtained in the same experiment . E . Quantification of EGFR blot . The half - life of EGFRwt in NR6 , in the presence of EGF is also indicated by dashed lines . F . EGF recycling was measured in the presence of 125 I - EGF 20 ng / ml . Results are the average of triplicate points ( s . e . m . < 8 % ) and representative of three independent experiments . G . Cells were incubated with rhodamine - EGF ( 0 . 5 μ g / ml , red ) and anti - EGFR 13A9 antibody ( green ) at 37 °C for the indicated times . Images are typical and representative of three experiments . Bar , 18 μ m . Note that ( in reference to panels B and C ) , under low EGF , internalization is measured under initial conditions , and the internalization rates are therefore independent of the number of receptors / cell . Thus , two populations , such as WT and Y1045F transfectants , can be fairly compared . Under high EGF , the number of receptors / cell affects the rates . Despite the fact that the bulk populations of NR6 - EGFR - WT and NR6 - EGFR - Y1045F expressed comparable number of receptors / cell , one must consider that typically in a transfected population each individual cell will display a variable number of receptors . This means that the K e - obs cannot be fairly used to compare two populations ; however , they can be used to compare different treatments within the same population . 21 Figure S7 . Caveolin - 1 KD Does Not Affect EGFR Degradation / Signaling or Internalization A . HeLa cells , subjected to caveolin - 1 KD or to mock silencing with a mismatched oligo ( control ) , were serum - starved for 16 h and then stimulated with 100 ng / ml EGF for the indicated time - points . Total cell lysates were immunoblotted as shown on the left . B . EGF internalization was measured in the presence of EGF 1 . 5 ng / ml ( LOW EGF , left panel ) or 20 ng / ml ( HIGH EGF , one time point at 6 min , right panel ) . Results are the average of triplicate points ( s . e . m . < 8 % ) , and are representative of three independent experiments . Internalization constants ( K e ) are shown in the boxed panel and were calculated from the internalization kinetics at low EGF . 22 As shown , the KD of caveolin - 1 did not affect several measurable parameters , including receptor degradation , signaling , or internalization in the presence of EGF . Thus , similarly to what happens for internalization of SV40 ( Damm et al . , 2005 ) and CTB ( Kirkham et al . , 2005 ) , EGFR internalization via NCE does not strictly depend on the presence of caveolin - 1 . Likely , therefore , the NCE pathway ( explored in this paper ) that contributes to the internalization of EGF at high doses of ligand , is not dependent on caveolae , since ablation of caveolin - 1 in non - muscle cells leads to loss of caveolae [ reviewed in ( Parton and Simons , 2007 ) ] . This is compatible with the reported existence of clathrin - and caveolin - independent pathways [ reviewed in ( Mayor and Pagano , 2007 ; Parton and Simons , 2007 ) ] . We would like to comment further on this result . Since the publication of our paper on EGFR internalization through non - clathrin endocytosis ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) , we have been credited with having claimed that NCE of the EGFR occurs via caveolae ( Barriere et al . , 2006 ; Hawryluk et al . , 2006 ; Kazazic et al . , 2006 ; Madshus , 2006 ) . Instead , in our paper , we showed that upon EGF treatment there was increased localization of EGFR to caveolae . We also showed that , under conditions of high EGF , the EGFR was in part internalized through a clathrin - independent pathway that was sensitive to filipin ( the NCE pathway characterized in the present manuscript ) . The increased localization of EGFR to caveolae does not imply that the NCE pathway of EGFR internalization is a caveolar pathway . Indeed , it is well known that caveolae are highly immobile structures that are only rarely mobilized ( Thomsen et al . , 2002 ) . While we reiterate that , in our previously published paper ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) , we never stated that EGFR NCE internalization is via caveolae , the results shown here should once and for all clarify our position on this issue . Our present data are also apparently in contradiction with those reported by Kazazic et al . ( Kazazic et al . , 2006 ) . These authors showed that the KD of clathrin efficiently reduced internalization of the EGFR ( and to similar extents ) , both in the presence of low and high EGF . There are no immediate explanations for this discrepancy . One possibility is that cell - specific variations ( or clone - specific differences since HeLa cells were used in both studies ) might account for the reported differences . Clearly more work will be needed to verify this possibility . 23 SUPPLEMENTAL REFERENCES Barriere , H . , Nemes , C . , Lechardeur , D . , Khan - Mohammad , M . , Fruh , K . , and Lukacs , G . L . ( 2006 ) . Molecular basis of oligoubiquitin - dependent internalization of membrane proteins in Mammalian cells . Traffic 7 , 282 - 297 . Chen , X . , and Resh , M . D . ( 2002 ) . Cholesterol depletion from the plasma membrane triggers ligand - independent activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J Biol Chem 277 , 49631 - 49637 . Damm , E . M . , Pelkmans , L . , Kartenbeck , J . , Mezzacasa , A . , Kurzchalia , T . , and Helenius , A . ( 2005 ) . Clathrin - and caveolin - 1 - independent endocytosis : entry of simian virus 40 into cells devoid of caveolae . J Cell Biol 168 , 477 - 488 . Hawryluk , M . J . , Keyel , P . A . , Mishra , S . K . , Watkins , S . C . , Heuser , J . E . , and Traub , L . M . ( 2006 ) . Epsin 1 is a polyubiquitin - selective clathrin - associated sorting protein . Traffic 7 , 262 - 281 . Hinrichsen , L . , Harborth , J . , Andrees , L . , Weber , K . , and Ungewickell , E . J . ( 2003 ) . Effect of clathrin heavy chain - and alpha - adaptin - specific small inhibitory RNAs on endocytic accessory proteins and receptor trafficking in HeLa cells . J Biol Chem 278 , 45160 - 45170 . Kazazic , M . , Roepstorff , K . , Johannessen , L . E . , Pedersen , N . M . , van Deurs , B . , Stang , E . , and Madshus , I . H . ( 2006 ) . EGF - induced activation of the EGF receptor does not trigger mobilization of caveolae . Traffic 7 , 1518 - 1527 . Kirkham , M . , Fujita , A . , Chadda , R . , Nixon , S . J . , Kurzchalia , T . V . , Sharma , D . K . , Pagano , R . E . , Hancock , J . F . , Mayor , S . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2005 ) . Ultrastructural identification of uncoated caveolin - independent early endocytic vehicles . J Cell Biol 168 , 465 - 476 . Kitajima , Y . , Sekiya , T . , and Nozawa , Y . ( 1976 ) . Freeze - fracture ultrastructural alterations induced by filipin , pimaricin , nystatin and amphotericin B in the plasmia membranes of Epidermophyton , Saccharomyces and red complex - induced membrane lesions . Biochim Biophys Acta 455 , 452 - 465 . Kornilova , E . , Sorkina , T . , Beguinot , L . , and Sorkin , A . ( 1996 ) . Lysosomal targeting of epidermal growth factor receptors via a kinase - dependent pathway is mediated by the receptor carboxyl - terminal residues 1022 - 1123 . J Biol Chem 271 , 30340 - 30346 . Kotler - Brajtburg , J . , Medoff , G . , Kobayashi , G . S . , Boggs , S . , Schlessinger , D . , Pandey , R . C . , and Rinehart , K . L . , Jr . ( 1979 ) . Classification of polyene antibiotics according to chemical structure and biological effects . Antimicrob Agents Chemother 15 , 716 - 722 . Levkowitz , G . , Waterman , H . , Ettenberg , S . A . , Katz , M . , Tsygankov , A . Y . , Alroy , I . , Lavi , S . , Iwai , K . , Reiss , Y . , Ciechanover , A . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Ubiquitin ligase activity and tyrosine phosphorylation underlie suppression of growth factor signaling by c - Cbl / Sli - 1 . Mol Cell 4 , 1029 - 1040 . Madshus , I . H . ( 2006 ) . Ubiquitin binding in endocytosis - - how tight should it be and where does it happen ? Traffic 7 , 258 - 261 . Mayor , S . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2007 ) . Pathways of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 , 603 - 612 . 24 Motley , A . , Bright , N . A . , Seaman , M . N . , and Robinson , M . S . ( 2003 ) . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 - depleted cells . J Cell Biol 162 , 909 - 918 . Parton , R . G . , and Simons , K . ( 2007 ) . The multiple faces of caveolae . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 , 185 - 194 . Pike , L . J . , and Casey , L . ( 2002 ) . Cholesterol levels modulate EGF receptor - mediated signaling by altering receptor function and trafficking . Biochemistry 41 , 10315 - 10322 . Pruss , R . M . , and Herschman , H . R . ( 1977 ) . Variants of 3T3 cells lacking mitogenic response to epidermal growth factor . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 74 , 3918 - 3921 . Ringerike , T . , Blystad , F . D . , Levy , F . O . , Madshus , I . H . , and Stang , E . ( 2002 ) . Cholesterol is important in control of EGF receptor kinase activity but EGF receptors are not concentrated in caveolae . J Cell Sci 115 , 1331 - 1340 . Rodal , S . K . , Skretting , G . , Garred , O . , Vilhardt , F . , van Deurs , B . , and Sandvig , K . ( 1999 ) . Extraction of cholesterol with methyl - beta - cyclodextrin perturbs formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles . Mol Biol Cell 10 , 961 - 974 . Roepstorff , K . , Thomsen , P . , Sandvig , K . , and van Deurs , B . ( 2002 ) . Sequestration of epidermal growth factor receptors in non - caveolar lipid rafts inhibits ligand binding . J Biol Chem 277 , 18954 - 18960 . Ros - Baro , A . , Lopez - Iglesias , C . , Peiro , S . , Bellido , D . , Palacin , M . , Zorzano , A . , and Camps , M . ( 2001 ) . Lipid rafts are required for GLUT4 internalization in adipose cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 , 12050 - 12055 . Royle , S . J . , Bright , N . A . , and Lagnado , L . ( 2005 ) . Clathrin is required for the function of the mitotic spindle . Nature 434 , 1152 - 1157 . Sigismund , S . , Woelk , T . , Puri , C . , Maspero , E . , Tacchetti , C . , Transidico , P . , Di Fiore , P . P . , and Polo , S . ( 2005 ) . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 , 2760 - 2765 . Sorkin , A . , Krolenko , S . , Kudrjavtceva , N . , Lazebnik , J . , Teslenko , L . , Soderquist , A . M . , and Nikolsky , N . ( 1991a ) . Recycling of epidermal growth factor - receptor complexes in A431 cells : identification of dual pathways . J Cell Biol 112 , 55 - 63 . Sorkin , A . , Waters , C . , Overholser , K . A . , and Carpenter , G . ( 1991b ) . Multiple autophosphorylation site mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor . Analysis of kinase activity and endocytosis . J Biol Chem 266 , 8355 - 8362 . Thomsen , P . , Roepstorff , K . , Stahlhut , M . , and van Deurs , B . ( 2002 ) . Caveolae are highly immobile plasma membrane microdomains , which are not involved in constitutive endocytic trafficking . Mol Biol Cell 13 , 238 - 250 . Wiley , H . S . , and Cunningham , D . D . ( 1982 ) . The endocytotic rate constant . A cellular parameter for quantitating receptor - mediated endocytosis . J Biol Chem 257 , 4222 - 4229 . Winkler , M . E . , O ' Connor , L . , Winget , M . , and Fendly , B . ( 1989 ) . Epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor alpha bind differently to the epidermal growth factor receptor . Biochemistry 28 , 6373 - 6378 . Zygmunt , W . A . , and Tavormina , P . A . ( 1966 ) . Steroid Interference with Antifungal Activity of Polyene Antibiotics . Appl Microbiol 14 , 865 - 869 .