from Plans and Situated Actions Lucy A . Suchman Original Publication : Plans and Situated Actions : The Problem of Human - Machine Communication . Cambridge University Press , 1987 . Trukese v . European Navigation European : follow a plan or a course Trukese : ad hoc responses to conditions that occur en route to an objective “It is only when we are pressed to account for the rationality of our actions , given the biases of European culture , that we invoke the guidance of a plan . Stated in advance , plans are necessarily vague , insofar as they must accomodate the unforeseeable contin - gencies of particular situations . ” “Reconstructed in retrospect , plans system - atically filter out precisely the particularity of detail that characterizes situated actions , in favor of those aspects of the actions that can be seen to accord with the plan . ” Is purposeful action determined by a plan ? “The logical form of plans makes them at - tractive for the purpose of constructing a computational model of action , to the ex - tent that for those fields devoted to what is now called cognitive science , the analysis and synthesis of plans effectively constitute the study of action . ” Interactive Artifacts “the description of computational artifacts as interactive is supported by their reactive , linguistic , and internally opaque properties” “people – or “cognizers” of any sort – act on the basis of symbolic representations : a kind of cognitive code , instantiated physical - ly in the brain , on which operations are per - formed to produce mental states” . . . “which in turn produce behavior consistent with those states . ” So , is the human mind the only mind on the market alleged to be able to take a men - tal representation of an external object and turn that into a token that it is able to per - form operations on ? interaction ( reactive ) : “contrasts current capabilities with ear - lier forms of computing , specifically batch processing , where user commands were queued and executed without any intermedi - ate feedback . ” also sez Manovich “In view of our tendency to ascribe full intel - ligence on the basis of partial evidence , the recommendation is that designers might do best to make available to the user the ways in which the system is not like the partici - pant in interaction . ” How does this relate to blackboxing ? Suchman , ref . Dennett : “it is in part our inability to see inside each other’s heads , or our mutual opacity , that makes intentional explanations so powerful in the interpretation of human action . So it is in part the internal complexity and opaci - ty of the computer that invites an intentional stance . ” Should interfaces be self - explanatory ? Should screwdrivers be self - explanatory ? “the designer’s objective now is to imbue the machine with the grounds for behaving in ways that are accountably rational : that is , reasonable or intelligible to others . ” from the introduction : “the elaborate plans and symbolic manipulations that character - ized artificial intelligence’s early attempts to create interactive de - vices were fundamentally misguided . Artificial intelligence practi - cioners had assumed that these logical manipulations were much like the human planning process” . . . “once they were sufficiently refined , they would , of course , succeed . ”