Endocytosis involves the invagination of the plasma membrane to generate cellular uptake intermediates that then fuse with membrane - bound cytoplasmic compart - ments called endosomes . The plasma mem - brane of eukaryotic cells simultaneously undergoes multiple endocytic processes . In the clathrin - dependent pathway , a well - characterized and highly organized molecu - lar coat is formed in a tightly orchestrated manner ( BOX 1 ) , but other uptake events operate independently of this pathway 1 – 3 . Some of these alternative pathways recruit coat proteins , such as the caveolar cavin complex 4 , that mimic the molecular organi - zation defined by clathrin ( BOX 1 ) . However , some endocytic processes function indepen - dently of clathrin and caveolae altogether ( BOX 1 ) . In these cases , highly organized , electron - dense , clathrin - like coats could not be detected at sites of membrane invagina - tion , raising the question of how endocytic pits are built at those sites . In this Opinion article , we discuss new ideas regarding the mechanisms that account for two key events — cargo recruitment and membrane bending — in the process of building endocytic pits in clathrin - and caveolin - independent endocytosis . We do not cover machinery that indirectly contrib - utes to these two key events ( for example , via signalling functions ) or for which the exact endocytic contribution is not yet molecularly defined . Following an historical overview of clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) , we reflect on the need for different types of internalization processes from the perspec - tive of cellular functions such as protein and lipid homeostasis , cell migration and membrane - tension regulation . The physica l considerations of endocytic membrane mechanics are then put in the context of the actin - driven focusing of membrane constituents , the lectin – glycosphingolipid ( GSL ) - dependent construction of endocytic nanoenvironments and the role of Bin – Amphiphysin – Rvs ( BAR ) domain proteins as scaffolding modules . Finally , we propose a generic model to summarize emerging con - cepts regarding the mechanisms of pit const - ruction in CIE . For in - depth discussions of clathrin and caveolar uptake processes , the reader is referred to comprehensive recent reviews 4 – 7 . History and diversity of CIE Clathrin - mediated endocytosis involves a morphological structure with a defining molecular identity ( the clathrin - coated pit ) , cargo selectivity and defined signals for cargo concentration ; these features have facilitated the study of the clathrin pathway ( BOX 1 ) . However , these features are generally lack - ing for clathrin - independent , non - caveolar pathways . In fact , the absence of these features is characteristic of CIE and has dictated the strategies used for their study . For example , the lack of a recognizable morphological structure and specific mark - ers meant that early studies of CIE used general surface markers ( such as a plant lectin , ricin ) or fluid - phase markers ( that is , soluble markers of the extracellular fluid that is engulfed nonspecifically during endocytosis ) , together with treatments that disrupted clathrin - dependent internaliza - tion 8 – 10 . Later studies used genetic tools , including temperature - sensitive mutants of dynamin ( a scissioning GTPase involved in endo cytosis ) 11 , 12 and dominant - acting mutants of clathrin and clathrin - associated machinery proteins 13 . More - recent studies have involved the knockdown of essential proteins in the clathrin pathway and the use of knockout cells and small - molecule inhibi - tors 14 – 17 . All of these strategies have been important in defining the key cargoes and the molecular and morphological features of clathrin - independen t pathways . A sum - mary of experimental approaches for assess - ing different forms of endocytosis is given in Supplementary informatio n S1 ( table ) . Despite the use of these approaches , contro - versy remains about the contribution of CIE to endocytic uptake in mammalian cells 18 . The CLIC – GEEC pathway of CIE . Glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins were one of the first sets of specific cargo proteins to be identified as markers of a major clathrin - and caveolin - independent pathway , now termed the clathrin - independent carrier ( CLIC ) – GPI - anchored protein - enriched early endosomal compartment ( GEEC ) pathway 13 , 19 ( see Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) . Through this pathway , internalization occurs via tubular structures and is unaffected by the inhibition of clathrin or dynamin , but is sensitive to inhibition of the small GTP - binding protein CDC42 ( REF . 13 ) . Further work has identified the small GTP - binding protein ADP - ribosylation factor 1 ( ARF1 ) , GTPase regulator associated with focal adhesion kinase 1 ( GRAF1 ; also known as OPINION Building endocytic pits without clathrin Ludger Johannes , Robert G . Parton , Patricia Bassereau and Satyajit Mayor Abstract | How endocytic pits are built in clathrin - and caveolin - independent endocytosis still remains poorly understood . Recent insight suggests that different forms of clathrin - independent endocytosis might involve the actin - driven focusing of membrane constituents , the lectin – glycosphingolipid - dependent construction of endocytic nanoenvironments , and Bin – Amphiphysin – Rvs ( BAR ) domain proteins serving as scaffolding modules . We discuss the need for different types of internalization processes in the context of diverse cellular functions , the existence of clathrin - independent mechanisms of cargo recruitment and membrane bending from a biological and physical perspective , and finally propose a generic scheme for the formation of clathrin - independent endocytic pits . PERSPECTIVES NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 311 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Dynamin Clathrin - coated pit Plasma membrane Lysosome Clathrin - coatedvesicle Caveola coated pit Endocyticcaveolacarrier Receptor Ligand Actin CAV1 Cavincomplex Budding oﬀ of transport vesicles Fusion with endosome Uncoating Earlyendosome b Hydrolytic enzymes Return of receptors to the plasma membrane CIE GEEC a c Caveolarecycling ARHGAP26 ) , cholesterol and actin as key factors in this pathway , and the cell - surface glycoprotein CD44 as a specific cargo 13 , 20 – 22 . GRAF1 is a membrane - sculpting BAR domain protein with GTPase - activating activity that colocalizes with and regulates CDC42 . Perturbation of GRAF1 reduces the uptake of markers of the CLIC – GEEC pathway without affecting internalizatio n through clathrin - coated pits 22 . The early carriers in the CLIC – GEEC pathway were defined at the ultrastructural level as uncoated tubular and ring - shaped structures 19 , and their composition was later identified 20 . The pathway is highly active and strictly polarizes to the leading edge of migrating cells , in striking contrast to un polarized clathrin - coated pits and caveolae , which are preferentially found at the trailing end of migrating cells 20 , 23 . CLIC – GEEC carriers fuse with early endosomes in a process that is dependent on phosphatidylinosit o l 3 - kinase activity 24 . Other types of CIE . A second process , which might overlap with the CLIC – GEEC pathway , was initially defined by the inter - nalization of major histocompatibility class I ( MHCI ) molecules and regulation by ARF6 ( REFS 25 , 26 ) ( see Supplementary informa - tion S2 ( table ) ) . These early studies dem - onstrated that MHCI was internalized into tubular endosomes that were distinct from those containing clathrin - dependent cargo , and initial entry was assumed to be clathrin - independent . As for the CLIC – GEEC path - way , cargo internalized through this process converged with endosomes containing clas - sical clathrin - dependent cargo proteins 26 . Subsequent work identified GPI - anchored proteins and CD44 as cargoes 27 , and defined a specific recycling pathway that segregates these cargo proteins from conventional endosomes that contain proteins destined for degradation . Crucial machinery proteins involved in the sorting of the endocytosed markers such as GPI - anchored proteins , CD44 and MHCI include RAB22 , HOOK1 and membrane - associated RING - CH ( MARCH ) ubiquitin ligases 28 , 29 . Other proteins and processes have been linked to CIE , but the trafficking pathways in which they participate have been less extensively characterized . These proteins include the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) , which is endocytosed and degraded in response to high EGF concentrations 30 , and the IL - 2 receptor , which is endocytosed in a RHOA - and dynamin - dependent process 31 ( see Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) . Furthermore , the regeneration of Box 1 | Endocytosis through clathrin - coated pits and caveolae , and CIE Clathrin - coated pits ( see the figure , part a ; green dot in the electron microscope image ; scale bar 100 nm ) and caveolae ( see the figure , part a ; red dots ) are readily recognizable surface features of mammalian cells . Clathrin - coated pits are part of the best - understood endocytic pathway ( reviewed in REFS 6 , 119 ) . A diverse range of transmembrane cargo proteins interact with a number of different adaptors and accessory proteins . Accessory proteins coordinate clathrin nucleation at the plasma membrane to initiate the formation of endocytic pits . Clathrin polymerization , together with the activity of proteins such as amphiphysin , epsin and sorting nexin 9 , drives membrane deformation to create an invaginated pit with a constricted neck . The membrane scission GTPase dynamin then forms an oligomeric structure at the neck that mediates fission on GTP hydrolysis . The clathrin basket is released through the activity of auxilin and heat shock cognate 71 kDa protein to generate an uncoated vesicle that then fuses with the early endosome ( see the figure , part b ) . Caveolar function is less well understood but has been implicated in transcellular transport in endothelia , membrane repair , the uptake of various cell - surface receptors , protection against lipotoxicity , and mechanotransduction 4 , 120 . Caveolae are generated by integral membrane proteins known as caveolins ( such as CAV1 ) and a coat complex of three or four cavin proteins 121 , 122 . Caveolae bud from the cell surface with variable frequency . In fibroblasts , in which the dynamics of the process have been most extensively studied , the residence of individual caveolae on the plasma membrane ranges from seconds to minutes , but the vast majority show budding activity 123 . Dynamin has a role in caveolar budding , as suggested by the use of dominant - negative dynamin mutants and small - molecule inhibitors of dynamin , and it is negatively regulated by the ATPase EH domain - containing protein 2 ( EHD2 ) which , like dynamin , localizes to the neck of caveolae 124 – 127 . As in the clathrin - mediated endocytic process , caveolae fuse with the early endosome , and the caveolar domain can then recycle back to the plasma membrane 123 , 128 ( see the figure , part b ) . Many endocytic processes operate independently of the clathrin or caveolar coats . A clathrin - independent carrier ( CLIC ) structure containing galectin 3 is shown in part c of the figure ( structure boxed in main image and highlighted in green in the side panels ; scale bar 200 nm ) . Clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) processes are also schematically represented in part b of the figure and are discussed in detail in this Opinion article . Of note , in CIE pathways , intermediate very early endosomal compartments such as GPI - anchored protein - enriched early endosomal compartments ( GEECs ) exist between the plasma membrane and the early endosome . Part c of the figure adapted from REF . 85 , Nature Publishing Group . P E R S P E C T I V E S 312 | MAY 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved clathrin - coated vesicles at synapses was shown to involve an ultrafast clathrin - independent uptake step of large endocytic vesicle s of > 100 nm in diameter 32 . Macropinocytosis represents another stimulated , clathrin - independent transfor - mation of the plasma membrane in which a substantial area is engulfed at one time . This process is likely to involve a number of molecular players that are common to all of the endocytic mechanisms described so far , with the notable exception of caveolae 33 . However , it is obvious that macropinosomes are much larger 33 and thus morphologically different from early uptake intermediates of CIE , such as CLICs 19 . This points to the fact that there are important mechanistic differences . Need for different endocytic modes From our discussion above it is clear that cells may engage in many endocytic pathways that are not completely independent . Indeed , recent work suggests that , at least between the clathrin - independent pathways , there is considerable crosstalk 34 . Cross - regulation between clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent endocytic pathways may also occur . For example , inhibition of dynamin activity seems to upregulate the CLIC – GEEC pathway 12 . These compensatory endocytic mechanisms complicate the distinction between different uptake mechanisms and make their independent analysis difficult . Other features of CIE also make it more difficult to study than clathrin - coated pits . For example , several studies have noted the variability in the activity CIE pathways between cells within a population 22 , 35 ; this is not seen for clathrin - dependent endocytosis . In addition , CIE and the clathrin pathway show different sensitivities to experimental protocols that involve low - temperature treatments , which are a common feature of standard procedures to measure endocytosis ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . CIE is slow to recover from low - temperature treatments , whereas clathrin - dependent endocytosis resumes within seconds of cells being returned to 37 °C . This explains why the endocytic activity of CLIC – GEEC is more sensitive to the temperature conditions at which assays are performed than that of clathrin - mediated endocytosis 36 . The tubula r morphology of clathrin - independent endocytic carriers is also sensitive to cold treatment 22 , 37 . The magnitude of CIE also varies between different cell types . Although mouse embry - onic fibroblasts can internalize large amounts of fluid through CLIC – GEEC endocytosis 20 , this is not the case for most HeLa cells ( even for markers that are internalized by CIE in other cell types ) , in which the clathrin - dependent pathway is predominant 36 . Some HeLa cells , however , have a fairly well - develope d CLIC – GEEC pathway 22 , indicat - ing that care must be taken when choosing a cell line to confirm conclusions on CIE , and that several cell lines should be tested under appropriate conditions ( for example , avoiding incubations at low temperatures ) . Of note , the conservation of CIE machiner y through at least metazoan evolution 38 establishe s the importance of this pathway . So why does a cell use different endocytic pathways ? Recent screens looking at c lathrin - dependent and clathrin - independen t endo - cytic processes in the same cell 38 , 39 suggest that these pathways share some machinery . However , a large set of molecular players are distinct between these pathways , providing multiple avenues of independent regu - lation . Clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent pathways traffi c different sets of cargo proteins ( see Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) and can therefore regulate the cell - surface composition of a number of resident proteins 40 . It is also likely that some clathrin - independent pathways traffic a specific subset of membrane lipids ( for example , those that support the forma - tion of ordered domains ) and exclude others , thus potentiall y affecting membrane lipid homeostasis . Besides protein and lipid homeostasis , membrane tension may also be regulated by the combined action of clathrin - independent pathways . Indeed , it has been recently recognized that caveolae are passive membrane reservoirs that buffer membrane tension , and their active assembly allows the cell to regenerate this buffer after it has been used 41 . Furthermore , several tension sensors , such as p130CAS ( also known as BCAR1 ) , regulate the CLIC – GEEC pathway but not the clathrin - dependent pathway 38 , indicating that CLICs and GEECs may set membrane tension . The CLIC – GEEC pathway also has an important role in cell spreading , which is inhibited by the ablation of CLIC – GEEC compartments 20 and by the depletion of GRAF1 ( REF . 23 ) . This suggests an interesting ‘division of labour’ between endocytic pathways . The regulation of active integrins at the surface is maintained by a clathrin - dependent mechanism , whereas membrane remodelling at specific locations might be mediated by the CLIC – GEEC pathway that is located at the leading edge of the cell and enriched at cell – matrix a dhesion sites 23 . Another reason to construct multiple endocytic pathways is to create different types of early endocytic organelles with distinct chemical and physical properties . For example , GEECs are highly acidic orga - nelles , whereas sorting endosomes that are accessed by clathrin - dependent cargo have pH values that are a whole unit higher 24 . The recycling compartment of the MHCI - based pathway is almost neutral in pH . Therefore , the simultan eous construction of different chemical and physical environments is pos - sible , and this facilitates the release ( or asso - ciation ) of ligands in distinct environments inside the cell . As our knowledge of cargoes , endocytic mechanisms and the destinations of material endocytosed by these pathways accumulates , our understanding of why these pathways exist will become clearer . Physically modelling bud formation We consider below the essential physical features of curvature generation by proteins in general . This section is not directly linked to a specific type of endocytosis but rather sets the scene for later discussion on how endocytosis might occur in the absence of clathrin and caveolar coats . Physics underlying membrane bending . Endocytosis implies a local mechanical deformation of the flat plasma membrane to form a spherical or tubular bud ( FIG . 1a ) . The energy required for membrane bending is essentially provided by proteins . Indeed , the radius of transport intermediates is a few tens of nanometres , usually below 100 nm , whereas the lipid bilayer is 5 nm thick , and the cell is many microns in diameter . These simple orders of magnitude show that patches of membrane must be strongly bent to produce endocytic carriers . From a physi - cal point of view , the energy ( per unit area ) ( F b ) necessary to bend a patch of membrane and to impose a local curvature ( C ) is well described by the Helfrich Hamiltonian as shown below , where κ is the bending modu - lus of the membrane , which is characteristic of its composition 42 . F b = C 2 κ 2 This energy ( F b ) can be directly provid ed by molecular motors : that is , kinesins , dyneins or myosins . These bind to mem - brane and pull on it , using ATP hydrolysis , when moving along microtubules ( kinesins and dyneins ) or actin filaments ( myosins ) , leading to the formation of tubular mem - brane structures 43 , 44 ( FIG . 1b ) . Although kinesin s and dyneins are generally consid - ered to be the essential motors for extending P E R S P E C T I V E S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 313 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology a b c Dynein Epsin N - BAR domain protein Protein R t R R Plasma membrane Plasma membrane Plasma membrane Microtubule Actin ﬁlament Actinnucleator + + – – BAR domain protein micron - long tubules from organelles and the plasma membrane , class I myosins have recently been shown to be crucial for the tubulation of Golgi and endosomal compart - ments 45 . The mechanisms of tube formation by these motors have been deciphered by physical models and confirmed by several in vitro experiments that mimic bio logical conditions 46 – 48 . Membrane deformation can also result from force generated by the polymerization of cytoskeleton filaments that push against the membrane , as in the case of filopodial structures at the leading edge of cells . The extent to which the actin cytoskeleton is involved in endocytosis varies with cell type ( see below ) . Actin has been proposed to exert a pulling force on the endocytic bud 49 ( FIG . 1b ) or to induce the formation of lipid domains that contribute to bud scission 37 . However , no model is curren tly available that would bridge , at the molecular level , the organization of actin at the membrane and the mechanics of mem - brane bud formation . From a biological per - spective , direct evidence for the generation of initial membrane curvature by cytoskeletal activity has been provided in yeast 50 , 51 but is still lacking for mammalian cells . Membrane bending can alternatively be achieved by the asymmetrical binding of proteins onto the membrane . Indeed , an asymmetrical composition of lipid , protein or buffer environments between the two leaflets of a lipid bilayer causes it to sponta - neously bend . The free energy of bending is then reduced as shown below , where C 0 indi - cates the spontaneous membrane curvature — that is , the relaxed equilibrium curvature of the membrane in the absence of external mechanical action 42 ( for a recent physical review , see REF . 52 ) . F b = ( C – C 0 ) 2 κ 2 The bending energy is minimal when the mean curvature ( C ) is equal to the spon - taneous curvature ( C 0 ) everywhere on the membrane surface . Asymmetrically bound proteins can induce spontaneous membrane bending by inserting hydrophobic sequences into the bilayer ( for instance , epsins insert an amphipathic helix ) , by scaffolding ( or moulding ) the membrane upon adhesion ( as is the case for crescent - shaped BAR domain proteins , for example ) or simply by a generic crowding effect that could work for any protein that is locally concentrated on a membrane ( FIG . 1c ) . When proteins or lipids segregate and form domains in the membrane , the energetic cost associated with the interface between a domain and the rest of the membrane ( known as interfacial Figure 1 | Mechanisms for physically bending membranes . a | Lipid membranes are flat in the absence of proteins . They can be deformed , for instance , into tubular ( cylindrical ) or spherical struc - tures , corresponding to a curvature of C = 1 / R t ( where R t is the tube radius ) or C = 2 / R ( where R is the radius of the sphere ) , respectively . b | Membranes can be deformed into a tubular state as a result of interactions with the cytoskeleton . Specifically , membrane tubes can be pulled by dynein motors , which move along microtubule filaments in the direction of the microtubule minus ends and away from the plasma membrane ( left panel ) , or by kinesin motors , which move towards the microtubule plus ends and away from the Golgi or endoplasmic reticulum ( not shown ) . These motors dynamically accumulate at the tip of the tube , where they share a common load because they are slowed down by the force exerted by the membrane . Myosin motors can also pull on the membrane when moving along actin filaments ( not depicted ) . Tube formation is facilitated by ‘catch - bond’ motors ( that is , motors such as myosin 1b for which the actin detachment rate decreases on force application ) or by a high motor density on membranes . Membrane deformation can also be induced by the polymeriza - tion of branched actin networks , which requires actin nucleators at the membrane surface ( right panel ) . c | Membrane bending can be induced by asymmetrical interactions between cytosolic pro - teins and the lipid membrane . For example , insertion of amphipathic helices by proteins such as epsin into one leaflet of the membrane leads to bending , as does scaffolding by Bin – Amphiphysin – Rvs ( BAR ) domains that are present in sorting nexins , or by N - BAR domain proteins ( such as amphiphysin and endophilin ) , which combine helix insertion with scaffolding . Finally , bending can result from the steric interaction between proteins that are locally concentrated on one side of the bilayer , which is known as the crowding effect . P E R S P E C T I V E S 314 | MAY 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved energy ) leads to a constriction force called line tension that also tends to bend the membrane to reduce the perimeter of the contact between the domain and the rest of the membrane 53−55 . Nevertheless , consider - ing that line tension along domains in cell membranes is weak 56 , this contribution to budding is not sufficient to account for the formation of endocytic pits with a diameter smaller than 100 nm ( REF . 3 ) . The C 0 parameter represents the effectiv e coarse - grained action of proteins on the membrane . This parameter is expected to increase with the fractional density of bound proteins 57 , 58 . However , it is not easy to predict spontaneous curvature ab nihilo . Molecular dynamics simulations can predict the local membrane deformation that is likely to be caused by a single protein or a few proteins 59 , 60 , but multiscale simulations are necessary to infer this at a larger scale and to know how the concentration of proteins on the membrane affects bending . Because C 0 is generally deduced from macroscopic physi - cal measurements ( see REFS 61 , 62 for recent reviews ) , it remains a challenge to bridge the molecular and macroscopic scales . Coats and scaffolds . Some proteins self - assemble into rigid , curved , shell - like structures which , when membrane - bound , impose their curvature onto the bilayer . These protein assemblies can have a spheri - cal shape , as is the case for clathrin , caveol ae , coatomer protein I ( COPI ) and COPII . Well - organized structures such as these with strong lateral interactions between proteins are generally called coats . In principle , this definition also applies to dynamin and F - BAR ( FES – CIP4 homology ( FCH ) - BAR ) proteins that form rigid helical structures . Because the lateral size of the membranes is generally larger than 4π / C 2 0 ( which cor - responds to the area of a spherical bud of radius 1 / C 0 ) , F - BAR proteins cannot adapt their shape ( corresponding to a minimiza - tion of the total bending energy over the membrane area ) to the spontaneous curva - ture ( C 0 ) that is induced by protein binding by forming a single sphere . Rather , they form long tubules with radii R = 1 / 2 C 0 ( REF . 52 ) . Indeed , most membrane - shaping proteins cause tubulation on small or giant liposomes ( that is , experimentally prepared vesicles composed of a single lipid bilayer ) . Clathrin - and caveolin - independent endocytic structures are also tubular and often have a defined diameter , whereas their length is not precisely controlled and is only influenced by membrane stretching ( tension ) and the total quantity of bound proteins . When endocytosis requires tight control over carrier size , spherical coats are much better suited : they combine bending by spontaneous curvature with a size that is set by direct protein – protein inter actions between coat proteins . By contrast , scaffold - ing by BAR domain proteins can occur at lower density 63 and in the absence of direct protein – protein interactions via membrane - mediated mechanisms driven by the aniso - tropic shapes of the proteins 64 . The precise degree of organization depends on protein density . As the concentration of BAR domain proteins on biological membranes is yet to be determined , it remains to be estab - lished whether their scaffolding potential is realized in vivo for endocytic membrane bending in relation to pit constructio n and / or scission . We discuss below how the general prin - ciples summarized here can be applied to processes of CIE . We focus our discussion on the biochemical factors and processes that account for the formation of initial membrane curvature without the help of the clathrin coat . Building endocytic pits in CIE The construction of endocytic pits in path - ways of clathrin - and caveolin - independent endocytosis poses a challenge in terms of cargo selection . A direct function of cargo concentration in pit biogenesis may repre - sent a solution to this problem . We discuss two kinds of cargo concentration mecha - nisms that seem to operate according to this scheme and highlight BAR domain proteins and their proposed contributions to pit formation . Actin - driven clustering and endocytosis . The potential of the cortical actin cyto - skeleton to organize proteins has become a focus of interest in understanding how proteins , including cargo destined for endo - cytosis , accumulate in defined areas of the plasma membrane . It is evident that the composition and organization of membrane lipids and proteins at the cell surface are maintained by active , energy - dissipating processes 65 . Although the overall composi - tion of the plasma membrane seems to be set by an amalgamation of many processes — including lipid synthesis and transport , vesicular secretion and endocytic retrieval — its local organization arises from its interaction with a dynamic cortical actin and myosin layer juxtaposed to the cell surface . A closer examination of the corti - cal layer of the cell surface suggests that the membrane rests on a multilayered structure composed of actin filaments with a distribu - tion of lengths ; longer actin filaments form the static actin mesh , whereas shorter actin filaments are dynamic and transiently attach to the cell membrane via linker proteins 65 . Both the actin mesh and fluid - like actin interact with components of the membrane to constitute an active actin membrane composite . This also gives rise to active stresses and currents that affect both local membrane composition and shape 66 , and might therefore contribute to membrane bending in CIE . Localized and dynamic remodelling platforms created by short actin filaments are driven by myosin motors into aster - like structures 67 . These in turn cause the clustering of membrane molecules , which can potentially interact with filamentous actin ( FIG . 2 ) . Recent experiments suggest that a dynamic actin architecture at the cell cortex engages with lipid - tethered proteins at the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane to create regions where specific lipids may be concentrated 67 . Although the detailed chemistry underlying the transbilayer coupling of lipids or lipid - anchored pro - teins and cortical actin filaments requires further elucidation , it is likely to involve long acyl chain - containing lipids , which couple across the bilayer in the presence of cholesterol . Cholesterol extends the acyl chains to favour the indentation of these lipids at the interface between mono layers . Thus , the dynamic actin filament - driven clustering of lipid - anchored proteins could create specialized lipid domains that could serve as sites for endocytosis in the CLIC – GEEC pathway . In addition , a plethora of proteins in the membrane associate with actin , either directly through actin - binding motifs or indirectly through the presence of sequences that bind to actin linkers 68 . These motifs allow the dynamic actin machinery to recruit specific proteins and / or drive their dynamics . In addition to manipulating local mem - brane lipid and protein composition , actin dynamics also influence CIE . In the RHOA - dependent pathway of CIE , an elaborate actin - recruiting machinery that includes cortactin , p21 - activated kinase 1 ( PAK1 ) and neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) is necessary for endocytosis 69 . In the CLIC – GEEC pathway , the cycling of CDC42 between an active , GTP - bound state and an inactive , GDP - bound state is neces - sary to drive actin polymerization and thus endocytosis 70 . Actin polymerization also seems to be a necessary component of mem - brane scission . Experiments using model P E R S P E C T I V E S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 315 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Myosin Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Nanoclusters Model transmembrane protein GPI - anchored protein in the outer leaﬂet Short dynamic actin ﬁlament Corticalactin mesh Plasma membrane Actin ﬁlament binding domain membranes suggest that the recruitment of actin to an endocytic membrane contributes to local phase segregation of lipids 49 , and this could act as a driving force for scission via a line - tension - driven mechanism 71 . Line ten - sion contributes to scission by favouring the spontaneous reduction of tubule diameter in an attempt to reduce the energy penalty associated with domain interfaces 3 . Indeed , the endocytosis of Shiga toxin requires actin polymerization on toxin - induced endocytic invaginations to drive the scission of the vesicle through a mechanism that involves membrane reorganization 37 . Therefore , actin dynamics coupled to membrane com - position and organization could serve as a mechanism to affect CIE from the inside of the cell . Lectin - driven construction of endocytic pits . CIE may also be driven by cargoes that bind to the outside of the cell , such as protein toxins . The first cargoes that were shown to be endocytosed through a non - clathrin - mediated pathway were cholera toxin ( from bacteria ) 72 and ricin ( a plant toxin ) 8 . Later studies revealed that 50 % of the early uptake structures for cholera toxin are negative for markers of the clathrin pathway 19 , indicat - ing that clathrin - independent processes predominantly facilitate the entry of cholera toxin into cells , even if other endocytic mechanisms also contribute 73 . The situation seems to be similar for the bacterial Shiga toxin . Although some toxin molecules are found in clathrin - coated pits 74 , interfering with the clathrin pathwa y has only a small inhibitory effect ( less than 20 % reduction ) on toxin uptake 14 , 75 , 76 , strongly suggesting that most toxin mol - ecules enter cells by CIE . The cellular receptor of Shiga toxin is the GSL globo - triaosylceramide ( Gb3 ) and , in addition to binding toxins , Gb3 seems to be important for the clathrin - independent construction of endocytic pits 77 . According to the cur - rent model ( FIG . 3a ) , Shiga toxin reorganizes Gb3 molecules 78 to generate a mechanical membrane potential that causes membrane bending without clathrin . The formation of a highly curved membrane domain is likely to be perceived by the cytoplasmic aspect of the cell membrane . Toxin - induced invagi - nations are then detached from the plasma membrane by scission involving dynamin 77 , actin 37 and the BAR domain protein endo - philin A2 ( REF . 76 ) . Actin polymerization on endocytic membrane invaginations triggers membrane reorganization that leads to line tension 37 , apparently exploiting a membran e state that is poised to this effect 79 . GSLs are involved in the cellular entry of a large number of pathogens and patho - genic factors , including viruses such as polyoma viruses , rotavirus , influenza virus and HIV , and toxins such as Shiga , cholera , botulinum and tetanus toxins 80 . For Shiga toxin , cholera toxin and simia n virus 40 ( SV40 , a polyoma virus ) , the crystal structures of their carbohydrate - binding ( lectin ) sub units in interaction with analogues of their cellular GSL recep - tors have been solved 81 – 83 . These lectins do not have sequence similarity , and yet the 3D structures overlay so that the carbo - hydrate moieties of the GSL receptors are similarly oriented ( FIG . 3b ) : these lectins are pentamers ( or have a pentameric fold ) , and the distances between their carbohydrate recognition sites and the angle with which these sites face the membrane are con - served . Strikingly , these lectins all induce membrane invaginations on interacting with GSLs , and for SV40 the structure of the lipid tail of its cellular receptor , the GSL monosialotetrahexosylganglioside ( GM1 ) , was crucial for membrane invagination , CIE and infection 84 . Therefore , the GSL - based membrane - bending mechanism operates across a broad range of pathogens and pathogenic factors , and a specific molecular architecture may have evolved to satisfy the geometric requirements of CIE membrane deformation . A recent study extended the concept of lectin - driven , GSL - dependent , clathrin - and caveolae - independent endocytosis to endogenous proteins . It was shown that the cellular lectin galectin 3 drives the bio - genesis of CLICs and the cellular uptake of the CLIC cargoes CD44 and β 1 integrin , proteins that are involved in cell migration and adhesion 85 . Galectin 3 seems to func - tion as an endocytic adaptor that recruits cargoes ( in this case , glycosylated proteins ) and curvatur e - inducing components ( in this case , GSLs ) into molecular nano - environments , the intrinsic properties of which cause the plasma membrane to bend and endocytic pits to form without the cytosoli c clathrin machinery ( FIG . 3c ) . Galectin 3 was previously reported to have a stimulatory or an inhibitory effect on endocytosis 86 – 89 . The finding that CIE of the CLIC cargo CD44 was stimulated at con centrations of galectin 3 between 0 . 01 μg ml −1 and 1 μg ml −1 but inhibited at 10 μg ml −1 ( REF . 85 ) provides a possible explanation for this apparent contradiction . It seems likely that endocytic nanocluster formation is favoured at low concentrations of galectin 3 , whereas an extended lattice of galectin 3 that prevents cargo internaliza - tion might form at high concentrations . Interestingly , serum levels of galectin 3 are in the range of 10 – 60 ng ml −1 ( REFS 90 , 91 ) , consistent with a role for this protein in endo cytosis . However , higher local concen - trations of galectin 3 could , in principle , be reached by the stimulation of galectin 3 secretion and its sub sequent retention in the glycocalyx . The interaction of galectin 3 with the GSL monosialodihexosylganglioside ( GM3 ) has been described 92 , 93 , but it seems to be weak because galectin 3 did not visibly bind to pure lipid vesicles or to cells from which Figure 2 | Clustering of membrane components as a consequence of active organization of short actin filaments . Glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins ( lipid - anchored glycoproteins that couple across the bilayer ) and transmembrane proteins that have actin - binding capacity couple to short dynamic actin filaments . These filaments are actively organized into aster - like configurations , which serve as a template for the formation of small nanoclusters of the membrane proteins to which they bind . The collection of such nanoscale clusters in the cell defines distinct regions that are dictated by the activity of actin polymerization and myosin at the cell cortex , and that are likely to correlate with sites of clathrin - independent endocytosis . The chemistry underlying the transbilayer coupling of lipids or GPI - anchored proteins and cortical actin filaments requires further elucidation , but it is likely to involve long acyl chain - containing lipids . Of note , longer actin filaments are static and form the cortical actin mesh . Arrows indicate advection along filaments . Figure adapted from REF . 67 , Elsevier . P E R S P E C T I V E S 316 | MAY 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology 1 Formation of galectin 3 – cargo complex 2 Galectin 3 oligomerization and GSL recruitment 3 Membrane bending and endocytic pit formation GSL GSL Plasmamembrane 1 2 3 4 5 Shiga toxin Plasmamembrane N C Galectin 3 Glycosylatedcargo b a c the extracellular domains of plasma mem - brane proteins were removed 85 . Despite this low level of interaction between galectin 3 and the GSL , it is known that the galectin 3 - driven membrane bend - ing and construction of endocytic pits is dependent on GSL . It is likely that binding sites for GSL are of low affinity , such that monomeric galectin 3 cannot bind , and only its oligomerization on membranes 94 enables GSL – galectin 3 avidity interactions . Alternatively , GSL binding sites might be generated at interfaces between galectin 3 monomers . Resolving the membrane - bound structure of galectin 3 will help to answer this question . Finally , galectin 4 ( REF . 95 ) and galectin 9 ( REF . 96 ) also bind to GSLs , and galectin 4 has been observed to localize to CLICs 85 , raising the possibility that CLIC biogenesis could be stimulated by other galectins . There may be a generic mechanism through which carbohydrates on lipids and proteins are integrated via extracellular lectins to build compositional nanoenvironments for clathri n - independent uptake into cells . BAR domain proteins . Proteins of the BAR superfamily have membrane - remodelling abilities . Specifically , by interacting with acidic phospholipids , they can stabilize or induce membrane curvature that corre - sponds to the molecular geometry of their membrane - binding surface 97 , 98 . Their abil - ity to form a higher - order organization as rigid scaffolds predisposes them for this membrane - remodelling function 99 . In the clathrin pathway , it has been argued that BAR domain proteins are recruited in a sequential manner 100 . Proteins that harbour shallow F - BAR domains , such as FCH domain only protein 1 ( FCHO1 ) and FCHO2 , would have functions at early stages of the process , whereas proteins that harbour narrow N - BAR domains ( which have an N - terminal amphipathic helix preceding the BAR domain ) , such as endo - philin and amphiphysin , would associate with deeply invaginated pits at late stages of dynamin recruitment . It remains controver - sial whether FCHO1 and FCHO2 nucleate all endocytic pits in the clathrin pathway and whether they always generate early membrane invagination events 101 – 103 . The function of BAR domain pro - teins in CIE was only recently addressed experimentally . One study found that the depletion of endophilin isoforms A1 , A2 and A3 affected the clathrin - independent , dynamin - dependen t cellular uptake of G protein - coupled receptors such as α2a - and β1 - adrenergic receptors , dopaminergic D3 and D4 receptors , and muscarinic acetylcholine receptor 4 ; the receptor tyrosine kinases EGFR , hepatocyte growth factor receptor , vascular endothe - lial growth factor receptor , platelet - derived growth factor receptor , nerve growth factor receptor ( also known as TNFRSF16 ) and Figure 3 | Lectin - driven mechanisms for building endocytic pits . a | Model for Shiga toxin - driven membrane bending is shown . Shiga toxin binds to its cellular receptor , the glycosphingolipid ( GSL ) globotriaosylceramide ( Gb3 ) ( steps 1 and 2 ) , and reorganizes membrane lipids ( step 3 ) to favour mem - brane bending without the need for cytosolic clathrin ( step 4 ) . The membrane - mediated clustering of toxin – Gb3 complexes then leads to the formation of deep and narrow membrane invaginations ( step 5 ) . Other lipids such as monosialotetrahexosylganglioside ( GM1 ; blue ) may get passively co - sorted 129 . b | Molecular organization of membrane - bending lectins is shown . The left panel shows an overlay of co - crystal structures of Shiga toxin B - subunit 82 ( green ; Protein Data Bank ( PDB ) identifier 1BOS ) , cholera toxin B - subunit 83 ( red ; PDB identifier 1FGB ) and the VP1 capsid protein of simian virus 40 ( REF . 81 ) ( blue , PDB identifier 3BWR ) in complex with their GSL receptor analogues ( represented as ball - and - stick structures in the same colour ) . These lectins have no sequence similarity , yet they interact with the carbohydrate parts of their respective GSL receptor analogues with the same pentameric organization , the same distance between binding sites and the same angle at which the carbohydrate binding pock - ets face the membrane . The binding pocket orientation is represented by a black dashed arrow , and the binding site angle with a red dashed arrow ; the solid black arrow indicates the central axis of the pro - teins normal to the membrane . The right panel shows a schematic representation of these lectins in which binding pocket orientation ( black dashed arrow ) and angle ( red dashed arrow ) are represented as in the inset with respect to the underlying membrane . c | In g alectin 3 - driven biogenesis of CLICs , monomeric galectin 3 binds to glycosylated cargo proteins ( step 1 ) and oligomerizes on the membrane surface . The oligomeric form then interacts with GSLs to result in the co - clustering of cargoes and GSLs ( step 2 ) , the bending of the membrane and clathrin - independent construction of endocytic pits ( step 3 ) . Part c adapted from REF . 85 , Nature Publishing Group . P E R S P E C T I V E S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 317 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved insulin - like growth factor 1 receptor ; as well as the known clathrin - independen t cargo IL - 2 receptor 40 . Interestingly , endophilins A1 – A3 were shown to interact with these cargo proteins , as previously described for β1 - adrenergic receptor 104 . As endophilins also induce membrane curvature 105 , they may have key roles in the early construction of endocytic pits in these CIE events . This remains to be tested ; however , the narrow curvature radius of the membrane - binding surface of endophilins predisposes them to function on deeply invaginated pits ( see above ) . Another study showed that endo - philin A2 was required for the scission step but not for the formation of mem - brane invaginations in the CIE of bacterial Shiga and cholera toxins 76 . Interestingly , scaffolding membrane tubules with endophilin A2 rendered them prone to pulling force - induced scission . Because microtubule - associated motors were active on cellular Shiga toxin - induced membrane invaginations , a new scission mechanism emerges in which motors pull on mem - branes scaffolded by BAR domain proteins , which creates friction 76 . As a consequence , membrane tension builds up , leading to the spontaneous squeezing of the tube until the scission threshold radius has been reached , which for a multicomponent membrane tube was calculated to be of the order of 3 – 5 nm ( REF . 106 ) . The detailed mechanism of this scission process has not yet been clarified . In the case of Shiga toxin , this novel scission modality operates in an addi - tive manner with dynamin 77 and actin 37 , as shown by the length of toxin - induced tubules and the cellu lar intoxication reac - tion under single or combined interference conditions 76 . Thus , in addition to their function in clathrin - dependent endocytosis 16 , 107 , 108 , endophilins have a predominant role in CIE , including functions in the synaptic vesicle cycle 109 , 110 . Model for pit construction in CIE In this Opinion article , we have argued that the investment of a high protein load onto a membrane , as in the case of the clathrin coat , allows the shaping of uptake carrier s , the molecular dimensions of which are tightly controlled . This condi - tion is not as such a prerequisite for the formation of endocytic carriers . Clathrin - independent processes are indeed charac - terized by uptake intermediates that have been described as pleomorphi c ( reviewed in REF . 111 ) . Whether coats are absent altogether from sites of CIE cannot be ascertained at this stage . This question is largely pertinent to the definition of the coat term , as discussed above in the section on physics . Although highly organized electron - dense structures are absent from sites of CIE and caveolin - independent endocytosis 1 , other forms of organized molecular assemblies , such as BAR domain protein scaffolds , could pos - sibly substitute for clathrin’s membrane - bending function . Even extracellular lectins might possibly form ‘coat - like’ clusters . Because the molecular details that underlie the construction of endocytic pits in CIE still need to be elucidated ( as discussed above ) , we suggest that the coat term should , at this stage , be restricted to the conventional electron - dense structures that can be detected by conventional electron microscopy , such as those formed by clath - rin , COPs and cavin complexes . This notion may need to be reconsidere d at a later stage . Efforts to categorize processes of CIE according to biochemical factors have met with limited success ( see Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) , probably because molecular machinery is used in a modular manner 3 and there is no single ‘clathrin - like’ universal element that would be com - mon to all processes of CIE 38 , 39 but excluded from the clathrin pathway . Even in clathrin - dependent endocytosis , key functions in the construction of endocytic pits are performed by non - clathrin molecules ; such function s include the recruitment of cargoes by endocytic adaptors 112 and , at least in part , the bending of membranes by scaffolding BAR domain proteins and proteins such as epsins that insert hydro - phobic residues into membranes 98 . Of note , clathrin is not strictly required for endocytosis in yeast , even for cargoes that internalize through clathrin - coated carriers in unperturbed cells 113 . As other elements of molecular machinery for cargo recruit - ment and membrane bending are present and operational to sustain basic uptake , it is tempting to speculate that clathrin was added to a basic endocytic machinery to provide higher - order functions . Indeed , even in higher eukaryotic cells , adap - tor prote in 2 ( AP2 ) remains organized in spots at the plasma membrane in clathrin - depleted cells 114 , 115 , suggesting that funda - mental principles of pit organizatio n are maintained under these conditions . The apparently unsuccessful quest for the unifying biochemical clathrin - like factor has obstructed the fact that several aspects are shared between processes of CIE , such as their reliance on actin func - tion and on the generation of membrane domains containing cholesterol and GSLs , and the fact that they are often cargo - induced 79 . On the basis of these elements and the literature reviewed above , we pro - pose a modular hypothesis for the forma - tion of generic pits in clathrin - independent uptake ( FIG . 4 ) . This schematic representa - tion is not meant as a strict mechanistic proposal but rather as a ‘blackboard’ onto which key modules are arranged . It is lim - ited to the two key steps for building endo - cytic pits : cargo recruitment and membrane bending . We think that a categorization of processes of CIE must come from a molecular and modular understanding of these events . Already identified molecular players in processes of CIE ( for example , GTPases such as RHOA and CDC42 ; see Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) may then be assigned precise functions within this larger picture . As argued below , the ele - ments of our model ( FIG . 4 ) are not mutually exclusive but may , in some cases , operate in synergy at different length scales . Component 1 : intracellular clustering . The first element of the hypothesis is that the actin cytoskeleton is a key clustering force in processes of CIE 65 . However , sev - eral challenges must be met to establish this emerging concept . One of these is achiev - ing a more detailed understanding of the mechanisms of transbilayer coupling for cargoes , such as GPI - anchored proteins , that are associated with the exoplasmic leaflet of the membrane even though actin is on the cytoplasmic leaflet . Another chal - lenge is gaining knowledge of the mecha - nisms by which the actin - driven long - range ( > 100 nm ) focusing of cargoes in certain areas of the plasma membrane leads to their short - range ( nanometre distances ) conden - sation within endocyti c pits . Evidence is likely to come from unbiased screens 38 , 39 or screens dedicated to specific protein classes . Possible candidates for bridging these dis - tances are BAR domain proteins such as endophilins , if the capacity to interact with endocytic cargo 40 , 104 was combined with their scaffolding function 116 . Extracellular clustering forces might also have a role ( see below ) . Component 2 : extracellular clustering . The second component of the hypothesis is that lectins drive CLIC biogenesis 85 . As an oligomeric protein , galectin 3 clus - ters glycosylated 87 and non - glycosylated 117 cargoes . How generally this concept of P E R S P E C T I V E S 318 | MAY 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Actin N - BAR domain protein Glycosylatedprotein Lectin GSL Plasmamembrane c Intracellular bending b Extracellular clustering a Intracellular clustering d Extracellular bending lectin - driven clustering applies to processes of CIE remains to be established . The exact molecular topology of endocytic clusters comprised of lectins and cargoes also needs further investigation . Key questions are whether endocytic lectins adopt defined oligomeric structures ( such as the penta - meric structures formed by Shiga toxin , cholera toxin and SV40 lectins ) and how cargo proteins are arranged in relation to this presumed intrinsic lectin organization . Following a mechanism described above 65 , actin dynamics might drive the long - range focusing of individual lectin – cargo com - plexes into defined plasma membrane areas to favour the formation of tightly packed clusters involving direct or indirect short - range interactions . Component 3 : intracellular membrane - bending forces . The third point in the hypothesis is that , in principle , any of the membrane - bending drivers discussed above could operate in processes of CIE . A cargo - specific recruitment of BAR domain proteins 40 could drive clustering and bend membranes by scaffolding 116 and / or by helix insertion 105 . However , some BAR domain proteins reveal their membrane - shaping potential only at non - negligible local surface density 63 , and spe - cific classes of BAR domain proteins are recruited at later stages of the endocytic membrane invagination process , at least for clathrin - dependent uptake 100 . Alternatively , because BAR domain proteins produce very stable domains of phosphoinositide lipids 118 , these could be platforms for bind - ing other bending proteins ( such as epsins ) , or these domains could drive bending directly by generating line tension . In most cases of CIE , researchers have yet to iden - tify such cytosolic machinery with the explicit capacity to drive membrane - shape changes and a documented involvement in the earliest stages of pit formation . Component 4 : extracellular membrane - bending forces . The lectin - driven reor - ganization of membranes containing the raft fabric GSLs represents another driving force for endocytic membrane bending and is the fourth component of our hypoth - esis 85 . The theory here is that an initial , highly bent membrane invagination is induced by lectin when it is bound to gly - cosylated cargoes and GSLs . Such narrow plasma membrane curvature radii would then be recognized by cellular machinery , such as BAR domain proteins , which could favour further invagination and regulate the invagination diameter and length , as well as subsequent processing events such as scission . Key challenges are determin - ing the exact mechanisms by which GSL reorganization leads to membrane bending , the identification of the full list of lectins and cargoes that operate according to this mechanism and their classification within endocytic groups in relation to specifi c physiological outputs . Perspectives CIE still holds many secrets , and it is an exciting field for discovery in fundamental membrane biology research coupled to physical and chemical biology . Owing to its role in key cell functions related to cell migration and as an entry portal for patho - gens , CIE will be of importance in under - standing infectious diseases and cancer , and mechanistic insights into CIE will generate knowledge that can be exploited for the development of innovative therapeutic intervention strategies . CIE - dependent effects on lipid homeostasis and membrane biophysics also suggest a role in the control of cell physiology by nutrition and physical forces ; the characterization of CIE pathways in living animals will be an important step in uncovering these functions . Note added in proof In support of the hypothetical mechanism of plasma membrane bending proposed in FIG . 1b , a study by Day et al . 130 , published while the proofs of this Opinion article were being finalized , uncovered a role for dynein and microtubules in tubulation of the plasma membrane in CIE . Ludger Johannes is at Institut Curie , PSL Research University , Endocytic Trafficking and Therapeutic Delivery Group , 26 rue d’Ulm , 75248 Paris Cedex 05 , France ; Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR3666 , 75005 Paris , France ; and INSERM U1143 , 75005 Paris , France . Figure 4 | The formation of a generic clathrin - independent endocytic pit . A schematic view of the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane of a eukaryotic cell is shown . An endocytic membrane invagination is represented in the centre , and four processes that we propose are involved in the formation of a generic clathrin - independent pit are depicted . a | Intracellular clustering involves the focusing of transmembrane proteins ( or exoplasmic leaflet - associated proteins that couple through the bilayer ) into the pit zone through their interaction with the actin cytoskeleton . An aster - like actin structure that surrounds the endocytic pit is represented . b | Extracellular clustering of glycosylated membrane proteins in interaction with lectins is shown . Lectins have clustering potential as a result of their oligomeric nature . c | Intracellular membrane - bending forces are depicted . Cytosolic mol - ecules such as N - Bin – Amphiphysin – Rvs ( N - BAR ) domain proteins or helix - inserting epsins might be recruited by cargo proteins to bend membranes through the construction of curved scaffolding on the membrane or through the expansion of the cytosolic membrane leaflet in an asymmetrical man - ner . d | Extracellular membrane - bending forces can be generated through the reorganization of glyco sphingolipids ( GSLs ) by lectins . A defined lectin geometry ( stoichiometry , distance and angle of GSL binding sites ; FIG . 3 ) seems to be critical for this . The exact mechanisms of curvature generatio n remain to be determined . P E R S P E C T I V E S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 319 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Robert G . Parton is at the University of Queensland , Institute for Molecular Bioscience and Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis , St Lucia QLD 4072 , Australia . Patricia Bassereau is at Institut Curie , PSL Research University , Membrane and Cell Functions Group , 26 rue d’Ulm , 75248 Paris Cedex 05 , France ; Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR168 , 75005 Paris , France ; and Université Pierre et Marie Curie , 75252 Paris , France . Satyajit Mayor is at the National Centre for Biological Sciences , Cellular Organization and Signaling Group , and at Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine , UAS - GKVK Campus , 560 065 Bangalore , India . e - mails : ludger . johannes @ curie . fr ; r . parton @ imb . uq . edu . au ; Patricia . Bassereau @ curie . fr ; mayor @ ncbs . res . in doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3968 Published online 10 April 2015 ; Corrected online 17 April 2015 1 . Howes , M . T . , Mayor , S . & Parton , R . G . Molecules , mechanisms , and cellular roles of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 519 – 527 ( 2010 ) . 2 . Mayor , S . & Pagano , R . E . Pathways of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 603 – 612 ( 2007 ) . 3 . Johannes , L . , Wunder , C . & Bassereau , P . Bending “on the rocks” — a cocktail of biophysical modules to build endocytic pathways . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 6 , a016741 ( 2014 ) . 4 . Parton , R . G . & del Pozo , M . A . Caveolae as plasma membrane sensors , protectors and organizers . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 , 98 – 112 ( 2013 ) . 5 . McMahon , H . T . & Boucrot , E . Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 517 – 533 ( 2011 ) . 6 . Kirchhausen , T . , Owen , D . & Harrison , S . C . Molecular structure , function , and dynamics of clathrin - mediated membrane traffic . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 6 , a016725 ( 2014 ) . 7 . Lajoie , P . & Nabi , I . R . Lipid rafts , caveolae , and their endocytosis . Int . Rev . Cell . Mol . Biol . 282 , 135 – 163 ( 2010 ) . 8 . Moya , M . , Dautry - Varsat , A . , Goud , B . , Louvard , D . & Boquet , P . Inhibition of coated pit formation in Hep2 cells blocks the cytotoxicity of diphtheria toxin but not that of ricin toxin . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 548 – 559 ( 1985 ) . 9 . Sandvig , K . , Olsnes , S . , Petersen , O . W . & van Deurs , B . Acidification of the cytosol inhibits endocytosis from coated pits . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 679 – 689 ( 1987 ) . 10 . Sandvig , K . & van Deurs , B . Selective modulation of the endocytic uptake of ricin and fluid phase markers without alteration in transferrin endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 6382 – 6388 ( 1990 ) . 11 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , van der Bliek , A . M . & Schmid , S . L . Clathrin - independent pinocytosis is induced in cells overexpressing a temperature - sensitive mutant of dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 69 – 80 ( 1995 ) . 12 . Guha , A . , Sriram , V . , Krishnan , K . S . & Mayor , S . Shibire mutations reveal distinct dynamin - independent and - dependent endocytic pathways in primary cultures of Drosophila hemocytes . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 3373 – 3386 ( 2003 ) . 13 . Sabharanjak , S . , Sharma , P . , Parton , R . G . & Mayor , S . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev . Cell 2 , 411 – 423 ( 2002 ) . 14 . Saint - Pol , A . et al . Clathrin adaptor epsinR is required for retrograde sorting on early endosomal membranes . Dev . Cell 6 , 525 – 538 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Liu , Y . W . , Surka , M . C . , Schroeter , T . , Lukiyanchuk , V . & Schmid , S . L . Isoform and splice - variant specific functions of dynamin - 2 revealed by analysis of conditional knock - out cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 5347 – 5359 ( 2008 ) . 16 . Ferguson , S . M . et al . Coordinated actions of actin and BAR proteins upstream of dynamin at endocytic clathrin - coated pits . Dev . Cell 17 , 811 – 822 ( 2009 ) . 17 . Stahlschmidt , W . , Robertson , M . J . , Robinson , P . J . , McCluskey , A . & Haucke , V . Clathrin terminal domain - ligand interactions regulate sorting of mannose 6 - phosphate receptors mediated by AP - 1 and GGA adaptors . J . Biol . Chem . 289 , 4906 – 4918 ( 2014 ) . 18 . Bitsikas , V . , Correa , I . R . Jr & Nichols , B . J . Clathrin - independent pathways do not contribute significantly to endocytic flux . eLife 3 , e03970 ( 2014 ) . 19 . Kirkham , M . et al . Ultrastructural identification of uncoated caveolin - independent early endocytic vehicles . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 465 – 476 ( 2005 ) . 20 . Howes , M . T . et al . Clathrin - independent carriers form a high capacity endocytic sorting system at the leading edge of migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 675 – 691 ( 2010 ) . 21 . Kumari , S . & Mayor , S . ARF1 is directly involved in dynamin - independent endocytosis . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 30 – 41 ( 2008 ) . 22 . Lundmark , R . et al . The GTPase - activating protein GRAF1 regulates the CLIC / GEEC endocytic pathway . Curr . Biol . 18 , 1802 – 1808 ( 2008 ) . 23 . Doherty , G . J . et al . The endocytic protein GRAF1 is directed to cell - matrix adhesion sites and regulates cell spreading . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 4380 – 4389 ( 2011 ) . 24 . Kalia , M . et al . Arf6 - independent GPI - anchored protein - enriched early endosomal compartments fuse with sorting endosomes via a Rab5 / phosphatidylinositol - 3 ʹ - kinase - dependent machinery . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 3689 – 3704 ( 2006 ) . 25 . Radhakrishna , H . & Donaldson , J . G . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulates a novel plasma membrane recycling pathway . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 49 – 61 ( 1997 ) . 26 . Naslavsky , N . , Weigert , R . & Donaldson , J . G . Convergence of non - clathrin - and clathrin - derived endosomes involves Arf6 inactivation and changes in phosphoinositides . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 417 – 431 ( 2003 ) . 27 . Eyster , C . A . et al . Discovery of new cargo proteins that enter cells through clathrin - independent endocytosis . Traffic 10 , 590 – 599 ( 2009 ) . 28 . Eyster , C . A . et al . MARCH ubiquitin ligases alter the itinerary of clathrin - independent cargo from recycling to degradation . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 3218 – 3230 ( 2011 ) . 29 . Maldonado - Baez , L . , Cole , N . B . , Kramer , H . & Donaldson , J . G . Microtubule - dependent endosomal sorting of clathrin - independent cargo by Hook1 . J . Cell Biol . 201 , 233 – 247 ( 2013 ) . 30 . Sigismund , S . et al . Clathrin - mediated internalization is essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for degradation . Dev . Cell 15 , 209 – 219 ( 2008 ) . 31 . Lamaze , C . et al . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains define a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 ( 2001 ) . 32 . Watanabe , S . et al . Clathrin regenerates synaptic vesicles from endosomes . Nature 515 , 228 – 233 ( 2014 ) . 33 . Mayor , S . , Parton , R . G . & Donaldson , J . G . Clathrin - independent pathways of endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 6 , a016758 ( 2014 ) . 34 . Chaudhary , N . et al . Endocytic crosstalk : cavins , caveolins , and caveolae regulate clathrin - independent endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 12 , e1001832 ( 2014 ) . 35 . Dey , G . et al . Exploiting cell - to - cell variability to detect cellular perturbations . PLoS ONE 9 , e90540 ( 2014 ) . 36 . Kumari , S . Dynamin Independent Endocytosis : Molecular Mechanisms and Membrane Dynamics . Thesis , Natl Centre Biol . Sci . , Tata Institute Fundam . Res . ( 2009 ) . 37 . Römer , W . et al . Actin dynamics drive membrane reorganization and scission in clathrin - independent endocytosis . Cell 140 , 540 – 553 ( 2010 ) . 38 . Gupta , G . D . et al . Population distribution analyses reveal a hierarchy of molecular players underlying parallel endocytic pathways . PLoS ONE 9 , e100554 ( 2014 ) . 39 . Liberali , P . , Snijder , B . & Pelkmans , L . A hierarchical map of regulatory genetic interactions in membrane trafficking . Cell 157 , 1473 – 1487 ( 2014 ) . 40 . Boucrot , E . et al . Endophilin marks and controls a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Nature 517 , 460 – 465 ( 2015 ) 41 . Sinha , B . et al . Cells respond to mechanical stress by rapid disassembly of caveolae . Cell 144 , 402 – 413 ( 2011 ) . 42 . Helfrich , W . Elastic properties of lipid bilayers : theory and possible experiments . Z . Naturforsch C 28 , 693 – 703 ( 1973 ) . 43 . Leduc , C . , Campas , O . , Joanny , J . F . , Prost , J . & Bassereau , P . Mechanism of membrane nanotube formation by molecular motors . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1798 , 1418 – 1426 ( 2010 ) . 44 . Soldati , T . & Schliwa , M . Powering membrane traffic in endocytosis and recycling . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 897 – 908 ( 2006 ) . 45 . Almeida , C . G . et al . Myosin 1b promotes the formation of post - Golgi carriers by regulating actin assembly and membrane remodelling at the trans - Golgi network . Nature Cell Biol . 13 , 779 – 789 ( 2011 ) . 46 . Leduc , C . et al . Cooperative extraction of membrane nanotubes by molecular motors . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 17096 – 17101 ( 2004 ) . 47 . Shaklee , P . M . et al . Bidirectional membrane tube dynamics driven by nonprocessive motors . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 7993 – 7997 ( 2008 ) . 48 . Yamada , A . et al . Catch - bond behaviour facilitates membrane tubulation by non - processive myosin 1b . Nature Commun . 5 , 3624 ( 2014 ) . 49 . Liu , J . , Kaksonen , M . , Drubin , D . G . & Oster , G . Endocytic vesicle scission by lipid phase boundary forces . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 10277 – 10282 ( 2006 ) . 50 . Kukulski , W . , Schorb , M . , Kaksonen , M . & Briggs , J . A . Plasma membrane reshaping during endocytosis is revealed by time - resolved electron tomography . Cell 150 , 508 – 520 ( 2012 ) . 51 . Idrissi , F . Z . , Blasco , A . , Espinal , A . & Geli , M . I . Ultrastructural dynamics of proteins involved in endocytic budding . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , E2587 – E2594 ( 2012 ) . 52 . Lipowsky , R . Coupling of bending and stretching deformations in vesicle membranes . Adv . Colloid Interface Sci . 208 , 14 – 24 ( 2014 ) . 53 . Julicher , F . & Lipowsky , R . Domain induced budding of vesicles . Phys . Rev . Lett . 70 , 2964 – 2967 ( 1993 ) . 54 . Sens , P . , Johannes , L . & Bassereau , P . Biophysical view on protein - induced membrane deformations in endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 476 – 482 ( 2008 ) . 55 . Semrau , S . & Schmidt , T . Membrane heterogeneity — from lipid domains to curvature effects . Soft Matter 5 , 3174 – 3186 ( 2009 ) . 56 . Veatch , S . L . et al . Critical fluctuations in plasma membrane vesicles . ACS Chem . Biol . 3 , 287 – 293 ( 2008 ) . 57 . Leibler , S . Curvature instability in membranes . J . Phys . 47 , 507 – 516 ( 1986 ) . 58 . Campelo , F . , McMahon , H . T . & Kozlov , M . M . The hydrophobic insertion mechanism of membrane curvature generation by proteins . Biophys . J . 95 , 2325 – 2339 ( 2008 ) . 59 . Blood , P . D . , Swenson , R . D . & Voth , G . A . Factors influencing local membrane curvature induction by N - BAR domains as revealed by molecular dynamics simulations . Biophys . J . 95 , 1866 – 1876 ( 2008 ) . 60 . Arkhipov , A . , Yin , Y . & Schulten , K . Four - scale description of membrane sculpting by BAR domains . Biophys . J . 95 , 2806 – 2821 ( 2008 ) . 61 . Callan - Jones , A . & Bassereau , P . Curvature - driven membrane lipid and protein distribution . Curr . Opin . Solid St . M . 17 , 143 – 150 ( 2013 ) . 62 . Bhatia , V . K . , Hatzakis , N . S . & Stamou , D . A unifying mechanism accounts for sensing of membrane curvature by BAR domains , amphipathic helices and membrane - anchored proteins . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 , 381 – 390 ( 2010 ) . 63 . Sorre , B . et al . Nature of curvature coupling of amphiphysin with membranes depends on its bound density . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 173 – 178 ( 2012 ) . 64 . Simunovic , M . , Srivastava , A . & Voth , G . A . Linear aggregation of proteins on the membrane as a prelude to membrane remodeling . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 20396 – 20401 ( 2013 ) . 65 . Rao , M . & Mayor , S . Active organization of membrane constituents in living cells . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 29 , 126 – 132 ( 2014 ) . 66 . Maitra , A . , Srivastava , P . , Rao , M . & Ramaswamy , S . Activating membranes . Phys . Rev . Lett . 112 , 258101 ( 2014 ) . 67 . Gowrishankar , K . et al . Active remodeling of cortical actin regulates spatiotemporal organization of cell surface molecules . Cell 149 , 1353 – 1367 ( 2012 ) . 68 . Chen , B . et al . The WAVE regulatory complex links diverse receptors to the actin cytoskeleton . Cell 156 , 195 – 207 ( 2014 ) . P E R S P E C T I V E S 320 | MAY 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 69 . Grassart , A . et al . Pak1 phosphorylation enhances cortactin - N - WASP interaction in clathrin - caveolin - independent endocytosis . Traffic 11 , 1079 – 1091 ( 2010 ) . 70 . Kumari , S . , Mg , S . & Mayor , S . Endocytosis unplugged : multiple ways to enter the cell . Cell . Res . 20 , 256 – 275 ( 2010 ) . 71 . Liu , J . , Sun , Y . , Drubin , D . G . & Oster , G . F . The mechanochemistry of endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000204 ( 2009 ) . 72 . Montesano , R . , Roth , J . , Robert , A . & Orci , L . Non - coated membrane invaginations are involved in binding and internalization of cholera and tetanus toxins . Nature 296 , 651 – 653 ( 1982 ) . 73 . Torgersen , M . L . , Skretting , G . , van Deurs , B . & Sandvig , K . Internalization of cholera toxin by different endocytic mechanisms . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3737 – 3747 ( 2001 ) . 74 . Sandvig , K . , Olsnes , S . , Brown , J . E . , Petersen , O . W . & van Deurs , B . Endocytosis from coated pits of Shiga toxin : a glycolipid - binding protein from Shigella dysenteriae 1 . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 1331 – 1343 ( 1989 ) . 75 . Lauvrak , S . U . et al . Shiga toxin regulates its entry in a Syk - dependent manner . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 1096 – 1109 ( 2006 ) . 76 . Renard , H . - F . et al . Endophilin - A2 functions in membrane scission in clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nature 517 , 493 – 496 ( 2015 ) . 77 . Römer , W . et al . Shiga toxin induces tubular membrane invaginations for its uptake into cells . Nature 450 , 670 – 675 ( 2007 ) . 78 . Solovyeva , V . , Johannes , L . & Simonsen , A . C . Shiga toxin induces membrane reorganization and formation of long range lipid order . Soft Matter 11 , 186 – 192 ( 2014 ) . 79 . Johannes , L . & Mayor , S . Induced domain formation in endocytic invagination , lipid sorting , and scission . Cell 142 , 507 – 510 ( 2010 ) . 80 . Ravindran , M . S . , Tanner , L . B . & Wenk , M . R . Sialic acid linkage in glycosphingolipids is a molecular correlate for trafficking and delivery of extracellular cargo . Traffic 14 , 1182 – 1191 ( 2013 ) . 81 . Neu , U . , Woellner , K . , Gauglitz , G . & Stehle , T . Structural basis of GM1 ganglioside recognition by simian virus 40 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 5219 – 5224 ( 2008 ) . 82 . Ling , H . et al . Structure of Shiga - like toxin I B - pentamer complexed with an analogue of its receptor Gb3 . Biochemistry 37 , 1777 – 1788 ( 1998 ) . 83 . Zhang , R . G . et al . The three - dimensional crystal structure of cholera toxin . J . Mol . Biol . 251 , 563 – 573 ( 1995 ) . 84 . Ewers , H . et al . GM1 structure determines SV40 - induced membrane invagination and infection . Nature Cell Biol . 12 , 11 – 18 ( 2010 ) . 85 . Lakshminarayan , R . et al . Galectin - 3 drives glycosphingolipid - dependent biogenesis of clathrin - independent carriers . Nature Cell Biol . 16 , 595 – 606 ( 2014 ) . 86 . Furtak , V . , Hatcher , F . & Ochieng , J . Galectin - 3 mediates the endocytosis of β - 1 integrins by breast carcinoma cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 289 , 845 – 850 ( 2001 ) . 87 . Partridge , E . A . et al . Regulation of cytokine receptors by Golgi N - glycan processing and endocytosis . Science 306 , 120 – 124 ( 2004 ) . 88 . Gao , X . et al . The two endocytic pathways mediated by the carbohydrate recognition domain and regulated by the collagen - like domain of galectin - 3 in vascular endothelial cells . PLoS ONE 7 , e52430 ( 2012 ) . 89 . Lepur , A . et al . Galectin - 3 endocytosis by carbohydrate independent and dependent pathways in different macrophage like cell types . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1820 , 804 – 818 ( 2012 ) . 90 . Iurisci , I . et al . Concentrations of galectin - 3 in the sera of normal controls and cancer patients . Clin . Cancer Res . 6 , 1389 – 1393 ( 2000 ) . 91 . Christenson , R . H . et al . Multi - center determination of galectin - 3 assay performance characteristics : anatomy of a novel assay for use in heart failure . Clin . Biochem . 43 , 683 – 690 ( 2010 ) . 92 . Hirabayashi , J . et al . Oligosaccharide specificity of galectins : a search by frontal affinity chromatography . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1572 , 232 – 254 ( 2002 ) . 93 . Collins , P . M . , Bum - Erdene , K . , Yu , X . & Blanchard , H . Galectin - 3 interactions with glycosphingolipids . J . Mol . Biol . 426 , 1439 – 1451 ( 2014 ) . 94 . Lepur , A . , Salomonsson , E . , Nilsson , U . J . & Leffler , H . Ligand induced galectin - 3 self - association . J . Biol . Chem . 287 , 21751 – 21756 ( 2012 ) . 95 . Delacour , D . et al . Galectin - 4 and sulfatides in apical membrane trafficking in enterocyte - like cells . J . Cell Biol . 169 , 491 – 501 ( 2005 ) . 96 . Mishra , R . , Grzybek , M . , Niki , T . , Hirashima , M . & Simons , K . Galectin - 9 trafficking regulates apical - basal polarity in Madin – Darby canine kidney epithelial cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 17633 – 17638 ( 2010 ) . 97 . Mim , C . & Unger , V . M . Membrane curvature and its generation by BAR proteins . Trends Biochem . Sci . 37 , 526 – 533 ( 2012 ) . 98 . Kozlov , M . M . et al . Mechanisms shaping cell membranes . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 29 , 53 – 60 ( 2014 ) . 99 . Frost , A . , Unger , V . M . & De Camilli , P . The BAR domain superfamily : membrane - molding macromolecules . Cell 137 , 191 – 196 ( 2009 ) . 100 . Daumke , O . , Roux , A . & Haucke , V . BAR domain scaffolds in dynamin - mediated membrane fission . Cell 156 , 882 – 892 ( 2014 ) . 101 . Henne , W . M . et al . FCHo proteins are nucleators of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 328 , 1281 – 1284 ( 2010 ) . 102 . Umasankar , P . K . et al . Distinct and separable activities of the endocytic clathrin - coat components Fcho1 / 2 and AP - 2 in developmental patterning . Nature Cell Biol . 14 , 488 – 501 ( 2012 ) . 103 . Cocucci , E . , Aguet , F . , Boulant , S . & Kirchhausen , T . The first five seconds in the life of a clathrin - coated pit . Cell 150 , 495 – 507 ( 2012 ) . 104 . Tang , Y . et al . Identification of the endophilins ( SH3p4 / p8 / p13 ) as novel binding partners for the β 1 - adrenergic receptor . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 12559 – 12564 ( 1999 ) . 105 . Gallop , J . L . et al . Mechanism of endophilin N - BAR domain - mediated membrane curvature . EMBO J . 25 , 2898 – 2910 ( 2006 ) . 106 . Allain , J . M . , Storm , C . , Roux , A . , Ben Amar , M . & Joanny , J . F . Fission of a multiphase membrane tube . Phys . Rev . Lett . 93 , 158104 ( 2004 ) . 107 . Milosevic , I . et al . Recruitment of endophilin to clathrin - coated pit necks is required for efficient vesicle uncoating after fission . Neuron 72 , 587 – 601 ( 2011 ) . 108 . Gad , H . et al . Fission and uncoating of synaptic clathrin - coated vesicles are perturbed by disruption of interactions with the SH3 domain of endophilin . Neuron 27 , 301 – 312 ( 2000 ) . 109 . Llobet , A . et al . Endophilin drives the fast mode of vesicle retrieval in a ribbon synapse . J . Neurosci . 31 , 8512 – 8519 ( 2011 ) . 110 . Kononenko , N . L . et al . Clathrin / AP - 2 mediate synaptic vesicle reformation from endosome - like vacuoles but are not essential for membrane retrieval at central synapses . Neuron 82 , 981 – 988 ( 2014 ) . 111 . Hansen , C . G . & Nichols , B . J . Molecular mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1713 – 1721 ( 2009 ) . 112 . Sorkin , A . Cargo recognition during clathrin - mediated endocytosis : a team effort . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 392 – 399 ( 2004 ) . 113 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . & Drubin , D . G . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 , 305 – 320 ( 2005 ) . 114 . Hinrichsen , L . , Harborth , J . , Andrees , L . , Weber , K . & Ungewickell , E . J . Effect of clathrin heavy chain - and α - adaptin - specific small inhibitory RNAs on endocytic accessory proteins and receptor trafficking in HeLa cells . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 45160 – 45170 ( 2003 ) . 115 . Montagnac , G . et al . α TAT1 catalyses microtubule acetylation at clathrin - coated pits . Nature 502 , 567 – 570 ( 2013 ) . 116 . Mim , C . et al . Structural basis of membrane bending by the N - BAR protein endophilin . Cell 149 , 137 – 145 ( 2012 ) . 117 . Shalom - Feuerstein , R . et al . K - ras nanoclustering is subverted by overexpression of the scaffold protein galectin - 3 . Cancer Res . 68 , 6608 – 6616 ( 2008 ) . 118 . Zhao , H . et al . Membrane - sculpting BAR domains generate stable lipid microdomains . Cell Rep . 4 , 1213 – 1223 ( 2013 ) . 119 . Doherty , G . J . & McMahon , H . T . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 857 – 902 ( 2009 ) . 120 . Shvets , E . , Ludwig , A . & Nichols , B . J . News from the caves : update on the structure and function of caveolae . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 29 , 99 – 106 ( 2014 ) . 121 . Hansen , C . G . & Nichols , B . J . Exploring the caves : cavins , caveolins and caveolae . Trends Cell Biol . 20 , 177 – 186 ( 2010 ) . 122 . Ariotti , N . & Parton , R . G . SnapShot : caveolae , caveolins , and cavins . Cell 154 , 704 – 704 . e1 ( 2013 ) . 123 . Boucrot , E . , Howes , M . T . , Kirchhausen , T . & Parton , R . G . Redistribution of caveolae during mitosis . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 1965 – 1972 ( 2011 ) . 124 . Stoeber , M . et al . Oligomers of the ATPase EHD2 confine caveolae to the plasma membrane through association with actin . EMBO J . 31 , 2350 – 2364 ( 2012 ) . 125 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . & McNiven , M . A . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 – 99 ( 1998 ) . 126 . Moren , B . et al . EHD2 regulates caveolar dynamics via ATP - driven targeting and oligomerization . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 1316 – 1329 ( 2012 ) . 127 . Oh , P . , McIntosh , D . P . & Schnitzer , J . E . Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven fission from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 101 – 114 ( 1998 ) . 128 . Pelkmans , L . , Burli , T . , Zerial , M . & Helenius , A . Caveolin - stabilized membrane domains as multifunctional transport and sorting devices in endocytic membrane traffic . Cell 118 , 767 – 780 ( 2004 ) . 129 . Safouane , M . et al . Lipid cosorting mediated by Shiga toxin induced tubulation . Traffic 11 , 1519 – 1529 ( 2010 ) . 130 . Day , C . A . et al . Microtubule motors power plasma membrane tubulation in clathrin - independent endocytosis . Traffic http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / tra . 12269 ( 2015 ) . Acknowledgements The help of J . Ménétrey is acknowledged for the overlay in Figure 3b . L . J . is funded by grants from the European Community’s Framework Programme under grant agreement numbers TRANSPOL - 264399 and H2020 - MSCA - ITN - 2014 , Agence Nationale pour la Recherche ( ANR - 11 BSV2 014 03 , ANR - 14 - CE14 - 0002 - 02 and ANR - 14 - CE16 - 0004 - 03 ) , Human Frontier Science Program ( HFSP ) grant RGP0029 - 2014 , European Research Council advanced grant ( project 340485 ) and INCa programme PLBIO11 - 022 - IDF - JOHANNES . R . G . P . is funded by grants and fellowships from the National Health and Medical Research Council , Australia , and grants from the Australian Research Council . S . M . is sup - ported by a JC Bose fellowship from the Department of Science and Technology and grants from HFSP RGP0027 / 2012 and a Centre of Excellence ( CoE ) grant from the Department of Biotechnology , Goverment of India . P . B . is funded by a European Research Concil advanced grant ( pro - ject 339847 ) and by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche ( ANR - 11 BSV2 014 03 , ANR - 14 - CE09 - 0003 - 03 ) . The Johannes and Bassereau teams are members of Labex CelTisPhyBio ( 11 - LBX - 0038 ) and Idex Paris Sciences et Lettres ( ANR - 10 - IDEX - 0001 - 02 PSL ) . The facilities as well as scientific and technical assistance from staff in the PICT - IBiSA / Nikon Imaging Centre at Institut Curie - Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique ( CNRS ) and the France - BioImaging intrastructure ( ANR - 10 - INSB - 04 ) are acknowledged . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . DATABASES Protein Data Bank : http : / / www . rcsb . org / pdb / 1BOS | 1FGB | 3BWR SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( table ) | S2 ( table ) ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF P E R S P E C T I V E S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 321 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved