PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE Research Article GETTING THE RIGHT IDEA : Semantic Activation in the Right Hemisphere May Help Solve Insight Problems Edward M . Bowden and Mark Jung Beeman Section of Cognitive Neuroscience , Department of Neurological Sciences , Rush - Presbyterian - St . Luke’s Medical Center Abstract— Two experiments examined hemispheric differences in information processing that may contribute to solving insight prob - lems . We propose that right - hemisphere ( RH ) coarse semantic coding is more likely than left - hemisphere ( LH ) fine semantic coding to acti - vate distantly related information or unusual interpretations of words , and thus more likely to activate solution - relevant information for insight problems . In Experiment 1 , after trying to solve insight prob - lems , participants read aloud solution or unrelated target words pre - sented to the left visual field ( lvf ) or right visual field ( rvf ) . Participants showed greater lvf - RH than rvf - LH priming for solutions for solved problems and priming only in the lvf - RH for unsolved prob - lems . In Experiment 2 , participants showed an lvf - RH advantage for recognizing solutions to unsolved problems . These results demonstrate that in a problem - solving context , there was greater activation of solu - tion - relevant information in the RH than in the LH . This activation is useful for recognizing , and perhaps producing , solutions to insight problems . This article examines how hemispheric differences in information processing might contribute to solving insight problems . We examine two component processes necessary for problem solving : activation of information that is relevant to the solution and may lead the solver to the correct solution path , and recognition of the solution . Recognition of the solution ( or solution - relevant information ) can occur when such information is encountered in the environment or when it is activated ( or generated ) internally . Although there is no universally accepted definition of what con - stitutes an insight problem , it is generally agreed that three properties distinguish insight solutions from noninsight solutions : First , when working on an insight problem , the solver experiences an impasse , probably because of being misdirected by ambiguous information in the problem ( Dominowski & Dallob , 1995 ; Smith , 1995 ) . Second , solvers often cannot report the processing that helped them overcome the impasse ( Gick & Lockhart , 1995 ; Ohlsson , 1992 ) . Third , upon solving insight problems , solvers experience a distinctive affective response involving suddenness and surprise—the “aha ! ” experience ( Davidson , 1995 ; Metcalfe , 1986a , 1986b ; Metcalfe & Wiebe , 1987 ) . ( For an in - depth discussion of these properties , see Bowden , 1997 ) . In this article , we examine how the first two properties might be explained by processing differences of the cerebral hemispheres . Researchers have suggested that creative thinking and insight can come from unconscious processing . For example , problem solvers can be influenced by information for which they report no awareness ( e . g . , Maier , 1931 ; Rees & Israel , 1935 ; Safren , 1962 ; Schunn & Dunbar , 1996 ) . In fact , when a person is solving anagrams , hints presented below the threshold of awareness lead to faster solutions as well as a unique subjective experience similar to the experience found with classical insight problems ( Bowden , 1997 ) . In addition , some implicit solution - relevant processing is suggested by the fact that solvers can estimate the coherence or solvability of insight problems they have not solved ( Bowers , Regehr , Balthazard , & Parker , 1990 ; Dorfman , 1990 ) . 1 ( For a review , see Dorfman , Shames , & Kihlstrom , 1996 . ) It has also been suggested that creative thinking emanates largely from the right hemisphere ( RH ) ( Ornstein , 1977 ; Springer & Deutsch , 1981 ) . Insight solutions are often viewed as more creative than non - insight solutions because they rely on retrieval of unusual interpreta - tions of problem elements , or on information that may seem only distantly related to the original problem . Some recent descriptions of RH semantic processing are compatible with a role for solving verbal insight problems . For instance , when people comprehend individual words , the RH appears to engage in relatively coarse semantic coding , weakly activating a large field of semantic information , including sec - ondary word meanings ( Burgess & Simpson , 1988 ) and information that is only distantly related to the input word ( Beeman et al . , 1994 ; Chiarello & Richards , 1992 ) . 2 In contrast , the left hemisphere ( LH ) appears to strongly activate a smaller semantic field of information that is closely related to the word in context . Specifically , greater left - visual - field ( lvf - RH ) than right - visual - field ( rvf - LH ) priming occurs when a target word is distantly related to , or related to an unusual interpretation of , a preceding prime word or words ( Beeman et al . , 1994 ; Burgess & Simpson , 1988 ; Chiarello , Burgess , Richards , & Pollock , 1990 ; Faust & Gernsbacher , 1996 ; Nakagawa , 1991 ) . Similarly , people recognize distant associations VOL . 9 , NO . 6 , NOVEMBER 1998 Copyright © 1998 American Psychological Society 435 1 . Solvers can predict solvability better for noninsight problems than for insight problems ( Metcalfe , 1986a ) . 2 . Different conclusions have been drawn from work examining asymme - tries in semantic processing of pictures . Specifically , it has been claimed that the RH is more rigid in its ability to remember scenes , being less adept at remembering incongruous object arrangements such as those represented in surreal paintings ( for a review , see Zaidel , 1994 ) . It is possible that pictorial and lexical semantics operate differently across the hemispheres ( Chiarello , 1998 ) . But the results using picture paradigms could also be interpreted as suggesting that the RH is more sensitive than the LH to the global ( if not local ) context , perhaps relying on distantly related features of the pictured objects to establish global connections , and having more difficulty when such connections are alto - gether absent . If so , it is not surprising that patients with RH damage have more difficulty than patients with LH damage in detecting incongruities in pictures ( Milner , 1958 ; Warrington & Taylor , 1973 ) . Similarly , less central features of object representations may determine one category exemplar’s relation to coex - emplars and to the category as a whole—in other words , the exemplar’s typi - cality . Thus , it is not surprising that typicality affects RH processing to a greater extent than LH processing ( Cronin - Golomb , 1995 ; Zaidel , 1987 ) , because the LH may focus on the more central features of an object—say , the wings and beak of a bird—which have a lesser impact on typicality . Address correspondence to Edward M . Bowden or Mark Beeman , Section of Cognitive Neuroscience , Department of Neurological Sciences , Rush - Presbyterian - St . Luke’s Medical Center , 1645 W . Jackson Blvd . , Suite 450 , Chicago , IL 60612 ; e - mail : ebowden @ rush . edu or mbeeman @ rush . edu . PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE Insight and the Right Hemisphere between paired words more easily if one of the pair is presented to the lvf - RH ( Rodel , Cook , Regard , & Landis , 1992 ) . In addition , patients with RH brain damage ( who therefore rely on their intact LH ) tend to focus on the most direct , denotative interpretations of words , whereas patients with LH damage ( who therefore rely on their intact RH ) tend to focus on metaphoric or connotative meanings ( Brownell , Potter , Michelow , & Gardner , 1984 ) . Patients with RH damage can have dif - ficulty drawing inferences ( Beeman , 1993 ; Brownell , Potter , Bihrle , & Gardner , 1986 ) and comprehending discourse that depends heavily on distant semantic associations ( for a review , see Beeman , 1998 ) . We believe that diffuse semantic activation in the RH may provide people with information useful to solving verbal insight problems , whereas the LH’s normally effective pattern of activation may make it more susceptible to misdirection if its narrower field of activation is focused on an incorrect interpretation of a problem . Moreover , uncon - scious processing might play a more salient role in solving insight than in solving noninsight problems because the processing necessary to overcome impasse depends heavily on weak and diffuse RH activa - tion . That is , the solution - relevant RH activation might be too weak and diffuse to reach consciousness , or to be selected to generate a solu - tion ( Beeman et al . , 1994 ) , yet it might persist after misdirected acti - vation decays ( after impasse ) , allowing it to influence the direction of future solution efforts . This role proposed for the RH when people solve insight problems is analogous to the role proposed for the RH when comprehenders draw inferences from discourse ( Bowden , Beeman , & Gernsbacher , 1995 ) . It appears that information related to predictive inferences is passively activated in the RH , but not selected—that is , it is not activated strong - ly enough for consciousness or for further more complex processing , such as being included in the comprehender’s representation of the dis - course . When the inference becomes necessary to maintain coherence , it may be selected by the LH’s focused activation , and incorporated into the comprehender’s representation ( Bowden et al . , 1995 ) . In practice , it is difficult to assign problems to insight and non - insight categories on a principled basis . Clearly , problems lie on a continuum between pure insight problems and pure noninsight problems , and vary greatly in complexity . In the following experi - ments , we examined hemispheric differences in solution activation by presenting simple insight problems patterned after the Remote Associates Test ( RAT ; Mednick , 1962 ) . Each of our items consisted of three stimulus words for which participants were asked to generate a fourth word that , when combined with each of the three stimulus words , would result in a word pair used in everyday language ( e . g . , pie / luck / belly — pot ) . We chose to use these compound remote - associate problems for a number of reasons . The RAT was originally developed as a test of cre - ativity and has been widely used to study insight and creative thinking ( e . g . , Bowers et al . , 1990 ; Dallob & Dominowski , 1993 ; Dorfman , 1990 ; Schooler & Melcher , 1995 ; Shames , 1994 ; Smith & Blanken - ship , 1991 ) . Furthermore , problem solvers’ success on RAT items has been found to correlate reliably with their success on classic insight problems ( Dallob & Dominowski , 1993 ; Schooler & Melcher , 1995 ) . Although RAT items may not be as complex as classic insight problems , they exhibit the three properties that distinguish insight solutions from noninsight solutions : They misdirect retrieval processes in the sense that a nondominant meaning of at least one of the words in the triad must be accessed to reach the solution . Memo - ry search for the solution appears to involve both controlled and auto - matic processing ( Ben - Zur , 1989 ) , so that solvers often cannot report the processing that led to the solution . And upon solving RAT items , solvers often have the aha ! experience . That is , solving RAT items involves the same component processes critical for insight solu - tions to more complex problems . For an investigation of how hemispheric differences in information processing might contribute to solving insight problems , the RAT problems have two advantages over more complex insight problems : They are short , allowing centralized presentation of an entire problem , and they have single - word solutions , allowing presentation of solution or unrelated target words to a single visual hemifield . More complex insight problems cannot be studied in this way . We used a priming paradigm to test for activation of the correct solution when participants had or had not solved insight problems . Priming was defined as how much more quickly participants read aloud ( named ) solution target words compared with solution - unrelated target words . The presence of priming for solutions to prob - lems that have not been solved would suggest that unconscious activation exists and that this activation might eventually be useful in reaching insight solutions . It is possible to examine activation in each hemisphere by comparing priming for solution words presented to the lvf - RH or to the rvf - LH even if participants manifest the normal rvf - LH advantage for word reading . Numerous studies have demon - strated qualitatively different patterns of semantic priming for words presented to the rvf versus the lvf , suggesting some independent processing by each hemisphere despite an intact corpus callosum ( for a review , see Beeman & Chiarello , 1998 ) . Our research adds to previous research in several important ways : In previous research , the prime word ( or words ) and target word were presented with stimulus onset asynchronies ( SOAs ) of no more than 1 , 000 ms . In addition , when multiple prime words were presented prior to a target word , participants were not instructed to actively seek an association between the prime words ( e . g . , Beeman et al . , 1994 ) . The following experiments used prime - target SOAs up to 15 s and explicit instructions to attempt to discover the association between the three words . Therefore , we examined hemispheric differences in semantic activation over an extended period of effortful problem solv - ing rather than largely automatic activation occurring within a fraction of a second after the presentation of a word . EXPERIMENT 1 Method Participants Thirty - two right - handed college students at the University of Illinois - Chicago participated for partial course credit . All participants were women , because of constraints on the subject pool , and all were strongly right - handed according to a handedness survey ( Bryden , 1982 ) . Materials The problems were 144 items similar to items from the RAT ( Mednick , 1962 ) . For our items , each of three words in a problem could combine with the solution word to form a word pair used in everyday language ( e . g . , high / district / house — school ) , providing participants with a consistent task . 436 VOL . 9 , NO . 6 , NOVEMBER 1998 PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE Edward M . Bowden and Mark Jung Beeman Procedure For each trial , participants tried to solve one problem , then read aloud one target word . Each trial began with a central fixation cross , and then the three problem words were presented simultaneously in normal horizontal orientation above , at , and below the center of the screen . Par - ticipants tried to produce the solution word within a 15 - s time limit ( determined by pilot studies ) . After either a solution was produced or time ran out , the problem words were erased , a tone sounded , and the fixation cross reappeared . Then a target word was presented horizontal - ly for 180 ms ( with the inner edge 1 . 5° of visual angle from fixation ) , and latency to read the target word aloud was measured . Half of the tar - get words were solution words and half were unrelated words ( the solu - tions to other problems ) ; half the solution words and half the unrelated words were presented to each visual hemifield . Participants saw each target word only once over the course of the experiment . Participants were tested individually . Prior to the experiment , they were given five practice problems with target words . Further explana - tion was given if required . Participants viewed the screen through a binocular viewer mounted on the table . Results On average , participants solved 31 . 3 % ( SD = 5 . 9 ) of the problems within the 15 - s time limit . The data from 3 participants were replaced because they solved too few problems ( more than 2 SD s below the mean ) . There were significant main effects of hemifield of presentation , type of target word ( solution vs . unrelated ) , and whether the problem was solved or unsolved . Participants showed the expected LH advan - tage for naming : Target words presented to the rvf - LH were read 49 ms more quickly than target words presented to the lvf - RH , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 21 . 13 , p < . 0001 . Participants showed overall priming , read - ing solution target words 56 ms more quickly than they read unrelat - ed target words , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 30 . 82 , p < . 0001 . Participants also read target words 39 ms more quickly following correctly solved problems than following unsolved problems , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 8 . 99 , p < . 005 . Most important , the amount of priming depended on the hemifield to which the target words were presented , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 9 . 69 , p < . 004 . As illustrated in Figure 1 , participants showed greater priming ( i . e . , reading latencies decreased more ) for solution words ( relative to solution - unrelated words ) presented to the lvf - RH than for those pre - sented to the rvf - LH . This greater priming for lvf - RH presentation occurred for both solved and unsolved problems , F ( 1 , 31 ) < 1 . However , the overall amount of priming did depend on whether participants solved the problems , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 18 . 36 , p < . 0002 . For solved problems , target relatedness interacted with hemifield , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 4 . 61 , p < . 04 . Participants showed 112 ms of priming for lvf - RH solution words , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 35 . 84 , p < . 0001 , and 58 ms of priming for rvf - LH solution words , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 9 . 31 , p < . 005 . For unsolved problems , target relatedness again interacted with hemifield , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 5 . 22 , p < . 03 . Participants showed 44 ms of priming for lvf - RH solution words , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 8 . 50 , p < . 007 , but only 12 ms for rvf - LH solution words , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 2 . 64 , p < . 11 . Thus , when participants solved problems , activation for the solution was greater in the RH than in the LH . Moreover , when they had not yet solved problems , activation of the solution was found only in the RH . This activation can be considered unconscious in the sense that partic - ipants had not used it to produce the solution . It is possible that this activation derived from the solution’s distant relation to one or two individual problem words , and was not directly related to the problem - solving process . However , as long as solution - relevant activation exists ( apparently , to a greater extent in the RH ) , it might eventually help peo - ple solve the problems . Experiment 2 tested whether the solution acti - vation observed in Experiment 1 might be useful for the second component process of problem solving : recognizing the solution . EXPERIMENT 2 Method Thirty - two right - handed college students ( 16 females , 16 males ) at the University of Wisconsin - Parkside participated for partial course credit . The materials and procedure were the same as those of Exper - iment 1 , except that instead of naming the target word , participants indicated with a button press whether the target word was the solution to the problem . This was a direct test of participants’ ability to recog - nize solutions . However , because solution words required a “yes” response , whereas unrelated words required a “no” response , we could not examine priming . Instead , we examined the hemispheric differ - ence in raw response times , keeping in mind that participants normal - ly display an rvf - LH advantage when responding to words . Half the participants responded with their left hands , and half with their right . Instead of using a binocular viewer , as in Experiment 1 , participants were positioned in a chin rest – head holder . Results On average , participants solved 32 . 8 % ( SD = 7 . 2 ) of the problems within the time limit . The data from 5 participants were replaced because they solved too few problems ( more than 2 SD s below the mean ) . Latencies of correct responses were analyzed . Most important , after unsolved problems , participants responded more quickly to lvf - RH words than they did to rvf - LH words , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 14 . 62 , VOL . 9 , NO . 6 , NOVEMBER 1998 437 Fig . 1 . Naming times for solution and unrelated target words for solved and unsolved problems . LH = left hemisphere ; RH = right hemisphere . PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE Insight and the Right Hemisphere p < . 0006 . This result is in contrast to the typical rvf - LH advantage for responding to words , and was found for both hits ( “yes” responses to solutions ) and correct rejections ( “no” responses to unrelated targets ) . After solved problems , there was no effect of hemifield of presenta - tion , F ( 1 , 31 ) < 1 , so hemifield of presentation interacted with whether the problem was solved or unsolved prior to seeing the target word , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 7 . 23 , p < . 011 ( see Fig . 2 ) . Participants responded to target words 798 ms more quickly after solved problems than after unsolved problems , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 135 . 81 , p < . 0001 . Participants made hit responses marginally more quickly ( 49 ms ) than they made correct rejections , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 2 . 88 , p < . 10 . Type of response ( hit or correct rejection ) interacted with whether participants solved the problems , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 18 . 65 , p < . 0001 : Participants made hits more quickly than correct rejections after solved problems , but made correct rejections more quickly than hits after unsolved problems . No significant effect was found for response hand , F ( 1 , 30 ) < 1 . The lvf - RH advantage was found regardless of response hand ( 74 ms for left - handed responses and 88 ms for right - handed responses ) . There was no significant effect of sex of participant , F ( 1 , 30 ) < 1 . Both women ( 76 ms ) and men ( 85 ms ) showed the lvf - RH advantage . We used a sensitivity analysis ( d ' ) from signal detection theory to examine accuracy of recognition responses . After solving problems , participants responded with equal sensitivity to the target words in the rvf - LH and lvf - RH ( rvf - LH d ' = 3 . 54 , 94 . 5 % correct ; lvf - RH d ' = 3 . 28 , 93 . 9 % correct ) , F ( 1 , 31 ) < 1 . After failing to solve problems , they responded with marginally greater sensitivity in the rvf - LH ( d ' = 2 . 14 , 83 . 8 % correct ) than in the lvf - RH ( d ' = 1 . 81 , 79 . 3 % correct ) , F ( 1 , 31 ) = 2 . 56 , p = . 12 . The lvf - RH advantage for response latency was not correlated with the rvf - LH advantage for accuracy , r ( 32 ) = – . 05 . Thus , participants were not sacrificing accuracy for speed when responding to lvf - RH target words . GENERAL DISCUSSION Experiment 1 showed that when participants had solved insight problems , activation of the solution was stronger in the RH than in the LH . Even when participants had not yet solved insight problems , they had some solution - related activation in the RH , but not in the LH . The fact that problem solvers have solution - related activation for problems they have not yet solved is consistent with the belief that unconscious processing contributes to insight solutions ( Bowden , 1997 ) . Experi - ment 2 showed that problem solvers can use this RH activation to make faster solution judgments on words presented to the lvf - RH than on words presented to the rvf - LH . Solution - related priming has previously been documented for obscure words that participants could not produce in response to the words’ definitions ( Yaniv & Meyer , 1987 ) . The current data extend this finding to insight problems , and are in accord with unpublished data from Shames ( 1994 , cited in Dorfman et al . , 1996 ) and a preliminary study of RH involvement in insight ( Fiore & Schooler , 1998 ) . Also , the fact that information related to solutions of insight problems is more likely to be activated in the RH than in the LH is consistent with previ - 438 VOL . 9 , NO . 6 , NOVEMBER 1998 Fig . 2 . Response times for hits and correct rejections , for solved problems ( left panel ) and unsolved problems ( right panel ) . LH = left hemisphere ; RH = right hemisphere ; lvf = left visual field ; rvf = right visual field . PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE Edward M . Bowden and Mark Jung Beeman ous data about semantic priming asymmetries , and specifically with the theory that the RH coarsely codes meanings of words : In response to input words , the RH weakly activates large semantic fields of related information , including information only distantly related to the input words . This provides only a coarse interpretation of each word , but the large semantic fields from multiple words in discourse , or from an insight problem , are more likely to overlap than the smaller semantic fields generated in the LH ( Beeman , 1998 ; Beeman et al . , 1994 ) . Our research adds to previous research by demonstrating hemispheric dif - ferences in semantic activation over an extended period of effortful problem solving rather than only within a fraction of a second after the presentation of a word . Moreover , the lvf - RH priming advantage for solved problems ( Experiment 1 ) and the lvf - RH advantage in recogniz - ing solutions ( Experiment 2 ) suggest that the activation of distantly related information might contribute to solving insight problems . When solution candidates are presented to problem solvers , the RH activation helps in judging whether those candidates are indeed solutions . It is pos - sible that if solvers continued to work on these problems without solu - tion candidates being presented , they could use this weak RH activation to help generate solutions . Although problems similar to the ones used here have been used to study problem solving , creativity , and insight in previous experiments ( e . g . , Ben - Zur , 1989 ; Bowers et al . , 1990 ; Dorfman , 1990 ; Shames , 1994 , cited in Dorfman et al . , 1996 ; Smith & Blankenship , 1991 ) , classical insight problems are generally more complex , and solving them undoubtedly requires additional component processes not addressed in the present experiments . This research does demonstrate that RH activation can aid in two of the processes involved in problem solving : directing retrieval of solution - relevant information and recog - nizing the solution or solution path . Schooler , Fallshore , and Fiore ( 1995 ) suggested that with insight problems , solvers have difficulty initially recognizing the correct approach , and therefore are likely to activate solution - irrelevant infor - mation rather than solution - relevant information in memory . What is needed is to disengage retrieval processes from irrelevant information and redirect them to solution - relevant information . This is difficult and takes time ( Bowden , 1985 ) . As mentioned earlier , it is possible that activation of solution - relevant remote associates in the RH derives from the solution’s distant relation to one or two individual problem words , and is not directly related to the problem - solving process . However , if the RH simply sustains this activation until after the mis - directed activation in the LH has subsided , it might still help people solve problems . The present experiments suggest that the necessary redirection of the search process might benefit from the activation of remote associates that already exists in the RH . We propose that RH activation might help people solve insight prob - lems in the following way : Insight problems contain ambiguous features that misdirect retrieval toward information that is strongly related to the typical interpretation of words in the problems , but does not lead to solu - tion . Because of the LH’s relatively fine semantic coding , the misdirec - tion causes strongly focused activation of such information in the LH—to the exclusion of solution - relevant information . Because of the RH’s relatively coarse semantic coding , there is likely to be activation of solution - relevant information as well as misdirected information in the RH . However , problem solvers have difficulty using this weak activa - tion . The current data cannot determine whether the solution - relevant activation in the RH is simply too weak to allow solvers to generate the solution , or is blocked by stronger , misdirected activation . We do know that the RH activation is too weak to be reported . Further , we speculate that strong but misdirected activation , primarily in the LH , prevents solvers from generating the solution , and must subside for solvers to overcome impasse . When the misdirected activation has subsided , the weak solution - relevant activation in the RH could be stronger than com - peting activation , allowing it to be selected for further processing , or to influence future problem - solving efforts . Once retrieval is correctly redirected , the solution ( or solution path ) is soon obvious . When this happens , solvers may experience the aha ! of insight . In contrast , when problems do not misdirect retrieval , the strong activation in the LH like - ly is focused on the correct interpretation from the start . In these cases , solvers are less likely to experience impasse , contributions from uncon - scious processing , and feelings of insight . We do not claim that the RH is solely responsible for producing the solution ; indeed , we believe the LH plays a major role in selecting a solution to output , or in executing further operations along the solution path . It is also possible that insight problems could be solved entirely in the LH . The LH could simply initiate a new search after impasse , essentially moving its focused spotlight of activation around the prob - lem space until the solution is found . However , given that the solution , or solution - related information , is already activated in the RH , the optimal problem - solving strategy would make use of it . SUMMARY Achieving insight to solve complex problems is an important and multifaceted behavior . The present experiments demonstrate that coarse semantic coding in the RH is well suited to two component processes that contribute to producing creative or insightful solutions : activating distantly related but still solution - relevant information and recognizing the solution or solution path . We suggest that when a person is working on an insight problem , RH coarse semantic processing is more likely than LH fine semantic processing to activate solution - relevant informa - tion , just as it is more likely to activate distantly related information or less common interpretations during language comprehension in general . We also suggest that RH activation persists in the absence of awareness because it is weak and diffuse ( and perhaps overshadowed by stronger misdirected activation in the LH ) . Although it is not clear whether the RH can directly generate the solution , RH activation can still be useful for guiding retrieval attempts or recognizing the solution when it is encountered . REFERENCES Beeman , M . ( 1993 ) . Semantic processing in the right hemisphere may contribute to draw - ing inferences from discourse . Brain and Language , 44 , 80 – 120 . Beeman , M . ( 1998 ) . Coarse semantic coding and discourse comprehension . In M . Beeman & C . Chiarello ( Eds . ) , Right hemisphere language comprehension : Perspectives from cognitive neuroscience ( pp . 255 – 284 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Beeman , M . , & Chiarello , C . ( Eds . ) . ( 1998 ) . Right hemisphere language comprehension : Perspectives from cognitive neuroscience . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . VOL . 9 , NO . 6 , NOVEMBER 1998 439 Acknowledgments— This research was supported by Grant 5 R29 DC 02160 from the National Institute on Deafness and Communication Disorders , National Institutes of Health , to Mark Beeman . We thank Refugio Atilano and Kim Hassenfeld for assistance in creating the stimuli and testing participants . We also thank Sylvia Beyer and Jennifer Dorfman for comments on an earlier version of the manuscript . Special thanks to the Departments of Psychology at the University of Illinois at Chicago and the University of Wisconsin at Parkside for allowing us to use their human subject pools . PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE Insight and the Right Hemisphere Beeman , M . , Friedman , R . B . , Grafman , J . , Perez , E . , Diamond , S . , & Lindsay , M . B . ( 1994 ) . Summation priming and coarse semantic coding in the right hemisphere . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 6 , 26 – 45 . Ben - Zur , H . ( 1989 ) . Automatic and directed search processes in solving simple semantic - memory problems . Memory & Cognition , 17 , 617 – 626 . Bowden , E . M . ( 1985 ) . Information access in problem solving : Constraints on search in the problem space . Memory & Cognition , 13 , 280 – 286 . Bowden , E . M . ( 1997 ) . The effect of reportable and unreportable hints on anagram solution and the aha ! experience . Consciousness and Cognition , 6 , 545 – 573 . Bowden , E . M . , Beeman , M . , & Gernsbacher , M . A . ( 1995 , March ) . Two hemispheres are better than one : Drawing coherence inferences during story comprehension . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society , San Francisco . Bowers , K . S . , Regehr , G . , Balthazard , C . , & Parker , K . ( 1990 ) . Intuition in the context of discovery . Cognitive Psychology , 22 , 72 – 110 . Brownell , H . H . , Potter , H . H . , Bihrle , A . M . , & Gardner , H . ( 1986 ) . Inference deficits in right brain - damaged patients . Brain and Language , 29 , 310 – 321 . Brownell , H . H . , Potter , H . H . , Michelow , D . , & Gardner , H . ( 1984 ) . Sensitivity to lexical denotation and connotation in brain - damaged patients : A double dissociation ? Brain and Language , 22 , 310 – 321 . Bryden , M . P . ( 1982 ) . Laterality : Functional asymmetry in the intact brain . New York : Academic Press . Burgess , C . , & Simpson , G . ( 1988 ) . Hemispheric processing of ambiguous words . Brain and Language , 33 , 86 – 104 . Chiarello , C . ( 1998 ) . On codes of meaning and the meaning of codes : Semantic access and retrieval within and between hemispheres . In M . Beeman & C . Chiarello ( Eds . ) , Right hemisphere language comprehension : Perspectives from cognitive neuro - science ( pp . 141 – 160 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Chiarello , C . , Burgess , C . , Richards , L . , & Pollock , A . ( 1990 ) . Semantic and associative priming in the cerebral hemispheres : Some words do , some words don’t , . . . some - times , some places . Brain and Language , 38 , 75 – 104 . Chiarello , C . , & Richards , L . ( 1992 ) . Another look at categorical priming in the cerebral hemispheres . Neuropsychologia , 30 , 381 – 392 . Cronin - Golomb , A . ( 1995 ) . Semantic networks in the divided cerebral hemispheres . Psychological Science , 6 , 212 – 218 . Dallob , P . I . , & Dominowski , R . L . ( 1993 , April ) . Erroneous solutions to verbal insight problems : Effects of highlighting critical material . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Western Psychological Association . Davidson , J . E . ( 1995 ) . The suddenness of insight . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 125 – 155 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Dominowski , R . L . , & Dallob , P . ( 1995 ) . Insight and problem solving . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 33 – 62 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Dorfman , J . ( 1990 ) . Metacognitions and incubation effects in insight problem solving . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla . Dorfman , J . , Shames , V . A . , & Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1996 ) . Intuition , incubation , and insight : Implicit cognition in problem solving . In G . Underwood ( Ed . ) , Implicit cognition ( pp . 257 – 296 ) . Oxford , England : Oxford University Press . Faust , M . E . , & Gernsbacher , M . A . ( 1996 ) . Cerebral mechanisms for suppression of inap - propriate information during sentence comprehension . Brain and Language , 53 , 234 – 259 . Fiore , S . M . , & Schooler , J . W . ( 1998 ) . Right hemisphere contributions to creative problem solving : Converging evidence for divergent thinking . In M . Beeman & C . Chiarello ( Eds . ) , Right hemisphere language comprehension : Perspectives from cognitive neuroscience ( pp . 349 – 371 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Gick , M . L . , & Lockhart , R . S . ( 1995 ) . Cognitive and affective components of insight . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 197 – 228 ) . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Maier , N . R . F . ( 1931 ) . Reasoning in humans I : On direction . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 12 , 181 – 194 . Mednick , S . A . ( 1962 ) . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological Review , 69 , 220 – 232 . Metcalfe , J . ( 1986a ) . Feeling of knowing in memory and problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 12 , 288 – 294 . Metcalfe , J . ( 1986b ) . Premonitions of insight predict impending error . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 12 , 623 – 634 . Metcalfe , J . , & Wiebe , D . ( 1987 ) . Intuition in insight and noninsight problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 238 – 246 . Milner , B . ( 1958 ) . Psychological defects produced by temporal lobe excision . Proceedings of the Association for Research in Nervous and Mental Disease , 26 , 244 – 257 . Nakagawa , A . ( 1991 ) . Role of anterior and posterior attention networks in hemispheric asymmetries during lexical decisions . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 3 , 315 – 321 . Ohlsson , S . ( 1992 ) . Information - processing explanations of insight and related phenome - na . In M . Keane & K . Gilhooley ( Eds . ) , Advances in the psychology of thinking ( pp . 1 – 44 ) . London : Harvester - Wheatsheaf . Ornstein , R . ( 1977 ) . The psychology of consciousness . New York : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . Rees , H . J . , & Israel , H . E . ( 1935 ) . An investigation of the establishment and operation of mental sets . Psychometric Monographs , 46 ( Whole No . 210 ) . Rodel , M . , Cook , N . D . , Regard , M . , & Landis , T . ( 1992 ) . Hemispheric dissociation in judging semantic relations : Complementarity for close and distant associates . Brain and Language , 43 , 448 – 459 . Safren , M . ( 1962 ) . Associations , sets , and the solution to word problems . Journal of Exper - imental Psychology , 64 , 40 – 45 . Schooler , J . W . , Fallshore , M . , & Fiore , S . M . ( 1995 ) . Epilogue : Putting insight into per - spective . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 559 – 587 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Schooler , J . W . , & Melcher , J . ( 1995 ) . The ineffability of insight . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 249 – 268 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Schunn , C . D . , & Dunbar , K . ( 1996 ) . Priming , analogy , and awareness in complex reasoning . Memory & Cognition , 24 , 271 – 284 . Smith , S . M . ( 1995 ) . Getting into and out of mental ruts : A theory of fixation , incubation and insight . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 229 – 251 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Smith , S . M . , & Blankenship , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Incubation and the persistence of fixation in problem solving . American Journal of Psychology , 104 , 61 – 87 . Springer , S . P . , & Deutsch , G . ( 1981 ) . Left brain , right brain , San Francisco : Freeman . Warrington , E . K . , & Taylor , A . M . ( 1973 ) . The contribution of the right parietal lobe to object recognition . Cortex , 9 , 152 – 164 . Yaniv , I . , & Meyer , D . E . ( 1987 ) . Activation and metacognition of inaccessible stored infor - mation : Potential bases for incubation effects in problem solving . Journal of Exper - imental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 187 – 205 . Zaidel , D . W . ( 1987 ) . Hemispheric asymmetry in long - term semantic relationships . Cognitive Neuropsychology , 4 , 321 – 332 . Zaidel , D . W . ( 1994 ) . Worlds apart : Pictorial semantics in the left and right cerebral hemispheres . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 3 , 5 – 8 . ( R ECEIVED 1 / 6 / 97 ; R EVISION ACCEPTED 4 / 20 / 98 ) 440 VOL . 9 , NO . 6 , NOVEMBER 1998