Collaborative Live Media Curation : Shared Context for Participation in Online Learning William A . Hamilton 1 , Nic Lupfer 1 , Nicolas Botello 1 , Tyler Tesch 1 , Alex Stacy 1 , Jeremy Merrill 2 , Blake Williford 1 , Frank R . Bentley 3 , Andruid Kerne 1 1 Dept . of Computer Science & Engineering , Texas A & M University 2 Dept . of Landscape Architecture & Urban Planning , Texas A & M University | 3 Yahoo , Inc . { bill , nic } @ ecologylab . net , { nbotell2 , tytesch , oricalcon } @ gmail . com , jmerrill42 @ tamu . edu , bwilliford @ gmail . com , fbentley @ yahoo - inc . com , andruid @ ecologylab . net ABSTRACT In recent years , online education’s reach and scale have in - creased through new platforms for large and small online courses . However , these platforms often rely on impoverished modalities , which provide limited support for participation in social learning experiences . We present Collaborative Live Media Curation ( CLMC ) , a new medium for sharing context and participation in online learning . CLMC involves collabora - tive , synchronous collection , creation , and assemblage of web media , including images , text , video , and sketch . CLMC inte - grates live media including streaming video , screenshares , au - dio , and text chat . We deploy and study LiveMâché , a CLMC technology probe , in four situated online learning contexts . We discovered student and instructor strategies for sharing con - text and participating including creating curations in advance , sketching to illustrate and gesture , real - time transformations , sharing perspective , and assembling live streams . We develop implications through live experience patterns , which describe how spatial and computing structures support social activities . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 3 Group and Organization Interfaces Author Keywords live streaming , curation , participation , context , online learning INTRODUCTION This research addresses the need for shared context [ 21 , 46 ] and participation [ 51 , 30 ] in online learning experiences by synthesizing two recent forms of new media—live streaming [ 27 , 73 ] and free - form web curation ( FFWC ) [ 56 , 41 ] —to cre - ate the new form of collaborative live media curation ( CLMC ) . In recent years , massive open online courses ( MOOCs ) have expanded the reach and scale of education . There has also been an emergence of small private online courses ( SPOCs ) , which rely more on small group learning experiences [ 20 , 80 ] . Both MOOCs and SPOCs draw on prior media , including Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspeciﬁcpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montreal , QC , Canada © 2018 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5620 - 6 / 18 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174129 asynchronous forms , such as pre - recorded YouTube lectures [ 26 ] and student discussion forums [ 10 ] . Some are starting to also employ synchronous media tools , like chat rooms [ 8 ] and Google Hangouts [ 49 ] . Alas , these modalities provide limited support for participatory learning experiences , in situ - ated social contexts , which have been shown to be critical for learning [ 51 , 31 ] . Research in communication has shown the importance of shared visual context for conversational ground - ing in collaborative tasks and distance learning [ 21 , 46 ] . To address these needs , we develop a new medium for creating online contexts for participatory learning experiences . We incorporate live streaming , an emerging form of social media , because it has been found to afford sharing rich ex - periences and participating in them [ 27 ] . Platforms such as Twitch [ 27 ] , Periscope [ 73 ] , and Facebook Live [ 55 ] have en - abled new live streaming practices . These platforms combine streaming audio / video of live action with other synchronous and asynchronous communication modalities . This combina - tion of modalities has been shown to provide shared context , which supports online community formation [ 27 ] . We build on the the medium of free - form web curation , which has been show to help students engage in visual thinking [ 56 ] and creatively engage with prior work to conceive , synthesize , and express new ideas [ 41 ] . In art , curation means the creative conceptualization and design of an exhibition context [ 61 ] . Curators arrange and interpret elements in an exhibition space , to stimulate active engagement and produce cultural mean - ing . Free - form web curation is a computational medium that enables multimedia elements to be spontaneously collected from the web , written about , sketched amidst , manipulated , and visually assembled—in a continuous zoomable space—in order to create conceptual and spatial contexts [ 56 ] . Collaborative Live Media Curation extends free - form web curation . CLMC integrates live streaming modalities—e . g . , webcam video , screenshares , audio , and text chat ( see Figure 1 ) —to support participating in shared learning experiences . Further , where prior implementations of FFWC only supported a single user at a time [ 56 , 41 ] , CLMC incorporates collabo - rative and synchronous collection and assemblage of media elements , which becomes a new live communication modality . Through this work , we explore the following research ques - tions : How do students and instructors use CLMC to support and engage in learning activities ? How can we further support participation in online learning experiences ? CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 1 To explore these research questions , we design and develop LiveMâché [ 50 ] , a technology probe [ 33 ] , for collaborative live media curation . We deployed the LiveMâché probe in four situated online learning contexts to provoke and collect data about new experiences . During these situations we observed emergent strategies for sharing context and participating in learning activities using CLMC . We also develop implications through live experience patterns , which describe how spatial and computing structures support social activities . PRIOR WORK To frame the present research , we weave together prior work across ﬁelds , including participation and media in online ed - ucation , participation in live streaming , and sharing visual context for conversational grounding . Finally , we incorporate the medium of free - form web curation , and its strategies for contextualization , which we extend to form collaborative live media curation . We draw on Cohen’s articulation of the terms media and modal - ities [ 11 ] . He uses the term “medium” to refer to the holistic “production , storage , and transmission by the machine of sig - nals” [ 11 ] . Alternatively , he uses “modality” to “concentrate on the syntactic , semantic , and pragmatic properties of the signal” [ 11 ] . We use medium to refer to holistic tools ( e . g live streaming or CLMC ) , while using modality to refer to speciﬁc communication channels ( e . g . text chat or screenshares ) . Participation and Media in Online Learning According to Lave and Wenger , “Learners inevitability partici - pate in communities of practitioners . . . the mastery of knowl - edge and skill requires newcomers to move toward full partici - pation in the sociocultural practices of a community” [ 51 ] . In this way , learning , as a process , is not simply individual . It takes place in inherently social situated contexts . “Learning , thinking , and knowing are relations among people in activity in , with , and arising from the socially and culturally structured world” [ 51 ] . Much recent online learning research holds that participation and social engagement are at the core of learn - ing processes [ 12 , 72 , 63 , 31 ] . Hrastinski developes a theory of online learning as participation , synthesizing social and constructivist views on learning [ 31 ] . Other researchers have studied the effects of asynchronous and synchronous media on learner participation [ 32 , 30 ] . Asynchronous media , such as wikis , blogs , and forums , have been shown to afford stu - dent reﬂection and discussion , but discussion can be hard to initiate [ 29 ] . Synchronous media in online courses , such as video conferences and text chat , foster more overall dialogue , addressing task planning and social support [ 29 ] . In a few MOOCs , instructors have deployed live media forms to foster student participation . Cambre et al . ’s Talkabout system enables small - group discussions of 4 – 6 students in MOOCs using Google Hangouts [ 6 , 52 ] . Talkabout randomly assigns students to small group discussions based on their availability . Other work has explored the use of synchronous text chat in MOOCs [ 9 ] . CLMC goes beyond the separate win - dows of text chat and Google Hangouts , enabling participants to assemble and interact with media to create more integrated situated contexts for online learning activities . Live Streaming for Participation Live streaming has emerged over the past decade as a new form of social media . Platforms have ranged from the now defunct Qik and Bambuser [ 39 ] , to Twitch [ 27 ] , to Periscope [ 74 ] , and now Facebook Live and Instagram [ 55 ] . We observe that live streaming practice [ 27 , 55 ] and research has shifted towards shared experiences [ 59 , 34 , 66 , 57 ] . Live streaming shared experiences has led to the formation of new online communities through participation and shared histories [ 27 , 55 ] . In the present research , we support shared participatory learning experiences using a new form of live media . Prior research has explored how new modalities support par - ticipation and agency in live experiences . Jo and Hwang [ 35 ] explored viewpoint control and direct sketching on video to support viewer communication during video calls . Kim et al . [ 44 ] found that providing contextual information , such as maps and high resolution photographs , enabled viewers to par - ticipate by pointing out things to a remote streamer . Yonezawa and Tokuda [ 78 ] found that enabling remote viewers to con - trol the light and camera angles of live music performance broadcasts engaged viewers and helped connect performers and their audiences . Webb et al . prescribe new modalities for feedback and participation between audiences and performers [ 75 ] . Hamilton et al . explored how live streaming modalities , such as push - to - talk audio and Periscope - style hearts , afford new forms of participation in multi - stream experiences [ 28 ] . Other work has investigated collaborative production of live media experiences . Engström et al . explored systems support - ing the collaborative production of mobile live streams [ 15 , 17 , 18 ] . Juhlin et al . reported on the practices of amateur [ 38 ] and professional [ 16 ] broadcasters . Finally , Sa et al . designed an application supporting collaborative mobile broadcasting by providing awareness of nearby streams [ 68 ] . CLMC is a new medium for collaborative live production and participation . Conversational Grounding : Shared Context Prior research has investigated the role of shared visual context in collaborative work [ 21 , 48 , 47 , 24 ] . Fussell et al . argue that developing virtual co - presence through shared visual and linguistic context is critical for establishing common ground , information that all participants in an activity are aware of [ 7 , 21 ] . Conversational grounding is the iterative process by which participants exchange information to frame shared un - derstanding [ 7 ] . Kraut et al . later showed that media providing shared visual context enables participants to more effectively complete complex tasks using deixis [ 48 ] . Deixis is the use of deictic language , i . e . language dependent on context , such as other language , gestures , or images , e . g . , pointing at “that” . In the present research , we show how CLMC enables participants to perform deixis to ground discussion around complex ideas through shared visual and linguistic context . Others investigated the use of remote gesturing in collaborative work [ 62 , 45 ] and instruction [ 46 ] . Fussel et al . , in work inves - tigating pointing and sketch gestures on live video to support collaborative tasks , argue that gestures facilitate grounding by enabling participants to simultaneously communicate multiple pieces of information [ 22 ] . Kirk et al . found remote gesturing beneﬁts remote instruction and learning [ 46 ] . Citing Clark CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 2 [ 7 ] , McNeill [ 58 ] , and Kendon [ 40 ] , they argue that the per - formance of gesture , to contextualize language , supports the construction and communication of meaning [ 46 ] . Much prior work on shared visual context and gestures focuses on perfor - mance and the efﬁciency of physical collaborative tasks [ 21 , 48 , 46 , 45 , 47 , 24 ] . In this work , we do not focus on physical tasks , but report on emergent use of CLMC for sharing context and performing gesture in online learning activities . Free - form Web Curation : Creating Context Free - form web curation ( FFWC ) is a visual medium for col - lecting and assembling media , in order to support creative cognition and the emergence of new ideas [ 56 , 41 ] . FFWC is inspired by curation in art—the conceptualization and cre - ation of a context , in which works are found , collected , in - terpreted , and arranged—to stimulate active engagement and visual thinking [ 60 ] . Strategies of free - form web curation were articulated based on diverse artistic and scholarly practices : Collect , Assemble , Shift Perspective , Sketch , Write , and Exhibit [ 41 ] . Students made extensive use of the strategies in creative engagement with prior work [ 41 ] . FFWC was also shown to support stu - dents in visual thinking [ 56 ] . To support participation in learn - ing activities and other CSCW , this research extends FFWC to develop a new collaborative and social medium , with syn - chronous support for multiple users and live streaming media . Collect is the gathering of content elements . The diversity of collected elements promotes ideation [ 71 , 77 , 42 ] . Central to the collect strategy is the found object , a conceptual technique in which one takes an ordinary article , exhibits it with a new title , places it in a new context , and so transforms its meaning [ 54 ] . The current probe enables diverse media types to be collected from the web . The Assemble strategy involves visual organization of ele - ments to express relationships and convey meaning . In art , as - semblage —the process and means of fastening found objects together—is used to highlight duality and tension between the original and resulting contexts of found objects [ 70 ] . In FFWC , this has been shown to promote creative cognition of relationships among collected media elements , supporting ideation [ 43 , 53 , 41 ] . Shift perspective involves navigating a curation space to dif - ferent views . Here , this is accomplished with a zoomable user interface [ 5 ] . Sketch , which involves making marks depicting abstract or concrete relationships or ideas , has been shown to be a generative means for design ideation [ 25 ] . Write is the articulation of ideas through text ; shorter writing involves la - beling categories ; longer writing involves exposition . Exhibit involves sharing , experiencing , and engaging in discourse . LIVEMÂCHÉ PROBE In order to explore the use of CLMC in online learning con - texts , we designed and developed LiveMâché [ 50 ] for use as a technology probe . LiveMâché is a cloud based web application implementing collaborative free - form web curation . The probe integrates typical live streaming modalities including text chat as well as streaming audio and video . Finally , LiveMâché supports participant roles and sharing perspective . We present here the design motivations and resulting capabilities of the LiveMâché probe . Collaborative Free - Form Web Curation To enable the collaborative creation of media curations , for supporting live learning activities , the LiveMâché probe brings synchronous collaboration to the FFWC strategies : collection , assemblage , sketching , writing , shifting perspective , and ex - hibiting [ 41 ] . Users can collaborate both synchronously and asynchronously to collect a wide range of media from the web and their personal devices . They assemble collected elements in a shared , near - inﬁnite zoomable canvas . They use visual transformation , updated in real - time , to further relate and syn - thesize elements . Collaborative sketching and writing help users think about and communicate ideas . Real - time Collecting and Assembling In order to support ﬂexible collecting of content , the LiveMâché probe enables gathering and transforming media elements—including images , text snippets , videos ( YouTube and Vimeo ) , Google Docs , and Google Maps—from the web . Users collect content directly from their web browser or ﬁle system by dragging and dropping it into the zoomable cura - tion canvas ( Figure 1 ) . The canvas is a near - inﬁnite zoomable space in which the user can pan and zoom their viewport using the mouse or keyboard . Each curation begins as an empty space with no predeﬁned or suggested structure . As soon as an element is dropped onto the canvas , it immediately becomes visible to all other users . Users assemble their curation as they gather and arrange elements . In order to support the development of ideas and construc - tion of new meanings , LiveMâché enables expressive visual assemblage through graphical transformation of media ele - ments , e . g . , position , scale , rotation , and layer . Any element can be repositioned by clicking and dragging it to a new loca - tion . When collected , an element’s initial scale is determined by the zoom level of the user’s viewport . Elements can be scaled larger or smaller at any time . Scaling elements , in con - junction with the zoomable user interface , enables users to create arrangements which span multiple levels of scale . Layer transformations enable users to position elements behind or in front of others . All visual transformations are synchronized , in real - time , across all instances of a curation . Real - time Sketching and Writing To support authoring and annotation of ideas , the LiveMâché probe supports collaborative sketching and writing . Users can freely sketch within a curation . These sketches can be on empty sections of the canvas or they can overlap other elements . Users can adjust the size and shape of the sketching brush and select a color from a preset palette . While a user is sketching , other users see the partial sketch , in vivo , as it is drawn . Our motivation for supporting lightweight sketching , is to support visual thinking [ 3 ] and the expression of the images and forms in the minds’ of the users [ 25 ] . Similarly , collaborative writing supports exposition , which involves labeling , explaining , expounding , and verbally illus - trating . Within the curation , users are able to create , edit , or CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 3 Figure 1 . The LiveMâché probe implements CLMC , providing a synchronized media assemblage space ( center ) . It also integrates live modalities including text chat ( right ) , live streaming audio and video ( bottom right , and middle right ) , and screensharing ( center left ) . In this observed example , C4I is discussing the landscape architecture of a park using a screenshare of Google Earth on the left . He asks his students if the park’s architecture reminds them of other contexts they have seen . C4S1 responds that it reminds her of Dragonstone from HBO’s popular television show Game of Thrones . She then collects two images of the ﬁctional castle to ground her point . C4I proceeds to sketch on and discuss the castle’s architecture . paste in text elements . Text can be created , layered , and ma - nipulated in the same manner as as all other curation elements . By default , the initial font size of a newly created text element will automatically scale in relation with the current viewport zoom level . As a user edits a single text element , changes are continuously synchronized in real - time . While only one user can edit a text element at a time , different text elements can be edited simultaneously by different users . Viewport Following To support sharing perspective in collaborative curations’ ex - hibition experiences , we incorporate tools for following view - ports in LiveMâché . The viewport is the mechanism that controls what each user sees . In FFWC , users engage in the shift perspective strategy to situate their view of a curation . We developed viewport following to enable users to continu - ously shit perspective with another user . To follow another user , a participant simply clicks on their avatar in the upper right of the interface ( see Figure 1 ) . While following another user’s view , the user’s viewport is continuously centered on the same point as the followed viewport . A minimum zoom level , encompassing the followed user’s viewport , is then used . During continuous perspective shifts , such as zoom and pan , the following user’s view is updated at approximately 20Hz . In order to stop following another user’s perspective , a user di - rectly retakes control , moving their own viewport by panning or zooming . If a user tries to follow a user who is currently following a third user’s viewport , they automatically start fol - lowing the third user . Live Media Modalities In order to support sharing experiences and participating in learning activities , the LiveMâché probe integrates communi - cation modalities that have become typical in live streaming : e . g . , synchronous text chat , video , and audio . These modalities have been shown to support shared context , communication , and participation in live experiences [ 27 , 28 ] . Text - Chat Text chat has been shown to serve as a light - weight , non - intrusive communication modality , supporting participation by large numbers of users [ 37 , 27 ] . LiveMâché incorporates persistent text chat , overlaid on the right side of the curation space ( see Figure 1 ) . Messages are displayed with the sending user’s avatar and a timestamp . Chat messages can be collapsed to provide a greater view into the curation space . Live Streaming Audio and Video In order to support real - time discussion and views of activ - ity , LiveMâché enables adding live streaming audio , webcam video , and screenshares into shared curations . Audio and web - cam video streams are added to a curation using a modal dia - log , allowing the participant to select and preview the desired video and audio source ( not shown ) . Once added , webcam video thumbnails and audio stream controls are shown in an overlaid , ﬁxed dock in the lower right hand ( Figure 1 ) . In the dock , audio streams are represented as small meters . These meters include a slider knob for adjusting each respec - tive audio stream’s volume . Audio volumes are synchronized CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 4 for each client , enabling participants to control the shared vol - ume mix of the curation . Each meter also displays a dynamic green bar representing the audio activity for its respective au - dio stream . Video streams in the dock are rendered as small video thumbnails alongside each participant’s audio meter . Each participant’s streams in the dock are displayed together along with their avatar and name on hover ( Figure 1 ) . In early testing , we found it is often is more appropriate for webcam video and audio to be situated independently of a user’s shifting perspective . A participant’s facial expression and speech is often important for the whole activity context , not at a location in the curation . For this reason , webcam video and audio tools are initially placed in the dock . However , if a participant wants to situate a webcam view within the media assemblage of the curation , LiveMâché supports simply dragging live video streams directly into the shared curation space . The video is then directly embedded in the curation and can be transformed like other media elements . Video elements can be moved back to the dock using an on hover button . Participants can add live screenshare streams into the curation ( Figure 1 ) . To do so , they must install a browser extension , to meet security requirements . In early deployments , we found that screenshare streams are most likely to be used for sharing views of activity . Thus , LiveMâché automatically adds screen - shares into the composition space instead of the dock , where they can be readily assembled with other media elements . To capture and broadcast participant audio and video streams , LiveMâché uses the open source Jitsi Videobridge project [ 65 ] . Jitsi Videobridge enables web clients to send and receive media streams using WebRTC , an emerging web standard for real - time communication [ 1 ] . By using Jitsi Videobridge and WebRTC , LiveMâché functions as a collaborative web - based live media curation space , the ﬁrst we are aware of . Prior work found that combining multiple video streams—particularly video streams of people and views of activity—effectively supports sharing , participating , and collaborating in live experience [ 76 , 34 , 27 , 28 ] . We modiﬁed Jitsi Videobridge to support multiple video streams from a single client . Low latency in communication modalities is critical for efﬁcient communication and grounding in collaborative tasks [ 23 ] . LiveMâché is able to transmit video and audio streams with sub - second latency . LiveMâché also utilizes Simulcast , a WebRTC feature for on the ﬂy adjustment of video resolution for balancing quality and bitrate [ 13 ] . Permissions and Roles In live streaming practice , in order to organize participatory experiences , streamers often make decisions about when and how their viewers can engage through modalities , such as gameplay , text chat , or voice [ 27 ] . Thus , we wanted to sup - port instructors and students in making decisions about how other participants can engage and applying structure to their curations and activities . To this end , LiveMâché implements a basic permissions and participant roles system , drawing from observed practice and capabilities in other collaborative tools . Similar to Google Docs , curation authors are able to make their curations public or private . Public curations can be viewed by anyone who has the link . Meanwhile , private curations are only shared with users who are explicitly assigned a role . Authors can assign users one of three predeﬁned roles : viewer , commentator , and editor . We model these on roles observed in live streaming practice , on platforms such as Twitch [ 27 ] . Viewers can see everything that happens in a curation space , but are only able to engage with other participants through the text chat modality . This role models that of a live stream viewer . Commentators can additionally add video and audio streams to the curation , enabling them to comment on activity . This is like how a video game commentator , or remote player , participates in a stream on Twitch . Third , beyond the com - mentator live modalities , editors can engage in collaborative FFWC . Editors may also assign roles to other participants and control or remove others’ media streams . The editor role mod - els that of ‘streamer’ in live streaming practice . In addition to assigning roles to speciﬁc users , editors may choose a default role for all other participants in a public curation . We note that LiveMâché interface elements dynamically change , or are removed , as a participant’s role changes . STUDY DESIGN In order to observe emergent use of CLMC , we deployed LiveMâché as a technology probe . Technology probes are functional technologies that are deployed in situated real - world contexts [ 33 ] . They are intended to ﬁeld test , provoke , and collect data about new experiences . We deployed LiveMâché in four different situated online learn - ing contexts . These include a local human - centered computing graduate seminar , a MOOC on edX , an informal perspective drawing tutorial , and an online undergraduate landscape ar - chitecture history course . The activities conducted in each of these situations was different . Instructors worked with us , in advance , to conceptualize and setup learning activities . We video - recorded participant curations during each situation . We also conducted semi - structured post - interviews with stu - dents and instructors regarding their experience participating in probed learning activities . In total , we interviewed ten stu - dents and two instructors . Interviews lasted 20 - 50 minutes . Interviewees were compensated with a 15 USD gift card . Our analysis of the interview and learning activity recordings follows the critical incident approach , in which analysis is focused on signiﬁcant or pivotal activity [ 19 , 67 ] . Two of the authors identiﬁed critical incidents from observation notes taken during the learning activities . Critical incidents included points where emergent behavior relevant to our research ques - tions or signiﬁcant breakdowns occurred . We targeted ques - tions about these incidents during interviews . Focusing on these incidents , we transcribed and categorized interview and activity data using open coding to form a grounded set of emer - gent themes . Initial themes included multimodal interactions , deictic interactions , avoiding interruptions through text chat , annotating other participant’s elements , social cues , follow - ing other users , is anybody watching me , awareness of other participants , collaborative audio adjustment , and organizing activity . We discuss some of these as ﬁndings . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 5 In the following subsections , we describe each probed situation including its participants , content , and use of LiveMâché . We refer to each of the situations using the identiﬁers C1 – C4 . We refer to participants by their situation’s identiﬁer followed by either an I or S < N > to denote the instructor or a student respectively , where N is a number identifying speciﬁc students . For example , C1I is the instructor in the ﬁrst situation , while C1S3 denotes that situation’s third student . C1 : Human - Centered Computing Graduate Seminar We deployed LiveMâché in a graduate seminar course offered at a local university . This ﬁrst deployment was intended to be formative in nature . Authors of this paper were among the participants . The seminar focused on the theory and design of human centered media experiences . It required that students work on research projects . There were a total of 12 students , involved in 3 group projects of 2 - 3 students , while 4 students worked as individuals . Throughout the course , students pre - sented and discussed their work in informal presentations to the class . Presentations normally occurred in a classroom . In one class session , students were asked to present and dis - cuss their projects using LiveMâché . Participants used a sin - gle shared classroom presentation curation , with designated spaces for each project group . All participants were assigned the role of editor . Students prepared their presentations , in the curation , by collecting , authoring , and composing media including images , YouTube videos , GIFs , text , and sketches . The students and instructor added live webcam , screenshare , and audio streams to the curation , in order to present and otherwise participate in the live curation as seminar classroom . Project group members presented together , ﬂuidly alternating who spoke and demonstrated . Presenting students referenced their prepared media . During and after each presentation , students ﬁelded questions and comments from the instructor and other students . We interviewed the students C1S1 – C1S5 . C2 : Mobile Application Experiences MOOC For the second situation , we deployed LiveMâché in “Mo - bile Application Experiences” a popular edX course . The online course addresses the design , usability , implementation , and evaluation of novel mobile applications . We targeted the course in order to explore how to support engaging visual design education tasks in software development education . The instructor asked students to volunteer to use LiveMâché to create a digital poster explaining their ﬁnal project , a mobile application prototype . The digital posters were prepared in advance . Students were asked to present their projects to the instructor and other students during one of two poster sessions . Sessions were scheduled 12 hours apart to accommodate inter - national students’ varying time zones . Six students signed up to participate . However , only 3 students were present during the scheduled times . These 3 attended both sessions . One hour prior to each session , we hosted a green room cura - tion , in which all of the students were assigned the editor role . Students were encouraged to join and ask us questions about LiveMâché as well as test their video , audio , and screenshare streaming settings . In the green room , we posted the list of the participating students , with links to their poster curations . At the start of each session , C2I and students met in the green room . C2I would then chose one of the students to present their poster , following the link to the presenter’s curation . In poster curations , the presenter and C2I were editors , while other students were viewers . The student typically added audio and a screenshare of their mobile application running in an emulator . The instructor added a webcam and audio stream of himself . We note that , in one of the presentations , C2I wasn’t able to add his audio stream , and used chat instead . Presenting students explained their application , referencing their poster and screenshare . Following their explanation , C2I and the student engaged in a short discussion about the project . Other students gave feedback via text chat . This process was repeated for each student . We interviewed C2S1 and C2S2 . C3 : Perspective Drawing Tutorial For the third situation , we deployed the LiveMâché probe to support an informal drawing tutorial . The tutorial was pre - sented by a local student , listed as a coauthor of this paper . Participants were recruited using the researchers’ and the in - structor’s social media networks . The tutorial was attended by 4 students collocated with the instructor and 3 remote students . The tutorial took place in a lab space instrumented with three webcams oriented to provide close - up shots of the instructor’s and students’ drawings , a webcam providing a wide shot of the room , and a large display showing the instructor’s view of the tutorial curation . Local participants sat around a large table , where they could easily watch the instructor work through the tutorial curation on the large display . The room was also equipped with a condenser microphone to pick up and broad - cast the instructor’s and local participants’ discussion . The condenser microphone audio stream and webcam views of the physical tutorial space were added into the shared live curation . Remote participants were assigned the role of com - mentator , so they were able to interact with the local partic - ipants by adding their own video and audio streams to the curation . We observe that 2 of the 3 remote participants chose to engage using a live audio stream . C3I began by discussing basic concepts of perspective drawing . To illustrate his points , he sketched over ( using the LiveMâché sketching capability ) photographs and sketches he had col - lected prior to the tutorial ( Figure 2 ) . After going over these concepts , he switched to demonstrating and narrating the dis - cussed techniques , by drawing with a pen on a sheet of paper . This was captured and broadcast by one of the webcam views in the live curation . During this time , C3I encouraged both local and remote participants to follow his view and attempt to sketch their own perspective drawings . Additional webcam views in the room were added to the curation to capture and broadcast the local participants’ efforts . Next , C3I viewed and discussed the local participants’ drawings using his desk webcam . Later in the tutorial , C3I made students editors and encouraged them to share pictures or live videos of their draw - ings , but none did . We interviewed C3I , C3S1 , and C3S2 . C4 : Landscape Architecture History For the ﬁnal situation , we looked at how LiveMâché would be used over an extended period . We deployed the probe in CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 6 a SPOC on the history of landscape architecture . The course was taught over 5 weeks during a summer semester . It had 4 enrolled students . The instructor is listed as a coauthor of this paper . C4I used LiveMâché to conduct 4 weekly live chats to supplement the course’s other content . Each week , C4I would send out two sets of slides , which constituted the main content of the course . Then , during the live chats , C4I and the students discussed important content covered in these slides . Prior to each live chat , the instructor would collect media ( usually images of landscapes ) illustrating the concepts he planned to cover . In the ﬁnal two weeks , the instructor also used screenshares of Google Earth , through which he explored examples of landscape architecture from around the world . He also incorporated slides into the curation , using screen - sharing . The instructor frequently sketched over assembled media elements as he discussed them . During each live chat , the instructor assigned students the role of commentator . He required that they add audio streams and , optionally , webcam views of themselves to the curation . This enabled the students to easily ask questions and engage in the live chat . In the sec - ond week , C4I had students present assignments . To support this , he added student submitted images of their assignments to the curation , which they then referenced during presentations . In the third week , C4I also made his students editors in the curation for a short time , so they could collect and assemble media to discuss during class . We interviewed C4I and C4S2 . FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION We present and discuss ﬁndings from deploying the LiveMâché probe in these 4 situated online learning contexts . The ﬁndings and discussion are presented together , in order to ground our discussion with description of observed phe - nomena . We ﬁrst report on emergent strategies we observed participants using to share context and ground their collabora - tive learning activities . We then discuss how the synchronous capabilities of CLMC function as a new participatory modality . Finally , we identify patterns of live experience that emerged during the probed situations and discuss resulting implications . Collaborative Live Media Curation Strategies In each situation , we observed participants using CLMC to establish shared context supporting their learning activities . Participants engaged in deixis , using language to reference collected content , grounding discussion in the shared context deﬁned by their curation . Kerne et al . articulated strategies of free - form web curation , each of which addresses methods and techniques that artists , curators , and scholars employ—and which in many cases have been investigated by creative cog - nition researchers—in creative acts [ 41 ] . We extend their strategies to collaborative live media curation , by identify - ing how participants share context , ground conversation , and perform deixis . Creating Shared Curation Space in Advance In each probed situation , participants worked to create cura - tion spaces before the actual live engagement . Participants , students in C1 and C2 and instructors in C3 and C4 , collected media , wrote text , sketched , and assembled curations prior to each activity . For example , prior to his tutorial , C3I collected Figure 2 . Prior to presenting his tutorial , C3I collected photographs and drawings exemplifying perspective . During the tutorial , he sketched over these images to illustrate perspective drawing techniques . images exemplifying perspective ( Figure 2 ) . He subsequently used the context of these collected media elements to ground his early instruction , by referencing and sketching over them . Participants found it valuable to asynchronously assemble cu - ration spaces in advance , then engage in synchronous curation , on the ﬂy , during the learning activity . By collecting and assembling content , they established context for upcoming activity , where they subsequently created shared meaning . Sketch : Illustration and Gesture Participants in C1 , C3 , and C4 used sketching over other media elements in order to ground their descriptions of a particular concept . Sketching was used to directly articulate ideas re - lated to other curation elements . We observed participants not only using sketch to illustrate concepts , but further , as deictic gesture to call attention to particular features of other elements as they discussed them . We give examples of both uses here . C3I started his perspective drawing tutorial by explaining concepts of vanishing points and lines . In order to do this , he collected exemplary images , including photographs and drawings , before the tutorial . During the tutorial , he then sketched over these images , to illustrate , by sketching dots at the vanishing points and lines along the vanishing lines of the image ( Figure 2 ) . Using this approach , C3I was able to ground his discussion of vanishing points and lines by illustrating the concepts using his previously collected media . C3I left these sketches in place , throughout the tutorial , as a reference . C4I also extensively used sketching to facilitate discussion of landscape architecture examples . He would often sketch over elements depicting landscape architecture sites , e . g . , pho - tographs or screenshare streams of Google Earth . While he used sketching to illustrate concepts , he also used sketch ges - ture to focus students’ attention on particular design features of the sites . He described the architecture of a particular park , while sketching over a Google Earth screenshare ( Figure 3 ) : C41 You can see the building right over here [ draws a quick circle in orange around the building behind some trees ] . Right through those trees there . Now Kiley has given us this meandering path . [ draws curvy line along a bricked path through the park ] . Because this part is separated by all of these trees . . . [ scribbles green lines over trees ] So all of these trees are screening the building . So you don’t have that neoclassical inﬂuence on your CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 7 Figure 3 . C4I discusses the design of a park . He sketches over a Google Earth screenshare as deictic gesture to ground his description . aesthetic experience anymore . Now you are in a different type of park . Now you are actually in part of , you are in a different sculpture garden , because look at that [ circles a sculpture in red ] ! That is a very modern art piece . . . In this case , C4I uses sketch as deictic gesture . To indicate the trees in “all of these trees” , he sketches over the trees in the screenshare . C4I is not directly illustrating a concept . He is using sketch to reference and ground his vocal explanation of the site . After making these quick sketches , C4I usually deleted them , since they lacked continued illustrative purpose . Real - time Element Transformations One of the primary strategies participants used to engaged in deixis was the dynamic transformation of media elements . Since element transformations are synchronized across par - ticipants’ views of a shared curation , participants were able to express complex ideas through language contextualized in gesture performed through media transformations . In one salient example , C4I was discussing the work of Antoni Gaudí , a well known Catalan architect . He described Gaudí’s practice of modelling architecture , using upside - down force models , with hanging weights and string . To do this , he started by collecting a picture of one of Gaudí’s hanging models from Google Images . After brieﬂy describing the construction of the model , C4I then used the rotate transform tool to ﬂip the image of the model upside down ( see Figure 4 ) , while explaining : Figure 4 . C4I explains Gaudí’s use of hanging models . He performs a ro - tation transformation on an image of a model to ground his explanation . What he did actually though was , he designed a building . So now you can see , these strings . . . He was making a physical model of showing how the forces of gravity were going to pull on these archways . By rotating the image to invert it , C4I was able to ground his explanation using the image of the model . He used the act of rotating it as gesture to explain its inverted nature . He then used the inverted image as a shared visual context for himself and his students , to ground his explanation of the model’s purpose . He went on to sketch over the image , highlighting the arches and weights composing the hanging model . Sharing Perspective The viewport following capability was used by participants , in every situation , to ground conversation through shared visual context . Viewport following was used by participants watching a presentation made by the instructor or peers . While other participants followed his viewport , the speaker would discuss a concept , while shifting perspective , to focus on a particular set of media elements in the curation . In turn , other participants would see the speaker’s visual context changing , grounding his points with media curated into the participant’s viewport . The FFWC strategy of shift perspective is a means through which an individual reorients their view in a curation [ 41 ] . A compelling aspect of the shared viewport capability is that when a participant shifts their perspective , others literally fol - low , in the space , and so dynamically share their changing visual context . Participants in C1 reported that while they made extensive use of viewport sharing , they hardly thought about how their audience was viewing the curation . However , we did ﬁnd that sometimes more purposeful consideration mo - tivated perspective shifts . When asked about how he thought about shifting perspective during his live chats , C4I reported : I didn’t want it to ﬁll the screen . I wanted you to be able to see the things on the periphery , so that you would know that it was connected to other things . When I laid things out , I wanted them all the same size , but I wanted them to be organized in a sort of structure that talked about [ how ] these things are related . So when I zoomed in , I wouldn’t try to ﬁll the whole screen with one thing . I liked a little bit of white space around it , and just a little touch of other things . So there is this idea , this thing doesn’t exist in a vacuum . It is actually related to other things . Here , C4I explains how he deliberately shifted his perspective to ensure that media elements remained contextualized within the broader curation for his audience . Assembling Webcam and Screenshare Streams Live streaming video was used extensively in all the situations to contextualize learning activities . Participants primarily ac - complished this by adding screenshares of applications they were using or demonstrating . Webcam streams were also used to share views into activity . Since LiveMâché supports directly embedding live video streams into the curation canvas , streams can be assembled , sketched on , and transformed , like any other element , to construct context . We brieﬂy describe some in - stances of participants assembling live streaming video . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 8 During the student poster presentations in C2 , students were asked to demonstrate their ﬁnal project mobile applications . In addition to discussing their prepared posters , students would assemble a screenshare stream of their application running in an development emulator , in the curation , next to their poster . This enabled students to ground their discussion by connecting live views of their application with prepared poster materials . C3I used a live webcam stream to show himself demonstrat - ing perspective drawing techniques . The stream provided an overhead view onto his desk , where he was drawing , using pen and paper . C3I used the stream to ground his explanation of perspective drawing techniques , for local and remote par - ticipants . The stream was assembled into the curation , with other video streams of the room , providing multiple views of the activity . These streams were augmented by images , which C3I sketched over , to illustrate perspective drawing concepts . In the C2 and C3 examples , participants contextualized ac - tivities by situating live stream activities by assembling other media . They engaged with the live media using the above strategies for sharing context . For example , C4I sketched over screenshares of Google Earth , which he used to explore landscape architecture sites . Collaborative Curation : A Participatory Modality CLMC integrates prior live streaming modalities such as video , audio , and text chat , each of which affords participating in live experiences [ 27 ] . However , prior work has shown that new modalities can support new forms of participation [ 79 , 36 , 44 , 28 ] . Beyond existing modalities , CLMC enables participants to engage by collaborating in the assemblage of shared media curations . Participants with the editor role can collect media , assemble it , share their perspective , sketch , and write in the shared curation . Each of these synchronous capabilities can serve as a new modality for participation . For example , in C1 , each team assembled a curation for the discussion of their project . During class , each team described their work , referencing their previously assembled media . Stu - dents who were watching the presentations participated by au - thoring text and sketching to annotate the presenters’ collected media to give feedback , pose questions , and make suggestions . During the third week of C4 , a student collected images to contribute to and participate in live chat discussion . While discussing the architecture in a particular park , C4I asked the students if it reminded them of anything else they had seen . C4S1 responded that it reminded her of architecture she had seen in the popular HBO television show , Game of Thrones . At this point , C4I made all of the students editors of the curation and suggested that C4S1 try to ﬁnd some images of the building she was thinking of . C4S1 went and found two images of the ﬁctional castle Dragonstone , and added them to the curation ( see Figure 1 ) . C4I commented on Dragonstone’s asymmetry and sketched over the collected images to highlight the castle’s lines , noting their repetitive style . In both of these cases , we see students engaging in learning activities by collecting , authoring , and assembling media using CLMC . Thus , collaborative curation served as a new modality for participating in social learning activities . Live Experience Patterns : Structure Supporting Activity During the probed situations , we observed the emergence of recurring structures of live experience and social activities . We refer to these here as patterns of live experience , draw - ing on Alexander’s notion of patterns , which are recurring forms of spatial organization that support particular types of experiences and events [ 2 ] . WWhere Alexander referred to spatial patterns in architecture , the patterns we discuss here describe organization of modalities and computing resources to support live social activities . We note that these patterns are not limited to CLMC . They may be found in other live social media forms , such as Twitch , Periscope , Facebook Live , Skype , Google Hangouts , etc . Live experience patterns we identify include include small team , broadcast , and touring . We present examples of how these patterns were manifested by users , and abstract from examples , focusing on how the affordances of CLMC contributed to their structure . We also address how the patterns are invoked in other live media forms . In the small team pattern , we typically observe a curation shared with two or more participants given full editing access . Workﬂows and roles are then worked out through ad - hoc artic - ulation between participants . An example of the small team pattern arises in C1 , in which everyone had equal access to the curation . Who presented when , who was speaking , and where participants prepared their presentation was established through informal social articulation . The small team pattern is typiﬁed by prior tools , such as Google Hangouts and Skype . The broadcast pattern is more asymmetric , with one or more core participants broadcasting live media and editing the cura - tion . All others participate using limited , peripheral modalities , like text chat . We speciﬁcally observed this pattern of use in C2 , where the poster presenter and instructor had a live video / audio discussion , while other students observed the presenta - tion and discussed through text chat . In CLMC , the broadcast pattern can be organized by assigning a few participants high impact roles like editor or commentator , assigning all oth - ers the viewer role . The broadcast pattern is typical of live streaming forms such as Twitch or Periscope . Finally , in the touring pattern , participants move together between social activity contexts . During the student presenta - tions in C2 , we observed touring , where participants moved between and interacted across several different curations . In our study , touring was supported by providing links to each poster curation in the green room , with the instructor directing participants to move between them . We note that the touring pattern can also be observed in other live streaming forms . For example , Twitch streamers can “host” other streamers , effectively shifting their audience to another stream . Future re - search that explores how to support maintaining social context while groups tour live media contexts would be beneﬁcial . In prior live media forms and in CLMC , live experience pat - terns are collaboratively established through explicit system enforced roles , ad hoc articulation of social roles , and the as - semblage of modalities . This curation of roles and modalities is performed by organizers , i . e . streamers or instructors , to control the media’s content , how it is perceived , and how oth - ers may participate . A poorly assembled media curation may CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 9 result in limited participatory opportunities or cognitive over - load . CLMC enables curators to freely assemble modalities and roles to create media contexts that supports the needs and requirements of their situated social activity . In the following , we discuss issues and approaches that we hypothesize may support structuring live experience through curation . Structuring Live Experiences Through Roles The LiveMâché roles system provides a ﬂexible mechanism for structuring how curations and their respective activities are viewed , edited , and participated through . These roles specify what modalities are available for participants to use . Existing live forms like Google Hangouts ( small team ) or Twitch ( broadcast ) implement static media structures and roles . In contrast , CLMCs can be restructured by moving participants dynamically between roles . This enables organizers to ﬂuidly transition between patterns like small team and broadcast , or to organize experiences somewhere in between . For instance , during most of C4 a broadcast pattern was as - sumed . Students were able to commentate , but C4I was the only participant able to actively compose media in the cura - tion space . However , at some points C4I would change the students’ roles to editor , shifting the experience to more of a small team pattern . LiveMâché only currently provides 3 dis - tinct roles . Future work could explore a more diverse , nuanced set of roles that could lead to new patterns of live experience . Live Experience Pattern Templates While the roles provided by LiveMâché support structuring live experiences , some participants reported difﬁculty in think - ing about how to assign roles . As C1S5 noted , The whole experience could get out of hand rather quickly , because it [ is ] such a creative system . In which , it is so open - ended , and there are is not lot of structure . [ . . . ] My thinking is that at a high level it would beneﬁt from a little more structure in some situations . Like possibly , different templates with varying degrees of structure . Assigning roles to support a particular pattern of experience requires signiﬁcant forethought and collaboration from partic - ipants . A potential solution we plan to explore is live experi - ence pattern templates , as mentioned by C1S5 . For example , when a participant creates a curation , they may be given the option to use a broadcast template . This template would have preconﬁgured role assignments , so the creator could edit and broadcast video and audio , with a default role of viewer for other participants . Templates would support thinking about roles and scaffold the work needed to organize activities . Territories Another approach that emerged for structuring live experiences was the use of territories within a curation associated with a speciﬁc participant or group . In C1 , each group was given an area in which to prepare media for their presentations . These territories were implicitly agreed upon and denoted via a grid of text elements of participants’ names . Given that the territories were not computationally enforced by LiveMâché , we did observe instances of participants manipulating others’ elements or revealing intentionally hidden content in others’ territories . While these interactions were mostly beneﬁcial and sometimes playful , it is easy to imagine situations where these interactions would be less acceptable . This suggests that enforced territories in a curation might help structure shared activities . Territories would support spatially deﬁning how curation space is assembled and seen . This could help participants articulate their roles and deﬁne social context . We note that the use of territories for coordination in tabletop systems has been investigated [ 69 , 64 ] . Future work investigating the use of territories in zoomable collaboration spaces like CLMC , may lead to unique considerations . For instance , a territory deﬁned within a inﬁnite zoomable space also provides inﬁnite , ample room for participation . CONCLUSION Collaborative live media curation is a new medium for live CSCW . Prior live streaming forms do not afford collabora - tive , free - form assemblage of live modalities . By extending free - from web curation with synchronous collaboration and live media , CLMC enables a new contextualization of live experience . By deploying the LiveMâché CLMC probe in four online learning situations , we provoked new participatory online learning experiences . We observed how participants invoke new collaborative live media curation strategies for sharing context , grounding col - laboration , and constructing meaning through the assemblage of media and performance of deictic gestures . Like others , we found that shared context is based on common understanding of framing [ 14 ] and social construction of mutual understand - ing [ 4 ] . The strategies—creating shared curation space in advance , sketching to illustrate and gesture , real - time element transformations , sharing perspective , assembling web cam and screenshare streams—contribute new , concrete means for pro - moting collaborative meaning making through shared visual and social context . Collaborative free - form web curation af - forded new modalities for participation . Prior forms limit most participants to limited modalities , such as text chat . CLMC’s open - ended integration of media and modalities affords new opportunities for any participant to engage in the collection , broadcasting , and assemblage of media . Finally , we articulated patterns of online live experience . Prior live media platforms typically support a single activity pat - tern . For example , Google Hangouts supports the small team pattern , while Twitch supports broadcast . CLMC is more ﬂexible , enabling participants to assign roles and assemble media to form small - team , broadcast , and touring patterns of live experience . Participants can shift between patterns , using roles , to support dynamic social contexts . Future work has the potential to provide value by exploring how new strategies for assembling and structuring media will support new forms of participation and shared context in situated live experiences . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grants IIS - 074742 , IIS - 1247126 , and IIS - 1528044 . Any opinions , ﬁndings , and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the NSF . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 10 REFERENCES 1 . 2017 . WebRTC Home | WebRTC . ( August 2017 ) . https : / / webrtc . org / . 2 . Christopher Alexander . 1979 . The timeless way of building . Vol . 1 . New York : Oxford University Press . 3 . Rudolf Arnheim . 1969 . Visual Thinking . University of California Press . 4 . Jared S . Bauer , Aubury L . Jellenek , and Julie A . Kientz . 2018 . Reﬂektor : An Exploration of Collaborative Music Playlist Creation for Social Context . In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Supporting Groupwork ( GROUP ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 27 – 38 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3148330 . 3148331 5 . Benjamin B . Bederson , Jon Meyer , and Lance Good . 2000 . Jazz : An Extensible Zoomable User Interface Graphics Toolkit in Java . In Proceedings of the 13th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’00 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 171 – 180 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 354401 . 354754 6 . Julia Cambre , Chinmay Kulkarni , Michael S Bernstein , and Scott R Klemmer . 2014 . Talkabout : Small - group Discussions in Massive Global Classes . In Proceedings of the First ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale Conference ( L @ S ’14 ) . 2 . 7 . H . H . Clark . 1996 . Using Language . Cambridge University Press . https : / / books . google . com / books ? id = DiWBGOP - YnoC 8 . Derrick Coetzee , Armando Fox , Marti A . Hearst , and Bjoern Hartmann . 2014a . Chatrooms in MOOCs : All Talk and No Action . In Proceedings of the First ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale Conference ( L @ S ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 127 – 136 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556325 . 2566242 9 . Derrick Coetzee , Armando Fox , Marti A . Hearst , and Bjoern Hartmann . 2014b . Chatrooms in MOOCs : All Talk and No Action . In Proceedings of the First ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale Conference ( L @ S ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 127 – 136 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556325 . 2566242 10 . Derrick Coetzee , Armando Fox , Marti A . Hearst , and Björn Hartmann . 2014c . Should Your MOOC Forum Use a Reputation System ? . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & # 38 ; Social Computing ( CSCW ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1176 – 1187 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531657 11 . Philip R . Cohen . 1992 . The Role of Natural Language in a Multimodal Interface . In Proceedings of the 5th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’92 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 143 – 149 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 142621 . 142641 12 . A Collins , J Greeno , and LB Resnick . 1992 . Cognition and learning . B . Berliner & R . Calfee , Handbook of Educational Psychology , New York : Simon & Shuster MacMillan ( 1992 ) . 13 . Oscar Divorra . 2016 . webrtcH4cKS : Optimizing video quality using Simulcast . ( June 2016 ) . https : / / webrtchacks . com / sfu - simulcast / . 14 . Paul Dourish . 2004 . What we talk about when we talk about context . Personal and ubiquitous computing 8 , 1 ( 2004 ) , 19 – 30 . 15 . A . Engström , M . Esbjörnsson , and O . Juhlin . 2008 . Mobile Collaborative Live Video Mixing . In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services ( MobileHCI ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 157 – 166 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1409240 . 1409258 16 . Arvid Engstrom , Mattias Esbjornsson , Oskar Juhlin , and Mark Perry . 2008 . Producing Collaborative Video : Developing an Interactive User Experience for Mobile Tv . In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Designing Interactive User Experiences for TV and Video ( UXTV ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 115 – 124 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1453805 . 1453828 17 . Arvid Engström , Mark Perry , and Oskar Juhlin . 2012a . Amateur Vision and Recreational Orientation : : Creating Live Video Together . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 651 – 660 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145304 18 . Arvid Engström , Goranka Zoric , Oskar Juhlin , and Ramin Toussi . 2012b . The Mobile Vision Mixer : A Mobile Network Based Live Video Broadcasting System in Your Mobile Phone . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia ( MUM ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 18 , 4 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2406367 . 2406390 19 . John C Flanagan . 1954 . The critical incident technique . Psychological bulletin 51 , 4 ( 1954 ) , 327 . 20 . Armando Fox . 2013 . From MOOCs to SPOCs . Commun . ACM 56 , 12 ( Dec . 2013 ) , 38 – 40 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2535918 21 . Susan R . Fussell , Robert E . Kraut , and Jane Siegel . 2000 . Coordination of Communication : Effects of Shared Visual Context on Collaborative Work . In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’00 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 21 – 30 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 358916 . 358947 22 . Susan R . Fussell , Leslie D . Setlock , Jie Yang , Jiazhi Ou , Elizabeth Mauer , and Adam D . I . Kramer . 2004 . Gestures over Video Streams to Support Remote Collaboration on Physical Tasks . Hum . - Comput . Interact . 19 , 3 ( Sept . 2004 ) , 273 – 309 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327051hci1903 _ 3 CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 11 23 . Darren Gergle , Robert E . Kraut , and Susan R . Fussell . 2006 . The Impact of Delayed Visual Feedback on Collaborative Performance . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’06 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1303 – 1312 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1124772 . 1124968 24 . Darren Gergle , Robert E . Kraut , and Susan R . Fussell . 2013 . Using Visual Information for Grounding and Awareness in Collaborative Tasks . Humanâ ˘A¸SComputer Interaction 28 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 1 – 39 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370024 . 2012 . 678246 25 . Gabriela Goldschmidt . 1994 . On visual design thinking : the vis kids of architecture . Design studies 15 , 2 ( 1994 ) , 158 – 174 . 26 . Philip J . Guo , Juho Kim , and Rob Rubin . 2014 . How Video Production Affects Student Engagement : An Empirical Study of MOOC Videos . In Proceedings of the First ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale Conference ( L @ S ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 41 – 50 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556325 . 2566239 27 . William A Hamilton , Oliver Garretson , and Andruid Kerne . 2014 . Streaming on twitch : fostering participatory communities of play within live mixed media . In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , 1315 – 1324 . 28 . William A . Hamilton , John Tang , Gina Venolia , Kori Inkpen , Jakob Zillner , and Derek Huang . 2016 . Rivulet : Exploring Participation in Live Events Through Multi - Stream Experiences . In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Interactive Experiences for TV and Online Video ( TVX ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 31 – 42 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2932206 . 2932211 29 . Stefan Hrastinski . 2008a . Asynchronous and Synchronous E - Learning . Educause quarterly 31 , 4 ( 2008 ) . 30 . Stefan Hrastinski . 2008b . What is online learner participation ? A literature review . Computers & Education 51 , 4 ( 2008 ) , 1755 – 1765 . 31 . Stefan Hrastinski . 2009 . A theory of online learning as online participation . Computers & Education 52 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 78 – 82 . 32 . James M Hudson and Amy S Bruckman . 2004 . The bystander effect : A lens for understanding patterns of participation . The Journal of the Learning Sciences 13 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 165 – 195 . 33 . Hilary Hutchinson , Wendy Mackay , Bo Westerlund , Benjamin B . Bederson , Allison Druin , Catherine Plaisant , Michel Beaudouin - Lafon , Stéphane Conversy , Helen Evans , Heiko Hansen , Nicolas Roussel , and Björn Eiderbäck . 2003 . Technology Probes : Inspiring Design for and with Families . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’03 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 17 – 24 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 642611 . 642616 34 . Kori Inkpen , Brett Taylor , Sasa Junuzovic , John Tang , and Gina Venolia . 2013 . Experiences2Go : Sharing Kids’ Activities Outside the Home with Remote Family Members . In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1329 – 1340 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441926 35 . Hyungeun Jo and Sungjae Hwang . 2013a . Chili : Viewpoint Control and On - video Drawing for Mobile Video Calls . In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1425 – 1430 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468610 36 . Hyungeun Jo and Sungjae Hwang . 2013b . Chili : Viewpoint Control and On - video Drawing for Mobile Video Calls . In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1425 – 1430 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468610 37 . Quentin Jones , Mihai Moldovan , Daphne Raban , and Brian Butler . 2008 . Empirical Evidence of Information Overload Constraining Chat Channel Community Interactions . In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 323 – 332 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1460563 . 1460616 38 . Oskar Juhlin , Arvid Engström , and Elin Önnevall . 2014 . Long Tail TV Revisited : From Ordinary Camera Phone Use to Pro - am Video Production . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1325 – 1334 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557315 39 . Oskar Juhlin , Arvid Engström , and Erika Reponen . 2010 . Mobile Broadcasting : The Whats and Hows of Live Video As a Social Medium . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services ( MobileHCI ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 35 – 44 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1851600 . 1851610 40 . Adam Kendon . 1996 . An agenda for gesture studies . Semiotic review of books 7 , 3 ( 1996 ) , 8 – 12 . 41 . Andruid Kerne , Nic Lupfer , Rhema Linder , Yin Qu , Alyssa Valdez , Ajit Jain , Kade Keith , Matthew Carrasco , Jorge Vanegas , and Andrew Billingsley . 2017 . Strategies of Free - Form Web Curation : Processes of Creative Engagement with Prior Work . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & # 38 ; C ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 380 – 392 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3059454 . 3059471 42 . Andruid Kerne , Andrew M . Webb , Steven M . Smith , Rhema Linder , Nic Lupfer , Yin Qu , Jon Moeller , and Sashikanth Damaraju . 2014a . Using Metrics of Curation to Evaluate Information - Based Ideation . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 21 , 3 , Article 14 ( June 2014 ) , 48 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2591677 CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 12 43 . Andruid Kerne , Andrew M . Webb , Steven M . Smith , Rhema Linder , Nic Lupfer , Yin Qu , Jon Moeller , and Sashikanth Damaraju . 2014b . Using Metrics of Curation to Evaluate Information - Based Ideation . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 21 , 3 , Article 14 ( June 2014 ) , 48 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2591677 44 . Seungwon Kim , Sasa Junuzovic , and Kori Inkpen . 2014 . The Nomad and the Couch Potato : Enriching Mobile Shared Experiences with Contextual Information . In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 167 – 177 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2660398 . 2660409 45 . David Kirk , Tom Rodden , and Danaë Stanton Fraser . 2007 . Turn It This Way : Grounding Collaborative Action with Remote Gestures . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’07 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1039 – 1048 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240782 46 . David S . Kirk and Danaë Stanton Fraser . 2005 . The Effects of Remote Gesturing on Distance Instruction . In Proceedings of th 2005 Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning : Learning 2005 : The Next 10 Years ! ( CSCL ’05 ) . International Society of the Learning Sciences , 301 – 310 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1149293 . 1149332 47 . Robert E . Kraut , Susan R . Fussell , and Jane Siegel . 2003 . Visual Information As a Conversational Resource in Collaborative Physical Tasks . Hum . - Comput . Interact . 18 , 1 ( June 2003 ) , 13 – 49 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15327051HCI1812 _ 2 48 . Robert E . Kraut , Darren Gergle , and Susan R . Fussell . 2002 . The Use of Visual Information in Shared Visual Spaces : Informing the Development of Virtual Co - presence . In Proceedings of the 2002 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’02 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 31 – 40 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 587078 . 587084 49 . Chinmay Kulkarni , Julia Cambre , Yasmine Kotturi , Michael S . Bernstein , and Scott R . Klemmer . 2015 . Talkabout : Making Distance Matter with Small Groups in Massive Classes . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & # 38 ; Social Computing ( CSCW ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1116 – 1128 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675166 50 . Interface Ecology Lab . 2018 . LiveMâché . https : / / livemache . ecologylab . net 51 . Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger . 1991 . Situated learning : Legitimate peripheral participation . Cambridge university press . 52 . Seongtaek Lim , Derrick Coetzee , Bjoern Hartmann , Armando Fox , and Marti A Hearst . 2014 . Initial experiences with small group discussions in MOOCs . In Proceedings of the ﬁrst ACM conference on Learning @ scale conference . ACM , 151 – 152 . 53 . Rhema Linder , Nic Lupfer , Andruid Kerne , Andrew M . Webb , Cameron Hill , Yin Qu , Kade Keith , Matthew Carrasco , and Elizabeth Kellogg . 2015 . Beyond Slideware : How a Free - form Presentation Medium Stimulates Free - form Thinking in the Classroom . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & # 38 ; C ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 285 – 294 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2757251 54 . L . R . Lippard . 1971 . Dadas on Art . Prentice - Hall . 55 . Danielle Lottridge , Frank Bentley , Matt Wheeler , Jason Lee , Janet Cheung , Katherine Ong , and Cristy Rowley . 2017 . Third - Wave Livestreaming : Teens’ Long Form Selﬁe . In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services . ACM , 20 . 56 . Nic Lupfer , Andruid Kerne , Andrew M . Webb , and Rhema Linder . 2016 . Patterns of Free - form Curation : Visual Thinking with Web Content . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM on Multimedia Conference ( MM ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 12 – 21 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2964284 . 2964303 57 . Michael Massimi and Carman Neustaedter . 2014 . Moving from Talking Heads to Newlyweds : Exploring Video Chat Use During Major Life Events . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 43 – 52 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598570 58 . David McNeill . 1992 . Hand and mind : What gestures reveal about thought . University of Chicago press . 59 . Carman Neustaedter , Erick Oduor , Gina Venolia , and Tejinder K . Judge . 2012 . Moving Beyond Talking Heads to Shared Experiences : The Future of Personal Video Communication . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 327 – 330 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2389176 . 2389240 60 . Paul O’Neill . 2012a . The Culture of Curating and the Curating of Culture ( s ) . MIT Press . 61 . P . O’Neill . 2012b . The Culture of Curating and the Curating of Culture ( s ) . MIT Press . https : / / books . google . com / books ? id = ZyeOtgAACAAJ 62 . Jiazhi Ou , Susan R . Fussell , Xilin Chen , Leslie D . Setlock , and Jie Yang . 2003 . Gestural Communication over Video Stream : Supporting Multimodal Interaction for Remote Collaborative Physical Tasks . In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces ( ICMI ’03 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 242 – 249 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 958432 . 958477 63 . Anthony G Picciano . 2002 . Beyond student perceptions : Issues of interaction , presence , and performance in an online course . Journal of Asynchronous learning networks 6 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 21 – 40 . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 13 64 . David Pinelle , Mutasem Barjawi , Miguel Nacenta , and Regan Mandryk . 2009 . An Evaluation of Coordination Techniques for Protecting Objects and Territories in Tabletop Groupware . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2129 – 2138 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1519025 65 . Atlassian Corporation Plc . 2017 . Jitsi Videobridge . ( August 2017 ) . https : / / jitsi . org / jitsi - videobridge / . 66 . Jason Procyk , Carman Neustaedter , Carolyn Pang , Anthony Tang , and Tejinder K . Judge . 2014 . Exploring Video Streaming in Public Settings : Shared Geocaching over Distance Using Mobile Video Chat . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2163 – 2172 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557198 67 . Yvonne Rogers , Helen Sharp , and Jenny Preece . 2011 . Interaction design : beyond human - computer interaction . John Wiley & Sons . 68 . Marco Sá , David A . Shamma , and Elizabeth F . Churchill . 2014 . Live Mobile Collaboration for Video Production : Design , Guidelines , and Requirements . Personal Ubiquitous Comput . 18 , 3 ( March 2014 ) , 693 – 707 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 013 - 0700 - 0 69 . Stacey D . Scott , M . Sheelagh T . Carpendale , and Kori M . Inkpen . 2004 . Territoriality in Collaborative Tabletop Workspaces . In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’04 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 294 – 303 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1031607 . 1031655 70 . William Chapin Seitz . 1961 . The Art of Assemblage . Museum of Modern Art New York . 71 . Jami J Shah , Steve M Smith , and Noe Vargas - Hernandez . 2003 . Metrics for measuring ideation effectiveness . Design studies 24 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 111 – 134 . 72 . Karen Swan . 2002 . Building learning communities in online courses : The importance of interaction . Education , Communication & Information 2 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 23 – 49 . 73 . John C Tang , Gina Venolia , and Kori M Inkpen . 2016a . Meerkat and periscope : I stream , you stream , apps stream for live streams . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 4770 – 4780 . 74 . John C . Tang , Gina Venolia , and Kori M . Inkpen . 2016b . Meerkat and Periscope : I Stream , You Stream , Apps Stream for Live Streams . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4770 – 4780 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858374 75 . Andrew M . Webb , Chen Wang , Andruid Kerne , and Pablo Cesar . 2016 . Distributed Liveness : Understanding How New Technologies Transform Performance Experiences . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 432 – 437 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2819974 76 . Daniel Wigdor , Hao Jiang , Clifton Forlines , Michelle Borkin , and Chia Shen . 2009 . WeSpace : The Design Development and Deployment of a Walk - up and Share Multi - surface Visual Collaboration System . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1237 – 1246 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518886 77 . Merryl J Wilkenfeld and Thomas B Ward . 2001 . Similarity and emergence in conceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Language 45 , 1 ( 2001 ) , 21 – 38 . 78 . Takuro Yonezawa and Hideyuki Tokuda . 2012a . Enhancing Communication and Dramatic Impact of Online Live Performance with Cooperative Audience Control . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 103 – 112 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2370216 . 2370234 79 . Takuro Yonezawa and Hideyuki Tokuda . 2012b . Enhancing Communication and Dramatic Impact of Online Live Performance with Cooperative Audience Control . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UbiComp ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 103 – 112 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2370216 . 2370234 80 . Sabrina Ziebarth and H . Ulrich Hoppe . 2014 . Moodle4SPOC : A Resource - Intensive Blended Learning Course . In Proceedings of the 9th European Conference on Open Learning and Teaching in Educational Communities - Volume 8719 ( EC - TEL 2014 ) . Springer - Verlag New York , Inc . , New York , NY , USA , 359 – 372 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 11200 - 8 _ 27 CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 555 Page 14