Phosphorylation - Regulated Binding of RNA Polymerase II to Fibrous Polymers of Low - Complexity Domains Ilmin Kwon , 1 , 5 Masato Kato , 1 , 5 Siheng Xiang , 1 Leeju Wu , 1 Pano Theodoropoulos , 1 Hamid Mirzaei , 1 Tina Han , 1 , 3 Shanhai Xie , 1 , 4 Jeffry L . Corden , 2 and Steven L . McKnight 1 , * 1 Department of Biochemistry , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX 75390 - 9152 , USA 2 Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics , The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD 21205 , USA 3 Present address : Department of Physiology , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA 94158 , USA 4 Present address : Peloton Therapeutics , Dallas , TX 75235 , USA 5 These authors contributed equally to this work * Correspondence : steven . mcknight @ utsouthwestern . edu http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 10 . 033 SUMMARY The low - complexity ( LC ) domains of the products of the fused in sarcoma ( FUS ) , Ewings sarcoma ( EWS ) , and TAF15 genes are translocated onto a variety of different DNA - binding domains and thereby assist in driving the formation of cancerous cells . In the context of the translocated fusion proteins , these LC sequences function as transcriptional activa - tion domains . Here , we show that polymeric ﬁbers formed from these LC domains directly bind the C - terminal domain ( CTD ) of RNA polymerase II in a manner reversible by phosphorylation of the iterated , heptad repeats of the CTD . Mutational analysis indi - cates that the degree of binding between the CTD and the LC domain polymers correlates with the strength of transcriptional activation . These studies offer a simple means of conceptualizing how RNA polymerase II is recruited to active genes in its unphosphorylated state and released for elongation following phosphorylation of the CTD . INTRODUCTION Numerous forms of cancer result from translocation events wherein the amino terminal , low - complexity ( LC ) domains of any of three related RNA - binding proteins become fused to a variety of different DNA - binding domains ( Arvand and Denny , 2001 ; Guipaud et al . , 2006 ; Lessnick and Ladanyi , 2012 ) . The relevant RNA - binding proteins include the products of the fused in sarcoma ( FUS ) , Ewings sarcoma ( EWS ) , and TAF15 genes . Collectively , these three RNA - binding proteins are referred to as FET ( F US / EWS / TAF15 ) proteins ( Andersson et al . , 2008 ) . The proteins encoded by these varied translocation products are causative of transformation ( Bertolotti et al . , 1999 ; Crozat et al . , 1993 ; Ichikawa et al . , 1999 ; Rabbitts et al . , 1993 ; Zinszner et al . , 1994 ) . They further display dual dependency upon both the DNA - binding domain , which can be represented by members of thehomeobox , zincﬁnger , ETS , orleucinezipperfamiliesofDNA - binding domains , as well as the LC domains donated by FUS , EWS , or TAF15 . The DNA - binding domains are understood to directthecancer - causingfusionproteinstoappropriatebatteries ofgenesadequatetofacilitatecellgrowthorsurvival . Bycontrast , the LC sequences donated by members of the FET family are understood to function as transcriptional activation domains . Over the past several decades the ﬁelds of biochemistry , biophysics , and molecular biology have achieved a concrete un - derstanding of how DNA - binding domains function . The atomic structures of many such domains have been resolved by either X - ray crystallography or NMR spectroscopy , often in complex with their speciﬁc DNA substrates . By contrast , far less is known about the manner in which transcriptional activation domains operate at a mechanistic level . Prototypic activation domains are comprised of low - complexity sequences that exist in an intrinsically disordered , random coil conformation ( Huntley and Golding , 2002 ; Uversky , 2002 ) . The observation that evolutionary pressure of cancer cell formation has repeatedly led to the selec - tion of the LC domains of FET proteins as the fusion partner to a variety of different DNA - binding domains strongly hints that these particular LC sequences may be exceptionally potent tran - scriptional activation domains . The LC domain of FUS donated to the translocation product causative of cancer has a highly skewed distribution of amino acids . Of the 220 residues within the FUS LC domain , 84 % are comprised of only four amino acids—glycine , serine , glutamine , and tyrosine . The domain contains zero representatives of gluta - mic acid , lysine , arginine , cysteine , histidine , valine , leucine , isoleucine , tryptophan , or phenylalanine . By having an amino acid composition dominated by only a four letter code ( G , S , Q , and Y ) , the LC domain of FUS would appear to be more like nucleic acids than typical proteins that fold into their ultimate , three - dimensional shape by use of a much wider reliance on all 20 types of amino acid residues . When incubated at high con - centrations , the LC domain of FUS has been found to polymerize Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 , November 21 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 1049 into uniform , amyloid - like ﬁbers ( Han et al . , 2012 ; Kato et al . , 2012 ) . Although morphologically similar to pathogenic amyloid aggregates , polymeric ﬁbers formed from the LC domain of FUS are labile to depolymerization , raising the possibility that reversible LC polymerization may engender functional utility . Given two measurable features of the LC domain of FET proteins ( transcriptional activation capacity and polymerization propen - sity ) , we hereby describe experiments that test the correlative relationship between the two . RESULTS The FUS LC domain contains 27 repeats of the triplet sequence [ G / S ] Y [ G / S ] , and derivatives carrying 5 , 9 , 15 , and 27 tyrosine - to - serine mutations in randomly chosen triplets showed progres - sively diminished capabilities of polymerization and stress granule recruitment ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) . In order to initiate studies of the transcriptional activation capacity of the FUS LC domain , it was linked to the GAL4 DNA - binding domain and assayed by transient transfection for activation of ﬁreﬂy luciferase activity driven by a GAL4 - dependent reporter gene . Forty - three mutated derivatives were prepared wherein individual tyrosine residues of the triplet sequence within the LC domain were randomly mutated to serine . Three mutants randomly changed a single tyrosine , 6 changed two tyrosines , 9 changed three tyrosines , 12 changed four tyrosines , 7 changed ﬁve tyrosines , 4 changed six tyrosines , 1 changed seven tyrosines , and 1 changed nine tyrosines ( Table S1 ) . As shown in Figure 1A , concordance was observed between the number of tyrosine residues changed to serine and the degree of impediment upon of transcriptional activation . With a single exception , variants carrying either one or two tyrosine - to - serine changes exhibited transcriptional activation capacity indistinguishable from the GAL4 : wild - type fusion protein . The exceptional variant ( 2A ) was considerably more active than the wild - type LC domain of FUS . Variants car - rying three tyrosine - to - serine changes tended to be slightly less active than those carrying zero , one or two mutations . The trend in loss of activity was observed to track with variants carrying four , ﬁve , or six random tyrosine - to - serine mutations , and mutants carrying seven or nine tyrosine - to - serine mutations revealed no detectable capacity to activate expression of the GAL4 - responsive luciferase target gene . A simple assay for the propensity of LC domains to polymer - ized into amyloid - like ﬁbers has been described previously ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) . Brieﬂy , upon prolonged incubation of a hybrid protein linking the LC domain of FUS to mCherry , the protein polymerizes into a hydrogel - like state . Microscopic gel droplets can be formed in chamber slides , exposed to soluble test pro - tein , then scored for trapping of the test protein via confocal microscopy . The molecular basis of trapping has been deduced , by TIRF microscopy , to result from copolymerization of the GFP - tagged test protein into existing polymeric ﬁbers in the mCherry : FUS hydrogel droplets ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) . Forty out of the 43 var - iants described above were fused to GFP and tested for their ability to be trapped by hydrogel droplets composed of mCherry linked to the wild - type LC domain of FUS . As shown in Figure 1B , variants carrying one or two tyrosine - to - serine changes were trapped by the mCherry : FUS hydrogel droplets in a manner Figure 1 . Correlation Between Transcriptional Activation and Hydrogel Binding of Native and Mutated Derivatives of the LC Domain of FUS ( A ) The LC domain of FUS was linked to the DNA - binding domain of GAL4 and assayed for activation of a GAL4 reporter gene in transiently transfected U20S cells . Activity of the native LC sequence was compared with 43 variants whereindifferentnumberoftyrosineresidueswererandomlymutatedtoserine ( see text ) . Identities of speciﬁc tyrosine - to - serine changes in each mutant are shown in Table S1 . Expression levels for all test protein were assayed by western blotting as shown below histograms . ( B ) The GFP - linked LC domains of FUS carrying the same mutations as ( A ) were exposed to mCherry : FUS hydrogels ( left ) and initial binding rates were measured ( right ) . ( C ) Acorrelationplotbetweenthetransactivationactivityandhydrogel - binding rate of the individual LC mutants . Note that there is but one signiﬁcant outlier indicated by a red circle . This is the ‘‘2A mutant’’ and described in more detail in the text and Figure 5 . 1050 Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 , November 21 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . similar to the protein linking the wild - type FUS LC domain to GFP . Sequential diminishment in hydrogel trapping was observed for variants carrying three , four , ﬁve , six , seven , or nine tyrosine - to - serine mutations . The scatter plot shown in Figure 1C directly compares the transcriptional activation and hydrogel trapping capacities of all 40 mutants that were scored in both assays . With the exception of the 2A mutant , which acti - vates transcription considerably better than the wild - type LC domain of FUS , a strong correlation was observed between the two activities under study ( Pearson’s r = 0 . 7 with a p value of less than 0 . 0001 ) . These data tentatively indicate that tran - scriptional activation capacity of the LC domain of FUS may be dependent upon its ability to polymerize . B - isox Microcrystals Precipitate Nuclear Proteins Having observed a correlative relationship between ﬁberization and transcriptional activation capacity , we prepared nuclear ex - tracts from HEK293 cells and subjected the lysate to precipita - tion by the biotinylated isoxazole ( b - isox ) chemical . As described previously , the b - isox chemical crystallizes in cold aqueous buffer at concentrations between 30 and 100 m M ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) . X - ray diffraction studies at high resolution revealed the b - isox crystal surface to contain a wavy repetition of peaks and troughs separated by 4 . 7 A˚ , and it has been hypothesized that the troughs are properly disposed to capture proteins con - taining signiﬁcant stretches of random coil polypeptide . These disordered , LC sequences are thought to adopt an extended b strand conformation having dimensions that match the trough of the b - isox crystal surface , thereby facilitating selective precipitation of proteins endowed with substantive regions of disordered polypeptide . Given that earlier studies were limited to cytoplasmic lysates , we prepared nuclear lysates from cultured mammalian cells , precipitated with b - isox microcrystals , separated the precipi - tated proteins on SDS polyacrylamide gels , and identiﬁed precipitated proteins by shotgun mass spectrometry ( Experi - mental Procedures ) . Roughly 580 nuclear proteins were identi - ﬁed as being precipitated by b - isox microcrystals ( Table S2 ) . This survey revealed overlap with many of the proteins precipi - tated from cytoplasmic extracts by the b - isox chemical , including many hnRNP proteins . Additionally , however , these efforts revealed the identities of a number of nuclear proteins not observed in earlier experiments that had interrogated cyto - plasmic lysates . Prominent among the newly identiﬁed , b - isox precipitated nuclear proteins were TAF15 , the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II , numerous subunits of the mediator com - plex ( including Med4 , Med6 , Med10 , Med13L , Med 14 , Med 15 , Med 17 , and all subunits of CDK8 ) , a variety of enzymes involved in epigenetic modiﬁcation of histones , both coactivator and corepressor proteins known to control the function of nuclear hormone receptors , and many distinct SR proteins known to be involved in pre - mRNA splicing . Parallel studies were per - formed on nuclear extracts prepared from Saccharomyces cerevisae , leading to the identiﬁcation of roughly 260 yeast nuclear proteins signiﬁcantly precipitated by the b - isox chemical ( Table S3 ) . We again observed b - isox - mediated precipitation of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II . We also observed the list of precipitated proteins to contain multiple subunits of the mediator complex , and a number of gene - speciﬁc transcrip - tion factors endowed with glutamine - and asparagine - rich , low - complexity sequences . With respect to nuclear proteins precipitated by the b - isox chemical , our initial focus fell on TAF15 and the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II . Among the 580 mammalian proteins selectively precipitated by b - isox microcrystals , TAF15 regis - tered the 23 rd highest number of spectral counts , and the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II registered the 46 th highest number of spectral counts ( Table S2 ) . B - isox precipitation of yeast nuclear extracts also revealed the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II as displaying an exceptionally high number of spectral counts ( Table S3 ) . TAF15 represents the third paralog of the FET family of RNA - binding proteins and is endowed with an N - terminal LC domain very similar to the LC domains found in FUS and EWS . Unlike FUS and EWS , TAF15 has been identiﬁed as a substoichometric component of the TFIID complex , which has been extensively characterized as an important assembly in transcriptional initia - tion by RNA polymerase II ( Bertolotti et al . , 1999 ) . Attention to the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II was prompted by the fact that it contains an intrinsically disordered region of roughly 380 residues at its C terminus . This C - terminal domain ( CTD ) of mammalian RNA polymerase II contains 52 heptad repeats of the sequence Y 1 S 2 P 3 T 4 S 5 P 6 S 7 ( Corden et al . , 1985 ) . Extensive work over the past two decades has conﬁrmed the importance of the CTD in the transcription cycle ( Buratowski , 2009 ; Egloff et al . , 2012 ; Phatnani and Greenleaf , 2006 ) . Included among a variety of seminal advancements , the ﬁeld now understands that in its initial state of recruitment to a promoter , the CTD exists in the unphosphorylated state . A series of obligatory phosphor - ylation events on serine residues S 2 , S 5 and S 7 of the CTD heptad repeats accompanies release of RNA polymerase from the pre - initiation complex so that it can begin transcriptional elongation ( Egloff and Murphy , 2008 ) . When aligned contiguously , the CTD contains 52 repeats of the triplet sequence S 7 Y 1 S 2 ( or close var - iations thereof ) . These repeats form a subset of the [ G / S ] Y [ G / S ] repeats that we have found to be critical for polymerization of the LC domain of FUS ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) . Phosphorylation of the CTD Blocks B - isox Precipitation Using antibodies speciﬁc to either the unphosphorylated form of the CTD of RNA polymerase II ( 8WG16 ) , or antibodies to S 2 phosphorylation ( 3E10 ) , S 5 phosphorylation ( 3E8 ) , or S 7 phos - phorylation ( 4E12 ) ( Chapman et al . , 2007 ) , we observed that b - isox microcrystals preferentially precipitate only the unphos - phorylated form of the yeast CTD ( Figure 2 ) . Parallel analyses of b - isox precipitates from mammalian cells also revealed selective precipitation of only the unphosphorylated form of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II ( Figure S1A available online ) . We tentatively hypothesize that the CTD is the determi - nant of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II that facilitates b - isox precipitation , and that phosphorylation on residues S 2 , S 5 or S 7 somehow impedes the ability of the CTD to ﬁt within the 4 . 7 A ˚ surface troughs of b - isox microcrystals . In order to test these ideas more carefully , a GFP fusion protein was prepared linked to heptad repeats 27 - 52 of the human CTD ( Experimental Procedures ) . The puriﬁed , recombinant Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 , November 21 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 1051 GFP : CTD C26 fusion protein was effectively precipitated by b - isox microcrystals , yet phosphorylation of the CTD by either CDK7 , which phosphorylates S 5 and S 7 ( Akhtar et al . , 2009 ; Kim et al . , 2009 ; Rickert et al . , 1999 ; Roy et al . , 1994 ; Trigon et al . , 1998 ) , or CDK9 , which phosphorylates S 2 , S 5 and S 7 ( Czudnochowski et al . , 2012 ; Jones et al . , 2004 ; Ramanathan et al . , 2001 ) , prevented b - isox - mediated precipitation ( Fig - ure S1B ) . These observations conﬁrm the CTD as the determi - nant of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II responsible for b - isox precipitation and give evidence that when the CTD is phosphorylated , precipitation is prevented . Binding of the CTD to Hydrogel Droplets Composed of FET Protein Polymers Having recognized that the iterated S 7 Y 1 S 2 triplet repeats of the CTD correspond to a variant of the [ G / S ] Y [ G / S ] triplet repeats diagnostic of the LC domains of FET proteins , we tested whether the GFP : CTD fusion protein might bind to hydrogel droplets formed from the LC domains of the three FET proteins ( FUS , EWS , and TAF15 ) , as well as hydrogel droplets formed from the LC domains of hnRNPA2 and cold inducible RNA - binding protein ( CIRBP ) . As shown in Figure 3A , the GFP : CTD fusion pro - tein was avidly trapped by hydrogel droplets composed of the LC domain of TAF15 . No trapping whatsoever was observed when the GFP : CTD test protein was exposed to either hnRNPA2 or CIRBP hydrogel droplets and weak trapping was observed for FUS and EWS hydrogels . GFP : CTD binding to TAF15 hydrogel droplets was extended in two ways . First , we compared the binding properties of two GFP test proteins , one containing 20 heptad repeats from the highly conserved , N - terminal half of the CTD ( repeats 1 - 20 = GFP : CTD N20 ) and another containing 20 heptad repeats from the degenerate C - terminal half of the CTD ( repeats 33 - 52 = GFP : CTD C20 ) . As shown in Figure 3B , the GFP test protein ap - pended to the 20 degenerate CTD repeats , GFP : CTD C20 , bound TAF15 considerably more avidly than the counterpart fusion containing the 20 conserved CTD repeats ( GFP : CTD N20 ) . Sec - ond , we compared hydrogel trapping for fusion proteins con - taining 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 , or all 26 of the degenerate CTD repeats ( GFP : CTD C5 = CTD repeats 48 - 52 , GFP : CTD C10 = CTD repeats 43 - 52 , GFP : CTD C15 = CTD repeats 38 - 52 , GFP : CTD C20 = CTD repeats 33 - 52 , and GFP : CTD C26 = CTD repeats 27 - 52 ) . As shown in Figure 3C , no trapping by mCherry : TAF15 hydrogel droplets was observed for the fusion protein containing only 5 heptad repeats , intermediate trapping was observed for the fusion containing 10 heptad repeats , and equivalent trapping was observed for fusions containing 15 , 20 , or 26 repeats . When evaluating the kinetics of binding of the various GFP : CTD constructs to hydrogel droplets composed of mCherry linked to the LC domains of TAF15 , FUS , or EWS , it was noticed that gel trapping occurred more rapidly than the homo - or heterotypic trapping of GFP fusion proteins linked to the LC domains of FET proteins . Knowing that the latter trapping occurs via a mechanism of copolymerization of soluble test proteins to ﬁbrous polymers of which the hydrogel droplets are themselves composed ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) , we employed ﬂuorescence micro - scopy to evaluate binding of the GFP : CTD C26 fusion protein to ﬁbrous preparations of mCherry : TAF15 . As soon as the mixture of the two protein samples could be applied to the microscope substrate , clear evidence of GFP signal could be seen to coat the entire length of mCherry : TAF15 polymeric ﬁbers ( Figure S2 ) . Instead of slow , time - dependent copolymerization extending from either end of existing ﬁbers , the GFP : CTD C26 protein rapidly bound to the lateral surface of mCherry : TAF15 ﬁbers . These observations offer evidence of a second and distinct means by which LC polymeric ﬁbers are able to trap otherwise soluble test proteins composed , in part , of LC domains . They may further offer mechanistic insight into the perplexing promiscuity of protein : protein interaction of intrinsically disordered proteins ( Cumberworth et al . , 2013 ) . CTD Phosphorylation Blocks Hydrogel Binding Knowing that phosphorylation of the CTD prevents precipitation by b - isox microcrystals , we evaluated the effects of phos - phorylation on trapping of GFP : CTD test protein by TAF15 hydrogels . When phosphorylated by either CDK7 or CDK9 , the GFP : CTD fusion protein was fully blocked from binding to hydrogels composed of polymers of the LC domain of TAF15 ( Figure S3 ) . Emboldened by this observation , we prebound the GFP : CTD C26 test protein to mCherry : TAF15 hydrogel drop - lets then added either CDK7 or CDK9 in the presence of ATP . In both cases , the GFP signal was lost in an enzyme concentra - tion - dependent manner ( Figure 4A ) . When applied at ﬁxed enzyme levels , the GFP signal diminished in a time and ATP - dependent manner ( Figure 4B ) . A video showing the dynamics of GFP signal loss can be seen in Movie S1 . Material released from mCherry : TAF15 gel droplets in response to CDK7 was recovered from the wells of chamber slides and evaluated by western blotting using antibodies to both GFP and the S 5 phos - pho - form of the CTD . As shown in Figure 4C , both GFP and phosphorylated CTD S 5 western blotting signals were released from the mCherry : TAF15 hydrogels as a function of enzyme concentration . We conclude from these observations that not only does phosphorylation of the CTD prevent binding to mCherry : TAF15 hydrogels , but prebound material is accessible to kinase - mediated phosphorylation and subsequent release from the gels . Figure 2 . Biotinylated Isoxazole Preferentially Precipitates Unphosphorylated CTD of RNA polymerase II Western blot of total cell extract ( T ) or b - isox pellet ( P ) with different CTD antibodies . Bands shown in the four panels correspond in size to the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II ( 217 kD ) . The 8WG16 antibody recognizes the unphosphorylated CTD , the 3E10 antibody recognizes serine 2 phosphory - latedCTD , the3E8antibody recognizesserine5phosphorylated CTD , and the 4E12 antibody recognizes serine 7 phosphorylated CTD . B - isox signiﬁcantly precipitates only unphosphorylated CTD of Pol II . See also Figure S1 . 1052 Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 , November 21 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . The 2A Mutant of the FUS LC Domain Displays a Gain - of - Function Phenotype In comparing the properties of mutants of the LC domain of FUS with respect to both ﬁber polymerization and transcriptional acti - vation ( Figure 1 ) , we observed signiﬁcant discordance for only one mutant . The so - called ‘‘2A mutant’’ bound to mCherry : FUS hydrogel droplets with avidity indistinguishable from the wild - type protein , yet activated transcription considerably better than the normal LC domain of FUS . Hydrogel droplets were formed from a fusion protein linking the 2A mutant to mCherry , fully analogous to the wild - type protein linked to mCherry save for the two tyrosine - to - serine changes . When challenged with the different heptad repeats of GFP : CTD test proteins , signiﬁ - cantly stronger gel trapping was observed for hydrogel droplets formed from the 2A mutant LC domain ( Figure 5A ) . We conclude that polymeric ﬁbers formed from the 2A mutant bind the unphosphorylated CTD better than the wild - type LC domain of FUS , and offer the hypothesis that this gain - of - function pheno - type may explain why the 2A mutant activates transcription bet - ter than the wild - type LC domain of FUS ( Figure 1 ) . Despite the enhanced binding of the 2A mutant to various GFP : CTD test pro - teins , the latter interactions were blocked by CDK7 - or CDK9 - mediated phosphorylation ( Figure S4A ) . Moreover , application of either of these protein kinase enzymes , in the presence of ATP , caused prebound GFP : CTD C26 protein to be released from hydrogel droplets composed of LC domain prepared from the 2A mutant in a manner indistinguishable of CTD release from hydrogel droplets formed from the wild - type LC domain of FUS ( Figure S4B ) . An alignment of the 27 [ G / S ] Y [ G / S ] triplet repeats located within the LC domains of FUS and TAF15 is shown in Figure 5B . The two tyrosine residues mutated to serine in the 2A , gain - of - function variant , correspond to tyrosine residues embedded within the 16 th and 20 th [ G / S ] Y [ G / S ] triplets of the FUS LC domain . In comparing this region of the two LC domains , FUS that when polymerized binds the CTD weakly , and TAF15 that binds the CTD avidly , we notice that triplet repeats 16 - 21 of the TAF15 LC domain are unusual . Instead of the central tyrosine residues being ﬂanked by either glycine or serine , six straight repeats bear an aspartic acid residue on one side of the central tyrosine or the other ( SYD 16 , DYG 17 , SYD 18 , GYD 19 , SYD 20 , and NYD 21 ) . As will be discussed , this ‘‘16 - 21 window’’ may be worthy of close attention with respect to the ability of the LC do - mains of FET proteins to capture the CTD of RNA polymerase II . DNA - Mediated Enhancement of FET Protein Polymerization The test tube polymerization of the LC sequences associated with FET proteins is only observed at high concentrations ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) . One means by which appropriately high con - centrations necessary for polymerization could take place in living cells is if FET proteins are iteratively bound to a multivalent substrate . ChIP - chip experiments have given evidence that when the LC domain of EWS is linked to the FLI DNA - binding domain , it binds in living cells to microsatellites carrying iterative repeats of the tetranucleotide sequence GGAA ( Gangwal et al . , 2008 ) . Since GGAA represents an optimal binding site for the ETS DNA - binding domain of the EWS : FLI protein , the fusion pro - tein binds iteratively to these otherwise inert microsatellites . If located within 5 - 10 kb of a target promoter , the translocation product - bound microsatellite is envisioned to become a rogue enhancer . Under such a setting , it is possible that the LC domains of the densely packed EWS : FLI molecules can be prompted to polymerize . As a test of this hypothesis , microsatellite sequences asso - ciated with the hNR0B1 gene were ampliﬁed by PCR from U2OS cells ( Experimental Procedures ) . A PCR product contain - ing 25 repeats of the GGAA tetranucleotide was incubated with a recombinant protein linking mCherry to a fusion protein composed of the DNA - binding domain of FLI attached to the LC domain of FUS ( Experimental Procedures ) . In the absence of added DNA , the 0 . 5 m M levels of the mCherry : FUS - FLI protein Figure 3 . Selective Binding of GFP : CTD to mCherry : TAF15 Hydrogel Droplets ( A ) HydrogelscomposedofLCdomainsofmCherry : TAF15 , mCherry : FUS , mCherry : EWS , mCherry : hnRNPA2 and mCherry : CIRP were incubated with a soluble form of GFP linked to the C - terminal 26 heptad repeats of the CTD of mammalian RNA po - lymeraseII . LittleornoretentionoftheGFP : CTD C26 protein was observed for the mCherry : hnRNPA2 or mCherry : CIRBP hydrogel droplets , and weak binding was observed for mCherry : FUS and mCherry : EWS hydrogels . By contrast , strong retention was observed for mCherry : TAF15 hydro - gel droplets . See also Figure S2 . ( B ) The degenerate C - terminal half of the CTD ( GFP : CTD C20 ) binds mCherry : TAF15 hydrogel droplets more strongly than the highly conserved , N - terminal half of the CTD ( GFP : CTD N20 ) . ( C ) The binding intensity of the GFP : CTD degenerate repeats to mCherry : TAF15 hydrogel droplets correlates with the number of heptad repeats , withnobindingobserved for GFP : CTD C5 , weak binding for GFP : CTD C10 and strong binding for GFP : CTD C15 , GFP : CTD C20 and GFP : CTD C26 . Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 , November 21 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 1053 remained in a largely disaggregated state as deduced by trans - mission electron microscopy ( Figure 6B ) . By contrast , addition of the PCR product containing the iterative GGAA repeats led to the formation of an extensive network of interwoven ﬁbers ( Fig - ure 6A ) . When evaluated by a gel mobility shift assay , it was apparent that multiple copies of the mCherry : FUS - FLI protein were simultaneously bound to the probe DNA containing iterative repeats of the GGAA tetranucleotide ( Figure S5 ) . We tentatively conclude that when multiple copies of the mCherry : FUS - FLI protein are simultaneously bound to DNA , polymeriza - tion of the LC domain of FUS is enhanced . Polymerization - Dependent CTD Binding to the LC Domain of TAF15 Hydrogel droplets formed from a fusion protein linking mCherry to the amino terminal 208 residues of TAF15 bind a variety of GFP : CTD constructs , particularly those housing 15 or more of the degenerate , C - terminal heptad repeats ( Figure 3C ) . A trun - cated version of the TAF15 LC domain restricted to 80 amino - terminal residues was observed to form hydrogel droplets equally as well as the intact LC domain , yet was only minimally capable of trapping the GFP : CTD C10 and GFP : CTD C20 con - structs ( Figure S6 ) . Addition of the remaining 128 residues of the LC domain yielded a protein that readily formed hydrogels that trapped the GFP : CTD constructs avidly . These observations hint to the possibility that the amino termi - nal half of the TAF15 LC domain may be critical for polymeriza - tion , and that the carboxyl terminal half might be critical for CTD binding . Proceeding with this idea , a series of 48 variants was prepared wherein between one and six tyrosine residues of the [ GS ] Y [ GS ] triplet repeats were randomly mutated to serine ( Table S4 ) . Each mutant was linked to the DNA - binding domain of GAL4 and tested for its ability to activate the GAL4 - luciferase reporter gene . As shown in Figure 7A , all six variants carrying a single tyrosine - to - serine mutation were less competent in tran - scription activation capacity than the wild - type protein . Variants carrying two , three , four , ﬁve , or six random tyrosine - to - serine mutations suffered sequentially diminished activity . Three of the 48 mutants were chosen for further study . These include the 1F , 2H , and 3K mutants , all of which were among the most debilitated variants within their respective classes . All of the tyro - sine residues altered in these particularly deleterious mutants localized to the ﬁrst 80 residues of the TAF15 LC domain that , on its own , is capable of ﬁberization and hydrogel formation . The 1F mutant changes tyrosine 46 to serine , the 2H mutant changes tyrosines 38 and 56 to serine , and 3K changes tyrosines 17 , 46 , and 63 to serine ( Table S4 ) . The TAF15 LC domains of these variants were linked to mCherry and compared to the wild - type LC domain with respect to hydrogel formation , ﬁberization , and CTD interaction . None of the mutants formed hydrogels when incubated under standard conditions ( Movie S2 ) . When incubated under conditions favor - able for ﬁberization , the mCherry variant linked to the wild - type LC domain of TAF15 , as visualized by ﬂuorescence microscopy , formedobvioustanglesofaggregatedﬁbers . Almostnopolymer - ization was observed for the 1F , 2H , and 3K mutants . Inspection of the rare occurrence of visible mCherry aggregates in the latter variants revealed small amorphous particles ( Figure 7B ) . Finally , when mixed with the GFP : CTD C26 construct and subjected to coimmunoprecipitation , nointeractionwhatsoeverwasobserved foranythingbutthemCherryfusionproteinlinkedtothenativeLC domain of TAF15 ( Figure 7C ) . These and other data presented herein give evidence that the LC domains of FET proteins obliga - torily rely upon polymerization in order to execute their role in transcriptional activation . Whether LC domain polymerization mightbemorebroadlyemployedinthecontextofgeneregulation in eukaryotic cells remains open to question . Schematic Concept of RNA Polymerase Recruitment by LC Domain Polymers Cancer cells expressing the translocation product wherein the LC domain of EWS is linked to the ETS DNA - binding domain of Figure 4 . CDK7 - Mediated Release of GFP : CTD C26 from mCherry : TAF15 Hydrogel Droplets ( A ) The GFP : CTD C26 trapped by mCherry : TAF15 hydrogel was released upon addition of CDK7 or CDK9 in the presence of ATP in an enzyme con - centration - dependent manner . ( B ) Hydrogel droplets of mCherry : TAF15 ( red ) were exposed to GFP : CTD C26 ( green ) . Chamber slides containing individual hydrogel droplets were exposed to CDK7 plus ATP ( top row ) , CDK7 alone ( middle row ) , or ATP alone ( bottom row ) . SamplesexposedtobothCDK7andATPrevealed the time - dependent release of GFP : CTD C26 . See also Movie S1 . ( C ) Westernblotanalysisofmaterialsreleasedinto the well of chamber slides revealed progressive increases in the presence of soluble , phosphor - ylated CTD ( top ) , and soluble GFP : CTD C26 ( bottom ) . See also Figure S3 . 1054 Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 , November 21 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . FLI depend upon this fusion protein to drive cell growth or survival . The EWS : FLI translocation product is undoubtedly employed as an aberrant transcription factor required to repro - gram gene expression in a manner beneﬁcial to cancer cells . We hypothesize that upon binding to the relevant sites on DNA , including microsatellites bearing iterative repeats of the tetranucleotide sequence GGAA , the EWS : FLI fusion protein can polymerize via its LC domains . As depicted schematically in ( D ) of Figure 7 , we further hypothesize that ﬁbrous polymers of the LC domain create binding sites for the CTD of RNA poly - merase . Finally , we predict that phosphorylation of the CTD by CDK7 , CDK9 , or a related protein kinase enzyme facilitates release of the polymer - bound RNA polymerase so that it can escape gene promoters and enter into the process of transcrip - tional elongation . DISCUSSION Here , we report evidence that the LC domains of FET proteins may require polymerization as a means of directly capturing the CTD of RNA polymerase II . If correct , these data lend credence to the hypothesis advanced by Kato , Han , and colleagues ( Han et al . , 2012 ; Kato et al . , 2012 ) . The thesis of the initial studies on b - isox precipitation , LC sequences , LC polymerization , and LC - derived hydrogels offered the concept that intrinsically disor - dered domains associated with RNA regulatory proteins and transcription factors might reversibly polymerize as a means of helping establish cellular organization and information ﬂow from DNA to RNA to protein . The present study extends earlier work in several ways . First , by having a simple functional read - out ( transcriptional activation ) , we have been able to establish a pattern of signiﬁcant concordance between the capacity of LC domains to polymerize and their ability to function as transcrip - tional activation domains ( Figure 1 ) . Indeed , the single most discordant mutant ( the 2A mutant ) was found to suffer a gain - of - function phenotype in transcriptional activation capacity that may be attributable to its enhanced capacity to bind the CTD of RNA polymerase II . Second , we offer the simple conclusion that , when appended to a DNA - binding domain as a function of scores of independent cancer - causing translocation events , the LC domains of FET proteins act to directly recruit the CTD of RNA polymerase II ( Figure 3 ) . In order to achieve this task , the LC domains of FET proteins must be capable of polymeriza - tion ( Figure 7 ) . Whereas the hydrogel droplets deployed as our mainstayassayarecomposedoflongﬁberouspolymerscontain - ing thousands of subunits , we have no idea as to how many sub - units must polymerize as a ‘‘point source’’ to recruit the CTD of RNA polymerase . It is entirely possible that ﬁberous seeds composed of only a handful of LC domain subunits might be suf - ﬁcient to nucleate functionally competent organizational puncta . Evidence that the LC domains of FET proteins are able to interact with the CTD of RNA polymerase II is consistent with recent studies of FUS in its native form ( Schwartz et al . , 2012 ) . The latter study provided compelling evidence for direct interac - tion between the CTD of RNA polymerase II and the intact FUS protein . Intriguingly , this interaction was shown to be RNA dependent . In a new study , Cech and colleagues offer exciting data that may explain RNA dependence ( Schwartz et al . , 2013 ) . Since the intact FUS protein is endowed with an RNA - binding domain , addition of an RNA polymer offers the opportu - nity for FUS to bind multiple times to the RNA substrate , thereby bringing LC domains of multiple protomers into proximity , and thereby enhancing local concentration and the propensity of the LC domains to polymerize . Similar phenomena may well be in play in the context of trans - location products carrying the LC domains of FET proteins fused Figure 5 . Hydrogels Formed from the 2A Mutant of FUS LC Domain Display Enhanced CTD Binding ( A ) 2A mutant of FUS LC domain , which exhibits enhanced transactivation activity relative to the wild - type protein ( Figure 1C ) , carries tyrosine - to - serine mutations at tyrosine within the 16 th and 20 th [ G / S ] Y [ G / S ] triplet repeats ( Figure5B ) . The 2A mutant LC domain was fused with mCherry , and hydrogel - binding assays were carried out with GFP : CTD fusions carrying different numbers of heptad repeats . Compared with hydrogel droplets formed with the native LC domain of FUS , those formed from the 2A mutant showed enhanced binding to GFP : CTD C20 and GFP : CTD C26 . See also Figure S4 . ( B ) Alignment of [ G / S ] Y [ G / S ] triplet repeats in low - complexitydomainsofFUS ( left ) andTAF15 ( right ) . Thetwotyrosine - to - serine mutationscausingFUS to suffer a gain - of - function enhancement in tran - scriptional activation and CTD binding are high - lighted in blue . All triplet repeats of TAF15 carrying an aspartic acid or glutamic acid adjacent to tyrosinearehighlighted ingreen . Canonical [ G / S ] Y [ G / S ] tripletrepeatsofbothLCdomainsareshown in red . Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 , November 21 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 1055 to different DNA - binding domains . Beautiful ChIP - chip experi - ments have given evidence that when the LC domain of EWS is linked to the FLI DNA - binding domain , it binds in living cells to microsatellites carrying iterative repeats of the tetranucleotide sequence GGAA ( Gangwal et al . , 2008 ) . Since GGAA represents an optimal binding site for the ETS DNA - binding domain of the EWS : FLI protein , the fusion protein binds iteratively to these otherwise inert microsatellites . If located within 5 – 10 kb of a target promoter , the translocation product - bound microsatellite has been hypothesized to become a rogue enhancer . We are like - minded with the Cech lab in providing evidence that enhanced local concentration via proximal binding of multiple subunits of LC domain containing proteins will represent a crit - ical stimulus for polymerization ( Figure 6 ) . Despite coming to similar conclusions regarding LC polymer - ization and CTD binding , the Cech studies differ in many ways from those reported herein . Cech and colleagues have employed intact FUS protein and have studied the protein in the context of its normal cellular function . We , instead , have focused on the isolated parts of FET proteins that are translo - cated in cancer onto a variety of DNA - binding domains . It is rela - tively straightforward to conceptualize how the latter class of Figure 6 . DNA - Dependent Enhancement of Fiber Formation of FUS - FLI Fusion Protein ( A ) mCherry : FUS LC domain - FLI DNA - binding domainfusion protein ( 0 . 5 m M ) wasincubatedwith microsatellite DNA ( 20nM ) inthepresenceof 35 % glycerol . After 1 hr incubation , materials in the solution were visualized by transmission electron microscopy . FUS - FLI ﬁbers grew long and became large sleave . ( B ) mCherry : FUS - FLI protein was incubated in the presence of 35 % glycerol ( no DNA ) . Small amounts of spontaneous nucleation and ﬁber growth were observed . All scale bars indicate 0 . 5 m m . See also Figure S5 . proteins bind DNA , polymerize locally via their LC domains , and thereby achieve the ﬁbrous organizational state required to bind the CTD of RNA poly - merase II . How , instead , might one conceptualize the manner in which native , RNA - binding forms of FET pro - teins achieve the same task ? One possi - bility is that native FET proteins are able to bind to noncoding RNAs that remain nascently attached to DNA . Perhaps these complexes might function as ‘‘RNA enhancers , ’’ ( Kim et al . , 2010 ; Lam et al . , 2013 ; Li et al . , 2013 ; Wang et al . , 2011 ) achieving the goal of bringing FET proteins into the proximity of target genes at locally elevated protein concen - trations adequate to facilitate LC domain polymerization necessary for the recruit - ment of RNA polymerase II . Even if both of these conceptualizations of polymer - depen - dent CTD recruitment are fundamentally correct , we are un - doubtedly only beginning to see the tip of the iceberg . Hundreds of RNA regulatory proteins and transcription factors contain LC domains , offering almost limitless opportunity for complexity in cellular organization—including the possible existence of solid - state polymeric pathways for information ﬂow from ‘‘transcrip - tion factories’’ through ﬁbrous nuclear bodies into various forms of cytoplasmic RNA granules to the ultimate sites of mRNA translation . Anticipating that LC domains are almost certainly regulated by posttranslational modiﬁcation , it is clear that we are at the earliest stage of recognizing this new and unconven - tional way of thinking about cellular organization . Indeed , if we are correct in assuming that phosphorylation of the CTD of RNA polymerase II triggers its release from FET protein ﬁbers , this may serve as an initial paradigm for considering post - translational modiﬁcation as a means of controlling the dynamic behavior of LC derived polymers . We close with three perplexing observations . First , why do polymeric ﬁbers formed from the LC domain of TAF15 bind the CTD so much more avidly than the analogous LC domains of FUS and EWS ( Figure 3A ) ? Second , why is it that mutations of 1056 Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 , November 21 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . two tyrosines in the LC domain of FUS yield a protein with enhanced transcriptional activation capacity and an enhanced ability to bind the CTD of RNA polymerase II ( Figures 1 and 5 ) ? Third , why do the degenerate CTD repeats bind the polymeric ﬁbers of FET LC domains better than the consensus repeats ( Fig - ure 3B ) ? Since TAF15 was discovered as a component of the TFIID complex , one might imagine that its function has become more proximally evolved to the transcription initiation process than FUS or EWS , thus consistent with constitutive , avid afﬁnity for the CTD of RNA polymerase II . The region of TAF15’s LC domain most distinctly different from the LC domains of FUS and EWS is in the [ G / S ] Y [ G / S ] repeats 16 - 21 , precisely the same region of the location of the two tyrosine - to - serine muta - tions in the 2A gain - of - function mutant of FUS ( Figure 5 ) . Six straight repeats of TAF15 contain aspartic acid on one side or the other of the central tyrosine . We speculate that these aspartic acid residues disrupt or in some way modify the TAF15 poly - meric ﬁber in this region , and that such modiﬁcations enhance CTD binding . Likewise , we hypothesize that the two tyrosine - to - serine alterations in the 2A mutant of the FUS LC domain also modify the polymeric ﬁber in a manner favoring CTD binding and transcriptional activation capacity . Perhaps FUS and EWS can be modiﬁed by phosphorylation on serine residues ﬂanking the tyrosines in this ‘‘16 - 21 window’’ of their LC domains , such that ﬁber disruption and propensity for CTD binding might be controlled in a regulated manner—rather than being ‘‘hard - wired’’ as is possible owing to TAF15’s evolutionary accumula - tion of aspartic acid residues as phosphomimetics . Finally , we consider why it might be that the polymeric form of the TAF15 LC domain binds the C - terminal degenerate CTD repeats so much more strongly than the N - terminal consensus CTD repeats ( Figure 3B ) . The N - terminal consensus repeats of the CTD have been shown to bind and cocrystallize with compo - nents of the mediator complex ( Robinson et al . , 2012 ) . Likewise , elegant EM studies have also provided evidence of CTD : media - tor interaction ( Tsai et al . , 2013 ) . Perhaps upon evolutionary duplication of the CTD from 26 repeats in yeast to 52 repeats in mammals has allowed the degenerate repeats to adopt a new function molded to the ﬁbrous LC domains of FET proteins . Close inspection of the degenerate repeats may be revealing in this regard . In comparing the degenerate repeats to our most distant evolutionary relative bearing the degenerate repeats , Figure 7 . Polymerization of the LC Domain of TAF15 is Required for Both Transcrip - tional Activation and CTD Binding ( A ) Forty - eight tyrosine - to - serine mutations were randomly introduced into the LC domain of TAF15 ( Table S4 ) . Mutants were assayed for transcrip - tional activation capacity as GAL4 fusion proteins . Expression levels for individual test proteins were monitored by western blotting as displayed below histogram depictions of transcriptional activation measurements . ( B ) mCherry fusion proteins linked to the native LC domain of TAF15 ( WT ) , the 1F mutant , the 2H mutant , and the 3K mutant were incubated under conditions favorable for polymerization ( Experi - mental Procedures ) . Fluorescence microscopy was employed as an assay for ﬁberization of the four test proteins . See also Movie S2 . ( C ) Coimmunoprecipitation assays were con - ducted by mixing Flag - tagged GFP : CTD C26 with HA - tagged versions of mCherry linked to the native form of the TAF15 LC domain , or to the 1F , 2H or 3K tyrosine - to - serine mutants . Following HA - mediated immunoprecipitation , samples were run on a denaturing SDS - PAGE gel and subjected to western blotting using either anti - Flag or anti - HA antibodies . See also Figure S6 . ( D ) Schematic Concept of RNA Polymerase II Recruitment by LC Domain Polymers . ( 1 ) The CTD of RNA polymerase II does not bind to monomers of the unstructured LC domain of FET protein fused to the ETS DNA - binding domain . ( 2 ) Once the ETS DNA - binding domain of the fusion pro - tein binds to the GGAA repeats on microsatellite DNA , the LC domains of FET protein form ﬁbrous polymer that can recruit RNA polymerase II via direct interaction with the CTD . ( 3 ) Phosphoryla - tion of serine residues 2 , 5 , and 7 of the CTD heptad repeats by CDK7 or CDK9 facilitates release of RNA polymerase II from the FET LC domain polymer . Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 , November 21 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 1057 teleost ﬁsh from which humans diverged 450 million years ago , it is notable that the pattern of degeneracy is nearly identical . Brieﬂy put , the degenerate changes installed nearly one half billion years ago have been perfectly conserved . The most notable difference between the degenerate and consensus CTD repeats is the presence of lysine residues replacing S 7 ( Y 1 S 2 P 3 T 4 S 5 P 6 S 7 versus Y 1 S 2 P 3 T 4 S 5 P 6 K 7 ) in seven of the degen - erate repeats . Although embarrassingly simplistic , we speculate that the positive charge of these seven lysine residues on the immediate N - terminal sides of tyrosines in the degenerate CTD repeats might blend with the negative charge of six consecu - tive aspartic acids ﬂanking tyrosines in the ‘‘16 - 21 window’’ of TAF15 . If correct , this idea of charge attraction might explain the longstanding enigma of acidic activation domains . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Materials Synthesis of the biotinylated isoxazole is described previously ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) . Mammalian pM expression vector was purchased from Clontech Lab - oratory ( USA ) . CDK7 / Cyclin H / MAT1 and CDK9 / Cyclin T1 enzyme complexes were purchased from Millipore . TranscriptionalActivationbyTyrosine - to - SerineMutantsofFUSand TAF15 LC Domain MammalianexpressionplasmidsforhumanFUSorTAF15LCdomainfusedto GAL4 DNA - binding domain were constructed by insertion of a DNA fragment encoding FUS LC domain ( residues 2 - 266 ) or TAF LC domain ( residues 2 - 208 ) into the multiple cloning sites of pM vector ( Clontech , USA ) . Tyrosine - to - serine mutants of GAL4 - FUS LC and GAL4 - TAF15 LC were generated by QuickChange Multi Site - Directed Mutagenesis Kit ( Agilent Technologies ) . To test transcriptional activity of GAL4 - fused LC domains , luciferase assays were performed in quadruplicate in 96 - well plate . In each well , 50 ng of pM - LCvector and20ngL8G5 - Luc ( Lemercieretal . , 2000 ) werereversetrans - fected to HEK293T cells ( 6 , 500 cells per well ) by lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitro - gen ) . Luciferaseassayswereperformedafter24hrofincubationat37 (cid:1) C , using Bright - Glo Luciferase Assay System ( Promega ) . In order to obtain similar protein levels relative to wild - type , 25 ng , 50 ng , or 100 ng of pM - LC mutant plasmids were cotransfected with L8G5 - Luc , and expression of GAL4 - fused LC domains was determined by western blotting with anti - GAL4 antibody ( sc - 510 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) . The DNA dosages yielding the same expression level of GAL4 - FUS mutant proteins to the wild - type protein were used for luciferase assays . Generation of Bacterial Expression Constructs Expression plasmids for recombinant proteins used in all the biochemical assays were constructed using pHis - parallel vectors ( Shefﬁeld et al . , 1999 ) as described before ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) . The details were described in Supple - mental Information . Protein Puriﬁcation All recombinant proteins were overexpressed in E . coli strain BL21 ( DE3 ) . mCherry and GFP fusion LC domains from FUS , EWS , TAF15 , CIRBP and hnRNPA2 were expressed and puriﬁed as described previously ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) . GFP : CTD proteins were puriﬁed by Ni - NTA ( QIAGEN , USA ) in the same conditions described previously ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) , and further puriﬁed by a Hi - Load Superdex 200 gel ﬁltration column ( GF Healthcare , USA ) . The expression and puriﬁcation of his - tagged mCherry : FUS LC domain - FLI DNA - binding domain fusion protein is described in Supplemental Information . Hydrogel - Binding Assays Hydrogel droplets of mCherry : LC domain of either FUS , EWS , TAF15 , CIRBP , or hnRNPA2 were prepared as described before ( Kato et al . , 2012 ) . Brieﬂy , concentrated mCherry fusion proteins ( typically (cid:3) 50 mg / ml ) were dialyzed in gelation buffer containing 20 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 200 mM NaCl , 20 mM BME , 0 . 5 mM EDTA , 0 . 1 mM PMSF over night . Dialyzed protein solution was sonicated , clariﬁed by centrifugation , and concentrated again to (cid:3) 50 – 80 mg / ml . Small droplets ( 0 . 5 m L ) of this protein solution were placed on a glass - bottomed dish ( MatTek , USA ) . Hydrogels typically form after incu - bation for a couple of days at room temperature . For standard hydrogel - bind - ingassays , glycerolstocksofthepuriﬁedGFPfusiontestproteinswerediluted to 1 m M in 1 ml of the gelation buffer . The GFP test solution was pipetted into thehydrogel dish soastosoak thehydrogel dropletsintheGFP solution . After overnight incubation at 4 (cid:1) C , a horizontal section of the hydrogel droplet was scanned with both the mCherry and GFP excitation wavelengths on a Zeiss LSM510 confocal microscope . To measure binding rates of the FUS LC domain mutants carrying different number of tyrosine - to - serine mutations onto the wild - type mCherry : FUS hydrogels , immediately after GFP : mutant solution was administered into the hydrogel dish , scans of a horizontal section ofthehydrogeldropletwereperformedatindicatedtimepoints . GFPsignalsof thescannedsectionswereintegratedbytheprogramImageJ ( Rasband , 1997 - 2011 ) . Initialbindingrateswerecalculatedbyalinearregressionﬁttingwiththe program Prism ( Graphpad , USA ) . The scatter plot for calculating correlation between transactivation and hydrogel binding rate of the mutants was made using the program Prism . Cyclin - Dependent Kinase Assay For release of GFP : CTD C26 from mCherry : TAF15 , mCherry : FUS and mCherry : FUS 2A hydrogels by phosphorylation , unphosphorylated GFP : CTD C26 was preincubated with the hydrogels overnight . After removing the GFP : CTD C26 solution , the CDK7 or CDK9 reaction mixtures were applied to the GFP : CTD C26 - trapped hydrogel droplets . The hydrogel plates were incubated at 30 (cid:1) C for 1 hr . Hydrogels were analyzed by a confocal microscope . For western blotting of the released protein from the hydrogel droplets , the reaction mixture was carefully removed from the hydrogel plate and mixed with 2 3 SDS lysis buffer . After SDS - PAGE , GFP : CTD C26 protein was transferred to a nitrocellulose ﬁlter and visualized by western blotting using anti - GFP antibodies ( Chemicon ) or the 3E8 phospho - S 5 antibody ( Millipore ) . Biotinylated Isoxazle - Mediated Precipitation Proteinprecipitationbyb - isoxchemicalfromyeastextractandhumannuclear extract is described in Supplemental Information . Cloning of Microsatellite DNA ThemicrosatelliteDNAinthepromoterregionofthehNROB1genewasampli - ﬁed by PCR from U2OS cell genomic DNA as a template . The sequence of the microsatellite DNA is shown in Supplemental Information . Transmission Electron Microscopy DNA - dependentﬁberformationofmCherry : FUS - FLIproteinwascarriedoutin a reaction mixture containing 20 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 200 mM NaCl , 20 mM BME , 0 . 5 mM EDTA , 0 . 1 mM PMSF , and 35 % glycerol , with or without 20 nM microsatellite DNA . mCherry : FUS - FLI protein stored in 50 % glycerol was added to the reaction mixture at the ﬁnal concentration of 0 . 5 m M , and the reactions were incubated at room temperature for 1 hr . The sample solution ( 10 m L ) was spotted on a TEM grid ( FCF - 200 - Cu Copper grid from Electron Microscopy Sciences , USA ) . After blotting the excess solution , the surface of the grid was washed with 10 m l distilled water twice . After removing the excesswater , thegridwasstainedfor10swith10 m ldropof2 % uranylacetate in water . After the uranyl solution was blotted , the grid was dried in air . TEM images were obtained at 120 kV on Tecnai TEM . Fiber Extension Assays ThemCherry : TAF15 WT , 1F , 2H , or3K protein solution ( 100 m M ) inthegelation bufferwassonicatedtobreakdownthepreformedﬁbers , ifany , intoshortﬁber seeds . After spin down at 14K rpm for 5 min at 4 (cid:1) C , the protein solution was transferred to new test tubes . After overnight incubation at 4 (cid:1) C , the proteins were 10 - fold diluted in the gelation buffer and the formed ﬁbers were detected by ﬂuorescence microscopy . 1058 Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 , November 21 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . Pull Down of GFP : CTD C26 by mCherry : TAF15 HA - or Flag - tag was added , respectively , to the C terminus of mCherry : TAF15 or GFP : CTD C26 by PCR ampliﬁcation . mCherry : TAF15 WT , 1F , 2H , or 3K - HA proteins were diluted to 10 m M in gelation buffer with 0 . 05 % NP - 40 . After 4 hr of incubation at 4 (cid:1) C , 1 m M of GFP : CTD C26 - Flag and 10 m l of HA - magnetic beads ( Pierce , USA ) were added to each tube containing mCherry : TAF15 so - lution . The mixtures were incubated for overnight at 4 (cid:1) C with gentle rotation . The magnetic beads were washed twice with the gelation buffer with 0 . 05 % NP - 40 . Protein was recovered by boiling at 95 (cid:1) C for 10 min in 2 3 SDS lysis buffer . Protein was visualized by western blotting using Flag or HA antibodies . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures , six ﬁgures , four tables , and two movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 10 . 033 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the shared resource cores in Microscopic Imaging , Proteomics and DNA Sequencing at UTSWMC for technical support ; Dr . Robert Tycko for provisionoftheelectronmicrographofamyloidﬁbersincludedinthegraphical abstract ; Dr . David Trudgian for help with mass spectrometry ; and Drs . Bruce Alberts , Deepak Nijhawan , Michael Brown , and Michael Rosen for helpful comments on the composition of the manuscript . This work was funded by an unrestricted endowment provided S . L . M . by an anonymous donor and NIH grant GM066108 for J . L . C . Received : August 1 , 2013 Revised : September 13 , 2013 Accepted : October 1 , 2013 Published : November 21 , 2013 REFERENCES Akhtar , M . S . , Heidemann , M . , Tietjen , J . R . , Zhang , D . W . , Chapman , R . D . , Eick , D . , and Ansari , A . Z . ( 2009 ) . TFIIH kinase places bivalent marks on the carboxy - terminal domain of RNA polymerase II . Mol . Cell 34 , 387 – 393 . Andersson , M . K . , Sta˚hlberg , A . , Arvidsson , Y . , Olofsson , A . , Semb , H . , Sten - man , G . , Nilsson , O . , and Aman , P . ( 2008 ) . The multifunctional FUS , EWS and TAF15 proto - oncoproteins show cell type - speciﬁc expression patterns and involvement in cell spreading and stress response . BMC Cell Biol . 9 , 37 . Arvand , A . , and Denny , C . T . ( 2001 ) . Biology of EWS / ETS fusions in Ewing’s family tumors . Oncogene 20 , 5747 – 5754 . Bertolotti , A . , Bell , B . , and Tora , L . ( 1999 ) . The N - terminal domain of human TAFII68 displays transactivation and oncogenic properties . Oncogene 18 , 8000 – 8010 . Buratowski , S . ( 2009 ) . Progression through the RNA polymerase II CTD cycle . Mol . Cell 36 , 541 – 546 . Chapman , R . D . , Heidemann , M . , Albert , T . K . , Mailhammer , R . , Flatley , A . , Meisterernst , M . , Kremmer , E . , andEick , D . ( 2007 ) . TranscribingRNApolymer - ase II is phosphorylated at CTD residue serine - 7 . Science 318 , 1780 – 1782 . Corden , J . L . , Cadena , D . L . , Ahearn , J . M . , Jr . , and Dahmus , M . E . ( 1985 ) . A unique structure at the carboxyl terminus of the largest subunit of eukaryotic RNA polymerase II . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 82 , 7934 – 7938 . Crozat , A . , Aman , P . , Mandahl , N . , and Ron , D . ( 1993 ) . Fusion of CHOP to a novel RNA - binding protein in human myxoid liposarcoma . Nature 363 , 640 – 644 . Cumberworth , A . , Lamour , G . , Babu , M . M . , and Gsponer , J . ( 2013 ) . Promiscu - ity as a functional trait : intrinsically disordered regions as central players of interactomes . Biochem . J . 454 , 361 – 369 . Czudnochowski , N . , Bo¨sken , C . A . , and Geyer , M . ( 2012 ) . Serine - 7 but not serine - 5 phosphorylation primes RNA polymerase II CTD for P - TEFb recognition . Nat Commun 3 , 842 . Egloff , S . , and Murphy , S . ( 2008 ) . Cracking the RNA polymerase II CTD code . Trends Genet . 24 , 280 – 288 . Egloff , S . , Dienstbier , M . , and Murphy , S . ( 2012 ) . Updating the RNA polymer - ase CTD code : adding gene - speciﬁc layers . Trends Genet . 28 , 333 – 341 . Gangwal , K . , Sankar , S . , Hollenhorst , P . C . , Kinsey , M . , Haroldsen , S . C . , Shah , A . A . , Boucher , K . M . , Watkins , W . S . , Jorde , L . B . , Graves , B . J . , and Lessnick , S . L . ( 2008 ) . Microsatellites as EWS / FLI response elements in Ewing’s sarcoma . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 10149 – 10154 . Guipaud , O . , Guillonneau , F . , Labas , V . , Praseuth , D . , Rossier , J . , Lopez , B . , and Bertrand , P . ( 2006 ) . An in vitro enzymatic assay coupled to proteomics analysis reveals a new DNA processing activity for Ewing sarcoma and TAF ( II ) 68 proteins . Proteomics 6 , 5962 – 5972 . Han , T . W . , Kato , M . , Xie , S . , Wu , L . C . , Mirzaei , H . , Pei , J . , Chen , M . , Xie , Y . , Allen , J . , Xiao , G . , and McKnight , S . L . ( 2012 ) . Cell - free formation of RNA gran - ules : bound RNAs identify features and components of cellular assemblies . Cell 149 , 768 – 779 . Huntley , M . A . , and Golding , G . B . ( 2002 ) . Simple sequences are rare in the Protein Data Bank . Proteins 48 , 134 – 140 . Ichikawa , H . , Shimizu , K . , Katsu , R . , and Ohki , M . ( 1999 ) . Dual transforming activities of the FUS ( TLS ) - ERG leukemia fusion protein conferred by two N - terminal domains of FUS ( TLS ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 7639 – 7650 . Jones , J . C . , Phatnani , H . P . , Haystead , T . A . , MacDonald , J . A . , Alam , S . M . , and Greenleaf , A . L . ( 2004 ) . C - terminal repeatdomain kinase Iphosphorylates Ser2 and Ser5ofRNApolymeraseIIC - terminaldomain repeats . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 24957 – 24964 . Kato , M . , Han , T . W . , Xie , S . , Shi , K . , Du , X . , Wu , L . C . , Mirzaei , H . , Goldsmith , E . J . , Longgood , J . , Pei , J . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Cell - free formation of RNA granules : low complexity sequence domains form dynamic ﬁbers within hydrogels . Cell 149 , 753 – 767 . Kim , T . K . , Hemberg , M . , Gray , J . M . , Costa , A . M . , Bear , D . M . , Wu , J . , Harmin , D . A . , Laptewicz , M . , Barbara - Haley , K . , Kuersten , S . , etal . ( 2010 ) . Widespread transcription at neuronal activity - regulated enhancers . Nature 465 , 182 – 187 . Kim , M . , Suh , H . , Cho , E . J . , and Buratowski , S . ( 2009 ) . Phosphorylation of the yeast Rpb1 C - terminal domain at serines 2 , 5 , and 7 . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 26421 – 26426 . Lam , M . T . , Cho , H . , Lesch , H . P . , Gosselin , D . , Heinz , S . , Tanaka - Oishi , Y . , Benner , C . , Kaikkonen , M . U . , Kim , A . S . , Kosaka , M . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Rev - Erbs repress macrophage gene expression by inhibiting enhancer - directed tran - scription . Nature 498 , 511 – 515 . Lemercier , C . , Verdel , A . , Galloo , B . , Curtet , S . , Brocard , M . P . , and Khochbin , S . ( 2000 ) . mHDA1 / HDAC5 histone deacetylase interacts with and represses MEF2A transcriptional activity . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 15594 – 15599 . Lessnick , S . L . , and Ladanyi , M . ( 2012 ) . Molecular pathogenesis of Ewing sarcoma : new therapeutic and transcriptional targets . Annu . Rev . Pathol . 7 , 145 – 159 . Li , W . , Notani , D . , Ma , Q . , Tanasa , B . , Nunez , E . , Chen , A . Y . , Merkurjev , D . , Zhang , J . , Ohgi , K . , Song , X . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Functional roles of enhancer RNAs for oestrogen - dependent transcriptional activation . Nature 498 , 516 – 520 . Phatnani , H . P . , and Greenleaf , A . L . ( 2006 ) . Phosphorylation and functions of the RNA polymerase II CTD . Genes Dev . 20 , 2922 – 2936 . Rabbitts , T . H . , Forster , A . , Larson , R . , and Nathan , P . ( 1993 ) . Fusion of the dominant negative transcription regulator CHOP with a novel gene FUS by translocation t ( 12 ; 16 ) in malignant liposarcoma . Nat . Genet . 4 , 175 – 180 . Ramanathan , Y . , Rajpara , S . M . , Reza , S . M . , Lees , E . , Shuman , S . , Mathews , M . B . , and Pe’ery , T . ( 2001 ) . Three RNA polymerase II carboxyl - terminal domain kinases display distinct substrate preferences . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 10913 – 10920 . Rasband , W . S . ( 1997 - 2011 ) . ImageJ ( Bethesda : U . S . National Institute of Health ) . Rickert , P . , Corden , J . L . , and Lees , E . ( 1999 ) . Cyclin C / CDK8 and cyclin H / CDK7 / p36 are biochemically distinct CTD kinases . Oncogene 18 , 1093 – 1102 . Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 , November 21 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc . 1059 Robinson , P . J . , Bushnell , D . A . , Trnka , M . J . , Burlingame , A . L . , and Kornberg , R . D . ( 2012 ) . Structure of the mediator head module bound to the carboxy - ter - minal domain of RNA polymerase II . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 17931 – 17935 . Roy , R . , Adamczewski , J . P . , Seroz , T . , Vermeulen , W . , Tassan , J . P . , Schaeffer , L . , Nigg , E . A . , Hoeijmakers , J . H . , and Egly , J . M . ( 1994 ) . The MO15 cell cycle kinase is associated with the TFIIH transcription - DNA repair factor . Cell 79 , 1093 – 1101 . Schwartz , J . C . , Ebmeier , C . C . , Podell , E . R . , Heimiller , J . , Taatjes , D . J . , and Cech , T . R . ( 2012 ) . FUS binds the CTD of RNA polymerase II and regulates its phosphorylation at Ser2 . Genes Dev . 26 , 2690 – 2695 . Schwartz , J . C . , Wang , X . , Podell , E . R . , and Cech , T . R . ( 2013 ) . RNA seeds higher - orderassemblyofFUSprotein . CellRep . 5 . PublishedonlineNovember 21 , 2013 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2013 . 11 . 017 . Shefﬁeld , P . , Garrard , S . , and Derewenda , Z . ( 1999 ) . Overcoming expression and puriﬁcation problems of RhoGDI using a family of ‘‘parallel’’ expression vectors . Protein Expr . Purif . 15 , 34 – 39 . Trigon , S . , Serizawa , H . , Conaway , J . W . , Conaway , R . C . , Jackson , S . P . , and Morange , M . ( 1998 ) . Characterization of the residues phosphorylated in vitro by different C - terminal domain kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 6769 – 6775 . Tsai , K . L . , Sato , S . , Tomomori - Sato , C . , Conaway , R . C . , Conaway , J . W . , and Asturias , F . J . ( 2013 ) . A conserved Mediator - CDK8 kinase module association regulates Mediator - RNA polymerase II interaction . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 20 , 611 – 619 . Uversky , V . N . ( 2002 ) . Natively unfolded proteins : a point where biology waits for physics . Protein Sci . 11 , 739 – 756 . Wang , D . , Garcia - Bassets , I . , Benner , C . , Li , W . , Su , X . , Zhou , Y . , Qiu , J . , Liu , W . , Kaikkonen , M . U . , Ohgi , K . A . , etal . ( 2011 ) . Reprogrammingtranscriptionby distinct classes of enhancers functionally deﬁned by eRNA . Nature 474 , 390 – 394 . Zinszner , H . , Albalat , R . , and Ron , D . ( 1994 ) . A novel effector domain from the RNA - binding protein TLS or EWS is required for oncogenic transformation by CHOP . Genes Dev . 8 , 2513 – 2526 . 1060 Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 , November 21 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Inc .