Title Vast heterogeneity in cytoplasmic diffusion rates revealed by nanorheology and Doppelgänger simulations Short title Cytoplasmic Diffusion is Heterogenous Authors Rikki M . Garner 1 , 2 , 4 , * , & , Arthur T . Molines 3 , 4 , * , Julie A . Theriot 1 , 2 , 4 , # , and Fred Chang 3 , 4 , # 1 . Biophysics Program , Stanford University School of Medicine , Stanford , CA , USA 2 . Department of Biology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute , University of Washington , Seattle , WA , USA 3 . Department of Cell and Tissue Biology , University of California San Francisco , San Francisco , CA , USA 4 . Marine Biological Laboratory , Woods Hole , MA 02543 , USA & . Current address : Harvard Medical School , Department of Systems Biology , Boston MA 02115 * . Authors had equal contributions to the work . # . Authors had equal contributions to the work . Corresponding authors : rikkimgarner @ gmail . com ( R . M . G . ) , a . t . molines @ gmail . com ( A . T . M . ) Keywords Biological noise , diffusion , cytoplasm , viscosity , rheology , particle tracking , fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe , simulations Graphical abstract Abstract The cytoplasm is a complex , crowded , actively - driven environment whose biophysical characteristics modulate critical cellular processes such as cytoskeletal dynamics , phase separation , and stem - cell fate . Little is known about the variance in these cytoplasmic properties . Here , we employed particle - tracking nanorheology on genetically encoded multimeric 40 - nm nanoparticles ( GEMs ) to measure diffusion within the cytoplasm of the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe . We found that the apparent diffusion coefficients of individual GEM particles varied over a 400 - fold range , while the differences in average particle diffusivity among individual cells spanned a 10 - fold range . To determine the origin of this heterogeneity , we developed a Doppelgänger Simulation approach that uses stochastic simulations of GEM diffusion that replicate the experimental statistics on a particle - by - particle basis , such that each experimental track and cell had a one - to - one correspondence with their simulated counterpart . These simulations showed that the large intra - and inter - cellular variations in diffusivity could not be explained by experimental variability but could only be reproduced with stochastic models that assume a wide intra - and inter - cellular variation in cytoplasmic viscosity . The simulation combining intra - and inter - cellular variation in viscosity also predicted weak non - ergodicity in GEM diffusion , consistent with the experimental data . To probe the origin of this variation , we found that the variance in GEM diffusivity was largely independent of factors such as temperature , cytoskeletal effects , cell cycle stage and spatial locations , but was magnified by hyperosmotic shocks . Taken together , our results provide a striking demonstration that the cytoplasm is not “well - mixed” but represents a highly heterogeneous environment in which subcellular components at the 40 - nm size - scale experience dramatically different effective viscosities within an individual cell , as well as in different cells in a genetically identical population . These findings carry significant implications for the origins and regulation of biological noise at cellular and subcellular levels . Significance Biophysical properties of the cytoplasm influence many cellular processes , from differentiation to cytoskeletal dynamics , yet little is known about how tightly cells control these properties . We developed a combined experimental and computational approach to analyze cytoplasmic heterogeneity through the lens of diffusion . We find that the apparent cytoplasmic viscosity varies tremendously – over 100 - fold within any individual cell , and over 10 - fold among individual cells when comparing averages of all particles measured for each cell . The variance was largely independent of temperature , the cytoskeleton , cell cycle stage , and localization , but was magnified under hyperosmotic shock . This suggests that cytoplasmic heterogeneity contributes substantially to biological variability within and between cells , and has significant implications for any cellular process that depends on diffusion . Main Text Introduction Life at the molecular scale is stochastic , with macromolecules continually being jostled by Brownian motion . This emergence of “biological noise” at the molecular level permeates all aspects of cell biology , inducing stochastic fluctuations in subcellular processes and driving natural variation among cells in a population . Previous work has outlined critical roles for biological noise in signaling ( 1 ) , cell size control ( 2 – 4 ) , organelle size scaling ( 5 – 7 ) , and gene expression ( 8 – 11 ) . In general , biological noise presents a challenge to cellular homeostasis and signaling mechanisms , and is often suppressed in order for biological functions to be robust . For example , signaling frequently depends on strong amplification of initially weak signals , which can erroneously amplify noise unless proofreading mechanisms are in place ( 1 ) . However , biological noise can also confer a selective advantage . In a fluctuating and unpredictable environment , biological variation between cells in an isogenic population can ensure population - level survival ( 12 , 13 ) . One potentially significant source of biological noise that has been largely ignored is that of heterogeneity in the cell cytoplasm . The cytoplasm is composed of a highly diverse and actively - mixed assembly of resident macromolecules of various size ( 14 , 15 ) , charge ( 15 ) , and hydrophobicity ( 16 ) . The complexity of the cytoplasmic milieu could influence molecules ' behavior locally . Indeed , spatiotemporal heterogeneity in the diffusion of particles has been observed in multiple contexts such as E . coli , fungi , mammalian cells and even Xenopus egg extract using methods ranging from fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) to particle tracking ( 17 – 31 ) . Heterogeneity of cytoplasmic properties have potentially far - reaching effects in cell biology , as the cytoplasm hosts a wide variety of critical molecular processes ranging from protein synthesis and turnover , to cytoskeletal transport and force production , metabolism , and beyond ( 32 , 33 ) . Further , changes to physical cytoplasmic properties such as the macromolecular density , viscosity , and degree of crowding have been shown to impart widespread effects within the cell ー including sudden and significant impacts on growth and viability ( 34 , 35 ) . For example , altering cytoplasmic crowding by changing the concentration of ribosomes has strong effects on phase separation ( 36 ) , and high osmotic shocks can completely halt microtubule dynamics ( 37 ) . Additionally , alterations in cytoplasmic density have been implicated in cellular aging and senescence ( 38 ) and differentiation ( 39 ) . Here we establish a combined experimental and computational approach to examine cytoplasmic heterogeneity through the lens of diffusion . Single particle motion - tracking allows for a robust quantification and statistical analysis of particle behavior , revealing variations between particles which would otherwise be averaged out in bulk measurements obtained in photobleaching ( e . g . FRAP ) and FCS ( 33 , 40 ) experiments . Further , this kind of “passive” rheology approach requires minimal perturbations to the cell . Previously , particle tracking rheology on fluorescent proteins has proven difficult due to their fast diffusion rates and tendency to photobleach . The development of GEMs ( Genetically Encoded Multimeric nanoparticles ( 36 ) ) , has enabled large improvements on this front . These bright and photostable protein spheres are expressed as fluorescently - tagged monomers which self - assemble into hollow shells of nearly - uniform size and shape ( 36 , 41 ) . Because each particle contains tens of fluorescent proteins , they can be tracked for relatively long periods of time without photobleaching . Additionally , the near - diffusive movements of GEMs suggest they do not interact strongly with eukaryotic cellular components , making them ideal reagents for rheological studies ( 22 , 36 ) . Critically , their relatively large size and slow diffusion rates - comparable to large protein complexes such as ribosomes - allow GEMs to be tracked using modern high - speed cameras ( which is still not attainable for individual fluorescent proteins ) . Initial studies have established their utility in quantitatively probing diffusion and crowding in the cytoplasm and nucleoplasm in various cell types including yeast and mammalian cells ( 22 , 36 , 41 – 45 ) . The fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe provides an excellent model system for the study of cytoplasmic heterogeneity because of their uniformity in many other aspects of their cell biology . In standard laboratory conditions , these rod - shaped cells exhibit very tight distributions in their cell size at division ( CV ~ 6 % ( 3 , 4 ) ) and cell shape ( 46 – 48 ) , as well as cell cycle progression and intracellular density ( CV ~ 10 % ( 49 ) ) . The relatively low phenotypic variability within and between fission yeast cells permits the study of cytoplasmic heterogeneity in a well - controlled system in the presence of minimal confounding factors . Using live cell high - speed imaging and quantitative tracking of 40 nm - diameter GEMs in Schizosaccharomyces pombe , we measured cytoplasmic diffusivity for thousands of individual particles . These data revealed large heterogeneity in diffusion coefficients both within single cells as well as between cells in the population . To analyze this variability , we developed an automated pipeline , which we call the Doppelgänger Simulation approach , to reproduce our experimental results computationally using simulations of diffusion , and assay heterogeneity using statistical techniques for analysis of variance . Using these methods , we showed that orders of magnitude of variability in GEM cytoplasmic diffusivity within and between cells arose from an equally wide distribution of cytoplasmic viscosity . This variance was not affected by temperature , the cytoskeleton , or cell size , but was increased by hyperosmotic shock . Our studies support a growing body of evidence that the cytoplasm is not physically well - mixed ( 17 – 20 , 22 , 23 , 50 ) and reveal this heterogeneity in diffusion as an important potential source of biological noise . Results Statistical characterization of cytoplasmic GEM particle diffusion in fission yeast To assay cytoplasmic diffusion in fission yeast , we expressed 40 nm - diameter GEM nanoparticles in wildtype S . pombe from a multicopy plasmid on an inducible promoter ( 37 ) . Tuning the expression of the GEMs construct allowed us to titrate particle formation to a small number of particles ( < 10 ) per cell . To reduce environmental variability , these cells were grown at 30 °C under optimal conditions in shaking liquid cultures to exponential growth phase and mounted in imaging chambers with fixed dimensions under constant temperature and imaged acutely . Using variable angle epifluorescence microscopy ( VAEM ) ( 36 , 37 , 44 , 51 ) we tracked GEM particle motion at 100 Hz for 10 s , as described previously ( 36 , 37 , 44 ) ( Fig . 1a - b , Methods ) . Each field of view ( FOV ) contained multiple cells that were individualized post - acquisition . Images were manually curated to eliminate from the data set a small subset of cells that had died , exhibited grossly abnormal morphologies , or contained a single bright aggregate of GEM particles . From a dataset of 145 cells , 3681 tracks were analyzed , with an average of 25 ± 10 ( AVG ± SD ) tracks per cell , a mean step size of 104 ± 72 nm ( AVG ± SD ) , and a mean track length of 273 ± 268 ms ( AVG ± SD ) ( Fig . 1c ) . From these trajectories we computed the time - averaged , ensemble - averaged ( i . e . , track - averaged ) mean squared displacement ( MSD ) as a function of time interval , and fitted the resulting MSD curve to a power law ( Fig . 1d , Methods ) . MSD analysis showed that GEM particle motion in the cytoplasm was largely diffusive ( MSD ≈ Dτ ) , following a robust power law with apparent diffusivity D app , 100ms = 0 . 3 ± 0 . 01 µm 2 / sec ( AVG ± 95 % CI ) and anomalous diffusion exponent ⍺ = 0 . 92 ± 0 . 02 ( AVG ± 95 % CI ) , which were similar to previously published measurements in fission yeast ( 43 , 44 ) . The diffusivity of the 40 nm GEMs in the cytoplasm was roughly 40 times slower than the theoretical prediction for simple Stokes - Einstein diffusion in water - - and corresponded to the particle’s expected Figure 1 : High - speed particle - tracking nanorheology of GEMs allows detailed statistical analysis of cytoplasmic diffusion . ( a ) Schematic of the experimental imaging set - up . ( b ) Example brightfield image ( top left ) and maximum intensity projection through time of the GEM particle fluorescence ( top right ) for one representative field of view , alongside the measured nanoparticle trajectories ( bottom ) for the upper cell in the image . Trajectories are colored by the step size of the particle in nanometers between each time frame of the movie . Gray indicates the mean step size across all tracks in the dataset . Scale bar is 5 μm . ( c ) Histograms of the number of tracks per cell ( left ) , the step - size for all time - points ( middle ) , and the duration of time that each particle was tracked ( right ) . Note that tracks shorter than 10 time - points were not included in the analysis . ( d ) The mean squared displacement ( MSD ) of the particle tracks . The time - averaged MSD was first calculated individually for each track , and then a second averaging was performed to find the ( ensemble averaged ) MSD across all tracks . Note the logarithmic scale along the x - and y - axes . ( e ) The average velocity autocorrelation across all article tracks . Averaging was performed in the same order as the MSD . ( d - e ) Error bars represent the standard error . ( f ) Plots of particle trajectories drawn from many experiments and cells , randomly subsampled for better visibility of individual particle behaviors . Subsampled trajectories include at least one track from 141 of the 145 cells in the dataset . Gray indicates the mean step size across all tracks in the dataset . ( c - f ) Dataset includes 3681 tracks among 145 cells , recorded from 5 different samples and over 3 different days . ( g ) Individual trajectory plots for five of the longest - tracked particles ( in time ) , excluding stationary particles . Color scaling of the step size was identical in all panels included in f - g ( using the mean and standard deviation of the step size across the entire dataset ) . diffusion rate in a 75 % glycerol solution in water . We note that diffusion along the long and short axes of the cell were comparable by our measurements ( Supp . Fig . 1a ) , and we found that the MSD plots do not plateau , indicating that diffusion of the GEMs was not confined on timescales less than a second ( e . g . , most particles do not run into the cell wall within the measured time window ) . The time - averaged , ensemble - averaged ( i . e . , track - averaged ) velocity autocorrelation of particle trajectories was also consistent with simple unconstrained diffusion ( Fig . 1e ) . Notably , the autocorrelation plot lacked the characteristic negative peak associated with subdiffusive motion and viscoelastic response seen in other systems ( Supp . Fig . 1b - c ) ( 52 – 55 ) . Therefore , at least with this approach at this 40 - nm size scale , we detected no elastic response in the yeast cytoplasm . Cytoplasmic diffusivity spans orders of magnitude We next analyzed individual particle tracks , which revealed a rich phenotypic variability ( Fig . 1f - g ) that was obscured by the ensemble averaging - based analysis described above ( e . g . , MSD - Fig . 1d ) . Notably , even within a single trace , individual particles exhibited large fluctuations in their step size ( Fig . 1g ) . To investigate the variety of comportment displayed by individual particles , we calculated and fit the time - averaged MSD individually for each track ( Fig . 2a ) and the time - averaged , ensemble - averaged MSD over all tracks in each cell ( Fig . 2b ) . These data showed that variability in particle motion ranged over orders of magnitude ; fits of particle and cell MSDs ( Fig . 2c - d ) showed that diffusivity Figure 2 : GEM diffusivity varies over 400 - fold across tracks and 10 - fold across cells . ( a - b ) Mean squared displacements averaged either ( a ) by track ( averaged over time for each track ) , or ( b ) by cell ( averaged over time for each track and then averaged across all tracks in each cell ) . Note the logarithmic scale along the x - and y - axes . ( c - d ) Apparent diffusivities ( c ) and power law exponents ( d ) calculated from fits of the track - wise and cell - wise MSDs to a power law . Note the logarithmic scale along the y - axis . Boxplots : Central line , median ; grey dot , mean ; boxes , 25th and 75th percentiles ; whiskers , furthest data point that is not an outlier ; outliers , any point that is more than 1 . 5 times the interquartile - range past the 25th and 75th percentiles . ( e - f ) The same distributions of the fitted apparent diffusivities plotted in ( c ) , now plotted as a histogram either on a linear scale ( e ) or on a log scale ( f ) . Probabilities represent the probability density per histogram bin width , such that the sum of the bin heights multiplied by the bin width equals 1 . ( g - h ) Results from a nested ANOVA performed on track - wise fits of diffusivities ( g ) and power law exponents ( h ) . The amount of the experimentally - observed variance that can be explained by track - to - track , cell - to - cell , imaging session - to - session , and day - to - day variability is plotted as a fraction of the total variance . ( a - h ) Dataset is identical to that shown in Fig . 1 c - f , including 3681 tracks among 145 cells , recorded from 5 different samples and over 3 different days . follows a long - tailed , log - scale distribution , consistent with Brownian motion in a heterogeneous environment ( 56 , 57 ) . The distribution of apparent diffusivities exhibited a single peak ( Fig . 2c - f ) , which appeared more normally - distributed on a log scale ( Fig . 2f ) than on a linear scale ( Fig . 2e ) . Therefore , we performed all further statistics and visualization on the log 10 of the fitted apparent diffusivities . The median of the diffusivity distribution in log space , which we then converted to linear space ( see Methods ) , corresponded to a diffusivity of 0 . 29 µm 2 / sec for the track - wise distribution and 0 . 33 µm 2 / sec for the cell - wise distribution , both similar to the bulk estimate . The standard deviation of the diffusivity distribution in log space ( representing the number of orders of magnitude spanned by the dataset ) can be converted to linear space as a fold - range at 2 . 5 standard deviations away from the median ( see Methods ) , giving a 392 - fold range across tracks and 11 - fold range across cells . We chose 2 . 5σ as our cutoff as it gave a range consistent with our outlier estimation algorithm ( Fig . 2c , see caption ) . Overall , we showed that diffusivities vary by over 2 . 5 orders of magnitude among individual GEMs and one order of magnitude among cells . Hereafter we use the terms inter cellular variation to refer to the spread of the cell - wise diffusivity ( Fig . 2c , right ) and intra cellular variation to indicate the spread in the track - wise diffusivity ( Fig . 2c , left ) . To understand whether variation arose from cell - to - cell variability , from different microenvironments within a single cell , or from experimental day - to - day variation , we performed an Analysis of Variance ( ANOVA ) on the track - wise diffusivity measurements ( Fig . 2g ) . The ANOVA revealed that the vast majority ( ~ 80 % ) of the measured spread in diffusivity came from intracellular variation ( i . e . , Track in Fig . 2g ) , but there was also a significant amount of variance ( ~ 20 % ) explained by cell - to - cell variability ( i . e . , Cell in Fig . 2g ) . Only < 1 % could be attributed to experiment - to - experiment variability . Similar results were observed for the fitted anomalous diffusion exponent ( Fig . 2d , h ) , which was not surprising given the strong correlation between the fitted apparent diffusivities and power law exponents in our dataset ( Supp . Fig . 2a ) . Another common way to differentiate sources of noise in biological data is to separate the observed spread into intrinsic ( uncorrelated within cells ) and extrinsic ( correlated within cells ) components ( 9 , 58 ) . Our ANOVA results suggested that noise in this system was almost entirely intrinsic , as ~ 80 % of the variation was maintained after controlling for cell - to - cell variability . Indeed , by plotting the apparent diffusivities of random pairs of GEM particles , where each pair is randomly chosen from particles within a single cell , we found that the noise had only a very weak correlation between particles within the same cell ( Spearman correlation : r = 0 . 21 , p = 5 * 10 - 35 , Supp . Fig . 2b ) . We noted that the large intercellular and intracellular variation observed in our data cannot be explained by differences in GEM particle expression levels , as the mean apparent diffusivity among track - wise diffusivity fits within a cell was not significantly correlated with the number of tracks in the cell ( Spearman correlation : r = - 0 . 003 , p = 0 . 97 , Supp . Fig . 2c ) , and the coefficient of variation among track - wise diffusivity values within a cell was only very weakly correlated with the number of tracks in the cell ( Spearman correlation : r = 0 . 25 , p = 0 . 004 , Supp . Fig . 2d ) . In addition , the coefficient of variation of particle diffusivities within each cell was ~ 1 , and was uncorrelated with the mean particle diffusivity across all particles in the cell , consistent with Poisson statistics ( Spearman correlation : r = - 0 . 1 , p = 0 . 15 , Supp . Fig . 2e ) . Stochastic simulations demonstrate that spread is not due solely to statistical measurement noise As diffusion is an inherently stochastic process , we next explored whether the measured variation in particle mobility was due to statistical properties of our measurements . It is known , for example , that datasets with shorter track lengths will produce wider distributions of measured diffusivities ( 55 ) . We therefore developed what we called the Doppelgänger Simulation ( DS ) approach , employing a custom algorithm to automatically read in and replicate the experimental measurement statistics in silico cell - for - cell and track - for - track ( Fig . 3a ) . With DS , simulated cells have the exact same cell length and number of tracks as their experimentally - measured counterparts , and each simulated track has an identical length ( i . e . , number of time points tracked ) to the associated experimental trajectory . This straightforward and powerful approach allowed us to produce simulated data that could be directly compared to the experimental tracks and analyzed using identical statistical methods . Figure 3 : Stochastic simulations reveal both spatial and cellular heterogeneity in viscosity are required to reproduce experimentally observed variation . ( a ) Schematic of the Mirror Image Simulation approach . Each experimentally - measured cell and particle were reproduced one - to - one in the simulated dataset , with every simulated cell having the same long - axis length as its experimentally - measured counterpart , and each particle being tracked for the same amount of time . ( b ) Schematic demonstrating different types of heterogeneity in cytoplasmic viscosity included in each of the four models . Note : the choice of physical domain size for spatial heterogeneity in ( c - g ) is 1000 nm . ( c ) Median apparent diffusivity ( averaged across all tracks ) plotted for the experimental dataset as well as each model . Error bars represent the standard error of the median . Significance stars represent the result of the Wilcoxon rank sum test for equality of the medians . ( d - e ) Distributions of apparent diffusivities calculated from fits of the track - wise ( d ) or cell - wise ( e ) MSD curves displayed for the experimental data as well as each of the models . Note the logarithmic scale along the y - axis . Boxplots are drawn as in Figure 2 . Significance stars represent the result of Levene’s test for equality of variance . ( c - e ) * p < 0 . 05 . * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . ( f ) Results from a nested ANOVA performed on track - wise fits of diffusivities ( d ) . The percent of the experimentally - observed cell - to - cell and track - to - track variability that can be explained by each of the models . ( g ) The distribution of cytoplasmic viscosities , shown relative to the viscosity of water , needed to most closely reproduce the experimental data ( i . e . , simulations from Model # 4 , using the same parameters used to generate ( c - f ) ) . Histograms are shown for the distribution of average cell viscosities ( intercellular heterogeneity , red dashed line ) and the distribution of intracellular viscosities for three example cells ( blue lines of varying darkness ) . The examples include a cell whose average viscosity equals that of the cell - wide average ( medium blue line ) , a cell with an average viscosity three standard deviations above the cell - wide average ( dark blue line ) , and a cell with an average viscosity three standard deviations below the cell - wide average ( light blue line ) . Note the logarithmic scale along the x - axis . The simulation did not allow viscosities below that of water . Using DS , particle motion was then recapitulated using stochastic Brownian dynamics simulations of diffusion inside a box representing the exterior cell boundary ( Fig . 3 , Tables 2 - 3 ) . We opted for a simple diffusion model because GEM particle motion is observed experimentally to be largely diffusive ( Fig . 1d ) and did not display characteristics of constrained or viscoelastic behavior ( Fig . 1d - e ) . The model assumes an average cytoplasm viscosity forty times that of water , giving a mean diffusivity of 0 . 35 μm 2 / s that closely matches that of the experimental data . The simplest iteration of the model ( Fig . 3b - f , Model # 1 : uniform viscosity ) , which we will hereafter refer to as the uniform viscosity model ( due to its assumption of constant viscosity within and among cells ) , accounted for only a fraction of the experimentally - measured spread in GEM particle mobility ( Fig . 3d - f ) – including ~ 50 % of the track - to - track variability in diffusivity , and < 10 % of the cell - to - cell variability , as measured by ANOVA ( Fig . 3f ) . We therefore concluded that neither the stochastic nature of diffusion nor the statistical properties of our experimental measurement statistics were the major source of heterogeneity in GEM particle diffusion . Simulations suggest that heterogeneity in diffusion must arise from an equally vast spread in cytoplasmic viscosity . As the data set of experimentally - measured GEM particle motion fitted well to a model of simple diffusion , there were only a finite number of sources in this simple model from which heterogeneity in mobility could arise . The major parameter defining diffusion is the diffusivity , D , which theoretically ( by the Stokes - Einstein equation ) is simply equal to the ratio of the thermal energy , k B T , to the viscous drag on the particle , γ . For a spherical particle , γ = 6πηR , where η is the viscosity of the cytoplasm and R is the radius of the particle ( 59 ) . Of these parameters , viscosity is the only parameter that could be varying within and between cells , as temperature is held constant and the radii of GEM nanoparticles have been shown by electron microscopy to be fairly uniform ( CV ≈ 0 . 1 ) when expressed in mammalian and budding yeast cells ( 36 ) . We therefore generated three other versions of our model incorporating viscosity variation ( Fig . 3b ) , while keeping the mean viscosity ( and thus mean particle diffusivity ) constant ( Fig . 3c ) . In one version , which we refer to as the spatial heterogeneity model ( Fig . 3 , Model # 2 : spatial heterogeneity ) , we aimed to explore whether intracellular spatial variations in viscosity could account for the experimentally measured spread in diffusivity . A spatially varying viscosity was consistent with the observation that individual particles can display significant variations in step size within a single track ( Fig . 1g ) . This model assumed that viscosity varies across the cell with a fixed domain size , approximated by a grid of discrete viscosity domains where each region was randomly assigned a distinct viscosity value . The average cellular viscosity was held constant . In another variation of the model , termed the cellular heterogeneity model , viscosity was uniform within each cell , but the uniform viscosity value varied between cells ( Fig . 3 , Model # 3 : cellular heterogeneity ) . Finally , we developed a fourth model combining both intracellular and intercellular heterogeneity , which we called the combined heterogeneity model ( Fig . 3 , Model # 4 : combined heterogeneity ) . In all three variations on the original model , viscosity values were chosen from a log - normal distribution , mimicking the distribution of the experimentally - measured step sizes ( Fig . 1c , middle ) and diffusivities ( Fig . 2f ) . We then ran each model multiple times to account for their stochastic nature and assayed whether each model could reproduce the experimentally - observed spread in diffusivity ( 1 ) as measured by ANOVA ( Fig . 3f ) , and ( 2 ) such that the variance was not statistically significantly different from the experiments according to Levene’s test for equality of variances ( Fig . 3d - e ) ( 60 ) . While the spatial heterogeneity model could only account for the track - to - track variation in experimentally - measured diffusivity ( but not the cell - to - cell variation ) , and the cellular heterogeneity model could only reproduce the cell - to - cell variation ( but not the track - to - track variation ) , only the model combining both spatial and cellular heterogeneity could fully reproduce the amount of spread observed in the experimental data ( Fig . 3d - f ) . Further , only a viscosity variation spanning orders of magnitude ( Fig . 3g ) could quantitatively recapitulate the experimentally - measured spread . In particular , the viscosity was required to vary 10 - fold ( on average ) among cells , 100 - fold within any individual cell , and 400 - fold across the dataset in order to best match the experiments . Importantly , this extreme degree of heterogeneity in viscosity was required regardless of the choice of characteristic length scale for the spatial variation ( Table 4 , Supp . Fig . 3 ) . Overall , our simulations showed that our data is best explained by a model in which the effective viscosity experienced by cytoplasmic GEM particles varies drastically within and between cells . Spatial heterogeneity in cytoplasm viscosity can lead to ergodicity breaking . Heterogeneity in diffusion is frequently observed in non - ergodic systems , due to the fact that individual particles within the system exhibit distinct behaviors compared to the ensemble average ( 27 – 29 , 61 , 62 ) . The experimentally - observed spread in GEM diffusivity thus suggested that the cytoplasm may represent a non - ergodic system . To test this hypothesis , we assayed the ergodicity of the GEM diffusion . A hallmark of a non - ergodic system is that the ensemble - averaged ( EA ) MSD diverges from time - ensemble - averaged ( TEA ) MSD ( 62 ) . In comparing the EA MSD with the TEA MSD of our experimental dataset ( Fig . 4 ) ( 62 ) , we found that GEM diffusion was indeed weakly non - ergodic ( Fig . 4a ) . In particular , the EA and TEA MSD exhibited a ~ 40 % difference at short times , which decreased to ~ 10 % at longer times ( Fig . 4d ) . To determine the origin of the weak non - ergodicity of GEM particle diffusion , we returned to our Doppelgänger simulations . As expected , we found that simulations with no heterogeneity in viscosity resulted in perfectly ergodic diffusion ( Fig . 4b , e ) . However , simulations with both spatial and cellular heterogeneity ( Model # 4 ) were able to reproduce the experimentally - observed non - ergodicity ( Fig . 4c ) , including quantitative features of the decay in non - ergodicity at long times ( Fig . 4f ) . Another possible origin of non - ergodicity in particle diffusion is transient particle immobility , which can be mathematically described by a continuous time random walk ( CTRW ) ( 27 ) . However , our longest - tracked diffusing particles ( Fig . 1g ) showed no evidence of transient immobilizations ( Supp . Fig . 4a - b ) . Further , the time - averaged MSDs of individual tracks did not have a power law exponent , α , equal to 1 even for the longest - tracked particles ( Supp . Fig . 4c ) , in contrast to what would be expected for a CTRW . Overall , our data were more consistent with heterogeneity in cytoplasm viscosity ( Fig . 4 ) than a two - state system of mobile and immobile particles . Figure 4 : Weak non - ergodicity of GEM diffusion can be explained by heterogeneity in viscosity . ( a ) GEM particle mean squared displacement ( MSD ) vs time , calculated either by ensemble - averaging over all particle tracks ( EA MSD , red line ) , or by first time - averaging over each track and then ensemble - averaging over all particles ( TEA MSD , black line ) . 95 % confidence intervals ( CI ) of the EA MSD were calculated by bootstrapping and are plotted as a red shaded region around the EA MSD . Note the logarithmic scale along the x - and y - axes . ( b ) The TEA and EA MSD calculated for a representative Doppelgänger simulation for Model # 1 : Uniform viscosity ( see Fig . 3b ) . ( c ) The TEA and EA MSD calculated for a representative Doppelgänger simulation for Model # 4 : Spatial + cellular heterogeneity in viscosity ( see Fig . 3b ) , using a 100 nm spatial domain size . ( d - f ) The percent difference between the EA and the TEA MSD ( ( EA - TEA ) * 100 / EA ) displayed in ( a - c ) , respectively , plotted as a function of time interval . The best fit of the data to an exponential decay plus a constant : y = A * e ( - Bt ) + C is plotted as a thick dashed black line . ( g ) The percent difference between the EA and TEA MSD for Model # 4 : Spatial + cellular heterogeneity in viscosity , where each subplot represents a different choice for the domain size of the spatial heterogeneity . X - and y - axes for all subplots are identical . Each light orange line represents an individual simulation , equivalent to the entire experimental dataset . 50 replicate simulations are superimposed onto the plot . Each curve was individually fit to an exponential decay plus a constant : y = A * e ( - Bt ) + C , and the best fit parameters were averaged across all 50 simulations to produce the best fit line ( thick dashed orange line ) . The best fit to the experimental data shown in ( d ) is overlaid as a thick dashed purple line . Of the domain sizes sampled , simulations using the 100 nm domain gives the closest agreement to the experimental data , with the experimental data best fit line lying well within the range of outcomes among replicate simulations . On average , the 100 nm simulation best fit line lies slightly below the experimental best fit line , and the 300 nm simulation best fit line lies slightly above the experimental best fit line . Thus we estimate the domain size of the cytoplasm is on the order of ~ 100 - 300 nm . In the Doppelgänger simulations with heterogeneous viscosity , non - ergodicity arises from the fact that particles within distinct spatial domains exhibit different diffusion rates . Therefore , non - ergodicity in diffusion should depend on the domain size of the spatial heterogeneity in viscosity . Indeed , we found that non - ergodicity in our simulations is strongly dependent on the domain size ( Fig . 4g ) . Interestingly , while the experimentally - measured variability in GEM diffusion can be reproduced using a wide range of different domain sizes ( Table 4 , Supp . Fig . 3 ) , the experimentally - measured non - ergodicity of GEM particle diffusion could only be reproduced quantitatively with a subset of characteristic length scales ( Fig . 4g ) . By comparing the simulations to the experimental data , we estimate the size of spatial domains of cytoplasm viscosity for the 40 nm GEM particles to be on the order of ~ 100 - 300 nm . Heterogeneity in diffusion does not arise from density fluctuations related to the cell cycle or cell tip growth We next tested what factors might be responsible for such a large heterogeneity in cytoplasmic viscosity . Within an asynchronous population , fission yeast cells exhibit an approximately two - fold range in cell size , which corresponds to the cell cycle stage ( 63 ) . A recent study used quantitative phase imaging ( QPI ) to show that the overall intracellular dry - mass density of fission yeast cells fluctuates over the cell cycle , with density decreasing during interphase and increasing during mitosis and cytokinesis ( 49 ) . To test whether GEM diffusion also varies over the cell cycle , we examined the relationship of GEM diffusion with cell length as a proxy for cell cycle stage ( Supp . Fig . 5a - b ) . We detected no significant correlation of diffusivity with cell length , making it unlikely that the cell - to - cell variability in GEM diffusion is cell cycle dependent . We next tested whether spatial variations of density could explain the variability of GEM diffusion . QPI experiments demonstrated a subtle gradient of intracellular density in a subset of fission yeast cells , in which growing cell tips generally appear to be less dense than the rest of the cell ( 49 ) . Regional cytoplasmic differences have also been shown in Ashbya gossypii , in which GEMs have decreased diffusivity in the perinuclear region ( 22 ) . To test for spatial variations in fission yeast , we mapped the GEM tracks relative to their positions in the cell ( Supp . Fig . 5c - d ) . This analysis yielded no obvious regional differences in diffusivity within the fission yeast cell ; specifically , we noted no strong differences in diffusion at growing cell tips or at the perinuclear regions . Therefore , it is unlikely that systematic regional differences in intracellular density are responsible for the variance in diffusivity . Variance in diffusion is impacted by osmotic shock but not by cytoskeletal or temperature perturbations . We then probed what factors could affect the variance by submitting the cells to different perturbations . For each perturbation , we measured the distribution of track - wise and cell - wise fits of GEM diffusivities , and performed the Wilcoxon rank sum non - parametric test for equality of medians ( 64 ) and Levene’s test for equality of variances ( 60 ) to establish whether changes to the median and variance were statistically significant ( Methods ) . One cytoplasmic constituent implicated in the rheological properties of the cytoplasm is the cytoskeleton . A rigid and interconnected cytoskeleton network can act as a barrier ( 65 ) , or elastically resist particle motion – properties which can be described by poroelastic models ( 40 , 66 ) . In addition , the cytoskeleton is responsible for transporting and positioning organelles and “actively mixes” the cytoplasm ( 67 ) . The cytoskeleton may also create structured intracellular regions with distinct biophysical properties ( 68 ) . We used a combination of latrunculin A ( LatA ) and methyl benzimidazol - 2 - yl - carbamate ( MBC ) to depolymerize actin and microtubules in interphase fission yeast cells ( Fig . 5a ) . This treatment however had only subtle effects on GEM diffusivity ; we detected a small , statistically insignificant increase in the median diffusivity ( Fig . 5d , Wilcoxon t - test , Track - wise fits : 6 % increase , p - value = 0 . 17 ; Cell - wise fits : 18 % increase , p - value = 0 . 3 ) , and a small , statistically insignificant increase in the variance ( Fig . 5g , j , Levene test , Track - wise fits : 71 % increase , p - value = 0 . 08 ; Cell - wise fits : 27 % increase , p - value = 0 . 18 ) ) . We therefore concluded that the cytoskeleton is not the main determinant of cytoplasmic viscosity or variance at the 40 - nm size scale in fission yeast . Another main determinant of diffusivity D is temperature T . In addition to purely physical effects of temperature of diffusion as defined by the Stokes - Einstein equation where D ∝ T . temperature can also have also a multitude of biological effects . For instance , temperature shifts may alter active mixing of the cytoplasm ( 69 ) , and trigger viscosity adaptation mechanisms via production of viscogens ( 70 ) . There are also reports of regional differences in effective temperature within single cells ( 71 – 73 ) . Figure 5 : Heterogeneity in cytoplasmic diffusion has varied responsiveness to experimental perturbations . ( a ) Fluorescence images of fluorescent tubulin ( top ) and actin ( bottom ) in the context of the DMSO control ( left ) and addition of cytoskeleton depolymerizing drugs ( right ) . Scale bar is 5 μm . ( b ) Schematic of experiments varying the experimental temperature ( top ) and prediction of the relationships between the diffusivity , D , and the experimental temperature , T , as well as the Boltzmann constant , k B , and the viscous drag coefficient , ᵞ ( bottom ) . ( c ) Schematic of experiments varying osmotic shock with sorbitol ( top ) and example brightfield images of osmotically - shocked cells showing a reduction in cell volume ( bottom ) . Scale bar is 5 μm . ( d - f ) The median diffusivity is plotted for each experimental condition . Significance stars represent the result of the Wilcoxon rank sum test for equality of the medians . ( g - l ) Distributions of apparent diffusivities calculated from fits of the track - wise ( g - i ) or cell - wise ( j - l ) MSD curves displayed for each condition . Note the logarithmic scale along the y - axis . Boxplots are drawn as in Figure 2 . Significance stars represent the result of Levene’s test for equality of variance . ( d - l ) * p < 0 . 05 . * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . To assay the effects of temperature on GEMs diffusivity , we grew fission yeast cells overnight at 30 °C , and then imaged them ~ 5 min after shifting cells down to 20 °C ( Fig . 5b ) . This 10 ˚C decrease in temperature corresponds to ≈ 3 % decrease in the absolute temperature ( in Kelvin ) , and thus the Stokes - Einstein equation predicted a similar decrease in diffusivity . We observed a slightly larger than predicted drop in the median track - wise diffusivity of GEMs ( Fig . 5e , Wilcoxon test , Track - wise fits : 11 % decrease , p - value = 0 . 03 ; Cell - wise fits : 6 % decrease , p - value = 0 . 54 ) . The track - wise variance exhibited a statistically significant decrease , but the cell - wise variance did not change significantly ( Levene test , Track - wise fits : 49 % decrease , p - value = 0 . 006 ; Cell - wise fits : 28 % decrease , p - value = 0 . 43 ) . Overall , increasing the temperature had no effect on cell - to - cell variation but slightly increased intracellular heterogeneity . Finally , we tested the effects of osmotic shocks . Osmotic shocks acutely alter the concentration of molecules in the cytoplasm by removal or addition of water ( 34 , 37 , 44 ) . We performed hyperosmotic shocks with 1 M and 1 . 5 M sorbitol ( Fig . 5c ) , which has been previously reported to roughly double the concentration of the cytoplasm ( 37 , 44 ) . Consistent with previous reports ( 37 , 44 ) , these hyper - osmotic shocks induced a striking decrease in the median track - averaged diffusivity of GEM particles compared to control experiments ( Wilcoxon t - test , Track - wise fits : 93 % and 96 % decreases , p - values = 5 * 10 - 273 , 3 * 10 - 153 for 1 M and 1 . 5 M shocks , respectively ; Cell - wise fits : 92 % and 94 % decreases , p - values = 3 * 10 - 21 , 4 * 10 - 10 for 1 M and 1 . 5 M , respectively ) . Interestingly , it also induced a sizable increase in both the track - wise and cell - wise variance in measured diffusivity ( Fig . 5i , l , Levene test , Track - wise fits : 275 % and 420 % increases , p - values = 1 * 10 - 9 , 2 * 10 - 10 for 1 M and 1 . 5 M shocks , respectively ; Cell - wise fits : 530 % and 16 , 083 % increases , p - values = 4 * 10 - 4 , 3 * 10 - 9 for 1 M and 1 . 5 M , respectively ) . Thus we found that increasing the concentration of the cytoplasm slowed diffusion but also drastically increased both intracellular and intercellular cytoplasmic heterogeneity . These results suggest that hyperosmotic shocks may make the cytoplasm even more heterogeneous . Discussion Here we used a combined experimental and theoretical analysis to reveal a high degree of cytoplasmic heterogeneity experienced by objects on the scale of large protein complexes . In particular , our results indicated the effective cytoplasmic viscosity in fission yeast varies more than 10 - fold among cells , and 100 - fold within cells . Although the source of this heterogeneity is not yet understood , our analyses showed that viscosity variation is independent of the cytoskeleton , cell cycle stage , and temperature – but increases under hyperosmotic shock . Generalizability of cytoplasmic heterogeneity It is highly likely that the large diffusive heterogeneity we observed in fission yeast is generalizable to most , if not all , cell types . In fact , because fission yeast exhibit strikingly regular cell shape and growth properties , they may be expected to have much less cytoplasmic variability than many other systems . Although most previous work has not explicitly focused on variability , studies of GEM particle diffusion in the cytoplasm or nucleoplasm of budding yeast , the filamentous fungus Ashbya gossypii , Xenopus egg extract , and several mammalian cell types ( 24 , 26 , 36 , 41 ) , as well as other studies of diffusion in E . coli ( 30 ) , show that comparable variability in diffusion exists in these diverse contexts . In particular , McLaughlin et al . reported sizeable variation in both inter - and intra - cellular heterogeneity of GEM diffusivity in Ashbya ( 22 ) . Beyond measurements of diffusion , a study directly probing viscosity also revealed substantial variability ( 74 ) . Thus , large variability in cytoplasmic properties may be a fundamental , conserved property of cells . Hints from the literature suggest that heterogeneous cytoplasmic diffusion is also not limited to large protein complexes . Both larger objects such as lipid droplets ( 28 , 54 ) and smaller particles such as individual fluorescent proteins ( 17 – 21 , 23 , 29 , 75 ) and quantum dots ( 25 , 26 , 31 ) seem to exhibit substantial amounts of diffusive heterogeneity , as well as ergodicity - breaking ( 28 – 30 ) . Sources of cytoplasmic heterogeneity What might be the origin of this variability in cytoplasmic properties ? Heterogeneity may originate from multiple non - exclusive sources . At the submicron and micron - scale , obstruction by organelles ( 76 , 77 ) and other cytoplasmic structures such as condensates , as well as localized active mixing , could contribute to cytoplasmic variability ( 78 ) . Local differences in the composition of specific macromolecules , for instance in the vicinity of organelles , may also contribute to cytoplasmic heterogeneity ( 79 , 80 ) . In addition , GEMs and other intracellular constituents may become transiently trapped between or inside membrane - bound and membrane - less compartments , thereby lowering the particle’s apparent diffusion rate . These various scenarios are consistent with our rough estimate of spatial domain size on the order of hundreds of nanometers for the 40 nm GEM particles . At the nanometer - scale there are some enticing sources of heterogeneity that remain unexplored , notably those intrinsic to the macromolecular milieu : crowder density , size , charge , and hydrophobicity . Indeed , the fact that diffusion varies strongly with probe size and molecular species ( 25 , 81 – 86 ) , suggests that the local molecular structure of the cytoplasm plays a large role in the diffusion of macromolecules . Similarly , all - atom molecular dynamics simulations of the cytoplasm show that thermal fluctuations in the local cytoplasmic composition can lead to significant variability in diffusion rates ( 87 ) . Therefore , the molecular and cellular features contributing to viscosity may themselves be highly dynamic and transient . Future studies of diffusive heterogeneity across different species , cell types , and physiological states will be invaluable for dissecting the biophysical determinants of cytoplasmic variation . Consequences of cytoplasmic heterogeneity The heterogeneity of the cytoplasm may act as a highly significant source of biological noise for any diffusion - limited process . For example , spatial heterogeneity in diffusivity could lead to differences in diffusion - limited reaction rates across the cell . In particular , if the regions of high viscosity ( low diffusivity ) are long lived , they could act as “traps” , locally increasing the concentration of larger protein complexes or organelles , potentially influencing the speed and localization of certain reactions . The effects of stochasticity should be particularly strong for complexes which exist at low copy number or whose biological function depends on rare binding events . At the cell population level , having a wide range of diffusivities might be advantageous , allowing different cells to react to changes in the environment at different rates , permitting strategies such as bet - hedging to take place . In fact , it is hard to imagine a biological process that would not be affected by such a large variation in the effective viscosity . For example , many reactions driving gene expression , biosynthesis and metabolism are considered to be diffusion limited . For example , cytoplasmic viscosity has been demonstrated to have strong effects on microtubule dynamics in vivo ( 37 ) . Interestingly , the dynamics of individual microtubules were much less variable than those of the GEMs , suggesting that cellular systems may employ compensatory mechanisms that buffer the effects of heterogeneity in viscosity . Cellular control of viscosity and other aspects of the cytoplasm such as intracellular density represents a potential global mode of regulation . Generalization of the Doppelgänger simulation approach Our analyses of biological noise were made possible by using our Doppelgänger simulation approach . This approach explicitly reproduces the experimental measurement statistics in silico , which allowed us to definitively distinguish between statistical noise and biological heterogeneity . This simulation approach may be generalizable to many other systems ( Supp . Fig . 6 ) , and could be useful for instance in the analysis of noise suppression . Overall , we believe this powerful approach combining experiment and theory will provide needed clarity for studies of stochastic processes in biology , such as cytoskeletal dynamics , signaling , and gene expression . Methods Table 1 : Reagents and Resources REAGENT AND RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER S . pombe strains h - [ pREP41X - PfV - Sapphire ] ade + his + leu + ura + Chang lab collection ( 37 ) FC3287 h + GFP - atb2 : kanMX ade6 - leu1 - 32 ura4 - D18 his + Chang lab collection FC2861 h + pAct1 - Lifeact - mCherry : : leu + ade6 - M216 leu1 - 32 ura4 - D18 his + Chang lab collection ( 88 ) FC2781 Chemicals D - sorbitol Sigma S1876 Carbendazim Sigma 378674 Latrunculin A Abcam ab144290 Edinburgh Minimal Media ( EMM ) MP Biomedicals 4110 - 032 YES 225 Sunrise Science Products 2011 - 500 Lectin ( glycine max ) Sigma L1395 Dimethyl sulfoxide Sigma 472301 Supplies µ - Slide VI 0 . 4 ibiTreat IBIDI 80606 Software FIJI Schindelin et al . , 2012 https : / / imagej . net / contribut e / fiji ImageJ Schneider et al . , 2012 https : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / MOSAIC for ImageJ Sbalzarini et al . , 2005 https : / / imagej . net / plugins / m osaicsuite Matlab Mathworks https : / / www . mathworks . co m / Micromanager Edelstein et al . , 2010 https : / / micro - manager . org / Citing _ Micro - Manager Yeast strains and culture conditions Standard methods for growing and genetically manipulating Schizosaccharomyces pombe were used ( 89 ) . The constructions of the GEMs expressing strains were described previously ( 37 , 44 ) . In brief , the encapsulin - mSapphire chimera was expressed under the control of the inducible nmt1 promoter ( 90 ) on a multcopy pREP41X plasmid containing a leucine selection cassette . Cells were grown overnight in Edinburgh minimal medium ( EMM ) containing adenine , histidine and , uracil at 0 . 25 g per liter ( here called EMM LEU - ) and 0 . 1 µg / mL thiamine with shaking at 30 °C to exponential phase ( OD600 between 0 . 2 - 0 . 8 ) . See Table 1 for reagents and strain list . Expression of the Pyrococcus furiosus encapsulin - mSapphire construct produces particles of 40 nm in diameter , with the encapsulin proteins facing the inside of the particle and the fluorescent proteins facing the cytoplasm ( 36 , 41 ) . Microscopy S . pombe cells were imaged in commercial microchannels ( Ibidi μ - slide VI 0 . 4 slides ; Ibidi 80606 , Ibiditreat # 1 . 5 ) . Channels were pre - treated with 50 μl of 100 μg / ml lectin solution for 5 min . The lectin solution was removed by pipetting and 50 μl of cell culture were introduced then incubated for 5 to 10 minutes to allow adhesion to the lectin then cells were washed with EMM LEU - . For the 20°C condition the Ibidi slide and the buffer were equilibrated at 20°C before cells were added . For the 30°C condition , slides and buffers were equilibrated at 30°C before cells were added to it . For hyper - osmotic shocks , the medium was manually removed from the channel via pipetting and quickly replaced with pre - warmed ( 30°C ) hyper - osmotic media . Cells were imaged immediately and for no longer than 5 minutes after the medium was exchanged to minimize adaptation . For cytoskeleton depolymerization cells were introduced in the Ibidi slide as described previously then the buffer was exchanged for pre - warmed ( 30°C ) EMM LEU - containing Latrunculin A ( 8 . 4 µg / mL or 20 µM ) and methyl benzimidazol - 2 - yl - carbamate ( MBC ) ( 25 µg / mL or 131 µM ) . Cells were incubated at 30°C with the drug cocktail for 5 minutes prior to imaging . We confirmed that this treatment caused depolymerization of the microtubule and actin cytoskeletons in < 5 min by imaging cells expressing Lifeact - mCherry or GFP - Atb2 . For imaging GEMs , yeast cells were imaged with a Nikon TI - 2 equipped with a Diskovery Multi - modal imaging system from Andor and a SCMOS camera ( Andor , Ixon Ultra 888 ) using a 60x TIRF objective ( Nikon , MRD01691 ) . Cells were imaged sequentially , first a brightfield ( BF ) image then 1 , 000 fluorescence images at 100 Hz ( for ~ 10 s ) with a 488 nm excitation laser and a GFP emission filter 525 + / - 25 nm . Variable angle epifluorescence microscopy ( VAEM ) ( 51 ) was used to reduce background fluorescence and allow for the high imaging frequency required . Cells were selected for sparse numbers of labeled motile nanoparticles ( < 10 GEMs per cell ) to ensure proper particle tracking . Note that each GEM can be imaged multiple times during the acquisition giving more tracks per cell than the number of visible nanoparticles . Particle tracking Cells were individualized from the field of view by cropping the images . Images of individual cells were rotated so that cell length ( long axis ) was horizontal . From the brightfield image cell length was measured by tracing a straight line joining each pole and passing through the center of the cell . Cell contours were drawn manually from the brightfield image and used to determine cell centroid . Cell length and centroid were used to plot GEMs tracks in linear and normalized space ( Figure 1 ) . GEMs nanoparticles in each cell were tracked using the MOSAIC plugin ( Fiji ImageJ ) ( 91 , 92 ) with the following parameters for the 2D Brownian dynamics tracking in MOSAIC : radius = 3 , cutoff = 0 , per / abs = 0 . 2 - 0 . 3 , link = 1 , and displacement = 6 . Tracks shorter than 10 timepoints were removed from further analysis . Diffusivity Analysis Mean Square Displacement ( MSD ) Analysis : Unless explicitly stated otherwise , all analysis was performed using the time - ensemble averaged ( TEA ) MSD = < ( x ( t + τ ) - x ( t ) ) 2 > t , n . The time - averaged MSD was first calculated individually for each track , and then a second averaging was performed to find the ( ensemble averaged ) MSD across all tracks . For the time - averaging of each track , MSDs were calculated using non - overlapping windows and plotted versus time interval , τ . For example , a track with 7 time steps and time interval τ = 3 time steps would have an MSD x = ( ( x ( t = 4 ) - x ( t = 1 ) ) ^ 2 + ( x ( t = 7 ) - x ( t = 4 ) ) ^ 2 ) / 2 ) . For the subsequent ensemble - averaging step , the MSDs for each time interval were averaged across all tracks . Fitting the MSD : A linear fit of ln ( MSD ) vs ln ( τ / τ 0 ) for the first 7 time intervals ( ~ 70 ms ) was used to determine the values of the anomalous exponent and the apparent diffusivity ( see our rationale for choice of τ 0 below in this paragraph ) . As the length of the trajectories is an exponentially decaying distribution ( Fig . 1d - histograms ) , the statistical error grows with time ( Fig . 1e - MSD ) - - hence , we fit the only first part of the MSD function . The fitting resulted in two fit parameters corresponding to the equation MSD = A ( τ / τ 0 ) α , where A has units of nm 2 ( representing the MSD when τ = τ 0 ) and α is unitless . We can convert these values to an apparent diffusivity by assuming MSD τ = τ0 = A = 2nD app , τ0 τ 0 , where n is the number of spatial dimensions ( in this case , n = 2 ) . Solving for the apparent diffusivity D app in nm 2 ms - 1 , we find the following conversion : D app , τ0 = A / ( 2nτ 0 ) ( representing the apparent diffusivity specifically at τ 0 ) . We choose τ 0 = 100ms , to represent the intermediate regime measured in our dataset . For track - wise fits , the time - averaged MSD was calculated and fit separately for each trajectory . For cell - wise and condition - wise MSD calculations , the time - averaged MSDs for each track were then ensemble - averaged over all tracks in each cell or condition , respectively , and subsequently fit . The 95 % confidence intervals ( CI ) for α and D app were calculated using bootstrapping of the TEA MSD by sampling the individual TA MSDs ; the bootci ( ) function in MATLAB was called using the basic percentile method and a sample size equal to the number of tracks in the dataset . Doppelganger Simulations Simulations of particle diffusion were implemented using fixed time step Brownian dynamics , according to the Stokes - Einstein relation for diffusion of a spherical particle in a viscous medium ( D = k B T / γ , where D is the diffusion coefficient such that the mean - squared displacement MSD = 2nDt is linear with time t and the number of dimensions n , k B is the Boltzmann constant , T is the temperature , and γ = 6πηR , where η is the viscosity of the cytoplasm and R is the radius of the particle ) . See Tables 2 - 3 for a list of the parameters used . All code was written in custom MATLAB scripts . Cells were implemented as 2D rectangular boxes with reflecting boundary conditions at the edges of each box . All simulated cells had a short - axis width of 3 μm , and a long - axis width equal to that of its experimentally - measured doppelgӓnger . ( Note that the short - axis width was chosen to be 3 μm , rather than the known 4 μm diameter of fission yeast cells , to best represent the imaging conditions in the experimental data . VAEM imaging only captures the lower portion of the cell near the coverslip , where the cross - section is smaller than at the equatorial plane . ) Each simulated cell had the same number of particles as its experimental doppelgänger . Each particle was initialized randomly within the rectangular cell wall boundary . After initialization , particle positions were updated using fixed time step Brownian dynamics , where the fixed time step , Δt , was equal to the acquisition frame rate of the experimental measurements . In each time step , a random number generator ( randn , seeded randomly at the beginning of each set of simulations with rng ( ' shuffle ' ) ) selected each particle’s step size and direction from a normal distribution with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of ξ = sqrt ( 2 * k B T * Δt / γ ) . If a particle left the cell boundary during a timestep , the particle’s position was reflected across the cell boundary ( or boundaries ) that the particle crossed , in order to keep the particle inside the cell ( i . e . , reflective boundary conditions ) . For ease of implementation , all particle tracks were simulated for the longest length of time any particle in the experimental dataset was tracked ; then after simulations were complete , each simulated particle’s data were pruned to match their experimental doppelgӓnger - - all other timepoints that were not tracked for the experimental doppelgӓnger were deleted from the simulated dataset . For simulations with cell - cell variations in viscosity ( Models # 3 and # 4 ) , viscosity values for each cell were chosen from a random log - normal distribution ( η = μe ( σ / μ ) * randn ( ) ) , with a mean viscosity equal to 40 times that of water , and a standard deviation of 45 % of the mean . For simulations with spatially - varying viscosity ( Models # 2 and # 4 ) , each rectangular cell was broken up into spatial domains of equally - sized squares with 1 μm side - length . As all cells were 3 μm in width but variable in length , simulated spatial domains within cells were arranged in a 3xm grid , where m is the number of domains along the long axis . If the cell length along the long dimension was not an integer multiple of 1 μm , then the remainder was placed in its own spatial domain of smaller size . Viscosity values in each domain were chosen from a random log - normal distribution ( η = μe ( σ / μ ) * randn ( ) ) , with a mean equal to the mean viscosity of that cell , and a standard deviation equal to 85 % of the mean . For simulations varying the domain size of spatial heterogeneity , the mean and variance in viscosity was fit to the experimental data in order to replicate the mean and variance of the experimentally - measured GEM particle diffusivity ( Supp . Fig . 4 , Table 4 ) . The ergodicity was then compared between different spatial domain sizes under these conditions . Statistical analysis Velocity autocorrelation analysis : Velocity autocorrelations were defined as VAC ( τ ) = < ( v ( t + τ ) v ( t ) ) > t and were performed using non - overlapping intervals . ANOVA : A nested , n - way analysis of variance was performed using MATLAB’s anovan ( ) function . Track identity was nested under cell , session , and day identities , cell identity was nested under session and day identities , and the session identity was nested under the day identity . ANOVA was performed separately on the power law exponents and the natural logarithm of the diffusivities . ANOVA was performed identically on the experimental and simulated datasets . Because the Doppelgӓnger simulation approach computationally reproduces the exact experimental distribution of tracks , cells , sessions , and days , the exact magnitudes of the variance attributed to each category can be directly quantitatively compared ( e . g . Fig . 3f ) . Comparison of median diffusivity values between conditions : A Wilcoxson rank sum non - parametric test for equality of medians ( 64 ) was performed to determine whether differences in the medians between conditions were statistically significant . We chose a non - parametric test , and compared the medians instead of the means , so that our analysis would be less sensitive to the fact that the distributions were long - tailed and not perfectly Gaussian ( even on a log scale ) . Statistical tests were performed on the logarithm ( base 10 ) of the apparent diffusivities . Comparison of variance in diffusivity values between conditions : Levene’s test for equality of variance ( 60 ) was performed to determine whether differences in the variances between conditions were statistically significant . While Levene’s test is not a non - parametric test , it is less sensitive to non - normality than many other parametric tests , and is MATLAB’s recommended test for equality of variance for non - normal distributions . Statistical tests were performed on the logarithm ( base 10 ) of the apparent diffusivities . Converting summary statistics from log space to linear space : Because the diffusivities were more normally distributed on a log scale than a linear scale , all of the summary statistics ( medians , standard deviations , etc . ) were calculated on the distribution in log space . For a distribution that is log - normally distributed , medians and standard deviations calculated in log space are not the same as those calculated in linear space and so are not interchangeable ( i . e . 10 < a > = / = < 10 a > , and 10 sqrt ( < ( a - < a > ) ^ 2 > ) = / = sqrt ( < ( 10 a - < 10 a > ) 2 > ) and have different interpretations . The median of the log - scale diffusivity distribution ( μ log = < log 10 ( D app , 100ms ) > represents the median order of magnitude of diffusivities in the dataset . The medians reported in this work were first calculated from the distribution in log space , and then converted to linear space as μ linear = 10 μ _ log , and also represents the median order of magnitude ( but now presented in linear space ) . The standard deviation of the log - scale diffusivity distribution ( σ = sqrt ( < ( log 10 ( D app , 100ms ) - < log 10 ( D app , 100ms ) > ) ^ 2 > ) represents the number of orders of magnitude spanned by the dataset ) . In linear space , the associated number which best captures the data’s span in order of magnitudes is the fold - range of the distribution measured at some specified number of standard deviations away from the mean . In our dataset , a 2 . 5σ threshold best matched the outlier exclusion algorithm used in our box - plotting software ( 1 . 5 times the interquartile range past the 25th and 75th percentiles , Fig . 2c , see caption ) . To determine the fold - range , the standard deviation was calculated for the diffusivity distribution in log space , then the ratio of the diffusivities at 10 ( μ _ log±2 . 5 * σ _ log ) ( i . e . , the fold - range ) was evaluated as 10 ( μ + 2 . 5 * σ ) / 10 ( μ - 2 . 5 * σ ) = 10 5 * σ . In perturbation conditions ( Fig . 5 ) , the reported percent change in the median and fold - range were determined using the converted linear space median and fold - range as described above in this paragraph . Ergodicity The ensemble - average ( EA ) MSD = < ( x ( τ ) - x ( 0 ) ) 2 > was computed as the squared displacement at each time interval relative to the particle’s origin position , and then averaged across all particles . The 95 % confidence intervals ( CI ) for the EA MSD were calculated using bootstrapping ; the bootci ( ) function in MATLAB was called using the basic percentile method and a sample size equal to the number of tracks in the dataset . The time - ensemble - average ( TEA ) MSD = < ( x ( t + τ ) - x ( t ) ) 2 > was first time - averaged across each individual track using non - overlapping time intervals , and then the time - averages were again averaged across all particles ( exactly as in Diffusivity Analysis ) . The percent difference between the EA and TEA MSD was calculated as ( EA - TEA ) * 100 / EA MSD . The percent difference as a function of the time interval was then fit to an exponential decay plus a constant : y = A * e ( - Bt ) + C using the MATLAB fit ( ) function . The fitting was weighted by the inverse of the standard error for each data point . Table 2 : Model Parameters - Input parameters Variable Meaning Value Source k B Boltzmann’s constant 0 . 0138pN nm / K - T Cytoplasm temperature 303 . 15 K ( 30 °C ) This work R Particle radius 20 nm ( 36 ) L Cell length That of the experimentally - measured counterpart This work W Cell width 3 μm This work η w Dynamic viscosity of water 2 . 414×10 - 8 ×10 ( 247 . 8 / ( T - 140 ) ) ( 8×10 - 7 pN ms / nm 2 at 30 °C ) - 〈 η c , s 〉 Dynamic viscosity of the cytoplasm ( mean across all cells and subcellular spatial domains ) 40 η w ( 320×10 - 7 pN ms / nm 2 at 30 °C ) Approximated to match experimentally - measured average diffusivity assuming the Stokes - Einstein relationship D = k B T / γ σ η , c Standard deviation of the average cellular viscosity across all cells in the population 0 . 45 〈 η c , s 〉 Best fit to this work σ η , s Standard deviation of the viscosity among all spatial domains in a cell 0 . 85 〈 η c 〉 where 〈 η c 〉 is the average across all spatial domains in a particular cell Best fit to this work λ Spatial domain size within a single cell 1 μm Best fit to this work Table 3 : Model Parameters - Derived parameters Variable Meaning Value k B T Thermal energy 4 . 18 pN nm 〈 γ 〉 Viscous drag coefficient given Stokes’ law ( for the average particle ) γ = 6π 〈 η c 〉 R 0 . 012 pN ms / nm ( at 30 °C ) 〈 D c , s 〉 Diffusivity ( averaged across all cells and spatial domains ) D = k B T / γ 350 nm 2 / ms Table 4 : Model Parameters - Best fit parameters for each spatial heterogeneity domain size in order to match the experimentally - observed mean and variance in GEM diffusivity Spatial domain size within a single cell λ Mean cytoplasm viscosity η c , s 〉 Standard deviation of the average cellular viscosity across all cells in the population σ η , c Standard deviation of the viscosity among all spatial domains in a cell σ η , s 100 nm 50 η w 0 . 375 〈 η c , s 〉 1 . 1 〈 η c 〉 300 nm 39 η w 0 . 4 〈 η c , s 〉 1 . 0 〈 η c 〉 600 nm 38 η w 0 . 4 〈 η c , s 〉 0 . 9 〈 η c 〉 1000 nm 40 . 5 η w 0 . 4 〈 η c , s 〉 0 . 8 〈 η c 〉 3000 nm 41 . 5 η w 0 〈 η c , s 〉 0 . 775 〈 η c 〉 Data and code availability All raw imaging data are available upon request . All tracking data and code are freely available on Gitlab : < https : / / gitlab . com / theriot _ lab / vast - heterogeneity - in - cytoplasmic - diffusion - rates - revealed - by - nanorheology - and - doppelgaenger - simulations . git > Author Contributions Conceptualization , A . T . M . , and R . M . G . ; Methodology , A . T . M , R . M . G . ; Software , R . M . G . ; Validation , R . M . G . and A . T . M . ; Formal Analysis , R . M . G . , and A . T . M . ; Investigation , A . T . M . , and R . M . G ; Resources , A . T . M . , and R . M . G . ; Data curation , A . T . M . and R . M . G . ; Writing – Original Draft , A . T . M . , R . M . G . . ; Writing – Review & Editing , A . T . M . , R . M . G . , J . A . T . , and F . C . ; Visualization , R . M . G . and A . T . M . ; Supervision , A . T . M . and R . M . G . ; Project Administration , A . T . M . and R . M . G . ; Funding Acquisition , J . A . T . and F . C . ; R . M . G . and A . T . M . contributed equally and have the right to list their name first on their C . V . Acknowledgements We thank Joël Lemière and Elena Koslover , for useful discussions and Chenlei Hu , for preliminary analysis and modeling . We are grateful to the MBL community and members of the MBL Physical Biology of the Cell Course for support . We thank the Chang lab and the Theriot labs for support and discussions . Funding This work was supported by grants to F . C . ( NIH R01GM115185 and R35GM141796 ) , grants to J . A . T . ( NIH R37 - AI036929 and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute ) , a Gerald J . Lieberman Fellowship to R . M . G , and an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship to R . M . G . This article is subject to HHMI’s Open Access to Publications policy . HHMI lab heads have previously granted a nonexclusive CC BY 4 . 0 license to the public and a sublicensable license to HHMI in their research articles . Pursuant to those licenses , the author - accepted manuscript of this article can be made freely available under a CC BY 4 . 0 license immediately upon publication . References 1 . Huang , W . Y . C . , Q . Yan , W . - C . Lin , J . K . Chung , S . D . Hansen , S . M . Christensen , H . - L . Tu , J . Kuriyan , and J . T . Groves . 2016 . Phosphotyrosine - mediated LAT assembly on membranes drives kinetic bifurcation in recruitment dynamics of the Ras activator SOS . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 113 : 8218 – 8223 . 2 . Schmoller , K . M . 2017 . The phenomenology of cell size control . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 49 : 53 – 58 . 3 . Facchetti , G . , B . Knapp , F . Chang , and M . Howard . 2019 . Reassessment of the Basis of Cell Size Control Based on Analysis of Cell - to - Cell Variability . Biophys . J . 117 : 1728 – 1738 . 4 . Patterson , J . O . , P . Rees , and P . Nurse . 2019 . Noisy Cell - Size - Correlated Expression of Cyclin B Drives Probabilistic Cell - Size Homeostasis in Fission Yeast . Curr . Biol . 29 : 1379 – 1386 . e4 . 5 . Chang , A . Y . , and W . F . Marshall . 2017 . Organelles - - understanding noise and heterogeneity in cell biology at an intermediate scale . J . Cell Sci . 130 : 819 – 826 . 6 . Mohapatra , L . , B . L . Goode , P . Jelenkovic , R . Phillips , and J . Kondev . 2016 . Design Principles of Length Control of Cytoskeletal Structures . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 45 : 85 – 116 . 7 . Gray , W . T . , S . K . Govers , Y . Xiang , B . R . Parry , M . Campos , S . Kim , and C . Jacobs - Wagner . 2019 . Nucleoid Size Scaling and Intracellular Organization of Translation across Bacteria . Cell . 177 : 1632 – 1648 . e20 . 8 . Oates , A . C . 2011 . What’s all the noise about developmental stochasticity ? Development . 138 : 601 – 607 . 9 . Raj , A . , and A . van Oudenaarden . 2008 . Nature , nurture , or chance : stochastic gene expression and its consequences . Cell . 135 : 216 – 226 . 10 . Raser , J . M . , and E . K . O’Shea . 2005 . Noise in Gene Expression : Origins , Consequences , and Control . Science . 11 . Battich , N . , T . Stoeger , and L . Pelkmans . 2015 . Control of Transcript Variability in Single Mammalian Cells . Cell . 163 : 1596 – 1610 . 12 . Suderman , R . , J . A . Bachman , A . Smith , P . K . Sorger , and E . J . Deeds . 2017 . Fundamental trade - offs between information flow in single cells and cellular populations . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 : 5755 – 5760 . 13 . Levien , E . , J . Min , J . Kondev , and A . Amir . 2021 . Non - genetic variability in microbial populations : survival strategy or nuisance ? Rep . Prog . Phys . 84 . 14 . Milo , R . , and R . Phillips . 2015 . Cell Biology by the Numbers . Garland Science . 15 . Requião , R . D . , L . Fernandes , H . J . A . de Souza , S . Rossetto , T . Domitrovic , and F . L . Palhano . 2017 . Protein charge distribution in proteomes and its impact on translation . PLoS Comput . Biol . 13 : e1005549 . 16 . White , S . H . , and R . E . Jacobs . 1990 . Statistical distribution of hydrophobic residues along the length of protein chains . Implications for protein folding and evolution . Biophys . J . 57 : 911 – 921 . 17 . Bakshi , S . , B . P . Bratton , and J . C . Weisshaar . 2011 . Subdiffraction - limit study of Kaede diffusion and spatial distribution in live Escherichia coli . Biophys . J . 101 : 2535 – 2544 . 18 . Baum , M . , F . Erdel , M . Wachsmuth , and K . Rippe . 2014 . Retrieving the intracellular topology from multi - scale protein mobility mapping in living cells . Nat . Commun . 5 : 4494 . 19 . Dross , N . , C . Spriet , M . Zwerger , G . Müller , W . Waldeck , and J . Langowski . 2009 . Mapping eGFP oligomer mobility in living cell nuclei . PLoS One . 4 : e5041 . 20 . Manley , S . , J . M . Gillette , G . H . Patterson , H . Shroff , H . F . Hess , E . Betzig , and J . Lippincott - Schwartz . 2008 . High - density mapping of single - molecule trajectories with photoactivated localization microscopy . Nat . Methods . 5 : 155 – 157 . 21 . Scipioni , L . , M . Di Bona , G . Vicidomini , A . Diaspro , and L . Lanzanò . 2018 . Local raster image correlation spectroscopy generates high - resolution intracellular diffusion maps . Commun Biol . 1 : 10 . 22 . McLaughlin , G . A . , E . M . Langdon , J . M . Crutchley , L . J . Holt , M . G . Forest , J . M . Newby , and A . S . Gladfelter . 2020 . Spatial heterogeneity of the cytosol revealed by machine learning - based 3D particle tracking . Mol . Biol . Cell . 31 : 1498 – 1511 . 23 . Xiang , L . , K . Chen , R . Yan , W . Li , and K . Xu . 2020 . Single - molecule displacement mapping unveils nanoscale heterogeneities in intracellular diffusivity . Nat . Methods . 17 : 524 – 530 . 24 . Huang , W . Y . C . , X . Cheng , and J . E . Ferrell . 2021 . Cytoplasmic organization promotes protein diffusion . bioRxiv . 2021 . 07 . 09 . 451827 . 25 . Etoc , F . , E . Balloul , C . Vicario , D . Normanno , D . Liße , A . Sittner , J . Piehler , M . Dahan , and M . Coppey . 2018 . Publisher Correction : Non - specific interactions govern cytosolic diffusion of nanosized objects in mammalian cells . Nat . Mater . 17 : 1048 . 26 . Sabri , A . , X . Xu , D . Krapf , and M . Weiss . 2020 . Elucidating the Origin of Heterogeneous Anomalous Diffusion in the Cytoplasm of Mammalian Cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 125 : 058101 . 27 . Lubelski , A . , I . M . Sokolov , and J . Klafter . 2008 . Nonergodicity mimics inhomogeneity in single particle tracking . Phys . Rev . Lett . 100 : 250602 . 28 . Jeon , J . - H . , V . Tejedor , S . Burov , E . Barkai , C . Selhuber - Unkel , K . Berg - Sørensen , L . Oddershede , and R . Metzler . 2011 . In vivo anomalous diffusion and weak ergodicity breaking of lipid granules . Phys . Rev . Lett . 106 : 048103 . 29 . Weigel , A . V . , B . Simon , M . M . Tamkun , and D . Krapf . 2011 . Ergodic and nonergodic processes coexist in the plasma membrane as observed by single - molecule tracking . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 : 6438 – 6443 . 30 . Parry , B . R . , I . V . Surovtsev , M . T . Cabeen , C . S . O’Hern , E . R . Dufresne , and C . Jacobs - Wagner . 2014 . The bacterial cytoplasm has glass - like properties and is fluidized by metabolic activity . Cell . 156 : 183 – 194 . 31 . Janczura , J . , M . Balcerek , K . Burnecki , A . Sabri , M . Weiss , and D . Krapf . 2021 . Identifying heterogeneous diffusion states in the cytoplasm by a hidden Markov model . New J . Phys . 23 : 053018 . 32 . Cadart , C . , L . Venkova , P . Recho , M . C . Lagomarsino , and M . Piel . 2019 . The physics of cell - size regulation across timescales . Nat . Phys . 15 : 993 – 1004 . 33 . Neurohr , G . E . , and A . Amon . 2020 . Relevance and Regulation of Cell Density . Trends Cell Biol . 30 : 213 – 225 . 34 . Knapp , B . D . , P . Odermatt , E . R . Rojas , W . Cheng , X . He , K . C . Huang , and F . Chang . 2019 . Decoupling of Rates of Protein Synthesis from Cell Expansion Leads to Supergrowth . Cell Syst . 9 : 434 – 445 . e6 . 35 . Tsai , H . - J . , A . R . Nelliat , M . I . Choudhury , A . Kucharavy , W . D . Bradford , M . E . Cook , J . Kim , D . B . Mair , S . X . Sun , M . C . Schatz , and R . Li . 2019 . Hypo - osmotic - like stress underlies general cellular defects of aneuploidy . Nature . 570 : 117 – 121 . 36 . Delarue , M . , G . P . Brittingham , S . Pfeffer , I . V . Surovtsev , S . Pinglay , K . J . Kennedy , M . Schaffer , J . I . Gutierrez , D . Sang , G . Poterewicz , J . K . Chung , J . M . Plitzko , J . T . Groves , C . Jacobs - Wagner , B . D . Engel , and L . J . Holt . 2018 . mTORC1 Controls Phase Separation and the Biophysical Properties of the Cytoplasm by Tuning Crowding . Cell . 174 : 338 – 349 . e20 . 37 . Molines , A . T . , J . Lemière , M . Gazzola , I . E . Steinmark , C . H . Edrington , C . - T . Hsu , P . Real - Calderon , K . Suhling , G . Goshima , L . J . Holt , M . Thery , G . J . Brouhard , and F . Chang . 2022 . Physical properties of the cytoplasm modulate the rates of microtubule polymerization and depolymerization . Dev . Cell . 57 : 466 – 479 . e6 . 38 . Neurohr , G . E . , R . L . Terry , J . Lengefeld , M . Bonney , G . P . Brittingham , F . Moretto , T . P . Miettinen , L . P . Vaites , L . M . Soares , J . A . Paulo , J . W . Harper , S . Buratowski , S . Manalis , F . J . van Werven , L . J . Holt , and A . Amon . 2019 . Excessive Cell Growth Causes Cytoplasm Dilution And Contributes to Senescence . Cell . 176 : 1083 – 1097 . e18 . 39 . Guo , M . , A . F . Pegoraro , A . Mao , E . H . Zhou , P . R . Arany , Y . Han , D . T . Burnette , M . H . Jensen , K . E . Kasza , J . R . Moore , F . C . Mackintosh , J . J . Fredberg , D . J . Mooney , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , and D . A . Weitz . 2017 . Cell volume change through water efflux impacts cell stiffness and stem cell fate . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 : E8618 – E8627 . 40 . Charras , G . T . , T . J . Mitchison , and L . Mahadevan . 2009 . Animal cell hydraulics . J . Cell Sci . 122 : 3233 – 3241 . 41 . Szórádi , T . , T . Shu , G . R . Kidiyoor , Y . Xie , N . L . Herzog , A . Bazley , M . Bonucci , S . Keegan , S . Saxena , F . Ettefa , G . Brittingham , J . Lemiere , D . Fenyö , F . Chang , M . Delarue , and L . J . Holt . 2021 . nucGEMs probe the biophysical properties of the nucleoplasm . bioRxiv . 2021 . 11 . 18 . 469159 . 42 . Carlini , L . , G . P . Brittingham , L . J . Holt , and T . M . Kapoor . 2020 . Microtubules Enhance Mesoscale Effective Diffusivity in the Crowded Metaphase Cytoplasm . Dev . Cell . 54 : 574 – 582 . e4 . 43 . Molines , A . T . , J . Lemière , M . Gazzola , I . E . Steinmark , C . H . Edrington , C . - T . Hsu , P . Real - Calderon , K . Suhling , G . Goshima , L . J . Holt , M . Thery , G . J . Brouhard , and F . Chang . 2022 . Physical properties of the cytoplasm modulate the rates of microtubule polymerization and depolymerization . Dev . Cell . 57 : 466 – 479 . e6 . 44 . Lemière , J . , P . Real - Calderon , L . J . Holt , T . G . Fai , and F . Chang . 2022 . Control of nuclear size by osmotic forces in Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Elife . 11 . 45 . Alric , B . , C . Formosa - Dague , E . Dague , L . J . Holt , and M . Delarue . 2021 . Macromolecular crowding limits growth under pressure . bioRxiv . 2021 . 06 . 04 . 446859 . 46 . Saunders , T . E . , K . Z . Pan , A . Angel , Y . Guan , J . V . Shah , M . Howard , and F . Chang . 2012 . Noise reduction in the intracellular pom1p gradient by a dynamic clustering mechanism . Dev . Cell . 22 : 558 – 572 . 47 . Abenza , J . F . , E . Couturier , J . Dodgson , J . Dickmann , A . Chessel , J . Dumais , and R . E . C . Salas . 2015 . Wall mechanics and exocytosis define the shape of growth domains in fission yeast . Nat . Commun . 6 : 8400 . 48 . Davì , V . , H . Tanimoto , D . Ershov , A . Haupt , H . De Belly , R . Le Borgne , E . Couturier , A . Boudaoud , and N . Minc . 2018 . Mechanosensation Dynamically Coordinates Polar Growth and Cell Wall Assembly to Promote Cell Survival . Dev . Cell . 45 : 170 – 182 . e7 . 49 . Odermatt , P . D . , T . P . Miettinen , J . Lemière , J . H . Kang , E . Bostan , S . R . Manalis , K . C . Huang , and F . Chang . 2021 . Variations of intracellular density during the cell cycle arise from tip - growth regulation in fission yeast . Elife . 10 . 50 . Weiss , J . N . , and P . Korge . 2001 . The cytoplasm : no longer a well - mixed bag . Circ . Res . 89 : 108 – 110 . 51 . Konopka , C . A . , and S . Y . Bednarek . 2008 . Variable - angle epifluorescence microscopy : a new way to look at protein dynamics in the plant cell cortex . Plant J . 53 : 186 – 196 . 52 . Weber , S . C . , M . A . Thompson , W . E . Moerner , A . J . Spakowitz , and J . A . Theriot . 2012 . Analytical tools to distinguish the effects of localization error , confinement , and medium elasticity on the velocity autocorrelation function . Biophys . J . 102 : 2443 – 2450 . 53 . Guigas , G . , C . Kalla , and M . Weiss . 2007 . Probing the nanoscale viscoelasticity of intracellular fluids in living cells . Biophys . J . 93 : 316 – 323 . 54 . Tolić - Nørrelykke , I . M . , E . - L . Munteanu , G . Thon , L . Oddershede , and K . Berg - Sørensen . 2004 . Anomalous diffusion in living yeast cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 93 : 078102 . 55 . Weber , S . C . , J . A . Theriot , and A . J . Spakowitz . 2010 . Subdiffusive motion of a polymer composed of subdiffusive monomers . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 82 : 011913 . 56 . Ślęzak , J . , and S . Burov . 2021 . From diffusion in compartmentalized media to non - Gaussian random walks . Sci . Rep . 11 : 5101 . 57 . Santos , M . A . F . dos , M . A . F . dos Santos , and L . M . Junior . 2020 . Log - Normal Superstatistics for Brownian Particles in a Heterogeneous Environment . Physics . 2 : 571 – 586 . 58 . Bauer , D . , H . Ishikawa , K . A . Wemmer , N . L . Hendel , J . Kondev , and W . F . Marshall . 2021 . Analysis of biological noise in the flagellar length control system . iScience . 24 : 102354 . 59 . Einstein , A . 1905 . Über die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der Wärme geforderte Bewegung von in ruhenden Flüssigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen . Ann . Phys . 322 : 549 – 560 . 60 . Levene , H . 1960 . Contributions to probability and statistics . Essays in honor of Harold Hotelling . 278 – 292 . 61 . Weron , A . , K . Burnecki , E . J . Akin , L . Solé , M . Balcerek , M . M . Tamkun , and D . Krapf . 2017 . Ergodicity breaking on the neuronal surface emerges from random switching between diffusive states . Sci . Rep . 7 : 5404 . 62 . Janczura , J . , and A . Weron . 2015 . Ergodicity testing for anomalous diffusion : small sample statistics . J . Chem . Phys . 142 : 144103 . 63 . Mitchison , J . M . 1957 . The growth of single cells : I . Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Exp . Cell Res . 13 : 244 – 262 . 64 . Mann , H . , and D . Whitney . 1947 . Controlling the false discovery rate : A practical and powerful approach to multiple testing . Ann . Math . Stat . 18 : 50 – 60 . 65 . Potma , E . O . , W . P . de Boeij , L . Bosgraaf , J . Roelofs , P . J . van Haastert , and D . A . Wiersma . 2001 . Reduced protein diffusion rate by cytoskeleton in vegetative and polarized dictyostelium cells . Biophys . J . 81 : 2010 – 2019 . 66 . Moeendarbary , E . , L . Valon , M . Fritzsche , A . R . Harris , D . A . Moulding , A . J . Thrasher , E . Stride , L . Mahadevan , and G . T . Charras . 2013 . The cytoplasm of living cells behaves as a poroelastic material . Nat . Mater . 12 : 253 – 261 . 67 . Brangwynne , C . P . , G . H . Koenderink , F . C . MacKintosh , and D . A . Weitz . 2008 . Cytoplasmic diffusion : molecular motors mix it up . J . Cell Biol . 183 : 583 – 587 . 68 . Fletcher , D . A . , and R . D . Mullins . 2010 . Cell mechanics and the cytoskeleton . Nature . 463 : 485 – 492 . 69 . Weber , S . C . , A . J . Spakowitz , and J . A . Theriot . 2012 . Nonthermal ATP - dependent fluctuations contribute to the in vivo motion of chromosomal loci . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 : 7338 – 7343 . 70 . Persson , L . B . , V . S . Ambati , and O . Brandman . 2020 . Cellular Control of Viscosity Counters Changes in Temperature and Energy Availability . Cell . 183 : 1572 – 1585 . e16 . 71 . Okabe , K . , N . Inada , C . Gota , Y . Harada , T . Funatsu , and S . Uchiyama . 2012 . Intracellular temperature mapping with a fluorescent polymeric thermometer and fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy . Nat . Commun . 3 : 705 . 72 . Hayashi , T . , N . Fukuda , S . Uchiyama , and N . Inada . 2015 . A cell - permeable fluorescent polymeric thermometer for intracellular temperature mapping in mammalian cell lines . PLoS One . 10 : e0117677 . 73 . Chrétien , D . , P . Bénit , H . - H . Ha , S . Keipert , R . El - Khoury , Y . - T . Chang , M . Jastroch , H . T . Jacobs , P . Rustin , and M . Rak . 2018 . Mitochondria are physiologically maintained at close to 50 °C . PLoS Biol . 16 : e2003992 . 74 . Wang , K . , X . H . Sun , Y . Zhang , T . Zhang , Y . Zheng , Y . C . Wei , P . Zhao , D . Y . Chen , H . A . Wu , W . H . Wang , R . Long , J . B . Wang , and J . Chen . 2019 . Characterization of cytoplasmic viscosity of hundreds of single tumour cells based on micropipette aspiration . R Soc Open Sci . 6 : 181707 . 75 . Yan , R . , K . Chen , K . Xu , W . Li , and L . Xiang . 2020 . Single - molecule displacement mapping unveils nanoscale heterogeneities in intracellular diffusivity . Nature Methods . 17 : 524 – 530 . 76 . Gu , W . , L . D . Etkin , M . A . Le Gros , and C . A . Larabell . 2007 . X - ray tomography of Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Differentiation . 75 : 529 – 535 . 77 . Parkinson , D . Y . , G . McDermott , L . D . Etkin , M . A . Le Gros , and C . A . Larabell . 2008 . Quantitative 3 - D imaging of eukaryotic cells using soft X - ray tomography . J . Struct . Biol . 162 : 380 – 386 . 78 . Chaubet , L . , A . R . Chaudhary , H . K . Heris , A . J . Ehrlicher , and A . G . Hendricks . 2020 . Dynamic actin cross - linking governs the cytoplasm’s transition to fluid - like behavior . Mol . Biol . Cell . 31 : 1744 – 1752 . 79 . Schmitt , D . L . , and S . An . 2017 . Spatial Organization of Metabolic Enzyme Complexes in Cells . Biochemistry . 56 : 3184 – 3196 . 80 . Heinig , U . , M . Gutensohn , N . Dudareva , and A . Aharoni . 2013 . The challenges of cellular compartmentalization in plant metabolic engineering . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 24 : 239 – 246 . 81 . Luby - Phelps , K . , P . E . Castle , D . L . Taylor , and F . Lanni . 1987 . Hindered diffusion of inert tracer particles in the cytoplasm of mouse 3T3 cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 84 : 4910 – 4913 . 82 . Luby - Phelps , K . , D . L . Taylor , and F . Lanni . 1986 . Probing the structure of cytoplasm . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 2015 – 2022 . 83 . Arrio - Dupont , M . , S . Cribier , G . Foucault , P . F . Devaux , and A . d’Albis . 1996 . Diffusion of fluorescently labeled macromolecules in cultured muscle cells . Biophys . J . 70 : 2327 – 2332 . 84 . Arrio - Dupont , M . , G . Foucault , M . Vacher , P . F . Devaux , and S . Cribier . 2000 . Translational diffusion of globular proteins in the cytoplasm of cultured muscle cells . Biophys . J . 78 : 901 – 907 . 85 . Verkman , A . S . 2002 . Solute and macromolecule diffusion in cellular aqueous compartments . Trends Biochem . Sci . 27 : 27 – 33 . 86 . Banks , D . S . , and C . Fradin . 2005 . Anomalous Diffusion of Proteins Due to Molecular Crowding . Biophysical Journal . 89 : 2960 – 2971 . 87 . Yu , I . , T . Mori , T . Ando , R . Harada , J . Jung , Y . Sugita , and M . Feig . 2016 . Biomolecular interactions modulate macromolecular structure and dynamics in atomistic model of a bacterial cytoplasm . Elife . 5 . 88 . Huang , J . , Y . Huang , H . Yu , D . Subramanian , A . Padmanabhan , R . Thadani , Y . Tao , X . Tang , R . Wedlich - Soldner , and M . K . Balasubramanian . 2012 . Nonmedially assembled F - actin cables incorporate into the actomyosin ring in fission yeast . J . Cell Biol . 199 : 831 – 847 . 89 . Moreno , S . , A . Klar , and P . Nurse . 1991 . [ 56 ] Molecular genetic analysis of fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe . In : Methods in Enzymology . Academic Press . pp . 795 – 823 . 90 . Maundrell , K . 1990 . nmt1 of fission yeast . A highly transcribed gene completely repressed by thiamine . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 10857 – 10864 . 91 . Sbalzarini , I . F . , and P . Koumoutsakos . 2005 . Feature point tracking and trajectory analysis for video imaging in cell biology . J . Struct . Biol . 151 : 182 – 195 . 92 . Schindelin , J . , I . Arganda - Carreras , E . Frise , V . Kaynig , M . Longair , T . Pietzsch , S . Preibisch , C . Rueden , S . Saalfeld , B . Schmid , J . - Y . Tinevez , D . J . White , V . Hartenstein , K . Eliceiri , P . Tomancak , and A . Cardona . 2012 . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods . 9 : 676 – 682 . Supplementary Figures Supp . Fig . 1 : Experimental data is consistent with nearly unconstrained diffusion . ( a ) Mean - squared displacement ( MSD ) along the long and short axes of the cell , plotted alongside the total MSD . ( b ) The predicted MSD for Fractional Brownian motion ( FBM ) , including both analytical theory and results from simulated data , using the experimentally - measured values of D and α . The experimental data is also plotted for comparison , showing good agreement with the theory . ( a - b ) Note the logarithmic scale along the x - and y - axes . ( c ) Same legend as in ( b ) . The predicted velocity autocorrelation for FBM , showing the characteristic negative peak which then decays to zero . Experimental data shows a wide and very shallow negative basin , which does not match the shape or depth of the peak predicted by FBM . Supp . Fig . 2 : Additional evidence for intrinsic and extrinsic sources of noise . ( a ) The relationship between the apparent diffusivity and power law exponent . ( b ) The apparent diffusivity of each particle in the dataset plotted against a randomly chosen particle from the same cell . Each particle is represented exactly once in the plot . For cells with an odd number of particles , one particle would not be represented for that cell . ( c ) Mean diffusivity across tracks in each cell plotted vs the number of tracks in each cell . ( d ) Coefficient of variation across tracks in each cell plotted vs the number of tracks in each cell . ( e ) Coefficient of variation vs mean diffusivity calculated by averaging across all tracks for each cell . ( a - e ) Fits of track - wise MSD data are shown in light blue , with cell - wise fits overlaid in dark blue . ( a - b ) Note the logarithmic scale along the y - axis . ( b ) Note the logarithmic scale along the x - axis . ( b - d ) r - and p - values determined by a Spearman correlation algorithm . Supp . Fig . 3 : Best fit parameters for each spatial domain size preserve the experimentally - observed mean and variance in diffusivity . ( a ) Simulation input parameters for viscosity ( Model # 4 : Spatial and cellular heterogeneity ) that best recapitulate the experimentally - measured spread in diffusivity . Left : The mean viscosity relative to the viscosity of water ( e . g . , A mean of 40 would indicate the cytoplasm has 40X the viscosity of water ) . Middle : The coefficient of variation ( CV , mean divided by the standard deviation ) of the viscosity among different spatial domains within each cell . Right : The coefficient of variation ( CV , mean divided by the standard deviation ) of the cell - averaged viscosities among a population of cells . ( b ) Median apparent diffusivity ( averaged across all tracks ) plotted for the experimental dataset as well as each model . X - labels for the models represent the domain size for the spatial heterogeneity . Error bars represent the standard error of the median . Significance stars represent the result of the Wilcoxon rank sum test for equality of the medians . ( c - d ) Distributions of apparent diffusivities calculated from fits of the track - wise ( c ) or cell - wise ( d ) MSD curves displayed for the experimental data as well as each of the models . Note the logarithmic scale along the y - axis . Boxplots are drawn as in Figure 2 . Significance stars represent the result of Levene’s test for equality of variance . ( a - c ) * p < 0 . 05 . * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . Supp . Fig . 4 : Weak non - ergodicity of GEM diffusion cannot be explained by a continuous time random walk model . ( a ) X - and y - trajectories of the tracks shown in Fig . 1g . ( b ) X - and y - trajectories of a completely immobilized particle observed within the experimental dataset . ( c ) The best fit of the power law exponent , α , for time - averaged MSD of each track , plotted as a function of the track length . Each dot represents the best fit for an individual track . The mean across all tracks of a given length is displayed as a thick black line , and the standard error of the mean ( SE ) is plotted as error bars . Supp . Fig . 5 : The large heterogeneity in diffusivity cannot be explained by the cell cycle or subcellular GEM particle localization . ( a - b ) Fitted values for diffusivity ( a ) and power law exponent ( b ) plotted as a function of cell length . ( c - d ) Track - wise fit values for diffusivity ( c ) and power law exponent ( d ) plotted against the mean ( time - averaged ) particle position along the long axis of the cell . There are fewer cells and tracks represented in ( c - e ) compared to ( a - b ) because the new pole could be distinguished from the old pole for only a subset of cells . ( a - d ) Fits of track - wise MSD data are shown in light blue , with cell - wise fits overlaid in dark blue . ( a , c ) Note the logarithmic scale along the y - axis . Supp . Fig . 6 : Schematic of the generalized Doppelgänger approach .