1 University of Guelph College of Arts School of English and Theatre Studies Environmental and Indigenous Literatures and Law Winter 2019 Instructor : Dr . M . Nandorfy Office : MacKinnon 416 Ext . : 52929 Email : mnandorf @ uoguelph . ca Synopsis : This course will include a selection of Indigneous stories from Canada , the US , and Australia , focusing on earth based conceptions of law that question and expand Western legal traditions . We will consider how Indigenous law might be combined with the public trust doctrine and environmental law to protect the biosphere and slow down the effects of climate change . Storytelling includes both fiction and non - fiction , and draws from oral traditions and worldviews whose governing principle is a kind of constitutionalism based on relationships among all living beings and natural elements . Texts will deal with current crises such as global warming , mass migration of displaced people , ongoing colonial exploitation and neglect of racialized peoples , and destructive extraction of resources . We will also read works by writers of European heritage who draw inspiration from ancestral stories to create cautionary tales and stories of new / recuperated possiblities to heal humans’ relations to the earth . These include the envisioning of shared space as commons instead of private property , leading to community formations that generate and thrive on mutualism . Method of Evaluation : Will depend on class size but will involve regular participation , seminar presentations , discussions , and close attention to developing writing skills . Tentative Reading List Atleo , E . Richard . Principles of Tsawalk : An Indigenous Approach to Global Crisis Bobis , Merlinda . Locust Girl : A Love Song Borrows , John ( Kegedonce ) . Drawing out Law : A Spirit’s Guide Bowden , Charles . A selection of texts Haraway , Donna J . Staying with the Trouble : Making Kin in the Chthulucene King , Thomas . The Back of the Turtle Leduc , Timothy . B . A Canadian Climate of Mind Wright , Alexis . Carpentaria