Targeting of Cholera Toxin and Escherichia coli Heat Labile Toxin in Polarized Epithelia : Role of COOH - terminal KDEL W . L Lencer , * C . Constable , * S . Moe , * M . G . Jobling , I I H . M . Webb , § S . Ruston , " ~ J . L . Madara , * T . R . Hirst , § and R . K . Holmesll * Combined Program in Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition , Children ' s Hospital , Boston Massachusetts 02115 ; * Gastrointestinal Pathology , Brigham ' s and Women ' s Hospital and the Departments of Pediatrics and Pathology , Harvard Medical School , and the Harvard Digestive Diseases Center ; . ~ Research School of Biosciences , University of Kent , Canterbury ; and LlDepartment of Microbiology and Immunology , Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Abstract . Vibrio cholerae and Escherichia coli heat la - bile toxins ( CT and LT ) elicit a secretory response from intestinal epithelia by binding apical receptors ( ganglio - side GM1 ) and subsequently activating basolateral effec - tors ( adenylate cyclase ) . We have recently proposed that signal transduction in polarized cells may require transcytosis of toxin - containing membranes ( Lencer , W . I . , G . Strohmeier , S . Moe , S . L . Carlson , C . T . Con - stable , and J . L . Madara . 1995 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 92 : 10094 - 10098 ) . Targeting of CT into this path - way depends initially on binding of toxin B subunits to GMI at the cell surface . The anatomical compartments in which subsequent steps of CT processing occur are less clearly defined . However , the enzymatically active A subunit of CT contains the ER retention signal KDEL ( RDEL in LT ) . Thus if the KDEL motif were required for normal CT trafficking , movement of CT from the Golgi to ER would be implied . To test this idea , recombinant wild - type ( wt ) and mutant CT and LT were prepared . The COOH - terminal KDEL se - quence in CT was replaced by seven unrelated amino acids : LEDERAS . In LT , a single point mutation re - placing leucine with valine in RDEL was made . Wt and mutant toxins displayed similar enzymatic activities and binding affinities to GM1 immobilized on plastic . Bio - logic activity of recombinant toxins was assessed as a C1 - secretory response elicited from the polarized hu - man epithelial cell line T84 using standard electrophys - iologic techniques . Mutations in K ( R ) DEL of both CT and LT delayed the time course of toxin - induced C1 - secretion . At T1 / 2 , dose dependencies for K ( R ) DEL - mutant toxins were increased ~ > 10 - fold . KDEL - mutants displayed differentially greater temperature sensitivity . In direct concordance with a slower rate of signal transduction , KDEL - mutants were trafficked to the basolateral membrane more slowly than wt CT ( as - sessed by selective cell surface biotinylation as transcy - tosis of B subunit ) . Mutation in K ( R ) DEL had no ef - fect on the rate of toxin endocytosis . These data provide evidence that CT and LT interact directly with endogenous KDEL - receptors and imply that both tox - ins may require retrograde movement through Golgi cisternae and ER for efficient and maximal biologic ac - tivity . ETROGRADE transport through Golgi cisternae has been shown to occur for soluble and membrane proteins of the ER ( 49 ) and for certain protein tox - ins ( 6 , 55 ) . Targeting of soluble ER and some type II mem - brane proteins in this pathway depends on the COOH - ter - minal sorting signal Lys - Asp - Glu - Leu ( KDEL or HDEL Address correspondence to W . I . Lencer , M . D . , Combined Program in Pe - diatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition , Children ' s Hospital , 300 Long - wood Ave . , Boston , MA 02115 . Tel . : ( 617 ) 355 - 8599 . FAX : ( 617 ) 730 - 0404 . The laboratories of Drs . Holmes and Hirst contributed equally to these studies . The opinions and assertions contained herein are private views of the authors and should not be construed as official or as necessarily reflecting the views of the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences or the Department of Defense . in yeast ) ( 42 , 48 , 62 ) . Targeting of type I membrane pro - teins depends on a short cytoplasmic double lysine motif ( 19 , 20 , 43 ) . Retrograde transport of shiga toxin from the cell surface through Golgi stacks to ER appears to depend on the structure of the toxin ' s cell surface receptor gly - cosphingolipid Gb3 ( 56 ) . Movement of shiga toxin along this pathway may be required for toxin action . Likewise , the function of Pseudomonas exotoxin A may depend on toxin entry into Golgi or ER as evidenced by sensitivity to mutation in the toxin ' s COOH - terminal REDLK se - quence and rescue by replacement with KDEL ( 6 ) . The heat labile enterotoxins produced by Vibrio chol - erae ( cholera toxin , CT 1 ) and Escherichia coli ( heat labile 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : CT , Cholera toxin ; Isc , short circuit current ; LT , heat labile toxin ; R , resistance ; wt , wild - type . © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525195111 / 951 / 12 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , Number 4 , November 1995 951 - 962 951 on A ugu s t 4 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m toxin , LT ) also contain respectively the KDEL or the equally potent sorting signal RDEL at the C - terminus of their enzymatically active A subunits ( 59 , 60 ) . CT and LT are structurally , immunologically , and functionally homol - ogous ( reviewed in reference 61 ) . Both toxins act directly on intestinal epithelia to elicit massive secretory diarrhea by activating cAMP - dependent signal transduction path - ways . Both CT and LT are comprised of five identical B subunits that bind with high affinity to ganglioside GM1 at the cell surface ( 7 , 17 , 25 ) , and a single enzymatic A sub - unit comprised of two peptides linked by a disulfide bond ( 59 , 66 ) . After reduction of the A subunit , the enzymati - cally active At - peptide ( ~ 22 kD ) acts inside the cell to activate adenylate cyclase by catalyzing the ADP - ribo - sylation of the heterotrimeric GTPase Gsct ( 5 , 39 , 40 ) . The A2 - peptide ( ~ 5 kD ) contains the COOH - terminal K ( R ) DEL motif that protrudes unhindered below the plane formed by the pentameric B subunit on the side which binds GMI at the cell surface ( 36 , 59 , 60 ) . The presence of K ( R ) DEL at such a site on both CT and LT raises the distinct possibility that both toxins re - quire direct interactions with endogenous KDEL - recep - tors for biologic activity ( 50 ) . The KDEL - receptor is a seven - transmembrane domain protein localized predomi - nantly to the intermediate compartment and Golgi cister - nae with a graded distribution from cis to trans ( 16 , 63 ) . The KDEL - receptor mediates retrograde transport of KDEL - containing proteins from multiple sites within Golgi cisternae including trans - Golgi ( 8 , 20 , 31 , 37 , 52 ) . The process by which CT elicits a response in polarized and nonpolarized cells takes 20 - 40 min ( termed the " lag " phase ) ( 11 , 28 ) and involves movement of CT through multiple intracellular compartments . Binding of CT to the cell surface is followed by endocytosis and subsequent transport of toxin containing membranes to a functionally defined intracellular compartment ( s ) where reduction and membrane translocation of the A subunit occurs ( 27 , 45 ) . The anatomical compartment of A subunit translocation , however , remains unknown though available evidence suggests this event may occur in Golgi cisternae . For ex - ample , CT - labeled horseradish peroxidase or gold parti - cles have been shown to move from the cell surface via en - dosomes to trans - Golgi ( 23 ) , and recently , a small fraction of internalized CT B subunit has been localized within cis elements of Golgi cisternae ( 56 ) . These data provide direct evidence that CT can move retrograde in the secretory pathway . Neither study , however , provides evidence that transit through Golgi is physiologically relevant to the cel - lular response . The lag phase ends with activation of adenylate cyclase by toxin - catalyzed ADP - ribosylation of Gsa . Activation of adenylate cyclase occurs by movement of the reduced and translocated Al - peptide ( or possibly another messenger ) back to the plasma membrane . The events that follow re - duction ( and presumably translocation [ 24 ] ) of the A sub - unit are not necessarily diffusion limited . In polarized T84 cells , for example , signal transduction by the reduced Al - peptide is completely inhibited late in the lag phase by lowering incubation temperatures from 37 to 15°C ( 28 ) . These and other data ( 13 , 14 , 69 ) suggest that the At - pep - tide may not break free of the membrane after transloca - tion . We have recently found that after translocation the Arpeptide may not dissociate from membrane vesicles containing the B subunit . Both subunits may move to - gether via vesicular carriers from the site of translocation to adenylate cyclase on the basolateral membrane ( 29 ) . Our aim in the present study was to define intermediary compartments through which CT and LT must physiologi - cally traffic to elicit a cellular response . We examined whether the COOH - terminal K ( R ) DEL motif of the A2 - peptide may play a role in toxin action . If K ( R ) DEL were required for normal CT or LT signal transduction , retrograde movement of CT / LT from Golgi to ER would be implied . Recombinant wild - type ( wt ) and mutant CT and LT were prepared . The COOH - terminal KDEL se - quence in CT was replaced by seven unrelated amino ac - ids : LEDERAS . In LT , a single point mutation replacing leucine with valine was made . Toxin action was examined in the human intestinal cell line T84 , a polarized cell model of intestinal epithelia and the natural target of CT in na - ture . T84 cells grown on permeable supports form conflu - ent monolayers of columnar epithelia that exhibit high transepithelial resistance , polarized apical and basolateral membranes , and a cAMP - regulated C1 - secretory pathway analogous to that found in intact intestine ( 1 ) . Activation of adenylate cyclase in T84 cells by intoxication with CT or LT elicits a strong CI - secretory response that can be de - tected using standard electrophysiologic techniques . Our data provide strong evidence that CT and LT interact di - rectly with endogenous KDEL - receptors and imply that both toxins may require retrograde movement through Golgi cisternae and ER for efficient and maximal biologic activity . Materials and Methods Materials Cholera toxin ( CT ) was obtained from Calbiochem Novabiochem ( San Diego , CA ) . Sulfo - NHS - biotin , sulfo - NHS - acetate , and protein - A - Sepharose were purchased from Pierce ( Rockford , IL ) . All other reagents were from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St . Louis , MO ) unless otherwise stated . Hanks bal - anced salt solution ( HBSS , containing in g / L 0 . 185 CaCI2 , 0 . 098 MgSO4 , 0 . 4 KCI , 0 . 06 KH2PO 4 , 8 NaC1 , 0 . 048 Na2HPO4 , 1 glucose , to which was added 10 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 ) was used for all assays unless otherwise stated . Cell Culture T84 cells obtained from ATCC were cultured and passaged as previously described ( 9 ) in equal parts of DME ( 1 g / L D - glucose ) and Ham ' s F - 12 Nutrient mixture , supplemented with 5 % newborn calf serum , 15 mM Hepes , 14 mM NaHCO3 , 40 mg / L penicillin , 8 mg / L ampicillin , and 0 . 90 mg / L streptomycin . Cells were seeded at confluent density onto 0 . 33 - or 5 - cm 2 Transwell inserts ( Costar Corp . , Cambridge , MA ) coated with a di - lute collagen solution as previously described ( 33 ) . Transepithelial resis - tances attained stable levels ( > 1 , 000 ohms cm 2 ) after 7 d . The develop - ment of high transepithelial resistance correlated with the formation of confluent monolayers with well - developed tight junctions as assessed by morphological analysis ( 32 ) , and with the ability of monolayers to secrete CI - . Cells from passages 71 - 84 were utilized for these experiments . Preparation of Recombinant Wild - type and Mutant CT and LT Mutagenesis of the COOH - terminal K ( R ) DEL Sequence . The LT - RDEL se - quence was mutated in plasmid pTRH29 , a derivative of the plasmid vec - tor pBluescript IIKS + , that contains the genes for the A and B subunits of E . coli labile toxin ( 70 ) . Mutagenesis of Leu 24° to Val at the COOH ter - minus of the A subunit was performed with an in vitro oligonucleotide - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 952 on A ugu s t 4 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m directed mutagenesis kit ( Amersham International , Arlington Heights , IL ) using single - stranded pTRH29 as a template and a synthetic oligonu - cleotide ( 5 ' - TATTCAT _ _ ACTTCATCC - 3 ' , from the Microanalytical Facil - ity , IAPGR , Cambridge Research Station , UK ) as the mutagenic primer . The correct Leu to Val substitution was confirmed by dideoxy sequencing using Sequenase I1 ( United States Biochemical Corp . , Cleveland , OH ) and the resultant pIasmid designated pTRH73 . The clone producing the CT variant with LEDERAS substituted for KDEL at the COOH termi - nus of the A subunit was constructed in two steps . First the Lys 237 codon AAG ( italicized letters in the sequence GAATI ' AAG ) in pMGJ60 was changed by oligonucleotide - directed mutagenesis to CAG , thereby creat - ing the EcoR1 restriction site GAATTC in the resulting plasmid pMGJ67 ( 22 ) . Next , a PvuII - EcoRI fragment of pMGJ67 that encodes the IPTG - inducible , truncated ctxA gene was subcloned into PvuII - EcoRI cut pBR322 to generate pMGJ117 , and the predicted fusion joint was con - firmed by dideoxy sequencing . Fusion of ctxA to vector - derived se - quences in pMGJll7 substitutes LEDERAS for KDEL at the COOH ter - minus of the A subunit of CT , in a manner equivalent to the LEDERAS variant of LT constructed by Sanchez et al . ( 54 ) . To produce holotoxin with the LEDERAS variant of CT - A , pMGJ117 was transformed into E . coli TX1 ( Stratagene Inc . , La Jolla , CA ) containing pMGJ85 , a compati - ble plasmid clone that expresses ctxB from the IPTG - inducible promoter of pK184 ( 21 ) . Preparation of Periplasmic Extracts Containing Recombinant Wild - type and Mutant CTand LT . E . coli XL1 - Blue ( fecAl lac - endA1 gyrA96 thi hsdR17 supE44 relA1 IF ' proAB lacIq lacZAM15 Tnl0 ] ) ( 4 ) or TX1 harboring plasmids encoding wild - type or mutant CT or LT were inoculated from stocks into 200 ml Luria - Bertani medium ( L - broth ) ( 53 ) supplemented with 200 ~ g / ml ampicillin and 10 p . g / ml tetracycline . The cells were grown at 37°C on a rotary shaker . When the culture had reached an optical den - sity of 0 . 2 ( 600 nm ) , isopropyl - l - thio - 13 - o - galactopyranoside ( 0 . 5 mM fi - nal ) was added and the cells cultured for an additional 2 h . The cells were then collected by centrifugation ( 6 , 000 rpm , 4°C for 15 rain ) and washed in 4 ml of ice - cold PBS ( NaC1 140 raM , Na2HPO3 / NaH2PO3 10 mM , pH 7 . 2 ) and then resuspended in 8 ml of ice - cold 0 . 3 M sucrose , 0 . 1 M Na2HPO3 / NaH2PO3 , pH 7 . 6 . EDTA ( 5 mM ) and lysozyme ( 10 p . g / ml ) were added and the cells kept on ice for an additional 15 min with occasional agitation . The treated cells were centrifuged ( 12 , 000 rpm at 4°C for 5 min ) and the supernatant containing the periplasmic extract removed , dialyzed over - night against two changes of HBSS ( 1 : 1 , 000 vol / vol ) , separated into 20 - 50 - ~ l aliquots , flash frozen , and stored at - 80°C until required . Electrophysiology For electrophysiological studies , confluent monolayers on Transwell in - serts were transferred to HBSS and preincubated with apical CT at 4°C for 30 rain before shifting to fresh HBSS at 37°C . Measurements of short circuit current ( Isc ) and resistance ( R ) were performed with 0 . 33 - cm 2 monolayers as previously described ( 9 , 28 , 33 ) . Serosal and mucosal reser - voirs were interfaced with calomel and Ag - AgC1 electrodes via 5 % agar bridges made with Ringers buffer ( 114 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCI , 1 . 65 mM Na2HPO4 , 0 . 3 mM NaH2PO4 , 25 mM NaHCO3 , 1 . 1 mM MgSO4 , 1 . 25 mM CaCl2 ) . Measurements of resistance were made using a dual voltage / cur - rent clamp device ( University of Iowa , Iowa City , Iowa ) and 25 - ~ tA cur - rent pulses . Isc was calculated using Ohm ' s law . Selective Cell Surface Biotinylation Methods described by Sargiacomo et al . ( 1989 ) and Le Bivic et al . ( 1990 ) were modified for use in the Tg4 cell system as described ( 29 ) . GM1 Binding and ELISA Fluorescein - labeled CT ( CT - fluorescein ) ( 28 ) was used to define binding of recombinant toxins to GM1 immobilized on plastic micro - titre plates as previously described ( 30 ) . Dynatec microfluor 96 - well black microtitre plates were coated with type III gangliosides ( 20 Ixg / ml ; Sigma Chemical Co . ) in 60 mM sodium carbonate , pH 9 . 9 , and incubated at 37°C for 36 - 48 h as previously described ( 34 ) . After washing in PBS ( 140 mM NaCI , 10 mM Na2HPO3 / NaH2PO3 , pH 7 . 4 ) the plates were blocked in PBS containing 5 % BSA . CT - fluorescein ( 3 . 1 nM in PBS containing 2 . 5 % BSA , pH 7 . 4 ) was applied to each well with increasing concentrations ( 0 . 05 - 50 nM ) of recombinant wt and mutant toxins or buffer alone , incubated for 30 min at 37°C , washed with PBS , and fluorescence quantified in a fluorescence con - centration analyzer ( Pandex Fluorescence Plate Reader ; Baxter , McGraw Park , IL ) . To assay toxin concentrations an EL | SA - based assay was used . Peri - plasmic extracts containing recombinant toxins were applied to 96 - well microtitre plates coated with ganglioside GM1 as previously described ( 34 ) . After 30 min at 37°C , the plates were washed with PBS , pH 7 . 4 , and the presence of CT or LT bound to GM1 was assayed by routine ELISA using rabbit polyclonal antiserum raised against either CT - A subunit or CT B subunit ( 27 , 29 ) . Toxin concentrations were confirmed by SDS - PAGE and Western blot . Toxin - catalyzed ADP - Ribosylation of Agmatine NAD : agmatine ADP - ribosyltransferase activity was assayed as described by Tsai ( 64 ) with minor modifications . Recombinant wt or K ( R ) DEL - mutant toxins ( ~ 200 nM final ) were incubated at 30°C for 60 rain with 15 mM agmatine , 100 I ~ M nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( NAD , con - taining 0 . 02 ~ Ci [ carbonyl - 14C ] NAD ) , 1 mM GTP , 50 mM KHzPO4 , 4 mM MgCI2 , 20 mM dithiothreitol , 0 . 3 mg / ml ovalbumin , 2 mg / ml cardiolipin , 200 I ~ M cibachrome blue , and 20 Ixl crude guinea pig brain cytosol ( as a source of ADP - ribosylating factor ) in a final volume of 100 p . l . Reactions were terminated with the addition of 1 ml 1 % SDS in water and applied to AG l - X2 ( Bio - Rad Labs . , Richmond , CA ) 0 . 25 × 2 - cm columns . The col - umns were washed with 4 ml of distilled water and eluates containing hy - drolyzed [ carbonyl - 14C ] nicotinamide were assayed by scintillation count - ing . Recombinant toxins were first activated by incubation with 30 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min at 30°C . Three point calibration was provided by incubation with dithiothreitol activated purified CT ( 1 or 0 . 01 ~ M ; Calbio - chem Novabiochem ) or buffer alone . The assay was linear within these toxin concentrations as assessed by formal dose responses . Guinea pig brain was homogenized ( 15 strokes in tight fitting Dounce ) in 0 . 34 M sucrose , 0 . 1 mM MgCI2 , 1 mM EDTA , 10 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , containing 1 . 25 mM PMSF and 0 . 5 ~ l / ml chymostatin . Cytosol was pre - pared by differential centrifugation and defined as the supernatant of a 100 , 000 g spin for 60 min . SDS - PAGE , Immunoprecipitation , and Western Blotting Recombinant toxins were analyzed on 10 - 20 % polyacrylamide gradient gels under reducing conditions ( unless otherwise indicated for A subunit ) and either Coomassie stained or transferred to 0 . 25 - 1J . m nitrocellulose membranes . Rabbit antisera raised against CT - A and CT - B subunits were used as described ( 29 ) and diluted 1 : 200 for immunoprecipitations and 1 : 1 , 000 for western blotting . Pre - stained molecular mass markers ( Bio - Rad Labs . ) contained : lysozyme ( 18 . 5 kD ) , soybean trypsin inhibitor ( 27 . 5 kD ) , carbonic anhydrase ( 32 . 5 kD ) , ovalbnmin ( 49 . 5 kD ) , bovine serum albu - min ( g0 kD ) , and phosphorylase B ( 106 kD ) . Endocytosis Methods described by Orlandi and Fishman were modified for use in the T84 cell system ( 44 ) . Recombinant toxins ( 20 nM ) were incubated with confluent monolayers of T84 cells grown on plastic 96 - well plates at 4°C for 20 min and then shifted to 37°C or kept at 4°C . At the indicated times , monolayers were returned to 4°C and washed . Toxin remaining at the cell surface was measured by immunoreactivity to anti - serum raised against CT B subunit ( 1 : 200 dilution ) ( 29 ) , secondary incubation with horseradish peroxidase - labeled anti - IgG , and development with 2 , 2 ' - azino - bis ( 3 - eth - ylbenzthiazoline ) - 6 - sulfonic acid . Assays were performed in triplicate or quadruplicate and reproduced four times . Two point calibrations for each experiment were provided by incubation at 4°C ( positive control ) and in - cubations without CT ( negative control , ~ 30 % of maximal signal ) . Means - - - SE are reported . Statistics Data were analyzed using Statview 512 + software ( Brainpower , Inc . , Cala - basas , CA ) . Results Preparation of Recombinant CT and LT Mutations were engineered into the COOH - terminal K ( R ) DEL sequence of the A subunit of V . cholerae and E . Lencer et al . Targeting of Cholera Toxin by KDEL 953 on A ugu s t 4 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m coli heat - labile enterotoxins . In CT , the COOH - terminal KDEL sequence was replaced by the unrelated seven - amino acid sequence : Leucine - Glutamic acid - Aspartic acid - Glutamic acid - Arginine - Alanine - Serine ( Fig . 1 ) . In LT , the COOH - terminal RDEL sequence was altered by a sin - gle point mutation replacing leucine with valine ( Fig . 1 B ) . Both removal of KDEL and substitution of valine for leu - cine have been shown to inhibit post - ER retrieval of K ( R ) DEL - containing proteins in other eucaryotic systems ( 47 , 48 , 71 ) . Recombinant wild - type and mutant CT and LT were expressed from plasmid vectors in E . coli XL1 - Blue , followed by extraction of periplasmic proteins ( con - taining the recombinant toxins ) as described in Materials and Methods . Toxin concentrations were determined by GM ~ - ELISA against both CT A and pentameric B sub - units . Further analysis by SDS - PAGE and Western blot showed that A and B subunits of both mutant and wild - type toxins were present in known concentrations . As as - sessed by GMI - ELISA , A and pentameric B subunits were present in ~ 1 : 1 ratio indicating that all functional recom - binant B subunits were fully assembled with A subunits . Further functional analysis of toxin assembly by competi - tive inhibition with recombinant B subunit confirmed these results ( see below ) . Mutation in COOH - terminal KDEL Does Not Affect Toxin Binding or ADP - ribosyl - transferase Activity In Vitro Toxin binding to GMl immobilized on plastic was exam - ined in vitro to determine whether mutation in K ( R ) DEL may affect indirectly the ability of the toxin B subunits to associate with cell membranes . Fluorescein - labeled CT was utilized to generate binding isotherms for wt and mu - tant CT and LT . Fig . 2 shows that both the RDEL - ( A ) and KDEL - mutant ( B ) bound to GM ~ with apparent affini - ties that were nearly identical to that of wt LT and wt CT ( Ka - ~ 6 nM ) . Competition with increasing concentrations of heat denatured CT had no effect on CT - fluorescein binding , indicating that binding was specific . Enzymatic activities of recombinant toxins ( not pro - teolytically nicked in the exposed loop between the A1 and A2 - peptide ) were assessed by in vitro ADP - ribosylation of agmatine ( 64 ) ( Fig . 3 ) . These data show that wt and KDEL - mutant CT ( 200 nM ) displayed nearly identical ADP - ribosyltransferase activities in vitro ( 1 . 6 - 0 . 08 vs . 1 . 8 _ + 0 . 02 nmol NAD hydrolyzed / h , mean + SD in tripli - cate , representative of two independent experiments ) . Mutation in the COOH - terminal K ( R ) DEL Sequence Impedes the Time Course of Toxin Action Initial experiments with T84 cells showed that mutation in the K ( R ) DEL sequence delayed the onset of toxin - induced C1 - secretion . At T1 / 2 ( half - maximal secretion : 50 rain for wt CT and 80 rain for wt LT ) , secretory responses elicited by wild - type toxins were two - to threefold stronger than those elicited by corresponding KDEL - ( 26 + 3 vs . 8 - + 2 p ~ A / cm 2 ) or RDEL - mutants ( 25 _ + 0 . 7 vs . 13 _ + 1 ~ A / cm2 ; mean _ + SE , n = 6 - 8 ) . Periplasmic extracts from a control E . coli strain XL1 - Blue not harboring toxin clones were electrically silent . Mutation in K ( R ) DEL affected both the initial lag phase and rate of toxin induced Cl - se - cretion ( Fig . 4 and Table I ) . The inhibitory effect on the kinetics of toxin action appeared greater in monolayers exposed to lower toxin concentrations ( Fig . 4 , C and D ) but was otherwise not dose dependent . At T1 / 2 , dose de - pendencies for both mutant toxins were increased / > 10 - fold ( Fig . 5 ) . At high toxin concentrations ( 100 nM ) , the maximal secretory responses eventually reached were not significantly different ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) . KDEL - mutants were not degraded by intracellular pro - [ ] V . cholerae Cholera Toxin [ ] S3 A 1 I A21KDEL CT LT a I [ SS KDEL - mutant A1 IA21LEDERAS RDEL - mutant 1 a I I E . coil A1 Labile Toxin ss IAZIRDEL B . 71 AI IAZlRDEV B . . . . . . . . ] Figure t . Preparation of re - combinant wild - type and K ( R ) DEL - mutant toxins . Primary structures for wild - type and mutant CT ( A ) and LT ( B ) are shown . Recombi - nant toxins were harvested in periplasmic extracts and ana - lyzed by SDS - PAGE . Coo - massie stains A show : peri - plasmic extracts containing KDEL - mutant CT ( lane 1 ) and wt CT ( lane 2 ) ; and puri - fied CT from V . choterae ( lane 3 ) . Coomassie stains B show : purified CT from V . cholerae ( lane 1 ) ; and peri - plasmic extracts containing RDEL - mutant LT ( lane 2 ) and wt LT ( lane 3 ) . Western blots A show : purified CT from V . cholerae ( lane 1 ) ; and periplasmic extracts con - taining wt CT ( lane 2 ) or KDEL - mutant CT ( lane 3 , the KDEL - mutant migrates at a slightly slower rate than wt CT ) . Anti - sera against A subunit which cross reacts weakly with B subunit was used for western blotting . Western blots B show : purified CT from V . cholerae ( lane I ) ; and periplasmic extracts containing wt LT ( lane 2 ) or RDEL - mutant LT ( lane 3 ) . Combined anti - sera against A and B sub - units were used for western blotting . Both A and B subunits are indicated . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 954 on A ugu s t 4 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m i . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , - = • ~ = m 2c 10 G ' r 1 10 100 Competing Toxin ( nM ) Figure 2 . Effect of mutation in K ( R ) DEL on toxin bind - ing to ganglioside GM1 . The fluorescent toxin analogue , CT - fluorescein , was used as tracer as described in Materi - als and Methods . Binding isotherms for both wt and K ( R ) DEL mutant toxins were nearly identical and of equally high affinity ( Kd ~ 6 nM ) . Representative of two independent experiments in duplicate . cessing faster than wt CT ( Fig . 6 ) . Nearly identical amounts of A and B subunit were immunoprecipitated from T84 cells after 15 , 60 , and 120 min incubations at 37°C . To ex - clude the possibility that mutation in K ( R ) DEL affected toxin action indirectly by affecting assembly of A and B subunits , recombinant LT - B subunits were applied to T84 monolayers in competition with K ( R ) DEL - mutant or wt toxins ( Fig . 7 ) . Recombinant LT B subunit displayed nearly identical IC50 ' s for inhibition of toxin action ( IC50 = 10 - 4 nM vs . 10 - + 6 nM , for RDEL - mutant and wt LT , mean + SD , n = 2 in duplicate , upper panel ; and IC50 = 11 _ 1 nM vs . 11 _ + 4 nM for KDEL - mutant and wt CT , mean + SD , n = 3 in duplicate , lower panel ) . These data confirm that mutation in K ( R ) DEL had no detectable effect on toxin assembly and periplasmic extracts contained little or no free B subunit . Taken together , these data provide evidence that the K ( R ) DEL motif is not absolutely required for toxin ac - tion , but in its absence signal transduction is significantly less efficient . The clear sensitivity displayed by both CT z O E ¢ - 3 t / l t ~ e - 2 t ~ . Q 1 " 7 D . . r ~ t . . ) I - - tll Figure 3 . Effect of mutation in KDEL on the enzymatic activity of the A subunit of CT . ADP - ribosyltransferase activity of KDEL - mutant and wt CT ( 0 . 2 txM , not nicked ) . CT purified from V . cholerae ( i . e . , nicked ) , at 1 txM , 0 . 01 txM , and vehicle alone provide three point cal - ibration ( mean _ + SD , n = 3 ) . and LT to mutation in K ( R ) DEL strongly implies that both toxins require functional interaction with endoge - nous KDEL - receptors within Golgi cisternae or ER for ef - ficient retrograde transport and maximum biologic activity . Effect of Cell Polarity on Signal Transduction by KDEL - Mutants When applied to basolateral instead of apical reservoirs , CT can bind to the cell at a site in close proximity to its tar - get enzyme adenylate cyclase . Signal transduction from basolateral cell surfaces , however , also requires endocyto - sis and subsequent transport of CT through multiple com - partments of the central vacuolar network ( 27 , 45 ) . To examine whether signal transduction via basolateral receptors may also require sorting by K ( R ) DEL , it was necessary to first proteolytically nick ( trypsin , 20 lxg / ml ) the exposed loop between the A1 - and A2 - peptides ( resi - dues 187 - 199 ) ( 35 ) . The A subunits of the recombinant toxins are not nicked by endogenous proteases in E . coli as they are in V . cholerae ( Fig . 1 , Western blots ) . This has no effect on the time course of toxin action when applied to apical cell surfaces in the T84 cell system where both re - combinant CT and LT are nicked by a protease ( s ) at the apical cell surface . Nicking , however , appears to be rate limiting when toxins are applied to basolateral membranes ( unpublished data ) . Signal transduction by toxin internalization via basolat - eral endosomes was also sensitive to mutation in the K ( R ) DEL sorting signal ( Fig . 8 ) . KDEL - mutants applied to either apical ( A ) or basolateral cell surfaces ( B ) elicited a secretory response more slowly than wild - type CT . Both the initial lag phase and rate of toxin induced C1 - secre - tion were affected ( KDEL - mutant vs . wt CT : lag phase , 53 + _ 4 vs . 35 _ _ 7 min ; dlsc / dt , 1 . 4 - + 1 vs . 2 . 5 - + 1 . 4 ixA / cm2 / min ; peak Isc , 62 _ + 25 vs . 80 _ + 28 ixA / cm 2 , mean _ + SD , n = 2 in duplicate ) . Identical results ( qualitatively ) were ob - tained for wt LT and RDEL - mutants ( data not shown ) . Thus , mutation in K ( R ) DEL affects a physiologic event in the cellular processing of CT that is in common with toxin entry through apical or basolateral endosomes . This com - mon event displays sensitivity to mutation in the K ( R ) DEL sorting signal and as such represents retrograde traffic of CT and LT through proximal components of the secretory pathway ( compartments shared in polarized cells by the apically and basolaterally directed secretory pathway ) . Thus these data fit nicely with the current hypothesis that translocation of the A subunit ( an event essential for toxin action ) may occur within Golgi cisternae or ER ( 50 ) . Signal Transduction by KDEL - Mutant CT Displays Greater Sensitivity to Temperature We examined the temperature dependency of toxin in - duced CI - secretion . We reasoned that if the KDEL sort - ing signal facilitates a rate - limiting step in toxin action , KDEL - mutants should display greater sensitivity to tem - perature . Fig . 9 shows the time course of toxin action for KDEL - mutant ( 1 nM , open squares ) and wild - type CT ( 1 nM , filled squares ) at three different temperatures ( 37 , 27 , and 20°C ) . Lowering temperatures below 37°C reduced the rate of toxin induced CI - secretion for both wild - type and mutant toxins . Signal transduction by the KDEL - Lencer et al . Targeting of Cholera Toxin by KDEL 955 on A ugu s t 4 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 7o . 60 . ~ 40 . ~ 30 . - - 20 . 10 . 0 0 40 . 3o E v lO [ ] 1 0 0 n M S 100 nM " RDEL mutant 100 Time ( mln ) [ ] 0 . 5 nM 7O / / 1 ~ . : : / ) 2 0 0 0 4 0 8 0 1 2 0 Time ( rain ) 40 . L ~ m u t a n t Time ( mln ) 30 . 20 . 10 . 0 0 0 200 0 [ ] , I O . 5 tiM Time ( mln ) 2O0 Figure 4 . Effect of mutation in K ( R ) DEL on the time course of toxin induced C1 - secretion . The time courses of toxin induced C1 - secre - tion are shown for LT and the RDEL - mutant in high ( 100 nM , A ) and low doses ( 0 . 5 nM , C ) ; and for CT and the KDEL - mutant in high ( 100 nM , B ) and low doses ( 0 . 5 nM , D ) . mutant , however , was more strongly inhibited by reduced temperature . This is most apparent at 20°C ( bottom ) , where the ability of the KDEL - mutant to elicit a secretory response was completely inhibited , while C1 - secretion in - duced by wt CT was clearly present . The viability of these monolayers was demonstrated by the brisk secretory re - sponse elicited by the administration of 3 nM vasoactive intestinal peptide to basolateral reservoirs at 480 min ( marked with * in lower panel ) . This differential tempera - ture dependency was not dependent on toxin concentra - tion . Identical results were obtained when wt and mutant toxins were applied in fivefold higher concentrations ( 5 nM ) . Table II summarizes the results of seven indepen - dent experiments . These data provide additional kinetic evidence that specific interactions between CT and endog - Table I . Effect of Mutation in K ( R ) DEL on Toxin Induced Cl - Secretion Toxin Lag phase dlsc / dt Peak lsc min pA / cm2 / min I ~ / cm z CT KDEL - mutant 35 + 1 " 1 . 2 - + 0 . 06 * 45 + - 4 n = 8 Wild type 27 - + 1 1 . 8 - + 0 . 1 47 - + 4 n = 6 LT RDEL - mutant 53 - + 2 * 0 . 62 - + 0 . 03 * 44 + 4 n = 7 Wild type 43 + _ 2 0 . 85 _ + 0 . 03 52 + 2 n = 6 Mean - SE . * K ( R ) DEL - mutant vs . wild - type toxin . p = 0 . 0001 by ANOVA . enous KDEL - receptors occur in human intestine and play a physiologic role in toxin action . Effect of KDEL - Mutation on Toxin Traffic : Endocytosis Is Unaffected but Transcytosis of the KDEL - Mutant Occurs More Slowly Than for Wild - type Toxin To show directly that mutation in K ( R ) DEL affects toxin trafficking , we examined the time course of endocytosis and transcytosis for both wt and KDEL - mutant toxins . The reduced efficiency in signal transduction by K ( R ) DEL - mutants may be attributable to an effect on toxin uptake by endocytosis . The data show , however , that mutation in K ( R ) DEL had no detectable effect on endocytosis ( Fig . 10 ) . Both wt and K ( R ) DEL - mutant toxins were internal - ized at nearly identical rates with apparent half - times of ~ 7 . 5 min ( n = 4 , in triplicate or quadruplicate ) . The transcytotic movement of wt and KDEL - mutant toxins from apical to basolateral membrane was also ex - amined . In polarized intestinal epithelia , CT must trans - duce a signal from its apical receptor ( GM1 ) to its basolat - eral effector ( adenylate cyclase ) . We have recently found that this transcellular signaling may require transcytosis of toxin containing membranes ( 29 ) . Transcytosis of KDEL - mutant or wt CT from apical to basolateral membranes was assessed directly by selective cell surface biotinylation . These experiments were carried out at 27°C to enhance the difference in time course between KDEL - mutant and wt CT - induced C1 - secretion . Fig , 11 A shows the representative results of one of three independent experiments . The upper panel shows a western blot to demonstrate that each lane contains equiv - alent amounts of immunoprecipitated CT B subunit . The The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 956 on A ugu s t 4 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 20 . 40 . 15 R " E _ = 5 . [ ] = ~ . . . . RDEL mutant 0 10 " 13 10 " 12 10 - 11 10 , 10 1041 10 - 8 10 - 7 DoN Toxin ( M ) [ ] 20 , 10 , B ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ L ~ t 1 p - t4 10 - 13 10 " ta 10 " 10 " t° 10 " 9 10 " 8 10 " 7 10 - 6 Dose Toxin ( M ) Figure 5 . Effect of mutation in K ( R ) DEL on the dose de - pendency of toxin induced C1 - secretion . Dose depen - dency of K ( R ) DEL - mutant ( open squares ) and wild - type ( filled squares ) LT ( A ) and CT ( B ) . Representative of two to three independent ex - periments , mean _ + SD for duplicate monolayers . lower panel shows the avidin blot of monolayers exposed to KDEL - mutant or wt CT at 27°C for the indicated times . The first and second lanes are positive and negative con - trois respectively . Wild - type CT ( 1 nM ) was applied api - cally to T84 monolayers and incubated for 160 min at 4°C , a temperature that completely inhibits vesicular traffic and CT - induced signal transduction ( 28 ) . The monolayers were then biotinylated either at the apical ( lane 1 ) or baso - lateral ( lane 2 ) cell surface . The large avidin - peroxidase signal ( lane 1 , bottom ) demonstrates that CT B subunit can be labeled with biotin while bound to GM1 at the cell surface . In the absence of vesicular traffic ( at 4°C ) , how - ever , the CT B subunit was not labeled by applying biotin to basolateral reservoirs ( lane 2 ) . These and supplemental data ( 29 ) show that CT does not traverse the T84 cell mono - layer by diffusion through intercellular tight junctions . Lanes 7 and 8 show that in monolayers incubated at 27°C for 160 min basolaterally applied biotin has now la - beled a fraction of the B subunit at the basolateral mem - brane indicating that both the KDEL - mutant and wt CT had breached the epithelial barrier by transcytosis . The fractional component of mutant toxin biotinylated at the basolateral membrane , however , was approximately five - fold less than wt CT . This corresponds quantitatively to the smaller secretory response elicited by the KDEL - mutant at this time point ( B ) . Nearly identical results were obtained for monolayers incubated at 27°C for 110 min ( lanes 5 and 6 ) . In contrast , after only 30 min ( lanes 3 and 4 ) , neither the B subunit of KDEL - mutant nor wt CT was A - Subunit t Temp 4 ° C 37 ° C I - - - 1 i Time ( rain ) 120 15 60 Lane 1 2 3 wt CT I KDEL - [ mutant B - Subunit i f I 4 " C 37OC ' ~ ' 90 ' 120 90 15 60 4 5 6 7 8 Figure 6 . Effect of mutation in K ( R ) DEL on intracellular degra - dation . Wild - type ( wt ) and KDEL - mutant CT were applied to apical membranes of T84 cell monolayers and incubated at either 4°C ( lanes I and 5 ) or 37°C for the indicated times . CT A subunits ( lanes 1 - - 4 ) or B subunits ( lanes 5 - 8 ) were immunoprecipitated from total cell extracts ( lysed in the presence of 10 mM N - ethyl - maleimide ) and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and western blot under non - reducing conditions . labeled by basolaterally applied biotin at a point in the lag phase where a secretory response was not yet detected . Little or no difference in the amount of B subunit deliv - ered to basolateral membranes was detected in monolay - ers incubated at 37°C for 90 min ( data not shown ) or 150 min ( A , lanes 9 and lO , and C ) . Roughly equivalent amounts of mutant and wt toxin were present at the basolateral membrane at these time points which correspond ( at 37°C ) to nearly maximal secretion for both toxins . The amount of wt and KDEL - mutant toxin transcytosed were quantified ( mean _ SE , n = 3 ) and displayed super - imposed at the appropriate points on the time course of CT - induced C1 - secretion obtained from monolayers of the same passage and studied in parallel ( Fig . 11 B ) . The m E m > ( = . " O ¢1 O Z 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 120 100 80 6O e LTEL mutant . . . . . ~ R 40 20 0 10 " 12 1611 1610 10 9 10 . 8 16 ; ' Recombinant B - aubunlt ( M ) _ _ e CT ~ KDEL mutant 1 i lO - e lO - 5 Figure 7 . Effect of competition with recombinant B subunit on toxin induced CI - secretion . Competitive inhibition of secretory response elicited by K ( R ) DEL mutant ( filled squares ) and wt ( open squares ) LT ( top ) and CT ( bottom ) . Isc ' s were normalized to peak secretory responses for each toxin ( 35 and 45 ixA / cm 2 for RDEL - mutant and LT ; 62 _ _ _ 25 and 80 - 28 ixA / cm 2 for KDEL - mutant and CT ) . Representative of two independent experiments for duplicate monolayers . Lencer et al . Targeting of Cholera Toxin by KDEL 957 on A ugu s t 4 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 100 80 " [ Apical Toxin 1 CT " nicked " 60 40 - 20 " OI E o 80 - 60 " Beaofeterel Toxin CT KDEL - mutant " nicked " 40 . t ~ / KDEL - mutent " nicked " 20 - 0 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 Time ( min ) Figure 8 . Effect of cell polarity on the time course of C1 - secre - tion elicited by KDEL - mutant and wt CT . Time courses of toxin induced secretion are shown for KDEL - mutant and wt CT pro - teolytically nicked as described in Materials and Methods . Toxins were applied to either apical ( top ) or basolateral ( bottom ) cell surfaces . Signal transduction by KDEL - mutants were delayed from both cell surfaces . Identical results were obtained with RDEL - mutant and wt LT ( data not shown ) . Representative of two independent experiments for both toxins , mean _ SD for du - plicate monolayers . appearance of the B subunit on the basolateral membrane coincides temporally and quantitatively with mutant ( open squares ) and wt CT - induced CI - secretion ( filled squares ) . Taken together , these data provide direct evidence that mutation in KDEL affects toxin movement within a baso - laterally directed transcytotic pathway and identify Golgi and ER as intermediary compartments through which CT traffics . Discussion Evidence for Retrograde Transport of CT and LT into Golgi Cisternae and ER The results in this paper show that the presence of a func - tional K ( R ) DEL sequence in CT and LT plays a role in fa - cilitating toxin action in human T84 cells and thus implies a direct and specific interaction with endogenous KDEL - receptors during signal transduction . In the absence of a functional K ( R ) DEL sequence at the COOH terminus of the A2 - peptide , both mutant CT and LT elicited a secre - tory response more slowly and with higher apparent acti - vation energies than their wild - type counterparts . The in - teraction between toxin and KDEL - receptor was specific in that a single and conservative point mutation ( replacing leucine with valine in the RDEL sequence of LT ) affected toxin action . These results were not explained by indirect / °t E 4ot O ! , , 20O 300 60 ¸ E 40 - - 2 0 0 , 20 A 0 37 ° C 400 27 * C 100 200 300 400 20 ° C I 200 300 400 500 Tlrne ( rain ) Figure 9 . Effect of mutation in KDEL on the temperature de - pendency of CT - induced C1 - secretion . Time courses of toxin in - duced C1 - secretion are shown for 1 nM KDEL - mutant ( open squares ) and wt CT ( filled squares ) at 37 , 27 , and 20°C . Represen - tative of 7 independent experiments , mean _ + SD for duplicate monolayers . The * marks the administration of 3 nM vasoactive intestinal peptide to basolateral monolayers at 480 rain . effects on toxin assembly , toxin binding , resistance to in - tracellular degradation , or ADP - ribosyltransferase activ - ity . In contrast , we provide direct evidence that K ( R ) DEL effected toxin trafficking as assessed by movement through the basolaterally directed transcytotic pathway . The compartment ( s ) affected represent a common struc - ture in the apical and basolateral endocytic pathways , as mutation in K ( R ) DEL inhibited signal transduction from both cell surfaces . These data provide strong evidence that CT and LT may require retrograde movement through the secretory pathway to elicit a maximal secretory response . Two lines of evidence from the available literature sup - port this view . First , CT ( conjugated to horseradish perox - idase ) has been visualized directly within trans - Golgi in neuroblastoma cells ( 23 ) and recently , purified CT B sub - unit ( also conjugated to horseradish peroxidase ) has been visualized within cis - Golgi in A431 epidermoid cells ( 56 ) . These studies show directly that CT can traffic from the cell surface to trans - Golgi and retrograde into Golgi cister - nae . Movement into these compartments appears to de - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 958 on A ugu s t 4 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Table II . Effect of Temperature on the Secretory Response Elicited by KDEL - mutant and Wild - type CT Lag phase dlsc / dt Peak lsc Ratio * Lag Ratio * dlsc / dt Ratio peak lsc min mA / cm2 / min mA / cm2 37°C , n = 7 pairs mutant 44 _ + 1 0 . 59 + - - 0 . 04 50 + _ 3 wt 33 - + 1 1 . 1 _ 0 . 1 60 - + 5 1 . 333 0 . 55 0 . 82 27°C , n = 7 pairs mutant 127 - - - 9 0 . 19 + _ 0 . 02 25 4 - 2 wt 83 - - - 2 0 . 38 - 0 . 05 34 4 - 3 1 . 53 0 . 51 0 . 74 20°C , n = 7 pairs mutant I > 410 + 20 ~ < 0 . 012 _ _ _ 0 . 004 2 . 5 - + 0 . 8 wt 256 + _ 11 0 . 48 + _ 0 . 003 10 . 5 + - 0 . 6 ~ > 1 . 6 < ~ 0 . 25 0 . 24 Mean _ + SE . * KDEL - mutants are significantly more sensitive to temperature than wt CT . p = 0 . 001 by 2 - factor ANOVA . pend on toxin binding ( or clustering ) ganglioside GM1 , as purified or recombinant CT B subunit will move into these compartments in the absence of sorting signals from the A subunit . These data fit nicely with our current findings that the K ( R ) DEL sequence is not absolutely required for toxin action , and with our concurrent observations ( 29 ) that trafficking of CT through a basolaterally directed transcytotic pathway also depends primarily on toxin - binding ( or perhaps clustering ) ganglioside GM1 . Second , the KDEL - receptor , the product of the mam - malian ERD2 gene , has now been clearly localized at steady - state to Golgi cisternae and intermediate compart - ment with small amounts of receptor visualized in ER and trans - Golgi ( 16 , 63 ) . KDEL - receptors were not visualized at the cell surface or in more distal compartments of the 1 . 4 t Cholera Toxin 1 . 2 1 . 0 ' ~ " ~ 0 . 8 " - - i 0 . s ~ wtCT 0 . 4 ' . . 4 . _ KDEL - mutant . ~ 0 . 21 " = - C T , V cho / erae ~ 0 . 0 " ~ I . . ~ lle Toxin e . , 0 . 5 o " ~ 0 . 4 ' Q . O 0 . s ~ RDEL - 0 . 2 ' mutant - - = - - wt LT 0 . 1 0 . 0 2 ' o , ' o 6 ' 0 8o Time ( min ) Figure 10 . Effect of mutation in K ( R ) DEL on toxin endocytosis . Time course of toxin endocytosis . ( Top ) wt CT ( filled squares ) , KDEL - mutant ( filled triangles ) , and wt CT purified from V . chol - erae ( open squares ) . ( Bottom ) wt LT ( filled squares ) , RDEL - mutant ( filled triangles ) . Both wild - type and K ( R ) DEL - mutant toxins display nearly identical rates of internalization with appar - ent half - times of ~ 7 . 5 rain . secretory pathway . Furthermore , the preponderance of evidence establishes that KDEL - receptors mediate retro - grade transport of other KDEL - containing proteins through Golgi cisternae to ER ( 42 , 48 , 62 ) . Retrieval and recycling to ER occurs from multiple sites in the secretory pathway , including trans - Golgi ( 8 , 20 , 31 , 37 , 52 ) . Thus , CT and LT would have multiple opportunities to interact with KDEL receptors as these toxins move retrograde in the secretory pathway via binding ( or clustering ) ganglioside GM1 ( see below ) . Components of the apical and basolateral endocytic pathways converge in late endosomes ( 2 , 12 , 18 , 46 ) and al - most certainly in the trans - Golgi , as vesicles exchange con - stitutively between these compartments ( 15 and refer - ences therein ) . Our demonstration , however , that the K ( R ) DEL sorting signal plays a physiologic role in toxin action indicates that both CT and LT move beyond the late endosome into compartments where interactions be - tween toxin and KDEL - receptors may plausibly occur . Thus , these studies identify trans - Golgi , Golgi cisternae , and possibly ER as intermediary compartments through which CT may physiologically traffic to elicit an efficient secretory response . Since reduction and translocation of the A subunit also represent events that occur in shared ( or similar ) compartments of both the apical and basolat - eral endocytic pathways ( 27 ) , it is tempting to speculate that A subunit translocation occurs in ER or possibly Golgi cisternae as previously hypothesized ( 50 ) . If so , movement into these compartments would be facilitated by direct interaction between toxin and K ( R ) DEL - recep - tors . This prediction fits nicely with our experimental data and provides a cogent and biologically plausible explana - tion for conservation of the COOH - terminal K ( R ) DEL sorting signal in these two toxins . However , it remains possible that mutation in K ( R ) DEL may also affect mem - brane translocation of the A subunit by a mechanism sepa - rate from its effect on toxin trafficking . Biology of Glycosphingolipids and Targeting of CTILT by Binding or Clustering Ganglioside GM1 Our current studies , together with those discussed above ( 23 , 38 , 56 ) , show that both retrograde traffic into the secretory pathway and transcytosis across polarized cells ( 29 ) may plausibly depend on structural features of the toxin ' s endogenous receptor , ganglioside GM1 . Glycosphin - Lencer et al . Targeting of Cholera Toxin by KDEL 959 on A ugu s t 4 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m [ ] 4 ~ C 27 " C 3PC f 160 I i ' ~ ~ Time ( rain ) 30 110 . . . . 160 150 I i ' wt ' ' ; , ' ' ' , , , ' Toxin wt m m wt m wt m Lane I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Western I Blot Avidln - HRP [ " [ ] 30 ¸ 20 10 i ~ l " KD El . - , " numrd 1 . 2 1 . o ~ o . 6 " ~ • , o . 4 ~ o . o ~ ' 50 1oo 15o 200 Time ( mini CT - B SubunK [ ] 37 ' * C 150 rain . ~ 12 . I ' ' | ' ° ] l ° ' 811 ° " I IH i ° - ' . IIH n , , , 0 , 0 i m vl It Figure 11 . Effect of mutation in KDEL on toxin trafficking through the transcytotic pathway . T84 cell monolayers grown on permeable supports were exposed continuously to 1 nM KDEL - mutant ( m ) or wild - type ( wt ) CT at the apical cell surface at the indicated temperatures and times . Selective cell surface biotinyla - tion was performed as described . ( A ) Top shows western blot of immunoprecipitated CT B subunit showing that each lane con - tains equivalent amounts of CT B subunit . Bottom shows HRP - avidin blot of same experiment . Lane 1 , ( positive control ) 120 min incubation at 4°C , biotinylation from apical cell surface ; lane 2 , ( negative control ) 120 min incubation at 4°C , biotinylation from basolateral cell surface ; lanes 3 - 10 were biotinylated baso - laterally ; lanes 3 and 4 , 30 min incubation at 27°C ; lanes 5 and 6 , 110 min incubation at 27°C ; lanes 7 and 8 , 160 rain incubation at 27°C ; lanes 9 and 10 , 160 min incubation at 37°C . ( B ) Time course of KDEL - mutant ( open squares ) and wt ( filled squares ) CT - induced CI - secretion at 27°C . Relative band optical densities for avidin blots of monolayers incubated at 27°C ( mean - + SEM , n = 3 ) are superimposed at the appropriate time points . Signals in lane 8 ( 160 min , wt CT ) and lane 2 ( negative control ) for each indepen - dent experiment served as two point calibrations . ( C ) Relative band optical densities for avidin blots of monolayers incubated at 37°C for 150 min . Signals in lanes 9 and 2 served as two point cal - ibrations . golipids such as ganglioside GM1 are expressed exclusively on the outer ( exo - cytoplasmic ) leaflet of cell membranes ( reviewed in 57 , 65 , 67 , 68 ) . They contribute to the struc - ture and function of membrane domains throughout the central vacuolar network of eucaryotic cells except per - haps ER where they may be present in extremely low con - centrations . Transport between distinct intracellular struc - tures occurs only by vesicular traffic . Thus , ganglioside GM1 , which has been shown directly to recycle between the cell surface and trans - Golgi in murine NCTC 2071 and rat glioma C ' 6 cells ( 10 ) , represents an ideal target for toxins entering the endocytic and retrograde secretory pathway• Targeting of CT and LT into Golgi and ER ( though not ef - ficient ) may simply depend on binding ( or clustering ) GM1 via the pentameric B subunit . This would explain our ob - servations that the K ( R ) DEL sorting signal is not abso - lutely essential for toxin action . Possible Mechanism of CT Action on Polarized Epithelia Based on our current understanding , we propose the fol - lowing working model of toxin action on polarized epithe - lia ( Fig . 12 ) . Binding of CT or LT to ganglioside GM1 at the apical cell surface is sufficient for targeting these toxins to all intracellular compartments necessary for signal trans - duction . In the absence of any other targeting information , however , retrograde movement of CT or LT through the endocytic system to more proximal compartments of the secretory pathway is not efficient . Interaction with endog - enous KDEL - receptors shifts the steady state distribution of the CT - GM1 complex towards Golgi cisternae and ER where reduction and translocation of the A subunit may occur . If after translocation the Al - peptide breaks free of the membrane , activation of adenylate cyclase on the ba - solateral membrane may then occur by diffusion through the cytosol . Available data indicate , however , that the A l - peptide may not dissociate from the membrane after translocation ( 28 , 69 ) , and that signal transduction may de - pend instead on movement of the CT - GM1 complex back out the secretory pathway ( via anterograde transport ) within basolaterally targeted vesicles ( 29 ) . Escape of toxin from the KDEL - recycling pathway into anterograde trans - port vesicles may occur as a result of saturation of KDEL - receptors ( by incoming toxin ) or by sequestration of the K ( R ) DEL motif after translocation of the A subunit . Fu - sion of toxin - containing vesicles with the basolateral mem - brane delivers the Al - peptide to a site where the toxin can now catalyze the ADP - ribosylation of Gsc ~ . Thus , direct interaction with endogenous KDEL - receptors facilitates toxin entry into Golgi cisternae and ER where reduction and translocation of the A subunit may occur and where the toxin may now transfer from apically recycling to baso - laterally targeted vesicles ( Fig . 12 ) . Both maximal toxin action and efficient transcytosis then depends on traffick - ing through these proximal components of the secretory pathway . Though transcytosis of toxin - containing membranes from apical to basolateral cell surface appears to be required for biologic activity , transcytosis of toxin subunits by itself will not lead to signal transduction ( 29 ) . Our current and previ - ous studies show that CT must traffic through multiple in - tracellular compartments to elicit a C1 - secretory response . Here we provide evidence that identifies trans - Golgi , Golgi cisternae , and possibly ER as intermediary compartments through which CT may traffic . Available data indicate that this indirect route across T84 cells may be more complex than that taken by the apically directed polymeric immu - noglobulin receptor ( 41 ) or by basolateraUy targeted VSG proteins artificially inserted into apical membranes of MDCK cells ( 51 ) . As such , we introduce the term " indirect transcytosis " to describe this process . We can now tentatively assign anatomic identities to phys - iologic compartments previously defined only by functional criteria . For example , brefeldin A inhibits completely CT - induced signal transduction from both the apical and basolateral cell surface . Brefeldin A scrambles protein tar - geting and diverts the movement of CT away from a com - partment necessary for reduction and translocation of the A subunit ( 27 ) . The brefeldin block occurs early in the lag The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 960 on A ugu s t 4 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m c / nRllllallllllll llll Transcellular ~ ~ transport of B - subunlt GM1 GM1 Figure 12 . Proposed model of toxin action on polarized epithelia . ( Left ) Depicts transport steps functionally defined in earlier stud - ies . ( Right , 1 ) . Toxin enters the cell by binding GMa at the apical cell surface . The bulk of the CT - GM1 complex recycles to the api - cal cell surface through early and late apical endosomes ( shaded structures ) . ( 2 ) The COOH - terminal K ( R ) DEL sorting signal on the A subunit facilitates retrograde movement of the CT - GM1 complex through Golgi cisternae to ER . ( 3 ) Reduction and trans - location of the A subunit may occur in Golgi cisternae or ER and the CT - GM1 complex is sorted ( or transferred ) from apically recy - cling to basolaterally targeted membrane structures . ( 4 ) Trans - port to the basolateral membrane occurs by anterograde vesicu - lar traffic back out the secretory pathway . ( 5 ) Fusion of basolaterally targeted vesicles carrying the CT - GM1 complex de - livers the translocated A subunit to a site near the Gs / adenylate cyclase complex on the basolateral membrane . Arrows are scaled to depict the steady state distribution of glycosphingolipids within the central vacuolar network . AE , apical endosome ; TGN , trans - Golgi network and Golgi cisternae , ER , endoplasmic reticulum , BE , basolateral endosome ; AC , adenylate cyclase ; Gas , hetero - trimeric GTPase Gs . phase . Based on our current studies , we propose that brefeldin A may inhibit toxin action by inhibiting retro - grade transport into trans - Golgi or Golgi cisternae . Either of these sites would be consistent with known effects of brefeldin A on membrane traffic in both polarized and nonpolarized cells ( 26 ) . Signal transduction from the apical membrane of polar - ized cells also depends on movement of CT through a sep - arate temperature - sensitive step ( 27 , 28 ) . This occurs late in the lag phase after the A subunit has been reduced and presumably translocated . This temperature - sensitive step is not apparent when CT is applied to basolateral cell sur - faces , and represents a step ( s ) uniquely required for signal transduction from apical membranes . We propose that this late lag phase temperature - sensitive step represents sort - ing ( or transfer ) of toxin from apically derived to basolat - erally targeted membrane structures ( i . e . , membrane mi - crodomains ) . This must occur within Golgi cisternae or ER as mutation in K ( R ) DEL has a clear effect on transcy - tosis of CT . In contrast , CT internalized from basolateral membranes of the same cells does not display such a dra - matic sensitivity to temperature , as signal transduction from the basolateral cell surface does not require move - ment to the contralateral apical membrane . After arrival within Golgi cisternae or ER , the CT - GM1 complex inter - nalized from the basolateral cell surface can move retro - grade into the secretory pathway and back out again to adenylate cyclase on the basolateral membrane by remain - ing associated with membrane receptors derived from ( and presumably targeted to ) the basolateral membrane . In summary , these studies identify Golgi cisternae and ER as intermediary compartments through which CT may traffic to elicit an efficient and maximal physiologic re - sponse . The unique lipid and protein structure of these compartments ( 3 ) may provide a thermodynamically or ki - netically favorable environment for translocation of the A subunit . The COOH - terminal K ( R ) DEL sorting signal fa - cilitates toxin entry into the secretory pathway , but move - ment into Golgi cisternae and possibly even ER will occur ( though not efficiently ) in the absence of the K ( R ) DEL - sorting signal after toxin binding ( or clustering ) ganglio - side GM1 . Thus CT , as a paradigm for vesicular transport , provides an example where protein targeting ( and ulti - mately the pathogenesis of cholera in humans ) depends on the combined effects of protein and lipid structure in small membrane microdomains ( 58 , 68 ) . We thank H . R . Pelham and M . J . Lewis for supplying plasmids containing hERD2 . 1 and hERD2 . 2 . This work was supported by the National Institute of Health research grants DK48106 ( W . I . Lencer ) , DK35932 , DK33506 ( J . L . Madara ) , A131940 ( R . Holmes ) ; The Wellcome Trust , grant 032215 ( T . R . Hirst ) ; and the Harvard Digestive Diseases Center , NIDDK DK34854 . Received for publication 1 March 1995 and in revised form 31 July 1995 . Note Added in Proof . After our manuscript was submitted , the following paper was published : Cieplak , W . , Jr . , R . J . , Messer , M . E . Konkel , and C . C . R . Grant . 1995 . Mol . Microbiol . 16 : 789 - 800 . They also constructed and characterized an RDEV mutant of LT , but unlike the results in our study , concluded that K ( R ) DEL was not important for toxin trafficking . References 1 . Barrett , K . E . 1993 . Positive and negative regulation of chloride secretion in T84 cells . Am . J . Physiol . 265 : C859 - C868 . 2 . Bomsel , M . , K . Prydz , R . G . Parton , J . Gruenberg , and K . Simons . 1989 . Endocytosis in filter - grown Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 3242 - 3258 . 3 . Bretscher , M . S . , and S . Munro . 1993 . Cholesterol and the Golgi apparatus . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 261 : 1280 - 1281 . 4 . Bullock , W . O . , J . M . Fernandez , and J . M . Short . 1987 . XL - 1 - Blue : a high efficiency plasmid transforming recA Escherichia coli strain with 13 - galac - tosidase selection . Biotechniques 5 . 4 : 376 - - 379 . 5 . Cassel , D . , and Z . Selinger . 1977 . Mechanism of adenylate cyclase activa - tion by cholera toxin : inhibition of GTP hydrolysis at the regulatory site . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 74 : 3307 - 3311 . 6 . Chaudry , V . K . , Y . Jinno , D . Fitzgerald , and I . Pastan . 1990 . Pseudomonas exotoxin contains a specific sequence at the carboxyl terminus that is re - quired for cytotoxicity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 87 : 308 - 312 . 7 . Cuatrecasas , P . 1973 . Gangliosides and membrane receptors for cholera toxin . Biochemistry . 12 : 3558 - 3566 . 8 . Dean , N . , and H . R . B . Pelham . 1990 . Recycling of proteins from the Golgi compartment to the ER in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 369 - 377 . 9 . Dharmsathaphorn , K . , and J . L . Madara . 1990 . Established intestinal cell lines as model systems for electrolyte transport studies . Methods Enzy - mot . 192 : 354 - 359 . 10 . Fishman , P . H . , and E . E . Stikkaw . 1980 . Mechanism of action of cholera toxin : effect of receptor density and multivalent binding on activation of adenylate cyclase . J . Membr . Biol . 54 : 51 - 60 . 11 . Fishman , P . H . , R . M . Bradley , B . E . Horn , and J . Moss . 1983 . Uptake and metabolism of exogenous gangliosides by cultured cells : effect of coler - agen on the turnover of GMI . J - Lipid Res . 24 : 1002 - 1011 . 12 . Fujita , M . , F . Reinhart , and M . Neutra . 1990 . Convergence of apical and basolateral endocytic pathways at apical late endosomes in absorptive cells of suckling rat ileum in vivo . J . Cell . Sci . 97 : 385 - 394 . 13 . Goins , B . , and E . Freire . 1985 . Lipid phase separations by the association of Cholera toxin to phospholipid membranes containing ganglioside GM1 . Biochemistry . 24 : 1791 - 1797 . Lencer et al . Targeting of Cholera Toxin by KDEL 961 on A ugu s t 4 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 14 . Goins , B . , and E . Freire . 1988 . Thermal stability and intersubunit interac - tions of cholera toxin in solution and in association with its cell - surface receptor ganglioside GM1 . Biochemistry . 27 : 2046 - - 2052 . 15 . Green , S . A . , and R . B . Kelly . 1992 . Low density lipoprotein receptor and cation - independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor are transported from the cell surface to the Golgi apparatus at equal rates in PC12 cells . Z Cell BioL 117 : 47 - 55 . 16 . Griffiths , G . , M . Ericsson , J . Krijnse - Locker , T . Nilsson , B . Goud , H . - D . Soling , B . L . Tang , S . H . Wong , and W . Hong . 1994 . Localization of the Lys , Asp , Glu , Leu tetrapeptide receptor to the Golgi complex and the intermediate compartment in mammalian cells . Z Cell BioL 127 : 1557 - 1574 . 17 . Holmgren , J . , I . Lonnroth , J . - E . Mansson , and L . Svennerholm . 1975 . Inter - action of cholera toxin and membrane ganglioside GM ~ of small intestine . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA . 72 : 2520 - 2524 . 18 . Hughson , E . J . , and C . R . Hopkins . 1990 . Endocytic pathways in polarized Caco - 2 cells : identification of an endosomal compartment accessible from both apical and basolateral surfaces . J . Cell BioL 110 : 337 - 348 . 19 . Jackson , M . R . , T . Nilsson , and P . A . Peterson . 1990 . Identification of a consensus motif for retention of transmembrane proteins in the endo - plasmic reticulum . EMBO ( Eur . MoL Biol . Organ . ) J . 9 : 3153 - 3162 . 20 . Jackson , M . R . , T . Nilsson , and P . A . Peterson . 1993 . Retrieval of trans - membrane proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum . J . Cell BioL 121 : 317 - 333 . 21 . Jobling , M . G . , and R . K . Holmes . 1990 . Construction of vectors with the pl5a replicon , kanamycin resistance , inducible lacZ ~ and pUC18 or pUC19 multiple cloning sites . Nucleic Acids Res . 18 : 5315 - 5316 . 22 . Jobling , M . G . , and R . K . Holmes . 1992 . Fusion proteins containing the A2 domain of cholera toxin assemble with B polypeptides of cholera toxin to form immunoreactive and functional holotoxin - like chimeras . Infect . lm - munoL 60 : 4915 - 4924 . 23 . Joseph , K . C . , A . Stieber , and N . K . Gonatas . 1979 . Endocytosis of cholera toxin in GERL - Iike structures of murine neuroblastoma cells pretreated with GM1 ganglioside . J . Cell BioL 81 : 543 - 554 . 24 . Kassis , S . , J . Hagmann , P . H . Fishman , P . P . Chang , and J . Moss . 1982 . Mechanism of action of cholera toxin on intact cells : generation of A1 peptide and activation of adenylate cyclase . Z Biol . Chem . 257 : 12148 - 12152 . 25 . King , C . A . , and W . E . van Heyningen . 1973 . Deactivation of cholera toxin by a sialidase resistant monosialosylganglioside . J . Infect . Dis . 127 : 639 - 647 . 26 . Klausner , R . D . , J . G . Donaldson , and J . Lippincott - Schwartz . 1992 . Brefel - din A : insights into the control of membrane traffic and organelle struc - ture . J . Cell BioL 116 : 1071 - 1080 . 27 . Lencer , W . I . , J . B . de Almeida , S . Moe , J . L . Stow , D . A . Ausiello , and J . L . Madara . 1993 . Entry of cholera toxin into polarized human intestinal epi - thelial cells : identification of an early brefeldin A sensitive event re - quired for Al - pepfide generation . Z Clin . Invest . 92 : 2941 - 2951 . 28 . Lencer , W . I . , C . Delp , M . R . Neutra , and J . L . Madara . 1992 . Mechanism of cholera toxin action on a polarized human epithelial cell line : role of vesicular traffic . J . Cell BioL 117 : 1197 - 1209 . 29 . Lencer , W . I . , S . Moe , P . A . Rufo , and J . L . Madara . 1995 . Transcytosis of cholera toxin subunits across model human intestinal epithelia . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 92 : 10094 - 10098 . 30 . Lencer , W . I . , G . Strohmeier , S . Moe , S . L . Carlson , C . T . Constable , and J . L . Madara . 1995 . Signal transduction by cholera toxin in polarized epi - thelia : processing in vesicular compartments does not require acidifica - tion . Am . J . PhysioL 269 : 6548 - 6557 . 31 . Lewis , M . J . , and H . R . B . Pelham . 1992 . Ligand - induced redistribution of a human KDEL receptor from the Golgi complex to the endoplasmic retic - ulum . Cell . 68 : 353 - 364 . 32 . Madara , J . L . , and K . Dharmsathaphorn . 1985 . Occluding junction struc - ture - function relationships in a cultured epithelial monolayer . Z Cell BioL 101 : 2124 - 2133 . 33 . Madara , J . L . , S . Colgan , A ~ Nusrat , C . Delp , and C . Parkos . 1992 . A simple approach to measurement of electrical parameters of cultured epithelial monolayers . J . Tiss . Cult . Methods . 14 : 209 - 216 . 34 . Mekalanos , J . 1988 . Production and purification of cholera toxin . Methods EnzymoL 165 : 169 - 175 . 35 . Mekalanos , J . J . , R . J . Collier , and W . R . Romig . 1979 . Enzymic activity of cholera toxin . II . Relationships to proteolytic processing , disulfide bond reduction , and subunit composition . , L BioL Chem . 254 : 5855 - 5861 . 36 . Merritt , E . A . , S . Sarfaty , F . van der Akker , C . L ' Hoir , J . A . Martial , and W . G . J . Hol . 1994 . Crystal structure of cholera toxin B - pentamer bound to receptor GM ~ pentasaccharide . Protein Sci . 3 : 166 - 175 . 37 . Miesenbock , G . , and J . E . Rothman . 1995 . The capacity to retrieve escaped ER proteins extends to the trans - most cisterna of the Golgi stack . J . Cell BioL 129 : 309 - 319 . 38 . Montesanto , R . , J . Roth , and L . Orci . 1982 . Non - coated membrane invagi - nations are involved in binding and internalization of cholera and tetanus toxins . Nature ( Lond . ) . 296 : 651 - 653 . 39 . Moss , J . , and M . Vaughan . 1977 . Mechanism of action of choleragen : evi - dence for ADP - ribosyltransferase activity with arginine as an acceptor . J . BioL Chem . 252 : 2455 - 2457 . 40 . Moss , J . , and M . Vaughan . 1979 . Activation of adenylate cyclase by choler - agen . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 48 : 581 - 600 . 41 . Mostov , K . , G . Apodaca , B . Aroeti , and C . Okamoto . 1992 . Plasma mem - brane protein sorting in polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell BioL 116 : 577 - 583 . 42 . Munroe , S . , and H . R . B . Pelham . 1987 . A C - terminal signal prevents secre - tion of luminal ER proteins . Cell 48 : 899 - 907 . 43 . Nilsson , T . , M . R . Jackson , and P . A . Peterson . 1989 . Short cytoplasmic se - quences serve as retention signals for transmembrane proteins in the en - doplasmic reticulum . Cell . 58 : 707 - 718 . 44 . Orlandi , P . A . , and P . H . Fishman . 1993 . Orientation of cholera toxin bound to target cells . J . BioL Chem . 268 : 17038 - 17044 . 45 . Orlandi , P . A , P . K . Curran , and P . H . Fisbman . 1993 . Brefeldin A blocks the response of cultured cells to cholera toxin , implications for intracellu - lar trafficking in toxin action . Z Biol . Chem . 268 : 12010 - 12016 . 46 . Patton , R . G . , K . Prydz , M . Bomsel , K . Simons , and G . Griffiths . 1989 . Meeting of the apical and basolateral endocytic pathways of the Madin - Darby canine kidney cell in late endosomes . J . Cell BioL 109 : 3259 - 3272 . 47 . Pelham , H . R . B . 1988 . Evidence that luminal ER proteins are sorted from secreted proteins in a post - ER compartment . EMBO ( Eur . MoL BioL Organ . ) J . 7 : 913 - 918 . 48 . Pelham , H . R . B . 1990 . The retention signal for soluble proteins of the en - doplasmic reticulum . Trends Biochem . Sci . 15 : 483 - 486 . 49 . Pelham , H . R . B . , and S . Munro . 1993 . Sorting of membrane proteins in the secretory pathway . Cell . 75 : 603 - 605 . 50 . Pelham , H . R . B . , L . M . Roberts , and M . Lord . 1992 . Toxin entry : how re - versible is the secretory pathway . Trends Cell BioL 2 : 183 - 185 . 51 . Pesonen , M . , R . Bravo , and K . Simons . 1984 . Transcytosis of the G protein of vesicular stomatitis virus after implantation into the apical membrane of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . If . Involvement of the Golgi com - plex . J . Cell BioL 99 : 796 - - 802 . 52 . Peter , F . , P . N . Van , and H . - D . Soling . 1992 . Different sorting of Lys - Asp - Glu - Leu proteins in rat liver . J . BioL Chem . 267 : 10631 - 10637 . 53 . Sambrook , J . , E . F . Fritsch , and T . Maniatis . 1989 . Molecular Cloning . A Lab - oratory Manual . Cold Spring Harbor Press , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . p . 1 . 54 . Sanchez , J . , P . M . Bennett , and M . H . Richmond . 1982 . Expression of eltB , the gene encoding the B subunit of the heat - labile enterotoxin of Escher - ichia coli , when cloned in pACYC184 . FEMS MicrobioL Lett . 14 : 1 - 5 . 55 . Sandvig , K . , O . Garred , K . Prydz , J . V . Kozlov , S . H . Hansen , and B . van Deurs . 1992 . Retrograde transport of endocytosed Shiga toxin to the en - doplasmic reticulum . Nature ( Lond . ) . 358 : 510 - 511 . 56 . Sandvig , K . , M . Ryd , O . Garred , E . Schweda , P . K . Holm , and B . van Deurs . 1994 . Retrograde transport from the Golgi complex to the ER of both shiga toxin and the nontoxic shiga B - fragment is regulated by bu - teric acid and cAMP . J . Cell BioL 126 : 53 ~ i4 . 57 . Schwarzman , G . , and K . Sandhoff . 1990 . Metabolism and intracellular transport of glycosphingolipids . Biochemistry . 29 : 10865 - 10871 . 58 . Simons , K . , and G . van Meer . 1988 . Lipid sorting in epithelial ceils . Bio - chemistry . 27 : 6197 - 6202 . 59 . Sixma , T . K . , S . E . Pronk , H . H . Kalk , E . S . Wartna , B . A . M . van Zanten , B . Witholt , and W . G . J . Hol . 1991 . Crystal structure of a cholera toxin - related heat - labile enterotoxin from E . coli . Nature ( Lond . ) . 351 : 371 - 377 . 60 . Sixma , T . K . , S . E . Pronk , K . H . Kalk , B . A . M . van Zanten , A . M . Ber - ghuis , and W . G . J . Hol . 1992 . Lactose binding to heat - labile enterotoxin revealed by X - ray crystallography . Nature ( Lond . ) . 355 : 561 - 564 . 61 . Spangler , B . D . 1992 . Structure and function of cholera toxin and the re - lated Escherichia coli heat - labile enterotoxin . Microbiol . Rev . 56 : 622 - 647 . 62 . Sweet , D . J . , and H . R . B . Pelham . 1992 . The Saccharomyces cerevisiae SEC20 gene encodes a membrane glycoprotein which is sorted by the HDEL retrieval system . EMBO J . 11 : 423 - 432 . 63 . Tang , B . L . , S . H . Wong , X . L . Qi , S . H . Low , and W . Hong . 1993 . Molecu - lar cloning , characterization , subcellular localization and dynamics of p23 , the mammalian KDEL receptor . J . Cell BioL 120 : 325 - 338 . 64 . Tsai , S . - C . , M . Noda , R . Adamik , J . Moss , and M . Vaughan . 1987 . Enhance - ment of choleragen ADP - ribosyltransferase activities by guanyl nucle - otides and a 19 - kDa membrane protein . Proc . NatL Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 5139 - 5142 . 65 . van Echten , G . , and K . Sandhoff . 1993 . Ganglioside metabolism : enzymol - ogy , topology , and regulation . J , Biol . Chem . 268 : 5341 - 5344 . 66 . van Heyningen , S . 1976 . The subunits of cholera toxin : structure , stoichi - ometry , and function . J . Infect . Dis . 133 : $ 5 - S13 . 67 . van Meer , G . 1989 . Lipid traffic in animal cells . In Annual Review of Cell Biology . Vol . 5 . G . E . Palade , editor . Annual Reviews Inc . , Palo Alto , CA . 247 - 275 . 68 . van Meer , G . 1993 . Transport and sorting of membrane lipids . Curr . Opin . Cell BioL 5 : 661 - 673 . 69 . Watkins , P . A . , J . Moss , and M . Vaughan . 1981 . ADP ribosylation of mem - brane proteins from human fibroblasts : effect of prior exposure of cell to choleragen . J . BioL Chem . 256 : 4895 - 4899 . 70 . Yu , J . , H . Webb , and T . R . Hirst . 1992 . A homologue of the E . coli DsbA protein involved in disulphide bond formation is required for enterotoxin biogenesis in V . cholerae . MoL MicrobioL 6 : 1949 - 1958 . 71 . Zagouras , P . , and J . K . Rose . 1989 . Carboxy - terminal SEKDEL sequences retard but do not retain two secretory proteins in the endoplasmic reticu - lum . J . Cell BioL 109 : 2633 - 2640 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 962 on A ugu s t 4 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m