Carotenoids in evolutionary ecology : re - evaluating the antioxidant role Lorenzo Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez * Instituto de Investigacio´n en Recursos Cinege´ticos , IREC ( CSIC , UCLM , JCCM ) , Ciudad Real , Spain The antioxidant role of carotenoids in the living organism was proposed as a possible basis for the honesty of carotenoid - based signals . However , recent studies have questioned the relevance of carotenoids as powerful antioxidants in vivo . Current evidence does not seem to support the ‘‘antioxidant role’’ hypothesis , but it does not allow us to reject it either . This paper proposes some steps to solve this controversy , such as taking a dynamic approach to antioxidant responses , designing protocols that expose individuals to oxidative challenges , analyz - ing tissues other than blood , and obtaining measures of antioxidant capacity and oxidative damage simulta - neously . However , it should be considered that , irrespec - tive of their antioxidant potential , carotenoids might still give information on oxidative stress levels if they are particularly sensitive to free radicals . Finally , lumping together the immunostimulatory and antioxidant roles of carotenoids should be avoided as these functions are not necessarily associated . Keywords : honest signaling ; immune response ; ornaments ; oxidative stress ; reactive oxigen species Introduction The study of carotenoid - based ornaments as honest signals of individual quality has been one of the most relevant topics in behavioral and evolutionary ecology over the last two decades . ( 1 , 2 ) Given that carotenoid pigments cannot be synthesized de novo by animals , and must be obtained through their diet , pioneer papers suggested that carotenoid - based ornaments could act as honest signals of foraging capacity and overall body condition ( the ‘‘foraging ability’’ hypothesis ) ( Fig . 1 ) . ( 3 – 5 ) However , the publication of the seminal paper of Lozano ( 6 ) offered an alternative hypothesis , suggesting that carotenoids could be involved in immune response and parasite resistance . Later , von Schantz et al . ( 7 ) incorporated these ideas into a broader context , highlighting the connections between oxidative stress and immunity and paying attention to the antioxidant properties of carotenoids ( as mentioned by Lozano ) . ( 6 ) This resulted in an alternative honesty in carotenoid - based signals ( the ‘‘antioxidant role’’ hypothesis ) that relies on the assumption that carotenoid pigments have physiological functions other than pigmentia - tion of skin , feathers or scales . Speciﬁcally , this hypothesis assumes that carotenoids are relevant antioxidants in the body , which links it to immunostimulantion . Thus , individuals potentially face a trade - off between allocating available carotenoids for self - maintenance functions and ornamental coloration . Healthier individuals would require lower amounts of carotenoids for antioxidant functions , allowing instead allocation of these pigments to ornament expression , subsequently signaling their quality to conspeciﬁcs ( Fig . 1 ) . Initial reviews ( 1 , 2 ) supported the viability of the ‘‘antioxidant role’’ hypothesis and , over the last 15 years , it has generated considerable interest among ecologists as a compelling and exciting ( although not mutually exclusive ) alternative to the ‘‘foraging ability’’ hypothesis . However , recent studies have questioned the key assumption of this ‘‘antioxidant role’’ hypothesis , claiming that carotenoids are not as powerful antioxidants as initially proposed . ( 8 , 9 ) For instance , it has been suggested that carotenoids are poor antioxidants but are particularly sensitive to be altered by reactive oxigen species ( ROS ) , which may result in a spurious relationship between carotenoid pigmentation and oxidative stress that is mediated by the quality of the antioxidant system . ( 8 ) In addition , a recent review suggests that circulating carotenoids do not contribute much to the antioxidant defenses of birds . ( 9 ) Therefore , despite the disproportionate attention paid by behavioral ecologists to carotenoids as signals of oxidative stress and health , it seems that the crucial assumption of this hypothesis deserves further evaluation . In this article I analyze : ( i ) the evidence supporting the hypothetical antioxidant role of carotenoids ; ( ii ) the reasons that may have led to the current controversy in this topic , and ( iii ) the steps necessary to clarify this issue . As most studies on this topic have used birds as study models , this paper is slightly biased to this taxonomic group . However , most of the conclusions and future prospects are applicable to other taxa . Carotenoids and ROS Carotenoids are large lipophilic molecules composed of a chain of 40 carbon atoms joined with alternating single and Problems and paradigms DOI 10 . 1002 / bies . 200900070 * Correspondence to : L . Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez , Instituto de Investigacio´n en Recursos Cinege´ticos , IREC ( CSIC , UCLM , JCCM ) , Ronda de Toledo , s / n , E - 13005 Ciudad Real , Spain . E - mail : lorenzo . perez @ uclm . es Present Address : School of Biological Sciences , University of Aberdeen , Zoology Building , Tillydrone Avenue , Aberdeen AB24 2TZ , United Kingdom . 1116 BioEssays 31 : 1116 – 1126 , (cid:1) 2009Wiley Periodicals , Inc . double bonds . In most carotenoids , this linear hydrocarbon skeleton is cyclized at both ends , and these end - rings are often substituted by different functional groups . There are about 700 carotenoids in living organisms , although only a limited subset of them are found in signiﬁcant amounts in animals . ( 10 ) This diverse array of carotenoids can be divided into two major groups according to their functional groups : Firstly , carotenes ( e . g . , a - carotene , b - carotene , lycopene ) , which contain only carbon and hydrogen , and secondly . xanthophylls , which contain at least one oxygen atom . In addition , xanthophylls can be subdivided into hydroxy - carotenoids ( e . g . , lutein , zeaxanthin ) or ketocarotenoids ( e . g . , asthaxanthin , canthaxanthin ) , depending on whether the oxygen - containing substituent is a hydroxyl or a ketone , respectively . Although diet ultimately constrains the amount and type of carotenoid in an animal , it should be noted that animals are able to perform some metabolic transformations of ingested carotenoids , so the array of speciﬁc carotenoids present in the organism may differ from that ingested . The color of carotenoid - based traits ( crucial in their role as honest signals of quality ) is determined by the concentration of speciﬁc types of carotenoids deposited in tissue . In turn , the color produced by a speciﬁc carotenoid ( usually ranging from yellow to red ) is determined by its chemical conﬁguration . Apart from this , the chemical structure of carotenoids results in their poor solubility in aqueous solutions . Importantly , this effectively restricts them to hydrophobic regions of biological systems . But , more importantly , the chemical structure of carotenoids , particularly , the number of double bonds and the type and position of substituent groups , is also responsible for physio - logical functions , including their antioxidant properties . ( 11 , 12 ) This capacity of carotenoids to quench ROS forms the basis of the ‘‘antioxidant role’’ hypothesis . But , what are ROS ? The term ROS covers both free radicals ( e . g . , superoxide , hydroxyl , nitric oxide ) and non - radical oxidants ( e . g . , hydro - gen peroxide , hypochlorous acid , singlet oxygen ) . From a biological perspective , the most relevant point here is that ROS are highly reactive and can damage biologically relevant molecules , such as DNA , proteins and lipids . ( 13 ) Most of endogenously produced ROS ( about 90 % ) are normal by - products of mitochondrial activity during aerobic metabolism . ( 13 ) Apart from cell metabolism , another impor - tant source of ROS is the immune response . During an infection , the immune system cells are activated , which usually implies a certain degree ROS production . ( 13 – 15 ) For instance , lymphocytes constantly generate ROS as a way to combat invading pathogens , whereas macrophages and neutrophils phagocytose and destroy foreign particles through an oxidative mechanism termed respiratory burst that also involves the production of ROS . Even though ROS are produced as part of the killing mechanism , this may be potentially harmful for the host organism , increasing the cost of immune response . To ﬁght ROS and protect themselves from oxidative damage , organisms rely on a relatively complex antioxidant system composed of endogenously produced compounds , including low molecular weight antioxidants , enzymes and some other proteins without enzymatic functions , plus some Figure 1 . Schematic representation of the trade - offs and physio - logical pathways proposed by the four main hypothesis ( H1 – H4 ) aimed at explaining the honesty of carotenoid - based traits . The amount of carotenoids available for physiological functions in the organism ( bioavailable carotenoids ) is mostly limited by the foraging ability and the capacity of the individual to absorb , transport and metabolizeingestedcarotenoids efficiently . Accordingtothe‘‘foraging ability’’ hypothesis ( H1 ) , the primary role of bioavailable carotenoids is tegument pigmentation , resulting in trait coloration conveying infor - mation about the capacity of the individual to acquire and process carotenoids . The ‘‘antioxidant role’’ hypothesis ( H2 ) assumes that carotenoids are relevant antioxidants in the body , so individuals face a trade - off between allocating bioavailablecarotenoidsto ROS quench - ing versus tegument pigmentation . ROS are produced as a result of aerobic metabolism , immune system activation or various external factors ( e . g . , polution , UVradiation , etc . ) , and are counteracted by the antioxidant system ( that , after the ‘‘antioxidant role’’ hypothesis , includes the participation of carotenoids ) . The higher the ROS levels , the higher is the proportion of bioavailable carotenoids allocated to ROS quenching . This results in lower amounts of carotenoids being allocated to trait pigmentation , which results in tegument coloration mirroring the oxidative stress level of the individual . However , carotenoid - based traits mayalso reveal oxidative stress if carotenoids are not significant antioxidants , but are , in turn , particularly prone to be bleached by ROS ( H3 ) . Finally , carotenoids may play a immuno - stimulatory role in the organism . This would lead to a trade - off between allocating bioavailable carotenoids to immune response versus tegument pigmentation ( H4 ) , resulting in carotenoid - based traits conveying information about the health status of the individual . L . Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez Problems and paradigms BioEssays 31 : 1116 – 1126 , (cid:1) 2009Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 1117 food - derived antioxidants ( Fig . 2 ) . The imbalance between ROS and antioxidant defenses is deﬁned as oxidative stress , and is involved in relevant processes such as ageing and several degenerative diseases . ( 13 , 16 ) Within an ecological and evolutionary context , oxidative stress may play a key role in life - history evolution because increased oxidative damage is likely to be a signiﬁcant constraint in many biological processes . ( 7 , 17 – 19 ) Vitamins E , A ( which can be derived from some carotenoids by metabolic transformation ) and C , polyphenols and carotenoids are the main food - derived antioxidants ( Fig . 2 ) . Although dietary antioxidants constitute just another piece within the antioxidant network ( Fig . 2 ) , they have been the target for ecologists since their bioavailability is likely to be limited in comparison with other endogenously produced antioxidants , ultimately constraining individual homeostasis . However , there is scant evidence supporting the assumption that dietary antioxidants ( such as carotenoids ) are limiting in animals and whether this applies to different taxa . ( 20 ) Furthermore , we do not really know whether individuals can compensate for a lack of food - derived antioxidants by up - regulating the production of endogenous antioxidant mechan - isms , or what the cost of such up - regulation would be . In vitro studies reveal that carotenoids are able to scavenge ROS . Although carotenoids are not necessarily destroyed after quenching ( theycan be recycled several times with the participation of other antioxidants ; see below ) , the ‘‘antioxidant role’’ hypothesis assumes that carotenoids contribute signiﬁcantly to ROS scavenging in the organism , and that carotenoids consumed in that function are no longer available for ornament coloration . Hence , an increase in ROS production will lead to reallocation of available carotenoids to antioxidant functions , setting the basis for the hypothetical sequence of increased ROS levels , oxidative stress , decrease in circulating carotenoids and subsequent decrease in carotenoid - based trait coloration . Hence the fact that carotenoid - based traits may reﬂect the health status ( levels of oxidative stress or immune system activation ) of the individual . ( 1 , 2 , 6 , 7 ) Re - evaluating a priori assumptions : can we extrapolate conclusions from humans to other taxa ? During the last two decades several studies from the medical and nutrition literature summarized and highlighted the antioxidant properties of carotenoids and the beneﬁcial Figure 2 . Simplified representation of the main components of the antioxidant system that protects individuals from oxidative damage . ( Some constitutive factors that may contribute to antioxidant protection , such as fatty acid membrane composition , have been omited for clarity . ) The antioxidant system comprises mainly endogenously produced compounds , such as enzymes that repair or discard molecules that have suffered oxidative damage , plus some endogenous low molecular weight antioxidants . In addition , some other endogenous proteins without enzymatic functions ( metal - binding proteins ) withdraw transition metal ions from circulation to protect them from reacting with ROS ( which may lead to chain reaction and enhanced ROS production ) . Note that dietary antioxidants , where carotenoids are included , constitute only a small group of all antioxidant compounds that help to fight ROS . This must be kept in mind in those studies aiming to assess the activity or response of antioxidant defenses by measuring just a single component ( (cid:1) Vitamin C may be endogenously produced by some groups , but not by others ) . Problems and paradigms L . Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez 1118 BioEssays 31 : 1116 – 1126 , (cid:1) 2009Wiley Periodicals , Inc . effects of carotenoid - rich diets on several diseases attributed to oxidative stress . ( 13 , 21 ) However , it should be noted that years before the controversy reached the ﬁeld of evolutionary ecology , the criticisms regarding the antioxidant properties of carotenoids had also emerged in medical literature . ( 12 , 22 , 23 ) In spite of this , ecophysiologists and behavioural ecologists have extrapolated the supposed antioxidant role of carote - noids from humans to birds and other taxonomic groups . But , how accurate are these extrapolations ? There are radical differences between taxa that makes it risky to extrapolate conclusions from one group to another . The most obvious difference , as highlighted a decade ago by Hill , ( 24 ) lies in the fact that mammals and other taxa , such as birds , circulate different amounts of carotenoids . Humans circulate less than 1 m g / mL carotenoids in the blood , ( 25 , 26 ) whereas some bird species may circulate up to 75 m g / mL , with average levels of (cid:2) 20 m g / mL in many species . ( 27 ) One may infer that these higher concentrations would imply greater contribution of circulating carotenoids to antioxidant protection in birds compared to humans . However , it is known that carotenoids may lose their antioxidant effectiveness ( or even show pro - oxidant properties ) at high concentrations . ( 12 , 28 ) However , although many supplementation studies in birds have elevated circulating carotenoids up to saturation levels ( e . g . , above 100 m g / mL ) , ( 29 ) except in one case , ( 30 ) the effects on health status have been consistently positive , which does not support the hypothesis proposedby someauthors that carotenoids may be harmful for the organism and that carotenoid - based signals indicate the detoxiﬁcation capacity of the individual . ( 1 , 2 , 8 ) Humans and other taxa also differ in the speciﬁc types of carotenoids that they accumulate and circulate in the blood . Humans tend to accumulate preferentially carotenes ( lyco - pene and b - carotene constitute approximately the 70 % of total carotenoids circulated in the blood ) . ( 25 , 26 ) In contrast , most bird species , for instance , accumulate xanthophylls ( specially lutein and zeaxanthin ) , which may represent up to > 90 % of the circulating carotenoids . ( 10 ) However , only small concentrations of carotenes are found in the avian plasma and body stores , except in those species whose diet is particularly rich in these types of carotenoids . ( 10 ) Similarly , species belonging to other taxa ( ﬁshes , insects , reptiles ) may also strongly differ in their speciﬁc carotenoid afﬁnity . This is a relevant issue because , at least in vitro , carotenes show a higher ROS scavenging capacity than xanthophylls . ( 11 , 31 ) In addition , the antioxidant capacity exhibited by a particular carotenoid is strongly dependent of the relative abundance of other types of carotenoids present in the sample . ( 31 ) Another factor to consider is that there are physiological differences between taxa that may affect the relative importance of each component of the antioxidant system . For instance , birds , in contrast to mammals , are uricotelic and therefore maintain blood levels of uric acid three times higher than humans . Uric acid may have deep effect on the ‘‘antioxidant environment’’ of the organism , ( 18 ) explaining between 36 % and 65 % of the variation in plasma antioxidant capacity of birds . ( 32 – 34 ) This is also important because the antioxidant capacity of a given molecule is stronglyaffected by the physiological context in which it is immersed , especially by the concentration of other antioxidants . ( 35 ) For instance , vitamin C recycles the tocopheroxyl radical generated by vitamin E after ROS scavenging , and a similar cooperative relationship has been established between vitamin E and b - carotene , and between b - carotene and vitamin C . ( 36 ) As a result , many antioxidants have a synergistic ( rather than simply additive ) effects and it is possible that this kind of relationship applies to many other antioxidants , carotenoids included . Hence , as the antioxidant context varies accross taxa , it seems risky to extrapolate the relative contribution of carotenoids ( or any other dietary antioxidant ) across different taxonomic groups . Finally , susceptibility to oxidative stress may differ between groups or species due to differences in metabolic rates or life histories , or due to structural factors , such as the degree of unsaturation of lipids in cell membranes , ( 18 ) resulting in different requirements of speciﬁc antioxidants . Focusing on carotenoids , it is quite relevant that mammals , for instance , do not possess ornaments to be pigmented by carotenoids and do not need to allocate disproportionate amounts of these pigments to egg yolk formation . This implies different demands and constraints in mammals as compared with other taxa . Assessing the physiological roles of carotenoids in animals We can therefore conclude that the initially highlighted antioxidant role of carotenoids can not be extrapolated from humans to birds , ﬁshes , reptiles or invertebrates . Therefore , the a priori assumption that carotenoids play a relevant role in the antioxidant system of birds and other taxa needs to be ascertained . In birds , recent studies have started shedding light on this topic . Costantini and Møller ( 9 ) reviewed the published literature relating carotenoid levels and any variable indicative of oxidative stress ( i . e . , antioxidant capacity or oxidative damage ) , concluding that carotenoids are minor antioxidants for birds . Unfortunately , the scant literature focused on this topic ( 14 studies ) , together with a narrow range of species studied ( n ¼ 6 ) , limited their data set . It is known that the antioxidant system of birds shows important interspeciﬁc variations ( 37 ) , partly explained by differences in life - history traits . ( 17 ) Also , the amount of carotenoids ( as well as the relative concentrations of each carotenoid type ) between species is highly variable , being strongly conditioned by factors such as phylogeny , diet , body size or presence and extent of carotenoid - based ornamentation . ( 10 , 27 ) Although such a limited data set is hardly representative of the whole L . Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez Problems and paradigms BioEssays 31 : 1116 – 1126 , (cid:1) 2009Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 1119 Aves class , a recent study reached similar conclusions after analyzing samples from a larger number of species , ( 37 ) ﬁnding weak and inconsistent relationships between carotenoids and antioxidant capacity . However , these results must be inter - preted with caution as infering oxidative stress levels from measures of antioxidant capacity alone may be mislead - ing . ( 38 ) Also , we cannot exclude the possibility that the effect of lipophilic compounds like carotenoids is more evident in tissues other than blood ( see below ) . This implies a need to perform additional studies , covering a broader range of species and with an adequate methodology to fully assess the antioxidant role of carotenoids in birds and other groups . Below , I discuss some relevant issues that must be taken into account to design and perform future studies , paying attention to aspects that must be considered when designing experimental protocols , analyzing samples or interpreting results to assess the antioxidant role of carotenoids in a given model species . Quantifying oxidative defenses and oxidative damage Oxidative stress is a multifaceted situation and there are several different analytical approaches to capture it . It is possible to measure all four components of oxidative stress ( ROS production , antioxidant defenses , oxidative damage and repair mechanisms ) . Recent studies have reviewed the available methods to assess these components , ( 19 ) so that this topic is not dealt with further here . I focus instead on some useful tools to be considered in evaluating the antioxidant role of carotenoids . These tools can be divided into three main groups : measures of particular antioxidants , measures of antioxidant capacity , and measures of oxidative damage . The quantiﬁcation of individual components of the antioxidant system , either enzymatic ( superoxide dismutase , catalase , glutathione peroxidase , glutathione reductase , glucose - 6 - phosphate dehydrogenase ) or non - enzymatic ( vitamins A , C and E , uric acid , glutathione , carotenoids ) could give some relevant information when used as biomarkers of antioxidant status . However , although they may indicate up - regulation of the antioxidant machinery or overall levels of antioxidant reserves , ( 19 ) these measures alone do not tell us much about the oxidative stress level of the individual . ( 38 ) Therefore , measures of the antioxidant capacity ( i . e . , the ability of the sample to quench ROS ) are a much more integrative and functional tool to estimate antioxidant potential of a given sample . ( 39 ) There are several different techniques for measuring antioxidant capacity , such as oxygen radical absorbance capacity ( ORAC ) , trolox equiva - lent antioxidant capacity ( TEAC ) ( also called total antioxidan status , TAS ) or ferric reducing ability of plasma ( FRAP ) , among others . However , it should be noted that results are not always consistent across assays because each technique measures a slightly different phenomenon . ( 32 , 39 ) The third group of analytical tools comprises the measures of oxidative damage in some biomolecules . This is usually done by measuring peroxidation products of lipids , proteins or DNA . Lipids are one of the major targets of oxidative stress , and lipid peroxidation can be quantiﬁed by means of biomarkers such as isoprostanes and malondialdehyde ( MDA ) . Carotenoids are lipid - soluble molecules , and their antioxidant role is more likely to be relevant in cellular membranes and lipophilic environments . ( 40 ) Therefore , oxi - dative damage in lipids is probably the most useful biomarker to assess their antioxidant properties . Probably the best analytical approach is to use measures of antioxidant capacity and oxidative damage simultaneously . This could inform us about the relative contribution of carotenoids to antioxidant capacity , and how important carotenoids are in preventing oxidative damage . Furthermore , measures of oxidative damage are recommended because infering oxidative stress level by analyzing antioxidant capacity alone can be misleading ( see below ) . ( 38 ) In addition , given the slightly inconsistent results found between meth - odologies , the use of more than one single type of assay is desirable . These measures could be complimented with the analysis of one or more key antioxidants . For instance , measuring uric acid seems particularly necessary in birds because , as mentioned above , this metabolite strongly affects measures of antioxidant capacity . Measuring some other speciﬁc antioxidant compounds or enzymes could be interesting to eliminate a collateral up - regulation ( or down - regulation ) of other arms of the antioxidant system after manipulating carotenoid levels . For instance , carotenoid supplementation has been shown to increase vitamin E in birds ( 41 , 42 ) or the activities of some antioxidant enzymes in rats . ( 43 ) Also , given the synergistic relationships mentioned above , the scarcity of any other limitant antioxidant ( i . e . , vitamin E or C ) could prevent carotenoids from exerting their antioxidant role . These possibilities cannot be discarded unless other speciﬁc antioxidants are monitored . Fortunately , most of these techniques require very small sample volumes , which makes it possible to measure several parameters even when the amount of sample that one can reasonably collect is limited . Going beyond the blood The above - mentioned assays are usually applied only to blood samples . Blood seems to be a suitable sample for assessing the effect of circulating carotenoids as the blood stream is the transport vehicle for carotenoids and other antioxidants . However , it is not clear to what extent results from blood are representative of other organs and tissues . More importantly , when testing the antioxidant role of carotenoids , it might be sufﬁcient to ﬁnd an effect in any single tissue , whether it is mirrored by blood parameters or not . This is because strong cell damage in one tissue Problems and paradigms L . Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez 1120 BioEssays 31 : 1116 – 1126 , (cid:1) 2009Wiley Periodicals , Inc . ( irreversible or not ) could potentially cause detrimental effects to the whole organism , with the consequent general loss of functionality and decreased ﬁtness . Interestingly , there are subtle variations in carotenoid concentration between organs that may reﬂect a functional strategic allocation . ( 10 , 36 ) For instance , adipose tissue , liver , ovary and retina tend to accumulate high amounts of carotenoids in birds and other animals , ( 36 ) and are promising target tissues that deserve further research . In fact , the retina is a tissue in which the photoprotective and antioxidant role of xanthophylls have been highlighted above that of caro - tenes , ( 35 ) leading some authors to highlight the role of retinal carotenoids in birds . ( 44 ) Carotenoids are also present in the skin , where they contribute to protection of this tissue from light - induced damage in a process that , again , involves their role as antioxidants . ( 45 ) Sperm is particularly prone to oxidative - induced damage , which could have major implications in sexual selection . ( 46 , 47 ) Carotenoids ( and other dietary antioxidants ) have been shown to increase sperm quality in ﬁshes and mammals . ( 20 , 36 ) Although there is less evidence of this effect in birds , reported relationships between carotenoid - based ornamentation cor - relate with sperm quality ( 48 ) and the presence of carotenoids in bird ejaculates ( 49 ) are encouraging for the study of the antioxidant role of carotenoids in testes and semen . Apart from the actual function in the body itself , carotenoids have may play a relevant antioxidant role in the egg of many oviparous taxa . ( 36 , 50 ) In fact , most of current empirical evidences of antioxidant protection by carotenoids in birds come from studies on egg yolks and embryos . ( 36 , 51 , 52 ) This is likely because the egg yolk is very rich in lipids and carotenoids , and the embryo development is accompained by high metabolism and consequently high ROS production . This results in an ideal context for the antioxidant action of carote - noids . Also , the conditions of low oxygen tensions prevailing during embryonic development in the egg seems to enhance the antioxidant properties of carotenoids . ( 36 ) Apart from birds , carotenoids are also present in high concentrations in the eggs of many ﬁshes and reptiles ( 36 ) and probably also in invertebrates . So their biological action in these tissues should also be tested . Finally , the ﬁnding that mounting an immune response increased carotenoid allocation to immune organs ( 53 ) should not be overlooked . Given the association between mounting an immune response and ROS production , future studies must pay attention to the antioxidant role of carotenoids in immune - related tissues . Measures in challenged versus unchallenged individuals With the exception of a recent study that manipulates oxidative stress itself ( 54 ) and setting aside some studies that manipulate oxidative stress by exposing individuals to an immune challenge ( discused below ) , most of our current knowledge about the contribution of carotenoids to antiox - idant defenses is mainly based on correlational studies or , at best , on experiments that analyze the effect of carotenoid supplementation on plasma antioxidant capacity or oxidative damage . ( 9 , 37 ) Although these studies are necessary , they may be insufﬁcient to assess the antioxidant role of carotenoids . The antioxidant system is not fully active in unchallenged individuals , but the real capacity of antioxidant defenses is only displayed when facing an oxidative challenge , which applies both to enzymatic and / or non - enzymatic antioxi - dants . ( 19 , 55 – 57 ) This may also potentially be the case of carotenoids . It has been shown that birds may mobilize carotenoids from body stores to blood ( 58 ) or to immune organs ( 53 ) when facing an immune challenge , which could be related to their use as antioxidants . Therefore , two - way experimental designs in which the effect of improved carotenoid levels on the resistance to a standard oxidative challenge is analyzed ( 29 , 33 , 54 , 59 ) are most valuable . In addition , the comparison of several types of oxidative challenges ( e . g . , moderate and constant levels of ROS vs . occasional and intensive increases of ROS production ) would help to assess the role of carotenoids and other antioxidants under different scenarios . Taking a dynamic approach Our understanding of the role of carotenoids would also be enhanced if we take into account the dynamic nature of antioxidant responses . Protocols where only pre - and post - experiment measures are recorded are informative , but we may lose relevant information for understanding the whole underlying process . For instance , as noted above , an oxidative challenge enhances the production of key enzymes and the release of antioxidants from body stores , increasing their concentration above basal levels to counteract ROS . ( 19 , 39 , 55 , 57 ) However , if ROS production persists , anti - oxidant reserves may be depleted and their levels could drop after a certain time period . ( 57 , 60 ) As a result , depending of the timing of sampling , we may ﬁnd an increase or a decrease in antioxidant levels ( including carotenoids ) after an oxidative challenge . In addition , this implies that high antioxidant levels may not necessarily be a desirable condition in unchallenged individuals ( i . e . , a characteristic of healthiness ) as it may simply reﬂect current up - regulation as a result of a situation of oxidative stress . ( 38 ) In addition , individuals may differ in the timing , latency or intensity of response and particular antioxidants may differ in their kinetics and depletion times . ( 32 , 61 ) All these relevant aspects could be overlooked unless a dynamic approach is considered . Keeping this in mind , the a priori prediction of the negative relationship between measures of antioxidant defenses and L . Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez Problems and paradigms BioEssays 31 : 1116 – 1126 , (cid:1) 2009Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 1121 the degree of oxidative damage may not always be correct . Measures of antioxidant defenses ( i . e . , antioxidant capacity or levels of particular antioxidants ) reﬂect current state . In contrast , measures of oxidative damage reﬂect the current or recent past situation of oxidative stress . Therefore , these two parameters may reﬂect process slightly decoupled in time , preventing us from ﬁnding the expected association . Further - more , in a unchallenged organism , measures of antioxidant defenses do not necessarily reﬂect the capacity to prevent future damages , which is more likely to be related to levels during up - regulation ( that may correlate or not with baseline levels ) . Again , studies designed under a dynamic perspective must analyze the relationship between measures of anti - oxidant capacity and levels of particular antioxidants in individuals before being challenged and during up - regulation , and how these values ( or their changes ) predict the subsequent oxidative damage . The importance of experiments in captivity and under natural conditions Experimental manipulations are much more feasible under controlled captive conditions , where relatively complex research protocols can be performed and many potentially confounding variables ( such as diet composition , breeding status , infection by parasites , etc . ) can be controlled for . However , a free - living individual is likely to experience higher levels of oxidative stress due to locomotion , parasitism , breeding effort , or several environmental stressors ( 57 , 62 – 67 ) in comparison to a captive conspeciﬁc . The antioxidant system of free - living individuals is therefore much more likely to be constrained by different ecological factors , intensifying physiological trade - offs , which may result in a stronger effect to a standard oxidative challenge compared to that of a captive individual . Hence , these studies are essential to evaluate the relative importance of the studied factors ( i . e . , oxidative stress , carotenoid levels ) under a realistic scenario . Some alternatives for the ‘‘antioxidant role’’ hypothesis Do carotenoids need to be signiﬁcant antioxidants to convey information about oxidative stress ? The ‘‘antioxidant role’’ hypothesis ( Table 1 , Fig . 1 ) assumes that carotenoids are linked to oxidative stress because they are signiﬁcant antioxidants , and therefore individuals face an allocation trade - off between ornamentation or other physio - logical ( antioxidant ) functions . ( 1 , 2 , 6 , 7 ) However , as suggested by Hartley and Kennedy ( 8 ) and recently supported by some empirical studies , ( 63 , 68 , 69 ) carotenoid - based traits may signal oxidative stress levels even if carotenoids are minor antioxidants . According to this hypothesis ( Table 1 , Fig . 1 ) , carotenoids might not be very efﬁcient in ROS scavenging in vivo , but they may in turn be especially sensitive to the effect of ROS , which alter or destroy their chemical structure and pigmentary properties . Hence , preservation of carotenoid color properties , making their use for ornament pigmentation possible , would indicate lower ROS production or the possession of an efﬁcient antioxidant system . However , carotenoids themselves would not be responsible for the antioxidant efﬁciency being highlighted by the pigmented trait . Immune response , oxidative stress , and carotenoids The immunostimulatory properties of carotenoids have also been hypothesized to play a relevant role in the allocation trade - offs , as diseased individuals must allocate greater amounts of carotenoids to immune function , and these are therefore not available for ornament expression ( Fig . 1 ) . However , these immunostimulatory properties of carotenoids are usually attributed to their role as antioxidants because immune response is associated to ROS production and carotenoids may enhance it by ROS scavenging , allowing a more effective response . ( 70 – 72 ) Therefore , both functions are usually lumped together . ( 2 , 7 ) In fact , to date , the most common procedure to study the relationship between carotenoids and oxidative stress has been to promote an immune response . ( 29 , 33 , 34 , 59 ) Nonetheless , it should be noted that , with the information currently available , the link between carotenoids and immunity is sounder than that between these two factors and oxidative stress . In fact , carotenoid supplementation usually enhances immune response , ( 73 – 75 ) whereas it rarely increases antioxidant protection . ( 9 ) Conversely , it is well documented that immune responses deplete circulating carotenoids , ( 29 , 34 , 75 ) which is not always linked to increased oxidative damage . ( 29 , 34 , 59 ) Taken together , evidence suggests that the immunosti - mulatory effect of carotenoids may not be necessarily mediated by their antioxidant role ( 34 ) ( see Table 1 ) . Carote - noids or their derivatives are involved in the activation of thymocites , ( 76 ) the expression of immune - related genes , ( 77 ) the up - regulation of proteins involved in cell - to - cell commu - nication , ( 78 ) and the increase in membrane ﬂuidity , ( 72 ) functions of vital importance when mounting an immune response but not necessarily linked to their antioxidant properties . Considering the antioxidant and the immunosti - mulatory role of carotenoids as different phenomena ( that may be associated or not ) could reconcile some of the controversial evidence regarding the physiological roles of carotenoids . This also stresses the necessity of designing experimental procedures that manipulate oxidative stress independently of promoting an immune response . Experimental manipulation Problems and paradigms L . Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez 1122 BioEssays 31 : 1116 – 1126 , (cid:1) 2009Wiley Periodicals , Inc . of steroid hormones such as corticosterone or testosterone may affect metabolic rates and oxidative stress levels . ( 79 – 85 ) However , these hormones may also impair immune func - tion ( 86 , 87 ) and directly affect carotenoid absorption and transport and antioxidant capacity , ( 67 , 88 , 89 ) collateral effects that may be undesirable for our purposes . Increasing metabolic rates by increasing physical exercise or , in the case of endotherms , exposing individuals to lower tempera - tures would increase oxidative stress . ( 57 , 60 , 65 , 90 ) However , again , collateral effects derived from increased energy expenditure or changes in hormone ( e . g . , corticosterone ) levels cannot be discarded . A promising alternative to these procedures could be the experimental administration of diluted solutions of paraquat or other similar bipyridine . ( 54 , 91 ) This substance speciﬁcally promotes the production of superoxide anion ( O 2 (cid:3) (cid:4) ) , which leads to oxidative damage of lipid membranes , allowing us to directly manipulate the oxidative stress of the individual , avoiding many confounding collateral effects . Conclusion The antioxidant role of carotenoids in the living organism has generated great interest among behavioral ecologists as a possible basis for physiological trade - offs ensuring the Table 1 . Summary of predicted effects of the four most common or feasible experimental treatments ( supplementation with carotenoids , supplementation with non - carotenoid antioxidants , immune challenge or increased ROS production ) on carotenoids , antioxidant capacity , oxidative damage and intensity of immune response , according to the main hypotheses relating carotenoids and oxidative stress ( H1 – H4 , see also Fig . 1 ) . It should always be considered that the outcome of an oxidative challenge ( i . e . , whether it causes oxidative damage or not ) will depend of the balance between ROS production and antioxidant defenses . As a generalization , I assumed that increased carotenoid levels imply larger amounts of carotenoids available for ornament expression , although this will ultimately depend of individual allocation priorities . Experimental protocols that include two or more treatments in multi - way experimental designs , especially those combining supplementation and challenge protocols , would be particularly useful for discriminating between these hypotheses ( see the text for a detailed explanation ) . It should be noted , however , that the hypotheses H3 and H4 are not mutually exclusive Experimental treatment Response variables Hypotheses H1 : Carotenoids are not antioxidants , immunostimulantsorsensitiveto bleaching by ROS H2 : Carotenoids are antioxidants H3 : Carotenoids are not antioxidants , but are sensitive to bleaching by ROS H4 : Carotenoids are not antioxidants , but have immunostimulant properties Carotenoid supplementation Carotenoids " " " " Antioxidant capacity ¼ " a ¼ ¼ Oxidative damage ¼ # a ¼ ¼ Immune response b ¼ " c ¼ " Non - carotenoid antioxidant Carotenoids ¼ " or ¼ " or ¼ ¼ supplementation Antioxidant capacity " a " a " a " a Oxidative damage # a # a # a # a Immune response b " c " c " c " c Immune challenge d Carotenoids ¼ # e # e # e Antioxidant capacity g # , ¼ or " # , ¼ or " # , ¼ or " # , ¼ or " Oxidative damage g " or ¼ " or ¼ " or ¼ " or ¼ Immune response b (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) Increased ROS production f Carotenoids ¼ # e # e ¼ Antioxidant capacity g # , ¼ or " # , ¼ or " # , ¼ or " # , ¼ or " Oxidative damage g " or ¼ " or ¼ " or ¼ " or ¼ Immune response b # c # c # c # c a Predictions made assuming that supplementation with carotenoids or any other antioxidant has an additive effect on antioxidant capacity and is not accompanied by the down - regulation of any other antioxidant mechanisms as a side effect ( see main text for further details ) . b Estimated as intensity of response against a standard exposition to an antigen . c Predictions made assuming that increased oxidative stress have a negative effect on immune responses . ( 92 – 94 ) d Predictions made assuming an increase in ROS production associated to mounting an immune response ( see the text for justiﬁcation ) . e Predictions refer to total amount of carotenoids present in the body . This does not exclude the possibility that carotenoid concentration may remain unchanged or even increase in some particular tissues as a result of strategic allocation ( see the text for further details ) . f Increased ROS production by means of any protocol not involving mounting an immune response ( see the text for further details ) . g As a result of the dynamic nature of antioxidant response ( see text ) , the effect of the treatment on thevariableresponse depends on the timing of sampling , the ability of the antioxidant system to cope with the oxidative challenge or the ﬁnal outcome of the antioxidant response . L . Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez Problems and paradigms BioEssays 31 : 1116 – 1126 , (cid:1) 2009Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 1123 honesty of carotenoid - based signals . Recent studies have criticized the core assumption that carotenoids are signiﬁcant antioxidants in vivo . ( 8 , 9 ) This controversy may have arisen because ecologists have extrapolated some initial evidence from medical literature ( where the antioxidant role of carotenoids is currently also being questioned ) ( 12 , 22 , 23 ) to other taxa . However , there are substantial differences in the physiology and the antioxidant systems that makes it inadvisable to extrapolate some conclusions across taxa . Although current evidence in birds does not support a strong antioxidant effect of carotenoids , ( 9 , 37 ) available studies do not allow us to reject this hypothesis either . Therefore , the real contribution of carotenoids to the antioxidant system on each studied group needs to be ascertained . Experimental designs addressing this question should take into account several important features of carotenoids and the antioxidant net - work , avoiding too simplistic interpretations of antioxidant responses . For instance , experimental designs must com - prise measures of antioxidant capacity and oxidative damage simultaneously , taking a dynamic approach and covering tissues other than just blood . Guidelines and suggestions given in this article should help in designing , performing and interpreting studies aimed at assessing this crucial question , and help us gain a better understanding of the relative importance of carotenoids within the antioxidant system of individuals from different taxonomic groups . This will ﬁnally lead us to a better understanding of the physiological mechanisms underlying the honesty of carotenoid - based signals . Acknowledgments : I am very grateful to J . D . Blount , J . Martı´nez - Padilla , R . Mateo , F . Mougeot and three anonymous referees for their helpful comments and suggestions on a ﬁrst version of this manuscript . I am also grateful to Mohammed Zeineddine for reviewing the English . I was supported by a postdoctoral contract ( 07 / 028 - A ) from the Junta de Comuni - dades de Castilla - La Mancha . References 1 . Olson , V . A . and Owens , I . P . F . , 1998 . Costly sexual signals : are carotenoids rare , risky or required ? Trends Ecol Evol 13 : 510 – 514 . 2 . Møller , A . P . , Biard , C . , Blount , J . D . , Houston , D . C . , Ninni , P . , et al . 2000 . Carotenoid - dependent signals : Indicators of foraging efﬁciency , immunocompetenceordetoxiﬁcationability ? AvianPoultBiolRev 11 : 137 – 159 . 3 . Endler , J . A . , 1983 . Natural and sexual selection on colour patterns in poeciliid ﬁshes . Environ Biol Fishes 9 : 173 – 190 . 4 . Kodric - Brown , A . , 1985 . Female preferente and sexualselection for male colorationintheguppy ( Poeciliareticulata ) . BehavEcolSociobiol 17 : 199 – 205 . 5 . Hill , G . E . , 1990 . Female house ﬁnches prefer colorful males : Sexual selection for a condition - dependent trait . Anim Behav 40 : 563 – 570 . 6 . Lozano , G . A . , 1994 . Carotenoids , parasites , and sexual selection . Oikos 70 : 309 – 311 . 7 . von Schantz , T . , Bensch , S . , Grahn , M . , Hasselquist , D . and Wittzell , H . , 1999 . Good genes , oxidative stress and condition - dependent sexual signals . Proc R Soc Lond B 266 : 1 – 12 . 8 . Hartley , R . C . andKennedy , M . W . , 2004 . Arecarotenoidsaredherringin sexual display ? Trends Ecol Evol 19 : 353 – 354 . 9 . Costantini , D . and Møller , A . P . , 2008 . Carotenoids are minor antiox - idants for birds . Funct Ecol 22 : 367 – 370 . 10 . McGraw , K . J . , Mechanics of carotenoid - based coloration . In : Hill , G . E . and McGraw , K . J . editors . Bird coloration . I . Mechanisms and measure - ments . Cambridge , Harvard University Press , 2006 . 11 . Miller , N . J . , Sampson , J . , Candeias , L . P . , Bramley , P . M . and Rice - Evans , C . A . , 1996 . Antioxidant activities of carotenes and xanthophylls . FEBS Lett 384 : 240 – 242 . 12 . Young , A . J . and Lowe , G . M . , 2001 . Antioxidant and prooxidant proper - ties of carotenoids . Arch Biochem Biophys 385 : 20 – 27 . 13 . Halliwell , B . and Gutteridge , J . M . C . , Free radicals in biology and medicine , 4th edn . Oxford , Oxford University Press , 2007 . 14 . Nathan , C . and Shiloh , M . U . , 2000 . Reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates in the relationship between mammalian hosts and microbial pathogens . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 : 8841 – 8848 . 15 . Coleman , J . W . , 2001 . Nitric oxide in immunity and inﬂammation . Int Immunopharmacol 1 : 1397 – 1406 . 16 . Ahmad , S . , Oxidative stress and antioxidant defenses in biology . New York , Chapman and Hall , 1995 . 17 . Cohen , A . A . , McGraw , K . J . , Wiersma , P . , Williams , J . B . , Robinson , W . D . , et al . 2008 . Interspeciﬁc associations between circulating antiox - idant levels and life history variation in birds . Am Nat 172 : 178 – 193 . 18 . Costantini , D . , 2008 . Oxidative stress in ecology and evolution : lessons from avian studies . Ecol Lett 11 : 1238 – 1251 . 19 . Monaghan , P . , Metcalfe , N . B . and Torres , R . , 2009 . Oxidative stress as a mediator of life history trade - offs : Mechanisms , measurements and interpretation . Ecol Lett 12 : 75 – 92 . 20 . Catoni , C . , Peters , A . and Schaefer , H . M . , 2008 . Life history trade - offs are inﬂuenced by the diversity , availability and interactions of dietary antioxidants . Anim Behav 76 : 1107 – 1119 . 21 . Krinsky , N . I . , 1989 . Antioxidant functions of carotenoids . Free Radic Biol Med 7 : 617 – 635 . 22 . Rice - Evans , C . , Sampson , J . , Bramley , P . M . andHolloway , D . E . , 1997 . Why do we expect carotenoids to be antioxidants in vivo ? Free Radic Res 26 : 381 – 398 . 23 . Krinsky , N . I . , 2001 . Carotenoids as antioxidants . Nutrition 17 : 815 – 817 . 24 . Hill , G . E . , 1999 . Is there an immunological cost to carotenoid - based ornamental coloration ? Am Nat 154 : 589 – 595 . 25 . Talwar , D . , Ha , T . K . K . , Cooney , J . , Brownlee , C . and JO’Reilly , D . S . , 1998 . A routine method for the simultaneous measurement of retinol , a - tocopherol and ﬁve carotenoids in human plasma by reverse phase HPLC . Clin Chim Acta 270 : 85 – 100 . 26 . Djuric , Z . , Uhley , V . E . , Naegeli , L . , Lababidi , S . , Macha , S . , et al . 2003 . Plasma carotenoids , tocopherols , and antioxidant capacity in a 12 - week intervention study to reduce fat and / or energy intakes . Nutrition 19 : 244 – 249 . 27 . Tella , J . L . , Figuerola , J . , Negro , J . J . , Blanco , G . , Rodrı´guez - Estrella , R . , et al . 2004 . Ecological , morphological and phylogenetic correlates of interspeciﬁc variation in plasma carotenoid concentration in birds . J Evol Biol 17 : 156 – 164 . 28 . Palozza , P . , 1998 . Prooxidant actions of carotenoids in biological sys - tems . Nutr Rev 56 : 257 – 265 . 29 . Alonso - Alvarez , C . , Bertrand , S . , Devevey , G . , Gaillard , M . , Prost , J . , et al . 2004 . An experimental test of the dose - dependent effect of car - otenoidsandimmune activationonsexualsignalsandantioxidant activity . Am Nat 164 : 651 – 659 . 30 . Costantini , D . , Coluzza , C . , Fanfani , A . and Dell’Omo , G . , 2007 . Effects of carotenoid supplementation on colour expression , oxidative stress and body mass in rehabilitated captive adult kestrels ( Falco tinnunculus ) . J Comp Physiol B 177 : 723 – 731 . 31 . Stahl , W . , Junghans , A . , de Boer , B . , Driomina , E . S . , Briviba , K . , et al . 1998 . Carotenoid mixtures protect multilamellar liposomes against oxida - tive damage : synergistic effects of lycopene and lutein . FEBS Lett 427 : 305 – 308 . Problems and paradigms L . Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez 1124 BioEssays 31 : 1116 – 1126 , (cid:1) 2009Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 32 . Cohen , A . A . , Klasing , K . and Ricklefs , R . , 2007 . Measuring circulating antioxidants in wild birds . Comp Biochem Physiol B 147 : 110 – 121 . 33 . Ho˜rak , P . , Saks , L . , Zilmer , M . , Karu , U . and Zilmer , K . , 2007 . Do dietary antioxidants alleviate the cost of immune activation ? An experiment with greenﬁnches . Am Nat 170 : 625 – 635 . 34 . Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez , L . , Mougeot , F . , Alonso - A´lvarez , C . , Blas , J . , Vin˜uela , J . , et al . 2008 . Cell - mediated immune activation rapidly decreases plasma carotenoids but does not affect oxidative stress in red - legged partridges ( Alectoris rufa ) . J Exp Biol 211 : 2155 – 2161 . 35 . Stahl , W . and Sies , H . , 2003 . Antioxidant activity of carotenoids . Mol Aspects Med 24 : 345 – 351 . 36 . Surai , P . F . , Natural antioxidants in avian nutrition and reproduction . Nottingham , Nottingham University Press , 2002 . 37 . Cohen , A . A . and McGraw , K . J . , 2009 . No simple measures for anti - oxidant status in birds : Complexity in inter - and intraspeciﬁc correlations among circulating antioxidant types . Funct Ecol 23 : 310 – 320 . 38 . Costantini , D . and Verhulst , S . , 2009 . Does high antioxidant capacity indicate low oxidative stress ? Funct Ecol 23 : 506 – 509 . 39 . Prior , R . L . and Cao , G . , 1999 . In vivo total antioxidant capacity : Com - parison of different analytical methods . Free Radic Biol Med 27 : 1173 – 1181 . 40 . Sies , H . and Stahl , W . , 1995 . Vitamins E and C , beta - carotene , and other carotenoids as antioxidants . Am J Clin Nutr 62 : 1315S – 1321S . 41 . Biard , C . , Surai , P . F . and Møller , A . P . , 2005 . Effects of carotenoid availability during laying on reproduction in the great tit . Oecologia 144 : 32 – 3244 . 42 . Biard , C . , Surai , P . F . and Møller , A . P . , 2006 . Carotenoid availability in diet and phenotype of blue and great tit nestlings . J Exp Biol 209 : 1004 – 1015 . 43 . Breinholt , V . , Lauridsen , S . T . , Daneshvar , B . and Jakobsen , J . , 2000 . Dose - response effects of lycopene on selected drug - metabolizing and antioxidant enzymes in the rat . Cancer Lett 154 : 201 – 210 . 44 . Toomey , M . B . and McGraw , K . J . , 2009 . Seasonal , sexual , and quality related variation in retinal carotenoid accumulation in the house ﬁnch ( Carpodacus mexicanus ) . Funct Ecol 23 : 321 – 329 . 45 . Roberts , R . L . , Green , J . and Lewis , B . , 2009 . Lutein and zeaxanthin in eye and skin health . Clin Dermatol 27 : 195 – 201 . 46 . Blount , J . D . , Møller , A . P . and Houston , D . C . , 2001 . Antioxidants , showy males and sperm quality . Ecol Lett 4 : 393 – 396 . 47 . Velando , A . , Torres , R . and Alonso - A´lvarez , C . , 2008 . Avoiding bad genes : Oxidatively damaged DNA in germ line and mate choice . BioEs - says 30 : 1212 – 1219 . 48 . Peters , A . , Denk , A . G . , Delhey , K . and Kempenaers , B . , 2004 . Car - otenoid - based bill colour as an indicator of immunocompetence and sperm performance in male mallards . J Evol Biol 17 : 1111 – 1120 . 49 . Rowe , M . and McGraw , K . J . , 2009 . Carotenoids in the seminal ﬂuid of wild birds : Interspeciﬁc variation in fairy - wrens . Condor 110 : 694 – 700 . 50 . Blount , J . D . , Houston , D . C . and Møller , A . P . , 2000 . Why egg yolk is yellow ? Trends Ecol Evol 15 : 47 – 49 . 51 . Blount , J . D . , Surai , P . F . , Nager , R . G . , Houston , D . C . , Møller , A . P . , et al . 2002 . Carotenoids and egg quality in the lesser black - backed gull Larus fuscus : A supplemental feeding study of maternal effects . Proc R Soc Lond B 269 : 29 – 36 . 52 . Blount , J . D . , Surai , P . F . , Houston , D . C . and Møller , A . P . , 2002 . Patterns of yolk enrichment with dietary carotenoids in gulls : the roles of pigment acquisition and utilization . Funct Ecol 16 : 445 – 453 . 53 . Koutsos , E . A . , Calvert , C . C . and Klasing , K . C . , 2003 . The effect of an acute phase response on tissue carotenoid levels of growing chickens ( Gallus gallus domesticus ) . Comp Biochem Physiol A 135 : 635 – 646 . 54 . Isaksson , C . and Andersson , S . , 2008 . Oxidative stress does not inﬂuence carotenoid mobilization and plumage pigmentation . Proc R Soc Lond B 275 : 309 – 314 . 55 . Ji , L . L . , 1999 . Antioxidants and oxidativestress inexercise . Exp Biol Med 222 : 283 – 292 . 56 . Selman , C . , McLaren , J . S . , Himanka , M . J . and Speakman , J . R . , 2000 . Effect of long - term cold exposure on antioxidant enzyme activities in a small mammal . Free Radic Biol Med 28 : 1279 – 1285 . 57 . Aguilo ´ , A . , Tauler , P . , Fuentespina , E . , Tur , J . A . , Co ´ rdova , A . , et al . 2005 . Antioxidant response to oxidative stress induced by exhaustive exercise . Physiol Behav 84 : 1 – 7 . 58 . Costantini , D . andDell´Omo , G . , 2006 . EffectsofT - cell - mediatedimmune response on avian oxidative stress . Comp Biochem Physiol A 145 : 137 – 142 . 59 . Ho˜rak , P . , Zilmer , M . , Saks , L . , Ots , I . , Karu , U . , et al . 2006 . Antioxidant protection , carotenoids and the costs of immune challenge in green - ﬁnches . J Exp Biol 209 : 4329 – 4338 . 60 . Mastaloudis , A . , Leonard , S . W . and Traber , M . G . , 2001 . Oxidative stress in athletes during extreme endurance exercise . Free Radic Biol Med 31 : 911 – 922 . 61 . Meydani , M . , Martin , A . , Ribaya - Mercado , J . D . , Gong , J . , Blumberg , J . B . , et al . 1994 . b - Carotene supplementation increases antioxidant capacity of plasma in older women . J Nutr 124 : 2397 – 2403 . 62 . Allen , P . , 2002 . Oxidative stress during avian coccidiosis . Poult Sci 81 : 59S . 63 . Bertrand , S . , Faivre , B . andSorci , G . , 2006 . Docarotenoidbasedsexual traitssignaltheavailabilityofnon - pigmentaryantioxidants ? JExpBiol 209 : 4414 – 4419 . 64 . Isaksson , C . , McLaughlin , P . , Monaghan , P . and Andersson , S . , 2007 . Carotenoid pigmentation does not reﬂect total non - enzymatic antioxidant activity in plasma of adult and nestling great tits , Parus major . Funct Ecol 21 : 1123 – 1129 . 65 . Cohen , A . A . , Hau , H . and Wikelski , M . , 2008b . Stress , metabolism , and antioxidants in two wild passerine bird species . Physiol Biochem Zool 81 : 463 – 472 . 66 . Costantini , D . , Fanfani , A . and Dell’Omo , G . , 2007 . Carotenoid avail - ability does not limit the capability of nestling kestrels ( Falco tinnunculus ) to cope with oxidative stress . J Exp Biol 210 : 1238 – 1244 . 67 . Mougeot , F . , Martinez - Padilla , J . , Webster , L . M . I . , Blount , J . D . , Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez , L . , et al . 2009 . Honest sexual signalling mediated by parasite and testosterone effects on oxidative balance . Proc R Soc Lond B 276 : 1093 – 1100 . 68 . Pe´rez , C . , Lores , M . andVelando , A . , 2008 . Availabilityofnonpigmentary antioxidant affects red coloration in gulls . Behav Ecol 19 : 967 – 973 . 69 . Pike , T . W . , Blount , J . D . , Lindstrom , J . and Metcalfe , N . B . , 2007 . Availability of non - carotenoid antioxidants affects the expression of a carotenoid - based sexual ornament . Biol Lett 3 : 353 – 356 . 70 . Machlin , L . J . and Bendich , A . , 1987 . Free radical tissue damage : Protective role of antioxidant nutrients . FASEB J 1 : 441 – 445 . 71 . Burton , G . W . , 1989 . Antioxidant action of carotenoids . J Nutr 119 : 109 – 111 . 72 . Chew , B . P . and Park , J . S . , 2004 . Carotenoid action on the immune response . J Nutr 134 : 257S – 261S . 73 . Blount , J . D . , Metcalfe , N . B . , Birkhead , T . R . and Surai , P . F . , 2003 . Carotenoid modulation of immune function and sexual attractiveness in zebra ﬁnches . Science 300 : 125 – 127 . 74 . Aguilera , E . and Amat , J . A . , 2007 . Carotenoids , immune response and the expression of sexual ornaments in male greenﬁnches ( Carduelis chloris ) . Naturwissenschaften 94 : 895 – 902 . 75 . McGraw , K . J . andArdia , D . R . , 2003 . Carotenoids , immunocompetence , and the information content of sexual colors : an experimental test . Am Nat 162 : 704 – 712 . 76 . Garbe , A . , Buck , J . and Ha¨mmerling , U . , 1992 . Retinoids are important cofactors in T cell activation . J Exp Med 176 : 109 – 117 . 77 . Geissmann , F . , Revy , P . , Brousse , N . , Lepelletier , Y . , Folli , C . , et al . 2003 . Retinoids regulate survival and antigen presentation by immature dendritic cells . J Exp Med 198 : 623 – 634 . 78 . Basu , H . N . , Del Vecchio , A . J . , Flider , F . and Orthoefer , F . T . , 2001 . Nutritional and potential disease prevention properties of carotenoids . J Am Oil Chem Soc 78 : 665 – 675 . 79 . Buchanan , K . L . , Evans , M . R . , Goldsmoth , M . R . , Bryant , D . M . and Rowe , L . W . , 2001 . Testosterone inﬂuences basalmetabolic rate inhouse sparrows : A new cost of dominance signalling ? Proc R Soc Lond B 268 : 1337 – 1344 . 80 . Lin , H . , Decuypere , E . and Buyse , J . , 2004 . Oxidative stress induced by corticosterone administration in broiler chickens ( Gallus gallus domesticus ) : 1 . Chronic exposure . Comp Biochem Physiol B 139 : 737 – 744 . 81 . Lin , H . , Decuypere , E . and Buyse , J . , 2004 . Oxidative stress induced by corticosterone administration in broiler chickens ( Gallus gallus domes - ticus ) : 2 . Short - term effect . Comp Biochem Physiol B 139 : 745 – 751 . L . Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez Problems and paradigms BioEssays 31 : 1116 – 1126 , (cid:1) 2009Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 1125 82 . Kurtz , J . , Kalbe , M . , Langefors , A . , Mayer , I . , Milinski , M . , et al . 2007 . An experimental test of the immunocompetence handicap hypothesis in a teleost ﬁsh : 11 - ketotestosterone suppresses innate immunity in three - spined sticklebacks . Am Nat 170 : 509 – 519 . 83 . Costantini , D . , Fanfani , A . and Dell’Omo , G . , 2008 . Effects of corticos - teroids on oxidative damage and circulating carotenoids in captive adult kestrels ( Falco tinnunculus ) . J Comp Physiol B 178 : 829 – 835 . 84 . Alonso - Alvarez , C . , Bertrand , S . , Faivre , B . , Chastel , O . and Sorci , G . , 2007 . Testosterone and oxidative stress : the oxidation handicap hypoth - esis . Proc R Soc Lond B 274 : 819 – 825 . 85 . Alonso - A´lvarez , C . , Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez , L . , Mateo , R . , Chastel , O . and Vin˜uela , J . , 2008 . The oxidation handicap hypothesis and the carotenoid allocation trade - off . J Evol Biol 21 : 1789 – 1797 . 86 . Folstad , I . and Karter , A . J . , 1992 . Parasites , bright males , and the immunocompetence handicap . Am Nat 139 : 603 – 622 . 87 . Wingﬁeld , J . C . and Ramenofsky , M . , Hormones and the behavioural ecology of stress . In : Balm , P . H . M . editor . Stress physiology of animals . Shefﬁeld , Shefﬁeld Academic Press , 1999 . 88 . Blas , J . , Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez , L . , Bortolotti , G . R . , Vin˜uela , J . and March - ant , T . A . , 2006 . Testosterone increases bioavailability of carotenoids : New insights into the honesty of sexual signaling . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 18633 – 18637 . 89 . McGraw , K . J . , Correa , S . M . and Adkins - Regan , E . , 2006 . Testosterone upregulates lipoprotein status to control sexual attractiveness in a colour - ful songbird . Behav Ecol Sociobiol 60 : 117 – 122 . 90 . Costantini , D . , Dell’Ariccia , G . and Lipp , H . P . , 2007 . Long ﬂigths and age affect oxidative status of homing pigeons ( Columbia livia ) . J Exp Biol 211 : 377 – 381 . 91 . Galva´n , I . and Alonso - Alvarez , C . , 2009 . The expression of melanin - based plumage is separately modulated by exogenous oxidative stress and a melanocortin . Proc R Soc Lond B ( in press ) . 10 . 1098 / rspb . 2009 . 0774 . 92 . van der Ven , A . J . and Boers , G . H . , 1997 . Oxidative stress in immuno - deﬁciency . Eur J Clin Invest 27 : 731 – 732 . 93 . Cemerski , S . , Cantagrel , A . , van Meerwijk , J . P . M . and Romagnoli , P . , 2002 . Reactive oxygen species differentially affect T cell receptor - signal - ing pathways . J Biol Chem 277 : 19585 – 19593 . 94 . Larbi , A . , Kempf , J . and Pawelec , G . , 2007 . Oxidative stress modulation and T cell activation . Exp Gerontol 42 : 852 – 858 . Problems and paradigms L . Pe´rez - Rodrı´guez 1126 BioEssays 31 : 1116 – 1126 , (cid:1) 2009Wiley Periodicals , Inc .