Journal of Clinical Medicine Article Phosphoproteomic Proﬁling Identiﬁes Aberrant Activation of Integrin Signaling in Aggressive Non - Type Bladder Carcinoma Barnali Deb 1 , 2 , Vinuth N . Puttamallesh 1 , 3 , Kirti Gondkar 1 , 3 , Jean P . Thiery 4 , 5 , 6 , * , Harsha Gowda 1 , * and Prashant Kumar 1 , 2 , * 1 Institute of Bioinformatics , International Technology Park , Bangalore 560066 , India ; barnali @ ibioinformatics . org ( B . D . ) ; vinuth @ ibioinformatics . org ( V . N . P . ) ; kirti @ ibioinformatics . org ( K . G . ) 2 Manipal Academy of Higher Education , Madhav Nagar , Manipal 576104 , India 3 School of Biotechnology , Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham , Kollam 690525 , India 4 Cancer Science Institute of Singapore , National University of Singapore , Centre for Translational Medicine NUS Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine , Singapore 117597 , Singapore 5 Comprehensive Cancer Center , Institut Gustave Roussy , 114 Rue Edouard Vaillant , 94800 Villejuif , France 6 CNRS UMR 7057 , Matter and Complex Systems , Universit é Paris Diderot , 10 rue Alice Domon et L é onie Duquet Paris , 75205 Paris , France * Correspondence : bchtjp @ nus . edu . sg ( J . P . T . ) ; harsha @ ibioinformatics . org ( H . G . ) ; prashant @ ibioinformatics . org ( P . K . ) ; Tel . : + 91 - 80 - 28416140 ( P . K . ) ; Fax : + 91 - 80 - 28416132 ( P . K . ) Received : 27 March 2019 ; Accepted : 23 April 2019 ; Published : 17 May 2019 (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7) Abstract : Bladder carcinoma is highly heterogeneous and its complex molecular landscape ; thus , poses a signiﬁcant challenge for resolving an e ﬀ ective treatment in metastatic tumors . We computed the epithelial - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) scores of three bladder carcinoma subtypes—luminal , basal , and non - type . The EMT score of the non - type indicated a “mesenchymal - like” phenotype , which correlates with a relatively more aggressive form of carcinoma , typiﬁed by an increased migration and invasion . To identify the altered signaling pathways potentially regulating this EMT phenotype in bladder cancer cell lines , we utilized liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry ( LC - MS / MS ) - based phosphoproteomic approach . Bioinformatics analyses were carried out to determine the activated pathways , networks , and functions in bladder carcinoma cell lines . A total of 3125 proteins were identiﬁed , with 289 signature proteins noted to be di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated ( p ≤ 0 . 05 ) in the non - type cell lines . The integrin pathway was signiﬁcantly enriched and ﬁve major proteins ( TLN1 , CTTN , CRKL , ZYX and BCAR3 ) regulating cell motility and invasion were hyperphosphorylated . Our study reveals GSK3A / B and CDK1 as promising druggable targets for the non - type molecular subtype , which could improve the treatment outcomes for aggressive bladder carcinoma . Keywords : urothelial cancer ; phosphoproteomics ; activated pathways ; ingenuity pathway analysis ; molecular subtypes 1 . Introduction Advancedcancertherapeuticsdemandsadetailedunderstandingofthealteredmechanismsoperating in malignant disease . Notably , in bladder carcinoma , the current treatment regimens and interventions are mostly determined by the clinicopathological characteristics of the tumor . Bladder carcinoma is categorized into two clinicopathologically distinct subgroups : non - muscle - invasive bladder cancer ( NMIBC ) and muscle - invasive bladder cancer ( MIBC ) . At diagnosis , 75 % of bladder carcinoma is NMIBC , whereas 20 % to 25 % is MIBC . About 50 % to 70 % of NMIBC , including Ta - and T1 - stage tumors , frequently recur [ 1 ] , whereas 10 % to 15 % progress to MIBC ( T2 , T3 , and T4 stages ) [ 2 ] . Unlike most other carcinomas , carcinoma J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 ; doi : 10 . 3390 / jcm8050703 www . mdpi . com / journal / jcm J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 2 of 21 in situ ( Tis ) tumors , a superﬁcial tumor , progress very rapidly to MIBC . Emerging evidence suggests that tumor heterogeneity alters treatment response and confers resistance , leading to recurrence . Thus , a detailed understanding of the clinicopathological subgroups and their molecular alterations is of paramount interest , especially for targeted therapy . Identiﬁcation of distinct molecular subtypes of NMIBC and MIBC could highlight clinically relevant signaling pathways . Clinical staging is still not precisely deﬁned for bladder carcinoma because of its highly heterogeneous nature . The advent of whole - genomic and transcriptomic approaches has transformed our understanding of cancer heterogeneity . Whole - genome sequencing and expression proﬁling , have uncovered molecular subtypes that relate to distinct clinical entities in various cancers . For instance , several studies have identiﬁed intrinsic subtypes of MIBC that resemble the intrinsic subtypes of breast cancer [ 3 – 5 ] . Comprehensive studies have deﬁned the molecular subtypes in bladder carcinoma , mainly by analyzing gene expression data , speciﬁc mutations , and copy - number changes with recent analyses suggesting that speciﬁc genetic alterations in ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor 3 ( FGFR3 ) , tumor protein P53 ( TP53 ) , retinoblastoma 1 ( RB1 ) , Erb - B2 receptor tyrosine kinase 2 ( ERBB2 ) , nuclear - factor , erythroid 2 like 2 ( NFE2L2 ) , and lysine demethylase 6A ( KDM6A / UTX ) are enriched in di ﬀ erent molecular subtypes and are clinically actionable [ 6 – 8 ] . So far , the intrinsic subtypes of bladder carcinoma have been categorized into two to seven classes by di ﬀ erent groups . A broad stratiﬁcation of high - grade bladder carcinoma was described by the University of North Carolina ( UNC ) , where the subtypes ( luminal and basal - like ) reﬂected the hallmarks of breast cancer [ 4 ] . This study classiﬁed luminal and basal subtypes of bladder carcinoma using a 47 - gene signature . Another similar molecular classiﬁcation ( MD Anderson ) using gene expression proﬁling , restricted to MIBCs , found three subgroups : basal , luminal , and p53 - like MIBCs [ 5 ] ; the inclusion of the “p53 - like” subtype was based on the mRNA expression of p53 , which can predict MIBC chemoresistance . The Cancer Genome Atlas ( TCGA ) research network also categorized the intrinsic subtypes of bladder carcinoma into four clusters ( Clusters I – IV ) based on an integrated analysis of the mRNA , miRNA , and proteome expression proﬁling of 129 tumor samples . However , the most extensive classiﬁcation by LUND University was conducted on gene expression proﬁling data for 308 tumor tissue samples , and resulted in ﬁve intrinsic types of carcinoma , designated Urobasal A , Genomically unstable , Urobasal B , Squamous cell carcinoma - like , and Inﬁltrated [ 9 ] . The LUND molecular subtypes were further characterized into seven gene signature ( subdividing Urobasal A and Genomically instable subtypes into two groups each ) , based on the di ﬀ erential expression of genes associated with biological processes [ 10 ] . Using a 117 - gene signature , Hedegaard et al . [ 11 ] classiﬁed only NMIBCs into three subclasses ( Class I – III ) with basal - and luminal - like characteristics as well as clinical features . A later meta - analysis on the molecular subtypes ( established by UNC , MDA , TCGA and LUND ) revealed some consensus patterning among the molecular subtyping strategies [ 10 ] . However , there remain inaccuracies in the current staging systems , and the clinicopathological features may also inﬂuence treatment selection [ 12 ] . Such inadequacies are to be expected due to the low sample size in these studies and a large , collaborative study is needed to identify the molecular signatures before assigning treatment with conventional chemotherapy . In a study by Warrick et al . , bladder carcinoma cell lines were used to study the molecular subtypes in a relevant in vitro model . A detailed analysis was carried out on the publicly available data for the 27 bladder carcinoma cell lines ( CCLE database ) [ 13 ] as per the TCGA study . The panel of bladder carcinoma cell lines was classiﬁed into three subtypes based on gene expression clusters : luminal , basal , and “non - type” [ 14 ] . The non - type subtype displayed low expression of both luminal and basal markers . We further included these three subtypes for our deeper understanding of the molecular events involved in bladder carcinoma . We employed liquid chromatography tandem - mass spectrometry ( LC - MS / MS ) - based approach to identify differentially expressed proteins in all three distinct subtypes . We also sought to evaluate pathways enriched in luminal , basal , and non - type subtypes . We undertook an extensive quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of six bladder carcinoma cell lines ( RT112 , SW780 , VMCUB - 1 , T24 , J82 , and J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 3 of 21 UMUC3 ) and compared the phosphoproteomic data of bladder carcinoma cell lines with a non - neoplastic bladder cell line ( TERT - NHUC ) [ 15 ] . The six cell lines were previously assigned to luminal ( RT112 and SW780 ) , basal ( VMCUB - 1 ) , and non - type ( UMUC3 , J82 and T24 ) molecular subtypes [ 14 ] . To our knowledge , this is the first phosphoproteomic profiling of bladder carcinoma and it may provide a global platform to identify the complex kinase - driven signaling events in bladder carcinoma . 2 . Experimental Section 2 . 1 . Cell Culture Bladder carcinoma cell lines , SW780 , RT112 , VMCUB - 1 , T24 , J82 , and UMUC3 were cultured in dulbecco’s modiﬁed eagle’s medium ( DMEM ; with high glucose , HIMEDIA ) , supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin . Cells were maintained in a humidiﬁed incubator at 37 ◦ C and 5 % CO 2 . The non - neoplastic bladder cell line ( TERT - NHUC ) was cultured in KGM - Gold Media ( Lonza Group , Allendale , NJ , USA ) supplemented with hydrocortisone , transferrin , epinephrine , gentamicin , amphotericin B ( GA - 1000 ) , bovine pituitary extract ( BPE ) , recombinant human epidermal growth factor ( rhEGF ) , and insulin in a humidiﬁed incubator at 37 ◦ C and 5 % CO 2 . TERT - NHUC cells were kindly provided by Prof . M . A . Knowles , University of Leeds , UK [ 15 ] . 2 . 2 . Cell Lysis , Protein Extraction , and Digestion Cell lines were grown to 70 % conﬂuence , starved in serum - free medium for 12 h , and then lysed in cell lysis bu ﬀ er ( 2 % SDS , 5 mM sodium ﬂuoride , 1 mM β - glycerophosphate , 1 mM sodium orthovanadate in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate ( TEABC ) ) . Protein concentration was estimated using the BCA method ( Pierce ; Waltham , MA , USA ) . Equal amount of protein from each cell line was used for protein digestion . Cell lysates were reduced and alkylated using 5 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) and 20 mM iodoacetamide ( IAA ) , respectively . Samples were then digested overnight at 37 ◦ C using trypsin ( 1 : 20 ) ( Promega ; San Luis Obispo , CA , USA ) . 2 . 3 . TMT Labeling Before labeling , peptides were reconstituted in 50 mM TEABC ( pH 8 . 0 ) . Equal amounts of peptides from each condition were used for 10 - plex Tandem Mass Tag ( TMT ) labeling ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc , Rockford , IL , USA ) . Labeling was carried out as per the manufacturer’s protocol . TERT - NHUC was labeled with the channel 126 , and SW780 , RT112 , VMCUB - 1 , T24 , J82 , and UMUC3 were labeled with 130N , 130C , 129C , 131 , 128C , and 128N , respectively . The reaction was quenched by the addition of 8 µ l of 5 % hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature , and the samples were dried . 2 . 4 . Basic pH RPLC ( bRPLC ) and TiO 2 - Based Phosphopeptide Enrichment TMT - labeled peptides were pooled and fractionated using an Agilent 1100 high - pH reverse - phase liquid chromatography ( RPLC ) system with a ﬂow rate of 1 mL / min , as described earlier [ 16 ] . Brieﬂy , labeled peptides , resuspended in 1 mL of bRPLC solvent ( 10 mM TEABC pH 8 . 4 ) , were fractionated using high - pH , reverse - phase XBridge C18 columns ( 5 µ m , 250 × 4 . 6 mm ; Waters Corporation , Milford , MA , USA ) , with an increasing gradient of bRPLC solvent B ( 10 mM TEABC in 90 % ACN , pH 8 . 4 ) . A total of 96 fractions were collected in a 96 - well plate containing 0 . 1 % formic acid . The fractions were then concatenated into 12 pools , vacuum - dried , and subjected to TiO 2 - based phosphopeptide enrichment [ 17 ] . The enriched phosphopeptides were eluted thrice into microfuge tubes with 40 µ L of 2 % ammonia solution containing 10 µ L of 20 % triﬂuoroacetic acid . The peptides were then dried , resuspended in 30 µ L of 0 . 1 % TFA , and desalted using C18 Stage Tips ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) . The eluted peptides were then subjected to LC - MS / MS analysis . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 4 of 21 2 . 5 . LC - MS / MS Analysis Phosphoproteomic analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) interfaced with an Easy - nLC II nanoﬂow liquid chromatography system ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) , as described earlier [ 18 ] . Brieﬂy , each fraction was reconstituted in Solvent A ( 0 . 1 % Formic acid ) and loaded on trap column ( 75 µ m × 2 cm ) packed with Magic C18 AQ ( Michrom Bioresources , Inc . , Auburn , CA , USA ) . Peptides were resolved on an analytical column ( 75 µ m × 15 cm ) at a ﬂow rate of 350 nL / min using a linear gradient from 5 % to 60 % ACN in a 120 min run . MS data were acquired using scan range of 400 – 1 , 600 m / z at mass resolution of 120 , 000 , and MS / MS data were acquired using resolution of 30 , 000 at m / z of 400 . HCD fragmentation for MS / MS analysis was carried out with isolation width of 2 m / z and normalized collision energy of 34 % . Data - dependent acquisition was carried out where the most intense precursor ions were detected . 2 . 6 . Data Analysis The MS - derived data were searched using Mascot and Sequest HT search engines with Proteome Discoverer 2 . 0 ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) . Phosphopeptide - enriched fractions from each replicate were searched against the RefSeq protein database ( version 70 ) , National Institutes of Health , USA with carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation . Oxidation of methionine ; the phosphorylations of serine , threonine , and tyrosine ; and the deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as dynamic modiﬁcations . Trypsin was set as the protease and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed . Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm , and a fragment mass tolerance of 0 . 05 Da was allowed . All peptide - spectrum matches ( PSMs ) were identiﬁed at a 1 % false - discovery rate ( FDR ) . Posterior error probability was calculated for individual PSMs using a percolator , providing statistical conﬁdence for each spectral match . The probability of phosphorylation for each site was calculated by the phosphoRS node in Proteome Discoverer . Only phosphopeptides with > 75 % site localization probability were considered for further analysis . A 2 - fold cut - o ﬀ was used for dysregulated phosphopeptides compared to TERT - NHUC cell line . 2 . 7 . Scratch Wound Assay For each cell line , 3 × 10 5 cells were seeded into the wells of a 6 - well plate . The experiment was conducted in triplicate . When the cells had reached 90 % to 95 % conﬂuency , a scratch was made with a 20 - µ l pipette tip . Cells were washed gently with media , incubated with PBS , and then imaged . Cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 2 % FBS . Cells were observed and imaged at 0 and 24 h . The rate of migration was calculated using ImageJ macros ( v1 . 50i ; National Institutes of Health , Maryland , USA ) . A t - test was used to calculate signiﬁcance and the area covered by the migrating cells was plotted in a bar graph . 2 . 8 . Invasion Assay The transwell system was used to measure invasion , as reported earlier [ 19 ] . Brieﬂy , 20 , 000 cells per 500 µ l of serum free media were seeded onto the Matrigel - coated PET membrane ( BD Bio Coat Matrigel Invasion Chamber ; BD Biosciences , CA , USA ) in the upper compartment , while the lower compartment was ﬁlled with complete growth media . Plates were maintained at 37 ◦ C for 48 h . After the incubation period , the upper membrane surface was wiped with a cotton - tip applicator to remove non - migratory cells . Cells that migrated to underside of membrane were ﬁxed and stained using 4 % methylene blue in 50 % methanol . The number of cells that penetrated was counted for randomly selected viewing ﬁelds at 10 × magniﬁcation using CX 41 Olympus Polarizing Trinocular microscope . The counting of cells was done using ImageJ multi - point cell counter ( v1 . 50i ; National Institutes of Health , Maryland , USA ) . The experiment was conducted in replicates . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 5 of 21 2 . 9 . Kinome Map The kinome map was built using the KinMap tool ( http : / / www . kinhub . org / kinmap / index . html ) . The list of identiﬁed kinases was searched and the relevant kinases are highlighted on the kinome map . Dysregulated kinases ( hyper - or hypo - phosphorylated in any cell line ) are also depicted . 2 . 10 . Clustering the Molecular Subtypes All quantiﬁed peptides ( across all cell lines and in both replicates ) were considered to identify di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated peptides . Fold - change was calculated by taking the intensity ratios with TERT - NHUC as the control . A t - test was used to determine the di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated peptides in the non - type subtype as compared with the luminal / basal subtype and the control cells . Di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated peptides ( p ≤ 0 . 05 ) were further considered for supervised clustering using Perseus data analysis tool v1 . 5 . 8 . 5 , Martinsried , Germany ( http : / / www . biochem . mpg . de / 5111810 / perseuss ) [ 20 ] . 2 . 11 . Ingenuity Pathway Analysis Pathway analysis was completed for signiﬁcantly dysregulated phosphopeptides in the non - type subtype using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis tool ( IPA Build : 460209M ; Version : 39480507 ; IPA , Qiagen , Redwood City , CA , USA ) . The Core Analysis module in the IPA Ingenuity Knowledge Base reference repository was used to predict relationships of di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated molecules in our dataset . IPA was used to overlay our input dataset with that of the knowledge base . Canonical pathway analyses identiﬁed the top canonical pathways signiﬁcantly enriched in our datasets . The “integrin pathway” was enriched in the total quantiﬁed dataset across all tested cell lines and with a conﬁdent phosphosite assignment . Signiﬁcantly enriched functions and networks were also obtained . The IPA analysis results were schematically replicated using Adobe Illustrator ( vCS5 . 1 ; Adobe Systems , San Jose , CA , USA ) . 2 . 12 . Kinase - Substrate Enrichment Analysis Kinase - substrate enrichment analysis was done using the online KSEA tool ( https : / / casecpb . shinyapps . io / ksea / ) [ 21 ] . Proteins with di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated sites in the non - type subtype were used for the input ﬁle , and analyzed using PhosphoSitePlus and NetworKIN as the background datasets . The p - value cuto ﬀ ( for plot ) and number of substrates cuto ﬀ were set to 0 . 05 and 5 , respectively . 2 . 13 . Motif Analysis Motifs enriched in the non - type subtype were analyzed using the motif - x algorithm v1 . 210 . 05 . 06 ( http : / / motif - x . med . harvard . edu ) . The “phospho - window” ( 7 amino acid residues on either side of the phosphorylated residue ) was extracted from the RefSeq database . Signiﬁcance threshold was set to p < 0 . 001 . The minimum occurrence of the motif was set to 20 for pSer peptides and 10 for pThr against an IPI ( International Proteome Index ) human proteome background with the central character as “s” and “t” , respectively . 2 . 14 . Immunohistochemistry High - grade and low - grade bladder cancer FFPE tissue sections were obtained from Kidwai Institute of Molecular Oncology after informed patient consent . IHC was carried out on both the cases . Brieﬂy , sections were depara ﬃ nized and antigen retrieval was carried by incubating sections in antigen retrieval bu ﬀ er ( 0 . 01 M Trisodium citrate bu ﬀ er , pH 6 ) for 20 minutes . Endogenous peroxidases were quenched using ( 1 : 1 ) methanol : chloroform solution followed by washes with PBS plus 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 . The sections were blocked using 5 % goat serum to avoid non - speciﬁc binding of primary antibody for 30 minutes . Further sections were incubated with primary anti - Talin1 ( S425 ) ( Abcam , Cambridge , United Kingdom ) antibody at 1 : 200 dilutions overnight at 4 ◦ C in a humidiﬁed chamber . Next day , the sections were washed thrice with wash bu ﬀ er and incubated with appropriate J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 6 of 21 horseradish peroxidase conjugated rabbit secondary antibody for 30 minutes at room temperature . Excess secondary antibody was removed using wash bu ﬀ er followed by addition of DAB substrate . The signal was developed using DAB chromogen ( DAKO , Glostrup , Denmark ) and counterstained by hematoxylin . The immunohistochemical labeling was assessed by an experienced pathologist . Images were taken at 10 × on Olympus DP - 21 microscope . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . EMT Scores of the Molecular Subtypes of Bladder Carcinoma Cell Lines EMT ( − 1 . 0 to + 1 . 0 ) scores were computed to estimate the EMT phenotype of the molecular subtypes of bladder carcinoma cell lines ( Supplementary Table S1 ) [ 3 ] . To compute the EMT score in bladder carcinoma cell lines , we adopted a similar approach to that used in ssGSEA [ 22 ] . Empirical cumulative distribution function ( ECDF ) was estimated for Epithelial and Mesenchymal gene sets . The 2KS test was employed to compute the di ﬀ erence between the Mesenchymal ECDF ( ECDF Mes ) and the epithelial ECDF ( ECDF Epi ) . The EMT signature speciﬁc to bladder was curated and applied to single sample gene set enrichment analysis ( ssGSEA ) to provide a gross assessment for the EMT phenotype for each cell line . The BinReg EMT signature was used to predict the EMT phenotype in the cell lines [ 3 , 23 ] . A cell line with a positive EMT score exhibits a more “mesenchymal - like” phenotype , whereas a negative EMT score reﬂected a more “epithelial - like” phenotype . EMT scores suggested that non - type cell lines were “mesenchymal - like” , whereas the luminal and basal cell lines had an “epithelial - like” characteristic ( Figure 1a ) . 3 . 2 . Non - Type Bladder Carcinoma Has Increased Migration and Invasive Ability We performed functional assays to determine and compare the tumorigenic properties of the non - type cell lines with the luminal / basal subtype . Using matrigel invasion assay , we estimated that the non - type were signiﬁcantly more invasive as compared to the luminal ( p = 6 . 9 × 10 − 14 ) and basal subtypes ( p = 0 . 03 ) ( Figure 1b , c ) . We found increased migration of non - type bladder carcinoma cell lines as compared to luminal ( p = 0 . 002 ) and basal ( p = 0 . 007 ) subtypes ( Figure 1d , e ) . 3 . 3 . Phosphoproteomic Analysis of Bladder Carcinoma Cell Lines Phosphoproteomic proﬁling was conducted for six bladder carcinoma cell lines ( RT112 , SW780 , VMCUB - 1 , J82 , T24 , and UMUC3 ) and the non - neoplastic bladder cell line ( TERT - NHUC ) using an established workﬂow for the enrichment of phosphopeptides ( Figure 2 ) . To increase the reliability of our phosphoproteomic analyses , we have included technical replicates in our study . The MS data were processed and searched against databases using SEQUEST - HT and MASCOT algorithms using the Proteome Discoverer 2 . 0 platform . Using an FDR cuto ﬀ of 1 % , 10 , 979 phosphopeptides were identiﬁed , corresponding to 3125 proteins ( Supplementary Table S2 ) . The probability of Ser / Thr / Tyr phosphorylation sites on each peptide was calculated by the phosphoRS algorithm using a cut - o ﬀ of > 75 % . We identiﬁed 4846 unique phosphopeptides corresponding to 2270 proteins ( Supplementary Table S3 ) , with a total of 4878 phosphosites identiﬁed : 4271 Ser residues , 574 Thr residues , and 33 Tyr residues ( Figure 3a ) . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 7 of 21 J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 21 Figure 1 . ( a ) Epithelial - mesenchymal transition score of the molecular subtypes of bladder carcinoma cell lines . ( b ) Invasion assay . Cells which invaded through the Matrigel were stained using methylene blue and imaged at 10× magnification . ( c ) Quantitative analysis of the number of cells which have invaded in each molecular subtype . ( d ) Scratch wound assay . Migration rate of the molecular subtypes of bladder carcinoma cell lines ( magnification : 10× ) . ( e ) Quantitative analysis of scratch wound assay of the molecular subtype of bladder carcinoma . Figure 1 . ( a ) Epithelial - mesenchymal transition score of the molecular subtypes of bladder carcinoma cell lines . ( b ) Invasion assay . Cells which invaded through the Matrigel were stained using methylene blue and imaged at 10 × magniﬁcation . ( c ) Quantitative analysis of the number of cells which have invaded in each molecular subtype . ( d ) Scratch wound assay . Migration rate of the molecular subtypes of bladder carcinoma cell lines ( magniﬁcation : 10 × ) . ( e ) Quantitative analysis of scratch wound assay of the molecular subtype of bladder carcinoma . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 8 of 21 J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 21 Figure 2 . Workflow illustrating the quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis of bladder carcinoma cell lines . For sample processing , proteins were extracted from the bladder carcinoma and non - neoplastic cell lines and digested using trypsin . Each cell line was tagged using the tandem mass tags TMT labeling kit and lyophilized and enriched using the phosphopeptide enrichment protocol ( titanium dioxide enrichment ) . The samples were run on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer and MS2 - based quantitation was achieved . The files were searched against Mascot and Sequest HT search engines . PhosphoRS node was used for the phosphosite assignment . Data was acquired in technical replicates . Figure 2 . Workﬂow illustrating the quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis of bladder carcinoma cell lines . For sample processing , proteins were extracted from the bladder carcinoma and non - neoplastic cell lines and digested using trypsin . Each cell line was tagged using the tandem mass tags TMT labeling kit and lyophilized and enriched using the phosphopeptide enrichment protocol ( titanium dioxide enrichment ) . The samples were run on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer and MS2 - based quantitation was achieved . The ﬁles were searched against Mascot and Sequest HT search engines . PhosphoRS node was used for the phosphosite assignment . Data was acquired in technical replicates . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 9 of 21 J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 21 Figure 3 . ( a ) Pie chart depicting the phosphosites identified in the study . Identification of the unique phosphosites ( percentage of unique serine , threonine , and tyrosine sites identified in the study is mentioned ) . ( b ) Kinome map depicting the identified kinases in the dataset . Kinases are highlighted as in the inset legend . The map was built using the KinMap tool . Figure 3 . ( a ) Pie chart depicting the phosphosites identiﬁed in the study . Identiﬁcation of the unique phosphosites ( percentage of unique serine , threonine , and tyrosine sites identiﬁed in the study is mentioned ) . ( b ) Kinome map depicting the identiﬁed kinases in the dataset . Kinases are highlighted as in the inset legend . The map was built using the KinMap tool . 3 . 4 . Kinases Enriched in the Phosphoproteomics Dataset A total of 151 kinases were enriched in the phosphoproteomic analysis of the bladder carcinoma cell lines . Of these , 35 were CMGC ( which refers to the CDK , MAPK , GSK3 , and CLK set of families ) ; 26 were of the homologs of yeast Sterile 7 , Sterile 11 , and Sterile 20 kinases ( STE ) ; 24 were from the protein kinase A , G , and C families ( AGC ) ; 20 were calmodulin / calcium regulated kinases ( CAMK ) ; 16 were tyrosine kinases ( TK ) ; 12 were tyrosine - like kinases ( TLK ) ; seven were casein kinases ( CK1 ) ; and 11 were atypical kinases . In our dataset , 16 kinases were hyperphosphorylated and 14 were hypophosphorylated ( in at least one cell line ) ( Figure 3b ) . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 10 of 21 3 . 5 . Unique Phosphorylation Signature Identiﬁed for the Non - Type Subtype of Bladder Carcinoma In a recent detailed analysis , Warrick et al . used agglomerative methods ( using the expression of a subtype - speciﬁc gene list from the TCGA study ) to characterize molecular subtypes of bladder carcinoma cell lines [ 14 ] . Based on that report , we selected six bladder carcinoma cell lines to identify di ﬀ erential changes in the signaling pathways of the non - type molecular subtype ( Table 1 ) . Table 1 . General characterization and molecular subtypes of the bladder carcinoma cell lines . Cell Line Source a MolecularSubtype b Derived from Male / Female Grade SW780 UCC Luminal Female Grade 1 RT112 UCC Luminal Female Grade 2 T24 EC Non - type Female Grade 3 J82 EC Non - type Male Grade 3 UMUC3 UCC Non - type Male - VMCUB - 1 EC Basal Male Grade 2 a UCC , urothelial cell carcinoma ; EC , epithelial carcinoma ; b Molecular subtypes are from Warrick et al . , 2016 [ 14 ] . Unsupervised hierarchical clustering was employed to cluster quantiﬁed phosphopeptides across normal and malignant bladder cell lines ( Supplementary Table S4 ) . The luminal subtype showed distinct clusters ( RT112 and SW780 ) , whereas the non - type cell lines ( J82 , UMUC3 and T24 ) were clustered along with the basal type ( VMCUB - 1 ) ( Supplementary Figure S1 ) . Thus , we sought to use the phosphorylation pattern or signature in the non - type subtype to explain what drives the mesenchymal phenotype . 375 di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated peptides corresponding to 289 proteins were identiﬁed in the non - type cell lines as compared to the luminal / basal subtype ( p ≤ 0 . 05 ) ( Supplementary Table S5 ) . Supervised clustering of the 375 di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated peptides revealed distinct phosphopeptide signature . Two distinct clusters were observed : the non - type cell lines were clustered away from the luminal / basal cells ( Figure 4 ) . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 21 Figure 4 . ( a ) Supervised clustering of the molecular subtypes of bladder carcinoma cell lines . A t - test conducted on the quantified data ( across all cell lines ) indicated that 375 peptides ( corresponding to 289 proteins ) were differentially phosphorylated in the non - type cell lines ( T24 , J82 , and UMUC3 ) as compared with the luminal / basal subtype ( SW780 , RT112 , and VMCUB - 1 ) ( p ≤ 0 . 05 ) . ( b ) Canonical pathways enriched in the non - type subtype of bladder carcinoma . IPA analysis identified the “integrin pathway” as the most significantly enriched pathway in the aggressive non - type bladder carcinoma subtype . 3 . 6 . Ingenuity Pathway Analysis ( IPA ) Identifies Aberrant Activation of Pathways in the Molecular Subtypes of Bladder Carcinoma IPA of 46 hyperphosphorylated peptides identified significant enrichment of “integrin pathway” components ( p = 6 . 29E - 04 ; z - score = 2 . 00 ) ( Figure 4b ) . Five proteins involved in cell motility had significantly increased phosphorylation in the non - type subtype as compared with the basal and luminal subtypes as well as the TERT - NHUC ( control ) cells ( Supplementary Table S6 ) . TLN1 was 3 - fold hyperphosphorylated in the non - type and 2 - fold in the basal . We further checked the hyperphosphorylation of TLN1 ( S425 ) in bladder tumor sections . Immunohistochemical staining showed hyperphosphorylation of TLN1 ( S425 ) in high - grade tumors as compared to low - grade tumors ( Supplementary Figure S2 ) . TLN1 is a major mediator of the integrin activation and crosstalk . It also stabilizes extracellular matrix - actin linkage [ 24 ] . CTTN and CRKL were 1 . 5 - fold hyperphosphorylated in the non - type subtype . CTTN phosphorylation is reported to mediate and accompany integrin mediated cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix [ 25 ] . The translocation of CRKL to the focal adhesion activates integrin induced downstream signaling through Src family of kinases and further mediates cell migration [ 26 ] . ZYX and BCAR3 were 1 . 5 - fold hyperphosphorylated in the non - type subtype whereas 0 . 5 - fold hypophosphorylated in the luminal subtype . ZYX regulates cellular movement and binds strongly to the focal adhesions . Integrins bind its cytoplasmic tail to ZYX through alpha - actinin [ 27 ] . BCAR3 along with its binding partner BCAR1 leads to changes in cellular morphology , motility , and adhesion by the transduction of integrin signaling [ 28 ] . To check the global phosphorylation status in aggressive non - type we carried out a pathway analysis with the set of all the phosphopeptides quantified across all cell lines ( 2806 phosphopeptides ) . The analysis displayed integrin pathway enrichment which comprises global proposition of the other proteins ( the other proteins which are identified / dysregulated in our study ) ( p = 5 . 06E - 04 ; z - score = 5 . 303 ) with the total inclusion of 49 proteins in the signaling network ( Figure 5 ) . Figure 4 . ( a ) Supervised clustering of the molecular subtypes of bladder carcinoma cell lines . A t - test conducted on the quantified data ( across all cell lines ) indicated that 375 peptides ( corresponding to 289 proteins ) were differentially phosphorylated in the non - type cell lines ( T24 , J82 , and UMUC3 ) as compared with the luminal / basal subtype ( SW780 , RT112 , and VMCUB - 1 ) ( p ≤ 0 . 05 ) . ( b ) Canonical pathways enriched in the non - type subtype of bladder carcinoma . IPA analysis identified the “integrin pathway” as the most significantly enriched pathway in the aggressive non - type bladder carcinoma subtype . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 11 of 21 3 . 6 . Ingenuity Pathway Analysis ( IPA ) Identiﬁes Aberrant Activation of Pathways in the Molecular Subtypes of Bladder Carcinoma IPA of 46 hyperphosphorylated peptides identiﬁed signiﬁcant enrichment of “integrin pathway” components ( p = 6 . 29E - 04 ; z - score = 2 . 00 ) ( Figure 4b ) . Five proteins involved in cell motility had signiﬁcantly increased phosphorylation in the non - type subtype as compared with the basal and luminal subtypes as well as the TERT - NHUC ( control ) cells ( Supplementary Table S6 ) . TLN1 was 3 - fold hyperphosphorylated in the non - type and 2 - fold in the basal . We further checked the hyperphosphorylation of TLN1 ( S425 ) in bladder tumor sections . Immunohistochemical staining showed hyperphosphorylation of TLN1 ( S425 ) in high - grade tumors as compared to low - grade tumors ( Supplementary Figure S2 ) . TLN1 is a major mediator of the integrin activation and crosstalk . It also stabilizes extracellular matrix - actin linkage [ 24 ] . CTTN and CRKL were 1 . 5 - fold hyperphosphorylated in the non - type subtype . CTTN phosphorylation is reported to mediate and accompany integrin mediated cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix [ 25 ] . The translocation of CRKL to the focal adhesion activates integrin induced downstream signaling through Src family of kinases and further mediates cell migration [ 26 ] . ZYX and BCAR3 were 1 . 5 - fold hyperphosphorylated in the non - type subtype whereas 0 . 5 - fold hypophosphorylated in the luminal subtype . ZYX regulates cellular movement and binds strongly to the focal adhesions . Integrins bind its cytoplasmic tail to ZYX through alpha - actinin [ 27 ] . BCAR3 along with its binding partner BCAR1 leads to changes in cellular morphology , motility , and adhesion by the transduction of integrin signaling [ 28 ] . To check the global phosphorylation status in aggressive non - type we carried out a pathway analysis with the set of all the phosphopeptides quantiﬁed across all cell lines ( 2806 phosphopeptides ) . The analysis displayed integrin pathway enrichment which comprises global proposition of the other proteins ( the other proteins which are identiﬁed / dysregulated in our study ) ( p = 5 . 06E - 04 ; z - score = 5 . 303 ) with the total inclusion of 49 proteins in the signaling network ( Figure 5 ) . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 21 Figure 5 . Schematic diagram of enriched integrin signaling pathway in non - type subtype of bladder carcinoma cell lines . Ingenuity pathway analysis lead to the identification of integrin signaling to be most enriched in the aggressive molecular subtype . The dysregulated proteins , the number of phosphopeptides , and the phosphosites identified are highlighted in the pathway . For the luminal subtype , there was an enrichment of “phospholipase C signaling” components ( p = 6 . 29E - 03 ; z - score = 2 . 00 ) , including four differentially phosphorylated proteins—Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 16 ( AREGEF16 ) , actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex subunit 1B ( ARPC1B ) , cdc42 effector protein 1 ( CDC42EP1 ) , and stathmin1 ( STMN1 ) . The basal subtype showed enrichment of “signaling by Rho family GTPase” components ( p = 3 . 68E - 03 ; z - score = 2 . 00 ) , and included the differential phosphorylation of neuroblast differentiation - associated protein ( AHNAK ) , AREGEF16 , myristoylated alanine - rich C - kinase substrate ( MARCKS ) , and proto - oncogene tyrosine - protein kinase Src ( SRC ) ( Supplementary Figure S3 ) . 3 . 7 . Regulatory Interaction Network Enriched in the Non - Type Subtype Network analysis appeared to link key molecules not identified in our study which may be important regulators of the network along with the non - type subtype specific phosphoproteins . The most enriched network in the non - type subtype contained 25 proteins from our dataset ( score = 46 ) ( Supplementary Figure S4a ) . The primary hub proteins included protein kinase A catalytic subunit ( PRKACA ) , Rac - alpha serine / threonine protein kinase ( AKT ) and nuclear factor NF - kappa - B ( NF κ B ) . PRKACA interacts with protein kinase A regulatory subunit 1A ( PRKAR1A ) , ADP ribosylation factor guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2 ( ARFGEF2 ) and A - kinase anchor protein ( AKAP11 ) . AKT interacts which TBC2 domain family 4 ( TBC2D4 ) and interferon - induced , double - stranded RNA activated protein ( EIF2AK2 ) , desmoplakin ( DSP ) , SRC , and integrin beta - 4 ( ITGB4 ) . NF κ B interacts with TGF β - activated kinase 1 ( TGFB1 ) , MAP3K7 - binding protein 2 ( TAB2 ) , TBC2D4 , casein kinase II subunit beta ( CSNK2B ) , EIF2AK2 , CDC42 , CDC42EP1 , DNA polymerase alpha subunit B ( PLOA2 ) , sentrin - specific protease 1 ( SENP1 ) , PKA , and immunoglobulin G ( IgG ) . Cell motility was the most enriched function determined by the IPA analysis . 21 proteins related to cell motility were enriched in the non - type subtype of bladder carcinoma ( Supplementary Figure S4b ) . Figure 5 . Schematic diagram of enriched integrin signaling pathway in non - type subtype of bladder carcinoma cell lines . Ingenuity pathway analysis lead to the identiﬁcation of integrin signaling to be most enriched in the aggressive molecular subtype . The dysregulated proteins , the number of phosphopeptides , and the phosphosites identiﬁed are highlighted in the pathway . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 12 of 21 For the luminal subtype , there was an enrichment of “phospholipase C signaling” components ( p = 6 . 29E - 03 ; z - score = 2 . 00 ) , including four di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated proteins—Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 16 ( AREGEF16 ) , actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex subunit 1B ( ARPC1B ) , cdc42 e ﬀ ector protein 1 ( CDC42EP1 ) , and stathmin1 ( STMN1 ) . The basal subtype showed enrichment of “signaling by Rho family GTPase” components ( p = 3 . 68E - 03 ; z - score = 2 . 00 ) , and included the di ﬀ erential phosphorylation of neuroblast di ﬀ erentiation - associated protein ( AHNAK ) , AREGEF16 , myristoylated alanine - rich C - kinase substrate ( MARCKS ) , and proto - oncogene tyrosine - protein kinase Src ( SRC ) ( Supplementary Figure S3 ) . 3 . 7 . Regulatory Interaction Network Enriched in the Non - Type Subtype Network analysis appeared to link key molecules not identiﬁed in our study which may be important regulators of the network along with the non - type subtype speciﬁc phosphoproteins . The most enriched network in the non - type subtype contained 25 proteins from our dataset ( score = 46 ) ( Supplementary Figure S4a ) . The primary hub proteins included protein kinase A catalytic subunit ( PRKACA ) , Rac - alpha serine / threonine protein kinase ( AKT ) and nuclear factor NF - kappa - B ( NF κ B ) . PRKACA interacts with protein kinase A regulatory subunit 1A ( PRKAR1A ) , ADP ribosylation factor guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2 ( ARFGEF2 ) and A - kinase anchor protein ( AKAP11 ) . AKT interacts which TBC2 domain family 4 ( TBC2D4 ) and interferon - induced , double - stranded RNA activated protein ( EIF2AK2 ) , desmoplakin ( DSP ) , SRC , and integrin beta - 4 ( ITGB4 ) . NF κ B interacts with TGF β - activated kinase 1 ( TGFB1 ) , MAP3K7 - binding protein 2 ( TAB2 ) , TBC2D4 , casein kinase II subunit beta ( CSNK2B ) , EIF2AK2 , CDC42 , CDC42EP1 , DNA polymerase alpha subunit B ( PLOA2 ) , sentrin - speciﬁc protease 1 ( SENP1 ) , PKA , and immunoglobulin G ( IgG ) . Cell motility was the most enriched function determined by the IPA analysis . 21 proteins related to cell motility were enriched in the non - type subtype of bladder carcinoma ( Supplementary Figure S4b ) . 3 . 8 . CDK1 ( Cyclin - Dependent Kinase 1 ) and GSK3A / GSK3B ( Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3A and 3B ) Are the Predicted Activated Kinases in Non - Type Subtype of Bladder Carcinoma Cell Lines Eight kinases—GSK3A , GSK3B , CDK1 , ribosomal protein S6 kinase alpha - 1 ( RPS6KA1 ) , ribosomal protein S6 kinase alpha - 1 ( RPS6KB1 ) , serine / threonine protein kinase Sgk 1 ( SGK1 ) , TGF β receptor type - 2 ( TGFBR2 ) , and 5 (cid:48) - AMP - activated protein kinase catalytic subunit alpha - 2 ( PRKAA2 ) —were predicted to be signiﬁcantly enriched ( Supplementary Table S7 ) . GSK3A ( p = 0 . 003 ; z - score = 2 . 7 ) and GSK3B ( p = 0 . 01 ; z - score = 2 . 3 ) were predicted to be activated and responsible for the phosphorylation of four downstream proteins ( tuberin ( TSC2 ) , AKAP11 , MAP1B , and TBC1 domain family 4 ( TBC1D4 ) ) . GSK3A was predicted to independently phosphorylate translocon - associated protein subunit alpha ( SSR1 ) , whereas GSK3B was predicted to be upstream of neurogenic locus notch homolog protein 2 ( NOTCH2 ) and transcription factor RelB ( RELB ) . CDK1 was also predicted as the upstream activated kinase ( p = 0 . 01 ; z - score = 2 . 06 ) for 23 proteins at single , double , or triple phosphorylation sites ( Supplementary Table S8 ) . RPS6KA1 , RPS6KB1 , and SGK1 were predicted as the negatively regulated kinases ( p = 0 . 01 ; z - score = − 2 . 10 ) ( Figure 6a – c ) . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 13 of 21 J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 21 3 . 8 . CDK1 ( Cyclin - Dependent Kinase 1 ) and GSK3A / GSK3B ( Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3A and 3B ) Are the Predicted Activated Kinases in Non - Type Subtype of Bladder Carcinoma Cell Lines Eight kinases—GSK3A , GSK3B , CDK1 , ribosomal protein S6 kinase alpha - 1 ( RPS6KA1 ) , ribosomal protein S6 kinase alpha - 1 ( RPS6KB1 ) , serine / threonine protein kinase Sgk 1 ( SGK1 ) , TGF β receptor type - 2 ( TGFBR2 ) , and 5 ' - AMP - activated protein kinase catalytic subunit alpha - 2 ( PRKAA2 ) —were predicted to be significantly enriched ( Supplementary Table S7 ) . GSK3A ( p = 0 . 003 ; z - score = 2 . 7 ) and GSK3B ( p = 0 . 01 ; z - score = 2 . 3 ) were predicted to be activated and responsible for the phosphorylation of four downstream proteins ( tuberin ( TSC2 ) , AKAP11 , MAP1B , and TBC1 domain family 4 ( TBC1D4 ) ) . GSK3A was predicted to independently phosphorylate translocon - associated protein subunit alpha ( SSR1 ) , whereas GSK3B was predicted to be upstream of neurogenic locus notch homolog protein 2 ( NOTCH2 ) and transcription factor RelB ( RELB ) . CDK1 was also predicted as the upstream activated kinase ( p = 0 . 01 ; z - score = 2 . 06 ) for 23 proteins at single , double , or triple phosphorylation sites ( Supplementary Table S8 ) . RPS6KA1 , RPS6KB1 , and SGK1 were predicted as the negatively regulated kinases ( p = 0 . 01 ; z - score = − 2 . 10 ) ( Figure 6a – c ) . Figure 6 . ( a ) Predicted upstream kinases enriched in the non - type subtype of bladder carcinoma cell lines . Graph showing the positively regulated upstream kinases ( red bars ) predicted to be activated in the non - type subtype . ( b ) Substrates of GSK3A / 3B and ( c ) CDK1 enriched in non - type molecular subtype depicted by a schematic diagram . The respective phosphosites of the substrates identiﬁed are also highlighted . ( d ) Motif analysis of di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated peptides of non - type subtype bladder carcinoma . Serine and threonine motifs identiﬁed in the non - type subtype of bladder carcinoma . 3 . 9 . Active Proline - Directed Motifs Identiﬁed in the Non - Type Molecular Subtype In the non - type subtype , ﬁve serine and one threonine phosphorylated motifs were signiﬁcantly di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated ( among the 289 signature proteins ) . A maximum fold change of 36 was calculated for the pSDxE serine phosphorylated motif . The consensus motifs PxpSP and pSP motifs also showed a high fold change in phosphorylation of 7 . 5 - fold . Supplementary Table S9 enlists the di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated protein sites matching to the consensus motifs . Only one motif for the threonine sites ( pTP ) was identiﬁed in the dataset ( 10 - fold enriched among 24 phosphopeptides ) ( Figure 6d ) . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 14 of 21 4 . Discussion A molecular subtype is an “intrinsic” feature that deﬁnes both clinical and biological stratiﬁcation of a given tumor . The molecular subtypes of bladder carcinoma have not been extensively studied . In addition , switching between molecular subtypes and the multifocal characteristics of these tumors are two phenomena that preclude our understanding of the biological and clinical properties of these tumors . Most of the studies have deﬁned the molecular subtypes by analyzing gene expression data based on the enrichment of speciﬁc genetic alterations and gene expression proﬁles . However , a comprehensive and quantitative phosphoproteomics study on bladder carcinoma has still not been reported . Here we provide compelling data that suggests the cellular signaling pathways that contribute to the mesenchymal phenotype in the non - type molecular subtype of bladder carcinoma . Our study identiﬁed 10 , 979 phosphopeptides corresponding to 3125 proteins from a panel of bladder carcinoma cell lines . This study o ﬀ ers new biological insight and identiﬁes potential kinases that could be targeted in bladder carcinoma . We combined bioinformatics approaches with phosphoproteomic analyses of bladder carcinoma cell lines to generate highly enriched cellular signaling pathways . This provided the groundwork for deﬁning the molecular subtypes in bladder carcinoma cell lines , which may help to identify and develop new therapeutic approaches within these model systems . Importantly , the study needs to be extended on large cohort of bladder tumor sections to validate a prognostic and predictive role of the subtype speciﬁc signature . This would aid in the clinical assessment of bladder carcinoma patients for appropriate treatment regimen based on the molecular subtypes . The computed EMT score suggests that the non - type molecular subtype is more “mesenchymal - like , ” whereas the luminal / basal subtypes are “epithelial - like . ” The non - type subtype cell lines show an increased migratory and invasive phenotype , reﬂecting typical characteristics of a mesenchymal - like phenotype . Non - type carcinomas may ; thus , more readily invade the bladder wall , and this knowledge may provide the necessary evidence to spur a change in the ﬁeld of muscle invasive bladder carcinoma , particularly in terms of their recurrent nature . Recently , existence of hybrid EMT state has also been reported by various groups [ 29 , 30 ] . A study by Jolly et al . showed that hybrid epithelial / mesenchymal cells adhere higher tumor - initiation capabilities and metastatic potential [ 31 ] . Another study by Yadavalli et al . computed the EMT score using transcriptomic datasets . The EMT scores distributed between − 0 . 3 to + 0 . 5 , for cancer CTCs suggestive of intermediate phenotypes [ 32 ] . In our study , we observed the distribution of EMT scores in the aggressive non - type subtype were distributed between + 0 . 35 to + 0 . 65 . We identiﬁed the enrichment of the integrin signaling pathway in the non - type molecular subtype , with di ﬀ erential phosphorylation in ﬁve major proteins : TLN1 , CTTN , BCAR3 , CRKL , and ZYX . Integrins are a family of cell adhesion receptors that mediate cell – matrix and cell – cell interactions [ 33 – 35 ] . A major function of the integrins is to regulate the intracellular signaling cascades that lead to cell proliferation , survival , motility , and migration [ 36 – 38 ] . TLN1 is an adaptor protein critical to integrin signaling . In the non - type molecular subtype , TLN1 is signiﬁcantly hyperphosphorylated at S425 in the head domain ( band 4 . 1 , ezrin , radixin , moesin homology domain ) ( Supplementary Figure S5 ) , a site also known to be hyperphosphorylated in prostate cancer [ 39 ] . TLN1 S425 is phosphorylated by cyclin - dependent kinase 5 ( CDK5 ) , which controls the metastatic potential in prostate cancer [ 40 ] . S425 acts on integrin β with an “inside - out” mechanism ; however , we did not identify a change in integrin β 1 . Cell migration is stimulated by TLN1 coupled to the integrin cytoplasmic domain : TLN1 connects ligand - bound integrins with the actin cytoskeleton , and this is needed for the catalysis of the focal adhesion - dependent pathways [ 41 ] to initiate cell movement . The phosphorylation of TLN1 at S425 limits focal - adhesion turnover , which , in turn , stabilizes the lamellipodia contributing to the sustained cell migration [ 42 ] . TLN1 overexpression is also correlated with advanced and aggressive oral squamous cell carcinoma [ 43 ] . In concordance with the reported studies , we also observed a hyperphosphorylation of TLN1 ( S425 ) in high grade tumor sections . In our unpublished global proteomics data of bladder carcinoma cell lines , TLN1 is > 1 . 5 - fold overexpressed in the non - type cell lines ; however , its role in bladder carcinoma and whether it contributes to the “mesenchymal - like” phenotype is unclear . J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 15 of 21 CTTN is an actin - binding protein signiﬁcantly hyperphosphorylated at S418 , S405 , and T401 in the non - type molecular subtype . CTTN promotes cell migration by lengthening lamellipodia , increasing the number of ﬁlopodia , and increasing protrusion time [ 44 ] . CTTN is phosphorylated at S418 and S405 by the serine / threonine extracellular signal - regulated kinases ( ERK1 / 2 ) [ 45 ] , which , in turn , stimulates binding of the Arp2 / 3 complex to N - WASP via its SH3 domain [ 46 ] . CTTN phosphorylation is required for actin regulation and is responsible for lamellipodia formation and associated with enhanced cancer cell migration [ 47 ] . In bladder carcinoma , CTTN may be involved in the regulation of actin - based extravasation through invadopodia formation [ 48 ] . CRKL is another adaptor protein that is overexpressed in many cancers , including bladder carcinoma [ 49 ] . It regulates cyclin D1 and modulates ERK1 / 2 phosphorylation . In bladder carcinoma cell lines , CRKL is hyperphosphorylated at S107 ; however , the function of this phosphorylation is unclear . The two other di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated proteins identiﬁed in our study are ZYX and BCAR3 . ZYX is a LIM domain protein with distinct actin polymerization activity . It also modulates cell adhesion and the expression of integrins , controlling cell motility in lung carcinoma . ZYX may also regulate EMT during lung cancer development and may regulate cell – cell adhesion , integrin α 5 β 1 expression , and ECM adhesion [ 50 ] . ZYX is overexpressed in breast cancer and positively correlated with breast carcinoma metastasis [ 51 ] . Its depletion reduces cell proliferation , motility , and in vivo tumorigenic activity . BCAR3 , on the other hand , binds to the C - terminal of its partner p130Cas ( BCAR1 ) and co - ordinates the activation of SRC , a non - receptor tyrosine kinase [ 52 ] . The BCAR3 – SRC activation axis is governed by PTP α , binding to its SH2 domain to recruit the BCAR3 / Cas complex . T789 phosphorylation of PTP α is required for integrin induced - adhesion signaling [ 53 ] . The functional roles of ZYX ( S259 ) and BCAR3 ( T50 ) phosphorylation have not been studied in bladder carcinoma , but these proteins may contribute to invasion , as both proteins are involved in cell motility . However , EMT is regulated at several levels through transcriptional controls , epigenetic modiﬁcations , translational modiﬁcations , and alternative splicing [ 54 – 58 ] . Phospholipase C has a decisive role in skin cancer development [ 59 ] , and its overexpression in gastric - mucosa cells perhaps o ﬀ ers an opportunity to di ﬀ erentiate gastric cancer and inﬂammatory lesions [ 60 ] . Thus , its overexpression in luminal bladder carcinoma is not unexpected , and may be the result of early pro - inﬂammatory signaling . Our pathway analysis also identiﬁed an enrichment of Rho signaling in the basal cell line . Activated Rho proteins can alter cell behavior as well as cell morphology . In breast cancer , Rho family GTPases regulates cell motility by cytoskeleton remodeling and altering focal adhesions [ 61 ] . High RhoA and RhoC expression is correlated with poor tumor di ﬀ erentiation , muscle invasion , and lymph node metastasis in bladder carcinoma [ 62 ] . The basal subtype of bladder carcinoma is relatively more aggressive than the luminal subtype , and activated Rho protein signaling may contribute to this aggressive clinical outcome [ 63 ] . In our IPA analysis , NF κ B was highlighted as the regulatory hub molecule of the most enriched network in the non - type subtype . This transcriptional regulator largely a ﬀ ects the expression of cytokines , chemokines , adhesion molecules , and controls various mechanisms , including inﬂammation , proliferation , transformation , angiogenesis , invasion , and chemoresistance [ 64 ] . Interestingly , β 1 - integrin contains a unique NF κ B - binding site in its promoter region , suggesting a potential regulatory role of NF κ B in integrin signaling [ 65 ] . Thus , NF κ B may regulate the expression of integrins and enhance signaling downstream , a ﬀ ecting cell proliferation and motility . The non - type signiﬁcantly enriched in golgi vesicle ( 0 . 09 % ) , cytoskeleton ( 5 . 1 % ) and in nuclear compartment ( 75 . 2 % ) . In addition , ubiquitin - speciﬁc proteases ( 4 . 9 % ) , cytoskeleton protein binding ( 4 . 5 % ) , and signal transducers ( 1 . 1 % ) were signiﬁcantly active in non - type bladder carcinoma cell line ( Supplementary Figure S6 ) . Through our kinase - substrate enrichment analysis , we predicted that the two most activated kinases were GSK3A and GSK3B , two highly conserved serine / threonine protein kinases . The roles of these two kinases in cancer remain controversial , with little evidence in the literature to support their role in the disease . The Y216 - phosphorylated active form of GSK3B is signiﬁcantly decreased in squamous cell carcinoma [ 66 ] and in lung cancer , inhibiting GSK3B J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 16 of 21 increases the expression of the transcriptional repressor Snail , which suppresses E - cadherin and promotes EMT [ 67 ] . A potent GSK3 inhibitor LY2090314 has been tested in clinical trials against metastatic pancreatic cancer ( NCT0163230 ) and acute leukemia ( NCT01214603 ) [ 68 ] . Others have reported that pharmacological inhibition of GSK3B can induce apoptosis by sorafenib in melanoma cell lines and leukemic cells [ 69 , 70 ] . Yet , in ovarian cancer , GSK3B activity was linked with cell proliferation , and overexpression of its active form can induce CDK1 expression and facilitate cell proliferation [ 71 ] . CDK1 is a major mitotic regulating kinase involved in the G2 / M phase of the cell cycle , and is upregulated in several cancers and also associated with clinicopathological factors [ 72 – 74 ] . Various CDK inhibitors have been trialed for the treatment of breast cancer and chronic lymphocytic leukemia [ 75 – 77 ] . Nevertheless , the role of CDK1 in bladder carcinoma has yet to be elucidated . GSK3A / B and CDK1 could be potential druggable targets for the aggressive non - type bladder carcinoma . Intriguingly , we identiﬁed enrichment of proline - directed motifs ( pSP / pTP ) in our dataset , which are known to be active mostly in proliferating cells and phosphorylated by CDK1 during mitosis [ 78 ] . We also identiﬁed the pSer and pThr motifs that recognize acidic casein kinase II in our dataset [ 79 ] , yet the importance of these motifs in bladder carcinoma remains unclear . 5 . Conclusions We present the ﬁrst comprehensive phosphoproteome of bladder carcinoma cells and o ﬀ er a potential starting point for further mechanistic studies . Our phosphoproteomic data and bioinformatic analyses suggest two key activated kinases ( GSK3A / B and CDK1 ) as potential druggable targets for the aggressive subtype of bladder carcinoma . We provide a glimpse of the dynamic process of phosphorylation in bladder carcinoma and also the di ﬀ erentially regulated phosphoproteins in this aggressive molecular non - type subtype . Supplementary Materials : The following are available online at http : / / www . mdpi . com / 2077 - 0383 / 8 / 5 / 703 / s1 , Figure S1 : Unsupervised clustering of the bladder carcinoma cell lines of the quantiﬁed data across all the cell lines ; Figure S2 : Immunohistochemistry showing TLN1 ( S425 ) hyperphosphorylation in high - grade tumors as compared to low - grade tumors ; Figure S3 : Top ﬁve canonical pathways enriched by IPA in ( a ) luminal and ( b ) basal subtypes of bladder carcinoma ; Figure S4 : ( a ) A global network interaction map of the di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated proteins in the non - type subtype . Most enriched network in the aggressive subtype with an enrichment score of 46 ( IPA ) . ( b ) Cell motility is an intrinsic characteristic of the non - type subtype of bladder carcinoma . Phosphoproteins involved in cell motility , as depicted from the IPA analysis ; Figure S5 : Protein domain structure for TLN1 . The domains of TLN1 and the signiﬁcantly di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated sites ( S425 ; head domain ) in the non - type cell lines ; Figure S6 : Gene ontology enrichment of the di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated proteins in the non - type molecular subtype . Most of the proteins are nuclear proteins ( 75 . 2 % ) . Proteins with kinase activity and signal transducer activity are also signiﬁcantly enriched ( p ≤ 0 . 05 ) . Data were analyzed using FunRich ; Table S1 : EMT score of bladder carcinoma cell lines molecular subtypes ; Table S2 : List of phosphopeptides identiﬁed in bladder carcinoma cell lines using SequestHT and Mascot search algorithms ; Table S3 : List of phosphopeptides identiﬁed in bladder carcinoma cell lines using SequestHT and Mascot search algorithms with a PhosphoRS probablity of ≥ 75 % ; Table S4 : List of phosphopeptides identiﬁed in bladder carcinoma cell lines using SequestHT and Mascot search algorithms with a PhosphoRS probability of ≥ 75 % and quantiﬁed across all the cell lines ; Table S5 : A total of 375 di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated peptides in the non - type bladder carcinoma molecular subtype ; Table S6 : Proteins di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated in non - type subtype in integrin signaling ( p - value ≤ 0 . 05 ) ; Table S7 : Kinase scores for the kinase - substrate enrichment analysis ; Table S8 : Kinase - substrate enrichment scores ; and Table S9 : Motifs identiﬁed by motif - x in the di ﬀ erentially phosphorylated peptides in non - type subtype . Author Contributions : Conceptualization , P . K . and H . G . ; methodology , B . D . , V . N . P . , and K . G . ; software , B . D . and V . N . P . ; validation , B . D . and K . G . ; formal analysis , B . D . , H . G . , and P . K . ; investigation , B . D . , H . G . , and P . K . ; writing—original draft preparation , B . D . and P . K . ; writing—review and editing , J . P . T . , H . G . , and P . K . ; visualization , B . D . , J . P . T . , H . G . , and P . K . ; supervision , J . P . T . , H . G . , and P . K . ; project administration , P . K . ; funding acquisition , P . K . All authors have read and approved the ﬁnal version of the manuscript . Funding : This research was funded by Department of Science and Technology ( DST ) , Ramanujan Fellowship , Government of India , grant number SB / S2 / RJN - 077 / 2015 and the APC was funded by SB / S2 / RJN - 077 / 2015 , Department of Science and Technology ( DST ) , Ramanujan Fellowship , Government of India . Acknowledgments : We thank the Department of Biotechnology ( DBT ) , Government of India for research support to the Institute of Bioinformatics , Bangalore . PK is a recipient of the Ramanujan Fellowship awarded by Department of Science and Technology ( DST ) , Government of India . BD is a recipient of INSPIRE Fellowship from Department of Science and Technology ( DST ) , Government of India . KG is a recipient of Senior Research Fellowship from J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 17 of 21 University Grants Commission ( UGC ) , Government of India . We also thank Rebecca A . Jackson , Scientiﬁc Editor , for English editing . Conﬂicts of Interest : The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest . The funders had no role in the design of the study ; in the collection , analyses , or interpretation of data ; in the writing of the manuscript , or in the decision to publish the results . References 1 . Burger , M . ; Oosterlinck , W . ; Konety , B . ; Chang , S . ; Gudjonsson , S . ; Pruthi , R . ; Soloway , M . ; Solsona , E . ; Sved , P . ; Babjuk , M . ; et al . ICUD - EAU International Consultation on Bladder Cancer 2012 : Non - muscle - invasive urothelial carcinoma of the bladder . Eur . Urol . 2013 , 63 , 36 – 44 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 2 . Schrier , B . P . ; Hollander , M . P . ; van Rhijn , B . W . ; Kiemeney , L . A . ; Witjes , J . A . Prognosis of muscle - invasive bladder cancer : Di ﬀ erence between primary and progressive tumours and implications for therapy . Eur . Urol . 2004 , 45 , 292 – 296 . [ CrossRef ] 3 . Tan , T . Z . ; Miow , Q . H . ; Miki , Y . ; Noda , T . ; Mori , S . ; Huang , R . Y . ; Thiery , J . P . Epithelial - mesenchymal transition spectrum quantiﬁcation and its e ﬃ cacy in deciphering survival and drug responses of cancer patients . EMBO Mol . Med . 2014 , 6 , 1279 – 1293 . [ CrossRef ] 4 . Damrauer , J . S . ; Hoadley , K . A . ; Chism , D . D . ; Fan , C . ; Tiganelli , C . J . ; Wobker , S . E . ; Yeh , J . J . ; Milowsky , M . I . ; Iyer , G . ; Parker , J . S . ; et al . Intrinsic subtypes of high - grade bladder cancer reﬂect the hallmarks of breast cancer biology . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2014 , 111 , 3110 – 3115 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 5 . Choi , W . ; Porten , S . ; Kim , S . ; Willis , D . ; Plimack , E . R . ; Ho ﬀ man - Censits , J . ; Roth , B . ; Cheng , T . ; Tran , M . ; Lee , I . L . ; et al . Identiﬁcation of distinct basal and luminal subtypes of muscle - invasive bladder cancer with di ﬀ erent sensitivities to frontline chemotherapy . Cancer Cell 2014 , 25 , 152 – 165 . [ CrossRef ] 6 . Fujimoto , K . ; Yamada , Y . ; Okajima , E . ; Kakizoe , T . ; Sasaki , H . ; Sugimura , T . ; Terada , M . Frequent association of p53 gene mutation in invasive bladder cancer . Cancer Res . 1992 , 52 , 1393 – 1398 . [ PubMed ] 7 . Van Rhijn , B . W . ; Lurkin , I . ; Radvanyi , F . ; Kirkels , W . J . ; van der Kwast , T . H . ; Zwartho ﬀ , E . C . The ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor 3 ( FGFR3 ) mutation is a strong indicator of superﬁcial bladder cancer with low recurrence rate . Cancer Res . 2001 , 61 , 1265 – 1268 . [ PubMed ] 8 . Orlow , I . ; Lacombe , L . ; Hannon , G . J . ; Serrano , M . ; Pellicer , I . ; Dalbagni , G . ; Reuter , V . E . ; Zhang , Z . F . ; Beach , D . ; Cordon - Cardo , C . Deletion of the p16 and p15 genes in human bladder tumors . J . Natl . Cancer Inst . 1995 , 87 , 1524 – 1529 . [ CrossRef ] 9 . Sjodahl , G . ; Lauss , M . ; Lovgren , K . ; Chebil , G . ; Gudjonsson , S . ; Veerla , S . ; Patschan , O . ; Aine , M . ; Ferno , M . ; Ringner , M . ; et al . A molecular taxonomy for urothelial carcinoma . Clin . Cancer Res . 2012 , 18 , 3377 – 3386 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 10 . Aine , M . ; Eriksson , P . ; Liedberg , F . ; Sjodahl , G . ; Hoglund , M . Biological determinants of bladder cancer gene expression subtypes . Sci . Rep . 2015 , 5 , 10957 . [ CrossRef ] 11 . Hedegaard , J . ; Lamy , P . ; Nordentoft , I . ; Algaba , F . ; Hoyer , S . ; Ulhoi , B . P . ; Vang , S . ; Reinert , T . ; Hermann , G . G . ; Mogensen , K . ; et al . Comprehensive Transcriptional Analysis of Early - Stage Urothelial Carcinoma . Cancer Cell 2016 , 30 , 27 – 42 . [ CrossRef ] 12 . Svatek , R . S . ; Shariat , S . F . ; Novara , G . ; Skinner , E . C . ; Fradet , Y . ; Bastian , P . J . ; Kamat , A . M . ; Kassouf , W . ; Karakiewicz , P . I . ; Fritsche , H . M . ; et al . Discrepancy between clinical and pathological stage : External validation of the impact on prognosis in an international radical cystectomy cohort . BJU Int . 2011 , 107 , 898 – 904 . [ CrossRef ] 13 . Barretina , J . ; Caponigro , G . ; Stransky , N . ; Venkatesan , K . ; Margolin , A . A . ; Kim , S . ; Wilson , C . J . ; Lehar , J . ; Kryukov , G . V . ; Sonkin , D . ; et al . The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity . Nature 2012 , 483 , 603 – 607 . [ CrossRef ] 14 . Warrick , J . I . ; Walter , V . ; Yamashita , H . ; Chung , E . ; Shuman , L . ; Amponsa , V . O . ; Zheng , Z . ; Chan , W . ; Whitcomb , T . L . ; Yue , F . ; et al . FOXA1 , GATA3 and PPAR Cooperate to Drive Luminal Subtype in Bladder Cancer : A Molecular Analysis of Established Human Cell Lines . Sci . Rep . 2016 , 6 , 38531 . [ CrossRef ] 15 . Chapman , E . J . ; Hurst , C . D . ; Pitt , E . ; Chambers , P . ; Aveyard , J . S . ; Knowles , M . A . Expression of hTERT immortalises normalhumanurothelialcellswithoutinactivationofthep16 / Rbpathway . Oncogene 2006 , 25 , 5037 – 5045 . [ CrossRef ] 16 . Selvan , L . D . ; Renuse , S . ; Kaviyil , J . E . ; Sharma , J . ; Pinto , S . M . ; Yelamanchi , S . D . ; Puttamallesh , V . N . ; Ravikumar , R . ; Pandey , A . ; Prasad , T . S . ; et al . Phosphoproteome of Cryptococcus neoformans . J . Proteomics 2014 , 97 , 287 – 295 . [ CrossRef ] J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 18 of 21 17 . Pinto , S . M . ; Nirujogi , R . S . ; Rojas , P . L . ; Patil , A . H . ; Manda , S . S . ; Subbannayya , Y . ; Roa , J . C . ; Chatterjee , A . ; Prasad , T . S . ; Pandey , A . Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of IL - 33 - mediated signaling . Proteomics 2015 , 15 , 532 – 544 . [ CrossRef ] 18 . Verma , R . ; Pinto , S . M . ; Patil , A . H . ; Advani , J . ; Subba , P . ; Kumar , M . ; Sharma , J . ; Dey , G . ; Ravikumar , R . ; Buggi , S . ; et al . Quantitative Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic Analysis of H37Ra and H37Rv Strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis . J . Proteome Res . 2017 , 16 , 1632 – 1645 . [ CrossRef ] 19 . Subbannayya , Y . ; Syed , N . ; Barbhuiya , M . A . ; Raja , R . ; Marimuthu , A . ; Sahasrabuddhe , N . ; Pinto , S . M . ; Manda , S . S . ; Renuse , S . ; Manju , H . C . ; et al . Calcium calmodulin dependent kinase kinase 2 - a novel therapeutic target for gastric adenocarcinoma . Cancer Biol . Ther . 2015 , 16 , 336 – 345 . [ CrossRef ] 20 . Tyanova , S . ; Temu , T . ; Sinitcyn , P . ; Carlson , A . ; Hein , M . Y . ; Geiger , T . ; Mann , M . ; Cox , J . The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of ( prote ) omics data . Nat . Methods 2016 , 13 , 731 – 740 . [ CrossRef ] 21 . Wiredja , D . D . ; Koyuturk , M . ; Chance , M . R . The KSEA App : A web - based tool for kinase activity inference from quantitative phosphoproteomics . Bioinformatics 2017 . [ CrossRef ] 22 . Verhaak , R . G . ; Tamayo , P . ; Yang , J . Y . ; Hubbard , D . ; Zhang , H . ; Creighton , C . J . ; Fereday , S . ; Lawrence , M . ; Carter , S . L . ; Mermel , C . H . ; et al . Prognostically relevant gene signatures of high - grade serous ovarian carcinoma . J . Clin . Invest . 2013 , 123 , 517 – 525 . [ CrossRef ] 23 . Gatza , M . L . ; Lucas , J . E . ; Barry , W . T . ; Kim , J . W . ; Wang , Q . ; Crawford , M . D . ; Datto , M . B . ; Kelley , M . ; Mathey - Prevot , B . ; Potti , A . ; et al . A pathway - based classiﬁcation of human breast cancer . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2010 , 107 , 6994 – 6999 . [ CrossRef ] 24 . Das , M . ; Ithychanda , S . ; Qin , J . ; Plow , E . F . Mechanisms of talin - dependent integrin signaling and crosstalk . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 2014 , 1838 , 579 – 588 . [ CrossRef ] 25 . Vuori , K . ; Ruoslahti , E . Tyrosine phosphorylation of p130Cas and cortactin accompanies integrin - mediated cell adhesion to extracellular matrix . J . Biol . Chem . 1995 , 270 , 22259 – 22262 . [ CrossRef ] 26 . Li , L . ; Guris , D . L . ; Okura , M . ; Imamoto , A . Translocation of CrkL to focal adhesions mediates integrin - induced migration downstream of Src family kinases . Mol . Cell Biol . 2003 , 23 , 2883 – 2892 . [ CrossRef ] 27 . Xu , C . ; Yang , Y . ; Yang , J . ; Chen , X . ; Wang , G . Analysis of the role of the integrin signaling pathway in hepatocytes during rat liver regeneration . Cell Mol . Biol . Lett . 2012 , 17 , 274 – 288 . [ CrossRef ] 28 . Green , Y . S . ; Kwon , S . ; Christian , J . L . Expression pattern of bcar3 , a downstream target of Gata2 , and its binding partner , bcar1 , during Xenopus development . Gene Expr . Patterns 2016 , 20 , 55 – 62 . [ CrossRef ] 29 . Pastushenko , I . ; Brisebarre , A . ; Sifrim , A . ; Fioramonti , M . ; Revenco , T . ; Boumahdi , S . ; Van Keymeulen , A . ; Brown , D . ; Moers , V . ; Lemaire , S . ; et al . Identiﬁcation of the tumour transition states occurring during EMT . Nature 2018 , 556 , 463 – 468 . [ CrossRef ] 30 . George , J . T . ; Jolly , M . K . ; Xu , S . ; Somarelli , J . A . ; Levine , H . Survival Outcomes in Cancer Patients Predicted by a Partial EMT Gene Expression Scoring Metric . Cancer Res . 2017 , 77 , 6415 – 6428 . [ CrossRef ] 31 . Jolly , M . K . ; Somarelli , J . A . ; Sheth , M . ; Biddle , A . ; Tripathi , S . C . ; Armstrong , A . J . ; Hanash , S . M . ; Bapat , S . A . ; Rangarajan , A . ; Levine , H . Hybrid epithelial / mesenchymal phenotypes promote metastasis and therapy resistance across carcinomas . Pharmacol . Ther . 2019 , 194 , 161 – 184 . [ CrossRef ] 32 . Yadavalli , S . ; Jayaram , S . ; Manda , S . S . ; Madugundu , A . K . ; Nayakanti , D . S . ; Tan , T . Z . ; Bhat , R . ; Rangarajan , A . ; Chatterjee , A . ; Gowda , H . ; et al . Data - Driven Discovery of Extravasation Pathway in Circulating Tumor Cells . Sci . Rep . 2017 , 7 , 43710 . [ CrossRef ] 33 . Taherian , A . ; Li , X . ; Liu , Y . ; Haas , T . A . Di ﬀ erences in integrin expression and signaling within human breast cancer cells . BMC Cancer 2011 , 11 , 293 . [ CrossRef ] 34 . Boudjadi , S . ; Carrier , J . C . ; Beaulieu , J . F . Integrin alpha1 subunit is up - regulated in colorectal cancer . Biomark . Res . 2013 , 1 , 16 . [ CrossRef ] 35 . Giancotti , F . G . ; Ruoslahti , E . Integrin signaling . Science 1999 , 285 , 1028 – 1032 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 36 . Hood , J . D . ; Cheresh , D . A . Role of integrins in cell invasion and migration . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2002 , 2 , 91 – 100 . [ CrossRef ] 37 . Radeva , G . ; Petrocelli , T . ; Behrend , E . ; Leung - Hagesteijn , C . ; Filmus , J . ; Slingerland , J . ; Dedhar , S . Overexpression of the integrin - linked kinase promotes anchorage - independent cell cycle progression . J . Biol . Chem . 1997 , 272 , 13937 – 13944 . [ CrossRef ] J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 19 of 21 38 . Le Gall , M . ; Grall , D . ; Chambard , J . C . ; Pouyssegur , J . ; Van Obberghen - Schilling , E . An anchorage - dependent signal distinct from p42 / 44 MAP kinase activation is required for cell cycle progression . Oncogene 1998 , 17 , 1271 – 1277 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 39 . Jin , J . K . ; Tien , P . C . ; Cheng , C . J . ; Song , J . H . ; Huang , C . ; Lin , S . H . ; Gallick , G . E . Talin1 phosphorylation activates beta1 integrins : A novel mechanism to promote prostate cancer bone metastasis . Oncogene 2015 , 34 , 1811 – 1821 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 40 . Strock , C . J . ; Park , J . I . ; Nakakura , E . K . ; Bova , G . S . ; Isaacs , J . T . ; Ball , D . W . ; Nelkin , B . D . Cyclin - dependent kinase 5 activity controls cell motility and metastatic potential of prostate cancer cells . Cancer Res . 2006 , 66 , 7509 – 7515 . [ CrossRef ] 41 . Zhang , X . ; Jiang , G . ; Cai , Y . ; Monkley , S . J . ; Critchley , D . R . ; Sheetz , M . P . Talin depletion reveals independence of initial cell spreading from integrin activation and traction . Nat . Cell Biol . 2008 , 10 , 1062 – 1068 . [ CrossRef ] 42 . Huang , C . ; Rajfur , Z . ; Youseﬁ , N . ; Chen , Z . ; Jacobson , K . ; Ginsberg , M . H . Talin phosphorylation by Cdk5 regulates Smurf1 - mediated talin head ubiquitylation and cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 2009 , 11 , 624 – 630 . [ CrossRef ] 43 . Lai , M . T . ; Hua , C . H . ; Tsai , M . H . ; Wan , L . ; Lin , Y . J . ; Chen , C . M . ; Chiu , I . W . ; Chan , C . ; Tsai , F . J . ; Jinn - Chyuan Sheu , J . Talin - 1 overexpression deﬁnes high risk for aggressive oral squamous cell carcinoma and promotes cancer metastasis . J . Pathol . 2011 , 224 , 367 – 376 . [ CrossRef ] 44 . He , Y . ; Ren , Y . ; Wu , B . ; Decourt , B . ; Lee , A . C . ; Taylor , A . ; Suter , D . M . Src and cortactin promote lamellipodia protrusion and ﬁlopodia formation and stability in growth cones . Mol . Biol . Cell 2015 , 26 , 3229 – 3244 . [ CrossRef ] 45 . Kruchten , A . E . ; Krueger , E . W . ; Wang , Y . ; McNiven , M . A . Distinct phospho - forms of cortactin di ﬀ erentially regulate actin polymerization and focal adhesions . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 2008 , 295 , C1113 – C1122 . [ CrossRef ] 46 . Martinez - Quiles , N . ; Ho , H . Y . ; Kirschner , M . W . ; Ramesh , N . ; Geha , R . S . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol . Cell Biol . 2004 , 24 , 5269 – 5280 . [ CrossRef ] 47 . Kelley , L . C . ; Hayes , K . E . ; Ammer , A . G . ; Martin , K . H . ; Weed , S . A . Cortactin phosphorylated by ERK1 / 2 localizes to sites of dynamic actin regulation and is required for carcinoma lamellipodia persistence . PLoS ONE 2010 , 5 , e13847 . [ CrossRef ] 48 . Tokui , N . ; Yoneyama , M . S . ; Hatakeyama , S . ; Yamamoto , H . ; Koie , T . ; Saitoh , H . ; Yamaya , K . ; Funyu , T . ; Nakamura , T . ; Ohyama , C . ; et al . Extravasation during bladder cancer metastasis requires cortactinmediated invadopodia formation . Mol . Med . Rep . 2014 , 9 , 1142 – 1146 . [ CrossRef ] 49 . Han , B . ; Luan , L . ; Xu , Z . ; Wu , B . Clinical signiﬁcance and biological roles of CRKL in human bladder carcinoma . Tumour . Biol . 2014 , 35 , 4101 – 4106 . [ CrossRef ] 50 . Mise , N . ; Savai , R . ; Yu , H . ; Schwarz , J . ; Kaminski , N . ; Eickelberg , O . Zyxin is a transforming growth factor - beta ( TGF - beta ) / Smad3 target gene that regulates lung cancer cell motility via integrin alpha5beta1 . J . Biol . Chem . 2012 , 287 , 31393 – 31405 . [ CrossRef ] 51 . Ma , B . ; Cheng , H . ; Gao , R . ; Mu , C . ; Chen , L . ; Wu , S . ; Chen , Q . ; Zhu , Y . Zyxin - Siah2 - Lats2 axis mediates cooperation between Hippo and TGF - beta signalling pathways . Nat . Commun . 2016 , 7 , 11123 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 52 . Riggins , R . B . ; Quilliam , L . A . ; Bouton , A . H . Synergistic promotion of c - Src activation and cell migration by Cas and AND - 34 / BCAR3 . J . Biol . Chem . 2003 , 278 , 28264 – 28273 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 53 . Sun , G . ; Cheng , S . Y . ; Chen , M . ; Lim , C . J . ; Pallen , C . J . Protein tyrosine phosphatase alpha phosphotyrosyl - 789 binds BCAR3 to position Cas for activation at integrin - mediated focal adhesions . Mol . Cell Biol . 2012 , 32 , 3776 – 3789 . [ CrossRef ] 54 . Lu , M . ; Jolly , M . K . ; Levine , H . ; Onuchic , J . N . ; Ben - Jacob , E . MicroRNA - based regulation of epithelial - hybrid - mesenchymal fate determination . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2013 , 110 , 18144 – 18149 . [ CrossRef ] 55 . Roca , H . ; Hernandez , J . ; Weidner , S . ; McEachin , R . C . ; Fuller , D . ; Sud , S . ; Schumann , T . ; Wilkinson , J . E . ; Zaslavsky , A . ; Li , H . ; et al . Transcription factors OVOL1 and OVOL2 induce the mesenchymal to epithelial transition in human cancer . PLoS ONE 2013 , 8 , e76773 . [ CrossRef ] J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 20 of 21 56 . Feng , J . ; Xu , G . ; Liu , J . ; Zhang , N . ; Li , L . ; Ji , J . ; Zhang , J . ; Zhang , L . ; Wang , G . ; Wang , X . ; et al . Phosphorylation of LSD1 at Ser112 is crucial for its function in induction of EMT and metastasis in breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res . Treat . 2016 , 159 , 443 – 456 . [ CrossRef ] 57 . Sun , L . ; Fang , J . Epigenetic regulation of epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 2016 , 73 , 4493 – 4515 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 58 . Warns , J . A . ; Davie , J . R . ; Dhasarathy , A . Connecting the dots : Chromatin and alternative splicing in EMT . Biochem . Cell Biol . 2016 , 94 , 12 – 25 . [ CrossRef ] 59 . Ikuta , S . ; Edamatsu , H . ; Li , M . ; Hu , L . ; Kataoka , T . Crucial role of phospholipase C epsilon in skin inﬂammation induced by tumor - promoting phorbol ester . Cancer Res . 2008 , 68 , 64 – 72 . [ CrossRef ] 60 . Chen , J . ; Wang , W . ; Zhang , T . ; Ji , J . ; Qian , Q . ; Lu , L . ; Fu , H . ; Jin , W . ; Cui , D . Differential expression of phospholipase C epsilon 1 is associated with chronic atrophic gastritis and gastric cancer . PLoS ONE 2012 , 7 , e47563 . [ CrossRef ] 61 . Burbelo , P . ; Wellstein , A . ; Pestell , R . G . Altered Rho GTPase signaling pathways in breast cancer cells . Breast Cancer Res . Treat . 2004 , 84 , 43 – 48 . [ CrossRef ] 62 . Kamai , T . ; Tsujii , T . ; Arai , K . ; Takagi , K . ; Asami , H . ; Ito , Y . ; Oshima , H . Signiﬁcant association of Rho / ROCK pathway with invasion and metastasis of bladder cancer . Clin . Cancer Res . 2003 , 9 , 2632 – 2641 . 63 . Dadhania , V . ; Zhang , M . ; Zhang , L . ; Bondaruk , J . ; Majewski , T . ; Siefker - Radtke , A . ; Guo , C . C . ; Dinney , C . ; Cogdell , D . E . ; Zhang , S . ; et al . Meta - Analysis of the Luminal and Basal Subtypes of Bladder Cancer and the Identiﬁcation of Signature Immunohistochemical Markers for Clinical Use . EBioMedicine 2016 , 12 , 105 – 117 . [ CrossRef ] 64 . Chaturvedi , M . M . ; Sung , B . ; Yadav , V . R . ; Kannappan , R . ; Aggarwal , B . B . NF - kappaB addiction and its role in cancer : ‘One size does not ﬁt all’ . Oncogene 2011 , 30 , 1615 – 1630 . [ CrossRef ] 65 . Ahmed , K . M . ; Zhang , H . ; Park , C . C . NF - kappaB regulates radioresistance mediated by beta1 - integrin in three - dimensional culture of breast cancer cells . Cancer Res . 2013 , 73 , 3737 – 3748 . [ CrossRef ] 66 . Leis , H . ; Segrelles , C . ; Ruiz , S . ; Santos , M . ; Paramio , J . M . Expression , localization , and activity of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta during mouse skin tumorigenesis . Mol . Carcinog . 2002 , 35 , 180 – 185 . [ CrossRef ] 67 . Caccavari , F . ; Valdembri , D . ; Sandri , C . ; Bussolino , F . ; Serini , G . Integrin signaling and lung cancer . Cell Adh . Migr . 2010 , 4 , 124 – 129 . [ CrossRef ] 68 . McCubrey , J . A . ; Steelman , L . S . ; Bertrand , F . E . ; Davis , N . M . ; Sokolosky , M . ; Abrams , S . L . ; Montalto , G . ; D’Assoro , A . B . ; Libra , M . ; Nicoletti , F . ; et al . GSK - 3 as potential target for therapeutic intervention in cancer . Oncotarget 2014 , 5 , 2881 – 2911 . [ CrossRef ] 69 . Panka , D . J . ; Cho , D . C . ; Atkins , M . B . ; Mier , J . W . GSK - 3beta inhibition enhances sorafenib - induced apoptosis in melanoma cell lines . J . Biol . Chem . 2008 , 283 , 726 – 732 . [ CrossRef ] 70 . Mirlashari , M . R . ; Randen , I . ; Kjeldsen - Kragh , J . Glycogen synthase kinase - 3 ( GSK - 3 ) inhibition induces apoptosis in leukemic cells through mitochondria - dependent pathway . Leuk . Res . 2012 , 36 , 499 – 508 . [ CrossRef ] 71 . Cao , Q . ; Lu , X . ; Feng , Y . J . Glycogen synthase kinase - 3beta positively regulates the proliferation of human ovarian cancer cells . Cell . Res . 2006 , 16 , 671 – 677 . [ CrossRef ] 72 . Kang , J . ; Sergio , C . M . ; Sutherland , R . L . ; Musgrove , E . A . Targeting cyclin - dependent kinase 1 ( CDK1 ) but not CDK4 / 6 or CDK2 is selectively lethal to MYC - dependent human breast cancer cells . BMC Cancer 2014 , 14 , 32 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 73 . Zeestraten , E . C . ; Maak , M . ; Shibayama , M . ; Schuster , T . ; Nitsche , U . ; Matsushima , T . ; Nakayama , S . ; Gohda , K . ; Friess , H . ; van de Velde , C . J . ; et al . Speciﬁc activity of cyclin - dependent kinase I is a new potential predictor of tumour recurrence in stage II colon cancer . Br . J . Cancer 2012 , 106 , 133 – 140 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 74 . Chen , X . ; Zhang , F . H . ; Chen , Q . E . ; Wang , Y . Y . ; Wang , Y . L . ; He , J . C . ; Zhou , J . The clinical signiﬁcance of CDK1 expression in oral squamous cell carcinoma . Med . Oral Patol . Oral Cir . Bucal 2015 , 20 , e7 – e12 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 75 . De Azevedo , W . F . , Jr . ; Mueller - Dieckmann , H . J . ; Schulze - Gahmen , U . ; Worland , P . J . ; Sausville , E . ; Kim , S . H . Structural basis for speciﬁcity and potency of a ﬂavonoid inhibitor of human CDK2 , a cell cycle kinase . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1996 , 93 , 2735 – 2740 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 76 . Christian , B . A . ; Grever , M . R . ; Byrd , J . C . ; Lin , T . S . Flavopiridol in the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia . Curr . Opin . Oncol . 2007 , 19 , 573 – 578 . [ CrossRef ] J . Clin . Med . 2019 , 8 , 703 21 of 21 77 . Ghia , P . ; Scarfo , L . ; Perez , S . ; Pathiraja , K . ; Derosier , M . ; Small , K . ; McCrary Sisk , C . ; Patton , N . E ﬃ cacy and safety of dinaciclib vs ofatumumab in patients with relapsed / refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia . Blood 2017 , 129 , 1876 – 1878 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 78 . Wu , C . F . ; Wang , R . ; Liang , Q . ; Liang , J . ; Li , W . ; Jung , S . Y . ; Qin , J . ; Lin , S . H . ; Kuang , J . Dissecting the M phase - specific phosphorylation of serine - proline or threonine - proline motifs . Mol . Biol . Cell 2010 , 21 , 1470 – 1481 . [ CrossRef ] 79 . Villen , J . ; Beausoleil , S . A . ; Gerber , S . A . ; Gygi , S . P . Large - scale phosphorylation analysis of mouse liver . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2007 , 104 , 1488 – 1493 . [ CrossRef ] © 2019 by the authors . Licensee MDPI , Basel , Switzerland . This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution ( CC BY ) license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) .