Rethinking Notions of ‘Giving Voice’ in Design Cara Wilson QUT , Brisbane , Australia , cara . wilson @ qut . edu . au Roisin McNaney Bristol University , UK r . mcnaney @ bristol . ac . uk Abi Roper City , University of London Abi . Roper . 1 @ city . ac . uk Tara Capel QUT , Brisbane , Australia , Tara . capel @ qut . edu . au Laura Scheepmaker TU Wien , Austria Laura . scheepmaker @ tuwien . ac . at Margo t Brereton QUT , Brisbane , Australia , m . brereton @ qut . edu . au Stephanie Wilson City , University of London , UK s . m . wilson @ city . ac . uk David Philip Green University of Western England , UK David10 . green @ uwe . ac . uk Jayne Wallace Northumbria University , UK Jayne . wallace @ northumbria . ac . uk Abstract The notion of ‘giving voice’ to under - represented groups in design is fraught with issues of power and interpretation . This workshop will address socio - methodological issues at play across design contexts , and build a community comprised of those who seek to support the expression and inclusion of diverse needs , abilities , and experiences in design . Research often involves participants who communicate in ways which are in line with assumed social norms and practices ( e . g . those who communicate verbally ) , while those who communicate differently can be under - represented in design research . We highlight a need to broaden the inclusion and support of communities who have different communication needs , including ; people with functional communication impairments , neurodiverse people , people who experience adverse life situations or trauma , people who are discriminated against or under - represented , and many , many other individuals and communities . We aim to unpick - and develop pragmatic solutions to - several challenges around working with diverse communities in research and practice , producing functional guidelines for design research in this area and problematising current methods and terminology . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . CHI ' 20 Extended Abstracts , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA © 2020 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6819 - 3 / 20 / 04 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3375171 CHI 2020 Workshop Summary CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA W28 , Page 1 Author Keywords Giving Voice ; Design ; Participation ; Communication ; Diversity ; Inclusion ; Agency CSS Concepts • Human - centered computing ~ Participatory design Background We define ‘voice’ in design as existing both physically ( referring to one’s verbal , vocal expression ) and metaphorically ( referring to the conveying of one’s opinion and agency ) . To discuss ‘giving voice’ in design supposes that ‘voice’ does not belong to the individual , rather it belongs to the researcher , designer , or another proxy [ 2 ] . Thus , rather than giving voice in design , we suggest that we might seek to support voice in design , emphasising that research participants’ design insights and opinions already exist , and that we need to adapt our methods of understanding these . We continue to discuss ‘giving voice’ here as a provocation - one we wish to explore , reimagine and relabel . We use the term ‘communication differences’ to refer to any individuals who predominantly communicate in ways which challenge societal norms ( e . g . people with dementia [ 19 , 20 ] , people with aphasia post - stroke [ 23 ] , children on the autism spectrum [ 21 , 22 ] ) , or those who experience barriers to verbal communication due to stigma or marginalisation ( e . g . people experiencing homelessness [ 15 ] , sex workers [ 16 ] , refugees [ 1 , 17 ] ) . While we use the term ‘communication differences’ here , we acknowledge that this is not a perfect term by any means and seek to explore alternatives in this workshop . Beyond terminology , while it is widely recognised that these communities should have a say in the design of technologies to support their needs , this is not always a simple task when communities are particularly difficult to access , engage , or communicate with . There is also a broad range of process - related challenges which can arise in engaging such groups in design . For example ; obtaining informed consent , varying levels of participation , collecting qualitative data , transcription of audio , navigating highly stigmatising topics of discussion , ethical approvals , and the interpretation of data ( see e . g . [ 13 ] ) . In addition , approaches to engaging individuals in design focus largely on verbal or written activities ( e . g . group discussions ) , thus requiring adequate communication and literacy skills in order to participate . This means that , for those with communication differences , representation often occurs via proxy , e . g . family members , or clinicians e . g . [ 4 ] . Despite these perceived challenges , there are many varied ways in which individuals who communicate differently convey their design insights [ 21 , 22 ] . However , there exist few practical guidelines for interpreting and supporting these contributions . We acknowledge that working in this space can challenge traditional design research mindsets and approaches , and it is for precisely this reason that there is a need for serious discussion , reflection , and action as a research community . We require an understanding of how traditional methods might be adapted or extended to support the participation of such individuals , e . g . methods for engaging people with enduring and pervasive communication challenges in design [ 5 , 6 , 7 , 12 , 19 - 23 ] . This prior work shows that , despite substantial challenges , we can find ways to support design participation , with adapted methods and appropriate facilitation by researchers . Crucially , the CHI 2020 Workshop Summary CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA W28 , Page 2 success of these approaches lies in the researchers’ commitment to devolution of power , and in utilising a perspective which champions the holistic support of the individuals own strengths , interests , and abilities in and through design [ 6 , 21 , 22 ] . Summary of PDC 2018 Workshop In August 2018 , we ran a workshop entitled ‘Giving Voice through Design : Adapting Design Methods to Enhance the Participation of People with Communication Difficulties’ at the Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ) in Hasselt , Belgium [ 14 ] . The workshop aimed to explore the different methods and approaches attendees were currently using to engage people with communication differences in design ( whether these be verbal , non - verbal , or relating to other factors such as stigma ) , and the challenges they were facing . The workshop attracted researchers , designers and practitioners working in diverse settings , as well as people with lived experience of some of the communication differences we discuss here . While many participants discussed functional communication difficulties ( and how methods could be flexibly adapted during design sessions to support individual communication needs [ 6 , 21 ] ) , others discussed contexts where aspects such as social stigma may be the main barrier to communication ( e . g . talking to young people about their smoking habits [ 11 ] ) , or mental health conditions which can lead to miscommunication ( e . g . schizophrenic episodes [ 18 ] ) . A key learning outcome from this workshop was that ‘giving voice’ can be interpreted both literally and metaphorically . We might consider , for example , ‘giving voice’ as a way of overcoming issues such as social anxiety , stigma or intimidation or ‘giving voice’ to non - native speakers of a language in certain contexts . An important challenge therefore , is to develop means for supporting ‘voice’ , both in situations where there are physiological language impairments , as well as situations where communication differences are due to marginalization , discrimination or trauma . Themes at CHI 2020 Workshop This workshop will build on these outcomes by bringing together a wide range of participants from across HCI to explore the notion of supporting ‘voice’ within research and practice . To frame the workshop , we have developed the previous outcomes into key themes : T HEME 1 – T ERMINOLOGY AND S HIFTING THE P OWER B ALANCE Is ‘giving voice’ inherently positive ? Is voice really something that can be given , particularly without lived experience ? Whose voice is it to ‘give’ ? Whose participation is it to ‘enhance’ ? Who defines communication as ‘difficult’ or ‘different’ ? By exploring the idea of ‘giving voice’ more widely , we hope to inspire alternative visions of design inclusion . We must also consider the presence of a deficit model , where solutionism is understood to be at the root of design thinking , and where people with challenges in communicating are approached with regard to impairment . In line with Alper [ 2 ] , we problematize the terminology around ‘giving voice’ , and around the many deficit - centric terms for those with communication differences . In this workshop , we seek to discuss the inherent power imbalances that such terminology assumes , with the end goal of rethinking notions of how this is discussed , defined and how the process of ‘giving voice’ is undertaken in HCI research [ 3 ] . Indeed , while we use the term ‘communication differences’ here , we acknowledge that this is not a perfect term by any means and seek to explore alternatives . CHI 2020 Workshop Summary CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA W28 , Page 3 T HEME 2 - T HE R ESEARCHER AS AN I NTERPRETER In the process of interpreting data , particularly data which is abstracted in some way ( e . g . fictional personas ) , how can we ensure that we are adequately representing participants’ intentions ? Participatory Design and Participatory Action Research methodologies ( e . g . [ 9 ] ) offer a suite of techniques for ‘giving voice’ , but to what extent are current participatory techniques adaptable to people with communication differences ? A case has been made for the importance of reflexivity and reciprocity in design [ 10 ] , but what skills are required by HCI researchers to do so ? We must also consider our research methods . How might we support the collection of non - verbal expressions ? What are the challenges of using non - verbal approaches to research processes , such as obtaining consent , translation of research findings or ensuring procedural ethics are being met ? What level of skill is required from both research participants and researchers alike to facilitate participation in design through non - verbal means ? T HEME 3 – S UPPORTING ‘V OICE ’ IN D IVERSE C OMMUNITIES Communities , including those with a strong , shared identity , are composed of individuals with diverse—or even contradictory—needs and expectations [ 8 ] . What are the ethical implications of conducting research that does not facilitate the participation of non - traditionally communicating members ? What proactive steps can we take to reflect the diverse requirements of our participant groups within the design process ? Are there alternative approaches to communicating in a design process that could better reframe participation by people with a variety of communicative abilities ? Workshop Goals and Outcomes We propose a one - day workshop , to be attended by the authors of 15 - 20 accepted submissions . The workshop intends to support multi - disciplinary discussion around how the HCI community might begin to re - think notions of ‘giving voice’ . We will invite the submission of 2 - 4 - page position papers offering perspectives on these topics . We will solicit submissions from researchers , designers and practitioners involved in fields such as healthcare , digital civics , social sciences and interaction design ( among others ) . Workshop goals are as follows : 1 ) Explore how notions of supporting ‘voice’ are understood within HCI research and clarify different interpretations and terminologies . 2 ) Provide a space for researchers to share experiences of working with people who communicate differently in HCI research— both successful and challenging . 3 ) Generate a series of case studies / guidelines detailing successful approaches to facilitating the participation of people who might communicate in different ways . Through these , we aim to draw attention to the ways in which we might define better ways of listening to participant communities in meaningful ways . Workshop outputs will be disseminated to the wider HCI community through our website . We will discuss further possible outputs with workshop attendees , coming to a shared decision around how to extend our conversations and maintain the network that we have built ( e . g . co - authoring a paper , delivering a special issue ) . CHI 2020 Workshop Summary CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA W28 , Page 4 Organizers We have extensive experience organising CHI workshops , with 10 + between us , e . g . ; Designing for and with Vulnerable People ( CHI’13 ) ; Ethical Encounters in HCI ( CHI’16 / 17 ) ; and Open Design at the Intersection of Making and Manufacturing ( CHI ’17 ) Roisin McNaney is a Lecturer in Digital Health and Care at Bristol University . Her research interests centre around the co - design of self - care technologies with health communities experiencing long - term conditions . Cara Wilson is a PhD candidate at QUT , Brisbane , whose research centres on the co - design of digital and tangible technologies with minimally - verbal children on the autism spectrum . Abi Roper is a Speech and Language Technologist within the Centre for HCI Design at City , University of London , focusing on the Co - Design and evaluation of computer - based therapies for aphasia . Laura Scheepmaker is a PhD candidate at TU Wien , Vienna , in which she develops participatory design methods to involve groups of neuro - diverse children in the design process of playthings . David Green is a research fellow at the University of the West of England , where his research interests include participatory documentary and co - creating nonfiction with communities . Margot Brereton is Professor of HCI at QUT , Brisbane . She develops innovative designs , methods and theoretical understandings to support user communities in challenging contexts . Stephanie Wilson is Professor of HCI and Co - Director of the Centre for HCI Design at City , University of London , focusing on digital technologies for health , inclusive interaction design / user experience , and novel therapeutic technologies for people with aphasia . Jayne Wallace is Professor of Craft and Wellbeing at Northumbria University , UK . She explores how co - creative design can support sense of self , particularly in those living with dementia . She is co - founder of the Research Through Design conference series . Tara Capel is a PhD candidate at QUT , Brisbane whose work centres on digital and tangible making practices with women who experience adverse life situations . Website The workshop website will be hosted at https : / / www . rethinkinggivingvoice . com / We will display the call for participation , position paper deadlines , and accepted papers . After the workshop we will update the webpage to reflect the workshop outcomes and make materials available to the CHI community . We will continue to use the homepage as a basis for discussion and community building activities . Pre - Workshop Plans In order to promote the workshop , we will disseminate our call for participation through personal contacts , professional social media accounts , and appropriate SIGCHI mailing lists . Through our website , we will encourage potential participants of the workshop to contribute to pre - workshop discussions about key themes . Submissions to the workshop will be invited in the form of 2 - 4 - page position papers , describing examples of experience centred reflections around the CHI 2020 Workshop Summary CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA W28 , Page 5 challenges of working with communities who communicate differently , and case studies describing approaches which have been used successfully to work with communities in a way that enhances senses of ownership and empowerment within the design process . All accepted papers will be published on the workshop website . Reading groups of 3 - 4 people will be created and will be asked to prepare for the workshop by reading their group’s papers . Workshop Structure The workshop will be scheduled as illustrated in Fig . 1 . We aim for a balanced workshop with focused group work , plenary discussions and brief presentations . During introductions , attendees will be invited to share their backgrounds , research interests and personal experiences of involving communities who communicate differently in design . After this , participants will break into pre - assigned reading groups , in which they discuss each other’s position papers and draw out the particular communities they have been working with , how they have approached ‘giving voice’ with them , and the successes and / or challenges they faced . The next activity will aim to unpick and problematize the concept of ‘giving voice’ and allow us to create a new , shared definition around what it means to ‘give voice’ , both figuratively and / or metaphorically . Each small group will present the main themes of discussion they had to the wider workshop participants . As this happens , the facilitators will begin to draw out the similarities and differences , which will then be used to prompt whole group discussion on the different ways that ‘giving voice’ can be interpreted and facilitated . We will then aim to highlight the core values of ‘giving voice’ that are emerging as themes through discussion . After the lunch break , participants will continue working in small groups , with new members . We will generate explorative future approaches to ‘giving voice’ . The focus will be on methods , tools and techniques that researchers can apply when trying to engage diverse communities of participants . We will brainstorm how we might overcome issues with the interpretation of data and the impacts this might have on our research practices ( e . g . by re - thinking the way we collect and report data as a research community , being reflexive with research protocols and the impact this might have on ethical approvals and obtaining research funding ) . The final activity of the day will be a practical activity , that will ask participants to create a poster , slideshow , or other creative presentation describing their take home messages for the day . We aim to make this a resource for other HCI researchers who may be embarking on work with communities who communicate differently and this will form the basis for our case studies / guidelines . Groups will present their work to the wider workshop participants . The last 30 minutes of the workshop will be used to wrap up and plan our next steps . Post - Workshop Plans Workshop outputs , including materials created in the final practical activity , will be disseminated to the wider HCI community through our website , and through a proposed special issue journal , which will be based on a set of case studies ( drawn from the workshop ) and will focus on approaches to overcoming challenges around ‘giving voice’ in design . We will discuss further outputs with workshop attendees on the day , coming to a shared decision on how to extend our conversations and maintain the network that we have built ( e . g . co - authoring a paper , delivering a special issue ) . Workshop Schedule 09 : 00 - 09 : 30 Welcome and introductions 09 : 30 - 10 : 30 Participant plenary introductions 10 : 30 - 10 : 45 Coffee break 11 : 15 - 12 : 00 Position paper discussion ( small groups ) 12 : 00 - 12 : 30 Creating a new shared definition of ‘giving voice’ ( whole group ) 13 : 00 - 14 : 00 Lunch break 14 : 00 - 15 : 00 Focused group work on key themes identified during the previous activities 15 : 00 - 15 : 30 Practical group activity 15 : 30 - 16 : 00 Coffee break 16 : 00 - 17 : 30 Practical group activity , discussion of group work and wrap - up 19 : 00 Workshop dinner and drinks ( optional ) Figure 1 Workshop Structure CHI 2020 Workshop Summary CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA W28 , Page 6 Call for Participation : CHI 2020 Workshop on Rethinking Notions of ‘Giving Voice’ in Design This one - day workshop will be held as part of the 2020 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , held in Honolulu , HI , USA . Submission Deadline : 11th February 2020 Acceptance Notification : 28th February 2020 Workshop Day : 25th or 26th April 2020 The notion of ‘giving voice’ to under - represented groups in design is fraught with issues of power and interpretation . This workshop will address socio - methodological issues at play across design contexts , and build a community comprised of those who seek to support the expression and inclusion of diverse needs , abilities , and experiences in design . Research often involves participants who communicate in ways which are in line with assumed social norms and practices ( e . g . those who communicate verbally ) , while those who communicate differently can be under - represented in design research . We highlight a need to broaden the inclusion and support of communities who have different communication needs , including ; people with functional communication impairments , neurodiverse people , people who experience adverse life situations or trauma , people who are discriminated against or under - represented , people who experience challenges in verbally discussing stigmatising issues , people who do not speak the native language , and many , many other individuals and communities . We problematise the very concept of ‘giving voice’ , asking whose voice it is to give and which societal and methodological assumptions are at play here ? In this workshop , we aim to unpick and develop pragmatic solutions to challenges around working with diverse communities in research and practice across three themes ; 1 ) Terminology and Shifting the Power Balance , 2 ) Researcher as Interpreter , and 3 ) Supporting ‘Voice’ in Diverse Communities . We will address how we can reach strengths - focused , inclusive methods and terminology to replace current deficit - focused terms and inapt methodological approaches . We invite people working across contexts and disciplines to submit 2 - 4 page case studies ( ACM Extended Abstract format ) , which describe the successes and challenges they have experienced around ‘giving voice’ in their research , either methodologically or theoretically . Your area of expertise within HCI may be in , for example ; ageing , disability , feminist studies , indigenous studies , gender studies , refugee and asylum seeker studies , ( mental ) health , or any domain at all which supports diversity and inclusion , or which seeks to . Submissions should be sent in . pdf format to cara . wilson @ qut . edu . au . Position papers will be reviewed by a committee of experts and selected on the basis of relevance to the workshop themes , quality of presentation , and potential to stimulate discussion . At least one author of each accepted submission must register for the workshop and at least one day of the main conference . For more information , please visit : https : / / rethinkinggivingvoice . com . References [ 1 ] Asam Almohamed and Dhaval Vyas . 2019 . Rebuilding Social Capital in Refugees and Asylum Seekers . ACM TOCHI . 26 , 6 , Article 41 ( Nov 2019 ) , 30 pages . CHI 2020 Workshop Summary CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA W28 , Page 7 [ 2 ] Meryl Alper . ( 2017 ) . Giving Voice : Mobile communication , disability , and inequality . MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts [ 3 ] Tone Bratteteig and Ina Wagner . ( 2012 ) . Disentangling power and decision - making in participatory design . In Proc . of PDC ' 12 . 41 - 50 . [ 4 ] Margot Brereton et al . ( 2015 ) . Design after design to bridge between people living with cognitive or sensory impairments , their friends and proxies . CoDesign 11 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 4 - 20 . [ 5 ] Abigail Durrant , Jonathan Hook , Roisin McNaney et al . ( 2013 ) . Design to support interpersonal communication in the special educational needs classroom . In Proc . of IDC ' 13 , 46 - 55 . [ 6 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Julia Makhaeva , and Katharina Spiel . ( 2017 ) . Blending Methods : Developing Participatory Design Sessions for Autistic Children . In Proc . of IDC ' 17 . 39 - 49 . [ 7 ] Julia Galliers , Stephanie Wilson , Abi Roper , et al . ( 2012 ) . Words are not enough : empowering people with aphasia in the design process . In Proc . of PDC ' 12 . 51 - 60 . [ 8 ] David Philip Green et al . ( 2017 ) . Enabling Polyvocality in Interactive Documentaries through " Structural Participation " . In Proc . Of CHI ' 17 6317 - 6329 . [ 9 ] Gillian R . Hayes . ( 2011 ) . The relationship of action research to human - computer interaction . ACM Trans . Comp - Hum Interact . 18 , 3 , Article 15 . [ 10 ] Seray B . Ibrahim , et al . ( 2018 ) . Design Opportunities for AAC and Children with Severe Speech and Physical Impairments . In Proc . of CHI ' 18 . 227 - 240 [ 11 ] Georges Khalil , Karen Calabro , and Alexander Prokhorov . ( 2018 ) . Development and initial testing of the brief adolescent smoking curiosity scale ( ASCOS ) . Addictive Behaviors , 78 , 67 - 73 . [ 12 ] Joanna McGrenere et al . ( 2002 ) . Insights from the aphasia project : designing technology for and with people who have aphasia . In Proc . of CUU ' 03 . 112 - 118 . [ 13 ] Roisin McNaney , et al . ( 2015 ) . Designing for and with People with Parkinson ' s : A Focus on Exergaming . In Proc . of CHI ' 15 . 501 - 510 . [ 14 ] Roisin McNaney , Cara Wilson , Jayne Wallace , et al . ( 2018 ) . Giving a voice through design : adapting design methods to enhance the participation of people with communication difficulties . In Proc . of PDC ' 18 , Article 40 . [ 15 ] Jill Palzkill Woelfer and David G . Hendry . ( 2011 ) . Homeless young people and living with personal digital artifacts . In Proc . of CHI ' 11 . 1697 - 1706 . [ 16 ] Angelika Strohmayer , Mary Laing , and Rob Comber . ( 2017 ) . Technologies and Social Justice Outcomes in Sex Work Charities : Fighting Stigma , Saving Lives . In Proc . of CHI ' 17 . 3352 - 3364 . [ 17 ] Reem Talhouk , et al . ( 2016 ) . Syrian Refugees and Digital Health in Lebanon : Opportunities for Improving Antenatal Health . In Proc . of CHI ' 16 . 331 - 342 [ 18 ] Malene Terp , et al . ( 2016 ) . A room for design : Through participatory design young adults with schizophrenia become strong collaborators . International Journal of Mental Health Nursing , 25 , 6 , 496 - 506 . [ 19 ] Jayne Wallace , Anja Thieme , Gavin Wood et al . ( 2012 ) . Enabling self , intimacy and a sense of home in dementia : an enquiry into design in a hospital setting . In Proc . of CHI ' 12 . 2629 - 2638 . [ 20 ] Jayne Wallace , Peter C . Wright , John McCarthy , David Philip Green , et al ( 2013 ) . A design - led inquiry into personhood in dementia . In Proc . of CHI ' 13 . 2617 - 2626 . [ 21 ] Cara Wilson , Margot Brereton , Bernd Ploderer , and Laurianne Sitbon . 2019 . Co - Design Beyond Words : ‘Moments of Interaction’ with Minimally - Verbal Children on the Autism Spectrum . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings ( CHI 2019 ) , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland UK . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 15 pages [ 22 ] Cara Wilson , Laurianne Sitbon , Bernd Ploderer , Margot Brereton and Jeremy Opie . 2020 . Self - Expression by Design : Co - Designing the ExpressiBall with Minimally - Verbal Children on the Autism Spectrum . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings ( CHI 2020 ) , Honolulu , Hawaii , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA . [ 23 ] Stephanie Wilson , Abi Roper , Jane Marshall , et al ( 2015 ) . Codesign for people with aphasia through tangible design languages . CoDesign 11 , 1 ( 2015 ) 21 - 34 . CHI 2020 Workshop Summary CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA W28 , Page 8