THEMATIC ISSUE ARTICLE : ASTROBIOLOGY The Evolutionary Psychology of Extraterrestrial Intelligence : Are There Universal Adaptations in Search , Aversion , and Signaling ? Peter M . Todd 1 • Geoffrey F . Miller 2 Received : 17 March 2017 / Accepted : 12 July 2017 / Published online : 18 November 2017 (cid:2) Konrad Lorenz Institute for Evolution and Cognition Research 2017 Abstract To understand the possible forms of extrater - restrial intelligence ( ETI ) , we need not only astrobiology theories about how life evolves given habitable planets , but also evolutionary psychology theories about how intelli - gence emerges given life . Wherever intelligent organisms evolve , they are likely to face similar behavioral challenges in their physical and social worlds . The cognitive mecha - nisms that arise to meet these challenges may then be copied , repurposed , and shaped by further evolutionary selection to deal with more abstract , higher - level cognitive tasks such as conceptual reasoning , symbolic communi - cation , and technological innovation , while retaining traces of the earlier adaptations for solving physical and social problems . These traces of evolutionary pathways may be leveraged to gain insight into the likely cognitive processes of ETIs . We demonstrate such analysis in the domain of search strategies and show its application in the domains of emotional aversions and social / sexual signaling . Knowing the likely evolutionary pathways to intelligence will help us to better search for and process any alien signals from the search for ETIs ( SETI ) and to assess the likely beneﬁts , costs , and risks of humans actively messaging ETIs ( METI ) . Keywords Aversions (cid:2) Evolutionary psychology (cid:2) Extraterrestrial intelligence (cid:2) METI ( messaging extraterrestrial intelligence ) (cid:2) Search strategies (cid:2) SETI ( search for extraterrestrial intelligence ) (cid:2) Social signaling Introduction Evolution shapes not just bodies , but minds . Just as evo - lutionary biology can help us understand the likely physical features of extraterrestrial life - forms , evolutionary psy - chology and behavioral ecology can help us understand the likely cognitive and communicative abilities of extrater - restrial intelligence ( ETI ) . This is because these latter two ﬁelds use a rich toolbox of theories incorporated from biology , economics , and other disciplines that can illumi - nate a wide range of cognitive and communicative adap - tations across a wide range of species . The key theories include optimal foraging theory , life history theory , host - parasite and predator - prey coevolution theory , sexual selection theory , and signaling theory . Beyond the details of terrestrial DNA - based life , these theories can be gen - eralized to apply at a more abstract and universal level to life evolved elsewhere . Yet very little work on ETI so far has capitalized on the potential of such ideas to inform our expectations about alien psychologies . All terrestrial organisms have evolved to solve concrete physical problems such as ﬁnding constituent chemicals , energy sources , and shelter , and avoiding threats such as predators , parasites , and toxins . The more intelligent spe - cies have evolved to meet particular social and sexual Portions of this article are adapted from Todd and Miller ( 2017 ) ‘‘Cognitive exaptations for extraterrestrial intelligence’’ ; to appear in D . Vakoch ( ed . ) Extraterrestrial Intelligence : Cognition and Communication in the Universe . & Peter M . Todd pmtodd @ indiana . edu Geoffrey F . Miller gfmiller @ unm . edu 1 Cognitive Science Program and Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences , Indiana University , Bloomington , IN , USA 2 Department of Psychology , University of New Mexico , Albuquerque , NM , USA 123 Biol Theory ( 2018 ) 13 : 131 – 141 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s13752 - 017 - 0290 - 6 challenges as well , such as trading favors and attracting mates . And a few species appear to have evolved cognitive mechanisms for dealing with more abstract information - processing challenges , including navigating rich semantic spaces of concepts and communicating such concepts with others . The space of possible cognitive mechanisms that could support such general intelligence might seem vast and unconstrained , making it hard to predict the likely psychology of ETIs . Yet , as we will argue , in even the most abstract cognitive mechanisms , we can often see traces of the earlier adaptations for solving physical and social problems from which they evolved . Evolutionary Background If we observe an organism moving around , searching for resources , avoiding dangers , and displaying signals to attract or warn others , we often feel that we can understand its motives and strategies ( Barrett et al . 2005 ) . But if we encountered an alien intelligence thinking about abstract problems , searching for good ideas , rejecting toxic ide - ologies , and communicating its ﬁndings to allies or rivals , we may worry that we have no basis for understanding its motives and strategies . That reaction is too pessimistic , ignoring some deep principles of cognitive evolution that scientists can lever - age to understand other intelligent species . These principles may well prove universal across very different life - forms with different kinds of habitats , genetic systems , bio - chemistries , and body forms . We expect that cognitive evolution is predictable in certain domains , and that studying these domains—including search strategies , emotional aversions , and social / sexual signaling—can help guide our understanding of ETI psychology . There are good reasons from ecological and evolutionary theory to expect that most intelligent extraterrestrial organisms will evolve to meet analogs of many of the same challenges , selecting for functionally analogous cognitive abilities . For example , while ‘‘shelter’’ on the African savanna may mean shade beneath an acacia tree , on the seaﬂoor of a Europa - like moon it might mean protection from tidal ﬂexing convection currents under a salty outcropping , but the appropriate search strategies for organisms hoping to ﬁnd each type of shelter may be similar . Yet we can do more than just consider cases of con - vergent evolution , where different species evolve inde - pendently to solve similar challenges in similar ways . We as scientists can jumpstart our understanding of the cog - nitive adaptations of other intelligent life - forms by study - ing their—and our human— behavioral adaptations for dealing with challenges in the physical world and the social / sexual world . In particular , we can analyze the evolutionary pathways that lead to some of the challenges faced by intelligent organisms : because evolution often reworks old solutions to solve new problems , some of the familiar themes from behavioral adaptations for dealing with physical , social , and sexual challenges may be rec - ognizable in the cognitive adaptations of intelligent species . Why look to past adaptations for clues to current cog - nitive mechanisms , rather than just deriving the theoreti - cally expected strategies for the problems those cognitive mechanisms may ( approximately ) solve ? Reproductive success is relative , so evolution is often satisﬁed with good - enough solutions to current problems . You do not have to be perfect ; you just have to be better than your rivals . So , evolution does not build superhuman ( or super - alien ) minds that gather all available information and process it using strictly rational procedures to yield mathematically optimal solutions , as in rational choice models of Homo economicus . Rather , evolution often develops quick - and - dirty heuristics that allow good - enough decisions . Humans and other animals evolved to use various simple heuristics that operate within the real - world constraints of limited time , limited information , and limited brainpower to yield approximate , rather than optimal , solutions to the problems they face ( Gigerenzer et al . 1999 , 2011 ) . It may be possible to do better , but the marginal beneﬁts may not outweigh the marginal costs . We argue that many cognitive heuristics were adapted from behavioral mechanisms that evolved ﬁrst to deal with the challenges of the physical environment . Adaptations for physical tasks such as ﬁnding food or avoiding parasites may later evolve to deal with more abstract , strategic social and sexual tasks in group - living species that include competitive mating markets ( and there are good reasons to expect that most intelligent species including ETIs evolve from social , sexually reproducing , group - living species ; Miller 2000b ) . Then , these sociosexual adaptations may be copied , repurposed , and shaped by further selection to deal with more abstract , higher - level cognitive tasks such as conceptual reasoning , symbolic communication , techno - logical innovation , and intellectual curiosity—while still retaining design quirks that hint at their ancestral origins and functions . This ‘‘cognitive turn’’ from physical domains through sociosexual domains to abstract cognitive domains characterizes not just the evolution of terrestrial social primates over the last 50 million years or more , but also could likely characterize the emergence of many ETIs . Such adaptive pathways may be the most typical route for alien life - forms to reach the general intelligence levels necessary for large civilizations and advanced technolo - gies , because evolution often follows a quick and easy path , acting as a tinkerer or ‘‘backwoods mechanic’’ ( Wimsatt 2007 ) and building new things from old parts that 132 P . M . Todd , G . F . Miller 123 are already on hand . Given new selection pressures , adaptations that evolved originally to serve one function are often copied and repurposed to serve new functions . Adaptations that capitalize on existing resources such as genomic regulatory networks , neurodevelopmental path - ways , neuromodulator systems , and computational mod - ules ( or their alien equivalents ) can evolve more quickly than solutions arising de novo . In a variety of complex adaptive systems with modular components , new functions get added by reusing and modifying existing features . Programmers patch together new code using libraries of existing code , rather than writing every line from scratch . Companies enter new markets and create new products by patching together existing employees , teams , and intellec - tual property , rather than hiring all - new workers and inventing all - new brands . Likewise , evolution patches together new mental adaptations using genomic libraries and developmental and cultural scaffolding of existing information - processing machinery . Thus , cognitive adap - tations may be a useful level of analysis for considering the likely origins and functions of thoughts , feelings , and preferences in other intelligent species . Evolutionary psychology and behavioral ecology are relevant to understanding alien intelligence , just as evolu - tionary biology is to understanding alien life - forms . Fur - ther , adaptive pathways from physical through social to abstract cognitive domains may be common ways for alien intelligence to evolve . In the rest of this article , we describe a speciﬁc adaptive pathway in the domain of searching for good things ( such as food , mates , and ideas ) ; we brieﬂy introduce two other domains , avoiding bad things ( through anti - pathogen , sexual , moral , and intellectual disgust ) and signaling one’s own traits to others ( to deter predators , intimidate rivals , or attract mates ) , which are described in more detail in Todd and Miller ( 2017 ) . We will then consider the implications of evolutionary extraterrestrial psychology and these three domains for the search for extraterrestrial intelligence ( SETI ) in astrobiology , and in messaging ETIs ( METI ) . Our focus here is on the initial , naturally evolved forms of ETI , before ETIs consciously shape their further evo - lution through genetic selection or cognitive engineering , and before they invent artiﬁcial intelligences , autonomous robots , self - replicating spaceships , and so on . Natural evolution of minds will rely heavily on reuse of existing adaptations , but rational engineering of genetically engi - neered or artiﬁcial intelligence may break free of tradi - tional adaptation pathways to ﬁnd globally optimal ( or at least better and different ) information - processing methods , as humans are beginning to accomplish using methods such as Bayesian networks and deep learning . However , we expect that our arguments will apply to quite a range of naturally evolved intelligences , including socially distributed intelligences like those of eusocial insects ( cf . Dornhaus 2017 ) . Search Strategies Animals interact with their environments . They evolve to approach the things that promote their reproductive success ( e . g . , food , shelter , mates ) and to avoid the things that threaten their reproductive success ( e . g . , predators , patho - gens , rivals ) . So , they need to ﬁnd and perceive all kinds of ‘‘ﬁtness affordances’’—things that ‘‘afford’’ ﬁtness beneﬁts or impose ﬁtness costs ( Gibson 1979 ; Miller 2007 ) . Food affords eating ; mates afford breeding . Initially these ﬁtness affordances are concrete physical objects ( e . g . , food , predators ) . Then , some organisms evolve to register social and sexual affordances ( e . g . , kin , friends , rivals , mates , offspring ) . Finally , the most intelligent information - sharing organisms evolve to pay attention to more abstract cogni - tive affordances ( e . g . , surprises , memories , news , argu - ments , evidence , morals , science ) . But ﬁtness affordances such as food and mates can be hard to ﬁnd , because they are spatially distributed , and other animals are looking for them too . So animals need search strategies that maximize the rate of encountering good things while minimizing the energy costs and risks of movement . Optimal foraging theory in biology has ana - lyzed this problem for decades ( Bell 1991 ) . A key insight was that many good things in nature are not uniformly distributed , but are clustered into patches—lakes where gazelles can drink , herds of gazelles that lions can attack , leks of male birds that females can mate with . Patches arise partly because inorganic resources are unevenly distributed ( ‘‘spatially autocorrelated’’ ) , but especially because organic resources ( plants and animals ) arise through local repro - duction . This patchy structure of ﬁtness affordances means that animals face tradeoffs between exploiting an existing patch of good things versus exploring the environment to ﬁnd new patches of good things . Spatial autocorrelation of resources is likely to hold in any extraterrestrial environ - ment that evolves life , whether on the surface of a rocky planet , under the ice crust of a tectonic moon , or in the turbulence of a gas giant . Search strategies are ways for animals to organize their approach and avoidance behavior , exploring to ﬁnd patches of useful resources , exploiting them until they are depleted , and exploring for new patches . These explore / exploit search strategies evolve initially to guide search through physical space for physical resources such as food and shelter , but then they can be generalized to the sociosexual domain ( e . g . , searching for attractive mates , reliable friends , or savvy mentors ) , and then they can even be applied to more abstract informational domains ( e . g . , The Evolutionary Psychology of Extraterrestrial Intelligence : Are There Universal Adaptations … 133 123 searching episodic memory , exploring strategic alterna - tives , testing hypotheses , Googling ‘‘Europa tectonic plates’’ ) . Perhaps the earliest behavioral adaptations were for ﬁnding sources of energy—food , light , and heat . For a mobile organism , the simplest explore / exploit search strategy is : if the energy resource is present , stay put and use it ; if not , then move on to ﬁnd it ( a ‘‘win - stay / lose - shift’’ strategy ) . Just how to ‘‘move on’’ will depend on the spatial ( and temporal ) structure of the resource environ - ment and on the organism’s ability to perceive , remember , and understand its structure ( Bell 1991 ) . In terms of where to go , if resources are distributed in all directions , then move in any direction ; if not , then determine a likely direction ( e . g . , a chemical gradient of prey smell , an acoustic gradient of mating calls , or visual cues such as spoor or trails . ) If plant or animal resources grow back over time , then go back to where resources have been found in the past . How far should animals go when searching ? This depends on the resource structure of the environment and the organism’s sensory and movement capabilities . Because movement in space is energetically costly , it will be minimized where possible . So , if resources are likely to be nearby , then look for them nearby without moving much . This works well when resources are uniformly dis - tributed , as they may have been in early terrestrial ecosystems characterized by microbial mats on sea ﬂoors . But many environments have patchy distributions of resources , with regions of high resource concentration separated by relatively resource - empty spaces . Metazoans grazing on microbial mats , for instance , would become patches of high resource density for scavengers when they died . Flowers growing in clumps become a patch for for - aging bees , and the bees’ nest is a patch for honey - seeking mammals . ( And at the interstellar scale , likely planets for hosting advanced civilizations may also come in patches ; Di Stefano and Ray 2016 ) . Organisms seeking such patchy resources need to move larger distances to get from one patch to another , but once they ﬁnd a resource that may be in a patch , such as a nectar - rich ﬂower , they should take smaller steps to ﬁnd other resources likely to be nearby in the same patch without expending unnecessary movement energy . Thus , once an organism ﬁnds a resource patch , it should switch from exploring—making larger moves through space—to exploiting—moving shorter distances within a patch to exploit more of the resource . At some point , though , the organism may deplete the easily found resource in the patch , for instance drinking the nectar from many of the ﬂowers , and will have to decide whether to keep trying to exploit that patch or leave and look for another patch . This is the basic explore / exploit dilemma for organisms searching in patchy resource environments : exploring for new resources ( during which energy is expended and resources are often not being taken in ) versus exploiting existing resources ( when resource intake declines as resources are depleted ) . Explore / exploit problems are found in a wide range of domains facing individuals and groups , and many behavioral strategies , heuristics , and mechanisms have arisen to address them ( Hills et al . 2015 ) . The optimal way to solve the explore / exploit problem in foraging for patchy resources is to leave the current patch when its rate of return falls below the mean rate of return that would be obtained by optimally exploring and exploiting the whole distribution of patches in the envi - ronment ( as speciﬁed by the marginal value theorem ; Charnov 1976 ) . That is , the forager should leave a patch when it could do better by going elsewhere , taking into account the costs of traveling to the next patch . Typical evolved adaptations that enable a variety of species to come close to optimal explore / exploit performance include simple heuristics such as leaving a patch when a certain amount of time has elapsed since the last resource item was found ( a ‘‘giving - up time’’ rule ) , or performing ‘‘area - re - stricted search’’ in which each resource item found makes the searcher focus on the local area ( e . g . , by taking smaller steps or higher - angle turns to stay nearby ) , but elapsing time without ﬁnding a resource leads to a gradual return to global exploration ( e . g . , larger steps and less turning ) ( Stephens and Krebs 1986 ; Bell 1991 ) . Hominids evolved in environments ( e . g . , the African savanna ) with mostly patchy resources , such as watering holes , berry bushes , game animal herds , and clans of potential mates . This resulted in a general expectation among modern humans that resources tend to come in patches ( Wilke and Barrett 2009 ) , and a set of psycho - logical mechanisms to decide how to search or forage among them . In a computer task that mimicked foraging in space , people encountered a sequence of ponds ( patches ) containing depletable stocks of ﬁsh that they could catch . They had to decide when to leave and move on to the next one ; decisions made using ‘‘giving - up time’’ mechanisms produced near - optimal rates of ﬁnding resources ( Hutchinson et al . 2008 ) . Tribal people’s foraging behavior in the wild shows similar patterns ( Winterhalder and Smith 2000 ) . Explore / exploit heuristics are crucial for adaptive search in nonspatial domains as well ( Hills et al . 2015 ) . In the social search for mates , individuals—whether female sage grouse searching among males in a lek , or humans searching among potential dates on the OkCupid website— must balance how much time they spend gathering infor - mation about each potential mate against the beneﬁts of moving on to evaluate potentially better prospects ( Saad et al . 2009 ) . Individuals may also use area - restricted search 134 P . M . Todd , G . F . Miller 123 at the more abstract level of phenotypic similarity , for example searching ﬁrst for a ‘‘nearby’’ mate who is similar in appearance or personality to an opposite - sex parent ( Todd and Miller 1993 ) , and then , if no such ‘‘close’’ mates are found , relaxing those similarity preferences to explore the space of possible phenotypes more broadly ( Hills and Todd 2008a ) . For species that pair - bond , time spent in a sexual relationship may be analogous to time spent exploiting a food patch , with mate switching analogous to searching for a new food patch . At the cognitive level , we ﬁnd similar explore / exploit heuristics . In visual search tasks , people have to control their eye movements and attention to ﬁnd target items that appear in clusters , and searching within clusters versus switching between clusters follows patterns similar to foraging in space ( Wolfe 2013 ) . Further , similar decision strategies are used by humans searching for information in the external environment—e . g . , when ‘‘information forag - ing’’ on the Web , people leave a ‘‘local patch’’ of closely linked Web pages when they decide that its value ( or ‘‘information scent’’ ) has fallen below what they could ﬁnd from searching globally elsewhere ( Pirolli 2007 ) . People also seem to search for information internally in memory according to expectations from optimal foraging theory . For example , when asked to ‘‘name all the animals you can think of in three minutes , ’’ people typically switch between exploiting local patches of conceptually related animals ( e . g . , ‘‘lion , tiger , puma , caracal’’ ) and exploring globally for new categories of animals ( e . g . , pets , seafood , farm animals , mythological creatures , horror - movie aliens ) — and they do this in ways that maximize their success , as predicted by the marginal value theorem ( Hills et al . 2012 ) . These results suggest that related mechanisms guide organisms’ search for resources in physical space , search for partners in social space , and search for information in cognitive spaces ( see Todd et al . 2012b , for an overview ) . Is this the result of adaptations being sequentially copied , repurposed , and reﬁned from mechanisms for physical to social to information environments , or are these cases of convergent evolution of similar mechanisms given similar optimization problems across the three domains ? One clue comes from the neurophylogeny of search strategies . Hills ( 2006 ) argued that dopamine - driven mechanisms guiding the search for food were the evolutionary basis of mecha - nisms guiding search for other resources , including atten - tion - based search for information in the external environment and executive control of internal search for plans and solutions during goal - driven cognition . This argument is supported by a priming study that suggests a common underlying mechanism for external foraging and internal information search , possibly based on early dopaminergic search circuitry . In this study , people who engaged in more local exploitation in a spatial foraging task—staying longer in each spatial patch of resources— also exploited patches in memory longer in a more abstract anagram puzzle task ( Hills et al . 2008b ) . Furthermore , it does not seem inevitable that people should search through memory in ways that mirror search through physical space—for instance , searching in an area - restricted manner , looking at nearby points ﬁrst . In spatial search , this happens partly because resources are patchy , and partly because locomotion is energetically expensive . By contrast , in memory search , useful information might not be meaningfully ‘‘nearby’’ within associative patches , and the costs of switching memory patches might be neg - ligible . If this turns out to be the case , then the fact that humans nonetheless often use area - restricted search in memory suggests adaptation of search strategies from physical space to conceptual spaces . This would be con - sistent with a cognitive repurposing view ( that area - fo - cused search in memory builds upon area - focused search through habitats ) rather than a cognitive convergence view ( that area - focused search works because it is effective in both domains , memory and habitat ) . However , the repur - posing from habitat search would not have worked if it had not been at least somewhat effective in the new domain of memory . Once a positive ﬁtness affordance such as a food item has been found through a search strategy , it must usually be processed in some way to yield its latent ﬁtness beneﬁts such as nutrients . Organisms evolve to control complex sequences of physical movements for processing ﬁtness affordances from their raw state into more useful forms . Sometimes this involves sequences of disassembly , as when a predator dismembers prey into smaller , more easily swallowed chunks . Sometimes this involves sequences of assembly , as when a weaverbird combines grasses and twigs into safe nests for offspring . These sequencing mechanisms may often be copied and then adapted to the sociosexual domain ( e . g . , progressing through multistep courtship rituals , threat displays , and offspring - grooming bouts ) and then to the cognitive and communicative domains ( e . g . , speaking sentences , telling stories , pursuing if - then reasoning , planning space ﬂights ; see Holloway ( 1969 ) for suggestions that the forward - looking planning aspects of toolmaking and language may have been copied and modiﬁed from earlier hierarchical organizations of motor behavior ) . Two Further Domains : Emotional Aversions and Social Signaling Just as organisms evolve mechanisms for ﬁnding good things , they also evolve mechanisms for avoiding bad things . Larger , more complex organisms evolve to avoid The Evolutionary Psychology of Extraterrestrial Intelligence : Are There Universal Adaptations … 135 123 infestation by smaller , faster - evolving parasites that impose costs , risks , and diseases . They do this partly through a physiological immune system ( antibodies , cytokines , leukocytes , etc . ) that ﬁghts pathogens once they have entered the body , and partly through a ‘‘behavioral immune system’’ based on emotional aversions such as disgust that helps individuals avoid exposure to pathogens in the ﬁrst place . Anti - pathogen disgust works to prevent contact with pathogens such as salmonella bacteria in rotting meat , the measles virus in clan - mates , and syphilis bacteria in potential mates . It achieves this by coding cues of infec - tiousness , such as the smell of decay or the appearance of skin lesions . Disgust is at its core a mechanism for avoiding parasites and diseases ( Oaten et al . 2009 ; Rozin and Todd 2016 ) : it focuses on things likely to harbor pathogens ( meat , blood , feces , vermin , lesions ) ; it uses a ‘‘logic of contagion’’ that embodies awareness that invisible microbes can multiply exponentially in the body ; and it provokes physical distancing , self - grooming , and social ostracism . Host - parasite coevolution is a universal feature of organic life , so any intelligent aliens are likely to have evolved some anti - pathogen disgust to defend against their ancestral pathogens and parasites . Disgust also appears to have been adapted for use in sexual and social domains ( Tybur et al . 2013 ) . Sexual disgust is triggered by certain sex acts and potential mates that could be dangerous . Most complex animals with nervous systems on Earth reproduce sexually using some mate selectivity , and there are good theoretical reasons why intelligent aliens are likely to be sexually selective as well ( Miller 2000b ) , so aliens are likely to have evolved sexual disgust towards certain kinds of acts and mates . In the social domain , moral disgust is triggered by bad behavior such as lying , cheating , stealing , assaulting , raping , or killing ( Russell and Giner - Sorolla 2013 ) . At a more abstract level , we propose that ‘‘intel - lectual disgust’’ may have evolved to avoid exposure to bad ideas , malicious gossip , biased hearsay , stupid memes , logical fallacies , alternative facts , and ‘‘fake news . ’’ Once an intelligent species evolves the ability to transmit and receive ideas through symbolic communication , it may beneﬁt from adapting other forms of disgust into some form of intellectual disgust , to protect cognitive systems from epistemic corruption . Another domain likely to foster reuse of adaptations is that of social signaling—advertising one’s qualities as ﬁt - ness affordances to other organisms , for example , one’s excellence as a fertile mate , a formidable enemy , or an elusive prey . Fitness indicators are exaggerated traits such as the peacock’s tail or the elk’s antlers that evolve to signal the ﬁtness of one organism to another . Fitness indicators rely on game - theoretic signaling principles : they must be large , costly , complex , and / or precise so that they are honest , or else other organisms would evolve to ignore them ( Zahavi 1975 ; Miller 2012 ) . Consequently , many ﬁtness indicators take conspicuous , unfakeable physical forms , including physical signals of attractiveness to mates ( sexual ornaments like bird plumage ) and formidability to rivals ( weapons like teeth , horns , and antlers ; Zahavi 1975 ) . In our lineage , sexual selection has gone a step further , favoring still more abstract signals based on indi - vidual mental traits ( Miller and Todd 1998 ) . These ‘‘mental ﬁtness indicators’’ include intelligence ( Miller 2000c ) , language ( Miller 2002 ) , and creativity and art ( Miller 2000a ; Haselton and Miller 2006 ) . Given sexual repro - duction and genetic variation , there are incentives for organisms to select their mates carefully by paying atten - tion to ﬁtness indicators—and for the ﬁtness indicators to become ever larger , more complex , more precise , and more attractive . Cognitive and communicative abilities make especially informative ﬁtness indicators because their underlying computational systems must be especially complex and precise , so uniquely vulnerable to harmful mutations , uniquely informative about ﬁtness , and uniquely likely to get caught up in a signaling arms race that drives a runaway elaboration of intelligence ( Miller 2000a , b , 2002 ) . Thus , we can expect that extraterrestrial intelligence is most likely to emerge among life - forms that are sexually reproducing , choosy about their mates , and a bit obsessed with each other’s mental ﬁtness indicators—in a word , ‘‘sapiosexual . ’’ Indeed , the progression from physical to behavioral to social to cognitive signaling may be the mainspring of ETI evolution across many worlds , as it has been in human evolution . Analyzing Pathways for ETIs Analyzing adapted pathways should be useful in under - standing ETIs , regardless of their form or habitat . This is because the information - processing mechanisms that evolved to deal with physical domains are not perfectly adaptable to social , sexual , or cognitive domains , owing to the different structures in these different domains . ( The nature of the ﬁt between decision mechanisms and infor - mation structures in different environmental domains is studied in the ﬁeld of ecological rationality ; see , e . g . , Todd et al . 2012a . ) Human minds are cobbled - together patch - works of mental adaptations that originally evolved for one set of purposes , but that in many cases were then modiﬁed for quite different purposes . ETI minds , at least as they originally evolved , are likely to be similar : a patchwork of reused adaptations piled upon adaptations . This section considers some examples of how this matters—how to leverage evolutionary theory to make better predictions about the likely cognitive quirks of ETIs . 136 P . M . Todd , G . F . Miller 123 For example , in the physical domain , material resources such as space , food , and shelter have lower value when they have to be divided among competitors . Playing with physical resources is a zero - sum game . But in the cognitive domain , informational resources such as news , scientiﬁc ﬁndings , and technical innovations can retain their value when shared with many individuals ( though the originator may get the most prestige ) . Playing with ideas is often a positive - sum game . So , if intelligent species use physical - domain mental models to think about how resource sharing affects the value of information in the cognitive domain , they may tend to hoard ideas the way they hoard food . They will treat the world of shareable bits as if it were a world of non - shareable atoms—as we see evidence for in humans . In legal history , for example , it has taken centuries to adapt ancient principles concerning hard - to - share land ( real estate property law ) so they are suitable for easy - to - share ideas , brands , and patents ( intellectual property law ) . Relatedly , intelligent species may adapt their spatial cog - nition for social cognition , and might make predictable er - rors , such as overestimating the mutuality of social closeness ( if A likes B , B must like A ) , since spatial dis - tances are commutative . By considering which of the tools in a preexisting toolbox of mechanisms that evolved for an earlier set of problems may be used and modiﬁed to solve a new set of problems , we can develop a candidate set of cognitive mechanisms that might be found in ETIs . This is the approach we take here , looking at the behavioral mecha - nisms originally evolved to deal with the physical world for possible ways of dealing with social , sexual , and cognitive worlds . In hindsight , some of the proposals may not seem surprising—of course one should search for more solutions to a problem that are similar or near to solutions that have already been found . But some of the commonalities among the domains may be missed without this sort of perspective , and the physical differences between humans and aliens may obscure deeper psychological similarities . Further - more , without an evolutionary psychology framework that makes the ‘‘natural seem strange’’ ( James 1890 ; quoted in Cosmides and Tooby 1997 ) , the things that seem natural and obvious about our own species’ behavior may get overlooked when dealing with alien behavior generated by minds inhabiting very different morphologies , societies , and technologies . Implications for Interacting with ETIs What We Should Look for in ETI Signals ( SETI ) Let us make the reasonable common assumption that any ETIs capable of contacting us or receiving our signals are much more advanced in their science . This means they have already understood for millennia everything that we have argued here about adaptation , search strategies , behavioral immune systems , and signaling strategies ( as - suming we are right about any of them ) . How would such knowledge guide their strategies for searching for ( other ) ETIs ( that is , their own SETI ) , and for messaging other ETIs ( that is , their METI ) ? And how should our knowing what they already know guide our own SETI and METI strategies ? ( Here we assume some ability on the part of receivers to understand the content of messages sent , though in some cases , e . g . , signaling of formidability through high - powered transmissions from many beacons across several parsecs , appreciating the medium itself may be sufﬁcient to get the message—cf . Wason 2014 on rec - ognizing intelligence versus understanding content . ) Assuming they do not know much about whether their target audience is nice or nasty , strategically prudent ETIs would not want to send a signal that advertises the location of their home world or colonies , to avoid triggering the search strategies of any resource - hungry or aggressively curious aliens that might receive such a signal ( Liu 2015 ) . They would probably leave out any information about the coordinates or properties of their planet and star system , and they would use cryptic transmission technologies , distant relays , and other subterfuges to obscure the true origins of their signals . Prudent ETIs wishing to hold their audiences’ attention should avoid triggering the audiences’ behavioral immune systems , knowing that their messages should not be too disgusting . To minimize anti - pathogen disgust , they may not include visual depictions of their bodies , or information about their physical appearance , health issues , or parasites . To deter sexual disgust , they may avoid revealing details about their sexual ornamentation , courtship strategies , sexual behaviors , and mating systems . To avoid moral disgust , they may be very circumspect about their ethics and values . And to avoid intellectual disgust from poten - tially even more advanced civilizations , they may reveal only a few of their best - established theorems and empirical insights . In terms of signaling , prudent ETIs should not com - municate much about their formidability , such as their weapon capabilities or number of star systems colonized . They would not want to panic weaker audiences by appearing too formidable , but they would not want to seem easily exploitable to larger , more advanced civilizations . Again , the best strategy may be to give away the least possible information—just as many animals stay quiet in dark jungles . All of this means that , without assuming that ETIs possess any deeper understanding of evolutionary psy - chology than current Earth scientists possess , we can make The Evolutionary Psychology of Extraterrestrial Intelligence : Are There Universal Adaptations … 137 123 a good bet that ETIs doing interstellar signaling will include very little information about themselves , including their location , bodies , mating systems , ethics , science , or formidability . Even if they are feeling chatty , they may broadcast nothing more than ‘‘hey , here are some big prime numbers , just to show that we exist and we’re reasonably clever . ’’ This strategic analysis of how ETIs should construct interstellar signals , given a few evolutionary psychology insights , goes both ways : it should also apply to how we humans interpret any signals that we receive , and to how we design any signals that we send . In analyzing any ETI signals received , evolutionary game theory and signaling theory caution us to take nothing at face value . Most sig - naling on Earth has evolved to manipulate the behavior of receivers in the signaler’s own interests , treating the receivers’ nervous systems as an ‘‘extended phenotype’’ of the signaler , and not to altruistically convey useful infor - mation about the world ( Krebs and Dawkins 1984 ; Brad - bury and Vehrencamp 2011 ) . Given the superﬁcially cooperative nature of human language , we look like a virtuous exception . However , most human verbal behavior is also centered around inﬂuence , rhetoric , social manipulation , and sexual seduc - tion ( Miller 2000a , 2002 ) . Signaling theory also empha - sizes that most biological signals function to intimidate rivals , deter predators , attract mates , or solicit help from parents and kin ( Bradbury and Vehrencamp 2011 ) . In interstellar relationships , only the intimidating - rivals function is relevant : it would not be economical for aliens to hunt us ( as opposed to our home - world ) for food ; they would be sexually disgusted to mate with us , and they would not be related enough to care about our welfare based on our genetic similarity . Further , when intimidating potential rivals , signal reliability is guaranteed more cred - ibly by signal amplitude , precision , duration , and spatial distribution than by apparent signal content . The point of broadcasting a loud , intricate , long - lasting , widely repeated signal is not just to be detectable ; it is to be impressive in a hard - to - fake way . Calculations about the detectability of radio or laser signals are less important in SETI than a serious signaling theory analysis of which messaging fea - tures would look most formidable given minimal back - ground knowledge about the signalers . Thus , what alien messages may claim about their civilizations ( e . g . , ‘‘Don’t mess with us—we have 10 million heavy battle cruisers’’ ) will be less informative than how many exawatts they burn to convey this message , how precisely modulated their signals are , how many millennia the signals are broadcast for , and how many star systems the same signal is being broadcast from . Why We Should Not Yet Send Our Own Signals ( METI ) Similar cautionary principles , grounded in evolutionary psychology and signaling theory , should apply even more strongly to any signals we humans send to aliens , in any messaging ETI ( METI ) program ( see Johnson 2017 for an overview ) . A simple METI message of the type we are currently capable of sending announces to nearby ETIs that it is probably from a newly technological species that is still stuck on its ancestral home - world—and that the home - world is likely to be a habitable planet with enough organic resources to support a diverse biosphere . Astrobiologists have argued that most life anywhere will probably evolve on rocky planets , using carbon - based chemistry , plentiful water as a solvent , and a highly reactive oxygen atmo - sphere for fast metabolism . Those resources ( habit - able planet , organic molecules , water , oxygen ) might be relatively rare and desirable as ﬁtness affordances to any ETIs—to be taken by subterfuge , propaganda , or force . Thus , any METI - signaling species that has just recently developed a bit of science and technology is basically saying that they evolved quite recently on a big habit - able planet with plentiful resources , they are naive enough to be broadcasting from their sacred home - world , and there is so little local competition for their resources that they have not yet been assimilated or exterminated by more advanced and prudent local rivals . In other words , a naive METI signal announces , ‘‘Here is a delectable treat—a home - world with valuable and easy - to - acquire resources , lightly guarded by a gullible young species . ’’ Moreover , as described earlier , life everywhere evolves to deal with patchy resources and to search for those resources efﬁciently , using the explore / exploit tradeoffs from optimal foraging theory . At the cosmic level , the limiting resources for supporting organic life ( habit - able planets , water , oxygen ) are extremely patchy , and likely to be contested by life - forms that evolved using a similar biochemical basis in similar habitats . If interplan - etary or local interstellar colonization is possible , any METI message from point X could be taken as evidence that there are likely to be other habitable planets near X . Thus , a METI message might suggest the availability of a whole patch of life - supporting worlds to be exploited , rather than just one treat . An understanding of search heuristics , and the deeply competitive ( and possibly zero - sum ) nature of evolved resource - exploitative strategies , should make us very reluctant to reveal any information at all about our location , whether in the explicit form of rel - ative distances to nearby pulsars ( as on the plaques inten - ded for extraterrestrial communication on the Pioneer space probes launched in the early 1970s ) , or in subtler 138 P . M . Todd , G . F . Miller 123 forms that would allow inferences about our location using other triangulation methods we cannot imagine yet . Further , if we send a weak signal , we signal weakness . Any METI signal will likely be interpreted by aliens as either a credible signal of formidability , or not . ( We would not be able to send credible signals of sexual attractiveness without knowing their mate preferences ; we could not credibly send signals of potential for mutually beneﬁcial trade in resources or ideas unless our science and tech - nology closely matched theirs . ) If we credibly signal high formidability , we position ourselves as a threat worth neutralizing . If we signal low formidability ( intentionally or not ) , we announce our vulnerability and exploitability . So how do we signal that we are ‘‘just right’’ in terms of formidability—neither an imminent threat nor a bunch of exploitable simpletons—without having a good estimate of the ETI’s own level of formidability ? We do not yet know—and this raises the concern that METI metaphori - cally changes our planet from a ‘‘nut , ’’ an armored , unobtrusive , and often unnoticed seed , into a ‘‘fruit , ’’ a seed with an accompanying resource packet that advertises its availability to frugivores , incentivizes their approach and exploitation , and hopes it will survive passage through their digestive system . And if we do not understand the capabilities and agendas of local frugivores , it is better to stay an acorn than show off as a papaya . Even if a METI signal does not trigger resource envy in ETIs , it might provoke disgust—and disgusting animals often get squished by larger , stronger animals . If we share any biochemistry , phenotypic similarity , parasitic vulner - abilities , or pathogen transmission pathways with the receivers , we could provoke anti - pathogen disgust . If we reveal details about our sexuality , mating , or erotica , we will likely provoke sexual disgust , since the ETI’s mate preferences will not match our phenotypes . If we reveal what we consider to be our highest ethical ideals , forms of effective altruism , and strategies for reducing avoidable suffering , we may fall far short of more advanced ETI morality and provoke moral disgust . And if we proudly display what we cherish as our most fascinating achieve - ments in the arts , humanities , sciences , and religions , these might provoke intellectual disgust , and be treated as infectious memes deserving informational quarantine rather than as cultural achievements deserving serious analysis . Behavioral immune system theory suggests that if we include any detail about our bodies , mating systems , ethics , or ideas in our METI signals , we may incite disgust and abhorrence rather than curiosity and sympathy in ETIs . And perhaps more bruising to our intellectual egos , our proudest cultural achievements conveyed through METI may not provoke intellectual disgust and meme - contain - ment protocols , merely boredom . We just might not be that interesting to ETIs . If aliens have advanced science , that will likely include not just advanced physics but also advanced biology and behavioral sciences—including evolutionary signaling theory , evolutionary game theory , evolutionary psychology , and Darwinian aesthetics . They may already understand that the art , music , stories , humor , and other forms of creativity produced by most intelligent species are largely a set of signaling adaptations for attracting mates , friends , and status . What we consider the highest products of civilization and genius , they may see as just another set of trait - signaling adaptations with largely predictable themes and semi - random variations—espe - cially if we are not the ﬁrst species they detect . Finally , considering our METI signaling from the per - spective of signaling theory itself should make each of us more skeptical and self - conscious about our own motives for doing METI in the ﬁrst place . Why do individuals really want to do METI—is it to signal human existence to ETIs , or to signal the individual’s personal traits such as openness , optimism , and altruism to other people ? Humans evolved in social and sexual circumstances that favored relentless gossip , creative showing - off , verbal courtship , and virtue - signaling ( Miller 2000a ) , and we have irre - pressible instincts for broadcasting our intelligence , per - sonality traits , and moral virtues to anyone who will listen ( think Twitter ) . Many of the rationales given for METI seem to tap into these trait - signaling instincts , so we should self - consciously assess whether our METI signaling motives spring from the desire to show off to each other , or the drive to communicate between intelligent civilizations . Advocates of METI appear to want to show off to ETIs that humanity as a whole has the moral virtues of truth ( honest message content ) , courage ( signaling despite the risks ) , inclusiveness ( reaching out to other life - forms despite our radically different natures ) , and reciprocity ( transmitting , not just receiving ) . For instance , METI International’s ( 2016 ) Strategic Plan states , ‘‘By conduct - ing a METI project , we will model a sense of fairness and responsibility in making contact with other life , ’’ and Zaitev ( 2006 ) said that METI ‘‘can be thought of as a purely messianic , unselﬁsh activity , seeking to help our neighbors learn , that they are not alone in the boundless Universe . ’’ Advocates often frame METI as the courageous and optimistic choice , and disparage critics as fearful and pessimistic ( Shostak 2015 ) . The former may be a more desirable signal to some human listeners , but any METI strategy that could impose global risks to our whole planet , and existential threats to our whole species , should get committed buy - in from everyone across the political spectrum , across countries , and across generations . Indeed , some METI advocates have argued that if we are already ‘‘listening in the jungle’’ with SETI , we have a moral duty to ‘‘shout into the jungle’’ with METI : ‘‘We and every other ETI are morally obligated to realize together The Evolutionary Psychology of Extraterrestrial Intelligence : Are There Universal Adaptations … 139 123 active and passive CETI [ communication with extrater - restrial intelligence , i . e . , SETI and METI ] … ’’ ( Subotowicz et al . 1979 , p . 205 ; quoted in Vakoch 2011 ) . It is as if there is some cosmic reciprocity principle that demands tit - for - tat exchanges of honest information over vast distances between civilizations with wildly asymmetric forms and levels of power . The underlying thinking seems to be that we will not be admitted to the ‘‘galactic club’’ if we do not pass the initiation rite of taking the risk in signaling our virtues as good reciprocators . This kind of virtue - signaling is a reasonable strategy between partners with some com - mon ground , as when human individuals are trying to attract mates or friends , or when nations demonstrate their good intentions to promote peace , trade , and other mutual beneﬁts . But virtue - signaling only works if the signal receivers value the virtues that we offer , and see some potential for positive - sum interactions . So , what we con - sider altruistic information sharing , ETIs with different values may consider narcissistic noisemaking or foolhardy exploitability ( see Barkow 2017 for related concerns ) . Unfortunately , all human METI signals sent so far— including on the space probes Voyager and Pioneer , and from the radio telescopes at Arecibo and Evpatoria—ex - emplify these unconscious human trait - signaling instincts , rather than a conscious understanding of evolutionary psychology and signaling theory as applied to our inter - actions with ETIs . These METI signals also violate the precautionary principles described above for why we should not reveal our location , bodily form , technological ( lack of ) formidability , cultural creations , and so on . It is perhaps the most dangerous game any newly technological species could possible play , and we do not even know the rules yet . By contrast , nuclear weapons are very dangerous , but at least the 1950s game theorists discovered that ‘‘mutually assured destruction’’ could deter global ther - monuclear war fairly reliably . Going forward , we should practice extreme caution , both in interpreting SETI messages , and in undertaking any METI projects . Evolutionary psychology and signaling theory are crucial additions to astrobiology for basing our SETI and METI strategies . Yet these sciences are only a few decades old , with major new principles and ﬁndings being discovered every year . We are nowhere near a mature level of understanding about patterns of cognitive evolution across humans , artiﬁcial intelligences ( AIs ) , and ETIs . Perhaps in a few more centuries , we will know enough about adaptations , search heuristics , behavioral immune systems , ﬁtness indicators , and other cognitive domains to have a little more conﬁdence about how we should interpret or send interstellar messages . But until then , we think that SETI should be done very cautiously , with our intellectual - disgust radar on high alert to avoid potentially infectious memes , propaganda , and Trojan horses from ETIs . As for METI , we think there is an urgent need for more serious risk analysis before any more messaging is con - sidered ; a global moratorium on METI ( enforced at least as seriously as nuclear nonproliferation treaties ) is appropriate in the meantime . We are still far from even an advanced - beginner understanding of evolutionary signaling theory as applied to exopsychology . Once we get to an intermediate - level understanding , maybe we will conclude that we missed out on a few centuries of beneﬁts from benevolent ETIs . But we might instead realize that METI would have been a grave existential threat to humanity . If that happens , we hope our descendants can look back with the satisfac - tion of knowing that we did not broadcast our weakness and naivete´ by sending weak and naive signals , before we had any idea how our well - intentioned virtue - signaling would be heard in the rest of the dark forest . Acknowledgements We thank Anna Dornhaus , Tom Schoenemann , Linnda Caporael , and two reviewers for helpful comments and pointers on an earlier draft and Deborah Klosky for careful editing . Part of this work was supported by the John Templeton Foundation grant , ‘‘What drives human cognitive evolution , ’’ to the ﬁrst author . References Barkow JH ( 2017 ) The evolutionary psychology of extraterrestrials . In : Vakoch D ( ed ) Extraterrestrial intelligence : cognition and communication in the universe ( forthcoming ) Barrett HC , Todd PM , Miller GF , Blythe PW ( 2005 ) Accurate judgments of intention from motion cues alone : a cross - cultural study . Evol Hum Behav 26 ( 4 ) : 313 – 331 Bell WJ ( 1991 ) Searching behaviour : the behavioural ecology of ﬁnding resources . Chapman and Hall , London Bradbury JW , Vehrencamp SL ( 2011 ) Principles of animal commu - nication , 2nd edn . Sinauer , Sunderland Charnov EL ( 1976 ) Optimal foraging , the marginal value theorem . Theor Popul Biol 9 ( 2 ) : 129 – 136 Cosmides L , Tooby J ( 1997 ) Evolutionary psychology : a primer . Retrieved from http : / / www . cep . ucsb . edu / primer . html . Accessed 1 May 2017 Di Stefano R , Ray A ( 2016 ) Globular clusters as cradles of life and advanced civilizations . https : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1601 . 03455 Dornhaus A ( 2017 ) Aliens are likely to be smart but not ‘intelligent’ : what evolution of cognition on Earth tells us about extraterres - trial intelligence . In : Vakoch D ( ed ) Extraterrestrial intelligence : cognition and communication in the universe ( forthcoming ) Gibson JJ ( 1979 ) The ecological approach to visual perception . Houghton Mifﬂin , Boston Gigerenzer G , Todd PM , ABC Research Group ( 1999 ) Simple heuristics that make us smart . Oxford University Press , New York Gigerenzer G , Hertwig R , Pachur T ( eds ) ( 2011 ) Heuristics : the foundations of adaptive behavior . Oxford University Press , New York Haselton MG , Miller GF ( 2006 ) Women’s fertility across the cycle increases the short - term attractiveness of creative intelligence . Human Nature 17 ( 1 ) : 50 – 73 140 P . M . Todd , G . F . Miller 123 Hills TT ( 2006 ) Animal foraging and the evolution of goal - directed cognition . Cogn Sci 30 : 3 – 41 Hills TT , Todd PM ( 2008a ) Population heterogeneity and individual differences in an assortative agent - based marriage and divorce model ( MADAM ) using search with relaxing expectations . J Artif Soc Soc Simul 11 : 5 Hills TT , Todd PM , Goldstone RL ( 2008b ) Search in external and internal spaces : evidence for generalized cognitive search processes . Psychol Sci 19 ( 8 ) : 802 – 808 Hills TT , Jones MN , Todd PM ( 2012 ) Optimal foraging in semantic memory . Psychol Rev 119 : 431 – 440 Hills TT , Todd PM , Lazer D et al ( 2015 ) Exploration versus exploitation in space , mind , and society . Trends Cogn Sci 19 ( 1 ) : 46 – 54 Holloway RL ( 1969 ) Culture : a human domain . Curr Anthropol 10 : 395 – 412 Hutchinson JM , Wilke A , Todd PM ( 2008 ) Patch leaving in humans : can a generalist adapt its rules to dispersal of items across patches ? Anim Behav 75 : 1331 – 1349 James W ( 1890 ) Principles of psychology . Henry Holt , New York Johnson S ( 2017 ) , June 28 . Greetings ET ( please don’t murder us ) . New York Times Magazine . Retrieved from https : / / mobile . nytimes . com / 2017 / 06 / 28 / magazine / greetings - et - please - dont - mur der - us . html . Accessed 30 June 2017 Krebs JR , Dawkins R ( 1984 ) Animal signals : mind - reading and manipulation . Behav Ecol 2 : 380 – 402 Liu C ( 2015 ) The dark forest . Tor , New York METI International ( 2016 ) Strategic plan , 2015—2018 . http : / / meti . org / strategic - plan - 0 . Accessed 11 Sept 2017 Miller GF ( 2000a ) The mating mind : how sexual choice shaped the evolution of human nature . Viking , New York Miller GF ( 2000b ) Sexual selection for indicators of intelligence . In : Gregory B , Jamie G , Kate W ( eds ) The nature of intelligence ( Novartis Foundation Symposium 233 ) . Wiley , New York , pp 260 – 275 Miller GF ( 2000c ) Evolution of human music through sexual selection . In : Wallin NL , Brown S , Merker B ( eds ) The origins of music . MIT Press , Cambridge , pp 329 – 360 Miller GF ( 2002 ) How did language evolve ? In : Swain Harriet ( ed ) Big questions in science . Jonathan Cape , London , pp 79 – 90 Miller GF ( 2007 ) Reconciling evolutionary psychology and ecolog - ical psychology : how to perceive ﬁtness affordances . Acta Psychol Sin 39 ( 3 ) : 546 – 555 Miller GF ( 2012 ) Sex , mutations , and marketing . EMBO Rep 13 ( 10 ) : 880 – 884 Miller GF , Todd PM ( 1998 ) Mate choice turns cognitive . Trends Cogn Sci 2 ( 5 ) : 190 – 198 Oaten M , Stevenson RJ , Case TI ( 2009 ) Disgust as a disease - avoidance mechanism . Psychol Bull 135 ( 2 ) : 303 – 321 Pirolli P ( 2007 ) Information foraging theory : adaptive interaction with information . Oxford University Press , New York Rozin P , Todd PM ( 2016 ) The evolutionary psychology of food intake and food choice . In : Buss DM ( eds ) The handbook of evolutionary psychology , vol 1 , 2nd edn . Wiley , Hoboken , pp 183 – 205 Russell PS , Giner - Sorolla R ( 2013 ) Bodily moral disgust : what it is , how it is different from anger , and why it is an unreasoned emotion . Psychol Bull 139 ( 2 ) : 328 – 351 Saad G , Eba A , Sejean R ( 2009 ) Sex differences when searching for a mate : a process - tracing approach . J Behav Decis Mak 22 : 171 – 190 Shostak S ( 2015 ) Should we keep a low proﬁle in space ? New York Times . https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2015 / 03 / 28 / opinion / sunday / messaging - the - stars . html ? mcubz = 3 . Accessed 11 Sept 2017 Stephens DW , Krebs JR ( 1986 ) Foraging theory . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ Subotowicz M , Usowicz J , Paprotny Z ( 1979 ) On active and passive CETI from an earth satellite orbit . Acta Astronaut 6 : 203 – 212 Todd PM , Miller GF ( 1993 ) Parental guidance suggested : how parental imprinting evolves through sexual selection as an adaptive learning mechanism . Adapt Behav 2 ( 1 ) : 5 – 47 Todd PM , Miller GF ( 2017 ) Cognitive exaptations for extra - terrestrial intelligence . In : Vakoch D ( ed ) Extraterrestrial intelligence : cognition and communication in the universe ( forthcoming ) Todd PM , Gigerenzer G , The ABC Research Group . ( 2012a ) Ecological rationality : intelligence in the world . Oxford Univer - sity Press , New York Todd PM , Hills TT , Robbins TW ( eds ) ( 2012b ) Cognitive search : evolution , algorithms , and the brain . Stru¨ngmann Forum Reports , vol 9 . MIT Press , Cambridge Tybur JM , Lieberman D , Kurzban R et al ( 2013 ) Disgust : evolved function and structure . Psychol Rev 120 ( 1 ) : 65 – 84 Vakoch DA ( 2011 ) Asymmetry in active SETI : a case for transmis - sions from Earth . Acta Astronaut 68 : 476 – 488 Wason PK ( 2014 ) Inferring intelligence : prehistoric and extraterres - trial . In : Vakoch DA ( ed ) Archaeology , anthropology , and interstellar communication ( pp 113 – 128 ) . The NASA History Series SP - 2013 - 4413 . Washington , D . C . : NASA . http : / / www . nasa . gov / ebooks Wilke A , Barrett HC ( 2009 ) The hot hand phenomenon as a cognitive adaptation to clumped resources . Evol Hum Behav 30 : 161 – 169 Wimsatt WC ( 2007 ) Re - engineering philosophy for limited beings : piecewise approximations to reality . Harvard University Press , Cambridge Winterhalder B , Smith EA ( 2000 ) Analyzing adaptive strategies : human behavioral ecology at twenty - ﬁve . Evol Anthropol 9 : 51 – 72 Wolfe JM ( 2013 ) When is it time to move to the next raspberry bush ? Foraging rules in human visual search . J Vis 13 : 1 – 17 Zahavi A ( 1975 ) Mate selection : a selection for a handicap . J Theor Biol 53 : 205 – 214 Zaitsev A ( 2006 ) Past – Present – Future . SETI League . http : / / www . setileague . org / editor / motion . htm . Accessed 11 Sept 2017 The Evolutionary Psychology of Extraterrestrial Intelligence : Are There Universal Adaptations … 141 123