Growth cones as soft and weak force generators Timo Betz a , b , 1 , Daniel Koch a , Yun - Bi Lu a , c , Kristian Franze a , c , and Josef A . Käs a a Division of Soft Matter Physics , Department of Physics , Universität Leipzig , Linnéstrasse 5 , 04103 Leipzig , Germany ; b Laboratoire Physico - chimie Curie ( Unité mixte de recherche 168 ) , 11 , rue Pierre et Marie Curie , 75231 Paris Cedex 05 , France ; and c Paul - Flechsig - Institute for Brain Research , Department of Neurophysiology , University of Leipzig , Jahnallee 59 , 04109 Leipzig , Germany Edited by Thomas D . Pollard , Yale University , New Haven , CT , and approved June 30 , 2011 ( received for review May 12 , 2011 ) Many biochemical processes in the growth cone finally target its biomechanical properties , such as stiffness and force generation , and thus permit and control growth cone movement . Despite the immense progress in our understanding of biochemical processes regulating neuronal growth , growth cone biomechanics remains poorly understood . Here , we combine different experimental approaches to measure the structural and mechanical properties of a growth cone and to simultaneously determine its actin dy - namics and traction force generation . Using fundamental physical relations , we exploited these measurements to determine the internal forces generated by the actin cytoskeleton in the lamelli - podium . We found that , at timescales longer than the viscoelastic relaxation time of τ ¼ 8 . 5 (cid:1) 0 . 5 sec , growth cones show liquid - like characteristics , whereas at shorter time scales they behaved elas - tically with a surprisingly low elastic modulus of E ¼ 106 (cid:1) 21 Pa . Considering the growth cone ’ s mechanical properties and retro - grade actin flow , we determined the internal stress to be on the order of 30 pN per μ m 2 . Traction force measurements confirmed these values . Hence , our results indicate that growth cones are particularly soft and weak structures that may be very sensitive to the mechanical properties of their environment . motility ∣ neuron ∣ elasticity ∣ mechanics ∣ scanning force microscopy N euronal growth is a fundamental event during ontogenetic development and nerve regeneration . The mechanical forces required for neuronal pathfinding and translocation are gener - ated in the growth cone , a motile extension at the neurite tip ( 1 ) . As in other motile structures , growth cone movement involves actin polymerization and myosin motor mediated contraction of the actin network in the lamellipodium , a flat structure intern - ally made up by a cross - linked actin network ( 2 ) . The movement of the leading edge is determined by the difference between out - ward pushing actin polymerization and the continuous centripetal flow of actin , called the retrograde flow ( 3 ) ( Fig . S1 ) . Local mea - surements of the retrograde flow ( 3 , 4 ) and traction forces of filopodia ( 5 , 6 ) have been reported on various substrate stiffness . These observations and the detailed analysis of neuron branching on substrates of varying stiffness ( 7 ) highlight the importance of the mechanical environment for neuronal growth . Furthermore , the constant neurite tension that is maintained by molecular motors in the neurite cytoskeleton has been extensively studied ( 8 – 10 ) . However , neither the internal forces , which are the forces generated and acting within the growth cone , nor the growth cone ’ s lamellipodial traction forces have yet been quantified . To understand the mechanics of neuronal growth , knowledge of the relation between the growth cone ’ s viscoelastic material proper - ties , the internally generated forces and the traction forces trans - mitted to the substrate is of fundamental importance . A recent study used speckle microscopy and a simple spring model to convert data from retrograde flow in epithelial cells into qualitative internal stresses ( 11 ) . Whereas this model allowed a qualitative derivation of the internal stress , it only modeled the elastic contribution , thus neglecting the viscous dissipation that is dominant at longer timescales . Furthermore , as the material properties of the cell were not determined , this approach did not allow a quantitative force calculation . On the other hand , the - oretical work has been published that uses mean field theory models to describe the viscous regime of lamellipodial actin flows by expanding liquid crystal physics to active systems ( 12 ) . Here we extend these purely elastic ( 11 ) and viscous ( 12 ) analyses by considering the inherent viscoelastic nature of a cell from a mechanical point of view . The main scope of this study is to provide a measurement of the internal and external stress generated by the actin cytoskele - ton of a moving growth cone . It should be noted that stress and force give similar information , because stress is defined by a force per area . As all the following measurements are based on image analysis , the fundamental property measured is stress . We first establish the characteristic mean viscoelastic material properties of a growth cone and then combine these with the material flow fields as determined by speckle microscopy to determine the stress required for the observed flow . Finally , we exploit traction force microscopy to obtain a complete picture of the intra - and extracellular stresses that eventually result in neuronal growth cone motility . Deducing Forces From Deformation Common experience tells us that objects can be deformed upon application of a force . In the example of a simple spring , there is a linear relation between force and deformation , summarized in Hooke ’ s law for an elastic spring : F ¼ k × x , where F is the force that is required to deform a spring with spring constant k by a distance x . Hence , knowing the spring constant and the deforma - tion , it is straight forward to deduce the force responsible for the observed deformation . Another well known deformation is the flow of a liquid , where the viscous forces are independent of the actual deformation magnitude , but depend on the deforma - tion rate or flow velocity . Living cells , however , are neither ideally elastic nor ideally fluid objects , but show both characteristics simultaneously . This needs to be taken into account for any quan - titative description . Typically , living cells show viscous character - istics at long time scales , whereas they are rather elastic at short times . These viscoelastic material properties are described by the time dependent viscoelastic relaxation modulus E ( t ) . In the case of a three dimensional cell , in general , the viscoelastic modulus is a fourth - order tensor . However , this complexity can be drastically reduced by applying the approximation that the elastic properties are in first order homogeneous and isotropic . These two general assumptions allow to describe a viscoelastic material by two fundamental properties , namely the time dependent relaxation modulus E ( t ) and the Poisson ’ s ratio ν . We directly measure these two material properties of a growth cone using a modified scanning force microscopy ( SFM ) technique ( 13 , 14 ) Once the material properties are known , it is straight forward to determine the relation between deformation u ij and stress tensor σ ij Author contributions : T . B . and J . A . K . designed research ; T . B . , D . K . , Y . - B . L . , and K . F . performed research ; K . F . contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; T . B . , D . K . , and Y . - B . L . analyzed data ; and T . B . and J . A . K . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : timo . betz @ curie . fr . This article contains supporting information online at www . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1106145108 / - / DCSupplemental . 13420 – 13425 ∣ PNAS ∣ August 16 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 33 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1106145108 ( σ ¼ Force ∕ Area ) that reads ( see Appendix and SI Text for a detailed derivation ) : σ ij ð t Þ ¼ Z t −∞ E ð t − τ Þ 1 þ ν (cid:1) du ij d τ þ ν 1 − 2 ν du kk d τ δ ij (cid:2) d τ : [ 1 ] This equation describes how the stress at a given time depends on the material properties ( E ( t ) and ν ) and the deformation velocity ( du ∕ dt ) . The integral over the time passed ensures that the history of the deformation is taken into account . This history dependence presents the difference between a purely elastic versus a viscoelastic deformation because a viscoelastic material such as a cell has a memory effect represented by the time dependence of E ( t ) . Results and Discussion Viscoelastic Properties of the Growth Cone . We determined the viscoelastic material properties of neuronal growth cones using SFM - based microrheology ( 13 , 14 ) , which measures the fre - quency dependent elastic storage modulus E 0 ð f Þ and viscous loss modulus E 00 ð f Þ . We measured E 0 ð f Þ and E 00 ð f Þ for five different frequencies in the range of 0 . 3 – 30 Hz ( Fig . 1 ) . To extract the time dependent relaxation modulus E ( t ) , we fitted E 0 ð f Þ and E 00 ð f Þ to an extended Kelvin – Voigt model ( Fig . 1 , SI Text , and Fig . S2 ) , which has been previously shown to approximate cellular defor - mations in the measured frequency range ( 15 ) . Whereas the fit quality shows that this model provides an adequate approxima - tion , it is also evident that a complete description requires more refined models , which are out of scope of the presented work . Furthermore , it should be noted that the technique used cannot well resolve small spatial variations of the mechanical properties as the size of the probe limits the spatial resolution to approxi - mately 2 μ m . Thus the measured values directly represent average viscoelastic properties for the whole growth cone . The good reproducibility of the data with an average relative error of 21 % ( n ¼ 64 , 11 growth cones ) in the 10 measurement points ( two points for five frequencies ) shows that the applied measure - ment indeed gives a reasonable approximation of the material properties . Hence , the small error justifies the approximation of spatial and temporal homogeneity as applied in the mathema - tical description . The fit of E 0 ð f Þ and E 00 ð f Þ presented in Fig . 1 depends on three independent fit parameters for the growth cone : the Young ’ s modulus E ¼ 106 (cid:1) 21 Pa , the steady state viscosity η ¼ 905 (cid:1) 26 Pas and the relaxation time τ R ¼ 8 . 5 (cid:1) 0 . 5 s . The Poisson ratio ν ¼ 0 . 47 (cid:1) 0 . 05 ( mean (cid:1) SEM ; n ¼ 64 ) was directly deter - mined from the SFM measurements , as previously described ( 13 , 14 ) . It should be stressed that the Young ’ s modulus E and the relaxation modulus E ð t Þ are different quantities . Whereas the Young ’ s modulus E is a constant that describes the purely elastic stiffness of the material represented by the plateau ( Fig . 1 ) , the relaxation modulus E ð t Þ is a function that includes the time dependence of the viscous deformation of the growth cone . Our data is consistent with previously published values for central nervous system ( CNS ) cells ( 14 ) and CNS tissue ( 16 , 17 ) . Inter - estingly , the measured elastic plateau at E ¼ 106 (cid:1) 21 Pa is surprisingly soft as compared to other motile cell types such as fibroblasts or fish keratocytes , which typically show elastic moduli in the range of kilopascal ( 18 , 19 ) . The measured Young ’ s mod - ulus presents a natural limit for the load ( i . e . , maximal stresses ) that can be transmitted to the underlying substrate . Such a max - imal load may be imposed by the tension within the distal neurite that has to be balanced by the growth cone . Based on the mea - sured Young ’ s modulus , we estimated a maximal neurite tension of 8 nN ( Young ’ s modulus times area : F max ≈ E × r 2 gc × π ≈ 8 nN ) that a typical growth cone can sustain ( radius : r gc ≈ 5 μ m ) . This upper limit is consistent with measurements , as it is well above previously reported maximum neurite tensions of about 2 nN ( 20 , 21 ) . The measured Young ’ s modulus further indicates that the maximal traction forces generated in a growth cone should be significantly smaller than those found in stiffer cell types such as fibroblasts or fish keratocytes ( 22 , 23 ) . Internal Stress of the Actin Cytoskeleton . To quantify the internal stress ~ σ ð x ; y Þ within the growth cone , the viscoelastic material properties , and the deformation rate of the actin cytoskeleton ( i . e . , the retrograde flow fields ~ u ð x ; y Þ ; see Fig . S1 ) need to be determined . It should be noted that the calculation assumes that the 2D retrograde flow detection captures all the information , and that flows in the out of plain direction are not relevant in the lamellipodium . The calculation can be separated into four steps ( further explained in SI Text ) . First , the retrograde flow is calculated . Subsequently , the stress required to explain the defor - mation between subsequent images is calculated . In a third step , the deformation history is included in the calculation . This step makes use of the fact that stress from the previous deformation has not yet been fully dissipated . Finally , the forces are calculated based on the local gradient of the stress tensor . In more detail , the steps are : 1 . Quantification of retrograde flow . To extract the lamellipodial actin dynamics , we used a feature tracking algorithm inspired by speckle microscopy ( 24 , 25 ) . Fluorescence microscopy time - series of growth cones from GFP - actin transfected NG108 - 15 cells were recorded with a time resolution of 3 – 5 s ( see Movie S1 ) . In contrast to most previous measurements of neuronal retrograde flow ( 3 , 26 ) , our technique measures the flow fields of filamentous actin ( F - actin ) within the whole growth cone ( 25 ) ( Fig . S1 and Movie S2 ) . We find a mean retrograde flow velocity for NG108 - 15 growth cones of 1 . 46 (cid:1) 0 . 60 μ m ∕ min ( mean (cid:1) SEM ; n ¼ 19 ) . The measured retro - Fig . 1 . Rheological measurements of the frequency dependent Young ’ s modulus of growth cones . Filled circles represent the storage modulus , whereas open circles give the loss modulus . The lines represent the fit accord - ing to the extended Voigt model as described in SI Text . It should be noted that for the low frequency measurements ( below 1 Hz ) the data is less reliable as the active retrograde flow can not be neglected in the long time regime , whereas the fit model does not consider such activity . At low frequencies the loss modulus becomes more important than the storage modulus , thus marking a viscous regime , whereas at higher frequencies , the growth cone behaves morelike an elastic object . According to the model , it is possible to identify a plateau for the storage modulus , which gives a steady state Young ’ s modulus of E ¼ 106 (cid:1) 21 Pa . The sketch and the inset illustrate the measurement method . A bead , glued to the cantilever of a SFM , penetrates the lamellipodium with an oscillating force ( Inset , red ) , whereas the resulting deformation ( Inset , black ) is measured . The amplitude and the phase difference between force and deformation determine the viscoelastic properties at the oscillation frequency . Betz et al . PNAS ∣ August 16 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 33 ∣ 13421 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P H Y S I C S grade flow shows a centripetal alignment and a strong decrease of retrograde flow toward the transition zone between the actin filled lamellipodium and the microtubule dominated central region . This confirms the well described properties of retrograde flow as reported in the literature ( 3 , 26 ) , and raises the question of the origin , distribution and dynamics of the forces that drive the observed flow . 2 . Calculation of the stress field between successive images . This step does only consider the deformation between two succes - sive images . We assume that the flow is constant during a time interval , which simplifies the integral of Eq . 1 ( details in Appendix and SI Text ) . Hence , this step does only extract the stress that is required to explain the deformation between two successive images , and it does not yet take into account the accumulation of stress due to the history of the system . 3 . Accumulation of stress and relaxation by the deformation history . To obtain the full stress at a given moment , we add up all the stresses of the previous deformations to the current stress cal - culated in step 2 . Stress relaxes over time following an expo - nential decay with time constant τ R ¼ 8 . 5 (cid:1) 0 . 5 s that leads to a relaxation below 1 % after 40 s . To include the entire stress history , we sum all the partially relaxed stresses from previous deformations . When the stress measured at previous time points is dissipated to less than 1 % of its initial value , we do not further consider it . This strategy includes both , the actual measured deformation , and the stress history according to the viscoelastic material properties . It should be noted that the transport of stress according to the measured deformation is also taken into account . This is important , because local stresses are created in the actin network of the lamellipodium , and are thus transported with the retrograde flow . 4 . Final calculation of the internal forces . Here , we use the stress tensor field calculated in the previous step to gain the internal force field . This is done by applying the local equilibrium con - dition Eq . 6 , where we calculate the local gradient of the stress tensor , which has to be balanced by an internal stress . This is equivalent to Newton ’ s laws . This calculation yields the inter - nal force for each pixel , so it is again in units of stress . Resulting internal stresses are presented in Fig . 2 ( Movie S3 ) . The internal stress distribution shows localized foci within the transition zone at which they converge , resulting in a mean peak stress of h σ IntPeak i ¼ 40 . 1 (cid:1) 17 Pa ( median (cid:1) STD ; n ¼ 119 ; with one Pa ¼ 1 pN ∕ μ m 2 ) . These spots were highly dynamic and gen - erally appeared and disappeared within 30 – 60 s . Hence , the peak stresses are an order of magnitude higher than the overall average stress that is found by averaging over the full area of a growth cone : h σ Int i ¼ 5 . 8 (cid:1) 0 . 3 Pa ( mean (cid:1) STD ; n ¼ 119 ) . To study the spatial distribution of stress , we average over a 10 min time period . This is done by calculating the average over the recording time for each pixel . The resulting distribution of stress magni - tudes is presented in Fig . 2 B . This analysis reveals that on average the stresses are mainly produced at the transition zone and decay toward the edge . The measured internal stresses at the transition zone are contractile , as demonstrated by the opposing stress directions in the enlarged area shown in Fig . 2 C . This is consistent with the forces dipoles generated by Myosin II ( 27 ) pulling on two neighboring actin filaments with opposing force directions . In ad - dition our analysis provides a full quantification of the internal force amplitude and direction as well as the stress tensors with a spatial resolution that is only limited by the resolution of the underlying retrograde flow detection . Therefore , we provide a powerful analytic tool to determine forces by simply analyzing the retrograde flow fields . Traction Stress of Neuronal Growth Cones . To further validate the obtained values of the internal stress calculation we used traction force microscopy ( TFM ) ( 22 , 28 ) to independently measure the stresses that are finally transmitted to the substrate by the growth cone . As the traction forces originate from the internal forces , the magnitude of the traction stress should be consistent with the magnitude of the internal stress and therefore provide an inde - pendent control measurement to the presented calculation . TFM measures the stress of a growth cone adhered to an elastic poly - acrylamide ( PAA ) gel substrate by detecting the movement of fluorescent beads embedded at the surface of the gel . The Young ’ s modulus of the PAA gel was determined to be E PAA ¼ 200 (cid:1) 20 Pa using an SFM . To measure integrin mediated trac - tion forces , we coated the PAA gel with laminin . Similar to the calculation of the intracellular forces , once the elastic parameters of the substrate and its deformation as caused by the growth cones are known , the traction forces can be determined ( 22 , 28 ) . We find that the traction forces act close to the edge of the growth cone ( Fig . 3 A ) , where most substrate attachments are found ( 29 ) . The average peak traction stress of 26 . 7 (cid:1) 2 . 6 Pa is in excellent agreement with the determined internal forces . This further sup - ports our finding that growth cones are mechanically soft and weak force generators compared to other cell types such as fibro - blasts [ traction force : approximately 1 kPa ( 30 ) ] or migrating epithelial cells [ traction force : approximately 200 Pa ( 31 ) ] , both having elastic moduli in the kilopascal range ( 18 , 19 ) . The low stresses that we observed for neuronal growth cones are consis - tent with our findings of low elastic strength and low internal forces . Our results indicate that there may be a direct correlation between cell rigidity , internal forces , and traction forces coupled to the substrate . We can further speculate about a possible rela - tion between cell rigidity and the preference for certain substrate rigidity . Stiff cells such as fibroblasts have been found to prefer stiff substrates ( 32 ) whereas neurons prefer soft substrates that are comparable to the elasticity of glial cells ( 7 , 14 ) . However , it should be noted that there are also soft cells such a astrocytes that prefer growing on stiff substrates ( 33 ) . Further investigation will be required to understand to which extend there may be a fundamental relation or if these similarities are purely random . The total stress acting in a growth cone is a combination of the internal stress and the traction stress . Because the growth cone exerts traction forces on the substrate , local force balance Fig . 2 . Internal stress within a neuronal growth cone . ( A ) Distribution of the momentary internal stress field in a neuronal growth cone . The color coding gives the stress magnitude in units of force per area ( Pa ¼ pN ∕ μ m 2 ) , and the black arrows indicate the stress direction . Scale bar is 10 μ m . ( B ) Time aver - aged mean stress distribution of a full time series of internal stress fields ( t ¼ 10 min ) . The stress is highest in the transition zone , and decays toward theedge . ( C ) Aclose - uponthecentralpartofthestressfieldin ( A ) showsthat the internal stresses are contractile and arranged like dipoles . 13422 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1106145108 Betz et al . requires that the growth cone feels exactly the opposite forces from the substrate . As we are interested in the stress acting on the actin network in the lamellipodium , the traction stress felt by the growth cone is the opposite stress as measured using TFM . Consequentially , to gain the full stress fields of a growth cone , the traction stress vectors have to be subtracted from the internal stress vectors to yield the total stress acting inside : σ Total ð ~ x Þ ¼ σ Internal ð ~ x Þ − σ Traction ð ~ x Þ . The total stress field arising from our model for the stress generation mechanism is shown in Fig . 3 C ( see also Movies S4 and S5 ) . The measured traction forces can also be used to directly determine the neurite pulling force , or neurite tension . As a matter of fact , the sum of the traction stress over the growth cone area does not fully match up , as it should for a stationary object . The reason for this mismatch is that we need to consider the neurite pulling force , which is equivalent to the neurite tension ( 5 , 34 ) . Consequently , the sum up of the traction stress is a measure of the neurite tension . We find a net force or neurite tension of F Net ¼ 602 (cid:1) 149 pN , which is in good agree - ment with previously reported values ( 20 , 35 ) . Summary of the Determined Viscoelastic Forces on the Actin Cytoske - leton . To summarize our findings we propose a simple scheme as shown in Fig . 4 . Contractile stresses are generated at the force foci in the transition zone ( Fig . 2 A and Fig . 3 C ) . The viscoelastic actin network in the lamellipodium partially transmits these forces to the leading edge where the forces are coupled to the substrate via adhesion sites , whereas part of the energy is dissi - pated by the viscoelastic deformation of the actin network and the substrate clutch . The contractile forces do furthermore compen - sate for the neurite tension that is constantly pulling on the growth cone . This neurite tension has been extensively studied in the literature ( 10 ) and it is well known that it originates from the contraction of the neurite cytoskeleton ( 8 – 10 ) . The force transmission toward the substrate depends partially on the interaction between the actin network and the substrate , which is mediated by actin to integrin force transmission , but also by the mechanical properties of the lamellipodium . This clutch mechanism of force transmission has been well documented in the literature ( 6 , 36 – 38 ) , but the underlying molecular details are yet to be understood . As we show in this work , the actin net - work in the lamellipodium is a viscoelastic material , and hence the force transmission strongly depends on its viscoelastic proper - ties , a fact that should be considered when investigating the force clutch mechanism , as not only the actin to integrin connection , but also the actin network itself presents a viscous flow . In the long time regime ( > 10 s ) the viscous effects dominate , and there - fore any force transmission requires flow . In this view it becomes clear that the actin network in the lamellipodium has to deform steadily to maintain a constant force transmission to the sub - strate . From a mechanical point of view our results may also explain why even in stationary growth cones a steady and fast ret - rograde flow is observed . Without the continuous polymerization and viscous flow , the actin network could not sustain the contin - uous neurite tension and would simply disintegrate and loose its substrate adhesions . This in turn would lead to a retraction of the Fig . 3 . Tractionstress , internal stress , and thecombined total stress of a neu - ronalgrowthcone . ( A ) Tractionstressdistributionofaneuronalgrowthcone . ( B ) Internal stress field of growth cone shown in A . Contractile stresses are localized at the central domain of the growth cone . ( C ) The total stress field of the growth cone reveals that the forces are generated at the central do - main , and the cross - linked actin network transmits the stress to the substrate adhesions in the peripheral region . The black arrow represents the pulling force with which the neurite is pulling on the growth cone . ( A – C ) Color code gives stress magnitude in Pa . Scale bar is 10 μ m . Fig . 4 . Summarizing scheme of the forces involved in the actin cytoskeleton in growth cone motility . External forces such as neurite tension ( black arrow ) and the substrate stress ( white arrows ) are transmitted to the contracting myosin motors ( blue arrows ) by the viscoelastic actin networks of the lamel - lipodium and the actin cortex of the neurite . In this model , the effective link between these two types offorces are the force generating myosin motors in the transition zone . Betz et al . PNAS ∣ August 16 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 33 ∣ 13423 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P H Y S I C S whole growth cone , as the pulling forces of the neurite need to be balanced by transmitting them to the substrate , which requires sufficiently strong lamellipodial rigidity and substrate adhesion . Hence , the steady flow allows even soft viscoelastic structures like the growth cone to bear the constant tension generated in the neurite . Conclusion Neuronal growth is a highly specialized type of cell motility that appears to be mechanically optimized for the movement in soft environments . The neuronal growth cones ’ weak forces and low elastic stiffness may indicate an important adaptation to the soft tissue found in the brain : glial cells provide a soft mechanical substrate with rather small elastic moduli of E approximately 300 Pa ( 14 ) . The passive and active mechanical properties of neu - ronal growth cones investigated in this study provide a plausible mechanical framework for the preference of neurons for soft sub - strates ( 7 ) . In addition , our results may explain why it is necessary to keep the energy consuming retrograde flow running even when the growth cone is in a resting phase and does not move exten - sively . Our results suggest that the continuous retrograde flow allows maintaining the substrate traction forces that are required to prevent growth cone retraction by the neurite tension . If the flow would cease , the viscoelastic characteristics of the lamellipo - dium would result in a simple relaxation of any transmitted stres - ses within a few seconds , leading to an immediate retraction of the whole structure due to neurite tension . Regarding biomecha - nics and force generation , the presented work allows the specula - tion that there may be a fundamental relation between the mechanical properties of a growth cone and the mechanical prop - erties of the environment . Growth cone mechanics could there - fore optimize navigation in soft environments , and mechanics could even be an additional guidance cue on top of all the bio - chemical guidance cues already identified to control neuronal growth . Further investigation on the role of mechanics in neuro - nal navigation will yield unique insights into the complex behavior of neuronal navigation . Materials and Methods Preparation of Elastic Polyacrylamide Substrates . A modified version of the protocol published by Wang and Pelham ( 28 ) was used . Briefly , as bottom plate round coverslips ( diameter : 20 mm ; VWR ) were cleaned and then covered with 400 μ L of 0 . 1N NaOH , which was evaporated using a hotplate . Subsequently , coverslips were covered with 200 μ L of 3 - aminopropyltri - methoxy silane ( Sigma ) for 5 min , rinsed with Millipore water and treated with 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde for 30 min to finalize the coating . As nonadherent surface , microscope slides were pretreated to prevent any adhesion to PAA . Aftercleaning , athinfilmofSurfaSil ( PerbioScience ) wasappliedtotheslides using either a cotton swab or a small cotton cloth . Subsequently , the film was cleaned off using a cotton swab or cloth and the slides were submerged in methanol to finalize the reactions . The composition of PAA determines the elastic properties of the final gel , and for the presented experiments , 170 μ L of 40 % acrylamide solution ( Sigma ) and 30 μ L of 2 % bis - acylamid ( Sigma ) were added to 1 , 750 μ L PBS , yielding a final concentration of 3 . 5 % acryla - mide and 0 . 03 % bis - acrylamide . Fluorescent beads were embedded into the gel by addition of 20 μ L bead solution ( Fluo Sphere , 100 nm diameter , 2 % , Molecular Probes ) . Polymerization was started by adding 8 μ L of 10 % ( w ∕ v ) ammonium persulfate ( Sigma ) and catalyzed by 12 μ L of N , N , N ’ , N ’ - tetramethylethylenediamine ( Sigma ) . A drop of 14 μ L solution was added onto the inert microscope slides and the silanized coverslips were put onto the drop , with the treated side down . The polymerization finished within 30 min . Using scanning force microcopy ( SFM ) , the elasticity of the gel was measured to be E PAA ¼ 200 (cid:1) 20 Pa . For surface modification , 1 . 5 μ g Sulfo - SANPAH ( Perbio Science ) was dissolved in 20 μ L DMSO , and then 1980 μ L of a 20 mM Hepes solution with a pH of 8 . 5 was added to the solution . One hundred microliters of the final solutionwereaddedtoeachofthePAAgels , whichweresubsequentlystored in the dark for 30 min and then photoactivated for 5 min using a strong UV lamp ( Model B , Blak - Ray ) . The activated solution was carefully washed off using 20 mM Hepes solution . After washing three times with PBS , 100 μ L poly - L - lysine ( Sigma ) was added to each gel and stored at 4°C over night . Finally , gels were washed three times in PBS , and 100 μ L of a 40 μ g ∕ mL laminin ( Sigma ) solution were applied to the gels . Gels with laminin were incubated at 37°C for 1 h , washed with PBS , then stored at least 24 h in cell culture medium for equilibration before cells were plated . Cell Culture and Image Acquisition . Details are given in SI Text . Microrheology . The methods used to determine the viscoelastic properties of neuronal growth cones have been described in detail before ( 13 , 14 ) . Briefly , we used a 5 . 6 μ m diameter bead that was glued on the SFM cantilever and applied a sinusoidal force on the lamellipodium with a given frequency ( Fig . 1 , Inset ) . The applied forces and the resulting deformation were mea - sured and the in and out of phase components were acquired using a lock - in amplifier ( 13 ) . The final viscoelastic modulus for each frequency was deter - mined by fitting the data to a viscoelastic model that takes into account the thickness of the lamellipodium , as previously discussed in the literature ( 13 , 18 ) . Traction Force Microscopy . After recording the time series of GFP - actin trans - fected growth cones and fluorescent tracer particles embedded in the PAA gel , growth cones were removed using a combination of 0 . 5 % trypsine and 0 . 5 % Tween 20 ( Sigma ) , and a reference image of the relaxed PAA gel was recorded . The deformation between the time - series images and the refer - ence image was calculated using a cross correlation algorithm implemented in LabView ( National Instruments ) and Matlab ( MathWorks ) . Finally , traction stresses were calculated following the unconstrained deconvolution method as presented in ( 22 ) . The analysis method was successfully verified by repro - ducing an applied lateral force of 1 nN using SFM . Appendix To gain the forces that drive retrograde actin flow , we extended linear elasticity theory ( 39 ) to the viscoelastic regime . Viscoelas - ticity connects the stress σ and the strain u using the characteristic memory function , or relaxation modulus E ( t ) that contains infor - mation about both viscous and elastic material characteristics . If the stress resulting from a known deformation is sought , the Boltzmann superposition principle is useful ( 40 ) : σ ð t Þ ¼ Z t −∞ E ð t − τ Þ du d τ d τ ; [ 2 ] where _ u ¼ du ∕ dt is the strain rate . If the time dependent relaxa - tion modulus E ( t ) and u ( t ) are known , the time dependent stress can be calculated . In 3D , it is necessary to change to a tensorial description . The linear strain tensor u ij is calculated at each point in the object from the deformation vector ~ u by u ij ¼ 1 2 (cid:1) ∂ u i ∂ x j þ ∂ u j ∂ x i (cid:2) : [ 3 ] The pure elastic material properties can be described by the Young ’ s modulus E and the Poisson ratio ν to calculate the stress by σ ij ¼ E 1 þ ν (cid:1) u ij þ ν 1 − 2 ν u kk δ ij (cid:2) : [ 4 ] Recalling the Boltzmann superposition principle ( Eq . 2 ) , the time dependent stress can be calculated by σ ij ð t Þ ¼ Z t −∞ E ð t − τ Þ 1 þ ν (cid:1) du ij d τ þ ν 1 − 2 ν du kk d τ δ ij (cid:2) d τ : [ 5 ] In a final step we calculate the internal force vectors using the local equilibrium condition that requires that any spatial stress gradient has to be balanced by an internal force : f int i ¼ −∂ σ ik ∂ x k : [ 6 ] ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank Jacques Prost , Klaus Kroy , Ulrich Schwarz , and Iva Tolic - Norrelykke for helpful discussions . This work was supported 13424 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1106145108 Betz et al . by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft - Graduiertenkolleg Interneuro , Specific Targeted Research Project of the European Union , called Active Biomics , the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation [ Feodor Lynen Return Fellowship ( K . F . ) ] , and Ms . Marianne Duda . 1 . Chilton JK ( 2006 ) Molecular mechanisms of axon guidance . Dev Biol 292 : 13 – 24 . 2 . FranzeK , GuckJ ( 2010 ) The biophysicsofneuronalgrowth . RepProg Phys 73 : 094601 – 094619 . 3 . Lin CH , Espreafico EM , Mooseker MS , Forscher P ( 1996 ) Myosin drives retrograde F - actin flow in neuronal growth cones . Neuron 16 : 769 – 782 . 4 . Mallavarapu A , Mitchison T ( 1999 ) Regulated actin cytoskeleton assembly at filopo - dium tips controls their extension and retraction . J Cell Biol 146 : 1097 – 1106 . 5 . Heidemann SR , Lamoureux P , Buxbaum RE ( 1990 ) Growth cone behavior and produc - tion of traction force . J Cell Biol 111 : 1949 – 1957 . 6 . Chan CE , Odde DJ ( 2008 ) Traction dynamics of filopodia on compliant substrates . Science 322 : 1687 – 1691 . 7 . Flanagan LA , Ju YE , Marg B , Osterfield M , Janmey PA ( 2002 ) Neurite branching on deformable substrates . Neuroreport 13 : 2411 – 2415 . 8 . Joshi HC , Chu D , Buxbaum RE , Heidemann SR ( 1985 ) Tension and compression in the cytoskeleton of PC 12 neurites . J Cell Biol 101 : 697 – 705 . 9 . Ahmad FJ , et al . ( 2000 ) Motor proteins regulate force interactions between microtu - bules and microfilaments in the axon . Nat Cell Biol 2 : 276 – 280 . 10 . Baas PW , Ahmad FJ ( 2001 ) Force generation by cytoskeletal motor proteins as a regulator of axonal elongation and retraction . Trends Cell Biol 11 : 244 – 249 . 11 . Ji L , Lim J , Danuser G ( 2008 ) Fluctuations of intracellular forces during cell protrusion . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 1393 – 1400 . 12 . Juelicher F , Kruse K , Prost J , Joanny JF ( 2007 ) Active behavior of the Cytoskeleton . Phys Rep 449 : 3 – 28 . 13 . Mahaffy RE , Park S , Gerde E , Kas J , Shih CK ( 2004 ) Quantitative analysis of the viscoe - lasticpropertiesofthinregionsoffibroblastsusingatomicforcemicroscopy . BiophysJ 86 : 1777 – 1793 . 14 . Lu YB , et al . ( 2006 ) Viscoelastic properties of individual glial cells and neurons in the CNS . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 17759 – 17764 . 15 . WottawahF , etal . ( 2005 ) Opticalrheologyofbiologicalcells . PhysRevLett 94 : 098103 . 16 . MillerK , ChinzeiK , OrssengoG , BednarzP ( 2000 ) Mechanicalpropertiesofbraintissue in vivo : Experiment and computer simulation . J Biomech 33 : 1369 – 1376 . 17 . ChristAF , etal . ( 2010 ) Mechanicaldifferencebetweenwhiteandgraymatterintherat cerebellum measured by scanning force microscopy . J Biomech 43 : 2986 – 2992 . 18 . Mahaffy RE , Park S , Gerde E , Kas J , Shih CK ( 2004 ) Quantitative analysis of the viscoe - lasticpropertiesofthinregionsoffibroblastsusingatomicforcemicroscopy . BiophysJ 86 : 1777 – 1793 . 19 . BrunnerCA , etal . ( 2006 ) Cellmigrationthroughsmallgaps . EurBiophysJ 35 : 713 – 719 . 20 . Dennerll TJ , Joshi HC , Steel VL , Buxbaum RE , Heidemann SR ( 1988 ) Tension and com - pression in the cytoskeleton of PC - 12 neurites . II : Quantitative measurements . J Cell Biol 107 : 665 – 674 . 21 . Bernal R , Pullarkat PA , Melo F ( 2007 ) Mechanical properties of axons . Phys Rev Lett 99 : 018301 . 22 . Butler JP , Tolic - Norrelykke IM , Fabry B , Fredberg JJ ( 2002 ) Traction fields , moments , and strain energy that cells exert on their surroundings . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 282 : C595 – 605 . 23 . LeeJ , JacobsonK ( 1997 ) Thecompositionanddynamicsofcell - substratumadhesionsin locomoting fish keratocytes . J Cell Sci 110 ( ( Pt 22 ) ) : 2833 – 2844 . 24 . Danuser G , Waterman - Storer CM ( 2006 ) Quantitative fluorescent speckle microscopy of cytoskeleton dynamics . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 35 : 361 – 387 . 25 . Betz T , Koch D , Lim D , Kas JA ( 2009 ) Stochastic actin polymerizationand steady retro - grade flow determine growth cone advancement . Biophys J 96 : 5130 – 5138 . 26 . Medeiros NA , Burnette DT , Forscher P ( 2006 ) Myosin II functions in actin - bundle turn - over in neuronal growth cones . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 216 – 226 . 27 . BridgmanPC , DaveS , AsnesCF , TullioAN , AdelsteinRS ( 2001 ) MyosinIIBisrequiredfor growth cone motility . J Neurosci 21 : 6159 – 6169 . 28 . WangYL , PelhamRJ ( 1998 ) Preparationofaflexible , porouspolyacrylamidesubstrate for mechanical studies of cultured cells . Methods Enzymol 298 : 489 – 496 . 29 . Gatlin JC , Estrada - Bernal A , Sanford SD , Pfenninger KH ( 2006 ) Myristoylated , alanine - rich C - kinase substrate phosphorylation regulates growth cone adhesion and path - finding . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 5115 – 5130 . 30 . Dembo M , Wang YL ( 1999 ) Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomo - tion of fibroblasts . Biophys J 76 : 2307 – 2316 . 31 . Gardel ML , et al . ( 2008 ) Traction stress in focal adhesions correlates biphasically with actin retrograde flow speed . J Cell Biol 183 : 999 – 1005 . 32 . LoC - M , WangH - B , DemboM , WangY - li ( 2000 ) Cellmovementisguidedbytherigidity of the substrate . Biophys J 79 : 144 – 152 . 33 . Georges PC , Miller WJ , Meaney DF , Sawyer ES , Janmey PA ( 2006 ) Matrices with com - pliance comparable to that of brain tissue select neuronal over glial growth in mixed cortical cultures . Biophys J 90 : 3012 – 3018 . 34 . Bray D ( 1979 ) Mechanical tension produced by nerve cells in tissue culture . J Cell Sci 37 : 391 – 410 . 35 . BernalR , Melo F , PullarkatPA ( 2010 ) Dragforce asa toolto testthe active mechanical response of PC12 neurites . Biophys J 98 : 515 – 523 . 36 . Mitchison T , Kirschner M ( 1988 ) Cytoskeletal dynamics and nerve growth . Neuron 1 : 761 – 772 . 37 . Suter DM , Forscher P ( 2000 ) Substrate — cytoskeletal coupling as a mechanism for the regulation of growth cone motility and guidance . J Neurobiol 44 : 97 – 113 . 38 . Moore SW , Biais N , Sheetz MP ( 2009 ) Traction on immobilized netrin - 1 is sufficient to reorient axons . Science 325 : 166 . 39 . Landau LD , Lifschitz EM ( 1986 ) Theory of Elasticity ( Pergamon , Oxford ) . 40 . Lakes RS ( 1998 ) Viscoelastic Solids ( CRC , Boca Raton ) . Betz et al . PNAS ∣ August 16 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 33 ∣ 13425 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P H Y S I C S