REVIEW PAPER Review of Managerial Science https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11846 - 023 - 00621 - 4 Abstract Artificial intelligence ( AI ) is deemed to increase workers’ productivity by enhancing their creative abilities and acting as a general - purpose tool for innovation . While much is known about AI’s ability to create value through innovation , less is known about how AI’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ( IWB ) . With AI’s limits in perspective , innovative work behaviour might serve as workarounds to compensate for AI limitations . Therefore , the guiding research question is : How will AI limitations , rather than its apparent transformational strengths , drive workers’ innovative work behaviour in a workplace ? A search protocol was employed to identify 65 articles based on relevant keywords and article selection criteria using the Scopus database . The thematic analysis suggests several themes : ( i ) Robots make mistakes , and such mistakes stimulate workers’ IWB , ( ii ) AI triggers ‘fear’ in workers , and this ‘fear’ stimulates workers’ IWB , ( iii ) Workers are reskilled and upskilled to compensate for AI limitations , ( iv ) AI interface stimulates worker engagement , ( v ) Algorithmic bias requires IWB , and ( vi ) AI works as a general - purpose tool for IWB . In contrast to prior reviews , which generally focus on the apparent transformational strengths of AI in the workplace , this review primarily identifies AI limitations before suggesting that the limitations could also drive innovative work behaviour . Propositions are included after each theme to encourage future research . Keywords Artificial intelligence · Intelligent robot · AI limitation · Innovative work behaviour · Creativity · Reskilling Received : 30 June 2021 / Accepted : 18 January 2023 © The Author ( s ) , under exclusive licence to Springer - Verlag GmbH Germany , part of Springer Nature 2023 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? Araz Zirar 1 Araz Zirar A . Zirar @ hud . ac . uk 1 Huddersfield Business School , University of Huddersfield , Huddersfield , UK 1 3 A . Zirar 1 Introduction Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) is increasingly taking over physical motion and performance activities , data processing and analysis , repetitive physical equipment management , and individual effective performance in workplaces ( Chuang 2020 ; Malik et al . 2021 ) . One might , therefore , argue that workers engage in more innovative work behaviour ( IWB ) ( Henkel et al . 2020 ; Jaiswal et al . 2021 ) . But then , how will AI in a workplace make workers innovative ? The answer seems to be more nuanced . While the existing literature ( Chuang 2020 ; Klotz 2018 ; Malik et al . 2021 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) suggests that AI enhances workers’ abilities ( intuition , empathy , and imagination ) by automating mundane , repetitive , and boring activities . In academic research , there is a debate on whether this enhancement in workers’ abilities results from AI augmenting human intelligence and skills ( Farrow 2019 ; Klotz 2018 ) . Workplace AI that helps doctors diagnose disease and helps bankers detect fraud improves workers’ detection abilities rather than innovative work behaviour . However , the use of AI in this context suggests that AI cannot act independently of human workers ( Klotz 2018 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . It is reasonable to imply that AI’s limitations require human intelligence and abilities , for instance , to diagnose disease and detect fraud because current AI advancements cannot do so without humans ( Klotz 2018 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . Workers , therefore , compensate for algorithmic flaws than relying on AI to enhance their creativity . While AI can influence workers’ behaviour ( Malik et al . 2021 ; Yam et al . 2020 ) , it is unclear how it might enable innovative work behaviour . The research question that guides this review is : how will AI make workers innovative in their work ? Following a protocol , the analysis involved reviewing 65 articles found in the Scopus database ( Tranfield et al . 2003 ) . Insights in the form of themes are obtained , along with propositions and prospective research areas , to highlight gaps in current knowledge and encourage further AI - enabled IWB research . There are five sections to this study . The second section offers background for the two concepts . The third section describes the research method . Section four presents the research themes and propositions . The fifth section provides the concluding remarks , including discussion and conclusion , contributions , and study limits . 2 Background 2 . 1 Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) in the workplace AI refers to computers’ ability to learn from experience and perform human - like complex tasks , such as rational decision - making ( Pomerol 1997 ; Wang 2019 ) . A common trend emerging from AI definitions is that machines can perform complex human - like tasks based on algorithms and data in the workplace and society . AI’s purpose is , therefore , to imitate human cognitive functions like perception , learning , reasoning , and decision - making ( Holford 2019 ; Lopes de Sousa Jabbour et al . 2018 ) . However , the performance of intelligent systems depends on the data fed into them ( Farrow 2019 ; Thesmar et al . 2019 ) . Intelligent systems are unable to obtain 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? missing parts of data . Therefore , data consistency and quantity are significant issues for AI applications in the workplace . Human intervention to support AI is required , as human intelligence and innovative behaviour are needed to find missing parts of data and categorise appropriate data for AI systems ( Shute and Rahimi 2021 ) . Human intervention is also necessary to override or interpret the outputs of these systems ( Yam et al . 2020 ) . However , a core issue for workers with workplace AI is the loss of employment ( Braganza et al . 2020 ; Rampersad 2020 ) . Many workers will lose their jobs to AI applications in the workplace ( Balsmeier and Woerter 2019 ) . Consequently , the chances are high that the work performed by workplace AI would no longer need the workers’ involvement ( Holford 2019 ; Wright and Schultz 2018 ) . Workers , therefore , would not feel comfortable if they could not understand how an AI application helps or affects them . The strategy that appears to help with this dilemma is to let workers see how this advancement activates their innovative behaviour ( Fügener et al . 2022 ; Klotz 2018 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . However , the reality is quite the opposite ( Davenport 2019 ; Gligor et al . 2021 ; Waterson 2020a , b ) . In such a technological context , while the inner workings of such systems generally remain unknown ( Gligor et al . 2021 ; Klotz 2018 ) , it is up to workers to upskill and reskill themselves to engage in innovative behaviour to coexist with AI systems ( Afsar et al . 2014 ; Jaiswal et al . 2021 ; Sousa and Wilks 2018 ) . 2 . 2 Innovative work behaviour ( IWB ) Scholarly research combines idea conception through completion under ‘innovative behaviour’ ( Baer 2012 ; Baer and Frese 2003 ; Scott and Bruce 1994 ; Somech and Drach - Zahavy 2013 ) . The generation and implementation of new and original ideas into newly designed goods , services , or ways of working are examples of innovative work behaviour ( Baer 2012 ; Perry - Smith and Mannucci 2017 ) . Further , innovative behaviour is often associated with creative problem - solving in engineering literature ( Anantrasirichai and Bull 2021 ; Colin et al . 2016 ) . AI technologies intend to enhance and support individuals’ creativity in problem - solving . In this literature , AI is a creative tool and can be a creator in its own right ( Anantrasirichai and Bull 2021 ; Colin et al . 2016 ) . On the other hand , workers can use AI applications to demonstrate ‘creativity in problem - solving’ in the workplace . They could use AI to create something new , like a unique ice cream flavour . However , IWB is generally reactive rather than proactive in management literature , such as devising workarounds ( Alter 2014 ) . Idea generation , elaboration , promotion , and implementation are parts of the process of developing workarounds ( Alter 2014 ; Perry - Smith and Mannucci 2017 ) . With AI’s limits in perspective , innovative work behaviour serves as workarounds to compensate for AI limitations . Moreover , as per engineering literature ( Anantrasirichai and Bull 2021 ; Colin et al . 2016 ) , being creative is more about the creative process and an individual’s intellect than the creative outcome and behaviour . Solving a problem through a dramatic shift in viewpoint by employing technology is vital in the creative process ( Colin et al . 2016 ) . As per management literature , innovative behaviour manifests in the 1 3 A . Zirar creative product ( the behaviour ) through idea generation , elaboration , championing , and implementation ( Alter 2014 ; Perry - Smith and Mannucci 2017 ) . In this review , IWB is spontaneous activity to compensate for AI flaws or make sense of AI system outputs rather than a dramatic shift in an individual’s perspective . IWB necessitates deliberate workers’ intervention in the workplace ( Perry - Smith and Mannucci 2017 ) . It is thus IWB is the identification of issues , together with the generation , initiation , and implementation of new and original ideas , as well as the set of behaviours required to develop , initiate , and execute ideas with the intent of enhancing personal and business performance ( Jong and Hartog 2010 ) . The behavioural element is critical , which means the conception through completion of ideas is not enough to demonstrate IWB without workers’ engagement with others in this process ( Perry - Smith and Mannucci 2017 ) . A worker collaborates with others to drive new ideas and determine feasibility ( Perry - Smith and Mannucci 2017 ) . However , when a worker engages with others as part of IWB , groupthink is likely to kill an idea prematurely ( Moorhead and Montanari 1986 ) . In addition , IWB reflects organisational contexts , which means ideation and the involvement of workers with others reflect the context of an organisation ( Perry - Smith and Mannucci 2017 ; Saether 2019 ) . While workers identify potential problems and initiate behaviours that allow sharing of knowledge and insights ( Chatterjee et al . 2021 ) , IWB is expected to produce innovative output ( Farrow 2019 ) . It is , therefore , reasonable to suggest that IWB is a worker’s deliberate action of ideation and adopting new ideas , goods , processes , and procedures to their tasks , unit , department , or organisation ( Jong and Hartog 2010 ) . In this analysis , IWB examples include supporting the design , implementation , introduction and use of AI applications in the workplace ( Desouza et al . 2020 ) , implementing AI - related technologies ( Choi et al . 2019 ) , and proposing ways of achieving goals and executing work tasks using AI technologies ( Mahroof 2019 ) . However , this is not an exhaustive list ; any behaviour in an organisation with an ‘innovative’ element falls under IWB ( Jong and Hartog 2010 ) . 3 Research method The researcher formulated the research question , determined the keywords , and identified , collected , analysed and synthesised the relevant literature ( Klein and Potosky 2019 ; Tranfield et al . 2003 ) . The research began with a review of relevant literature on ‘artificial intelligence’ and ‘innovative work behaviour . ’ The review question – how will AI in a workplace make workers innovative in their work ? – allowed for a ‘concept - centric’ approach to the review , as mentioned in Method 1 below ( Rousseau et al . 2008 ) . Three stages were followed to find studies on ‘artificial intelligence’ and ‘innovative behaviour’ : First , a manual search was performed in Google Scholar using a combination of the two concepts . This search aimed to delve into the potential keywords for the data collection . Second , a search was performed in the electronic and multidisciplinary database of Scopus using a combination of the keywords : ALL ( 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? ( “artificial intelligence” OR “augmented intelligence” OR robot * ) AND ( “human innovati * ” OR “human creativ * ” OR “innovative work behavi ? r” ) ) . Previous literature ( e . g . , Bos - Nehles et al . 2017 ; Charlwood and Guenole 2021 ; Farrow 2019 ) has used these keywords . Also , Truncation and Wildcards techniques were used to optimise the search string . Truncation and Wildcards are ‘search string broadening strategies’ to include various word endings and spellings . For example , in “innovative work behavi ? r” , the Truncation symbol “ ? ” in “behavi ? r” was used to force the search string to return the British and American spellings of “innovative work behaviour . “ The search string used the Scopus field code ‘ALL ( ) ’ rather than ‘TITLE - ABS - KEY ( ) ’ to search document contents for the combination of the keywords . The search string returned documents that included the combination of the keywords in the entire body of the documents and the title , abstract , and keywords . The final list of articles was retrieved from the Scopus database . The breadth of publications was prioritised over the depth . The Scopus database provides this , as it covers peer - reviewed journals published by major publishing houses and goes beyond only influential journals ( Ballew 2009 ; Burnham 2006 ; Sharma et al . 2020 ) . Further , due to the nature of ‘artificial intelligence’ and ‘innovative behaviour’ concepts , an interdisciplinary field coverage was chosen , a strength of the Scoups database compared to other databases such as the Web of Science . While Google Scholar could have provided such interdisciplinary field coverage , compared to Scopus , it has significant drawbacks , including difficulty narrowing down search results , limited sorting options , questionable content quality , and difficulties accurately extracting meta - data from PDF files , to highlight a few . When the Scopus database was searched , the returned results were limited to the last ten years ( Fig . 1 ) , articles in the English language , journal as a source type , articles as a document type , articles of ABS ranking , articles in the following subject Fig . 1 Publication trend 1 3 A . Zirar areas : Business , Management , and Accounting ; Social Sciences ; Psychology ; Arts and Humanities ; and Decision Sciences . The Scopus field code EXACTSRCTITLE ( ) was used to limit the returned results to ABS - listed journals ( Table 1 ) . This field code was supplied with a list of ABS - ranked journals . Then , manual checking of journal titles was performed to verify the quality of the returned data to ABS - rated journals . A graphic representation of the process is shown in Fig . 2 . A further reduction of the list was made by reviewing the abstracts of the articles in stage 2 above ( Di Vaio et al . 2020 ) . Articles had to satisfy thematic requirements to be included in the review . Articles that addressed the relationship between artificial intelligence and innovative work behaviour were retained for analysis . A careful reading of the articles’ abstracts helped create an excel table highlighting the relevance of each article to the topic ( Di Vaio et al . 2020 ) . Then , in the third stage , to identify articles not returned by the Scopus search string in the second stage , a review of the reference lists of the recent articles , among the articles returned by the Scopus database , was performed ( Di Vaio et al . 2020 ) . Following the exclusion and inclusion criteria , 65 studies matching the criteria were combined for this analysis . The objective of the data analysis stage was to understand the selected list of articles ( Tranfield et al . 2003 ) . The data were organised into themes in an Excel spreadsheet ( Braun and Clarke 2006 ) . The analysis adopted ‘Reflexive Thematic Analysis’ ( Braun and Clarke 2019 , 2022 ) . ‘Reflexive’ in this context highlights the role of the researcher in generating the themes ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ; Terry and Hayfield 2020 ) . This analysis method relies on the researcher’s interpretation and active engagement with the data considering the research question ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ; Byrne 2022 ; Terry and Hayfield 2020 ) . Using reflexive thematic analysis , a researcher can offer deeper levels of meaning and significance , analyse hidden interpretations and assumptions , and explore the implications of meaning ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ; Byrne 2022 ) . In the reflexive thematic analysis , themes are hence patterns of meaning anchored by a shared idea or concept ( Terry and Hayfield 2020 ) . They are generated , explored , and refined Table 1 Journals and disciplines of selected articles ( only journals with two or more articles ) Journal titles in descending order of number of articles Disciplines per the Academic Journal Guide 2021 # articles Journal of Business Research ETHICS - CSR - MAN 7 Journal of Knowledge Management ORG STUD 5 Creativity Research Journal PSYCH ( GENERAL ) 4 Computers in Human Behavior INFO MAN 3 Creativity and Innovation Management INNOV 3 Futures SOC SCI 3 International Journal of Human - Computer Studies INFO MAN 3 Annals of Operations Research OR & MANSC 2 Journal of Business Economics ECON 2 Journal of Enterprise Information Management INFO MAN 2 Journal of Management Information Systems INFO MAN 2 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? throughout iterative rounds rather than simply emerging from the data ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ; Byrne 2022 ; Terry and Hayfield 2020 ) . They are meaningful entities from codes that capture the essence of meanings from data rather than clusters of data , classifications , or summaries ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ; Terry and Hayfield 2020 ) . Fig . 2 The process of selecting the articles 1 3 A . Zirar When reviewing the selected articles , the researcher allowed the six phases of thematic analysis ( Braun et al . 2019 ; Braun and Clarke 2006 ) to guide theming and anchoring data to themes . First , the researcher immersed himself in the selected articles by re - reading them to familiarise himself with the data . During this phase , by being curious , the researcher made casual notes of interesting statements , such as “tasks robots will dominate” ( Wirtz et al . 2018 ) , “robot - related up - skilling” ( Lu et al . 2020 ) , “robots often make mistakes” ( Yam et al . 2020 ) , etc . In the second phase , the researcher started anchoring statements from the selected articles to interesting codes such as “robot mistake” , “replacement fear” , etc . In the third phase , constructing themes , themes were “built , molded , and given meaning” ( Braun and Clarke 2019 , p . 854 ) , and they were the analytic output of an immersion process and deep engagement ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ) . The researcher explored latent meanings , connections , and possible interpretations such as “tasks robots will dominate” ( Wirtz et al . 2018 ) and the uncertainties around robot - human tasks distribution , or “robot - related up - skilling” ( Lu et al . 2020 ) and the perpetual race of upskilling and reskilling , or “robots often make mistakes” ( Yam et al . 2020 ) and the idea of worker’s finding workarounds , etc . The researcher reviewed the candidate themes in the fourth and fifth phases and revised and defined them . Themes that were substantiated using the reviewed articles and were related to one another and the research question were kept ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ) . The researcher also shared the themes in research circles to enhance reflexivity and interpretative depth ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ; Dwivedi et al . 2019 ) . After that , in the sixth phase , the researcher used an iterative approach to report the themes with supporting references from the list of selected articles and relate the analysis to the research question ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ) . The researcher also presented the themes at the 37th EGOS Colloquium 2021 . The researcher benefited from the participants’ feedback to further enhance reflexivity and interpretative depth ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ; Dwivedi et al . 2019 ) . The development of a coding book , intercoder reliability , and reproducibility are inconsistent with reflexive thematic analysis ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ) . Furthermore , multiple analyses are possible ; however , the researcher selected and developed the themes most pertinent to the research question ( Terry and Hayfield 2020 ) . Therefore , the process of thematic analysis was interpretive , intending to identify themes and highlight links ( Tranfield et al . 2003 ) . The analysis began with a manual text study . Themes were developed inductively ( Braun and Clarke 2006 ) . They were linked iteratively , meaning that the analysis process entailed continual forward and backward movement in terms of constructing and refining themes ( Braun and Clarke 2006 ) . 4 Analysis and interpretation The analysis suggested several themes in terms of how AI might drive IWB . A tabular presentation of the themes and supporting references is shown in Table 2 . These themes are discussed in this section . Propositions are also included after each theme to encourage future research into the role of AI in driving IWB . 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? 4 . 1 Robots make mistakes , and such mistakes stimulate workers’ IWB In this context , ‘robots’ refers to any intelligent systems in a workplace that emulate workers’ intelligence and abilities ( Yam et al . 2020 ) . To increase efficiency , organisations rely on robots ( Yam et al . 2020 ) . For instance , robots generated non - structured agreements in greater numbers than humans ( Druckman et al . 2021 ) . Negotiators working with a robotic platform were more pleased with the results and had more favourable views of the mediation experience ( Druckman et al . 2021 ) . These algorithmic approaches reduce human knowledge and meaning in the workplace ( Holford 2019 ) . However , different cultures can have different perspectives on robots . Americans , for example , were more critical of AI - generated content than the Chinese ( Wu et al . 2020 ) . One might argue that robots in a workplace interact with workers who may not be adequately trained to interact with them . Therefore robots need to relate to inexperienced instructions and feel normal to workers even in unstructured interactions ( Scheutz and Malle 2018 ) . However , autonomy and flexibility expose robots to a plethora of ways in which they can make mistakes , disregard a worker’s expectations and the ethical code of a workplace , or create physical or psychological harm to a worker ( Scheutz and Malle 2018 ) . A robot in an Amazon warehouse mistakenly ripped a can of bear repellent spray , resulting in the hospitalisation of 24 workers ( Parker 2018 ) . Microsoft’s robot editor Table 2 List of themes and supporting references Theme Reference Robots make mistakes , and such mistakes stimulate workers’ IWB ( Akhavan et al . , 2018 ; Bawack et al . , 2021 ; Botega & da Silva , 2020 ; Casazza & Gioppo , 2020 ; Grahn et al . 2020 ; Holford 2019 ; Köbis & Mossink , 2021 ; Kronblad 2020 ; S . K . Parker et al . , 2021 ; Townsend and Hunt 2019 ; Wu et al . 2020 ; Xu and Wang 2019 ) AI triggers ‘fear’ in workers , and this ‘fear’ stimulates workers’ IWB ( Abubakar et al . , 2019 ; Braganza et al . 2020 ; Cetindamar Kozanoglu & Abedin , 2020 ; Cropley 2020 ; Ding , 2021 ; Druckman et al . 2021 ; Gruchmann et al . , 2020 ; Holford 2019 ; Kronblad 2020 ; Loureiro et al . 2020 ; Palumbo 2021 ; Wu et al . 2020 ; Xu and Wang 2019 ) Workers are reskilled and upskilled to compensate for AI limitations ( Birdi , 2020 ; Butschan et al . , 2019 ; Casazza & Gioppo , 2020 ; Cetindamar Kozanoglu & Abedin , 2020 ; Chaubey & Sahoo , 2018 ; Cropley 2020 ; Dutse , 2015 ; Grahn et al . 2020 ; Holford 2019 ; Köbis & Mossink , 2021 ; Loureiro et al . 2020 ; Nevo et al . 2020 ; Palumbo 2021 ; Shute and Rahimi 2021 ; Van Acker et al . 2021 ; Vereycken et al . 2021 ; Xu and Wang 2019 ) AI interface stimulates worker engagement ( Akter et al . 2021 ; Althuizen et al . , 2012 ; Althuizen & Wierenga , 2014 ; Casazza & Gioppo , 2020 ; Chiru & Rebedea , 2017 ; Druckman et al . 2021 ; Flavián et al . , 2021 ; Nevo et al . 2020 ; Shute and Rahimi 2021 ; Townsend and Hunt 2019 ; Wu & Bryan - Kinns , 2019 ; Xu and Wang 2019 ) Algorithmic bias requires IWB ( Althuizen & Wierenga , 2014 ; Cropley 2020 ; Flavián et al . , 2021 ; Holford 2019 ; Keeler & Bernstein , 2021 ; Köbis & Mossink , 2021 ; Kronblad 2020 ; López - Cabarcos et al . , 2020 ; Stierand et al . 2014 ; Wu et al . 2020 ; Xu and Wang 2019 ) AI works as a general - purpose tool for IWB ( Akter et al . 2021 ; Althuizen and Reichel 2016 ; Austin , 2016 ; Bawack et al . , 2021 ; Botega & da Silva , 2020 ; Casazza & Gioppo , 2020 ; Chiru & Rebedea , 2017 ; Köbis & Mossink , 2021 ; Kronblad 2020 ; Lo and Tian 2020 ; Magallanes et al . , 2018 ; Nevo et al . 2020 ; Nöhammer & Stichlberger , 2019 ; Perry - Smith and Mannucci 2017 ; Shute and Rahimi 2021 ; Townsend and Hunt 2019 ; Warrier et al . , 2021 ) 1 3 A . Zirar used a photo of the wrong mixed - race member of a band to illustrate a news article about racism ( Waterson 2020b ) . An AI robot camera , which was meant to monitor the football during a game , instead tracked the assistant referee’s head , resulting in sudden camera movements towards the referee and repeated switching between the referee’s head and the actual football ( HT Tech , 2020 ) . Although organisations increasingly depend on robots to improve efficiency , they frequently make mistakes , adversely affecting workers and their organisations ( Yam et al . 2020 ) . Also , algorithmic approaches fail to understand the distinct characteristics of human creativity and the tacit knowledge that goes with it ( Chatterjee et al . 2021 ; Holford 2019 ) . Therefore , an observation in the literature ( Li et al . 2019 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) is evident in favour of workers shaping an organisation’s service innovation performance more than robots . Although this can come as a surprise , since robots are supposed to make fewer errors , workers’ IWB may benefit from robots’ mistakes ( Choi et al . 2019 ; Yam et al . 2020 ) . Delivery drivers , for example , can drive in real traffic while predicting events for a robotic autopilot ( Grahn et al . 2020 ) . Although robotic autopilot can manage predicted events in this scenario , workers can deal with uncertainty and related adaptive and social behaviours in specific , highly congested traffic conditions and environments ( Grahn et al . 2020 ) . If robots frequently fail to provide the expected service , workers would be pushed to think outside the box to eliminate robot mistakes . In this case , the role of robots in the workplace stimulates workers’ ability to think and innovate to overcome robot limitations ( Klotz 2018 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . Manual assembly , for example , would place high demands on workers’ cognitive processing in a robotic - enabled workplace ( Van Acker et al . 2021 ) . If robots make mistakes ( or due to the diverse nature of services ) , they will likely continue to stimulate workers’ IWB . Therefore , robots in the workplace ( particularly in knowledge work ) must prioritise collaborative approaches in which workers and robots collaborate closely ( Fügener et al . 2022 ; Sowa et al . 2021 ) . The interpretation of this theme is summed up in Proposition 1 . Table 3 proposes relevant questions to investigate this proposition further . Proposition 1 Robots make mistakes , and such mistakes stimulate workers’ IWB . 4 . 2 AI triggers ‘fear’ in workers , and this ‘fear’ stimulates workers’ IWB AI technologies in the workplace can reshape tasks and the definition of work across businesses ( Braganza et al . 2020 ) . This reshaping eliminates certain jobs or parts of an automated job ( Braganza et al . 2020 ) . As a result , algorithmic approaches aim to reduce various forms of human involvement and interpretation in the workplace ( Holford 2019 ) . Self - service technology ( SST ) and the Wizard - of - Oz ( WOZ ) experiment , for example , can demonstrate that the contribution of workers to services that incorporate these technologies has been reduced ( Costello and Donnellan 2007 ) . Moreover , rather than directly influencing worker productivity , AI technologies indirectly influence the development of new , modified , or unmodified worker routines ( Giudice et al . 2021 ) . Therefore , it is generally accepted that workplace AI threatens 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? T a b l e 3 R e s ea r c h qu e s ti on s f o r f u t u r e s t ud i e s T h e m a ti c a r ea R e s ea r c h qu e s ti on s R obo t s m a k e m i s t a k e s , a nd s u c h m i s t a k e s s ti m u l a t e w o r k e r s ’ I W B • W h i c h t ou c hpo i n t s o f t h e r obo t - c u s t o m e r r e l a ti on s h i p r e qu i r e w o r k e r i nnov a ti v e b e h a v i ou r ? • W h e n a nd w h e r e s h o u l d a r obo t b e t r a i n e d t o d i s r e g a r d a w o r k e r’ s e xp ec t a ti on s a nd t h e w o r kp l ace ’ s e t h i ca l c od e ? • S hou l d w o r k e r s b e t r a i n e d t o i n t e r ac t w it h r obo t s , o r s hou l d r obo t s b e t r a i n e d t o i n t e r ac t w it h w o r k e r s w ho a r e no t a d e qu a t e l y p r e p a r e d t o i n t e r ac t w it h t h e m ? • H o w ca n a l go r it h m i c a pp r o ac h e s b e d e s i gn e d t o t a k e a dv a n t a g e o f hu m a n c r ea ti v it y a nd i n t u iti on ? • H o w do w e d e t e r m i n e t h e s e v e r it y o f r obo t m i s t a k e s , a nd w h i c h t yp e s o f r obo t m i s t a k e s n ece ss it a t e i nnov a ti v e r e s pon s e s ? A I t r i gg e r s ‘f ea r’ i n w o r k e r s , a nd t h i s ‘f ea r’ s ti m u l a t e s w o r k e r s ’ I W B • W ill w o r k e r s und e r go a c on ti nuou s c y c l e o f r e s k illi ng a nd up s k illi ng b eca u s e o f A I a dop ti on i n t h e w o r kp l ace ? • W h a t i s t h e i m p ac t o f t h e f ea r o f b e i ng r e p l ace d on w h a t i s c on s i d e r e d m ea n i ng f u l w o r k ? • W h a t c u lt u r a l c o m pon e n t s , a s i d e fr o m f a m il y s uppo r t , ca n h e l p t o a ll e v i a t e t h e w o r k e r s ’ f ea r o f b e i ng r e p l ace d ? • I n t h e c on t e x t o f A I a dop ti on , ho w do e s t h e ‘f ea r o f b e i ng r e p l ace d ’ a ff ec t w o r k e r m o r a l e ? W o r k e r s a r e r e s k ill e d a nd up s k ill e d t o c o m p e n s a t e f o r A I li m it a ti on s • H o w e ff ec ti v e w ill A I - a ss i s t e d p e r s on a li s e d gu i d a n ce on w h a t s k ill s w o r k e r s n ee d t o r e t r a i n a nd up s k ill b e ? • H o w do t h e w o r kp l ac e s k ill s t h a t n ee d t o c o e x i s t w it h A I e vo l v e ? • B e yond r e s k illi ng a n d up s k illi ng , w h a t e l s e i s r e qu i r e d f o r hu m a n - A I c o ll a bo r a ti on i n t h e w o r kp l ace ? A I i n t e rf ace s ti m u l a t e s w o r k e r e n g a g e m e n t • H o w do A I s y s t e m u s a b ilit y a nd i n t e rf ace r e qu i r e m e n t s d i ff e r fr o m on e w o r k e r t o a no t h e r ? • H o w ca n c o m p a n i e s acc oun t f o r t h e n ee d s o f h i gh - a nd l o w - s k ill e d w o r k e r s w h e n it c o m e s t o c r ea ti ng t h e i n t e rf ace o f A I s y s t e m s ? • W ill h i gh - s k ill e d w o r k e r s r eac t d i ff e r e n tl y t o A I i n t e rf ace s t h a n l o w - s k ill e d w o r k e r s ? • W h a t s hou l d o r g a n i s a ti on s c on s i d e r w h e n bu il d i ng A I i n t e rf ace s , b e yond w o r k e r s ’ s e n s o r y a nd f un c t i on a l n ee d s , c on s i d e r i ng d i v e r s it y a nd i n c l u s i on i n t h e w o r k f o r ce ? A l go r it h m i c b i a s r e qu i r e s I W B • H o w do c o m p a n i e s d ec i d e ho w m u c h d i s c r e ti on w o r k e r s s hou l d h a v e w h e n ov e rr i d i ng A I s y s t e m s ? • W h a t s a f e gu a r d s s ho u l d o r g a n i s a ti on s bu il d i n t o A I s y s t e m s t o m i n i m i s e w o r k e r s ’ d i s c r e ti on t o ov e rr u l e A I s y s t e m s i n s it u a ti on s w h e r e n e po ti s m a nd w a s t a a r e c o mm on ? A I w o r k s a s a g e n e r a l - pu r po s e t oo l f o r I W B • W ill t ec hno l og i e s s u c h a s 3 D p r i n ti ng i m p r ov e w o r k e r s ’ s k ill s o r e n c ou r a g e t h e m t o b e m o r e i nnov a t i v e i n t h e w o r kp l ace ? • W ill ‘r ea l - w o r l d ’ ca s e s t ud i e s r e v ea l w h e t h e r A I t ec hno l og i e s i n s p i r e w o r k e r s t o r eac h w i d e a nd d ee p i n t o t h e i r kno w l e dg e b a s e s t o g e n e r a t e nov e l i d ea s ? • W h a t do w o r k e r s t h i n k o f t h e s t a t e m e n t t h a t “ b eca u s e A I i s t a k i ng ov e r r ou ti n e ac ti v iti e s , t h e y w ill h a v e m o r e ti m e t o p l a n on m o r e i nnov a ti v e a s p e c t s o f t h e i r w o r k ” ? • W h il e A I t ec hno l og i e s h a v e t h e po t e n ti a l t o fr ee up m o r e ti m e a nd s p ace f o r w o r k e r s t o e ng a g e i n i d e a g e n e r a ti on a nd d e li b e r a ti on , ho w s ho u l d bu s i n e ss e s f o s t e r w o r k e r s ’ “ w illi ngn e ss t o i nnov a t e” ? 1 3 A . Zirar the continuity and security of workers’ jobs ( Rampersad 2020 ) . It is also projected that AI applications will take over full - time and permanent jobs while workers will be hired for short - term assignments ( Braganza et al . 2020 ) . Therefore , considering the adoption of technological transformation , uncertainty about the employment of workers appears to be an integrated feature of AI systems ( Costello and Donnellan 2007 ) . This threat is genuine for jobs requiring repetitive motion , data management and analysis , repeated physical equipment control , and individual evaluative interaction ( Chuang 2020 ; Lloyd and Payne 2022 ) . This argument , however , does have limitations . Although there is a persistent fear of job loss ( Sousa and Wilks 2018 ) , the academic literature ( e . g . , Jaiswal et al . 2021 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) suggests a drive toward a more symbiotic synthesis of human - machine competencies . This drive takes a more proactive approach to AI adoption in the workplace , encouraging businesses to be cautious in treating their workers ( Li et al . 2019 ) . This body of literature also argues that businesses should actively protect workers’ interests and cautiously implement technology that supports rather than replaces them ( Li et al . 2019 ) . What can be suggested is that this line of thinking implies uncertainty about future employment for workers ( Li et al . 2019 ) . This uncertainty , however , may encourage workers to actively engage in service innovation ( Li et al . 2019 ) . And if an organisation can afford AI solutions , it is suggested that their workers’ IWB be enhanced by training ( Klotz 2018 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . While AI systems help workers in innovation ( Candi and Beltagui 2019 ; Verganti et al . 2020 ) , the ‘fear’ factor may trigger IWB in workers . This factor theoretically benefits workers in their quest for a long - term career and assists organisations in surviving through the transition time by safeguarding the interests of their workers ( Haefner et al . 2021 ; Li et al . 2019 ) . To stay relevant in a workplace where AI is reshaping human employment , workers must enhance their IWB ( Klotz 2018 ; Rampersad 2020 ; Sousa and Wilks 2018 ) . To coexist with intelligence systems , workers can capitalise on critical thinking , problem - solving , communication and teamwork ( Rampersad 2020 ; Sousa and Wilks 2018 ) . Therefore , workplace AI can stimulate IWB in workers because of improved workplace technology and the uncertainty and insecurity of jobs it brings to workers ( Jiang et al . 2020 ; Nam 2019 ) . ‘Fear’ of being replaced by robots or artificial intelligence , or ‘aliennational psychological contacts’ may trigger IWB in workers rather than the actual technology ( Braganza et al . 2020 ; Kim et al . 2017 ) . This discussion may also suggest that developments in AI systems , regardless of industry or context , stimulate IWB in workers if workers perceive a threat from these systems . However , when discussing the ‘fear’ of being replaced , the human culture’s underlying position on workplace technology should be considered ( Shujahat et al . 2019 ) . How workers perceive AI in the workplace through a cultural lens could indicate how much the ‘fear’ factor is perceived ( Wu et al . 2020 ) . For example , perceived wider family support might help alleviate the ‘fear’ factor ( Tu et al . 2021 ) . Though tailored approaches to mitigate the ‘fear’ factor of AI technologies and to put workers at the centre of workplace technologies are advised ( Kim et al . 2017 ; Palumbo 2021 ) , artificial intelligence is increasingly being adopted by organisations without careful consideration of the workers who will be working alongside it . 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? Uncertainty regarding the employment of workers continues to be an inherent feature of AI systems being adopted ( Costello and Donnellan 2007 ) . Proposition 2 summarises this understanding . Table 3 proposes relevant research questions to investigate this proposition further . Proposition 2 Workplace AI triggers ‘fear’ in workers , and this ‘fear’ stimulates IWB in workers as a means of staying relevant in the workplace . 4 . 3 Workers are reskilled and upskilled to compensate for AI shortcomings By rendering processes more scalable , broadening the scope of operations across boundaries , and enhancing workers’ learning abilities and flexibility , AI technologies enable organisations to transcend the limitations of human - intensive processes ( Verganti et al . 2020 ) . As per this interpretation , AI technologies encourage a people - centred and iterative approach ( Henkel et al . 2020 ; Verganti et al . 2020 ) . However , one might argue that AI supports human - based approaches to user - centred solutions by requiring workers to reskill and upskill ( Verganti et al . 2020 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . Therefore , while AI technologies can potentially reshape working arrangements , they can also facilitate workers’ reskilling and upskilling ( Kim et al . 2017 ; Palumbo 2021 ) . Further , human oversight of AI applications can encourage reskilling and upskilling of workers ( Brunetti et al . 2020 ; Xu and Wang 2019 ) . Human supervision is often needed with AI applications to ensure that biases are not propagated ( Sowa et al . 2021 ) . For instance , although AI robot lawyers can perform certain tasks , such as answering legal questions , it has been argued that working with human lawyers ensures nuanced issues are adequately handled ( Xu and Wang 2019 ) . As a result , the human - AI collaboration focuses on situations in which humans and AI collaborate closely ( Sowa et al . 2021 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . This interpretation explains that “algorithmic approaches , “ which aim to reduce human intervention in processes , could mean that while mundane and manual skills are delegated to robots , workers hone skills through reskilling and upskilling that robots still lack ( Holford 2019 ; Kim et al . 2017 ) . Workers , therefore , can reskill and upskill themselves because of the introduction of AI in the workplace ( Jaiswal et al . 2021 ) . When upskilling and reskilling combine data with human intuition to make the most of AI technological advances , algorithms can positively impact workers’ work and discretionary power ( Criadoa et al . 2020 ; Jaiswal et al . 2021 ) . However , not only practical and technical knowledge and skills are necessary for that purpose , but also creativity - focused skills such as managing uncertainty , critical thinking , problem - solving , exploring possibilities , tolerating ambiguity , exhibiting self - efficacy , teamwork , and effective communication ( Cropley 2020 ; Rampersad 2020 ) . Recent literature ( Jaiswal et al . 2021 ) also includes data analysis , digital , complex cognitive , decision - making , continuous learning skills , and creativity - focused skills . The necessary skill set for upskilling and reskilling can fall into three categories : technical , human , and conceptual skills ( Northouse 2018 ) . Also , one might argue 1 3 A . Zirar that upskilling and reskilling might mean workers are given AI - related short - term assignments when full - time and permanent assignments transfer to AI applications ( Braganza et al . 2020 ) . This discussion may also mean that to stay relevant , workers would go through a cycle of upskilling and reskilling , with the required skills evolving ( Gratton 2020 ; Ransbotham 2020 ) . Workers must also be challenged and empowered to generate and implement new ideas ( Auernhammer and Hall 2014 ) . Therefore , though workplace AI requires upskilling and reskilling ( Braganza et al . 2020 ) , workplace AI places high demands on workers’ cognitive processing ( Van Acker et al . 2021 ) . Gamification and simulations help workers understand the feasibility of ideas by collaborating in cross - functional teams and being involved in the active development and auditing processes of AI applications ( Anjali and Priyanka 2020 ; Criadoa et al . 2020 ) . Consequently , human - AI collaboration is needed to overcome AI limitations in the workplace . For human workers to stay relevant in such human - AI collaboration , they need to upskill and reskill . Proposition 3 summarises this understanding . Table 3 proposes relevant research questions to investigate this proposition further . Proposition 3 Workers can be reskilled and upskilled because of human - AI shortcomings in the workplace . 4 . 4 AI interface stimulates worker engagement When AI technologies take a people - centred approach , there are indications in the literature ( e . g . , Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) that the interface of AI systems can stimulate IWB in workers rather than the frequent errors of service robots ( Yam et al . 2020 ) . Earlier scholars ( e . g . , Davis 1998 ) agree that the interface design of technologies provides users with a means to interact with such technologies . For instance , Wilson and Daugherty ( 2019 ) report that medical professionals became medical coders in training workplace AI when the interface was user - friendly . The software interface , in this example , allowed medical coders to work with workplace AI and be involved in the AI solution’s much - needed training ( Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . However , it is essential to mention that usability and interface design requirements may change from one worker to another ( Massey et al . 2007 ) . It is also possible to infer that high - skilled workers are better at interacting with AI systems ( Shute and Rahimi 2021 ) . Therefore , a high - skilled worker may have different expectations from an AI system’s interface design regarding usability and responsiveness than a low - skilled worker ( Garnett 2018 ; Krzywdzinski 2017 ) . While a ‘responsive’ and ‘usable’ interface is proposed to stimulate IWB in workers , the judgement of a ‘responsive’ and ‘usable’ interface is impacted by complex interactions ( Garnett 2018 ; Massey et al . 2007 ) . The current research ( Massey et al . 2007 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) suggests that a ‘responsive’ and ‘usable’ interface , for example , to enter data into AI - systems , requires workers’ perspective on interface design . In the workplace , recent research ( Beane and Brynjolfsson 2020 ; Yam et al . 2020 ) also suggests that when robots 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? are human - like—capable of thinking and feeling—workers evaluate them more favourably . This favourable perception can be explained by the fact that workers like assisting others and sharing their knowledge ( Lo and Tian 2020 ; Yam et al . 2020 ) . Human - like robots may offer humans such feelings ( Giudice et al . 2021 ; Lo and Tian 2020 ) . However , the interface must meet workers’ sensory and functional needs ( Massey et al . 2007 ) . Therefore , designing such interfaces for workplace AI requires workers’ perspectives and understanding ( Massey et al . 2007 ) . While this extends beyond the interface design of an AI system ( Massey et al . 2007 ) , it suggests that intelligent systems can only encourage innovative behaviour if workers feel linked to them ( Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ; Yam et al . 2020 ) . This line of argument is extended further by proposing that a ‘responsive’ and ‘usable’ interface allows workers to conveniently enter data into an AI system and make sense of the systems’ outputs through such interface design ( Verganti et al . 2020 ) . The interface should clarify which issues need to be addressed and how the outputs should be used ( Verganti et al . 2020 ) . If workers can make informed decisions using such an interface , the interface may encourage IWB ( Verganti et al . 2020 ) . If AI systems have ‘friendly’ interface designs , responsive and usable , one may conclude that workplace AI stimulates IWB in workers . This understanding is summed up in Proposition 4 . Table 3 proposes relevant research questions to investigate this proposition further . Proposition 4 When workplace AI has a user - friendly interface design , it encourages workers to generate and implement ideas . 4 . 5 Algorithmic bias requires innovative behaviour Algorithmic bias may come from institutionalising existing human biases or introducing new ones ( Albrecht et al . 2021 ) . Implementing a machine learning model , for example , might be pitched to improve the satisfaction of employees and consumers . However , how do you define ‘satisfaction’ specifies the algorithm’s inner workings and the desired output ( Akter et al . 2021 ; Stahl et al . 2020 ) . And when AI technologies inform ( or make ) a decision that affects a human being ( i . e . a worker ) , such bias has a detrimental effect , resulting in discrimination and unfairness ( Akter et al . 2021 ) . For instance , based on data obtained from male CVs , Amazon’s AI recruitment system did not rate candidates gender - neutrally ( BBC , 2018 ) . Facebook’s Ad algorithm allowed advertisers to target users based on gender , race , and religion , all of which are protected classes ( Hern 2018 ) . An algorithm the UK’s Home Office used in visa decisions was dubbed “racist” ; the algorithm focused on an applicant’s nationality ( BBC , 2020 ) . Hence , although organisations are increasingly using AI systems and algorithms , the accessibility and interpretability of algorithms ( algorithmic transparency ) have drawn attention to the organisation’s algorithmic footprint ( Criadoa et al . 2020 ) . As 1 3 A . Zirar a result , innovative behaviour in the workplace entails addressing the ethical , social , economic , and legal aspects of AI applications ( Di Vaio et al . 2020 ) . While workers may still use discretion to override AI systems , biases in datasets and ambiguous algorithms force workers to rely on IWB to help AI systems make choices ( Criadoa et al . 2020 ) . Therefore , targeted human interventions are required to resolve the limitations of biases in a dataset and ambiguous algorithms ( Palumbo 2021 ) . Proposition 5 summarises this theme . Table 3 proposes relevant research questions to investigate this proposition further . Proposition 5 Algorithmic bias necessitates innovative behaviour to overcome the limitations of biases in a dataset and ambiguous algorithms . 4 . 6 AI as a general - purpose tool for innovative behaviour AI - assisted technologies can encourage curiosity , questioning , systematic thinking , trial and error , reasoning , and elaboration ( Güss et al . 2021 ) . A recently published preprint ( Wang et al . 2022 ) shares how curiosity might encourage humans to use AI’s ‘blind spots . ‘ The underlying argument is that AI - enabled systems encourage workers to reach wide and deep into their knowledge bases , resulting in novel ideas ( Althuizen and Reichel 2016 ) . Therefore , AI acts as a tool to transcend the limitations of human - intensive processes by allowing workers to generate ideas and assess their feasibility , thereby entering a cycle of learning iterations that is constantly updated ( Verganti et al . 2020 ) . Even if AI - enabled solutions act as a general tool for innovation , workers still need to share expertise ( Chatterjee et al . 2021 ) . However , knowledge sharing appears to be challenging in this context as digital technologies reshape working arrangements and the organisational social climate ( Palumbo 2021 ) . Inadvertently , these technologies may create high - skilled vs . low - skilled groupings of workplace workers ( Garnett 2018 ; Krzywdzinski 2017 ) . Workplace design , training , and organisational culture , on the other hand , may also impact knowledge sharing in this context and , as a result , help AI - assisted technologies enable innovative behaviour ( Aureli et al . 2019 ) . that , Further , rather than serving as a general - purpose tool for innovation , AI - enabled solutions may create time and space for innovative behaviour ( Beltagui et al . 2021 ; Candi and Beltagui 2019 ) . Intelligent systems perform routine tasks , relieving workers to be more innovative ( Jaiswal et al . 2021 ) . Instead of 3D printing being a tool for innovation ( Beltagui et al . 2021 ; Candi and Beltagui 2019 ) , it will relieve workers from work they have traditionally done ( Greenhalgh 2016 ) . Workers will have more opportunities to plan on innovative aspects of their jobs . While AI technologies can create time and space for idea generation , workers react to these opportunities differently ( Kronblad 2020 ) . It is also interesting that workers’ perceptions differ across cultures regarding AI - generated content ( Wu et al . 2020 ) . Besides , procedural and distributive justice and the manager - employee relationship may impact how innovative work behaviour can be improved in a workplace ( Perry - Smith and Mannucci 2017 ; Potter 2021 ) . 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? Furthermore , intuition commonly guides innovative behaviour and relies on workers’ perception , knowledge , and value judgment ( Stierand et al . 2014 ) . Even so , AI technologies can create additional time and space for workers to engage in idea generation and deliberation ( Nevo et al . 2020 ) , ‘willingness to innovate , ‘ as exhibited by experimenting with ideas , plays a critical role in innovative behaviour ( Auernhammer and Hall 2014 ) . AI technologies can overcome design process limitations and improve the ability of workers to learn and adapt ( Verganti et al . 2020 ) . These technologies provide patterns and products to workers critical for innovative behaviour : idea conception through completion ( Nevo et al . 2020 ; Perry - Smith and Mannucci 2017 ) . AI systems open new avenues for innovative thinking ( Townsend and Hunt 2019 ) . Proposition 6 summarises this theme , and Table 3 proposes relevant research questions to investigate this proposition further . Proposition 6 AI facilitates innovative behaviour by serving as a general - purpose tool for innovation , providing space and time for innovation , and providing patterns and products that workers can engage with . 5 Concluding remarks This section discusses the themes , concludes the review , and highlights the study’s contributions and limitations . 5 . 1 Discussion and conclusion The relationship between artificial intelligence and innovative work behaviour is explored in this review , and several themes are developed . Per the analysis , artificial intelligence’s flaws in the workplace can stimulate innovative work behaviour . However , this review does not dispute the advancement of artificial intelligence and how it helps workers , workplaces , and organisations ( Shrestha et al . 2021 ; Sowa et al . 2021 ) . It does , however , attempt to draw attention to artificial intelligence’s limits and how these limitations may drive innovative behaviour ( Braganza et al . 2020 ; Stahl et al . 2020 ) . The first theme suggested that intelligent robots in the workplace make mistakes ( Yam et al . 2020 ) . While developers attempt to consider multiple scenarios , they cannot anticipate all scenarios when an intelligent robot interacts with an untrained human ( Scheutz and Malle 2018 ) . Intelligent robots may make mistakes even when not interacting with untrained humans since they cannot make sense of specific information or situations ( Yam et al . 2020 ) . Humans in the workplace should be innovative to compensate for such flaws in intelligent robots . However , rather than the technology’s ability to drive innovative behaviour , it appears that the technology’s shortcomings are doing so . A worker may feel at ease delegating simple tasks to robots while keeping social and creative tasks ( Van Looy 2022 ) . The nature of the social and creative tasks that 1 3 A . Zirar human workers reserve for themselves , as opposed to the mistakes made by robots , might drive innovative work behaviour . Although this is reasonable , it does not explain why workers are sceptical about robots performing social and creative tasks ( Van Looy 2022 ) . Therefore , the idea that robots make mistakes may explain why human workers delegate simple tasks to robots ( Van Looy 2022 ) . In this process , human workers do social and creative tasks which require innovative work behaviour . The second theme focuses on the ‘fear’ factor associated with integrating intelligent systems in the workplace ( Li et al . 2019 ; Rampersad 2020 ) . AI will take over routine and manual tasks from humans , allowing humans to focus on tasks , for instance , that involve critical thinking and creativity ( Rampersad 2020 ; Sousa and Wilks 2018 ) . While this insight appears to be positive , it also brings a fear factor into the workplace ( Braganza et al . 2020 ) . Workers will eventually worry if such intelligent systems will replace them . Therefore , while AI provides narrow intelligence that exceeds human abilities , one may argue that it does not create jobs for itself but instead takes human jobs ( Chuang 2020 ) . The “fear” factor drives innovative behaviour as individuals attempt to remain relevant in a workplace where intelligent technologies are expected to take over existing tasks . Recent studies ( Chowdhury et al . 2022 ; Shin 2021 ) suggest that there may be another explanation for what drives innovative work behaviour other than the fear of intelligent systems . According to this line of research , when humans and AI collaborate , they can outperform an AI system alone ( Fügener et al . 2022 ) . Therefore , rather than the “fear” factor , a worker’s understanding of how an AI system decides , predicts , and performs tasks , as well as the limitations of an AI decision and its rationale , could drive innovative work behaviour ( Chowdhury et al . 2022 ; Shin 2021 ) . This course of research is still evolving ; therefore , it is unclear whether workers’ understanding of how an AI system decides , predicts , and fulfils tasks reduces the likely fear that workers will be replaced by the system ( Plumwongrot and Pholphirul 2022 ) . The third theme suggests that workers would need to be reskilled and upskilled to compensate for AI’s shortcomings ( Cropley 2020 ; Rampersad 2020 ) . Consequently , existing worker skills may become obsolete as these systems advance ( Sousa and Wilks 2018 ) . Whether workers enter a loop of becoming low - skilled and needing reskilling and upskilling as the weaknesses of AI systems are addressed is an interesting issue to explore . However , it is essential to highlight that such reskilling and upskilling do not appear to be motivated by the need for workers to remain relevant - instead , they seem to be driven by the desire to improve workers’ abilities to help AI systems in the workplace ( Choi et al . 2019 ; Kim et al . 2017 ) . It appears to be about exploiting humans to assist AI systems with existing flaws ( Choi et al . 2019 ; Sousa and Wilks 2018 ) . It is , therefore , reasonable to imagine that once AI flaws in an area are addressed , reskilling and upskilling of required skills to address flaws will cease . While AI systems would be predicted to replace human - only skills like creativity ( Holford 2019 ) , such predictions have yet to be realised . Furthermore , this interpretation does not consider how different personality traits among workers may drive innovative work in different ways ( Jiang et al . 2022 ) , or how using AI would lower the quality of work even after workers have been retrained and upskilled ( Charlwood and Guenole 2021 ) . 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? The fourth theme suggests that artificial intelligence interface is driving innovative behaviour . Workers will engage with AI systems in the workplace if the interface is designed human - friendly ( Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . However , it is worth noting that AI’s weakness needs such an interface to operate with humans ( Sowa et al . 2021 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . Also , this theme has yet to clarify whether worker personality traits would affect how innovative they are when interacting with a user - friendly AI interface or whether doing so requires technical expertise above and beyond basic digital skills ( Jiang et al . 2022 ; Lloyd and Payne 2022 ) . Alternatively , if AI systems had progressed to general intelligence ( human level ) , no such interface would have been required ( Holford 2019 ) . While creating such an interface implies that humans can collaborate with AI systems ( Fügener et al . 2022 ) , this collaboration is primarily about providing AI systems with additional data to work with or reinforcing AI learnings ( Sowa et al . 2021 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . Therefore , AI’s flaws need the development of a friendly interface that allows humans to improve such systems . The fifth theme argues that AI bias necessitates innovative work behaviour ( Criadoa et al . 2020 ) . AI systems use the data that has been fed to them ( Albrecht et al . 2021 ) . While humans give data and models that aid AI systems in learning from the data , the data and models may contain algorithmic bias ( Vereycken et al . 2021 ) . AI systems have yet to make sense of data beyond applying models . Human ingenuity is essential to assist AI systems in identifying and correcting bias in data or algorithms . Workers are , therefore , more likely to use their knowledge and training through innovative work behaviour to improve an AI system when moral violations are not involved ( Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . The sixth theme suggests that AI can be used as a general - purpose innovation tool ( Chan et al . 2018 ) . AI applications in the workplace encourage curiosity , questioning , thinking , trial and error , reasoning , and elaboration ( Güss et al . 2021 ) . Thus , AI in the workplace creates new tools , time and space for innovation and new patterns for workers to engage with ( Cebollada et al . 2021 ) . But this might be because workers are still hesitant about how well AI systems can perform creative and social tasks ( Castañé et al . 2022 ; Van Looy 2022 ) . It can be argued that AI is a general - purpose tool for innovative behaviour because the technology has yet to innovate without humans’ help ( Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . While it is predicted that the technology will have this capability in the distant future ( Holford 2019 ) , workers with innovative behaviour will be required to make sense of the AI systems’ elements or use the system ingeniously . 5 . 2 Contributions Recent reviews have delved into the use of AI in the workplace . These include AI to reshape innovation management ( Haefner et al . 2021 ) , artificial intelligence and business models ( Di Vaio et al . 2020 ) , electronic brainstorming for idea generation ( Maaravi et al . 2021 ) , AI to transform human existence ( Matthews et al . 2021 ) , AI to combat the COVID - 19 pandemic ( Khan et al . 2021 ) , and AI to solve tasks autonomously ( Cebollada et al . 2021 ) , etc . On the other hand , these reviews focus on the apparent transformational strengths of new technologies such as AI . It is , 1 3 A . Zirar however , not always the case with AI , which has limitations and weaknesses . For example , skilled personnel must fix errors made by service robots so that customers are not dissatisfied and their organisation is not adversely affected ( Yam et al . 2020 ) . In contrast to prior reviews , the present one identifies AI weaknesses before suggesting that these flaws , rather than AI’s strengths , could also drive innovative work behaviour . This positioning suggests that AI flaws should be embraced in the workplace , enabling worker ingenuity . Innovative work behaviour , therefore , compensates for AI flaws . However , a further implication of this positioning is whether AI adoption in the workplace would reduce innovative behaviour when AI advances or worker ingenuity overcome existing AI limitations ( Chuang 2020 ; Rampersad 2020 ) . This further implication does not appear favourable to workers , let alone motivation to adopt AI in the workplace ( Chuang 2020 ; Rampersad 2020 ) . Is it not a reason to avoid adopting AI in the workplace ? Or that AI may be programmed to stimulate innovative behaviour ? Or should we appreciate AI’s flaws since they allow workers to exhibit their ingenuity ? Holford ( 2019 , p . 143 ) argues that future AI advancement that minimises the human element will fail to recognise “the unique and inimitable characteristics of human creativity and its associated tacit knowledge . “ Accordingly , advances in AI and minimizing AI limitations are less likely to reduce the demand for innovative work behaviour . While intelligent robots may be less likely to make mistakes in the future , innovative behaviour will still be required , for example , to understand AI system outputs . Further , although Rogers’ innovation theory ( 2003 ) groups adopters into five groups based on their adoption rate , the theory does not explain how AI applications in the workplace might help adopters realise their IWB . In conclusion , this review suggests several potential research lines regarding AI and workers’ IWB , hoping to extend this theory . There are also implications for practice . AI technologies stimulate innovative work behaviour ( Liu et al . 2022 ; Odugbesan et al . 2022 ) . Therefore , organisations should foster an environment where workers and AI technologies can coexist ( Sowa et al . 2021 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) . However , how an organisation fosters such an environment is critical . While integrating intelligent robots and systems into a workplace helps workers to seek workarounds and enhance areas where such intelligence systems have limitations , such integration should not create an environment of fear ( Chuang 2020 ; Hasija and Esper 2022 ) . The fear of losing one’s job to intelligent systems may drive innovative work behaviour , but the existing intelligent systems cannot thrive without human involvement ( Grimpe et al . 2022 ; Plumwongrot and Pholphirul 2022 ) . Therefore , the fear factor may drive workers to restrict such systems from reaching their full potential . But how can an organisation minimise this fear factor ? One way is by outlining the “real” reason for incorporating intelligent systems at work ( Liu et al . 2022 ) . Another way is carefully contemplating how humans and AI systems can coexist ( Berkers et al . 2022 ; Plumwongrot and Pholphirul 2022 ) . While organisations’ understanding of manual jobs and those that require human elements is evolving , it seems that even if AI technologies can perform certain tasks like providing warmth and empathy , 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? consumers prefer to interact with real people for that purpose ( Beeler et al . 2022 ; Modliński et al . 2022 ; Peng et al . 2022 ) . Organisations might look at training options that help workers get along with AI systems . By retraining and upskilling workers , such training programmes can enable workers to overcome the limitations of intelligent systems . Such retraining and upskilling can enable workers to lessen algorithmic bias in workplace intelligent systems ( Tilmes 2022 ) . Additionally , such retraining and upskilling can allow employees to use intelligent systems to augment their innovative work behaviour ( Odugbesan et al . 2022 ; Peng et al . 2022 ) . Therefore , while AI’s limitations may drive innovative work behaviour , a meaningful coexistence that involves retraining and upskilling workers allow AI and humans to augment one another’s strengths . This review has policy implications too . Suppose workers’ interaction with AI is intended to compensate for AI flaws . In that case , such interaction may be inconsistent with the OECD AI Principles ( OECD , 2021 ) and the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 8 ( SDG 8 ) , promoting productive employment and decent work ( Braganza et al . 2020 ) , which state that AI should benefit workers . In this context , AI benefits primarily from interactions with workers rather than workers directly benefiting from such interactions . Therefore , policymakers should explore how AI may continue to be a human partner ( Sowa et al . 2021 ; Wilson and Daugherty 2019 ) rather than a rival ( Chuang 2020 ; Rampersad 2020 ) , as AI advancements may overcome the weaknesses highlighted in this review . 5 . 3 Limitations The analysis is limited to ABS - ranked peer - reviewed journal articles , excluding non - peer - reviewed or non - ABS ranking papers , books and book chapters , and practitioner research . Also , the search string may not have located relevant scholarly publications outside the Scopus database . The articles were retrieved from the Scopus database because of the breadth of publications it offers . The systematic search employed the ABS ranking to limit the returned articles to ABS - ranked journals . However , as one of the reviewers advised , the WoS database only indexes high - quality journals in each academic discipline . Future reviews on AI and innovative work behaviour can , therefore , source articles from the WoS database considering the quality aspect of the database . Further , while the used keywords were derived from related papers , they may not have returned all relevant articles . When limiting the scope of the study , the researcher used the concept of ‘artificial intelligence’ as a keyword to mean “a collection of technologies” rather than referring to subset fields or other contributing concepts . Therefore , the search string did not include the search keywords such as “big data” , “machine learning” , “deep learning” , “digital transformation” , “recommender system” , or “natural language processing” . These keywords can be used in a future bibliometric analysis , along with the ‘artificial intelligence’ keyword , to explore further how AI limitations drive innovative work behaviour in the workplace . Furthermore , later revisions excluded two themes from the manuscript : “AI accelerates knowledge creation and sharing” and “AI fosters open innovation , 1 3 A . Zirar which involves workers’ IWB in a supply chain . “ The researcher concluded that other themes had already covered these two themes . The researcher also recognised the need for additional research in the supply chain context about ‘AI fosters open innovation , which involves workers’ IWB in a supply chain’ . This decision was taken following Braun & Clarke’s guideline that “ [ … ] the researcher needs to decide on and develop the particular themes that work best for their project—recognizing that the aims and purpose of the analysis [ … ] ” ( 2022 , p . 10 ) . Future studies utilising different analytical techniques can explore whether such themes can be developed independently . In addition , while acknowledging the choices made in the study’s research design to limit the scope , the researcher understands that documents outside the inclusion criteria and alternative analytical methods may have added additional themes about AI and innovative work behaviour . Perhaps “AI’s explainability and causality to encourage innovative work behaviour” was one of these themes . Explainable AI describes how an AI system decides , predicts , and performs tasks ( Rai 2020 ) , enabling a worker to understand the limitations of an AI decision , its rationale , and preferred patterns of action ( Chowdhury et al . 2022 ; Shin 2021 ) . Therefore , it makes sense to infer that such themes might exist . According to recent research , explainable AI increases user trust and emotional confidence in the technology ( Shin 2021 ) . When workers know how AI makes decisions , along with the AI system , they can surpass an AI system on its own ( Fügener et al . 2022 ) . Therefore , it is intriguing to explore explainable AI with innovative work behaviour in future studies , for instance , to determine whether user trust and emotional confidence in AI would lead to innovative work behaviour among workers . Finally , the researcher’s active role in theme generation is also acknowledged . The researcher adopted the reflexive thematic analysis method ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ) . The analysis adhered to “Big Q qualitative paradigms” ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ; Kidder and Fine 1987 ) . Therefore , the analysis and the themes need to be viewed through the 10 - point core assumptions of reflective thematic analysis ( Braun and Clarke 2022 , pp . 8 – 9 ) . With this approach , a researcher can generate intriguing and unique themes by blending the data , subjectivity , theoretical and conceptual understanding , and training and experience ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ) . The researcher chose this form of analysis to engage with compelling , insightful , thoughtful , complex , and deep meanings from the texts reviewed for this study ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ) and in line with the existing literature that suggests subjectivity is a resource for research than an issue to be managed ( Gough & Madill , 2012 , as cited in Braun and Clarke 2022 ) . However , this analysis method is inconsistent with the objectivity and reproducibility of themes ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ; Byrne 2022 ; Terry and Hayfield 2020 ) . The researcher understands that the inherent subjectivity in reflexive thematic analysis and the researcher’s active role did not adhere to what scholars refer to as “Small q qualitative paradigms” ( Braun and Clarke 2022 ; Kidder and Fine 1987 ) . Future studies can adopt analytic approaches of “Small q qualitative paradigms” to control for subjectivity and the researcher’s active role . Future research can use other analytical methods like content analysis ( Seuring 2012 ) and bibliometric analysis ( Ellegaard and Wallin 2015 ) . While generating reproducible research , such 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? alternative analytical methods can also advance our understanding of other themes and the recurrent nature of the themes identified in this reflexive thematic analysis . While acknowledging these limitations , the purpose of this work is to encourage further research into exploring and expanding our understanding of AI - driven innovative work behaviour . Funding Not applicable . Data availability The Scopus string , the list of articles , and the Excel spreadsheet can be provided . Code availability Not applicable . Declarations Conflict of interest The author declares no conflict of interest . Ethics approval Not applicable . Informed consent Not applicable . References Abubakar AM , Behravesh E , Rezapouraghdam H , Yildiz SB ( 2019 ) Applying artificial intelligence technique to predict knowledge hiding behavior . Int J Inf Manag 49 : 45 – 57 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2019 . 02 . 006 Afsar B , Badir F , Y . , Bin Saeed B ( 2014 ) Transformational leadership and innovative work behavior . Industrial Manage Data Syst 114 ( 8 ) : 1270 – 1300 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / IMDS - 05 - 2014 - 0152 Akhavan P , Shahabipour A , Hosnavi R ( 2018 ) A model for assessment of uncertainty in tacit knowledge acquisition . J Knowl Manag 22 : 413 – 431 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JKM - 06 - 2017 - 0242 Akter S , McCarthy G , Sajib S , Michael K , Dwivedi YK , D’Ambra J , Shen KN ( 2021 ) Algorithmic bias in data - driven innovation in the age of AI . Int J Inf Manag 60 : 102387 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2021 . 102387 Albrecht T , Rausch TM , Derra ND ( 2021 ) Call me maybe : methods and practical implementation of artificial intelligence in call center arrivals’ forecasting . J Bus Res 123 : 267 – 278 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2020 . 09 . 033 Alter S ( 2014 ) Theory of Workarounds . Commun Association Inform Syst 34 ( 1 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17705 / 1CAIS . 03455 Althuizen N , Reichel A , Wierenga B ( 2012 ) Help that is not recognized : Harmful neglect of decision support systems . Decis Support Syst 54 : 719 – 728 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . dss . 2012 . 08 . 016 Althuizen N , Wierenga B ( 2014 ) Supporting Creative Problem Solving with a Case – Based Reasoning System . J Manag Inf Syst 31 : 309 – 340 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2753 / MIS0742 - 1222310112 Althuizen N , Reichel A ( 2016 ) The Effects of IT - Enabled cognitive stimulation tools on creative problem solving : a dual pathway to Creativity . J Manage Inform Syst 33 ( 1 ) : 11 – 44 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0 7421222 . 2016 . 1172439 Anantrasirichai N , Bull D ( 2021 ) Artificial intelligence in the creative industries : a review . Artif Intell Rev . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10462 - 021 - 10039 - 7 Anjali C , Priyanka B ( 2020 ) Future of work : an empirical study to Understand Expectations of the Millennials from Organizations . Bus Perspect Res 8 ( 2 ) : 272 – 288 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 2278533719887457 Auernhammer J , Hall H ( 2014 ) Organizational culture in knowledge creation , creativity and innovation : towards the Freiraum model . J Inform Sci 40 ( 2 ) : 154 – 166 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0165551513508356 1 3 A . Zirar Aureli S , Giampaoli D , Ciambotti M , Bontis N ( 2019 ) Key factors that improve knowledge - intensive business processes which lead to competitive advantage . Bus Process Manage J 25 ( 1 ) : 126 – 143 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / BPMJ - 06 - 2017 - 0168 Austin RD ( 2016 ) Unleashing creativity with digital technology . MIT Sloan Manag Rev 58 : 22 Baer M ( 2012 ) Putting creativity to work : the implementation of creative ideas in organizations . Acad Manag J 55 ( 5 ) : 1102 – 1119 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amj . 2009 . 0470 Baer M , Frese M ( 2003 ) Innovation is not enough : climates for Initiative and Psychological Safety , process innovations , and firm performance . J Organizational Behav 24 ( 1 ) : 45 – 68 Ballew BS ( 2009 ) Elsevier’s Scopus® Database . J Electron Resour Med Libr 6 ( 3 ) : 245 – 252 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15424060903167252 Balsmeier B , Woerter M ( 2019 ) Is this time different ? How digitalization influences job creation and destruction . Res Policy 48 ( 8 ) : 103765 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2019 . 03 . 010 Bawack RE , Fosso Wamba S , Carillo KDA ( 2021 ) A framework for understanding artificial intelligence research : insights from practice . J Enterp Inf Manag 34 : 645 – 678 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JEIM - 07 - 2020 - 0284 BBC . Amazon scrapped “sexist AI” tool . BBC News . https : / / www . bbc . com / news / technology - 45809919 BBC . Home Office drops “racist” algorithm from visa decisions . BBC News . https : / / www . bbc . com / news / technology - 53650758 Beane M , Brynjolfsson E ( 2020 ) Working with Robots in a Post - Pandemic World . MIT Sloan Management Review 62 ( 1 ) : 1 – 5 Beeler L , Zablah AR , Rapp A ( 2022 ) Ability is in the eye of the beholder : how context and individual factors shape consumer perceptions of digital assistant ability . J Bus Res 148 : 33 – 46 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2022 . 04 . 045 Beltagui A , Sesis A , Stylos N ( 2021 ) A bricolage perspective on democratising innovation : The case of 3D printing in makerspaces . Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 163 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techfore . 2020 . 120453 Berkers HA , Rispens S , Le Blanc PM ( 2022 ) The role of robotization in work design : a comparative case study among logistic warehouses . Int J Hum Resource Manage 0 ( 0 ) : 1 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0 9585192 . 2022 . 2043925 Bos - Nehles A , Renkema M , Janssen M ( 2017 ) HRM and innovative work behaviour : a systematic literature review . Personnel Rev 46 ( 7 ) : 1228 – 1253 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / PR - 09 - 2016 - 0257 Botega LF de C , da Silva JC ( 2020 ) An artificial intelligence approach to support knowledge management on the selection of creativity and innovation techniques . J Knowl Manag 24 : 1107 – 1130 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JKM - 10 - 2019 - 0559 Braganza A , Chen W , Canhoto A , Sap S ( 2020 ) Productive employment and decent work : the impact of AI adoption on psychological contracts , job engagement and employee trust . J Bus Res . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2020 . 08 . 018 Braun V , Clarke V ( 2006 ) Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Res Psychol 3 ( 2 ) : 77 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa Braun V , Clarke V ( 2019 ) Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis . Qualitative Res Sport Exerc Health 11 ( 4 ) : 589 – 597 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 2159676X . 2019 . 1628806 Braun V , Clarke V ( 2022 ) Conceptual and design thinking for thematic analysis . Qualitative Psychol 9 ( 1 ) : 3 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / qup0000196 Braun V , Clarke V , Hayfield N , Terry G ( 2019 ) Thematic analysis . In : Liamputtong P ( ed ) Handbook of Research Methods in Health Social Sciences . Springer , pp 844 – 858 Brunetti F , Matt DT , Bonfanti A , De Longhi A , Pedrini G , Orzes G ( 2020 ) Digital transformation challenges : strategies emerging from a multi - stakeholder approach . TQM J 32 ( 4 ) : 697 – 724 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / TQM - 12 - 2019 - 0309 Burnham JF ( 2006 ) Scopus database : a review . Biomedical Digit Libr 3 : 1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1742 - 5581 - 3 - 1 Byrne D ( 2022 ) A worked example of Braun and Clarke’s approach to reflexive thematic analysis . Qual Quant 56 ( 3 ) : 1391 – 1412 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11135 - 021 - 01182 - y Candi M , Beltagui A ( 2019 ) Effective use of 3D printing in the innovation process . Technovation , 80 – 81 , 63 – 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . technovation . 2018 . 05 . 002 Castañé G , Dolgui A , Kousi N , Meyers B , Thevenin S , Vyhmeister E , Östberg P - O ( 2022 ) The ASSISTANT project : AI for high level decisions in manufacturing . Int J Prod Res 0 ( 0 ) : 1 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 10 80 / 00207543 . 2022 . 2069525 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? Casazza M , Gioppo L ( 2020 ) A playwriting technique to engage on a shared reflective enquiry about the social sustainability of robotization and artificial intelligence . J Clean Prod 248 : . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jclepro . 2019 . 119201 Cebollada S , Payá L , Flores M , Peidró A , Reinoso O ( 2021 ) A state - of - the - art review on mobile robotics tasks using artificial intelligence and visual data . Expert Systems with Applications , 167 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2020 . 114195 Chan J , Chang JC , Hope T , Shahaf D , Kittur A ( 2018 ) Solvent : A mixed initiative system for finding analogies between research papers . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , 2 ( CSCW ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274300 Charlwood A , Guenole N ( 2021 ) Can HR adapt to the paradoxes of artificial intelligence ? Hum Resource Manage J . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1748 - 8583 . 12433 Chatterjee S , Chaudhuri R , Thrassou A , Vrontis D ( 2021 ) Antecedents and consequences of knowledge hiding : the moderating role of knowledge hiders and knowledge seekers in organizations . J Bus Res 128 : 303 – 313 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2021 . 02 . 033 Chiru C – G , Rebedea T ( 2017 ) Profiling of Participants in Chat Conversations Using Creativity – Based Heuristics . Creat Res J 29 : 43 – 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10400419 . 2017 . 1267464 Choi Y , Choi M , Oh M , Moon , Kim S , Sam ( 2019 ) Service robots in hotels : understanding the service quality perceptions of human - robot interaction . J Hospitality Mark Manage 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 19368623 . 2020 . 1703871 Chowdhury S , Joel - Edgar S , Dey PK , Bhattacharya S , Kharlamov A ( 2022 ) Embedding transparency in artificial intelligence machine learning models : managerial implications on predicting and explaining employee turnover . Int J Hum Resource Manage 0 ( 0 ) : 1 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09585192 . 2022 . 2066981 Chuang S ( 2020 ) An empirical study of displaceable job skills in the age of robots . Eur J Train Dev . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / EJTD - 10 - 2019 - 0183 Colin TR , Belpaeme T , Cangelosi A , Hemion N ( 2016 ) Hierarchical reinforcement learning as creative problem solving . Robot Auton Syst 86 : 196 – 206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . robot . 2016 . 08 . 021 Costello GJ , Donnellan B ( 2007 ) The diffusion of WOZ : expanding the topology of IS innovations . J Inform Technol 22 ( 1 ) : 79 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / palgrave . jit . 2000085 Criadoa JI , Valero J , Villodre J ( 2020 ) Algorithmic transparency and bureaucratic discretion : the case of SALER early warning system . Inform Polity 25 ( 4 ) : 449 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3233 / IP - 200260 Cropley A ( 2020 ) Creativity - focused Technology Education in the age of industry 4 . 0 . Creativity Res J . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10400419 . 2020 . 1751546 Davenport TH ( 2019 ) Can we solve AI’s “Trust Problem” ? MIT Sloan Management Review 60 ( 2 ) : 1 Davis M ( 1998 ) Making a case for design - based learning . Arts Educ Policy Rev 100 ( 2 ) : 7 – 15 Desouza KC , Dawson GS , Chenok D ( 2020 ) Designing , developing , and deploying artificial intelligence systems : Lessons from and for the public sector . Bus Horiz 63 ( 2 ) : 205 – 213 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bushor . 2019 . 11 . 004 Di Vaio A , Palladino R , Hassan R , Escobar O ( 2020 ) Artificial intelligence and business models in the sustainable development goals perspective : a systematic literature review . J Bus Res 121 : 283 – 314 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2020 . 08 . 019 Druckman D , Adrian L , Damholdt MF , Filzmoser M , Koszegi ST , Seibt J , Vestergaard C ( 2021 ) Who is best at mediating a Social Conflict ? Comparing Robots , Screens and humans . Group Decis Negot 30 ( 2 ) : 395 – 426 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10726 - 020 - 09716 - 9 Dwivedi YK , Hughes L , Ismagilova E , Aarts G , Coombs C , Crick T , Duan Y , Dwivedi R , Edwards J , Eirug A , Galanos V , Ilavarasan PV , Janssen M , Jones P , Kar AK , Kizgin H , Kronemann B , Lal B , Lucini B , … , Williams MD ( 2019 ) Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) : Multidisciplinary perspectives on emerging challenges , opportunities , and agenda for research , practice and policy . International Journal of Information Management , 101994 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2019 . 08 . 002 Ellegaard O , Wallin JA ( 2015 ) The bibliometric analysis of scholarly production : how great is the impact ? Scientometrics 105 ( 3 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 015 - 1645 - z Farrow E ( 2019 ) To augment human capacity—Artificial intelligence evolution through causal layered analysis . Futures 108 : 61 – 71 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . futures . 2019 . 02 . 022 Fügener A , Grahl J , Gupta A , Ketter W ( 2022 ) Cognitive Challenges in Human – Artificial intelligence collaboration : investigating the path toward productive delegation . Inform Syst Res 33 ( 2 ) : 678 – 696 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 2021 . 1079 1 3 A . Zirar Flavián C , Pérez - Rueda A , Belanche D , Casaló LV ( 2021 ) Intention to use analytical artificial intelligence ( AI ) in services – the effect of technology readiness and awareness . J Serv Manag . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JOSM - 10 - 2020 - 0378 Garnett A ( 2018 ) The Changes and Challenges facing Regional Labour Markets . Aust J Labour Econ 21 ( 2 ) : 99 – 123 Giudice MD , Scuotto V , Ballestra LV , Pironti M ( 2021 ) Humanoid robot adoption and labour productivity : a perspective on ambidextrous product innovation routines . Int J Hum Resource Manage 1 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09585192 . 2021 . 1897643 Gligor DM , Pillai KG , Golgeci I ( 2021 ) Theorizing the dark side of business - to - business relationships in the era of AI , big data , and blockchain . J Bus Res 133 : 79 – 88 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2021 . 04 . 043 Gough , B . , & Madill , A . ( 2012 ) . Subjectivity in psychological research : From problem to prospect . Psychological Methods , 17 ( 3 ) , 374 – 384 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0029313 Grahn H , Kujala T , Silvennoinen J , Leppänen A , Saariluoma P ( 2020 ) Expert Drivers’ Prospective Thinking - Aloud to Enhance Automated Driving Technologies – Investigating Uncertainty and Anticipation in Traffic . Accident Analysis and Prevention , 146 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . aap . 2020 . 105717 Gratton L ( 2020 ) Pioneering approaches to re - skilling and upskilling . ( Ed . ) , A manager’s guide to the New World of Work : the most effective strategies for managing people , teams , and Organizations . The MIT Press , MIT Sloan Management Review Greenhalgh S ( 2016 ) The effects of 3D printing in design thinking and design education . J Eng Des Technol 14 ( 4 ) : 752 – 769 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JEDT - 02 - 2014 - 0005 Grimpe C , Sofka W , Kaiser U ( 2022 ) Competing for digital human capital : the retention effect of digital expertise in MNC subsidiaries . J Int Bus Stud . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41267 - 021 - 00493 - 4 Güss CD , Ahmed S , Dörner D ( 2021 ) From da Vinci’s Flying Machines to a theory of the creative process . Perspect Psychol Sci . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1745691620966790 Haefner N , Wincent J , Parida V , Gassmann O ( 2021 ) Artificial intelligence and innovation management : A review , framework , and research agenda . Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 162 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techfore . 2020 . 120392 Hasija A , Esper TL ( 2022 ) In artificial intelligence ( AI ) we trust : a qualitative investigation of AI technology acceptance . J Bus Logistics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / jbl . 12301 Henkel AP , Bromuri S , Iren D , Urovi V ( 2020 ) Half human , half machine – augmenting service employees with AI for interpersonal emotion regulation . J Service Manage 31 ( 2 ) : 247 – 265 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JOSM - 05 - 2019 - 0160 Hern A ( 2018 ) , May 16 Facebook lets advertisers target users based on sensitive interests . The Guardian . https : / / www . theguardian . com / technology / 2018 / may / 16 / facebook - lets - advertisers - target - users - based - on - sensitive - interests Holford WD ( 2019 ) The future of human creative knowledge work within the digital economy . Futures 105 : 143 – 154 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . futures . 2018 . 10 . 002 HT Tech ( 2020 ) , November 4 AI robot mistakes referee’s bald head with a football , tracks it throughout the match . HT Tech . https : / / tech . hindustantimes . com / tech / news / ai - robot - mistakes - referee - s - bald - head - with - a - football - tracks - it - throughout - the - match - 71604487038101 . html Jaiswal A , Arun CJ , Varma A ( 2021 ) Rebooting employees : Upskilling for artificial intelligence in multinational corporations . Int J Hum Resource Manage 1 – 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09585192 . 2021 . 1891114 Jiang L , Xu X , Wang H - J ( 2020 ) A resources – demands approach to sources of job insecurity : a multilevel meta - analytic investigation . J Occup Health Psychol . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / ocp0000267 Jiang X , Lin J , Zhou L , Wang C ( 2022 ) How to select employees to participate in interactive innovation : Analysis of the relationship between personality , social networks and innovation behavior . Kybernetes , ahead - of . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / K - 09 - 2021 - 0884 Jong JD , Hartog DD ( 2010 ) Measuring innovative work Behaviour . Creativity and Innovation Management 19 ( 1 ) : 23 – 36 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8691 . 2010 . 00547 . x Keeler LW , Bernstein MJ ( 2021 ) The future of aging in smart environments : Four scenarios of the United States in 2050 . Futures 133 : . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . futures . 2021 . 102830 Khan M , Mehran MT , Haq ZU , Ullah Z , Naqvi SR , Ihsan M , Abbass H ( 2021 ) Applications of artificial intelligence in COVID - 19 pandemic : A comprehensive review . Expert Systems with Applications , 185 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2021 . 115695 Kidder LH , Fine M ( 1987 ) Qualitative and quantitative methods : when stories converge . New Dir Program Evaluation 1987 ( 35 ) : 57 – 75 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ev . 1459 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? Kim YJ , Kim K , Lee S ( 2017 ) The rise of technological unemployment and its implications on the future macroeconomic landscape . Futures 87 : 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . futures . 2017 . 01 . 003 Klein HJ , Potosky D ( 2019 ) Making a conceptual contribution at Human Resource Management Review . Hum Resource Manage Rev 29 ( 3 ) : 299 – 304 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . hrmr . 2019 . 04 . 003 Klotz F ( 2018 ) How AI can amplify human competencies . MIT Sloan Management Review 60 ( 1 ) : 14 – 15 Köbis N , Mossink LD ( 2021 ) Artificial intelligence versus Maya Angelou : Experimental evidence that people cannot differentiate AI – generated from human – written poetry . Comput Hum Behav 114 : . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2020 . 106553 Kronblad C ( 2020 ) Digital innovation in law dirms : the dominant logic under threat . Creativity and Innovation Management 29 ( 3 ) : 512 – 527 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / caim . 12395 Krzywdzinski M ( 2017 ) Automation , skill requirements and labour - use strategies : high - wage and low - wage approaches to high - tech manufacturing in the automotive industry . New Technol Work Employ 32 ( 3 ) : 247 – 267 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / ntwe . 12100 Li L , Li G , Chan SF ( 2019 ) Corporate responsibility for employees and service innovation performance in manufacturing transformation . Career Dev Int 24 ( 6 ) : 580 – 595 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / CDI - 04 - 2018 - 0109 Liu L , Schoen AJ , Henrichs C , Li J , Mutlu B , Zhang Y , Radwin RG ( 2022 ) Human Robot collaboration for enhancing work activities . Hum Factors 00187208221077722 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 00187208221077722 Lloyd C , Payne J ( 2022 ) Digital skills in context : working with robots in lower - skilled jobs . Econ Ind Democr 0143831X : 221111416 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0143831X221111416 Lo MF , Tian F ( 2020 ) How academic leaders facilitate knowledge sharing : a case of universities in Hong Kong . Leadersh Organ Dev J 41 ( 6 ) : 777 – 798 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / LODJ - 11 - 2019 - 0481 López - Cabarcos MÁ , Srinivasan S , Vázquez - Rodríguez P ( 2020 ) The role of product innovation and customer centricity in transforming tacit and explicit knowledge into profitability . J Knowl Manag 24 : 1037 – 1057 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JKM - 02 - 2020 - 0087 Jabbour LS , Jabbour AB , Filho CJCGodinho , M . , Roubaud D ( 2018 ) Industry 4 . 0 and the circular economy : a proposed research agenda and original roadmap for sustainable operations . Ann Oper Res 270 ( 1 ) : 273 – 286 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10479 - 018 - 2772 - 8 Loureiro SMC , Guerreiro J , Tussyadiah I ( 2020 ) Artificial intelligence in business : state of the art and future research agenda . J Bus Res . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2020 . 11 . 001 Lu VN , Wirtz J , Kunz WH , Paluch S , Gruber T , Martins A , Patterson PG ( 2020 ) Service robots , customers and service employees : What can we learn from the academic literature and where are the gaps ? Journal of Service Theory and Practice , ahead - of . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JSTP - 04 - 2019 - 0088 Maaravi Y , Heller B , Shoham Y , Mohar S , Deutsch B ( 2021 ) Ideation in the digital age : literature review and integrative model for electronic brainstorming . RMS 15 ( 6 ) : 1431 – 1464 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11846 - 020 - 00400 - 5 Mahroof K ( 2019 ) A human - centric perspective exploring the readiness towards smart warehousing : the case of a large retail distribution warehouse . Int J Inf Manag 45 : 176 – 190 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2018 . 11 . 008 Malik N , Tripathi SN , Kar AK , Gupta S ( 2021 ) Impact of artificial intelligence on employees working in industry 4 . 0 led organizations . Int J Manpow . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / IJM - 03 - 2021 - 0173 Massey AP , Khatri V , Montoya - Weiss MM ( 2007 ) Usability of Online Services : the role of Technology Readiness and Context * . Decis Sci 38 ( 2 ) : 277 – 308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 5915 . 2007 . 00159 . x Matthews G , Hancock PA , Lin J , Panganiban AR , Reinerman - Jones LE , Szalma JL , Wohleber RW ( 2021 ) Evolution and revolution : personality research for the coming world of robots , artificial intelligence , and autonomous systems . Pers Indiv Differ 169 : 109969 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2020 . 109969 Modliński A , Fortuna P , Rożnowski B ( 2022 ) Human – machine trans roles conflict in the organization : How sensitive are customers to intelligent robots replacing the human workforce ? International Journal of Consumer Studies , n / a . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / ijcs . 12811 Moorhead G , Montanari JR ( 1986 ) An empirical investigation of the Groupthink Phenomenon . Hum Relat 39 ( 5 ) : 399 – 410 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 001872678603900502 Nam T ( 2019 ) Technology usage , expected job sustainability , and perceived job insecurity . Technol Forecast Soc Chang 138 : 155 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . techfore . 2018 . 08 . 017 Nevo S , Nevo D , Pinsonneault A ( 2020 ) Exploring the role of IT in the Front - End of Innovation : an empirical study of IT - Enabled creative behavior . Inf Organ 30 ( 4 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . infoandorg . 2020 . 100322 1 3 A . Zirar Northouse PG ( 2018 ) Skills Approach . In Leadership : Theory and Practice ( 8 edition , pp . 43 – 72 ) . SAGE Publications , Inc Odugbesan JA , Aghazadeh S , Qaralleh A , R . E . , Sogeke OS ( 2022 ) Green talent management and employees’ innovative work behavior : The roles of artificial intelligence and transformational leadership . Journal of Knowledge Management , ahead - of . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JKM - 08 - 2021 - 0601 OECD ( 2021 ) State of implementation of the OECD AI Principles : Insights from national AI policies . In OECD Digital Economy Papers ( Vol . 311 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1787 / 1cd40c44 - en Palumbo R ( 2021 ) Does digitizing involve desensitizing ? Strategic insights into the side effects of workplace digitization . Public Manage Rev . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14719037 . 2021 . 1877796 Parker C ( 2018 ) , December 6 Robot Accidentally Hospitalises 24 Amazon Workers After It Sprays Them With Bear Repellent . The Huffington Post . https : / / www . huffingtonpost . co . uk / entry / robot - accidentally - hospitalises - 24 - amazon - workers - after - it - sprays - them - with - bear - repellent _ uk _ 5c09036 fe4b069028dc6dbb3 Parker SK , Ward M k . , Fisher GG ( 2021 ) Can High – Quality Jobs Help Workers Learn New Tricks ? A Multidisciplinary Review of Work Design for Cognition . Acad Manag Ann 15 : 406 – 454 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / annals . 2019 . 0057 Peng C , van Doorn J , Eggers F , Wieringa JE ( 2022 ) The effect of required warmth on consumer acceptance of artificial intelligence in service : the moderating role of AI - human collaboration . Int J Inf Manag 66 : 102533 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2022 . 102533 Perry - Smith JE , Mannucci PV ( 2017 ) From Creativity to Innovation : the Social Network Drivers of the four phases of the idea Journey . Acad Manage Rev 42 ( 1 ) : 53 – 79 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2014 . 0462 Plumwongrot P , Pholphirul P ( 2022 ) Are Robots stealing jobs ? Empirical evidence from 10 developing countries . Econ Innov New Technol 1 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10438599 . 2022 . 2051020 Pomerol J - C ( 1997 ) Artificial intelligence and human decision making . Eur J Oper Res 99 ( 1 ) : 3 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0377 - 2217 ( 96 ) 00378 - 5 Potter A ( 2021 ) Exploring the role of lean managers within the Toyota supply network : evidence from a social media platform . Prod Plann Control 1 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09537287 . 2020 . 1831643 Rai A ( 2020 ) Explainable AI : from black box to glass box . J Acad Mark Sci 48 ( 1 ) : 137 – 141 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11747 - 019 - 00710 - 5 Rampersad G ( 2020 ) Robot will take your job : Innovation for an era of artificial intelligence . J Bus Res 116 : 68 – 74 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2020 . 05 . 019 Ransbotham S ( 2020 ) Reskilling talent to Shrink Technology gaps . MIT Sloan Management Review . https : / / sloanreview . mit . edu / article / reskilling - talent - to - shrink - technology - gaps / Rogers EM ( 2003 ) Diffusion of Innovations ( 5th edition ) . Free Press Rousseau DM , Manning J , Denyer D ( 2008 ) 11 evidence in management and Organizational Science : assembling the field’s full weight of scientific knowledge through Syntheses . Acad Manag Ann 2 ( 1 ) : 475 – 515 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / 19416520802211651 Saether EA ( 2019 ) Motivational antecedents to high - tech R & D employees’ innovative work behavior : self - determined motivation , person - organization fit , organization support of creativity , and pay justice . J High Technol Manage Res 30 ( 2 ) : 100350 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . hitech . 2019 . 100350 Scheutz M , Malle BF ( 2018 ) Moral robots . The Routledge Handbook of Neuroethics . Routledge , pp 363 – 377 Scott SG , Bruce RA ( 1994 ) Determinants of innovative behavior : a path model of Individual Innovation in the Workplace . Acad Manag J 37 ( 3 ) : 580 – 607 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 256701 Seuring S ( 2012 ) Conducting content - analysis based literature reviews in supply chain management . Supply Chain Management : An International Journal 17 ( 5 ) : 544 – 555 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 13598541211258609 Sharma R , Kamble SS , Gunasekaran A , Kumar V , Kumar A ( 2020 ) A systematic literature review on machine learning applications for sustainable agriculture supply chain performance . Comput Oper Res 119 : 104926 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cor . 2020 . 104926 Shin D ( 2021 ) The effects of explainability and causability on perception , trust , and acceptance : implications for explainable AI . Int J Hum Comput Stud 146 : 102551 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2020 . 102551 Shrestha YR , Krishna V , von Krogh G ( 2021 ) Augmenting organizational decision - making with deep learning algorithms : principles , promises , and challenges . J Bus Res 123 : 588 – 603 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2020 . 09 . 068 Shujahat M , Sousa MJ , Hussain S , Nawaz F , Wang M , Umer M ( 2019 ) Translating the impact of knowledge management processes into knowledge - based innovation : the neglected and mediating role of knowledge - worker productivity . J Bus Res 94 : 442 – 450 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2017 . 11 . 001 1 3 Can artificial intelligence’s limitations drive innovative work behaviour ? Shute VJ , Rahimi S ( 2021 ) Stealth assessment of creativity in a physics video game . Computers in Human Behavior , 116 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2020 . 106647 Somech A , Drach - Zahavy A ( 2013 ) Translating Team Creativity to Innovation implementation : the role of Team Composition and Climate for Innovation . J Manag 39 ( 3 ) : 684 – 708 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0149206310394187 Sousa MJ , Wilks D ( 2018 ) Sustainable skills for the World of Work in the Digital Age . Syst Res Behav Sci 35 ( 4 ) : 399 – 405 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sres . 2540 Sowa K , Przegalinska A , Ciechanowski L ( 2021 ) Cobots in knowledge work : human – AI collaboration in managerial professions . J Bus Res 125 : 135 – 142 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2020 . 11 . 038 Stahl BC , Andreou A , Brey P , Hatzakis T , Kirichenko A , Macnish K , Laulhé Shaelou S , Patel A , Ryan M , Wright D ( 2020 ) Artificial intelligence for human flourishing – Beyond principles for machine learning . J Bus Res . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2020 . 11 . 030 Stierand M , Dörfler V , Macbryde J ( 2014 ) Creativity and innovation in haute cuisine : towards a systemic model . Creativity and Innovation Management 23 ( 1 ) : 15 – 28 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / caim . 12050 Terry G , Hayfield N ( 2020 ) 38 . Reflexive thematic analysis . In : Ward MRM , Delamont S ( eds ) Handbook of qualitative research in Education . Edward Elgar Publishing Limited , pp 430 – 441 . http : / / ebookcentral . proquest . com / lib / hud / detail . action ? docID = 6317815 Thesmar D , Sraer D , Pinheiro L , Dadson N , Veliche R , Greenberg P ( 2019 ) Combining the power of Artificial Intelligence with the richness of Healthcare Claims Data : Opportunities and Challenges . PharmacoEconomics 37 ( 6 ) : 745 – 752 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40273 - 019 - 00777 - 6 Tilmes N ( 2022 ) Disability , fairness , and algorithmic bias in AI recruitment . Ethics Inf Technol 24 ( 2 ) : 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10676 - 022 - 09633 - 2 Townsend DM , Hunt RA ( 2019 ) Entrepreneurial action , creativity , & judgment in the age of artificial intelligence . Journal of Business Venturing Insights , 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbvi . 2019 . e00126 Tranfield D , Denyer D , Smart P ( 2003 ) Towards a methodology for developing evidence - informed management knowledge by means of systematic review . Br J Manag 14 ( 3 ) : 207 – 222 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 8551 . 00375 Tu Y , Li D , Wang H - J ( 2021 ) COVID - 19 - induced layoff , survivors’ COVID - 19 - related stress and performance in hospitality industry : The moderating role of social support . International Journal of Hospitality Management , 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhm . 2021 . 102912 Van Acker BB , Parmentier DD , Conradie PD , Van Hove S , Biondi A , Bombeke K , Vlerick P , Saldien J ( 2021 ) Development and validation of a behavioural video coding scheme for detecting mental workload in manual assembly . Ergonomics 64 ( 1 ) : 78 – 102 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00140139 . 2020 . 1811400 Van Looy A ( 2022 ) Employees’ attitudes towards intelligent robots : A dilemma analysis . Information Systems and E - Business Management . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10257 - 022 - 00552 - 9 Vereycken Y , Ramioul M , Hermans M ( 2021 ) Old wine in new bottles ? Revisiting employee participation in industry 4 . 0 . New Technol Work Employ 36 ( 1 ) : 44 – 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / ntwe . 12176 Verganti R , Vendraminelli L , Iansiti M ( 2020 ) Innovation and Design in the age of Artificial Intelligence . J Prod Innov Manage 37 ( 3 ) : 212 – 227 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / jpim . 12523 Wang P ( 2019 ) On defining Artificial Intelligence . J Artif Gen Intell 10 ( 2 ) : 1 – 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2478 / jagi - 2019 - 0002 Wang TT , Gleave A , Belrose N , Tseng T , Miller J , Dennis MD , Duan Y , Pogrebniak V , Levine S , Russell S ( 2022 ) Adversarial Policies Beat Professional - Level Go AIs ( arXiv : 2211 . 00241 ) . arXiv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2211 . 00241 Warrier U , Shankar A , Belal HM ( 2021 ) Examining the role of emotional intelligence as a moderator for virtual communication and decision making effectiveness during the COVID - 19 crisis : revisiting task technology fit theory . Ann Oper Res . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10479 - 021 - 04216 - 8 Waterson J ( 2020a ) , May 30 Microsoft sacks journalists to replace them with robots . The Guardian . https : / / www . theguardian . com / technology / 2020 / may / 30 / microsoft - sacks - journalists - to - replace - them - with - robots Waterson J ( 2020b ) , June 9 Microsoft’s robot editor confuses mixed - race Little Mix singers . The Guardian . https : / / www . theguardian . com / technology / 2020 / jun / 09 / microsofts - robot - journalist - confused - by - mixed - race - little - mix - singers Wilson HJ , Daugherty PR ( 2019 ) Creating the Symbiotic AI workforce of the future . MIT Sloan Management Review 61 ( 1 ) : 1 – 4 . https : / / sloanreview . mit . edu / article / creating - the - symbiotic - ai - workforce - of - the - future / Wirtz J , Patterson PG , Kunz WH , Gruber T , Lu VN , Paluch S , Martins A ( 2018 ) Brave new world : service robots in the frontline . J Service Manage 29 ( 5 ) : 907 – 931 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / JOSM - 04 - 2018 - 0119 1 3 A . Zirar Wright SA , Schultz AE ( 2018 ) The rising tide of artificial intelligence and business automation : developing an ethical framework . Bus Horiz 61 ( 6 ) : 823 – 832 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bushor . 2018 . 07 . 001 Wu Y , Bryan – Kinns N ( 2019 ) Musicking with an interactive musical system : The https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11846 - 023 - 00621 - 4 effects of task motivation and user interface mode on non – musicians’ creative engagement . Int J Hum Comput Stud 122 : 61 – 77 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2018 . 07 . 009 Wu Y , Mou Y , Li Z , Xu K ( 2020 ) Investigating American and Chinese Subjects’ explicit and implicit perceptions of AI - Generated artistic work . Computers in Human Behavior , 104 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2019 . 106186 Xu N , Wang K - J ( 2019 ) Adopting robot lawyer ? The extending artificial intelligence robot lawyer technology acceptance model for legal industry by an exploratory study . J Manage Organ 1 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / jmo . 2018 . 81 Yam KC , Bigman YE , Tang PM , Ilies R , De Cremer D , Soh H , Gray K ( 2020 ) Robots at work : people prefer—and forgive—service robots with perceived feelings . J Appl Psychol . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / apl0000834 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Springer Nature or its licensor ( e . g . a society or other partner ) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author ( s ) or other rightsholder ( s ) ; author self - archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law . 1 3