Q Academy of Management Review 2016 , Vol . 41 , No . 3 , 410 – 434 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amr . 2014 . 0281 A REALIST PERSPECTIVE OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP : OPPORTUNITIES AS PROPENSITIES STRATOS RAMOGLOU University of Southampton ERIC W . K . TSANG University of Texas at Dallas Theideathatentrepreneurialopportunitiesexist “ outthere ” isincreasinglyunderattackby scholars who argue that opportunities do not preexist objectively but are actively created through subjective processes of social construction . In this article we concede many of the criticisms pioneered by the creation approach but resist abandoning the preexisting reality of opportunities . Instead , we use realist philosophy of science to ontologically rehabilitate the objectivity of entrepreneurial opportunities by elucidating their propensity mode of existence . Our realist perspective offers an intuitive and paradox - free understanding of whatitmeansforopportunitiestoexistobjectively . Thisrenewedunderstandingenablesus to ( 1 ) explain that the subjectivities of the process of opportunity actualization do not con - tradict the objective existence of opportunities , ( 2 ) acknowledge the category of agency - intensive opportunites , ( 3 ) develop the notion of “ nonopportunity , ” and ( 4 ) clarify the ways individualsmightmakecognitivecontactwithopportunitiespriortotheiractualization . Our actualization approach serves as a refined metatheory for guiding future entrepreneurship research and facilitates the revisiting of subtle conceptual issues at the core of entrepre - neurial theory , such as the nature of uncertainty and “ nonentrepreneurs , ” as well as the role played by prediction in a scientific study of entrepreneurship . We live in a world of propensities , and . . . this fact makes our world both more interesting and more homely than the world as seen by earlier states of the sciences . . . . [ Propensities ] are not mere possi - bilitiesbutarephysicalrealities . . . . Thefutureis , in thisway , actively presentateverymoment ( Popper , 1990 : 9 , 12 , 20 ) . According to the leading theoretical perspec - tive of entrepreneurship , the possibility of entre - preneurial profit requires the preexistence of entrepreneurial opportunities waiting to be dis - covered ( Casson , 1982 ; Kirzner , 1979 ; Shane & Venkataraman , 2000 ) . This foundation for the “ discovery approach ” is increasingly under fire by scholars expressing their dissatisfaction with the idea that opportunities exist objectively “ out there ” in ways visible to potential entrepreneurs ( Alvarez , Barney , McBride , & Wuebker , 2014 ; Davidsson & Wiklund , 2009 ; McMullen , Plummer , & Acs , 2007 ) . Moreover , a growing contingent of scholars forming the “ creation approach ” denies that opportunities are preexisting entities in the external world and argues that opportunities are created endogenously through entrepreneurial agency ( Korsgaard , 2011 ; Sarasvathy , 2001 ; Wood & McKinley , 2010 ) . In this article we advance the “ actualization approach ”— which theorizes opportunities as unactualized propensities — as an alternative that maintains a commitment to the objectivity of op - portunities but does not have the shortcomings plaguing the discovery perspective . Explicit meta - theoretical attention to underpinning ontologies is key to the realization of this novel theoretical niche . Discovery scholarship ’ s treatment of op - portunities as “ physically observable objects ” ( Alvarez et al . , 2014 : 227 ) subscribes to an empiri - cist ontology ( Ramoglou , 2013a ) . This realization indicates the potential for rectifying the objec - tivity of opportunities alongside the sophisti - cated blueprint of reality as advanced by critical realist metatheory ( Bhaskar , 1978 ; Lawson , 1997 ; Searle , 1995 ) , which we refer to as realism hereafter . Realism facilitates the move away from the deep - seated empiricist idea that opportunities are present at the actual but undiscovered do - main of reality and toward the view of opportu - nities as absent from the actual but present in the deeper domain of existence . To state that Many thanks are due to former editor Roy Suddaby for his insightful guidance , three reviewers for their constructive comments , Tony Lawson , Mark Gatenby , Stephen Pratten , and SteliosZyglidopoulosfortheirvaluablefeedback , andTyrahLi for her assistance . 410 Copyright of the Academy of Management , all rights reserved . Contents may not be copied , emailed , posted to a listserv , or otherwise transmitted without the copyright holder ’ s express written permission . Users may print , download , or email articles for individual use only . opportunities exist “ out there ” is — to paraphrase Popper ( 1990 ) in the opening epigraph — to ac - knowledge that the future lies within the unac - tualized but no less real layers of the present world . Against this background we define en - trepreneurial opportunity as the propensity of market demand to be actualized into profits through the introduction of novel products or services . Although our primary aim is to provide an ontological analysis of the “ core puzzle of en - trepreneurship research — where entrepreneurial opportunities come from ” ( Suddaby , Bruton , & Si , 2015 : 1 ) , we also illuminate and organize aspects of the entrepreneurial cognition as they emerge within our propensity framework of opportunities . We accordingly spell out three fundamental modes for making cognitive contact with possibly real yet empirically unac - tualized propensities : imagining , believing , and knowing . This article is organized as follows . In the next section , which serves as a background for the whole article , we discuss the nature of meta - theoretical research , followed by a discussion of the major challenges that the discovery approach faces . We then advance our actualization ap - proach in four sections , covering such important issues as opportunities ’ propensity modeof being , the role of agentic effort in opportunities ’ actual - ization , the space of the impossible , and key distinctions between entrepreneurial and non - entrepreneurial actions and opportunities . In the following two sections we show how our recon - ceptualization of opportunity addresses critiques of the discovery approach , on the one hand , and clarifies conundrums surrounding entrepreneurial cognition , on the other . We next discuss a unique strength of the actualization approach in pro - viding a deep understanding of uncertainty that is missing from both the discovery and creation approaches . Finally , we present research and pedagogical implications . EMPIRICIST , CONSTRUCTIVIST , AND REALIST METATHEORIES One of the greatest advances in contempo - rary entrepreneurship scholarship comes from metatheoretical studies into the fundamental conceptual blocks of entrepreneurial discourse , as demonstrated by the influence of Shane and Venkataraman ’ s ( 2000 ) , Sarasvathy ’ s ( 2001 ) , McMullen and Shepherd ’ s ( 2006 ) , and Alvarez and Barney ’ s ( 2007 ) contributions . Since we also intend to contribute on this level of analysis , in this section we discuss and contrast the basics of metatheoretical research as driven by empiricist , constructivist , and realist philosophies of science . Metatheoretical Research Metatheories are essentially worldviews . They comprise sets of understandings regarding the nature of the basic entities forming a field of scholarly interest and the ways these entities in - terrelate . More specifically , metatheories are the logically interconnected sets of conceptual pre - suppositions forming the frame against which pictures of a more substantive nature will be painted ( Harr´e , 2002 ; Tsoukas & Knudsen , 2003 ) . All substantive research presupposes meta - theoretical commitments in the form of funda - mental theoretical structures in response to abstract questions regarding the nature of the world ( ontological ) , possibility of knowing ( epis - temological ) , and methods of knowledge acqui - sition ( methodological ; Lawson , 1997 ; Suddaby , 2014a ) . These commitments may exist only sub - consciously , even in a state of confusion or in - ternal tension ( Kilduff , Mehra , & Dunn , 2011 ; Lawson , 2009 ) . Metatheoretical interventions represent scholarly efforts to promote scientific progress when substantive inquiry cannot sufficiently adjudicate the truth , soundness , or validity of ( a set of ) empirical propositions . Metatheoretical work comprises underlaboring efforts to aid substantive research by clearing the ground of whatever obstacles are deemed to be stand - ing in the way of progress ( Bhaskar , 1998 ) . Since metatheoretical research antecedes sub - stantive inquiry , it is neither falsifiable nor verifiable . However , the chief contribution of metatheoretical interventions lies in the sys - tematic organization , clarification , defense , and / or development of the fundamental theo - retical structures underpinning more substan - tive research ( Cal´as , Smircich , & Bourne , 2009 ; Suddaby , 2014a ) . The compass guiding the orientation of meta - theoretical interventions is the presupposed philosophies of science . In the following dis - cussion we compare realism and empiricism ( supporting the discovery approach ) , as well as re - alism and constructivism ( supporting the creation 2016 411 Ramoglou and Tsang approach ) . We briefly summarize this comparison in Table 1 . 1 Realist Reaction to Flat Empiricist Ontology By stressing the importance of sensory experi - ence for acquiring certain knowledge , empiricists equate the knowable with the empirically ob - servable . They accordingly tend to treat the world as reducible to its material dimensions and ground analyses on an ontologically flat concep - tion of the world . Causation lies in the constant conjunction between empirical events , while discourse on powers is treated as unscientific metaphysical speculation . Moreover , empiricists working within the so - called positivist wings of social science are often keen to rely on knowingly unrealistic models as long as they offer “ objec - tive ” ( i . e . , quantifiable ) measures that aid pre - dictive purposes ( Friedman , 1953 : 3 – 46 ) . Overall , empiricists endeavor to purge scientific discourse from the “ sophistry and illusion ” ( Hume , 1993 : 114 ) that supposedly come from metaphysical in - vestigations , while trusting that empirical re - search is the ultimate solution to all scientific problems ( Quine , 1969 ) . In stark contrast , realists prioritize the study of reality via systematic ontological reflection ( Harr´e , 2008 ) . They stress that ontological consid - erations should invariably antecede other ele - ments of the metatheoretical chain , and they maintain that to go the other way around is to trigger a “ meta - theoretical disaster ” ( Fleetwood , 2014 : 187 ) . For instance , realist philosophers of social science point out that econometric techniques — sophisticated as they may be — are by and large unfit for the study of ontologically complex systems comprising unpredictable human and social behavior ( Lawson , 1997 ) . Instead , they uphold the methodological superiority of the cultural and historical analytical tools cherished by institutional and evolutionary economists ( Hodgson , 2001 ) . Realists argue that the empiricist fixation with certainty fallaciously excludes from legitimate scientific discourse the fallibly knowable yet no - less - real domains of the world . They accordingly seek to remedy empiricist ontological distortions by countering that the world is irreducible to the actualized , material , and , in principle , observable modes of being . Unactualized powers are never directly observable but no less real , and ( under certain conditions ) they can be evidenced through their effects . The empirically observed is only a subset of the actual , which is itself only a subset of the real ( comprising variously and complexly interacting causally powerful structures and generative mechanisms ; Bhaskar , 1978 ) . By rejecting the actualist metaphysics of empiricism — that is , the presupposition that “ only the actual is possible ” ( Ayers , 1968 : 6 ) — realism effectively acknowledges that the most funda - mental and interesting property of ourworld lies in its unrealized propensities ( Bhaskar , 1978 ) . Even Karl Popper , a preeminent foe of metaphysics , came to appreciate near the end of his life that his empiricist preoccupations had blinded him to the reality of propensities ( Runde , 1996 ) . He emphati - cally acknowledged that propensities are physi - cal realities and “ not mere possibilities . They are as real as forces ” ( Popper , 1990 : 9 ) . Realists maintain that propensities may re - main unactualized because powers may not be triggered and , when triggered , need not be evi - dent , either because countervailing factors may constrain their empirical realization or because additional enabling factors might be absent . In such occasions unobservable tendencies are said to operate transfactually . For example , gravity operates constantly , although its effects are not always evident : the active tendency of a cup on a desk to fall is countered by the desk ( Lawson , 2009 ; Tsang & Kwan , 1999 ) . Realist Incorporation of Constructivist Insights Thetensionbetweenconstructivism andrealism in entrepreneurship research is unnecessary ( Ramoglou & Zyglidopoulos , 2015 ) . Realism , in principle , is not contradictory to social con - structivism , and the key insights of the latter are 1 Our intention with this table is to capture the basic points of tension between empiricism , constructivism , and realism , as well as to communicate the thrust of each philosophical perspective . It would be simplistic to presume that ( 1 ) the boundaries among the three perspectives are clear - cut or ( 2 ) each perspective represents a set of homogeneous or even harmoniously coexisting positions . For the first point , there is an epistemological overlap between realists and ( moderate ) constructivists ( i . e . , those who do not a priori rule out the pos - sibility of objective knowledge ) , with respect to such state - mentsas “ waterismadeupofH 2 O ” and “ WorldWarIIendedin 1945 . ” Forthesecondpoint , therecanbeconsiderablevariance in the form of argumentation and respective conclusions reached by philosophical schools of thought clustered under the banner of empiricism ( see Van Fraassen , 2008 ) , construc - tivism ( see Hacking , 1999 ) , or realism ( see Collier , 1994 ) . 412 July Academy of Management Review accommodated within the former ( Kwan & Tsang , 2001 ) . Realists accept the socially constructed na - ture of social reality and only reject extreme con - structivist views that tend to taboo the notions of “ reality ” and “ objectivity ” ( Bhaskar , 1998 ) . Realists acknowledge that social reality is de - pendent on the ways we think about it , but they caution against the implication that social reality does not exist . The subjective underpinnings of so - cialrealityonlyimplythatsocialreality ( 1 ) wouldnot existintheabsenceofhumansand ( 2 ) existsinways qualitatively different from the “ stuff ” studied by natural scientists . Without a doubt , “ if we all woke up tomorrow and no longer believed that money existed , money would no longer exist ( leaving only relatively useless bits of paper and metal ) ” ( Alvarez et al . , 2014 : 227 ) . However , this does not mean that money does not exist objectively “ out there . ” It only means that its objectivity is of a different kind by virtue of the more ontologically complicated nature of being money ( as opposed to paper ) . Searle ( 1995 ) argued that we ought to draw a dis - tinction between ontological objectivity and onto - logical subjectivity . Although dollar bills may exist only insofar as they are perceived by human subjects asdollarbills , theirontologicallysubjective nature does not diminish their existential weight . It merely underlines the multiplicity of the modes of existence inherentin ourworld . Money may notexist in the same manner as ordinary pieces of paper , yet it can be studied objectively , albeit as an ontologi - cally subjective entity . It could not have existed without humans . But it is a crude matter of fact that humans exist and have created the institution of money that has very real powers and effects . Overall , in response to the constructivist tendency tosubjectivizediscourseonreality , realistsmaintain thatrealitymust , tosomeextent , existindependently and irreducibly from the ways we might think about it . For the realist , the single most important stage in the scientificadvancementofascholarlyfieldliesin clarifying the mode of existence and independence of the entities posited at the foundations of the field ( Brock & Mares , 2007 ; Devitt , 1997 ) , particularly when their objectivity is under dispute . CHALLENGES TO THE DISCOVERY APPROACH The most influential contribution to the discov - ery approach is Shane and Venkataraman ’ s ( 2000 ) TABLE 1 Brief Comparison of Empiricism , Constructivism , and Realism Dimension Empiricism Constructivism Realism Ontology The world exists objectively “ out there , ” with an emphasis on material existence . Things that exist must be empirically observable . Causation is indicated by the constant conjunction of empirical events . The idea of an objective world is an illusion ; reality is ultimately reducible to socialconstructions . Thereis no single way the world is or can be . Agents can willingly create their own realities as long as they regard them as real . The world exists objectively , albeit in various modes of being . The real is broader than the domain of the empirically observable . Tendencies are unobservable and operate transfactually . Epistemology What can count as scientific knowledgemustbebasedon sensory experience , testable by observation and experiment . The objectivity of research outcomes requires the elimination of subjective interpretations . Contradictory interpretations of external reality can be equally valid . There are no objective criteria for assessing the truthfulness of some categories of knowledge claims , particularly those that relate to social or cultural knowledge . We can know the world indirectly . Our observations aretheoryladenandfallible . We may use our imagination in explaining phenomena , but reality imposes constraints on what should be accepted as plausible knowledge . Conception of entrepreneurial opportunities Discovery : Entrepreneurs discover opportunities that preexist independently of entrepreneurs as empirically undiscovered entities . Creation : Opportunities do not exist until they are created endogenously by entrepreneurs . Actualization : Opportunities are propensities that exist independently of potential entrepreneurs , in the form of unmet or possible market demand that can be actualized into profits . 2016 413 Ramoglou and Tsang article , “ The Promise of Entrepreneurship As a Field of Research ” ( often referred to as “ Promise ” ) . Shane and Venkataraman took seriously the complaint that entrepreneurship “ has become a broad label under which a hodgepodge of research is housed ” ( 2000 : 217 ) . Drawing on Schumpeter ’ s ( 1983 ) and Kirzner ’ s ( 1973 ) as - saults against the opportunity - free economic worldview at the heart of neoclassical economics , Shane and Venkataraman maintain that the de - fining feature of entrepreneurial phenomena is “ the discovery and exploitation of profitable op - portunities ” ( 2000 : 217 ) . They recommend that the objective existence of entrepreneurial oppor - tunities offers the sturdiest foundation for en - trepreneurship as a distinctive subject of study , stressing that the nexus between individuals and opportunities constitutes the most promising research topic . Entrepreneurship researchers often remark that the discovery approach is grounded in realist on - tology ( e . g . , Alvarez & Barney , 2013 ; Cal´as et al . , 2009 ; Roscoe , Cruz , & Howorth , 2013 ) . In sharp contrast , our metatheoretical backdrop suggests that the positing of some “ force exerted by the op - portunities themselves ” ( Shane , Locke , & Collins , 2003 : 269 ) or the attribution of challenges to prog - ress to the “ lack of instruments for measuring en - trepreneurial opportunity ” ( Dahlqvist & Wiklund , 2012 : 185 ) does not reveal the realist but , instead , the empiricist leanings of the discovery approach ( see also Ramoglou , 2013a ) . Before developing a genuinely realist concept of “ entrepreneurial opportunity , ” we review the challenges to the discovery approach that gave rise to the con - structivist movement , along with the concomi - tant rejection of the notion of opportunities as objectively existing realities . Constructivist Reaction Although Shane and Venkataraman ’ s ( 2000 ) framework defines contemporary entrepreneur - ship research , there is increasing disillusionment regarding its promise to meaningfully drive entrepreneurship research forward . Even Ven - kataraman has considerably distanced himself from this framework and joined forces with the rising constructivist reorientation ( Sarasvathy & Venkataraman , 2011 ; Venkataraman , Sarasvathy , Dew , & Forster , 2012 ) . First , we still lack a predictively successful en - trepreneurship theory and do not know why only some individuals can see and / or respond to op - portunities ( Arin , Huang , Minniti , Nandialath , & Reich , 2015 ; Roscoe et al . , 2013 ) . Second , the dis - covery approach has revived the notorious re - search quest for the “ entrepreneurial difference ” ( Gartner , 1989 ) in response to the puzzle that only a few individuals respond to the presence of op - portunities , and Shane himself leads the conten - tious research concerning the genetic makeup of enterprising individuals ( Nicolaou , Shane , Cherkas , Hunkin , & Spector , 2008 ; Shane & Nicolaou , 2013 ) . Moreover , there is an assault on discovery scholarship for portraying entrepreneurs with “ superior cognitive capabilities ” ( Shane , 2003 : 45 ) that supposedly allow them to foresee opportu - nities in an otherwise uncertain world ( Chiles , Bluedorn , & Gupta , 2007 ; McMullen & Shepherd , 2006 ) . Yet the most troubling aspect of the dis - covery approach lies in the elusiveness of the opportunity construct ( Dimov , 2011 ; Gartner , 2014 ) : “ opportunities are assumed to simply exist . . . without any real clarity as to what this would mean ” ( G¨orling & Rehn , 2008 : 101 ) . Given these problems , it is understandable why a growing contingent dismisses the core of the discovery approach — that opportunities are ob - jectively existing entities . Moreover , Alvarez and Barney ’ s ( 2007 , 2010 ) systematic development of the creation approach harbors promise in pro - gressing entrepreneurship research along a different path . According to this ontological reorientation , the discovery approach cannot either detect opportunities or predict entrepre - neurial events because these are only socially constructed “ entities ” that do not exist in - dependently of the ways entrepreneurs think about them ( Alvarez et al . , 2014 ; Spedale & Watson , 2014 ) . We should break free from the notion of exogenous opportunities waiting to be seized and adopt a view of opportunities as endogenously constructed ( created , made , fabri - cated , or manufactured ) through human agency ( Baker & Nelson , 2005 ; Bruyat & Julien , 2001 ; Santos & Eisenhardt , 2009 ; Sarasvathy , 2001 ) . In relocating the locus of causality from “ ethereally existing opportunities ” ( Alvarez & Barney , 2010 : 562 ) to human agency , constructiv - ist scholarship neatly sidesteps the conceptual problems associated with the objectivist treat - ment of opportunity . The constructivist reaction also strengthens the theorization of entrepre - neurial phenomena by paying due attention to 414 July Academy of Management Review the creative aspects of the entrepreneurial pro - cess , such as reconfiguring the value chain , manufacturing a new product , and raising the required capital ( e . g . , Baker & Nelson , 2005 ; Cornelissen & Clarke , 2010 ) . The role of crea - tive entrepreneurial agency , in fact , sits un - comfortably in a world where opportunities exist as dollar bills simply awaiting discovery . As stressed by McMullen , this static worldview “ neglects the importance of agency in entrepre - neurship . . . [ and ] opportunity becomes a de - terministic and overly structural concept ” ( 2015 : 663 ) . Moreover , skeptics of the discovery per - spective are right to remark that treating oppor - tunities as entities awaiting discovery does not allow a meaningful conceptualization of the temporal and uncertain aspects of the entrepre - neurial process ( Klein , 2008 ; McMullen & Dimov , 2013 ) . Toward Realism Constructivists have surely made important critiques and pioneered promising conceptual advances . Nonetheless , from a realist standpoint , entrepreneurial theory has experienced an oft - documented pattern in the social sciences since the mid - twentieth century — namely , an over - reaction to ontologically problematic metatheories encouraged by empiricism , resulting in skepti - cism toward the treatment of social reality as “ mind - independently existing ” or “ real ” ( Fleetwood , 2014 ) . As discussed , realism is not incompatible with constructivism . In fact , it allows the theori - zation of subjectively constituted entities as real entities that can be objectively studied as long as we acknowledge their qualitatively distinctive mode of existence . Realism encourages the for - mation of rich ontological landscapes through the meaningful metatheoretical organization of var - ied commitments to existence ( Harr´e & Madden , 1975 ; Searle , 1995 ) . Our realist backdrop suggests that we should not hastily dispense with an objectivist intuition that may be waiting to find its proper ontological articulation — beyond empiricist reifications . More - over , putting aside philosophical considerations , we do find the thesis that opportunities exist “ out there ” in some objective sense ( i . e . , they exist independently from potential entrepreneurs or entrepreneurship researchers ) intuitively ap - pealing . Is it not compelling to say that Richard Branson exploited a number of “ Virgin - branded ” opportunities ? Relatedly , there are cases that clearly contradict the creation approach ’ s argu - ment that “ opportunities do not exist until en - trepreneurs create them through a process of enactment ” ( Alvarez , Barney , & Anderson , 2013 : 307 ) . Take , for example , the opportunity to profit through the production of T - shirts and aprons with the “ Je suis Charlie ” slogan ( translation : “ I am Charlie ” ) following the terrorist attack at Charlie Hebdo in Paris on January 7 , 2015 ( Moulai & Paysant , 2015 ) . The opportunity itself was by no means created by those who pro - duced the T - shirts and aprons , despite any ele - ments of creativity involved ( cf . Sarasvathy , Dew , Velamuri , & Venkataraman , 2010 : 92 ) . The opportunity unquestionably came into existence because of the terrorist attack . Ourtask in the next sections is to systematically develop a realist theorization of entrepreneurial opportunities . This theoretical alternative will enable us to stay committed to the objectivity of opportunities while withstanding the challenges discussed above . A REALIST ACCOUNT OF ENTREPRENEURIAL OPPORTUNITIES We have seen that there are “ two dimensions of realism ” ( Devitt , 1997 : 14 ) required for assert - ing the reality of a disputed entity — namely , the dimensions of existence and independence ( Brock & Mares , 2007 ) . The second dimension is fairly straightforward : that opportunities exist independently means that without their pre - existence it is impossible for an entrepreneur to profit . Regardless of opportunities ’ form of exis - tence , any genuinely realist position requires that an opportunity ’ s agent independence be consistently acknowledged . We will elaborate the independence dimension below when we the - orize the space of “ nonopportunity ” ( Dimo Dimov , personal communication ) . In this section we probe the first dimension by unpacking the propensity mode of being via rereading Kirznerian analysis in a realist light . This is crucial for the task of moving beyond the idea that in order to be objective , opportunities must be , “ in principle , observable ” ( Alvarez & Barney , 2007 : 13 ) , yet without having to deny their objectivity by asserting that “ opportunities are social constructions that do not exist independent of entrepreneurs ’ perceptions ” ( Alvarez & Barney , 2007 : 15 ) . 2016 415 Ramoglou and Tsang Neoclassical Actualism and the Kirznerian Intuition Physicists study phenomena occurring within the contexts of tight experimental control . In the desire to emulate the research practices of physical scientists , neoclassical economists treat economies as fairly simple and highly pre - dictable systems that exist in states of equilib - rium ( Arrow & Debreu , 1954 ; Walras , 1954 ) . Based on such methodologically convenient yet onto - logically oversimplified models of reality , sup - ply and demand supposedly equilibrate and their “ nexus ” manifests in prices . The most noticeable way in which these static models fail to match the workings of the real world is that they cannot explain change ( Schumpeter , 1983 ) . From a realist point of view , however , the problems with the notion of equilibrium run deeper and exceed the limitation of accounting for changes observed in the empirical layers of reality . The core concern pertains to the actualist treatment of non change . In a conception of the world lacking underlying powers and tenden - cies , what is absent from the face of the world is simply impossible . The neoclassical worldview effectively presumes that the possible is in sync with the actual ( Arrow , 1974 ) and is ultimately devoid of the propensity at the heart of realist ontology ( Lawson , 1997 ) . In stark contrast , realism endorses the recog - nition of propensity even in the most ( empirically ) stable of situations . In spite of the lack of relevant theoretical vocabulary , Kirzner ( 1979 , 1997 ) in - geniously grasped this realist insight in appreci - ating that equilibrium - based economics fails to capture the deeper workings of real - world econ - omies . His insistence that unexploited profit op - portunities exist essentially is an emphatic rejection of the actualist thesis that existing op - portunities must be instantly exploited . Opportu - nities exist at “ each and every moment ” ( Kirzner , 1997 : 82 ) , even in the most seemingly stable of sit - uations . No change is necessary for their existence . Kirzner attributed the existence of unexploited opportunities to the scarcity of the “ entrepreneur - ial alertness ” ( purportedly ) required for their dis - covery ( see also Hayek , 1945 ) . For Kirzner , “ it is entirely possible for an individual to pass up an available opportunity for pure gain , without taking advantage of it . . . . [ We ought to ] grapple with the very real possibility of unexploited op - portunities for profit ” ( 2006 : 262 ) . The seemingly minor correction of the presumption — in their pres - ence , opportunities are inevitably exploited — has enormous metatheoretical ramifications . It en - tails commitment to the depth ontology advocated by realism . The Ontological Status of Opportunities Realist philosophy can provide a direct answer to the question , “ What is the ontological status of the opportunity e . g . Kirzner mentions ? ” ( G¨orling & Rehn , 2008 : 96 ) , which Kirzner himself acknowl - edged as a “ profound philosophical question ” ( 2009 : 150 ) . The opportunities that analytically emerge in response to Kirzner ’ s ( instinctive ) re - jection of the neoclassical worldview ’ s actualist metaphysics belong to the ontological category of propensity . They exist akin to the unactualized propensity of seeds . Unlike undiscovered archeo - logical artifacts , they do not qualify as empirically unidentified objects of the world . It is therefore misleading to discuss their discovery , since the word “ discovery ” connotes perceptualcontact with actualized entities ( or events ) . From a realist standpoint , as introduced ear - lier , entrepreneurial opportunity can be defined as the propensity of market demand to be actu - alized into profits through the introduction of novel products or services . These products or services do not have to be novel to the global market but , rather , new only for the target mar - ket . When the introduction of novel products or services dovetails with profits , then an opportunity qua propensity is said to have been actualized . We accordingly call our conceptualization of entre - preneurial opportunities the actualization ap - proach , and distinguish it from the discovery approach . Table 1 presents a brief comparison of the conceptions of entrepreneurial opportunity under empiricism , constructivism , and realism . Kirzner not only did not develop his realist in - tuition far enough but also inadvertently allocated opportunities to an ontologically unfit category : from the category of un actualized propensities to that of actualized but un discovered realities . We already noted that strong reliance on the inapt word “ discovery ” may be a linguistic barrier to grasping the reality of opportunities qua propensities . This seemingly innocent lin - guistic malpractice alone might entrap our theoretical imagination within the bounds of the ontologically erroneous category , bewitching us into inferring that opportunities must exist as 416 July Academy of Management Review actualized entities that can be somehow observed ( Wittgenstein , 1958 ) . Our realist analysis none - theless allows us to break free from the counter - intuitive yet deep - seated picture of opportunities existing “ like dollar bills blowing around on the sidewalk ” ( Casson & Wadeson , 2007 : 285 ) . Our analysis additionally facilitates the appreciation that opportunitiesaremorelike the ( unobservable ) intrinsic power of a seed ’ s propensity to germinate into a flower — versus the flower itself . Up to this point we have explicitly identified the ontology of entrepreneurial opportunity through a realist reconstruction of Kirzner ’ s critical en - gagement with ontologically neglectful studies of economies . In doing so , we afford an answer to the recalcitrant puzzle of entrepreneurial theory ( Kirzner , 2009 ; Suddaby et al . , 2015 ) , offer a realist definition of entrepreneurial opportunities , and uncover a category mistake in the foundation of entrepreneurial theory . An in - depth realist ac - count of opportunities , however , requires us to move beyond analogies borrowed from the natu - ral world ( Birkinshaw , Healey , Suddaby , & Weber , 2014 ; Lawson , 2003 ) and reflect on the ways op - portunities may be plausibly said to exist in hu - man societies where entrepreneurial actions take place . Entrepreneurial opportunities must have vast ontological differences compared with the crude propensities of the natural world ; for one , the very meaningfulness of the word “ opportunity ” presupposes the background existence of sub - jectively set and socially conditioned goals . Even in the rudimentary example of a seed ’ s propensity to actualize into a flower , this propensity cannot be said to exist as an opportunity without the presumption that it can make the satisfaction of agricultural goals possible . Moreover , although profit is customarily treated as an “ objective outcome ” motivating entrepreneurial action , in - dividuals will typically have various evaluative reactions to publicly describable outcomes ( McMullen , 2015 : 655 ) . The level ( or duration ) of profitability judged as “ adequate , ” as well as the act of measuring profitability ( e . g . , in choosing accounting vis - ` a - vis economic metrics ; McMullen & Dimov , 2013 : 1494 , 1508 – 1509 ) , is inevitably a subjective matter . Despite the subjectivity of goals , the condi - tions of their satisfaction lie in the objective conditions of the world . To more closely scruti - nize the nature of the propensity that makes the satisfaction of entrepreneurial subjectivities objectively possible , we face the question , “ What is the fundamental nature of the ‘ seed ’ of market demand that must preexist for the goal of profit to be a genuine ontological possibility ? ” EXISTENCE AND ACTUALIZATION OF ENTREPRENEURIAL OPPORTUNITIES In this section we deepen our theorization of opportunities through ( 1 ) the identification of desire as the core ontological ingredient of op - portunities qua latent market demand and ( 2 ) the recognition of the role of enhanced agentic effort in actualizing ontologically demanding opportunities . Realist Theorization of Unmet Market Demand In the neoclassical worldview there is “ no scope for pure profit ” ( Kirzner , 1997 : 69 ) , and the idea of unmet demand is intrinsically paradoxical ( see also Sarasvathy et al . , 2010 ) . Demand is synony - mous with purchasing behavior —“ What could be , is ” ( Martin , 2009 : 519 ) — and there is no ontological space for demand that is both real and simulta - neously absent from market transactions . A re - alist conceptualization of demand requires an ontological deepening capable of analytically disjoining it from actual consumer behaviors ( see McMullen , 2011 , and Schumpeter , 1983 ) . The cat - egory of desire is crucial for conceptualizing a demand that is out of sync with overt consuming behaviors . It satisfies the requirement of realist philosophy of science for ontological depth ( Danermark , Ekstrom , Jakobsen , & Karlsson , 2002 ) and is also central to the realist philosophy of mind ( Searle , 1983 ) . The concept of desire most typically refers to transfactually operating tendencies . It exists as an unobservable and ex ante nonevident force that can nonetheless produce observable effects under appropriate circumstances . Take as an example the behavior of prisoners who do not try to escape . The absence of escape attempts by prisoners does not imply an absence of the desire to escape . Desire captures an existing dynamism underlying even the most empirically stable of situations ; prisoners ’ desire to break free is out of sync with the compliant behavior observed on a quiet day in the prison . Consider the currently absent yet highly de - sired cure for HIV as an example of a desire forming the core component of an objectively 2016 417 Ramoglou and Tsang existing profit opportunity . This desire operates as a transfactually existing tendency that will materialize into consuming behavior once a pharmaceutical company offers the cure . With respect to the opportunity to profit through T - shirts and aprons with the “ Je suis Charlie ” slogan , that opportunity fundamentally existed in the active desire of people to express repulsion for the terrorist attack at Charlie Hebdo . Con - sider also an example in which no technologi - cal breakthrough or environmental change is necessary for the existence of a transfactual op - portunity : profiting by opening a Mediterranean restaurant in a city where no similar restaurants previously existed . In the first two cases , desire is arguably manifest or easy to discern before the product actually enters a market . In contrast , this need not be the case with the Mediterranean restaurant . The desire for such cuisine need not be knowable by an entrepreneur , or even customers themselves before encountering exotic tastes not previously on offer . Finally , it is worth noting that unmet market demand need not exist in the desire for concrete products or services . For instance , desire is not targeted at a specific HIV - curing substance or a particular slogan such as “ Je suis Charlie . ” De - sires typically exist in the abstract ( e . g . , the desire to cure oneself of the HIV virus or to protest against religious terrorism ) , and novel products and services can be suitable candidates for their satisfaction . Differentiating Mode of Actualization from Mode of Existence Up to this point we have demystified the kind of propensity intuited by Kirzner in his reference to unfulfilled tendencies toward equilibrium or “ ready - made ” opportunities awaiting discovery by “ passive ” agents . However , skeptics object to this static view of opportunities because it fails to acknowledge the salience of entrepreneurial ef - fort and agency ( McMullen , 2015 ) . Suddaby et al . astutely recognize that it is empirical cases of intense entrepreneurial effort fueling the creation perspective ’ s rejection of the notion that opportu - nities exist objectively : When Steve Jobs created the iPhone . . . he recog - nized that he could create and promote a product that consumers did not even realize they wanted . Similarly , when Edison created the electric light bulb , he supplemented the innovation effort with a tremendous effort to legitimize the product — i . e . , to socially construct the conditions for con - sumer acceptance of a product that had no prior contextual understanding or awareness in the marketplace ( 2015 : 3 ) . We agree that transfactually existing opportuni - ties cannot capture the totality of opportunities . However , this premise does not lead to the con - clusion that “ opportunities are social constructs ” ( Barreto , 2012 : 360 ) that “ do not exist as inde - pendent realities ” ( Spedale & Watson , 2014 : 761 ) . We resist the polarization between objectively existing opportunities and subjectively con - structed opportunities by explaining that there is no genuine tension between the constructivist intuitions animating the creation approach and the objectivity of opportunities . With subtle con - ceptual adjustments , our actualization approach can accommodate constructivist intuitions with - out surrendering commitment to their objective ontology . In keeping their mode of existence apart from their mode of actualization , we acknowledge the ontology of opportunity types animating cre - ation theory ’ s reaction as agent - independent op - portunities whose actualization is nevertheless agency intensive . Agency - Intensive Opportunities Schumpeter discerned the insufficiency of product development for the successful re - alization of business goals by noting that con - sumers often ought to “ be taught to want new things . . . [ or ] educated by . . . [ producers ] if necessary ” ( 1983 : 65 ; see also Penrose , 1995 : 80 ) . For example , “ it was not enough to produce satisfactory soap , it was also necessary to in - duce people to wash ” ( Schumpeter , 1939 : 243 ) . Thomas Edison ’ s case is particularly instructive . In hindsight , electric lighting looks like a techno - logical inevitability . However , the development of a product that could be a superior solution to users ’ needs was alone insufficient for the suc - cessful venture realization . It took Edison re - markable effort to overcome the resistance and skepticism toward this innovation , such as his effort in working out design details that invoked familiarity with widely used technologies of the time ( Hargadon & Douglas , 2001 ) . While creation theorists correctly acknowledge the elements of creativity and skillful entrepre - neurial engagement , they unnecessarily throw the baby out with the bathwater by denying the 418 July Academy of Management Review objectivity of opportunities . Instead , we can retain commitment to their objectivity by acknowledg - ing a type of desire that does not exist in ways that the cure for HIV does but that can exist in the presence of appropriate desire - eliciting efforts . What we can potentially desire may not operate actively . Imagine , for example , a situation in which an individual meets a person who at first sight seems uninteresting , but the individual then gradually develops a desire for this person ’ s continued presence . A desire to own a sports car after watching a compelling advertisement can emerge in someone who does not currently have an active desire to buy an automobile . In the case of a transfactually existing desire , the very supply of a product can prove sufficient for the realization of profits . In contrast , in the case of a desirethat can emerge butisnot activeata given point in time , the actualization of a related oppor - tunity is unlikely without appropriate marketing , advertising , and / or legitimating efforts ( Suddaby & Greenwood , 2005 ; Webb , Ireland , Hitt , Kistruck , & Tihanyi , 2011 ) . If in the examples of the iPhone and the electric light bulb the very fact that they eventually led to profits testifies to the objective preexistence of the related opportunities , we may also consider what appears to be a yet - to - actualize opportunity that nonetheless does not seem to be readily exploit - able . Janicki Bioenergy recently produced a ma - chine that generates clean water out of human excrement . Although there is a strong desire for sanitized water in many regions of the world , not many individuals would desire to drink water poured from this machine . It arguably takes in - genious effort , such as having Bill Gates drink the water ( BBC News , 2015 ) , to actualize the opportu - nityin question . The image ofGates carries strong symbolic power with potent reassuring effects regarding the safety of this new technology . On an ontological level , eradication of fears that counter the desire for this technological solution is a pre - requisite for success . Just as the blossoming of a flower may require efforts aimed at realizing the flower seed ’ s pro - pensity to blossom , the possibility of entrepre - neurial success may require a multitude of creative endeavors aimed at the actualization of a preexisting opportunity ( see also Ramoglou & Zyglidopoulos , 2015 ) . Still , the existence of en - trepreneurial opportunities remains independent of the thoughts , imagination , or actions of any given entrepreneur , entrepreneurial team , or entrepreneurial organization . Edison did not create or design the opportunity . To deny this agent - independence premise is to accept that limits to the possible are ultimately determined by creative agency and that Edison could effectively use his entrepreneurial resourcefulness to suc - ceed in any entrepreneurial undertaking . UNPACKING THE INDEPENDENCE DIMENSION In acknowledging the causal role of creative agency in realizing entrepreneurial goals , we run the risk of violating the above - mentioned realist dimension of independence . Here we show that our position is consistent with this dimension , thus guarding against the tendency of portraying entrepreneurial agents as limitlessly powerful superagents ( see also Suddaby , 2010a ) . The theo - rization of the nonopportunity space is key to tackling the metaphysics of possibilism , as pre - supposed by exaggerated portraits of creative entrepreneurial agency ( e . g . , Garud & Karnøe , 2001 ; Venkataraman , 2011 ) . Pitfalls of Possibilism The actualist resists granting ontological plausibility to currently absent and only imagin - able states of the world . In sharp contrast , the possibilist asserts that “ what is thinkable is pos - sible too ” ( Wittgenstein , 1922 : 3 . 02 ) . If for the actualist the absent is impossible , then the pos - sibilist commits the diametrically opposite fallacy by failing to acknowledge ontological limits to the possible . Possibilism translates into a worldview in which entrepreneurs have the power to create the future they dream of . This implies that one can successfully realize the goals motivating entrepreneurial actions as long as one tries hard enough . By denying the existence of objective opportu - nities , the creation approach subscribes to the metaphysics of possibilism . If “ an opportunity is an epistemological construct [ and its ] ontological status is irrelevant ” ( Venkataraman , 2011 : 106 ) , it is logically inevitable that the market demand required for the realization of successful out - comes must be reducible to agentic social con - struction processes . There are simply no limits to the possible in a world in which opportunities have no agent - independent existence . In stating that creation theorists posit a failure - free world , we do not imply that they do not acknowledge the 2016 419 Ramoglou and Tsang possibility of failure . Rather , we mean that failure is treated as a mere possibility . Space of the Impossible In a possibilist frame of mind , Stevenson and Jarillo seminally defined opportunity as a “ future situation which is deemed desirable and feasi - ble ” ( 1990 : 23 ) . In contrast , we conceptualize op - portunity as the objectively existing propensity that makes ontologically possible a future situa - tion deemed desirable and feasible . We drive the agent independence of opportunity home by underscoring the category of nonopportunity next to the domain of unactualized opportunities . The ontological domain of nonopportunity is one that lacks the objective conditions necessary for profit actualization . Like watering soil where no seeds exist , venturing in this domain cannot be profit - able , regardless of the level of effort or entrepre - neurial resourcefulness . Schumpeter captured this intuition by stating , “ contra to conventional wisdom , ” that , in the productive process , there is “ in general no real leader , or rather the real leader is the consumer ” ( 1983 : 21 , emphasis added ) . In fact , Schumpeter went so far as to assert that the “ people who direct business firms only execute what is prescribed for them by wants or demand ” ( 1983 : 21 , emphasis added ) . We do not rule out the power of creative agency to alter the course of events . The pre - ceding section demonstrates how the propensity framework allows us to resist deterministic conceptions regarding the actualization of pro - pensities , acknowledging that it often takes considerable effort to stimulate demand . This acknowledgment nonetheless does not contra - dict the thesis that an opportunity must be either preexistent or absent ; it is “ an either / or occurrence . Somethingiseitherpossible , ornot . . . . Thereareno shades of grey ” ( Gartner , 2014 : 28 ) . Whether an entrepreneurial action can dovetail with profits is predetermined , although whether a potentially profitable entrepreneurial action will dovetail with profits is not . In contemporary entrepreneurship research this insight is best expressed by McMullen and Dimov , who stress that “ there is no entrepre - neurial opportunity without customer demand ” ( 2013 : 1494 ) . Their argument is that the entrepreneur can be in the right place at the right time , but what makes this place and time “ right ” is the presence of a customer who is willing and able to pay the entrepreneur ’ s asking price . Without this demand , no opportunity exists ( McMullen , 2011 ) . The entrepreneur may engage in hard - sell tactics in an aggressive attempt to influ - ence the customer , but ultimately the choice to en - gage in an exchange is the customer ’ s to make ( McMullen & Dimov , 2013 : 1494 ) . The notion of nonopportunity arguably resonates with what the layperson accepts as plausible . Potential entrepreneurs , whether business stu - dents ( Keh , Foo , & Lim , 2002 ) or prison inmates ( Patzelt , Williams , & Shepherd , 2014 ) , typically face few difficulties in coming up with ideas for profitable ventures . We are nonetheless aware that our ideas need not be consistent with reality and may be nothing but a figment of our willful imagination . People ’ s desire to travel to the moon , for in - stance , has existed from time immemorial . How - ever , current aerospace technology would render the commercialization of moon travel an un - profitable venture because of the insurmountable financial costs involved . It is likewise unrealistic to believe that one can profit by selling Mercedes in places where the desire for luxury might exist but the median income does not exceed a few thousand U . S . dollars ( Shane et al . , 2003 : 262 ) . Consider also the spectacular failure of Ford Motor Company with the Edsel model in the 1950s , which could not have been averted regardless of any marketing approach Ford might conceivably have deployed ( Brooks , 1963 ) . The design and pricing of the Edsel in the 1950s were arguably a nonopportunity . Institutional insights can also shed valuable light on the ways historical contingencies limit the boundaries of the possible ( DiMaggio & Powell , 1983 ; Sydow , Schrey ¨ ogg , & Koch , 2009 ) . For instance , it is arguably impossible to run a profitable venture by selling dog or horse meat in certain markets . The cultural schema that dogs and horses share human properties , coupled with the script “ edibility is inversely related to hu - manity , ” simply makes their consumption un - thinkable in many regions ( Sahlins , 1976 : 174 – 175 ) . In addition to cases of nonopportunity for all in - terested agents ( e . g . , it is impossible for anybody to profit in market X ) , the boundaries of the pos - sible can also vary along the contextual positions in which individuals find themselves ( Lawson , 2003 ; Stinchcombe , 1983 ) . Although a profit op - portunity can exist objectively , it need not be an opportunity for anyone not suitably positioned to 420 July Academy of Management Review take advantage of it ( see McMullen & Shepherd , 2006 , for a distinction between first - and third - person opportunities ) . For instance , an organiza - tion might not have the opportunity to profit by bringing an otherwise desirable product to the market if it lacks the required reputation or if the product can be easily copied by competitors who can produce it at an improved quality or reduced cost ( George , Chattopadhyay , Sitkin , & Barden , 2006 ; Schumpeter , 1983 ) . As mentioned , academic possibilist disposi - tions are at odds with what laypersons are pre - disposed to accept as possible , since prospective entrepreneurs are arguably better attuned to the realist intuition that the realm of the naturally possible is a subset of the thinkable . The lack of reflective and systematic theorizing , as well as the intrinsic recalcitrance of the opportunity con - struct , may well explain the strong possibilist tendencies of entrepreneurship discourse . Searle ’ s explanation of the counterintuitive tendency to downplay the limitations of the real world is of potential relevance as well : It satisfies the basic urge to power . It just seems too disgusting , somehow , that we should have to be at the mercy of the “ real world . ” It seems too awful that our representations should have to be an - swerable to anything but us ( 1998 : 17 ) . Unexciting as it might be , our realist analysis forces us to categorically acknowledge that failure is a necessary and unavoidable state of the world when venturing into the domain of nonopportunity — no matter how hard one might try . CONSTRUCT CLARITY Inthissectionweclarifysomelogicaldimensions of entrepreneurial opportunities by delineating them from nonentrepreneurial actions and oppor - tunities . Such discussion is imperative for the task of eloquent theory development ( Suddaby , 2010b ) , given the considerable conceptual stretch that the entrepreneurial and opportunity constructs have undergone ( Gartner , 1990 ; Hansen , Shrader , & Monllor , 2011 ) . Boundary Conditions of Innovative and Entrepreneurial Action Being entrepreneurial is being innovative , be - cause “ if entrepreneurial action is always a break with the status quo , then it is likely to involve some degree of innovation for the individuals in - volved ” ( McMullen , 2015 : 671 ) . Yet what exactly makes an action “ sufficiently ” innovative cannot be determined by means of philosophical analy - sis and inevitably involves subjective evaluation . If being innovative is doing “ things that are not generally done in the ordinary course of business routine ” ( Schumpeter , 1983 : 7 ) , then the logic of the innovative construct is essentially contrastive : it does not lie in the nature of the activity but , rather , in the departure from the established ways of doing things . The very same practice can be varyingly innovative against the backdrop of different reference points . A corporation can in - novate with a product that has not appeared in the global market before ( e . g . , Apple with the iPad ) , an individual can innovate by introducing a nov - elty to one market that is nonetheless ordinary in other regions of the world ( e . g . , Howard Schultz ’ s introduction of the Italian “ coffee experience ” to the U . S . market with Starbucks ) , and an organi - zation can also innovate against its past practices through the implementation of total quality man - agement techniques . Moreover , whether a practice is counted as innovative will vary for different scholarly com - munities . While some will view as innovative only high - impact Silicon Valley venture types ( e . g . , Guzman & Stern , 2015 ) or immensely prof - itable businesses ( e . g . , Henrekson & Sanandaji , 2014 ) , others may follow Schumpeter and frame as innovative deeds as “ trivial ” as the decision to “ change pigs with cows ” ( 1983 : 79 ) . Such defini - tional matters eventually boil down to subjective preferences , local norms , and intersubjective consensus . For our metatheoretical purpose , there is noth - ing precluding an action from counting as entre - preneurial as long as it is deemed to be somehow novel from a market ’ s point of view . Changing pigs with cows can be considered an entrepre - neurial act if the departure from past practices leads to the offering of a new product to the target market . The level of technological sophistication , degree of inventiveness , or realization of profits ( or lack thereof ) are all inconsequential to our conceptualization of entrepreneurship . Although the boundaries of what can be counted as innovative are fairly broad in this respect , our definitional criterion of novel in - teraction with a market entails that entrepre - neurial activities are a subset of innovative 2016 421 Ramoglou and Tsang activities . Entrepreneurship must be somehow innovative , but the reverse does not necessarily follow . Not all innovations lead to the offering of a novel product or service . An obvious example is cost - cutting innovations , such as more effi - cient organizing methods or cheaper ingredients for the production of the same product . Cost - cutting efforts can certainly contribute to a venture ’ s profitability by increasing profit margins or boosting revenues . Analytical pre - cision nonetheless requires that we guard against their analytical conflation with entre - preneurial innovations . Entrepreneurial Opportunities vis - ` a - vis Opportunities for Entrepreneurial Action The single most important source of confusion in discovery theory lies in the interchangeable use of opportunities for profit with opportunities for entrepreneurial action ( e . g . , Davidsson , 2015 ; Dyer , Gregersen , & Christensen , 2008 ; Martin & Wilson , in press ; Shane & Venkataraman , 2000 ; Shook , Priem , & McGee , 2003 ; Short , Ketchen , Shook , & Ireland , 2010 ) . Consider , for instance , Shane ’ s ( 2012 : 16 ) somewhat synonymous use of “ technological opportunities ” and “ profit op - portunities ” in his recent example of the oppor - tunity to commercialize aviation when airplanes were invented . Using these two constructs in - terchangeably conflates them . The invention of aircraft gave rise to the opportunity to act entre - preneurially by introducing the aviation in - novation in the transportation market . However , the opportunity to profit was determined by mar - ket factors . In the example of electric lighting , there was a gap of approximately seventy - five years between the invention of electric lighting and its profitable commercial exploitation by Edison ( Hargadon & Douglas , 2001 : 482 – 486 ) . “ Situations in which new goods , services , raw materials , markets and organizing methods can be introduced ” ( Eckhardt & Shane , 2003 : 336 ) are interrelated but ontologically distinct from entrepreneurial opportunities . It is therefore imperative that we embrace “ a distinction be - tween opportunities to realize an event outcome ( e . g . , profit ) — i . e . , ‘ an opportunity to succeed ’— and opportunities to engage in action — i . e . , ‘ an opportunity to try ’” ( McMullen , 2015 : 660 ) . The propensity framework facilitates this distinc - tion well : the introduction of novel products or services into a market is the means of triggering the actualization of profit propensities , but the opportunities for the introduction of novel goods and services are not themselves entre - preneurial opportunities . Venture opportuni - ties lie in the conditions making the supply of novel products possible through technological advances , access to financial and social capi - tal , and so on ( see also McMullen , Wood , & Palich , 2014 ) . These market offerings might , in turn , trigger the actualization of profit oppor - tunities , which nevertheless involves market demand . For conceptual precision , we should also re - frain from naming the opportunity to create social value as entrepreneurial opportunity ( cf . Lee & Venkataraman , 2006 : 110 ) , in spite of the fact that social value can emerge ( intentionally or not ) from profit - seeking activities ( see also Baumol , 1990 : 897 – 898 ) . It is otherwise tempting to cursorily frame Mark Zuckerberg as motivated to create social value when attempting to actualize a profit opportunity via Facebook ( versus being moti - vated to making profits alone ) . Confounding goals with their side effects unintentionally en - courages the idea that entrepreneurship is an act of altruism , and it inadvertently conflates for - profit actions with social entrepreneurship ( see also Austin , Stevenson , & Wei - Skillern , 2006 ) . REVISITING THE CHALLENGES PLAGUING THE DISCOVERY APPROACH We revisit below the challenges to the discov - ery approach and show how they are addressed by the actualization approach . We specifically focus on issues related to time and uncertainty , along with the puzzle of real but unexploited opportunities . Time and Uncertainty Klein questioned the sensibility of referring to opportunity existence prior to the realization of profits , because “ gains ( and losses ) do not come into being objectively until entrepreneurial ac - tion is complete ” ( 2008 : 181 ) , echoing Kaish and Gilad ’ s concern that “ in intertemporal markets , the opportunity does not yet exist to be discov - ered ” ( 1991 : 46 ) . From a complementary view - point , Korsgaard , Berglund , Thrane , and Blenker assaulted the idea that opportunities may be objectively present by stressing that “ future markets do not yet exist ” ( in press ) . In a similar 422 July Academy of Management Review vein , Buchanan and Vanberg ( 1991 ) embraced Shackle ’ s thesis that “ the content of time - to - come is not merely unknown but inexistent ” ( 1983 : 33 ) , in an attempt to expose the absurdity of the Kirznerian idea that opportunities may already exist “ out there ” in a future that has “ yet to be created ” ( Buchanan & Vanberg , 1991 : 178 ) . Tensions stemming from the temporalities of the entrepreneurial process do not refute the objectivity of entrepreneurial opportunities . In - stead , they underscore the need to embrace their propensity mode of being and to pay closer at - tention to subtle logical intricacies . These ten - sions fade away once we differentiate between the two meanings ofexistence associated with the temporal transition from propensity to actuality : (cid:129) at Stage A , the existence of the propensity itself ( propensity to actualize into profits when the opportunity is successfully exploi - ted ) , and (cid:129) at Stage B , the existence of empirical events ( i . e . , profit realization ) that manifest the pro - pensity ’ s preexistence . It is important to note that the second meaning of existence does not refer to propensities but , rather , to events that convey knowledge re - garding preexisting propensities . There are two discrete kinds of existence at play , and contra - dictions emerge only when this subtle ontolog - ical distinction is overlooked . The transition from Stage A to B is typically uncertain since there is no metaphysical guarantee that ven - turing will result in profit making ( McMullen & Dimov , 2013 ) . Although Klein was correct in noting that profits “ do not come into being objectively until entre - preneurial action is complete ” ( 2008 : 181 ) , he un - necessarily questioned the objective existence of entrepreneurial opportunities , since profits are ontologically distinct from opportunities . Profits relate epistemologically to opportunities : when profits are realized , we know that the related op - portunities exist . However , opportunities are on - tologically irreducible to profits , and , therefore , it does make sense to discuss opportunities as pro - pensities prior to the realization of profits . To also respond to Kaish and Gilad ’ s ( 1991 ) concern , al - though opportunities exist , what does not exist prior to their actualization is our knowledge of their existence . It is profits but not opportunities that can be discovered . The preexistence of op - portunities can be retrospectively inferred when profits are realized , but it is not entirely accurate to say that opportunities themselves are discovered . Moreover , given that the ontological transi - tion from Stage A to Stage B requires the pas - sage of time , propensities do not actualize at the very moment they come into existence . This de - mystifies Popper ’ s prima facie paradoxical proposition that the “ future is , in this way , ac - tively present at every moment ” ( 1990 : 20 ) . Any sense of paradox surrounding notions of “ pre - existing futures ” disappears once we clearly grasp that “ future ” refers to events yet to actu - alize , which nonetheless currently exist in a state of propensity . Consider , additionally , Shackle ’ s thesis that “ the content of time - to - come is not merely un - known but inexistent ” ( 1983 : 33 ) , as endorsed by Buchanan and Vanberg ( 1991 ) , Venkataraman ( 2011 ) , and Korsgaard et al . ( in press ) . On the one hand , these scholars are right to assert that the future is inexistent , in the sense that it is absent from the present world . On the other hand , they overlook that the present reality of opportunities can be meaningfully maintained once the objec - tivity of opportunity is viewed within a propensity framework . The proposition that “ future parts of a market simply do not exist ; they are , by defini - tion , not present ” ( Buchanan & Vanberg , 1991 : 176 ) holds water only on a blueprint of existence that lacks the ontological depth brought to promi - nence by propensity - based realism . Reconsidering a Core Puzzle Discovery theorists cannot resolve the puzzle that “ so many people ‘ miss ’ opportunities that literally stare them in the face ” ( Baron , 2006 : 115 ) without drawing a deep ontological dichotomy between entrepreneurs and so - called non - entrepreneurs , who are treated as either “ essen - tially blind ” ( Gartner , Carter , & Hills , 2003 : 107 ) or genetically unsuitable ( Nicolaou et al . , 2008 ; see also Ramoglou , 2013b ) . For the actualization ap - proach , the puzzle of asymmetrical opportunity perception is a nonissue . Once we realize that opportunities do not exist like dollar bills or lost luggage and are not supposed to be “ discovered ” as such , we are in a better position to appreciate the uncertainties of the entrepreneurial process ( McMullen & Shepherd , 2006 ) . We abandon the expectation that opportunities will inevitably be perceived at the moment of their emergence or will be exploited at the moment they are 2016 423 Ramoglou and Tsang perceived . Opportunities might exist unper - ceived and unexploited , similar to potent seeds that remain unperceived and their propensity to become flowers unactualized . The actualization approach also overcomes the associated idea regarding the presence of some causal “ nexus ” between opportunities and in - dividuals ( McCaffrey , 2014 ) . Opportunities do not have any sort of causal interaction with in - dividuals . They exist as the background against which the realization of profits becomes objec - tively possible ( akin to nourishment that does not stand causally to life but , rather , is an ontological precondition for the possibility of life ) . In realist terms , opportunities exist as ontological condi - tions of possibility . ENTREPRENEURIAL SUBJECTIVITIES IN THE ACTUALIZATION APPROACH In the previous section we addressed chal - lenges concerning the objectivity of opportunities that plague the discovery approach . In this sec - tion we discuss the subjectivities of the entrepre - neurial process by demonstrating the nature of the interplay between entrepreneurial sub - jectivities and opportunities qua propensities . Whether the subjective perception of opportu - nities contradicts notions of objectivity is a pe - rennial source of tension between creation and discovery scholars ( e . g . , Alvarez & Barney , 2013 ; Eckhardt & Shane , 2013 ) . Here we explain how the subjectivity of “ opportunity perception ” can be meaningfully conceptualized in parallel with the objectivity of “ opportunity existence ” within the actualization approach . If propensities are absent from the world ’ s actualized domains , they lack “ the sharp - edged reality of all things which we have seen and experienced ” ( Schumpeter , 1983 : 85 ) , and the possibility of making cognitive con - tact with them — at the bare minimum — requires that they be seen as a “ figment of our imagina - tion ” ( Schumpeter , 1983 : 85 ; see also Shackle , 1979 ) . Yet what imaginative content could , within reason , bring about an individual ’ s attempt to grasp an opportunity ? Can the “ dreaming of things that do not yet exist ” ( Gaglio , 2004 : 533 ) , such as the “ imaginary combination of product / service offering ” ( Davidsson , 2015 : 683 ) , qualify as imagining opportunities ? For example , would an individual perceive opportunity in imagining oneself producing “ Je suis Charlie ” T - shirts simpliciter ? Ifactivitiesarethemeanstowardthesatisfaction of goals — but are not opportunities themselves — the imaginative inception of an entrepreneurial course of action alone cannot describe an in - dividual ’ s imaginative contact with a possible opportunity . Instead , it is in the imaginative projection of a favorable state of the world to follow a course of action that we may say that an individual makes imaginative contact with a possible opportunity . This conceptualization entails two key distinctions — ( 1 ) between imagi - nation and belief and ( 2 ) between belief and knowledge — suggesting , effectively , three ways of “ seeing ” opportunities . For the first distinction , using the word “ oppor - tunity ” connotes confidence that one is making contact with something not merely imaginable but in an important sense real . However , there exists a subtle ontological distinction between the medium of imagination and the structure of beliefs ( Searle , 2001 ) ; imagination is more of a neutral cognitive projection into the future that need not be accompanied by positive ( phenome - nological ) experiences ( see also Popper , 1963 ) . We can imagine winning a fortune by gambling in the casino or making billions by starting a far - fetched entrepreneurial venture . Yet we do not typically experience such projections as anything more than the offshoot of a playful imaginative en - deavor . We are aware that what can ( objectively ) be the case is considerably narrower than what we can ( subjectively ) imagine as possible . Imag - ining “ if X , then Y ” future scenario types might offer the raw material or stimulus ( see McMullen , 2015 , on the stimulus problem ) for making cogni - tive contact with opportunities , but such imagi - nation is insufficient for offering the experience one has when believing one has recognized an opportunity . One must additionally trust that the imaginative projection corresponds to a naturally possible world state . The second distinction concerns the fact that even if an individual claims to know that he or she has recognized an opportunity , we ( qua re - searchers ) cannot share this confidence prior to opportunity actualization . “ Individuals can only believe ( not know ) that they have recognized entrepreneurial opportunities under uncertainty ” ( McMullen , 2015 : 657 ) ; hence , the ( epistemologi - cally ) neutral “ opportunity belief ” should replace expressions such as “ opportunity recognition ” or “ opportunity identification ” ( McMullen & Shepherd , 2006 ) . Just as imagining scenarios is ontologically 424 July Academy of Management Review different from believing that they correspond to genuine possibilities , the belief in imagined fu - ture projections is ontologically distinct from knowledge concerning the genuinely possible . If “ in an uncertain world , expectations may be disappointed ” ( Kregel , 1976 : 209 ) , as seminally maintained by Keynes ( 1936 ) , beliefs regarding opportunities can also be disappointed . To summarize , we have discussed three ways through which an individual can make cognitive “ contact ” with opportunities qua propensities . The vague construct of “ entrepreneurial alert - ness ” ( Kirzner , 1997 ) can therefore be meaning - fully replaced by three types of seeing that can appear sequentially in an entrepreneurial process : imagining ( S 1 ) , believing ( S 2 ) , and knowing ( S 3 ) : (cid:129) S 1 : imagining the state of the world in which one makes profits after engaging in an en - trepreneurial course of action ; (cid:129) S 2 : believing this state of the world as onto - logically possible ; and (cid:129) S 3 : after the realization of profits , knowing retrospectively that an opportunity was truly there . Although objective knowledge of opportunities ’ existence can be gained only retrospectively ( S 3 ) , this recognition is not at odds with the objective ontology of opportunities . Moreover , their objec - tive existence does not negate the meaningful - ness of discussing purely subjective ways of making sense of them prior to their actualization ( S 1 and S 2 ) . If the perception of objectively existing “ stuff ” strictly concerned the ways we perceive dollar bills or mountains , it would be right to deny no - tions of opportunity objectivism and assert that “ opportunities are subjectively imagined rather than objectively existing ” ( Korsgaard et al . , in press ) . Yet the ( otherwise sensible ) urge to sub - jectivize opportunities can relax once we adopt the propensity reasoning that transcends the ei - ther subjectively perceived or objectively existing dichotomy . It is perfectly intelligible to maintain that objectively existing opportunities are sub - jectively imagined and believed in . A REALIST THEORIZATION OF UNCERTAINTY AND FAILURE In the previous two sections we demonstrated how the actualization approach addresses chal - lenges to the discovery approach and , at the same time , takes into account the subjectivities of the entrepreneurial process . In this section we discuss a unique strength of the actualization approach — namely , a profound conceptualization of un - certainty regarding opportunity existence ( 1 ) prior to the outcomes of action and ( 2 ) in instances of failure . A More Nuanced Treatment of Uncertainty In looking to the future from a realist vantage point , we are in a state of agnosticism . We can imagine endless possibilities , but we cannot know whether they fall within the domain of unactualized propensities or whether our imag - ination has sidetracked into the domain of the impossible . We know philosophically that un - actualized propensities exist in abstracto but not where they exist in concreto . This nuanced view of uncertainty is overlooked in entrepreneurial discourse by proponents of the discovery and creation approaches alike ( for ex - ceptions see McMullen , 2015 ; McMullen & Dimov , 2013 ; Ramoglou & Zyglidopoulos , 2015 ) . Scholars tend to limit uncertainty to the empirical re - alization of profits , as opposed to the more fun - damental ontological uncertainty regarding the existence of conditions capable of sustaining a venture ’ s profitability . It is typically presupposed that one can succeed , and uncertainty pertains to whether one will succeed . We explained above that in denying the exis - tence of exogenous conditions for possibility , the creation approach subscribes to the metaphysics of possibilism . A worldview that presumes that “ nothing we imagine is absolutely impossible ” ( Hume , 1985 : 81 ) is at odds with the deep kind of uncertainty that we advocate . Without the domain of the impossible , there is no uncertainty re - garding the limits of the possible ; anything is , in principle , achievable ( see also Arend , Sarooghi , & Burkemper , 2015 ) . The way in which discovery scholarship trivi - alizes uncertainty is more indirect and likely unintentional . Specifically , epistemologically charged words like “ discover , ” “ recognize , ” and “ identify ” connote that individuals know they come across opportunities prior to action ( whereas opportunities might only be imag - ined or believed to exist as we have argued ; see also Dimov , 2011 ) . If opportunities are ob - jectively discovered and then exploited , we un - intentionally commit to their necessary existence , 2016 425 Ramoglou and Tsang and uncertainty concerns whether they will be successfully exploited . Note in this regard the sense of paradox in - herent in Shane ’ s claim that the definitionofentrepreneurialopportunitiesdoesnot require them to be profitable ; rather , our definition suggests only that the probability new goods , ser - vices , raw materials , and organizing methods could be introduced and sold at greater than their cost of production exceeds zero ( 2012 : 15 ) . When a person is said to discover an entrepre - neurial opportunity and then exploit it , the prob - ability of having a profitable outcome must be greater than zero ( and cannot be zero ) . In other words , this profitability attribute of the outcome is supposedly known with certainty at the moment of “ discovery , ” before even the exercise of en - trepreneurial action . This conundrum is caused by conceptualizing opportunities as actualized entities . In brief , the discovery framework cannot ac - commodate the more profound kind of uncertainty envisaged by realist metatheory . If prior to action we are in a state of agnosticism and cannot know whether a projected venture falls into the domain of nonopportunity , can we ex post truly know the existence of opportunities ? The Indeterminacy - of - Failure Thesis The only occasion where we can know the existence of opportunity is at the realization of profits . Yet in the case of failure , we are ag - nostic . This proposition stands contrary to the assessment by objectivist scholars who ac - knowledge uncertainty ex ante but tend to infer the absence of opportunity in the absence of profits ( e . g . , McMullen , 2015 ; Ramoglou & Zyglidopoulos , 2015 ) . In contrast , the actual - ization approach suggests that we can seldom rule out the preexistence of an opportunity . If the entrepreneur stopped short of deploying the required agentic effort , the opportunity might have simply remained unactualized . The ab - sence of anticipated profits might often be due to wrongdoings or omissions in either the de - sign or the execution stage ( Singh , 2001 ) . For example , Hargadon and Douglas ( 2001 ) suggested that Edison failed to profitably exploit the phonograph innovation because of wrong - doings in infiltrating the market . Specifically , Edison offered a device with multiple functions , such as audible books for blind people and talking dictation , whereas the market retrospec - tively showed that promoting solely the function of music reproduction was the proper means of actualizing this opportunity ( Conot , 1979 ) . It was a real opportunity that was just waiting the ap - propriate mode of actualization , yet Edison had incorrectly dismissed it as lacking “ any commer - cial value ” ( Hargadon & Douglas , 2001 : 493 ) . In summary , a realist conception of uncertainty entails that ( 1 ) when looking forward into the fu - ture , we know neither whether an opportunity exists nor whether it will actualize , and ( 2 ) when looking backward at instances of failure , we cannot typically determine whether an opportu - nity was absent or simply unactualized . In es - sence , realist ontology suggests that we are in a state of agnosticism for questions that are by their very nature unanswerable . Still , the fact that we cannot acquire knowledge of this kind does not mean that there are no contributions to be made at the level of empirical inquiry . Empirical scientists benefit not only by becoming informed regarding novel theories and research impli - cations ( cf . Arend et al . , 2015 ; Davidsson , 2015 ; Dimov , 2011 ) but also by being alerted to theo - retical dead ends and unwholesome research orientations . Moreover , if we cannot address empirically unanswerable metaphysical questions , we can certainly study how individuals engage with the metaphysical uncertainties at the heart of entre - preneurship . Our sensemaking is not fully in - formed by empirical and testable theories after all ; in orderto survivein an inescapably uncertain world , we cannot but hold tight to notions that are by their very nature untestable . As seminally appreciated by Kant ( 1999 ) , by virtue of possess - ing a human mind , we are already metaphysical philosophers . The metaphysical issues elabo - rated in this article could serve as theoretical searchlights ( Popper , 1972 ) into the deeper beliefs ( Krueger , 2007 ) that individuals hold with respect to inevitably “ unanswerable metaphysical con - siderations ” ( Tetlock & Belkin , 1996 : 3 ) . We discuss below research implications along with atten - dant pedagogical possibilities . RESEARCH AND PEDAGOGICAL IMPLICATIONS We have argued that we can neither foresee where opportunities exist norknow retrospectively whether opportunities remained unexploited or were simply absent . We can nonetheless try to 426 July Academy of Management Review understand how agents make sense of these metaphysical puzzles . This is analogous to the move of scholars interested in empirically un - answerable questions about the existence of God switching from theology to the psychology of re - ligion . The following are some fruitful research directions constructed based onthisspirit , coupled with remarks toward a critical pedagogy in entre - preneurial studies ( Giroux , 1988 ) . Making Sense of Entrepreneurial Failure and Success Are failed entrepreneurs inclined to maintain their original beliefs in the existence of the pos - tulated opportunity while attributing failure solely to mishaps during the exploitation phase ? Or are they instead inclined to regret believing in the opportunity ’ s existence in the first place ? The following reflection by Richard Branson , follow - ing the crash of a Virgin Galactic spacecraft on October 31 , 2014 , is thought - provoking : I found myself questioning seriously for the first time , whether in fact it was right to be backing the development of something that could result in such tragic circumstances . In short — was Virgin Galac - tic and everything it has stood for and dreamt of achieving , really worth it ? . . . I got a very firm an - swer to that question immediately when I landed in Mojave . From the designers , the builders , the en - gineers , the pilots and the whole community who passionately believed — and still believe — that truly opening space and making it accessible and safe is of vital importance to all our futures ( Boyle , 2015 ) . It seems that despite his initial doubt immedi - ately following the tragedy , Branson decided to hold on to his belief that commercializing space travel is a profitable opportunity . Where does his confidence come from ? How could “ narrative attributions ” shed light on underlying meta - physical attitudes ( Mantere , Aula , Schildt , & Vaara , 2013 ) ? How do failed entrepreneurs resonate with our indeterminacy thesis ? How might culture relate to different metaphysical attitudes toward the unknowable ? Are individuals from cultures high in “ uncertainty avoidance ” ( Hofstede , 1980 ) more likely to resist the agnostic mental state , or even more likely to appeal to superstitious means driven by the desire for certainty in an uncertain world ( Tsang , 2004 ) ? It would also be interesting to examine the variety of meta - physical attitudes that emerge among different types of entrepreneurs , or the evolution of such attitudes for individuals who face a sequence of failures . Do the metaphysical schemata of highly experienced entrepreneurs differ from those of novice entrepreneurs ? For example , are the former , such as Branson , more aware that existing opportunities do not actualize neces - sarily , and that one should often persist , than the latter , who might be prone to quickly revise their initial beliefs in the absence of anticipated outcomes ? This line of research has strong pedagogical potential . Just as realist philosophers of science warn experimental scientists about the tempta - tion of pseudo - falsification ( Bhaskar , 1978 ) , realist entrepreneurship educators could make enter - prising individuals cognizant of the dangers of premature opportunity abandonment . This realist attitude can also shed light on the puzzle of stan - dard economic theory regarding entrepreneurial persistence despite the apparent unprofitability of the activity ( ˚ Astebro , Herz , Nanda , & Weber , 2014 ) . Persistent individuals might simply be aware of the ontological insight that absence of profits does not necessarily mean absence of opportu - nity for profit . Conversely , patterns of persistence in the face of failure might also be explained by unrealistic presuppositions . For example , if one is rigidly committed to a possibilist worldview and does not let failure weaken the initial belief in opportunity existence , then one is likely to persevere , and even to escalate resource commitment toward a probably hopeless venture . On such occasions the entrepreneurship educator could problem - atize deep - seated worldviews — in the style of cognitive therapy — by encouraging enterprising individuals to question dogmatic worldviews that might be entrapping them in financial dead ends . Moreover , it would be interesting to investigate how highly successful entrepreneurs relate to the view that their actions might have simply trig - gered the actualization of an objectively existing propensity . For example , would Zuckerberg be willing to accept that the “ Facebook opportunity ” might have been just waiting to be actualized and that anybody in his position could have enjoyed a similar level of success ? Or would he instead be inclined to attribute the core ingredient of his success to ingenious steps taken during the ex - ploitation process ? In other words , would he be willing to accept the counterfactual scenario of failure as plausible in the absence of his efforts , or 2016 427 Ramoglou and Tsang would he view his success in an important sense as metaphysically predestined ? We should also be alert to the possibility that some entrepreneurs might tend to display a more constructivist mindset . For example , this would be the case if Zuckerberg ’ s ontolog - ical presumptions resonated with popular cul - ture portraits , according to which he possesses the supreme world - creating ability required “ for changing how we live our lives ” ( Time , 2010 ) . Realist educators could challenge such world - creating convictions by offering alterna - tive explanations that do not ascribe spectacu - lar successes to “ superior innovative abilities ” ( McMullen & Shepherd , 2006 : 149 ) but instead highlight other contributing factors , such as re - lated technological advances and a favorable institutional surrounding . Such pedagogical advice could , in turn , protect successful entre - preneurs from potentially self - destructive hu - bris ( Hayward , Shepherd , & Griffin , 2006 ) . Nonentrepreneurs From an empiricist standpoint , if one does “ not do an action , then either . . . [ one ] lacks the ca - pacity or lacks the opportunity ” ( Ayers , 1968 : 105 ) . It is therefore unsurprising that for discovery theory nonenterprising individuals have the op - portunity but lack the capacity to exploit it ( Ramoglou , 2013b ) . Realism does not dismiss nonenterprising individuals as helpless non - entrepreneurs . Instead , the category of non - enterprising individuals ( those who could have yet did not act entrepreneurially ) emerges as a particularly interesting domain for the realist entrepreneurship researcher , given that realist philosophy of science is “ concerned essentially with possibilities , and only derivatively with ac - tualities ” ( Bhaskar , 1978 : 18 ) . Nonenterprising in - dividuals may not lack opportunity exploitation capacities but may simply doubt that their imag - inative projections into the future correspond to ontologically genuine possibilities . Instead of asking why some and not others are capable of exploiting the opportunities they “ discover ” ( Shane & Venkataraman , 2000 ) and searching for unique qualities in enter - prising individuals ( Gartner , 1989 ; Ramoglou , 2013b ) , a more fruitful research question would be , “ When facing the same imaginative sce - nario , why do individuals have vastly dif - ferent views regarding its plausibility ? ” The vocabulary associated with the actualization approach can facilitate research along these lines by deepening our understanding of the underlying causes for doubt : (cid:129) D 1 : doubt that profits will follow ( e . g . , I doubt that I will make profits by acting on this opportunity ) ; (cid:129) D 2 : doubt that profits can follow ( e . g . , I doubt that this opportunity exists in the first place ) ; (cid:129) D 2a : doubt that profits can follow because I doubt that an opportunity exists here for me ; (cid:129) D 2b : doubt that profits can follow because I doubt that opportunities exist here for anyone ; (cid:129) D 3 : doubt that opportunities exist in general ; and (cid:129) D 4 : doubt that I possess the capability to “ identify ” opportunities . This more nuanced view of doubt enriches peda - gogy as well . Individuals who believe that they lack the cognitive ability required for “ identify - ing ” entrepreneurial opportunities ( D 4 ) could be helped to appreciate that there need not be any extraordinary ability involved . Entrepreneurial success need not require prescience ( Dimov , 2011 ) . The distance between success and failure can also be attributed to luck : successful entre - preneurs might simply trust their imagination and find out ex post that they were fortunate enough to pursue a course of action based on that belief . A strong potential for a realist pedagogy also lies in the case of D 3 as an expression of the actualist worldview cherishing the actual as necessary — and a priori dismissing the absent as impossible . Consider for instance the 217 of the 242 potential investors approached by Howard Schultz who gave him various arguments re - garding why caf´es could not be a growth industry in the United States : Many investors I approached told me bluntly that they thought that I was selling a crazy idea . . . . “ Why on earth do you think this is going to work ? Americans are never going to spend a dollar and a half for coffee ! ” “ You ’ re out of your mind . This is insane . You should just go get a job . ” . . . Americans , they insisted , could never enjoy espresso the way Italians do ( Schultz & Yang , 1997 : 73 , 67 , 76 ) . When Schultz shared his vision with potential investors , all of them visualized imaginatively the very same projection — namely , a state of the world in which the American public ’ s desire for the coffee experience sustained the profitability of Starbucks - type ventures . Yet the majority of these 428 July Academy of Management Review individuals not only did not experience this sce - nario as ontologically possible but forcefully dis - missed its plausibility . The Starbucks example suggests that entrepre - neurial pedagogy could target action - hindering beliefs . This is not to say that one must always believe in the existence of opportunities . Rather , possibleopportunitiesshouldnotbeautomaticallyrejectedbecauseofmetaphysicaldogmatism . To this end , we could communicate the invaluable realist insight that the world “ out there ” exists in more ways than the eye can meet , and we should refrain from falling for the idea that existing pro - pensities must have been inevitably imagined , believed , and actualized . There are always op - portunities remaining unimagined , imagined yet unpursued , or pursued but unactualized . It is sheer epistemological superstition to believe that as long as cognitively privileged agents possessing the flashlight of “ entrepreneurial alertness ” hap - pen to be around ( Kirzner , 1979 ) , opportunities will instantly be spotted and exploited . Last , we should move decisively beyond the entrepreneur versus nonentrepreneur divide and the associated static explanations of risk pro - pensity and entrepreneurial potential ( Gartner , 1989 ; McMullen & Shepherd , 2006 ) . Instead , we should study the ( likely ) evolution from doubt to belief among enterprising individuals , and vice versa among nonenterprising individuals . Such a diachronic mode of study could help us un - derstand why some individuals allow peer skep - ticism to undermine their confident beliefs in opportunity existence , whereas others hold tight to their personal judgment ( Metcalfe , 2004 ; Shepherd , 2015 ) . How do individuals make sense of this con - flict of judgments ? Do they even attempt to make rational sense of it , or are they inclined to dogmatically hold on to original beliefs ? Promoting Reflective Entrepreneurship The promotion of enterprise is an increasingly prominent topic on the public policy agenda ( Nightingale & Coad , 2014 ) . Individuals are en - couraged to take fate into their own hands , and entrepreneurship is celebrated as the panacea to some of our most pressing socioeconomic chal - lenges , such as poverty and unemployment . According to our realist analysis , this entrepre - neurship public policy is erected on the pre - carious metaphysics of possibilism . If we lived in a world free from nonopportunities , it would be right to place primary emphasis on raising the “ entrepreneurial spirit . ” However , if our world is close to the realist view that there is a large space of nonopportunity next to the domain of entre - preneurial opportunities , we should tone down the oft - unqualified enthusiasm about entrepre - neurship and caution against the tendency to celebrate wanderings of imagination as “ oppor - tunity identification . ” This is not to say that realism discourages entrepreneurship . Rather , in promoting a more nuanced worldview , realism guards against simplistic and potentially irresponsible narra - tives ( Cal ´as et al . , 2009 ) , and it underscores the need for more reflective entrepreneurs , as op - posed to more entrepreneurs simpliciter . Op - portunities surely exist . But we cannot know where they exist and for whom , nor how much effort must be invested for their actualization . Prediction versus Explanation Finally , realism can soothe entrepreneurship researchers ’ worry about lacking predictively successful theories ( Shane & Venkataraman , 2000 ) . As mentioned , predictive power is a prime positivist criterion for theory assessment . From a realist standpoint , however , the scientific status of a discipline is not threatened by the lack of predictively powerful theories . Prediction is only feasible on the relatively rare occasions of exper - imental closure produced in laboratory situations or in the study of astronomical phenomena ( Miller & Tsang , 2011 ) . But the complexity of factors af - fecting entrepreneurial activities and outcomes makes the lack of predictively powerful theories far from surprising . For example , it does not suffice to believe in the existence of an oppor - tunity for the exercise of entrepreneurial activ - ity , for a number of reasons , such as the doubt that the opportunity will materialize into profit ( see D 1 and D 2a ) . Rather than maintaining that prediction of entrepreneurial activities is a rea - sonable expectation , we may instead focus our attention on explaining and understanding en - trepreneurial phenomena , as well as improving the effectiveness of entrepreneurial actions through reflective teaching . After all , while the study of planets does not make them alter their orbits , management re - searchers ’ conceptions of reality do shape the business world that they study ( Ferraro , Pfeffer , & Sutton , 2005 ; Suddaby , 2014b ) : “ Our 2016 429 Ramoglou and Tsang very understanding of the world changes the con - ditions of the changing world ” ( Popper , 1990 : 17 ) . In the context of entrepreneurship , why worry that we cannotpredictentrepreneurialeventsaslongaswecanhelptrainmorereflectiveentrepreneurs ? CONCLUSION Shane and Venkataraman ( 2000 : 224 ) close their “ Promise ” by highlighting the possibility that they may have made some flawed assumptions and invalid arguments , and Shane concludes his recent article by inviting future researchers to “ identify errors and confusing points ” ( 2012 : 18 ) . In an important sense our article responds to Shane ’ s ( 2012 ) invitation for further meta - theoretical research by addressing prevailing puzzles and confusion from a realist philoso - phy of science standpoint . Most crucially , by rehabilitating the objectivity of opportunities along the depth ontology offered by realist meta - theory , we could more explicitly appreciate the propensity mode of opportunity existence that has been hindered by inadequate theorizing and overpowered by empiricist preconceptions . We do not imply that we have said the last word on these foundational issues . It is likely that weaknesses will be revealed and new conceptual challenges will emerge . This possibility seems even more likely if we take into account that the subject matter of entrepreneurial discourse lies at the crossroads of some of the most intellectually challenging matters , such as the metaphysics of potentiality and the nature of human intention - ality . It would not be an exaggeration to say that the study of entrepreneurial phenomena touches on some of the most demanding aspects of phi - losophy . This is readily evidenced by the fact that philosophers since Aristotle ( including Bertrand Russell and Roy Bhaskar ) have often found themselves struggling with the task of theorizing real yet empirically absent modes of existence . We close by daring a novel reading into the causes of the slow intellectual progress in the field of entrepreneurship so routinely documented . En - trepreneurship stands on the thin line between possibility and actuality and therefore faces unique conceptual difficulties unknown to dis - ciplines studyingactualizedphenomenawithmore discernible patterns of causality ( e . g . , astronomy or molecular biology ) . Yet despite the challenges intrinsic to the subject matter , scholars should not become easily intimidated , let alone dismiss the option of realist studies by surrendering this domain to ill - conceived philosophical concep - tions of scholarly research ( see Suddaby , 2014b : 449 – 453 , on scientism and dustbowl empiricism ) . To this end , it is imperative that we fully embrace the theoretical intricacies and uncertainties stemming from the fact that we “ live in a world of propensities ” ( Popper , 1990 : 9 ) . REFERENCES Alvarez , S . A . , & Barney , J . B . 2007 . Discovery and creation : Alternative theories of entrepreneurial action . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 1 : 11 – 26 . Alvarez , S . A . , & Barney , J . B . 2010 . Entrepreneurship and epistemology : The philosophical underpinnings of the study of entrepreneurial opportunities . Academy of Management Annals , 4 : 557 – 583 . Alvarez , S . A . , & Barney , J . B . 2013 . Epistemology , opportuni - ties , and entrepreneurship : Comments on Venkataraman et al . ( 2012 ) and Shane ( 2012 ) . Academy of Management Review , 38 : 154 – 157 . Alvarez , S . A . , Barney , J . B . , & Anderson , P . 2013 . Forming and exploiting opportunities : The implications of discovery and creation processes for entrepreneurial and organi - zational research . Organization Science , 24 : 301 – 317 . Alvarez , S . A . , Barney , J . B . , McBride , R . , & Wuebker , R . 2014 . Realism in the study of entrepreneurship . Academy of Management Review , 39 : 227 – 233 . Arend , R . J . , Sarooghi , H . , & Burkemper , A . 2015 . Effectuation as ineffectual ? Applying the 3E theory - assessment frame - work to a proposed new theory of entrepreneurship . Academy of Management Review , 40 : 630 – 651 . Arin , K . P . , Huang , V . Z . , Minniti , M . , Nandialath , A . M . , & Reich , O . F . M . 2015 . Revisiting the determinants of entrepre - neurship : A Bayesian approach . Journal of Management , 41 : 607 – 631 . Arrow , K . J . 1974 . Limited knowledge and economic analysis . American Economic Review , 64 : 1 – 10 . Arrow , K . J . , & Debreu , G . 1954 . Existence of an equilibrium for a competitive economy . Econometrica , 22 : 265 – 290 . ˚ Astebro , T . , Herz , H . , Nanda , R . , & Weber , R . A . 2014 . Seeking the roots of entrepreneurship : Insights from behavioral economics . Journal of Economic Perspectives , 28 ( 3 ) : 49 – 69 . Austin , J . , Stevenson , H . , & Wei - Skillern , J . 2006 . Social and commercial entrepreneurship : Same , different , or both ? Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 30 : 1 – 22 . Ayers , M . R . 1968 . The refutation of determinism . London : Methuen . Baker , T . , & Nelson , R . E . 2005 . Creating something from nothing : Resource construction through entrepreneurial bricolage . Administrative Science Quarterly , 50 : 329 – 366 . Baron , R . A . 2006 . Opportunity recognition as pattern recog - nition : How entrepreneurs “ connect the dots ” to identify new business opportunities . Academy of Management Perspectives , 20 ( 1 ) : 104 – 119 . 430 July Academy of Management Review Barreto , I . 2012 . Solving the entrepreneurial puzzle : The role of entrepreneurial interpretation in opportunity formation and related processes . Journal of Management Studies , 49 : 356 – 380 . Baumol , W . J . 1990 . Entrepreneurship : Productive , unproductive , and destructive . Journal of Political Economy , 98 : 893 – 921 . BBC News . 2015 . Bill Gates drinks water distilled from human faeces . January 7 : http : / / www . bbc . co . uk / news / technology - 30709273 . Bhaskar , R . 1978 . A realist theory of science . Hassocks , UK : Harvester Press . Bhaskar , R . 1998 . The possibility of naturalism ( 3rd ed . ) . New York : Routledge . Birkinshaw , J . , Healey , M . P . , Suddaby , R . , & Weber , K . 2014 . Debating the future of management research . Journal of Management Studies , 51 : 38 – 55 . Boyle , A . 2015 . How Richard Branson almost scrapped Virgin Galactic , and why he didn ’ t . NBC News , January 4 : http : / / www . nbcnews . com / storyline / virgin - voyage / how - richard - branson - almost - scrapped - virgin - galactic - why - he - didnt - n279411 . Brock , S . , & Mares , E . 2007 . Realism and anti - realism . Oxford : Routledge . Brooks , J . N . 1963 . The fate of the Edsel and other business adventures . New York : Harper & Row . Bruyat , C . , & Julien , P . A . 2001 . Defining the field of research in entrepreneurship . Journal of Business Venturing , 16 : 165 – 180 . Buchanan , J . M . , & Vanberg , V . J . 1991 . The market as a creative process . Economics and Philosophy , 7 : 167 – 186 . Cal´as , M . B . , Smircich , L . , & Bourne , K . A . 2009 . Extending the boundaries : Reframing “ entrepreneurshipas social change ” through feminist perspectives . Academy of Management Review , 34 : 552 – 569 . Casson , M . 1982 . The entrepreneur : An economic theory . Totowa , NJ : Barnes & Noble Books . Casson , M . , & Wadeson , N . 2007 . The discovery of opportuni - ties : Extending the economic theory of the entrepreneur . Small Business Economics , 28 : 285 – 300 . Chiles , T . H . , Bluedorn , A . C . , & Gupta , V . K . 2007 . Approach to entrepreneurship beyond creative destruction and en - trepreneurial discovery : A radical Austrian approach to entrepreneurship . Organization Studies , 28 : 467 – 493 . Collier , A . 1994 . Critical realism : An introduction to Roy Bhaskar ’ s philosophy . London : Verso . Conot , R . E . 1979 . Thomas Edison : A streak of luck . New York : Seaview Books . Cornelissen , J . P . , & Clarke , J . S . 2010 . Imagining and ratio - nalizing opportunities : Inductive reasoning and the cre - ation and justification of new ventures . Academy of Management Review , 35 : 539 – 557 . Dahlqvist , J . , & Wiklund , J . 2012 . Measuring the market newness of new ventures . Journal of Business Venturing , 27 : 185 – 196 . Danermark , B . , Ekstrom , M . , Jakobsen , L . , & Karlsson , J . 2002 . Explaining society : Critical realism in the social sciences . London : Routledge . Davidsson , P . 2015 . Entrepreneurial opportunities and the entrepreneurship nexus : A re - conceptualization . Journal of Business Venturing , 30 : 674 – 695 . Davidsson , P . , & Wiklund , J . 2009 . Scott A . Shane : Winner of the Global Award for Entrepreneurship Research . Small Business Economics , 33 : 131 – 140 . Devitt , M . 1997 . Realism and truth . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . DiMaggio , P . J . , & Powell , W . W . 1983 . The iron cage revisited : Institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational fields . American Sociological Review , 48 : 147 – 160 . Dimov , D . 2011 . Grappling with the unbearable elusiveness of entrepreneurial opportunities . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 35 : 57 – 81 . Dyer , J . H . , Gregersen , H . B . , & Christensen , C . 2008 . Entre - preneur behaviors , opportunity recognition , and the ori - gins of innovative ventures . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 2 : 317 – 338 . Eckhardt , J . T . , & Shane , S . A . 2003 . Opportunities and entre - preneurship . Journal of Management , 29 : 333 – 349 . Eckhardt , J . T . , & Shane , S . A . 2013 . Response to the commen - taries : The individual - opportunity ( IO ) nexus integrates objective and subjective aspects of entrepreneurship . Academy of Management Review , 38 : 160 – 163 . Ferraro , F . , Pfeffer , J . , & Sutton , R . I . 2005 . Economics language and assumptions : How theories can become self - fulfilling . Academy of Management Review , 30 : 8 – 24 . Fleetwood , S . 2014 . Bhaskar and critical realism . In P . Adler , P . Du Gay , G . Morgan , & M . Reed ( Eds . ) , Oxford handbook of sociology , social theory , and organization studies : Contemporary currents : 182 – 219 . Oxford : Oxford Univer - sity Press . Friedman , M . 1953 . Essays in positive economics . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Gaglio , C . M . 2004 . The role of mental simulations and coun - terfactual thinking in the opportunity identification pro - cess . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 28 : 533 – 552 . Gartner , W . B . 1989 . “ Who is an entrepreneur ? ” is the wrong question . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 13 ( 4 ) : 47 – 68 . Gartner , W . B . 1990 . What are we talking about when we talk about entrepreneurship ? Journal of Business Venturing , 5 : 15 – 28 . Gartner , W . B . 2014 . Notes towards a theory of entrepreneurial possibility . In E . Chell & M . Karatas - ¨Ozkan ( Eds . ) , Hand - book of research in small business and entrepreneurship : 25 – 37 . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Gartner , W . B . , Carter , N . M . , & Hills , G . E . 2003 . The language of opportunity . In C . Steyaert & D . Hjorth ( Eds . ) , New movements in entrepreneurship : 103 – 124 . London : Edward Elgar . Garud , R . , & Karnøe , P . 2001 . Path creation as a process of mindful deviation . In R . Garud & P . Karnøe ( Eds . ) , Path dependence and creation : 1 – 40 . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . 2016 431 Ramoglou and Tsang George , E . , Chattopadhyay , P . , Sitkin , S . B . , & Barden , J . 2006 . Cognitive underpinnings of institutional persistence and change : A framing perspective . Academy of Management Review , 31 : 347 – 365 . Giroux , H . A . 1988 . Teachers as intellectuals : Toward a critical pedagogy of learning . Westport , CT : Greenwood . G¨orling , S . , & Rehn , A . 2008 . Accidental ventures : A materialist reading of opportunity and entrepreneurial potential . Scandinavian Journal of Management , 24 : 94 – 102 . Guzman , J . , & Stern , S . 2015 . Where is Silicon Valley ? Science , 347 : 606 – 609 . Hacking , I . 1999 . The social construction of what ? Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Hansen , D . J . , Shrader , R . , & Monllor , J . 2011 . Defragmenting definitions of entrepreneurial opportunity . Journal of Small Business Management , 49 : 283 – 304 . Hargadon , A . B . , & Douglas , Y . 2001 . When innovations meet institutions : Edison and the design of the electric light . Administrative Science Quarterly , 46 : 476 – 501 . Harr´e , R . 2002 . Cognitive science : A philosophical introduction . London : Sage . Harr´e , R . 2008 . The complexity of Wittgenstein ’ s method . Philosophy , 83 : 255 – 265 . Harr´e , R . , & Madden , E . H . 1975 . Causal powers : A theory of natural necessity . Oxford : Blackwell . Hayek , F . A . 1945 . The use of knowledge in society . American Economic Review , 35 : 519 – 530 . Hayward , M . L . , Shepherd , D . A . , & Griffin , D . 2006 . Ahubristheory of entrepreneurship . Management Science , 52 : 160 – 172 . Henrekson , M . , & Sanandaji , T . 2014 . Small business activity does not measure entrepreneurship . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 111 : 1760 – 1765 . Hodgson , G . M . 2001 . How economics forgot history : The problem of historical specificity in social science . London : Routledge . Hofstede , G . 1980 . Culture ’ s consequences : International dif - ferences in work related values . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Hume , D . 1985 . A treatise of human nature . London : Penguin . Hume , D . 1993 . An enquiry concerning human understanding . Indianapolis , IN : Hackett . Kaish , S . , & Gilad , B . 1991 . Characteristics of opportunities search of entrepreneurs versus executives : Sources , in - terests , general alertness . Journal of Business Venturing , 6 : 45 – 61 . Kant , I . 1999 . Critique of pure reason . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Keh , H . T . , Foo , M . D . , & Lim , B . C . 2002 . Opportunity evaluation under risky conditions : The cognitive processes of entrepre - neurs . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 27 : 125 – 148 . Keynes , J . M . 1936 . The general theory of employment , interest and money . New York : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . Kilduff , M . , Mehra , A . , & Dunn , M . B . 2011 . From blue sky re - search to problem solving : A philosophy of science theory of new knowledge production . Academy of Management Review , 36 : 297 – 317 . Kirzner , I . M . 1973 . Competition and entrepreneurship . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Kirzner , I . M . 1979 . Perception , opportunity and profit . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Kirzner , I . M . 1997 . Entrepreneurial discovery and the com - petitive market process : An Austrian approach . Journal of Economic Literature , 35 : 60 – 85 . Kirzner , I . M . 2006 . The driving force of the market : Essays in Austrian economics . London : Routledge . Kirzner , I . M . 2009 . The alert and creative entrepreneur : A clarification . Small Business Economics , 32 : 145 – 152 . Klein , P . G . 2008 . Opportunity discovery , entrepreneurial ac - tion , and economic organization . Strategic Entrepreneur - ship Journal , 2 : 175 – 190 . Korsgaard , S . 2011 . Entrepreneurship as translation : Un - derstanding entrepreneurial opportunities through actor - network theory . Entrepreneurship & Regional Development , 23 : 661 – 680 . Korsgaard , S . , Berglund , H . , Thrane , C . , & Blenker , P . In press . A tale of two Kirzners : Time , uncertainty and the “ nature ” of opportunities . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice . Kregel , J . A . 1976 . Economic methodology in the face of un - certainty : The modelling methods of Keynes and the post - Keynesians . Economic Journal , 86 : 209 – 225 . Krueger , N . F . 2007 . What lies beneath ? The experiential es - sence of entrepreneurial thinking . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 31 : 123 – 138 . Kwan , K . - M . , & Tsang , E . W . K . 2001 . Realism and construc - tivism in strategy research : A critical realist response to Mir and Watson . Strategic Management Journal , 22 : 1163 – 1168 . Lawson , T . 1997 . Economics and reality . London : Routledge . Lawson , T . 2003 . Reorienting economics . London : Routledge . Lawson , T . 2009 . Ontology and economics : Tony Lawson and his critics . London : Routledge . Lee , J . - H . , & Venkataraman , S . 2006 . Aspirations , market of - ferings , and the pursuit of entrepreneurial opportunities . Journal of Business Venturing , 21 : 107 – 123 . Mantere , S . , Aula , P . , Schildt , H . , & Vaara , E . 2013 . Narrative attributions of entrepreneurial failure . Journal of Business Venturing , 28 : 459 – 473 . Martin , A . 2009 . Critical realism and the Austrian paradox . Cambridge Journal of Economics , 33 : 517 – 531 . Martin , L . , & Wilson , N . In press . Opportunity , discovery and creativity : A critical realist perspective . International Small Business Journal . McCaffrey , M . 2014 . On the theory of entrepreneurial in - centives and alertness . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 38 : 891 – 911 . McMullen , J . S . 2011 . Delineating the domain of development entrepreneurship : A market - based approach to facilitat - ing inclusive economic growth . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 35 : 185 – 215 . McMullen , J . S . 2015 . Entrepreneurial judgment as empathic accuracy : A sequential decision - making approach to 432 July Academy of Management Review entrepreneurial action . Journal of Institutional Economics , 11 : 651 – 681 . McMullen , J . S . , & Dimov , D . 2013 . Time and the entrepre - neurial journey : The problems and promise of studying entrepreneurship as a process . Journal of Management Studies , 50 : 1481 – 1512 . McMullen , J . S . , Plummer , L . A . , & Acs , Z . J . 2007 . What is an entrepreneurial opportunity ? Small Business Economics , 28 : 273 – 283 . McMullen , J . S . , & Shepherd , D . A . 2006 . Entrepreneurial action and the role of uncertainty in the theory of the entrepre - neur . Academy of Management Review , 31 : 132 – 152 . McMullen , J . S . , Wood , M . , & Palich , L . 2014 . Entrepreneur - ial cognition and social cognitive neuroscience . In R . Mitchell , J . R . Mitchell , & B . Randolph - Seng ( Eds . ) , Hand - book of entrepreneurial cognition : 316 – 363 . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Metcalfe , J . S . 2004 . The entrepreneur and the style of modern economics . Journal of Evolutionary Economics , 14 : 157 – 175 . Miller , K . D . , & Tsang , E . W . K . 2011 . Testing management theories : Critical realist philosophy and research methods . Strategic Management Journal , 32 : 139 – 158 . Moulai , S . , & Paysant , D . 2015 . From shirts to aprons , “ Je Suis Charlie ” sells online . France 24 , January 10 : http : / / www . france24 . com / en / 20150110 - shirts - aprons - je - suis - charlie - sells - online / . Nicolaou , N . , Shane , S . , Cherkas , L . , Hunkin , J . , & Spector , T . D . 2008 . Is the tendency to engage in entrepreneurship ge - netic ? Management Science , 54 : 167 – 179 . Nightingale , P . , & Coad , A . 2014 . Muppets and gazelles : Po - litical and methodological biases in entrepreneurship research . Industrial and Corporate Change , 23 : 113 – 143 . Patzelt , H . , Williams , T . , & Shepherd , D . 2014 . Overcoming the walls that constrain us : The role of entrepreneurship ed - ucation programs in prison . Academy of Management Learning & Education , 13 : 587 – 620 . Penrose , E . T . 1995 . The theory of the growth of the firm . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Popper , K . R . 1963 . Conjectures and refutations . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . Popper , K . R . 1972 . Objective knowledge . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Popper , K . R . 1990 . A world of propensities . Bristol , UK : Thoemmes Antiquarian Books . Quine , W . V . O . 1969 . Ontological relativity and other essays . New York : Columbia University Press . Ramoglou , S . 2013a . On the misuse of realism in the study of entrepreneurship . Academy of Management Review , 38 : 463 – 465 . Ramoglou , S . 2013b . Who is a “ non - entrepreneur ” ? Taking the “ others ” of entrepreneurship seriously . International Small Business Journal , 31 : 432 – 453 . Ramoglou , S . , & Zyglidopoulos , S . 2015 . The constructivist view of entrepreneurial opportunities : A critical analysis . Small Business Economics , 44 : 71 – 78 . Roscoe , P . , Cruz , A . D . , & Howorth , C . 2013 . How does an old firm learn new tricks ? A material account of entrepre - neurial opportunity . Business History , 55 : 53 – 72 . Runde , J . 1996 . On Popper , probabilities , and propensities . Review of Social Economy , 54 : 465 – 485 . Sahlins , M . D . 1976 . Culture and practical reason . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Santos , F . M . , & Eisenhardt , K . M . 2009 . Constructing markets and shaping boundaries : Entrepreneurial power in na - scent fields . Academy of Management Journal , 52 : 643 – 671 . Sarasvathy , S . D . 2001 . Causation and effectuation : Toward a theoretical shift from economic inevitability to entre - preneurial contingency . Academy ofManagementReview , 26 : 243 – 263 . Sarasvathy , S . D . , Dew , N . , Velamuri , S . R . , & Venkataraman , S . 2010 . Three views of entrepreneurial opportunity . In Z . J . Acs & D . B . Audretsch ( Eds . ) , Handbook of entrepreneur - ship research : 77 – 96 . New York : Springer . Sarasvathy , S . D . , & Venkataraman , S . 2011 . Entrepreneurship as method : Open questions for an entrepreneurial future . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 35 : 113 – 135 . Schultz , H . , & Yang , D . J . 1997 . Pour your heart into it : How Starbucks built a company one cup at a time . New York : Hyperion . Schumpeter , J . A . 1939 . Business cycles : A theoretical , histori - cal , and statistical analysis of the capitalist process . New York : McGraw Hill . Schumpeter , J . A . 1983 . The theory of economic development : An inquiry into profits , capital , credit , interest , and the business cycle . New Brunswick , NJ : Transaction Publishers . Searle , J . R . 1983 . Intentionality : An essay in the philosophy of mind . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Searle , J . R . 1995 . The construction of social reality . London : Penguin . Searle , J . R . 1998 . Mind , language and society : Philosophy in the real world . New York : Basil Books . Searle , J . R . 2001 . Rationality in action . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Shackle , G . L . S . 1979 . Imagination and the nature of choice . Edinburgh , UK : Edinburgh University Press . Shackle , G . L . S . 1983 . The bounds of unknowledge . In J . Wiseman ( Ed . ) , Beyond positive economics : 28 – 37 . London : Macmillan . Shane , S . 2003 . A general theory of entrepreneurship : The individual - opportunity nexus . Northampton , MA : Edward Elgar . Shane , S . 2012 . Reflections on the 2010 AMR Decade Award : Delivering on the promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research . Academy of Management Review , 37 : 10 – 20 . Shane , S . , Locke , E . , & Collins , C . 2003 . Entrepreneurial motivation . Human Resource Management Review , 13 : 257 – 279 . 2016 433 Ramoglou and Tsang Shane , S . , & Nicolaou , N . 2013 . The genetics of entrepreneurial performance . International Small Business Journal , 31 : 473 – 495 . Shane , S . , & Venkataraman , S . 2000 . The promise of entre - preneurship as a field of research . Academy of Manage - ment Review , 25 : 217 – 226 . Shepherd , D . A . 2015 . Party on ! A call for entrepreneurship research that is more interactive , activity based , cogni - tively hot , compassionate , and prosocial . Journal of Business Venturing , 30 : 489 – 507 . Shook , C . L . , Priem , R . L . , & McGee , J . E . 2003 . Venture creation and the enterprising individual : A review and synthesis . Journal of Management , 29 : 379 – 399 . Short , J . C . , Ketchen , D . J . , Shook , C . L . , & Ireland , D . R . 2010 . The concept of “ opportunity ” in entrepreneurship research : Past accomplishment and future challenges . Journal of Management , 36 : 40 – 65 . Singh , R . P . 2001 . A comment on developing the field of en - trepreneurship through the study of opportunity recogni - tion and exploitation . Academy of Management Review , 26 : 10 – 12 . Spedale , S . , & Watson , T . J . 2014 . The emergence of entrepre - neurial action : At the crossroads between institutional logics and individual life - orientation . International Small Business Journal , 32 : 759 – 776 . Stevenson , H . H . , & Jarillo , C . J . 1990 . A paradigm of entre - preneurship : Entrepreneurial management . Strategic Management Journal , 11 : 17 – 27 . Stinchcombe , A . L . 1983 . Economic sociology . New York : Aca - demic Press . Suddaby , R . 2010a . Challenges for institutional theory . Journal of Management Inquiry , 19 : 14 – 20 . Suddaby , R . 2010b . Construct clarity in theories of management and organization . Academy of Management Review , 35 : 346 – 357 . Suddaby , R . 2014a . Editor ’ s comments : Why theory ? Academy of Management Review , 39 : 407 – 411 . Suddaby , R . 2014b . Indigenous management theory : Why management theory is under attack ( and what we can do to fix it ) . In J . Miles ( Ed . ) , New directions in man - agement and organization theory : 447 – 456 . Newcastle , UK : Cambridge Scholars . Suddaby , R . , Bruton , G . D . , & Si , S . X . 2015 . Entrepreneurship through a qualitative lens : Insights on the construction and / or discovery of entrepreneurial opportunity . Journal of Business Venturing , 30 : 1 – 10 . Suddaby , R . , & Greenwood , R . 2005 . Rhetorical strategies of legitimacy . Administrative Science Quarterly , 50 : 35 – 67 . Sydow , J . , Schrey¨ogg , G . , & Koch , J . 2009 . Organizational path dependence : Opening the black box . Academy of Man - agement Review , 34 : 689 – 709 . Tetlock , P . & Belkin , A . ( Eds . ) . 1996 . Counterfactual thought experiments in world politics : Logical , methodological , and psychological perspectives . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Time . 2010 . Person of the year : Mark Zuckerberg . Decem - ber 15 : http : / / www . time . com / time / specials / packages / 0 , 28757 , 2036683 , 00 . html # ixzz2BRYmFAUU . Tsang , E . W . K . 2004 . Toward a scientific inquiry into super - stitious business decision - making . Organization Studies , 25 : 923 – 946 . Tsang , E . W . K . , & Kwan , K . M . 1999 . Replication and theory development in organizational science : A critical re - alist perspective . Academy of Management Review , 24 : 759 – 780 . Tsoukas , H . , & Knudsen , C . ( Eds . ) . 2003 . The Oxford handbook of organization theory : Meta - theoretical perspectives . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Van Fraassen , B . C . 2008 . The empirical stance . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Venkataraman , S . 2011 . Entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial opportunity : Made as well as found . In R . K . Mitchell & R . N . Dino ( Eds . ) , In search of excellence : Exemplars in entrepreneurship : 97 – 115 . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Venkataraman , S . , Sarasvathy , S . , Dew , N . , & Forster , W . 2012 . Reflections on the 2010 AMR Decade Award : Whither the promise ? Moving forward with entrepreneurship as a science of the artificial . Academy of Management Review , 37 : 21 – 33 . Walras , L . 1954 . Elements of the political economy . Homestead , NJ : Irwin . Webb , J . W . , Ireland , R . D . , Hitt , M . A . , Kistruck , G . M . , & Tihanyi , L . 2011 . Where is the opportunity without the customer ? An integration of marketing activities , the en - trepreneurship process , and institutional theory . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 39 : 537 – 554 . Wittgenstein , L . 1922 . Tractatus logico - philosophicus . London : Kegan Paul , Trench and Tr¨ubner . Wittgenstein , L . 1958 . Blue and brown books . Oxford : Blackwell . Wood , M . S . , & McKinley , W . 2010 . The production of entrepre - neurial opportunity : A constructivist perspective . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 4 : 66 – 84 . Stratos Ramoglou ( s . ramoglou @ soton . ac . uk ) is an associate professor at the University of Southampton , United Kingdom . He earned his Ph . D . from the University of Cambridge . His research interests span entrepreneurship and organization studies , philosophy of sci - ence , and economic theory and methodology . Eric W . K . Tsang ( ewktsang @ utdallas . edu ) is the Dallas World Salute Distinguished Professor of Global Strategy at the University of Texas at Dallas . He received his Ph . D . fromtheUniversityofCambridge . Hisresearchinterestsincludeorganizationallearning , strategic alliances , corporate social responsibility , entrepreneurship , and philosophical analysis of methodological issues . 434 July Academy of Management Review