Chondro - osteogenesis induced by rhOP - 1 689 Short Communication Selection and amplification of a bone marrow cell population and its induction to the chondro - osteogenic lineage by rhOP - 1 : an in vitro and in vivo study JOSÉ A . ANDRADES 1 , JESÚS A . SANTAMARÍA 1 , MARCEL E . NIMNI 2 and JOSÉ BECERRA * , 1 1 Department of Cell Biology and Genetics , Faculty of Sciences , University of Málaga , Málaga , Spain 2 Surgical Research Laboratories , School of Medicine , University of Southern California , Los Angeles , CA , USA ABSTRACT The differentiation and maturation of osteoprogenitor cells into osteoblasts are processes which are thought to be modulated by transforming growth factors - beta ( TGF - ß ) as well as by bone morphogenetic proteins ( BMPs ) . Osteogenic protein - 1 ( OP - 1 , also known as BMP - 7 ) is a member of the BMP family , and it is considered to have important regulatory roles in skeletal embryogenesis and bone healing . Rat bone marrow cells were cultured in vitro in a collagen - gel medium containing 0 . 5 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) for 10 days in the presence of 40 ng / ml recombinant human OP - 1 ( rhOP - 1 ) . Under these conditions , survival of the bone marrow cell population was dependent on the presence of rhOP - 1 . Subsequently , the selected cells were cultured for 6 days in medium containing 40 ng rhOP - 1 and 10 % FBS . During the last 2 days , dexamethasone ( 10 - 8 M ) and ß - glycerophosphate ( 2 mM ) were added to potentiate osteoinduction . Concomitant with an up - regulation of cell proliferation , DNA synthesis levels , colony number and size were determined . Chondro - osteogenic differentiation in vitro was evaluated in terms of the expression of alkaline phosphatase , the production of osteocalcin and the formation of mineralized matrix . After culturing in vitro , cells were placed inside diffusion chambers or inactivated demineralized bone matrix ( DBM ) cylinders and implanted subdermically into the backs of old rats for 28 days . Biochemical , histological and immunocytochemical analyses provided evidence of cartilage and osteoid tissue inside the diffusion chambers , whereas bone was also observed inside the DBM implants . In conclusion , this experimental procedure is capable of selecting a cell population from bone marrow which , in the presence of rhOP - 1 , achieves skeletogenic potential under in vitro as well as in vivo environments . KEY WORDS : mesenchymal stem cells , osteoprogenitor cells , collagen matrix , BMPs , cartilage , bone Int . J . Dev . Biol . 45 : 689 - 693 ( 2001 ) 0214 - 6282 / 2001 / $ 25 . 00 © UBC Press Printed in Spain www . ijdb . ehu . es * Address correspondence to : Dr . José Becerra . Departamento de Biología Celular y Genética , Facultad de Ciencias , Campus Universitario de Teatinos , 29071 , Málaga , Spain . Fax : + 34 - 952 - 13 - 2000 . e - mail : becerra @ uma . es Abbreviations used in this paper : AB , alcian blue ; ALP , alkaline phosphatase ; a - MEM , alpha - minimum essential medium ; ß - GP , beta - glycerophosphate ; BM , bone marrow ; Ca , calcium ; DBM , demineralized bone matrix ; dex , dexamethasone ; Dw , dry weight ; FBS , fetal bovine serum ; GAGs , glycosami - noglycans ; HE , hematoxylin - eosin ; MSCs , mesenchymal stem cells ; OC , osteocalcin ; PSH , picrosirius - hematoxylin ; PSP , picrosirius polarization ; PGs , proteoglycans ; rhBMP , recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein ; rhOP - 1 , recombinant human osteogenic protein - 1 ; rhTGF - ß1 , recombinant human transforming growth factor - beta1 . Bone morphogenetic proteins ( BMPs ) are pleiotropic molecules which belong to the transforming growth factor - beta ( TGF - ß ) superfamily and are closely related in structure and function ( Reddi , 1997 ) . Several of these proteins have now been purified from bovine demineralized bone matrix ( DBM ) , cloned and prepared as recombinant human proteins ( Reddi , 1998 ) . These proteins have been reported to induce the expression of bone matrix proteins and to play a regulatory role in the initiation of cartilage differentiation and the induction of bone - forming cells from pluripotent mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ; Lecanda et al . , 1997 ) . These proteins have been reported to induce the expression of bone matrix proteins and to play a regulatory role in the initiation of cartilage differentiation and the induction of bone - forming cells from pluripotent mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ; Lecanda et al . , 1997 ) . BMPs appear to be involved in skeletal embryogenesis and to be osteoinductive , both in in vitro and in vivo models ( Welch et al . , 1998 ) . BMP - 2 or BMP - 7 ( also named “osteogenic protein 1” or OP - 1 ) have been reported to enhance bone repair when applied either directly or combined with a carrier , in fracture healing ( Bonn , 1999 ) . OP - 1 not only stimulates the synthesis of cartilage molecules in human articular chondrocytes cultured in vitro ( Nishida et al . , 2000 ) , but it also induces in vivo cartilage repair 690 J . A . Andrades et al . ( Katic et al . , 2000 ) . The first clinical reports on bone regeneration using recombinant human BMPs ( rhBMPs ) have been published only for BMP - 2 and OP - 1 ( Geesink et al . , 1999 ) . Although both BMPs are able to induce important beneficial effects in bone repair , significant differences can be observed in both circumstances ( Groeneveld and Burger , 2000 ) . In all cases , the targets of BMPs are mesenchymal cells , which are capable of being induced through the chondro - osteogenic lineage . These cells have been demonstrated to be derived from the MSCs of bone marrow , which significantly diminish in number with aging ( Haynesworth et al . , 1994 ) . We have recently developed an in vitro procedure which includes a progenitor cell compatible collagen gel , impregnated with different growth factors to select , amplify and induce a population of chondro - osteoprogenitor cells from rat bone marrow . These cells processed under the effects of a genetically engineered rhTGF - ß1 , containing an auxiliary collagen binding domain ( rhTGF - ß1 - F2 ) ( Andrades et al . , 1999 ; Becerra et al . , 2001 ) , or BMP - 2 ( Andrades and Becerra , 2001 ) express skeletal markers and form hard tissue when they are implanted in animals . The present study evaluates the efficiency of rhOP - 1 to select , amplify and induce a skeletogenic cell population from bone marrow , cultured in a collagen gel trap . Cell number , expressed as DNA content ( Table 1 ) , suffered a decrease as a consequence of the starvation conditions associated with low serum concentration . After ten days of culture in collagen gels ( Fig . 1B ) , the number of cells began to increase . Subsequently , cells cultured with rhOP - 1 formed well - defined colonies ( Fig . 1C ) , which increased in number and size . Mineralization of colonies was evident at day 14 . Bone marrow cells cultured under control conditions never formed colonies and presented a morphology which was different to that observed when the cells were cultured in the presence of rhOP - 1 ( data not shown ) . The expression of alkaline phosphatase ( ALP ) and osteocalcin , together with the deposition of calcium , which are all well - known markers of osteoblastic differentiation , were measured ( Fig . 2 ) . After the starvation period ( from day 11 on ) , these values increased significantly in cultures which had been exposed to rhOP - 1 . Calcium deposition and osteocalcin levels in control conditions were imperceptible . These results show that rhOP - 1 is mitogenic in this system , as has been shown for rhTGF - ß1 - F2 ( Andrades et al . , 1999 ) and rhBMP - 2 ( Andrades and Becerra , 2001 ) . The formation of colonies and their mineralization is a characteristic of a certain differentiated state . The increase in expression of ALP and osteocalcin in cultures treated with rhOP - 1 indicates that osteogenic induction has occurred , as has been claimed in other systems ( Yamaguchi et al . , 1991 ) . Therefore , on the basis of the differentiation criteria , it can be assumed that rhOP - 1 selects in vitro a progenitor cell population from bone marrow , which can be directed along the osteogenic lineage under these experimental conditions . The results of the biochemical analysis after in vivo implantation are summarized in Table 2 . Histo - and immunocytochemical analyses facilitate an understanding of the distribution of collagen , proteoglycans ( PGs ) and other tissue components formed during the implantation period . Sections of diffusion chambers containing non - treated culture cells showed a homogeneous appearance ( Fig . 3A ) . In contrast , chambers filled with rhOP - 1 - treated cells presented a heterogeneous appearance , where conspicuous tissue condensations occupied an important volume of the implants ( Fig . 3B ) . Parallel sections of these nodules showed that the regions with high alcianophilia ( demonstrating the presence of sulfated glycosaminoglycans , GAGs ) , ( box 1 in Fig . 3B ) , were not Gomori stained ( Gomori stains mature bone matrix ) ( Fig . 3C ) , and were only weakly collagen II immunoreactive ( Fig . 3D ) . These characteristics , together with other data regarding collagen I and IV ( data not shown ) , indicate that this type of condensation presents a core of cartilage - like tissue , surrounded by a layer Fig . 1 . Experimental procedure and appearance of cell cultures in collagen gels . ( A ) For details of the experimental procedure , see Experimental Procedures . a - MEM , alpha - minimum essential medium ; ß - GP , beta - glycerophosphate ; BM , bone marrow ; DBM , demineralized bone matrix ; dex , dexamethasone ; FBS , fetal bovine serum ; GF , growth factor . ( B ) Cell cultures in collagen gel in the presence of rhOP - 1 at the end of the selection period ( day 10 , round - shaped isolated cells ) , and ( C ) at day 18 where cells form conspicuous colonies . Bar , 100 m m for B and C . TABLE 1 EFFECT OF EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS ( CONTROL AND rhOP - 1 ) ON DNA SYNTHESIS , COLONY NUMBER , MINERALIZED COLONY NUMBER AND COLONY SIZE DURING IN VITRO CULTURE IN THE PRESENCE OF rhOP - 1 Day 0 10 14 18 21 Control 22 . 50 – 3 . 2 2 . 28 – 0 . 53 3 . 90 – 0 . 41 5 . 20 – 0 . 72 6 . 47 – 0 . 68 DNA ( m g ) rhOP - 1 22 . 50 – 3 . 2 3 . 28 – 0 . 31 6 . 20 – 0 . 52 8 . 25 – 1 . 63 12 . 32 – 2 . 54 Colony ND 6 – 0 . 8 11 – 1 . 2 24 – 2 . 3 28 – 2 . 1 Mineralized colony ND ND 4 – 0 . 2 11 – 0 . 8 22 – 1 . 1 Colony size ( mm 2 ) ND 0 . 7 – 0 . 1 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 8 – 0 . 2 3 . 1 – 0 . 3 ND , not - detected . No colony formation was detected under control conditions . Values are given as means – SD for four samples . Chondro - osteogenesis induced by rhOP - 1 691 resembling osteoid - like tissue , as well as an outer perichondrium or periostium - like sheet , bordering the remaining fibrous tissue . In contrast , alcian blue ( AB ) - negative condensations ( Fig . 3B , box 2 ) , were Gomori stained ( Fig . 3E ) . Similar condensations near the wall of the chamber ( Fig . 3B , box 3 ) , presented a deep red color , which was more intense after papain digestion , when stained with picrosirius - hematoxylin ( PSH ) , ( Fig . 3F ) , probably reflecting immature bone matrix . In agreement with such a possibility , collagen I immunoreactivity was observed in these areas ( Fig . 3G ) while collagen II immunoreactivity was absent ( data not shown ) . Sections of DBM implants containing non - treated culture cells ( controls ; Fig . 3H ) showed a better structured fibrillar tissue than controls in diffusion chambers . DBM implants with rhOP - 1 - treated cells were filled with a well - organized tissue with a consistent hard mass ( Fig . 3I ) . A homogeneous tissue , abundant in ground substance and scattered isolated cells ( light pink area ) , occupied a large part of the slide . Near the wall , a more cellular tissue with grouped cells could be seen ( the wall is to the bottom in Fig . 3I ) . A tissue resolved in trabecular structures of dense collagenous tissue with individual cells in small lacunae occupied other extensive areas . These trabecula surrounded soft tissue with empty areas ( upper part in Fig . 3I ) . Under high magnification of the tissue near the wall , we observed conspicuous cells inside the lacunae , isolated or forming groups , consistent with an isogenic - like arrangement with intense birefringency with the picrosirius polarization ( PSP ) method ( Fig . 3J ) . Positive Gomori staining was present in the extracellular matrix , and in regular bone matrix ( Fig . 3K ) ; weak collagen II immunoreactivity was observed in some cells of those areas ( Fig . 3L ) . Light collagen I immunoreactivity was also observed in the cytoplasm of the cells ( Fig . 3M ) . These characteristics of the tissue are indicative of a fibrocartilage - like structure . The homogeneous tissue occupying the central areas ( light pink area in Fig . 3I ) , presented thin collagen fibers in the ground substance among a few isolated cells . This ground substance did not present Gomori staining ( Fig . 3K ) or collagen II immunoreactivity ( Fig . 3L ) , although anti - collagen I immunostaining could be observed ( Fig . 3M ) . These characteristics are indicative of a cartilage - like tissue with some heterotypic components . The above - described tissue appears to transform into a different one where bone characteristics emerged ( Figs . 3I and N - P ) . Endochondral bone - like ossification events could be observed . Chondrocyte lacuna became wider and cavities with vascular - like elements could be seen ( Fig . 3N ) . These cavities appeared to be enclosed by a new material forming trabecula densely stained with PSH , with some cells trapped on it , and rows of osteoblast - like cells lining the new material . Gomori staining ( Fig . 3O ) and collagen I immunoreactivity ( Fig . 3P ) were observed in those trabecula . Our results using two types of implants ( a closed system , diffusion chamber ; and an open one , DBM chamber ) clearly indicate that the process of histogenesis is strongly influenced by the environment in which cells are implanted . In diffusion chambers , cells treated with rhOP - 1 form conspicuous condensations of a cartilage , osteoid and bone - like nature , whereas in DBM chambers , a more advanced and consolidated chondro - osteogenic tissue appears , in which the typical tissular quality of bone and cartilage can be observed . Although the present results clearly demonstrate the cartilaginous and osseous identity of the tissue formed inside diffusion chambers , intramembranous or endochondral ossification could not be found in that circumstance . It is possible that an exact ossification process might occur inside the chambers without the presence of vascular elements . Our data show details that lead us to think that some special events take place in those situations . Moderate collagen IV and laminin immunoreactivity was observed in the presumed cartilage areas , whereas collagen II immunoreactivity was weak , even using previous enzymatic digestions to eliminate the ground substance usually masking collagen fibrils in cartilage . This may be explained by deviations of the differentiation pathway or by a transient transdifferentiation , as has been observed in other systems , particularly related to cell cultures ( Hay , 1983 ) . Similar results were obtained in these experimental systems when the implanted cells were treated with rhTGF - ß1 - F2 ( Andrades et al . , 1999 ; Becerra et al . , 2001 ) or rhBMP - 2 ( Andrades and Becerra , 2001 ) . We frequently observed cartilage nodules towards the center of the chambers and bone accumulation close to the filter , in agreement with other studies ( Ashton et al . , 1980 ) . This could be related to the nutritional situation of the different regions of the chambers . Thus , chondro - and osteogenesis could take place as independent Fig . 2 . Expression of alkaline phosphatase ( ALP ) , osteocalcin ( OC ) and calcium ( Ca ) content in cell cultures at different times during the in vitro experiments . Control cultures only express ALP . Cells in the presence of 40 ng / ml rhOP - 1 progressively increased ALP expression after day 10 , significantly above control levels . Ca deposition increased in cultures after a certain ALP activity ( premineralization enzyme ) had been reached . OC protein expression , which is indicative of mature osteoblast activity , was observed only during the final stages of culture . TABLE 2 BIOCHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF CHAMBER CONTENT AFTER IMPLANTATION UNDER CONTROL AND rhOP - 1 – TREATED CONDITIONS Diffusion Chambers DBM Chambers ALP OC Ca ALP OC Ca Control 4 . 08 – 0 . 7 3 . 2 – 0 . 9 ND 20 . 0 – 1 . 0 4 . 4 – 0 . 8 6 . 0 – 1 . 0 rhOP - 1 12 . 65 – 1 . 0 30 . 0 – 2 . 0 2 . 54 – 0 . 3 68 . 0 – 2 . 1 32 . 7 – 2 . 0 90 . 3 – 5 . 7 Levels of ALP ( U / m g DNA ) , OC expression ( ng / m g DNA ) and Ca content ( m g / mg dw ) . ND , not - detected . Values are given as means – SD for four samples . 692 J . A . Andrades et al . processes in these circumstances from different cell lines or from the same cell line under different environmental conditions . Alternatively , transdifferentiation from chondrocytes to osteoblasts may occur , as has been suggested ( Bianco et al . , 1998 ) . The mature nature of the tissue formed inside DBM implants is apparent . The morphological and chemical features of the tissue are much more like those of typical bone and cartilage , although a sensu stricto intramembranous or endochondral bone formation process is not easily identified . Why did such a type of tissue appear inside DBM implants ? Two cooperative circumstances could be implicated : i ) the nature of the chamber walls , and ii ) the violation of the implant contents by vasculature coming from outside . Cells implanted in DBM chambers could receive an extra dosage of a variety of bioagents ( probably BMPs ) coming through the wall of the implant or perhaps its collagen scaffold could exert a chemotactic action on BMPs issuing from the host tissular environment . This idea must imply a synergy or cooperative relationship between OP - 1 in vitro applied to the cells , and BMPs ( we don’t know which one ) coming from the host and targeted to the implanted cells . Such a type of synergy has been claimed by Si et al . ( 1998 ) between TGF - ßs and BMP - 2 , and among BMP - 2 , - 3 and - 7 ( Thomadakis et al . , 1999 ) . Fig . 3 . Sections of diffusion chambers ( A - G ) or DBM chambers ( H - P ) after 28 days of in vivo implantation . ( A ) A representative chamber with cells cultured under control con - ditions ; the chamber is occupied by a fluid with some fibrillar tissue . Asterisk represents the wall of the chamber . PSH staining . Bar , 200 m m . ( B ) General view of the chamber content formed by cells pretreated with rhOP - 1 in vitro . Distinct types of tissular condensa - tions can be seen . Dotted boxes 1 , 2 and 3 are detailed in C , D , E and F with different staining techniques in contiguous sections . AB stain - ing . Bar , 400 m m . ( C ) Condensation in B ( box 1 ) stained with Gomori . Underneath the cellu - lar sheet , a lightly stained area can be seen surrounding an unstained central core , which appeared stained in B . ( D ) A parallel section stained with anti - collagen II . A light net occu - pies the central AB stained area in B ( box 1 ) . ( E ) Tissular condensations in B ( box 2 ) ap - peared stained with Gomori . ( F ) A condensa - tion in B ( box 3 ) processed with PSH stain and the PSP method . The deep red color indicates an immature bone - osteoid matrix near the wall of the chamber ( asterisk ) . ( G ) A similar condensation presents collagen I immunore - active fibrils . Bars , 500 m m . ( H ) Control DBM implants . The wall is sectioned in the top left corner . HE staining . ( I ) Tissue formed in a DBM implant containing cells pretreated with rhOP - 1 . Cartilage tissue with grouped cells ( arrowhead ) , and trabecular tissue ( small ar - rows ) with cells placed in lacunae as bone tissue . New tissue penetrated inside the DBM matrix wall ( arrows ) , where empty osteocyte lacunae can be observed . PSH staining . Bars , 500 m m . ( J - M ) Cartilage - like tissue formed in DBM implants in contiguous sections . ( J ) PSH staining of lacunar tissue , close to the wall ( asterisk ) . ( K ) Parallel section stained with Gomori ; the asterisk indicates the DBM wall . ( L ) Anti - collagen II immunoreactivity is limited to certain parts of the matrix of the lacunar area . Several cells have colonized the cavities of the DBM wall ( asterisk ) forming new matri - ces which are stained with this antiserum ( arrows ) . ( M ) Anti - collagen I immunoreactiv - ity in some cells of the lacunar area near the wall ( asterisk ) , and also in the homogeneous tissue ( arrows ) . Bars , 100 m m . ( N - P ) Trabecular bone - like tissue . ( N ) Osteoblast - like cells lining the new material everywhere ( arrows ) ; hypertrophic chondrocyte - like ( arrowhead ) and osteocyte - like cells inside the DBM wall ( asterisk ) . PSH staining . ( O ) A contiguous section presents Gomori staining only in the new bone - like trabecula ( asterisks ) . ( P ) A contiguous section illustrating collagen I immunoreactivity in the trabecula ( arrows ) . Bars , 100 m m . Chondro - osteogenesis induced by rhOP - 1 693 Regarding vascular ingrowth , the porosity of the DBM wall allows capillary infiltration and endothelial cell contribution to vessel formation and consequently , enhancement of bone formation , as was shown by Villanueva and Nimni ( 1990 ) . Obviously , the porosity of this type of open implant raises the question about the origin ( donor or host ) of the cells which are responsible for the tissue formed inside . However , neither bone nor cartilage was found when DBM implants were filled with cells pretreated with bFGF ( Andrades et al . , 1999 ) or without treatment ( control ) . Since no markers for stem cells have been used to distinguish host from donor cells , indirect proof can only be claimed : i ) the procedure of bone marrow extraction ensures that no bone cell contamination exists in cultures ; ii ) starvation and amplification during in vitro periods determine that only undifferentiated cells , such as stem cells , could remain after that culture time and iii ) bone marrow cells cultured under control conditions ( without OP - 1 treatment ) did not induce any skeletogenic effect . It is conceivable that OP - 1 added to the cultures might attract stem cells from the host . However , the half - life of this factor is probably incompatible with that possibility , because OP - 1 was added more than two days before implantation , besides washing , isolation and the general manipulation of cells , prior to implantation . Overall , our results indicate that the implanted donor - derived cells are responsible for the DBM implant skeletogenesis . Experimental Procedures Isolation of bone marrow stromal cells and collagen gel preparations were performed as described elsewhere ( Andrades et al . , 1999 ) . Culture preparations contained 150 m l of collagen ( 0 . 35 mg / ml ) mixed with 40 ng / ml rhOP - 1 ( Creative Biomolecules ) . Cells were mixed with the collagen - rhOP - 1 solution at a density of 2x10 6 cells / 150 m l collagen / well in 48 - well plates . The culture plates , 6 plates per experiment , were left 30 min at 37 (cid:176) C to allow the collagen to gel . Then , 150 m l / well of a - MEM containing rhOP - 1 were added on top of the collagen gel and cultures were maintained in standard conditions . The medium was changed every 3 days and fresh rhOP - 1 was added , according to the diagram shown in Fig . 1A . Control cultures did not contain rhOP - 1 . The culture medium consisted of a - MEM containing 100 m g / ml Penicillin G ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) , 50 m g / ml Gentamicine Sulfate ( Sigma ) and 0 . 3 m g / ml Fungizone ( GIBCO ) . This medium contained 0 . 5 % FBS for the initial 10 days of culture , and 10 % FBS up to the end of the in vitro experiment . Dexamethasone ( 10 - 8 M , Sigma ) and ß - glycerophosphate ( 2 mM , Sigma ) were added to the cultures to facilitate the induction of osteogenesis . Biochemical parameters were measured as reported elsewhere ( Andrades et al . , 1999 ) . After 16 days of in vitro culture , collagen gels were digested with collagenase ( 0 . 05 % collagenase type I , Worthington Biochemical Corp . ) as previously described ( Andrades et al . , 1999 ) , and cells were dissociated , centrifuged , washed , resuspended , counted and transferred to DBM and diffusion chambers . In this study , a total of 130 DBM implants ( 10 mm diameter x 2mm ) , and 70 diffusion chambers ( 14 mm diameter x 2 mm ; Millipore Ltd . ) , were implanted in 20 animals . In each chamber , 5x10 5 cells processed in vitro were implanted . Twenty , eight - week - old male isogenic ( inbred strain ) Fischer 344 rats were anesthetized and surgery was performed as described ( Andrades et al . , 1999 ) . Four weeks later the implants were harvested . All procedures were carried out at room temperature . Implants were fixed and decalcified ; the plastic ring of the diffusion chambers was dissolved in toluene . Dehydration , paraffin embedding , cutting and staining with alcian blue , picrosirius - hematoxylin and hematoxylin - eosin were routinely performed . When necessary , digestions on tissue slides were performed with papain ( Papain IV , Difco Laboratories ) , hyaluronidase ( testicular hyaluronidase , Sigma ) or chondroitinase AC ( Miles Laboratories ) . Immunocytochemistry was carried out using specific antisera to collagen I , II , III , IV and to laminin ( Chemicon International Inc . ) . To test the antisera , different rat tissues were used as controls . Images were obtained with a Zeiss III ( Zeiss ) inverted phase contrast microscope and a Nikon Microphot FXA ( Nikon ) . Acknowledgements Supported by Grants from the Ministerio de Educación y Cultura ( SAF99 - 0133 ) and Junta de Andalucía ( CVI / 0217 ) , Spain . References ANDRADES , J . A . , HAN , B . , BECERRA , J . , SORGENTE , N . , HALL , F . L . and NIMNI , M . E . ( 1999 ) . A recombinant human TGF - ß1 fusion protein with collagen - binding domain promotes migration , growth and differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal cells . Exp . Cell Res . 250 : 485 - 498 . ANDRADES , J . A . and BECERRA , J . ( 2001 ) . Bone morphogenetic proteins , collagen matrices and mesenchymal stem cells . In Advances In Skeletal Reconstruction Using Bone Morphogenetic Proteins , ( Ed . T . S . Lindholm ) . Academic Press , pp . 54 - 62 . ASHTON , B . A . , ALLEN , T . D . , HOWLETT , C . R . , EAGLESOM , C . C . , HATTORI , A . and OWEN , M . ( 1980 ) . Formation of bone and cartilage by marrow stromal cells in diffusion chambers in vivo . Clin . Orthop . 151 : 294 - 307 . BECERRA , J . , ANDRADES , J . A . , SANTAMARÍA , J . A . , CIFUENTES , M . and GUERADO , E . ( 2001 ) . Bone repair , cell therapy and tissue engineering . Med . Clin . 116 : 23 - 34 . BIANCO , P . , CANCEDDA , F . D . , RIMINUCCI , M . and CANCEDDA , R . ( 1998 ) . Bone formation via cartilage models : the " borderline " chondrocyte . Matrix Biol . 17 : 185 - 192 . BONN , D . ( 1999 ) . The application of cell biology to broken bones [ news ] . Lancet 353 : 650 . GEESINK , R . G . , HOEFNAGELS , N . H . and BULSTRA , S . K . ( 1999 ) . Osteogenic activity of OP - 1 bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP - 7 ) in a human fibular defect . J . Bone Joint Surg . Br . 81 : 710 - 718 . GROENEVELD , E . H . and BURGER , E . H . ( 2000 ) . Bone morphogenetic proteins in human bone regeneration . Eur . J . Endocrinol . 142 : 9 - 21 . HAY , E . D . ( 1983 ) . Cell and extracellular matrix : Their organization and mutual dependence . Modern Cell Biol . 2 : 509 - 548 . HAYNESWORTH , S . E . , GOLDBERG , V . M . and CAPLAN , A . I . ( 1994 ) . Diminution of the number of mesenchymal stem cells as a cause for skeletal aging . In Musculoskeletal soft - tissue aging : impact on mobility . ( Eds . J . A . Buckwalter , V . M . Goldberg and S . L . Y . Woo ) . Rosemont , pp . 80 - 86 . KATIC , V . , MAJSTOROVIC , L . , MATICIC , D . , PIRKIC , B . , YIN , S . , KOS , J . , MARTINOVIC , S . , McCARTNEY , J . E . and VUKICEVIC , S . ( 2000 ) . Biological repair of thyroid cartilage defects by osteogenic protein - 1 ( bone morphogenetic protein - 7 ) in dog . Growth Factors 17 : 221 - 232 . LECANDA , F . , AVIOLI , L . V . and CHENG , S . L . ( 1997 ) . Regulation of bone matrix protein expression and induction of differentiation of human osteoblasts and human bone marrow stromal cells by bone morphogenetic protein - 2 . J . Cell Biochem . 67 : 386 - 396 . NISHIDA , Y . , KNUDSON , C . B . , EGER , W . , KUETTNER , K . E . and KNUDSON , W . ( 2000 ) . Osteo - genic protein 1 stimulates cells - associated matrix assembly by normal human articular chondrocytes : up - regulation of hyaluronan synthase , CD44 , and aggrecan . Arthritis Rheum . 43 : 206 - 214 . REDDI , A . H . ( 1997 ) . BMPs : actions in flesh and bone [ news ] . Nat . Med . 3 : 837 - 839 . REDDI , A . H . ( 1998 ) . Initiation of fracture repair by bone morphogenetic proteins . Clin . Orthop . ( 355 Suppl . ) : S66 72 . SI , X . , JIN , Y . and YANG , L . ( 1998 ) . Induction of new bone by ceramic bovine bone with recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein - 2 and transforming growth factor beta . Int . J . Oral Max . Surg . 27 : 310 - 314 . THOMADAKIS , G . , RAMOSHEBI , L . N . , CROOKS , J . , RUEGER , D . C . and RIPAMONTI , U . ( 1999 ) . Immunolocalization of bone morphogenetic protein - 2 and - 3 , and osteogenic protein - 1 during murine tooth root morphogenesis and in other craniofacial structures . Eur . J . Oral Sci . 107 : 368 - 377 . VILLANUEVA , J . E . and NIMNI , M . E . ( 1990 ) . Promotion of calvarial cell osteogenesis by endothelial cells . J . Bone Miner . Res . 5 : 733 - 739 . WELCH , R . D . , JONES , A . L . , BUCHOLZ , R . W . , REINERT , C . M . , TJIA , J . S . , PIERCE , W . A . , WOZNEY , J . M . and LI , X . J . ( 1998 ) . Effect of recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein - 2 on fracture healing in a goat tibial fracture model . J . Bone Miner . Res . 13 : 1483 - 1490 . YAMAGUCHI , A . , KATAGIRI , T . , IKEDA , T . , WOZNEY , J . M . , ROSEN , V . , WANG , E . A . , KAHN , A . J . , SUDA , T . and YOSHIKI , S . ( 1991 ) . Recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein - 2 stimulates osteoblastic maturation and inhibits myogenic differentiation in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 113 : 681 - 687 . Received : February 2001 Revised by Referees : April 2001 Modified by Authors and Accepted for Publication : May 2001