Tactical Technical Communication in Communities Legitimizing Community - Created User - Generated Instructions Avery C . Eden ﬁ eld Utah State University Logan , UT , USA avery . eden ﬁ eld @ usu . edu Lehua Ledbe tt er Th e University of Rhode Island Kingston , RI , USA lehua @ uri . edu ABSTRACT User - created guides , or the “do - it - yoursel f ” ( DIY ) genre of online procedural discourse , o ﬀ er their audience access to vital knowledge while allowing them to bypass traditional gatekeeping mechanisms . Some vulnerable communities must further subvert or “hack” institutions to gain access to information that they need to survive exclusive or oppressive policies . In this article , we present original data in an e ﬀ ort to legitimize the work these communities have done while also challenging the boundaries of what constitutes successful design . Eden ﬁ eld shares his research of medical information - sharing practices of DIY hormone replacement therapy ( HRT ) for trans individuals . Ledbe tt er ' s study of YouTube’s beauty community involved collecting and analyzing user - generated makeup tutorials on YouTube as well as interviewing women who self - identify as members of the community . Both studies prompt a reconsideration of what it means to create successful instructional guides . We suggest strategies for avoiding institutional appropriation of these communities’ work and for identifying community spaces and the borders that can protect the wellbeing of marginalized individuals . CCS CONCEPTS • Human computer interaction ( HCI ) KEYWORDS Technical communication ; procedural discourse ; social justice ; YouTube ; tactical ACM Reference format : Avery C . Eden ﬁ eld & Lehua Ledbe tt er . 2019 . Tactical technical communication in communities . In SIGDOC ' 19 : The 37th ACM International Conference on the Design of Communication Proceedings , October 04 – 06 , 2019 , Portland , OR , USA , 9 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328020 . 3353927 1 INTRODUCTION User - created guides , or the “do - it - yoursel f ” ( DIY ) genre of online procedural discourse , o ﬀ er their audience access to vital knowledge while allowing them to bypass traditional gatekeeping mechanisms [ 30 ] . In the sections below , we expand on Ledbe tt er [ 30 ] by arguing that some vulnerable communities must also employ “tactics” [ 27 ] to gain access to information they need to survive and thrive in the face of exclusive or oppressive policies , and to share that information with others who are also in need . In other words , some user - generated instructions can serve as a way to gain unauthorized access ( or “hack” ) institutions that have a history of excluding marginalized communities . Blythe points out that organizations ( such as certain medical institutions and brick - and - mortar workplaces ) “have what Iris Marion Young calls ‘structural inequalities’ built into them , and that people may either maintain or a tt empt to alter those inequalities as they create and enforce wri tt en policies” [ 7 ] . We argue communication design must legitimize and center the procedural discourse these communities produce , understanding them as e ﬀ ective acts of resistance with their own unique perspective of e ﬀ ective design , but we must do so in a way that avoids appropriation or perpetuating exclusive , colonizing practices . We do so by ﬁ rst presenting original data from research projects that demonstrate the work these communities have done to access these institutions while also challenging assumptions about what constitutes “successful” user - generated instructional discourse . Th en , we share strategies for avoiding institutional appropriation of marginalized communities’ work ( such as the sites we studied ) , as doing so may endanger those for whom this information is most needed . We also share guidelines for identifying community spaces , borders , and boundaries that can protect the wellbeing of marginalized individuals [ 6 , 13 , 14 ] . We ground these strategies and guidelines in post - colonial and decolonial methods alongside participatory design . We also point out that while the important social justice turn in technical communication has led to much needed a tt ention to marginalized groups , we take a di ﬀ erent approach ; our decolonial focus on participatory design encourages researchers and users to engage with their own “cultural communities” [ 38 ] rather than seek outside groups for study . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . SIGDOC ' 19 , October 4 – 6 , 2019 , Portland , OR , USA © 2019 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6790 - 5 / 19 / 10 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328020 . 3353927 SIGDOC 19 , October 04 - 06 , 2019 Portland , OR USA Edenfield and Ledbetter As evidence of the legitimacy and complexity of user - generated instructions , we present ﬁ ndings from action research projects conducted within / alongside these communities . Ledbe tt er’s study of YouTube’s beauty community involved collecting and analyzing user - generated makeup tutorials on YouTube as well as interviewing women who self - identify as members of the community . Importantly , one community member , who we refer to with the pseudonym Lisa , noted the importance of her participation in making tutorials as part of her strategies for hacking the brick - and - mortar workforce and accessing a safer community as a woman of color . Her most viewed videos are what she refers to as “gross beauty videos” such as “how to get rid of clogged pores” as well as “how to be yoursel f ” videos in which she discusses the isolation and challenges growing up as an Asian - American immigrant in the Midwest . Eventually , this participant was able to hack the traditional workplace and leave her job to pursue a career in creating tutorial content full - time , which she considers a safer space for herself . Ledbe tt er’s study suggests that for the beauty tutorial community , user - generated instructional guides also provide a community and identity - building space for diverse participants . It also enables participants to create their own criteria for what counts as expertise in a system that typically does not position women of color as the expert . Similar to Ledbe tt er’s work , with partners Jared Colton and Steve Holmes , Eden ﬁ eld studied extra - institutional information - sharing practices of hormone replacement therapy ( HRT ) for transgender ( “trans” ) individuals in support of medical gender transitions , made possible by the a ﬀ ordances of online forums such as Reddit [ 18 ] . To hack their gender transformation—that is , to access medical transition processes outside or even alongside “legitimate” institutional methods—and to help others to do so as well , people purchased hormones online , compiled medical resources , and generated original content in the form of posts and comments . Th ese posts and comments related to understanding lab results and adjusting dosages as needed , navigating customs and other barriers , negotiating resistant physicians , and even concealing their transition when necessary . Th is study indicates that in many cases individuals saw themselves as resisting oppressive or exclusionary policies and institutions , including gatekeeping by medical professionals . Th ough each study had di ﬀ erent stakes and aims , both show individuals creating their own unique procedural content in e ﬀ orts to hack institutions , gaining access to that which is otherwise o ﬀ limits to them . In both cases , empowerment was also a key motivator to their endeavors . Our paper suggests that ﬁ rst , practitioners and researchers should recalibrate notions of success in documentation practices . Th is recalibration can begin with asking questions about what “success” means , and for whom . It should also involve acknowledging the colonial origins of standardization—a practice of measurement and quanti ﬁ cation stemming from European Enlightenment thinking that once served the project of colonial expansion [ 38 ] . Th is practice can help to account for user - generated instructions generated by marginalized communities , especially when the procedural discourse represents acts of resistance to typical textbook guidelines and / or to exclusive institutional practices or policies . In both studies , we found that success had li tt le to do with achieving industry - set standards . Rather , successful instruction could serve many purposes , including sustaining the life and wellbeing of a community . We suggest that when examining these forms of “tactical technical communication” [ 27 ] , one way to approach this work is through participatory design informed by decolonial methodologies . So , for practitioners and researchers , rather than upholding a generalized understanding of successful design—and an understanding that excludes some marginalized community practices that do not ﬁ t within those guidelines—we suggest considering instances in singularity rather than universal . Th at is , in each instance , rather than relying on standardization , success must be considered as rhetorical , achieving purposes that are community - speci ﬁ c . When working with marginalized communities , researchers must resist generalizations of success out of those practices , especially if a generalization strips out the community from which that practice emerged . 2 TACTICAL , DECOLONIAL DESIGN : INSTRUCTIONS IN SUCCESSFUL RESISTANCE Tactical technical communication and decolonial frameworks help us to see the work these two communities do as both vital to their wellbeing and as legitimately e ﬀ ective technical communication . Both provide a lens to see outsider work as acts of agency and resistance . Together , they enable us to understand how user - generated guides function to side - step gatekeeping or otherwise gain access to the out of bounds , while resisting the colonizing practice of appropriation . 2 . 1 Tactical Technical Communication In the last few decades , technical communication scholarship has extended consideration of documentation appropriate for scrutiny to user - produced documentation , in part an acknowledgement of the productive complexity of extra - institutional , nonexpert technical communication [ 11 , 12 ] , especially in light of what Kimball and others call “tactical technical communication [ 27 , 17 , 28 , 36 , 39 ] . Kimball [ 27 , 28 ] and others studying user - generated content have taken up de Certeau’s concepts of strategies and tactics [ 16 ] . Kimball [ 27 ] describes strategies as “systems , plans of actions , narratives , and designs created by institutions to in ﬂ uence , guide , and at worst manipulate human society” [ 27 , 16 ] . In contrast , users engage in tactical action when they take up institutional strategies in resistance to those institutions and their authority [ 27 ] . Important for us , tactics are “an art of the weak , ” [ 27 , 16 ] , the art of “making do” [ 22 , 16 ] . Two terms from de Certeau [ 16 ] that help us analyze tactics used by communities in our two studies are bricolage , making do with what is at hand , and la perruque , or borrowing o ﬃ cial tools , such using a work computer to research and / or purchase hormones online , as in the case of Eden ﬁ eld’s study participants . Farmer clari ﬁ es this “outsider use” of “insider tools” [ 22 ] : Tactical Technical Communication in Communities SIGDOC 19 , October 04 - 06 , 2019 Portland , OR USA Because “people have to make do with what they have” and because “what they have” is largely determined for them , individuals and groups resort to various tactics through which they might enact a productive agency , while at the same time , consuming the imposed , ready - made products of a dominant social order . [ 16 ] Th is idea of “productive agency” centers users ( in our case , marginalized users ) as producers rather than passive consumers of information [ 27 ] , making do with what is at hand to engage not only in cultural production [ 22 ] but also acts of survivance [ 37 ] . Eden ﬁ eld , Colton , and Holmes suggest tactical technical communication could be understood to further technical communication’s interest in enacting justice for marginalized communities , “especially when institutional communication channels fail users and their communities” [ 18 ] , as in the case of the two studies in this publication . Yet , in 2017 , Colton , Holmes , and Walwema comment that de Certeau’s terms do not provide a clear framework for ethical action [ 12 ] . For that we turn to decolonial and postcolonial methods . 2 . 2 Decolonial & Postcolonial Methods Decolonial methods positions our research as supporting rather than co - opting work . Scholars such as Longo and Sco tt , Longo , and Wills [ 31 , 40 ] have pointed to the need for cultural studies inquiry in technical communication . Haas noted that with the “cultural turn” in technical communication , “ Th e intellectual work of these scholars that cultural studies approaches to technical communication research , practice , and pedagogy can guide and support us in creating more culturally responsive and responsible texts that accommodate their users” [ 20 ] . Haas’ construction of an “epistemological and decolonial framework” for race , rhetoric , and technology gave us the language of critical race theory and showed us why it important to technical communication . Haas drew this connection by arguing that : decolonial methodologies and pedagogies serve to ( a ) redress colonial in ﬂ uences on perceptions of people , literacy , language , culture , and community and the relationships therein and ( b ) support the coexistence of cultures , languages , literacies , memories , histories , places , and spaces—and encourage respectful and reciprocal dialogue between and across them . [ 20 ] To this end , our decolonial approach to user - created instruction seeks to resist the colonial practice of co - opting these communities’ work , and instead moves towards supporting their coexistence acknowledging their contributions to our thinking with the goal of establishing a “respectful and reciprocal dialogue” around information design and UX . As Powell points out , equally important to a decolonial process is the act of centering marginalized voices rather than using them as an “additive” or “tactical curative for the homogenous focus” of Western - European scholarship [ 37 ] . Simply adding in a few oppressed voices to a homogenous chorus will not correct the larger structural problem . A decolonial approach to design , then , must center , legitimize , and prioritize the practices of marginalized users . We acknowledge that we cannot possibly speak to and know the conditions of oppressed groups . What we aim to do is bring them into our dialogue . Moreover , we draw from Powell , Levy , and Riley - Mukavetz , et al . , who use the term " cultural communities " to refer to “any place / space where groups organize under a set of shared beliefs and practices” [ 38 ] . We understand the communities named in our study as cultural communities in the same regard . Rather than treat them as static objects of study , which can result in “tokenizing exemplars from speci ﬁ c oppressed cultural traditions , ” we seek to understand the communities as rhetorical , ﬂ uid , and engaged in shared meaning - making practices . We aim to legitimize and center the users in these communities , particularly those who produce DIY instructional materials , as technical communicators . Understanding why users seek procedural discourse is important to understanding why users DIY . According to Novick and Ward , when participants in their study seeking instructional assistance were given the option to “ask others , ” “use online help , ” “solve without assistance , ” or “use printed manual” to solve a problem , only 20 % of problems were solved using a manual . Most participants gravitated toward asking other people ( 90 % ) and online help ( 75 % ) . Th e reasons cited included be tt er navigability , greater precision of help , and greater searchability [ 35 ] . Th is may explain the prevalence of the DIY genre when it comes to procedural discourse , especially on platforms like YouTube . What this study does not account for ( as we point out ) is the exclusionary , gatekeeping aspect of procedural knowledge . Users who are excluded from accessing HRT via sanctioned medical institutions , for example , must then turn to DIY procedural discourse for information , engaging in tactical action in order to exert agency . Much of the existing scholarship on “successful” instructional discourse , while useful to understanding tutorials as a genre , does not make visible the means by which who or what determines what counts as expertise . Moreover , it does not account for the inequality that is o ft en present in deciding who gets to be positioned as an “expert . ” Institutions are o ft en involved in the determination of these criteria , whether they are educational , ﬁ nancial , or both . Blythe points out that “Institutions are embodied in part by bricks and mortar , and money , and printed forms , and policies , and the people that uphold them” [ 7 ] . When marginalized groups , such as women of color , members of the trans community , and immigrants are not well - represented in institutional se tt ings , the criteria that is produced for what “counts” may not represent or include those groups . Th is exclusion , in part , can result in gatekeeping necessary information . Carliner’s “three - part framework of information design” is useful for se tt ing some guidelines on what makes successful procedural discourse , though we seek to expand on it . Th is framework consists of the following areas : Physical design , which directs users to a message ; cognitive design , which helps users understand a message ; and a ﬀ ective design , which helps users engage with and feel comfortable with a message [ 10 ] . SIGDOC 19 , October 04 - 06 , 2019 Portland , OR USA Edenfield and Ledbetter Morain and Swartz , in their study on user - generated video tutorials , explain that when they assess instructional videos , they noted that successful instructional videos kept viewers engaged by creating and ful ﬁ lling expectations [ 32 ] . While such guidelines help us understand successful user - created instructional content broadly , they do not explain where our standards and de ﬁ nitions for success come from , or which groups have easier access to the means of achieving those standards . In the next section , we bring these perspectives to bear on our individual case studies . Understood as tactical technical communication , these user - produced instructions within the DIY trans communities and Asian - American women’s YouTube beauty videos demonstrate successful user - produced communication design . 3 CASE STUDIES : USER - PRODUCED DOCUMENTATION AS RESISTANCE Th ough the two studies may initially appear di ﬀ erent in terms of the stakes for the participants , and were completed separately at separate times , we believe it is productive to bring our studies together as we understand them to be connected in many ways . Both of these studies examined successful procedural discourse and user - generated instructions in a particular online platform . We believe both communities are driven to their work by economic concerns and a concern for others with a similar experience and who are in similar predicaments . Both communities expressed their tactical actions as resistance to gatekeeping measures . Both communities saw themselves as exerting a “productive agency” through their work . In the case of Ledbe tt er’s study , the women were concerned with lack of access to Asian and Asian - American communities in their hometowns ( both participants noted this as a primary reason for joining the beauty community ) and a desire to feel a sense of belonging . Th e participants also used their content to generate income , and in one case , over the course of the study , YouTube replaced the participant’s brick - and - mortar job . In the case of Eden ﬁ eld’s study , individuals speci ﬁ cally used the platform to resource information and supplies that were otherwise una tt ainable . It is important to note that a 1 : 1 study of YouTube communities is extremely di ﬃ cult because of YouTube’s recent demonetization of trans and queer YouTubers forcing many trans and queer creators o ﬀ the platform [ 23 ] . Th us , scholars who are interested in studying user - generated online content with transgender - speci ﬁ c subject ma tt er may need to ﬁ nd other platforms . Additionally , some platforms resist or are hostile to DIY gender transition e ﬀ orts and will ban users who post such information . Th is includes Susan’s Place , one of the largest and oldest transgender websites [ 15 ] . To date , Reddit is one platform that allows for DIY hormone related - content . 3 . 1 YouTube’s Beauty Community Marginalized women’s uses of YouTube for both identity - building and entrepreneurial purposes is li tt le researched in the context of technical communication ( speci ﬁ cally , procedural discourse ) . While scholarship on the genre of vernacular video has shown us that this genre of user - created video does not always follow industry guidelines for “good , ” high production - quality video [ 29 ] , we point out that these guidelines do not account for the processes by which the criteria for “good” content are determined . In fact , such criteria can function as a gatekeeping mechanism that excludes much of the DIY genre . Moreover , many users who create videos in the YouTube beauty community do so in way that brings to mind de Certeau’s concept of bricolage : they hack traditional production routes by making do with the tools they have at hand , like phone cameras and makeshi ft props , as many do not have access to professional - quality video production training and equipment . Th ese instructional videos play a vital role in community - building . Th e tutorials and stories created within the beauty community provide another example of instructional discourse that prompts a re - evaluation of procedural discourse and the de ﬁ nitions of “successful” user guides that are circulated in technical communication classrooms . Ledbe tt er sought to study YouTube’s beauty community for both personal and professional reasons . As a member of the community herself , prior to this study , she produced videos as a means of connecting with other Asian - American women with shared interests . Her qualitative , mixed - methods study was broadly informed by both cultural rhetorics and intersectional feminism as well as post - positivist realist theories of identity . Her case study ( IRB x13 - 007e ) consisted of both coding participant YouTube videos and conducting interviews . She found that in the beauty community , women position themselves as experts—a status that may not be a ﬀ orded to them in the brick - and - mortar institutions for which they work . Rather than bear the burden of changing those institutions , the women sought out and created space in the YouTube beauty community in which they could be paid for their expertise and set their own criteria for what counts as “successful” instructional content . One participant , Lisa , hacked the limitations of her brick - and - mortar workplace by creating her YouTube channel , which she said enabled her to access a community and experience a sense of authentic identity that she felt was o ﬀ limits at her job . Th e videos in which participants instruct users on how to create makeup looks , use a skincare product , or master a makeup technique also contain DIY information on how to survive as a cultural outsider ( or , sometimes , what not to do ) . Th ey tell stories that normalize the struggles and experiences of immigrants . In this particular how - to guide , Lisa tells her audience about how she struggled to ﬁ t in upon moving to the United States . Lisa discusses what it is like being the only Asian child at school , and of being ridiculed in her Minnesota hometown . She points out that before she started her YouTube channel , she felt the need to create a fake , middle - class White identity for herself to legitimize herself : Tactical Technical Communication in Communities SIGDOC 19 , October 04 - 06 , 2019 Portland , OR USA I started o ﬀ my YouTube channel three years ago . And if you look back to my oldest videos , it was about . . but I have my oldest oldest videos all privated because they were so embarrassing . Th ey were on this really crappy webcam and I felt like it was a way for me to be heard and I saw I had like , 30 views on a video and I was like , oh my god , there’s 30 eyeballs watching this . And I felt like I got a tt ention , you know . . . and I taught myself how to make these websites . . . . and I had this girl on here , I had a persona . And her name was Jennifer Foster . And I myself at 12 years old , I called myself Jennifer Foster , and I was a blonde haired girl with divorced parents . And I created this persona on the Internet that ﬁ t in with everything I saw around me . And maybe it was because I created her as a persona to ﬁ t in , because I didn’t feel like I ﬁ t in with you know , people at school or whatever . So I created this online identity because behind a computer … I felt like I could ﬁ t in . Lisa went on to say that it was not until she started her YouTube channel that she felt comfortable revealing her “authentic” self— a truer version of herself that represented her reality as an Asian - American woman . Th e instructional videos that she makes serve multiple purposes for her , as we can see from her story . Th ey connect her to a larger community of users with shared interests . Th ey also shed light on her struggle with ﬁtt ing in as a cultural outsider in the United States and the role that digital communication played in establishing her identity as an “insider . ” Her story resists the narrative of the Internet’s anonymity as providing an easy solution to the challenges around cultural di ﬀ erence ; as evident from her story , even online , Lisa still experienced the challenges of being an outsider marked by her identity . Finally , Lisa’s story provides evidence as to why appropriating her techniques to YouTube success can be dangerous . When asked if she would share some of her techniques during her interview , she responded by saying that these were trade secrets that she had developed over time . Appropriation could mean a loss of income or of the job that she had created for herself . On ﬁ rst glance , many of Lisa’s videos do not meet the industry guidelines for successful procedural discourse . One of her most viewed how - to videos , “Get rid of blackheads and clogged pores WARNING GRAPHIC , ” published on YouTube on January 8 , 2012 , went viral shortly a ft er uploading and currently has over ten million views . Th e video contains shaky , blurry footage as she records herself opening the pores on her face with a clothing steamer . Th e instructions meander between personal narrative and instructional content . Th e goal - se tt ing that Carliner lists as one of the key aspects of successful cognitive design is not clearly integrated into the structure of the video [ 10 ] . Swarts also points to the importance of clear goal - se tt ing that functions “like video equivalents of printed documentation” [ 43 ] . Yet , in her interview , Lisa reports that this was her most successful video in terms of establishing her presence in the community as a “beauty guru” and increasing her subscriber and view counts to the tens of millions . Th ese informal , user - generated videos have received li tt le a tt ention in the study of documentation , despite their public success . 3 . 2 Trans Self - medding Documentation Broadly speaking , trans experiences in and alongside medical institutions represent another important and critically under - researched area . Trans people have historically ( and currently ) experienced gatekeeping in the form of medical standards of care , economic and geographical constraints , and other barriers to care , including preventative care and even emergency care [ 9 , 5 , 24 ] . Gender - transition care can be particularly di ﬃ cult to obtain , though gender dysphoria is a recognized medical condition , and many medical associations recognize the medical necessity of gender transition treatment , including the American Medical Association and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists [ 26 , 2 , 1 ] . Admi tt edly , these statements fully position gender dysphoria within a pathological framework , a position many trans people see as problematic and inappropriate [ 34 ] . Given these di ﬃ culties , many trans people have turned to online forums and Internet commerce to hack institutions by side - stepping gatekeeping measures . For example , some obtain and monitor their hormone regimens on their own terms . In a clear example of tactical technical communication , online users engage in bricolage , using materials on hand and easy - to - access information and resources ( i . e . a free online account with Reddit , internet access , online pharmacies , bitcoin ) . Th ey also demonstrate la perruque by reusing and remixing o ﬃ cial medical documentation produced for other means , such as Guidelines and Protocols for Hormone Th erapy and Primary Care for Trans Patients [ 8 ] , or videos showing proper injection technique , but for treatment of another condition such as diabetes . Motivated to understand and to help broadcast barriers to care that trans people face and their agentive maneuvers around those barriers , with co - researchers Jared S . Colton ( Utah State University ) and Steve Holmes ( Texas Tech University ) , Eden ﬁ eld launched a mixed method research project that examined the DIY medical literacy practices of transgender individuals in a public online forum , Reddit’s Trans Self - Med ( anonymized here ) [ 18 ] . Under a university IRB ( # 8212 ) , methodology included rhetorical analysis of online forums , rhetorical artifact analysis , and survey data of 83 individuals who participated in these forums . Surveys gathered data on user - reported tactics for hacking medical access via seeking out , contributing to , or otherwise operationalizing information on DIY hormone treatments toward gender transition . Analysis revealed several key ﬁ ndings relevant to user - generated instructions and how they used the a ﬀ ordances of online forums to navigate institutional barriers . Th e study found that the reasons people DIY - ed their HRT were manifold and complex . Th e initial assumption was that the primary reason people would DIY their HRT would be because of lack of insurance . Th is was not the case at all . Instead , survey data found that the two biggest reasons were a lack of access to care , SIGDOC 19 , October 04 - 06 , 2019 Portland , OR USA Edenfield and Ledbetter broadly de ﬁ ned , and a rejection of gatekeeping methods required to access medications . Th is second point on gatekeeping is important to understand their procedural discourse hacking as a form of tactical resistance . Note that while the survey did not collect information on location per se , many participants commented on their locations in their responses . Th ose participants located in the United States made similar claims about lacking access and resisting gatekeeping as those outside of the U . S . In fact , many participants noted hostility and ignorance at the patient - provider level as signi ﬁ cant barriers to care in the U . S . One participant commented : It ' s brutal , and most medical services are nominal only . In America , I have to worry about violence every time I use the bathroom , and obviously quality medical care is only available to the very rich . Read alongside research on health disparities and the collected artifacts , it is evident that social oppression and injustice ﬁ gures heavily into the authorized and unauthorized means trans patients use to gain access to medical care . For example , evidently in response to oppressive institutions and institutional barriers to care , individuals shared detailed information on acquiring hormones . One user posted the following about a new shop in Europe : Just wanted to let you know there is a shop for estradiol injections in europe . Th ey ship from czech . No problems with the customs so far to germany . I struggled to give you this information… I ' m afraid they go o ﬄ ine like QHI did once I made this public… Like this user , people recognize that sharing this information puts their own access at risk , a painful acknowledgment of the precarity of their healthcare access . Others ask for help navigating their blood work , obtaining labs at a laboratory , then posting their results to the forum for help interpreting results and adjusting as needed—all without the help of a physician . For example , one user asked for clari ﬁ cation from the forum by posting , “My most recent test showed TOTAL ESTROGEN , SERUM @ : 361pg / ml . Note : My test was done at trough levels , right before my next injection . Is this the correct way of doing things ? ” In the comments below , people post to help her interpret her results . A crucial a ﬀ ordance of Reddit is its upvote system . P ﬂ ugfelder has previously published on the proliferation of the “nontechnical” technical de ﬁ nition on Reddit and the role of upvotes and downvotes ( “positive and negative votes” ) [ 36 ] . In the subreddit Trans Self - Med , posts that are deemed helpful are upvoted for visibility , while unhelpful or unwelcome comments are downvoted or deleted . Uses capitalize on this feature to identify helpful information and disregard unhelpful information . Crucial to this forum’s success is anonymity : an email is not required to obtain a log - in and this particular community is publicly visible ( a viewer does not need to be logged in to read posts ) . Note that for these communities , accessing the necessary medication , interpreting lab work , adjusting dosages , and otherwise helping each other is not only an act of self - care and resistance but also an act of community - building . One of the community rules posted on the side bar lists “Hate Speech” as an o ﬀ ense that will result in a ban : If you ' re here to be disruptive , this isn ' t the place for you . Having a dissenting or unpopular opinion and backing it up with factual data will not get you banned . Spewing vitriol , harassing , demeaning and / or personally assaulting users will . As a community that developed in response to institutional gatekeeping and exclusionary policies , research within these communities must be extraordinarily sensitive as a loss of access threatens their well - being . Th e rate of suicidal ideation among trans or questioning people is shockingly high , and yet a tt ributed to environmental factors such as discrimination , violence , isolation , and rejection [ 45 ] . Th ough more research is needed , these user - generated instructions provide access to potentially life - saving medications and knowledge that would otherwise be o ﬀ limits . 4 APPLICATIONS Th e above sections use the lens of tactical technical communication to identify the ways two marginalized communities create successful communication design through hacking necessary intuitions and resources . In this ﬁ nal section , we suggest guidelines for identifying community spaces and the borders and boundaries that can protect the wellbeing of marginalized individuals , namely by drawing on participatory design informed by postcolonialism . Th ough only ﬁ rst steps in this work , we draw on decolonial methodologies to suggest strategies for avoiding institutional appropriation of these communities’ work by engaging in dialogue . 4 . 1 Participatory Design & Postcolonial Th eory Our projects point to the need for practitioners and researchers to center di ﬀ erent users in our work . Bridging tactical technical communication ( with its emphasis on tactical action and resistance ) and decolonial frameworks—which both focus on the marginalized user , Balsamo claims design is interested not only in “the making of new artifacts” but also in cultural production , “the creation of new cultural possibilities” and thus the “design of new technologies” is also the work of “designing culture” [ 4 , 33 ] . One way technical communication has recognized the cultural production of marginalized users is through participatory design ( PD ) [ 41 , 25 ] . Evia and Patriarca explicitly describe PD as centering user expertise : PD is based on the claim that users should be regarded as experts when they enter the design process of workplace tools , and it is driven by the concern for a more humane , creative , and e ﬀ ective relationship between those involved in technology’s design and those involved in its use . [ 19 ] Tactical Technical Communication in Communities SIGDOC 19 , October 04 - 06 , 2019 Portland , OR USA Th us , participatory design informed by postcolonialism seeks to frame marginalized users as experts of their own experience and to center “humane” relationships between particular uses and technology . Th is acknowledgement of user expertise resonates with Ledbe tt er’s description of Lisa’s experience , as well as Eden ﬁ eld’s tactical strategies of DIY trans users , experts in their own experience , “taking up” and “taking apart” the technologies at hand [ 33 ] . Along these lines , Mainsah and Morrison identify four key areas of concern for postcolonial theory and participatory design . First , a concern for power relations in PD forefronts the agency of marginalized users while challenging unequal power relations . Second , a postcolonial approach to PD means challenging the use of spatial metaphors and cultural essentialism , including terms involving “the relationship between a particular social space and the larger matrix of power and cultural relations in which it is embedded” [ 33 ] . Th ird , understanding design as culture acknowledges that identity categories “do not exist independently of technology” but are o ft en “entangled with power . ” Finally , “de - centering PD knowledge” means shi ft ing the “center” of knowledge [ 33 ] . To this point , Mainsah and Morrison write , “Although PD stresses the importance of participation of stakeholders in the process of design , these local participants do not o ft en take part in the process of interpretation and analysis through which knowledge is produced” [ 33 ] . Rather , Mainsah and Morrison draw on hooks to argue that : the experience of the marginalized are used in the west without opening up the process to their knowledges , theories and explanations . When there is a meeting between the centre and the margins , it is always according to terms set down by the centre . [ 21 , 33 ] In contrast , PD intersected with postcolonial work “a tt empts to recover the voices of the oppressed , marginalized , and dominated” in part by challenging the position of expert and researcher , and who gets to tell the users story at all [ 33 ] . Mainsah and Morrison’s four points provide a framework for researchers and practitioners interested in centering marginalized users , but decolonial methods can further help avoid appropriation of community knowledge . 4 . 2 Guidelines for Dialogue In support of the above PD approach , we also draw from decolonialist methods to o ﬀ er the following guidelines as a resource for centering users . Th ese guidelines are intended to encourage dialogue across and among cultures and avoid appropriation by bringing stakeholders and communities into the conversation [ 20 ] . It is important to note , again , that a decolonial approach to participatory design is not the same as a social justice - orientated approach , and they should not be con ﬂ ated . A decolonial approach involves looking inward rather than out ; it entails identifying one’s own cultural communities and drawing from them as sources of knowledge rather than seeking out and representing others . We point out that these studies have drawn from our experiences as members ourselves of these respective communities and encourage readers to do the same . For researchers or practitioners , we propose the following precautions creates a safer environment for participants and users , especially those who come from marginalized spaces : • Ask participants to identify their own cultural communities instead of analyzing others • Do not require participants to provide a real name ; instead allow the use of pseudonyms or keep participants anonymous • Do not require the user to submit or use a photograph of themselves , the use of which has been linked to expressions of racism , sexism , xenophobia , homophobia , and transphobia • Be equitable and reciprocal in your research activities , including compensating for time and resources when possible • Be aware of one’s own privileges and historical relations with the participants’ community • Foster conversations about inequality and power • Focus on the singular ; do not a tt empt to generalize ﬁ ndings in a way that appropriates voices , knowledges , or expertise • Acknowledge how and by whom criteria for successful discourse are established , as well as who bene ﬁ ts from those criteria • Recognize that instructional discourse can serve multiple purposes for some communities Th is brief list draws on practice and suggestions from a range of communication design studies , cultural rhetorics and indigenous scholarship , as well as our above studies . Th ey are not intended to serve as absolutes , but instead as a starting point for generative conversation . While scholars such as Carliner and Swarts have provided useful guidelines in understanding the procedural discourse genre [ 10 , 43 ] we argue that recalibrating notions of success by acknowledging the colonial origins of standardization will be necessary to understand the multiple , o ft en overlooked functions of tactical technical communication as tools for knowledge , community - building , and resistance in marginalized communities . Also , approaching user’s work as tactical action within a framework of resistance to oppressive institutions and an expression of cultural production recognizes the unique contributions and vulnerabilities of these communities . A decolonial approach to communication design involves making visible the power dynamics and in ﬂ uences of Western - European standardization processes on knowledge - making and communication practices . Rather than take these standards for granted , we argue questioning the power dynamics behind those standards will result in safer spaces for marginalized communities and a more diverse understanding of e ﬀ ective communication design as a whole . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Eden ﬁ eld would like to thank Jared S . Colton and Steve Holmes for their partnership on this work . SIGDOC 19 , October 04 - 06 , 2019 Portland , OR USA Edenfield and Ledbetter Ledbe tt er would like to thank her research participants , Lisa and Esther . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Th e American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2011 . Commi tt ee opinion No . 512 : Health care for transgender individuals . 118 Obstetricians and Gynecologists 1454 . [ 2 ] American Medical Association . 2008 . Resolution H - 185 . 950 : Removing ﬁ nancial barriers to care for transgender patients . [ 3 ] Sebastiano Bagnara and Gillian Crampton Smith . 2006 . Th eories and practice in interaction design . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . [ 4 ] Anne Balsamo . 2011 . Designing culture : Th e technological imagination at work . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . [ 5 ] Greta R . Bauer , Rebecca Hammond , Robb Travers , Ma tt hias Kaay , Karin M . Hohenadel , and Michelle Boyce . 2009 . “I don ' t think this is theoretical ; this is our lives” : How erasure impacts health care for transgender people . Journal of the Association of Nurses in AIDS Care , 20 ( 5 ) , 348 - 361 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . jana . 2009 . 07 . 004 . [ 6 ] Martha Brady . 2005 . Creating safe spaces and building social assets for young women in the developing world : A new role for sports . Women ' s Studies Qu arterly , 33 ( 1 / 2 ) , 35 - 49 . [ 7 ] Stuart Blythe . 2007 . Agencies , ecologies , and the mundane artifacts in our midst . Labor , writing technologies , and the shaping of composition in the academy . Takayoshi , P . and Sullivan , P . , Eds . Cresskill , New Jersey : Hampton Press Inc . , 167 - 186 . [ 8 ] Amy Bournes . 2015 . Guidelines and protocols for comprehensive primary care for trans clients . Toronto , On : Sherborne Medical Center . Retrieved at h tt p : / / sherbourne . on . ca / wp - content / uploads / 2014 / 02 / Guidelines - and - Protocols - for - Comprehensive - Primary - Care - for - Trans - Clients - 2015 . pdf . [ 9 ] Judith Bradford , Sari L . Reisner , Julie A . Honnold , and Jessica Xavier . 2013 . Experiences of transgender - related discrimination and implications for health : results from the Virginia Transgender Health Initiative Study . American Journal of Public Health , 103 ( 10 ) , 1820 - 1829 . DOI : 10 . 2105 / ajph . 2012 . 300796 . [ 10 ] Saul Carliner . 2000 . Physical , cognitive , and a ﬀ ective : A three - part framework for information design . Technical Communication 47 ( 4 ) , 561 - 576 . [ 11 ] Stephen Carradini , 2018 . An organizational structure of Indie Rock musicians as displayed by Facebook usage . Journal of Technical Writing and Communication , 48 ( 2 ) , 151 - 174 . DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0047281616667677 . [ 12 ] Jared S . Colton , Steve Holmes , and Josephine Walwema . 2017 . From NoobGuides to # OpKKK : Ethics of Anonymous’ Tactical Technical Communication . Technical Communication Qu arterly . 26 ( 1 ) , 59 - 75 , DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10572252 . 2016 . 1257743 . [ 13 ] Patricia Hill Collins . 2002 . Black feminist thought : Knowledge , consciousness , and the politics of empowerment . Routledge . [ 14 ] Olga Idriss Davis . 1999 . In the kitchen : Transforming the academy through safe spaces of resistance . Western Journal of Communication ( includes Communication Reports ) , 63 ( 3 ) , 364 - 381 [ 15 ] Dena . 2017 , December 29 . Re : DIY HRT ⁇ ? [ Online discussion group ] . Retrieved from h tt ps : / / www . susans . org / forums / index . php ? topic = 232250 . 0 . [ 16 ] Michel de Certeau . 1984 . Th e practice of everyday life , trans . Steven Rendall . Berkeley , CA : University of California Press . [ 17 ] Huiling Ding . 2009 . Rhetorics of alternative media in an emerging epidemic : SARS , censorship , and extra - institutional risk communication . Technical Communication Qu arterly , 18 ( 4 ) 327 - 350 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10572252 . 2013 . 746628 [ 18 ] Avery Eden ﬁ eld , Jared S . Colton , and Steve Holmes , 2019 . Qu eering tactical technical communication : DIY HRT . Technical Communication Qu arterly . 28 ( 3 ) , 177 - 191 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10572252 . 2019 . 1607906 . [ 19 ] Carlos Evia and Ashley Patriarca . 2012 . Beyond compliance : Participatory translation of safety communication for Latino construction workers . Journal of Business and Technical Communication , 26 ( 3 ) , 340 - 367 . DOI : 10 . 1177 / 1050651912439697 . [ 20 ] Angela Haas . 2012 . Race , rhetoric , and technology : A case study of decolonial technical communication theory , methodology , and pedagogy . Journal of Business and Technical Communication , 26 ( 3 ) , 277 - 310 . DOI : 10 . 1177 / 1050651912439539 . [ 21 ] bell hooks . 1990 . Yearning : race , gender and cultural politics . Boston , MA : South End Press . [ 22 ] Frank Farmer . 2013 . A ft er the public turn : Composition , counterpublics , and the citizen bricoleur . Boulder , CO : University Press of Colorado . [ 23 ] Farokhmanesh , M . 2018 , Jun . 3 . YouTube is still restricting and demonetizing LGBT videos — and adding anti - LGBT ads to some . Th e Verge . Retrieved from h tt ps : / / www . theverge . com / 2018 / 6 / 4 / 17424472 / youtube - lgbt - demonetization - ads - algorithm . [ 24 ] Pooja S . Gehi , and Gabriel Arkles . 2007 . Unraveling injustice : Race and class impact of Medicaid exclusions of transition - related health care for transgender people . Sexuality Research & Social Policy , 4 ( 4 ) , 7 - 35 . doi : 10 . 1525 / srsp . 2007 . 4 . 4 . 7 . [ 25 ] Corrine Glesne . 1998 . Becoming qualitative researchers : An introduction , vol . 2 . New York , NY : Allyn and Bacon . [ 26 ] " International Classi ﬁ cation of Diseases ( ICD ) F64 Gender identity disorders " . World Health Organization . Retrieved March 14 , 2019 . [ 27 ] Miles A Kimball . 2006 . Cars , culture , and tactical technical communication . Technical Communication Qu arterly , 15 ( 1 ) , 67 – 86 . DOI : 10 . 1207 / s15427625tcq1501 _ 6 . [ 28 ] Miles A . Kimball . 2017 . Tactical technical communication . Technical Communication Qu arterly , 26 ( 1 ) , 1 - 7 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10572252 . 2017 . 1259428 . [ 29 ] Patricia Lange . 2009 . Videos of a ﬃ nity on YouTube . Th e YouTube reader . Pelle Snickars and Patrick Vondereau , Eds . National Library of Sweden . Retrieved March 15 , 2019 . [ 30 ] Lehua Ledbe tt er . 2018 . Th e rhetorical work of YouTube’s beauty community : Relationship - and Identity - Building in user - created procedural discourse . Technical Communication Qu arterly , 27 ( 4 ) , 287 - 299 . DOI : h tt ps : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10572252 . 2018 . 1518950 . [ 31 ] Bernade tt e Longo . 1998 . An approach for applying cultural study theory to technical writing research . Technical Communication Qu arterly , ( 7 ) 1 , 53 - 73 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10572259809364617 . [ 32 ] Ma tt Morain and Jason Swarts . 2011 . YouTutorial : A framework for assessing instructional online video . Technical Communication Qu arterly , 21 ( 1 ) , 6 - 24 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10572252 . 2012 . 626690 . [ 33 ] Henry Mainsah , & Andrew Morrison . 2014 , October . Participatory design through a cultural lens : insights from postcolonial theory . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2 ( pp . 83 - 86 ) . ACM . [ 34 ] “Manifesto . ” 2012 . International Network for Trans Depathologization . Retrieved from h tt p : / / www . stp2012 . info / old / en / manifesto . [ 35 ] David G . Novick & Karen Ward . 2006 , October . Why don ' t people read the manual ? . In Proceedings of the 24th annual ACM international conference on Design of communication ( pp . 11 - 18 ) . ACM . [ 36 ] Ehren Helmut P ﬂ ugfelder . 2017 . Reddit’s “Explain Like I’m Five” : Technical descriptions in the wild . Technical Tactical Technical Communication in Communities SIGDOC 19 , October 04 - 06 , 2019 Portland , OR USA Communication Qu arterly 26 ( 1 ) , 25 - 41 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10572252 . 2016 . 125774 . [ 37 ] Malea Powell . 2002 . Rhetorics of survivance : how American Indians use writing . CCC : a journal of the National Council of Teachers of English . 53 ( 3 ) , 396 - 434 . [ 38 ] Malea Powell , Daisy Levy , & Andrea Riley - Mukavetz , et al . 2014 . Our story begins here : constellating cultural rhetorics . Enculturation : a journal of rhetoric and culture . 25 . Retrieved from h tt p : / / enculturation . net / our - story - begins - here . [ 39 ] Hilary A . Sarat - St . Peter . 2017 . “Make a Bomb in the Kitchen of Your Mom” : Jihadist Tactical Technical Communication and the Everyday Practice of Cooking . Technical Communication Qu arterly , 26 ( 1 ) , 76 - 91 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10572252 . 2016 . 1275862 . [ 40 ] Blake Sco tt , Bernade tt e Longo , and Katherine V . Wills . 2006 . Critical power tools . Albany , NY : SUNY Press . [ 41 ] Clay Spinuzzi . 2005 . Th e methodology of participatory design . Technical Communication , 52 ( 2 ) , 163 - 174 . [ 42 ] Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak . 2010 . Can the subaltern speak ? Re ﬂ ections on the history of an idea : Can the subaltern speak ? Ed . Morris , R . New York : Columbia University Press . [ 43 ] Jason Swarts . ( 2012 ) . New modes of help : best practices for instructional video . Technical Communication 59 ( 3 ) , 195 - 206 . [ 44 ] Steven Whi tt le , Lewis Turner , Maryam Al - Alami . Em Rundall , & Ben Th om . 2007 . Engendered penalties : Transgender and transsexual people ' s experiences of inequality and discrimination . Wetherby : Communities and Local Government Publications . [ 45 ] Caitlin Wolford - Clevenger , Christopher J . Cannon , Letitia Y . Flores , Philip N . Smith , & Gregory L . Stuart . 2017 . Suicide Risk Among Transgender People : A Prevalent Problem in Critical Need of Empirical and Th eoretical Research . Violence and Gender , 4 ( 3 ) , 69 - 72 . DOI : 10 . 1089 / vio . 2017 . 0006 .