Novel Roles of Formin mDia2 in Lamellipodia and Filopodia Formation in Motile Cells Changsong Yang 1 , Lubov Czech 2 , Silke Gerboth 3 , 4 , Shin - ichiro Kojima 2 , Giorgio Scita 3 , 4 , Tatyana Svitkina 1 * 1 Department of Biology , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , United States of America , 2 Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Feinberg School of Medicine , Northwestern University , Chicago , Illinois , United States of America , 3 The Italian Foundation for Cancer Research ( FIRC ) Institute for Molecular Oncology , Milan , Italy , 4 Department of Experimental Oncology , European Institute of Oncology , Milan , Italy Actin polymerization - driven protrusion of the leading edge is a key element of cell motility . The important actin nucleators formins and the Arp2 / 3 complex are believed to have nonoverlapping functions in inducing actin filament bundles in filopodia and dendritic networks in lamellipodia , respectively . We tested this idea by investigating the role of mDia2 formin in leading - edge protrusion by loss - of - function and gain - of - function approaches . Unexpectedly , mDia2 depletion by short interfering RNA ( siRNA ) severely inhibited lamellipodia . Structural analysis of the actin network in the few remaining lamellipodia suggested an mDia2 role in generation of long filaments . Consistently , constitutively active mDia2 ( D GBD - mDia2 ) induced accumulation of long actin filaments in lamellipodia and increased persistence of lamellipodial protrusion . Depletion of mDia2 also inhibited filopodia , whereas expression of D GBD - mDia2 promoted their formation . Correlative light and electron microscopy showed that D GBD - mDia2 – induced filopodia were formed from lamellipodial network through gradual convergence of long lamellipodial filaments into bundles . Efficient filopodia induction required mDia2 targeting to the membrane , likely through a scaffolding protein Abi1 . Furthermore , mDia2 and Abi1 interacted through the N - terminal regulatory sequences of mDia2 and the SH3 - containing Abi1 sequences . We propose that mDia2 plays an important role in formation of lamellipodia by nucleating and / or protecting from capping lamellipodial actin filaments , which subsequently exhibit high tendency to converge into filopodia . Citation : Yang C , Czech L , Gerboth S , Kojima S , Scita G , et al . ( 2007 ) Novel roles of formin mDia2 in lamellipodia and filopodia formation in motile cells . PLoS Biol 5 ( 11 ) : e317 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 Introduction Cell motility is a cyclic process consisting of protrusion of the leading edge followed by retraction of the rear . Actin ﬁlament polymerization provides a driving force for protru - sion , whereas the shape and dynamics of protrusive organ - elles depend on the spatial organization of underlying ﬁlaments and activity of accessory molecules . Spatially restricted and temporally controlled actin ﬁlament nuclea - tion is critical for generating membrane protrusions . Arp2 / 3 complex and formins are two major actin ﬁlament nucleators acting as convergent nodes of signaling pathways leading to initiation of actin - based motility ( reviewed in [ 1 , 2 ] . Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates branched actin ﬁlaments [ 3 , 4 ] . Conversely , formins nucleate single linear ﬁlaments , binding to and protecting from capping their growing barbed ends [ 5 – 7 ] . Therefore , Arp2 / 3 complex and formins are thought to have nonoverlapping functions in cells in the formation of dendritic networks and linear bundles , respectively . These distinct roles have been clearly demonstrated in yeast [ 8 ] , but appear to be conserved also in mammals . Thus , Arp2 / 3 complex is a key nucleator during lamellipodia extension [ 9 – 12 ] and endocytosis , where it functions downstream of WAVE [ 13 ] and N - WASP [ 14 ] Arp2 / 3 activators , respectively . Formins mDia1 and mDia2 , instead , play a role in stress - ﬁber formation [ 15 ] and ﬁlopodia [ 16 , 17 ] , respectively . Dictyostelium dDia2 is also both necessary and sufﬁcient for ﬁlopodia extension [ 18 ] . The concept of functional separation of Arp2 / 3 complex and formins during leading - edge protrusion to generate dendritic networks in lamellipodia and parallel bundles in ﬁlopodia , respectively , is challenged by the observation that ﬁlopodia may arise by reorganization of the lamellipodial network [ 10 , 19 , 20 ] . In this process , termed the convergent elongation , Arp2 / 3 - dependent nucleation was proposed to supply ﬁlaments for ﬁlopodial bundles . However , other studies point to a nonessential role of Arp2 / 3 complex in ﬁlopodia [ 12 , 21 ] favoring an alternative model whereby formin mDia2 is sufﬁcient to generate a ﬁlopodial bundle not necessarily associated with lamellipodia [ 17 , 22 ] . Thus , the mechanisms of ﬁlopodia formation and contribution of different actin nucleators to the generation of protrusions in mammalian cells are far from being elucidated . The domain organization of two related formins , mDia1 and mDia2 , and functions of individual domains are well characterized [ 23 , 24 ] . The functional module consisting of FH1 and FH2 domains is responsible for nucleation , barbed - end binding , and anticapping protection of formins in vitro [ 5 – 7 ] . In cells , the FH1FH2 domain of mDia1 can travel on polymerizing barbed ends over signiﬁcant distances until it Academic Editor : David Pellman , Dana - Farber Cancer Institute , United States of America Received February 20 , 7007 ; Accepted September 27 , 2007 ; Published November 27 , 2007 Copyright : (cid:2) 2007 Yang et al . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original author and source are credited . Abbreviations : Abi1KD , Abi1 - RNAi - knockdown cells ; GFP , green fluorescent protein ; RNAi , RNA interference ; siRNA , short interfering RNA ; WANP complex , WAVE / Abi1 / Nap1 / PIR121 / HSP300 complex * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : svitkina @ sas . upenn . edu PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2624 PLoS BIOLOGY stops at the cell membrane [ 25 ] . The N - terminal regulatory region upstream of the FH1FH2 module contains the GTPase - binding domain ( GBD ) , the Diaphanous inhibitory domain ( DID ) , the dimerization domain ( DD ) , and the coiled coil region ( CC ) , whereas the Diaphanous autoinhibitory domain ( DAD ) is present at the C - terminus of the molecule . Full - length Diaphanous - related formins are autoinhibited through intramolecular interaction between DID and DAD , which is thought to be relieved by speciﬁc small GTPases binding to GBD and displacing DAD from DID [ 26 ] . Disruption of this intramolecular interaction by deleting DAD or DID sequences generates constitutively active mutants of these formins [ 27 ] . In this study , aiming to characterize the mDia2 - dependent mechanism of ﬁlopodia formation , we investigated a role of mDia2 in the leading - edge protrusion by loss - of - function and gain - of - function approaches followed by detailed analyses of the phenotypes using light and electron microscopy ( EM ) and a combination of both . Unexpectedly , we found that mDia2 was implicated in lamellipodia formation , suggesting that the Arp2 / 3 complex , despite being essential , was not sufﬁcient for this function . Furthermore , the constitutively active mDia2 mutant efﬁciently induced ﬁlopodia , but these ﬁlopodia were formed , not from a focal spot away from lamellipodia , but by the gradual reorganization of lamellipodial ﬁlaments con - verging into ﬁlopodial bundles . We also found that speciﬁc targeting to the membrane was essential for mDia2 functions in protrusion . The targeting required a multifunctional scaffolding protein Abi1 , which also participates in other actin - remodeling events , including regulation of Arp2 / 3 - dependent nucleation [ 13 ] . Thus , two types of actin - based protrusions , lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , despite containing structurally distinct actin ﬁlament arrays , display consider - able dynamic relationship with each other and share mDia2 as a key molecular player . Results Knockdown of mDia2 by siRNA Inhibits Lamellipodia and Filopodia Mouse melanoma B16F1 cells form broad lamellipodia interspersed by a varying number of ﬁlopodia ( Figure 1A ) . During their lifetime , ﬁlopodial bundles might remain within lamellipodia and are often termed microspikes , or protrude beyond the leading edge , becoming bona ﬁde ﬁlopodia [ 19 ] . We determined the intracellular localization of endogenous mDia2 by immunostaining , and found that it concentrated at ﬁlopodial tips , but also was distinctly enriched in lamellipodia ( Figure 1A ) . Filopodial localization is consistent with pre - viously shown targeting of activated mDia2 [ 16 , 17 ] and Dictyostelium formin dDia2 [ 18 ] to ﬁlopodial tips , but lamellipodial enrichment was unexpected , and suggested that mDia2 might function in both types of protrusions . We investigated mDia2 functions in cells using the RNA interference ( RNAi ) approach . Transfection of B16F1 cells with mDia2 short interfering RNA ( siRNA ) signiﬁcantly depleted endogenous mDia2 , but not other proteins involved in actin - based protrusion ( Figure 1B ) , such as the p34 - Arc subunit of Arp2 / 3 complex , a ﬁlopodial actin - bundling protein fascin [ 28 ] , or VASP , an actin - binding protein localizing to ﬁlopodia tips , lamellipodial edges , and focal adhesions [ 29 ] . Depletion of mDia2 caused a signiﬁcant delay in cell spreading ( Figure 1C ) , cell migration ( Figure 1D ) , and a striking inhibition of both lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , as compared to control , scrambled siRNA - treated cells ( Figure 1E – 1H ; Videos S1 and S2 ) . Quantitative analysis of phalloi - din - stained cells ( Figure 2B ) revealed that less than 10 % of the cell periphery in mDia2 - depleted cells was occupied by actin - rich fringes morphologically resembling lamellipodia ( see Materials and Methods for quantiﬁcation criteria ) , as compared to approximately 50 % in control cells . Further - more , the presence of lamellipodia sharply declined with decreasing levels of mDia2 ( Figure S1 ) . Accordingly , the lamellipodial markers , p16 - Arc ( Arp2 / 3 subunit ) ( Figure 1H ) , capping protein , Abi1 , or VASP ( unpublished data ) were no longer enriched at the cell edge in mDia2 siRNA - treated cells . Thus , control cells had 53 . 1 6 11 . 1 % ( n ¼ 11 ) of their perimeter stained with p16 - Arc antibody , whereas mDia2 knockdown cells had only 4 . 4 6 1 . 6 % ( n ¼ 10 ) of Arp2 / 3 - positive edges . Notably , the remaining lamellipodia in mDia2 - depleted cells were abnormal morphologically , as they were very narrow in the direction perpendicular to the edge and often resembled small rufﬂes , whereas classical broad and ﬂat lamellipodia were not observed . These lamellipodia were also abnormal kinetically , as they quickly switched to retraction after transient protrusion ( Figure 1G ) , and their protrusion rate and persistence were signiﬁcantly reduced ( Figure 1E ) . Some ﬁlopodia also remained after transfection with mDia2 siRNA , but they appeared less rigid than normal , frequently bending and protruding in a curvy path . Although fascin was present in these ﬁlopodia , the number of fascin - containing structures was signiﬁcantly decreased ( Figure 1H ) . No obvious changes in stress - ﬁber levels or organization were detected ( Figure 2A ) . Depletion of mDia2 also caused accumulation of pigment granules , consistent with a role of mDia2 either in membrane trafﬁcking [ 30 , 31 ] or transcrip - tion [ 32 ] . The effects of mDia2 siRNA on lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2625 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion Author Summary Cell motility is a cyclic process , with the protrusion of the leading edge followed by retraction of the rear . Protrusion is driven by polymerization of actin filaments , with the spatial organization of these filaments determining the shape of the protrusions . For example , the spike - like filopodia contain bundles of long actin filaments , whereas the sheet - like lamellipodia contain branched actin networks . In biochemical assays , two stimulators of actin polymerization , Arp2 / 3 complex and formins , induce branched or individual filaments , respectively . In cells , Arp2 / 3 complex and formins also appear to be implicated in the formation of lamellipodia and filopodia , respectively . However , when we inves - tigated the role of mDia2 formin by functional approaches , we unexpectedly found that it is essential , not only for filopodia , but also for lamellipodia . Moreover , functions of mDia2 in lamellipodia and filopodia appeared intimately linked . We recorded behavior of cells by light microscopy and then used electron microscopy to study actin architecture in the same cells . We found that an activated form of mDia2 was first recruited to lamellipodia , where it induced many long , unbranched filaments , and from there , drove formation of filopodia through gradual convergence of these lamellipodial filaments into bundles . These data demonstrate a strong relationship between structurally different actin filament arrays and molecular machineries involved in their formation . PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2626 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion were speciﬁc because they could be rescued by RNAi - resistant full - length green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - mDia2 ( FL - mDia2 * ) ( Figures 1E , 2 , and S2 ) . Although GFP - FL - mDia2 * localized mainly cytoplasmically , as reported earlier for wild - type FL - mDia2 [ 27 ] , it was sometimes enriched in lamellipo - dia and at ﬁlopodial tips , especially in rescued cells ( Figure 2A ) , apparently because of less competition from the endogenous untagged protein . As additional speciﬁcity tests , we attempted to rescue the mDia2 knockdown phenotype by expressing proteins with potentially redundant activities , a closely related formin GFP - mDia1 and GFP - VASP [ 33 , 34 ] . However , neither of them produced a signiﬁcant rescue , suggesting nonredundant functions with mDia2 . To test a possibility that inhibition of lamellipodia involved down - regulation of Rac1 , we expressed constitutively active Rac1V12 in mDia2 knockdown cells . Although Rac1V12 increased lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia in control cells , it did not restore their amount in mDia2 siRNA - treated cells . Interestingly , FH1FH2 - mDia2 also did not rescue the pheno - type ( see below ) . Platinum replica EM was used to reveal speciﬁc defects caused by mDia2 depletion in the architecture of the protrusive organelles ( Figure 3 ) . Normal lamellipodia in B16F1 cells are ﬁlled with branched actin network consisting of combination of long and short ﬁlaments , whereas ﬁlopodia contain tight bundles of long actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 3A and 3B ) [ 4 , 19 ] . In mDia2 - knockdown cells , actin ﬁlament organ - ization at the cell periphery was severely disrupted ( Figure 3C – 3G ) . Consistent with light microscopic data , only a small fraction ( 8 . 7 6 8 . 9 % , n ¼ 5 ) of cell perimeter in these cells contained dendritic actin network characteristic for lamelli - podia . The rare remaining lamellipodia contained patches of dense network poorly connected to the rest of the cytoske - leton and formed by short branching actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 3F ) , while long ﬁlaments were not obvious there . This morphology suggests that Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin nucleation likely remains functional [ 4 ] , but anticapping protection and / or linear ﬁlament elongation was compromised [ 33 ] . Remain - ing ﬁlopodia , instead of a regular bundle of long , parallel ﬁlaments , contained less - uniform actin arrays ( Figure 3G ) . Collectively , these results reveal a novel role of formin mDia2 in the formation of lamellipodia , likely involving facilitated formation of long ﬁlaments , and corroborate its function in ﬁlopodial protrusion [ 16 – 18 ] by an alternative approach . Effects of Constitutively Active D GBD - mDia2 on Lamellipodia Structure and Dynamics In addition to loss - of - function analysis by RNAi , we also tested mDia2 functions by a gain - of - function approach using a constitutively active mDia2 mutant ( D GBD - mDia2 ) lacking GBD and a part of DID [ 15 , 16 ] . We reasoned that any unusual features induced by this mutant would point to speciﬁc molecular mechanisms of mDia2 involvement in cell pro - trusion . In B16F1 cells , GFP - D GBD - mDia2 localized to a subset of lamellipodia ( Figures 4A and 5 ) and to ﬁlopodial tips ( Figure 6 ) with relatively low cytoplasmic ﬂuorescence . This local - ization is consistent with the functional importance of the endogenous protein for these protrusions . Compared to endogenous mDia2 , D GBD - mDia2 had narrower distribution at the very edge of lamellipodia . D GBD - mDia2 – positive lamellipodia contained normal lamellipodial components , Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein , VASP , and Abi1 ( Figure 4A ) . However , at edges with high levels of D GBD - mDia2 , capping protein was not detected , possibly reﬂecting anti - capping activity of formins [ 7 ] . Conversely , the pattern of D GBD - mDia2 at the leading edge frequently correlated with that of Abi1 . However , Abi1 only partially colocalized with the endogenous mDia2 , which formed a broader band at the leading edge ( Figure S3 ) . An unusual feature of D GBD - mDia2 – positive lamellipodia was the presence of fascin ( Figure 4A ) , which is normally not detected in B16F1 lamellipodia [ 19 ] . Analysis of dynamic behavior of D GBD - positive lamellipodia revealed that their protrusion is remarkably persistent , whereas the rate of protrusion is slower than that of control cells ( Figure 4B ) . Correlative EM analysis D GBD - mDia2 – positive lamellipo - dia ( Figure 5 ) revealed that they had unusual abundance of long , parallel , unbranched actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 5D ) . Quantitative analysis of ﬁlament orientation revealed a narrow distribution of angles in D GBD - mDia2 – positive lamellipodia compared to very broad distribution in control lamellipodia ( Figure 5E – 5G ) . Enrichment in long ﬁlaments after expression of constitutively active mDia2 complements the siRNA data showing apparent ﬁlament shortening after mDia2 depletion . These long ﬁlaments frequently displayed apparently free ( not engaged in branch formation ) proximal ends ( Figure S4 ) , which are very rare in normal lamellipodia [ 35 ] , suggesting that active mDia2 might nucleate these linear Figure 1 . Depletion of mDia2 in B16F1 Cells by siRNA ( A ) Staining of endogenous mDia2 by antibody ( red ) and actin by phalloidin ( green ) . mDia2 is concentrated in lamellipodia and at filopodial tips ( see insets at right ) . ( B ) Western blotting of cell populations transfected with control or mDia2 siRNA . Tubulin is used as a loading control . Amount of mDia2 is decreased by approximately 60 % ; amounts of other proteins involved in protrusion do not decrease . ( C ) Inhibition of cell spreading by mDia2 siRNA . Projected cell area was determined 2 h after cell plating . Top and bottom of a box indicate 75th and 25th quartiles , respectively ; whiskers indicate 10th and 90th percentiles , respectively ; dot is the mean ; and the middle line is the median . An asterisk ( * ) indicates statistical significance ( p , 0 . 0001 , n ¼ 120 – 129 cells ) . ( D ) Inhibition of cell migration by mDia2 siRNA . An asterisk ( * ) indicates statistical significance ( p , 0 . 001 , n ¼ 34 – 35 cells ) . ( E ) Inhibition of lamellipodia protrusion by mDia2 siRNA . Analysis of kymographs ( top ) showed that rate and persistence of lamellipodia ( bottom ) are reduced in mDia2 siRNA - treated cells ( red ) compared to control siRNA ( blue ) . Coexpression of siRNA - resistant GFP - mDia2 * ( purple ) partially rescues the rate and fully rescues the persistence of mDia2 siRNA cells . Differences between datasets connected by brackets are statistically significant ( p , 0 . 001 , n ¼ 20 – 36 cells ) . Red arrows in kymographs indicate the direction and the scale of time and distance . ( F ) Cell transfected with mDia2 siRNA ( left ) , in contrast to control cell ( right ) , poorly forms lamellipodia . Numbered boxes indicate regions for the time - lapse sequences shown in ( G ) . ( G ) Frames from time - lapse sequence ( 25 s apart ) for boxed regions in ( F ) ( top , box 1 is shown ; middle , box 2 ; and bottom , box 3 ) . ( H ) Immunostaining of p16 - Arc subunit of Arp2 / 3 complex ( left ) and fascin ( right ) in control and mDia2 siRNA - treated cells . Both proteins lose their characteristic enrichment in lamellipodia and filopodia , respectively . mDia2 siRNA is shown in red . Scale bars indicate 10 l m in ( A ) ; 10 l m in ( F ) ; and 25 l m in ( H ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g001 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2627 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion Figure 2 . Rescue of mDia2 siRNA Phenotype ( A ) Phalloidin staining ( white ) in cells transfected , as indicated , with control or mDia2 siRNA ( red ) and cotransfected with siRNA - resistant GFP - FL - mDia2 * , GFP - mDia1 , GFP - Rac1V12 , GFP - VASP , or GFP - FH1FH2 - mDia2 ( green ) , as indicated . Lamellipodia formation is inhibited by mDia2 , but not by control PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2628 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion ﬁlaments within lamellipodia . However , D GBD - mDia2 – pos - itive lamellipodia also contained some branched ﬁlaments ( Figure S4 ) and Arp2 / 3 complex ( Figure 4A ) , suggesting that the lamellipodial network represents a mixture of linear and dendritic actin ﬁlament arrays . The atypical abundance of long , parallel ﬁlaments induced by constitutively active mDia2 might cause the peculiar recruitment of fascin . Thus , the gain - of - function approach showed that the constitutively active mDia2 mutant was recruited to lamelli - podia and induced structural reorganization of the lamelli - podial actin network by promoting formation of long ﬁlaments , as well as increased the persistence of lamellipodia protrusion . These results corroborate the ﬁndings of mDia2 knockdown experiments , which suggested mDia2 function in lamellipodia . Constitutively Active D GBD - mDia2 Induces Club - Like Filopodia Our ﬁndings of mDia2 involvement in lamellipodia formation apparently contrast with previous reports showing a role of mDia2 [ 16 , 17 ] and Dictyostelium dDia2 [ 18 ] in ﬁlopodia . However , we found that the lamellipodial local - ization of GFP - D GBD - mDia2 was transient and especially evident at early stages of transfection . At later times , D GBD - mDia2 induced abundant ﬁlopodia with D GBD - mDia2 local - izing at their tips ( Figure 6 ; Video S3 ) , consistent with other reports [ 16 – 18 ] . We noticed , however , that these ﬁlopodia frequently had an unusual club - like shape with a thick actin - rich distal domain on a thin stalk ( Figure 6A , 6C , and 6D ) . Nonetheless , they contained conventional ﬁlopodial markers : fascin , VASP , and myosin X [ 36 ] , albeit with a somewhat altered localization ( Figure 6A ) . Fascin was concentrated predominantly in thick distal parts of ﬁlopodia . VASP colocalized with D GBD - mDia2 at ﬁlopodial tips in some cells , but high levels of D GBD - mDia2 seemed to displace VASP from tips to the ﬁlopodial shafts , possibly reﬂecting VASP’s bundling ability [ 37 , 38 ] . Abi1 , which usually localizes to lamellipodial edges and ﬁlopodial tips [ 39 ] , was faint at the ﬁlopodial tips enriched in D GBD - mDia2 . Filopodia induced by D GBD - mDia2 frequently were very long , ﬂexible , not attached to the substratum , and occasion - ally appeared on the dorsal cell surface ( Figure S5 ) , resembling ﬁlopodia induced by a small GTPase Rif through mDia2 [ 17 ] . During protrusion , D GBD - mDia2 remained at ﬁlopodial tips ( Figure 6D ) , consistent with the formins’ ability to ride on elongating barbed ends [ 25 ] . The thick termini of ﬁlopodia moved forward , remaining approximately of the same length , suggesting actin ﬁlament treadmilling within these domains ( Figure 6D ) . Consistent with this idea , GFP - actin speckles moved retrogradely in D GBD - mDia2 – induced ﬁlopodia and disappeared upon or after exiting the thick terminal domains ( Figure 6F – 6H ; Video S4 ) . The protrusion rate of D GBD - mDia2 – positive ﬁlopodia was slightly lower than that of control ﬁlopodia ( Figure 6E ) . By EM analysis , D GBD - mDia2 – mediated ﬁlopodia con - tained actin bundles , which looked normal in their distal domains , but displayed informative differences in the proximal regions ( Figure 7 ) . In normal ﬁlopodia ( Figure 3A ) , ﬁlaments in their roots commonly splay apart , reﬂecting the convergent elongation process of ﬁlopodia formation , and frequently terminate at branch points in the surrounding network [ 19 ] . Conversely , many D GBD - mDia2 – induced ﬁlo - podia displayed tapered bundles at the rear , with numerous unbound proximal ends ( Figure 7A and 7B ) , which are predicted to be pointed ends based on their orientation . Since actin network is assembled predominantly at the leading edge and then treadmills backwards , undergoing little rearrangement except depolymerization , the structural organization of the network to some extent portrays its immediate history [ 40 ] . Therefore , tapered roots of D GBD - mDia2 – induced bundles suggest that these ﬁlaments were nucleated by D GBD - mDia2 and / or they were nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex , but then debranched and depolymerized from the pointed ends . Notably , some D GBD - mDia2 – induced ﬁlopodia contained bundles with splayed roots ( Figure 7A and 7C ) , and some ﬁlaments in these ﬁlopodia originated from a branch point ( Figure 7C ) , suggesting that Arp2 / 3 - nucleated ﬁlaments might contribute to bundle formation . Together , these results conﬁrm the previous observations that mDia2 plays a role in ﬁlopodia generation , and localizes to ﬁlopodial tips . We extend prior observations by showing that although ﬁlopodia induced by active mDia2 share many features with normal ﬁlopodia , they also display an abnormal abundance of prematurely terminated ﬁlaments in the proximal parts of ﬁlopodial bundles . D GBD - mDia2 – Induced Filopodia Are Formed from Lamellipodia We next asked whether mDia2 roles in lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia are related . Kinetic analysis of ﬁlopodia initiation showed that virtually all D GBD - mDia2 – induced ﬁlopodia formed from D GBD - mDia2 – positive lamellipodia ( Figure 8 ; Video S5 ) . In this pathway , a line of D GBD - mDia2 ﬂuores - cence at the lamellipodial leading edge gradually condensed into dots at the tips of newly formed ﬁlopodia ( Figure 8A ) , similar to VASP behavior in naturally occurring ﬁlopodia [ 19 ] . Full - length GFP - mDia2 displayed similar behavior ( Video S6 ) , although high cytoplasmic ﬂuorescence of this autoinhibited protein signiﬁcantly decreased contrast of the leading edge signal . Newly formed D GBD - mDia2 – induced ﬁlopodia might subsequently fuse with each other , generating larger ﬁlopodia and gradually acquiring a club - like shape ( Figure S5 ) . Some ﬁlopodia subsequently translocated to the dorsal surface of lamella ; the majority of dorsal protrusions were formed by this pathway ( Figure S5 ) . To understand the mechanism of lamellipodia - to - ﬁlopodia transition , we performed correlative EM for cells with known live history ( Figure 8B – 8J ; Video S7 – S9 ) . Figure 8 shows two examples of ﬁlopodia formed during live imaging . One ﬁlopodium began to form approximately 30 s before ﬁxation , siRNA , and can be rescued by GFP - FL - mDia2 * , but not by other proteins . Cyan lines mark examples of edges scored as lamellipodia during quantification shown in ( B ) . Insets in phalloidin channels show close - ups of cell edges scored as positive ( 1 ) of negative ( 2 ) for lamellipodia presence according to the criteria described in Materials and Methods . Inset in GFP - FL - mDia2 panel shows FL - mDia2 * at filopodial tips in another cell . ( B and C ) Quantification of lamellipodia ( B ) and filopodia ( C ) expression in conditions shown in ( A ) . Box - and - whisker plots are as in Figure 1 . All differences are statistically significant . n ¼ 21 – 38 cells . Scale bars indicate 10 l m . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g002 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2629 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion Figure 3 . EM of Protrusions in Control ( A and B ) and mDia2 - Depleted ( C – G ) B16F1 Cells ( A and B ) Overview of an edge ( A ) and enlargement of the boxed region ( B ) of untreated cell show dense actin filament network in lamellipodia and parallel bundles in filopodia . Filaments in filopodia roots splay apart and merge with the surrounding network ( A ) . Brackets in ( A ) mark a region analyzed in Figure 5E . ( C ) Overview of mDia2 - depleted cell . Boxes indicate the magnified regions shown in ( D ) and ( E ) . ( D and E ) Intermediate magnification of boxed regions in ( C ) . Boxes indicate the magnified regions shown in ( F ) and ( G ) . PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2630 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion as judged from condensation of GFP ﬂuorescence at the leading edge ( Figure 8D and 8E ) . In the corresponding EM image , this ﬁlopodium consisted of long ﬁlaments originating from a broad area at the base and coming together at the tip ( Figure 8H ) . Projection of the life history onto EM image revealed that ﬁlaments converged in parallel with condensa - tion of GFP ﬂuorescence ( see Figure 8 legend for detail ) , similar to normal ﬁlopodia [ 19 ] . The second example ( Figure 8F and 8G ) shows a slightly older ﬁlopodium formed from a line of GFP ﬂuorescence visible in the ﬁrst frame of the movie . By approximately 50 – 60 s before ﬁxation , the line gradually condensed into a dot , suggesting that the ﬁlopodial bundle was formed by that time . Subsequently , the dot moved approximately 1 l m as the ﬁlopodium protruded . In the corresponding EM image ( Figure 8I and 8J ) , the ﬁlopodium contained a spindle - shaped actin bundle that tapered both toward the front ( perhaps because of tighter ﬁlament bundling ) and toward the rear due to gradual termination of ﬁlaments . The projection of the ﬂuorescence history of this ﬁlopodium onto the EM image showed a sparse actin network proximally from the position of the leading edge at time 0 : 00 ( yellow line in Figure 8I ) . Such morphology might be explained by nucleation of a ﬁlament bundle by D GBD - mDia2 at a local spot in actin - poor region , followed by elongation of the bundle , as proposed [ 22 ] . However , in this case , we would see an emergence and gradual advance of a dot of D GBD - mDia2 ﬂuorescence in the time - lapse movie instead of a ﬂuorescent line converging into a dot ( Figure 8F ) . As we showed above ( see Figure 5 ) , the linear distribution of D GBD - mDia2 , as it appears at the 0 : 00 time point for this ﬁlopodium ( Figure 8F and 8I ) , always associates with dense lamellipodial network of long , aligned ﬁlaments . Thus , the tapered shape of the ﬁlopodium root among sparse actin network is more consistent with the alternative possibility that actin depolymerization eliminated much actin from the ﬁlopodium rear in parallel with the ﬁlopodium protrusion at the front . Correlative analysis of six cells imaged live for 90 – 120 s showed that all nascent ﬁlopodia ( 31 total ) emerged by condensation of linear lamellipodial ﬂuorescence . At EM level , 14 out of these 31 ﬁlopodia were similar in structure to the ﬁrst example in Figure 8 ; ﬁve were similar to the second example ; nine displayed an intermediate organization , having a fully formed distal bundle with well - preserved splayed ﬁlaments in the root ; they looked similar to the ﬁlopodium marked by an asterisk in Figure 7 ; and one ﬁlopodium contained converging ﬁlaments like in the ﬁrst example , but showed signiﬁcant actin depletion at the root , like in the second example . These data , collectively , indicate that induction of ﬁlopodia by active mDia2 temporally and mechanistically follows the mDia2 appearance in lamellipodia . Long , unbranched actin ﬁlaments induced by D GBD - mDia2 in the lamellipodial network seem to play an important role in this process by expressing a high tendency to converge into bundles , and leading to ﬁlopodia induction in association with pre - existing lamellipodia . mDia2 Is Specifically Recruited to the Leading Edge to Induce Protrusions FH1FH2 constructs of many formins are sufﬁcient to nucleate actin ﬁlaments and bind barbed ends [ 24 ] , whereas sequences upstream of this module are required for targeting of some formins [ 41 , 42 ] . Enrichment of D GBD - mDia2 at the leading edge and ﬁlopodial tips ( Figures 4 and 6 ) may be mediated simply by binding to barbed ends through the FH2 domain , or involve an additional targeting mechanism . We tested this idea using FH1FH2 - mDia2 mutant ( Figure 9 ) . GFP - FH1FH2 - mDia2 was not able to rescue the mDia2 siRNA phenotype ( Figure 2 ) and , when expressed in wild - type B16F1 cells , displayed different behavior as compared to D GBD - mDia2 ( Figure 9 ; Video S10 ) : ( 1 ) it induced fewer and shorter , evenly thin , but not club - shaped , ﬁlopodia ; ( 2 ) it localized mostly in the cytoplasm and poorly at ﬁlopodial tips ; and ( 3 ) , in contrast to D GBD - mDia2 , GFP - FH1FH2 - mDia2 was easily removed by detergent extraction ( Figure 9B ) . Truncation of the FH2 domain from the C - terminus or its complete removal from FH1FH2 - mDia2 abrogated ﬁlopo - dia - inducing ability and localization to ﬁlopodia tips ( Figure S6 ) . Thus , although mDia2 nucleating and barbed end - binding module FH1FH2 is required for and capable of tip localization and weak ﬁlopodia induction , additional motifs of D GBD - mDia2 are needed for robust mDia2 targeting to the leading edge and efﬁcient induction of ﬁlopodia . This is strengthened by the observation that an analogous mutant of mDia1 localized differently ( Figure S6 ) . Similar to previous reports [ 43 , 44 ] , active mDia1 displayed strong cytoplasmic ﬂuorescence with weak targeting to the edges . Abi1 Is Required for D GBD - mDia2 Targeting and Efficient Induction of Filopodia Searching for a molecular mechanism of mDia2 targeting , we concentrated on proteins displaying robust localization to the leading edge of lamellipodia . Ena / VASP proteins were likely not involved , as D GBD - mDia2 localized properly in Ena / VASP - deﬁcient MV D7 cells ( Figure S6 ) . Next , we considered the WAVE / Abi1 / Nap1 / PIR121 / HSP300 ( WANP ) complex [ 11 , 45 ] , a major activator of Arp2 / 3 complex in lamellipodia , because Abi1 [ 39 ] and WAVEs [ 46 ] localize robustly to the lamellipodial leading edge . Depletion of any member of WANP complex causes degradation of its other components [ 11 , 47 ] . Thus , we tested whether mDia2 would associates to any of the members of the WANP complex . Ectopically coexpressed GFP - FL - mDia2 and Abi1 ( Figure 10A ) , but not WAVE ( Figure 10B ) , Nap1 , or PIR121 ( unpublished data ) , readily coimmunoprecipitated . Further - more , recombinantly produced full - length Abi1 associated in vitro with FL - mDia2 ( Figure 10C ) . Finally , a C - terminal Abi1 fragment containing the SH3 domain was able to associate in in vitro binding assays with FL - mDia2 , D GBD - mDia2 , and an N - terminal fragment of mDia2 containing residues up to the beginning of the FH1 domain , but not with FH1FH2 - mDia2 or FH1 - mDia2 ( Figure 10D and 10E ) . These data map the Abi1 - interacting region on mDia2 to amino acids 258 – 518 within the N - terminal regulatory region ( part of DID þ DD þ ( F and G ) High magnification of boxed regions in ( E ) and ( D ) , respectively . Note overall inhibition of protrusions ( C – E ) and abnormal organization of remaining lamellipodia ( F ) and filopodia ( G ) . Scale bars indicate 1 l m in ( A ) , ( D ) , and ( E ) ; 0 . 2 l m in ( B ) , ( F ) , and ( G ) ; and 5 l m in ( C ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g003 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2631 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion Figure 4 . Lamellipodia of D GBD - mDia2 – Expressing B16F1 Cells ( A ) Distribution of GFP - D GBD - mDia2 ( red ) and indicated cytoskeletal proteins ( green ) detected by phalloidin ( Actin ) or immunostaining ( all others ) . D GBD - mDia2 – positive lamellipodia contain normal lamellipodial components : actin , Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein , VASP , Abi1 , and a filopodial marker , fascin . Scale bars indicate 2 . 5 l m . ( B ) Lamellipodia dynamics in control and D GBD - positive lamellipodia . Left : kymographs ; right : quantification of the rate and persistence of lamellipodial protrusion . D GBD - positive lamellipodia are slower , but remarkably persistent , as compared to control cells ( n ¼ 23 – 39 cells , p , 0 . 0001 ) . Red arrows in kymographs indicate the direction and the scale of time and distance . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g004 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2632 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion Figure 5 . Structural Organization of Lamellipodia in D GBD - mDia2 – Expressing Cells Correlative EM is used to unambiguously identify D GBD - mDia – positive regions . ( A ) Phase contrast image overlaid with the GFP - D GBD - mDia2 image in red . ( B ) Low - magnification EM image of the periphery of the same cell overlaid with GFP image in red . Boxes indicate the magnified regions shown in ( C ) and ( D ) . ( C and D ) Enlarged boxed regions from ( B ) . ( C ) D GBD - mDia2 – negative lamellipodium containing branching actin network . ( D ) Lamellipodium with continuous GFP fluorescence is dominated by densely packed , long parallel filaments . Box indicates a region analyzed in Figure 5F . Scale bars indicate 10 l m in ( A ) and in 0 . 5 l m ( C ) and ( D ) . PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2633 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion CC ) . Lack of interaction with FH1FH2 - mDia2 and FH1 - mDia2 argues against a possibility of nonspeciﬁc interaction between the proline - rich FH1 domain of mDia2 and SH3 of Abi1 . To assess the physiological relevance of this interaction , we used a previously characterized stable line of Abi1 - RNAi – interfered ( Abi1KD ) HeLa cells with approximately 90 % depletion of Abi1 ( Figure S7 ) , which fail to form lamellipodia in response to a variety of stimuli , but can spread and form ﬁlopodia [ 11 ] . We ﬁrst examined ﬁlopodia in Abi1KD cells quantitatively and by EM ( Figures 11 and S7 ) . Control HeLa cells formed a mixture of ﬁlopodia and small lamellipodia or rufﬂes , whereas Abi1KD cells lacked rufﬂes and displayed long ﬁlopodia ( Figures 11A and S7 ) . Since ﬁlopodial bundles are normally partially embedded into a lamellipodial actin network , inhibition of lamellipodia likely exposed these internal parts , leading to apparent elongation of ﬁlopodia . Despite having longer ﬁlopodia , Abi1KD cells had fewer ﬁlopodia per cell than control cells ( Figure 11A and 11D ) , indicating that Abi1 and / or its interacting partners , such as other members of WANP complex , may play a role in ﬁlopodia formation . Interestingly , despite almost complete absence of a lamellipodial dendritic network , EM analysis revealed multiple branched ﬁlaments in the roots of ﬁlopodia in Abi1KD cells ( Figure S7 ) , suggesting a preferential formation of ﬁlopodia at the sites with residual activity of Arp2 / 3 complex . We tested next whether the human ortholog of mDia2 ( DIAPH3 ) plays a role in ﬁlopodia formation in control and Abi1KD HeLa cells using both loss - of - function and gain - of - function approaches . Similar to B16F1 cells , DIAPH3 siRNA signiﬁcantly depleted DIAPH3 expression and impaired cell spreading and protrusive activity in control and Abi1KD HeLa cells ( Figure 11 ) . DIAPH3 depletion decreased ﬁlopodia length and number in Abi1KD HeLa cells , and inhibited rufﬂes and ﬁlopodia in control HeLa cells , conﬁrming in the human system that DIAPH3 is an important part of the mechanism of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia formation . Similar to B16F1 cells , expression of D GBD - mDia2 in HeLa cells induced long , robust ﬁlopodia ( Figure 12A and 12C ) . Interestingly , the number of ﬁlopodia decreased after D GBD - mDia2 expression ( Figure 11B ) , which might occur because of extensive fusion of neighboring ﬁlopodia , a well - known feature of ﬁlopodia dynamics [ 40 ] . In contrast , Abi1KD cells formed slender and signiﬁcantly shorter ﬁlopodia in the same conditions ( Figure 11A and 11C ) , whereas their number slightly , but signiﬁcantly , decreased compared to D GBD - mDia2 – expressing control cells ( Figure 12B ) . Furthermore , D GBD - mDia2 in Abi1KD cells localized cytoplasmically , with only faint signal at the ﬁlopodial tips , which was more sensitive to detergent extraction than in control HeLa cells ( Figure 12D ) . Thus , the D GBD - mDia2 in Abi1KD cells , similar to FH1FH2 - mDia2 in B16F1 cells , was deﬁcient in robust targeting to the edge and efﬁcient induction of ﬁlopodia , suggesting a role of Abi1 in D GBD - mDia2 targeting . Discussion In this study , by combination of loss - of - function ( RNAi ) and gain - of - function ( constitutively active mutant ) ap - proaches , we investigated a role of mDia2 formin in the actin - based protrusion in motile cells . Although our original goal was to characterize the mechanism of mDia2 - dependent ﬁlopodia formation , we unexpectedly found that mDia2 is important for lamellipodial protrusion and induces ﬁlopodia in association with lamellipodia . Based on our data , we propose a model suggesting that mDia2 is recruited to the lamellipodial leading edge in an Abi1 - dependent manner , where it nucleates new ﬁlaments and / or maintains ﬁlament elongation by protecting barbed ends from capping . In the course of elongation , lamellipodial ﬁlaments converge and become bundled , generating ﬁlopodia . Targeting of mDia2 to the Leading Edge We found that mDia2 can be recruited to the leading edge by at least two mechanisms , one of which relies on binding of the mDia2 FH1FH2 module to barbed ends and another on N - terminal mDia2 sequences interacting with Abi1 . The FH1FH2 module contributes to localization to ﬁlopodial tips by binding to and riding on elongating barbed ends , which accumulate at the membrane after encountering the boun - dary conditions [ 25 ] . However , FH1FH2 - mDia2 was not sufﬁcient to fully restore formin’s functions in mDia2 - interferred cells and to efﬁciently induce ﬁlopodia , likely reﬂecting inferior membrane targeting of FH1FH2 - mDia2 as compared to D GBD - mDia2 or full - length mDia2 . In the second mechanism , binding of N - terminal regulatory sequen - ces of mDia2 to Abi1 provides a potential additional surface for mDia2 proper localization to leading edges . This is also consistent with the observation that similar regions were previously shown to control targeting of other formins [ 41 , 42 ] . It is also possible that Abi1 not only recruits mDia2 to the membrane , but also participates in its regulation , but we currently do not have data to evaluate this idea . The majority of Abi1 has been shown to be engaged in complex with WAVE , Nap1 , and PIR121 [ 11 , 45 , 48 ] . However , we did not detect interaction of mDia2 with WAVE , Nap1 , or PIR121 , indicating that mDia2 and Abi1 may form a distinct macromolecular signaling unit with respect to the WANP complex . Accordingly , only a minor fraction of Abi1 interacted with mDia2 in coimmunoprecipitation experi - ments . The ability of Abi1 to act as a scaffolding molecule driving the formation of additional signaling units , such as those containing N - WASP [ 14 ] or Eps8 [ 49 , 50 ] , has been previously observed . The Abi1 - mDia2 assembly adds to the versatility of Abi1 , which by entering distinct complexes is capable of controlling diverse processes and / or coordinating related activities , such as the formation of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia protrusions reported here . The precise regulatory events governing the relationship between these units remain to be deﬁned and represent one of the challenges for future investigation . ( E – G ) Actin filament orientation in control and D GBD - mDia2 – positive lamellipodia . ( E and F ) Plots of radial intensity versus angle ( blue ) of Fourier transforms generated from the D GBD - mDia2 – positive lamellipodium in the box in ( D ) ( E ) , and from the control lamellipodium indicated by brackets in Figure 3A ( F ) . Standard deviation ( r ) of Gaussian fits ( red ) , which is used as a parameter of mutual filament orientation , is shown in respective plots . ( G ) Distributions of r for D GBD - mDia2 - positive and control lamellipodia are significantly different ( p , 0 . 0001 ; n ¼ 8 – 9 cells ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g005 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2634 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion Figure 6 . Filopodia Induction by D GBD - mDia2 ( A ) Cytoskeletal proteins in D GBD - induced filopodia . GFP - , YFP - , or mRFP1 - D GBD - mDia2 ( red ) - induced filopodia contain filopodial markers , actin , fascin , VASP , and myosin X , but Abi1 is not enriched there . Fascin , which normally localizes throughout the filopodia , is present only in thick distal domains . VASP localizes to filopodia tips ( panel CFP - VASP ) or shafts ( VASP ) in cells expressing low and high levels of D GBD - mDia2 , respectively . Myosin X at the filopodial tips either colocalizes with or is more distal than GFP - D GBD - mDia2 . Indicated proteins were visualized by coexpressing fusion proteins ( panels CFP - VASP and GFP - myosin X ) , phalloidin staining ( Actin ) , or immunostaining ( all others ) . ( B ) Control B16F1 cell contains relatively short filopodia partially or completely embedded into lamellipodia . Arrow indicates a filopodium shown in ( D ) . ( C ) Cell expressing GFP - D GBD - mDia2 has long , curvy filopodia with D GBD - mDia2 at their tips . GFP fluorescence alone ( left ) and phase overlaid with GFP image in red ( right ) . Arrow indicates a filopodium shown in ( D ) . ( D ) Filopodia dynamics . Frames from time - lapse sequences showing protrusion of control filopodium ( top ) and D GBD - mDia2 – induced club - like filopodium ( bottom ) indicated by arrows in ( B ) and ( C ) , respectively . Time shown in minutes : seconds . ( E ) Protrusion rates of control ( n ¼ 48 ) and D GBD - mDia2 – induced ( n ¼ 62 ) filopodia . Box - and - whisker plots are as in Figure 1 . The difference is statistically significant at p , 0 . 001 . PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2635 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion Lamellipodia Protrusion Speciﬁc targeting of proteins is a common way to conﬁne the protein activity to a certain area . Therefore , mDia2 targeting to lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia points to an idea that mDia2 may function there . Although mDia2 9 s role in ﬁlopodia is expected [ 16 , 17 ] , the lamellipodial function contrasts with the current belief that formins and Arp2 / 3 complex are responsible for different actin structures . Two complementary sets of data in our study suggest that mDia2 is an important player in lamellipodial protrusion . First , mDia2 ( F – H ) Dynamics of GFP - actin in mRFP - D GBD - mDia2 – expressing cell . Overview ( F ) shows filopodia having actin ( green ) enriched in distal segments and mRFP - D GBD - mDia2 ( red ) localizing at their tips . Boxed filopodium is enlarged at right . Time - lapse sequence ( G ) and kymograph ( H ) of the boxedfilopodium from ( F ) shows retrograde movement and disappearance of actin speckles ( arrowheads ) while the filopodium protrudes . Scale bars indicate 2 . 5 l m in ( A ) ; 10 l m in ( B ) and ( C ) ; 1 l m in ( D ) ; or 2 . 5 l m in ( F ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g006 Figure 7 . EM of D GBD - mDia2 – Positive Filopodia ( A ) Overview of a peripheral region of D GBD - expressing cell . Arrows point to filopodia enlarged in insets . ( B ) Club - like filopodium induced by D GBD - mDia2 . Numerous filaments present in the thick terminal bundles are gradually lost as the bundle tapers towards the rear ( bottom of the image ) . Boxed region in left panel is enlarged at right , and unbound filament ends are marked by arrows . ( C ) Filopodium in D GBD - mDia2 – expressing cell contains filaments originating from branch points ( lower insets , wide arrows ) and filaments having unbound ‘‘ pointed ’’ ends ( upper inset , narrow arrows ) . Scale bars indicate 0 . 5 l m in ( A ) ; 0 . 2 l m on ( B ) ; or 0 . 1 l m in ( C ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g007 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2636 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion Figure 8 . Initiation of D GBD - mDia2 – Induced Filopodia in B16F1 Cells ( A ) Time - lapse sequence shows how linear lamellipodial distribution of GFP D GBD - mDia2 transforms into a series of dots . Time is shown in minutes : seconds . ( B – J ) Correlative EM of nascent D GBD - mDia2 – induced filopodia . ( B ) Phase contrast of D GBD - mDia2 – expressing cell overlaid with GFP image in red ( left ) and frames from live GFP sequence including an image after extraction ( Ext ) ( right ) . Most fluorescence remains after extraction . ( C ) EM overview of the periphery of the cell shown in ( B ) overlaid with the GFP image taken after extraction ( red ) . Boxes indicate regions shown in ( D ) and ( E ) ( left ) and in ( F ) and ( G ) ( right ) . ( D – G ) GFP ( D ) and ( F ) and phase overlaid with GFP in red ( E ) and ( G ) sequences showing formation of nascent filopodia . In both cases , GFP dots at the tips of filopodia ( arrows ) were formed by condensation of linear lamellipodial fluorescence ( brackets ) . ( H – J ) EM of nascent filopodia shown in ( D ) and ( E ) ( [ H ] ) or in ( F ) and ( G ) ( [ I ] and [ J ] ) . Colors in ( H ) and ( I ) represent projected GFP images from corresponding regions taken at those time points : yellow , 0 : 00 ; red , 0 : 50 ; and green , 1 : 30 . Since D GBD - mDia2 is dynamically associated with the advancing cell edge , its localization marks the position of the cell edge at the respective time point . Therefore , only structures behind the color line PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2637 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion inhibition by siRNA severely impaired lamellipodia and reduced long ﬁlaments in the remaining lamellipodial network . Second , constitutively active D GBD - mDia2 , con - versely , induced numerous long ﬁlaments in lamellipodia . Similar complementarity was observed regarding the persis - tence of lamellipodia protrusion , which decreased after mDia2 depletion and increased after expression of the constitutively active mutant . The lamellipodial function seems speciﬁc for mDia2 ; other formins , which were supposedly present in knockdown cells , were not sufﬁcient . Moreover , overexpression of a related formin , mDia1 , did not rescue lamellipodia formation . Interestingly , 3T3 cells lacking mDia2 [ 15 ] still make lamellipodia . We found , however , that 3T3 cells express another related formin , mDia3 , which is absent in B16F1 cells ( unpublished data ) , raising a possibility that mDia3 may be partially redundant with mDia2 . Biochemical activities of mDia2 suggest that it may contribute to lamellipodia formation through nucleation and / or anticapping protection of actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 13A ) . Our D GBD - mDia2 data are consistent with both possibilities . Thus , high frequency of linear ﬁlaments with unlinked ‘‘ pointed ’’ ends , and fast depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments from the rear ( see Figure 8 ) are consistent with formin , but not with Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation . The anticapping activity of mDia2 is also employed during lamellipodia formation . Indeed , the dissociation of mDia2 from barbed ends is very slow , at least in vitro [ 51 ] , suggesting that it would protect the nucleated ﬁlaments from capping for long time . In addition to this consideration , we found that ( 1 ) capping protein was diminished in D GBD - mDia2 – rich lamellipodial regions ; ( 2 ) D GBD - mDia2 enrichment at the leading edge correlated with the presence of long actin ﬁlaments in EM images ; and ( 3 ) mDia2 - depleted lamellipodia contained very short branched ﬁlaments . The latter observation also suggests that mDia2 may protect from capping branched ﬁlaments , apparently nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex . The ability of D GBD - mDia2 to displace VASP from barbed ends ( Figures 6A and S6 ) is also consistent with this idea . Notably , long unbranched ﬁlaments may also form in the course of debranching of Arp2 / 3 - nucleated and mDia2 - protected ﬁla - ments without nucleation by D GBD - mDia2 . Importantly , lamellipodial ﬁlaments nucleated and / or protected from capping by mDia2 may be responsible for the presence of long ﬁlaments [ 52 ] , and two kinetically distinct actin subpopulations in lamellipodia [ 53 ] noted earlier . It is unclear why mDia2 has such a signiﬁcant role in lamellipodial protrusion , considering the well - established involvement of Arp2 / 3 complex in this process [ 1 ] . One possibility is that mDia2 - nucleated ﬁlaments may help to initiate lamellipodia by nucleating ‘‘ mother ’’ ﬁlaments , which are required to Arp2 / 3 - dependent nucleation . Additionally , mDia2 may be a better ‘‘ device , ’’ compared to VASP , for example , to maintain fast and processive barbed - end growth and thus to ensure persistent protrusion . Long ﬁlaments induced by mDia2 in lamellipodia may also provide better connection of lamellipodia to the rest of the cytoskeleton . In any case , our results suggest that two different actin nucleators , Arp2 / 3 complex and mDia2 , jointly contribute to generation of lamellipodia . Filopodia Protrusion A role of mDia2 in ﬁlopodia formation in mammalian cells [ 16 , 17 ] and of dDia2 in Dictyostelium was reported [ 18 ] , but the mechanism of formin - mediated ﬁlopodia induction has not been fully investigated . The previous model suggested that mDia2 initiates ﬁlopodia from a focal spot not necessarily associated with lamellipodia [ 17 , 22 ] , thus putting this mechanism at an apparent conﬂict with the convergent elongation model [ 19 ] . In this study , we provide evidence to solve this contradiction . By investigating the spatiokinetic mechanism underlying ﬁlopodia initiation by active mDia2 , we found that , in our experimental system , lamellipodia are a highly preferred site for ﬁlopodia initiation , although subsequently , ﬁlopodia may lose association with lamellipo - dia , for example , by moving to the dorsal surface . However , we cannot exclude a possibility that in other experimental systems or conditions [ 12 , 54 ] , formins may nucleate actin bundles from focal spots without association with lamellipo - dia or other dendritic arrays . The overall process of ﬁlopodia initiation by mDia2 was very similar to that described for naturally emerging ﬁlopodia [ 19 ] and involved gradual convergence of lamellipodial ﬁlaments ( Figure 13B ) . These results show that the convergent elongation mechanism is applicable to formin - induced ﬁlaments . Importantly , FL - mDia2 displayed similar conver - gence of lamellipodial ﬂuorescence into dots , as D GBD - mDia2 , suggesting that convergence behavior is not entirely due to excessive activity of D GBD - mDia2 . Initiation of ﬁlopodia by D GBD - mDia2 was very efﬁcient , whereas the lamellipodia from which the ﬁlopodia arose were quite transient . This can be explained by the favorable combina - tion of biochemical activities in mDia2 , which may drive the efﬁcient transformation of lamellipodia into ﬁlopodia , not only by nucleating and elongating ﬁlaments , but also by cross - linking them [ 55 ] and thus promoting the initiation of ﬁlament convergence . A downside of the excessive activity of D GBD - mDia2 is that ﬁlopodia acquired an abnormal club - like shape , in which the majority of ﬁlaments did not extend all the way to the cell body . Based on the known mechanism of formin - mediated nucleation and our data obtained by correlative light microscopy and EM ( Figure 8 ) , and by observing GFP - actin dynamics ( Figure 6 ) , we interpret this phenotype as fast depolymerization of mDia2 - nucleated ﬁlaments from unprotected pointed ends . Because of formation of atypical club - like ﬁlopodia , we suppose that D GBD - mDia2 does not fully recapitulate the physiological pathway of ﬁlopodia formation . Based on the structural data , we previously proposed that Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates ﬁlaments for ﬁlopodial bundles [ 19 ] . We have conﬁrmed this idea by a functional siRNA approach showing existed at that time , and structures in front of the line were formed later . In ( H ) , D GBD - mDia2 fluorescence at the 0 : 00 time point ( yellow ) projects to a region with unbundled filaments behind it ; subsequently , filaments begin to converge , and a partially condensed fluorescence ( red , 0 : 50 ) projects to partially bundled filaments ; by the end of the sequence , when GFP condenses into a dot ( green ) , a bundle is formed . In ( I ) , line of D GBD - mDia2 in the first frame ( yellow ) projects to a region with sparse actin filaments , possibly due to network disassembly ( see text ) . Scale bars indicate 5 l m in ( A ) and ( B ) ; 1 l m in ( C ) ; or 0 . 5 l m in ( H – J ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g008 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2638 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion that Arp2 / 3 depletion inhibits ﬁlopodia ( F . Korobova and T . Svitkina , unpublished data . These two sets of data together suggest that Arp2 / 3 complex and mDia2 may jointly contrib - ute to ﬁlopodia formation . In such case , one would expect that the balanced activities of these two nucleators are important for the normal ﬁlopodial shape and functions , whereas any imbalance will likely lead to aberrant ﬁlopodia . Club - like ﬁlopodia induced by constitutive activation of mDia2 may serve as an illustration for this contention . Abnormal ﬁlopodia were also formed after depletion of mDia2 . However , the relative roles of formins and Arp2 / 3 complex in ﬁlopodia await further investigation . In summary , we have shown that mDia2 plays a role in formation of both lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia . However , these roles are not separate , but related to each other ; mDia2 ﬁrst participates in lamellipodia formation and then induces ﬁlopodia from lamellipodia . A most likely scenario is that mDia2 - nucleated actin ﬁlaments and / or ﬁlaments nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and protected by mDia2 are initially dispersed in the lamellipodial network , and subsequently , they elongate persistently and gradually converge , eventually segregating themselves into ﬁlopodial bundles . Although regulation of actin dynamics is the most straightforward way to explain how mDia2 may function in protrusion , we cannot exclude a possibility that other mDia2 activities , such as regulation of microtubule dynamics [ 56 ] , membrane trafﬁcking [ 30 , 31 ] , surface blebbing [ 57 ] , or transcription [ 32 ] , also contribute to generation of observed phenotypes . Materials and Methods Reagents . Plasmids . Full length mDia2 in a Bluescript cloning vector ( Stratagene ) and pEFm - EGFP - D GBD - mDia2 ( amino acids [ aa ] 258 – 1 , 171 ) [ 15 ] were gifts of A . Alberts ( Van Andel Research Institute ) . The mRFP1 - D GBD - mDia2 construct was prepared by substituting EGFP with mRFP1 [ 58 ] , which is a gift from R . Tsien ( University of California San Diego ) . Full - length mDia2 was cloned into pEGFP - C1 vector ( Clontech ) . DNA fragments for FH1 ( aa 519 – 600 ) , trFH1FH2 ( aa 519 – 909 ) , FH1FH2 ( aa 519 - 1007 ) , and NT - mDia2 ( aa 1 – 550 ) were ampliﬁed by PCR , cloned into pEGFP - C1 vector , and conﬁrmed by sequencing . EGFP - VASP was obtained from F . Gertler ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology [ MIT ] ) and cloned into pECFP - C1 vector ( Clontech ) ; myosin X [ 36 ] from R . Cheney ( University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill ) ; and full length mDia1 and D N2 - mDia1 [ 44 ] from S . Narumiya ( Kyoto University ) . Antibodies . The following polyclonal antibodies were obtained as gifts : mDia2 from A . Alberts [ 15 ] and H . Higgs ( Dartmouth Medical School ) ; CP b 2 C terminus ( R26 ) from D . Schafer ( University of Virginia ) ; Arp3 from T . Uruno ( Holland Laboratory ) ; coﬁlin from J . Condeelis ( Albert Einstein College of Medicine ) ; and VASP from F . Gertler ( MIT ) . Antibody against Abi1 was previously described [ 59 ] . The following antibodies were from commercial sources : fascin ( DAKO ) , a - tubulin ( Sigma ) , cortactin 411F ( Upstate ) , and secondary antibodies ( Molecular Probes or Jackson Laboratories ) . All other reagents were from Sigma unless indicated otherwise . siRNA . siRNA for mDia2 coding region ( 5 9 - ataagagagcagtatttcaaa - 3 9 ) and control siRNAs ( 5 9 - aagaaatagggaaggtggaac - 3 9 and 5 9 - aaattta - caggacttcagtca - 3 9 ) were obtained from Dharmacon , and siRNA for DIAPH3 coding region ( 5 9 - aaccttcggatttaaccttag - 3 9 ) was from Am - bion . siRNAs were Cy3 - labeled using a Silencer siRNA labeling kit ( Ambion ) and used at 20 nM concentration . The efﬁciency of siRNA transfection was approximately 90 % . Effects of siRNA were analyzed 2 to 3 d post - transfection . For rescue experiments , silent mutations were introduced into siRNA - targeted region of GFP - mDia2 ( 5 9 - ataagagaAcagtaCttcaaa - 3 9 ) using the Quikchange site - directed muta - genesis kit II ( Stratagene ) . Cell culture and microscopy . B16F1 mouse melanoma cells [ 19 ] , HeLa cells , and Abi1KD HeLa cells [ 11 ] were cultured as described . Transient transfection of DNA and siRNA was performed using Fugene6 or Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) , respectively . Lipofect - amine 2000 was used for cotransfection of siRNA and DNA . Light microscopy was performed using Eclipse TE2000 - U inverted micro - scope ( Nikon ) equipped with Planapo 100 3 1 . 3 NA or 20 3 0 . 75 objectives and Cascade 512B CCD camera ( Photometrics ) driven by Metamorph imaging software ( Molecular Devices ) . For live - cell imaging , cells were transferred into phenol red – free L - 15 or DMEM medium ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % FBS and kept on the microscope stage at 35 8 C during observation . Samples for platinum replica EM were processed as described [ 60 ] and analyzed using JEOL 1200EX transmission electron microscope operated at 120 kV . Cells expressing D GBD - mDia2 for EM analysis were identiﬁed by correlative EM or isolated by FACS . Immunostain - ing was performed after cell extraction for 5 min at room temper - ature with 1 % Triton X - 100 in PEM buffer ( 100 mM PIPES - KOH [ pH 6 . 9 ] 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA ) containing 2 % polyetheleneglycol ( MW 35 , 000 ) and 2 l M phalloidin , followed by ﬁxation with 0 . 2 % Figure 9 . Targeting of mDia2 to the Leading Edge ( A ) GFP - FH1FH2 - mDia2 in B16F1 cells is not efficiently targeted to the membrane and weakly induces filopodia . GFP fluorescence ( top ) and F - actin ( middle ) are enriched throughout the cell . Boxed region is enlarged at right . Contrast enhancement shows some FH1FH2 - mDia2 at the tips of filopodia . ( B ) FH1FH2 - mDia2 , in contrast to D GBD - mDia2 , is not anchored to the cytoskeleton . Cells expressing GFP - FH1FH2 - mDia2 ( top ) or D GBD - mDia2 ( bottom ) are shown live ( left ) and detergent - extracted ( right ) after identical image processing . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g009 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2639 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion Figure 10 . mDia2 Interacts with Abi1 ( A ) mDia2 and Abi1 coimmunoprecipitate . Total cellular lysates ( 1 mg ) of 293T cells cotransfected with GFP - FL - mDia2 and Abi1 , alone or in combination , were immunoprecipitated with an anti - Abi1 antibody . Lysates ( 20 l g ) and immunoprecipitates ( IP ) were immunoblotted ( IB ) with the indicated antibodies . Slower migrating Abi1 bands reflect hyperphosphorylation associated with ectopic expression of Abi1 [ 11 , 49 ] . ( B ) mDia2 and WAVE2 do not coimmunoprecipitate . Total cellular lysates ( 1 mg ) of 293T cells cotransfected with GFP - FL - mDia2 , WAVE2 , and Abi1 , alone or in combination , were immunoprecipitated with an anti - WAVE2 antibody . Lysates ( 20 l g ) and immunoprecipitates ( IP ) were immunoblotted ( IB ) with the indicated antibodies . ( C ) Recombinant full - length Abi1 binds FL - mDia2 . Total cellular lysates ( 1 mg ) of 293T cells , untransfected ( control ) or transfected with GFP - FL - mDia2 ( mDia2 ) , were incubated with 1 . 5 l M of immobilized GST - Abi1 or GST . Lysates ( 20 l g ) and bound proteins were resolved by SDS - PAGE , stained with Ponceau S to detect GST - fusion proteins , and immunoblotted ( IB ) with the indicated antibodies . ( D ) The SH3 domain - containing fragment of Abi1 mediates the interaction with mDia2 . Total cellular lysates ( 1 mg ) of 293T cells , untransfected or PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2640 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion glutaraldehyde and quenching with NaBH 4 . Texas red phalloidin ( 0 . 033 l M ; Molecular Probes ) was used for actin staining . Fascin staining was performed after methanol ﬁxation of extracted cells . For staining with VASP or mDia2 antibody , cells were extracted / ﬁxed by a mixture of 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde and 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in PEM buffer for 20 min . To evaluate cytoskeletal association of mDia2 constructs , cells were ﬁrst imaged live , then culture medium was replaced by the extraction solution , the same as used for immunos - taining , and another image was acquired approximately 2 min later . Image analysis and statistics . All morphometric measurements were done using MetaMorph Imaging software ( Molecular Devices ) unless stated otherwise . Graphs and statistical analysis were done using SigmaPlot software . Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by the Student t - test . transfected with GFP - FL - mDia2 ( FL ) , GFP - FH1 - mDia2 ( FH1 ) , GFP - FH1FH2 - mDia2 ( FH1FH2 ) , GFP - D GBD - mDia2 ( D GBD ) , or GFP - N - terminal fragment of mDia2 ( NT ) were incubated with 1 . 5 l M immobilized GST - Abi1 - SH3 ( SH3 - Abi1 ; aa 330 – 480 ) or GST . Lysates ( 20 l g ) and bound proteins were resolved by SDS - PAGE , stained with Ponceau S to detect GST - fusion proteins and immunoblotted ( IB ) with the indicated antibodies . Molecular weight markers in ( C ) and ( D ) are shown in blue . ( E ) Summary of binding activities of mDia2 constructs to SH3 - Abi1 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g010 Figure 11 . Roles of Abi1 and DIAPH3 in Protrusion ( A ) Inhibition of protrusions by DIAPH3 siRNA ( phalloidin staining ) . Boxed regions are shown enlarged at the bottom of the panel . ( B ) Western blot of Abi1KD and control HeLa cells after transfection with control or DIAPH3 siRNA . Abi1KD cells express 75 % DIAPH3 compared to control HeLa cells . DIAPH3 siRNA depleted 80 % and 55 % of DIAPH3 in control and Abi1KD cells , respectively . ( C ) Inhibition of spreading of control and Abi1KD cells by DIAPH3 siRNA . Projected cell area is determined 2 h after cell plating . Differences between datasets connected by brackets are statistically significant ( p , 0 . 0001 , n ¼ 130 – 252 cells ) . ( D ) and ( E ) Filopodia number ( D ) and length ( E ) in Abi1KD and control cells after transfection with control or DIAPH3 siRNA . Box - and - whisker plots are as in Figure 1 . Differences between datasets connected by brackets are statistically significant ( p , 0 . 001 , n ¼ 265 – 1 , 102 filopodia from 11 – 31 cells ) . Scale bars indicate 10 l m . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g011 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2641 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion Quantiﬁcation of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia were performed as described [ 20 ] . Brieﬂy , MetaMorph line function was used to trace and measure the whole - cell perimeter and the cell perimeter with adjacent lamellipodia ( an actin - rich fringe with ﬂuorescence intensity gradually declining with the distance from the edge ) on ﬁxed phalloidin - stained cells . The fraction of the cell perimeter occupied by lamellipodia was used as a parameter for quantiﬁcation . For quantiﬁcation purposes , ﬁlopodia were deﬁned as actin - rich ﬁnger - like protrusions crossing the cell edge and having ﬂuorescence intensity at least 1 . 2 - fold above background . Quantiﬁcation was performed using a blind experimental procedure by an uninformed observer on coded samples . Control and experimentally treated cells in mixed populations were measured using phalloidin channel only . After numbers were assigned to individual cells , the phalloidin images were combined with other channels showing siRNA or a rescue construct , the identity of samples was decoded , and numbers were entered into respective columns of a spread sheet for statistical analysis . For spreading assays , the projected cell area was measured 2 h after plating . For cell migration analysis , cells transfected with mDia2 siRNA ( Cy3 labeled ) or control siRNA ( nonlabeled ) were co - cultured in 35 - mm dishes and imaged 36 – 48 h post - transfection ( 4 h after plating ) . Phase contrast time - lapse sequences were acquired with 5 - min intervals for 6 h using a 4 3 objective . Fluorescence images to identify siRNA - transfected cells were acquired immediately before and after each movie . Cell positions were recorded every ten frames using Track Object tool in MetaMorph . An average instantaneous rate was calculated for each cell , and then the mean speed of cell migration was determined for each group of cells . To analyze the lamellipodial dynamics , time - lapse sequences were acquired with 3 - s intervals for 10 min using a 100 3 objective . Kymographs were generated along straight lines drawn in the direction of protrusion . Rates of lamellipodia protrusion were determined based on slopes produced by advancing leading edges . Persistence corresponds to time intervals during which individual protrusions occurred . The relative mDia2 levels in control and mDia2 siRNA - treated cells were determined by immunostaining after ﬁxation with paraformaldehyde and permeabilization with Triton X - 100 . Integrated ﬂuorescence Figure 12 . Phenotype of D GBD - mDia2 Expression in Abi1KD Cells ( A ) GFP - D GBD - mDia2 in Abi1KD cells ( top row ) is not efficiently targeted to the membrane and weakly induces filopodia , as compared to control HeLa cells ( bottom row ) . GFP is shown in the left column and phase contrast overlaid with GFP in red in the middle column . Filopodia indicated by arrows are identically enlarged ( approximately 3 - fold ) in insets at right . ( B and C ) Filopodia number ( B ) and length ( C ) in Abi1KD and control HeLa cells after transfection with D GBD - mDia2 . Box - and - whisker plots are as in Figure 1 . Differences between datasets connected by brackets are statistically significant ( p , 0 . 001 , n ¼ 265 – 1 , 102 filopodia from 11 – 31 cells ) . ( D ) GFP - D GBD - mDia2 in Abi1KD cells is more sensitive to detergent extraction than in control HeLa cells . Abi1KD ( top ) or control ( bottom ) cells expressing GFP - D GBD - mDia2 are shown live ( left ) or detergent - extracted ( middle and right ) after identical image processing ( middle ) or contrast - enhanced to better visualize tips of filopodia ( right ) . Scale bars indicate 10 l m . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g012 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2642 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion intensity of mDia2 staining for each cell after background subtraction was plotted against the fraction of the cell edge occupied by lamellipodia . To determine the degree of mutual orientation of actin ﬁlaments in lamellipodia of control and D GBD - mDia2 - expressing cells , square EM images of the lamellipodial network ranging from 0 . 13 to 0 . 53 l m 2 were thresholded using Adobe Photoshop to maximally highlight the linear features . Matlab software was used to generate two - dimensional Fast Fourier Transform from these images , collect radial intensity line scans , plot intensity as a function of angle , and ﬁt a Gaussian curve to the major peak . Standard deviation of the Gaussian ﬁt was used as a parameter of the orientational order . Matlab code for this analysis was provided by J . Winer , Q . Wen , and P . Janmey ( University of Pennsylvania ) . Biochemical assays . For immunoblotting , cells were lysed in buffer containing 10 mM Tris ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 10 % glycerol , and a protease inhibitor tablet ( Roche ) . Protein concentration of the lysates was determined using Bio - Rad protein assay kit ( Bio - Rad ) . Proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE ( 7 . 5 % – 10 % polyacrylamide ) . Tubulin was used as loading control . Immuno - blots were developed using ECF Western blotting kit ( Amersham ) . Coimmunoprecipitation and in vitro binding assays were per - formed as described [ 59 ] . For coimmunoprecipitation , total cellular lysates ( 1 mg ) of 293T cells cotransfected with GFP - FL - mDia2 and Abi1 , alone or in combination , were immunoprecipitated with an Abi1 antibody . For GST pull - down assay , total cellular lysates ( 1 mg ) of 293T cells transfected with GFP - mDia2 were incubated with 1 . 5 l M of immobilized GST - Abi1 , GST - Abi1 - SH3 ( aa 330 – 480 ) , or GST , as a control . Lysates ( 20 l g ) and bound proteins in both cases were resolved by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotted . GFP antibody was used to detect GFP - mDia2 constructs . Supporting Information Figure S1 . The Correlation of the Intensity of mDia2 Immunostaining with Lamellipodia ExpressionEach data point represents an individ - ual cell . a . u . , arbitrary units . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sg001 ( 183 KB PDF ) . Figure S2 . mDia2 Knockdown and Its Rescue by FL - mDia2 * , but Not by Rac1V12 Cell populations transfected with mDia2 siRNA ( A ) or cotransfected with mDia2 siRNA and siRNA - resistant GFP - FL - mDia2 * or GFP - RacV12 ( B ) . mDia2 knockdown inhibits lamellipodia ; this phenotype can be rescued by FL - mDia2 * , but not by GFP - Rac1V12 . Bars indicate 25 l m . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sg002 ( 9 . 3 MB PDF ) . Figure S3 . Immunostaining of mDia2 and Abi1 Distribution of endogenous mDia2 ( red ) and Abi1 ( green ) in lamellipodia of B16F1 cell , as detected by immunostaining . Bar indicates 5 l m . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sg003 ( 1 . 9 MB PDF ) . Figure S4 . The 3D Structure of D GBD - mDia2 – Induced Lamellipodia Both unbound and branched proximal ( ‘‘ pointed ’’ ) ends of actin ﬁlaments can be detected in D GBD - mDia2 – induced lamellipodia . Top : anaglyph stereo image ( right eye blue ) showing 3D organization of ﬁlaments in D GBD - mDia2 – induced lamellipodia . Bottom : 2D image of the same region with unbound ends marked by yellow dots , and ends engaged in branch formation by red dots . Boxed region is enlarged in the inset with branched ﬁlaments highlighted in blue . Scale bar indicates 0 . 2 l m . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sg004 ( 10 . 3 MB PDF ) . Figure S5 . Dynamics of Filopodia Formation in B16F1 Cells Expressing D GBD - mDia2 Examples show formation of a club - like ﬁlopodium ( arrowhead ) and a dorsal ﬁlopodium ( arrow ) . Top : phase contrast . Middle : GFP ﬂuorescence in inverse contrast . Bottom : overlay with GFP in red . Arrowhead points to the formation of a club - like ﬁlopodium by fusion of several smaller ﬁlopodia . Discontinuous linear ﬂuorescence of D GBD - mDia2 ( 0 : 00 time point ) gradually converges ( 0 : 30 ) and produces two distinct dots at the tips of small ﬁlopodia ( 1 : 00 ) . Another ﬁlopodium is seen in - between with barely detectable GFP signal . The right ﬁlopodium moves laterally ( 1 : 00 through 2 : 00 ) , and all three ﬁlopodia fuse ( 2 : 30 ) , producing a single ﬁlopodium that protrudes extensively and acquires a club - like shape . Arrow points to the formation of a dorsal protrusion from a lateral ﬁlopodium . Linear ﬂuorescence at the lower right side of the lamellipodium ( 0 : 30 ) gradually produces two ﬁlopodia by the 2 : 00 time point , which fuse ( 3 : 00 ) , and the resulting structure translocates to the dorsal surface of lamella . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sg005 ( 6 . 9 MB PDF ) . Figure S6 . Phenotypes Induced by Expression of D N2 - mDia1 or Inactive mDia2 Mutants in B16F1 Cells and by D GBD - mDia2 in Ena / VASP - Deﬁcient Cells ( A ) Phenotype induced by expression of GFP - D N2 - mDia1 . GFP ﬂuorescence of GFP - D N2 - mDia1 ( left ) and F - actin enrichment ( middle ) are found throughout the cytoplasm of a bipolar cell as previously described in other cells [ 43 ] . Only very short , ﬁnger - like protrusions with slight enrichment of D N2 - mDia1 at the tips could be observed at the cell edges abutted by actin bundles ( right ) . No ﬁlopodial - like protrusions reaching signiﬁcant length were observed . Arrow in the merged panel points to a region enlarged at right . ( B ) Expression of GFP - tagged mDia2 constructs in B16F1 cells . FH1 Figure 13 . Models for mDia2 Functions in Lamellipodia and Filopodia ( A ) In lamellipodia , mDia2 is targeted to the membrane in an Abi1 - dependent manner , where it may nucleate ‘‘ mother ’’ filaments , which serve as a base for Arp2 / 3 - dependent nucleation , and / or protect from capping elongating barbed ends , which are nucleated by mDia2 itself or by Arp2 / 3 complex . Other barbed ends may be protected from capping by VASP . Unnecessary barbed ends are capped by capping protein . ( B ) During formation of filopodia , lamellipodial filaments associated at their barbed ends with mDia2 or VASP converge during elongation and become cross - linked , thus forming filopodial bundles . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . g013 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2643 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion domain , residues 519 – 600 ( FH1 ) , and truncated FH1FH2 , residues 519 – 909 ( trFH1FH2 ) have cytoplasmic distribution and do not induce ﬁlopodia . Scale bars indicate 10 l m . ( C ) Filopodia induction does not depend on Ena / VASP proteins . Expression of GFP - D GBD - mDia2 ( a and b ) or mRFP1 - D GBD - mDia2 ( c ) in Ena / VASP - deﬁcient MV D7 cells ( a ) or MV D7 cells stably re - expressing GFP - Mena ( MVD7 - EM ) ( b ) or transiently re - expressing GFP - VASP ( c ) . ( a and b ) D GBD - mDia2 localizes to the membrane and induces ﬁlopodia equally well in MV D7 and MV D7 - EM cells . ( c ) In cells expressing relatively low levels of D GBD - mDia2 ( top row ) , re - expressed VASP is still occasionally present at ﬁlopodial tips ( arrow ) , but is displaced to more proximal regions of ﬁlopodia ( arrowheads ) in highly expressing cells ( bottom row ) . Scale bars indicate 5 l m in ( a and b ) and 10 l m in ( c ) . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sg006 ( 4 MB PDF ) . Figure S7 . Characterization of Abi1KD HeLa Cells ( A ) Western blotting of lysates from control or Abi1KD HeLa cells . Amount of protein loaded is shown in l g . Expression of Abi1 is decreased by approximately 90 % in Abi1KD cells , but Arp2 / 3 subunit p34 - Arc ( p34 ) is not changed . ( B ) EM of a peripheral region of a control HeLa cell . ( C ) EM of a peripheral region of Abi1KD cell with two ﬁlopodia . Boxed regions showing branched ﬁlaments in ﬁlopodial roots are enlarged at the bottom as 3D anaglyph images ( right eye red ) ( top row ) , and as 2D images with branched ﬁlaments highlighted in color ( bottom row ) . Although lamellipodia are grossly inhibited in these cells , small regions of dendritic network can be occasionally detected at cell edges ( arrow ) . Bars indicate 0 . 5 l m . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sg007 ( 8 . 8 MB PDF ) . Video S1 . Inhibition of Protrusive Activity of B16F1 Cell Transfected with mDia2 siRNA B16F1 cell at the left is transfected with mDia2 siRNA and has very low protrusive activity . Control untransfected B16F1 cell at the right forms lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia . This video corresponds to Figure 1F . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sv001 ( 1 . 2 MB MOV ) . Video S2 . Another Example of B16F1 Cell Transfected with mDia2 siRNA Lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia are severely inhibited . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sv002 ( 19 . 4 MB MOV ) . Video S3 . Formation of Dynamic Filopodia by GFP - D GBD - mDia2 Expression of GFP - D GBD - mDia2 ( red ) induces formation of dynamic ﬁlopodia in a B16F1 cell . GFP - D GBD - mDia2 remains associated with ﬁlopodial tips during protrusion . This video corresponds to Figure 6C . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sv003 ( 1 . 4 MB MOV ) . Video S4 . Kinetics of GFP - Actin during Filopodia Formation Induced by mRFP - D GBD - mDia2 in B16F1 Cell Coexpression of GFP - actin ( white ) and mRFP1 - D GBD - mDia2 ( not shown ) in B16F1 cell shows actin enrichment at the thicker termini of GFP - D GBD - mDia2 – induced ﬁlopodia . Arrow points to an actin speckle which undergoes slow retrograde ﬂow and ﬁnally disappears , while the ﬁlopodial tip protrudes forward . This behavior illustrates actin assembly at the tip , whereas disappearance of the speckles and overall decrease of actin intensity toward the rear indicates actin disassembly in proximal regions . This video corresponds to Figure 6F – 6H . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sv004 ( 5 . 9 MB MOV ) . Video S5 . Kinetics of GFP - D GBD - mDia2 during Filopodia Formation in B16F1 Cells Linear ﬂuorescence along the lamellipodial leading edge gradually transforms into a series of bright dots at the ﬁlopodial tips . This video corresponds to Figure 8A . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sv005 ( 886 KB MOV ) . Video S6 . Kinetics of GFP - FL - mDia2 during Filopodia Formation in B16F1 Cells Linear ﬂuorescence along the lamellipodial leading edge converges into dots at the ﬁlopodial tips ( arrows ) . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sv006 ( 2 MB MOV ) . Video S7 . GFP - D GBD - mDia2 Expressing B16F1 Cell Used for Correlative EM with Known History Top : ﬂuorescence ; bottom : phase overlaid with ﬂuorescence in red . This video corresponds to Figure 8B . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sv007 ( 1 . 4 MB MOV ) . Video S8 . Formation of a Nascent Filopodium ( ; 30 second old ) in GFP - D GBD - mDia2 – Expressing B16F1 Cell Top : ﬂuorescence ; bottom : phase overlaid with ﬂuorescence in red . This video corresponds to Figure 8D and 8E . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sv008 ( 328 KB MOV ) . Video S9 . Formation of a Nascent Filopodium ( ; 90 second old ) in GFP - D GBD - mDia2 – Expressing B16F1 Cell Top : ﬂuorescence ; bottom : phase overlaid with ﬂuorescence in red . This video corresponds to Figure 8F and 8G . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sv009 ( 626 KB MOV ) . Video S10 . Kinetics of GFP - FH1FH2 - mDia 2 in B16F1 Cell The time - lapse sequence of B16F1 cell expressing GFP - FH1FH2 - mDia2 . GFP - FH1FH2 - mDia2 displays strong cytoplasmic localization and is mildly enriched at the tips of dynamic ﬁlopodia . Found at doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 . sv010 ( 1 MB MOV ) . Acknowledgments We thank Drs . A . Alberts , R . Cheney , F . Gertler , H . Higgs , K . Kaibuchi , S . Narumiya , D . Schafer , R . Tsien , and T . Uruno for generous gifts of reagents , P . Sterling for permission to use his JEOL 1200EX electron microscope , S . H . Zigmond and G . G . Borisy for fruitful discussions , and J . Winer and P . Janmey for help with quantiﬁcation of ﬁlament orientation . Author contributions . CY , GS , and TS conceived and designed the experiments . CY , LC , SG , and SK performed the experiments . CY , SG , GS , and TS analyzed the data . CY , SK , and GS contributed reagents / materials / analysis tools . TS wrote the paper . Funding . Supported by National Institutes of Health grant GM 70898 to TS . Competing interests . The authors have declared that no competing interests exist . References 1 . Pollard TD , Borisy GG ( 2003 ) Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 113 : 549 . 2 . Zigmond SH ( 2004 ) Beginning and ending an actin ﬁlament : control at the barbed end . Curr Top Dev Biol 63 : 145 – 188 . 3 . Mullins RD , Heuser JA , Pollard TD ( 1998 ) The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high afﬁnity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of ﬁlaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 : 6181 – 6186 . 4 . Svitkina TM , Borisy GG ( 1999 ) Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J Cell Biol 145 : 1009 – 1026 . 5 . Pruyne D , Evangelista M , Yang C , Bi E , Zigmond S , et al . ( 2002 ) Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end association . Science 297 : 612 – 615 . 6 . Sagot I , Rodal AA , Moseley J , Goode BL , Pellman D ( 2002 ) An actin nucleation mechanism mediated by Bni1 and proﬁlin . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 626 – 631 . 7 . Zigmond SH , Evangelista M , Boone C , Yang C , Dar AC , et al . ( 2003 ) Formin leaky cap allows elongation in the presence of tight capping proteins . Curr Biol 13 : 1820 – 1823 . 8 . Evangelista M , Zigmond S , Boone C ( 2003 ) Formins : signaling effectors for assembly and polarization of actin ﬁlaments . J Cell Sci 116 : 2603 – 2611 . 9 . Rogers SL , Wiedemann U , Stuurman N , Vale RD ( 2003 ) Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J Cell Biol 162 : 1079 – 1088 . 10 . Biyasheva A , Svitkina T , Kunda P , Baum B , Borisy G ( 2004 ) Cascade pathway of ﬁlopodia formation downstream of SCAR . J Cell Sci 117 : 837 – 848 . 11 . Innocenti M , Zucconi A , Disanza A , Frittoli E , Areces LB , et al . ( 2004 ) Abi1 is essential for the formation and activation of a WAVE2 signalling complex . Nat Cell Biol 6 : 319 – 327 . PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2644 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion 12 . Steffen A , Faix J , Resch GP , Linkner J , Wehland J , et al . ( 2006 ) Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 2581 – 2591 . 13 . Stradal TE , Scita G ( 2006 ) Protein complexes regulating Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin assembly . Curr Opin Cell Biol 18 : 4 – 10 . 14 . Innocenti M , Gerboth S , Rottner K , Lai FP , Hertzog M , et al . ( 2005 ) Abi1 regulates the activity of N - WASP and WAVE in distinct actin - based processes . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 969 – 976 . 15 . Tominaga T , Sahai E , Chardin P , McCormick F , Courtneidge SA , et al . ( 2000 ) Diaphanous - related formins bridge Rho GTPase and Src tyrosine kinase signaling . Mol Cell 5 : 13 – 25 . 16 . Peng J , Wallar BJ , Flanders A , Swiatek PJ , Alberts AS ( 2003 ) Disruption of the Diaphanous - related formin Drf1 gene encoding mDia1 reveals a role for Drf3 as an effector for Cdc42 . Curr Biol 13 : 534 – 545 . 17 . Pellegrin S , Mellor H ( 2005 ) The Rho family GTPase Rif induces ﬁlopodia through mDia2 . Curr Biol 15 : 129 – 133 . 18 . Schirenbeck A , Bretschneider T , Arasada R , Schleicher M , Faix J ( 2005 ) The Diaphanous - related formin dDia2 is required for the formation and maintenance of ﬁlopodia . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 619 – 625 . 19 . Svitkina TM , Bulanova EA , Chaga OY , Vignjevic DM , Kojima S , et al . ( 2003 ) Mechanism of ﬁlopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J Cell Biol 160 : 409 – 421 . 20 . Mejillano MR , Kojima S , Applewhite DA , Gertler FB , Svitkina TM , et al . ( 2004 ) Lamellipodial versus ﬁlopodial mode of the actin nanomachinery ; pivotal role of the ﬁlament barbed end . Cell 118 : 363 – 373 . 21 . StrasserGA , RahimNA , VanderWaalKE , GertlerFB , LanierLM ( 2004 ) Arp2 / 3 is a negative regulator of growth cone translocation . Neuron 43 : 81 – 94 . 22 . Faix J , Rottner K ( 2006 ) The making of ﬁlopodia . Curr Opin Cell Biol 18 : 18 – 25 . 23 . Otomo T , Otomo C , Tomchick DR , Machius M , Rosen MK ( 2005 ) Structural basis of Rho GTPase - mediated activation of the formin mDia1 . Mol Cell 18 : 273 – 281 . 24 . Higgs HN ( 2005 ) Formin proteins : a domain - based approach . Trends Biochem Sci 30 : 342 – 353 . 25 . Higashida C , Miyoshi T , Fujita A , Oceguera - Yanez F , Monypenny J , et al . ( 2004 ) Actin polymerization - driven molecular movement of mDia1 in living cells . Science 303 : 2007 – 2010 . 26 . Ridley AJ ( 2006 ) Rho GTPases and actin dynamics in membrane protrusions and vesicle trafﬁcking . Trends Cell Biol 16 : 522 – 529 . 27 . Alberts AS ( 2001 ) Identiﬁcation of a carboxyl - terminal diaphanous - related formin homology protein autoregulatory domain . J Biol Chem 276 : 2824 – 2830 . 28 . Vignjevic D , Kojima S , Aratyn Y , Danciu O , Svitkina T , et al . ( 2006 ) Role of fascin in ﬁlopodial protrusion . J Cell Biol 174 : 863 – 875 . 29 . Rottner K , Behrendt B , Small JV , Wehland J ( 1999 ) VASP dynamics during lamellipodia protrusion . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 321 – 322 . 30 . Gasman S , Kalaidzidis Y , Zerial M ( 2003 ) RhoD regulates endosome dynamics through Diaphanous - related Formin and Src tyrosine kinase . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 10 . 31 . Wallar BJ , Deward AD , Resau JH , Alberts AS ( 2006 ) RhoB and the mammalian Diaphanous - related formin mDia2 in endosome trafﬁcking . Exp Cell Res . 32 . Copeland JW , Treisman R ( 2002 ) The Diaphanous - related formin mDia1 controls serum response factor activity through its effects on actin polymerization . Mol Biol Cell 13 : 4088 – 4099 . 33 . Bear JE , Svitkina TM , Krause M , Schafer DA , Loureiro JJ , et al . ( 2002 ) Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell 109 : 509 – 521 . 34 . Barzik M , Kotova TI , Higgs HN , Hazelwood L , Hanein D , et al . ( 2005 ) Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin polymerization in the presence of barbed end capping proteins . J Biol Chem 280 : 28653 – 28662 . 35 . Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG ( 1997 ) Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J Cell Biol 139 : 397 – 415 . 36 . Berg JS , Cheney RE ( 2002 ) Myosin - X is an unconventional myosin that undergoes intraﬁlopodial motility . Nat Cell Biol 18 : 246 – 250 . 37 . Bachmann C , Fischer L , Walter U , Reinhard M ( 1999 ) The EVH2 domain of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein mediates tetramerization , F - actin binding , and actin bundle formation . J Biol Chem 274 : 23549 – 23557 . 38 . Huttelmaier S , Harbeck B , Steffens O , Messerschmidt T , Illenberger S , et al . ( 1999 ) Characterization of the actin binding properties of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein VASP . FEBS Lett 451 : 68 – 74 . 39 . Stradal T , Courtney KD , Rottner K , Hahne P , Small JV , et al . ( 2001 ) The Abl interactor proteins localize to sites of actin polymerization at the tips of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia . Curr Biol 11 : 891 – 895 . 40 . Katoh K , Hammar K , Smith PJ , Oldenbourg R ( 1999 ) Arrangement of radial actin bundles in the growth cone of Aplysia bag cell neurons shows the immediate past history of ﬁlopodial behavior . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 : 7928 – 7931 . 41 . Petersen J , Nielsen O , Egel R , Hagan IM ( 1998 ) FH3 , a domain found in formins , targets the ﬁssion yeast formin Fus1 to the projection tip during conjugation . J Cell Biol 141 : 1217 – 1228 . 42 . Kato T , Watanabe N , Morishima Y , Fujita A , Ishizaki T , et al . ( 2001 ) Localization of a mammalian homolog of diaphanous , mDia1 , to the mitotic spindle in HeLa cells . J Cell Sci 114 : 775 – 784 . 43 . Ishizaki T , Morishima Y , Okamoto M , Furuyashiki T , Kato T , et al . ( 2001 ) Coordination of microtubules and the actin cytoskeleton by the Rho effector mDia1 . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 8 – 14 . 44 . Watanabe N , Kato T , Fujita A , Ishizaki T , Narumiya S ( 1999 ) Cooperation between mDia1 and ROCK in Rho - induced actin reorganization . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 136 – 143 . 45 . Eden S , Rohatgi R , Podtelejnikov AV , Mann M , Kirschner MW ( 2002 ) Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nucleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature 418 : 790 – 793 . 46 . Nozumi M , Nakagawa H , Miki H , Takenawa T , Miyamoto S ( 2003 ) Differential localization of WAVE isoforms in ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia of the neuronal growth cone . J Cell Sci 116 : 239 – 246 . 47 . Kunda P , Craig G , Dominguez V , Baum B ( 2003 ) Abi , Sra1 , and Kette control the stability and localization of SCAR / WAVE to regulate the formation of actin - based protrusions . Curr Biol 13 : 1867 – 1875 . 48 . Steffen A , Rottner K , Ehinger J , Innocenti M , Scita G , et al . ( 2004 ) Sra - 1 and Nap1 link Rac to actin assembly driving lamellipodia formation . EMBO J 23 : 749 – 759 . 49 . Biesova Z , Piccoli C , Wong WT ( 1997 ) Isolation and characterization of e3B1 , an eps8 binding protein that regulates cell growth . Oncogene 14 : 233 – 241 . 50 . Scita G , Nordstrom J , Carbone R , Tenca P , Giardina G , et al . ( 1999 ) EPS8 and E3B1 transduce signals from Ras to Rac . Nature 401 : 290 – 293 . 51 . Kovar DR , Harris ES , Mahaffy R , Higgs HN , Pollard TD ( 2006 ) Control of the assembly of ATP - and ADP - actin by formins and proﬁlin . Cell 124 : 423 – 435 . 52 . Small JV , Herzog M , Anderson K ( 1995 ) Actin ﬁlament organization in the ﬁsh keratocyte lamellipodium . J Cell Biol 129 : 1275 – 1286 . 53 . Ponti A , Machacek M , Gupton SL , Waterman - Storer CM , Danuser G ( 2004 ) Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science 305 : 1782 – 1786 . 54 . Majstoravich S , Zhang J , Nicholson - Dykstra S , Linder S , Friedrich W , et al . ( 2004 ) Lymphocyte microvilli are dynamic , actin - dependent structures that do not require Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) for their morphology . Blood 104 : 1396 – 1403 . 55 . Harris ES , Rouiller I , Hanein D , Higgs HN ( 2006 ) Mechanistic differences in actin bundling activity of two mammalian formins , FRL1 and mDia2 . J Biol Chem 281 : 14383 – 14392 . 56 . Palazzo AF , Cook TA , Alberts AS , Gundersen GG ( 2001 ) mDia mediates Rho - regulated formation and orientation of stable microtubules . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 723 – 729 . 57 . Eisenmann KM , Harris ES , Kitchen SM , Holman HA , Higgs HN , et al . ( 2007 ) Dia - interacting protein modulates formin - mediated actin assembly at the cell cortex . Curr Biol 17 : 579 – 591 . 58 . Campbell RE , Tour O , Palmer AE , Steinbach PA , Baird GS , et al . ( 2002 ) A monomeric red ﬂuorescent protein . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 : 7877 – 7882 . 59 . Disanza A , Carlier MF , Stradal TE , Didry D , Frittoli E , et al . ( 2004 ) Eps8 controls actin - based motility by capping the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments . Nat Cell Biol 6 : 1180 – 1188 . 60 . Svitkina TM , Borisy GG ( 1998 ) Correlative light and electron microscopy of the cytoskeleton of cultured cells . Methods Enzymol 298 : 570 – 592 . PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org November 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 11 | e317 2645 Formin mDia2 in Leading - Edge Protrusion